AN EPISTLE To the Church of Christ in CHIPPIN-NORTON As Also certain
Scripture Rules which Jesus Christ has given to His Churches to walk by,
which are approved of and consented unto, by all the Members of the said CHVRCH.

Published for their use and benefit, and for the satisfaction of such persons
as desire to know the Principles, and practices of the Church aforesaid.

By STEPHEN FORD Pastor.

As ye have therefore received Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him. Col. 2.6.

And as many as walk according unto this rule peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16.

OXFORD, Printed by A. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, for T. ROBINSON
1657.

An Epistle to the Church of Christ in Chippin-Norton.
MY Dearly beloved friends, my Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus; when the
blessed God inclined my heart to the work of the Ministry, my earnest request
to God was, that he would be pleased to east my lot in a place where I might be
(if he saw good) eminently useful in the Church and service of Christ: and in
order thereunto, that he would be pleased to take off my heart from aiming at
great things, in the world: that I might never be carried away with them, so as
to neglect the work of the Lord, in any measure; and that God would give me an
enlarged heart and sufficient abilitys to perform so great a work, diligently
and faithfully all my days: but it pleased God to hold me in suspense many
months after I began to preach; sometimes gathering that God would have me fit
down in one place, sometimes in another: but I could not be fully satisfied
where the Lord would have me to abide.

Whereupon I determined to stay longer in the University of Oxford, and to wayt
for a satisfactory answer from God. The same week that I thus resolved, I was
desired to preach the next Lords day, at Chippin-Norton, which accordingly I
did; and it pleased God to begin to put a seal to my Ministry there as he had
done in other places before: and being importuned with much earnestness to
preach to you once more I was willing so to do: Afterward you earnestly with
the rest of the Inhabitants, desired me to accept of the place and be your
Minister. At that time I had three places offered me; one of them was worth
near twenty times as much as this poor Vicari^ge that now I have; (as many can
testify) but I found my heart more inclined toward you then toward any of the
said places and through Grace I refused all of them for your sakes; and after I
had spent many days in asking counsel of God, I was persuaded, and in some
measure satisfied that the Lord would have me abide with you, at least for a
time.

And accordingly I found the Lord sweetly and strongly bearing in my former
resolutions and promises to God when I was depending upon him for directing and
strengthening Grace upon my heart, and the Lord was pleased to satisfy your
desires by his engaging of my heart to continue with you, and I assure you that
I am willing to spend, and to be spent for you, and as I never thought any
pains too great nor any difficulty too hard that I have not endeavored to
take and break through, for the weal and happiness of your souls: so I trust
I shall never knowingly neglect any opportunity, where in I may any way further
your wellbeing here and your eternal Salvation hereafter.

Now my beloved, the returns that I do expect and desire of you for all the
sufferings that I have and am still like to undergo for your sake^, for all my
temporal losses, for my care and pains, labor and travel for your
everlasting happiness are, that you will be pleased to read, consider, and
practice these following dutys.

I entreat you all for Jesus Christ his sake, for the love you bear to his
name, his honor, for the love you have to your own souls: if you love peace
of Conscience, and desire communion with the ever blessed God: if you would
have the sweet smiles of your heavenly Father breaking forth upon you: for the
love you profess to have to the glorious Gospel and Appointments of Christ:
for the respect you have to the Lords people, who love you and pray for you,
who prayed for you before you could pray for your selves, who have seen your
conversion, rejoiced with you, for the Grace of God in you as Barnabas for the
Saints at Antioch (11. Act.) for the love you bear to me: if you desire to lay
up to your selves a good foundation against the time to come, to have
continual assurance of the Love of God toward you, if you would not be
stumbling blocks to sinners: if you value the precious blood of your Redeemer,
if you desire to be prepared for death, and to be partakers of that Crown of
Glory which is laid up in Heaven for the heirs of Heaven, such as by patient
continuance in well doing seek for it. Romans 2.7.

(I do beseech you in the first place,

1. Try and examine your selves whether God has thoroughly and savingly
convinced you of your miserable and lost estate and condition by nature, Joh.
16.8. which may be known by these particulars:

1. Has God by his Word and Spirit broken and melted your hearts; has it been
and is it so still a soul emptying and heart breathing conviction? has the
Lord shown you your own nothingnesse and insufficiency; that you have nothing
in you that is able in whole, or in part to deliver you out of your sad estate:
that you are poor and miserable, and blind, and naked. Rev. 3.17. without
Christ's Righteousness, Isa. 55.1, 2.

2. Have your convictions been self loathing, and self abhorring convictions
Ezekiel. 36.31. Job. 42.5, 6.

3. Have you been convinced of the evil of sin in general and of your
sins in particular, both of emission and commission, how the great, the
gracious, and merciful God has been dishonored by you, he who waited to be
gracious unto you so many years who invited and entreated you to come in and
be reconciled to him by Jesus Christ? 2 Jer. 19. Romans 7.13. has it been the
burden of your souls that you should thus requite the Lord, to choose rather
to serve sin and Satan then to serve him? Jerem. 3 25. 1 Timothy 1.13.

4. Are you brought to loath, to hate, and abhor all your sins: your right
hand, and right eye sins: your former beloved sins, that were espoused to
you? do you loath the very garment spotted with the flesh? Psalm. 119.104, 113.
Romans 7.15.

5. Have you cast off and taken your leave of all your former evil ways; your
flesh pleasing and profitable sins as you accounted them: can you say that
your hearts are brought to this, that you had rather suffer much, then sin a
little: that you had rather die then hug, entertain, or commit any known
sin? Ezekiel. 36.25. Judge. 10.16. Hos. 14.8. 1 John 3.9.

6. Have you been convinced of the Justice of God, how justly God might have
damned you for the least sin that ever you were guilty of? that the great God
has cast many thousands into Hell for far less sins then you have
committed: that it was ten thousand to one that you had not been lost, that God
has been infinitely patient and forbearing toward you? Romans 2.4. Gen ^.17.

7. Have you been convinced of your unworthiness, that you deserve for ever to
be rejected of God, and never to be received into favor with him Jerem 32.10.
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.

8. Have you understood and seriously considered what it will cost you to be
Christians indeed? many (as I have often told you) when they are a little
startled and awaked by the terrors of the Almighty; make some foolish,
desperate resolutions and attempts to change their course of life; and go on so
to do for a while; but when they meet with storms and tempests they change
their minds and go back with the dog to their vomit 2 Pet. 2.22. Math. 13.21,
Luke 14.28, to 34. have you con^^dered that it will cost you the loss of
Father and Mother, wife and Children, yea it may be your own lives also: that
you must take up Christ's yoke and follow him Luke 14.26.27. and are you
resolved notwithstanding to be Christians? can you say that none of these
things move you? you care not what you suffer or undergo, so that you may
win Christ and be found in him, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.

9. Has God followed these convictions? have they been revived again when
they have been dying or sleeping? have they spurred you on to Christ and to a
more dilligent and earnest enquiry after God and your selves Phil. 1.6. Phil.
2.13. Joh. 16.9.

10. Did sin lie so heavy upon your Consciences and the sense of Divine
wrath, as to make you restlessely and unweariedly to make out after Jesus
Christ for rest and peace? Math. 11.28.29. and when you went about to quiet
your Consciences with your prayers, or the good opinion of the Saints: or your
reformation or resting upon any other broken reeds or sparks of your own
kindling. Did the blessed God fetch you off, and continually pursue your
Consciences until he had brought your wills to choose and accept of Jesus
Christ upon his own terms; and that freely without looking back with
reluctance of Spirit etc. finding a kind of loathnesse and unwillingnesse to
foregoe your Idols; but you could cherefully and heartily cast them all away?
can you remember that the Lord has brought you so far, and is still carrying
on the work in your hearts: can you find that your hearts were and still are
drawn to go to the free grace and mercy of God in and by Jesus Christ, by his
blood and righteousness, and in the sight and sense of your own lost,
miserable, and woeful estate and condition being sinners, and in the sense of
your own vileness, sinfullnesse, unworthiness; and insufficiency say sincerly
and heartily; Oh Lord: here is a poor, wretched, sinful Creature come to thee
for to be justified and pardoned: Oh Lord I do abhor my self and all my own
Righteousness: I am a poor beggar, miserable, blind, naked: Oh Lord I am a
condemned person cast and lost and I am like to perish for ever by thy
righteous Law: but Oh I hear that there is another Court of Justice and mercy
erected for poor sinners to appeal unto, and I am invited, nay commanded to
make my appeal there: Lord I come unto thy free grace and mercy: nay Lord I
come to thy Justice in Ghrists name 1 John 1.9. I believe that he came into the
world to save sinners 1 Timothy 1.15. and that he has satisfied thy Justice; that
he obeyed thy Law, that thou art well pleased with him; Lord thou have made thy
Son to be sin for some persons, that they may be made Righteous by him: he
bore the sins of many, yea for all that come unto thee by him, with special
Faith. Oh Lord I desire to be made Righteous by his blood and righteousness,
to have Redemption through his blood: Oh Lord if it may please thee to Justify
me for his sake; Oh thou that justifies the ungodly, own me and be well pleased
with me; and use me in thy work. I shall account it my greatest happiness. Oh
Lord whatever has separated between me and thee heretofore I do utterly and
heartily renounce, abhor, and forsake; all my beloved sins, all my beloved
Righteousness; that I may have Communion with thee, that I may no more
dishonor thee; Oh Lord I have been a willing servant to sin and the Devil,
but unwilling to serve thee; but oh Lord now I am willing to cast of Sathan's
service, and to engage in thy service. I preserre thy ways and thy
Commandments tenthousand times before my old ways. Oh Lord I have delighted in
sin but now in Holiness; to please my lusts, but now to please my God. Oh
Lord I am willing to have an interest in Jesus Christ upon any terms, send me
where thou will, do with me as it shall seem good unto thee; only deny me not
an interest in thy Son, in thy special Love Oh for Christ, for Christ am I
come; give me Christ else I dye; I will hang upon thy invitation, thy command,
thy promise, Joh. 7.37. 1 John 3.23. Joh. 6.37. Oh Lord thou have invited
sinners to come in, and be reconciled unto thee; O Lord thou have entreated and
beseeched sinners; 2 Cor. 5.20. to accept of the terms of reconciliation. Oh
Lord I do come, I am a sinner; I am one of them that is invited; it is true I
am a great sinner, oh yet I am but a sinner. Oh I am willing now to be saved in
the same way that Paul was. Oh Lord why not I? why not I? seeeing that sinners
are invited, yea whoever will let him come. O Lord thou have commanded sinners
such as see themselves lost, to look upon thy mercy and Grace in Christ and be
Saved Is. 45.22. Oh Lord I come in Obedience to thy command, I am resolved to
hang here: Yea Lord thou have promised never to cast off such as come unto
thee; Oh Lord I Will hang upon thy faithfulness and promise: Oh let me find
favor I am resolved to take no denial; I will not be put off without thee
Lord Jesus; I am resolved to be like the importunate Widow Luke 18.1, 2, 3, 4.
I will keep crying and praying; Oh Lord it is for my life; Oh Lord thou have
been a long time waiting to be gracious unto me, now I will wait for thee to
answer my petition, thou have been many years wooing of me to gain my Love,
and consent to marry thy Son: Oh Lord now I Will woe thee; Oh now I consent
freely. Now with all my heart I am ready to contract with him; here is my soul
and body and all is ready for him; Oh if I might but hear one comfortable word
from thee about it: Oh that I might see but one smile; but one good look, to
encomage me to continue my suit, Oh Lord the end of my coming to thee is, that
I may be made holy, as well as happy; to be saved from sin, as well as from
wrath: Oh Lord if thou should reject me, I shall dishonor thee to all
eternity, the thoughts whereof is burden some to me: if thou shall please to
accept me, and adopt me into that family, and ingraft me into Christ, I shall
live to thy honor and glory: Oh Lord when bloody persecuting Paul sought for
favor, for acceptance, when Mary Magdalene and other great sinners, came to
thee for pardon thou did accept them. O Lord thou art as full of Mercy and
goodness as ever, oh for Christ's sake, for Love and Mercy sake. Oh for the
Honor and praise of thy great name pardon, love, receive me into thine arms of
Love. Has the Lord dealt thus with you, have you been thus brought to Christ;
could you never be quiet, and satisfied until you had peace spoken to you by
Christ, in answer to your constant and importunate suits and petitions; oh then
be of good comfort Christ is thine; the spirit of God is in thee; thou have an
interest in the special Love of God, and in the Govenant of Grace; thou may
go on tryumphing over sin, death. and hell who shall lay any thing to your
charge, Romans 8. Christ is at the right hand of the Father for you.

Oh but beloved your work is not yet at an end; you may not think that it is
enough that you are in Christ, and Christ in you, that now you may fit still
and be idle; no you just now begin to work, you never served Christ till he
brought you home unto himself; Oh then now up and be doing and the Lord will
be with you.

My beloved the reason why I have given these few trialls, and desired you to
try your estates by them, is, that you may go on in the practice of your duty
to God and man, the more freely, quietly and Comfortably: for I am very
sensible what advantage the Devil has upon poor Believers in their Christian
walking, when they are always upon every temptation, ready to doubt whether
they are in Christ, when they should go about their masters business; the
Devil would feign persuade them that they are not his servants, and that they
have no relation to him, his end is to render their lives uncomfortable and
unfruitful, but now when poor souls are sure that they have thus been brought
to Christ, as before, and reasoning thus: well I can say that I have been thus
drawn to Christ. I have chosen him upon his own terms, and he has said he
will cast off none that so come to him; well I will cast my soul upon his
word, i will trust him with my self; and all my concernements, i will care for
nothing but how I may live and honor God, how I may bring forth fruit to him;
I am commanded to cast all my care on him 1 Pet. 5.7. Phil. 4. and to commit my
self unto him in well doing; well I will go about my Fathers work and do
what he has commanded me.

I beseech you mind this in the whole course of your lives; when you are
tempted to neglect your work and fall back to distrustful fears, and doubts
about your estates; oh then stand up stoutly and be not overtaken with the
tempters wiles; and you will find it very advantageous to your souls.

2. If upon due trial and search you can find that you have been convineed,
emptyed, and humbled, and at last brought to Christ as you have heard; Oh then
be sure there to rest and rely, let the free Grace and Mercy of God in and by
Christ, and the blood and Righteousness of Christ manifested, and held forth
in the Promises; be the foundation you rest upon: rest there for continual
pardon for acceptance for all supplys of Grace all must come from thence: here
God will find you and you shall find God: this is your greatest duty yea and
your greatest privilege: a privilege far greater then Adams: Now to move
you and press you to this great duty.

1. Consider that it is an easier matter then most of the Lords people think it
is, to rest and live upon some broken Cistern Jer. 2.13. after that they are in
Christ, and are Justified: As first upon Prayer; when they have prayed with
more affection then ordinarily they do: or secondly upon brokennesse and
enlargement of heart, or thirdly on former experiences: they are of singular
use, but not to be refted upon: not to be set up in the room of Christ:
fourthly on grace in them; on knowledge, faith, or love, or patience, fifthly or
on obedience, your care to please God, your respect unto his Commands; beloved
you are to bless God that he has wrought these things in you, and labor to
be eminent in them, but if you rest and rely upon those or the like and expect
acceptance because of these things and to have your wants supplied because it
is so with you; or that God is therefore engaged to you to do you good, herein
you greatly err now that you may see that it is an easy thing thus to do;
take notice 2. Chron. 14.11. compared 2 Chr. 16.1. to the end Genesis 20.2 Math.
26.

2. Be sure that your old selfish principle will draw you in servility to rest
upon something of your own, though not altogether as you did before Christ and
you were one, yet in part it will be so.

3. You will exceedingly wrong your own souls if you do not rest on God and
rely wholly on him in Christ, as you have heard.

4. How unworthy will it be of your profession to Jesus Christ, for when you
were burdened with your sins you sought for ease and relief to other helps
and Savioures, but they could give you none, and being persuaded to go to
Christ alone, and to cast all your burdens on him Math. 11.28, 29. when you
promised him that if he would receive you, and take of the guilt of sin from
you: you would for ever rest on him; and wholly cast your selves upon him now
you have obtained your hearts desire of him; be sure it is expected that you
should make good your promise, and live out your profession, which you made to
him in time of trouble: Christ will take it very ill at your hands if now you
should neglect him; and trust to those things that could not help you in time
of need Judge. 10.12, 13, 14.

5. You will cause the Lord Jesus to leave you to your selves; yea in time of
need when you shall go to him for help: he will bid you go unto your Gods:
Judge. 10.14. he will withdraw from you and suspend his strengthening Grace, his
teaching and comforting presence, if you do rest upon and trust in any other.

6. Consider that Christ alone can supply all your wants: yea he will if you do
cast your selves, and all your concernments upon him 2 Cor. 9.8 2 Timothy 1.12.
Jud. 24. Phil. 4.19.

7. God has pronounced such as do not rely on him, but upon any other thing
ac^ursed, oh it is very dangerous Jerem. 17.5.

8. Many promises are made to this duty: God has engaged himself by promise to
you that shall rest alone on him, to pardon you, to help you, to protect you:
to give you peace Mark. 16.16. Isa. 41.10. Romans 5.1.

9. It is of all other duties the greatest, and such a duty that if it be well
performed will as a means enable you to perform all other duties that you owe
to God or men: you will hereby be enabled to pray, to fight against flesh and
blood, yea against the Devil himself. You will engage the great God to stand
by you, to supply you with all grace at all times Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. Math. 21.22.

Notes of living by faith.
1. YOu live by faith and rest on Christ; when you can acquiesce, satisfy, and
quiet your hearts in him when all creatures and creature supports and comforts
fail you: then you can trust in him and say I have interest in an able and
faithful God, in a full and all sufficient Christ, and here I can rest my
soul, and I am fully satisfied, I have enough in having him, here lys my
happiness, he has made a Covenant that is sure, and certain, and this is all
my salvation 2 Samuel 23.5. but if you despond in your spirits, complain,
murmur, and are as persons undone when the Lord takes away Creature supports:
then certainly you rested upon these things. A man may think that he does
believe and rely on God with a strong faith so long as he is hedged about with
Creature comforts, but very difficult to know whether he can live by faith
indeed at such a time. 1 Jam. 30.6. Prove. 18 10.

2. If it be more and more familiar and easy to you, you can quickly and
readily go to your resting place: and not account it a strange thing. Psalm.
56.3. Isa. 26.4.

3. If you are not discouraged in the work God sets you about because of the
difficulties you meet withal in it; but you are carried on with much
resolvednesse, and boldness of spirit to do your duty: yea though your way be
hedged up with thorns, yet you will not decline any one duty: it is a sign
that you rest on Christ. Gen: 22.10 first verses. 20. Act. 24.

4. If you can keep your ground, and stand steadfast, and keep close to God in
times of temptations, and raising up of that unbelief that is in your hearts;
if you can say that none of these things move you: 6. Ephesians. 11. to 18.7. Math.
26.

5. If when the Lord withdraws and hides his face from you, when your graces
are dead, your Sanctification clouded; your light is gone out as to your
present sense, I say if then you can rest on the name of the Lord: 50. Isa.
10.43. Psalm. 5. and stay upon the God of Jacob: then to conclude, well, though
it be a sad and cloudy day now, yet I shall see the Sunshine of grace again.

6. If when you see your emptiness, wants, and insufficiency, you can then go
freely unto him who has all fulness of all grace for supply, and there wait
until it please him to satisfy your desires: and you a^e kept from going back
to broken Cisternes; then you live by Faith, 30. Isa. 18. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.

7. If you can quietly and cheerfully commit your selves to God, all your
cares, troubles, and enjoyments; and mind nothing but your duty and
privileges, how you may receive from God, and how you may live to him, and
please him well in all things, how you may walk worthy of the Lord, and bring
forth fruit to his praise: and take no care but a dutiful care, what you shall
eat, and what you shall drink; but throw your selves on God for these things,
then you Live by Faith. 4. Phil. 6. 1 Pet. 57. 2 Tym. 1.12.

NOw then for your comfort and encouragement know, that if you can find that
you are thus brought home to Christ, that there is a real, hearty ^ntract made
between Christ and your soul, and that now it is your care to rest and rely on
him: then know for your comfort,

1. That you have an interest in, and a right unto all the promises that are
made in Christ unto Believers: the Father, Son, and Holy spirit, are all by
Covenant engaged to you to do you good: his wisdom, his strength, his
goodness, and farthfullnesse, nay his Justice, 1 John 1.9 oh you that are the
Lord blessed ones, rejoice and be exceeding glad; you may; it is your
privilege, 2 Cor. 1.20. Joh. 18 21, 23. 1 John 1 9.

2. You have freedom, and liberty to treat with God about the great
concernments of your souls or bodies, yea you may draw near unto him with
boldness, and confidence and make your requests known unto him: Oh precious
privilege: Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. Romans 8.15. Heb. 4.15, 16.

3. You have an interest in Christ's love: he can and will receive you, and your
Sacrifices that you shall offer up to God in his name; he will plead your case
in Heaven, be sure he will never neglect you, if you do not neglect him: he
expressed his hearty love to his poor friends when he was leaving of the world
promising them that if they should ask any thing in his name he would do it,
he that loves you can do what he will for you Joh. 14.13, 14, 15. Joh. 15.7.
John 16.23, 24, 26. Joh. 17.

4. God the Father himself loves you: Jesus Christ's Father, and your Father
loves you; notwithstanding your former sins, and present infirmitys; he loves
you with an everlasting love, before you loved him, he had his heart fixed on
you, looking upon you in Christ when you were sinners: though he loved you not
with the love of delight and complacency, as now he does, having stamped his own
Image upon you Joh. 16.26, 27. Joh. 14.23.

5. Be sure that your Heavenly Father will never leave you nor forsake you;
provided that you endeavor to please him and continue faithful unto him he
will not do as men, to love for a month or a year, and provide for their
friends for a few days; but as his love will be eternal, so will his care be
also; he will provide for your souls and bodies Romans 8.32. he delights in the
Prosperity of his Servants Heb. 13.5. 2 Chr. 15.2.

6. You have an interest in, and a peculiar right unto all the good things that
Christ has: he has purchased all things that pertain to life and Godliness;
you being Christ's all these benefits are yours; name what you will that may
make for your well being here, and your eternal Salvation and happiness
hereafter: Oh blessed portion. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 1 14. Romans 8.32.

NOw Beloved the Lord having done all these things for you, having by his Grace
brought you so far in the way to Heaven and given you such great and singular
privileges, and many more then I have named; in the next place I entreat you
to consider what manner of persons ought you to be in all manner of holy
Conversation and Godliness: Oh study now to walk worthy of the Lord, in all
well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work: Oh consider what the Lord
has deserved at your hands; what he has redeemed, chosen, and called you for;
why he has called you into the followship of his Son Jesus Christ, and with
each other, and bestowed such great mercy upon you and labor to answer Gods
ends. Ephesians. 4.1 Col 1 10 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.

1. Give up your selves wholly to God, devote your souls and bodies and all
your enjoyment, strength, wisdom, all the gifts that you have received of God
unto him, do it freely and heartily, say Oh Lord all that I am, or have is all
thine; here Lord I freely give it to thee again 1 Samuel 1.11.28. 1 Pet. 4 19.

2. Love your Heavenly Father and Savior, as much as you can, oh you heirs of
H^aven, the more you love him the fuller your hearts will be of Love to him,
the more cheerfully you will serve him and obey him, the more you will fear to
offend him or to grieve him: Love will keep you from running out after the
Creature: oh it is a heart preserving grace.

NOw for the increasing and actuating your love to the ever blessed God Psalm.
18.1, 2.

1. Consider and realize much the great Love, the anspeakable love of the Lord
Jesus to you, it has and it will for ever even astonish and confound men and
Angels, 1 John 3.1. Romans 5.8, 9, 10.

2. Consider and realize the freeness of it: he loved thee because it pleased
him, no other reason can be given for it but because he would: he saw nothing
in you worthy of his Love: he might have hated you, and loved others Romans 9.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8, 9.

3. Consider how this Love has been expressed: God has not expressed it by
giving you corruptible things, by giving you earthly inheritances: not in
giving you a reprobates portion: no nor yet in making you perfectly holy
without spot: but in parting with his own dear Son: in giving the dearly
beloved of his Soul unto a cursed death for you to redeem you from the curse
of the Law, from sin, and Satan; to make you righteousness with the
righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5. ult. Romans 5.8. 1 John 4.10.

4. Believe and pray much for hearts full of Love, go to him and say; Oh Lord
thou that have all fulness of love, I pray thee supply me, Oh Lord I am
empty, Oh fill me: Oh Lord thou have commanded me to love thee; Oh I desire to
obey thee: Oh thou have promised to give it. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 5.5.

5. Consider that God is infinite in Glory and in Holiness. All the excellency
beauty and holiness that is upon all the Creatures is but a reflection of his
Holiness, and Glory, Oh how should poor wormer love him. Exodus 15.11.

6. Consider he has loved you with an unchangeable love, your sins Could never
hinder its nor shall never be able to break it: he will continue to Love you
though you oftentimes abate in your love to him Is. 55.3. Jer. 31 3.

2. Take heed of Hypocrily in all your undertakings and walkings, your words
and deportments toward God and men: be sure to serve the great God in
sincerity, and in truth, and whatever you profess, promise, or do to; or for
men; do it without guile. Coll. 3.23 1 Pet. 2.1. Jam. 3.17.

1. Consider if you do any thing though never so Good an action never so worthy
of praise from m^n hypocritically, the blessed God will loose his glory, it is
not a Pelievers doing of a good work that glorifies God unless his whole
heart be sincerely engaged unto God in the performance. And therefore the
Apostle injoyns servants and all others to do what they do heartily as to the
Lord Col. 3.23. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 25.1, 2.

2. Be sure that you will loose the Comfort. God has appointed his servants
their employments, and in their faithful and dilligent performing their duty
to him, he has promised to give them Comfort, Joy, and Peace, but now when men
leave out the special qualification to which God has promised acceptance and
his presence and other benefits, they shall loose the blessing promised. 1 Cor.
28 9.

3. You will lose your reward hereafter: you shall never hear at the day of
Judgment one word for your comfort of any duty that you have performed, but
what has been done in syncerity and Truth, 25. Math 21.

4. Con: if you do not serve the Lord Christ in syncerity, and in Truth, you
will grieve the heart of one of your greatest friends, the Holy Ghost, 4 Ephesians.
30.

4. Con. You will cause the blessed God to depart from you, God cannot, he will
not hold communion with such as are hypocritical in their duties: you may not
be hypocrities, yet you may have much hypocrisy mixed with your duties, and so
much if you be not watchful, and very careful, as may cause the Lord to
withdraw from you.

3. I Beseech you endeavor to avoid all occasions of evil, what ever may
endanger and ensnare your hearts; and cause them to forget the Lord, and to
depart from him: as

1. The company of sinners; a man can hardly touch pitch, and not be defiled
therewith: he must be a strong Christian indeed, that can associate himself
much with sinners, and not be ensnared and seduced by them: Psalm. 6.8. Psalm.
26.4.

2. Be sure that you give not way to temptations, but resist them: yield not to
the tempter a moment: if you do you will be foyld: David and Sampson, and
Jehosaphat you know were overcome by temptations, because they dallied with
them, and did not resist them.

3. Take heed that you be not too bold in using your Christian Liberty: it is
easy to run too far that way; th people of God are not so often prejudiced by
unlawful things, as by lawful: your hearts will be soon taken with these poor
vain delights, that perish which the useing. Gal 5.13. 1 Cor. 6.12.

4. Then you must be very careful to turn away your eyes from beholding such
objects as may probably provok and stir up your Lusts, those things that your
hearts are soonest affected withal: that are most apt to draw your minds and
affections after them: as the fashions and (...) of this present age; you will
quickly loose your minds; oh I like such clothes and such fashions. Psalm.
119.37. Joh. 31.1.

5. Avoid occasions of evil in this; walk not so much by example as by
precept: look not too much upon the practices of Rich, Wise, and Learned men,
it is not safe to follow examples, especially of such men, except they be
transcendently gracious men: follow men so far as their practices agree with
the precepts of God. Phil. 3.17. 1 Cor. 11.1.

4. IF you desire to live as Christians, and to walk worthy of the Lord, then
be ware of Idleness, be always employed in some honest business; for
Idleness is a very great sin, and it will bring you into many
inconveniences Prove 31.27 Ezekiel 16.49. 1 Timothy 5 13. 1 Timothy 5.10.

1. You will thereby tempt Satan to tempt you, the Devil will be often
visiting of an idle person, and tempting him to many sins, as he did David.
2. Sam. 11.

2. Idleness will indispose your souls and bodies for spiritual duties, it
will bind up your hands and hearts: if you give up your selves to idleness,
you will not be able to pray, or hear, or meditate, or examine your hearts:
you will be putting off duties from time to time; resolve to day to be better
and to morrow: when to morrow comes, then you will be as unfit as before, and
then you will put off God, and quiet your consciences with new resolutions, and
so never bring any thing to pass that you desire to do, and God requires of
you.

3. You will thereby incur deadness, dullness, and regardlesnesse upon your
hearts, which will prove a heavy affliction to you: you will be incapable of
enjoying God in his Ordinances, or to worship God spiritually.

4. Idleness will bring continual guilts upon you; to trouble and disturb
your consciences, you will never be at quiet, but always perplexed and
tormented.

5. Idleness will expose you to many sins, God will permit many stumbling
blocks to lie in your way; God oftentimes punishes one sin with another: you
will meet with many occasions to draw you to the commitment of other sins, as
David found by sad experience.

6. Idleness will imbolden your Lusts to break out, it will give vent to
Lusts, Idle persons have one Lust or other continually breaking out in words or
actions.

5. IF you will walk worthy of the Lord, be careful not to give way unto the
indispositions of your hearts, take heed of an indifferent frame of heart; when
you find an indifferency and loathness upon your hearts to pray, or meditate,
or to examine your hearts or practices, or to any other duty. when you begin to
have a very low esteem of any duty; oh friends suffer it not to be in you with
quietness: but

1. Go to God immediately in Christ's name; and acquaint him with your
condition; say oh Lord it is so and so with me, I have low and undervaluing
thoughts of thy Commandments, and my duty to thee: Oh Lord I entreat thee for
Jesus Christ his sake, deliver my poor soul, that I may serve thee with
gladness. Psalm. 55 22 Psalm 119.32. Psalm. 4.1,

2. Consider how dear it cost you heretofore, when you were through your
carelessness, and neglectfulnesse under such a frame of heart: what expense of
labor, pains, and care you were at in praying, weeping, waiting, hearing, and
the like, before you were delivered.

3. If it be objected to you, that you cannot Pray or use any means to remove
it from you at such a time; consider that you ought to do what you can, though
you cannot do what you would, as you would: If you can but creep to God, and
only acquaint him with your present burdens: it is not your unfitness, if you
do what you can in Christ's name, that can altogether hinder your prayers from
being accepted, Romans 8.26, 27. Psalm. 103.13, 14.

4. Be sure that it will be worse with you before it will be better, if you
yield to them. The quieter you are, and the less you do to remove such frames
of heart, the more these indispositions will grow, and increase in you: if you
cannot use means now to remove them, you will be less able hereafter.

5. Consider that so long as you are under such a frame of heart, you cannot be
fit for any spiritual duty, you cannot do any good work well.

6. Use such quickenings considerations, and Arguments, as may probably be a
special means to help you out, to free you from these indispositions.

1. As first, that the blessed God can remove them with a word if he please;
and that he is willing and able. Romans 4 20, 21.

2. That Jesus Christ came into the world to give life, and to give it more
abundantly; he came to give quickening grace to believers through the whole
course of their lives, as at the first to deliver them out of a state of death,
and to bring them into a state of life. Ioh. 10.10. Jer. 13.3.

3. That God has promised to quicken dead souls; to remove all your cloggs
and fetters, that hinder you from a comfortable walking with him. Psalm. 119.25.
Rom 8 11.

4. That the Lord has delivered you when you sought unto him; nay when you
were wholly dead in sins, yea before ever you desired him to do it for you:
and surely he will not now refuse to hear and help you when you call upon him,
Psalm. 119.50; 93. 2 Ephesians. 5.

5. That it is the Office and work of the Holy Ghost, to quicken Believers
hearts: that he is employed by the Father, and the Son, in such heart
quickening work: Ioh. 6.63.

6. That it is the will of your heavenly Father that you should serve him with
lively cheerful hearts, that he cannot endure to have his children lie under a
dead indifferent frame of heart. 2 Cor. 9.7.

7. Consider that God is still your Father, and Jesus Christ is still
interceding in heaven for you, even then, when you are so bound up in your
hearts, as that you cannot bring up your affections to follow your judgments:
you have still an interest in your Fathers love, and in the covenant of Grace,
and in Christ's prayers, Romans 8.34. Ioh. 14.14. Heb. 1.25.

6. IF you desire to walk with God: then labor much to be watchful
Christians, keep a strict eye upon your hearts; no Christian like unto a
watchful Christian: none so holy, so humble, so strong, so wise, and
faithful: watchfullnesse is a preserving duty, and therefore the Holy Ghost is
often pressing it upon the Lords people: Math. 24.42. Math. 26.41. Mark. 13.33.
to the end. 1 Cor. 16.13. Coll. 4.2. 1 These. 5 6. 1 Pet. 4 7.

1. Labor to spy out the very first turning away of your hearts from God, and
then you may prevent your hearts from going any farther; when you are upon your
watch, you will find quickly which way your hearts are enclining, and where
they intend, and for what: if you do so constantly and faithfully, you will be
able to keep your ground, and still be Lords over your own hearts under God.

2. Watch that you may see and quickly find out what secret flatteries, and
flesh pleasing insinuations the Devil at any time shall suggest unto you;
Satan will draw you off from God if possible, not by violent temptations, but
by some sweet suggestions; pretending that you may do such and such things: for
they are lawful, and others have done such things, that have been holy wise
men: others have spent much time in seasting, and merry meetings: in jestings,
and merry discourses: in sleeping and idleness: and why not you also: why
these things are not altogether unlawful, and many other such ways he has to
seduce you.

3. Be sure to keep a strict watch when you are in vain, evil company: for
then you will be in great danger of being betrayed; your hearts will soon be
drawn to close with them; at least to a conniving at them, or to speak
something that may manifest too much of your consenting to them: and make them
the more bold in their practices, and betray your own hearts, Psalm. 39.1, 2.

4. Observe your hearts when providence calls you to change, either your places
or businesses, or both: for then you will be in great danger of loosing your
hearts, and your God too: many gracious hearts have found it true by sad
experience; that have kept close to God for the most part, after they have been
converted, so long as they have lived in the same places, and followed the same
employments; but in and after some considerable changes, they have miserably
fallen, and departed from God. 2 Samuel 11.

5. When you meet with any great disappointments, and cross providence; or
God at any time gives you your hearts desires; then be sure to have a strict
eye over your hearts: for if you are not exceeding careful at such times, you
will backslide from God: for then your thoughts will be taken up, about making
some carnal advantag by the one: or in looking too much on the second causes
in the other: at such times either your hearts will be too high or too low:
Job. 1. 1 Samuel 1.

6. Watch when God calls you to the solemn performance of any spiritual duty,
either privately or publicly; least when you come to the performance, you
come without hearts, or without hearts that will rather hinder you, then help
you, 1 Pet. 4.7.

7. Be sure to watch your hearts, when you are in holy duties; especially when
you pray, or speak before others, or when you join with others in prayer, your
hearts will be like the fools eyes in every corner of the earth at such a
time; or pride, and self exalting will arise in your hearts: 1 Cor. 3.

8. When you have performed any spiritual duties, and you have met with God in
it: you have been filled with joy, and enlargements of heart: your hearts are
warm, and cheerful, you can read your names written in the Book of life: oh
then especially watch; then you have more need then at any other times.

1. Because your hearts will rest upon your enjoyments; and set them up in the
room of Christ; I do assure you that I have found my heart readier to rest
upon these broken reeds, and to neglect Christ, then at any other time; now you
should endeavor to see it. Jer. 2.13.

2. Because your hearts will attribute that which only is due to God, to the
Creature; and say my own hands have done this; or by the excellent gifts, and
graces of such a man, who prayed and Preached admirably, and so forget that the
holy spirit did all for you, and in you; Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.13.

3. Because the heart is very apt to grow secure and careless then, more then
at another time: then Satan and your own hearts will tell you, that now all is
well, and therefore eat, drink, and be merry, until you have so provoked the
spirit, as that he will take his leave of your hearts secretly, you shall not
know when nor how he departs. 1 Kings 9.2. compared 11 chap. 1.4.

4. Because if you should depart from God after such sweet expressions of his
love, you will more dishonor and grieve him then before, and God will take it
as a very proud affront to his Majesty, that when he has sweetly and
graciously answered your desires, you should so much slight and undervalue him,
as not to endeavor to keep what he has given you: 1 King. 11 9. Psalm. 85.8.

5. Because when you were waiting and depending on God, for such or the like
favors, as you have received, you promised and vowed that you would improve
them when the Lord should grant them, now you cannot possibly make good your
promises and vows, except you be very watchful, Psalm. 76.11. Eccl. 5.4, 5.

6. Because then you have power: your faculties and graces are prepared; you
have divine strength put into your hand, to walk with God, and to do some
singular thing for God, for the farther advantage of your souls, more then at
another time. Psalm. 36.9. Psalm. 30.5. Therefore be much in this blessed duty,
especially at such times: and know that it is not your duty only at such times
(though especially then) but at all times, in all places, in all businesses, in
all companies; in all your conversings with men: and in all your conversings
with God.

1. NOw to quicken you to this great duty, consider these few things: first; if
you shall carefully, faithfully, and constantly practice this duty, you will be
able to see, and clearly to discern all passages between God, and your souls:
you will see his comings in, and goings out; you will know the method of the
spirits workings; you will be ready to embrace and receive all his benefits:
you will quickly see a clear difference between your own spirits, and the
spirit of God; your own wisdom, and strength, and his; you will see the worth
of divine assistances: 2 Pet. 4.9. the 4, 5, 6. Chapters of the Cant.

2. You will be well provided to wage war with the Devil, your Lusts, and
the World; you will be able to see your enemies a far off; you will not be
surprised, but be able to fight with them at a distance, and then you will have
a very great advantage, when you shall be able to fight with your enemies at
the swords point; I can say that when I have fought with sin, and Satan at a
distance; that I never was conquered, but was still a conqueror, through the
Lord Jesus that strengthened me. 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.

3. Consider that God has pronounced such blessed, God blesses you even in the
very performance of it: besides what soul advantages you will have thereby as
you have heard, Revel. 16 15. Math. 24.42, 46.

4. Consider that it is your duty to watch; therefore do it in obedience to
Gods command, make Conscience of performing this duty as well, and as much as
of any other Mark. 13.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.

5. You will make your passage to Heaven the more comfortable; you will make
the way easy and plain, you will not be so often at a loss as others are that
neglect it; you will be able to run, when others can hardly creep; you will
rejoice when others mourn Psalm. 51.

6. God will enable you hereby to be ready to every good work; you will be
able to go from one duty to another, from one business to another, from one
place to another; to perform the dutys of your particular callings, and go
from them to prayer or hearing, or meditation, or discoursing with the Saints;
oh my brethren what a privilege will you have? none can be greater then to
have the heart disposed unto every good word; and work for God Tit. 3.1. Luke
12.40.

7. Be much and often in the great duty of private prayer; take heed of
neglecting that spiritual and soul enriching duty, it has been and still it
is, the Common experience of the Lords people, that the neglect of this duty
has been unspeakably prejudicial to their souls; and beloved the Devil will
Labor more to keep Believers from this duty, then (I think) from any other;
for nothing can prejudice the Devils Kingdom, like unto this duty, well
performed: now that your hearts may be the more engaged to this duty, I shall
entreat you to realize these few considerations and Scriptures. Math. 6 6.9.
Math. 26.41. Mark. 13.33. Luke 18.1. Luke 21.36. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

1. IT is Gods way, his Ordinance, and appointment to Communicate and ^onvey
his choicest soul saving mercys to his People; so that if ever you expect much
of God, be much in private prayer Math. 7.6, 7, 8, Psalm. 2.8.

2. Cons. God has promised his Spirit to help such as shall be faithful in
waiting on God in this duty: so that when you intend to pray; but meet with
great oppositions with much deadness, and coldness of heart, many great
temptations; be not in the least discouraged; but go to the Lord and tell him
that you intend to pray as he has commanded you; but you cannot unless he
will help you; tell God that he has promised his Spirit to help you, and
that now you Stand in need of him, and entreat him to give him to you, and take
no denial Romans 8.26, 27. Gal. 4 6. Joh. 14.26.

3. Consider that the great God has condescended to promise to hear the very
groans and sighs of your hearts, when by reason of the prevalency of your
corruptions and temptations you cannot speak out your wants, and desires to
God. Romans 8, 26, 27. Psalm. 79.11.

4 Your Heavenly Father invites you to converse with him: he entreats you not
to be strangers to him: God would have his people to be familiar with him; call
on me says God, I will hear thee; you may go to God in Christ's name, as
friends invited to feast with him; and to ask what you will of him; Psalm. 50
15 Math. 11.28. Joh. 15.7.

5. Consider that your Heavenly Father Complains much of his peoples
strangeness to him; and tells them they had forgotten him days without number.
Jer. 2.32. Isa. 43 22.

6. Consider that God is your friend, and Father, he is full of bowels of love
compassion and goodness; he will be exceeding ready to receive you and here
your prayers and grant your desires; so that when you go to God to petition
him for any mercy, remember you go to the greatest and most real heartedst
friend, that you have. Exodus 34.6, 7. Jer. 3.19. Psalm. 86.5.

7. Consider that you have a great faithful; loving, and potent friend in
Heaven, to transact all your businesses in Heaven, between God and your souls;
one who can experimentally sympathize with you; your advocate and Intercessor
is man as well as God; you may open your very hearts to him, with as much
freedom and holy boldness, as you may to any friend you have in the world;
remember what he promised you before he went into Heaven, and put him in mind
of them, and be sure that he will be as good as his word, 1 John: 2.1, 2 John
14.13, 14, 15. John 16 23, 24, 26. John 15.14.

8. Consider prayer is an appointment of God, whereby God will hold Communion
with his people in his Ordinance, God communicates his mind unto his friends,
and the blessings of the new Covenant; and Believers having received of God;
they give back again to him; by acknowledging his free mercy and grace: in
blessing and praising of his Name; and in resting and relying upon him for
further expressions of his Love: and by commending his goodness, and
inhauncing it. Jam. 4.8. 1, and 2. Chapters of the Acts

9. Consider God has promised to hear and to Answer the desires, and requests
of his people, that are according unto his will; and God is ever mindful of
his Covenant. Jer. 29.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 34.15.

10. Consider that if you shall be negligent in this duty, you will quickly
incur guilt on your consciences, and bring heardnesse upon your hearts; you
will grieve the holy Spirit, and cause him to withdraw from you, you will bring
upon your selves many fears and doubtings, which will greatly perplex and
trouble your souls: you will loose the exercise and use of all your Graces;
yea you will have all your spiritual comforts taken from you Psalm. 30.5.

2. Be sure to perform this duty according to the will of God: Oh my beloved
it is not enough to pray much, but take heed how you pray; it is not any kind of
praying that is a Sacrifice well pleasing to God Mat. 6.9. after this manner
therefore pray ye says Christ.

1. Before you begin to pray, set a part a little time to prepare, by
considering 1. What your wants are, what you stand most in need of; 2. Whether
it be your duty at that time; it is an easy matter to be mistaken, and to pray
when we should do some other thing; I assure you friends it is a great thing,
yea a choice mercy indeed, for a Believer to do all duties in their season. 3.
Whether God has promised to give such things as you intend to ask, whether
there be any general or paticular promise to be a foundation for your faith:
4. Consider with whom you have to do in prayer a God who is Justice,
Goodness, Wisdom, Strength, Mercy, Love, Omniscient, Omnipresent. and a
Spirit: and then 5. Consider what frame of heart is, or may be most suitable to
these glorious Attributes of God; 6. Consider your own unworthiness; how
infinitely unworthy you are of such a privilege. 7. To consider your own
insufficiency that you can do nothing without the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, and that he has promised the Spirit to them that in sincerity ask
him. 8. To consider what encouragements you have from God to pray, and other
considerations you should use to prepare your hearts.

3. When you go to God, believe for much, and expect much of God, take heed of
doubtings and of low and narrow expectations: open your mouths wide, that is
your faith, that God may fill your hearts. Jam. 1.5. Psalm. 8.10.

4. Be sure that you get your hearts affected with your wants, and with the
greatness and preciousnesse of those mercys that can supply them, that so your
hearts may hunger and thirst earnestly after them Math. 5.6.

5. Go to God the Father in Christ's name, go in Christ's worthiness, by his
blood, and Righteousness, look on him as on one that sits at Gods right hand
to make intercession for you, say unto God, Lord though I am unworthy yet thy
Son is worthy, he has purchased these mercys that I beg of thee, John 14.13,
14.

6. Pray earnestly, heartily, and Spiritually to God; take heed of carnal,
dead, heartlesse Sacrifice, of formal praying; for that will exceedingly
prejudice your souls; never leave off until your hearts have been carried up
to God, Ioh. 4.24. Coll. 3.23.

1. COnsider your Consciences will not let you alone to rest contented, except
you do the matter of a duty; but then they will be for a time quiet in the
thing done, but know that no Sacrifice, no Prayer can find acceptance with God
but a hearty fervent prayer Jam. 5.16. Romans 12.11.

2. God requires the heart in all your dutys, and therefore it is but reason
that you should give that to him. Prove. 23 26.

3. Consider, unless you pray heartily, and earnestly, you cannot do it in
Faith; now whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. Heb. 11.6. Romans 24. ult.

4. Consider if you do not pray so, you mock God, you pretend to do that
which you do not, and you know that that is a great sin. Gal. 6.7. Jer. 3.10,

5. Consider if you do not pray so, you rob God of his own, that which is due
to him; you keep from him; will a man rob God, says the Prophet, will he be so
wicked as to detain that which he gives unto him: Mal. 3.8. Mal. 1.8, 9.

6. Consider that you will loose all your labor and pains: God will never
answer carnal, cold, heartlesse prayers here, nor reward you for them
hereafter; he will say who has required these things at your hands Isa. 1.11,
12, 13, 14. Math. 7.

7. Continue in prayer; be not discouraged and put off with fears that you
shall never obtain that which you pray for, because you are not answered
presently: but go again, and wrestle with God as Jacob did and resolve to take
no denial Genesis 32.24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

8. Then when you have prayed wait for and expect an answer, look after your
prayers; observe what answer the Lord gives to your prayers. Psalm. 85.8. Sam.
11.

9. Commit your selves and your concernment, your prayers and all into the hand
of Jesus Christ; as well after you have prayed, as when you are praying; and
labor to quiet your hearts as the prophet did in the goodness of God, let him
do what he sees good, refer your selves unto him to his wisdom, care, and
love. 1 Pet. 5.7.

8. I Beseech you brethren, take heed of the world; engage not your selves in
more worldly businesses then you can well manage and keep your hearts free for
God; and to have time enough for Spiritual dutys; for prayer, hearing,
Conference, Meditation, and examination 1 John 2.15. Romans 8.6. Phil. 3.18, 19. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11, 12.

1. Consider that though it may be profitable for the body, yet 'twill be very
hurtful, and prejudicial to your souls, now you know the soul is much more
precious then the body, Luke 12.32, to the 33 Luke 22.34.

2. Consider though you may fear and intend no hurt in so doing to your
souls, yet your hearts may soon be overcharged with the cares of this life;
for although in the first beginning your hearts may be kept with God, yet by
little and little you will find it will grow worldly Math. ^.24, to the end.

3. Consider that you have no promise to be assisted and kept by God in so
doing; because God has not called you to so many worldly businesses; God never
calls any of his people in love and mercy to more employments then they may
well do (if they will be careful) and yet keep their hearts free for and close
to God Coll. 3.1, 2. Phil. 3.20.

4. Consider if you do so, you will cause both Saints and sinners to have hard
thoughts of you: you will loose your room in spiritual hearts; and sinners
will conclude that you are covetuous earthly creatures; 2 Timothy 4.10. Phil. 3.19.

5. Consider if you engage in more worldly businesses then you ought, you will
expose your selves to more temptations then you will be able to bear 1 Timothy
6.9, 10, 11.

6. Consider it is better to have Communion with God then to have much of the
creature; to have a praying, ^enlarged heart then your purses full of money, and
your barnes full of corn; it is far better to be enriched with heavenly
things, then with earthly Psalm. 4.6, 7 Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.

7. Consider that Saints must be singular men, they must be as lights to guide
others, wicked men must see that Saints are men of other Spirits, of choice
Heavenly minds. Math. 5.46, 47. Isa. 63.8. John 17.16.

9. Endeavor to walk very humbly having low thoughts of your selves; and
showing much meekness, and humility before all men in your words, deportments,
and in all things: Coll. 3.12. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Prove. 39.23. Jam. 4.6. Isa. 57
15. Isa. 66.2. 1 Pet. 5.5, 6.

1. Consider that you were filthy vile wretched Creatures the worst of all
excepting Devils. before the Lord Jesus Christ did cleanse and wash you, before
his Righteousness covered you: Ezekiel. 16.14 first verses. Isa. 51.1. Romans 3.9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, to the 20.

2. Consider that you have deserved nothing but hell and wrath, or whatever may
make you miserable.

3. Consider that to be humble is to be like unto Jesus Christ himself, he
that was and ever shall be Coequall with the Father, made himself of no
reputation; how low did he stoop to exalt you. Phill. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy
3.16. John 13.13, 14, 15.

4. Consider that the more humble you are the more grace you shall have; God
delights to fill the Humble with Wisdom, and knowledge; he will open secrets
unto such: Psalm. 25. 1 Pet. 5.5, 6.

5. Consider that Humility is a great and glorious ornament to Religion; none
can more honor the Gospel then an humble Christian, he is a shining blessed
Christian; oh how does humility commend religion unto others, even unto Saints
and sinners. Math. 3.5.

6. Consider that the more humble you are, the more communion you shall have
with God; you will have more assisting Grace then others to keep you from
backsliding; God will quickly take his leave of a proud person: but he loves
tod well with him that is of a poor and of a contrite heart. Is. 57.15. Isa.
66.2. Psalm. 138.6.

7. Consider that you live upon free grace, God may take that from you that of
his free Grace he has given to you, if you forget him, and lift up your selves
with his mercys Math. 25.28 1 Pet. 5.5.

8. Consider the great distance that there is between God and you, how
infinitely great and glorious he is; he is glorious in holiness; fearful in
praises; and you are poor nothing Creatures; poor worms: God may (if he please
crush you in pieces, and give you no account why he does so: Psalm 5, 6.

9. Consider that you cannot do any thing without him, you can neither hear
nor pray, nor discourse without his w^sedome and strength, and therefore how
little cause have you to be proud of your selves 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. Romans 26, 27.

10. Consider that God requires and Commands you to walk humbly, what does the
Lord your God requires of you; the Prophet answers to walk humbly with your
God, Mich. 6.8. Col. 3.12.

10. Labor to have, and to keep always a tender Conscience that the ^ppearance
of sin may make some impression on it; Conscience is an active stirring
faculty; it will not be quiet if you give it liberty; if you do not offer
violence to it: take heed my friends, you may soon get a seared sleepy
Conscience; in a great measure; and know for certain, that if you stop the
mouth of Conscience, you will also hinder the spirits workings, who works in
and by Conscience; and if the Holy Ghost and your Consciences should once cease
their operations, you may be suffered to run into sin, and so from sin to sin;
for you have as it were, bound up the hands of your keepers: 2 Chronicles, 34.27.
Act. 24.16 1 Timothy 1.5. Heb. 10.22.

11. Take heed of taking the glorious and fearful name of God in vain; of
using it commonly, and frequently, without fear and trembling; you will not
use the name of some great men without some reverence and respect; consider
what God has spoken of Himself to his Creatures, to beget in them a holy
fear and reverence; how ill the Lord has taken it, that men speak so
slightly, and carelessely of him, the Lord will not hold such a person
guiltless that takes his name in vain, that is, that speaks of God in a
common ordinary manner; Oh my friends, if you love the Great and Holy God, show
your Love to him in being tender of his honor; never make mention of the name
of God but with a self abhorring, but with a deliberate purpose to exalt and
honor him; Oh my beloved, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, if ever you hope
to see the face of the Holy God; I beseech you when you speak of God, or to
him, do it with fear, reverence, and trembling. Exodus 20.7. Deuteronomy 5.11. Deuteronomy.
28.58.

13. Treasure up the word into your hearts, when and after you have heard it
Preached unto you, one great reason why you do not grow faster in knowledge, in
mortification, and holiness, is because you are (I am afraid) like unto the
hearers that James speaks of, Jam. 1.23, 24. if ever you exspect good by the
word, you must take pains with your hearts before you hear, and when you are
hearing; and after that you have heard, to consider what you have heard, to
labor to have it turned into Grace, in every faculty of your souls, to hear
for afterward: to search and see what advantage you may make of every Sermon
you hear. 1 Cor. 15.2. Math. 13.18. to 24. Psalm. 119.11.

13. Labor to walk joyfully and cheerfully; a holy serious mirth, a spiritual
rejoicing, is very commendable in a Saint; let your rejoicing be in God, not in
your selves; let it appear that Religion is a real thing; that you taste, and
feel more sweetness and joy in the ways of God that you walk in, then others
to do in their own ways.

1. Consider that God has promised it: he has promised to make his servants
joyful: to comfort and cheer their hearts. Oh you blessed of the Lord, make
out to God the Father and Jesus Christ for much of it; Isa. 35.1, 2, 10. Isa.
56.7. Isa. 65.13, 14.

2. Consider that the Lord commands you to rejoice: therefore labor to be
joyful and cheerful in obedience unto the command of God, Phil. 4, 4. Psalm.
97.12.

3. Consider that Jesus Christ has prayed for it: when Jesus Christ was about
to take his leave of his friends, you know he made a long prayer to his Father,
for his Servants and Friends, that he was to leave behind him in a persecuting
world, and among other Petitions you have this, Ioh. 17.13. I come to thee
Father, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

1. Be sure to call to mind, and to realize what once you were, and what you
are now: you were once Children of wrath, and of the Devil, but now you are
the sons and daughters of God, once the servants of sin, but now the
servants of Christ. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 4, 5. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.

2. Call to mind what great things Jesus Christ has done for you, and what it
has cost him, to make heirs of eternal glory, Tit. 2.14. Romans 5.8, 9.

3. Be often minding of your heavenly Fathers Love, and free grace to you; how
he continues still to love you, how his heart, and Christ's heart stands
affected toward you, that he loves you really and heartily: Ioh. 3.16. 1 Ioh.
3.1.

4. Remember your future estate, what you shall be, though now you have many
heavy burdens on you, yet the time is coming that you shall be freed from all,
and shall be partakers of the fullness of Christ's joy: you shall see him as he
is; realize it to your own souls, that so your hearts may be affected greatly
therewith: 1 Ioh. 3.2. Coll. 3.4. 2 Cor. 4.17. Revel. 2.10.

14. TAke heed, that you give not place to distrustful unbelieving thoughts,
and reasoning in a carnal manner, at any cross dispensations: you will then
quickly fall into the commitment of other sins: you will murmr and repine
against God: you will hinder your prayers acceptance, you will quickly weaken
the hands of grace, if you give way to the raisings up of unbelief, and
entertain it in your hearts, you will quickly ruin your selves.

1. Therefore to prevent it, consider that it is your duty to believe and not
to entertain any distrustful thoughts of God; and God takes special notice of
you, whether you be obedient unto him accordingly 1 John 3.23. Isa. 26.4. Isa.
50.10.

2. Consider that distrustfulnesse will grieve the Holy Ghost, he has wrought
faith in your hearts, and commands you to use it in order to the destroying of
unbelief; and therefore now expects that you should believe, and reject all
such wicked thoughts, Ephesians. 4.30.

3. Consider how exceeding hurtful it will be to your souls, if it be not kept
in subjection; it will hinder your spiritual comforts, and make you go
sorrowful to your graves, and disinable you for all your work and service for
God, Romans 15.13.

4. Consider what grounds you have to believe, what helps and encouragements
you have; Gods commands, his promises, his Oath, his faithfulness, power,
goodness, mercy, and love, engaged for you, you have the Lord Jesus
interceding for you in heaven with his merits: Romans 1.17. Heb. 6.17 18. 1 These.
5.24. Romans 8.34.

15. Labor to be of lively, active, public spirits, let not the Devils
disciples be more lively and active for their Lord, then you are for Christ
your Lord: do not give Jesus Christ cause to complain of you, that his
adversary the Devil has better servants then he: do not make Christ ashamed
of you: it is a shame to Christ to have dead, lifelesse members: when your hearts
begin to flagg, and to lose their activity, then go to him for life, who is the
fountain of Life, Ioh. 10.10. Psalm. 36 9. Isa 55.1.

16. Labor to have always upon your hearts the allseeing eye of God, Consider
that God sees all your thoughts, intentions, and all your contrivements, he
pondereth all your ways: yea there is not a thought in your hearts, but he
knows it altogether: Christians know that God does very narrowly p^y into all
your aims, and ends, more then into others; he loves the feet of his Saints:
Oh my friends this will keep you from the entertaining of many idle thoughts,
and vain words: from misspending of precious time: from sinful selfish aims
and ends in what you do: it will be a means to make you walk warily, and
circumspectly before God, Saints, and sinners; and prevent backsliding from
God: Psalm: 139.4. Prove. 5.21. Jer: 17.10.

17. Labor to be much affected with Gods favors to you, but especially with
the God of the Favors, and mercies; and endeavor to be very thankful for
them: for soul mercies, and bodily mercies; Labor to see the true and full
worth of the mercies, that you enjoy; consider that you are less then the
least of them; consider that all your enjoyments, all your mercies for your
souls and bodies, are given to you upon a special account, they are new
Covenant mercies; and the Lord Jesus has purchased them for you: so long as
you have a low esteem of mercies, you cannot be affectionately thankful for
them: Oh redeeming mercy electing mercy; calling, converting mercy, confirming,
and co^forting mercies: Oh how great is persevering mercy; teaching, and soul
strengthening mercies, oh your great Gospel mercies; your Ordinary mercy; your
mercies of peace, health, and Liberty, which all of the Lords precious Saints
in the world cannot enjoy, Math. 13.16, 17.

18. Keep to the good way of God wherein you have walked, and wherein you have
found God sweetly revealing of himself unto you; and take heed that you turn
not aside to the right hand or to the left: Oh labor to be stayed, stable,
strong Christians: take heed that you be not soon shaken in mind; for it is a
good thing that your hearts be established with grace, let no man deceive you
with vain words, and draw you back again from your faith and practice, to the
old corrupt formal way of worshipping God again: Oh let not the flatteries, or
frowns, or reproaches of men, though from your nearest relations, in the least
measure, cause you to faint in your spirits, or cause you in the least, to
decline from the ways of God; if any man draw bo^k (says God) my soul shall
have no pleasure in him: think not that you do not walk inthe ways of God
because wicked men reproach you for so doing: no my brethren, but rather use it
as an argument that you are in the way, because you are reproached by such men;
Consider that so long as you walked as the world did, and there was no
difference between you and them, they did not trouble you: Gods owning of you
and visiting you so often; with such sweet expressions of love, should confirm
you in your principles and walking; against all the Arguments of men, Ephesians.
4.14. Heb. 13.9. 2 Pet. 1.12. Gal 6.9. Heb. 12.3, 4, 5. Ioh. 15.18, 19.

19. Let all that you do, all your purposes and intentions, all your thoughts,
and words, or as many as possble, be directed to exalt the name of God: When
you hear the word preached hear for God: that you may be made more like unto
him: that your hearts may be brought nearer unto him: that you may know more of
his will, that you may do more, and so when you pray, or converse with the
people of God, or with sinners, pray for to exalt and honor him; converse for
God, labor in all your callings, and worldly businesses for God: you will
loose all your Labor, cost, and pains, that you lay out, and spend in any
good work, if you do not intend for God; and give it to him: 1 Cor. 10.31.
Col. 3.23. Prove. 3.6.

20. I beseech you in the last place, give diligent heed to these Rules, that
you have promised to walk by: Labor to understand, to remember, and to
practice every one of them; so far as they are practical: oh beloved, your
privileges are many and great, as you have oftentimes acknowledged to God: and
therefore be sure that your duties are many and great: God having done more for
you then for others, oh therefore be more wise, more holy, more circumspect,
more loving, more fruitful, more diligent, and more faithful then others: oh
labor to be more humble, more sincere, and more abounding in the work of the
Lord. Oh my beloved friends in the Lord Jesus, how insinitely are you engaged
to God, you owe your selves and all your enjoyments unto him; he has kept back
nothing from you that might do you good: he has freely given his own Son, his
holy spirit; oh rejoce in God and love, and fear, and honor him, think
nothing too much that you can do to honor him, he was contriving and lying
out his thoughts from all eternity about your salvation; contriving how to make
you everlastingly honorable and happy: Consider my dear friends, you have but
a few days to work and suffer here, you are drawing toward your rest, oh how
blessed will you be if you shall continue steadfast, and unmovable in your
walking with God unto the end; Oh my Friends keep close to God, and he will
keep with you he will not depart from you, if you will not depart from him: 2
Cron. 15.2. your God and Father will delight to do you good: you may have the
liberty to ask what you will and it shall be done; if good for you, oh fight
strongly against your spiritual enemies: you must fight before you can
overcome, before you can be crowned as conquerers even as Jesus Christ himself
has done for us, and before us: surely if we will be partakers with Christ in
his Crown and Glory, we must first suffer and work with him Consider all the
goodworkes that you shall perform in sincerity, for the glory of God, shall
all be remembered at the last day, to the infinite and endless Joy and comfort
of your souls; all your sufferings for Righteousness sake shall be abundantly
rewarded: fear not little slock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom, your Lord and Savior will shortly come and see you: he will fetch
you home unto himself: when your enemies shall have that dreadful sentence,
depart from me ye cursed, he will say to you come ye blessed of my Father
inherit the Kingdom of Glory; now you that have followed me shall sit upon
twelve Thrones Judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Then your enemies will be
confounded and ashamed, then they shall bow and bend to you. Oh you that now
suffer from your relations, you shall then be perfectly delivered, and
separated from them: it will not then grieve your hearts to see them rebellious
your natural affections shall then cease; you will be then wholly swallowed up
in glorifying the blessed God, then all your tears shall be wiped away; your
sorrow shall flee away; you shall be swallowed up of life: Oh how welcome will
you be to Saints and Angels: Oh then you will a dmire free Grace: you will
cry Grace, Grace, thon you shall have your hearts filled with love to God;
then all your prayers, sighs, gro^ns, and tears shall be answered, then you
shall rejoce without ceasing; then you shall be crowned with Glory and Honor
and you shall never be reproached any more. Oh you beloved of Gods soul; you
shall never complain of a dead heart, any more. Never cry out of a hard
heart, of a straightened narrow heart any more: then your hearts shall be
enlarged: and you shall forever sing for joy of heart; oh therefore be willing
to follow Christ a little while and he that shall come to put you into the full
possession of your promised happiness will come; and will not tarry:
unspeakably blessed shall you be if your blessed Savior should come and find
you so doing, which is the prayer of

Your servant in the Gospel of Christ S. F.

A short Preface touching the occasion of Printing-these following Rules.
WHen I saw that the blessed God had by the Preaching ing of the glorious
Gospel turned the hearts of many sinners from sin, unto himself; from resting
on their own Righteousness: to an earnest enquiry after an interest in Christ's
Righteousness: I was much pressed in Spirit to endeavor to bring the said
Converts into Gospel order: and accordingly showed that it was their duty and
Privilege to enter into a Church state: and as soon as they heard that it was
their duty, they waited on God by fasting, and prayer for wisdom and
strength, to walk in that way that God had appointed them to walk in: and
after they had spent many days in asking help of God: the Lord so satisfied
their hearts as that they declared their desire to walk in that way that I had
(through grace) made known unto them: and desire to be farther instructed in
their dutys in order thereunto: and also of their dutys in a Church state,
whereupon I wrote these following Rules: (which I judge to be according to the
revealed will of God) and proposed them unto the said persons: who freely gave
their consent and resolved to endeavor to the utmost of their abillitys to
walk by the said Rules. Now the Saints in their place being many: and all of
them besides many of the Lords people that live in other places) d^sired to
have the said Rules by them: (many of them not being able to read any man's
writing) which could not be except their said Rules were printed: where fore
being also exceedingly importuned by the Church, I thought good to have them
printed: which I hope will be offensive to none: and prositable to many.

Certain Scripture Rules, which Jesus Christ has given to his Churches to
walk by: which are approved of, and consented to, by all the Members of the
Church of Christ walking in Gospell-fellowship in Chippin-Norton.
THE matter of a visible Church of Christ, are Visible Saints: such as in the
Judgment of rational Charity according to the revealed will of God appear to
be Saints Luke 22.14. Act. 1.15, 16. Act. 2.37. to the end. Act. 4.32. Act.
5.14. Act. 9.26, 27. Act. 8.37. Act. 14.22, 23. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor.
1.1. Gal. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Coll. 1.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1,
2, 3. To these Scriptures may be added the Judgments of many Godly and learned
divines, both Presbyterian and Independent, the Assembly in their confession of
Faith, M. Hooker of new England; M. Cotton, M. Norton, M. Ainsworth, D. Owen,
D. Goodwin, M. Jer. Buroughs, M. Nigh, M. Bridges, M. Greenhill, M. Wellman, M.
William Bartlet, M. Stuckly, M. Ch^shull, M. Palmer, and the Ministers that
joined with him in Answering M Humph^ys Book, for free Admission, M. Robinson,
and many more might be added to these.

2. The formal cause of a visible Church of Christ, are Saints united in
Gospel ord^r: For a certain number of true Beli^vers walking at a distance
from each other: and scattered up and down in a Town or Parish, living as
strangers to each other, do not properly, and formally make a visible Church:
but only such as walk together accoridng to Christ's appointment; so then that
which gives being to a true visible Church of Christ: is, when seven or more
Believers do freely and voluntarily give up themselves to each other, promising
in the strength of God, to walk together in the same individual ordinances of
Christ, and in the practice of the same dutys according to the Gospel. Deuteronomy.
29.1, 9. 2 Cor. 8.5. Gal. 2 9. N^h. 9 38. Neb. 10.1, 29. Josh. 24.21.28.

3. For the Fathers kniting of the hearts of all the members together in
mutual love, which is the bond of perfectness among Saints: and also that
they may perform all dutys the more freely to each other: and for many other
reasons it is needful, that all that at first imbody together, and all that
afterward shall be added, that they be satisfied in each others fitness to be
Church members; upon such grounds as Paul and others in the primitive times did
conclude, men's Sainiship from: they did not conclude that men were Saints,
because they were not profane, but upon such grounds as these; that they did
bring forth fruits of Righteousness^; Phil. 1.1. compared with v. 11. that they
did trade for Heaven^ Phil 3.20. from such notes of true conversion, as they
had in Act. 2.37. to the end: such as David speaks of in Psalm. 15.1, 2. and
Paul Romans 8.1. who walked after the Spirit: and their Love unto, and delighting
in the Saints Ephesians. 1.15. Psalm. 15.4. also such grounds as we read of in 2 Cor.
7.10, 11. and such as waited for the coming of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor 1.7. which
none but Saints can really do: by their understanding of spiritual things
Spiritually: as such do understand whom God loves 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 14. being
such as had made a publik profession of their subjection to Christ 2 Cor. 9.13.
and also by their Sanctification, and Holiness 1 Cor. 6 11. by the fruits of
their Faith they were known to be Saints, as Paul calls them upon that ground 1
Coll. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3 now upon these and the like grounds, we are to Judge
charitably of men, and to conclude that they are Saints: though possibly some
of them may be Hypocrites: and to receive them into fellowship as brethren: and
to perform all offices of love toward them as members of Christ.

4. Visible Saints being thus united together by mutual consent, they are now
a true visible Church of Christ; according unto Christ's institution: such was
the Church in Jerusalem Act. 1.4, 14, 15. Act. 2.42. to the end Act. 8.1. Act.
13.1. Act. 4.32.

5. That the said Church has sufficient power to choose the Officers that
Christ has appointed, and ordained to teach, and Rule the said Church; for
Jesus Christ has appointed and given to his Church Pastors and Teachers, and
other Officers for the well being of his Church, and the said Church may call
the said Officers to teach and rule her without the Officers or members of
other Churches Act. 6.3. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 1 Chronicles. 29.20, 22. Act. 15.22.
Act. 13.1, 2. Act. 11.22. 2 Cor. 8.19. Math. 16.18.

6. That the Church should ask Council of God, by fasting and prayer to
direct her in her choice, and to direct and bless the person or persons to be
chosen to teach, and rule, her, as also to have knowledge of his or their
holiness, and abilities for such a work, before the said Church choose them
to teach and rule her Act. 14.23. Act. 6.6. Act. 1.24. Act. 13.

7. The Officers that Jesus Christ has appointed for, and given to his
Churches are a Pastor, Teacher, Ruling Elders, Deacons, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Act. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 5. M. Hooker calls widows Officers, Survey part. 2.
page 4.32. M. Cotton calls them Assistants: Way of the Churches, page 39.

8. That a Pastor, Teacher or any other of the said Officers; have Authority
and power from Christ, and the choice and call of the Church; and ordained
according to the Gospel Rule, to officiate in and to exercise the office of a
Pastor etc. in and over the said Church, for Christ has given them their
power, and the Church has called them to exercise it in the said Church, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. Act. 20 28 1 Pet. 5.2.

9. That a Pastor etc. so Authorized and chosen by Christ and his Church, has
power only to reach and officiate as Officers in the Church that has chosen
them, although the said Pastors and Teachers may preach in other Churches, and
places a^ gifted men Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.^.

10. That a Church so ^onstiruted according to the mind of Christ, is not
subject to any other church upon earth; She has no Lawgiver but Jesus Christ;
no head or Rule^ but Jesus Christ, as a Church, Man. 9.35. Mat. 16.18.

11. That the said Church may desire the assistence of other Churches in
difficult cases; which cannot be determined by the Church; and the Church
should submit to their determinations if consonant to the mind of Christ Act.
15.1, to the 30.

12. That when any persons are desirous to join themselves to he Church; the
said persons should first make known their desires to the Pastor or Elders, (if
the Church has any) and that the said persons do satisfy the Pastor some way
or other of their fitness to be received into the said Church: Act. 8.30, to
37. Math. 3.6. 1 Pet. 3.15.

13. That if the Pastor or Elder be satisfied in the fitness and qualification
of the said persons desiring admission; that then the said Pastor or Elder is
to propose the said persons to the Church at their next meeting.

14. That all the members of the said Church that shall be present when a
person is to be received into the Church; are upon Scripture grounds to be
satisfied in the fitness and worthiness of the person then to be admitted;
and also to give their free consent to the persons admission; and also in the
censuring, suspending, and excommunicating of an offending member; Act. 15 22,
23, 25. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Act. 9.26, 27. unless such as are unsatisfyed shall
give convincing reasons why he ought not to be admitted; in a short time the
major part of the Church ought to admit the said person

15. That not a bare profession, and form of Godliness be adjudged a
sufficient qualification for a Church member, without the fruits of the power
of Godliness T^^: 1 16. 2 Timothy: 3.5. Math: 3.7, 8, 9. Act: 8.37.

16. That in case any member of the Church be unsatisfied in the person
proposed for admission, that then the said member endeavor privately to be
satlsfied as soon as possible: but in case satisfaction cannot be obtained,
that then the said Member, is to give the grounds and reasons of his non
satisfaction to the Pastor, or Elder, and to no other person excepting him of
whom he desires satisfaction: or the Church shall call him so to do, least it
should prove prejudicial to the said person. Math: 18.15, 17.

17. That ordinary and common infirmities incident both to weak and strong
Saints are not to be sufficient grounds for to suspend any persons admission,
or to censure any member that shall be admitted: provided, that the said
persons in the general course of their lives walk as becomes the Gospel. 1
Cor: 5.1.11. Gal. 6.1, 2.

18. That such persons as through modesty, or want of the gift of utterance,
cannot by word of mouth declare the dealings of God with them to the
satisfaction of the Church, that then the said persons have Iberty to give
satisfaction to the Church in writing, or otherwise.

19. That every member do quietly and patiently, submit to the judgment and
determination of the Church, if agreeable to the word of God in any case, that
shall be determined by the Church, concerning any particular member thereof,
Heb. 13.17. Act. 15 1 Cor. 5.

20. That if upon due trial of Persons desiring admission, the Church may
gather by their words or works, that they have the saving work of grace wrought
in their hearts (at least probably) though but as a grain of Mustard seed: if
they have a competent measure of knowledge, the said persons ought to be
admitted, notwithstanding they are but weak in grace, in comparison of other
men; Rem: 14.1. Rem: 15.1. Act: 2.37 to end. 1 Cor: 3.2, 3.

21 That if the Persons that desire admission shall be found unworthy, they
should be desired to forbear until they shall be found worthy; Math: 3.7, 8
9. Act 9.26, 27.

22 That all such persons as are admitted members of the Church, their Children
also ought to be accounted and received members of the same Church, and their
Membership to be consirmed by Baptism; Act: 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.17. Genesis 17.1
to 15.

23 That if any Member of the Church shall offend, and persist in the practice
of the sin after reproof first by one Member; secondly by two or three; that
then the said offender is to be brought before the Church, and his sin laid
open to the Pastor, by the persons that have dealt with him more privately, and
the Pastor is to acquaint the Church, and the Church is to labor to convince
him, and to bring him to the sight of his sin, and if possible to repentance;
and it; case he will not hear the Church, and express his repentance, that
then the said Member is to be suspended, or cast out of the Church; and that
all the Members present should give their consent thereunto; Math: 18 17. Number.
15.30, 31. Number. 19.13, 20. Ezra 10.8. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.6. but in case
some few Members should refuse to give their consent, to the suspending or
excommunicating the said offender, without giving the Church convinc^ng reasons
for their refusal; the major part may suspend or cast him out.

24. That in case any person fearing God, shall desire to join with the
Church, but through weakness of judgment, and want of light in these things
cannot be fully satisfied in some circumstance used and practiced in the
Church; and yet the said person be willing to walk in Gospel Fellowship with
them in all other things: he ought to be admitted into the Church: provided it
may not apparently tond to make a breach in the said Church: Romans 14.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Romans 15. 1 Cor. 8.

More Particular Practical Rules For walking in Church fellowship.
THat all endeavor to the utmost of their power and abilities (especially by
their practice) to set up and maintain all the ordinances of Christ, that he
has given to his Church, for his own Glory, and his Churches edification and
comfort; Zach. 14.17, 18. Jos. 24.15. Deuteronomy. 6 7. Ephesians. 6. Ge^. 18 19.

1. Public and Private prayer, which are Gods holy appointments for to convey
Grace into the hearts of his Saints, Luke 21.36. Acts 1.24. Acts 4 41. Mark 6,
6.

2. Prea^hing and hearing the word, publicly or privately, these are Gods
Ordinances; Prove. 8.34. Act. 18 28 Act. 20.20 Isa. 55.3.

3. Singing of Psolmes and Hymes and Spiritual Songs, Math. 26 30. Ephesians. 5.19.
Coll. 3 16 Jam. 5.13.

4. Conferences one with another, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, 1 These.
5.11. Heb. 10.24, 25. Jude 20.

5. That Jesus Christ will have particular Churches until his second coming,
and therefore it is the duty of all Saints in their places and capacities, to
help to set up, and uphold this Ordinance and appointment of Jesus Christ, Romans
16.4, 16. 1 Cor. 7.17. 1 Cor. 11.16. Gal. 1.2. Rev. 1.11. Rev. 2.7. Rev. 22.16.

6. Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are Gods Ordinances, and they are appointed
to be signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, between God the Father, Son,
and Believers, Math. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.23.

7. The Ministry is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and to continue in the Church
unto the end of the World; and therefore all should endeavor to set up, and to
vindicate Christ's Ministers, and their Ministry, as much as they can; Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13 17. as an ordinance of Christ.

2. that all do endeavor to grow in grace, and to be spiritual Saints, such
as may worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and walk spiritually before Saints
and sinners, that they may commend Religion unto others by their spirituality:
for God has promised that such as are planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish, and go from strength to strength in Sion, Psalm. 92.13. Psalm. 84.7.
you should labor to be spiritual in all places, in all companies, and in all
businesses, in your words and deportments, Ioh. 4.24. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.3. Gal. 6.2.

3. It is the duty of all, to labor and endeavor to obtain so much wisdom,
and spiritual understanding as is possible, in spiritual things; that so they
may be able to serve God, and worship him according unto his will: that they
may not be soon shaken in mind, and tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine; but that they may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judgment in the truth: Coll. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Ephesians. 3 18.19.

4. That all do labor after a great measure of Faith, that they may be able
to trust God in times of trial; and not dispond, and be dejected at every
providence that thwarts sense and reason; but to be able to cast themselves on
the free grace, mercy, faithfulness, wisdom, power, and Love of God in
Christ: and to give him all the glory of his dispensations: the contrary
renders Religion odious and unpleasant; 2 Pet. 3 18. Ephesians. 6.9. to 18 Ephesians. 4.15.

5. That all the members of the said Church, do endeavor faithfully, according
to their abilities and opportunities, to perform such duties as they owe to
each other in their relations; whether as Saints, and members of Christ's body;
or a^ Men; and so as Parents or Children or Husbands, etc. Romans 13.8. or as
Offi^ers that teach or rule, or as private members, that are taught and ruled.

1. A Past^r is to attend upon Preaching the word in season, and out of season;
and to administer the Sacraments; to answer objections doubts and scruples; to
the study of the word; to maintain and defend the Truths he Preaches: to wai^h
over the flock: to protect them from wrong as much as he can: all which he i^
to do as a Pastor of his own flock only; and he is to manage matters in the
Church, that concerns the well ordering of it, 1 Cor. 12.28. Rom 12.6, 7, 8
Luk 22. Act. 20.11. 2 Cor. 1.4. Mal. 2.7. 1 T^m. 4.13, 14. 2 Timothy 2.15. Tit
1.9. 1 Pet. 5.2,

2. The du^y of the Members to their Pastor; first to provide for him: for his
subsistence, and comfortable being: that he may not be entangled with the
affairs of this life; but that he may wholly give up himself to the work of
the Lord, 1 Timothy 4.15. and discharge the trust committed to him, Gal. 6, 6, 7,
8. Rom: 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.7 to 15.

2. Not to receive an accusation against him under two or three with nesses, 1 Timothy 5.1, 19.

3. To give him that Love and respect that is due to him and no more; to be
careful not to give him that honor that is due only to God; or to refuse to
give him that which God commands them freely to give unto him, 1 These: 5.12,
13. 1 Timothy: 5.17. Heb: 13 17.

4. To attend upon his Ministry, as they have opportunity both in private and
public, Act: 2.42.

5. And in a special manner to pray for him, that God may bless him in his
studies: that God may direct him to Preach such truths as may by the blessing
of God be most advantageous and profitable to Saints, and sinners: and that God
may give him the door of utterance, that he may speak the Word with boldness
and clearness: that he may give to every one his portion: that he may be able
to divide the word aright; that he may be led into all truth; that he may be
very successful in the turning of many sinners to God, 1 These. 5.25. Heb.
13.18. Act. 12.5. 2 Cor. 1.11. Phil. 1.19. Romans 15.30. Ephesians. 6.18, 19. The
duties of Members to each other, and toward all men.

6. The Members are commanded to Love each other truly and heartily without
dissimulation: in deed and in truth, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 These. 3.12. Ioh. 13.34. Romans
12.9.

7. All the Members should have a watchful eye over each other, that they may
keep each other from sin; and if fallen into any sin to hasten their
deliverance. 1 These 5.6. 1 Cor: 12.25.

8. Not to speak evil or to backbite one another, 2 Cor. 12.20. Jam. 4.15.

9. They must be careful not to declare the faults of one another: to each
other, before they have lovingly and deliberately informed the Brother or
Sister that has offended, of his or her faults, and endeavored to convince
him: and not then, but in case of obstinacy; Math. 18.17. 2 Cor: 12.20.

10. They must not bear any grudge or envy in their hearts against any Member,
whether upon any evil reports of them, or upon any wrong received from them, 1
Pet. 2.1. Levit: 19.18. Iam. 5.9.

11 They must honor each other, as God has commanded them, and that in
syncerity and in truth, Rom: 12.10.

12 That they provoke and exhort one another, to the diligent practice of their
duty toward God and all men, Heb: 10.24, 25. Heb: 3.13.

13 That they inform, reprove, and admonish one another when there is
occasion, Rom: 15.14. Col: 3.16. Ephesians: 5.11.

14 To supply the wants of one another: if any Member shall stand in need of
subsistence: according unto every Members abilities, they ought to communicate
unto him, Rom: 12.13. 1 Tym: 6.18. 1 Pet: 4.10.

15 That none suffer sin to lie on his Brother, and connive and wink at it: but
immediately if possible to discover it unto him, Levit. 19.17. Math. 18.15, 16.
Gal. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.

16. That every Member is commanded by God to Pray for each other: and that
frequently, heartily, and fervently, especially for such as lie under any
affliction, or temptation either in Soul or Body, Jam. 5.16. Act. 12.5.

17. They ought to comfort each other, with the comforts wherewith they have
been comforted of God; to comfort each other with their Fathers promises to
them; with the mediation of Jesus Christ, the great honor that God has put
upon his people; and the hopes of their future happiness etc. 1 These: 4 18. 2
These. 5.14.

18. It is their duty to teach, and to Instruct one another; the eye may help
the hand, and the hand the eye; the foot may and ought to be helpful to the
head, 1 Cor: 12.15. 1 These. 5.11. 2 Col. 16.

19. To rejoyee with such as do rejoice; and weep with such as weep; to have a
fellow feeling of each others mercies and troubles; to have a sympathizing
heart, hand, and eye, toward each other, as fellow members of the same body,
Rom: 12.15.

20. That all such Members as have Families, ought to set up the worship of God
in them, and not only the form of Divine worship, but the power, and
spirituallity of it: to instruct those that are under their charge, Gen: 18.19.
Deuteronomy: 6.7. John 24.15. Jer: 10.25. Ephesians: 5.4. Ioh: 4.23, 24.

21. That they ought constantly to attend on all the Ordinances of God, at all
times; except some extraordinary occasions hinder, both publicly and
privately; Prove. 8.34. Mal. 3.16. Heb: 10.24, 25. Romans 14.19.

22. That all ought to endeavor to walk inoffensively, giving no offense to
Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God; laboring to walk wisely toward
them that are without, as that you may through the grace of God, thereby
possess them with good thoughts of Jesus Christ, of his ways and People: and
also that every member endeavor to preserve the Peace and privileges of the
Church; and of every member thereof, Ephesians. 4.1 to 6. 1 Ioh: 3.11 to end. Col:
3.12, 15. Phil: 2.1 6. Gal: 6.1.

23. That all ought quietly, and patiently, to submit to the Powers that God
has by his providence set over them, and obey all their lawful commands
willingly: the contrary is hateful in the sight of God, what ever men may
pretend for railing against, or opposing of them, 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. Jude
8.9, 10. Act: 23.5. Rom: 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

24. That all ought to avoid the company of erronrous persons, as much as hey
can; especially such persons as hold any dangerous Tenants; and make it their
business to vent them unto others, Romans 16.17. 1 Timothy 6.5.

25. That they walk humbly, and seriously before their fellow Members; and
before all men, as much as in them lies, Iam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Act. 20.19.
Ephesians. 4.29, 30. Ephesians. 5.4.

26. That all endeavor to preserve the purity of the Church; and not by any
means to endeavor either privately or publicly, the admission of any
unworthy person; although their nearest relation, 1 Tym. 5.26. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
1 Cor. 6.15.19. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

27. That if any Member of the said Church, shall here or know of any
Scandal, or ill report of a person desiring admission into the Church; that
then the said Member, enquire into the truth of it; and in case the said person
be found guilty; the said Member should inform the Pastor of it; and the
person should be suspended until he has repented, and declared his repentance
to the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.

28 That in case any member of the said Church, shall be cast out of the Church
for Scandal; and the said person shall repent afterward: and manifest so much
to the satisfaction of the Church: and shall desire to be admitted again into
the Church; he ought to be received again into Communion, with all love and
tenderness, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 5.

29. That all such as sin openly, should be openly, speedily, and severely
reproved, and proceeded against according unto the word of Christ, 1 Tym: 5.20,
25. 1 Cor. 5. Math: 18.15, 16.

30. That as the Church increases, need requires, and persons are found fit:
other Officers be chosen by the Pastor, and all the members of the Church then
present when any Officer is to be chosen; Act. 6.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.28.

31. That all the members ought to be diligent in some honest calling; that so
they may be useful in their generations: and not chargeable to others: and
that they may stop the mouths of their Adversaries; in case the said members
shall be able Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Timothy 5.10. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.10.16.

32. That all in a special manner do discharge the duties that they owe unto
their Relations; which God has commanded to be carefully performed by all both
superiors, and inferiors, as husba ds to their wives, Ephesians. 5.25. Wives to
their Husbands, Ephesians. 5.33. Parents to Children Ephesians. 6.4. Children to Parents,
Ephesians. 6.1, 2. Magistrates to the People, Romans 13.4. People to their Magistrates,
Romans 13.4. Masters to their Servants, Col. 4.1. Servants to their Masters, Ephesians.
6.5.

33. That all should really, and heatily intend, what they shall at any time
profess to each other, or any that are without, whither Saints or Sinners: as
expressions of their Love to them; by their words to take heed that their
hears, and tongues go together, without all dissimulation, or the worlds
complements Rom, 12.9. Coll. 3.23. 1 Pet. 1.22. Ephesians. 6.5. Romans 9.2. 2 Cor. 5.12.

34, That all the members be careful to avoid as much as they can the Company
of wicked men especially in any thing that is not of good report, or may be an
offense unto any godly person 2 Chronicles. 18.1, 3. 1 Cor. 5.17. Psalm. 110.7.

35. That all endeavor to hold forth the power and life of Godliness before
others to manifest the Spirituality of their profession; to take heed and
beware of a formal, dead, saplesse profession; which may predice the minds of
men against the ways of God, Phill. chap. 1. v. 27. 1 Pet. 3.1.

26, That no member withdraw Communion from the said Church, until the said
member has given convincing reasons for his, or her withdrawing; why he cannot
hold communion with the said Church, Heb. 10.24, 25. Heb, 3.13

37 That if at any time any member or members of other true Churches that walk
in Gospel order shall be recommended to the said church by the Pastor or other
Officers of the said Churches, and the said persons so recommended shall desire
to partake of all Gods Ordinannces with the Church that then the said Church
ought to admit them into Communion provided they be not scandalous or ignorant,
Rom: 16.1.

38 That if any member shall desire a dismission from the said Church: to join
with another Church of Christ walking in Gospel order: and it shall upon
trial appear to be for the advantage of his soul: or the convenience of its
habitation, as being nearer that Church that he is to be a member of: that then
the said person ought to have a free dismission.

39 That every member endeavor to avoid bitterness of Spirit, or bitter
railing words, toward such persons as do not walk in the same way, and order
with them waiting for, and endeavoring by all good means, Loving and wining
deportments, and arguments, to convince them of their errors; provided they be
holy serious persons in appearance at least, Ephesians: chap: 4. v. 31. 2 Timothy 2.25.
Phill. 3.15.

40 That every member in his place and capacity do endeavor to promote the
interest of Christ in the world: by praying or by any other lawful means
Math: 6.10.

41 That all should be very sparing in judging such persons as do differ from
them (or the way wherein the said Church walks) to be no true Saints knowing
that they stand or fall to their own master and that they must give an account
of themselves to God: provided they are otherwise sober, Spiritual and humble
men Rom: 14.10. Math: 7.1.

42 That every particular member should seek the weal and happiness of his
fellow member as his own: all should look at one another wealth: Phil. 2.4, 5,
6. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor. 10.24.

43. That every member should patiently submit unto and receive with
thankfulness all Reproofs, Instructions, Council, Admonition, or
exhortations from any member of the said Church: Heb. 13.17. Coll. 3.16. Tit.
3.10.

44. That all endeavor to improve all their privileges for the Glory of God:
and to peforme every duty to God with the more Strength, wisdom and comfort:
and also for the Comfort and edification of each other: Ephesians. 1.12. 1 Cor.
10.31. 1 Cor. 14.31.

45. That all Children that shall be baptized in the Church are to be accounted
members of the same Church; until they shall justly deprive themselves by
scandal or otherwise; for of such is the Kingdom of God Mark. 10.14 15, 16.

46. That so long as the said Children shall continue members of the said
Church, the Church ought to take care of them as fellow members; to pray for
them and to further by all good means their eternal Salvation in an especial
manner Gol. 6.10.

47. That Rich, and Poor walk together as fellow members of Christ; as
brethren and sisters, without patiality, and having respect to some persons
because they are rich; or disrespecting others because they are poor, Jam. 2.1,
6.

48. That all should greatly humble themselves and mourn before the Lord for
their upholding of corruption and complying with the abominable practices of
men for the worship of God; and so have thereby profaned the Lords holy
Ordinances, and exposed them to contempt; and caused many to desert and cast
them off as vain things, because they saw no distinction made between the
precious and the vile; but dogs and children eat together as fellow heirs of
Heaven; and God being thereby greatly dishonored was pleased to withdraw his
presence from them; in so much that many gracious hearts have said that they
never meet with any soul comforting or soul quickening presence of God in
receiving the Lords supper with a mixed multitude; but as soon as they came out
from among them their herats were filled with his presence. Ezechiel 22.26.
Ezechiel 44.5, 10. Jerem. 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.17.

49. That all endeavor to perform all their lawful promises that they shall
at any time make to Believers or unbelievers; and so to do to, and deal with
others, as they would have others do to them, or deal with them: Psalm 15.4.
Math. 7.12.

50. That all labor and endeavor to present sin in themselves, and in others:
to keep each other from the commitment of sin: to endeavor the destruction of
each others Lusts: and to study wherein they may be furtherers of one another
joy: and when they have found out their duty: accordingly to practice it, Heb.
3.12, 13. Heb. 10.24, 25, 26. Phil. 4.3.

FINIS.
REader I entreat thee to mend these few Erratas, page 4. lin: 24. read since.
l. 26. r. for. l. 37. r. breaking, p. 7. l. 25. r. the, l. 39. r. thy, page 9.
l. r. insensibly, p. 18. l. 16. r. with hearts that, p. 23. l. 19. r. he should
give, p. 24. l. r. for it they, p. 27. l. 2. leave out to, l. 19. r. you, p.
32. l. 20. this. l. 24. r. the.


