THE BLESSEDNESS OF BEING BOUNTIFUL: OR, Our Blessed Saviors usual PROVERB,
Opened, Asserted, and Practically Improved.

By SIMON FORD, D. D.

an angel looks on a madonna figure who is holding two children and being
prayed to by 5 people

LONDON, Printed for James Collins at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, 1674.

VIRO NATALIBUS, ERUDITIONE, Omnimodisque VIRTUTIBUS Nobilissimo, GEORGIO
Baroni de BERKELEY;

IN ALBUM CURATORUM HONORIFICORUM HOSPITII Vulgo DICTI DE BRIDEWELL,
Alteriusque de BETHLEM, DEMISSIONE SUI GRATIOSA NUPER ADSCRIPTO;

ET PROINDE IN HAC PAGELLA (HONORIS ergo) SEPARATIM NOMINANDO:

HUNC (TANQUAM TESTI EXPERTO) De BEATITVDINE BENEFICENTIAE TRACTATULUM,
Humillime Offert, OMNI OBSERVANTIAE GENERE ADDICTISSIMUS,

SIMON FORD.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL; Sir William Turner, Knight. PRESIDENT, With his
Assistants, the Governors of the two HOSPITALS of Bridewell and Bethlem.
Gentlemen,
IF, (as it has of late in like cases been customary) I should plead the
Authority of your Court, as that which has without any inclination of mine
own, solely prevailed with me to print this Discourse; I must ingenuously
confess, it would be no other than a modester kind of dissimulation with you
and the World.

For I must own, that when I delivered the substance of it from the Pulpit in
two Sermons (the one at the Spittle before the Lord Mayor then being, and the
Aldermen of this City, on Wednesday in Easterweek, 1672. and the other, which
was but the former (at the Instance of some of you) repeated with some suitable
enlargements, in your own Chapel of Bridewell at your late General Meeting,
1673.) I was not without thoughts of publishing it: because my principal Design
in preaching it being (as in Duty I am bound, having by your favor been
elected and hitherto continued Preacher to one of them) to promote the good of
the two Hospitals under your Government; I justly conceived that the more
public I made it, the more effectually it was like to answer my end.

Only I must withal acknowledge, that the general acceptance which it found
from those of you that heard me in both Auditories, and the testification of
your Desires (by an express Order of Court) to have it printed, concurring with
mine own inclinations; gave me a great additional encouragement to adventure it
thus to the public View.

Concerning the success of which undertaking, I am not altogether out of hope
that it may in some sort answer my desires; considering the serious Importance
of the weighty Argument it handles, and the great suitableness of the matter
contained in it, to the blowing up those few sparks of Charity, which
(notwithstanding these hard Times) remain yet unextinguished in the breasts of
many worthy Citizens and others; into such Acts and Expressions, as the great
Exigences of this City, and particularly, of these your Hospitals, do require.

However, if my hopes of success upon others should unhappily fail me; yet I
have reason to believe that my Endeavors herein will meet with a favorable
acceptance and compliance from you, who have already given me so great a pledge
of it, in commanding its publication.

I shall not farther enlarge this Dedicatory Address to you, because I shall
thereby the longer detain you from the Discourse it self; which I hope you had
no other design in calling for, than that you might read and practice it, and
thereby acquire that Blessedness to your selves unto which it directs. Which
also, that you may obtain, is and shall be the constant Prayer of

(Right Worshipful,) Your Obliged Servant in the Work of our Lord Jesus, Simon
Ford.

The Blessedness of being Bountiful, etc.
Acts 20. 35. -- It is more blessed to give than to receive.
SUch has always been the acknowledged Dominion of Proverbial Sayings over the
Principles and Lives of mankind; that some Etymologists have thence taken an
Argument to derive the Hebrew (...)
name of them from a Root which (though it have another signification besides,
yet) seems most of all to fit their purpose in that of ruling or commanding.

This Dominion, (besides what the worth and weight of their matter gives them)
is in a great degree conferred upon them, by the great Reputation of their
Authors; who (being ordinarily either wise, or great, or prosperous, beyond
the rate of other men) contribute that veneration to their Speeches, which is
wont to be given to their Persons. Which veneration also they obtain the
rather, because they are looked on by Posterity as the Abstracts of those grand
Principles, by the Practice whereof those eminent Persons arrived at that
degree of excellency in which they were placed; and are therefore esteemed the
most certain and compendious measures, by which the actions of all others can
be governed, who design to arrive at the same degree of eminency by their
examples.

And hence (probably) it is, that the wisdom of God thought meet to place a
Book of such Sayings in the Canon of Holy Scripture, with the great name of
Solomon, (who was most eminently both wise, and great, and prosperous)
prefixed; that the Principles of true Religion and Virtue, of which that Book
is composed, might not be destitute even of that lower degree of recommendation
(superadded to their divine Authority) which results from the credit of humane
Testimonials.

To shorten this Preface: It is upon this account that I chose at this time to
speak from this Text, which is much of the nature of a Proverbial Paradox,
which not only contains in it a great Truth, and therein the most powerful
motive to Works of Charity that can be couched in so few words; but is withal
recommended from the excellency of its Author beyond any of that kind. For
supposing all those that are digested into that one Book of Holy Scripture
before mentioned to be originally Solomon's, (which yet some question, and only
entitle him to the collection of the greatest part of them;) yet, this Proverb
is quoted from an Author in all the mentioned respects, far beyond both him
and all other men: one that was more truly than he, wiser than all men; ^ King.
4. 31. 1 Cor. 1. 24.
for he was the wisdom of God: one that was infinitely greater than he, or any
other mere man; for he was the Power of God, and Psalm. 72. 8, 9, 10.
of whose greatness even that of Solomon himself was but a Type or shadow: and
one that was also more prosperous than he, and all the most successful men in
the world; seeing the greatest design that ever was undertaken in the World
(the redemption of mankind from all their greatest, that is spiritual, dangers
and enemies) prospered in his hand. Is. 53. 10.


For it is the Lord Jesus Christ himself whom our Apostle (having occasion to
make use of this Proverb, in his Visitation Sermon to the Elders of Ephesus, of
which my Text is a part) avouches to be the utterer and frequent user of it. Ye
ought (says he) to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said (and it
was his usual saying, for so such forms of quoteing commonly import) that it is
more blessed, or rather blessed, (for (...) will bear both senses) to give,
than to receive.

And though we read not this saying of our Savior, in terminis, in any of the
Gospels of the Holy Evangelists who professedly undertook the penning of his
Speeches and Actions; yet have we not therefore any sufficient Reason to doubt
the Truth of the Apostles Quotation; seeing it was not (as one of them
professes for himself, and it is with the John 20, 30, 31, 21, 25.
same reason to be so judged of all the rest) the design of those holy Penmen
to give a perfect numerical account of every individual Passage of our Saviors
Life; but only to commend so much of it to Posterity, as might (without tiring
the Reader and confounding his memory with the length) suffice to beget a Faith
that he was the Son of God, and to instruct him sufficiently in those Doctrines
that were necessary to salvation. Yea, rather we have very weighty reasons to
justify the Apostle in this Quotation against all exception.

1. Because it is a saying, which does so aptly suit some others, recorded from
his mouth by the Evangelists; and which some Interpreters mention, to salve
Interpreters mention, to salve this Objection by Equivalency. For we find him
in his first Sermon commending mercifulness to his Disciples, under the same
encouragement of Blessedness; and promising Matt. 5. 7.
in the account he gives them of the last Judgment, that he will then pronounce
them eternally blessed, who extend their bounty to him in his members; and
those eternally cursed, who have in such good deeds been notoriously negligent
and defective, Matthew. 25. 34. to the end.

2. Because our Apostle quotes it before those to whom the very form of his
Speech supposes it to be as well known as to himself; if not to some of them
better, who (it may be) personally conversed with the Lord Jesus, (which he
himself did not) and heard it from his own lips. For he tells it them not as a
new thing that they knew not before, but only bids them remember it;
intimating that their own memories could not but attest that it was his saying
to whom he attributed it.

3. Add we to this Evidence, that the natural import of the Doctrine herein
contained is such, that it cannot with like Decorum be ascribed to any man, as
to him, who was himself (electively) the greatest Giver, and the least Receiver
that ever was in this world; and one (therefore) who must be supposed to have
most amply experimented the blessedness it speaks of, by the constant practice
of it.

4. Mind we, lastly, that the Saying it self is a most divine saying, every way
besitting that mouth which spoke the very thoughts of God's bosom to men; Joh.
1. 18.
seeing it so aptly and adequately expresses the very inward sentiments and
satisfactions of the Divine Essence, which imploys it self incessantly in being
the inexhaustible Fountain of all good Jam. 1. 17.
givings and perfect gifts to his Creatures, upon no other account (as you will
see more fully anon) but only the pleasure he takes therein.

You see, by this time (beloved) a double motive to engage your attention, to
what I have to say to you on this Text: the great Authority by which it comes
recommended; and the great Truth contained in it. Which attention so prepared,
I shall employ, by handling it in this method.

1. I shall open the words by a brief Explication. 2. Show you the Foundations
of Reason upon which the great Doctrine contained in them stands. 3. Gather
some practical Inferences from it.
I. In the Explication of the Words, I have promised to be brief. And therefore
I shall wave the Philosophical Notions in a great measure, which (being in
general considered without the coherence in which here they stand) they would
afford; as, concerning [The nature, and kinds, and degrees of humane
Blessedness; and (that which might in some sort also conduce to our present
purpose) the natural tendency of Acts of giving beyond those of receiving to
that blessedness naturally considered:] as apprehending, partly, that those
notions are not much conducing to your Christian Edification; and partly, that
our Savior, and our Apostle quoting this saying from him, cannot be supposed
to intend the instruction of their Hearers in a Metaphysical Speculation; but
rather, the laying before them and us a moral direction, to teach us by what
actions in this life men may most contribute to the advancement of their own
felicity.

And so the words are a determination of our Savior upon a supposed Question
concerning the comparative Acts of Giving and Receiving the good things of this
Life: to wit [ which of the two does most truly and most plentifully conduce
to man's blessedness?] In which Determination he casts the scale on the side of
Giving, (which imports, in general, the doing good to others in whatever kind
or way, and in special, by Acts of Liberality and Bounty;) against Receiving,
(which, in general, includes whatever way of doing good to a man's self in this
life, and in special, by Acts of getting and keeping this World's goods to his
own single emolument and advantage) as tending to make him more certainly and
cumulatively blessed. For in this sense, it is plain by the Context, this
Proverb of our Savior is here made use of by the Apostle, as an Argument to
persuade the Elders of Ephesus to preach the Gospel to their people in their
present state of affairs, gratis, and therein to give them that temporal reward
in to the bargain, which they might (as he elsewhere determines, viz. 1 Cor. 9.
12.) have challenged of them, together with the Gospel; it being as much a gift
to forgive a Debt, as to give a sum of money out of ones own Purse: which
piece of bountiful self-denial he exhorts them to for this end, that they might
(for their more effectual edification) comply with the weakness of their young
converts who loved not (as few do) a chargeable Gospel; though they were
thereby forced in the mean while, as he himself did, to labor with their own
hands to get a livelihood. And this is that, which in the beginning of this
Verse, he calls, [supporting the weak;] to induce them whereunto, he quotes
this notable saying of our Lord Jesus, to assure them that the inward
satisfaction which they would receive from the conscience of having faithfully
promoted the salvation of souls by preaching under such disadvantageous
circumstances, would be of more worth to them, than the richest temporal
Rewards and Revenues they could expect, or might lawfully challenge, for their
pains.

So that (in sum) you may take the whole sense of the words in this short
Paraphrase. Q. d. I know the World is generally apt to think that the way to
Happiness is by getting and possessing abundance of earthly goods. But I tell
you from the Lord Jesus, that man provides more truly and effectually for his
own blessedness, and promotes it more plentifully, by contributing to the
benefiting of others, then by doing good to himself: he is a surer and a
greater gainer by giving, then by having; by laying out thus, then by laying
up, as the most of the World do; by Bounty and Charity, then by Covetousness
and Parsimony.

II. And this Paradox (for such it seems to all Worldlings) thus explained, I
am (in the next place) engaged to make good from its proper foundations of
Reason. For though speaking to an Auditory of professed Christians, as I do, I
might very well acquiesce in the great Authority of our Savior, to which we
all submit, as a sufficient justification of that which is his own Assertion:
Yet, because the greatest divine Truths carry greater Evidence with them when
they are proved to be consonant to the common Notions implanted in humane
nature; I therefore think it needful to fortify this Doctrine (abundantly
capable of it) with Proofs of that kind also.

And this undertaking I thus endeavor to perform. All the good things which
generally (even in the opinion of worldlings) are thought contributary to
selicity, are either honorable, pleasurable, or profitable: and (if this be
granted, which I know none that denies,) I must confess my self much out of the
way in the matter of Reason and Argument, if I be not able to make it good,
that Giving has more of all these in it, than Receiving.

[1. Begin we therefore with the greater Honourableness of Bountiful Actions.

Honor is the real inward esteem that Persons who are meet Judges therein have
of any one for things and actions of true worth and excellency. So that, to be
truly Honorable, is, to be and do that which is really worthy and excellent;
and which is so esteemed to be by the most competent Judges.

Whence I have two things on this Head to prove.

1. That Acts of giving are Acts of more real worth and excellency than those
of receiving. 2. That they are, and have always been so esteemed by the most
competent Judges, and such as in this case can rationally be refused by no man.
1.] There is a real worth and excellency in Acts of Giving, beyond those of
Receiving. Which is to me evident from two main Arguments.

(1. From the greater conformity, which the former bear to the genuine temper
and constitution of the Soul of Man. The strength of which Argument lies in
this Principle; That where any Nature is acknowledged in it self to be
Honorable, (as certainly humane Nature is, being, in the confession of
Heathens themselves, God's offspring Acts 17. 23.
in a special way of Descent, and standing not so many removes from him, as all
other sublunary natures do;) there it is most honorable for all that partake
of that Nature to act conformably thereunto. Now the humane Soul is certainly a
Being endowed with large, generous, and beneficent propensions: so that it
cannot without very great uneasiness be confined and cooped up within narrow
and selfish Principles. It is strongly inclined to be sociable and conversive;
to be communicative and obliging; to be pitiful and compassionate; all which
qualities are of a giving nature: and that to such a degree, that the
expressions of these inclinations by one man to another, are ordinarily called
(as if they only were so, and the contrary propensions were accounted an
implicit abrenunciation of humane nature, and an herding ones self with
Brutes,) by the name of Humanity. Insomuch that our Savior, when he was to
undertake an Office for our benefit, which required compassionate affections,
chose to be made like unto us in all things, that he might, (by the
inclinations of his own assumed humane nature, as well as by the determinations
of his Divine Will,) become a Merciful Heb. 2. 17. 4. 15.
High Priest, and compassionately touched with the feeling of our infirmities.

Add we, (for a close of this Head) to this evidence of Reason, one or two
from Experience; which, where it is constant, is wont to found Maxims and
Principles for the use of Reason it self.

The first Instance I shall give, shall be in Friendship, wherein the soul of
man does most voluntarily fling off all disguises, and appears most
delightfully in its proper Naturals to the object of its dearest Affections.
Now in such circumstances wherein usually contests of friendship do arise, the
great dispute betwixt those Souls that are so linked together, is, whether the
one or the other shall exceed in acts of noble and generous bounty: which
extends to a pulling down all the Enclosures of Meum and Tuum, and rendering all
things, even life it self, mutually common.

The other Instance shall be in a Vice, which (even in those who at other times
use all the Arts they can to disguise their natures, and keep their breasts
shut to all mankind,) is wont to pick the lock of men's bosoms, and, whether
they will or no, to expose them to common view: I mean, that of Dunkenness. Now
in that sinful excess, among many vicious inclinations (which are various in
several men, and which then appear variously,) this one virtuous propension,
(which that vice that most transforms men to beasts, cannot eradicate) does
most evidently and almost universally discover it self; insomuch that the most
covetous and illiberal Persons in the world are in their cups always
generously frolic, and free of their Purses; and those that can worst spare it
many times, are yet apt to take it ill that any one in the company offers to
pay any part of the reckoning but themselves.

Which I make use of only, as an argument of great force from common
experience, that the purely Natural Temper of the Humane Soul is more inclined
to Giving than Receiving; and (by consequence) that that Propension which is
thus naturally implanted in us, renders those Acts which are most couformable
to it (viz. those of Giving,) most Honorable. My first proof.

2. The second, I shall take from the greater agreeableness of Acts of Giving
to principles of Justice, than those of Receiving. Which if I can make good, I
doubt not of gaining what I intend by it. Now this Notion I thus make out.

God has originally, by the Law of the Creation, given the Psalm. 115. 16.
Earth to the Children of men: that is, has entitled every man to so much of
it, as may yield him a competent and comfortable subsistence. And the propriety
that one man has in this, and another in that proportion of the common Fathers
Bounty, is not set out by him, immediately; but by particular Compacts and
Constitutions of men themselves. Which Compacts and Constitutions, though they
be sufficient bars, (even upon the obligation of Conscience) to fence men's
particular rights against the irruptions of fraud or violence, to alter the
possession against the owners will; yet cannot destroy the fundamental Title
that any man in want has to be supplied in his necessities, sutably to his
occasions, out of the abundance of other men. Whence it necessarily follows,
that there lies an obligation of Justice upon the abounding possessor of this
worlds goods, in all such cases, (as indeed in all other, wherein any of those
uses are concerned, which God and Nature have made necessary for the support of
common Humanity in the several generations of the World) to quit his propriety
so far, by his own consent, as may suffice for the relief of his Brethren, and
the satisfying of those uses, (whatever they be,) without which mankind cannot
be preserved or maintained as it ought to be.

Which is the Reason, in likelihood, why the abundance of any man's Riches is
called by our Savior, (...), that which is Luke 16. 12.
another, (i. e. another with him, and not entirely his own:) so that no man
can justly say of his worldly Estate, as Nabal did, and in his sense, [My
bread, and my 1 Samuel 25. 11.
water, and my flesh, etc.] as if no creature had any share therein but
himself. For indeed, (besides that all we have, even whiles we have it, is (in
reference to God) not ours; for he loses not his Supreme Right and Propriety
of Dominion by any of his bounties:) a greater part of most men's Estates than
usually they imagine, is by the Original Divine Law that I told you of before,
not entirely their own, even with reference to their brethren in humanity; but
they, in several capacities, may justly challenge considerable shares therein,
which cannot with Justice be denied them. And particularly, in the case of
Charity (which I specially here drive at,) Alms is therefore frequently called
Justice or Righteousness, and he that gives them, a Just or Righteous man, in
the usual Hebrew Idiom throughout the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and some
say, in the New Mat. 6. 1. 2 Cor. 9. 10, etc.
also in some places of special note, which I will not now insist on. And he
that denies or delays his relief, in his Brothers needs, is said (by Solomon)
to withhold Prove. 3. 27.
good from those to whom it is due, or (as the Margin reads it) from the Owners
thereof. So that (Justice, which is the foundation of all moral virtues, being
on that account Honorable, and Bounty an Act of Justice; and tenaciousness or
sordid parsimony, on the contrary, of injustice;) it is evident, that that act
which bears most conformity to Justice, must be more Honorable than that which
for a great part is, and more commonly is suspected to be, of Confederacy with
Injustice: i. e. Giving, then Receiving.

2.] And lest any person should seek protection from the dishonorable
Reflections this Doctrine makes upon his sordidness; by alleging, that this
Judgment, concerning the real excellency of acts of Giving above Receiving, is
not made by competent Judges; I shall (in the next place) show you who they are
on whose determinations I rely, for the justifying this Assertion: who (I am
bold to assert) are not to be refused (by any person who owns himself a
Creature, a Man, or a Christian,) as the most meet to determine in this matter.

(1. The first Judge to whom I appeal in this cause, is God himself, who must
needs be owned by every Creature, as the Supreme Judge in a Court of Honor;
being the most excellent of Beings, and the Fountain of all that is honorable.
Now God, besides what he has declared in his written word, which tells us that
the horn Psalm. 112. 9.
of him that disperseth and gives to the poor shall be exalted, (a Metaphor
taken from those ruling Beasts in the Herd that carry their horns higher than
the rest, with a kind of glorying, and confidence,) with honor: I say,
besides what his Word, (in that and other places) declares expressly; God does
most evidently pronounce his Judgment in this matter, by his own actions; who,
(renouncing the capacity of receiving from any other Being, as a
disparagement,) takes it for his honor to be and to be owned as the universal
Giver, that gives to all life and breath and all Act. 17. ^5.
things: and argues, (with some kind of exprobration) the unworthiness of
those men's thoughts concerning him, that conceit any man can give any thing to
him; from the precedence and causality of his Bounty to all that capacity we
can pretend to, to do any thing to oblige him withal, seeing that of him and
through him Romans 11. 35, 37.
are all things.

(2. Nor can the Lord Jesus be refused as a competent Judge in this matter, by
any that owns the Name of Christian, and acknowledges the highest Honors of
the whole Creation to be due to him; who is worshipped by all the Angels of
God, and Heb. 1. 6. Phil. 2. 10.
hatha Name above every Name, a Name to which every knee must bow, etc. Now it
must needs be yielded by any rational man, that (had he not, as he has,
verbally declared his Judgment in this particular of Blessedness as well in
many other Scriptures, as in the Text, yet) he has sufficiently by his deeds
proclaimed that to be the most worthy and honorable action, by the constant
exercise whereof he procured his own Honors; emptying himself that he might
fill us: and becoming poor for our sakes that we Phil. 2. 7. 2. Cor. 8. 9.
through his poverty might be rich; and in the prospect whereof, he quitted the
natural Honor of being equal to his Father, to assume an office wherein he was
to be his Inferior, that he might thereby acquire the peculiar Honor of being
our Redeemer. Now it is evident, that the whole work of our Redemption
consisted of acts of Giving, not Receiving.

(3. However, as Men, it is to be hoped that none that owns himself of that
number, will in this matter refuse the Judgment of all mankind. Which
Judgment may be evidently gathered,

(1.) From the respect and Duty which (all the world over) superior Relations
expect and receive from their Inferiors, which in humanity are equal to
themselves: whereof, if we enquire the Reason, there can be no other given
(antecedent to Divine or Humane Laws, which yet are founded upon antecedent
Reason) than this; that they are, or else are supposed to be, the Authors of
such and such benefits (either of Being, or conducing to well-being) which
those Inferiors receive from them, or enjoy under them.

(2.) From the Testimonies of Gratitude, which are every where and in all Ages
given to those who are eminently beneficial to Mankind, or to particular
Societies of men. Wherein, there could never be so universal a consent, but
from the concurrence of all men's Judgments in this Principle, that to do good,
is more noble than to receive.

Now this is evident, (in matter of fact) from all Histories. The old Heathens
thought they could not honor such Instruments sufficiently with any humane
Honors; and therefore they deified, (as far as in them lay, by Temples, and
Altars, and Sacrifices, etc.) the Inventours of useful Arts and Sciences; the
Founders of Kingdoms and Empires; the Authors of public Constitutions and
Laws; and the great and noted Champions and defenders, or Saviors and
deliverers, of any Communities of men from great and public calamities.

Yea, they bestowed like Honors, upon the Heavenly Bodies, and Earthly
Elements. The Sun and the Moon, and diverse of the noted Stars: yea the Earth it
self, and the Sea that encompasseth it, the Fire and the Air, and Rivers and
Springs; (and whatever else contributed to the support of man;) were either
reputed Gods themselves, or the special residencies of some Deities, who by
them communicated their particular Bounties to mankind.

And where these Heathen Idolatries have been exploded, yet even there, men
have generally thought such persons worthy the highest Acknowledgements that
Humane Nature was capable of: Which they have expressed in Panegyricks and
Poems, in Statues and other magnificent Structures, in Coyns and other public
Inscriptions, (and whatever other lasting Monuments they could devise;) to
render them, as to their Names and Memories (who could not be in their Bodies)
immortal.

Let now, (for a close of this Head) the sordid self-ended sort of men, show us
any Instances, if they can, of like Honors done to those who (without doing
good to any but themselves) have spent their Time in finding riches as a nest,
and gathering them like Isa. 10. 14.
eggs, to sit on. Yea, rather, let the experience of all Ages speak, and it
will tell us, that there are no sort of men in the world, whom the generality
of Mankind have treated with more curses and bitter scoffs whiles they lived;
or hissed off the stage of this life with more open reproach and infamy when
they died. So that I hope, I have sufficiently demonstrated, that (whether we
respect the nature of the Acts themselves, or the concurrent Judgment of God
and Man,) it is more honorable by far to give than to receive.

[2. The Pleasure which accrews to men from Acts of Bounty, does no less exceed
that which arises from those of Covetousness and Parsimony.

Of which there needs no farther evidence (in Reason) than what I before
intimated upon the former Head; viz. [the greater agreeableness of such actions
to the native largeness and generosity of the soul of man, and the Principles
of Universal Justice:] There being no such satisfactory pleasure in the world
attainable by Humane Nature, as is the inward content which a virtuous man
takes in reflecting upon those things which he has done with the approbation
of his own Reason and Conscience; and no greater grief, than when they complain
that they are violenced and oppressed by unnatural and unreasonable Lusts and
Passions.

But to make this also more evident by particular Instances.

(1. It is an undeniable Argument of the Pleasure that Giving yields beyond
Receiving, that God, whose infinite Perfection places him beyond all capacity
of Receiving (as was said before) can be supposed to have no other motive to
Give, as he does continually, but the inward satisfaction he finds in
Beneficence it self. Whence some tell us, that his Name, El-shaddai, has the
Notion of a full breast in it, to which nothing can be so pleasurable as to
vent it self into the mouth of the sucking Infant: which is pained with its own
fullness, and finds its only ease in being emptied. And indeed, the complacency
that he is said to have taken in all the works of his Creation, when he had
finished them, employed in that so often repeated Phrase, God saw Genesis 1. 10,
12, 18, 21, 25, 31. Psalm. 145. 16.
that it was good; the readiness that is in him to satisfy the desires of
every living thing; the constant unweariedness of his Bounty (the greatest
evidence of the pleasure taken in any action) continually Psalm. 104. 24.
filling the earth with his riches; the invitations he so frequently Ps. 50. 15.
gives to men to call upon him, opening the mouths of their holy desires wide
that he may fill them, Ps. 81. 10.
and in all things making their requests Phil. 4. 6.
known to him; with the delight he professes to take in Prove. 15. 8.
the prayers of good men, which invite his Bounties: sufficiently argue the
divine pleasure that is in giving; being the satisfaction which God himself
chooses for himself. And to be sure, be the pleasure of receiving what it
will, it cannot pretend to so high an Original.

(2. The like may (secondly) be argued from the example of our Lord Jesus, who
seems by his actions to have preferred the pleasure of seeing his spiritual
seed, Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 10. 5. 9.
and bringing many sons to glory, by being the Author and Captain of their
Salvation; before the infinite satisfactions and delights of his Fathers Bosom,
wherein he rejoiced Pro. 8. 30.
always before him from all eternity: and that so far, that he deprived
himself (in a sort) of the very pleasures of Divinity for a Time, by becoming
Man, that he might be the Redeemer and Savior of Mankind.

The very prospect of this great work cheered his heart before he undertook it,
he rejoiced in the Pro. 8. 31.
habitable part of Gods Earth, and his delights were with the Sons of men; when
he entered upon that Body the Father had prepared for him, though he knew he was
to make it a Sacrifice, yet he did it (as he professes) with delight to Heb.
10. 5, 7.
do his Fathers will therein; he spent all his Time on Earth in going about and
doing good gratis, Acts 10. 38.
to those miserable Creatures that could not any way requite him; did diverse of
his great works in Joh. 7. 4, 5.
silence and privacy, and forbad Luke 5. 14. 8. 56. Joh. 6. 15.
the publication of them; and refused the Honors that men offered him for
those that were of too public benefit to be concealed; and when he knew that
his doleful Hour was come, how did he complain the minutes moved slowly, till
he had opportunity offered to accomplish that bloody Luke 12. 50.
Baptism, that he foretold he was to be baptized withal? His Cross on which
he suffered, he is said Col. 2. 15.
to triumph upon, as a Conqueror in a Chariot of State. And (after his Death,)
his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven again, he looked on as a Joy set
before him; Heb. 12. 2.
not surely on his own account only, but because he also knew he was going to
prepare Mansions Joh. 14. 2.
for us, as our Harbinger, to lead us the way into the Holy Place, as our
forerunner, and to lie as our Heb. 6. 20.
Lieger there to do us good Offices by his intercession till he had saved us to
the utmost. So that our 7. 25.
Saviors Practice is a full and further evidence of the Pleasure that is in
Giving more than Receiving.

(3. Gods holy Angels, as (of all Creatures) they nearest approach to the
Divine Nature, so herein they proportionably imitate his perfections; that
(like him) they are continually employed in doing good upon the like motives of
the delight and satisfaction they find therein. For continuing in the state of
felicity wherein they were at first created, they must be supposed to be above
any need of receiving any real addition to the happiness which the continual
standing in Gods presence affords them; and yet, with what cheerfulness and
alacrity do they do the will of Heb. 1. 14.
God, even in those low Ministeries whereunto they stoop to serve our
occasions? They keep us in all our ways, and that with as much carefulness, as
the Nurse does the tender Infant, bearing us Ps. 91. 11, 12.
up in their hands, that we dash not so much as our foot against a stone; they
pitch their tents, as a Ps. 34. 7.
constant lifeguard, about good men, (yea, an whole Army of 2 Kings 6. 17.
them, sometimes, about one Saint) for their security; they fight for us
against evil Spirits, under the Apoc. 12. 7.
Captain of our Salvation; they fly swiftly, as our Intelligencers, Dan. 9. 21.
on good errands, to comfort us; and these, and all other good offices, they
are ready to do on all occasions, for the least and meanest of Mankind (even
those Isa. 58. 7. Mat. 18. 10.
whom we, who are their own flesh, are apt to despise) while they live; and
when they die, think it not beneath them to take up their Luke 16. 32.
Souls into their blessed Arms, and carry them to their habitation of bliss
and glory. All which offices they would never descend to do with so much
unwearied alacrity, if they found not the doing of them pleasurable: for if
they disgusted them in any sort, as burdensome and uncomfortable employments;
it must needs imply, that all the while they are so employed, their perfect
holiness must suffer a diminution, and their perfect happiness an eclipse.

(4. But all these Instances, it may be objected, are above us, and so not
imitable by us: nor are our pleasures to be measured by theirs. Let us
therefore (in the next place) make trial, whether, even men of like passions
with our selves, have not been wont to find the same satisfaction in giving;
and for that reason preferred it before receiving.

(1.) Look we first, on the Christian part of Mankind. And, whatever we may
observe in the later Ages and very dreggs of Christianity, whrein Religion is
even swallowed up and devoured by Interest all the world over; yet I am sure,
from the beginning it was not so. Those first Disciples of our Master Christ
took the greatest delight in copying out the great examples of his Generosity
and Bounty: They sold (some of them) considerable Estates, and gave in the
price of them to the common stock, to supply the necessary charges of the first
Plantation of Christianity. Acts. 4. 34. to the end. They carried about the
great and unsearchable riches of Christ, and 2 Cor. 2. 14.
scattered the savor of his knowledge with triumph in every place freely: and
when they might, refused to receive any thing from those to whom they gave so
much, and would not be stopped of this glorying, nor suffer it 1 Cor. 9. 15.
to be made void: accounting it the very reward of their work to do it without
reward; and render V. 18.
the Gospel without charge.

And the great hardships and hazards that they underwent, in the Discharge of
this Duty so infinitely beneficial to Mankind, they did undergo with the
greatest delight and inward satisfaction. I take pleasure (says our Apostle)
in infirmities, (i. e. of suffering) in reproaches, in necessities, 2 Cor. 12.
10.
in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: which abundantly shows what
pleasure that work yielded, that made all those necessary difficulties
pleasurable, which were then to be encountered for its sake. For, however they
that underwent these things had by Faith a prospect of a future great reward,
which contributed very much to their present Comfort; yet, even that argues
sufficiently the verity of our Hypothesis, that in that condition wherein they
were not in any temporal respect receivers, nor capable of being so, they found
such over-ballancing pleasures in the nature and consequences of their very
work, as weighed down all the discouraging Circumstances in which they were by
Providence engaged.

(2.) But, to be sure, whatever future hopes Christians had to encourage them
in well doing with delight: the Heathens had none such; for the Apostle tells
Ephesians. 2 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
us, they were without hope (i. e. such as is grounded and certain,) of these
felicities of another world. And yet even diverse of them, have found a kind of
intellectual Epicurisme (if I may so say) in the very acts of Beneficence. Of
which it is a notable Instance which Xenophon gives us in the character of his
Hero, of whom he tells us most divinely, that (...), he had a greater delight
in what he gave than in what he possessed. And on the other side, it is a great
Instance of the self-displeasure of a virtuous man, when he has missed the
opportunity of doing good in this kind; that the good Emperor Titus was wont
to complain he had lost that day, which he had spent without doing some body a
good Turn; than which, nothing can more strongly argue the pleasure he found in
every other Day wherein he had been so employed.

(3.) Lastly, look we on Mankind indefinitely, and we shall find, that all
persons (whether Christians or Heathens) own a great Pleasure in giving or
doing good to others, beyond the proportion of what receiving or doing good to
themselves yields. For whence is it else, that the careful Nurse delightfully
suffers her body to be drained of the best nourishment it receives, in suckling
her Infant; that she undergoes with singing so many nauseous drudgeries for
him; and disquiets her self with so many restless and wakefull nights to breed
him; from whom for diverse months she can expect no other present return than a
few smiles now and then, when she can get him in a good humor; and whose
future qualities or condition she cannot foresee so as to expect any certain
future requital from him? Whence is it, that every one generally loves the
creature of his own Bounty, and studies to oblige him more, to whom he has
formerly been wonted to show special kindnesses? And yet this many times is
done to those that have nothing of real worth to deserve, nor ever arrive at
proportionable capacities to requite them. Certainly, the most obvious Reason
of these actions, that occurres to a considering man, must be (that that I am
discoursing of,) that to all rational Beings there is a pleasure that
accompanies giving or Beneficence in any kind; which is more generous and
refined than any that comes in by receiving.

(5. Lastly, it seems not altogether unworthy to be taken notice of upon this
Head, that the Scripture (in conformity with this Notion of the pleasure of
Giving, and probably the more to commend it to us to make an experiment in our
selves) expresses the inanimate Creatures themselves as Instances of rejoicing
in acts of beneficence to Mankind.

For thus the outgoings of the Ps. 65. 8:
Morning and Evening are said to rejoice, when in their constant vicissitudes
they refresh us: thus the Sun, when he arises to enlighten the world, is
described as a Bridegroom coming out of his Ps. 19. 5.
Chamber, and a Giant rejoicing to run his race: thus, in Jothams Parable, the
Olive, and the Vine, and the Fig Tree, are represented as unwilling to forgo
the pleasures of bearing sweet fruit to furnish divine Sacrifices, and humane
Treatments, to obtain a Monarchy Judge. 9. 9, 11, 13.
among the Trees: and thus, lastly, the Pastures, when they are covered with
Grass, and Flocks to Ps. 65. 13.
crop it, and the Valleys, when laden with Corn to be reaped by us, are said to
shout and sing for joy. As, on the other side, the Heavens are said to be black
with Jer. 4. 28. 12. 4. Is. 24. 4, 7. 33. 9.
grief, and the Earth to mourn, and the Vine to languish (as it were) with
sorrow; when in a barren year their wonted fertility is restrained.

In sum therefore, (to close up this head too) whether we take measure of the
delight and pleasantness that is in Acts of Giving beyond Receiving; either
from God or Christ, or good Angels, or Christians, or Heathens, or inanimate
Creatures themselves, (which distribution takes in almost all Beings but
Devils, whose delight, indeed, is only in doing mischief:) we find, that the
felicity that accrews from Pleasure, is greater from giving than receiving.

[3. The third and last thing that contributes to blessedness is Profit. And my
next business is to show, that in that respect also Giving has the advantage
of Receiving, as being of the two the more profitable.

And so it is both in reference to the Benefit that thereby is attained in this
World, and in that which is to come.

(1. In reference to this World, There is a threefold Concern to be regarded,
wherein the advantage I speak of evidently appears,

1. In Life.

2. In Sickness and Death.

3. After Death.

1.) In Life, (this Life, wherein Ps. 17. 14.
the Worldlings portion principally lies) man's portion of this Worlds good
things is by acts of Bounty,

1. Best Secured,

2. Most Comfortably enjoyed,

3. Most plentifully Improved.

(1.) This Portion is hereby best secured. Insomuch, that no Deeds or
Evidences, or Bonds or Mortgages, or Baggs or Chests, or Walls or Forts, or
Locks or Bars, or Bolts or Guards, afford us like Security for what we have;
as charitable Giving bestows upon us. And that, not only in reference to a
Security of Equivalency, (in which notion St. Ambrose handsomely Rhetoricates
with the rich man in the Gospel, who was sollicitous to pull down his old Lu.
12. 18.
Barns, as not big enough to receive his increase, and build bigger; when he
tells him, that the course he took was the way to pull down rather than to
build; and adds, that he will direct him to a better course to secure and lay
up his Goods, by making the houses of the Widows, the Stomachs of the Poor, and
the Mouths of the Orphans his Barns and Granaries; And our Savior before him,
when he tells us of laying Mat. 6. 19.
up our Treasure (by laying it out,) where rust or moth does not corrupt, and
where thieves cannot break through and steal; and to put our money into baggs
that Lu. 12. 33.
will not wax old, etc:) but also in reference to that temporal Security in
kind, which the worldling most looks after, in whose Hearts as well as in his
Deeds [to have and to hold] is the clause of principal respect and esteem. Let
us see therefore, how even this Security may be chiefly attained by Giving. And
here, (besides the rational conducibleness of the Principles of Generosity and
Bounty to the preservation of men's temporal Estates, from the general
Friendship which such a Temper procures a man, whiles every mouth is open for
him, every hand is ready to be lifted up in his defense, and every man's Power
and Interest is engaged to preserve him as a public benefit; and the very
worst of men, that are wont vivere rapto, to live by cheating and robbery, have
a great awe of injuring such an one, as judging such a Crime to be of a guilt
little inferior to Sacrilege:) I say besides this rational Security, the
munificent man has the far greater Religious Security of diverse Promises of
Divine Protection. If thou deal thy bread to the hungry, (says the Prophet
Isaiah,) and satisfy the afflicted soul; if thou bring the poor that are cast
out of their own, to thy house, and when thou see the naked thou cover him,
and hide not thy self from thine own flesh, i. e. any one that is partaker of
common humanity with thy self, etc: then shall thy righteousness go before
thee, as thy Avantguard, and the glory of the Lord (as the presence of God to
the Israelites in their march out of Egypt) shall be thy Rereward. And the Lord
shall guide thee continually, into ways of safety and security, and satisfy
thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered
Isa. 58. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Garden, and like a Spring whose waters fail not, when public calamities
destroy the estates of others, as the scorching Sun does the fruits of the
earth in a dry season.

Which Promise is the same in substance (abating the high Metaphors) with what
(in plainer and more intelligible words, according to the Language of those
Times) we find elsewhere thus expressed; that the righteousness of him that is
bountiful, shall endure for ever, i. e. he shall never be other, than a giver,
he shall always have wherewithal to give, and wealth and riches shall Psalm.
112. 3. 9.
(as constant inhabitants) be in his house. I could heap up many places of
Scripture more to the same purpose. That of the Prophet before mentioned, that
by Isa. 32. 8.
liberal things the liberal man shall stand, when others fall to decay. That of
the same Prophet, that he that walks righteously, (of 33. 16, 17.
which righteous walking Almesgiving (as I told you before) is a part) shall
dwell on high, (the proper situation for strength,) his place of defense shall
be the munitions of rocks, (not to be stormed or undermined,) bread shall be
given him, and his waters shall be sure; so as not to be starved or famished
out of his fortification, placed in the Divine Protection, etc. But I forbear,
that I be not too tedious in so copious an Argument.

In a word, by this means that Quicksilver-wealth, that is so volatile, that
ordinarily it makes it self wings to fly away, (by offering Pro. 23. 5.
Temptations to the owner to waste it in riots and debaucheries, or to the
Robber to take it away by fraud and violence) is fixed and kept constant to its
Possessor: and uncertain riches 1 Timothy 6. 17.
(as the Apostle calls them,) being joined with wisdom and righteousness, (true
Godliness and Alms,) Pro. 8. 16.
become durable and abiding.

Whereas, on the contrary, the withholding what is meet from the good uses
wherein Providence calls for it, tends to Poverty; Prove. 11. 24.
i. e. is the ready ready way to undo a man even in this world. For, (as
constant Experience shows) most men are wont to make little Conscience, (when
they have ability and opportunity to do it,) of getting what they can from such
an one as is noted to be sordidly tenacious; every one contributing either his
wishes or his help to the pillaging of him: and Gods Curse also seconds such
attempts (though unjust, as from men, justly,) blowing Hag. 1. 9.
upon such Estates, till he has blown them away (as your Margin in the place
quoted reads it) which a sordid Parsimony scrapes together, and holds fast by
humane contrivance and endeavor. Thus you see the Security that Giving yields
to our present enjoyments, beyond Receiving.

(2.) This Portion is rendered more comfortable to us in the use of it, by
Giving, than by Receiving. And this from a twofold cause.

1. From the satisfaction that a bountiful giver has in his own Conscience,
that he spends out of that Estate which is clearly and entirely his own: a
satisfaction, which (how good a Title soever one has as to men) no person can
have, as to God, but he. For whereas all our Estates are held of God as their
Supreme Lord, (and that, under such and such charges and Duties to issue out of
them to pious and charitable uses;) it follows, that except those uses be first
duly satisfied, we have just reason to fear a forfeiture, and thereupon to
question our legal Title, in foro Dei, to the remainder. For, by taking from
that Lump or Heap from which Gods portion is not separated, we are in continual
hazard of devouring that which Prove. 20. 25.
is holy, together with that which is our own propriety; i. e. of committing
Sacrilege, which of all sins does most forfeit our selves and what we have to
Gods Exchequer. Whereas, on the contrary, the liberal Person that bountifully
discharges all these Payments, is free from that scruple. For, as the paying
of First Fruits, Deuteronomy. 26. 11.
under the Law, unto God, discharged the remainder of each years profits, to be
freely and comfortably made use of by the Owner: so does Alms, under the
Gospel, given proportionably to what we possess, (as our Savior tells the
Pharisees) make our Lu. 11. 41.
whole Estates, in point of Conscientious use, clean unto us.

2. From the true comfortable relish of the natural good which the Creatures
afford with Gods blessing; which the sordid Receiver never tastes so sweetly as
the bountiful Giver. For (besides that the great gatherers of worldly riches
do many times through sordid penuriousness, deny themselves, as well as all
others, the enjoyment of what they have, and have not the heart to eat Eccles.
6. 2.
thereof;) it often falls out that cares and fears and other uncomfortable
Passions which such men are subject unto, when they do eat, make their bread to
them like Ps. 102. 9. Prove. 20. 17.
ashes, and fill their mouths with gravel, as the Scripture phraseth the
uncomfortable use of those Creatures to some that are the comfortable food of
other men. So that the bountiful man, whose generosity sets him above those
vexing distempers, enjoyes more of the Creature it self in far meaner
accommodations, than he that has the good things of the world in the greatest
affluence, with the sordid attendance of those disquieting Passions that are
wont to wait on penurious parsimony and covetousness. So that a little (if it
be but a little) that a righteous Ps. 37. 16.
(i. e. the charitable) man has, is in this respect better than the riches of
many such wicked: And if, (for so it often falls out, as will by and by appear
more fully) the Blessing of God upon bountiful givers make them really rich;
he makes them herein (withal) richer than all others of equal or greater
Estates, that he adds no Prove. 10. 22.
sorrow with it.

(3.) But the greatest advantage of all, (in reference to his Portion in this
life) accrewing to the generous and religious Giver, is that which the worldly
man most looks after, [Improvement and Increase;] which (even in men's Temporal
Estates) is acquired also by Bounty rather than by Covetousness and Parsimony.
For indeed, though such persons as give liberally, are ordinarily said to be
too free to be fat; and the more a man takes from the heap, (in humane
judgment,) he makes it so much the less: yet herein we often judge by false
Measures, and might, if we duly weighed things, find our selves as often
confuted by Experience it self. For it is from thence, that those speeches of
Solomon got the reputation of Proverbs, that there is that thus scatters and
yet increases; Prove. 11. 24, 25.
and that the liberal soul, though free, becomes fat (to cross the former
Saw,) and he that waters others, is watered (plentifully with Gods
benediction in the same kind) himself.

Whence it is, that Giving, in the Scripture, is frequently compared to sowing,
wherein the seed does not (as one says) perire, but parturire; it is not lost,
but impregnated by the Soil on which it falls, and made fruitful; God
increasing to bountiful givers the fruits of their righteousness (i. e. the 2
Cor. 9. 3, 9, 10.
Estates which their Alms do scatter;) and making all Grace, (that is, all
sorts of effects of his own Bounty,) toward such to abound; and giving them
all sufficiency in all things; and even those (among the rest) of which they
seem, by bestowing so much on others, to endanger the not leaving what is
sufficient for themselves.

So that (as an ancient Writer tells us,) the breasts of Charity the more they
are sucked, breed the more milk; the Woman of Sarepta's Barrel and Cruse have
no 1 Kings 17. 16.
bottom, whiles she is charitable to Gods Prophet; and the Miracle of our
Savior, (in a sort) is daily acted over and over, whiles, as in his, so in the
bountiful donours hands, the loaves Matthew. 14. 19, 20. 15. 36, 37.
as they are distributed, multiply.

Very ingenious, to this purpose, is the comparison that one makes betwixt the
Expenses that men are at to maintain their Lusts, and those that they charge
themselves withal to charitable Uses; to the eating a Field of Corn in the
blade, (as is usual when it is rank,) by Horses and Sheep. The teeth of Lusts
in an Estate, though never so great, are like (says he) to those of Horses in
such a Field, that tear up the Corn by the roots; but those of the poor, like
the teeth of Sheep, that by cropping it moderately make it spread and increase.

And the story Melancthon (as I find him quoted) tells us of a certain good
Bishop, is very proper to this purpose. The good man upon a journey being
compassed about by a crowd of poor people (who, knowing his charitable mind,
begged his Alms) commands his servant that managed his expenses, to give them
three Crowns, which fell out then to be all he had in Purse. The servant
(considering the many occasions that in traveling fall out) thought it good
husbandry in his present circumstances, to curtail the Charity of his Master,
and save one of the three; withal, telling his Master how thrifty he had been
for him. They had not traveled much further, when certain great Personages
meeting them, and knowing formerly the Bishops bountiful disposition, gave the
same Servant for his Masters use 200 Crowns. Which Bounty when his Master
understood, he presently expressed his displeasure thus to his Servant for his
former unseasonable Providence. Thou (says he) have clearly lost me an hundred
Crowns. For thou gave the Poor but two Crowns when I bade thee give three:
and now God has sent me but two hundred: si autem tres dedisses, trecentos
accepisses, if thou had given the third Crown too, these two hundred had been
three.

Be the credit of the story with the Author or Relater: but I am sure, the
Moral of it, (if it be a fable,) is good, and fully to our present purpose; to
show how man's Bounty engages God's; and we never lose more, than by what we
think we save from pious and charitable Uses to add to our own Estates.

And the Reason upon which this great Truth is bottomed, is this; that (as
Solomon tells us) he that has pity upon the Poor Prove. 19. 17.
does, (in the rendering of the Vulgar out of the 72.) Domino foenerari; he
lends upon usury to the Lord, who is the best Creditor, and sure in such cases
to repay the Principal Money with ample Interest; even to an hundred fold in
this life (as his promise Mat. 19. 29.
runs, verified in the former story) besides the Interest upon Interest,
accumulated, in life everlasting.

Whereas, on the other side, the hoording receiver (as St. Ambrose again tells
the Rich man in the Gospel) nescit struere divitias, is indeed ignorant of the
true Art of thriving which he professes; for he takes the wrong way to Riches,
whiles he deals only with men that may break, (by a thousand accidents, as well
as, which too often falls out, through a dishonest Design;) and so often loses
the Interest with the Principal; and refuses to trust God for his Creditor,
who can never fail by casualty, and (to be sure) never will by deceitfulness,
and cousenage.

And thus have you seen, by what I have said, that (even in this Life) the
Concerns of the Giver (as to point of Profit) are in a better Condition every
way, than those of the Receiver. And they are no less so

2.) In Sickness and Death. For whereas the sordid Receiver usually has a
doleful and uncomfortable Time of it, and receives the sentence of death in
himself with a great deal of horror; whiles (partly) the omission of the good
that was in the power of his hand to have done, pursues him with guilt, and
(partly) the consideration that he and his beloved Mammon must now eternally
part company, and nothing of all that he enjoyed can descend into the grave
after him, afflicts him Ps. 49. 17.
with grief, and (partly) the settlement of what he has unconscionably
gathered distracts him with cares, and (lastly) the uncertaintie of his Eternal
Estate, which he has formerly neglected, oppresses him with just and deserved
fears: the bountiful Giver, (if, at least, he has managed his Charities with
Religious Principles) either has, or has cause to have, an easy and
peaceable Passage out of this world, a true (...), in all respects. Whiles he
is assured by Gods Promise, that he will strengthen him upon Psalm. 41. 3.
his bed of languishing, and make all his bed in his sickness: whiles the
leaving his earthly goods lies not near his heart, having continually kept the
cares of keeping them at a distance from it; and the Conscience of his good
deeds in this world, and the comfortable assurance of the Friendships he has
made in another world, dismiss him hence with that applause, which the vain
Emperor Augustus apud Suetonium.
once fondly called for of those friends which assisted him in his last Agonies.

3.) After Death: whereas there are are two things (in reference still to this
world) which commonly men when they come to die are concerned for, (their
Memory, and their Posterity;) both these also are secured to the bountiful
Giver.

(I.) His Memory, which Solomon Eccles. 7. 1:
tells us is better than precious ointment, (to embalm and keep Men from
putrefaction when they are dead:) the same holy Author tells us, shall be
blessed. All men Pro. 16. 7.
will speak of such an one with just commendations, and bury his Infirmities in
his Grave, as thinking themselves obliged to have his good deeds only in
everlasting remembrance. The good woman that spent her Box of precious ointment
upon our Saviors feet, received from him another ointment far more precious;
in the assurance he gave her, that wherever that Gospel should be preached
Mat. 26. 13.
in the world, that good deed should be told in memorial of her.

But of the tenacious Receiver (whom in opposition to the liberally righteous
the wise man calls Prove. 16. 7. supra.
the wicked) he says withal, that his memory shall rot, i. e. not only
perish, but also stink and be offensive whiles it is perishing, in the nostrils
of Posterity: and though he take as great care as Absalom 2 Samuel 18. 18.
did in his lifetime, to raise himself the most magnificent Monuments to
preserve his Name, when he is dead, yet they shall serve only (as they say his
Pillar does) to invite Survivors to cast stones at, in detestation of his
Memory.

(2.) His Posterity, and remaining Relations enjoy an entayled Blessing on the
Estate which the liberal man leaves behind him; and that in the largest extent
that can rationally be desired. And no wonder: For by his Charity he has
engaged God to be the Executor of his Will, the Husband of his Widow, and the
Guardian to his Fatherless Children. And under his Tuition (the Psalmist
assures us, both by Promise, and answerable Experience to back it) they shall
be well looked to. For (says he) the man who is merciful and lends,
(sometimes Psalm. 37. 25, 26.
lending is as true a Charity as giving) his seed shall be blessed. And he
makes it good by an Experimental Observation of his own; I have been young and
now am old, but I never saw the charitably righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging their bread.

Whereas, the Posterity of the sordid Receiver have no such provision made for
them, but (as to any Divine Promise) are left to the wide world, without any
assurance of being thus cared for by him. So that (however they fare, when the
Parent is gone, upon the account either of common Providence, or (if they prove
better than their Ancestor) by Divine Benediction as the reward of their
personal Piety; yet) the comfort hereof can no way lighten the cares and fears
of his dying Bed: because he has no warrant to expect any better event to
befall them, than the Prophetical Curse bestowed upon Judas, to be continually
Vagabonds Psalm. 109. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and beg, etc. And Experience too often proves that Curse to extend farther
than the Person it was principally meant for; even to the Children of all those
who (like him) remembered not to show mercy. It being a thing of common
observation, that the more the covetous Father leaves his Posterity, the more
certain Prey they become to as covetous Tutors and Guardians; or, if they
escape them, are (too often) worse handled by their own prodigal Lusts; which
(before the third Generation) scatter all that with the forke, which the
careful Predecessor gathered with the Rake. So that frequently within one man's
Memory a great Estate, in one and the same Family, is both gotten and spent;
and spent in fewer months it may be than it was years in getting. It is an
handsome Memento that one of the Ancients (before mentioned) gives the sordid
gatherer: Thou take care, says he, to oblige thy Heir by employing the
contrivances of thy gray head to augment the Estate thou intendest to leave
him. Alas, Wretch, (says he) thou art mistaken. Thy young Spark odit
incrementa haereditatis suae, ad damna festinat; thinks thou art getting too
long, and would fain have thee make an end of thy Trade of gaining, that he may
begin his of spending what thou have already gained.

And thus have I shown you the advantage that in point of Profitableness,
Giving has beyond Receiving, in reference to this world, and the Concerns
thereof; both in Life, in Death, and after Death. But the greatest Instance of
the Profit that comes thereby, is

(2. In reference to the World to come. For (although there be no proper Merit
in Bounty, how large soever, or however well qualified, to purchase everlasting
happiness; (no, far be such a thought from the breast of any charitable man;)
for, our good in this life, be it what it will, extends not to God, as it must,
if it Ps. 16. 2.
properly deserve any thing at his hands: yet) whiles we extend our bounties to
the Saints that are on earth, with such dispositions as God requires, we come
under a capacity of being rewarded with eternal felicity, by virtue of his
Promise; who has assured us, that he will not forget our work Heb. 6. 10.
and labor of love in this kind: and if we thus sow to the Spirit, Gal. 6. 7,
8.
by taking opportunities of doing good, we shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. Upon the account of which security of Divine Promises, a good man
by his Charities may have a stock going in another world while he lives, and
when he comes to die, may transport, by Bills of Exchange (as it were) that
cumbersome wealth, which no man can, (as the Psalmist Ps. 49. 17.
says) carry with him in kind: and thus do our good works follow Apoc. 14. 13.
us into Heaven which we did upon Earth; and the more they here abounded to the
relief of others, the more will they abound Phil. 4. 17.
there (as Fruits of the Spirit) to our account. When God and the truly
charitable man come to reckon, (O happy reckoning!) with what infinite
satisfaction shall he find all his great and numerous Debts to Gods Justice by
the blood and merit of Christ eternally canceled, and his good deeds only
booked by God (acknowledging himself by his gracious Promise his debtour;) to
be everlastingly rewarded; and that so punctually, that not so much as a cup of
cold water bestowed upon Matthew. 10. 41.
a charitable account shall be forgotten.

In this respect it is, that our Bounties are said to make us Luke 16. 9.
friends to receive us into everlasting habitations; to wit, such, as (in Gods
name and for his sake) receive from us: who, as they assist us whiles they live
here, by their prayers to obtain them; and by acknowledging the receipt of what
we bestow on them in their thanks to God for us, do (as it were) give us those
Bills of Exchange which I before spoke of to draw upon God for them: so, when
they die, and arrive at the same place of happiness themselves, they personally
attest to those Charities they have received, to make good our Title to those
Blessed Mansions.

And thence it is, that our Savior (acquainting us with the form of the
Proceedings in the last Judgment,) does not only tell us, that our Charities
will then be the great matters on which we shall be tried: but also, not
obscurely intimates, that the Testimonials of his poor members then present,
will stand us in great stead, as our witnesses; for so that phrase seems to
import, Forasmuch as ye have done it Mat. 25. 40.
for the least of these my Brethren, (who are here ready to attest it) ye have
done it unto me.

Whereas, on the contrary, the sordid and tenacious Receiver, as he in his
lifetime loved his wealth too well to lay it out, though for the good of his
Soul, (amator mammonae potius quam animae, in St. Cyprians phrase) and
therefore has no good works there recorded, no seed sown in that Country, to
yield him any fruit toward his account: so he has never a friend there to
open his mouth for him, and give him a friendly Testimony in that Judgment.
And, by consequence, how rich soever he was in this world, he must needs be
poor, and naked, and every way miserable in another: having had all his good
things in this life, (as the rich Glutton in Hell is told to his ^u. 16. 25.
eternal discomfort,) he has nothing to lay claim to in the next. Yea, (which
is infinitely worse) as he has showed no mercy upon Earth, so in the other
world he shall have Judgment without mercy, Jam. 2. 13.
and not receive a drop of comfort there, who denied his very crumbs to his
necessitous Brother here.

And thus have I justified the Doctrine of my Text fully, by the foundations of
Reason it self upon which it stands: and so dispatched the second part of my
intended Discourse upon it. I come now to my third and last undertaking, to
give you an account of

III. The Inferences or practical Uses which it affords us, by way of deduction
from it. In five Particulars.

[1. It hence follows, that God has put every man's present Blessedness, (at
least) in a great measure, in his own power.

For you see, the Acts by which it is very much to be promoted in this Life,
are within the reach of his own choice; such the Acts of Giving are: and if a
man (withal) take care to perform those Acts according to the measures of true
Christianity, he may also thereby, as the Apostle says, lay up in store for
himself a good 2 Timothy 6. 19.
foundation against the Time to come, that he may lay hold on eternal life also.

Obj. Will it be here objected, that the contrary seems to be the more proper
Inference, [That God has rather dealt hardly with the greater part of
Mankind, in that he has put them rather under a necessity of Receiving than a
capacity of Giving, by reason of the narrowness of their Estates, and
encumbrances of their worldly circumstances?]

Sol. If so; I answer, (1) That the Giving in the Text extends not only to the
donation of worldly wealth, but also, to all other ways wherein one man may be
gratuitously benefited by another; so that he that cannot give money or
money-worth, is not excluded from this blessedness by his poverty; seeing there
be other ways of benefiting others, that put a man to no temporal expense. Our
Counsels, and our Instructions, our Compassions, and our Visits upon many
occasions to express them, our good words (many Times) to men, and our Prayers
to God, always; are real and great Charities, where we have nothing else to
give. (2.) That, even in reference to temporal Gifts, as there be few men, but
often meet with objects more necessitous than themselves; so there are few so
disabled, but by their labors they might, if they would, not only maintain
themselves, but also be sufficiently provided to allow something out of their
earnings to relieve those who (either through age or impotency) cannot labor
for their own subsistence. (3.) And that the greatest part of those whose
temporal condition is strait and uneasy, yet disable themselves more by their
Lusts. Those Pence, yea Shillings and Pounds sometimes, which diverse ordinary
Laborers and Handicraftsmen expend in needless company-keeping, in Pride of
Apparel, and finer Fare than their condition and capacity will easily allow;
might amount to considerable Charities, if employed that way. (4.) And lastly,
that not actual giving only, but intentional and dispositive also, where power
is wanting, will reach the blessedness of the Text; God accepting the desire
which a man has, in such cases, in stead of the performance, which a man 2
Cor. 8. 12.
has not in his own power. Insomuch that two mites are, from the Luke 21. 3.
poor Widow, accounted more, than the great Gifts of wealthy Benefactors. So
that, though every man cannot in kind equal the great charitable Donations of
Kings and Princes; yet he does not only equal but exceed them too, in Gods
account, who has a mind as large as theirs, though in a far meaner condition:
and gives (for generosity) 2 Samuel 24. 23.
as a King, though (for Estate) he come short of ordinary Subjects.

From all which, my first Inference appears not to be ill gathered; that the
good God has put this Blessedness so far in every man's power, that no man, if
it be not through his own fault, is excluded from a capacity of obtaining it.

[2. It hence follows also, that those men are so far enemies to their own
Blessedness, as the import of this Text extends; who wilfully disable
themselves to give, and unnecessarily cast themselves upon a necessity of
receiving; and receiving too, in a most dishonorable and ungodly way, as too
many do.

(1. Such are those (in the first place) who out of love to sloth and
idleness, choose rather to beg, or steal, than work for their living. Though
indeed, as to this sort of men, I needed not to have distinguished betwixt
begging and stealing; as if all that did needlessly beg, did not withal
steal. For, the Truth is, every lusty Beggar and sturdy Vagrant is a Thief;
even while he beggs; and takes no more than is voluntarily given him. For so
the Apostle plainly insinuates, when he commands those that stole to Ephesians. 4. 28.
steal no more, but rather to labor with their hands that they may have to
give to him that needs. Whence it evidently follows, that he accounts him
that was a Thief before, to be the same still, and not to have left that Trade;
who labors not, but lives upon the bounty of others, when by his labor he
might put himself into a condition not to need it, yea, and to be able to
contribute to others needs.

And indeed, such an one is not only one way, but many ways a Thief: and
commits a complicated Theft in every Alms he receives.

(1.) He robs God of the Bountyes he beggs and takes of men for Gods sake, as
truly, as he robs his Neighbor, who in his name, without his order, takes up
wares at any of your Shops. (2ly,) He robs himself of the gains which he might
honestly make, and the Credit in which he might live, by a laborious Calling.
And (3ly,) he robs those that are truly poor, in diverse respects: both by
defrauding them of that portion of subsistence, which they are entitled unto
out of his own earnings, if he labored as he should; and by diverting into a
wrong Channel the Charities of others, which belong to them, whereby he eats
the bread out of their mouths, and wears the Clothes that belong to their
backs; and lastly, by obstructing and discouraging the Incomes and Revenues of
general Bounty; which would be more plentiful to the really necessitous, if
they were not overlay'd by such supernumerary multitudes of importunate and
clamorous Beggars, that deserve not an Alms, and yet will not take an Answer.

(2. Such as take to that way of living, out of a false opinion of meriting
thereby. Which is the course of all those idle Drones and lusty Mendicants
among the Papists, who make voluntary Poverty a Religious Profession, and place
a great degree of Christian Perfection in a Vow of continual Begging: as if
they were resolved to give the flat lie to our Savior Christ himself by
inverting my Text; and pronounce, (in direct opposition to him,) that it is
more blessed to receive than give. These Persons are not only equally criminal
with others of the Tribe of idle Vagrants and lusty Beggars, for breaking Gods
Commandment, that appoints all men to live by the labors of an honest Calling;
but far more criminal than they, because they blasphemously entitle God himself
to the Patronage of their disorderly and irregular living; and affirm that
which is an express breach of his Law, to be a work of supererogation, that is,
of greater perfection than it requires: and persuade the poor people where they
reside, that to give to maintain their idle bellies, is an act of highest
merit; whereas (indeed) it is the greatest misplacing of their Charity that can
be, as being a direct abetting and encouraging them in a wicked and ungodly way.

(3. Such as through prodigal Expenses upon their Lusts and Debaucheries, cast
themselves into a necessity of receiving by vicious living. Wherein, besides
the depriving themselves of that capacity wherein Gods Providence once placed
them of contributing to their own Blessedness by Bounty; and the simple
infelicity which they draw upon themselves of needing Alms from others, who
were once able to have bestowed them upon others: they expose themselves
likewise to the aggravated misery of receiving just reproaches with their
relief, both from their own Consciences, and the tongues of those whose
Charities they implore: and can hardly, without a great degree of impudence,
dare to beg in Gods Name, who have reduced themselves to Beggary in the Devils
service. To whom, indeed, (as to both the former sorts also) your Bridewell is
the most proper Almes-house, and the due Correction and Discipline thereof the
most proper Alms. And yet,

[3. It hence follows also, that no man ought to despise any miserable object,
whose true Necessities call upon him for his Bounty: either by shutting up the
1 Jo^. 3. 17.
bowels of his compassion from him, or bestowing the Charities he gives, so, as
to clogg and lessen them with opprobrious or disdainful circumstances. And
that, upon these considerations, which hold also from the import of my Text.

(1. That whosoever he be, that is presented to thee as an object of thy
Charity, gives thee, (whoever thou art,) an opportunity of doing thy self a far
better turn than thou can do him. For how were it possible that any one could
ever attain the Blessedness of actual giving, if there were none to receive?
And therefore, it is a mercy of God to the Rich, that he has so ordered it by
his Providence, that they shall have Mat. 26. 11.
the poor with them always; in that he thereby affords them daily occasions,
of making themselves blessed by the continual exercise of their Bounty.

(2. That if (as among many that are not so in these necessitous times, some
certainly are) any of the Petitioners for thy Alms be truly worthy; that
which he returns to thee in thanks and prayers, is a greater gift than he
receives from thee. For whiles he blesses God for thee, and blesses thee in
his requests to God to requite thee; he gives thee security of the repayment of
that which thou give him, with the greatest Interest, out of Gods Exchequer.
And though (it may be) thou know not particularly, when those payments are
made thee; yet thou have reason to believe, that the prospering of thy worldly
concerns (in general, if they go on prosperously) is a cumulative reward of thy
several Charities together; and (it may be, in particular also) thou owe the
return of thy next rich adventure, or the success of thy next gainful Bargain,
to the last poor man's Prayers that thou did relieve.

(3. And, thirdly; that if he that asks thy Charity, be never so unworthy, upon
whatever accounts, (even the worst of those mentioned in my former Inference,)
yet by that very unworthiness, (whiles his present necessities require relief,)
he gives thee an ampler opportunity of heightning thy generosity by the
hopelesness of being ever requited by him in any kind; and herein rendering thy
self the more like to God himself; who takes it for a great addition to the
honor of his bounty, that he does good to the unthankful, and Luke 6. 35.
causes his Sun to shine upon the Mat. 5. 45.
evil and the good, and his rain to fall upon the just and the unjust.

[4. This Truth gives us woeful (and yet plentiful) occasion to wonder at and
bewail that Ironheartedness of the uncharitable Age in which we live; and the
gross Infidelity, or blockish Stupidity, or both, of the great Receivers, the
men of ample Estates and Revenues of the world. Their gross Infidelity, if they
believe not the Doctrine of my Text, so positively asserted by our Savior,
attested by so great an Apostle, and standing withal upon such fi^m
foundations of unanswerable Reason, as I have before shown you this, if any in
the Bible, does. And if they do believe it, and yet act contrary to the evident
import of it, their monstrous Stupidity; who are so little sensible of, or
affected with, so great a part of their greatest concern, Blessedness.

These rich Misers (as they are most truly called by a Name most opposite to
Blessedness) both my subject, and my inclinations, lead me here to prosecute
with the sharpest and keenest of reproofs. But I shall forbear, considering,
that their own Consciences (if they have any) must needs (upon the Principles I
have before laid down) do that work sufficiently for me: at least, that by
their own tacit Confession, they have cause to do so, and they continually
stand in fear that they will; seeing they meditate so many Excuses to guard
themselves from their lashes, as they are constantly wont to do.

And yet (unhappy men that they are!) it fares so unluckily with them, that
those very Excuses which they are wont to make use of to stave off all
charitable motions suggested to them from others, and stifle their own workings
of good nature, if at any time they stir, in their bosoms; do only serve to
declare how willing, and withal how skillful and ingenious they are, to cheat
themselves of their own Blessedness. And this you will abundantly see, (and
they too, if their eyes be not totally blinded) by this brief examination of
the most usual of them by the measures of this blessed Proverb of our Savior.

Obj. The first, (and that that is most ready in all their mouths, when any
considerable Charities are suggested to them) is; such and such are better able
to give than they, and they will first see what they give, that they may follow
their Example.

Sol. That is, (being interpreted according to the Tenor of this Text) either,
that they are willing to make this great Complement to their Neighbors, that
they are content to yield to them the precedence, though in point of
Blessedness it self; and think it good manners, (even therein,) to let their
betters go before them. But these men ought to consider, that it is a dear and
costly complement, that loses a man an opportunity of making himself Blessed;
yea, or any way retardeth it.

Or else, that they are desirous to have the price of blessedness it self
beaten down by other Chapmen, before they will deal in the commodity: which
implies, that they are afraid of purchasing it for more than it is worth; a
conceit that no man ever entertained before them in matter of Blessedness,
which generally men think to be well purchased at the price of all that can be
asked for it.

Obj. A second usual excuse is, They are not the men the world takes them for;
not so rich, or well to pass (as they say) as they are reputed.

Sol. Nor so wise neither, as they desire to be reputed, if this Doctrine be
true; who have an opportunity offered of making the best Bargain they ever made
in their lives, for Blessedness it self, and yet want an heart to make use of
it.

Obj. Charities that have been bestowed by others before them, have been
misimployed; and they will be satisfied that those are better disposed before
they give more.

Sol. The true meaning of this excuse is (being measured by the standard of my
Text) that they are unwilling to be blessed themselves, till they can be
assured that all the world is honest. And both, (if they continue of this
mind,) are like to fall out together.

Obj. There are so many objects of Charity, that it is even oppressed with the
number; and it is to little purpose for a man to give to one or two, except he
could give to all that need; for (at this rate) he cannot foresee, if he once
begin to be charitable, when he shall make an end.

Sol. That is, thou art sorely grieved, that thou have so many opportunities
offered to make thy self blessed; and art afraid, that the taking hold of those
that are set before thee will draw on more; so that thou shall never make an
end of accumulating blessedness to thy self. Is this a rational fear?

Obj. Times are hard; Trading is dead; Customers break daily in their debts;
they run great hazards in the small dealings the hard Times afford them; etc.

Sol. Did ever rational Creature argue at this Rate? Times are bad; Ergo, it is
out of season to make my self blessed. Trading is dead; Ergo, I am unwilling to
deal in that Commodity, which yields the quickest and the richest Returns.
Customers break; therefore I resolve to deal still with breaking Customers, and
not with God that can never break. I run great hazards in the Trade I drive;
therefore I am loath to take the best course in the world to ensure my
Adventures; the taking God into Partnership with me in them. I commended some
persons before to the Discipline of one of your Hospitals, that of Bridewell:
And the men that argue at this rate, are as worthy to come under the Discipline
of the other, that of Bethlem.

Obj. I have Wife and Children to provide for, and I think my self obliged in
the first place to take care of them: for if I neglect them, the Apostle tells
me, I am worse than 1 Timothy 5. 8.
an Infidel.

Sol. That is, thou art desirous to provide better for them, than to make them
blessed; which, I have told you before, the Familyes and Posterity of liberal
men are. Nay (which is worse,) thou art willing to bequeath them a Curse in
stead of a Blessing: to leave them an Estate blown upon and blasted by divine
malediction, and yet to look on this as a good Provision for them: which, it is
(indeed) to be worse than the worst of Infidels, so much as to imagine.

Obj. I intend such and such Charities when I die, and therefore desire not to
be importuned till then in things of this Nature.

Sol. That is, in plainer Terms, (if my Text be true) that thou art resolved to
part with nothing, (no not for Blessedness it self,) till thou needs must; that
thou think thy Executors fitter to be entrusted with thy greatest Concern,
(that of Blessedness) than thy self, and art willing to hazard it upon their
fidelity; That thou art afraid of being blessed till thou come to die: as if
(contrary to the desire of all mankind) thou thoughtest it out of season to
foretaste any part of it in this life.

Did you ever hear any thing that pretended to Reason and Argument, more
unluckily confuting it self, than all these excuses that I have mentioned, do?
And yet (such is the folly of sordid penuriousness,) there are a great many
more of the same bran, perpetually in the mouths of the men that are rich in
this world (as our Savior says) but not rich toward God; which, though I
mention not, yet (by the measures I have given you from this Text) you may
(whenever you meet with them) your selves prove to be no less guilty of a like
felonious destroying themselves.

And now the foolish Mammonist, that thinks to hide his nakedness with these
Fig Leaves, may see, that if his own Excuses taken up for his defense, thus
fight against him in the judgment of men; they will be more killingly managed
against him before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ: who is infinitely better
able to manage the consequences of his own Doctrine, than I or any other
Preacher can; and will undoubtedly then show all the world, what great Fools
they are, that are so wise in their own conceits, to evade the Duty that he
requires of them, and cheat themselves.

And are these, now, the men whom the fond world is so apt to admire as shrewd
men, for parts and cunning contrivances to advance themselves? whose examples
they set before their sons; and whose sayings they are wont to approve and
quote as the great rules of living happily; and prefer Ps. 49. 13.
them before this and others of like nature, that are recommended to them, from
the mouth of their blessed Savior, and the holy Penmen of the Sacred
Scriptures? Or, are they not rather persons whose way is folly; whose sayings
(indeed,) are only worthy to be reckoned among the wild and extravagant
discourses of Children and Madmen; and themselves to be numbered, as the Spirit
of God ranks them, among the beasts that perish? V. 20.


[5. It hence follows, that to excite and direct any man's charity (how
ungrateful soever this Office of kindness seem to some) is really an obliging
courtesy; because the intent of it is, (properly) to assist him toward the
making himself blessed.

Upon which account (hoping I have here to deal with those that will so
interpret my intentions) I shall apply my self (in the last place) to exhort
you to Charitable Actions, and direct you in the performance of them.

(1. To exhort you, to the serious practice of this Doctrine: to be merciful,
and bountiful, compassionate and charitable; rich in good works, ready to
distribute, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
willing to communicate; doing good to all men as you have opportunity; Gal. 6.
10.
obliging all the world, as far as in you lies, by real benefits, and effects
of diffusive goodness.

To persuade you whereunto, I hope I shall need no other Arguments, than (in
the prosecution of this Text) I have already at large insisted on: And
therefore I shall only make some short reflections upon it to my present
purpose, and leave it to you to enlarge upon them, (which I hope you will do)
in your private Meditations.

(1.) And first, I entreat you from thence to inform your selves, what it is
that I persuade you to, Is it not, (that which you all profess, as your very
nature inclines you, to desire above all things,) to make your selves blessed?
Is it not that, which all men (though they take different ways to it,
according to their several apprehensions) do design and pursue?

(2.) Will you say, you agree with me indeed in the end, but you are not so
well satisfied in the means I advise you to for the attainment of it? Does it
stick with you, that giving, (to which you are so averse,) is recommended as
the way to blessedness? Do I, therefore, say this of my self, or says not the
Scripture the same also? View the Text again, and read there; [It is a blessed
thing to give.]

(3.) Is it an inferior and less effectual means to the attainment of that
end, than (that which the general practice of mankind seems more to
recommend,) the way of receiving; that is, of getting and keeping the good
things of this life to your selves? Glance on it again, and it tells you
farther, [It is more blessed to give, than to receive.]

(4.) Does this seem an hard saying to you; a Paradox, which you are difficult
to believe without good Vouchers to assure you of the Truth of it? Look on once
more, and you will find, it is quoted, as the saying of the Lord Jesus, an
Author beyond all exception, (especially to Christians, as we all profess our
selves:) and one, who, (as I have before showed you) is the most competent
Judge, in this case, of all men that ever were, or shall be.

(5.) Do you question, whether he indeed said so, or is rather quoted as if he
had said it, to give reputation to that which had its original from an obscurer
Author? Surely, you cannot be of that mind; when you look backward, and there
read, that it is a saying attributed to our Savior, by the great Apostle St.
Paul, in a Solemn Visitation Sermon, before the Elders of Ephesus, whom he
calls in as Witnesses to the Verity of his Quotation, as I told you before; and
knew, if he had falsified in that quotation, they were able to have confuted
him.

(6.) Does it seem, (seeing it is only in this one place taken notice of,) to
be a casual word dropped from him by the by, (as we sometimes throw out
Paradoxes to maintain discourse,) without Premeditation; and therefore used
only once or twice by him; not frequently, much less constantly, as an axiom
of approved Verity? The very form of the Apostles quotation confutes this
conceit, for it is quoted, as Proverbs are wont to be, with an implication,
that it was his familiar and constant word, for which he was noted, as
governing his whole life by this Principle.

(7.) Will you object (as we are wont to be very inventive when we study
excuses to ward off a Truth we have no mind to entertain) that it was a saying
(indeed) of his; but hardly thought great enough to be quoted from him, by any
of those Apostles that heard him, or recommended to Posterity by any one but
him that heard him not in person; they that did so, not minding it so much as
to commit it to memory? The Text also confutes this fond conceit. For it
supposes it to be famously known, even as far as Ephesus; and so noted, that
it needed only to be remembered by them actually, as a constant motive to
Beneficence, which they had long before treasured up in their memories
notionally, as a saying of special note and eminency.

(8.) Lastly, will you suppose, that the Apostle, (who then quoted it, as he
had occasion, to stir up the Charity of Christians,) did, (as too many
Preachers do,) press upon his Auditory a saying of our Lord Jesus, which he,
and his Brethren did not so far value themselves, as to practice it in their
own Persons? Look then a little farther backward of the Text, and you will
find him there urging his own example and experience in the practical use of
this Principle. For he appeals to all their knowledges, to attest, that his own
hands (whiles he V. 34.
preached the Gospel freely among them) ministered (by daily laboring) to his
and his companions necessities; and that he exhorted them not only to follow
their Saviors Doctrine, but also his own example in conformity to it.

So that you see, beloved, no starting-hole is left (by the prudent foresight
of the holy Penman of this Scripture,) for infidelity to escape the force and
authority thereof: but every word and circumstance so ordered as to contribute
more strength and efficacy to it.

And now, what shall I say more, what need I to say more, upon this head? If
such a saying, of such an Author, recommended to you by such an Orator, in
such an Assembly, in so solemn and affectionate a manner, and preferred by him
to that place in his discourse which was most likely to commend it to the
special notice and remembrance of his hearers, (the very last close and
concluding period of the last Sermon that ever he was to make among them:) I
say, if such a saying, so circumstantiated, will not bear weight with you: it
will be vain for me to imagine, that any thing said by me superadded thereunto,
should be of any force or prevalency upon you.

And therefore, (for a close of this part of my Address to you) I shall only
recommend it to your own thoughts as a matter of serious consideration, how you
will answer it at the last day, when that blessed Apostle, that spoke these
words from the mouth of our Lord Jesus, and that holy Evangelist who has
transmitted them on Sacred Record to us, (that I join not my self with them who
have all this while been pressing them upon you,) shall take up the Prophets
complaint against you, and say, Lord, who has believed our report? Isa. 53. 1.
Yea, when your blessed Savior himself shall charge you with infidelity, as
those in whom his own words have no place? How Joh. 8. 37.
do you think, you shall be able to look him in the face, when it shall be
objected to you before his terrible Tribunal, that the dirty Principles, and
sordid Practices of a brutish sort of Worldlings and Muckworms, have had more
force with you for the government of your lives, than his heavenly Doctrine,
and glorious Example? that you never stuck at the gratifying your lusts with
vast expenses, whenever they called for them; and never dropped halfpence or
farthings so penuriously on any occasion, as when you were called upon in his
Name and for his sake to promote a good work? that the Furniture of one room to
beautify your new dwellings, the expense of one Treatment to entertain your
riotous Guests, the price of one Jewel or other costly Ornament to express your
vain Pride, the charge of one Months keeping for a cast of Hawks or a kennel
of Hounds, for your Country Recreation; yea, (which is far worse,) the great
stakes that you adventure upon one cast of a Die, the value of one bribe to
blind the eyes of Justice, and promote a wrongful cause, the Hire of an
Harlot for one nights sinful pleasure, and the like rates of other costly
Debaucheries, (toties quoties,) a mounted to more by far, than all the sums,
put all together, that all your lives long, you have bestowed upon Religious
and Charitable Uses?

Are these, my friends, are these the fruits that you desire may abound to your
account at that Phil. 4. 1^.
Day? If they be, I fear, you will make but a sad account where such Items make
up the doleful reckoning. Is this the way you take to make you friends to
receive Lu. 16. 9.
you, when you fail, into everlasting habitations? If so, I doubt, your
Lodgings will be provided for you on the wrong side of the other world: not in
the House made without hands, eternal in the 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Heavens; but the Furnace of everlasting Fire, and the Dungeon of everlasting
darkness. Is this the way wherein you think to lay up in-store a good
foundation 1 Timothy 6. 19.
for the time to come, that you may lay hold of eternal life? If it be, I am
sorely afraid, you will sinde you have mistaken your ground, and built your
hopes upon the sand without a foundation; as our Savior tells us all those
do, who hear his sayings (of which my Text is one of the chief,) and do Mat.
7. 26.
them not.

But it may be, I have stood longer than needed upon this Exhortation, to
those, diverse of whom, (as the Apostle speaks in commendation of the
M^c^donians) 2 Cor. 8. 3.
are to their power, yea and beyond their power already willing of themselves;
who devise liberal I^a. 32. 8.
things, and need only to be instructed how they may reduce their own good
inclinations to act, and pursue their bountiful intentions, in such a sort, as
to make them most effectually contributary to the blessedness which my Text
promises them.

Which, if it be so, (and I am willing in my Charity to so worthy an Auditory
to presume it to be so;) gives me occasion in the next place, to enter on my
last task, viz.

(2. To give you such directions, in the pursuance whereof, you may amply
experiment the truth of this Doctrine in your selves. All which (as you will
see,) have so much countenance from the Text it self, that you may take them
all for further Deductions and Inferences from it.

1.) The first shall concern the matter of your Charity; which must consist of
that which is properly your own to give. The fountains of Charity that you
disperse abroad, and the rivers that (like your New River) you derive through
the streets, (to allude to that of Solomon in another case,) ought to be only
your own, and Prove. 9. 16, 17, 18.
no strangers with you; that your own bountiful Souls (the grand Fountain from
whence they proceed,) may be blessed. Otherwise, God that hates Robbery for
Isa. 61. 8.
a Burnt-offering, will never look upon your good deeds of this kind as
sacrifices wherewith he is well Heb. 13. 16.
pleased. There is a Curse upon all those temporal blessings, which are the
fruits of Theft and Rapine, of Cheating and Cousenage, of Bribery and
Extortion; and (which is commonly least thought of) the Sacrilegious spoils of
his Church, and its Sacred Revenues: and blessedness can never grow upon that
Stock, that (like the worm at that of Jonah 4. 7.
Jonas his Gourd) has Gods Curse at the root of it.

Besides, the palpable Cheat that the very Design of reaping blessedness to a
man's self from that seed which is stolen out of his Neighbors Barn, does
imply; is such a mockery of God, (who in such matters is not to be mocked,)
Gal. 6. 7.
that such a Giver (as Jacob did when he attempted in his Brothers Garments to
rob him of his Fathers Benediction) may rather fear he shall by that very
attempt, (if he were never so secure of it before,) bring a Curse Genesis 27. 12.
upon himself rather than a Blessing.

2.) The motives of it, must be Christian. For it is from Christ, that the
Blessedness of the Text must be expected: and he that seeks blessedness from
Christ's Promise must govern himself by his Precepts: as in all other
particulars, so in the ends and motives upon which he seeks it. Now those must
be; pure obedience to the Command of Christ, and 1 Pet. 2. 3. Heb. 13. 16. Mat.
5. 16.
Faith of being accep^ed in him; the glory of our Father which is in heaven,
and the causing through 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, 13.
our rich bounty thanksgivings to him to be abundant; the professing our
subjection to the Gospel of Christ; the walking worthy of the Col. 1. 10.
Lord to all pleasing by our fruitfulness in every good work; the showing our
Faith; the adorning Jam. 2. 18.
of the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus, Tit. 2. 10. 1 Timothy 2. 10.
and the Profession of Godliness.

These, and the like motives and designs of Charity, we find recommended to
Christians, by our Savior and his Apostles; by which we ought to direct our
intentions therein, that we may be blessed in our deed. But where the Romish
Church learns those, which in the greatest Charities they boast so much of,
have usually the greatest Influence, (the obtaining the pardon of sins, the
delivering their own and others Souls out of Purgatory, and the meriting of
Eternal Life,) I know not. I am sure, they have little countenance from
Scripture: which, as it knows no Purgatory, and therefore directs no such means
to any one to get out of it; so, can no expressions be found therein, that give
any just countenance to expect either pardon of sins, or eternal life, as the
merit of our Charities. For, if (as the Papists plead) the Scripture bids us
break off our sins by Dan. 4. 27
righteousness, and our iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; yet it is
only, (as in Nebuchadnezzars case) the changing a course of oppression and
unjust violence by Repentance into that of Charity and Beneficence, which is
there intended. If it tell us, that Charity hides a 1 Pet. 4. 8.
multitude of sins, it means only preventively, in reference to the passionate
effects of an uncharitable temper which stirs up strife, as the opposition
in Solomon's Prove. 10. 12.
Text whence it is quoted, interprets it. And to all other such places of
Scripture, it self gives us this one grand Bar against expounding them to
that Popish sense, that it tells us, that God has appointed us another
sufficient Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2.
who has undertaken by himself, (and therefore needs not our Charities to
assist him in this work) to purge them. And if it Heb. 1. 3.
allow us (as a secondary end) to have a respect to Eternal Life in our good
deeds of this kind, yet it is only in order to the disposing our selves for
it, by such actions as perfect and improve us Col. 3. 14.
in Christianity, of which Charity in its full latitude is one; and not to
encourage us in a fond opinion of meriting it by them. For it withal tells us,
that we must receive the very reward of our good works as a Gift, not Romans 6.
23.
as Wages, from God; and acknowledge, when we have done all, (if we could do
all) that we ought, in this or any other kind, that we are even then but
unprofitable Lu. 17. 10.
servants; and lastly, that we must look to be saved not by works of
righteousness which Tit. 3. 5.
we have done, but of Gods mere grace and mercy.

3.) The manner in which our Charities must be peformed, shall be the matter of
my third Direction. And that includes these particulars: Which also receive
like countenance from the Text.

(1.) Readiness and voluntary forwardness of Mind, which (as I told you
before) the Apostle so highly commends in the Macedonians; and also in the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8. 3, 10.
to whom he propounds their example, for their farther encouragement. And this
evidently follows from the Doctrine contained in my Text. For there can be
nothing more absurd, than to pretend a belief, that it is so great a
blessedness to give; and yet to need to be forced by Law, or constrained by
importunity thereunto: seeing there is nothing toward which we move with more
freeness, than that that (we understand or believe) tends to make us blessed.

(2.) Speediness and Celerity. Solomon requires us, in such cases, not to say
to an indigent Neighbor, Go, and come again, Pro. 3. 28.
and to morrow I will give; and we are required by the Apostle, not to let slip
the (...), the proper season or opportunity of doing Gal. 6. 10.
good; than which there is nothing of a quicker motion, or will sooner slip by
us if neglected, and therefore it ought in all duties to be redeemed, by a
careful Ephesians. 5. 16.
taking hold of it. And this (says Seneca) is an argument of our unwillingness
to such bountiful acts, when we are slow in doing of them. Qui tarde fecit
beneficium, diu noluit. This direction also follows from the Text. For it
implies a Contradiction, for any one to move slowly to that wherein he looks
for Blessedness.

(3.) Simplicity, or singleness of heart, must be another Ingredient in all our
acts of Charity; which disclaims all by-ends and designs folded together with
those true Christian ends which (I before told you) we ought herein to confine
our selves unto. He that gives for ostentation or vainglory, or any ambitious
project, and blows (with the Mat. 6. 1, 2.
Pharisees) a trumpet before his Alms, to call spectators, has his Reward,
says our Savior; i. e. forfeits the true blessedness his Bounty would
otherwise yield him, by an imaginary felicity he takes in the vain applause of
men. He that gives with a covetous design, (as some do) to those from whom he
hopes to receive in the like kind, makes receiving, his blessedness; not
giving: because he makes that the end and this the means. Now that has not in
it the true nature of Blessedness, that needs any thing else to make it
desirable.

(4.) Plentifulness, and abundance. So the Apostle directs the Corinthians to
extend their Charity, 2 Cor. 9. 5.
as a matter of Bounty not of Covetousness. Not, as if we were to buy a mean
commodity in the Market, wherein we are wont to beat down the Price as low as
we can, even to halfpence and farthings: but as we would bid for a Pearl of
inestimable value, which men think well bought at whatever rate: or as the
Competitours bade for the Roman Empire (in its later Age when the Praetorian
Soldiers made their markets of it,) that stuck at no sums to out-bid each
other. For so Blessedness deserves to be purchased: he that under-rates it, is
never likely to obtain it. He that sows sparingly (says the Apostle, in this
Argument,) shall reap sparingly, and he which sows 2 Cor. 9. 6.
bountifully shall reap bountifully. A narrow-hearted giver, is as foolish, as
he that from a few grains of Wheat expects to reap an Harvest like the rich
man's in the Gospel, that was fain to enlarge his Barns to receive his increase.

5. Constancy and Perseverance. We must not (says the Apostle Gal. 6. 9.
also, in this affair) be weary of well-doing. Our goodness must herein imitate
Gods, which (as the Psalmist tells us) endures continually. Psalm. 52. 1.
We must sow our seed of Charity in the morning of our life, Eccles. 11. 6.
and in the evening we must not withhold our hand. And this also follows from
the Doctrine of the Text. For that which we most desire in blessedness, (and
which, indeed, compleats it,) is duration. And therefore those acts by which it
is attained, cannot rationally be wearisome; seeing lassitude can never be a
companion of felicity.

4.) The Measures and Proportions of your Chari^y shall fill the last place in
these Directions. And those also are not obscurely to be determined, from the
import of this Doctrine. And that both

1. In general, and 2. In special.
(1.) In general; for the proportioning all your Charities, you ought to
consider,

1. Your own Abilities: and those not measured by the Standard of Pride,
Covetousness, and unbelieving distrust of Gods Providence; but by the rules of
Christian prudence, considering all those circumstances which the condition of
your affairs is accompanied withal. For he that gives much, in comparison with
others that are beneath him (it may be far more) in Estate; and yet little, in
comparison of what he might afford: withholdeth (in Solomon's Phrase) more than
is Pro. 11. 24.
meet, and deserves blessedness should be measured to him, by the same scanty
measure. And he, that by giving more than he can well spare, disables himself
to give, deprives himself of so much blessedness for the future, as he loses
of the capacity he had, of continuing bountiful.

2. The Receivers just capacity; all his circumstances also being duly weighed
in the same balance of Christian Prudence. For by giving too largely upon one
occasion, a man is necessitated many times to lose many future occasions of
advancing his blessedness in the way we are speaking of: and by giving too
little to any one, he loses the present opportunity, or at least improves it
not to the best advantage to that end.

(2.) In special, for the proportioning of particular Bountyes and Charities,
as they are to be diversely ordered, both in precedence and quantity, according
to the different obligations which result from the diversity of objects and
occasions: there are these farther Rules to be observed.

1. God, and our Country, our Parents, and our Children, and other near
Relations, our former Benefactors and their Posterity, our Neighbors and
Acquaintance, and among them especially those of the household of Gal. 6. 9.
faith, and those that are industrious, and not wonted to beg, but under some
present providential exigency; etc. are to have (in their several circumstances
proportionably,) the cream and chief of our Bounties; and the largest measures
of it too. And from thence, we must descend to all men, Christians and
Heathens, worthy and unworthy, that are partakers of the same common humanity
with us.

For the nature of the Soil, on which we sow to reap blessedness, (though no
Soil be altogether barren) is to be considered by the Seedsman; and the more
fruitful it is likely to be, the more seed is to be committed to it. Now,
seeing all our good deeds of this kind are so far contributary to our
blessedness, as they are accepted by God, and approved by our own Consciences;
and the measure of both these is our Duty: therefore where in Duty we are
obliged to give first and most, we may expect a more early and plentiful
Harvest.

2. Public Charities are to be preferred before private; and to do good to
many, is more to be chosen, than to confine a man's Beneficence to a few. The
blessedness that results from Bounty, (like the beams that are reflected from
an enlightened Body,) is more or less large and plentiful, according to the
largeness of the object upon which it falls. And indeed, seeing the public
Benefactour, (of all men) is most like God, (the Sphere of whose Bounty is of
equal dimensions with the whole world;) he cannot be supposed to approach less
to him in Blessedness than he does in Bounty: especially considering, that he
is most communicative of himself, to those that most resemble him.

3. Perpetual Charities are to be preferred before those that are of short
continuance. I mean, such as are bestowed upon Churches, Colleges, Schools,
Hospitals, Almes-houses, and all other such uses as endure to successive Ages,
and (as far as the Donours intention and design can reach it,) to the end of
the world. I say, as far as the Donours design can reach it; because I know too
often, those Charities that were intended to be immortal, are by the
unfaithfulness or sacrilegious Covetousness of after Ages imbezelled and
perverted to private uses: though (yet) that should discourage no man's
Bounties, seeing God judges of them, by the intendment of the Giver, not by
the effect of the Gifts themselves, which it was not in the power of the Giver
perpetually to secure. And the reason why Charities of this nature are to be so
preferred, is (by a fair Inference from the Text also,) because perpetual
Charities bear the best proportion to that property of Blessedness (to which
they contribute) which I told you before, consummates it; that is, Perpetuity.
For as to our memory, (which is the greatest blessedness, which we are capable
of perpetuating in this world) this is the way to engage all generations to
call us blessed. And, as to our Souls, and the condition of them in another
world; it may on fair grounds be presumed, that the bountiful rewarder of our
good works, will proportion the extent of the reward to that of the work, and
make perpetual additions of happiness to those in Heaven, whose Charities
perpetually grow upon earth.

4. Lastly, Charities to Men's Souls, are to be preferred before those that
extend only to their Bodies. For he is the greatest Benefactour to any one,
that does him the greatest good; which is, certainly, the saving of his Soul.
And then, it follows from the Text, that the greater the good is that any man
does to another, the greater is the blessedness that reflects from it: as that
Oven that is most intensely heated, sends back a greater and more intense heat
upon him that heats it, than that which is made hot in a lower degree.

And thus, I have done with my Text, both as to the Explication of the Terms,
the farther confirmation of its Truth, and the general Inferences arising from
it. And what now remains, but to close up this Discourse with a word of
particular Application to your selves, and your present occasions?

It is a thing notoriously known, that (for these three sorts of Charity last
mentioned) this famous City has in all Ages past yielded abundance of blessed
Benefactors; as appears in the many public Monuments thereof: and those so
ordered, as to be perpetual Reliefs both to the Bodies and Souls of Men, to all
succeeding Generations. And I no ways doubt, but that the Names of many of the
present Age, will be added to their worthy Predecessors, and transmitted, with
like Honor to Posterity.

And though we must acknowledge, that you the worthy Trustees for the several
Hospitals of this City, deserve to be reckoned among the blessed Givers in the
Text, though you give them no more than you daily do when just occasion
requires; to wit, your presence and countenance, your time and parts and pains,
which you might otherwise employ to your worldly advantage; and lastly, your
honest and faithful care in the managery of your Trusts, with no profit or
emolument thence accrewing to your selves: yet it is to be hoped, that you will
also bless your selves yet farther, by adding, of your own Donation, to the
Charities, which you govern and manage for your Predecessors.

And, in special, (as my present Relation obliges me) give me leave, (not with
any design to obstruct or discourage any ones good Inclinations to the rest,
for the effects of the late dreadful Fire, have been so universal that they
have all need enough) to mind you more particularly of your two Hospitals of
Bridewell and Bethlem; too much (it may be) of late forgotten, in the
subsidiary Charities of particular Citizens, though they are inferior to none
in the uses they are appointed for; and (it may be too) in some respects, of
greater public use and advantage than any of the rest.

For in the one of them (that of Bethlem, the only Hospital, as I understand of
that kind in the three Kingdoms) the constant Charities which you therein
dispense, imitate the very creating goodness of God, in the successful means
that are used for the restoring (not of men's lamed and maimed limbs, and
members, as in some other of your Hospitals, but) of Humanity it self, to
abundance of miserable Creatures, (and the more miserable for that they
understand not their own misery, but rather delight and glory in it, and resist
as far as they can, the means of their recovery;) who retain nothing of man,
but shape and voice, to difference them from the worst of Brutes: whose
understanding and reason Dan. 4. 34, 36.
returning to them (as Nebuchadnezzar's did when he was cured of a like
distemper) bless God (and you under him the blessed means thereof,) for their
restitution.

In the other, (that of Bridewell,) besides the imitation of the converting and
renewing Grace of God, (as far as just severities can effect it, and we have no
reason to think them altogether ineffectual, seeing the Scripture tells us,
that the rod and reproof, are means appointed Prove. 29. 15.
to give wisdom;) in the recovering and reclaiming notorious sinners from the
error of their ways, and saving their souls from death, wherein the Apostle
James places a great part of Charity: Jam. ^. ult.
you also strive to resemble his preventing Grace likewise by the constant care
taken, and provision made therein, for the Christian education of many
miserably necessitous Children in honest Trades and employments; wherein they
may get their livelihood by labor, which otherwise, (being trained up to no
other course of life but Begging or Thieving,) would be endangered to an almost
inevitable ruin both of Body and Soul.

All of whom, may, through Gods blessing on your endeavors (though like the
guests in our Saviors Parable, they be many of them gathered up by your
Officers from the Highways and Hedges, and brought into your Government by
necessary compulsion) prove, as diverse of them have done, (who, to their own
Honor as well as that of your City, and to the Glory of God principally, that
directed and enabled you to make such provision for them, have appeared and
will hereafter (no doubt) Annually continue to appear in public to give proof
thereof:) honest and substantial Citizens.

A mercy, for which, (next under God, and the general influence of the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of this famous City) they must acknowledge themselves
infinitely obliged to the Fatherly care, and diligent inspection of a public
spirited, prudent, vigilant, and active President (whose larger character I
must forbear at present in tenderness to his modesty) together with the worthy
Governors his Assistants.

All that I have more to add, concerning both Hospitals, at this Time, is,
That, it is to be hoped, the blessedness, you have already (according to my
Text) found in your past Beneficences, will encourage you (beyond all the
Rhetoric which, if I had it, I could bestow on such an Argument,) to go on,
and effectually promote such further designs, as shall be suggested to you for
the rendering them more useful to the ends of these several Foundations.

And here give me leave, (I beseech you) first of all, to recommend to you, the
New-Building, (among all the famous Structures that your City has raised for
public uses since the last dreadful fire) of your Hospital of Bethlem: which
I do upon this consideration, that those who have the particular Inspection of
that Hospital, (and especially, that learned and diligent Physician who can
hardly be valued sufficiently for his great skill, fidelity and industry in
that employment) have declared, that they judge it very convenient, if not
necessary, (considering the great numbers that are continually sent thither for
cure) that their strait Accommodations of Lodging, should be enlarged both as
to Capacity and Convenience; but are discouraged in the pursuance of those
thoughts, by the prospect of the great charge thereof far exceeding the
proportion of its small Revenues, (the smallest of any Hospital in London)
except they be assisted by some worthy Persons particular Munificences.

And next, on the behalf of your other Hospital of Bridewell; it is not unknown
to the most of you, that a very great part thereof was restored out of its
ruins and rubbish, since the late dreadful Conflagration, at its own charge:
whereupon, their whole Stock being exhausted, and the Building (for a great
part remaining) likely to be left unfinished, they must for ever acknowledge
the seasonable Assistance of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and the Court
of Aldermen, toward the perfecting of the Edifice, out of the public Purse;
without which, those Wastes, were like to have been Desolations of many
Generations.

But yet when that great work is thoroughly finished, (which is now near done)
there will (there also) be farther need of additional private Charities.

First, in order to the endowing a School, (already as to the case, built,) for
the improvement of the young Nurselings of your Charity, the Blew Boys, in
Reading, Writing, and casting Account, etc. at such hours as shall be assigned
by the Governors, with the least intrenchment that may be, upon their Masters
occasions. Which, if it were once effected, it is not to be doubted, but some
of them that are of riper Capacities, having their education thus heightened,
would when they come out of their time, be enabled to apply themselves to more
beneficial and advantageous employments, than they can expect the mean
Manufactures they are there bred to, will afford them.

And secondly, in order to the more liberal rewarding of the most honest and
industrious of them, when they have faithfully served their Apprentiships, with
such an concouraging Stock to set up withal; as might enter them into their
new Callings with an hopefuller prospect of carrying them on in a thriving and
creditable way. Upon which expectation they would (doubtless) more generally be
induced, to acquiesce in the services allotted to them, more contentedly,
follow their business more diligently, and carry themselves, (in hope of their
good word at parting to recommend them to your Bounty) to their Masters more
dutifully: and not be tempted, (as too many daily are, by the difficulties of
getting a livelihood by their Labors when they are freemen,) to run away, and
return again to the worse Trade they were first bred in.

These particulars, I have presumed to suggest to your wisdoms, not to limit
them to my conceptions, as if I knew better how to manage your Governments than
your selves; but only as probationers for your approbation and effectual
concurrence, in case, upon due consideration, you find them worthy thereof.

Now the Lord give you all so affecting a sense of the Truths I have delivered
concerning the blessedness of Giving above Receiving; that you may be desirous
of making experiment of it your selves: and then give you to find it every way
as I have taught you, in your Persons, in your Houses, in your Trades, in your
Memories, in your Posterities; and principally, in your Souls, and their
everlasting Concerns, in the last and great day of our Lord Jesus: To whom, etc.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by James Collins at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1673.
OBservations upon Military and Political Affairs, by the most Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle: Fol. price 6 s.

A Sermon Preached by Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum, at the Funeral of the most
Honorable George Duke of Albemarle: Quarto, price 6 d.

Philosophia Pia, or, A Discourse of the Religious tendencies of the
Experimental Philosophy, to which is added a Recommendation and Defense of
Reason in the Affairs of Religion, by Joseph Glanvil, Rector of Bath: Octavo,
price 2 s.

The Way to Happiness represented in its Difficulties and Encouragements; and
cleared from many popular and dangerous mistakes, by Joseph Glanvil.

A Prefatory Answer to Mr. Henry Stubbs, the Doctor of Warwick, by Jos.
Glanvil: Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Life and Death of Mr. George Herbert, the Excellent Author of the Divine
Poems. Written by Is. Walton: Octavo, price 1 s.

A Discourse of the Forbearance of Penalties, which a due Reformation requires,
by Herbert Thorndike one of the Prebendaries of Westminster: Octavo.

A Private Conference between a rich Alderman, and a poor Country Vicar made
public, wherein is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths, which have been imposed
on the Subjects of England: Octavo. 2 s.

The Episcopacy of the Church of England justified to be Apostolical from the
Authority of the Primitive Church: and from the confessions of the most famous
Divines beyond the Seas, by the Right Reverend the late Lord Bishop of Duresin,
with a Preface written by Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet: Octavo.

A Collection of Sermons preached before the King at White Hall by the Right
Reverend Father in God, Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum.

Catholic Charity recommended in a Sermon before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of London, in order to the abating the Animosities among Christians that
have been occasioned by differences in Religion, by Jos. Glanvile, Rector of
Bath: price 6 d.

A Mirror of Christianity, and a Miracle of Charity; or an exact Narrative of
the Life and Death of the Lady Alice Duchess Dudley, by R. Coreman, D. D.
price 6 d.

The General Assembly, or the necessity of the receiving the Communion in our
public Congregations evinced from the Nature of the Church, the Word of God,
and Presbyterian Principles; A Sermon by Francis Fulwood, D. D. price 6 d.

Miserere Cleri; A Sermon presenting the Miseries of the Clergy, and Assigning
their true Causes in order to Redress, by Edw. Wettenhall, B. D. price 6 d.

Vrint and Thummim; or the Clergies Dignity and Duty recommended in a
Visitation Sermon; by Mal. Convant, B. D. price 6 d.

A Discourse of Toleration, in Answer to a late Book, entitled, A Discourse of
the Religion of England, price 6 d.

Indulgence not justified, being a Continuation of the Discourse of Toleration,
in answer to the Arguments of a late Book, entitled, A Peace Offering or Plea
for Indulgence; and to another, called, The second Discourse of the Religion of
England, price 6 d.

Toleration not to be abused, or a serious Question soberly debated and
resolved upon Presbyterian Principles, etc. price 6 d.

The Judgment of the Learned and pious St. Augustine, concerning penal Laws
against Conventicles, and for Unity in Religion, delivered in his 48 Epistle to
Vincentius.

The Dead Man's Real Speech, a Sermon preached on Hebr. 11. 4. upon the 29th day
of April, 1672. at the Funeral of the Right Reverend Father in God John late
Lord Bishop and Count Palatine of Durham: Together with a Brief of the Life,
Dignities, Benefactions, principal Actions, Sufferings, and Death of the said
Lord Bishop of Durham. By Isaac Basire, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinanary to his
Majesty. price 1 s. 6 d.

The Necessity of keeping our Parish-Churches, argued from the sin and danger
of the Schisms in the Church of Corinth, and of the present Separations; in a
Sermon before the Honorable Judges at the last Assizes held at Exeter, by
Francis Fulwood, D. D. price 6 d.

Holy Rules and Helps to Devotion both in prayer and practice: in Two parts:
Written by the Right Reverend Father in God Bryan Duppa late Lord Bishop of
Winton, in the time of his Sequestration.

FINIS.

