L. F. LORD KEEPER HIS SPEECH Before the Kings MAJESTY and both Houses in the
High Court of Parliament.

Concerning His Majesty's Reign with the Bishops, Judges, and Peers of the
Land.
With The Kings Majesty's Speech, or Charge to the Speaker.

(...)by Richard Cotton 1641

THE Lord Keeper His Noble Speech Jn Parliament.
WHen did ever King of this Kingdom, sit in white robes so long years
together, and scarce any one made to feel the sensible stroke of the Axe, nor
blood drawn, but in petty and particular causes.

Mr. Speaker, It was a good wish, and I will join with you in it with all my
heart; that they may be cursed and anatomized by the Parliament, by all the
Kingdom, and by all succeeding Ages, that go about in the least way to
innovate or alter any thing in that happy government.

The Commons applauding his Lordships expression with a general hymn, His
Lordship proceeded.

It is a joyful acclamation, and J doubt not, but that your hearts are full:
and certainly you my Lords, and you of the house of Commons, will easily know,
that those that are of that spirit, and that disposition* will quickly resolve
all their debates* and all their actions into keales, and into Cades
principles, which is to ruin the Nobility, to ruin the Gentry, to ruin and
eat up one another.

Mr. Speaker, you have lifted up your Contemplations, and raised them on five
excellent pillars.

That of religion, you do well in the first place to begin with; for
certainly, it is that which must season all our other blessings: and it is
that, to which we ought to ascribe the great happiness that we have so long
enjoyed. In that, with great judgment and discretion, you fix your eye and
your case upon the reverend prelates, that assist his Majesty on his right hand.
Certainly to them, and to their Predecessors we owe the due preservation of the
Gospel, in that purity and sincerity that now we enjoy it.

Let any man but look back, from the first of Queen Elizabeth, and somewhat
before to these times, and see to whom we owe it most.

The Prophet Elizha, when he had Eliaes spirit doubled upon him, he took up
his Mantle, and there are golden Candlesticks, and there are gates of Sapphire,
and Onixe, and other rich stones spoken of, as well in the new Testament, as in
the old. And God forbid, that we should live to see God, that is the God of
decency, served in such sort and manner, as Plow-men come home from their
ploughes.

Mr. Speaker, you shall not need to doubt, but that his Majesty's pious example
vnpresidented by a King (if I should say by any man I should not say amiss)
will give you for the house of Commons, and all the world, cause to rest
confident, and most assured of his zeal and constancy in the Religion which
he professes; which nothing within, or without the Kingdom has ever found
to move.

In the next place, you look upon the Judges and Sages of the Law, and well
you may, persons for gr^vity and for learning: certain^y not exceeded in any
age. And for justice and integrity. I am sure if any of them be guilty of the
lest defect therein, they have the least reason reason to be excused for it,
that ever Judges in any time or age. They have the example of the King, they
have the freedom of his royal Election, they have received from time to time
charge and command, that they should with equity, and with indifferency
distribute that Justice committed to them: and so discharge the trust by God
laid upon his Majesty, and by him transmitted to their dispensation.

For Chivalry, the next pillar on which you set up the Trophies of honor, the
Grandees, and great Lords of this Kingdom. You behold them in number I think,
far greater then ever their Ancestors were: and I doubt not, but their courage
is every way equal, and I assure my self, they will never forget the famous
Acts, that have left them honorable to all posterity, nor do the least thing
that may deface the monumentall name and accounts of them: or that may in the
least kind stain their nobility and magnanimity.

For Commerce, it is most certain, Mr. Speaker, it is the royal Mines of this
Kingdom, the East and West Indies of our Nation, and in that we have all great
cause to bless God, and to give humble thanks to his Majesty, that he takes
such pains to maintain and encourage it: that this Nation never had a more
flourishing time since the Conquest, then now it has.

There remains but unity, and as you say well, without that we can never be
happy: I will but turn your saying, you have said, Si sumus inseperabiles,
sumus insuperabiles, I will but say it is a borrowed one; but it is a true one:
and I will as soon borrow that, Si icolldimur, frangimur.

Mr. Speaker, let all the world avoid distrust, assure your self, there will
not lack out of malignant and ill affections, there will not lack from
pestilent and peevish endeavors to make good their actions, there will not
lack mailcious and ambitious spirits, that may disjoynt and unknit his Majesty
and this House.

And you of the House of Commons, you see his Majesty has graciously invited
you hither: and let me put you in mind, that you forget not what was said unto
you, which howsoever I will repeat unto you, that ^on may the better remember.

That there is nothing does so much take, a gracious and good nature, as
humble, sweet, and cheerful expressions of affections.

For your Petitions, his Majesty has heard them all, and grants them all, as
fully and as freely, as ever himself in other Parliaments did, or have any of
his predecessors before him done.

And therefore there remains nothing now, but that you go on with
cheerfulness, you go on with duty, you go on with the expressions, that may
rejoice the heart of so gracious, so just, and so good a King; and that may be
more then showers in the drought, and heat of Summer to refresh and cheer this
Kingdom, and all his Majesty's Dominions,

His Majesty's SPEECH.
Mr. Speaker,
I Will only say one word to you, now that you are the Speaker, I command you
to do the Office of a Speaker; which is faithfully to report the great cause
of the meeting, that my Lord Keeper in my name, did represent unto you the last
day, with this assurance, that you giving me your timely help, in this great
affair, I shall give a willing ear to all our just Grievances.

FINIS.

