(...), OR, The Loyal Subjects Indignation, FOR HIS Royal Sovereign's
DECOLLATION;

Expressed in an Unparalled PARALLEL Between the Professed murderer of K.
SAUL, and the Horrid actual Murderers of KING CHARLES I.

The Substance whereof was delivered In a SERMON Preached at All hallows Church
in NORTHAMPTON, On (the Day appointed for an ANNIVERSARY HUMILIATION in
reference to that execrable Fact) Jan. 30. 1660.

By SIMON FORD B. D. Minister there, and Chaplain to his MAJESTY.

London, Printed by J. H. for Samuel Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Earl of LAUDERDAIL, Viscount Metallan, Lord
Thirleston and Bolton, One of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber,
Principal Secretary of State in the Kingdom of Scotland, and One of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in both Kingdoms
Right Honorable,
WHen I had the Happiness to be first known to your Lordship, during your Late
Tyrannical and tedious Imprisonment at Windsor Castle (for which I still
acknowledge my self obliged to your own Condescension, inviting me thereunto) I
remember your Lordship was pleased to acquaint me, that some Books of mine
formerly published, had been part of the entertainment of your private hours,
during the vacancy which that barbarous Persecution gave you from Public
Business. And the remembrance hereof emboldneth me to presume, that your
Lordships Library will afford this Little Piece also a place among its Fellows:
Nor am I altogether out of hope, that it may have the like favor of
approbation at your Lordships hands, from the experience then given me of the
value which your Lordship then assured me you put upon them: Especially, when I
consider, that the subject matter of it is Loyalty; for which your Lordship
then suffered so deeply under the heavy hands of the Late bloody Tyrant and
Usurper: and for which I have been for several years persecuted by the
Murderers of our Late Sovereign of Glorious Memory, for endeavoring to
obstruct them in the quiet possession of his vacant Seat, by both refusing to
subscribe, and also bearing public Testimony from the Pulpit against the
Subscription of that accursed Engagement, imposed by them in order to a
post-justification of that horrid Fact, the Extirpation of the Royal Posterity,
and the Settlement of themselves in their Rights, by color of a public and
National Consent.

And I assure you (my Lord) that the Con^cience hereof (together with that
little Contribution which (in my low capacity) I have (through Gods Goodness)
lived to give toward the Restoration and Settlement of his present Majesty,
my most Gracious Sovereign, and Royal Master, (whom the Divine Protection long
preserve) is not the least of my Comforts, nor (I hope) shall be to my dying
Day. Upon the comfortable experience whereof (as also upon the conviction of
those Doctrines, which in this, and my former Parallel, I have published to the
world) I am resolved as long as I live (through Gods Grace) to seek the Peace
and Welfare, and Support (to my capacity) the Crown and Dignity of my most
rightful Sovereign, and bid a perfect defiance to all Persons and Principles
whatsoever, that are given to change.

Now the Lord grant that the guilt of the Late Horrid Murder upon the Lords
Anointed, may be so wiped off from the Score of these Nations, that we be never
visited with those very evils, or worse, (for a just punishment thereof) to
prevent which, the Contrivers and Executors of it, took so irregular and
unlawful a course. I mean, that the violent revengefulness of some Spirits
among us, may not re-produce such woeful Tragedies, as God has mercifully
delivered us from once and again, within a few years last past, and perpetually
honor his just and rightful Successor, our present Sovereign, with the most
Noble and Glorious Title, of the Allayer of our mutual heats and animosities,
the Moderator of all our Differences, and the Reconciler of us each to other
(even whether we will or no) by the Interposition of his Royal Authority. Let
(...) be his perpetual Motto, and the inviolable Observation of all his Acts of
Pardon and Oblivion, be his Memorial and Honorable Remembrance to all
Generations; and may your Lordships Counsels be perpetually assistant to Him
(as I doubt not but they will) in all things of that Tendency; which will not
only preserve your Name in that Repute which you have hitherto maintained
amongst all pious and sober persons, but render you a Councellor in whom there
will be safety to the Person and Throne of his Sacred Majesty, and make good
the Character, which amongst other your Honourers, have been given of your
Lordships Wisdom and Temper, by

Right Honorable, Your Lordships most Humble and Affectionate Servant, SIMON
FORD.

(...) OR, The Loyal Subjects Indignation, FOR HIS Royal Sovereign's
Decollation, etc.
2 SAMUEL 1. 14. And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the Lords Anointed?
THis Chapter contains in it a relation of certain passages The Introduction to
the Text. An Amalckites Narrative of the death of Saul.
concerning the death of King Saul, (which whether true or false (seeing we
must take them upon the credit of a fugitive soldier) can hardly be put out of
question; though we, (as probably David, to whom it was made, did) will at
present suppose them true:) and the carriage of David thereupon. The whole
story whereof seems to be recorded of purpose for the vindication of the holy
man, from the unjust imputation of designing and conspiring to take away his
Sovereigns life, by the defensive Arms which he had formerly born against him.
And three particulars are therein mentioned, as evidences of his innocence.

1. His unfeigned grief for that lamentable death which (by the relators story)
he understood had befallen him, v. 11, 12.

2. His indignation against, and justice upon the person who professed he was
the instrument to hasten it, v. 13, to 17.

3. His pious endeavor to perpetuate the memory of his deceased Sovereign in a
mournful Ditty composed by himself, and appointed in succeeding Ages to be
sung in a solemn manner by the children of Judah. To which purpose, he caused
it to be recorded in a book kept (as it seems by Josh. 10. 13.) of purpose, to
preserve the memorials of eminent men, called the book of Jasher, or the
Upright; and gave it (in remembrance of the weapons of war which (it appears
by 1 Samuel 31. 3.) were most fatal in that battle wherein Saul received his
foyl, and first wound) the title of Kesheth, or the Bow, of which you have the
particular account from v. 17. to the end.

My Text comes under the second of these mentioned particulars, and is the
verse wherein David expresses his deep resentment of the related fact, with a
just horror and indignation: David said to him, How wast thou not afraid to
stretch forth thy hand to destroy the Lords anointed?

Which words, because rhey relate to a preceding Narrative, made by an
Amalekite (a mercenary of Saul's, as is likely, escaped out of that battle
before mentioned) concerning the manner of the Kings death: We will take a
little time before we come to a particular view of them, to examine the
considerable passages in it, and circumstances relating to it.

And it is observable that the villain expresses in (...) carriage and
relation, a strange mixture of

1. Confidence. Managed with a strange
2. Caution.
First, Confidence, in that he took the boldness to be the Relator 1.
Confidence.
of such a story concerning himself, and that in the face of Authority, which
an ordinary person would have trembled to have been charged withal by another.
And that which most sets off his confidence, is, that the person before whom he
confesses himself guilty of promoting Saul's death, was his immediate
Successoun* David, who by his death became actually King. Had he been never so
slightly read in politics, he might have learned, that succeeding Kings,
(however, they may look on the news of their Predecessors death as acceptable
tidings, yet) seldom look favorably upon those who have been Instruments in
making the royal Seat void for them; as considering that the same persons who
have been so kind to them, upon like inducements, may be easily tempted to do
the like courtesy for others, as occasion serves.

But (it seems) the Wretch built his confidence upon three probable Upon
mistaken grounds.
conjectures, in all of which (nevertheless) he was sorely mistaken.

1. That David, being by Gods appointment and Samuels unction, the next in
succession to Saul, might by his greediness to grasp the Scepter, be tempted
to make another judgment of the fact, then otherwise he would; and account his
service meritorious, who had helped him to it sooner then in the course of
nature it would have fallen. He made an ill conjecture (it appears) at the
temper of David's spirit, which was not so sharp-set upon the dish of Royalty
(however tempting in it self, and to vulgar appetites) but that he could stay
till Gods providence in a regular way carved it to him. How much mind soever he
had to the golden apple, which sets all the world at odds, Dominion, yet had he
no mind to have the Tret on which it grew, battered, to make it fall before the
time.

2. That however David might be too mortified to bite at the bait of Ambition,
yet secret revenge might tickle him into a good humor, when he understood in
what manner divine vengeance had overtaken his deadly enemy, and implacable
persecutor. But David had learned, that a gracious soul is frequently the more
endangered by being secure from dangers. That, a state of persecution well
husbanded, is the most feracious soil for grace to thrive in. That, be the
benefit accrewing by the fall of ones enemy never so great, yet to rejoice at
the destruction of him that hates us when evil has found him, is not only a
vicious disposition in morality, but a sin of no ordinary size in Divinity, Job
35. 15. and especially, when the person so suffering is the Lords anointed; and
so, the private advantage accrewing thereby to any person, is too
inconsiderable a compensation to be laid in balance against a public loss.
And upon this account his politics failed the Relator in his second
presumption.

3. That David had been in Arms against Saul for diverse years, and was at this
time in a posture of defense against him in a frontier Town of an enemies
Country. These considerations gave very great suspicion that he designed the
death of Saul himself, and so was (at least intentionally) a partner in guilt
with him who effected it. But the Miscreant either knew not, or was willing not
to know that David's Arms were merely defensive, not offensive; that, as his
warrant for wearing them was extraordinary, and much different from other
subjects in like cases, so his temper in the use of them was extraordinary
also: and lastly, that he had more then once given evidence of no less, when
both opportunity, and tentation from his most intimate friends, had put it to
the utmost trial, 1 Samuel 24. and 26. And thus was he mistaken in his third
conjecture, which bottomed his Confidence. And possibly, he himself might have
some twinges and wrenches of suspicion that he might be so; and that, in the
midst of his boldness, makes him to manage his relation (in the second place)
with much

Secondly, Caution: Which appears in several particulars observable 2. Caution
in his Artifices and Pleas for justification or extenuation of the Fact. 1. He
relates only the death of Saul, David's enemy. v. 5.
in his carriage and narrative, whereby he seems of purpose to design the
extenuation of this fact which he assumed the boldness thus to relate. As

1. That though he brought the tidings of both Saul's and Jonathans death, yet
he pretends not to have any such particular knowledge of Jonathans death, as he
had of Saul's, though David asked him concerning them both; lest David should by
the circumstances of his own relation, have suspected him guilty of Jonathans
death also, as he confessed himself of Saul's. He knew that friendship which was
between David and Jonathan, would have endangered him to a more severe
scrutiny, then he hoped he should undergo for Saul's. At least, he was not so
ready to insist on that part of the story, which he knew was the most
unwelcome, and therefore chose to insist only on that which he hoped would be
better entertained. He had indeed slain David's enemy, and so could give the
most perfect relation of his death: but could say little but from the voice of
the people, concerning the death of his friend.

2. That though he confesses he had an hand in the death of 2. He justifies
his Fact. 1. By Saul's request.
Saul, yet he was requested by himself to do it. He said unto him, stand upon
me, I pray thee, and slay me, ver. 9. Now, volenti non fit injuria; and how
much less, roganti? No man is injured, but against his will; and therefore, it
cannot (in any reason) come under the notion of Injury, to satisfy another
Request, which has in it a superlative degree of Voluntariness. Besides, he
was his Sovereign, and so his Requests adopted the Authority of Commands. And
if his Sovereigns Command might warrant him to take away the life of another,
why might it not justify him rather in the case of his own? seeing what is a
man's own, is more properly and directly in his power to dispose of, than what
is another. Add to this; that it was the last Office of Love and Service that
he was capable of performing toward him; and that so great, that as he had
cause to believe, that Saul himself thanked him for it in his dying thoughts,
so his very Ghost, if it were present, could not but attest, that no man ever
merited more highly from Saul, than he had done.

3. That there was Reason enough why Saul should account no By his dangerous
condition.
less of this Service, for no man in his condition, but would have courted
death, more amorously than ever he did the dearest Object of his Affections:
Wounded he was by his own hand, and as one that Job 3. 21.
longed for death, he had dug for it into his own Breast, as for hid
Treasure: But the Channel he had made for Life to run out at, was too narrow to
give it a speedy Vent, which he so earnestly desired. And how could his eyes
endure to see his Beloved Sovereign lie in that misery, wherein Life was his
greatest Burden, and not ease him of it? Besides, Had there been any grounds to
hope, he might recover of the wound he had given himself, no Subject he had,
should have been more ready to have bound it up, and attempted the Cure, than
himself. But sure he was, that long he could not live, V. 10. And to have
protracted his Life, when there was only so much remaining in him, as served to
augment the anguish of his death, had been the greatest Cruelty. So that, his
condition considered, he could not but highly merit, by dispatching him
quickly. Or if his Charity to him in that case might in any construction be
interpreted criminal, yet the guilt could not be such, as to render him the
thousandth part of a Murderer, seeing he could be no further chargeable with
it, than that pitiful fragment of life amounted unto which he took away. By the
Philislims pursuit of him.


4. That had he not done him the kindness of releasing his weary soul, he had
undoubtedly fallen into the hands of the uncircumcised Philistines, which he
professed to be his great fear, 1 Samuel 31. 4. And so had doubly died by the
Wounds and Sarcasmes of his Heathen Enemies. For, the Chariots and Horsemen
followed hard after him, V. 6.

5. That he brought no design with him to the place, where he By his
unpremeditated and providential coming to the place where he lay.
did that Unhappy Act. For he was by mere Providence, while he fled for his own
life, cast upon that lamentable Object: He happened by chance upon Mount
Gilboa, V. 6. and there he found Saul leaning upon his Spear: And this
consideration will clear him from all prepensed malice, which is essentially
requisite to constitute a Murderer: So that in this case killing was no Murder,
Besides, such was his have, that he was in, to escape with his own life, that
he had not the least time to deliberate upon any such course as might have
saved Saul's, or to debate with himself concerning the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of the Fact, being hardly himself, through his own fear, and the
suddenness of the surprise by so unexpected a Providence.

6. That whereas it might possibly be supposed, that some covetous By his
preserving and restoring the Royal spoils.
desire of enriching himself with the Royal Spoils, tempted him to the Fact;
to clear himself from any such suspicion, he had brought with him, and now
tendered to his Lawful Successor, the Crown that was upon his head, and the
Bracelet that was upon his Arm, V. 10. Which he took off after he was dead, to
preserve them from worse hands.

7. And lastly, That it had been, and still was his unspeakable By the mouraing
habit which he made the Relation in.
grief, that he was so unhappy, as to be any way drawn in to be instrumental in
so sad a Business. That he had already spent more Tears for it, than he drew
drops of blood in it; not because he thought himself in the least criminal, but
because he had been so unfortunate, as to do that which looked like so great a
Crime. This, though it be not recorded as the Language of his Lips, yet so much
is recorded, v. 2. concerning the Garb in which he presented himself to David,
as may justify a conjecture, that he intended it as no small part of his
vindication: He had rent his clothes, to testify the rending of his heart, and
covered himself with ashes, to show how willingly he could have laid himself
down in the dust for his dear Master, if by dying he could have redeemed his
Life. His entertainment from David.


Pleas as plausible, as so heinous a Fact could possibly admit of. After which,
we may suppose him pausing a while, and traveling with expectation of some
great reward from David, before whom he feemed to himself to have so well
acquitted himself, that he doubted not, but his Murder would advance it self to
the reputation of Merit. But my Text tells you, how David disappointed his
expectations, took down his confidence, and answered all his pleadings, by
setting before him the atrociousness of his Fact, nakedly, and in it self
considered in mitigation whereof, no Circumstances ought to be admitted to
consideration: For, be all that thou have said, true, (replies David) yet art
thou not in the least excusable. For, How wast thou not afraid (upon whatever
Motives, or with whatever intentions) to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the
Lords Anointed?

And thus have I led you through the Context to the Text, by Division of the
Text.
a Preface somewhat tedious (I confess) but yet very necessary, to the full
understanding and profitable improvement of it, as you shall see hereafter.
Mean while, may it please you, with me, to observe, in this Reply of David's,
these three Parts considerable,

1. Quid, or what he replies; That it was a fearful sin for him to stretch out
his hand to destroy the Lords Anointed. 2. Quis, or the Person that made it;
David said. 3. Quomodo, or the manner of his Reply, which is by way of vehement
Interrogation: How wast thou not afriad, etc.
First, The Quid, or Substance of his Reply, importing the Horridness of the
sin of this Amalekite.

To which there is a twofold Evidence;

I. The Aggravations of the Crime here condemned, taken from,

1. The Person that committed, but ought to have avoided it with holy Fear;
Thou, under a twofold Capacity: 1. Thou, a Private man. 2. Thou, a Subject, by
present relation (at least) to Saul, being his Soldier.
2. The Person on whom it was committed, and who ought to have been otherwise
dealt withal, considered in a double Capacity. 1. Of his Civil Quality; He was
Unctus, a Person who had received Regal Unction, and was thereby separated from
the Vulgus, or common sort of men, a King solemnly inaugurated, The Anointed.
2. Of his Sacred Relation, and so he was Messiah Jehovae, the Lords Anointed,
Gods Deputy and Vicegerent by special Commission.
3. The Fact it self, which was, 1. In its Nature, bloody, he destroyed him. 2.
In its Principle, voluntary, he stretched forth his hand to do it, which
imports a purpose and resolution of heart to do it. 3. In its Manner, it was
done (...), without fear; He was not afraid to do that Act which he should have
trembled at.

II. The Invalidity of all his former Pleas, or whatever might be urged in his
defense; gathered from the connection of the Verse with the preceding Relation;
David takes no notice of any of his Pleas at all, which imports thus much
[although all this, and much more might be truly said in his defense, yet it
was nevertheless horrid to David, nor ought to have been to him.]

Secondly, Quis, or the Person replying, David said; who comes under a twofold
Consideration also.

I. According to what he truly and indeed was. 1. As a man; one truly pious,
and incomparably tenderconscienced, [David (the Saint) said] 2. As a King; For
Saul's death actually possessed him of the Throne, though he were not possessed
of the Kingdom: [David (the King) said.]
II. According to the mistaken Idea or Notion under which the Malefactor
represented him to himself in the grounds of his forementioned Confidence; and
so he comes under a threefold view: 1. As a Person mortally persecuted by Saul;
who never left hunting him as a partridge upon the Mountains, till he had
hunted him into a Foreign Country, where now he was. 2. As a Person formerly
in Arms against him, and yet standing upon his guard, in Ziglag, the place of
his present Retreat. 3. As the Person who had long (by divine Warrant) expected
the devolution of Saul's Crown upon himself.

Thirdly, Quomodo, or the manner of his Reply; which imports an unusual heat
and eagerness, a strange concitation of passions. For it is by way of vehement
Interrogation, aculeated with abundance of quick Tartness.

It is not barely Assertio docentis, an affirmation of his Duty, for then he
needed to have expressed it only thus; [Thou ought to have been afraid.]

Nor barely, Querela dolentis, an expression of his grief for the sad accident:
For then he had not needed to have languaged it otherwise than thus; [Alas!
What a fearful thing was it for thee thus to stretch forth thy hand, etc.]

Nor barely, Quaestio discentis, an enquiry concerning the temper (or distemper
rather) wherein he did it, which might have been sufficiently expressed thus;
[Wast thou not afraid, etc.

But it is Interrogatio exprobrantis, a smart interrogation, exprobrating to
him the audacious impiousness of the Fact. [How wast thou not afraid, etc.]
Which expresses all the rest, and more too. In a word, it speaks three
Passions, which David felt upon the sad Relation.

1. Grief; For so do we find that Passion venting it self by a doleful
Interrogation, Lam. 4. 1. and Isa. 1. 21. etc. 2. Wonder and Astonishment; that
a Person so abject and contemptible, should arrive at the confidence to direct
a steady blow at the heart of his Sovereign. And such [How's] do we also find
in Scripture: See Isa. 14. 12. Prove. 30. 13. etc. 3. Horror and Abomination of
the monstrous impiety, as well as daringness of the Act. And we are not without
Examples of the Expression of this passion in a like Form. See Genesis 39. 9.
Hest. 8. 6. etc.
And thus, having crumbled my Text to pieces, for the fuller And handled.
Explication of it, by the due weighing of every Word contained in it, it will
be needful to look them over severally.

1. As they relate to the Chapter and Narrative contained in it.

2. As they may be accomodated by way of parallel to the sad occasion of this
days Solemnity.

And First, As they relate to the Chapter and its Narrative, it First view of
the Text.
will be useful to consider the three Parts of the Text distinctly, the first,
by way of Doctrine, the second and third by way of Inference or Application.

1. First then, The Quid or Doctrine which is by David in the Part 1. Quid. Or
the hainousness of this Fact of the Amalekite in killing Saul, and (under that)
of Kingkilling in general. Evidenced;
Text in ended, to be amplified to the utmost, is, the horrid wickedness of
this particular Fact of the Amalekites killing of King Saul (in Hypothesi) and
thence (in Thesi) or generally, the hainousness of the sin of murdering Kings,
under whatever diminutive considerations it may be presented.

Now this Intention, David in the Text does amply make good, (as before was
intimated.)

1. By so emphatical a Collection of the Circumstances of the Crime confessed,
which the distribution of the Text enumerates.

2. By the rejecting of all those Pleas (as invalid) which either were
expressed, or might be implied, in the particulars of his defense before
mentioned.

I. The aggravating Circumstances of the Fact, in the Text, are, First, By the
aggravating Circumstances. Taken From the Person committing the Fact.


1. The Considerations under which the Murderer came, (viz.) of a private
person, and one who (of a Forreigner, an Amalekite, whose life Saul had spared,
contrary to the express Command of God, 1 S^m. 15.) was admitted into the
condition of a Subject and Soldier under him; and (if the conjecture of some,
that this Amalekite was Doegs Son, be true) had received a peculiar Obligation
from him, in the advancement bestowed upon his Father.

But (to omit his Obligations, which indeed render the Fact monstrously
ungrateful, could they be proved; but being only received from
Jewish-Tradition, and not asserted in the Text, I shall make no further use of
them) in that he was (confessedly) a private person, and a Subject, it was
evidence sufficient of the horridness of the Fact, that he did it. For, for a
private man to execu^e a power of Life and death, was an high presumption, and
would amount to no less than Murder, if acted upon the Meanest and most
Criminal Person in the world: But when to the Privateness of the Condition, is
added Subjection also, this adds a far greater aggravation. Had the Amalekite
slain his equal, he had been a Murderer; but the slaying his Superior, to whom
he was lawfully subject, rendered him a Parricide. They that justify the power
of Subjects over the Lives of their Lawful Superiors, had need find out a
Logic, that can verify Contradictions; for such must that Doctrine
necessarily maintain, that renders the same Persons ad invicem, toward each
other, and at once, Sovereign and Subject; the Subject his own Princes
Sovereign, and the Sovereign his own Subjects Vassal. So that the sin of
King-killing, acted by the hands of Subjects, upon this bare account, amounts
to no less than an Usurpation of a Jurisdiction inconsistent with all
Principles or right Reason, and all Laws, both of God and man, and renders the
Person that is guilty of it, superlatively criminal, as one who forfeits his
Soul to God, and his Life to man, by the guilt of the highest Praemunire that
can be incurred. This is the first emphatical aggravation of the Fact, from the
Person committing it. Let Saul deserve to die never so justly, yet what
Commission had the Amalekite, a private Person, and his Subject, to kill him?
And so David tells him: -- At tu indignus quid faceres tamen?

[How wast not [Thou] afraid?]

II. The Fact is yet rendered more heinous, by the Second Emphatical From the
Person murdered, who was,
aggravation in the Text, taken from the Person slain, Saul, under a double
Consideration:

He was

1. Unctus. 2. Unctus Domini.
I. He was Unctus, (in his Civil Quality) He was a Person Anointed.
solemnly separated from other men, an Anointed King. Anointing (or whatever
Ceremony of Investiture is, (by the Customs of Particular Nations) equivalent
thereunto) puts a Note of highest difference between the Persons dignified
therewith, and others. Three high and honorable Functions in the Scripture
were conferred by this Ceremony of Anointing, and all of them senced and
privileged from Injuries by virtue of that Holy Oil; the Priestly,
Prophetical and Royal Offices. Not to instance in the two former, (upon which
(whatever these confused times have suggested to the contrary) it were easy to
prove, that God has written a Nolitetangere, a Privilege from common
handling) to be sure the Last, (the Royal) is so highly secured by the holy
Scriptures, that they exact from Subjects such a special Awe and Reverence
toward Kings, as not only binds the Hand and Tongue, but the very Heart also,
to the good behavior: Whence in the case of this very Saul, when he was once
anointed King, the Holy Ghost puts the Brand of Sons of Belial upon all those
who despised or spoke contemptuously of him, 1 Samuel 10. 27. And Solomon
strictly forbids us to curse, or wish evil to the King, even in our very
thoughts, Eccles. 10. 20. So that this Consideration was very effectually
conducing to the aggravation of the Amalekites in the Text, and (in him) of
every King-killers offense: For the consequence is a minori ad majus,
undeniable. If the lesser injury may not be done to Kings, the greater may not.
If our Tongues, nay Thoughts are not to injure them, much less our Hands.

II. To strengthen this consideration further, David calls him And the Lords
Anointed.
not only Unctum, [Anointed,] but Unctum Domini, [the Lords Anointed] Which
Title peculiarly relates him to God as his Vicegerent and Lieutenant, and
enhanceth the sin of King-killing to the guilt of High Treason against God
himself. That the Title of the Lords Anointed, is attributed to other Kings
besides Saul, as to all the Jewish Kings, yea and Heathen Kings also (instance
Cyrus, Isa. 45. 1) argues that the same security belongs to all other Kings, as
being no less related to God, and commissioned under him: That Supreme
Authority resides originally in the Body of the People as the Fountain of all
just power, and is delegated to Kings from Not the Peoples.
them, as their servants entrusted by them, and for maladministration
accountable to them, is a Doctrine that savours so much of a spirit quite alien
from the Scriptures, that I shall almost as soon turn Mohammedan, as believe it.
Surely in that the Holy Ghost calls them Gods, he cannot be thought to assign
them an humane Original, without allowing the Creature a power (which he every
Ps. 82. 6.
where denies him) of conferring a Divinity upon the work of his hands. Man,
whilst he attempts to make a God, does no other, than the Child, that attempts
with a Bundle of Clouts, to make a Babe. They that say to the works of their
hands, ye are gods, Hos. 14. 3. are no other, than blasphemous Idolaters; and
the gods they make, are Elilim, vain Idols, not Elohim, true Gods, Jer. 16. 20.
Psalm. 96. 5. Yea, it is a strong Scripture-consequence against the Divinity of
such Puppet-gods; [The workman made it, therefore it is not God, Hos. 8. 6.] Of
like nature is the Presumption of those men who undertake to make and unmake
Kings, at their own pleasure; and that so great, that (in reference to this
very claim) the Great Antichrist is justly charged with lifting himself up
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2. 4. And to set up Kings without God,
(Kings of humane Constitution, contrary to Gods appointed Order of Succession)
when it was acted by the Ten Tribes, in the case of Jeroboam, and the
succeeding Kings of Israel, is yoaked (as a parallel piece of presumptuous
Impiety) in one and the same verse, with making Idols of Silver and Gold, Hos.
8. 4. Indeed a God and a King of man's making, are both alike, Idols both; and
they that make them, are like unto them. It is He alone that has it to give,
who confers the least spark of Divinity, Political, as well as Natural: and he
that says to a man of his own setting up, Thou art Gods Deputy, first, robs
the True God of that power, and then bestows it upon a Counterfeit. And
although the Constitutions of some Nations, where Popular Election disposes of
the Crown, may seem to invalidate this Doctrine, I must tell you, that (besides
that ab initio non fuit ita, the Original of all Governments was from Paternal
Jurisdiction, and next that hereditary Succession (both appointed by God) and
all Forms varying from those, are too novel to prescribe against an ancienter
Constitution) even there where Election (according to Law and Custom) designs
the Person, Gods Ordination confers the Power, that he is invested withal; for
there is no power but from God, Romans Kings (even where elected by the People)
are nevertheless,
13. 1. In such Nations, the Kings may be Electi, Plebis, the Peoples Elect;
but when once regularly chosen, they become Uncti Domini, the Lords Anointed.
And with this distinction, (though it may possibly be, orthodox enough to
interpret St. Peter's (...), (Pet. 2. 13.) of a person according to the Laws and
Customs of a Nation elected, or acknowledged for King, that thereby he becomes
(so far) an Ordinance or Creature of man: yet) when this Creature of man is so
far made, as man's Votes or Laws or Consents can make him, he receives (over
and above this) by a Divine Dixi, a word of Authority, to make him the Object
of conscientious Obedience, which the same Apostle intimates in the next words,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, i. e. as
considering the relation he has to God. The Body of Authority is made by Laws
and Customs of Nations, but the Soul of it is infused by God. Prometheus may
make the Image of a man of Clay, but it is Fire from Heaven that must animate
it, or it is but an Image still: So till the Word of God come to men, (as our
Savior phraseth it, John 10. 35.) and say Gods Anointed.
Ye are Gods, they are but (as Sampson bereft of his Locks) like other men: But
when once Gods dixi, is past, then, and then only, this (...) this Ordinance of
man, becomes (...), the Constitution and Ordination of God, Romans 13. 2.

It is true indeed, that (for the ascertaining of men's Consciences in the
Object of their Civil Worship) Gods dixi, always concurs with the just and
lawful Issue of Humane Constitutions and Customs, so that God has given us
this Infallible Note, to discern who is Unctus Domini, his Vicegerent and
Deputy, that he comes to govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom. But yet
you may not ascribe the Authority he has, to the Laws which assert his Right,
but to God, whose Constitution enables those Laws to determine in so weighty a
matter.

And hence, it will not follow, that the Peoples consent (which And therefore
not subject to their Jurisdiction when once admitted.
made those Laws, upon the determination of which the divine Constitution is
necessarily attendant) renders the Person invested with Authority according to
those Laws, at all, much less altogether, dependant upon the People for that
Authority; and that therefore in case of maladministration, he may be unmade
by them who made him, more than it will follow, that because (according to the
standing Law of Nature) the rational Soul is necessarily annexed to the
Substance of the Body, in the instant of Generation; therefore we owe our
Spirits to our Parents, as well as our Bodies, or that (upon that Supposition)
the Natural Parent may dismiss the Soul of his Child from the Body at his
pleasure, which he is supposed to have by generation conferred upon it. But
rather (as in Nature and Reason the Soul of man, however necessarily tied to
the order of Nature in generation, is yet (...), Gods Offspring, Acts 17. Not
the Parents, and therefore may not be dislodged our of the Body without a Writ
of Revocation, a Redite Filii hominum, from the Father of Spirits, for no man
has Psalm. 90. 3. Heb. 12. 9.
power over the Spirit, but only God that gave it, Eccles. 8. 8. 12. 7. So in
the true and genuine reason of State-Government, (which is to be fetched from
the Scriptures, not men's Politics) Authority, which is (...), the Ordinance of
God, (whatever necessary Connection, by divine appointment, it have to humane
Laws and Customs) cannot justly be separated from the Person, whom those Laws
and Customs have invested with it, without an Act of divine resumption. He that
says to Princes, Ye are Gods, makes them (in a Political sense) what he says
they are, Civil Deities, and such they must continue, till by a like dixi or
word of Repeal, he unmake them again. And the resolution which Conscience must
expect, to determine herein also, must be fetched from the Laws Umpirage in all
Nations.

Now from this Dixi of God, this Divine Constitution it is, But Sacred and
secured by Divine Ordination
that the Persons of Kings have in all places and ages been accounted Sacred.
This Unction from the Holy One, (give me leave so to call it in allusion to
that of St. John, though by him used in another sense, 1 John 2. 20.) secures
them from the gripes of rude hands, with a Nolite tangere. For so (though that
Text directly relates to Gods wonderful preservation of the three Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that under the Notion of Gods Prophets, under
which Relation God expressly cautions Abimelech, Genesis 20. 7. And that Passage,
it is more than probable, the Psalmist had in his eye, when he penned it) the
Argument which God uses, Psalm. 105. 15. for the Privilege he gave them, that
they were Uncti Domini, will necessarily extend the security there claimed for
them, to all who are partakers of a like Unction: [Touch not says he, mine
Anointed] by that known Logical Maxim, A quatenus ad de omni valet Argumentum.
A consideration, which so far prevailed with Holy David, that his heart smote
him, in the Cave, for only cutting off the Skirt of King Saul's Garment, as if
the savor of the Divine Unction by descending (as it is said of Aarons, Psalm.
133. 2.) to the Skirts of his Garment, had communicared its Tincture so far to
the Royal Robe, as to mind him by the Sent it left upon his very fingers ends,
that he had made too bold with the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 24. 5. And therefore,
no wonder, And that although abusing their Power against the Laws, and turning
Tyrants.
if he charge it so home upon this Amalekite, who had with a murderous touch
assaulted that Body that wore it.

Obj. True, (will the Anti-monarchist say) whilst Princes keep to the Rules by
which they are to govern; but if they transgress them, do they not thereby
forfeit their Privilege, and become as other men; yea, far worse, by being
Tyrants: Is it not lawful to kill a which is,
Tyrant, that preys upon the Lives and estates of his Subjects, like a wild
Beast let loose, and makes use of Gods Authority committed to him, to secure
himself in such intolerable Abuses?

Sol. To which I answer,

1. Was not this very Saul as properly a Tyrant in this kind, Proved by several
Arguments.
as any recorded in Scripture or History? Was he empowered by the Law of God
(by which he was to govern, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15. etc. to the end) to persecute an
innocent David, as he did? or to attempt the murder of his own Son Jonathan, as
he did? 1 Samuel 20. 33. Or, was he empowered to destroy a whole City of Priests,
for the supposed offense of one Ahimilech, as he did? 1 Samuel 22. 18. Was he
empowered by that Law to do many other irregular Acts, which Samuel reckons up
by way of Prophecy concerning him, when he made him King? 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12.
And yet was he still Unctus Domini, under the Protection of his Divine Unction,
and not to be touched with a violent hand.

2. There is a twofold Tyrant, Tyrannus Titulo, and Tyrannns exercitio, a
Tyrant for want of a just Title to govern, and a Tyrant by unjust Acts in his
Government, though his Title to Government be never so just. He that is
Tyrannus Titulo, and has no Title to govern, an Usurper, has no nolite
tangere, no divine Protection from his Unction, no touch not mine Anointed, to
secure him.

And (although it be not (in my judgment) a safe Principle, which permits every
private Person to destroy such a Tyrant, (seeing hereby private men are made
competent Judges of Sovereign Rights, and the most Lawful Prince cannot be
safe, if that be allowed) yet) no question, the Collective Body of a Nation,
headed by an Usurper against the general sense of those who have the ordinary
power of interpreting and executing Laws, may (upon their call) rise up
against, dispossess, and bring him to condign punishment to make way for the
Lawful Prince unjustly excluded.

But where a Prince lawfully entitled to his Government, is yet Tyrannus
exercitio, abuses that Government, to unjust and illegal Barbarities, (though
herein he offend as highly against God, as it is not easily imaginable, how any
one can more, because he defaceth (the most glorious Image of God) himself; and
reflects the partnership of his guilt upon God, whom he represents, as
authorizing him to such enormities, which the power received from him (only)
capacitateth him to act: yet) is he still, because of the Anointing, a
privileged person, not to be violated by thy hands, or mine, whatever evils we
suffer under him, and what capacity soever we may be in, to revenge them. I
will evidence this to you by a familiar Instance: Adulterated Coin, that bears
the Princes Image, without the warrant of his own Mint, to attest it, any man
may refuse to receive in payment, and knock to pieces, or nayl to a Post,
because it is adulterate. But good and lawful Coin stamped by just Authority,
how much soever it may be battered or defaced, whilst any Print remains of the
Royal Inscription to declare it such, may challenge a free passage, and may not
be refused, or wilfully abused. So (whatever becomes of Tyrants by Title, who
bear Gods superscription only by adulteration, and are mere By-blows of
Supremacy) those that are not so, (however Tyrannous actions may blemish and
deface them, yet) because they are the Legitimate Issue of a Divine Commission,
and so truly Filii Excelsi, the Sons of the most High, having the true stamp of
his Image upon them, must be still owned as such, and respected according to
their Authority.

3. But be it supposed, that (notwithstanding all that is said) such a
Forfeiture may be made, as the Objectors pretend; I would fain know, who shall
be Judge, when, and by what Acts this Forfeit is incurred: Shall the Prince
himself? I doubt they will think that unreasonable, because in this case he is
a mere Party, and so will undergo the suspicion of Partiality to himself, from
a Principle of self-Love.

Who must then? The Collective body of the Subjects? And do not the Objectors
see that the same reason excludes them? Will not the Principle of Self-Love,
and Self-revenge be as apt to corrupt them, in taking cognizance of the
Injuries they feel? But there is an higher exception against them yet; and that
is the offending Israelites Question to Moses, Who made thee a Judge? Exodus 2.
14. By what Law either Divine or humane, (was the Question of our Late martyred
Sovereign) can the Subject be empowered to sit in Judgment upon his King? And
indeed, as there is no such Law, so is it most unreasonable there should be:
For, grant the Subjects such a power, and considering the prevalency of
prejudices against Governors, and the frequency of successeful attempts of
ill-meaning persons, to spread those prejudices, together with the incapacity
of the People to know and judge of the true reason of State-Actions, etc.) and
tell me, whether it would ever (in likelihood be the felicity of any King (how
just soever) without a miracle, to escape being deposed or murdered, at one
time or other by his subjects. The Accomplices and Partners in guilt of every
mal^factor whom he has put to death, though never so justly, would before a
Popular Judicatory arraign him for Murder; the persons concerned in
confiscated Estates, would Indite him for theft and robbery: the Fanatic
punished by his Laws, for never so horrid Blasphemies, and pretended
conscientious Conspiracies, etc. would prosecute him for a Persecutor: insomuch
that the only way for a King to be secure in such a Kingdom, were to let all
justice go at sixes and sevens, and then he would be obnoxious to the
displeasure of none but (those, who though by this dissolution of Government
they would be the deepest Sufferers, yet by their conscientious Principles are
remotest from all likelihood of revenging themselves upon their Sovereign) the
truly Godly. Nay (I will speak a big word for once) it would be hard for the
most righteous Governor of the whole world, to carry himself so inoffensively
toward his Subjects, but that the major part of them, were his actions to be
scanned by their Judgment, would think it fit to Vote the reins out of his
hand for maladministration.

And if neither Prince nor subjects in general be fit to determine in this
Controversy, who shall then? Will they say, the Representatives of the People?
If so, in what capacity shall they undertake it? Not of Inferiors surely, or
Equals; for par in parem (much less inferior in superiorem) non habet imperium.
Of Superiors? From whence shall they derive that power? If from Law, show that
Law? If from popular election, then their power can be no other then before was
in the body collective by whom they are chosen; so that except the people be
superior to their Sovereigns (which has before been disproved,) they cannot
delegate that superiority to others, which they never had themselves.

And now there remains only one shift imaginable for the judging this case: and
that is recourse to a Foreign power, which indeed is so far from amending
the matter, that it makes it far worse. For (besides that Sovereign Princes
are equals in Authority, (though not in Dominions it may be) and so the former
maxim recurres, Par in parem non habet imperium, and that none is likely
(because of the precedent) to be courted to such an Employment, (except the
Pope, who challenges a Supremacy over Princes as Christ's universal Vicar, and
whose claims in this kind have been over and over refuted:) how shall a
Foreign Prince be enabled to exercise this Jurisdiction, but by the success
of a War? And for subjects to call in a Foreign force to arbitrate the
differences between them and their Sovereign, what can it amount unto but the
highest of traitorous Conspiracies?

4. (and lastly) Suppose the case were unquestionable, and the forfeiture made
and justly so judged, yet, to whom does the seizure upon this forfeited
Authority belong? Not to man (certainly) for it has been before proved that
all Authority is Gods Ordinance, a Flower of his Prerogative, a Jewel of his
Crown, and so can fall (upon forfeiture) only into his hands who derived it. So
that it will clearly follow, that if God himself (for the chastisement of a
sinful people, or for other holy ends of his own) shall think fit, for a
while, not to enter upon the forfeiture, it will be high presumption in any men
to precipitate the judgment of God, and enter before his time (though in his
Name and right) upon his peculiar. Hence the Saints of God in former and latter
times, have suffered under the bloodiest Tyrants with admirable patience, as
under Gods scourges, and referred their cases to him who judges uprightly: and
even in their complaints to him, have expressed so much Christian temper and
moderation, that they have rather prayed for the conversion and pardon of their
persecutors, than wished vengeance upon them. And when they have foreseen the
vengeance coming, have not desired the woeful day, Jer. 17. 16. but deprecated
it rather: However (to be sure) they never put forth their hands to the
iniquity of self-reparation, but patiently expected the coming of the Lord, Ja.
5. 6, 7. And upon this ground David checks the forwardness of Abishai, (who
offered him the service of smiting Saul dead) Destroy him not, for either the
Lord shall smite him (with a disease) or his day (in the course of nature)
shall come to die, or he shall descend into the battle and perish: but the Lord
forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel
26. 8, 9, 10. And yet (which makes this Answer more considerable) the Crown of
Saul was not only actually forfeited, but adjudged so by God himself, and the
reversion of it bestowed upon David, 1 Samuel 15. 28. Notwithstanding all which,
you see, the holy man will not be persuaded to make a forcible entry, but waits
till God by his providence devolves that upon him which he had demised by
promise.

Obj. It will be farther objected, that this privilege belonged indeed deed to
Jewish Kings, but it may be doubted, whether the Gospel This privilege belongs
not to Jewish Kings only, but all other Kings. Sol.
(introducing a state of Liberty, beyond that which the Jews enjoyed,) the
same immunity belong to Princes since the coming of Christ?

Sol. To which I answer again,

1. That Gospel liberty dissolves not Natural or Civil duties: and those that
think it does, make it a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 16.

2. That the immunity of Jewish Kings belonged not to them as such, but as Gods
Anointed, as deputed Gods under the most high. And the Gospel owns the Supreme
power, even in the hands of persecuting Heathens as an Ordinance of God, Romans
13. 2.

3. And it is evident that the ancient Christians thought so, who after they
had adventured their lives in the field for persecuting Emperors, as
Soldiers, laid them down for their Religion, in obedience to their commands
(though unjust and barbarous) as Martyrs.

second consideration, (that of the person slain) made use of in the Text for
the second Aggravation of the sin of King-killing: that Saul slain was not only
Unctus, an anointed King, by his civil Quality, but Unctus Domini, one who was
Gods Vicegerent, by sacred Relation. And (by consequence) am now at liberty to
insist a while on the third Aggravation taken from the fact it self, as the
Text states it. And that is represented notoriously foul by three things. From
the Nature of the Fact, as Bloody.


1. That it was in its nature bloody. He destroyed the Lords anointed. It was
not a murder intended only, nor a murder barely attempted without success,
but an actual murder. And yet, had he not effected it, the very attempt
(considering the quality of the Person) had been so heinous a crime, that the
Laws of Nature and Nations would have punished it with death. But here the
guilt is infinitely aggravated by the execution of that which had been so
highly criminal but to attempt. For a King, (however attempted against) whiles
he is but in being, fills the Royal Seat, and Heads the Commonwealth, and
animates all Courts of Justice by the Authority of his Name: yea, lays some
restraint upon the most lawless and dissolute persons, on the account of a
possibility of being called to account for their outrages and enormities. But
the actual taking away of a Kings life, exposes the empty Throne to the next
potent Usurper, silenceth the Laws, annulleth all deputed Powers, by the
expiration of their Commissions, renders every man (in a sort) his own Master,
and sets up (for the Time) as many Lords of misrule in a Nation, as there are
evil-disposed persons in it. And although these evils are not equally felt in
hereditary Kingdoms, as in others, (because in such the King never dies) yet,
they are all equally chargeable upon all Regicides; seeing, that they do not
all actually ensue, is no thank to them, but to the public constitution
rather; and the Fact in its own nature being every where of like pernicious
tendency, and such as (even in the best constituted Governments) may give
advantage of opportunity to the designs of those who shall desire to improve
the alteration of affairs, to the subversion of the Fundamentals of Government,
by which succession is secured; as we of these Nations have lately found by too
sad experience. In which respect, the fact of this Amalekite was the more
heinous, as being an actual destroying of the Lords anointed.

2. That it was a voluntary or rather wilful Act. For he stretched wilful.
forth his hand, and that with a purpose to destroy the King. Had the King
accidentally rushed upon his drawn weapon, or had his armed hand, by impression
from some external force, been made the instrumental cause of taking away the
life of the Lords anointed, or any other like accident had rendered him the
destroyer of the King, though besides his intention; it had been an infelicity
to have been bewailed all the days of his life: But to reach forth his armed
hand to lend him a voluntary wound, with a purpose to take away his life, was a
crime, not to be expiated with his life it self. Every sin receives its degrees
of sinfulness from the degrees of voluntarinesse appearing in it. And the more
heinous the sin is, the more aggravation does it admit from the concurrence of
the will in any sort, because the greater an evil is in it self, the more
perversion of the will (whose only proper object is good) must there needs be,
to render it capable of choosing it.

3. (and lastly) That it was committed (...) he was not afraid to do it. A
modest, timorous sinner has so much (at least) of the Audacio^^.
appearance of virtue, as abates something of the odiousness of the sin he
commits. But a very strange monster of wickedness must he needs be, who has
arrived at the unhappy pinnacle of sinning dedolently. To baffle shame, and
muzzle fear, and stifle conscience in sinning, implies a kind of absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion in wickedness, and renders the person so qualified, a
kind of omnipotent sinner, and (by consequence) the most remote from all
possibility of repentance. And such a Wretch does David imply that man to be,
whom neither Religion toward God, nor reverence to Majesty will restrain from
so horrid a crime, as this of destroying the Lords anointed, let whatever can
be pleaded on his behalf: Which brings me to the second particular evidence
which David gives to the Quid or matter of his Answer, (the first General part
of my Text) which has waited a long while for its dispatch,

And that is, [the invalidity of all that had been, or might be pleaded 2. The
second particular evidence in reference to the matter of David's reply (or the
doctrine of the hainousnes of King-killing) The invalidity of all Pleas made
for it.
on this malefactors behalf,] implied in the connection of this sour and severe
expression, with the Amalekites garb and Narrative, before improved for his
vindication. Notwithstanding all which David pronounces him guilty of the
horrid sin of murdering the Lords anointed, and sentenceth him accordingly. To
clear the Justice of which Censure and Sentence, (seeing it will much conduce
to the main Hypothesis [the setting forth the horrid wickedness of
King-killing] and be of much use to us in our application) we will consider
every one of his real or possible Plea's apart, and answer them in their order.
His own plea's are seven (before mentioned) to which we will add one made by
Interpreters of this Scripture; and that shall be the first.

First, (though the Amalekite pleads it not, yet) there may be a The Amalekites
pleas answered Plea 1. answered, (which is the plea of Interpreters for him.)
Question made, Whether the Holy Ghost in the relation of Saul's death, 1 Samuel
31. 4, 5. do not acquit him of having any hand in the Fact, though he (in hope
of reward) might take it upon himself? For the story tells us, that when Saul
had desired his Armor-bearer to do him the kindness to dispatch him, and he
had refused, Saul took a sword and fell upon it: and that he died of that wound
by his own hand, seems probable by what is immediately subjoined, that Saul's
Armor-bearer seeing that he was dead, fell likewise upon his own sword and
died. From hence (with much likelihood) some Interpreters confidently acquit
the Amalekite from the Fact. Nor shall I much contend with them about it,
seeing I shall (upon other accounts) clear David's justice upon him anon. Though
I might tell them that there is no cogent reason to demonstrate a contradiction
between the relation of the History, and the Amalekites Narrative. For what if
Saul fell upon his own sword, and the Amalekite says he found him leaning upon
his Spear? Both may be true; he might (first) fall on his own Sword, and (that
not dispatching him) might scramble up again, and make a Second Attempt with
his Spear, but could not make way through his Coat of Mayle, as the Margin to
v. 9. renders his words to the Amalekite. And what if it be subjoyned, after
his falling on his Sword, that his Armor-bearer saw that he was dead? Does it
therefore follow, that he died immediately of that Wound? The Armor-bearer
might conclude him dead, seeing him so wounded and fallen; when yet he might
struggle longer with death, then he imagined, and outlive him that thought him
dead, even till the Amalekite came, and finding him in that sad posture, killed
him outright.

But (however) be it that the Amalekite did the Fact indeed, or only boasted
(in hope of reward) that he had done it; yet received he no wrong from David.

1. Voluntary Confession (especially, where no Force is used to extort it, upon
public arraignment, in the presence of a Judge) is Conviction sufficient, to
justify the condemnation of the person confessing.

2. Abundance of Circumstances there were to confirm David in the belief of it:
As,

1. That he was an Amalekite, and so one that upon a National quarrel, might be
supposed to owe Saul a Mischief, who had put the whole Nation of which he was,
excepting only himself, and some few more (it is probable) carried away
contrary to Gods Command alive for Slaves, 1 Samuel 15. And it may be (upon this
account, in his Examination) David asked him again, whence he was? V. 13.
(though in his Relation of the Discourse between Saul and himself, he had let
fall no less before) that he might judicially confess that Circumstance, so
necessary to his Conviction, upon Deliberation.

2. The Crown and Bracelet, which were known to be Saul's, gave evidence, that
in all probability, he had the Rifling of dead Saul, and probably, might kill
him, that he might plunder him.

3. That whether he committed the Fact, or no, yet was he guilty of it, in
intention (at least) otherwise he would not have made so formal a story to gain
from David the reputation of having done it, and related it with a kind of
glorying in it, as an act of merit toward David.

Insomuch, that if he were not really guilty of the Fact, David was upon these
evidences, guiltless of his Blood, and as he tells him, V. 16. that his Blood
lay upon his own head.

And thus has the first Plea made by Interpreters on his behalf, no other
strength than this, to give farther evidence to the horrid guilt of
King-killing, even though it be granted. For if that person justly died for it,
who had (as the Plea supposes) no other guilt of the Royal Blood upon him,
than that he esteemed the shedding of it a meritorious Service, and showed his
willingness to have done it, by boasting that he had done it: What a dreadful
Crime must it be, to be guilty of the Fact indeed? the very Intimation of a
good will whereunto, rendered this Amalekite so criminal. His own seven Pleas
answered.
Et passa est Poenas peccandi sola voluntas?

Saul was a Tyrant, a Persecutor of David, and his deadly Enemy. And it is hard
measure that he should die by David's Command, who had by this very Fact saved
David's Life.

To this, the Answer (from David's Principles) is easy: He was indeed David's
Enemy, but he was David's Sovereign, and the Lords Anointed. Besides, Had David
been so desirous to be rid of his Enemy in such a way, he needed not to have
left that work to be done by an Amalekite, seeing he had refused such a
Service, when offered by better Friends. Lastly, If he were David's Enemy, he
ought the rather to do him Justice upon his Murderer, that he might declare
himself in the execution of Law the more impartial; and learn others, that the
private Injuries received from our just and lawful Sovereigns, ought to make no
Impressions upon our Allegiance to the Lords Anointed.

Saul himself desired him to put an end to his miserable life, (the Amalekites
Second Plea)

Grant this too. But was he Saul, that is, himself, when he desired it; Fear,
and Guilt, and Anguish, and Loss of Blood and Spirits, and (it may be, over and
above) an evil Spirit from the Lord (with which he was wont to be haunted) may
be supposed at this time, to intercept the exercise of his Reason. And is it
the part of a Sober man to kill another at his Request, when he is out of his
wits, and understands not what he says? Will no Law allow a madman to dispose
of his Goods and Lands, and will it warrant him to dispose of his Life?
Besides, Who is there that thinks himself obliged to gratify the desires, or
obey the Commands of a private Person in distemper, by easing him of his Life,
whenever he thinks it a burden? How much less, when the case concerns a public
Magistrate, whose Life and Death are of public concernment, and the Lives of
whole Nations are bound up in his? So that the best obedience, in such a case
as this, had been, by Principles of Religion and Reason to have endeavored the
reducing of his Sovereign to a sober temper, and till that could have been
effected, to have taken from him all Instruments of death, bound up his wound,
and saved his Life (as far as in him lay) though against his Will.

that the case seemed never so desperate; and the wound he had given himself,
never so mortal in appearance, yet so long as Life remained, all hopes were not
vanished. How many persons have recovered, whom the best Physicians and
Chyrurgions have given over for desperate? He should have endeavored his best,
and then if Success had not answered the endeavor, the endeavor (which was
his duty) would have cleared his Loyalty, both before God and man. Besides,
Nature and Reason incline every man to a desire of enjoying his Friends, as
long as possibly he can, though all Prognostics assure him, that enjoyment
cannot be long. We do not think a Cordial cast away upon a near Relation, the
utmost effect whereof, we are assured, cannot be more, then to respite death
for a few minutes. To be sure, all Nations that are never so little reclaimed
from Barbarism, would with one mouth condemn him, who when a dear friend lies
struggling with the pangs of death it self, should knock him on the head, to put
him out of his Pain. And therefore, what in a like case, had been unlawful for
the Amalekite to have done to a private Relation, was notoriously criminal
toward the Lords Anointed.

the Philistines were in never so hot a Pursuit of the flying King, yet had
this Amalekite no warrant to kill him for prevention: For, might not Providence
have led them another way, and suffered none of them to light upon that place
where he lay? The Divine Protections of Sovereign Princes are many times of kin
to Miracle. Great deliverances gives he to his Kings, and shows mercy to his
Anointed, Psalm. 18. 50. Again, admit, he were never so much in danger of
falling into the hands of his pursuing enemies, yet who knows, but he might
have lighted into the hand of some Noble Personage, that (in honor) would have
spared the Royal Blood, and thought it more generous, to take a King Captive,
then (in cold Blood) to have murdered him, when he was not capable of
resistance? Or if it had been the Lot of a Mercenary Soldier to have lighted
upon him, might he not have endeavored the Preservation of such a Noble
Prisoner in hope of a Ransom? Nay, had this Amalekite been sure, that all the
Philistines were so barbarous, that never an one of them, would have saved the
Kings Life, out of hatred to his Religion, as well as Person; yet (had he
consulted either the honor of his Sovereign dying, or the safety of his Soul
after death) it had been far better for him to have left him to their Swords,
t^en to perform his Request with his own. For had an Uncircumcised Philistine
for his Religions sake, slain him, his death had been his Infelicity, but not
his guilt: Nay, those hands that slew him upon that account, had advanced him
to the honor of Martyrdom; whereas, to die precariously, by the hands of a
Subject, whom his own pusillanimous entreaty had prevailed with, to take away
his life, rendered him a cowardly self-murderer (by Proxy) and lost him not his
Life only, but his Honor, and ('it is to be feared) his Soul together. Besides,
If this Principle be but admitted, [That it is not criminal to take away a
Kings Life, provided it be done to prevent the killing of him by other hands,]
How can any Princes life be secure? For may not any one of many Conspirators,
justify himself, (by this excuse) for killing the King, that he did it, to
prevent his Fellows? And would it not be the greatest and subtillest piece of
ambition that could be, in such a case, to be the first of a traitorous Crew,
that should strike the mortal Blow, seeing he of all the Company, would be
secured of Indemnity, upon this Principle, who could obtain the precedence in
the horrid Fact? Nay, how easy would it be, for any person, (especially, if
his own Suspicions may be admitted for evidence) to conceit a Plot against the
Kings Life to be contrived by others, and then account himself at liberty to
kill him for prevention? However, Suppose there could be a case in which so
dangerous a Principle might be admited, yet (surely) it must be the last
Refuge, when a sufficient Trial has been made of all Means to prevent that
danger, which threatens a Princes Life, and all prove ineffectual. Had this
Amalekite done his best to have saved him from the Philistines; had he put his
shoulder under his fallen Sovereign, to lift him out of the common Road, into
some by-place, had he taken some course to disguise him, that the Pursuers, had
they lighted on him, might not have known him to be the King; or any other way
tried his utmost to secure him, he might with more appearance of Innocence,
have done him this kindness at the very last, to have slain him himself. Was
Mount Gilboa, or the Coast near it, so barren of Bushes, or Pits, or Thickets,
or Hollow Trees, or Cottages, that might have given a distressed King shelter,
till the Pursuit was over; that no shift could be made, to show a Subjects
Loyalty, whatever the Success had been? Well fare the hearts of such Subjects,
who in like exigences, would have tried 1000 homely Artifices, to have secured
their Liege Sovereign, rather than have taken this course of preventing the
cruelty of pursuing Enemies, by murdering him more charitably with their own
Hands: And if none of them should have proved successeful, would have stood by
him, to the utmost of extremities, and then have opposed their own Breasts
against the drawn Swords of bloody Pursuers, though they had been sure to die
with him; as considering, that the Life of the Lords Anointed, was worth 10000
of theirs, and that (next him that dies for Gods-sake, there is none who comes
so near the honor of Martyrdom, as he that dies for Gods Vicegerents sake,
his Lawful Sovereign.

Lastly, Had the Philistines killed him, they were in a double capacity more
excusable than this Amalekite: For they were Conquerors in a Battle newly
gained, and in the heat of pursuit; (and in National Wars, the Conquered
forfeits his life to the Conquerors mercy) Nay, they were Subjects of another
Country, and so Saul was to them but an Ordinary Person: But this Murderer was
not only of the same conquered party with Saul, and so had no claim to a power
of his life by the Success of the Day, but one of his own Subjects and
Soldiers, raised for the defense of his Person, and so was obliged by all
means (even with the loss of his own) to preserve (not take away,) the Life of
his Sovereign and General, and the Lords Anointed.

Fifth Plea) that he came by the mere conduct of Providence, to the place of
this sad Tragedy, and in his own Flight stumbled upon Saul unawares, and that
the have he was in to save his own Life, somewhat disordered his Reason, that he
had not a like freedom of deliberating what was best to be do^e, as at other
times. But yet he was an Amalekite, and there might be something of Enmity
against Saul, -- Alta mente repostum, upon the account of a National Fewd, and
in such a disposition (as malice uses to be quickly up and ready, when
Providence offers an opportunity of retaliation) this time (how little soever
it was) might be long enough to excite a desire of Revenge, together with a
Plot to make it seem innocent, by pleading the suddenness of the Accident in
its excuse. Besides, it may seem (by his own relation) that he was not in so
much hurry of thoughts by the suddenness of the Providence, but that he had
Reason enough left, to give a direct Answer to Readiness Question, V. 7, 8. and to
argue himself into the Commission of that bloody Fact from the Considerations
which he pleads, as moving him unto it; and that he was not in so much have,
but that he had time enough (by his own confession) to hold a formal Discourse
with Saul, (too long (one would think) for a dying and a flying Person to
dialogue together) and surely, he needed not much longer time, than he
confessed he had, (especially, seeing he had leisure enough to inform himself,
that the Person he discoursed with, was his Sovereign) to reflect upon his own
heart this Question, [What warrant have I to destroy the Lords Anoint^d?] So
that whatever his have was to save his own life, he made more have than good
speed to take away Saul's.

free from any covetous design, tempting him to such a Fact, that he might
enrich himself with the Royal spoils; yet, who knows, but that was first in
his Intention, and the ground of his Action, though upon second thoughts,
(consideringhow difficult it would be for him, a private Soldier, to make money
of things so commonly known, without being questioned, where he had them? and
that to bring them to the next Successor, might yield him more profit, than he
could have sold them for) he afterward thought it fitter to present them to
David? However, (be it that he had no intention to dispose of them any other
way, when he committed the Fact yet) was he not hereby much furthered in his
excuse. For could he think, that an Intention honestly to dispose of the Royal
Ornaments, would make a compensation for the murder of him that wore them?
Surely, if so, he was much out, in bringing them to David, who had now reason
to value a Kings Life higher than so, by the price he could not but set on his
own. Nay more, he could not indeed have given more loud evidence against
himself, than by bringing of those Regalia, he had done. For hereby he had cut
himself off from a capacity of pleading ignorance of the Person whom he slew;
which (if any) would have most steaded him; for he could not but know, that the
Crown he brought, was a Badge of Sovereignty, and therefore in killing him, on
whose Head he confessed it was, he confessed that he knowingly killed the Lords
Anointed.

Expressions of sorrow for the Fact, with which he ushered in his Relation,
might be but feigned and formal: Or if not so, yet what proportion was there
between a base Varlets Tears, and Royal Blood? It was well that he mourned for
the Infelicity of his Fact; but it would have been better, if he had repented
of the wickedness of it. And if (seeing how it was like to go with him) he
might plead that also; he must know, that repentance, though it may avail a
murderer toward the obtaining of his pardon from God, yet it is not a Plea
sufficient to indemnifie in a Court of humane Justice. Murderers, especially,
such Atrocious Murderers, justly die, by Gods Law and man's, though truly
penitent. The Tears of Repentance may do much toward the reparation of a man's
own Innocence, but can do nothing toward a reparation for another Life.

In a word, if indeed he repented of the fact, he could not but be willing to
prevent (as far as in him lay) the spreading of the leaven of his example to
infect others with a like guilt: and the effectuallest course to prevent such
crimes for the future, is the exemplary punishment of those who have taught the
world to commit them.

And thus have we dispatched the first part of the Text (with its reference to
the hypothesis of the Chapter, and the Doctrine couched in it, The heinousness
of the sin of murdering Kings.) Come we now to the two remaining, which (in
the person expressing his sense of it, and the manner how he expresses it)
contain the substance of those practical Inferences which it affords for
Application. And we will begin with the second part.

Secondly, Quis, or [the person expressing his deep sense of this Part 2. Quis,
or the Person thus replying, David.
horrid Fact,] David, who may herein be exemplary to after-Ages, in the twofold
Consideration, wherein the distribution of my Text represented him.

I. Consider him according to what he was, in a twofold Capacity. Considered,
according to what he was. In his personal Capacity,


1. As a man, (in his personal capacity) and so I told you before he was a
truly pious person, an eminent Saint, and for nothing more eminent, then for
tenderness of Conscience.

That he was a person truly pious and eminent for Saintship, is demonstratively
An eminent Saint,
evident in the high characters the Holy Ghost every where bestows upon him.
Gods servant David, is a Title wherein (by the mutual, and that frequent
enterchanging of it in Scripture) both God and he seem to delight. And such a
servant God thought him, that he seems to boast of his findings, when he had
met with him, as if the like were not to be found again, [I have found David my
servant, Psalm. 89. 20.] So good a servant he was, that (as another high
expression carries it) God himself could hardly wish or desire a better,
(allowing the imperfections incident to humane frailty) for he was [a man after
his own heart, and one that would stick at none of his Commands, but do (...)
all his wills.] A man so good, that God takes measure of the goodness or badness
of all his Successors, by the proportion or disproportion they bare to him: as
being so far accounted good, as they walked in the way and steps of their
Father David; and so far bad, as they departed from them; of which frequent
Instances might be given, would time permit. Yea, so good, that the best of men
that ever was (the Lord Jesus Christ) is by the Holy Ghost, called by the Name
of David as his most suitable Type, Jer. 30. 9. Hosea 3. 5. Nor do the
Characters given him in that kind, speak more then his own practice justified.
Every morning, his waking thoughts conversed with God, Psalm. 139. 8. Yea, he
was one, who (over and above the seventh day reserved by God for his public
service, which he as constantly attended, as the door-keepers of Gods house
themselves, Psalm. 84. 10.) consecrated seven petty Sabbaths a day to devotion,
Psalm. 119. 164. and broke his sleep at midnight to spend time in religious
duties, Psalm. 119. 62. and one of so raised a spirit in his pious meditations
and devotions, that his remains have been ever since made use of, as Forms of
public Devotion in the Church, in which Notion he is called the sweet Psalmist
of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 1.

And for the tenderness of his conscience, there needs no other and notably
tender-Conscienced.
evidence, then (that one instance already touched at) the disturbance he felt
in himself for cutting off but one thread of Saul's garment, though done for a
testimony of his own innocence, 1 Samuel 24. 5.

This is the person, whom the relation of this Amalekite, concerning his
murdering of Saul, does so transport into an holy passion, that he cries out,
How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destory the Lords
Anointed?

And herein he sets a fair copy for all persons who pretend to Saintship, and
plead Tenderness of Conscience, to write after: and gives us of this Age a
liberal occasion to wonder at that new-fashion'd, or rather newfangled garb of
Sanctity, which some have assumed to cloak the actual guilt of far more
horrid Villainies, than this (the very relation whereof so startled David) in my
Text; and at that paradoxical notion of tenderness of conscience, which admits
Murders and Treasons of the most horrid aggravation imaginable, into the
reputation of most heroical virtues, and elevated acts of Religion. For surely,
if David were such an eminent Saint, these persons who so directly walk
Antipodes to his principles and practice, can pass with all sober Christians
for no other then incarnate devils: and if David's Conscience were so truly and
remarkably tender, the Consciences of these men must needs be harder than
Adamants, and seared into an incurable dedolency, whose principles and tempers
carry so irreconcilable a contradiction to his, and that in a matter of so
high a concernment as blood, and that not of ordinary persons, but of the Lords
Anointed.

2. Consider him as a King (in his politic and public capacity,) In his
politic Capacity (by the death of Saul) King.
which by Saul's death he was now vested withal. The Intelligence which this
Miscreant brought him (it is probable) gave him the first glimpse, the first
intimation of the actual devolution of the Crown upon him: and now, as a
public Magistrate, he gives the Relator himself the first handsell of his new
Royalty, a severe increpation in the Text, and a deserved execution in those
that follow. And a like piece of Justice does he (a while afterward) execute
upon the murderers of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, who had for two years been
set up by a Faction, as Competitor with him in the Kingdom, chap. 4. Examples,
followed by Amaziah King of Judah, upon the murderers of his father Joash, 2
King. 14. 5. and very ordinarily to be paralelled in all Histories, wherein
there is no piece of Justice more commonly taken notice of, then the severe
inquisition and recompense made by succeeding Princes, for the blood of their
Predecessors. And indeed, both the Law of God (which admits (Upon occasion
whereof,
no compensation for humane blood, but the blood of him that sheds it, and that
upon good reason too, because in the murder of man the Image of God is
defaced, Genesis 9. 6.) allows and requires this severity, in such cases: and the
Law of man conformably allots an exemplary addition of poenal circumstances, to
that severity in the case of King-killing, upon weighty reason, seeing in that
prodigious crime there is a defacing of a double Image of God, both Natural and
Political. So that if it were possible to inflict a double death upon such
malefactors, their double, yea, manifold guilt (for he that murders a Supreme
Magistrate, virtually and in effect, murders a Community) would abundantly
justify the rigor of such an execution. Juven. Sat. 8.
Horum supplicio non debuit una parari
Simia, non serpens unus, non culeus unus.


One death (indeed) is too little for such Paricides, as kill the Father of an
whole Kingdom. Severity in such a case, is such a piece of righteousness, as
establishes the Throne (Prove. 16. 12.) by scaring those of succeeding Ages
from doing so presumptuously.

Upon consideration whereof, as those Princes are abundantly The severe
circumstances of the execution of Traitors, justified.)
justified, who in this piece of justice follow David's example; so are those
persons as much to be blamed, whose either good nature, and softness of
disposition, or evil Principles, and partnership of guilt, prejudiceth them
against the severe executions of Regicides, which humane Laws every where
appoint, and humane Authority (in terrorem) for others terror, sometimes
practices. For it is but meet, that exemplary severity should teach men the
difference between the value to be put upon the persons of Princes, and
Subjects: Otherwise Assasinations would be as frequently acted upon Sovereigns,
as Murders upon Private men; yea, hardly would any King that has an enemy
daring enough to adventure a bare life, be translated into Heaven sicca morte,
with an unbloudy death. Whereas (on the other side) experience tells us, that
those who can contemn a single death, yet dread it clothed with such
Circumstances, as carry a Brand of eternal ignominy with them, by a Blot upon
the Memory, and a Tincture upon the Blood to all posterity.

II. Consider David according to the Presumptions on which the And as he was
mistaken by the confident Presumptions of the Murderer.
Murderer grounded his Confidence, and we shall find an ample Ground, for the
farther improvement of his Example herein. For, if a David persecuted by a
Tyrannous King, and that without any color of Justice, for so many years, be
thus affected with the Murder of his Implacable Persecutor, if a David, who had
fled to Arms for shelter, against his Sovereigns unjust violence, neither dared
himself to use those Arms to the prejudice of his Person, when he had him
within his power, nor would dismiss his actual Murderer without exemplary
vengeance; and lastly, if the undoubted right of Succession in his Throne, and
the long expected news of an avoydance thereof, could not soften the radicated
Principles of Loyalty in David, so far, as to induce him to admit of a secret
titillation of complacency in that Fact, when done to his hand, which made his
way plain to the possession of a just Royalty, or sweeten him one jot toward
the Person who had been the Instrument of making room for him: does it not
demonstratively follow, that all other Persons, (especially such as are not
under the like probable Effects of Tentation in this kind) should be as sowrly
irreconcilable to the Agents and Principles, which are in the same
condemnation, for prodigious impiety and flagitiousness? Especially, when it
shall be considered, how emphatically, how pathetically David expresses his
sense of this horrid action, which I shall lay before your consideration in the
handing of the Third and Last Part of my Text.

Thirdly, The Quomodo, or manner of David's Expression of the Part 3. Quomodo.
Or the Manner how David answers.
violence of those Passions, which he inwardly felt upon occasion of this
Relation; which (as I told you before) is by way of sharp and cutting
Interrogation.

Importing,

1. Grief. 2. Wonder. With 3. Horror.
1. Grief. Which, how great it was in David's Breast upon Grief. this occasion,
diverse Particulars in the Text and Context express.

And those may be reduced to these two Heads; (Evidenced in,

1. Sudden Transports. 2. Deliberate and Solemn Acts.
1. For Evidence of his sudden Transports, let us but view the His Sudden
Transports. and
11th. and 12th. verses; where we are told, that he rent his clothes, and put
all his Court into a like Posture of Mourning. He mourns, and weeps, and fasts
all that day until Even.

2. For evide^ce of his Deliberate and Solemn Acts, to testify His Deliberate
and Solemn Acts.)
his hearty sorrow for this doleful accident, we find him, v. 17, 18. (as I
told you in the Preface) penning an Epicedium or Funeral-Song, for the constant
use both of himself, and the People of Judah, and commanding it to be set to a
Musical Tune, and taught them; that this Lamentation might be perpetuated to
all posterity. Nor was David's example in this kind altogether barren, for we
find it afterward followed by the godly Jews, upon occasion of the untimely
death of good Josiah; they mourned so truly and heartily for him, that the
greatness of their sorrow in after-ages grew into a Prove^b, [as the mourning
of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12. 11.] And among their Solemn
Lamentations, had one kept on record to Posterity, penned by an holy Prophet,
Lam. 4. 20. and perpetuated the solemn remembrance of that heavy stroke by
public Command: For so 2 Chronicles. 35. 24, 25. expresses it at large: All Judah
and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah; and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the
singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this
day, and made them an Ordiance in Israel, and behold, they are written in the
Lamentations.

And afterward, when Gedaliah the good Governor left by Nebuzaradan, was
treacherously slain by Ishmael, Jer. 41. 1, 2. We find there was an Annual Fast
appointed, and observed till after the return from Captivity, upon the Month
wherein he was slain, as the most judicious Interpreters expound the Fast of
the 7th. Month, Zech. 7. 5. Which Examples loudly call for like deep and
solemn Impressions and Expressions of heartiest sorrow from all Loyal Subjects
upon like Accidents, and abundantly justify the Annual Solemnization of this
Day; (especially if we consider, how great a Loss these Kingdoms suffered, and
how great a Guilt they contracted by the Lamentable Providence that occasioned
it: Of which, more plentifully anon. Indeed the Tears of Subjects are the best
Spices to embalm a Sovereigns Memory withal; nor can there be a louder
attestation to the Deserts of a Prince, than that his Loss is bewailed as a
Common Calamity. Upon which account it is, that God promises it as a signal
Mercy to the hopeful Son of wicked Jeroboam, that all Israel should mourn for
him, 1 Kings 14. 13. and threatens it as a heavy judgment on Jehoiakim, the
wicked Son of good Josiah, that he should be buried with the Burial of an Ass,
thrown in a ditch, without any one to mourn or lament for him, neither Brother,
nor Sister, nor Subject, Jer. 22. 18, 19.

2. Wonder and Astonishment, at the strangeness of the accident, Wonder,
and boldness of the Villain, in first daring to act, and then, not blushing to
relate that fearful wickedness. And fit it is that such Monsters wherever they
are found, should still set the whole world at gaze in a pious Amazement. Which
Affection, however in it self it be not so directly moral, as some others are,
yet it conduces very much to the exciting of that which is so, to wit, an holy
shyness and aversation of mind toward those Tentations, which we are before
prepossessed against with a potent prejudice, as so many monstrous and
portentous Births of hellish wickedness: Which apprehensions whosoever has,
concerning the detestable sin of Kingkilling, will quickly improve it unto,

3. Abomination and Abhorrency: the third Passion, wherein David expresses his
sense of this horrid Fact. For we may very and Horror or Abomination
well suppose that his tender and delicate Conscience presently took an Alarm
from the Amalekites brazen-faced Relation, and rallied all the Spirits in his
Body, to the Fort-Royal of his Heart, to fortify it against the pestilential
breath of such a proditious Monster; and thence it shot forth the Darts of
fiery indignation in the Frowns of his Royal Countenance, and sharpened every
hair of his head into a Porcupines Quill, which extreme horror erected (as it
were of purpose) to fly in the Face of the detestable Object. All this, and
more, presents it self to our apprehension, in the Form of this stinging
Interrogation, wherein, Quot Verba, Tot Tonitrua; every word is a Clap of
Thunder, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the
Lords Anointed?

And indeed, nothing less than such an Hyperbold of abomination will serve to
express, as it ought, the just sense which those who will imitate David in
either of his forementioned Capaci^ies, (whether of good men or good
Magistrates) ought to have of that (...), that monstrous steam of Hell, and
stench of the bottomless Pit, which breaths out of the mouths of those unclean
Beasts, and Lying Prophets, (whose Throats are worse than an open Sepulcher) by
whom the sin of King-killing (which David and every good man so startles at) is
not only proclaimed Lawful, but extolled as meritorious; and much more, of that
(...), or Abomination of Desolation, (the practice of that monstrous Principle)
when (especially) it shall be set up in the holy place, and worshipped in the
thoughts of deluded Creatures, as a distinguishing Character of eminent
holiness.

And thus (at last, have I done with the Text, as it relates to II. Second View
of the Text. As accomodable to the Occasion.
the Chapter and Narrative contained in it, together with the Doctrine and
Inferences (in general) comprehended therein. It only remains, that I review
them in this place, as they may be accomodated by way of Parallel to the sad
occasion of this days Solemnity.

And truly, when I thought of finding out a parallel Text of The Parallel
relating to the Parts of the Text.
Scripture to the Text of Providence, which this sad day calls to our
Remembrance, I must confess, I found my self ar an unusual loss. Many Kings
deaths are recorded in Sacred Writ, and diverse of them violent and bloody; and
diverse of them brought about by the hands of Rebellious and Traitorous
Subjects. But to match all the Circumstances of the most execrable Murder of
our Late Gracious Sovereign, I know none that can tolerably pretend unto it.

That which my Text attempts toward it, lies rather in the parallel In the
First, (expressing the Horridness of the Sin.)
which should be between David's Spirit and ours, upon so sad an occasion (for
which end mainly I made choice of it) then that which may be supposed between
Saul's Person and Death and his Majesty's, which are (almost altogether)
unparallelable. And therefore in those short Touches of Collation, which I
shall bestow upon them, I must of necessity compare them, and what befell them,
in their discrepancies; as that Painter, who to set off the vast bigness of an
Elephant, draws a Mouse by his side.

It is true indeed, that in some of the aggravations of the horrid How far it
holds: and Where it halts, viz.
murder committed upon them both, the Parallel holds. That both were Kings,
Anointed, and the Lords Anointed, and both murdered by Subjects; but the
differences are far more in the rest of the Circumstances, and those so vast,
that the power of Invention c^n hardly bring them nearer to one another, than
the two Poles.

1. Consider we the Person Murdered (our Late Gracious, and In the difference
between the Persons murdered; King Saul and King Charles. (Occasioning a short
Character of our late Sovereign.)
now Glorious Sovereign. A person (take him either as Man, or King) of a Temper
so far different from Saul's, that as the one seemed to be composed of Cruelty,
so the other seemed to have nothing in his Constitution but Clemency. A person
(in both capacities, both of Man and King) so free, not only from the guilt,
but even from the suspicion of any enormous Crime, that the malice of his
Accusers themselves, could find nothing to stuff out that Black Charge which
they laid against him, but the unhappy Contests between Himself and his
Subjects (the sad Issues of mutual Jealousies, blown up into an open War by a
Divine Blast upon all those Counsels, which might have prevented it, and a just
immission of an evil Spirit of Perversities to mingle with them, and render
them ineffectual, for the just punishment of our sins) which indeed were his
Infelicity, but their guilt, who first made the Breach, and afterward (as much
as in them lay) hindered the making it up, because their own Conscience of
having unpardonably offended him, told them, they could expect no Security, but
in his Ruin. A Person and King, of so elevated a size, both for Intellectual
and Moral Endowments, that the stature of his inward man, as much overtopped
the most accomplished of his Subjects, as Saul's outward man did overlook the
rest of the Israelites, 1 Samuel 10. 23.

For his Intellectuals: He was endowed with such an height of Fancy, as would
have won him the Laurel in a Commonwealth of Poets. He was Master of so sublime
a Grandeur of Language, and stately Majesticalness, joined with an amiable
fluency of Style, as might have challenged a Dictatorship among the best of
Orators; of which his Royal Remains are an indisputable evidence. And for
Soundness of Judgment, both in Points of Controversy, and Cases of Conscience,
he might have challenged the Theological Chair, upon the account of mere worth,
and have sat not only Regius Professor, but Rex Professorum, in both
Universities.

For his Morals: He was Just, Valiant, Temperate, Chaste, Merciful (and what
not?) to such a proportion, as he might have set the best of his Subjects a
Copy of virtue in his own example.

Indeed he was a Prince who might have passed clear with the universal
reputation of the best of English Kings, had he not fallen into the worst of
Times, wherein the English Manners were so debauched with the blandishments of
a long continued tranquillity and plenty; and their judgments so intoxicated
with prejudice, and censoriousnesse, that too too many neither loved the
practice of virtue themselves, nor would willingly allow the reputation of it
to others.

A King, whom if we had not by our sins rendered our selves unworthy to enjoy
longer, we had been (it may be to this day) in danger of nothing more then
being surfeited with our own felicity. And that we enjoyed him not, all the
world must bear him witness, it was not his fault, seeing in that last and
fatal Treaty (as Providence made it) at Newport, he showed so great a desire
in his Gracious Condescensions to make his people happy, that he even forgot he
had any share of his own to challenge among them; having indeed given them all,
but (what he could not part with) that Sovereign goodness of disposition,
which was the only thing (almost) that he had left, besides the redintigrated
affections of his people, (diverse of whom began then to know him better, and
therefore valued him the more, out of conviction that they had ignorantly
persecuted him) to support his Throne withal. So that, I must needs say it was
the fatal infatuation, and infelicity of these Nations, that they knew not in
the day of their visitation the things that belonged to their peace: and
therefore were they (by the righteous judgment of God) for a full decad of
years and more, justly hid from their eyes. O fortunatos nimium bona si sua
nossent Anglicolas! --

And for his Religion, This I think may safely be said without exception from
any, but such as all Religions may blush to own, that if the employment of his
serener hours were of a piece with the entertainment of his Solitudes and
Sufferings; that man is not enough Christian himself, who can admit a dispute
in his own bosom, whether he ought not to be ranked among the chiefest of
Christians: or, if (as some suppose) his Afflictions were the School wherein he
received the first elements of practical Piety, this (in deed and truth) is so
far from being a disparagement to him, that it renders him so much more the
subject of all good men's admiration and astonishment, for making so wonderful
a proficiency in so short a time, as the digesting into practice the whole
Doctrine and Example of his Master Christ, and especially so much as related to
the last passages of his life, proclaims to all the world.

And if in some modes and other circumstantials of his Profession, he pleased
not all men, yea possibly might distaste some good men; yet (even in these) his
conscientious constancy (and no other principle could prevail with him, when
all his earthly enjoyments were apparently adventured to a desperate
irrecoverablenesse by his adhering to them) ought not to be displeasing to any.
Especially when we consider, how many principles and practices of far greater
incompatibility with true piety, must be allowed, to make the Religion of some
persons current, who most disparage His.

And indeed, whatever we thought of him living (as to his Religion,) the
consequences of his death too sadly evidenced, how much the Protestant Cause
was concerned in his preservation: and especially, the sad face of this
Orphan-Church of ours, which from that time forwards, became the lamentablest
scene of Anarchy and Confusion, that ever was seen in the Christian world, not
excepting Munster it self, that saw but the prologue to our Tragedy. For who
knows not, that whatever Persons or Parties stepped up into ^^^s vacant Seat,
made it the M^ster-piece of their policy (like selfseeking Chirurgions) to keep
our wounds open, that they might keep themselves in practice: and to maintain
opposite Factions to peck at one another, that whiles the people were busied in
private contests, they might be the less sensible of their public
oppressions. Insomuch, that the sad revival of old Heresies and Schisms (every
one of which carried a Legion of new ones in its belly) together with the
apparent dangers of extirpation to the true Protestant Religion, and all its
Professors, for many years together since our sins removed Him from us, have
convinced not a few, that he was not so much to blame, as was too commonly
thought, for not giving His consent to those violent and sudden changes which
their misguided zeal (among many others alike misled,) in those times too
importunately called for. And no doubt, if he had lived to have perfected his
own designed Model for the Churches settlement, most of those dissentions that
have been of late (and yet are) too flagrant among us, had long before they
arrived at this maturity, been buried in the grave of oblivion, not so much by
suppressing, as by reconciling the Dissenters. But, as David when he had
collected materials for the building of the Temple, was fain to leave* them
with his Advice and Benediction to his Son Solomon to make use of: So our
Gracious Sovereign, being not permitted by Providence to live to see the
Rearing of that Structure, which he intended, has left such Materials behind
him, together with his Fatherly Charge and Blessing, for this happy work, to
his Genuine Son and Lawful Successor, our present Gracious King (whom God long
preserve) that we no ways doubt, but (as they are wonderful suitable to the
Moderation of his Majesty's temper, so) they will in due time be successefully
made use of by him to the Happy Settlement of these Churches with the infinite
Contentment of all those that love the Peace of Jerusalem.

In the mean while, if by what I have said concerning the Person, whose Funeral
Anniversary, this Day is appointed to solemnize (and I am afraid I have rather
injured his Memory, by saying too little, than the Truth, by saying too much of
him) you be in any measure sensible of the Loss you suffered by his violent
removal, I hope you are the better prepared to entertain the next
Consideration, wherein this accursed Paricide exceeded that of Saul in my Text;
and that is,

2. The View of the Persons who committed this horrid Act: And As also in the
difference between the Murderers of both.
here our Parallel halts again. Had they been Native Foreigners, as the
Amalekite in my Text was, and as he was (in probability) educated in a Heathen
Religion, and sowred with the Leaven of National Enmity, heightened with the
provocation of an universal Massacre, acted by the person they so barbarously
murdered, upon all their dearest Relations, the Crime had been more pardonable;
but these Paricides were his Majesty's Native Subjects, that had drawn their
first Breath in his Hereditary Dominions, and to this Natural Bond of
Allegiance, had voluntarily added diverse stronger Ties of religious Oaths,
Protestations and Covenants; yea, some of those that lifted up not their Heels
only, but their Hands against him, were such as did eat of his Bread, his own
sworn Servants, none of them disobliged by any such Provocations of cruel
Usages, so that it is hard to imagine, how it might be possible to load a
Malefactor with more personal aggravating Considerations, to render him
monstrously criminal, than these were notoriously guilty of; except only, that
one (which like a vast Mountain, overtops all the rest) that they were Persons
of the Professed True Religion, and in that Profession, coveted to engross the
Reputation of the most eminently strict and Conscientious. And indeed, this is
an aggravation, which ought beyond all others, to whet the indignation of every
Conscientious Christian to a keenness beyond all moderation, as that which is
most highly injurious to the whole Reformed Cause throughout all the world. O
tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askalon, lest the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice! Alas! What sport has this V. 20.
sad scandal already made, and how much more may it yet make, to the Romish
Emissaries, whose Religion has been wonted to raise Rebellions, and to
canonize for Saints, the most prodigious Traitors; and has alone born the
odium of monopolizing the (Occasioning a Vindication of the Protestant Re^igion
from Romish Calumn^^s.)
guilt of murdering Princes, for many ages; that they have now too colorable
a pretense to discharge a part of that guilt upon those of the Protestant
Communion, as being hereby become Fratres in malo, Brethren in this horrid
wickedness with themselves! An Occasion which we confess we have cause to
bevvail, because they make such use of it: But we must vvithal tell them, that
we think our Profession no way touched in its reputation thereby, in the
judgment of any whom inveterate Malice does not prejudicate against us. For
besides, that the Persons engaged in this horrid Act, were (most of them)
departed from the Protestant Faith or Communion, or both, before they engaged
in this horrid Villainy, (and so can no more justly reflect the guilt thereof
upon the Church they once belonged to, than a Renegado's miscarriages can
concern the Troop which he has forsaken) Let the Romanist know, that no such
Fruit ever grevv upon the root of Protestant Doctrines, which abhor and detest
all such Principles, and execrate all such Offenders; and (by consequence) if
any persons who professed themselves Protestants, were guilty of this
Barbarous Fact, Protestancy it self is no more concerned in it, than any State
is in the Crimes of other Malefactors, who suffer daily by the Svvord of
Justice, for Robberies, Murders, and Burglaries, without any imputation upon
the Community to which they belong; which sufficiently vindicates it self, by
the Laws provided against such Crimes, and the Severity executed upon those
who commit them, from any partnership in them.

In a word, when the Romanist can show us any such Tenets as these, publicly
avowed by general consent of Protestants, [That Christ has left a power to any
Person or Persons in his Church to dispose of all Crowns and Scepters, and has
subordinated the Temporal to the spiri^ual Sword: And that Sovereign Princes
being once blasted by the Thunderbolts of that Church, may be lawfully deposed
and murdered by their Subjects; and that Subjects (in such a case) are absolved
from all Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance to them, etc.] let them impute the
guilt of this horrid Crime to us, and spare not: but so long as we, and they
notoriously know, whose Doctrines these are, it is no hard matter to guess,
what Heifer those Seditious Seminaries ploughed with, and at whose Forge they
sharpened their Goads, and Plow-shares, who sowed the Tares, of such Traitorous
Principles, in the field of our English Church and Commonwealth.

However (for our fuller vindication in this Particular) let every true
Protestant for ever abominate the Memory of those Monsters, and detest their
Principles, who have thus opened the mouths of our Adversaries against our
Religion, and laid such a stumbling block of prejudice in the way of those poor
seduced creatures among us, who are thereby hardened in the distance they keep
from us and our Communion.

3. A Third Consideration to amplify the horrid murder of our And the vast
disproportion between the Facts themselves.
Late Sovereign, beyond that of Saul, may be taken from the Fact it self: Which
although (in the case of Saul) it has already been charged with,

1. Bloudiness. 2. Wilfulness. And 3. Audacionsness enough: Yet in all these,
our part of the Parallel weighs much heavier than that. The Amalekites Fact was
a Sneaking Business, acted in a Corner, so that it had not been known, but by
his own Relation. But this was a Public Tragedy, in all the Acts of it,
wherein the Conspirators, made all the world Spectators of their audacious
Effrontery. Here was a Pageantry of Public Justice, an High Court solemnly
convened, a Bench, and a Bar, a President, and a Prisoner, an Indictment, and a
Prosecution, and a Sentence, and all these, in the most public place of
Judicature in the three Nations. And after this, a Bloody Execution, not in a
Corner, but in the open Street, in the Face of the Sun, as if they meant (with
a kind of def^nce to God himself) to call him in, as a public Spectator, to
behold how insolently they trampled upon his Authority, in his undoubted
Vicegerent. A Tragedy, which in all the Acts and Scenes of it, I am confident
all the Histories in the world cannot match. Many Kings have died by the Sword,
by the Dagger and the Pistol; many by poisonous Drugs, and other such
Instruments of private and clandestine ambition, or revenge: But never any till
this black day, by the Executioners Axe, upon a public Scaffold, in the Front
of His own Royal Palace, etc. Nay more, if a Survey were made of all the
Utopian Inventions of Poetical Fancy, no Stage ever had a Tragedy like this
acted upon it. No Fabulous or feigned History ever adventured a Relation like
it to the eyes of the world: And indeed sober Readers would have disgusted
them, if they had, upon the very account of the monstrousness of it, and taxed
the Author with an unpardonable Error, for transgressing Ficta voluptatis
causae sint proxima veris. Nec quodcunque volet, poscat sibi fabula credi. Hor.
Art. Poet.
the ordinary Rule of Fiction, the subject matter whereof, must be such as
seems to carry an appearance of Truth, and though it be not verum, yet it is
verisimile. So that here was a confluence of all that wilful projected Cruelty
and Insolence could contribute to the aggravation of a Villainy.

4. To show the Parallel yet more unparallel, in the case of our late
Sovereign, his Murderers had none of all those Pleas to excuse their
wickedness, which before have been urged on the behalf of the Amalekite. For,

1. They made it too public to render it any way disputable, None of the
Amalekites Pleas, pleadable for this.
whether they were the Persons who did the Fact or no. And after they had done
it, they gloried in it as an act of Transcendent Justice, and took pride to be
pointed at for it.

2. So far was our murdered Sovereign from being (as Saul was) a Tyrant and a
Murderer; that none ever lost Life or Limb by his Authority, but in a course of
Justice, or by the chance of war. And if he were an Enemy to any true David's
(which some object to him as a Crime) it was his Infelicity not to understand
them to be such, which occasioned it; and I am confident, if any such there be,
who had cause to complain of hard usage from him, they are so far David's still,
that they will give the Murderers as little thanks for rescuing them from their
Sufferings, in such a way, as he did this Amalekite.

3. So far was he from being weary of his Life, and desiring the courtesy of a
dispatch out of it, that he strongly and unanswerably asserted to the faces of
his Murderers his Right both to his Life and Crown.

4. So far was he from an inevitable necessity of dying at that time, either by
natural Infirmity, or accidental stroke of Providence, that he was in the very
Prime of his Age, Health and Strength.

5. So far was he from being pursued by any Enemies but themselves, that he had
but newly concluded a reconciling Treaty with those who had fought against him,
whose Arms and Hearts were with a wonderful alacrity open to receive him, and
expiate all former unkindnesses with all possible Demonstrations of
Affectionate Loyalty.

6. So far were his Murderers from lighting occasionally upon a tentation to
this Fact, and being surprised by the unexpectedness thereof, that it was the
issue of a Conspiracy of diverse years before.

7. So far were they from being clear of the design of enriching themselves
with the Royal Spoils, that (like Ahab) they had no sooner killed, but they
presently fell to taking possession of all the Royal Lands and Revenews, and
distributed them amongst themselves: And whereas this Amalekite, after he had
done the Fact, he took the Crown and Bracelet of Saul, and returned them to his
Lawful Successor; these barbarous Murderers to make good their unjust
possession) exclude his undoubted Heir and Successor, for many years, from his
unquestionable Rights, and put God himself to the expense of a Miracle at last
to restore him.

8. And Lastly, So far were they from bewailing the Fact, when they had done
it, that (as I before told you) they triumphed in it, as the most Righteous,
Heroic and Meritorious Act, that ever was done by men. And some-of them
expressed an ambition to perpetuate the memory of their Names by no other
Epitaph; yea, when Gods Justice and man's overtook them, and brought them to
deserved Execution, took the Confidence to challenge a Crown of The Conclusion
in a serious application of the other two parts of the Text, expressing a
defi^e that in these the Parallel may hold between David and us: Or rather that
we may excced him (as there is great cause)
Martyrdom in the Kingdom of Glory, and prefer the Cause wherein they suffered,
before those of the chiefest of Martyrs; and abused themselves with a
Rodomantick persuasion, that it were a piece of ambition, becoming the most
eminont of that noble Society, to desire an Exchange of condition with them.
The saddest Instances of the efficacy of delusion that ever the world saw from
its first Creation to that very day.

And thus have I done with my Parallel so far as it concerns the Circumstances
of the two Facts, the one of the Text, and the other of the Time; wherein there
is little to be seen, but Concordia disoors, an agreement in nothing but this,
that there is scarce any Circumstance wherein they agree. I have only this to
add, that I hope to find a better Harmony in the other Part of it, which comes
now to hand; [the Parallel of David's carriage upon the one, and the Temper of
all Religious Hearts among us, and the Generations that are to come, in
reference to the other] containing the due sense which as he had, so we ought
to have, of so detestable and piacular a Fact, and dismal a Providence: Which
sense (according to the forementioned distribution) ought to express it self in
three things.

1. Grief; of which David had far less cause than we, upon a In our Grief, For
the Loss received.
fourfold account.

1. Of the Loss received: Which (in David's case) was inconsiderable, if
compared with ours, He indeed lost a Sovereign, valiant enough to fight the
Lords Battles, and one, who by his conduct, had diverse times saved Israel; but
one who was now in his Wane and Declination; so that (whatsoever David in
modesty thought of him) the Loss of Saul was Isreal's gain, by making room for a
better Successor, himself.

But our loss was like the dropping of a skilful Pilot overboard, when the Ship
under his conduct, was in the very Mouth of the haven, and big with expectation
of landing its precious Merchandise, but (by that sad accident) cast into the
hands of raw, and rash and mutinous Seamen; whose indiscretions and animosities
have cast us back again into a tempestuous Sea, where we have for many years
been tossed up and down, with unspeakable hazard, till at last God by a
Miraculous Providence, brought to our help, a Phoenix raised out of his Ashes,
the true Heir, both of his Kingdoms and Virtues, who has once more brought us
within sight of Land, and we hope will (if our sins obstruct not his
endeavors) set us safe on shore. To prevent which mischief, we ought to grieve
(as we have cause) more then David.

2. Upon account of those sins (in general) which provoked and our sins (in
general) provoking God to inflict it. (Whereof some are expressed; (the
peoples.)
God to take him from us. David k^ew, that God had cast off formerly, and now
out off Saul for his own sins, not his. But we have cause enough to charge this
loss upon our own provoking sins, which (at that time, and since) have been
too notoriously apparent to God and the world: Such as, Contempt of Gods Word
and Sacraments, Reproaching and persecuting his Faithful Messengers, Wanton
affecting of new Notions and Inventions, and contemning old Truths, and the
primitive simplicity of the Gospel, Uncharitable schisms and separations in
the Church, and ambitious self-seeking, and (in order thereunto, fomenting
Factions in the State, Sacrilegious robbing of God, and barbarous spoiling and
destroying one another with a rage reaching up to Heaven, Notorious Debauchery
and Profaneness in all sorts and degrees of men, which spared neither Gods Name,
nor his Sabbaths, nor his Creatures, nor the Profession of Religion in the life
and power of it, toleration of Popery, and other dangerous Errors and Heresies,
and (to make our Ephah of sins yet fuller) a spirit of Rebellion spread over
the whole Nation, against just and lawful Authority; and many more might be
added to this Black Roll, but that I hasten to an end.

And was it not time (think you) for God to be avenged of such a Nation as this
was? and I would to God (I could with a clear Conscience) stop at was: But I
fear, it may, with too much evidence of Truth be added, and yet is. And who
could tax that Justice, which by his Providence suffered us to cut through that
Bank with our own hands, which (under himself) kept out that Deluge of
Miseries, which our sins deserved, and fell down that Royal Tree, in the
Branches whereof our several Nests were built. And oh! Let us fear, lest by the
continued guilt of the same sins, we procure a Decree of the Watchers, to cut
down those Royal shoots, that have grown up in his stead (and he has begun
with them already, to our sad loss) and not leave so much as a stump in the
earth, out of which a Rod may grow, to make a Scepter of.

But (possibly) here I may be interrupted with a Question: whether The Thronts
waved,
all the Fault which provoked God to inflict such a severe stroke, were in the
People, and the Throne altogether guiltless.

To which I answer, That I doubt not but personal sins, and acts of
misgovernment toward the people under their charge, are incident to Kings as
well as to persons of a lower degree. And I dare not persuade my self or
others, that our late Sovereign was so much Saint, as to be altogether free;
nay he was so much Saint, as (more then once) to confess miscarriages in his
Government. and why.)
But I must tell the enquirers withal, that I do not believe him one half so
criminal, as popular prejudice, blown up by the breath of factious spirits
endeavored to make him. And for what was really amiss in him, I have this to
plead, That Kings are persons under such Tentations, as Vulgar capacities do
not understand: that because of their eminency and public influence, the
Tempter thrusts sorer at them then ordinary, that they may fall; that God Psalm.
118. 13.
does sometimes lead them into Tentation, because his wrath is kindled against
their people; that (in Scripture) those who have the (...) 4. 1.
commendation of Gods Spirit for the best of Kings, (David and Solomon) have
yet more and fouler spots upon their Names, than K. Charles; and that were the
busy enquirers into, and censurers of Kings faults a while in their places, I
fear they would commit more and greater. Let the Questionist if he can, answer
me this Question, Si fueris^tu Leo, qualis eris?

In a word, Were I sufficiently instructed in the Cabinet affairs of our late
Sovereign, and had I a revelation withal afforded me, to discover the secret
springs of those Counsels upon which he acted, and his own mind in acting; and
were I enabled thereby to conclude him really guilty of whatever, and more,
then what malice and prejudice have ever charged him withal, I should think my
self obliged to do (what is the duty of every good man) that right to his
memory, as to bury his errors and miscarriages in his grave, and proclaim his
virtues as Royal examples to all Posterity. The Lord discover to his Sacred
Majesty, who now fills his Seat, (to whom this enquiry is more proper then to
us) both these and those, that he may render his virtues immortal by imitation,
and wash off the guilt of his failings, (if any such adhere to the Throne) by
deprecating the imputation of them, and avoiding the incursion of the like. And
let us help him herein in our prayers, and encourage him by our loyal
affections and obedience; and amend our own lives the rather, upon the account
of the Love we bear to his prosperity; to whom our sins (whatever they are) are
Traitors, though our selves be never so loyal and affectionate subjects. And
for any sort of partnership in this particular horrid fact,


3. Let us grieve (and herein I am sure David had not so much cause by Saul's
own frequent confession) for that special guilt which the Nation in general,
and particular persons in great multitudes every where have contracted, by any
way furthering antecedently, or abetting consequentially, so horrid and
execrable a murder.

Let no Person or Party think to shift off this duty, as that which only
concerns such and such, who had the unhappiness to appear (which few are clear
of.)
in a contrary engagement to him in the field, (diverse of whom, as has
appeared by many real evidences, have vindicated their integrity (with David)
in this particular, notwithstanding the foul reflections of some
irreconcilable Zealots, (whose heat no Acts of Imdemp^ity or Oblivion can
slake) I say, let no man shift off this guilt upon others, because he was
engaged in a Party or Interest less obnoxious to such an imputation: For, by
that time we all have seriously examined our selves upon these weighty
Interrogatories, Whether we have not (antecedently to this sad accident) had an
hand in the heightning animosities, and fomenting the differences, whether
Religious or Civil, and sowing prejudices and jealousies, which gave occasion
to the public contests? Nay, whether we did what we might, and to the utmost
of our power, to keep them from arriving at such an height? And whether (during
the civil broyls) we (setting aside the consideration of the Quarrel, which (I
hope) we shall all strive to remember no more) have not been guilty of such
unjust oppressions, and exactions, and violences, as exasperated opposite
parties into an irreconcileablenesse? Nay further, whether we interposed (at
the time wherein that bloody Tragedy was acting) in all such ways as were
within the compass of our capacity to hinder it? Some did indeed, but how few
to the body of the Nation? Nay rather, whether we did not, by Petition, or
other encouragement, promote it? Or if not, yet, whether we mourned for it, and
deprecated the guilt of it? Whether we declared (after the sad blow given) our
just abomination and detestation of the fact in our several places and
capacities? Some indeed did (and let it be remembered to their everlasting
honor that they did so,) but how many were there (who should have been more
bold in such a cause) in whose mouths there were no reproofs? And lastly,
Whether (ex post facto) we have not justified the fact, by flattering Addresses
to the pretended Authority, of those who usurped the Royal Power successively?
Whether we have not laid our hands unjustly upon any of the Royal Revenues?
Whether we have not contributed Money or Arms toward the opposition of his
present Majesty's restitution? And (in a word) Whether we swallowed not the
execrable Engagement against Kingship it self, which very few (except only some
nice Consciences here and there, who valued their Allegiance at an higher rate)
refused to subscribe? I say, by that time every ones Conscience has seriously
answered these Interrogatories, and many such more as may be made, it will be
well if Centesimus quisque one of an hundred can before God and his own serious
Conscience, say, I am altogether innocent of this blood. O, that our Repentance
might be as general as our Guilt; and that we might not by casting it in each
others Faces, think to clear our selves from that which must be discharged and
blotted out only upon our particular and personal repentance.

4. And Lastly, Let us (as common Christianity blinds us) grieve And (lastly)
for those who are hardened in the guilt of this sin.
for those who will not be persuaded to grieve for themselves, but are so
obdurate in the error of their seduced Consciences, that they secretly applaud
themselves, and canonize others for Saints of an eminent Rank, upon the bare
account of their influence upon, and engagement in this abominable Act. Alas I
Poor seduced Creatures! Can you imagine that God will own it as a piece of
merit in you or any other, that you affront, and contemn, and injure (with the
utmost indignity) his own deputed Authority? Would any of you, si parvis
componere magna liceret, account your selves obliged by him who with the utmost
strength he can make, attempts the molestation or dispossession of a Tenant
that holds in your right? Did you ever read in any Scriptural or
Church-Records, that any Person was ever accounted a Martyr, that suffered for
conspiring, and much less, for murdering his Lawful Sovereign; excepting only
the Black Calendar of the Apostate Church of Rome? And shall those who bid the
greatest defiance to Popery in their Profession, forsake all the Churches of
Christ in all Ages of the world, to adhere to them, in a matter of such
concernment, and justify Beckets and Garnets, and other such Traytor-Saints,
by vindicating them, in comparison to whom, they were Saints indeed? O, let us
pray for the Conviction of these deluded Souls, and if our Prayers prevail not,
let us weep for them in secret, though they laugh never so much at our
tenderness toward them, as a foolish pity; and profanely bless themselves
from our Charity, which their erroneous Consciences judge mistaken.

2. Wonder and Astonishment, at ^he monstrous Confidence which and in our
wonder at the; amazing confidence of the: late executed T^aytors.
animated those Wretches who presumed to sit in Judgment, and pass Sentence of
Condemnation upon their Lawful Sovereign, and (after 12 years time vouchsafed
them by God to repent in, before his Vengeance found them out) would fain
persuade God by their Prayers, and the World by their Speeches, that they dyed
with Consciences so innocent, in this matter, as to need no repentance. I
profess solemnly, I was never more surprised with admiration, at any thing in
my life, than I was upon the accidental view of that dangerous insinuating
piece (the poison whereof (I fear) has i^fected hundreds of ignorant and
well-meaning people) The Relation of the last Passages of the late detestable
Traitors; and that, to see how Omnipotent a Deceiver (if I may so speak) that
Spirit of Error and Delusion is, that can so artificially extract Heaven out of
Hell, and not only Charm Conscience (even upon the very Brink of Eternity) into
a sleep, but impose upon it with such a Cheat as to absolve and justify in so
high a manner those Offenders, and so many of them (except we will suppose a
Confederacy in such an uniform resolution, of purpose designed for the
animating the relics of a broken Party, which I can hardly be so uncharitable
as to believe) whom both the Law of God, and the Dictates of Nature in the
Principles of all Nations under Heaven condemn. For my part, I dare not judge
their eternal estate: But this I must say (for the prevention of any evil
Influence from their examples) that I would not for 10000 worlds run their
hazard, for all their Confidences and Comforts. And if I had an Infallible
Revelation, to tell me they were gone to Heaven, I should think my self bound,
to keep it in my own Bosom, lest the publishing of it should occasion the
leading Millions to Hell; and pray God, to lead me to Heaven in a more ordinary
and unsuspected Rode, and keep me from being carried up to a Pinnacle of
spiritual Pride upon the Devils shoulders in the shape of an Angel of Light.

3. Abomination of those principles which tend to the like Practis^s. Of all
and abomination of the Princ^ples that lead to such horrid Crimes. Particularly
the F^f^h Monarchis^s.
which (and these late years have been as fruitful in Doctrines of this
tendency, as Aff^ica is of Monsters) there are none more desperate, than those
of the Expectants of a Fifth Monarchy to be begun in the personal appearance of
Christ upon earth to crush all Earthly Powers, and reign visibly with his
Saints a thousand years before the ge^eral Resurrection, which fancy with
abundance more strange conceits of like nature, some confident new Doctors
among them, pretend to gather from the Prophesies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse
so eviden^ly, that they have often presumed to set and fix the time of his
appearance. What a spirit these Princ^ples can conjure up, there needs no
further evidence then the desperate attempt made so lately, by an
inconsiderable number of the men of that persuasion; whiles they are seduced to
believe, that to make way for this Kingdom of Christ, the horridest murders
are meritorius, and the justest executions for those murders, Martyrdom. But
alas! poor men, would Christ come to set up a Temporal Kingdom, he has ways
enough of his own to effect it: So that Non tali Auxilio, nec Defensoribus
istis,
Christus eget. --


Christ has no more need of their Arms to further it, then we have of their
Principles, from both which, Good Lord deliver us. AMEN.

FINIS.

