SINGING OF PSALMS THE Duty of Christians Under the NEW TESTAMENT, OR A
VINDICATION OF THAT Gospel-Ordinance IN V. SERMONS Upon EPHESIANS 5. 19.
Wherein are Asserted and cleared 1. That 2. What 3. How 4. Why we must SING.

The second Edition, with many Additions.

By Tho. Ford, Minister of the Gospel in EXON.

Jam. 5. 13. Is any merry? Let him sing Psalms.

London, Printed by W. B. for F. Eaglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Marygold in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

An Advertisement Concerning this Second Edition of these SERMONS.
SInce there are many, that scruple the singing of David's Psalms, because
they deem them not proper, or pertinent to their particular occasions, and
conditions, here are several instances added to those already mentioned in the
foregoing Sermons, to show them their mistake, and to persuade them, (if the
Lord be pleased to set all home upon their hearts) that they may improve all
and every of those Psalms, as occasion serves, by swee^ meditation, and
stirring up godly affections accordingly, for singular advantage, and
spiritual edification in grace, and glorious practice.

Most of those Additions are to be found by themselves, toward the end of the
book, beginning with the word Suppose, in Page 137. which was judged the most
convenient place for them.

TO THE READER
READER,
IT is confessed, and cannot be denied, that as there are already but too many
Books in the world, so there are enough written in the Vindication of this
Gospel-Ordinance, if men would heed and read them as they ought to do: And this
consideration (besides others) so swayed the Author, as no importunity could
prevail with him to publish these Sermons till he was enforced to it, beyond
and against his own opinion and inclination, by others, threatening to Print the
Notes (which some had taken in shorthand) though very imperfect. Therefore it
is desired, if any fault be, the blame may light on those who are most guilty,
the Author at worst being but an accessory. When these Sermons were Preached,
it was his desire and prayer to God, that they might be imprinted on the hearts
of these that heard them; and it pleased the Lord (let him have all the glory)
to second his Desires and Endeavors with a blessing so far, as some, who
have neglected Singing, were convinced; others that were wavering were
c^firmed; and many better informed in the Nature, F^d and Use of that Duty,
which formerly they little u^derstood or he^ded. They were principally intended
for the more ignorant (such as the most are who question, or deny the Singing
of David's ^lme) and therefore contrived and framed with the greatest plainness,
so as they might best serve to give understanding unto the simple.

It Is desired and hoped, that the wiser and more u^derstanding Reader will take
no offense at that plainness which was affected and studied for the benefit and
edification of popular Auditory. Truth is never the l^sse comely, when she
walks abroad in a plain and homely dress. But there needs no Apology, since
plain dealing (we use to say) is a^waies best. There are three sorts unto whom
these Sermons are more especially directed, or (if you will have it so)
dedicated.

First, such as deny singing of David's Psalms to be a Duty.

Secondly, Such as neglect that Duty very much, especially in private.

Thirdly, Such as do it both in public and private, yet know not how to carry
themselves in it as becomes Christians.

Now it is earnestly desired, that all, and every of these will be pleased to
read them over, and when they have so done, if they find nothing either to
convince them of the Duty, or quicken them to it, or direct them in it, I shall
willingly yield they have lost their labor for once, hoping they will as
freely acknowledge that it is not the first time they have done so. I say
again, search and see, and when you have proved all, hold fast that which is
good; and I do the rather press and persuade to it, because (as I conceive)
Singing of Psalms is of greater concernment than most men are aware of. We use
it as a part of that Religious worship which we ow and yield to the only living
and true God, and therefore had need, as of a good Warrant for doing it, so of
a good understanding and frame of spirit so to do it, as therein to please God,
and benefit our own souls. If there be no Ordinance of God for it, we cannot in
reason expect a blessing from God in it; nay we had need be humbled for our
former using it. If it appear to be a duty (which I hope these plain Sermons
do in some sort demonstrate) let us be humbled for our former carelessness, and
endeavor henceforward to reap more benefit by it. For this I dare say, That of
all Religious exercises, there is none wherein God has been less honored, or
men less edified then in this of singing David's Psalms. If that which is here
presented may be of any use, either to persuade such as are otherwise minded,
or to confirm such as are already persuaded, and direct them how to wait upon
God, as they ought, for a blessing in this duty, Let the God of all grace have
the glory; Which is the Joint desire of him that preached, and them that
published these Sermons.

Farewell.
Singing of PSALMS the Duty of Christians under the New Testament.
The first SERMON.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
Songs, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord.
THe subject matter of this Text is singing of Psalms; a duty which many
continue to do, but few understand the nature, end, and use of it. Others (not
a few) do not sing at all; yea, deny it to be a duty. For conviction of the
one, and direction of the other, I shall so handle the words read as attending
these two things especially, viz.

the lawfulness of singing David's Psalms. usefulness

The Doctrinall part of this Epistle you have in the three first Chapters: The
use begins with the fourth Chapter, where the Apostle applies the Doctrine of
the rich and free Grace of God, exhorting them to walk worthy of that Vocation
wherewith they were called, doing all duties, both such as concern them as
Christians in common, and such as belong to them respectively in particular
relations, as Husbands, Wives, Parents, etc. Not to hold you long about the
Order and Connection of these general Precepts, verse 18. the Apostle
admonishes them, not to be drunk with wine; as being most contrary to that
accurate and circumspect walking required and expected of Christians: ver. 15.
and then enforces his admonition by an argument drawn from the inconvenience or
mischief of so foul and beastly a sin, there is excess in it, excess in
expenses, opposite to srugality and excess in delights, opposite to temperance;
or as some understand it) mores dissoluti, inordinate behavior, enormeous
lusts, D. Hammonds note on Ephesians. 5. all manner of loosnesse and wicked lewdness
follow it, or all kind of riot and lasciviousness go along with it. It follows
ver. 19. [ But be filled with the Spirit] As if he should say, I will show
another, and a better way of good fellowship, wherein you may drink your fill,
health it, and pledge one another in that which is wholesome and useful, and
delightful too. [ Be ye filled with the Spirit.] The Spirit is opposed to
wine, and filling with the Spirit, to excessive pouring in of wine or strong
drink. The Spirit is not only water to cleanse and wash, but wine to cheer and
refresh; labor you to be filled with the Spirit, or to be full of goodness,
To. 14. 15.

In this nineteenth verse he shows what are the effects of the Spirit when men
are filled with it, and that in way of allusion to the manner of men when they
are in their cups; then their tongues walk, they talk, and sing, and say they
know not what. Now (says the Apostle) Be ye but filled with the spirit, and
that will make you merry and wise too. Merry in a good and godly sort, it will
make you talk and sing, and rejoice in a spiritual manner, so as to glorify
God, edify your selves, and one another. In a word, the Apostle here teaches
Christians how to be merry in the Lord, and how to express their rejoicing in
God, and that is in singing of Psalms.

Particulars in the words observable are these:

1. He exhorts to singing of Psalms.

2. He advises what Psalms are to be sung.

3. He directs how to sing those Psalms.

Or these That we must sing. What How Why

1. For the Duty it self, We must sing.

2. For the Matter, we must sing Psalms and spiritual Songs.

3. For the Manner, we must sing, in, or with the heart.

4. For the End, we must sing unto the Lord.

I shall lay down only one general Doctrine, in handling of which I shall
take into consideration all the aforesaid particulars.

Doct. That singing of Psalms is a duty of Christians under the New Testament.

That it was the duty of Gods people under the old Testament, and that they did
well in it, having a warrant for it; I presume no sober man will question. All
the doubt is concerning the times of the New Testament, and yet not so much
whether Psalms are now to be sung, as what Psalms we are to sing, and what
manner of singing there ought to be.

That which I intend and shall endeavor to prove, is, That it is the duty of
Christians under the new Testament to sing David's Psalms; and to this end I
shall first make use of, and urge the strength and force of my Text, and that
other parallel place, Col. 3. 16. clearing them from the exceptions which lie
against them, and then answer other objections made against the Psalms, which
we sing, and our manner of singing them.

First, It Is clear and unquestionable, that the Apostle in both places calls
for singing of Psalms as a Duty to be done by all Christians. In this Chapter,
v. 4. He allows no foolish talking, or jeasting, ver. 18. He allows no
excessive drinking, or tippling, which profane men account and call
merry-making; yet he requires and calls for singing of Psalms, and such like
spiritual rejoicing in God.

Secondly, There is no more reason to exclude singing of Psalms from being
part of a Christians duty, than redeeming them, or being wise to know the will
of God, or teaching and admonishing one another, since the Apostle enjoynes
them all alike. He that says, Walk circumspectly, says also, Sing, and m^ke
melody in your hearts to the Lord.

Thirdly, In the Epistle to the Colossions, he cries down all legal
Ceremonies, and yet notwithstanding calls for singing of Psalms. Whence it is
clear and undeniable, that there must be singing of Psalms, there being as
express and peremptory Scripture-commands for this, as for Prayer, or any
other Duty. This I thought good to clear in the first place, because I fear
there are some who may look upon singing as a legal Ceremony, and so expired
with the rest of the Jewish Worship.

I proceed to prove that there must be audible singing with the voice, and that
of Christians together; though I deny not, but if a man have no company, he may
(being disposed as James says, Jam. 5. 13.) Sing, as well as pray alone.

Object. 1. It Is objected by some, that the Apostle here calls for speaking in
Psalms, and Col. 3. 16. for teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms,
and for singing in the heart, but not for singing with the voice.

Sol. This is to wrest and rack the Scripture, that so it may speak what men
have a mind to. And this will appear if we consider

1. That though the Apostle exhorts to speaking in Psalms, etc. yet he
explains himself in the following words [ singing and making melody, etc.]

2. There was this reason why the Apostle exhorts them to speak to themselves
in Psalms, etc. He would not have them walk as other Gentiles, who in their
cups, and merry meetings, talk they know not what, or else after their
heathenish custom, sang Songs to the praise of their Idols. Now (says the
Apostle) it must not be so with you Christians: But when you meet, and will be
merry, speak to one another in Psalms, etc.

Davenant. 3. Some (and those very learned and judicious) think there is no
necessity of carrying these words, viz. [ teaching, and admonishing, and
speaking, Col. 3. 16.] to that which follows, and the Original seems much to
favor their conceit; besides, the drift and scope of the Apostle, if it be
considered, seems also to make much for them, for he exhorts Christians to let
the Word of Christ dwell richly or plentifully in them, i. e. to be thoroughly
furnished with a sound and saving knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel; and
then shows them the use and benefit of Scripture so studied and understood. The
first use is, that Christians may thereby instruct one another in the doctrine
of Faith. The second is to admonish one another concerning a godly life. The
third is to rejoice together, and refresh one another by singing such
spiritual Songs as are recorded in Scripture for that end.

4. But if this satisfy not, I say further, That these words [ Speaking to
your selves and teaching one another] cannot admit of such a sense as some put
upon them, viz. Teaching one another out of the Psalms, since teaching in
Psalms is one thing, and teaching out of the Psalms is another. David's
Psalms are a part, and a choice part of Scripture, and Christians may and must
teach one another out of them, as well as out of other Scriptures, since they
are all written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. So Acts 28. 23. Paul persuaded
the Jews that Jesus was the Christ out of the law of Moses, and (...)
out of the Prophets. Had the Apostle intended the same thing in these places,
why had he not used the same expression, viz. Speaking to your selves out of
the Psalms, which yet, we see he does not; and therefore I conclude that he
intends somewhat else than these men would have him. And that which ^e intends
is this, that Christians in singing of Psalms together, should teach and
admonish one another, and speak to one another for mutual edifying as they do
by joining in prayer, or the like duties. So when Paul and Silas sung together,
Act. 16. 25. they thereby spoke to themselves, or amongst themselves for their
mutual encouragement and comfort, methinks it is an excellent way of speaking
to themselves, or one another, when Christians sing a Psalm together.

5. It Is clear to any that reads the Texts without prejudice, that speaking in
Psalms must be by singing of them. If he had said only [ speaking, teaching
and admonishing] then those men's gloss might have had some color of truth in
it: Bu^ since the Apostle adds [ singing and making melody] it is clear he
requires the singing of Psalms which is the thing we contend for.

As to the latter part of the objection ( viz) That the Apostle calls for
singing in the heart, but not for singing with the voice, I answer, That though
we must sing with the heart, it will never follow, That therefore we must not
sing with the voice, for then it would follow too, that we must not pray with
the voice, because we are to pray with the heart, Now what an argument is this?
I must hear the word with my heart, and receive it into my heart, therefore I
must not hear it with my ears. I grant we must sing with the heart, and with
grace in the heart, i. e. with a holy and gracious frame of spirit suitable to
the matter that we sing, or with thankfulness, as some interpret, or in
sincerity, and uprightness of heart from our very fouls, as David said, With
my whole heart will I praise thee, Psalm. 9. 7. and Psalm. 103 Bless the Lord, O
my soul, etc. For if our singing, or any other Religious service be not with
and from the heart, God will have no regard to it, and therefore it is no
marvel that the Apostle calls for singing in and with the heart. Nature, Art,
Parts, and common gifts may enable a man to the outside form, or bodily
exercise either in singing or praying, etc but the bodily exercise profits
little. God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit, and therefore
requires us to sing, and pray and perform all religious services in, and with
the heart, i. e. sincerely, and from our very souls.

Besides let it be considered that the Apostle here speaks in opposition to the
profane guise of Heathens singing to the praise of their Idols, or of
drunkards in their cups, singing, and saying they know not what; and only
making a noise that they may be heard. Now he would have (...) Chrysostom. ad Ephesians.
5. 19.
Christians sing praises to the living God after another manner, viz. With
grace in their hearts, understanding what, and considering how they sing.
Besides the Apostle considered how apt men are (as Austin says of himself) to
be taken more with musical accents then the heavenly matter; and therefore
gives a special caution for singing with the heart, it being a matter more then
ordinary for men to keep their hearts in order when they are singing of
Psalms, but never intended we should not sing with the voice, but only he
would have men with their minds, as well as with their mouths to glorify God.
Paul and Silas sang praises unto God, so as the prisoners heard them, Act. 16.
25. they sang with their voices, as well as in their hearts to the Lord.

Having thus cleared it from the text, That we must sing with an audible voice,
I come in the second place to show What we must sing; and this is also in the
Text [ Speaking to your selves in Psalms, etc.] We must sing nothing but
spiritual songs to the Lord; But what these Psalms and hymns, and spiritual
songs are, is another question.

The greatest difference I find amongst Interpreters, is the difference between
these, it being a matter of some difficulty to distinguish them so as to
determine precisely what are psalms, what Hymns, and what Spiritual Songs.

Many and various conceits of men I meet with, which I shall not trouble you
withal, being the most of them very groundless. I know nothing more probable
than this, viz. That Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, do answer to
Mizmorim, Tehillim, and Shirim, which are the (...)
Hebrew names of David's Psalms. All the Psalms together are called Tehillim,
i. e. Praises, or songs of praise. Mizmor and Shir are in the Titles of many
Psalms, sometimes one, and sometimes the other, and sometimes both joined
together, as they know well who can read the Original. Now the Apostle calling
them by the same names by which the Greek Translation (which the New (...)
Testament so much follows) renders the Hebrew, is an argument that he means no
other than David's Psalms. Besides, when ever the New Testament quotes the
Psalms, it means those of David, and so the Apostle speaks as taking it for
granted, that they to whom he wrote, knew what Psalms he meant. Sure I am that
David's Psalms are spiritual Songs, if ever there were any spiritual Songs in
the world.

Obj. Yea, but some will object, that the Apostle means not David's Psalms,
but such spiritual Songs as shall be upon occasion composed by some Officer or
Member of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 26. for as in the primitive times there were
some who had a gift of Psalms, so now also there are that have, if not the
same; yet the like gift, and such new Songs, they grant may be sung, but not
any other,

Sol. 1. In answer to this, I say first, That in the primitive Churches some
had a Psalm or spiritual Song dictated and inspired by the holy Ghost, though I
dare not determine any thing peremptorily concerning their manner of singing
those Psalms in the Church.

2. I say, If any have the same fgi now, they may do well to show and use it
for the benefit and edification of themselves and others. But I suppose no
sober man will now pretend to any such extraordinary gift, which ceast in the
Church long since, as the gift of Tongues, and other effects of the Spirit
extraordinary.

If any shall pretend to such an extraordinary Spirit, I desire to know of them
how others shall sing with them? for if they sing only their sudden raptures,
it is impossible others should join, because their meditations will differ, and
so will their meeter too, and such singing will be nothing but a sacrifice of
fools, and the confusion at Babel.

If it be said, Not so; But one to sing in the spirit, and the rest to say
Amen, I say (as before) no man now has such a Spirit as some had then. There
are indeed some that pretend much to the Spirit in these days, who if they
would be pleased to show their raptures in singing, as they do many times in
speaking, no question there would be as good rythme in the one as there is
reason in the other. If we must not sing but what is indicted by an extraordinary
Spirit, and no man have such a Spirit, it will follow that there must be no
singing at all, and then how do Christians fulfill this law of Christ,
commanding them to speak to one another in Psalms, etc. which I have formerly
proved to be a duty as much as redeeming the time, walking circumspectly, etc.
I believe that they who had a Psalm in the Church of Corinth, had it by an
extraordinary gift. How that Psalm was sang I cannot say, but this is clear and
certain that David's Psalms, which were ordinarily used in the Temple, though
they were composed, yet they were not sung by an extraordinary Spirit. For when
the Levites, Christ and his Disciples, Pa^l and Silas sung, those Psalms must
be such as were well known beforehand to the companies that sang them, else how
could they sing together?

Obj. But here I meet with an objection that must be answered before I proceed,
and it is this, viz. That Christ and his Disciples did not sing, but only gave
thanks, and that the Original word imports no more, but as it were saying
Grace after meat.

We deny not but the Original notes praise, but let all that understand the
Original speak whether it does not signify to praise with singing. Austin on
Psalm 52. Hymni sunt lauds Dei cum cantico, and si sit laus. and non sit Dei,
non est Hymnus: si sit laus, and Dei laus, and non cantetur, non est Hymnus,
oportet ergo ut, si sit Hymnus, habeat haec tria, and laudem, and Dei, and
cantico. Hymns are the praises of God with a song; If it be praise, and not the
praise of God, it is not a Hymn; if it be the praise of God, and not with a
song, neither is it a Hymn, which must have these three in it, viz. Praise, the
praising of God, and that with a song, or in singing. Questionless the
Original signifies to praise, whether God or men in songs.

But what need we go any further than my Text, the word here put in the middle
between Psalms and Songs, sufficien^ly shows what manner of praising God
that was. Besides the constant vote of all the Learned that Christ did sing
after his last supper, according to the custom of the Jews, whose practice it
was after the Cup of salvation or thanksgiving to sing some of David's Psalms,
which solemn Hymn they call, to this day, the Great Hallelujah.

That Christ prayed and praised God otherwise than in singing, we grant: But
that he also sang, is clear, and if he had sung a new song composed on the
sudden, probably one of the Evangelists would have recorded that song, as well
as John has set down our Saviors prayer, John 17. So Paul and Silas Act. 16.
25. prayed and sang praises aloud, so as the prisoners heard them, which argues
more than probably, a more than ordinary lifting up of their voices. But if we
yield that neither Christ and his Disciples did sing, nor Paul and Silas, yet
my Text with Col. 3. 16. and James 5. 13. do clearly evince that Christians
must sing, which is the thing we plead for.

But I return to answer the former objection concerning singing of Psalms
composed by an ordinary and common gift, as God in his providence gives
occasion. And to this I say that I am not so much against composing as
imposing; when men set up their own new songs, and shut out David's Psalms.
Suppose it lawful for men of spiritual minds to endite a Psalm, and then
commend it to others, and sing it; yet it will not follow, that therefore we
must not sing the Psalms of David.

Obj. But here again it is objected, That we conceive Prayers and therefore may
as well conceive Psalms too, for praising God upon occasion.

Sol. I will not say it is unlawful to conceive and compose a Psalm upon
occasion. But I say again, there is no reason that our conceived Psalms should
shut out David's; and I desire it may be considered, First, That a man may
conceive a Prayer on the sudden, and put it up to God, so as others may join
with him: But a man cannot so conceive and sing a Psalm, it being impossible,
at once, to contrive the Matter, and meeter, and be devout too.

Obj. But here it will be replied, That such a conceiving of Psalms is not
intended, but that some one first compose, and bring a spiritual Song, and
then commend it to be sung by others.

Sol. But why should any man prefer his Composures before David's Psalms, is
it because they are more excellent?

Obj. No, it will be said, We do not compare with David. Only our composed
Psalms are more suitable to the present occasions of Gods people; we conceive
Prayers, as occasion is offered, and so we would have Psalms conceived, and
composed too.

Sol. 1. God himself has made and given us a Psalm-book, But I know of no such
Prayer Book that he has left us.

2. There can be no composures of men, that will suit the occasions,
necessities, afflictions, or affections of God's people, as the Psalms of
David, concerning which we may say, what the Jews said of Manna, They have a
taste and relish according to every ones Palate. Let it once be granted that we
must sing Psalms, I Will warrant you David's Psalms shall carry it; there being
no art or spirit of man now, that can come near that of David. What though they
were penned upon occasion, and according to the necessities of Gods people
then? so were the other Scriptures, and yet they concern us as much now, as
they did the people of God then. Besides we read that in Hezekiah's time the
Levites were to praise God with the words of David, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. which
shows that the Psalms were for the use of Gods people in after-ages upon all
occasions, and I would fain know what occasions Gods people now, or at any
time, either have, or can have, which David's Psalms may not suit with, and
better than any Songs composed by an ordinary gift. What glorious things are
spoken of Christ his Kingdom, and the great work of Redemption by him? Who can
admire and adore the infinite excellencies of God in better phrases and forms
^han the spirit has dictated to us in David's Psalms? If we would cheer our
spirits, or compose them for hearing or other duties, what more heavenly
Meditations? If we would commend and magnify the Power, Wisdom, and goodness
of God in any mercy, how can we do it better than in the words of David? It
would become these that quarrel at our singing of David's Psalms, to give us
better in the room of them, or else to consider how they fulfill the Law of
Christ, when they sing neither those, nor any other.

And whereas occasional composures a^e so much cried up by many, I ask them
what poor souls shall do that cannot compose Psalms, neither have any to do
it for them? Certainly it is a duty (as has been proved) that lies upon all
Gods people, and to whom shall many of them go for a Psalm, if not to David?
They that pen psalms better, or at least fitter (as they think) do it for
their particular respective Congregations: In the mean time, what shall others
do, unless the same men will undertake to furnish all the Churches of God in
the Land, and the world too, with a better Psalm book, than that of David? If
it be said, that some Officer or member in every Congregation may do as much
upon occasion: I answer, perhaps not; nay, without all peradventure, the gift
will not be found at all, or in any tolerable measure amongst many Christians,
and then, when they meet, and would be merry in the Lord, poor souls they
shall have never a Psalm to sing, as James requires, James 5. 13. Nor shall we,
upon this account, have very much singing in private families, of which there
are thousands in England, that will not yield one who can endite, or compose a
Psalm fit for the occasions of Gods people. Therefore if these m^n will not
give us another Psalm-book in stead of David's, we shall have little singing in
Congregations, and less in private families; But I shall argue this no further;
only I add, that it is not enough for them to say that David's Psalms must
give place to their new Songs, especially, since the former can plead
prescription for so many ages, but they must prove it, and that strongly too,
that we must not sing David's Psalms.

For the accommodation of David's Psalms to the present particular occasions
of Gods people, I shall speak more hereafter: all I shall say for present is
this, That if we cannot accommodate them, or any passages in them, the fault is
our own. There are many, I fear, who cannot accommodate many passages in
David's Psalms: as when he professes his zeal for God, love to God, his Word
and Ordinances, and ways of Worship, his integrity, humility,
heavenly-mindedness, etc. But that is because they have not such a heart as was
in David; and it may be their consciences cannot well bro^k such a word of
admonition and conviction as they meet withal in many places and passages of
David's Psalms.

But if we sing David's Psalms, let us sing them in David's tunes, and not in
such Meetre as men have devised.

Sol. This reasoning will prove as well that we shall not read David's Psalms;
for may not a man as well say, Why should we read them in any Language but that
wherein they were written? and so farewell singing and reading Psalms too; and
if you say but as much of all the other parts of Scripture, farewell all
preaching of gifted men, for they will have never a Text nor Bible left them.
But if we think our selve; bound to read the Psalms in our own Tongue, why may
we not as well sing them in our own Tunes? If you say, there is a necessity of
reading, I grant it, and say, There is a necessity of singing them also; there
being as express precepts in Scripture for the one, as for the other. When any
man shall give us as a good reason against reading in our own Tongue, we will
give over singing Psalms in our own Tunes; till then, we believe there is the
like necessity of the one and the other, or else we are come to a good pass
indeed, that we must neither sing nor say. My answer then is in a word this,
That there being a necessity of singing, as well as of reading, we may do the
one in our own Tunes, as well as the other in our own Tongue.

There is yet one objection more against singing of David's Psalms, which was
not thought on at the preaching of these Sermons, and it is this:

Obj. As the Scripture commands us to pray, but prescribes us no set forms of
Prayer, which we are bound to use, and no other: so, when it commands us to
sing Psalms, it does not tie us to any form, but leaves us to our liberty.
For, if we are not tied to a form in praying, why should we be tied up to any
form in singing?

I dare not say (as some do) that all forms of Prayer are forbidden by the
second Commandment; nor yet that they wholly stint and quench the Spirit. But
to let that pass, I answer:

Sol. 1. The Apostle has prescribed us what to sing, viz. Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, which are the express Titles of David's Psalms, as was
showed before.

2. There is a difference in this, that the Lord did not prescribe unto his
people set forms of Prayer, as he prescribed set forms of Psalms, 2 Chronicles.
29. 30 They were to sing in the words of David and Asaph but we read not, that
they were to pray in any such set form. God gave them a Psalm book, but not a
Prayer Book, as was said before.

3. When the Psalms of David and Asaph were ordinarily sung in the Temple,
dare any man say, that the Spirit either in the Levites or others, was stinted
or quenched? and why should it be stinted now, more than it was then? Since we
have the same forms which God himself appointed, why may we not expect the
same enlargement of heart, as the people of God had then?

4. We must sing in a form or not at all, as I showed formerly, though we may
very well pray without it. Since therefore we must have a form, why should we
not prefer such as God has appointed before any other?

SERMON II.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, Singing, etc.
THE Apostle calls upon the people of God to edify themselves in singing of
Psalms. This we have proved to be the duty of Christians, and answered some
Objections made against it.

Obj. But how can Christians do this in a mixed Congregation (will some say)
where there is a multitude that join in the duty, who yet, (God knows) are no
way able to do it in such a manner, as may be either pleasing to God, or
profitabie to their own souls? They cannot sing in their heart, nor to the
Lord. And hence some complain they are much scandalized, to hear profane and
ungodly men in their singing of Psalms profe^s their Repentance, the integri^y
and uprightness of their hearts, when, God knows, there is no such thing in
them. Therefore (say they) What do such men in singing, but sound out so many
lies? yea, and blaspheme the holy Name and Truths of God, in doing of that
duty? and this so troubles and distracts them, that they cannot find in their
hearts to join in the duty with such profane people.

This is, I conceive, the main thing that troubles the most, and therefore
though there is but little strength in the Argument, yet, since it is that
which swayes with so many, I shall be the larger in clearing it.

They say, many profane wretches sing Psalms and sing lies; and therefore they
do not, they cannot sing.

Sol. I wish that some of these who make this Objection do not say lies; for
that many (who do not sing Psalms, and give this for a reason) do lie, I shall
make it appear thus:

They say, they do not sing, because of the mixed multitude, with whom they
cannot join. Then how comes it to pass, That Psalms are forborne, not only in
the Congregation, but in their own houses also? Therefore there is some deceit
in this argument. I do heartily wish such as these, before they charge lying
upon others in singing, to forbear lying themselves: for they do not sing in
their families, nor in their closets, neither alone, nor with others. Therefore
this is not the thing, there is somewhat else in their hearts. But I will
answer the Argument otherwise: though I do premise this in the first place,
That if they will not sing in the Congregation, because of the mixed multitude,
yet let them sing in their own families, If they say, There is a mixed company
in their families also: I ask, Whose fault is that? I should be loath to keep
them in my family, with whom I cannot pray, and praise God. But if so, yet, why
do they not sing by themselves? for a man may as well sing alone, as pray
alone: if none other be good enough to sing with them, let them sing by
themselves. But it seems they do not think themselves good enough to sing
withal.

1. To gratify them in what we can, I grant, that there are too many such, who
cannot sing with grace in their hearts; and this we acknowledge to be both their
sin and misery. But yet withal we think, though there be thousands that cannot
sing a Psalm as they ought to do, with grace in their hearts to the Lord: yet
it is the duty of those men to do it; and because they cannot do it as they
should, it will never follow that therefore they are not bound to do it, or
that they do not sin, if they do neglect it.

It is certain, a profane spirit is no more able to pray, than he is able to
sing praises to God. But I hope you will not say, that therefore a profane
person ought not to pray, or that it is not his duty to pray, or that he does
not sin if he neglect to pray, Act. 8. 22. Peter exhorts Simon Magus to pray,
though he were a wicked man.

Obj. But he bids him first to repent.

Sol. True; he does so, and there was a good reason for it. Peter would have
him to pray, so as his prayer might be heard, and accepted with God, which he
knew, could not be without repentance. For God hears not sinners, John 9. 31.
If I regard wickedness in my heart (says David, Psa, 66. 18.) the Lord will
not hear my prayer, But if a wicked man will humble himself, and pray, he has
Gods promise to be accepted. If he repent not, God has no regard either to his
prayer or his person, yet still it is his duty to pray, and his sin that he
does it not, and therefore I may persuade, and exhort him to do it. I would
have men sing with the heart, so as to please God in it. But if they cannot do
it, (and do it they cannot so long as they hold fast deceit) yet it is their
duty to do it. Else wicked men have a fair excuse for not doing that duty which
lies upon them by virtue of Gods commandment. To pray without faith is a great
sin, and I think not to pray at all, (is in some sense) a greater sin. He that
prays without faith and grace is an hypocrite, and he that prays not at all,
is an Atheist. So to sing without grace in the heart is hypocrisy; and I
think, not to sing at all, not to perform that duty and worship we owe unto
the living God, is a kind of Atheism. A wicked man after a sort profanes and
pollutes every Ordinance he takes in hand: but it will not hence follow,
therefore it is not his duty to wait upon God in Ordinances.

Secondly, It is true, a wicked man is not worthy to take the name of God in
his mouth, and when he does, he does (in some sort) blaspheme God in abusing
his word. But though he be not worthy, yet (as one says) Gods Word is worthy
to come into his mind, and into his mouth too, to convince him of his
wickedness. And here is a very great mistake of these men that thus urge and
argue, and they bewray a great deal of ignorance about the nature, end, and use
of this duty; for one great and main end of singing Psalms is Instruction: A
Psalm of David for Instruction, is the Title of many of the Psalms, that is
one end of singing of Psalms. Therefore I say, though they be not worthy to
take the Name of God into their mouths, yet the Word of God is worthy to come
into their mouths and minds for their instruction and admonition. Deuteronomy. 32.
Moses penned a Psalm, and Deuteronomy. 31. 19. there is a command of God, that it
should be penned; and for what end was it? namely to convince the wicked
Israelies of their apostasy from, and rebellion against the Lord. And
certainly, when ever a Psalm is sung, be they never so bad that sing it, there
is a Word of God in it, to reprove and condemn their sin. And does not the
Apostle say ( Col. 3, 16.) Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms? In
every Psalm of Instruction (I say) there is a word to convince the ungodly of
their ungodliness. As for example: Psalm. I. I. Blessed is the man that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor
sits in the seat of the scornful: But his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night: he shall be like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, his leaf shall not wither, and what soever he
does shall prosper. The ungodly are not so, but are like the chaff which the
wind drives away; Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor
sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. The Lord knows the way of the
righteous: But the way of the ungodly shall perish. When this is said, there is
a conviction, and when this is sung, there is a greater conviction, because
there is more time and space to meditate on those holy truths of God. Does not
God here, as it were, judge him out of his own mouth? and he himself pronounce
the sentence, That he is one of those ungodly ones of whom the Psalmist speaks
by the spirit in that Psalm?

So Psalm. 2. there is an admonition to those that do not kiss the Son, and
submit to the scepter of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Obj. But they take no notice of it, they go on and sing a Psalm, and so think
they have done God good service.

Sol. It may be so, So it is in hearing of Sermons, no question many are little
affected with what is delivered, though the Minister press it home upon their
consciences, and deal never so plainly and powerfully: yet I hope, you will not
say, but the Word of God preached has this end ( viz.) Conviction or
Admonition. So it is in singing of Psalms, wicked men are made judges of their
own wickedness by the Word of God in their own mouths.

Obj. Again, Whereas it is urged by some, That they are very much scandalized
to hear profane men profess a lie in singing the 119 Psalm, and the like,
touching their love to, and delight in the law of God, and other such
expressions which David uses in those Psalms.

Sol. We answer, True; it is a matter of scandal, but how far forth we shall
consider anon. He that sings David's Psalms, and not with a sanctified heart,
as David did, he lies in his heart, and in his throat too. But suppose such a
one should say David's Psalms, or pray David's Psalms, or read them out of a
Book, or join with the Minister in prayer, where he is the mouth for the rest
that do join with him; Does he not profess the like then? When the Minister
(who is the peoples mouth to speak to God) declares the experiences that he and
others have had of Gods goodness, and the work of grace upon their souls;
when he professes or expresses godly sorrow for sin, laments their
infirmities, indisposednesse, untowardnesse and frowardness of heart, and
further blesses God for spiritual graces, and the evidences of Gods love,
etc. When (I say) the Minister does thus in the Congregation, and profane men
are there, and pretend to go along with him in th^s, do they not lie in prayer,
since they never had experience of Gods goodness, and the work of God upon
their souls, they never had any evidences of Gods love to them in all their
lives? And why are we not as much scandalized at their praying, as at their
singing? For though they make not such a noise with their mouths in prayer, yet
they do lie and profane the Name of God as much in the one as they do in the
other. Therefore if any be scandalized by them in the one, why not also in the
other? Surely, by this reason, we must not only forbear singing, but praying
with them; Nay, by the same reason, we may not hear the Word of God with them,
for a profane wretch does even in that also take the Name of God in vain, and
if he be not powerfully convicted by the Word of God, he shall be one day made
to know what a sad thing it is to take the Name of God in his mouth, when he
hated to be reformed: Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth?
seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. This
Argument is that which is urged for separation, and if it hold good for
separating in one, it may as well hold (for ought I see) for separation in all
duties whatsoever, and so in hearing the Word of God also. For hearing the Word
is an act of spiritual communion, as well as prayer, or singing: I say, there
is communion with God in hearing as well as in praying: In prayer we speak to
God, and in hearing God speaks to us: In prayer we profess our selves to be the
Lords people, to have all our delight in him, and all our expectations from
him; and in hearing we come to sit before him as his people, to ask Counsel of
God, and to know his will, and there profess whatsoever the Lord shall command
us, that we will do.

Thus there is spiritual communion with God in hearing the Word, as well as in
praying and singing of Psalms. So then, if we may not sing nor pray, neither
may we hear with mixed company; and if it be thus, the people of God are in a
very sad condition. I say again, If the presence of wicked men shall hinder
their acceptance and communion with God in those duties which they
notwithstanding do in the sincerity and uprightness of their hearts, out of
all question the people of God are in a very sad condition, because they can
hardly assemble without great hazard of having one devil or other among them,
what then will become of them? Nay, I would fain know with whom they shall
join? for our Savior himself had a select company, but twelve in all, and one
of them was a devil. And so, when you have done what you can, and made choice
of your company, if there be not a black devil, a profane wicked man; yet
there may be a white devil, an hypocrite, which is bad, and as abominable to
God as the other. I have heard, that some have forborne prayers in their
families with their children and servants, because they thought them not good
enough to pray withal. I desire these to consider what Paul did in the Ship
before the company he sailed with; He was not so scrupulous, but gave thanks to
God, even before professed Infidels and Heathens, Acts 27. 35. He took bread, and
gave thanks to God in the presence of them all; because he knew it was a duty
which all men are bound to do, and though they did not, nor could not do it as
they should, yet it was their duty, and therefore Paul praises God even in the
presence of those wicked men. So may we do the like, though wicked men be by,
and join in the duty, what is that to us?

Oh! But it much troubles and distracts them, when they see men of profane
spirits join with them, and blaspheme (as they say) the Name of God.

Alas for them, that they are so tender of Gods honor. But is it so indeed? or
is not this another lie? It Is notoriously known, there are many great and
horrid blasphemies against Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, and the Scriptures,
etc. and yet I hear not much of their being scandalized at these: But they are
mightily scandalized to hear wicked men sing Psalms. But methinks, if they be
indeed scandalized at this, they should be more scandalized at those other
blasphemies; and truly let me tell them, their not being scandalized at those
horrid blasphemies indeed before spoken of, is a very great scandal to many
that are truly godly. Oh that there were no other Blasphemies in England than
singing of Psalms by wicked men, and that one day in a week. But does not the
Land mourn, because of oaths? and are not many wicked ones, all the week long,
blaspheming the living God? Yet some of these men (who make this Objection)
have, not showed at any time (that we have seen) so much dislike of these
blasphemies. If you be troubled at blasphemies, be troubled at all blasphemies.
If it be blasphemy for wicked men to sing Psalms, sure, there be other as
great blasphemies in England as this; and I wish, that some had not blasphemed
the Name of God in another manner, that have given over singing of Psalms. We
grant, That wicked men cannot do this or any duty as they should, they lie,
dishonor God, and take his name in vain. And it is a grief to every godly man,
whose righteous soul is sadded within him, when he hears or sees, that God has
not that honor given him, which is due unto his Name. Yea, it grieves all
godly men, that others are not as they are; They are of Moses his spirit, They
would all the Lords people were Prophets; They would that all could hear, and
pray, and read, and sing Psalms, as they themselves can. But be it so, that
they cannot sing Psalms, as they should do it, and it is thy grief, yet why
should thou neglect thy duty, and not do that which God calls thee to? If he
that sits next to thee lie unto God in professing his sincerity and integrity
of heart when there is no such thing, yet let me tell thee, thou may be
accepted of God in what thou do, if thou do that in sincerity, which another
does in hypocrisy. And take this from me, you that are so scandalized at the
hypocrisy and profaneness of others, look well to your selves, sweep before
your own doors. and see that your own hearts be right; and if they be, I will
warrant you, the wickedness of another man's heart shall never hurt you, or
hinder your acceptance with God. Thou prayest out of sincerity, thou prayest
out of experience, thou prayest from thy heart; and another man that joins with
thee, does none of these things, and does not God therefore accept thee,
think thou? Yes, God will hear the bleatings of one sheep, though he were in
the midst of a thousand wolves. It i^ were not so, Gods people were in a sad
condition, and, for ought I know, must go out of this world, to find those
whom they may join withal in prayer or praise, or any other duty. Therefore I
say, Is it thy duty to praise God in a Psalm, or is it not? If it be not thy
duty, then do it no where; but if it be, then thou may do it in any company
that will join with thee.

But the truth is, many of those that do not sing, believe it not to be a duty,
and upon that ground wholly neglect it; If it be thy duty, thou art bound to do
it in the best manner thou can, and thou art never the worse, though others
that join with thee do it not as they ought, and so instead of a blessing bring
a curse upon themselves, for God (I tell thee) does not accept of thee
according to thy company, but according to thy integrity. If thou do well,
(says God to Cain) shall thou not be accepted? So, if thou seckest God in
sincerity, from thy very soul, shall thou not be accepted? Questionless thou
shall. Can God reject a sacrifice offered to him from a poor, contrite, broken
heart, because that some wicked men are present?

If Cain and Abel offered sacrifice at one and the same time and upon the same
Altar (as for some reasons, and by some circumstances in the Text, it is
conjectured they might) did not God accept the sacrifice of Abel, because that
Cain was present? Sure we are, that Christ offered in the Temple, when not
only many of the people, but the Priests also were most ungodly wretches.

If singing of Psalms be a duty, thou have more need be troubled at thy
sinful neglect, than at another sinful doing of it: and truly, it is strange
to me, that for Fear of participating in others sins, men should commit sins of
their own, as bad or worse. Here I might show, how the sins of some might lie
upon others. But I shall not go so far out of my way; I shall only add;
When some will come to an Ordinance of God, to which they have no right, and
thou can not hinder them: Or when they will do any duty which they ought, but
cannot do, as it should be done, do thou bless God that has given thee an
heart to do thy duty, and pity those poor souls who cannot do it as well as
thou can.

Singing of Psalms is a duty, wherein there is a word of Admonition and
Instruction to wicked men, and it is a moral duty which every man is bound to
do, To praise the great God that made heaven and earth: That they cannot do it
as they ought is their sin and misery, and will be our sin as much, or more, if
we do it not at all.

And now I shall entreat all godly and sober-minded Christians, that they will
not be frighted from doing that which is their duty by such a scar-crow as
this. If wicked men join with them, and multiply transgression by offering the
sacrifice of fools; they are to be pitied and prayed for. But it is a
senseless con^eit, that therefore such as are godly shall neglect their duty.

Now I am sure, It is the duty of all men in the world to praise God: Wicked
men are bound to praise God in a Psalm; it is their sin and misery, they cannot
do it as they ought, but they are bound to do it in a Psalm, as much as they
are bound to pray, to hear the Word, or do any other duty. Nay, I say more, it
is some glory to God, when profane persons do sing David's Psalms to their
own conviction. The Minister glorifies God in the speaking of his Word,
although many in the Church should laugh and scoff at it, because the Word of
God has its end, either to convert, or to confound. So when a Psalm is sung,
it is the Word of God, although it be sung by a wicked man, and it is a word of
conviction, and a word of instruction to him: It is the Word of God, I say, in
his mouth, and herein God is glorified, that a wicked man is made with his own
mouth to condemn himself, and his own wickedness.

What scruples yet remain, I hope shall be resolved when I come to the
directive part, which I promised. For the Objections that are commonly made,
arise from ignorance of the Nature, End, and Use of the duty. I shall now close
all at this time, with these Considerations. The Question is, Whether we should
sing Psalms? Now to confirm us a little, That this p^actice of singing
Psalms in the Church of God, is not so groundless as some men imagine,

1. First of all, consider this Scriptureground, That God calls his people to
spiritual rejoicing in him, Philip. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say, rejoice. Gods people have always matter of rejoicing. Sometimes
God calls to mourning, and girding with sackcloth, to fasting and prayer; but
always God calls his people to rejoice, 1 These. 5. 16. Rejoice in the Lord
always, Rejoice evermore. Gods people have always matter of rejoicing. Though
they have matter of mourning one way, yet they have matter of rejoicing another
way: 1 Pet. 1. 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice (says the Apostle) Though now for
a season, you be in heaviness through manifold tribulations: Still they have
matter of joy even in the midst of tribulations.

Secondly, It is clear, That as God requires such a holy affection in his
people, so he does require some expressions suitable to that affection.
Therefore, we must not only rejoice with our hearts, but with our tongues
also, with all that is within us, with all that is without us, with all that is
about us. As therefore it is a truth, That (in a sense) Gods people should be
praying always (to wit) in their hearts, with ejaculatory prayers, lifting up
their souls unto the Lord, wheresoever they go; and it is as true also, That
God requires his people should pray unto him with their mouths at some times
more especially: Even so it is here in the duty of praise, God requires us to
rejoice always, and always, as it were, to be praising of him in our hearts.
But he requires us, at some times, to praise him with our mouths also, when
God gives occasion of so doing. As Gods people of old did sing praises
ordinarily on the Sabbath, and other solemn times, and extraordinarily, when
God gave them occasion, by some deliverance, victory, or other mercy. In Psalm
126. 2. Their mouths were filled with laughter, and their tongues with
singing. And so Judges. 5. Deborah sung a song. And so Acts 16. Paul and Silas
having joy in God, expressed it in singing of a Psalm. So it is said of the
people of God, Revelat. 15. 3. They shall sing the song of Moses, that is, as
Moses and the people of Israel sung that song, Exodus 15. for their deliverance
from Pharaohs tyranny, and their slavery in Egypt, so shall the people of God
sing a song for their deliverance from their slavery under Antichrist. So the
Twenty four Elders fell down, and worshipped, and sung a new song unto the Lord
God Almighty, Revel, 5. 8, 9. which is to be understood of all Gods worship, as
some learned men conceive: And Rev. 14. 3. It is said, the people of God there
should sing a song that no man else could sing: A Learned Interpreter upon that
place, conceives all Gospel Worship to be meant.

Now if singing were such an abomination (as some would have it) in the Church
of Christ, I wonder, why the holy Ghost should use that expression in that
place, and fet sorth all Gospel Worship under singing a new song, Psalm 126.
When Gods peoples hearts were enlarged with spiritual joy within, they did open
their mouths wide to show forth the praises of the Lord. And if God give us
more than ordinary joy, why should not we now make more than ordinary
expression of it? There are many exhortations in the Psalms, to sing, and
shout, and clap hands, and make a joyful noise. Now these signs of spiritual
rejoicing in God were no legal Ceremonies, but such as godly Christians may
use now, as well as they did then; so David sung, and danced before the Ark
with all his might, being so transported with holy joy, that he could not
forbear: And why are men so much against singing of Psalms? When there is good
news, and matter of great joy, we ring out our bells, and shoot off the great
gunns, shout and make a noise otherwise; and why not as well make a joyful
noise in singing of Psalms? I hear no man find fault with the former (viz.)
Ringing, or shooting, and joyful acclamations. And is not singing of Psalms
as fit and proper an expression of our rejoicing in God, as any of those?

If a company of godly Christians then will go by themselves, take some choice
parts of David's Psalms, and sing them, I would know, if this would not make as
good a noise in the ears of the Lord, as shooting of gunns, or ringing of
bells. The Apostle says, upon this very account, Is any merry? let him sing
Psalms, James 5. 13. Nay, I had almost said, is not singing of Psalms as good
an exercise, and becoming Christians, as playing at Cards, or Tables? I wonder
how some that quarrel so much at singing of Psalms, are yet so devout at
these exercises. For my part, I am of the mind, That, singing of Psalms (as
much as some slight it now adays) is as innocent, and honest, and useful an
exercise, as playing at Cards: And why may we not sing a Psalm as well as make
vain and foolish pastimes, or use antic and apish toyings, which would offend
any sober and grave man to behold? Surely, if singing of Psalms be once out of
fashion, I hope none of the other will be used amongst us, for these certainly
are as good as the other, if I should say no more of them. What, does God never
give us occasion to sing a Psalm of praise? or have we never any hearts to do
it? If so, we are the saddest Christians that ever were, and I am confident,
God never had such servants in former ages, as we are. It is well known, what
Plinius Secundus wrote unto Trajan, concerning Christians singing of Psalms in
those days; as also what Tertullian in his Apology says of their frugall
supper, and solacing themselves with Psalms. We all know, what James says,
James 5. 13. Is any afflicted, let him pray; Is any merry, let him sing
Psalms. Therefore say I, let us sing Psalms when we are merry, as well as
pray when we are sorry. Sing somewhere, at some times, by our selves, or with
others; perform the duty, except we will lay aside praying also. I shall leave
that text of James with you, and entreat you seriously to consider, whether if
we must pray, we must not sing also.

SERMON III.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, Singing, etc.
IN these words there are two main things considerable, ( viz.) the lawfulness
and the usefulness of singing Psalms. We have done with the former, and now
come to the later ( viz.) the usefulness of singing. This I call the directive
part, or Directory, and in it we shall inquire into these two particulars, (
viz.) how we must sing, and why we must sing; the Apostle shows both: We must
sing with the heart, or with grace in the heart; and we must sing to the Lord.
Singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord; that is (say some) to the
Lord Jesus Christ, or to the Lord Jehovah, i. e. to his praise and glory; as it
is said of the Israelites, Psalm 106. 12. They sang his praises. Now this the A
postle calls for here, if we would sing a Psalm as we ought, to the praise of
the Lord, to the glory of his great Name, we must do it, in or with the heart.
God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, John 4. 24. He calls for the
heart, My son, give me thy heart. So Chrysostom upon this Text, Attending with
understanding. The meaning of the Apostle is clear, and unquestionable, That
our singing of Psalms must not be a lip-labor, an outward bodily exercise; it
must not be the pleasing our selves or others with the tune of a Psalm: that is
not it which God looks for at our hands, but we must sing as Mary did, Luke 1.
46. My soul does magnify the Lord, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. And
as David in the 103 Psalm, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me, bless his holy Name. This is that which the Apostle here calls for; and it
implies these two particulars.

1. A sense and understanding of that which is sung, I will sing with
understanding, says the Apostle; 1 Cor. 14, 15. that is, so as I would be
understood by others, therefore by himself much more, Sing ye praises with
understanding, Psalm. 47. 7. a blind Sacrifice was an abomination to the Lord.

2. It must be an inward feeling, and affection of the heart and spirit. So
David in Psalm 57. 7. My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed: or, my heart is
prepared? or, my heart is disposed. When a man's heart is filled with the
Spirit, as the Apostle speaks, when a man's heart is full of holy and heavenly
thoughts, affections, and meditations, and so out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks; when the frame of a man's heart is suitable to the holy and
spiritual matter that is sung, this is singing in the heart, or with grace in
the heart, to the Lord, who looks at the heart, and how a man is affected
within. Certainly (as one says) grace in the heart is the best tune to any
Psalm; and without this, the sweetest best tuned voice is but howling and
bawling in the ears of the Almighty. Yet do we not exclude the voice in
singing; David used it, I will sing, and give praise even with my glory; awake
psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early, Psalm. 57. 8. and 108. 2. Awake
up my glory, says David; that was his tongue, called his glory, because his
tongue in singing was an excellent instrument of glorifying God. Nor do we
exclude all modulation or tuning of the voice according to the laws of Music,
provided there be no affectation of it, so as our hearts be wholly taken up
with it. Provided also, there be no empty tautologies or chanting over and over
the same things, tossing of the Word of God like a tennis-ball from one to the
other, like that Cathedral music intended only to please the care, and no
way ordered to the use of edifying in grace and knowledge. But for the voice in
singing we plead, and also for singing with tunes. All the Psalms were penned
in Hebrew meeter, with the exactest Art that might be. They were penned (says
one) with exactness and variety of Meeter. 1. In such verses as are suitable to
the Poetry of the Hebrew Language, and not in the style of such other books of
the Old Testament as are not poetical.

2. Many verses together in several of the Psalms do also run in rimes, as
those know, that understand the Hebrew; and as Buxtorph shows, The sau. p. 629.
But though we plead for singing with the voice, yet our chiefest respect in
that singing must be unto the heart and spirit, to the understanding, and to
the Affection, and inward feeling of what is sung, for this is to sing with
grace in the heart.

Hence it follows, that none can sing a Psalm as he ought, but he that has
grace in his heart, and is renewed in the spirit of his mind. None could learn
that Song, Rev. 14. 3. but the hundred forty and four thousand, which were
redeemed from the earth; which was only the people of God who stood in
opposition to Antichrist; and by their singing there, is meant all spiritual
Worship performed by Gods people to him. It is said there, No man could learn
that Song, but those that were redeemed from the earth; the Antichristian
earthly generation had no skill on the spiritual Worship and Service offered
to God in the true Christian Church. Therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 33. 1.
(speaking of this duty) Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is
comely for the upright; it is impossible for others to rejoice in the Lord.
Only Gods own people have an inward experimental knowledge of the glorious
Excellencies and Attributes of God ( viz.) his Power, Wisdom, goodness, etc.
they only have tasted how sweet the Lord is in his promises, and Providence:
They know, and none but they, what the Offices of Christ are, in the power,
fruit, and benefit of them. They know, what it is to be redeemed from the
earth, and from death, and from the nethermost hell. They only have experience
of the mercy and loving kindeness of the Lord, supporting, supplying them, and
ordering all for good to them. And they alone have a lively feeling of their
infirmities, figh and groan under the burden of their corruptions; are troubled
for the indisposition and ^towardness of their hearts. These and such as these,
who are so inspired and affected, can sing David's Psalms with David's spirit.
Others may sing more pleasingly to the ear, but these alone make melody in the
ears of the Lord, who looks at the heart.

Q. That Is it we desire to be satisfied in, How we may sing David's Psalms with
David's spirit.

A. It is commonly, truly, and piously said, We must sing David's Psalms with
David's spirit, though there is no Text in the Bible, to my remembrance, that
has those very words; but some speak somewhat to this effect, as Col. 3. 16.
we must sing with grace in our hearts, that is as much as if he should have
said, Sing David's Psalms with David's spirit.

2. We grant, it is impossible for any to sing Psalms so, but one that is a
new creature, renewed in the spirit of his mind, as David was.

3. We say in the general, to sing David's Psalms with David's spirit, or to
sing with grace in our hearts unto the Lord, there must be not only an
habitual, but an actual disposedness: as when a man sets upon any duty, he
must stir up the grace that is in him; so it is not enough in singing Psalms,
to have an habit of grace, but we must stir up, and act the gifts and graces of
God within us. Here then this shall be the great question, How our spirits
ought to be disposed when we are to sing, that we may so do it, as to give God
the glory, and gain benefit to our own souls? Or, (which is all own) how we
may sing David's Psalms with David's spirit? Or, how we may sing with grace in
our hearts unto the Lord? which is the Doctrine in the Text.

Now here I meet with that which is a very great scruple, and I believe has
taken and kept off many from singing of Psalms. They know not how to
accommodate passages in them; either those passages are no way suitable to their
conditions; or, their affections many times are not suitable to those passages:
and hence they conclude, they cannot sing them so as to praise or please God in
them, and therefore resolve not to sing at all.

Further, when they say, we must sing David's Psalms with David's spirit (if I
mistake not) their meaning is, we must be in every respect, like David, and in
the very same case that he was when he sung these Psalms to the Lord. As for
instance, the sixth Psalm was penned by David, when he was, or had been sick,
therefore we cannot sing this Psalm when we are well, and in good health. So
we cannot sing the fifty one psalm, because (as we hope) many of us have not
committed such soul sins as David had, viz. Adultery, and murder. So many of
us have not had occasion to fly out of our Country as David had, upon which
occasion he penned some of his psalms, as Psalm. 52. 54. 55. 56. 57. 120. etc.
So many of us have not a house to dedicate or purify, as David had, when he
penned the thirtieth Psalm, and therefore we may not sing that Psalm. To
conclude, we must be in the same condition in every respect, as David was, when
he penned those Psalms, or else, it is impossible to sing them as David did;
that is, to sing David's Psalms with David's spirit.

This is that which many object, and scruple much at it; and yet it is nothing
but a gross mistake of the Nature, Use, and End of th^s Duty of singing
Psalms; therefore to rectify it. I shall not only show you, What (...)
Nature, End, and Use of singing Psalms, but I shall give you some directions
whereby you may see, how all and every of those Psalms, and the several
passages in them may be applied to us for our use; and how we may sing them so,
as to glorify God, and to edify our own souls; always provided, that we
have grace in our hearts, and that we stir up the grace of God that is in us.

The Psalms of David, Asaph, etc. were written, as far as I understand, for a
threefold end or use, viz.

1. For Instruction. 2. For Admonition. 3. For Praise and Thanksgiving.


Which you may, if you please, reduce to these two, viz. Glorifying God,
Edifying our selves.

First, Instruction or Teaching.

Secondly, Admonition or Reproof.

Thirdly, Thanksgiving, and praising the Lord.

Look into Col. 3. 16. Teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms, etc.
there you have the ends of singing of Psalms, and speaking to your selves in
Psalms, etc. as the words are in the Text. And though these three ends be
distinct, yet I would not have you understand me so, as if they were always
divided: For even those Psalms that are for Instruction, and Admonition, are
also for Praise and Thanksgiving. Praising God, or giving thanks unto the Lord,
and the glorifying of Gods great Name, is the end of all singing, as it is the
end of all Duties. And though we distinguish praising of God from petitioning,
yet I hope you think, that even our petitioning and begging of God those things
we need, is a glorifying God, and a praising his Name; because therein we
acknowledge God is the God of all our mercies and comforts, with whom is the
well of life, and from whom is all our expectation. So when we pray to God, we
do praise him; so when we hear the Word, we do praise and glorify God because
therein we acknowledge God only to be our King, our Judge, and Lawgiver,
profess our selves his servants, and whatsoever he commands us we will do: and
thus in all duties we praise and glorify God. For all the duties we do, are
paying of our Homage, or acknowledging of our Fealty to God. And those that
know not this, know not what they do when they go about any Duty. Therefore I
say, if a Psalm be for Instruction or Admonition, yet notwithstanding it is to
praise the Lord with. So we suppose there be some Psalms that are Psalms
merely for Instruction, Doctrinall Psalms, yet we may sing them and others,
not only for our Admonition and Instruction, but to praise the Lord; as in
Psalm. 106. 12. Israel (it is said) sang his praise. These things premised, we
shall now resolve the Case in hand.

1. First, then I say, one main End of singing Psalms The first End or Use of
singing
is our Instruction and Admonition, when we in singing have sweet meditations
upon that heavenly matter that is sung. That is (I say again) one main end of
singing Psalms, viz. Teaching and admonishing our selves in Psalms, Col. 3.
16. For when we are singing a Psalm of Instruction, we are thereby admonished
of our evils, and also taught, what is our duty. Besides which place, I urge
the Title of some of David's Psalms, Maschil of David, Psalm. 142, 60. 32, 42,
45, 53, 55, 56, 74. etc. That is, A Psalm of David to give Instruction. So
Junius and Tremellius do always (if I do not wrong them) render it, A song to
teach. They are Psalms especially to teach, and to give Instruction. But
further, if there were nothing else, yet this also were an argument sufficient
to show that teaching and admonishing is one end of our singing Psalms;
namely, that some Psalms are merely Doctrinall, and you have not any formal
expression of prayer or praise in them; in many of the Psalms indeed there be
most heavenly patheticall forms of praise and prayer: but some Psalms are
merely Doctrinall, as the first Psalm; there is no one form of prayer, or of
praise in it; but the whole Psalm, if you mark it, is nothing else but a
doctrinall description of the different and contrary estate of the godly and
wicked in this life, and in the life to come; as ver. 1. Blessed is the man
that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the
^aw of the Lord, etc. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters,
his leaf shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. But the
ungodly are not so, but are like chaff, etc. the ungodly shall not stand in the
judgment, and the way of the ungodly shall perish, etc. Here is no formal
expression of praise or prayer, though the Prophet penned and sung it to the
praise of God. So the second Psalm is a Psalm of Instruction and Admonition,
but there are no forms of prayer or praise, unless you reckon that for one,
viz. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine Inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Now the doctrine of that
Psalm is briefly this, The peremptory decree and purpose of God to set up the
Kingdom of Christ in spite of the world, the vanity of all men's devices in
opposition to it, the miserable confusion of all Christ's enemies and opposers,
and the blessed condition of such as submit themselves to him. Now these
Psalms being merely doctrinall, and having nothing but Instruction and
Admonition in them, and being sung as well as others to the ptaise of God;
hence (I say) one end of our singing them, is to learn the Doctrine of them,
that it may be imprinted upon our spirits, or a sweet meditation in our hearts
upon that heavenly doctrine contained in those Psalms, to imprint it upon our
minds and memories, that we may be the more affected with it. Some Psalms are
mixed, and but in part doctrinall, as Psalm. 33. and 34. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him. The Lions shall lack and suffer
hunger, but those that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, etc. These
are doctrines of Gods providence ^d care over his people; and one main work of
our hearts and spirits, in singing these and such like passages, is to meditate
upon those Doctrines; and in so doing, we give glory to God, teaching and
admonishing our selves in a Psalm, Col. 3. 16.

Object. But we may as well read them, and so meditate on them for our
Instruction, Therefore there is no necessity that we should sing Psalms for
that reason.

Sol. I deny not, but we ought to read the Psalms as any other Scriptures, and
in and after our reading, to meditate upon them. In commending of singing, I do
not cry down reading: one good duty should not shut out another. So because we
read the Psalms, and meditate on them, it does not follow, that therefore we
should not sing the Psalms and meditate on them.

2. In singing there is a more distinct, settled, and fixed meditation of the
heart, than there can be in reading; therefore David in the 104 Psalm,
insisting upon the power and Providence of God in making and governing the
world, he draws to a close of it in the 34 Verse, professing his joy in the
Lord, from the consideration of Gods power and providence, I will sing unto
praise to my God, while I have my being: the Lord as long as I live, I will
sing Why? Unto God that made me, that made all the world, that maintains my
soul in life. And then he adds, My meditation of him shall be sweet, and I will
be glad in the Lord. David would not only speak of the works of Gods power,
and Providence, but he would sing of them, that his meditations might be sweet:
Therefore, though we read the Psalms, yet we ought also to sing them
sometimes, because there is more sweetness of meditation in singing, than in
reading or the bare reciting of them. In singing there is a dilating of the
sound, and a drawing out of the voice which gives us more time for the fixing
of our hearts upon that which is sung, in a more sweet meditation of the
goodness or power of God, or whatsoever the matter be.

Therefore the Mercies of the Lord, and the great things that God has done in
the world, have been commemorated with singing. The people of God did not think
it enough to say what God had done for them, but they did sing it, that they
might meditate the more upon the goodness of God, and be the more affected with
it.

3. It is not enough for us to meditate, as David intimates in that place, but
we must have sweet meditations of him, that we may be glad in the Lord, I will
be glad in the Lord. When we sing, there is a more than ordinary raising or
lifting up of our souls, and so far more sweetness in meditation on what is
sung, than what is barely said. The soul (I say) in singing is as it were,
elevated and raised, and so comes to be more ravished with admiration of what
God has done.

Let them who have had experience of communion with God in this duty speak,
whether they have not found a great raising of their hearts in it? whether they
have not been rapt and ravished, as it were, with the consideration of Gods
goodness in his Promises, and the works of his spiritual and gracious
Providence. I say not, that meditation is all the end of singing Psalms, but
this is one chief end.

Obj. Therefore if you say, why may we not read and meditate without more ado?

Ans. I answer, we may, and must read; But why not the other also? since it is
more useful, and helps to more sweetness in meditation. A man may pray in his
heart without moving his lips, as Hanna did: but thou shall find it a
quickening in prayer, if thou use thy tongue also; the voice is a great matter
to quicken us in prayer, and to keep our hearts in order. Therefore, as I would
have men pray in secret, so (were I to advise them) I would have them use their
voice too; provided always, it be not to be heard of men only. So here also
whereas men say, we may read a Psalm, as well as sing it. I answer, Singing
will affect us more than reading, as praying with the voice does affect us more
than when we pray, and do not use our tongues; you shall find, your hearts
will be more apt to wander, if you do not use your voice, than they will be if
you do.

Therefore as we should use our voice to help us in prayer, so why should we
not lift up the voice in singing, that we may be helped also in our meditation,
even with enlargement, and ravishment of spirit. Questionless the lifting up of
the voice is a great help to enlarge the heart when it is well affected.

Now when people complain, and say, their hearts are not suitable to such and
such passages in the Psalms, nor those passages to their hearts:

I say, That there is no passage in all David's Psalms, but thou may
accommodate it, if no otherwise, yet in this way, viz. by a sweet meditation
upon it. And I would fain know where that passage is, that a gracious spirit
may not have sweet meditation upon it; surely thou have a very ungracious
heart, if thou can not do this. If there be such a Psalm, or such passage of
a Psalm, as thou think thou can no way bring it to thy condition, yet (I
say) thou may bring thy heart to that Psalm, or to that passage, by a sweet
meditation upon it. And I would fain know where that good Christian is, that
will deny it to be his duty to have sweet meditations upon David's Psalms, or
any passage in them. Is there, (think you) any passage in David's Psalms, that
a Christian may not meditate upon, and so take comfort in God, and his word?

And so you may be satisfied about the Historical Psalms, and those passages
in them that have respect to other men, and other times.

As near as I can, I shall instance in some of all kinds; some Psalms are
only Doctrinall, some are only Historical, as the 78 Psalm, the 105 and 106
Psalm, etc. For the 105 and 106 Psalms, there are these passages in them, How
God fed his people with Manna or bread from heaven, how he divided the Sea, how
he drowned Pharaoh and his host; also a relation of the several plagues which
God sont upon Egypt, and the like, which I need not repeat. Beloved, is not
this matter of meditation to us Christians? If thou have a gracious frame of
Spirit, suppose this is the Psalm that is to be sung, Psalm. 105. or 106.

First thou may apply this to thy case thus, to have sweet meditations on the
matter of Fact, the great things that God did for the preservation of his
people by the destruction of his enemies; and if thou can sweetly meditate
upon that, thou have a word of Instruction, a word of consolation, and a word
of Admonition.

1. A word of Instruction, to teach thee the care that God has had of his
people in all Ages.

2. A word of consolation to show how God will deliver his people, and provide
for them in their greatest^ extremities.

3. A word of admonition, to take heed how thou vex and persecute the people of
God, as Pharaoh did, lest God bring destruction upon thee, as he did upon him.

Now is this nothing to thee? you read these Psalms, and you think you read
them with profit, and why may you not sing them with profit, by a sweet
meditation upon the matter, for your Admonition, consolation, Instruction,
according as the matter is? We read the History of the Bible for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope, not
thinking, that what is related concerning them only who lived in those times,
But what God did then, he does now, the people of God are as they were then,
have the same afflictions, and temptations, are in the same conditions, hated
and persecuted in the world, and have the same experience of Gods Goodness.
Therefore it is a wicked ignorance to say, that many passages in the Psalms do
not concern us; All things that were written, were written for our learning,
that we might have comfort and hope. God said to Joshua, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee. And the Apostle applies it, Hebr. 13. 5. to every
Christian. When God speaks to Joshua, I will never leave thee, God speaks it to
thee, and me, and every Christian in the world. and when God destroyed Pharaoh,
it assures the people of God, that God will destroy all the Pharaohs in the
world as well as he did him. There is nothing therefore in Scripture but does
concern thee and me as much as it concerned the people of God in those times;
and every Christian that has wit and grace may accommodate them for the
edification of his own soul. If God provided for them, and fed them with bread
from heaven, God will provide also for thee, and feed thee with bread from
heaven, if there be cause. So in David's time it was said, The Lions shall lack
and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
And does not this concern us as much as David, and others of the people of God
then? It was so them, and it shall be so now; The Lions shall lack and suffer
hunger, But those that fear the Lord shall lack no good thing. These things
therefore were all recorded for our Learning.

Suppose again you sing that 105 Psalm, all along there is work for thy faith;
if thou have faith in thy heart (I say) there is matter for thy faith to work
upon: all the providence of God there, are as so many props to keep thy heart
in assurance that God will protect and defend thee, and provide for thee, as
ever he did for his people in those times. What is that Scripture therefore,
that does not concern any child of God? So in the 105 Psalm Joseph was put in
the stocks, and the iron entered into his soul, till the time that his word
came, the word of the Lord tried him: Does this concern Joseph alone? certainly
it concerns us as much as Joseph. It was penned many years after Joseph was
dead and gone, and it concerns us still to think and meditate of the wonderful
providence of God, how his children are brought down, as Joseph was, even into
the prison, and into the stocks; and how by abasing them, God makes way to
honor and advance them; and how, by unlikely means he brings about great
things; are not these things worth meditation? how God does try and exercise
his people with heavy afflictions, and yet when he has laid them low, he
raises them up again, as he did Joseph?

You have the Israelites murmuring and repining against the Lord; and what does
this concern us, will you say? I say, very much, because we have the same
spirit lusting to evil as they had, the same spirit of pride, and hypocrisy,
and infidelity, in us as was in them. Now then we may meditate upon these
passages, and reflect upon our own hypocrisy and infidelity, and dist^ust of
Gods providence; and withal, take notice how the infidelity of men does not,
cannot make void the faithfulness of God, but he is gracious to his people for
his promise sake, notwithstanding their daily infirmities.

For the 137 Psalm, By the waters of Babylon we sat down, etc. It yields
matter of sweet meditation to this purpose, how God many times exposes his
people to be persecuted, afflicted, and then also to be mocked and flouted too.
It is an Admonition to us, that we are no more affected with the calamities and
sufferings of the Church of God, and that we must not rejoice and make merry at
such times as the people of God are afflicted. It instructs us also, that the
peace and prosperity of the Church of God is to be preferred above all worldly
comforts whatsoever. And now I would know what Psalm, or passage in any Psalm
does not minister matter of sweet meditation for our admonition, instruction,
or consolation. Therefore when some cry out, What is this or that to them? it
does not concern them, nor can they accommodate or apply it to themselves; I
ask what is the matter they cannot? or where lies the fault? Is it not in the
deadness and barrenness of their own hearts, who can let pass such precious
matter, without due meditation on it?

Obj. That meditation you speak of may be as well in reading as in singing the
Psalms.

Sol. I denied that before, and say again, That their is a great advantage to
meditation in singing of a Psalm, more then their is in the reading it, both to
affect the heart, and raise it up, and also to make an impression of what is
sung upon our souls. All Scripture is equal as to the Authority, and to the
matter too, if it be absolutely considered, yet in respect to our consolation
or direction, some parts of it may be preferred before others: So the book of
Psalms is a little Bible, or (if I may so call it) the Bible of the Bible; as
one star differs from another in glory, so may we say of the Scriptures, some
parts of it are more excellent, in respect of our necessities, than others, and
yet all are excellent, and useful, and of divine Authority: so I may say of
singing and reading the Psalms, both are useful; yet it will not follow, but
singing at some times may be more useful for some purposes. As for instance;
it is more useful (as I have showed) for sweet rejoicing in God and his word
with gladness of heart.

By this time (somewhat I hope) has been said toward the satisfying of those
that pretend they know not how to apply many passages in David's Psalms. I say
again, if there were no other way of applying them, they may do it this way,
viz. by a sweet meditation on them, or by exercising their hearts with holy
delight and rejoicing in meditating on Gods word. I say not, this is the only
way of accommodating them, but this is one, and I think, a good one too; there
being no passage in any Psalm, but may be applied and made use of this way. I
cannot but remember you what a reverend man now alive, says in this case:

It Is ignorance of a man's self, and the ways of God to think any Psalm is
unsuteable to any man's condition, if he be a good Christian especially. Some
Psalms set forth the Attributes, Excellencies and Works of God and his Christ.
These minister occasion of reverence, blessing, praising, admiring, and adoring
God. Some set forth the the Estate and ways of the Church and people of God;
some their miseries, calamities, sorrows, and sufferings; these offer to us
matter of compassion, instruction, imitation: some set forth the estate and
ways of wicked men; and in these we have a word of admonition, some are
excellent to express our own affections, afflictions, sufferings, comforts, and
then a man is furnished with matter and words to present his own condition
before the Lord.

It is a great mistake to think, I may not sing a Psalm, because it expresses
not my condition or affection: say, it does not, as for instance, Thou are not
sick, or sensible of Gods wrath, as David was, when he penned the sixth Psalm;
or thou have not committed adultery and murder, as David had done when he
penned the one and fiftieth Psalm; or thou have not a house to dedicate, as he
had, when he penned the thirtieth Psalm; or thou art not put to it as he was
when he changed his behavior before Abimelech, and then afterward penned the
thirty fourth Psalm: what then; Will thou not therefore sing these Psalms, or
do thou think, they do not concern thee; Thou may as well forbear to read
them upon the same grounds; yea, thou may as well forbear to read some parts
of Paul's Epistles, because thou never travelledst in Asia, or had to do with
Alexander the Coppersmith, or foughtst with beasts at Ephesus, or leftest a
cloak at Troas, as Paul did. There Is no necessity, when we read those
Scriptures, that we should be in every respect as Paul was that penned them; we
read them to learn out of them what the holy Ghost has recorded for our
learning; and so we sing the Psalms, that do not set forth our conditions in
particular for our instruction, admonition, consolation, there being no Psalm,
or part of a Psalm, that has not somewhat for our learning.

This may serve to satisfy them who are afraid they lie in singing those
passages of the Psalms, which do not express their condition in particular.

It is no lie in a godly man's mouth to sing this passage in the sixth Psalm, I
am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim, etc. If it be a
lie to sing, it is as much a lie to say it, and then we must not read that
Psalm for fear of lying. But we sing it, as we read it, for the good doctrine
that may be learnt from it, viz. That when God rebukes and chastens in
displeasure, no poor soul is able to abide it; That the sense of Gods wrath is
more grievous to be born than any other burden whatsoever; That in our
repentance and turning to God, there ought to be very great sorrow, arising
from the sense of Gods wrath due to sin, and that our sorrow for sin ought to
be the greatest of all other, etc. As for that place, Psalm. 6. 6. the
expression is (as I take it) hyperbolicall, and intended to express what heat
there is in the fire of Gods wrath, such and so great, as it even melted David
into tears: He was exceedingly grieved, and wept abundantly, and so do many of
Gods servants many times, and therefore may say, as David did, We make our beds
to swim, etc. Or, say it was the greatness of his bodily afffliction that made
him to weep so abundantly and excessively, yet we may learn something from it,
as I showed even now: sure all Scripture is written (as the Apostle says, Romans
15. 4.) for our learning. Thou can not in every respect say as Paul, 2 Timothy
4. 8. I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand etc.
And yet thou think it not a lie in thy mouth to recite those words when thou
read that Chapter. Few Christians (I (fear) are come so far as to say with
the Apostle, Phil. 1. 23. I am willing to depart. and to be with Christ, etc.
yet any Chr^stian may read that passage without danger of lying (as I suppose:)
Sure I am, there is matter of consolation and instruction in it to every
Christian. Say thy heart falls short of that ardent love to God and his law
which David expresses, Psalm. 119. yet it is no more lie to sing than to read
that Psalm, specially if thou have a gracious heart, although thou have not
attained that measure and degree of love to Gods Law as David had. Nay, suppose
thou have no love to Gods Law at all, yet thou have there a word of admonition
and Instruction, teaching thee what thou should do; and thou may take
occasion to lament and bewail the untowardliness of thine own heart, that when
David loved Gods Law so exceedingly, Thou had no love or liking to it.

I confess we must be in some respects as David was when he penned those
Psalms; that is, in the state of grace If we will sing them right and as we
ought. But it is no lie to sing them however; for if it be, then it is a lie to
say, and a lie to read them; and so you must not read the sixth Psalm, if you
do not water your couch with your tears, as David did.

Now I say, for a conclusion, Suppose there be some passages we cannot make our
own by using them for our selves, and in our own names, as David did, yet we
may make them our own by a sweet meditation on them for our benefit and
edification, and by using them also (as one says well) for, and in the behalf
of others that are of the same mystical body with our selves, that so we may
rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with those that weep, as (says he)
there is scarce any passage of the Psalms, but it either concerns our selves,
or some other of the Church of God, who at this day are, or may be in the same,
or in the like case, and condition as David or the Church of God, was then;
whom we are to remember as if we were in bonds with them, or to bless God for,
as if we were in like prosperity with them.

He that reads the Scriptures, or sings a Psalm, or does any duty without
reverence, attention, good affection, and some good use made of the same, he
takes Gods Name in vain.

This is granted. But to say, as some do, that others ly in singing such
Psalms, as do not express their own conditions in every particular, is (as far
as I understand) a belying or slandering them; and, I wish they may well
consider it, for (as I have said) a wicked man lies as much in reading as in
singing of a Psalm, though indeed it be not lying, but reporting or reciting
what God has revealed in his word for Admonition and Instruction to all men.
You have now seen one end and use of singing Psalms; and if there were no
more, I conceive, it is well worth the while.

SERMON IV.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, Singing, etc.
I Have showed it to be a Christians duty to sing David's Psalms, answering
many objections by the way, and acquainting you how a gracious spirit may apply
and make use of every passage in them. I shall now proceed to show how
Christians may apply some passages in particular to their own cases. Only let
me first answer a scruple or two, which some have, in regard of some passages
in David's Psalms.

Obj. I cannot sing the 131 Psalm, will some one say, for I find much pride
and haughtiness in my heart, how then should I sing, Mine heart is not haughty,
nor mine eyes lofty?

Sol. 1. By the same reason thou can not read it, and say, My heart is not
baughty, etc.

2. If thou art a Christian indeed, thy heart is not haughty, as the heart of a
natural man is haughty.

3. Say thine heart is more haughty than becomes a Christians heart to be (I
know no man's heart but is so) there is a word of admonition and instruction, to
mind thee of that evil, and humble thee for the pride of thy heart.

Obj. But thou have a proud heart still.

Sol. So thou have perhaps, after much and earnest prayer to God against it,
and many admonitions from the Word preached. David himself showed pride, or
somewhat as bad, when upon a false suggestion, 2 Samuel 16. 4. he presently
sequestered all Mephibosheth's estate, before he heard what he had to say for
himself. Besides, there is a sweet close of that Psalm, wherein David gives
himself and others a seasonable admonition, particularly and quietly to wait
upon God, Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Obj. But how can we sing such passages of the Psalms, as are nothing but
exhortations to singing? This is giving to God his exhortations again (say
some) and leaving the duty undone. Take Gods words he speaks to us, and speak
them to God again.

Sol. I. By the same reason David did not praise God in singing those
exhortations to praise him, The 48, 49. and 50th Psalms are almost nothing
else but exhortations to praise God; shall we say, that David, or whosoever was
the penman, did not praise God in those Psalms. And yet I think, the Argument
will hold as well for the one as for the other.

2. There Is somewhat in those exhortations to admonish us of our dullness, and
what need we have to be stirred up, to do that duty which all creatures owe,
and in a sort yield unto the Lord their Maker.

3. As praying is the best preparation to prayer, for then (as Luther says) we
set upon it in Gods strength and not in our own: So singing these exhortations
is an excellent means to prepare and raise our hearts; and therefore David
begins and concludes many Psalms with such Exhortations, as Psalm. 136. etc.

4. We may say of such exhortations, as one says of the 136 Psalm, that it is
Solemnis celebratio nominis Dei sub exhortationis forma. It Is an excellent way
of praising God, to provoke and call upon our selves to praise him. What if a
man in prayer speak to his own heart, and call upon himself to rouse and raise
up his spirits, as David, Psalm. 5. 7, 8. Awake my glory, etc. may he not be
well said to pray when he does so? And why may he not as well be said to praise
God, when he stirrs up himself to that duty?

But to speak as the thing is, such forms are nothing but elegancies of
expression, in the use of which we do indeed praise the Lord; and this if our
opposites had understood, we had never been put to the trouble of answering
such an Objection.

And now I shall proceed to A ^econd ^se of (...).
inform weak Christians how they may more especially improve some passages in
David's Psalms, as they are more suitable to their particular respective
conditions or affections; and this is a second use to be made of singing, viz.
the exercise and improvement of the graces of God in us.

For instance, perhaps thou art reported to say or do that which never entered
into thy heart to conceive or think of, what comfort is there to thy soul in
singing the former part of the seventh Psalm, and other like places, wherein
David complains of the same abuses Suppose all goes against thee, and thon have
no visible means of relief, how pertinently may thou sing the eleventh
Psalms When there is no faith, nor truth, nor trust in men, then I hope it is
no hurt to sing the twel^th Psalm, Help Lord, for the godly man cease, etc.
When wicked men flourish, and the godly are afflicted, how proper is it to sing
the 37 Psalm, and meditate, and apply those precious promises to confirm thy
faith, and comfort thy self in a patient waiting upon God? If thy afflictions
and affections are the same as David's and other holy men's were, thou may
apply to thy self with much comfort such passages of the Psalms as do
particularly concern thee in thy condition, whatsoever it be, and so act the
grace of God in thee.

If thou art a Christian, should thou not admire and adore the Attributes
and Excellencies of God and his Christ? and how can thou do it better than in
singing David's Psalms? Would thou (for instance) admire the work of God in
exalting Jesus Christ to be a Prince and a Savior) sing the 8, and 95, 96, 97,
98, and 99th Psalms. Do the sufferings of Christ, and the fruits of them
belong unto thee? then thou may well sing the 22d Psalm. Have thou experience
of Gods support, supply, protection, direction? then thou may sing the 23d
Psalm, with many others. Does it not concern us to admire the Power, wisdom,
and goodness of God in the works of Creation and Providence? If it do, why
should not we sing the first part of the 19 Psalm, and the 104 Psalm
throughout? Have thou any affection to the Word of God, out of the experience
thou had of the power of it on thy soul? why should thou not sing the
latter part of the 19 Psalm, and any part of the 119 Psalm? Have thou any sense
of sin, and wrath due to it? why may thou not sing the sixth, and 38
Psalms? Psalm. 3. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me, etc. So may all
Gods people, for the most part say. If thou art one of them, then there is thy
condition. David, when he was straitened by his enemies, goes to God, and so
takes courage. Go thou and do likewise, and then there is thy affection to the
same as his was.

Obj. But how can we sing such passages as are imprecations against wicked men?

Solut. Even these may be sung to good purpose, if our hearts be in a good tune.

1. We may meditate on them with fear and trembling at the wrath of God that
hangs over the heads of all impenitent sinners.

2. We may work our hearts to patience and contentation, notwithstanding the
present prosperity of wicked men, in assured confidence that God will destroy
them, and their foot shall slide in due time.

3. We may use them as prayers, not against our particular enemies, but against
all the implacable and incurable enemies of Christ and his kingdom.

Now I cannot enough wonder, that any Christians should be so much wanting to
themselves in that heavenly exercise of singing Psalms, which gives them so
much advantage of acquainting themselves more and more with God, in sweet
meditations on his infinite and most glorious Excellencies. Indeed I do not
wonder, if some men care not for singing of Psalms, when I consider the course
of their conversations. David's Psalms were many of them penned for the use of
Gods people when they are persecuted, how shall they that are more like David's
enemies, violent, deceitful, threatening, vexing, persecuting and mocking, sing
those Psalms? They may well forbear to sing them, seeing there are such
testimonies and evidences against their ungodly practices in them. We have some
now adays that will have no repentance, no humiliation, or sorrow for sin;
others that slight the Scriptures, or written Word; and it is no wonder these
men should not care to sing David's Psalms, being not able to abide the test
of them, whilst their affections, actions, and opinions, are so contrary to
them. David in the 84 Psalm laments the want of public Ordinances. I marvel
not that they who slight all Ordinances, under a pretense of living above them,
care not to sing that, or other Psalms. Whatever some men may dream, I make no
question but others have found God graciously revealing himself unto their
souls in this Exercise: yea; I believe that godly men (who are such indeed)
have scarcely seen more of God in any Exercise than in this. To my thinking,
there is not a more lively resemblance of heaven upon earth, than a company of
godly Christians singing a Psalm together.

But that which is most strange (and it is a hard case indeed) is this, that
never a passage can be found in all the Psalms which will suit with some men's
affections or occasions. If some do not, yet methinks others might; and yet
they that except against some (if I mistake not) refuse all; so that it seems,
there is nothing in them that will serve their turn, or suit with their
conditions.

Obj. Yes, it will be said, there are some Psalms, or parts of Psalms, that
suit well enough with our conditions, affections, and occasions, but that which
fits us well enough, is nothing so fit for others.

Sol. 1. There are several uses of the Psalms, as there are of other
Scriptures; why may we not in singing as well as in hearing, apply to our
selves that which is most pertinent to our proper cases? and so, those that are
not in the same condition, may yet profitably sing the same Psalm, even as they
may hear the same Sermon. Besides, all the Psalms, and every part of them, are
fitted to the occasions of all Gods people, so as there is nothing but
ministers matter of sweet meditation, and praising God by a holy rejoicing in
him.

I know not how well some Psalms will suit with some men's affections or
conditions. Once I am sure that Gods people from the beginning of the world to
this day, have had cause, as to complain and pray, so to bless and praise the
Lord in the very same manner, and upon the very same grounds as David did.
Wherefore I beseech all those that fear God, to do what becomes them, viz. now
and then to comfort and cheer, and encourage themselves, and one another in
Psalms, Seek the Lord, and his strength, seek his face continually: seek him
in prayer, and seek him too in singing of Psalms; say as Luther was wont upon
occasion, Come, Sirs, lets sing the 46 Psalm, and fear nothing.

There are, that would deal by us, as he that first made his enemy blaspheme
God, and then presently stabbed him at the heart, that so he might kill both
body and soul at once, and so take a brave revenge (as he called it.) So do
these in a sort; they vex us sufficiently, with seeing and hearing their
ungodly and Atheistical opinions and practices, and they would deprive us of
our comfort in God, by singing Psalms to his praise. Lets sing the 119 Psalm
however, and say, It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for men have destroyed
thy law. And so lets sing the 12 Psalm, and others, that thereby our hearts may
be cheared, and we may be confirmed in faith to wait with patience upon our
God, saying, as in Psalm. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will
be our guide even unto death.

I shall conclude this with what Perkins says on the eleventh of the Hebrews;
he asks the question, why we sing those Ps^lmes now, which were appointed for
the use of the Church in former times? and answer thus: That the Church, in all
ages, consisted of a company of believers, and their faith is always one and
the same; and this makes all that apprehend Gods promises, to be like to one
another in graces, meditations, dispositions, affections, desires, spiritual
wants in the feeling and use of afflictions, in ^urse of life and conversation,
and in performance of du^ies to God and man, and therefore the same Psalms,
Prayers, and Meditations, are now as fit for the Church in these days, and are
said and sung with the same use and profit to the Church in these days, as
when they were made. Sure if it be a sufficient ground to reject singing of
David's Psalms; that they were penned for the use of Gods people in former
ages, I know no reason, but that we may, for the same reason, take no notice of
the other Scriptures, and say, What do they concern us? but I rather think,
that there is no estate or condition wherein the people of God either are, or
can be, but the holy Ghost foreseeing the same, has prepared and recorded some
Scripture-Psalmes suitable thereunto. And those Psalms being chosen out
according to the new occasions of Gods people, and sung by them with new
hearts, will ever be found new Songs. Words of eternal truth (as one faith)
are ever new, and never old. Daily and hourly mercies are new mercies to
renewed hearts ( Lament. 3. 23. His mercies are new every morning) and when
they praise the Lord for those mercies, there is a new song of praise put into
their mouths. And when God has furnished us with Psalms, and Songs framed by
his own Spirit to the purpose, nothing (for ought I know) but wretched
ignorance and profaneness will neglect to use them.

The objection of singing Psalms composed by our selves and others, I have
already answered, and showed the absurdity of such a practice, unless we had
any of an extraordinary spirit; which if there be, let us once sec it, and I
make no question but we shall willingly acknowledge, the gift of God in them.

A third Use of singing Psalms.
A third use of singing David's Psalms, is a joyful praising of God, or
expressing our joy in the Lord: when a man is merry, naturally, and of course
(as we say) he will laugh, leap, sing and dance; as when a man is sorry,
contrariwise he is sullen, sits still, hangs the head, and says nothing, Psalm.
126. 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing.
Exodus 15. 1. Then sang Moses and the children of Israel. So Mary, and Zachary,
and Simon, Luke 1. and 2. brake forth into Songs upon the apprehension of Gods
wonderful goodness.

Obj. That was because the Spirit of God came upon them in an extraordinary
manner.

Sol. We deny not but the Spirit of God was upon some of them in a more than
ordinary manner; but yet it was not so upon them all, all the children of
Israel that sang with Moses had not an extraordinary spirit, only they were
for the time much affected with the Work of God in their deliverance, and the
destruction of the Egyptians, 2 Chro. 20. 27, 28. So Jehoshaphat and the men of
Judah came to Jerusalem with Psalteries and Harps, and Trumpets unto the house
of the Lord (no question but there was singing also) when the Lord had made
them to rejoice over there enemies; and yet no more extraordinary spirit on
them, than on Gods people now upon the like occasion. Their practice was a
precedent for Gods people in all ages to do the like, when ever their hearts
are enlarged in the apprehension of Gods goodness, to break forth into singing,
and an holy rejoicing before the Lord. How do we answer the goodness of God
unto us, if there be not affections and expressions suitable to his
dispensations? We all allow shooting off great gunns, ringing of bells, etc.
and why not as well singing of Psalms?

When we come to the Congregation, one end of our singing is to express our joy
in the Lord, for such mercies as his Word and Sacraments, and means of Grace;
and that God has given us his Sabbath and such solemn times; and therefore we
come before him with singing, that so we may praise the Lord with gladness of
heart, The 100 Psalm is called a Psalm of praise, and the 95 Psalm begins thus:
O come let us sing unto the Lord, etc. If you read the 96, 97, and 98. you will
find many expressions to the same purpose. Whatever were the occasion of
penning those Psalms, it is clear, that the holy Ghost in them had respect to
the Gospell-times, when all the ends of the earth should see the salvation of
God, Psalm. 98. 3. Heb. 4. The Apostle shows it plainly of the 95th Psalm, that
the Holy Ghost in it speaks of the times after Christ was come in the flesh.
Now if the promise, and their exspectation of those glorious Gospeldayes, did
so rejoice their hearts, how much more should we be affected, so as to sing and
rejoice at a higher rate than they did? How comely and pleasant a thing is it
to sing a Psalm (as Christ and his disciples did) after our receiving the
Sacrament, when God has honored us so much, as to admit us unto his Table,
and given in the tokens and pledges of his love to our souls? And after Sermon
too, why should we not sing and rejoice, when we have understood the good word
of God declared to us by his messengers, Nehem. 8. 12. Nehemiah and Ezra and
the Levites willed the people to rejoice upon such an occasion; and good
reason, since the Word of God is sweet to every soul that savours it; and so
our Sabbaths are special times of rejoicing in God, because the opportunities
of public Ordinances are renewed upon us.

Object. But you sing all days alike, fasting and feasting days, without any
difference.

Sol. For answer to this question) which some think unanswerable) I acknowledge
that singing is a most proper expression of joy, Jam. 5. 13. Is any merry, let
him sing. But it will never follow from that place, that we must not sing when
we are sorry: for then it will as well follow, that when we are not afflicted
we must not pray. That place (I say) will infer the one as well as the other.

I do not say, that all Psalms are fit for all occasions, but there must be a
choice made; and to make that choice, there is some understanding more than
ordinary required in him that appoints the Psalms to be sung.

3. As singing is proper in times of mirth, so it is not altogether improper in
times of mourning; and though this may seem strange, yet it is most true, and I
prove it thus. Because Gods people were wont to lament themselves and others in
Songs; so Jeremy lamented the sad estate of Judah, David's Psalms were penned
in times of great distress and danger, as appears by the many doleful
complaints in them. The 102d Psalm is entitled, A prayer of the afflicted when
he is overwhelmed, etc. and 130 Psalm begins, Out of the depths have I cried
unto thee, O Lord. To clear it yet further, give me leave a little to discourse
the nature of Music, which is somewhat strange in this respect, That it will
suit with different, yea contrary affections. Some Philosophers conceited the
soul to be an Harmony once, the soul of the world is a symmetry of all the
parts made in number, weight, and measure. Certainly of all sensible things,
there is none so much affects the soul, as melodious sounds; I say, nothing
affects the soul so much, be a man merry or sorry. If he be merry, it will
provoke him to more mirth, raise and rouse his spirits more than they were
before. Therefore singing is very proper when we are joyed, and would praise
the Lord with gladness of heart. If a man be sad, music will set it on, and
make him more Melancholique than he was before, so some understand Prove. 25.
20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon
nitre, so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart. I conceive the meaning to
be this, If when a man is in heaviness, one should come to him in a lightsome,
gamesome manner, (as if Job's friends had brought minstrells and Music with
them) he would vex and distemper, and increase his grief the more. Certainly
Music, as it may be ordered, will provoke mourning; hence the custom grew of
solemnizing Funerals with Music. So when the Rulers daughter was dead, there
were Minstrells among others; and if any say, That was to allay, and not to
increase their grief, I desire them to look Jer. 9. 17, 18. and there they may
see that there were cunning women, who professed an art of mournful Ditties, and
were hired on purpose to enhance affections of that kind in others. So 2 Chronicles. 35. 25. The singingmen and women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations.
For certain, a doleful sad Ditty sadly sung, will never make any laugh, unless
it be an errant fool. So a fit Psalm (a penitential Psalm you may call it, if
you please) sung to a sad tune, is as apt to melt and move our hearts upon a
day of humiliation, as any exercise we can use, and an apt expression also of
such affections as should be in us upon such an occasion. Some have sung for
sorrow, as David penned and sang many Psalms when his heart was as full of
grief and anguish as it could hold, and so he eased and breathed his heart by
pouring it out before the Lord in a doleful Song, lamenting his sad condition.
And why may not we as well lament our own and others sad conditions, in singing
of David's Psalms? some of which you know are sad complaints of his miseries
and sufferings, mixed with earnest prayers for deliverance. Sure David was not
very merry when he sang many of his Psalms; whence I gather we may sing even
when we are sorry, and so lament and bemoan our selves before the Lord.

Besides, if our hearts be very sad indeed, singing may revive them, since all
utterance is an ease to any grief. So some conceive that Christ chose to sing a
Psalm after supper, thereby to cheer up his own heart, and his Disciples also.
Music certainly will allay passions, 1 Samuel 16. v. 14. An evil spirit from the
Lord troubled Saul, ver. 20. And when David played on his harp, the evil spirit
departed from him. Not that there is any efficacy in Music to drive away
devils, but because in a natural way it disposed and settled Saul for ease, by
raising up his heart and spirit out of his melancholy dumps, tempering his
rage, and moderating his griefs and discontents, by which the Devil took
advantage to drive him into frenzy fits and furies. If by spirit, in that
place, we understand (as some) only that which is called Motus animorum, as a
spirit of fear, a spirit of jealousy, etc. then questionless, the Music had a
natural efficacy to recover Saul out of his melancholy moods. 2 King. 3. 15.
The Prophet Elisha finding some distemper in his spirit, occasioned by the
presence of an idolatrous King, and the present distress of Gods people, called
for a musician to cheer and compose his spirits, that he might be the better
fitted for prophecy. Some have conceived and said, that the spirit of
prophecy never came upon a sad soul. How true that is, I leave others to
judge. Nor shall I contend if any say there was somewhat extraordinary and
supernatural in those cases. However, this I think may be gathered from them,
That music has a virtue in it to compose, and quiet, and refresh, and cheer
the spirit of a man, when he is overgone with melancholy. So Gods people in
times of distress and danger, when they feel themselves too much dejected and
sadded, may cheer themselves up by singing a Psalm together. As for our singing
on fasting days (which some are offended at) we say as before, it is not so
much to make our selves merry, as to move and melt our hearts. It Is no
absurdity; nor impossibility neither, for Christians to sing with tears in
their eyes.

When a day of thanksgiving comes, we sing to another tune, in way of
rejoicing, exalting and triumphing in God our Savior. On Sabbath and Lecture
days we sing partly to express our joy in God, for giving us such
opportunities and seasons of spiritual edification, by the use of his
Ordinances; and partly to compose our spirits, and so fit them for hearing the
Word preached. And this I conceive to be the reason, why commonly we sing a
Psalm before Sermon.

SERMON V.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, Singing, etc.
ONe end (among others) of our singing of Psalms is (as I showed formerly) a
joyful praising of God, or expressing of our joy in the Lord, as Gods servants
were wont to do when God in his Providence gave them occasion and matter of
rejoicing by deliverances, victories, or any other mercies. I shall now add to
what has been said, That it becomes Gods people when they come before him in
public, to serve the Lord with joy and an holy rejoicing; and for this end
they must sing Psalms; there being no exercise more proper to express our joy
in the Lord. God calls his people to rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalon. 5. 16. and
Phil. 4. 4. to rejoice always; but more especially when they come before him in
the use of his Ordinances, Psalm. 105. 3. Glory ye in his holy Name, let the
heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12. 12. Ye shall rejoice before
the Lord, etc. Deuteronomy. 14. 26. Thou shall eat before the Lord thy God, and thou
shall rejoice, Deuteronomy. 16. 10, 11. Thou shall keep the feast of weeks, i. e.
Pentecost, with a tribute of a sree-will offering of thine hands, and thou
shall rejoice before the Lord thy God, etc. And Deuteronomy. 28. 47. there is a
threatening of judgment for this, that they served not the Lord with joyfulness
and gladness of heart, etc. Not a filthy on fleshly rejoicing according to the
^ourse of this world, but an holy and hea^enly, such as when the very heart and
soul is ravished with a sense of Gods goodness. And this, as it does very much
help us in the duties we have to do, so it is expressly required. Psalm. 100. 2.
Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with singing. Psa. 92.
which is, (as the Title shows) a Psalm for the Sabbath, the Prophet gives this
as a reason of that joyful solemnity, ver. 4. For thou Lord have made me glad
through thy work, I will triumph in the works of thy hands. The great work and
business of the Sabbath, is to magnify God, in regard of his great works, viz.
Creation and Providence, but especially the great work of reconciling the
world, and Redeeming sinners from death and hell by Jesus Christ. This great
Work was completed, on the day of Christ's resurrection, which was the
beginning of his exaltation, and then it becomes us to rejoice in the Kingdom,
Power, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, singing to the Lord, because he
has done mavelous things; and saying, This is the day which the Lord has
made, let us rejoice and be glad in it.

I say, it is suitable and seasonable ^o rejoice and be merry on the Lords day,
and therefore to sing, and so express our joy in the Lord, who has made us to
rejoice in his salvation. God loves not to see us lumpish and melancholy, but
cheerful and joyful in his service: Let us therefore sing and say, The Lord
reigns.

One gives this as one end A fo^h ^e of si^ging ^salmes. Z^. in loc.
and use of our singing of Psalms, viz. That the Spirit dwelling in us, may
be, as it were, excited and stirred up to put forth his power more effectually
and plentifully; and grounds it upon my Text, which (says he) imports two
things: First, that singing is an effect of the Spirit. And secondly, That the
Spirit is stirred up in us by singing. That which he says, to my thinking,
has much reason in it: For why may not singing excite and stir up the spirit,
and the graces of it in Christians, as well as the performance of other duties?
They that have grace therefore do duty, that by exercising their graces they
may improve them. Now let such as have any grace of God in them, consider how
in doing this duty as it ought to be done, the graces of God (specially faith
and hope) may be set on work, whilst we seriously meditate on the promises, and
other passages of David's Psalms.

Once more, a Psalm is good A fith Use of (...) Psalme^.
sometimes to comfort our hearts when we are under affliction, as I hinted
before, how Paul and Silas sang when they were under extreme sufferings; and
Luther would encourage himself and others, when he heard any bad news of any
attempts against the Gospel, and such as professed it, saying, Let us sing the
46th Psalm, and let them do their worst. Indeed that is a Psalm will cheer a
man's spirits, if he can sing it with understanding and grace in his heart. So
did the Primitive Christians comfort themselves in prison by singing of Psalms.

Lastly, singing of Psalms is A sixth Use of sing^ng Psalms.
an excellent way to praise God, and speak good of his Name. Many Psalms (you
know) are full of Gods praises, and set forth the wondrous works that he has
done, so as he may have the glory of them. To praise God, and bless his Name,
is the highest and most excellent service we can do on earth; it comes nearest
to the exercise of the Saints in heaven, who are always praising God in the
admiration of his infinite and incomprehensible Glory. Now singing of Psalms
is an excellent way of praising God. One says, that in singing there is a more
copious and ample profession of piety. Not as if God who is a Spirit, were
delighted with any sensible thing, as Music, or melodious tunes. But yet God
is (as I may say) more delighted, when we are more ample and patheticall in
pouring out our souls to him in praise, 2 Samuel 6. David (it is said) danced
before the Lord with all his might, and then Michol scorned and flouted him, as
some do us now adays for our singing of Psalms, which yet is but a praising
the Lord with all our might. And indeed, to speak as the thing is, the glory of
God is held forth more illustriously in singing of Psalms (as one observes)
because the praises of God are celebrated with greater attention and affection,
than if they were barely recited with a lower voice. Wherefore the Levites upon
all occasions sung the praises of the Lord, and so did all Gods people also. No
Prince (as he says) or great Commander but thinks himself more honored, if
the great things they have done be commemorated and set forth in a Song, 1 Samuel
18. 6, 7. So the women went out to meet Saul, with singing, and with
Instruments of Music. Now our great Champion and Captain General has
conquered sin and Satan, and all our spiritual enemies, we give him not the
glory due unto his name, unless we celebrate the victory with Songs of
deliverance.

That none of old sung, but such as had an extraordinary spirit, is false, as I
showed formerly, Exodus 15. All the children of Israel had not such a spirit,
though Moses and Miriam had. In Hezekiah's time the Levites sung praises to the
Lord with the words of David and Asaph the Seer; and so no question they did in
Jehoshaphat's time also. As for the gift of Psalms in the Primitive Churches,
it went with the gift of tongues, and both are long since ceased; so as we may
argue as well, that we must not say, because we have not the gift of Tongues,
as that we must not sing, because we have not the gift of Psalms. Besides, we
find no mention in Scripture of any Church Officer for compiling of Psalms,
as for the Ministry of the Word, and prayer. Nor has God inspired any with a
gift of Psalmistry to suit the occasions of the Churches from Sabbath to
Sabbath. We find neither Ordinance appointing, nor Providence granting it, nor
any reason to silence David's Psalms that others may be attended. We know who
indicted them, and we know too (which I wish may be duly considered) that some
of them are proper to Gospel times. If any question it, let them read the 98th
Psalm, and see, whether it be not more proper for Gods people now, than in the
times of the old Testament.

Quaest. But how may we sing David's Psalms so as to attain those ends?

Sol. First, We must have grace in our hearts, or a gracious frame of spirit,
such as David had. Singing praise to God is an exercise becoming Saints, who
alone can do it so as to please God, and profit themselves in it, as was showed
before.

2. Secondly, Sing none but spiritual Songs, such as David's Psalms are, and
others composed by holy men of God, who spoke as they were inspired by the Holy
Ghost. These are altogether spiritual, for the Author, for the Matter, and
for the End and Use of them.

Quest. May we not sing any other Song composed by a common gift, so long as it
is spiritual for the Matter?

Ans. It may be of ill consequence many ways, to shut out David's Psalms and
take in our own; as,

First, We may mistake even in the Matter; whereas, we are sure, there is no
such mistake in David's Psalms.

Secondly, Some perhaps may not like so well of other Composures, whereas none
but an Athiest will find fault with the Psalms that were penned by the Spirit
of God; that I say not (what was said formerly) No man's Composures can be
answerable to those of Gods Spirit. I rather think that such Psalms (if any
have them) should be fitter for their own private use than for the Churches of
God; though for my part, I do not encourage any to the private use of them,
with a neglect of David's Psalms, but rather dissuade them from it. For other
Songs (always supposed that there be no vanity, nor filthiness, nor
scurrility, nor reflectings upon other men's good name, which all Christians
must be far from) they may be for honest delight and recreation, for ought I
know, even as a man may play a lesson on a Lute or other Instrument to refresh
his Spirits.

Thirdly, Christians had need to watch their hearts exceedingly more than
ordinarily when they are singing a Psalm. It requires a good measure of the
Word and Spirit to pray in the Spirit, but more to sing in the Spirit, because
(as one says) our senses being delighted with the Melody, are apt to steal
away our hearts from spiritual fervency. For certainly we are exceeding apt to
be taken with the melody, and in the interim neglect our hearts, so as our
spirits shall not work and be doing when our tongues are a singing, To remedy
this, lets sing with understanding and attention of mind, in order to which it
were a great happiness and help to devotion, if we knew the mind and meaning
of the holy Ghost in all that we sing.

Object. What if a man understand not the meaning of what he sings?

Sol. He cannot then sing, in every respect as he should do. But yet I shall
offer this to your consideration, not peremptorily asserting it to the
prejudice of any that may be otherwise minded. We all grant reading of the
Scriptures, and hearing them read, to be an holy exercise, and that which God
has enjoined us. Yet when we read the Scriptures, I suppose, we many times
meet with that which we do not so well understand, shall we not therefore read
them at all? Or may we not for all this read them with profit, whilst we
understand many things which we read, and by reading them again and again come
to more understanding of the mind of God in them? And why may we not sing
Psalms for instruction and admonition that we may understand them? If thou
med^tate seriously, God may enlighten thee in the very singing. We read and
hear, to get more understanding, though sometimes we read and hear what for the
present we understand not, and so (for ought I know) we may sing also. Some, I
am confident, have found by experience, that in singing of Psalms they have
come to more understanding of some passages, than ever they had before. But
what Psalm is there that any understanding Christian knows not the main scope
and sense of it, though he understand not every particular passage and
expression in it? Certainly, he that has a gracious heart cannot be ignorant
of the main drift and and scope of any of David's Psalms. As we must sing with
understanding, so must we sing with affection also, acting and exercising the
grace of God that is in us, according as the matter that is sung gives us
occasion. Sometimes we are to act faith and hope in God, sometimes holy desires
after God, sometimes holy rejoicing in God, and sometimes holy fear and
trembling before God. It Is not enough that we have grace, but we must act it.
As for instance, when we sing that passsage, Psalm 119. 5. O that my way were
d^ed to keep thy s^atutes. The ^esires of our souls should be such as David's
were, to obey God in every thing to the utmost: when we sing, O how I love thy
Law, etc. Our souls should be even ravished with holy affections toward the
Word, and if we find not such ardent motions in our spirits, there is a word of
admonition, to mind us what we should be. Psalm. 73. 1. Yet God is good to
Israel, etc. In singing this, we learn to act faith as the Psalmist did, and
stir up our selves to lay hold on God, especially when we have any temptation
to distrust. As in prayer and praise we act faith, and other graces, express
and show forth good desires, and other holy affections, so let us in singing of
Psalms. For questionless in this duty we have occasions enough of so doing,
whilst such heavenly matter is suggested to us for sweet meditation, and
solacing our selves in God and his Word.

Quaest. Some may ask, Whether it be not good when we are at our work to sing a
Psalm, and so to exercise our hearts in meditation on heavenly things.

Ans. Though I had rather men should sing a Psalm, than do worse, yet I dare
not commend such a practice, nor advise to it, for this reason, viz. To sing a
Psalm as it ought to be done, is work enough, so as a man need to do nothing
else; and if it be said, That this will help us to meditate on something that
is good. I answer, That if meditation on some good matter were all the end of
singing, this were somewhat, but there is more in the matter; and to say truth,
singing a Psalm is such a duty as will require the whole man, there being no
good exercise wherein our hearts are more apt to miscarry than in this.

Again, thou must observe and watch in this duty, as in prayer, what answers
God gives in to thee, and how thy spirit closes with the heavenly matter that
is sung, so as thou art raised, comforted, cheared, confirmed, or humbled. As
there is a return of prayers, so of praises too, and in every Duty and
Ordinance there is marrow and fatness, if our souls are well disposed to
relish and receive it.

In one word, This is an excellent service, and therefore the more difficult,
so as thou have need to keep thy heart with a bridle, as David resolved to keep
his mouth, Psalm. 39. 1. or otherwise thou will hardly rule it when thou art in
this duty.

In order to singing Some caut^ous directi^ns in order to a right performance
of this duty.
with understanding and good affection, I advise all you that can, to look on
when you sing. Our practice is (you know) for one to read a line, and then all
to sing it, which some quarrel at, and I for my part wish we had no need so to
do, for questionless it were far better if all had books, and could read, or
else had learnt the Psalms by heart, But if singing be a duty, and we cannot
do it without this help, I know no reason we have to reject it. They that
cannot read themselves, may, and ought to hear others read. Nor is this reading
the Psalm an unwarrantable invention of men brought into the Worship of God, as
some have said, but only a necessary help to it, as Pulpits are necessary
helps unto the minister in speaking, and so are Galleries and Scaffolds to the
people in hearing. We must distinguish the immediate spiritual means of
Worship from such helps as serve only more remotely to the sense of hearing.
Now our reading the Psalm that is sung, is but only a remote help to the sense
of hearing, which we use only for necessities sake, because many cannot read
the Psalm themselves. Though I advise and entreat all that can read, to use
their books, and so help their understandings; for when a line only is read,
the sense remains imperfect, whereupon some have thought it better (and I am
not against it) that two lines be read together.

2. Again, I do heartily wish, there were some amendment of our English Meetre
in two or three particulars. First, that all the Psalms might run in such
Meetre as all our people are able to sing. And secondly, That some uncouth
expressions and obsolete words were altered; as for other faults in the
Translation, they would be chiefly looked after; though I must profess, I think
the faults are not so many or so great as some men would make them. There are,
no doubt, but too many things which I stand not to justify, but wish with all
my heart, they were well amended; yet this must be considered, that nothing can
be done by men, but it will be imperfect. Their arguing therefore is not so
good to my thinking, who will not sing David's Psalms, because of some flawes
in the Translation. For my part, I know no Translation of the Bible but has
its mistakes, and I suppose, we all look upon Translations as imperfect, and
yet we do not upon that ground refuse to read the Scriptures. That there are
faults I grant, but that they are such as should cause us to forbear singing
till they be amended, I deny. Some have not stuck to say, there are lies in our
singing Psalms, but their word is no slander. Though there be mistakes, it
will not follow, there are lies. I believe there is no Translation of the Bible
but there are some mistakes in it, and yet it is foul language to say there are
lies. For the mistakes, I heartily wish them amended; and do much approve of
their excellent pains, who have altogether changed our English Meetre; yet,
considering our people have been used to these, I conceive it far better for
the present necessity, to let them alone with some alteration in some things,
such as I spoke of even now. And if some one that is duly qualified for such a
work, would undertake it, I suppose (under favor) it would be an excellent
piece of service to the Church of God amongst us, and he should deserve very
much at the hands of all devout and godly Christians.

3. Again, there ought to be a choice of Psalms according as occasion
requires, for as they were penned upon occasion, and are some of them intended
more especially for one use, and some for another, so there should be a wise
choice made of Psalms to be sung, according as our necessities and occasions
respectively call for. The 92 Psalm is entitled a Psalm for the Sabbath; and
if you consider the subject matter of it, and many others that set forth the
works of God, they will appear very fit to be sung on the Sabbath day. As the
second, and eighth and other Psalms that speak of the Kingdom of Christ; the
33, 34, and 37, etc. that treat of the work of Creation and Providence; so the
119th Psalm, that shows what is the excellent use of Gods Word, and what
affection we should bear toward it. At times of humiliation such Psalms are
to be sung, as may seem to express our sense of sin, our trembling at the wrath
of God, or that set forth the calamities and sufferings of Gods people. At
times of rejoicing choose such Psalms as mention the mavelous works of God
in Victories, Deliverances, and other mercies showed unto his people.

If thus there be a wise choice made, I know not any occasion the people of God
have at any time, but there may be a Psalm found to answer it; and then if Gods
people can with one mind and one mouth glorify God, what a pleasant and
comely thing is it? such a resemblance of heaven, as hardly a better can be
found upon earth. Only let our care be, that our hearts be well tuned, for
that's it that makes melody in the ears of the Lord. You know, it is not so
comely, when in the Congregation some sing out of tune: but the greatest
absurdity of all is when our hearts are not in tune. Though (as I have showed)
the impiety and profaneness of some does not hinder the acceptance of others,
yet it is more desirable, and that which we should heartily wish, that all
could so do this duty, as therein to please God and profit their own souls.
Surely if we sing as we ought, somewhat will stick by us. Many sing, and make a
noise, and that is all, so they hear and pray to as little purpose, yet others
do these duties to their great advantage and edification in grace and gracious
practice. If admiring God, speaking good of his Name, rejoicing in his
goodness, and other his glorious infinite Excellencies, sweet meditation on the
Promises, servent expression of our good desires, humbling, comforting and
chearing our hearts, be good exercises, let us not give over singing, since
there is no one Psalm, or part of a Psalm, bu^ will ^ster occasion of doing one
(...) I do the rather persuade to it, because I observe many will not open
their mouths to sing in the Congregation; and most neglect this duty in their
families, are not so frequent in it, as Christians were wont to be. And I
observe withal, that few thrive well after they once neglect or scruple
singing of Psalms. They begin at this commonly, but seldom end here, but
proceed from evil to worse, till they come at last to live above Ordinances
and Duties (as they call it) but indeed live without them, and so live like
beasts in the shape of men. Let others think as they please, I never knew
Christians thrive better in grace and knowledge, than when repeating of
Sermons, singing of Psalms and such like exercises were more in fashion than
they have been of late. And let it be considered in what juncture of time
singing of Psalms has been so much denied and spoken against, even when all
the Ordinances of God, and all the Duties of his Worship have been as much
slighted by too many amongst us. Here (as I said even now) men begin, but
seldom or never stay, but go further to question and decry all Ordinances.
They begin here (as I conceive) for this reason, because wrangling wits have
some more specious and fair pretenses, whereby they can more easily entangle
simple and unstable souls, and so make them to scruple at this duty sooner
than at any other. And to say, as the thing is, The ignorance of most
concerning the nature, end, and Use of this Duty, has given the greatest
advantage unto others to seduce and draw them away from it. If that which has
been spoken upon this occasion, may convince or confirm, or direct any, I have
my end, and let God have the glory. Only hear what Mr Cotton (a reverend man
says in this case) It is (says he) the misery of this present age, that those
Ordinances, which men have used either without the knowledge of their true
grounds, or without any sense of comfort in and by them, or without love to
them, in the hour of temptation they have cast them aside, and so for saken the
holy Institutions of God, to please themselves in their own imaginations.

Suppose the 3d Psalm is to be sung, what a word of Admonition is there to act
faith in a God Almighty, as David did, and so to possess our souls in
patience, and confident exspectation of deliverance in Gods time, and way,
though our distress and danger be never so great? If a man have grace in his
heart, the singing of that Psalm may provoke, and put him on to offer up the
prayer of faith whatever his condition be; And so it is very proper to any good
Christians case. And that is the scope of the 4th Psalm, viz. to express the
confidence that David had in God, when he lay under the hard, and heavy hands
of cruel enemies, who insulted over him. Why may not any good Christian, in
singing that Psalm, act faith, as David did? However he may learn his duty,
and what he ought to do, when there is the like occasion. Besides; there is a
word of Admonition, not to look after comfort in any creature, but to prefer
the light of Gods countenance above all worldly accommodations, though in never
so great abundance.

If we would rejoice in the Lord, notwithstanding the insolency and outrage of
cruel enemies, and encourage our hearts to expect an end of them, and all
their wicked designs, and devices, how pertinent is the 9th Psalm? And suppose
we are not in such a sad condition, yet it is (I hope) no hurt for us to
meditate on such matter, thereby to furnish our selves with provision against a
time of need. Sure I am, we read many Psalms, and other portions of Scripture,
that, out of them we may gather and lay up somewhat in store for our selves
against a time of need, if there were no more. But there is more in the matter,
than so, as has been showed in the foregoing Sermons.

What singular expressions of our desires have we in the tenth Psalm, when we
have occasion to bewail the miseries, and sufferings of Gods people through the
craft and cruelty of unreasonable, and wicked men? And when have not Gods
people occasion so to do?

The eleventh Psalm is nothing else but a profession of David's confidence in
God, and his taking comfort thereupon, when there was no help, nor any hope of
it from men, but, as he there says, v. 3. All the foundations are destroyed,
and what can the righteous do?

Is there not much to be learnt from the 14th Psalm, concerning the folly, and
madness of profane ones, that fear not God, and regard not men? As also
concerning Gods watchful eye observing all their ways, and doings, when they
go on to vex, and oppress his people against the light of conscience shining
within them? And yet there is more to be learnt from it concerning the sad, and
miserable condition, wherein all men are by nature, and the only means of their
deliverance. How useful is it to meditate on the blessedness of such as are
true Citizens of Zion, which we may do in singing the 15th Psalm, and so learn
what manner of men we ought to be in all conversation, and godliness, as ever
we hope to enjoy communion with the Lord both here, and hereafter? What a
lively description of Christ's death, and resurrection have we in the sixteenth
Psalm, wherein the Lord professes his delight in the Saints on earth, as his
portion, and the lot of his inheritance, and proclaims to all the world, that
idolaters, and all despisers of his grace have no part, nor lot in the precious
fruits, and benefits of his death, and resurrection. Does it not become
Christians to sing that Psalm, and so to rejoice in the glorious conquest of
Christ over death, and the grave, by virtue whereof they have cause to triumph?
as the Apostle directs them, 1 Corinthians. 15. 55.

Or is there any thing that can minister occasion of rejoicing in God more than
the glorious victory we have in Christ Jesus over all our spiritual enemies?
When I consider these things, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the peevishness
of some people, quarrelling (as they do) at the singing of this, or other the
like Psalms, which is in effect to say, they would not have Christians to
rejoice in Gods salvation. Sure I am, that very many of David's Psalms set
forth the glory of Christ's Kingdom, and the beauty of his grace, and
providence in the administration of it, as whosoever has any sense of such
spiritual things, cannot but be ravished with the meditation and the
remembrance of them.

I may perhaps weary some Readers with so many particular instances; However
for the satisfaction of others, I shall crave leave to add a few more.

The 17th Psalm was penned (as it is probable) upon occasion of David's
persecution by Saul. Now though we are not in the same condition, yet we may be
in somewhat a like case. Or if not so, yet we may sing it to very good purpose,
whilst we thereby take occasion to consider that our innocence, and
uprightness is a singular argument of consolation in times of affliction, that
when we are under any sufferings, our greatest care must be to keep our selves
from sinning, and that the comfort of the godly arising from the sense of Gods
favor, and gracious presence is better by far, and rather to be chosen, than
the present condition of wicked men flourishing in all worldly wealth, and
having more than heart can wish. The Eighteenth Psalm teaches us, that God
alone is to be acknowledged, and honored in all our mercies, and particularly
in deliverances from enemies, or any dangers. It sets forth the condition of
Gods people in all ages, both as to their sufferings, and their safety, and
gives us fit occasion of meditating on the glorious victories of the Lord
Jesus, of whom David was a type in all his sufferings, and the glory that
followed after them.

The Nineteenth Psalm shows that however the glory of God is to be seen in his
works, yet his Word is that which makes us wise unto salvation, and that this
word of God is so perfect, as by comparing our lives and conversations with it,
we have cause to bewail our many infirmities, and with all earnestness, and
fervencie of spirit, to beg grace, and strength of God against the grossest
evils, since we have that corruption within us, which inclines us to them, and
not only to pray against great transgressions, and presumptuous sins, but
against the least motions and workings of sin, whether in word or thought.

The Twentieth Psalm teaches the duty of people toward their godly, lawful
Magistrates, and Governors, and though it were penned upon a particular
occasion (probably, when David went forth against the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.)
yet it has this Doctrine of general concernment, viz. That Godly Christian
Rulers, who are nursing fathers to the Church of God, ought to be remembered in
our prayers for a blessing upon their designs, and endeavors for Gods people,
and against his and their enemies. It teaches likewise, that it is Gods
blessing alone that keeps the City; as we have it in another Psalm Psalm. 127.

The 21. Psalm shows likewise, that the safety of the Church, and of all
Christian States depends on God alone, and gives us also occasion of admiring
the glory of Christ's Kingdom, which is so great through Gods salvation, seeing
David, in his kingdom over Israel, was a Type of Christ reigning in his
Church, and so also the passages in David's Psalms that respect his rule, and
government, have an aim at somewhat answerable to the Kingdom of Christ?

What more comfortable Consideration can any poor soul have than the subject
matter of the 24th Psalm wherein the Question is resolved, Whether God have any
peculiar company divided from the rest of the world, of which he is more
especialiy tender and careful, and where this company is, and what manner of
men they are, who (as I may say) are the fellows of this society. Here we may
learn, that God has a Church on earth, called out of the world, and
distinguished from it, that not hypocrites, and formal Professors, but hearty,
and upright Christians only communicate in the spiritual and everlasting
blessings which God pours upon the Church, and that all, even the greatest,
are invited and called upon to enter into this society of Gods people, out of
which there is no salvation.

The 25th Psalm was penned when David was in great distress, and is an eminent
testimony of his faith in God, which he expresses in his earnest prayer, unto
which he encourages himself by the consideration of Gods faithfulness in his
Promises, and in all his ways of Providence; more especially, in that he
manifests himself to his people, in the guidance, and government of his good
Spirit, that they may not mistake, and so miscarry in their Christian race. Now
what can be more sweet to any pious soul, than the serious consideration of
such gracious and merciful dealing of God with his people? Or how can such a
soul choose but be much enlarged toward the Lord, when it meditates, as it
ought, upon such things as these?

Would a Christian express his integrity, and innocence, and resolution to
cleave close to God in ways of holiness, and righteousness, however he be
defamed in the world, or whatever else befalls him, how pertinent is the 26th
Psalm.

The 27th Psalm teaches us wherein lies a Christians safety, peace,
comfort, and all, viz. in Gods protection, and gracious Providence over him. It
teaches also, what must be a Christians chiefest care in all estates, and
conditions, viz. that he may continue and abide in the sincere Profession of
the truth, and the faithful service of God according to his will, and so to
comfort himself, and encourage his heart, till God be pleased to come in with
deliverance.

The 28th Psalm (to say no more of it) may teach us, That God alone is to be
prayed unto in all dangers, and he alone to be praised for all deliverances:
And also, that in all our addresses to God, we are more especially to commend
unto him the safety, and enlargement of his Church.

May we not sing the 29th Psalm with much comfort, and spiritual benefit, if
we set our selves to meditate on the matter, scope, and drift of it, which is,
to invite all to lay aside carnal confidence in wealth, strength, wisdom, or
any such like things, and to submit themselves to the rule, and government of
God Almighty, who does wonderful things in the world, shows his glory in the
thunder of his power, to make all creatures, even the dead, and dumb, in a
manner, to stand in awe of him, and by all these terrible doings of his,
teaches his own people the more to trust him, who is so able to preserve them,
and destroy all his, and their enemies with the least blast of the breath of
his nostrills?

If we sing the Thirtieth Psalm, we may see the frame of our own spirits in
that of David's, who was as much cast down in adversity, as he was before
lifted up in prosperity, and how easy a matter it is for God to make sudden
changes, as to our outward estates, so to our inward also, and that, whatsoever
changes pass upon Gods people, he can easily and suddenly change all their
mourning into mirth, and so give them matter of rejoicing in his salvation.

In the One and Thirtieth Psalm David teaches us from his own experience,
that there is an inexhaustible store of all good laid up with God for all that
trust in him, yea, and that notwithstanding our infirmity and diffidence, God
of his mere faithfulness will deliver us in his appointed time. There also we
may learn, that though Gods people be many times low in their own apprehensions
by reason of many and great dangers, yet so long as their eyes and their hearts
are toward the Lord, as David's were, they may comfortably exspect a good
issue at last, and thereupon are to encourage themselves, and pluck up their
spirits, as they are exhorted to do in the last Verse of that Psalm.

The 32d Psalm teaches us wherein lies true blessedness, viz. in the pardon
of sin, and that we can never attain to assurance of that pardon, and peace
arising from it, till we come freely off from sin, and so are far from guile
in our spirits, as David was at last after much ado. It teaches us also in
what way we must come to God, and that is, in a way of true humiliation, and
hearty confession of sin, and that all such humble penitents have matter of
rejoicing, when impenitent, and hardened rebels shall have sorrow enough.

How can we admire Gods gracious dispensations toward his Israel better, than
by an affectionate singing the Thirty third, Thirty forth, and Thirty seventh
Psalms, which set forth in most ample manner the goodness of God toward his
own, and his just indignation against all his, and their enemies, though for
the present, it is not easy for us to apprehend the righteousness of God, in
his dealings with the one, and the other? And have not Gods people always
occasion from Gods daily Providence to sing such Psalms as those, that so
they may confirm their hearts in confidence on God, and comfortable
exspectations from him, though for the present they are in heaviness through
manifold temptations?

Thou may sing the 35th Psalm, and consider what usage Gods people have in
the world from wicked men, and what course they must take to rid themselves of
them, viz. to complain to God, and so engage all the power that is in heaven,
against them.

The 36th Psalm teaches us to oppose, and set the gracious dispensations of
God toward his people (who walk in the light of the Lord, and are fed with
the fatness of his house) against the sense of wicked men's prosperity, that
makes them not to fear God, and puts them on to devise evil against his
people, because it is in the power of their hand to do it.

We may sing the 38th Psalm, and consider what sufferings come upon Gods own
people for sin, and so help to move, and cause our bowels of compassion
toward the distressed Churches of God in the world. We may also take occasion
to consider that our sufferings are the fruits of our sins, and so labor to
quiet and patient our spirits, as David did, by faith, and fervent prayer, as
you may see in the 15, 21, and 22th Verses of that Psalm.

In singing the 39th Psalm we may learn, that it is through infirmity of the
flesh, that good men (such as David) are so apt to repine at the present
dispensations of divine Providence, That good men (such as David) may be
overcome by such a temptation, notwithstanding all their purposes, and
resolutions to the contrary, and that good, and godly men will bestirre
themselves, and strive to act faith in fervent prayers to God for deliverance
out of their present troubles, and for support under them.

The 40th Psalm acquaints us with David's experiences, how God had answered
him in his desires, and wrought wonderfully for his deliverance. It gives us
also to understand, how sensible he was of those many and great obligations
which God had laid upon him by his loving kindness, and how resolved he was to
give a real testimimony, as long as he lived, of his thankfulness by declaring
to others the goodness of God.

And, because he knew that troubles and dangers did still abide him, he
commends himself by prayer to the direction, and defense of God Almighty, and
that, not only for his own safety, and preservation, but that others might be
confirmed in faith, and so have occasion also to show forth the praises of the
Lord. We have also in this Psalm an instruction concerning the true worship of
God, that it consists especially in sincere obedience to the will of God, and
besides all this, applying some passsages out of the Sixth, seventh, and eight
Verses, to the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. the obedience of Christ, in
performing all the will of God, for the reconciling of the world, we may hence
confirm our faith, in assurance that the work of Redemption is perfectly
accomplished, according to the will, and counsel of God, who was not pleased
with sacrifices, but in the obedience of his well beloved Son, Isa. 42. 1. Mat.
3. 17.

The One and fourtieth Psalm instructs us concerning the perfidious baseness
of wicked and worldly men, who are apt to insult over Gods servants, when they
lie under the afflicting hand of God, It teaches us also, how to judge of good
men's sufferings, and not to conclude them therefore to be forsaken of God, and
utterly cast off, and moreover we may hence learn, when we find most deceit,
and falsehood in men, to fix our hearts on God by faith, exspecting deliverance
according to his truth, and faithfulness.

In the Two and fourtieth Psalm we may see how David is almost overwhelmed
with many and great calamities, that followed one upon another, as the waves of
the sea, one no sooner past, but another comes, and yet how he bears himself up
by acting faith to lay hold on God, and checking himself for his distrust, and
dejection of spirit. Now it concerns (as I take it) every Christian, to make
David's practice his Precedent in the same, or in the like case. Gods people
have their fears, and doubts, as he had, and may as truly and justly say, many
times, as he did, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Sure I am, there is no child of God, but is much
affected with holy desires toward the house of God, and accounts the want of
public Ordinances a great affliction, especially, when wicked men reproach
them, and insult over them for the loss of those opportunities which once they
enjoyed.

The 43d Psalm was penned upon the same occasion, and (as it seems) near about
the same time; and the scope of it is to beg of God that he may be again
restored to the enjoyment of those former mercies, and to encourage himself to
a confident exspectation of them in Gods good time.

The 44th Psalm sets forth the condition of Gods people suffering many times
for conscience sake, and because they dare not defile themselves, as the wicked
world would have them. It furnishes us with many Arguments wherewith to plead
with God, in the behalf of his people, when they are in such a sad, and
suffering condition. I need say no more, since no good Christian can choose but
see what use may be made of the Doctrine of this Psalm, as long as God has a
people upon earth to serve him.

In the 45th Psalm we may behold the King (Jesus Christ) in his beauty, and
the Church, his royal spouse, most excellently adorned with those admirable
perfections which he has endowed her withal. Sure there are most glorious
things spoken both of Christ, and the Church, and therefore Christians may sing
that Psalm in way of holy rejoicing, and thanksgiving.

The 46th Psalm was pointed at in one of the Sermons before, and thereupon I
shall not so much as touch with it now.

When Gods people did so rejoice, because the glory of the Lord, and his
salvation should be revealed, and made known amongst all nations, have not we
Christians more cause than ever they had, to rejoice in God, upon this account,
and so to sing the 47th Psalm? specially since we believe, and exspect that
God will, e're long, bring in the Nations to Jesus Christ, so as hitherto he
has not brought them in.

The Forty eighth Psalm being in a manner of the same argument with the
Forty sixth, I need say nothing of it.

The Scope, and drift of the Forty nineth Psalm, being the same with that of
the 37th, and 73d, and many others, I shall not say much of it. Only the
Doctrine of it is of singular use to all Gods people, that they may not be
discouraged at the present flourishing condition of worldly and wicked men.

The Fiftieth Psalm disclaimes all the Ceremonious observances of falsehearted
hypocrites, and shows what is the only acceptable way of serving God. Now I
need not tell any godly Christians, what need the best of us have of such
meditations and Instructions.

I suppose, there are but few Christians who have not occasion to bewail their
sins, and to beg pardoning and purging grace (as David did) of God, in the
One and fiftieth Psalm, and although every ones case be not the same in every
respect, as David's was, yet he is very much a stranger to his own heart, and
spiritual estate, that does not see cause enough to apply unto himself every
passage of that Psalm.

For the Two and fiftieth Psalm, although it were penned upon occasion of
Doeg's malicious, and murderous practices, yet it ministers matter for our
faith to work upon, so as we may take comfort in God, when we are in any
trouble and peril, upon the same grounds as David there does, viz. because the
goodness of God endures for ever, and all the people of God shall flourish and
grow fresh again, when all the ungodly shall perish.

The Fifty fourth Psalm penned upon occasion of some danger that David was in
(as the Title of it shows) teaches us whether to fly for help in time of need,
and what an happy issue we may exspect whilst we can live by faith in God, as
David did, even in the midst of troubles.

The Fifty fifth Psalm shows the necessities, and distresses that Gods
servants are many times brought into, patrly by the falsehood of seeming
friends, and partly, by the cruelty of enraged enemies, and how,
notwithstanding the one and the other, they may by the prayer of faith prevail
with God, both for their enemies destruction, and their own deliverance. None
therefore need to scruple the singing of this Psalm, but such as fear not God,
because they have not changes, ver. 19. Sure the matter of it will suit with
the necessities, and occasions of Gods people, for the most part of them, and
at most times.

I should quite tire the Readers patience, to run through every particular
Psalm? I have instanced in so many, as by them, whoever is willing, and has
any understanding, may judge of all the rest, how properly, and pertinently any
of them may be sung, specially if there be (as there ought) a wise
accommodation of them unto the several respective occasions, and conditions of
the Church, and people of God. I shall add this one word more,

That singing of Psalms is in order to our edification, and furtherance in
grace and gracious practice, as all other duties of Gods worship are; That we
may know more of the mind of God, be more inclined to do his will, and act
faith, and all other graces with more vigor, and life, and faithfulness, and
fervency of spirit. Now, if hearing, reading, praying, communicating at the
Lords Table be useful for those ends, why not also singing of Psalms?
specially, since in that duty (done as it ought to be) there is so great an
advantage by serious meditation on those precious truths, to act our graces, to
admonish our selves of our duties, to encourage our selves against all dangers,
and difficulties, and to express those high thoughts we are to have of God
according to his infinite excellencies. Surely then, if ever, are the high
praises of God in the mouths of his Saints, when their tongues are singing and
sounding out those great, and glorious things which God has both spoken, and
done in order to their salvation. Wherefore I am bold to conclude, that, the
duty is most useful, and excellent, and no Christ an has any cause to
complain, except of his own unaptness, and inability to do it, as it ought to
be done.

And now I do again most earnestly and heartily beseech, and exhort all sober,
and godly Christians to consider seriously, and sadly of the Premises. Is it
nothing to neglect a duty, so plainly, and so particularly enjoined, and
prescribed as this is? Yea, to persist in that neglect, and justify it?
Consider, I beseech you, who they were that first began to question, and decrie
this Christian exercise: Consider too, how far many of them are since fallen,
not only from this, but from all other duties of Religious Worship. Had they
ended where they began, you might happily have had some more probable pretense
for the neglect of this duty, whilst their constancy in other duties of Gods
worship and service had pleaded for them, that they intended, and desired to
lay aside only what was at least more questionable. But they have proceeded
(you know) to lay down all hearing and praying, and all outward acts of
worship, as well as singing of Psalms. I say not, that all, and every one have
done so already, but many ('it is sad to think how many) have renounced all
Ordinances, and ways of Worship wherein Gods people were wont to wait upon
God, and pretend to no way of knowing Gods mind, but that of immediate, and
extraordinary Revelation. And not so content, they labor, what in them lies,
to persuade others to the same course with themselves. I showed formerly, why
they began here: Now I entreat you to consider, that they who began here, knew
not where to end, till they came to a professed rejection of all Ordinances. By
this you may see (if there were nothing else) what manner of men they were that
first persuaded to a neglect of this duty. Surely they that set them on work,
were such as liked not the ways of worship wherein we had walked with God,
since he was pleased to take off from our necks the yoke of Romish
Superstition, and Idolatry. Need we question it, when so many printed Pamphlets
have flown abroad, to possess the people, that our Churches Ministers are all
false, yea, that our Worship used in our assemblies is all false. What is the
meaning (think you) of this? Can it be any other, than to insinuate, that we
have been a long while out of the right way, and that now, (and not before, for
these many years) is brought to light, the only true way of worshipping God.
And what must this more excellent way be, but that which Gods people formerly
departed from, when they made a separation from Rome? I commend their wit, they
play their game very handsomely: But I hope, such as have grace, will be wiser
than to hearken to such charmers, which have already enchanted so many
unlearned, and unstable souls, to an utter forsaking of our Assemblies, and
casting off all Duties, and Ordinances, though (as I said) they began at first
with slighting that most excellent duty of singing David's Psalms.

And now, Christian Reader, thou art desired to trouble thy thoughts no more,
whether thou shall sing; But rather to set thy self to a serious, and sincere
performance of this duty. And that for this reason: because there is ground
enough of fear, least, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so thy
mind should by little and little be corrupted to cast away all the Ordinances
which Jesus Christ has instituted for this end, that by the use of them thou
may be edified in grace, and gracious practice. And what if God should so
far leave thee, as he has left some? Know that men who dwell in fleshly
Tabernacles cannot hold communion with God (without the help of Ordinances)
whatever some for the present, deluded by Satan, and vainly puff up by their
fleshly minds, may pretend. What a temptation do thou lay upon thy self by
leaving one Christian exercise to cast off others, and at last, all? And then
what a temptation will there lie upon thee, to close with any ways of
Will Worship, when once thou have cast off those wherein thou wast wont to walk
with God? I shall argue no further, but desire thee to consider, what has been
said, and pray the Lord to give thee understanding in all these things. For
certainly we have all need of it, that Satan, (who now appears, as an Angel of
light in his Instruments) may not circumvent us.

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

A Catalogue of Books, printed: and are to be sold by Francis Eaglesfield, at
the Marygold in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Books of Divinity
THe Body of Divinity, or the sum and substance of Christian Religion, by I.
Usher Arch-bish^p of A^magh. in Folio.

All the Works of that learned Knight Sir Ric. Baker, Containing,

Meditations and Disquisitions on the Lords Prayer, in 4to.

On the first Psalm, in 4to.

On the seven penitential Psalms. 4to.

On the seven Consolatory Psalms, 4to.

On the Creed, in 12o.

Motives to Prayer, in 12o.

Solilcquies of the Soul, in 12o.

An Apology for Laymens writing in Divi^i y, in 12ves.

Also Cato's moral Disticks, variously translated into English Verse, in 4to
being a very useful piece.

Five choice Sermons on several occasions, p^ached at the Court, in 4to. by the
Reverend D^ctor Presten.

His Remains in 4to.

Also a choice piece of his, newly published, in^uled, Riches of Mercy to men
in misery, in 4to.

The whole Works of tha^ reverend and cloquent Divine, Tho. Plaiser, D. D. in
one vol. in 8vo.

An Introduction to the right receiving of the Sacrament, in 12o. by will.
Pemble.

The Burden, and unbu^hening of a loaded Conscience in 12o. by R. Kilbye.

Mr. Nichols Catechism in 8vo.

C^rpus Ch^sti, together with the Demonstration of Antichrist, by I. Gurncy, in
12o.

The usesu ness and excellency of Christ, by Chapter Fellinger, in 8vo.

Divine Emblems, and Hieroglyphics by Fr. Quarles, in 8vo.

Gods Summons to a general repentance by Adam Harsn^ in 12o.

The Doctrine of the Bible, in 8vo.

An Exposition of the whole Epistle to the H^brews, in 8^. by David Dickson.

And also a learned Commentary of his on all the Epistles, in English, in folio.

The Garden of spiritual Flowers, in 12o.

The excellency of a gracious Spirit, by Jeremy Burrough^, in 8vo.

Moses Self-denial, in 8vo. by Jer. Borroughs.

The Saints Inheritance, and the worldlings Portion, in 8vo: by J. Borroughs.

Most excellent Notes upon the whole Book of Psalms, written by G. Abbot,
lately published by Richard Vines, in 4to.

The Souls possession of Christ, by Thomas Hooker, of New England, in 12o.

The Saints dignity and duty, by Tho. Hooker, in 4o.

A Treatise of Liberty and Necessity, wherein Predestination, Election, Free
will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is decided and cleared, by Tho. Hobbs,
in 12o.

The Covenant of Grace, discovering the great worth of a Sinners reconciliation
to God, by Iobn Cotton, of New England: the 2d Edition, much larger than the
mer, printed by an exact Coppie, left by the Author.

The way to Heaven discovered, and the stumbling blocks removed, the second
Edition, much enlarged by Robert Purnell, in 8vo.

The Psalms of David excellently translated into meeter, by will. Barton, and
to be sung in the usual tunes.

The mortified Christian, showing the nature, signs, necessity, and difficulty
of true mortification, with a discovery of siacerity, by C. Love.

A glimps of Christ, discovering the sweet Incomes of Christ to a spiritual
heart, by Rob. Dingley. 8vo.

A most excellent Treatise of 18. Attributes of God in 4to. by Thom. Larkbam,
M. A. sometimes of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge.

Three Treatises, 1. The Young man's Memento: 2. Now if ever: 3. The danger of
being almost a Christian, in 12ves. by John chishul, Minister of Tiverton, in
Devon.

Decapla in Psalmos, ^ive commentarius ex dece^ (...) antiquis patribus, Rab.
Historicis and poetis, a Joanne Vicario, Anglo, in fol.

A Commentary on the First Psalm, by F. Fletcher, in 4to.

Consolations for afflicted Conscience, or joy in tribulation, in 12o. by the
same Author.

Spare-Minutes, or Meditations by Arth. warwick, in 12o.

None but Christ, by the Author of the Concordance, on the Bible, Mr Clement
Cotton.

Cases of Conscience resolved by John Hall, Bishop of Norwich.

Books of Morality.
A most compendious and easy way of keeping of Merchants Accounts after the
Italian manner, by John ^arpenter Merchant, sol.

Elian's Tackticks; or, the Art of Imbattailing an Army, with curs in Brass
Plates.

Animadversions of War, or the military Magazine of the truest Rules, the most
refined discipline, and other new inventions, both for Fortifications and
Stratagems in War, by Robert ward a Commander.

The Works of that famous Mathematician, Edw. Gunter, sometime professor of
Astronomy at Gresham Col. newly Reprinted and corrected with Additions, by Sa.
Foster, late professor of the same College. And Mr Foster's Secter is added to
this fourth and last Edition, and the Cannon, or Tables much enlarged with
other useful Additions.

The Handmaid to Arithmetic, reducing all foreign Coyns to our English money;
likew^se weights and measures to English; also what Commodities every Country
affords, and the best way of traffic for them: It teaches Arithmetic
speedily and most exac^ly, by N. Hunt. in 8o.

The M^p of England exa^tly cut in Copper, with the Kings about i^, by w.
Hollar.

The Needles Excellency, or a Book of Cut-work; being a most useful Book for
young Gentlewomen; cut in Brass plates, in 4to.

A very useful Piece, containing rare Secrets and Experiments in Physic, and
Chyrurgery; by Thomas Collings, practitioner in Physic, near Gloucester.

Posselii Syntaxis, in Greek, 8o.

Formulae oratoriae in usum Scholarum concinnatae, cum praxi and usu earundem
in Epistolis, thematibus, declamationihus conterendis: Accessit dux poeticus
cum suis aliquot poematiolis Editio 8. Novissima Autoris Opera multo limatior
and ^mendatior.

Select and choice Phrases, Latin and English, at first briefly collected by
John Clark, for the use and benefit of young Scholars; and since Recognized,
and made more useful by will. Du-Gurd, Master of Merchant-Talors School in
London, in 8o.

Also Phraso^giae Pueriles, five Elegantiae Sermonis, or, Selected Latin and
English Phrases methodically digested, by way of Common place, and
Alphabetically, for the more casie finding what is desired; very useful for
young Latinists, to prevent Barbarism, and bald Latin making, and to initiate
them in speaking and writing elegantly in both Languages: 3d Edition, very much
enlarged by the same Author, Jo. Clark, B.D. and sometime Master of the
Free School in Lincoln, in 8o.

His Dux Grammaticus, in 12o. and Dux Oratorius C. Salustius, in Lat. 24.

Retoricae compendium, Ang. Lat. by Tho. Horn, Master of Eaton College.

The Schools Probation, by Will. Du-Gard, Master of Merch^nt. Tailors School,
in London.

-- Retoric^ Elementa.

-- Vestibulnm Linguae latinae, in 8o.

Also The Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, 8vo.

AEsop's Fables in Verse, illustrated with Emblems or Pictures, and also
Grammatically translated into Prose, with apt Moralls; and printed according to
the order of the Latin Copy, together with the History of his life, from the
best Greek Copies, very useful for all, but especially for young Scholars, in
12o.

Rusneri Symbola, exactly corrected, and the defect of the three Tables in
former Editions, rectified, and made into one.

Lucii Flores, in Lat. 24.

A Latin Testament, in 12o. exactly corrected, for the use of Grammar Schools,
and newly printed, in a fairer and larger Letter than any lately printed, by
Roger Daniel.

Amicus Reipublicae, the Commonwealths friend, showing an exact and speedy way
to Justice and Right, for the preventing and determining tedious Lawsuits, by
John March of Gra^es Inn, in 8o.

The duty of Constables, Overseers for the poor, and Surveyors of Highways,
by Jo. Layer Counselor, in 8o.

A faithful Register of the Transactions of Parliament in the third and fourth
years of the Ra^gn of our late Sovereign Lord, King Charles, containing the
sever^ Speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, and grand Mystery of the Kingdom
then in agitation, by T. Fuller, ^ol.

A Collection of Speeches in Parliament, by Sir Ed. Dearing, in 4o.

A Discourse of proper Sacrifice, in 4to.

The Scots Design discovered, relating their dangerous attempts lately
practiced against England, with the sad consequences of the same.

Monuments in the Saxon Tongue, written 700 years since, showing, that the Old
and New Testament, Lords Prayer, and the Creed, were then used in the Mother
Tongue.

Histo^y of Heliodorus, translated into English 4o.

A Manuel of Controversies, by O^iander, 8o.

Letters of Monsieur de Balzac, 1, 2, 3, and 4, parts; done in English by Sir
R. Baker, and others, and collected into one Volume, in 8o.

Poems, containing excellent Songs, Sonnets, Epigrams, Carols, Poesies,
Dialogues, with variety of other mirth, together with his noble numbers, in his
Pious Pieces, by R. Herick, Esquire. 8o.

Longinus, on the Height of Eloquence:

Also Hierocles upon the golden Verses of Pyt^ageras, teaching a virtuous and
worthy life: both written ori-ginally in Greek, and Englished by J. Hall, late
of Grays-Inn^, Esquire, and pieces of great learning.

FINIS.

