NEWS FROM HEAVEN BOTH GOOD AND TRUE CONCERNING ENGLAND Showing the right way
to Compose all differences and reconcile all disagreements betwixt King and
Subjects, Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants.


And so to procure the Prince of peace to dwell in our LAND.

Being a DIALOGUE between Mr. TINDALL and Mr. BRADFORD, two famous English
MARTYRS.

Collected by E. F.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. 1641.

News from HEAVEN
Mr. Bradford. AH my dear Brother Tindall, do you hear what stirrs and
discords there are at this time in our native Country England, betwixt
Superiors, and Inferiors?


Tind. Yea my sweet Brother Bradford I both hear of them, and know the cause
of them.


Brad. O What is the cause I pray you.


Tind. The true cause is the want of doing their duties each to other, as
Christians ought to do.


Brad. Well then the remedy is for each one to do their duty, werefore my
dear Brother, I beseech you declare unto me what is their duty each to other
and I will send my Friend to be your messenger to carry it to some godly
brother of ours yet in the flesh.


Tind. My sweet brother you know I did it when I was in the flesh, and they
have my works amongst them.


Brad. O but brother, your works are very hard to be found and those that have
them do not raed them so often as they should, but of you would be pleased to
send a Message from Heaven, O how acceptable it would be unto many.


Tind. Well then sweet brother, since you will needs have it so, The Kings duty.
I will grant your request, wherefore I pray you first let the King know that
though in the Temporal Regiment he be in the Room of God, and represents
God himself, and is without comparison better then his Subjects, yet let him
put off that and become a brother, remembering that his people are Christ's
inheritance, and possession, bought with his blood, and therefore in that
respect are his brethren, and equal with him in the kingdom of God, let him
not therefore think himself too good to do them service, neither let him seek
any other thing in them then a father does in his children, yea then Christ
sought in us, let him do and leave undone, all things in the Commonwealth, in
respect to the good of his people, that it may be manifest he seeks nothing
but their good when a cause comes before him that requires the execution of
Justice then let him take the Parson of God upon him, then let him know no
creature but hear all indifferently, and judge righteously, for the judgment
is the Lords; let him rule his Realm himself with the help of laymen that
are sage, wise, learned, and godly: let him take their advice what is necessary
for the defense of his Realm, and the peace of his people, let him defend his
people from the wrongs of other Nations, and let him keep his faith and truth*
and all lawful promises and bonds not only with Christian Princes, but also
with the Turk or whatsoever other Infidel it be, for that is right before God,
as the examples of Scripture testify, and thus briefly touching the duty of
the King


Brad. But stay sweet brother, is it not meet that the King should make use of
them they call spiritual Lords for his Counselors?


Tind. O no by no means, for is it not a shame above all shames and a
monstrous thing, that no man should be found able to govern a worldly Kingdom
save Bishops and Prelates, that are appointed to preach the Kingdom of God,
which Kingdom Christ says is not of this World? The truth is dear brother,
to preach Gods word is too much for half a man one man therefore cannot well
do both for no man can serve two Masters.


Brad. Well then sweet brother, proceed on I pray to show the duty of Subjects.


Tind. Subjects Duty.
The Apostle Paul says, let every soul be subject to the authority of the
higher Powers, etc. God therefore has given Laws unto all Nations and put
Kings and governors in his own steed to rule the world through, for there is
no power but of God; by power understand the authority of Kings and Princes
therefore subjects are to obey not for fear of punishment so much as for
conscience sake, for those Subjects that have Christ's spirit in them, do not
look what is profitable, good, glorious, and honorable for themselves,
neither on their own will, but on Gods will only, and so they do reverently
think of and voluntarily subject unto their King for Gods Ordinance sake.


Brad. And sweet brother must Subjects do this to bad Kings as well as to good
Kings?


Tind. Sweet brother, this is most certain; that heads and governors are
ordained of God, and are the gift of God, whether they be good or bad, and
whatsoever is done unto us by them, that does God, be it good or bad, if they
be evil: why are they evil? verily for our wickedness sake are they evil,
we read in the Book of Sammuel, that God was angry with the people, If
Christians must be thankful for a Tyrant, then surely England has cause to be
thankful for a Christian King.
and moved David to number them and though Ioab and other Lords dissuaded him
from it, yet it help not; God so hardened his heart in his purpose to have an
occasion to slay the wicked people: and this is sure though a King be the
greatest Tyrant in the world; yet is he unto his subjects a great benefit for
whom they ought to thank the Lord highly for it is better to suffer one Tyrant
then many, and to suffer wrong of one then of every man, and better to pay the
tenth then to loose all.


Brad. Then surely sweet Brother, it is not lawful for Subjects to avenge
themselves of their King though he be wicked.


Tind. O no sweet Brother by no means, but rather pray to God heartily for him:
if any man might have avenged himself upon a King, that might David most
righteously have done upon King Saul, who so wrongfully prosecuted him, yet
when God had delivered Saul into his hands, that he might have done what he
would with him, he did no more but cut off the lap of his garment, and yet for
that his heart smote him, and when his men encouraged him to slay him, he
answered, God forbid that I should lay my hands upon the Lords anointed,
neither suffered he his men to hurt him, for if he had he had sinned against
God, for God has made the King in every Realm Judge over all, and over him is
there no Judge. He that judges the King judges God* and he that lays hands
on the King lays hands on God: if the Subjects sin they must be brought to
the Kings Judgment, if the King sin he must be reserved to the Judgment and
wrath of God.


Brad. Well then now sweet brother proceed in the next place to speak of the
duties of Husbands to their Wives.


Tind. The Apostle Peter exhorts husbands to give reverence to their wives as
unto the weaker vessel, Husban^s duty.
in many things God has made the man stronger then the woman, not to rage upon
her or be a tyrant unto her, but to help her and bear her weakness, let him
therefore be courteous unto her and win her to Christ, and overcome her with
kindness, that of love she may obey the Ordinance that God has made between
man and wife. Let man beware that his love to his wife be not provoked by his
lusts, but let him love her for Conscience sake, as unto the Lord Christ, for
Christ has authority over marriage, therefore let a man have an eye unto him,
and not look on his wives unworthiness, want of goodness* or untowardnesse
to be ruled, but on the will of Christ, and so go on in playing the good
husband and seeking to win his wife unto God, and if she continue still
untoward, let him say within himself, alas it is the Lords scourge on me, for
that I have not been as I ought to be in obeying Christ my spiritual husband,
wherefore let him not be rigorous toward his wife, seeing that he himself
deserves to be thus humbled, his duty is yet to love her and to bear with
her, yea though there be vices in her, he must not pass what the person is,
but must consider she is his wife, and that Christ allotteth him such a portion
because it is meet for him, wherefore let him consider his sins and pray for
the pardon for them, and then that the Lord would be pleased to take away that
rod and deal more gently with him: and for the enabling him to do this the
first and chief point is* that God be called upon, for though a man use all
the means that can be, yet if he trust in his own wisdom and power, he shall
but loose his time for God will laugh his presumption to scorn, but if he do
consider that God has his wives heart in his hands and can bow it as it
pleases him, and do thereupon call to the Lord to give his wife grace, then
will the Lord hear him, and let him not say tush let me alone, I will compose
her well enough, as who would say he were a God, and as though God had reserved
nothing to himself, whereby to teach men to come unto him, to meeken their
wives hearts and bow them to obedience and mildnes: and thus also have I showed
you the duties of husbands to their wives.


Brad. Proceed I beseech you likewise to show the duties of Wives to their
Husbands.


Tind. Who created the woman, knows what is in that weak vessel, as Peter
calls her, and has therefore put her under the obedience of her husband, let
the wife, therefore see that she fear her husband, as Paul commands her, for
her husband is unto her in stead of God, therefore she is to obey him, and wait
on his will and command, for his commands are Gods commands, yea though he be a
wicked and unkind husband, if she grudge against him and resist him, she
grudgeth against God and resists God, it is the Lords Ordinance that the
husband should rule over the wife, and how can the husband rule over her if she
obey him not.


Brad. But stay sweet brother and by the way tell me, in how many things the
wife must be subject to her husband.


Tind. You know sweet Brother the Apostle says in all things, that is both in
her opinion, affection, speech, action and all that concerns the Husband must
savor of subjection, and that not only to the good and godly husband but
though the husband carry the very Image of the Devil, yet in regard of the
place and Office he bears, she must be subject unto him, for Christian Wives
in their subjection to their Husbands must have respect unto Christ, in whose
room their Husbands are unto them, therefore they must be subject not so much
because their Husbands love them, or for that they are kind to them, or
maintain them well, no nor yet for fear of his displeasure, but because of
Christ's Ordinance, whereby their Husbands are made their head, thus holy Women
of old subjected themselves to their husbands, and a wife cannot be holy,
except she thus subject her self for conscience sake, and so have I also done
with the duty of the wife to her Husband.


Brad. Well then, dear bro^her, I pray proceed in the next place to show the
duties of Parents to their Children.


Tind. Parents duty.
The Apostle says, Fathers provoke not your Children to Wrath, but bring them
up in the nurture and admonishment of the Lord, le^ Parents teach them to know
Christ and set Gods Ordinances before them saying Son or Daughter, God has
created and made thee through us thy Father and Mother, and at his command have
we so long so kindly brought thee up, and kept thee from perils and he has
commanded thee to obey us* the which if thou do thou shall grow in favor both
with God and man, after this manner let Parents deal with them, and not rate
them or revile them least they be discouraged, for when the Parents are
weyward, hasty, and churlish, ever brawling and chiding; there are the Children
discouraged and heartlesse, and apt for nothing neither can they they do any
thing aright, yet let them not so much encourage them with worldly ends, as to
say, if thou do thus and thus thou shall come to wealth and honor, but
encourage them with the hope of Gods favor and of eternal happiness, and if
need require* let them give them seasonable moderate and due correction, and
ever be sure to pray heartily to Christ for them: and moreover let Parents
mark how they themselves were disposed at all Ages and by experience of their
own infirmities, help their Children and keep them from occasions, and let
not Parents stretch their authority to the utmost toward their Children, but
some times suffer with them and bear with their infirmities, as they desire
Christ should do theirs, and so seek to winn them to Christ by gentle and
loving means, and so have I also briefly declared the duty of Parents toward
their Children.


Brad. Go on I beseech yout, o show the duty of Children to their Parents.


Tind. The Apostle says, Children obey your Parents in the Lord, Childens duty.
whence note that Children must so perform their duties to their Parents as
they would or should perform it to the Lord, that is in conscience, or for
conscience sake, which is all one as for the Lords sake, not because their
Parents are rich, and therefore able to give them good Portions, nor yet
because they are kind and therefore ready to reward them, nor yet because they
fear they will punish them if they do not; but because God requires it, and
it is well pleasing to the Lord, let Children know then it is their duties to
love and fear their Parents, whatsoever they be, whether Poor or Rich, good
or bad, and that they owe unto them whatsoever they, either are, or have, and
therefore whatsoever they do unto their Parents whether good or bad they do
it unto Christ, when they please their Parents they please Christ, and when
their Parents are justly angry with them Christ is angry with them, neither is
it possible for them to come into Christ's favor again, no though all the
Angels in Heaven should pray for them until they have submitted and reconciled
themselves to their Parents again, and so have I also done with the duties of
Children toward their Parents.


Brad Go on I beseech you to show the duty of Masters to wards their Servants.


Tind. The Apostle says, ye Masters do even the same things unto your
Servants, that is, be a Master after the example and Doctrine of Christ,
Masters duty*
put away threatenings, give them fair words, and exhort them kindly to do
their duties, yea and nurture them as thine own Children, with the Lords
nurture, that they may see in Christ a cause why they ought lovingly to obey,
do unto them that which is just and equal remembering that you have a Master
in Heaven, give them food, raiment and learning, be not bitter to them, rail
not on them, nor give them a cruel countenance but deal kindly with them, and
when they labor sore, cherish them, pray heartily to God for them, and if they
have need of correction, let Gods word be by, and do it after such a good
manner, that they may see you do it only to amend them, and to bring them
into that way which God would have them walk in* and not to avenge your
selves* or to wreck your malice on them, and if at any time through passion you
exceed measure in correcting them, recompense it in pardoning them another
time, and be sure you have a special care of the good of their souls: and
thus you see also the Masters duties to their servants.


Brad. Conclude then I beseech you, in showing the duty of Servants to their
Masters.


Tind. The Apostle says, Servants obey your Masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling* Servants duty.
in singleness of heart as unto Christ, not with eye service as men pleasers,
but as the Servants of Christ, doing his will from the heart, wherefore let
Servants in what respect or degree soever they are, during the time of their
covenants know for a surety that their Master is unto them in the stead and
room of God and that God through him feeds thee* cloatheth thee* rules thee
and learneth thee, his Commandments are Gods Commandments, and thou ought
to yield obedience unto him as unto God, and in all things to seek his
pleasure and profit, for thou art his goods and possession as well as his Ox
and Horse, therefore Paul the Apostle though he had need of Onesiemus to
minister to him in his bonds yet would he not retain him without the consent
of his Master: if thou be a Christian servant, thou must do thy duty to thy
Master for conscience sake, as having an eye to Christ his will and Ordinance,
not for by respects, as for that thou would be bountifully rewarded, or that
thy Master may praise thee, nor yet to avoid correction, but have thou an eye
unto Christ and his acceptance, and this thou must not only do to a good and
courteous Master, but also to the froward, though he take no notice of it nor
reward thee for it, and thus my sweet brother, according to your desire I have
declared, the duties both of Superiors and Inferiors, in a Christian
Commonwealth.


Brad. Well then dear brother, I will now speedily send my Angel to my dear
Native Country England, even to that famous City of London where I shed my
blood for the love of that truth which now is there powerfully Preached, and he
shall tell them good news from Heaven, yea from the Lord, Lev. 26.3.6.12.
saying, O England, if ye walk in these Ordinances, and keep these
Commandments, and do them, I will send peace in the Land, and ye shall sleep,
and none shall make you afraid; and I will walk among you; and I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people. Amen.


FINIS.

