CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall, the Tenth of May, 1672.
Present,

The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His Highness Prince Rupert Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury Lord Keeper Duke of Lauderdaill Duke of Ormonde Marquess of
Worcester Lord Chamberlain Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Essex Earl of Anglesey
Earl of Bathe Earl of Carlisle Earl of Craven Earl of Arlington Earl of
Shaftesbury Viscount Fauconberge Viscount Halifax Lord Bishop of London Lord
Newport Lord Holles Lord Clifford Mr. Vice Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Trevor Mr.
Chancellor of the Duchy Master of the Ordnance Sir Thomas Osborne.
It was Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That an Order this day read and
Approved as the Board for dispensing for some time with certain Clauses of
several Acts, concerning Trade, Shipping, and Navigation, be forthwith Printed
and Published.

EDW. WALKER.

HIs Majesty by and with the Advice of His Privy Council is pleased to Declare,
and Order, That an Act of Parliament, made in the Parliament begun at
Westminster the Five and Twentieth day of April in the Twelfth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, and Confirmed by the Parliament, begun at Westminster the
Eighth day of May in the Thirteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, Reign,
Entitled, [ An Act for Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation]
and all the Proceedings therein, or thereby directed, Be totally suspended in
all the matters and things therein Contained, concerning or relating to any
Ships or Vessels, their Masters or Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle,
Ammunition, and Apparel, or to any Goods or Commodities Imported or Exported
to, or from Norway, or the Baltique Sea.

And His Majesty does further Order, That the said Act, and all the Proceedings
therein or thereby directed, be totally suspended in all the Matters and things
therein Contained, concerning or relating to any Ships or Vessels, their
Masters or Mariners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel, or
to any Goods or Commodities Imported or Exported to, or from any parts of
Germany, Flanders, or France, whereof the Merchants and Owners shall be His
Majesty's natural born Subjects.

And His Majesty is graciously pleased to Declare and Grant, That not only His
Majesty's natural born Subjects, but all Merchants of any Nation, may Import
from any Ports whatsoever, Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Masts, Saltpeter, and Copper,
and upon Importation thereof shall be Liable to pay only such Duties as by the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage are Imposed upon His Majesty's natural born
Subjects and no other; Any thing in the said Act to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

And his Majesty does further Order, That notwithstanding the said Act for
Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation. And one other Act made
in the said Parliament, begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May in the
Thirteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, [ An Act for the
Encouragement of Trade] or either of them, or any Clause or Clauses in them, or
either of them to the Contrary; It shall and may be lawful for any English
Merchants, and they are hereby Authorized freely and without Interruption to
make use of, and Employ any Foreign Ships, or Vessels whatsoever, Navigated by
Mariners, or Seamen of any Nation, for Importing, or Exporting of all Goods and
Commodities, to or from any Port in England or Wales, or to or from any of His
Majesty's Plantations, they paying only the aforesaid Duties Imposed upon His
Majesty's natural born Subjects, as for Goods Exported in English-built
Bottoms, and no other.

Provided, That no Goods or Commodities whatsoever, be by them Imported into
any of His Majesty's said Plantations, but what shall be without fraud, Laden,
and Shipped in England or Wales, and thence directly carried, and from no other
Place to His Majesty's said Plantations.

Provided also, That such Goods and Commodities as shall be by them Laden and
taken on Board at His Majesty's said Plantations, or any of them, be brought
directly from thence to some of His Majesty's said Ports in England or Wales;
And all Governors and Officers of the Customs, are hereby Charged, and
required strictly to observe all Rules, Directions, and Orders for taking of
Bonds or other Securities, and exacting all Forfeitures and Penalties by the
said Acts, or either of them required or enjoined, save only in the two Clauses
concerning English Ships, and English Mariners herein before Dispensed with.

And lastly His Majesty does Declare, That this shall continue and be in force
during His Majesty's pleasure: And when His Majesty shall think fit to
Determine the Dispensation hereby Granted, He will by His Royal Proclamation
give Six Months notice thereof, to the end no Merchant or other Person herein
concerned may be surprised.

Lord Keeper Duke of Lauderdaill Duke of Ormonde Marquess of Worcester Lord
Chamberlain Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Essex Earl of Anglesey Earl of Bathe
Earl of Carlisle Earl of Craven Earl of Arlington Earl of Shaftesbury Viscount
Fauconberge Viscount Halifax Lord Newport Lord Holles Lord Clifford Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Trevor Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy Sir Thomas
Osborne
EDW. WALKER.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1672.


