By the Lords and others His MAJESTY'S Commissioners.
An Order for the Observance and Execution of the Statute made for the Relief
and Ordering of Persons infected with the Plague.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament in the first year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lord King James, several good and necessary provisions were made
and ordained, touching those that be or shall be infected with the Plague: by
which Act power is given to Justices of Peace of Counties, Majors, Bayliffes,
Head Officers, or Justices of Peace in Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate, and
places Privileged, and to the Vice Chancellor of either of the Universities,
and to the Bishop and Deane of every Cathedral Church respectively, within
their several and respective Precincts and Jurisdictions, to tax and assesse
all Inhabitants, and all houses of Habitation, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, at such reasonable taxes and payments as they shall think fit
for the reasonable relief of Persons Infected, and to levye the same of the
goods of such as shall refuse or neglect to pay, and in default thereof, to
commit them to the Goal without Bail or Mainprize until payment; And also to
appoint Searchers, Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers, for the Persons
and places Infected, and to Minister Oaths unto them for the performing of
their Offices, and to give them other directions as shall seem good unto them
in their discretions for the present necessity. And it is thereby farther
Provided and Enacted, that if any person, or Persons Infected, or being or
dwelling in any houses Infected, shall be commanded or appointed to keep his or
their house, for avoiding of farther Infection, and shall notwithstanding
wilfully and contemptuously disobey such direction and appointment, offering or
attempting to break or go abroad, and to resist such Keepers or Watchmen as
shall be appointed to see them kept in: that then it shall be Lawful for such
Watchmen with violence to enforce them to keep their houses: And if any hurt
come thereby, that the Keepers, Watchmen, and their assistants shall not be
impeached therefore. And farther that if any Infected persons being commanded
to keep house, shall notwithstanding wilfully and contemptuously go abroad,
and converse with company, having any Infectious sore about him uncured, such
person shall be taken and adjudged as a Felon, and suffer death as in case of
Felony: but if they shall have no sore found about them, nevertheless for such
offense they shall be punished as Vagabonds in all respects, and also be bound
to his or their good behavior for one whole year, as by the said Act may more
fully appear. The Lords and others entrusted and authorized by His Majesty, by
His Commission under His Great Seal of England, for, and concerning, the
safety, preservation, and well Ordering of this University and City of Oxford,
and the County of Oxford, and other Counties and places adjoining, in His
Majesty's absence, taking into their consideration, that the due observance and
execution of the said Law, may (by Gods blessing) be a good means to prevent
the farther spreading of this present infection, and that the neglect of the
observance of the same Law, has been, and may be, in probability, an occasion
of the increase thereof, do therefore hereby in His Majesty's name, by virtue
of His Majesty's said Commission, straightly Charge and Require, the
Vice Chancellor of this University, and the Major, Justices of Peace,
Bayliffes, and other Officers of this City of Oxford, and the Justices of Peace
of the County of Oxford, and all others whom it may concern, that with all
possible care and diligence, they cause the said Law to be duly and
effectually put in execution, as well for the help and relief, as for the
governing and keeping in of Infected persons, as they will answer their neglect
and remissness therein at their perils. And they do likewise in His Majesty's
name, straightly Charge and Command all persons whatsoever, as well Soldiers as
others, upon whom it has pleased, or shall please God to lay this his
visitation, that they submit and yield obedience to the said Law. Letting them
know that a strict and severe proceeding shall be had, for punishing of all
such as shall wilfully or contemptuously offend against the same to the
endangering of others: and that a very strict account will be required of all
who are or shall be any way concerned in this just and necessary command,
tending so much to the health and preservation of this University and City, and
all that are resident therein or resort thereunto. Dated at Oxford this first
day of August in the year of our Lord God 1644. and in the twentieth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES.

YORK. Ed. Littleton C. S. Cottington. Hertford. Dorset. Hen. Dover.
Chichester. Chr. Hatton. Ed. Nicholas. Ed. Hide. Io. Banks. Arth. Ashton.


Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. 1644.


