Fore-warned, Fore-Arm'd: OR, England's Timely Warning in general, And London's
in particular. By a Collection of Five Prophetical Predictions Published by Mr.
William Lilly Forty years ago: Two of Mr. John Gadbury's, Anno 1678. And One of
Mother Shipton's long since, all at large: Published in the said Mr. Lilly and
Gadbury's own Words. PURPORTING I. London's Danger Anno 1683. and its
Catastrophe soon after. II. The Danger that the Protestant Religion will be
brought unto all over Europe, and by whom effected, and where contrived. III.
That England in general will be brought into great Calamities, and by what
means. IV. The Extinguishment of a very great Family in some part of Europe. V.
That the Breach of some Nations Privileges, Ancient Customs, and Long-enjoyed
Rights, may produce dangerous Effects. All of which are Published by the
Author, not to affright the People with, but to warn them of; knowing that Evil
beforehand warned of, commonly hurts less, then that which comes at unawares.


London, Printed for John Powel, 1682.

Fore-warned, Fore-Arm'd: OR, England's Timely Warning in general, and London's
in Particular.
I Shall begin first with Mr. Lillies, grounded on that (as he said) of Mother
Shiptons, but was not hers but Ambrose Merlins concerning London, Published in
his Englands Prophetical Merlin, Anno 1642 page 91. the words are as follows.

What Lincoln was, and London is, That York shall be;
The fairest City of the three.
Brave London prays that day she nere may see.
On which he says, That London in England (by reason of the unlucky Position
of Mars in her Sign, and being Cadent from Aries and Mercury his Dispositer in
Combust and in Detriment) shall endure many a hard shock, two plagues, (but
from Mercuries being Combust, and in detriment he might, and its a wonder to
me why he did not say, that one of those two Plagues might have been a fiery
one, as indeed it proved to be) extreme damage in her Wealth, the loss of many
Valiant Citizens, but it shall be with Honor and to her perpetual Renown. --
Nor shall any man yet alive s^e the days Mother Shipton spoke of concerning
London; yet in time all Cities must have an end: But I rather think that about
the year 1683. the City shall be in great danger, and then come to a final
Catastrophe during the Revolution of that fifth Conjunction.

So far Mr. Lilly in that page, but its danger shall be more particularly
declared anon.

But by that fifth Conjunction is to be understood that of Saturn and Jupiter,
in the Fiery Triplicity, and in Leo, on the 20 day of October, Anno 1682. which
will be their fifth from that seventh great Conjunction of theirs Anno 1603.
when they left the Watery, and entered into the Fiery Trigon, on the 7 of
December in the said year, which kind of Conjunctions seldom or never happened,
(if Credit may be given to History, Antiquity or Experience,) (as Mr. Lilly
says,) but they were followed with great and strange Changes in the World,
both in Civil and Ecclesiastical States, and are as seldom accompanied with any
propitious Successes to England in general, or London in particular.

1. For at their first entrance into Aries, called by Ptolomy the first of the
Zodiake, and the Arabians the fiery Trigon, which was their first Conjunction
after the Creation, and was called their great Conjunction, and was before
Enochs Translation. 2. Their Second before Noah's Flood, and was followed with
the sad Universal Deluge, Nimrods usurped Monarchy, and the building of Babel.
3. Their third, before Moses bringing the Israelites out of Egypt, and the
giving of the Law. 4. Their fourth was also followed with erecting of the
Empire of the Medes. 5. Their Fifth with that of the Romans, and the
Incarnation of Christ, and Publishing the Gospel to the Jews. 6. Their Sixth
with the Translation of the said Empire to the Germans. 7. And their Seventh
great, yea and greatest, being their Sabbatical Conjunction, was Anno 1603.
which was followed, first, with the Death of Queen Elizabeth, a Mother to the
English Nation, at which time was a great Plague in London. And secondly, The
raising the Monarchy of great Britain, and Ireland to the Family of the
Stewarts in Scotland; and could a more memorable change happen in this part of
the World, then for a Scotch King to become King of England and Ireland,
without blows, considering the Antipathy between both Nations? And was not this
a raising of a new Monarchy, and a great one too, of which James the sixth of
Scotland was the first King, and our King Charles the second was and is the
first King of the said Race, born in it, and to it, and consequently a proper
Native of it, God grant he may live long to enjoy it.
And here we are to take Notice, That these said seven Conjunctions of the two
superior Planets are all the great Conjunctions that have been since the
Creation; or that will be in some Centuries of years, if ever any more be at
all, of which Mr. Lilly doubted, with many more, the Sabbatical one being now
already past; neither do they come to pass above once in eight hundred
years.-And further, that there have been but fifteen more in all of those two
Planets, since the Creation, as appears by Ptolomy's Table of all the
Conjunctions that have been of all the Plannets since, as aforesaid, of which
said Table the Author has a Copy now extant of Mr. Lillies Transcribing.

1. Which said 15 Conjunctions past; with the next to come this next October,
are called lesser, or minor Conjunctions. 2. But the next Conjunction that
followed that of 1603. was that which came to pass in seven degrees of Leo, in
the same Trigon, Anno 1623. and was followed first with King James his death,
and then with that Plague of which was said to dye above 50 thousand People in
London Anno 1625. 3. Their third Conjunction fell out to be Anno 1642. in which
said year began our intestine War between King and Parliament, which lasted
more or less with some Intermissions until 1652. in which year or the next we
had a dull Saturnine Comet, on Contemplation whereof, Mr. Lilly writ a second
Prediction, for matter and form as follows.
In the Year of Eighty Three,
Great Changes there will be.
In England, -- But
Long ere that time poor Merlin sleeps,
In his Grave secure; sad England weeps.
Leaves he no Heir, unhappy man,
That this obscure Riddle -- can
Unfold? -- No.
But more remarkable was that which followed their fourth Conjunction in
Sagitarius, and fiery Trigon, Anno 1663. when all the Planets met in that house
as at a general Rendezvous to consult the effecting the heavenly decrees, and
was followed, first, with three great Comets, in less then Seven Months space,
and then secondly with the greatest Pestilential Plague that ever London knew,
to the Destruction of near an hundred thousand People, thereby leaving many
houses desolate of the Inhabitants, Anno 1665. and then with that dreadful fire
which Consumed most of the City and as much of the Suburbs, as it left of the
City, thereby leaving more Inhabitants destitute of houses, Anno 1666. by all
which we may observe, that the Effects of these last Conjunctions were speedy
and severe, though not of any long Continuance.

But what manner of Effects have already or may yet precede this now so near
approaching on, a very few years may probably determine; and for as much as the
former were, as aforesaid, what may we expect otherwise then that this coming
of the same or the like cause, should produce the like Effects, unless God of
his great Mercys be pleased to prevent the same.

3. Mr. Lillies third Prediction, saying, page 25. of the same Book, I judge
that privately by Lies, Treacheries, fained and dissembled Treaties and
Ambassadors, and by the Policies of a Jesuitical Faction, all over Europe, the
true Protestant Religion will be infinitely distressed, and the heavenly
intentions Impedited; and all those Countries professing Protestantisme
exceedingly molested by so great a Compact of Villains, and false hearted
Traitors lurking in the Clossets and Bosoms of Princes, that many shall think
that Popery shall return to its old Seat in every Country, etc.

Consider who are Enemies to the Protestant Religion, viz. The Popish Priests,
Jesuits and Papists, with their Adherents; and where they Harbor, and Contrive
their Mischiefs (if Mr. Lilly were not mistaken.)

4. His fourth Prediction page 110. of the same Book. Woe to a great Family in
Europe, That was, is now, and shall not be; it is not old, its not Ancient, but
like an untimely Birth, its cut off and shall not flourish in Branch or Root.
Good Lord! shall the number of Fifty cut off more than five, or shall less then
90. be allotted for four, shall the Virgin be barren, and the Lion have no
Issue? shall less then 36 end in two? shall the second end in a Cipher? and
shall seven come to be one, and then none?

The fifth of Mr. Lillies, I intend to reserve for the close of the Treatise.

Mr. Gadburies Prediction in his Almanac, for the Year 1678.

What art thou, O Crafty but smooth Tongued Enemy, whether Courtier, Causidian
or Ecclesiastic; that thus delightest to obstruct the Peace of Kingdoms, and
Republics, and playest thy Game under a show of Friendship, Piety and
Conscience; with a seeming compliance with the things thou really opposest?
shall time be so much a Traitor to Truth and Goodness, as not at length to pull
off thy Hypocritical Vizor? Be quiet Friends, it cannot yet be, Eighty Three is
not yet come; But the Heavens and Stars are by Gods Permission preparing
matter.

Another of the same Author.
When Venus shall a Prince and Empire raise
And Jove's Constrained to give dull Saturn praise,
Then shall the Laws and Powers Jove did Erect
Strike Sail, and how to a Saturnine Sect.
One of Shiptons own Prophecies
England thy proper Native thee betrays,
Because all Nations hate thee and thy ways.
Spain does Undermine thee, France does gnaw,
Wales Threats thee, Irish thee by Snares do aw.
Thy bravest men do on a sudden dye,
And thou thy self do wholly ruined lie,
And see it not, but under feigned Peace,
Do thine own Misery still the more increase.
Having thus given the Nation in general, and the City in particular, a
Prospect of some of the dangers predicted against them, and in possibility may
be brought upon them, and by whom, and about what time ( viz.) Soon after the
Celebration of that Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, spoken of by Mr. Lilly,
and is already preceded as follows.

First, by a restraint put upon Liberty of Conscience in Religious things,
contrary to some Engagements past to another purpose; and procured at the
Request and Solicitation of such men as peradventure are of no Religion
themselves, or at the best, such a Religion, whose Principle is to conclude
(Papist-like) with Nulla Fides, otherwise it had never been desired, but we may
thank the first Parliament for that. A second precedent is a Mercurial War
managed with Tongue and Pen, apt Weapons for such a Warfare.

Which is in all the Nation proclaimed by those distinguishing Nicknames of
Whiggs and Tories obscenely and provokingly put upon the Adherents to the two
adverse Parties in the quarrel; id est, the Protestants and Papists, just as it
was before the War began between the late King and Parliament, Anno 1642. when
called Cavaliers and Roundheads.

A Third is, some apparent dangers which the City of London does now labor
under, which may be part of the danger Mr. Lilly said the City should be in
about 1683.

The first is that of their Charter, called for by the King with a Quo
Warranto, and as some think is in danger of being lost.

The second is their Privileges assaulted by their present Lord Mayor, who (as
his Lordship thinks) has drank the Commons out of their Privilege of Electing
two Sheriffs. The third is their Religion in common with the rest of the
Nation, and has been and still is designedly assaulted by its common Enemies
the Papists.

But the fourth, last, and greatest, and worst danger, preceding the foresaid
Conjunction, is the Miserable Divisions the whole Nation in general is fallen
into, and labors under, making themselves two distinct parties, in absolute
Opposition against each other, of which kind of danger it may be feared, that
there is but little hope to escape from, unless the Lord send help some other
way then is yet thought of. Therefore let us yet consider Christ's Words, A City
divided against it self cannot stand. The present Condition, we now stand
Laboring under, may probably be the matter, Mr. Gadbury said that the Heavens
and Stars were preparing for Eighty three.

This is it that the Popish Priests, Jesuits, and other Papists longed for ever
since they miscarryed in their Design Anno 1678. and is the Product of what the
Addressors from the North to West desired at the first, and what some Gentlemen
near home Solicited so often for since, and which some of the Ministry,
Magistracy, and People of the Church of England, do so violently prosecute
against the Dissenters abroad, and which the Papists, Atheists and Debauchees
of the Nation, do now rejoice in, and hope to confound the Protestant Religion,
Laws, and Government by, against which, together with Popery with its ill
Circumstances, or for avoiding thereof, a War, with its doubtful events, we
should pray to God to deliver us from. Which War I mention the rather, because
Mr. Lilly in his Almanacks for 77 and 81. says, That the breach of Just
Privileges, Ancient Customs, and Long-Enjoyed-Rights, will Animate the
generality in some Nation to a strong and Sturdy Rebellion.

For preventing of all which, that God may bless King Charles the Second, with
Life to the height of old Age, shall be the daily Prayers of this Author.

FINIS.

