Golden Remains OF Sir GEORGE FREMAN, Knight of the Honorable Order OF THE
BATH.

BEING CHOICE DISCOURSES ON Select Subjects.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold by Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lyon
in St Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

PREFACE.
THE great charity the Author had for souls (lest any should take example by
seeing him drink) and the desire he had of making what restitution he could,
was the reason he desired me to set out his Treatise against Drinking after his
Death. And as I who was constantly with him must needs know him better than any
other; so I think my self obliged to do him that right, as to let the world
know he was not the Man they generally took him for. I can justly say I never
knew any one of a more tender Conscience: after he had been in company, if upon
inquiry into himself he found he had committed a sin in drinking too much, or
done any thing he thought extravagant, he would very much lament himself, and
has sent for the company he was with, and given them good advice, persuading
them to a holy life. He has made resolutions to drink nothing but small Beer,
which he has kept till the violence of his fits seized on him so severely,
that he has been forced to drink some Wine to relieve him from them; but has
been extremely troubled, and said to me, what a miserable condition am I in,
that these fits should force me to that I would fain quite cast off; and would
take it with great caution, and say, Lord give a blessing so far as I may
lawfully pray. For his Family Duties, he was careful there should be Prayers
morning and evening. For some time he had a Minister in the House which said
the Church Prayers twice a day; when he was gone, he performed the duty
himself: and when he was not able by reason of his illness, he ordered one of
his Sons to do it. Several times when he rose from Prayers, he would give his
Servants good instructions: And when he could not go to Church by reason of the
violence of his Fits, he would speak to me to take care that his Children and
Servants went; and bid me tell them the reason why he did not go, lest they
should take example by his staying away, which he said he would never do if it
pleased God he had his health. It was his constant practice before he went
abroad, though it was never so little a way, first to go to his Prayers and beg
a blessing of God. For his Charity in giving Alms, he had bowels of mercy, he
seldom gave Alms but he shed tears of compassion for their misery: And when
they returned thanks in praying for him, he would say to me, they do me much
more good by their prayers, than I can do them with my Alms: What a mercy it is
that I have so much plenty who deserve no more than they! On the Lords day he
had many of the Poor dined with his Servants, which he would speak to with a
friendly kindness, and look on them with much joy, that they received
refreshment at his Table. He gave yearly Pensions, one to a very ancient Widow,
and another to an ancient Gentleman, who died, and then he gave it to his
Brother, being in the like want. He relieved several Knights and Gentlemen in
their distress, feeding, clothing, and assisting them with money toward the
burying their dead. And every Christmas he gave money to the Poor of
Betchworth and Brockham: And as an encouragement to Charity he used to say, it
is the best way of putting money to use, to give it to the Poor. As he was thus
eminent in this Virtue of Almsgiving, so he was no less in that hardest part of
Charity, which is forgiving Enemies. He received as much wrong as a slanderous
tongue could do him, but was so far from returning evil for evil, that contrary
to that, he asked me what he should do, to do that party good; my answer was, I
knew no way but Prayer: which he immediately betook himself to, after a solemn
manner on his knees with me; and after that told me, he had Prayed at Church
and in his bed for that party, and though he received the wrong, yet he first
desired to be reconciled. I could give several other instances of his returning
good for evil, for he never bore malice against any, but still endeavored to
overcome his Enemies with kindness. His Charity to souls was so diffusive, that
he wrote several short dehortations from sin, and exhortations to a holy life,
and used to cast them privately about the streets, that some finding them might
by the grace of God be wrought upon to forsake their sins. One of the Papers I
have by me, with these words in it, Fear to do ill, for thou know not how
soon death may overtake thee. He was very just in all dealings, careful to pay
his debts, and in accounting would rather be a loser than any should suffer by
him. He many times used this expression, Whose Ox have I taken? He was humble,
kind and courteous to the meanest of his Neighbors, and never slighted any
Gentleman for his poverty; but used them with as much respect as those that had
great Estates. He was a Loyal Subject to his King, a true Son of the Church of
England, and very much against Popery. He was a loving Father to his Children,
a very kind Master to his Servants, and (I must ever own it) he was a most
tender loving Husband to me: which he showed in taking care to the utmost of
his power to provide for me, and to his last in his extraordinary kind
expressions to me on his deathbed. Above two years before his death a great
Affliction befell him, which brought much anguish on his spirits, so that when
he has been at Prayers with his Family he could scarce bring out his words for
tears: and he being naturally melancholy, great afflictions must needs lie
heavier upon him and be harder to overcome, had he not had a great support from
Heaven. But through Gods grace they turned so much to his advantage and weaned
him so from this world, that his discourses to me were as Sermons treating of
Death and the happiness of the next world. He said the day of our death might
very well be called the day of our birth, giving us a greater enlargement than
when we came from the enclosure of our Mother's womb: And told me he and I
should do as my Lady Falkland advised her friends, not love one another too
much, but endeavor to wean our affections, knowing one must go before the
other: telling me also of one, that when he had word brought him of the death
of his only Son, said, I knew I begat a mortal. When troubles were on him, he
would say, Heaven will recompense all, Heaven is a sweet place; there is no
disturbance, but all Peace and Love. He hoped he might overcome his troubles,
which he could never have done, had he not had a greater succor than any on
Earth: but God was all in all to satisfy his soul. He used to say, all my
strength is in God, had I not depended on the Holy Jesus I had been dead e're
this. He could not lay himself to sleep but with some of these expressions,
Jesus is my strength; God is a very present help in trouble: in him we live
move and have our being: It is he that performs all things for us: All my
fresh springs are in thee O Lord. He used to have the Italian Testament, Bishop
Hall's Book called, The Balm of Gilead, with other good Books at his beds-head;
which he would read in before he went to sleep, finding some comfortable
sentence suitable to his condition, of which he would discourse with me as he
laid himself to rest. He used in great troubles to take the Bible and open it
at adventure, and then read what he first found; which often has been so
suitable to his condition, that he has received great comfort, and writ the
places down, which I have by me. His heart was so much set on Heaven, that he
wondered how any Religious person could concern himself for any of these vain
and transitory things: and would use this expression of Dr Hammond, Let God
govern the world. And when he heard of any false reports he said, Let us not
trouble our selves, but consider how we stand in the sight of God. He was very
fearful of taking Gods name in vain: Insomuch that when Fits seized violently
on him, and pain made him cry, O Lord! he was troubled lest he had broken that
Commandment, who (said he) is able to help me but he in this my great
extremity? He could not endure to hear any one swear, and hated a lie. He wrote
some of our blessed Saviors Sermon on the Mount, which he intended to write
out, resolving to get it by heart and make it his practice, but death seized
him before it was finished. He had a great love to the Word of God; and said to
his Sister on his deathbed, I love Gods word, and I fear him. When he first
waked in the morning he said, God be blessed that I have lived to see the light
of another day, Lord grant that I may spend it to thy service; and that Collect
of the Church, Prevent us O Lord in all our doings, etc. And when he rose
crossing his Arms, he said, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, Amen; and then he said the Lords Prayer which he had a high
veneration for; afterward he read a Psalm. He did not use long Prayers, but
short Ejaculations often both day and night. When I have waked in the Morning,
I have seen him lifting up his hand with so great devotion that it has moved
my affection. He delighted much in discourses of Religion, and holy
Meditations: and has told me in his bed, he has had such sweet Meditations,
as have raised him even to Heaven. I am not able to express how excellently he
would speak of his love to the Holy Jesus, and the blessed Trinity. He said he
loved God above all, and not any thing in comparison of him; and that he would
be a Martyr for God. If he were sure his sins were forgiven, and the pain of
death over, he could willingly leave this world: for he desired to be dissolved
and to be with Christ. He has reckoned to me the many dangers he had escaped,
and the many blessings he had received: admiring the great goodness of God that
had preserved him to that present, and had given him time to repent of his
sins, and bestowed many undeserved blessings on him. He told me he had desired
some temporals, which God denied him; but he looked on it as a mercy, and
clearly saw that it was better for him to be in that very condition God had
placed him in; and would often speak of Gods Providence. He was a great lover
of the company of Divines; and could not abide to see them slighted. He had
several of them in his prayers, and desired the benefit of theirs for himself.
Satan would tempt him to lay aside his confidence in the mercies of God: but he
resolved and armed himself by faith against those assaults; and has said to me
that he could as plainly see Satan in his malicious designs and temptations
against him, as if he saw him with his bodily eyes. And sometimes Satan tempted
him to infidelity, but he did resist him and presently said the Creed. I heard
him say on his Deathbed, Satan would tempt me, but I will not believe him: And
then said, I believe in God, etc. which made me think he had the same
temptations then, which he had told me of at other times: And that that good
God that had sustained him to that time, would not then leave him, but
strengthn'd his faith to the last gasp. About half a year before his Death he
had many scruples, which proceeded from the tenderness of his Conscience, and
made him full of fears lest in this or that he had offended: and though when
company came to see him, he seemed as cheerful as he could; yet when they were
gone he would be troubled for any word or action he might offend in: and did
examine himself of his former life with sorrow for all he had done amiss. He
had very humble thoughts of himself, and would judge and blame himself rather
than others: and often say a proud Man could not go to Heaven. He was of a very
sweet disposition, and so tender hearted that he could not endure to see any
creature in misery: and has told me of one that put his only Son to death for
delighting in putting out the eyes of birds, thinking he would be a cruel Man.
And though he was thus tender hearted, yet upon a good account he had great
courage, as he has showed in his readiness to serve his King, in the Surrey
rising, and at other times, though he never had the fortune to be in any
action. He was a very good Scholar, understood Hebrew, Greek, Latin and
Italian, and had the French Tongue as perfect as a Native. He had great skill
in Music, and delighted very much in it. He had a great love to any he thought
loved God. Once a poor man came begging, that said he had been taken by the
Turks, and used very cruelly; but rather than he would deny Christ, he would be
torn in pieces: I cannot express how much my Husband rejoiced to hear him say
so, and he was so taken with him, that he gave him both Money and Clothes.
There was a poor Woman that used to sit with the rest of the Poor at his
Servants Table, and he heard she had the report of a good Woman, he took her to
his own Table, and used her with much respect. He had such humble thoughts of
himself, that for some time he would not allow himself decent Burial: but
afterward he consented to it, and desired his Neighbors might accompany him
to his Grave. He often desired me to be buried in the vault by him. I have
something in memory of a dream that he told me of when he waked a little before
his last sickness; he dreamed that the day of Judgment was come, and the Lord
appearing in the clouds, and calling the Elect, he was left behind; upon which
being grievously afflicted he prayed earnestly, and the Blessed Jesus looked
back and called him: and he went with great joy, and was received into Heaven
with the rest of the Elect. He was full of fears as to his future condition
while he was here: But now I question not but he is received into the joy of
the Lord. He was a sickly man for many years, troubled with Convulsion Fits and
shortness of breathing, which made him fear sudden Death, and pray daily
against it: But his last sickness was the Yellow-jaundice, with a very sore
throat and a violent* Fever. And though he was in very much pain, he bore it
with a great deal of patience, speaking comfortably to all about him: so that
they said they never were with any one that made a better end. He was much in
Prayer, I think I heard him say the Lords Prayer near twenty times in one day,
when he was so weak that he could hardly bring out his words. He desired me not
to be troubled, and said God would provide for me, and prayed God to send us a
happy meeting: He often told me, his Prayer for me was, That God would bless me
with the Blessings of his right hand and of his left. I cannot remember half
the Heavenly Expressions he had when Mr. Benson the Minister of our Parish
prayed by him. He said to me, Mr. Benson is a good Man, he speaks so sweetly
when he speaks of God. He desired the Bell might be rung, and asked many times
after it, if it did not ring. He departed this life on the 10th day of May,
1678. being Friday, the day after Ascension: And I hope he has received the
benefit of the precious Passion, and glorious Resurrection and Ascension of our
dearest Lord, and ever blessed Savior Jesus. He had formerly desired me not to
be by him when he was dying, lest seeing me should make him unwilling to leave
this world; and lest I should by any sudden passion disturb his soul departing*
But at last he very much called upon me not to leave him, so I stayed with him
to the last: and though my trouble was not to be expressed, yet (I thank God) I
did not in the least disturb him. He endured much pain in his sickness, but at
last I could not perceive he had any, but his breath grew shorter and shorter,
and so he went away without the least gasp or groan. His thoughts and discourse
were much of death long before; he would say our life was but as a dream, or
the shadow of a dream, and as a vapor. And when he saw any disturbed for fear
of losses in this world, he would say none are ever undone till they come to
Hell. He loved much to dispute about Religion, but once being disputing against
Predestination, and fearing he had spoken something irreverent, he was
extremely afflicted; I never saw any one express more sorrow, and writ what I
here set down, and have under his own hand by me: I did immediately strip my
self of it, and threw my self down before the Throne of Grace, by which it had
no propriety in me: I did it whatever it was to vindicate God's mercy: I have
committed my cause to God who knows my thoughts, and let him deal with me
according to his infinite goodness and wisdom: let Satan do what he can against
me, I know my Savior is the Captain of my Salvation. I have here endeavored
to give what account I can of my dear Husbands life; but I know I come very
short of what might have been observed by one of a better memory, that had been
with him so much as my self. I hope the Christian Reader, into whose hands
these Papers shall come, will pardon all imperfections in the Style or Method,
and make the best use of what was so well designed by the Author. The
fulfilling of whose Will in setting forth his Book, and discharging my duty, in
clearing him to the world, is the only cause I venture to appear in Print,

Sarah Freman.

I Received a Letter from a very Reverend Divine that gives this account of my
dear Husband, which I write in his own words; That he was in many respects the
most remarkable instance of humility, the greatest example of godly sorrow, and
the most admirable Precedent of self-denial and sincere detestation of sin in
himself, and passionate care that it might not infect others, which I have
known. And of this it pleased the all-wise guider of all things to make me a
very heedful witness about 18 years ago, when I preached at the Savoy for Dr.
T. F. Not many days after, I was summoned to wait on Sir George Freman, a
person then altogether unknown to me, whom he entertained with a most doleful
tenderness of affection, and with manly (because Christian) showers of tears
spoke after this manner: Sir, You are to me as I suppose I am to you, a
stranger. I thank you for your Sermon at the Savoy, where I was your Auditor. I
do not think you aimed at me, but sure I am your discourse pierced my heart. I
could scarce think any one there besides concerned, I dare say none more than
my self. I am that miserable man, who have not remembered my Creator in the
days of my Youth, (my Text was Eccles. xii. 1.) and now what shall I do, what
shall I do? give me your advice, assist me with your Prayers. Thus in one
person perceiving many blessed marks of true penitents, wounded with St Peter's
hearers who were pricked to the heart, Acts 2. inquisitive with the Baptist's
pious Auditors, St Luke 3. vowing amendment with David, and commanding it in
those under his care; sending to me as good Josiah did to Huldah the
Prophetess. I did as soon as I had recovered my self from that tumult of
passions which a sight so unexpected did raise, apply my self, according to my
poor ability, with utmost compassion, to aid the sorrowful patient of the
Almighty; who was pleased, after diverse weeks conference, prayers, and
meditations on several Texts of Scripture, and such like means used by my self,
and others of far more experience, to raise up his troubled spirit, bowed down
with the dreadful apprehensions of God's heavy displeasure, and to stay him
with some comfortable hopes that our heavenly Father would not cast him off for
ever, nor always shut up his loving kindness and tender mercy. For which with
what singular expressions of penitential sorrow he prepared himself, I am not
able to utter. With what zealous indignation did he call to mind his sins! With
what affectionate care did he dehort his Family from all wicked and vain
courses! I was astonished to see and hear with what awful reverence,
prostration and tears, with what inflammation of soul, he kissed the sacred Book
when he solemnly renewed his Covenant with God. I am too little acquainted with
virtue, to describe that masculine meekness, wherewith he deprecated the injury
he had done to his meanest attendants by his former example. I know too little
of sanctification to tell you with what fervency of spirit he declaimed
against, and dissuaded his servants from the imitation of his now abhorred
practices, and with penitent Manasses solemnly resolved to command all under
his authority to serve the Lord, The sincerity of these resolutions was proved
by his pious behavior, whereof I was till 1664. sometimes an eyewitness; and
by this did appear the soundness of his judgment, for hereby he declared, that
he knew how dangerous and senseless a conceit it is (which is too common) that
men may believe well without repentance, and repent well without amendment,
live well without prayer, and pray well without faith. And now, Madam, who can
think he wants joy, who thus sowed in tears? and why should any bewail him who
is happier than here he could be? Relieve your self from sad thoughts with
reflecting upon that bliss and fullness of pleasure, which he most earnestly
groaned for and now enjoys for ever.

The disswasive from Drunkenness (a most acutely pious discourse) I had from
his own hand, and it is now no little ornament to my Study.

The relics of his judicious and divine Pen (designed for the benefit of more
than one age) will have great commendation to the wiser part of the world from
the learned Author, and those excellencies wherein they resemble him will give
security that none can buy his Book too dear, or better bestow his time than in
reading what he wrote.

A Letter written to me upon the Death of my Husband.
Madam,
YOur loss is great, by reason of the Death of your dear Husband: however you
have this comfort to allay the grievance of the loss, the hope and even
confidence that he is gone to Heaven. Neither will it be accounted partiality
in you, in thus charitably judging of him; for it is very reasonable that is
thus concluded concerning him. Contrary to the usual way of a Letter, let me so
method what I knew of him to be very true:

First, He was a person of great reason, and had such a judgment as would
rightly distinguish betwixt good and evil.

Secondly, He did not thwart his Judgment and opinion of things by his actions,
but accordingly steered his course, as nearly as frail humanity would permit.

Thirdly, He was a true son of the Church of England, and wondered at the
opposition and contradictions of others to its Christian tenants.

Fourthly, His Prayers were constant unto God for the conversion of our
Churches Enemies. He labored not only by strong arguments when he met with the
Recusants, but at other times also when he was alone, by his Prayers to make
them Proselytes.

Fifthly, He was heavenly minded, and his discourse was continually about God
and Eternity; and he affected no man's company whose talk was worldly, for he
accounted it frivolous and vain.

Sixthly, Though a person of quality, yet he was affable and courteous, and
strangely condescending, and chused his Associates rather for their goodness
than for their greatness.

Seventhly, He was charitable, ready to contribute toward the necessity of the
poor, and timed some of his liberal gifts excellent well; encouraged many of
the poor Parishioners to come constantly to the Church by entertaining many of
them at his own House every Sunday.

Eighthly, He had a singular love for you his affectionate and most loving Wife:
It was nothing but death that could have separated him from you. I might speak
several things more, very honorably of him, but I purpose brevity. Madam, I
know, you lament because you have parted with so good and virtuous an Husband
as Sir George was: but let his virtue and goodness be an occasion of your
rejoicing. He now is possessed of that which we pray for to enjoy, Everlasting
bliss and happiness.

I am, Your humble and Faithful Servant, J. B.

TO THE MEMORY OF THE Pious Author Sir GEORGE FREMAN, Knight of the BATH, His
ever Honored Godfather.
1.
Blessed Soul! Thou who art wont to be,
Even when alive, a Saint to me.
And on my tender bead did often lay
Blessings for which thy little Votary
Was taught to pray,
With humble voice and bended knee,
As to some Officer of Heav'ens great Treasury.
Hear me agin now after Death,
Accept the tribute of my grateful breath,
And let it not disturb thy happiness
A while to hear my Verse express
Our sorrows for our loss of Thee,
And joys for thy fruition of vast Eternity.
2.
Thou, now the storms of sin and grief are over,
Art landed safe on the eternal shore;
And looking down smile'st on life's Galley -- slaves,
Tossed to and fro on Fortunes waves:
Now to the top of Honors sky they are gone,
And down to the Hell of low disgrace are headlong cast anon.
Some in slight Pleasure -- boats do careless row,
And unconcerned over the deep Gulf they go,
Never minding either Stars above, or Monsters hid below.
3.
Now quiet and serene are all thy thoughts;
Thy mind not tangled with hard knots,
Tied by thy too scrup'utous fears,
Not to be loosened by thy tears:
Which vanish now quite out of sight
Like idle Phantoms of the night.
And Heaven without a cloud does now appear,
Nothing but Love and joy and Hallelujah's there.
Now are thy busy scruples all at rest;
And even thy Melancholy's blessed,
Which did thy looser appetite command,
Though with too strict and too severe a hand.
Now thou art entered on those solid joys,
Where without laughing's mirth, and music without noise.
4.
Thou the great circle of all arts have past,
Another Drake have learning's world embraced;
And know how small a point it is if it vye
With the immense circumference of the sky.
What folly't all is when we'ave left this worlds Academy:
The soul shakes all these rags off then,
To the new clothed in Heav'en again.
And here as reminiscence science is:
So there when we forget it are we wise.
Our sins or virtues only then remain;
We have no list to think on ought that is vain.
Who can from Heavens observatory view,
If Tycho or Copernicus be true;
And with as much ease know, as now we err with pain.
5.
Thou wast my Guardian Angel here below,
And did me all the paths of virtue show.
When I a stranger hither come,
From nothing's and my Mother's Womb,
Did neither the people nor their language know;
Straight did thou wash my soul from sin,
Its original secundine;
And at the sacred Font for fear
I from the eternal laws should swerve,
Or any other Master serve,
Made me the badge and name of Christian bear.
6.
But now alas! you are from this Country gone,
And here have left me wandering all alone:
The clue is broke, and weary I
Bewildered in this Labyrinth lie,
And naught but monstrous Minotaurs of unheard Vices spy.
Thy sacred relics now must be
A second holy Guide to me,
And from thy Book I will such blessings crave
As once thy living precepts gave;
Where we behold thy Soul, it self, and free
From the restraint of vainer Company;
From the heats of Wine and passion,
From complement and fashion,
And all that discords with its native Harmony.
7.
Thy Charity expires not with thy breath,
But here you are benefactor after death.
Out of the ample treasure of thy mind
Leaving a stock of holy truths behind;
Thou do a large estate to pious souls bequeath.
O may success answer the great design;
May thou be others guide, as well as mine.
And may't increase thy joys to see
Thy Converts flocking after Thee,
The fruits of all thy passionate cares,
Captives of thy discourse, or blessings to thy Prayers.
A. B.

A BRIEF APOLOGY FOR THE Lords Prayer.
I Have selected two Texts out of the New Testament; one is in the 6th Chap. of
St Matthew, the beginning of the 9th verse; (...), After this manner therefore
pray ye, etc. the other is in the eleventh of St Luke at the second verse,
(...), And he said unto them, when you pray, say, Our Father. Which two places
of Scripture will administer a redundancy of argument to prove what I have
undertaken, namely, That it is the duty of every Christian to use the Lords
Prayer constantly, both at his public and private Devotions. As to the
integrality, and exact composure of this Prayer, every man will readily
acknowledge it, because it were sacrilegious impudence to say otherwise:
notwithstanding this, you shall hear the most moderate of its opposers say,
that the assiduous use of it is not necessary; and many since our late
dissensions began, have declared by their continued omission of it, that it is
not requisite at all, not allowing it entertainment (although the Lords Prayer)
within the walls of the Church, styled by our Savior himself, the House of
Prayer; nor into their own houses at their Family Duties, and I have much
reason to fear, not into the most recluse corners, when they have been at their
private devotions: Thus did they in effect teach Assemblies, that prayer as
effectual as that, might be made out of new molds of their own, and entertained
them with nothing else, but their own belches and eruptions. On the contrary, I
do assert the necessity of its use, both at all times of prayer, and by all
persons; first from the primitive practice, and the high esteem that all the
Eminent Fathers of the Church had of it: And next I shall endeavor to prove it
by Logical deductions from the letter of the Scripture, in one text, and by
unavoidable consequence from the other, showing that the place cited out of St
Matthew, must of necessity hold Analogy with that of St Luke: I will begin
with that of St Luke, (...), in the original is an adverb, compounded of (...)
adverbium primarium, and (...) conjunctio potentialis; sometimes it signifies
postquam, after that, as St John, chap. 16. verse. 21. (...), postquam aut
pepererit; sometimes quamdiu, as long as, so St John 9. 5. (...), quamdiu in
mundo fuero; here it signifies quum, or quando, and being indefinite
comprehends all the times of Prayer: but if you should put it thus, as a
solution to a question, namely, as if I should ask a man when will you do such
a kindness for me? (...); and the answer be made, (...), Isidor. when you
return, here supposing I had told him before when I would return, (...) is not
indefinite, but joined with (...), is an answer to the precedent question, and
points at some hour, or day in the which I said I would return; but in the Text
it must of necessity comprehend all the times of prayer: and therefore this
injunction, When you pray, say, Our Father, is, and must of necessity be as
much as if our Savior had said, whenever you pray, say, Our Father which art
in heaven, etc. Nor will it enter into my apprehension, how this can possibly
admit of any other explication. But to this they will object, if so, that our
Savior enjoins us whenever we pray, to say, Our Father; the consequence will
be, that we must say no other prayer: for when we pray in another form, we
pray; how is this command then fulfilled, when you pray, say, Our Father, if we
take a liberty to vary from it? I answer, that by these words, when you pray,
is not to be understood all the continued time of prayer, but some part of that
occasional, or assiduous praying, so that it is not spoken exclusively of all
other prayers; for St Paul, Ephesians, 1. 16. tells them he cease not to pray for
them; and verse the 17th tells them in what manner, namely, in words of his
own, as you may there read; and in another place, Acts 2. 42. it is said, And
they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread,
and prayers, in the plural; so that it is much more probable that they did use
occasional prayers, and not make a continued repetition of the Lords Prayer:
besides, we find that St Chrysostom, St Augustine, St Bernard, and all the
Fathers took that liberty, neither was it ever questioned; but however, if the
Text did restrain us to it, those that use it not at all would be the more
strongly refuted. From the premises then it will appear, that this individual
prayer, these very words (for they are the immediate subject of that command)
must be used by every Christian, whenever he applies himself to God in
prayer: But to this they will object, That the Text in St Matthew gives a
dispensation from using these very words, because it says. pray after this
manner, (...), thus. To this I answer, If our Savior commands us in this
Text to pray after this Prayer, then he does implicitly, though not expressly
enjoin these very words; but if it be supposed to be spoken exclusively of the
Lords Prayer, that is, as if our Savior had said, You need not say my Prayer,
or you need not use it always, but set it as a pattern, and rest always, or
for the most part, upon your own methods, which you make in imitation of mine;
what would the consequence be, but a horrid one? namely, that our Savior did
set a greater estimate upon those subsequent prayers, which we were afterward
to make in imitation of his, than he did upon his own, which will inevitably
follow if we reflect upon the ends of prayer. The chief subordinate ends of
prayer (for there are many others inferior to them) are these, to prevail with
God for the communicating of Grace to the soul, that so by faith and repentance
we may be interested in Christ, and then by the application of his merits to
our souls, we are put into an estate of salvation, which is the last of those
intermediate or subordinate ends of prayer; for if we continue in that, the
next remove, we shall arrive at eternal salvation, which is the ultimate end of
prayer, and of all the Ordinances of God. Thus then I argue, If these be the
ends of prayer, then the best composed prayer must needs be the most
efficacious for the procurement of these ends; but if our Savior commands us
to make prayers after his, and gives a dispensation to omit his own (though but
sometimes) the forementioned consequence will follow, that he prefers our
prayers before his own: for he does most certainly desire the salvation of our
souls, and doing so, has as certainly appointed the most conducible means
thereunto; but if he dispenses with the continued use of his own prayer, and
enjoins us to make others after it, and those to be our daily prayers, it will
inevitably follow, that he looks upon ours as more efficacious than his own,
which is a most blasphemous consequence. But again, suppose this Text, after
this manner pray ye, did not so necessarily enjoin the use of the Lords Prayer;
yet the other does, for it says, when you pray, say, Our Father, etc. This
admits of no evasion, as I suppose my self to have already proved, since these
very words are the immediate subject of the command, whereupon I offer this
argument; If one place of Scripture do ipsis terminis, and expressly command any
one Duty, and any other place of Scripture seem to dispense with it, the
ambiguous Text must be accommodated to that which is conspicuous, and clearly
intelligible; for otherwise we shall make the word of God repugnant to it self:
then if my judgment fail me not, it is evident, that the Text in St Luke
admits of no cavil, and the other carries but a seeming occasion of one, but
this seemingness (if there be such) must vail to the other, which is so nervous
and evincing: as for that ridiculous caution, that they omit the use of it in
public, lest men should idolize a form; they may as well say, that the
Scriptures may be taken away from them, because they may idolize the mechanic
part of it, namely, the paper, and the binding, or the letters, and not look at
the system of Truth, which is comprised in it. But besides this, the Lords
Prayer can no more be accounted indifferent, as to its peculiar use (which is
to be offered up to God in praying) than any other places of Scripture, as to
their proper and peculiar uses; because the Lords Prayer is a part of
Scripture: Now the Historical part of Scripture is to be believed, the
Doctrinal part is to be believed, and practiced, and urged in polemical
discourses, the supplicatory part is to be prayed; and therefore my Opinion is,
That when men do vary from this prayer (which undoubtedly is lawful, prvided
they do not exclude it) their prayers should be composed as near as they can of
sentences collected out of Scripture. To dispense with the use of this Prayer
is in the general, repugnant to Theology, which enjoins the greatest
reverence, and esteem that possibly can be for matters of Divine Institution;
and especially a command which issued immediately, and with so much clearness
out of the blessed mouth of Christ himself, does certainly call for our ready
and constant obedience; and it is contrary to all Christian practice, it having
ever been magnified in the Church of God, and inconsistent with the Principles
of Reason, if we take but a moral view of it; for in all actions the medium, or
instrumental cause, must be fitly proportioned for the attainment of what we
design, and by all requirable circumstances accommodated to that end; or else
we have no certain grounds to expect the procurement of what we would have: but
here it is otherwise, if we sue for blessings in our own deficient language,
and indigested petitions, voluntarily omitting this most accurate form, which
was composed by him, who is the wisdom of the Father, by which he made the
world, the first of St John and the tenth verse: Whosoever therefore does it,
despises the very wisdom of God, he is guilty lesae Divinae Majestatis, of
high treason against the King of heaven: and therefore it is not strange, that
during the late eclipse of our Church, rebellion did rouse up her self more and
more, till at last, with a bare and impudent face, she laughed at the tenderness
of Allegiance; for there is great reason to think, that the deliberate omission
of the Lords Prayer, was the sudden admission of rebellion; for he that dares
despise the wisdom of God, and by that means commit the highest treason, and
speak the greatest blasphemy against God, will easily slide into a conspiracy
of treason against his Temporal Prince: and although I am induced to believe,
that there was a fomes of rebellion and spleen lodged, and lurking in the
hearts of many these late wars, which gave the first spring to our dissensions;
yet, that by the neglect of this prayer, jointly with the discontinuance of
communicating in the Lords Supper, and the removal of Orthodox Divines, and
many other causes, I have great reason to believe they were very much promoted.
As there is a reason in Divinity, why the neglect of this Prayer was a great
inlet to rebellion; so is there likewise in Moral Philosophy, for he that
slights this most accurate form, will most certainly not stick to oppose all
other forms in the Church, by an argument a majore ad minus: and he that
opposes Set Forms, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, has a principle of
licentiousness, and independency in him, which will be still administering
arguments to him (dato uno absurdissimo) by a series of moral, or rather
immoral consequences against all coercive power, first in the Church, and then
in the State, which truth has been (though very deplorably) yet evincingly
laid down before us in the late rebellion: concerning which truth our dread
Sovereign Charles the second, having been without doubt along time satisfied,
is well prepared with instructions for his own security; though I believe his
Piety more than his Regal Interest will cement him to the Church of England,
which is the repository of primitive discipline and order. Whether these
arguments may be prevalent with many others, I know not, but they are so much
with me, that I was exceedingly scandalized at the public omission of it, and
am well assured that a very great body of Christians in England were so with my
self; and that it was not scandalum acceptum on our side, but scandalum datum
on theirs who did reject it: And I would very fain be satisfied how the
Dissenters from Ecclesiastical Ceremonies can quarrel with the Church of
England for imposing things in their own nature indifferent, that is, not
prohibited by God in his revealed will; how they can, I say, except against the
imposition of such lawful things, and plead it is for this reason, to avoid
giving offense to tender consciences, which consciences cry out before they are
hurt, and yet maintain that themselves may publicly omit this great duty of
saying the Lords Prayer, and that to the offense of so many well-grounded
consciences, who can by no means dispense with it. The Church of England out of
her prudent care to preserve Order and Uniformity in the exterior part of Gods
worship, imposes a lawful thing or action, and that is a sin; the Presbyterian
dispenses with the not performing of a necessary duty, and that is no sin. The
Church of England magnifies Christ's Prayer, and that is idolizing a Form; the
Presbyterian despises it, and that is good Religion: The Parliament of England,
of which the Fathers of the Church are a very considerable part, do cause the
illegitimate Covenant to be burnt, and that is a great wickedness; the
Presbyterian slights the Divine Energy of the Lords Prayer (legitimate, as
Tertullian calls it) which is far worse than the bare action of burning the
paper wherein it is printed or written, and that is not ill at all. But it may
be they will say to me, you make a discourse concerning the excellency of the
Lords Prayer, we may ask you the same question that one was asked, who insisted
long upon the praise of Hercules, Quis unquam vituperavit Herculem? which of us
ever spoke against the excellency of the prayer? It is true, I never heard any
man in terminis do it, as I said in the beginning of my discourse (for that
were open blasphemy, and persistence in it would merit excommunication from the
society of Christians) but you do implicitly, and inclusively, or otherwise
why do you not use it? Actions speak more than words, and cry aloud in the ears
of God either for reward or judgment: But some of them do object, that they do
use it sometimes, but they are not bound to use it always. To this I answer,
that the intermitting of its use, does imply the setting of but a gradual
esteem upon it, and that they do not acknowledge its supereminency above all
other prayers. If a man that is prescribed an excellent dyet-drink, which never
sailed the cure of some disease which he labors with, and is ordered by his
Physician to take it every day; if he intermit but one day it will argue that
he does not so highly approve of it, that is, that he does disapprove of it, in
a degree proportionable to the discontinuance of it: So if any man do make use
of the Lords Prayer sometimes, and sometimes uses it not; what does this
omission of his (unless it be through forgetfulness) but secretly whisper to
the understanding that he does not intensively and absolutely approve of it,
but partially and in gradibus remissis. For to say the Lords Prayer is the best
prayer, and yet to say, it is not requisite to use it at all times of prayer,
is a most absurd assertion, and to be exploded by all judicious men; for if it
be the best, and that most transcendently, why should any other prayer justle
it out? It is true, that many times there is incumbent upon the soul the guilt
of so many great and often repeated sins, that the deep apprehension of the
spirit at such a time requires more room, and a greater field of language to
rove up and down in, and to unbosome her remorse to God whom she has offended;
she would come to a more particular repentance, and insist upon all the
circumstances which may aggravate her guilt, and be argument of sorrow to her
in her self-condemning, that by her timely sentence, upon her self she may
avoid that irrevocable sentence which Christ at the last day will pronounce
against those who justify themselves, and therefore is not satisfied in her
deep recesses of grief, with that petition in our Lords Prayer, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: and therefore other
prayers are allowable, because the soul does by them as it were divide her
repentance into smaller parcels, and make it more fine by sifting it into
single circumstances; but when this penitent Soul has recollected all she can
for the accusation of her self, and finds that in her memory she can discover
no more, being troubled she cannot; now let her make a sure conclusion with
this perfect prayer, which is a summary of all her wants, in which she
confesses all her sins, and asks forgiveness for all; and not for her own
sins only, but for the sins of the whole Church, by which Petition of the Lords
Prayer we are most sweetly taught how diffusive our Charity should be: and now
having confessed all her sins, and begged pardon of God for all her own, and
others sins, she can strain at no more, but finding in this prayer a sweet
repository of all her scruples, commits her self to God, till the next time
that he shall honor her so highly, as to let her enter again into that near
Communion with himself which Prayer gives us. So that to conclude, though the
Lords Prayer do not exclude the use of other Prayers, especially when they are
collected out of Scripture; yet it comes with full commission for the use of it
self: Especially at the conclusion of our devotions. For then all other forms
of Prayer, which are like rivulets and little streams, should retire into this
Prayer, as they into the Ocean to cover their imperfections. One thing I shall
add more, and that concerning the brevity of it: for although various
expressions are allowed to the Soul in her passions for sin, which when they
are found in the concerns of repentance, are most exceeding acceptable to God
in Christ; yet that is caused by the unaptitude of the body to answer readily
to the first motions of the soul. And therefore the soul cannot communicate her
notions but by a longer successiveness of discourse; but those that have most
evaded their passions, and are advanced nearer to a ready use of their noble
faculties, may with the Lords Prayer, perform the act of repentance thoroughly,
and obtain pardon for their sins, with all temporal blessings, without a fear,
or groan, or any farther enlargements of themselves, and rise up as much
advanced as any others, in all the concernments of their salvation.

FINIS.
A DEHORTATION FROM ALL SIN, BUT Particularly the Sin OF DRINKING.
Reader,
IF thou have been hitherto careful to lead a good life, according to the rule
of Gods Word, I entreat thee to persevere for the Lords sake unto the end, that
thou may receive the end of thy hope, even the salvation of thy soul; which
upon thy continuance in well-doing, thou shall most certainly accomplish, to
thy unspeakable comfort: but if thou art a captive to the false, and deceitful
pleasures of sin, as I have been; hearken unto me, who can upon too too long an
experience (Lord pardon my many relapses) assure thee, that what fair
appearances soever sin presents thee with in its first approaches, it will
leave a sting behind, and after the commission of every sinful act, thou will
most certainly be so far removed from God as the greatness of thy sin was; and
as the testimonies of a good conscience decay, so will the accusations of an
evil one come in their room, till insensibly thou fall into horror and
despondencies of spirit, one of the least of which is far too dear a price for
all the pleasures the world can afford thee. These are the entrances of Hell
into thy soul, upon the withdrawings of God, and spiritual consolations;
without which the soul languisheth, as the body faints upon a decay of the
animal, or vital spirits: this must thou look for after the continuance in any
known, and presumptuous sin, but if thou find it not, thy condition is
dangerous, for the obduration, or hardening of the heart is the threshold of
Hell: look quickly then and seriously into thy soul; labor to get a sight of
thy sins in the Book of Conscience, whiles they may be blotted out; pray
earnestly to God for a true sense of them, (for Prayer is the Key of Heaven;)
consider often of Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell; think how odious the sin of
ingratitude is between man and man, and that unthankfulness for the Blood of
Christ is the highest of that kind: think of the shortness of man's life, and
the great business is to be done in that little life: that thy short life is
posting to an end; O the folly, and madness of sin! it is a continual acting
against reason, a treasuring up of wrath with the God of all Power, a providing
for the society of Devils, and damned souls, who will be cursing their Maker,
and one another to all eternity; it is that which only is dishonorable to man,
a disturbance to Commonwealths; it is the satisfaction of Devils (if they could
have any,) the trouble of Angels, and blessed souls, nay, the grieving of the
Holy Ghost, and the continual murdering of the Son of God. I have no design in
this short Discourse, but the Glory of God, the conversion of souls, and the
discharging of my own Conscience, by testifying to as many as I can, the
detestation of my former life, that so the ill consequences of my example may
be in some measure repaired by this publication of my self: and therefore wish
to that end that all may see this, that saw my debauchery: and I beseech God to
give me boldness in the confession of my faults, and to make me only shameful
of recommitting them. Above all things I advise men to beware of immoderate
drinking, which dulls the understanding, and makes the soul impatient of
contemplation: it disposes vehemently to the pleasures of sense, and to a
gigling impertinent mirth; it precipitateth to the acts of uncleanness, and
exciteth all the passions, exposing men to many and daily hazards both of soul
and body, and rendering them unfit for any employment, either in Ecclesiastical
or Civil Affairs. And since it is so, that some men's bodies by their
temperament do require strong drinks more than others, it is not a total
abstinence but a moderate use of it which is expected: for which end, I think
it a very good rule, by which to set some observable bounds to drinking; that
men would drink so far as to cherish the stomach, but not to the least
elevation of the brain; and the stomach is satisfied with a small quantity,
unless a man lie under the cheat of a habit: but when the spirits of the wine,
or any strong liquor, begin to mount up to the brain, from whence the soul does
principally, and most immediately act; the contemplative power begins to be
disquieted, and unfixt, and the soul now to fluctuating, as it were, and
wavering in her motion, (her best, and steady operations being hindered) pleases
her self with being conversant about outward things, and trivial objects, and
lies more exposed to the danger of frequent temptations: this which I speak of
is but the first change of the brain, when it is altered from its usual tone
and composure; and although a man may drink to this pitch, and yet carry
civility about him, and a favorable correspondence with men, because his
tongue does not falter, neither is his understanding so obscured, as to fail,
at least in matters of common converse; yet this person who has done nothing
unacceptable to the world, has so changed the Scene within himself, that he is
now more at the command of his sensual appetite, than before, and his noble
faculties begin to lean toward the world, and stagger in the sight of God,
though his legs stand firm before the eyes of them that see him: I appeal to
the consciences of any such plausible drinkers, whether they do not find
themselves more cold in acts of devotion, more fond of outward pleasures, more
affected with the thoughts of temporal honors, and the favor of great men,
more than the love of Jesus. Whether the contemplation of eternity, and the
estate of their souls in reference to that being, does so well relish with them
at that time? If they did so, why do they not wave a Stage Play, and go to
public prayers, which are at that time? Why, instead of going to a wrangling
Gaming-house, do they not study the game of Christianity, that they may beat
that experienced Gamester the Devil, and win their souls, which lie continually
at stake, and are in imminent danger of being lost? What a sad thing is it that
so noble a Creature as man, should rest in, and be contented with trifles, for
whom are prepared the glories of eternity, if here he will take upon him the
easy yoke, and light burden of Christ? Now although many men that drink not,
may, and do often these things, and far worse; yet drink betrays them more
easily to vanities, and idle pastimes; therefore be careful to avoid this
degree of drinking, and thou will then be secure from the scandalous sin of
visible drunkenness, which is the beastly consummation of the former. I do not
speak this to persuade men from society, and cheerfulness; as if Religion, and
Mirth were things inconsistent; since I know that true Mirth is found no where
else: But we do for the most part mistake Mirth the most of any thing,
accounting that it consists in laughter only; whereas properly a man may be
most truly merry when he laugheth least: For none laugh more than Idiots, and
men of weak understanding, and sensualists; while men advanced in knowledge,
and quieted in mind, by serious and due reflections on themselves, do it but
seldom: but none will deny but the latter sort have the greater cause for
mirth, and consequently must needs be more truly merry: for true mirth is a
complacency of the mind, arising from the apprehension of our personal
happiness; yet while we are in the body, laughter is natural, and if it be kept
within its bounds, and placed upon right subjects, is both allowable, and
conducing to health; but is not tied to the Glass, or Bowl. This caution
against drinking, concerns those chiefly whose bodies require strong drinks in
some small proportion, (for none do much) since those who are of another
temperament, will abstain without any man's counsel, or any virtue of their own,
which is only seen where there are propensities to the contrary; though some
men of this sort may contract habits to themselves, contrary to the first
requisites of nature. I cannot methinks dissuade men enough from this sin,
because I have so often drawn others into it, and therefore hope to make some
reparation for the spiritual hurt I may have done them who are yet living,
whiles for those of my associates who are departed this life, I hope the
mercies of God did overtake them: and I wish from my soul that the spiritual
dangers which I have experimented, and do know to be in that which we call good
fellowship, or a chirping Cup (two seducing terms) and the great scandal,
besides the sin it self, which is in staggering drunkenness, may have such an
influence upon those who have no account to make for any thing that they have
yet done as to this sin, that they may never commit it; and for those who have,
and do yet continue in it, that considering the great dangers attending upon
it, which (though now drowned in the lavers of the Grape) will one day rise up
and show themselves to their terror, they may start from it with as terrible
apprehensions, while they may prevent the danger, as the reprobate will do at
Hell when time is past, and he cannot escape it. For my own particular, I have
habituated my self to this vice from my youth, and of later years have
continued in it upon a misapprehension, that the predominancy of my temperament
being Melancholy, which is cold, and dry, it did require the supply of some
accidental heat to correct it: but I do now think I have mistaken my self all
this while, since looking back upon my beginning, I do not find I was so when I
was under tutelage; and therefore do impute it to a habit contracted since, and
some intervening causes of discontent: but since it is so easy a thing to be
cheated into an ill custom, and so dangerous to be under it, it behooves us to
be very vigilant against this adversary, which comes in the shape of nature,
and has such great advantages upon us. Custom has an interest in the actions
of the whole world; in good men it disposes them to goodness, though the first
Principle that moves in them is a Principle of Grace; but when the sanctified
Soul has made some progress in a good life, custom comes in, and promotes it,
and facilitates our perseverance: in bad men likewise it disposes, and
enclines them the more strongly to vice; and you shall find, that men who
accustom themselves to a constant afternoons-draught in the week days,
seldomest go to an afternoons Sermon upon the Sunday, if they go at all;
because the ill habit prevails so strongly, that the vitiated stomach must have
its false wants supplied, though the soul miss of her spiritual repast.

To prevent the contracting of this habit upon such as are yet free, and to set
those at liberty who are enslaved by it, I shall propose this general remedy;
be always employed in lawful exercises: It is an Epidemical disease amongst
the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, to be sick of their time; which is such
a burden to them, that being tired with the tediousness of the day, they must
either drink or trifle it away to avoid a surfeit; this as it is a
disparagement to their judgments, so it is an exceeding detriment to their
souls: for since man has a soul which must be eternally saved or damned, he is
a fool that thinks he wants employment, and he does every minute draw nearer to
the ruin of himself; therefore let none of us ever pretend that we want
business. If I have no accounts to take concerning my estate, no Lawsuits to
follow; though I am not a Magistrate, or a Divine, though I have no Office at
Court, though I have the Gout and cannot walk; though I am blind, or shut up in
a dungeon from conversing either with Men or Books, or whatsoever can befall
me; yet still I have a soul which is in her militant estate, and in the worst
of these conditions, I can do acts of repentance, reflecting with sorrow and
detestation upon my sins past, and renewing my purposes of amendment: I can
meditate upon Gods Mercies and all his Attributes; I can perform acts of Praise
to him: and for those public actions which I cannot do if I am denied the
liberty of my body, and the society of men, yet I can have them in voto, and
desiring to do what I am denied, and so I can keep on my journey to Heaven,
though I lie shakled in a dungeon. But indeed employment is as generally
mistaken as mirth; for most men think they want it, if their time be not spent
in some bodily exercise, or upon some slight or common subject; but for
meditation upon God and the Soul, the concernments of it, that is accounted a
symptom of Melancholy, and reading, writing, or discoursing of any thing that
is serious, or profitable, which comes the nearest to it. A great cause of this
evil arises, either from the carelessness of Parents in not giving their
Children a literate education, or their own neglect of improving it, when they
are at liberty from their Tutors, or Parents, or whoever had the charge of
them: for as the Principles of Learning and Knowledge do wear out, so the
delight in superficial things grows more strong and prevalent; because the
knowledge of any one thing, and the delight in it, always go, and come
together; since we cannot take pleasure in any thing which we are ignorant of:
therefore Hawking, Hunting, Horse-matches, Gaming, Stageplays, and the like,
are made the business of our time, in which our delights do terminate, which
should only be used to unbend the mind, and give it relief after serious
employments; and to exercise the body for the preservation of health, being
altogether subordinate to greater ends: and this is one reason why Taverns are
so much frequented; because Libraries are out of request, and holy, learned, or
serious communications do not relish with us. But this is not sufficient to
excuse them; for though men either want education, or stifle it, yet they
cannot extinguish Reason, and lose the Principles of Religion, which they have
in their Catechisms, in their Bibles, and by Preaching; and therefore upon that
account it is expected by God, that they yield obedience to him proportionably
to this common, and general Knowledge; which if any man fails to do, want of
education will not be a sufficient plea, because it will be found to be an act
of his will, running contrary to these degrees of Knowledge: if any man shall
say at the Tribunal of Christ, that he spent his time in drinking, and idle
pastimes, because he was not brought up to Learning, what will that avail him,
who did live under the means of Grace, which were sufficient for his salvation?
for though he had no knowledge in Tongues, and Sciences, yet he knew the
Commandments of God, and could not plead ignorance in presumptuous sins: and
though he that cannot read and understand Greek, or Latin; yet if he can read
English, let him spend a part of his time in reading the Bible, and other good
Books: and though he cannot discourse in Natural or Moral Philosophy, or in the
Metaphysics, nor much in practical Divinity; yet let him speak within the
limits of his knowledge, let him reprove common sins, and give all
encouragement to the generals of a holy life, both by word and example: and if
he be sooner tired with discourse, than men of greater knowledge would be; then
let him betake himself (as I advised before) to some honest divertisements; but
not to any thing that has the least appearance of evil in it; the result of
this is, that whether a man be literate, or illiterate, he may serve God: and
those Gentlemen of our Nation that are not members of the Commonwealth of
Learning, may yet be members of the Mystical Body of Christ: and though their
delight in great Studies, in Polemical Discourses and Meditations are lost,
proportionably to the decay of their Knowledge; yet their time may be the more
spent in the Agenda of Religion, and they may be allowed a more frequent use of
lawful recreations, but not of drinking, though but to good fellowship; which
though the word sounds finely, a man can hardly do it and secure his innocence:
but since the remedy of continual employment is not sufficient for an
accustomed drinker, he must unravel the habit by little and little, to which
the shunning of idleness will very much help him. To conclude, Let us be
careful to resist all the species and kinds of sin whatsoever; for it is only
sin which can deprive us of the favor of God, which if once we are excluded
from, we are eternally lost; but especially the sin of Drinking, which is the
unhappy Parent of all other sins, and therefore the more carefully to be
withstood; which care if this short Admonition may but stir up in one soul, I
should more rejoice to know, than to have the greatest honor of the Nation
conferred upon me. Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost,
be all honor, glory, praise and adoration, given by me, and by all his
creatures, from hence forth to all eternity Amen.

FINIS.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Sinfulness of my Life: Composed of Confessions and
Supplications FOR PARDON.
CHAP. I.
MY intention in writing this, is to make restitution (a necessary circumstance
required from true repentance) for the public injuries I may very probably
have done to the persons of many, who have beheld the licentious part of my
life: I did write about a twelve month since, this, being the 15th of April,
An. Dom. 1664. A short dehortation from a sinful life, but principally the sin
of Drinking; which I did for the same end I write this: I purposed then to do
what good I could both by Precept and Example. But alas, since that I have
miserably fallen into the same Vice, even the Sin of Drinking, which I chiefly
reproved, but not without many checks, serious retirements, and fresh attempts
to overcome the Vice; and herein I manifestly discover the depravedness of my
Will, and the proneness of my corrupted Nature to offend God: for when I did
set my self most seriously to do good, I did find evil to be present with me; O
miserable man that I am! But for the residue of my days, if Gods ineffable
Mercy shall add any more to my life, I do firmly purpose to spend them in a
strict observation of Divine Laws, having gained by a most dangerous
experience, clearer apprehensions concerning the temperament of my body, the
unprofitableness, and deceitfulfulness of sin, a better insight into the
subtilty of the Devils proceedings against my deluded soul: O thou who give
both to will, and to do, and in that bounteous act have not been partial to
any, that none might be excusable in sinning before thee, stir up thy gifts in
me, and cooperate with my weak endeavors, suffering me to live so long, that
I may have time to make up a sound evidence for my interest in Christ, though
not of so long a date as those happy souls who have been long proficients in
the Doctrine, and practice of the true Christian Religion: for whom I bless
thee, praying that my end may be such, as to bring me into the same place with
them, though I be never so low in my celestial degree.

CHAP. II.
MY Fathers care was such as not to deny me any thing for my Education: I lived
in my Fathers House with my dear Brother under two Tutors, the last of which, I
being arrived to a greater measure of understanding, had a great affection to.
He was of an affable disposition, and expressed great love to us, even with tears
at his departing from us: he was very Religious, which I may say was not
unpleasant to me when I was very young; but the Vice of Drinking did soon
overtake me by the reason of some loose acquaintance, who gave me an ill
Example, so that I began to go with them to Alehouses, which did soon initiate
me in an ill habit, which was much sooner taken up, than it could be since
removed: Thus I continued till I was about thirteen years of age, at which time
I went with my Father to Oxford, which was then a Garrison; there I being alone
with my Father, was much in his eye, which did restrain me very well from
drinking: being likewise sent to All-Souls-Colledge, where a Gentleman read
Greek to me in the mornings, I had there likewise a civil play-fellow, Mr
Thomas Sanderson, with whom I spent my time in harmless Recreations; but
afterward being very desirous to go along with my Cousin Martin Harvy to his
Quarters, not far from Oxford, who Commanded a Troop of Horse, and was willing
to show me the Country, and some part of the Army, for which I was very
importunate with my Father; but he would not suffer me to go from him, but
carried me along with him back again to his Countrey-house in Surrey. But
afterward my Father went back again to Oxford to wait upon the King, and I was
more at liberty again, and pestered again with my old Companions, especially
after the departure of my Tutor, which was not long after: but in the midst of
my idle and sensual life, I had intermissions of consideration not without some
trouble; my bashfulness, which I always had in a measure more than ordinary,
did much incline me to drink, finding that did embolden me: for which reason I
have wished I had been brought up at some public School, rather than in my
Fathers House; supposing that strange company, and being from under the tender
wing of my dearest Mother, I might have been rouzed up, by being put more to my
shifts; and my bashfulness abated, by being accustomed to the company of
strangers. And indeed I found manifestly, that being so much confined to home,
through the careful fear, and love both of my Father and Mother, bashfulness
and melancholy did so gain upon and take root in me, that it was always a great
disturbance to my life: I found likewise my memory both slow, and not
retentive, occasioned by that fixtness which was upon me, and that occasioned
by the want of business to employ my memory, and inform my judgment, and excite
my thoughts, which contributed much to fix me more in melancholy, and want of
confidence; which though not so considered of by my Father and Mother, yet I
found manifestly in my self, it was a great occasion of mischief to me, and did
expose me to a loose life: But Lord, had I stirred up in my self that stock of
Grace, and those Divine Principles, which were infused into me by thy self, the
fountain of holiness and purity, and the instiller of holy motions, thou
would undoubtedly have come into my soul with such controuling power as
would have reduced my disordered mind to an obedience to thy heavenly will, the
absence of which has bred in me so great matter of discomfort: but if thy
goodness shall spare me for so much future obedience as may place me in the
favor of thy self, I shall more esteem it than thousands of Gold and Silver.

A Prayer.
I Desire, Eternal Jesus, to call upon Thee from the depth of my sorrows; upon
Thee, O Divinity incarnate, whose mercies are bottomless, and whose Merits can
bury the most vast extuberances of repented sin from the eye of thy Fathers
Justice, and secure the relenting sinner from the stroke of his Omnipotent
hand; which nothing can intercept but thy self, who art all, and whose entire
Obedience can answer all the objections of Divine fury, and out-wrastle Justice
when she makes her greatest assaults. But O my presumptuous soul! though it be
true that the Mercies of God in Christ exceed all proportions, and that there
are continual springs of compassion, which are ever flowing from the breasts
of his goodness; yet how can that avail thee, while thou art bathing thy self
in sensuality, and courting thy treacherous lusts, who were the murderers of
the blessed Jesus; whom if thou chase from thee, which thou must needs do, if
thou welcome thy sins, she goes along with the blessed Lamb, and never leaves
him; where he is, she is still to be sound; and had not he come into the
visible world, she had never presented her self to mankind, but they must have
been ever separated from the Glories of Eternity: What can the best extracted
cordial do to a man who is naturally dead? neither can these cordials of
salvation advantage thee who art spiritually so. Most blessed Lord make me a
subject capable of thy mercy by faith and repentance, for else the preparations
of thy mercy will be my greatest misery; to see redemption at a distance,
causes a languishment of the soul here, if she have any residues of Grace
while mercy is not irrecoverable: but to see her removed, when she can never
return, yet so many times offered in the day of Grace, is the most bitter
ingredient of eternal misery.

Suffer me most glorious Jesus, who am but dust and ashes, to speak unto my
Lord; and let me ask at the mouth of wisdom, how it comes to pass that my heart
should pant after thee now, and anon grow cold and disobedient? can Christ and
Belial be inmates together? If I love thee and desire thee above all things to
day, why do I leave thee next, since thou art more delectable the second day
than the first, and the third day than the second; since thy essential sweets
do not like those thou have created, glut the appetite, but become the more
grateful the more frequently they are tasted? Oh it is my original corruption
which strives to demolish those reparations of Grace which are in my soul by
thy death, and to obscure those reinfused sparks: But Lord let thy additional
Grace, joined to that twinkling light which yet remains in me, improve it to
such a flame by thy frequent supplies, that by its light I may discover my
sins; and by its heat they may be consumed, who would betray me into that fire
which should ever light me and ever burn me, but never consume me: Blessed
Redeemer, I have not only my own inherent sinfulness, and the spirit of
spirits separated from thy self to encounter withal; but there is another
cause in nature which depresses my soul from rising up to her Lord, the flesh
which is ever warring against the spirit; and besides the usual evils of it,
there is more in me than the bodies of men do often bring with them; thou
know it Lord, for thou made'st me, and since thou did, I am silent; I
know thou made me to thy Glory: what though I have more of earth in the
composition of my body than others have, by which the motion of my animal and
vital spirits is obstructed; though my apprehension and memory be not so quick
and retentive, if I obey my Redeemer, and hearken to his charms, the spirit of
Jesus shall inspire and quicken my soul* which if it be nimble and active in
its correspondencies to the Rules of Christ, I shall have a large amends for
the spleen and dullness of my body: But when I have been troubled with the
incumbency of this weight, I have not looked up unto my blessed Jesus, whom I
might have seen through my thickest blood; since that excellent spirit which I
am by Creation, does not require the body to its sublime operations; but
instead of this most injured Savior, I have run to thy Creatures for help, yet
that I might have done, for they had not been but to preserve my being, and
support my natural life; but ah wretch that I am, I have made an inordinate use
of them, and turned thy blessings into my own curses instead of putting my soul
into a more serviceable estate for thy glory, by correcting the disproportions
of my temperament, I have defaced her beauty with intemperance, and exposed her
to the assaults of Lusts, and Devils: But Oh most meek and merciful Jesus,
though I made a resignation of my self, thou did not give me away by
substracting the residues of thy Grace, but my spirit even in her most
deliberate aberrations from thy Rule, was the object of thy infinite mercy; and
as thy Apostle St Peter in his diffidence was supported by thy graciously
extended Arm from being drowned in the sea of waters, so was my soul secured by
thy stupendous compassion from being overwhelmed by the consequences of my sin:
Most dear Jesus, inflame my soul I beseech thee so with thy love, that being
set on fire with thee, it may like unto these elementary flames which thou have
made, be still tending upwards in heavenly aspirations, till its desire shall
arrive to a most happy fruition. Sweet Jesus my Redeemer, pardon thy Creature
who dare thus to expostulate with thee; the enquiries into Men and Books return
upon us with a retinue of errors, unless we come to Thee who art the Oracle of
Divine Truth: It is most true, Lord, that we must use those means to attain
Knowledge which thou have laid before us; and not dream for infusions of truth
to drop from thy treasures of wisdom into the gaping idleness of our life; such
Enthusiastic Spirits must know their ignorance of the value of truth, that it
should be so poorly attainable before they can be in a capacity of further
information.

A Prayer.
O Eternal and most merciful Lord God, whose eyes are always upon the Children
of men; look down I humbly beseech thee upon me, who in great distress of mind,
and anguish of spirit, do here prostrate my self both soul and body before thy
Divine Majesty, beseeching thee (who art the God of all consolation) to assist
and comfort me thy poor Servant (though exceeding sinful) with refreshments
from thy self, and let thy heavenly support be always ready to hold me up,
that I may not sink under the burden of sad and melancholy apprehensions which
so incessantly oppress my soul: Lord, let thy holy spirit from above so raise
my dejected spirit from the depth of sorrow, and frightfull imaginations which
do continually assault me. Dear Father, I confess, that my life has been a
continual reiteration of sin, and daily repetition of all wickedness and
impiety; that time which should have been measured out in praising and
magnifying thy holy Name, has been spent in the service of Satan that grand
enemy of thy Truth and our Salvation; I have made a profession of godliness in
outward appearance, but have denied the power thereof, as if I had favored
Religion for no other end but to preserve my Name from scandal and reproach;
and so O Lord have preferred my own temporary credit before the honor of thy
holy Name, and my own eternal safety; all the sins that in thy decalogue for a
Christians life thou have forbidden to be done, do I stand guilty of O Lord;
and all the duties thou have commanded thy people to perform, O Lord, I have
neglected, and therefore all the judgments thou have denounced against sinners,
O Lord, I have most justly deserved: so that most righteous God when I look
upon thy Justice recorded in thy sacred Word, and then behold my own sinfulness
which I cannot see but in the same glass, I find such a disproportion, that
nothing is then left to me but the expectation of thy everlasting displeasure:
But dear Father, if thou whose most pure eyes cannot behold the least sin with
approbation, should strictly enquire into the Lives of men, even the best
men; and be extreme to mark what they have done amiss, none were sufficient to
stand before thee and endure thy touch, for there is none that does good, no
not one: But thou Lord have another look wherein Mercy reigns in abundant
measure, and casts so sweet regards toward the souls of repenting sinners, as
can in one moment raise them from death to life, for which we bless thee, for
which we praise thee O sweet Jesus the author and finisher of our salvation,
who have satisfied thy Fathers wrath, and have given us access by Grace through
thy infinite merits; and here O Lord I am emboldened to renew my petition,
first, for the pardon of all my sins past in his blood, and then dear Father
for all spiritual blessings and temporal which thou see conducible for me;
but especially, O Lord, in this Prayer, I beg for a cheerful heart, without
which I cannot serve thee as I ought, being indisposed to those holy Duties
which thou requirest from me by the incumbency of sadness, and a disturbed
fantasy, strange fears and deep imaginations do take hold upon me, but remove
them I beseech thee, and establish in me the fear of thy Name, and no other
fear, sorrow or sadness for having sinned against thee; that I may be always
merry in Jesus Christ, and may run with cheerfulness the race which thou have
set before me: Lord hear me for the sake of thy beloved Son, and my sweet
Savior, let my prayers and daily cryings come before thee, but let my sins be
never heard, O Lord; I will ever be lifting up my voice unto thee, Lord send me
comfort from thy Holy Place, that while I live in this world, I may be a
comfort and a delight unto my self, and not a burden, but above all things, a
persevering Christian through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
PHYSIOLOGIA: OR The Nature of EXTERNALS briefly discuss't.

SHOWING, That no true Pleasure can be derived from SENSIBLE OBJECTS.

(...). Plut. contra Chrysip. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Bonwicke at
the Red Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXI.

TO THE Highly Honorable GEORGE DUKE of BUCKINGHAM His GRACE.
My Lord,
I Am encouraged from Your Graces former Respects to me, and the honor of
being related to Your Person, to dedicate to Your Grace this Enchiridion: The
matter of the discourse in it, out of my Duty to Virtue, I dare not but call
good, though not the management of it: since by the Rule of Morals, Good does
Constare ex Integris, and will not admit of the least Evil, or smallest Error
into its composition. The simplicity of my intentions will only endure this
touchstone, which I may safely say are to promote Truth, and no ways to
obtrude Falsities. I humbly offer to Your Graces Patronage, only that part of
it which has escaped misprisions; as for the other it will be enough that it
be defended from the rude attacques of the world, under the Authority of Your
Graces Protection, though not of Your Approbation:

Your Graces most humble, and firmly devoted servant, George Freman.

PHYSIOLOGIA: Or the Nature of EXTERNALS briefly discuss't.
Beelzebub the Lord of Flies (as his Name signifies in the Hebrew) is with his
swarms of revolted spirits continually buzzing about the Souls of Men, and
suggesting to our minds falsities for truths: persuading us, that not Internal,
but External things are the matter of true Pleasure, that so causing us to
erect our hopes upon a rotten foundation, at the time of our death when that
shall fail, the structure may fall to the ground, nay, much lower, even into
the Abyss of despair.

The sad issues of this suggestion, are much promoted by our Essential
consistency of Spirit and Body: the material, and bodily part always disposing
us to the pursuance of Outward things, contrary to the approbation of the
Intellectual. But since the depravation of Man's Will by the fall of Adam, we
are united to Error, and need not a Tempter to lead us out of the way; for
both the Principles of our Being do now dispose us to wrong Objects: therefore
to lay open this grand Fallacy, it being in a matter of so great concernment,
as is the Eternal happiness or perdition of Men; let us examine what is
requisite to the constituting of true Pleasure. To the making up then of true
and real Pleasure, I shall lay down these three Conditions as requisite: First,
That the Object be suitable to the Soul. Secondly, That the Soul be put into
Fruition of this suitable Object. Thirdly, That the perpetuity of this Fruition
be ensur'd to it. Now let us enquire, whether External things, considered
simply in themselves, and not relatively, as they have respect to greater ends,
have these three Conditions in them, or no. First then: Is any External thing
an Object suitable to the mind of Man? I answer, That no External thing is:
because they all want two Qualifications which are requisite to make an Object
suitable to the mind; the first of which is, That it be congeneal and of the
same nature with the Soul: that is, a substance immaterial, or spiritual. The
second, that it have in it a sufficiency to gratify all the Appetites of the
Soul. First, No outward thing is immaterial, or spiritual, for a spiritual
substance comes not within the notice of our senses: and though in Scripture we
read of the appearing of Angels, as three to Abraham, two to Lot, one to
Cornelius, another to St Peter: yet this must be supposed to have been by the
assumption of bodies, to which they were united, not essentially, but
occasionally, and pro tempore: for in other places the Scripture tells us what
their natures are; calling them Spirits, Psalm. 104. verse. 4. Heb. chap. 1.
verse. 14. and although I find no decisive Text, for that Opinion of the Church
of Rome, that there is a Tutelary, and a seducing Angel, attending upon every
Man and Woman, and likewise Children, which was indeed held amongst the
Heathen, under the terms of bonus, and malus Genius; yet it speaks
indefinitely, Heb. 1. 14. that they are all ministering Spirits for the Elect:
but notwithstanding their presence appears not to them, when they come in their
own Natures. So likewise the Souls of Men are not within the notice of our
senses, being Spirits, and incorporeal substances, as Angels are: for which we
have the testimony of Scripture; Man was made after the Image and Similitude of
God. But since the sense of these words, Image and Similitude, is much
controverted in the Schools, let us look into the twelfth of the Hebrews, at
the ninth verse, Furthermore, we had fathers of our flesh which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits, and live? where Souls are called Spirits in opposition to
flesh. Besides the Testimony of Scripture, we have a demonstration of their
nature in the death of every Man, for though the Soul be separated from the
body, yet the standers by see it not: we hear nothing but the groans of the
dying person caused by the motion of Parts; we feel nothing but a coldness in
the extremities of the body, caused by the cessation of motion; we smell
nothing but a putrid savor caused by the corruption of humors, neither do we
taste any thing: On the contrary, all outward, and corporeal things are obvious
to some one of our senses: for instance; though we cannot hear the Light, we
can see it; though we cannot see the Air, we can feel it; and though we taste
not the white of an Egg, yet we can see it, or feel it; and though we cannot
smell a piece of Glass, yet we can likewise see it, or feel it; and so of all
material things that are at a due distance from the organs of our sense. And
here before we look into the second thing requisite, let us examine why it is
necessary that the Object be of the same nature with the Soul. Thus then; the
Soul of Man being immaterial, that which makes it happy by the fruition of it
self, must likewise be immaterial, for as it is a fundamental in Physic, that
Nutrition is made by Similaries: so likewise is this assertion true in the
Metaphysical complacency between the Soul, and the Object; it cannot receive a
proper supply from any thing that does not bear an affinity with it in its
substance, and qualities. This reciprocal delight between Parties is
discoverable in every species of Created Beings, and in every action in Natura
naturata. In Physics, flame and flame embrace one another; but a furious
conflict arises from the convention of fire and water: in Morals, goodness
accords with goodness, but vice will not be suffered to dwell with virtue: and
in the Metaphysical action of the contemplation of the Soul, we see
experimentally, that she cannot content her self with inferior Objects, but is
still seeking to her self some more excellent matter of delight: which desires
of the mind intelligent men may take notice of in themselves, if they will be
self-observers. This appetite of the Soul, is the reason why Solomon was not
contented with all his clusters of delights; though he turned over the whole
world, as it were, yet he arrived not to the sum of his desires, but still
there remained in his spirit, an appetite after something more than any
exterior thing could furnish him withal: so that at last he openly proclaims
them all to be (excuse the catachresis) but full of emptiness. Seneca says of
Augustus Caesar, that he delighted to talk of laying down the Scepter, and of
betaking himself to a recluse life. And we read that the Emperor Charles the
fifth resigned up the Low Countries and Burgundy, and afterward all the rest of
his Dominions, to his Son Philip in his lifetime. And of the Emperor
Theodosius, that he delivered up the charge of the Empire to his two Sons
Arcadius, and Honorius, though with power to resume it, which he never did: and
many other precedents of the same kind does History present us withal, of
which it is reasonable to think, that it was not only the troubles which
usually attend Crowns, caused this in them (others being deputed to bear the
greatest burdens in that kind) but rather, that all their enlargements could
not present them with any thing agreeable to those secret appetites of their
minds: and this dissatisfaction there is in all the entertainments of sense: by
which it appears, that the great capacities of the Soul can never be filled up
with these lean, and scanty Objects: and whiles that Capacity is unsupplyed,
there will be a coveting of those things which are the proper Objects of its
nature, and so long as there is that appetite, the mind cannot be said to enjoy
true pleasure. But here I expect to have it objected to me, That upon this
account, the Virtuous Man, as well as the Sensualist, cannot be said to enjoy
true Pleasure, because the former as well as the latter, has not while he is
in the body his appetite satisfied: To this I answer, That when the mind is
once set right, and has made a choice of that which is intrinsecally good, and
suitable to its nature; immediately it begins to enjoy true Pleasure: because
although it do still desire more, yet does it not covet any thing better or of
a more excellent nature, than it has already tasted of, so that the desires of
the mind are stopped quoad rem; because it does not covet any thing contrary to,
or desperate from what it has already pitched upon; but not quoad mensuram
rei, because it desires to be put into a full fruition of that, which it now
enjoys but in part: upon which account the Kingdom of Grace and Glory, seem not
to me to differ otherwise than gradually; so that the Spiritual man has
something of that he desires, but not all: yet so much as he has suffices to
bring him true Pleasure; though not to make up the integrality of it: while the
Sensual Man pursuing a wrong Object, cannot possibly while he does so, arrive
at true pleasure. The second thing requisite to constitute, or make an Object
suitable to the mind, is, that it have wherewithal to gratify all the
appetites of the Soul: but no external thing can accommodate the mind with more
than it has in it self, that is, it cannot entertain it with spiritual
delights: how far short will it prove then of satisfying the Soul with all it
is capable of in spirituals? this being more than any created Intelligence can
administer to it: for though we find many excellencies in Angels, and the Souls
of Men, by the reason that they are intelligent Natures, yet they have not that
sufficiency in them which is requisite to an Object that is in all respects
suitable to the mind; which must not only present it with something spiritual
and incorporeal, but likewise with whatsoever it can covet within the genus of
spiritual and immaterial existencies; and this nothing can do, but that
satiating Plenitude, which is only to be found in God: which appears to be true
by that propensity which Men of large apprehensions have to enquire into those
remote Truths which yet they cannot see clearly into: there is a (...), Romans 1.
19. which has such a Magnetic virtue in it, that it is always drawing the
Soul toward it self, neither will the Spirit of Man be ever at rest, till it
be united to the Son of God, and put into a full fruition of the Deity. How do
we hear even young Students wrangle about the dividing of a body into so small
parts, and that it is not capable of further division? for not conceiving how
it can be, that so long as there remains something in quantity, that quantity
should not be capable of being separated, at least Intellectu, though not Actu,
and yet not understanding how a body can admit infinite separations, they are
still searching into this Abstrusity which remains with God. What Battologies
have we about Free Will and respective Decrees? not being able to distinguish
between the precognition of God, and his concurrence of volition, or
necessitation? how are we prying into the mystery of the Incarnation? into the
nature of the Trinity? there are certain (...) which St Peter speaks of to be
in St Paul's Epistles; which although they are things hard to be understood, yet
are we still coveting to comprehend them; which aspirations of the Soul do
show, that it was created for matters of a higher concernment, than any created
substance can furnish it withal from themselves: for such things are to be
found only in God, inhesively, or subjectively, but they may be communicated to
us by Angels, who know them either by acquisition, or divine infusion: and
these tendencies of the mind, are arguments to me, that the Soul of Man is
capable of apprehending those abstracted Truths, which it so covets to know
while it is in the body; because our pressing to know, seems to me to be an
immediate effect, of our wanting, or being ignorant of something which our
minds are comprehensive of: and therefore Beatified spirits cease to desire
more, because their capacities are filled; which is perfect Happiness ad modum
recipientis. But it may be objected, That the Angels which fell desired to be
equal with God, but it was impossible it should be so, therefore we must not
measure our capacities by our desires. To this I answer: First, that I do not
believe they ever did, because, it must seem to be below the extent of their
knowledge, which reached to so vast a height, to entertain with the least hopes
such a childish Ambition, but rather that their Lapse did arise from a spleen,
and malice to God for advancing Mankind so high: or if it could be so: we must
distinguish between an undue, and vicious, and a natural, or necessary act of
the will: I Will suppose their's to have been an audacious, and arbitrary willing
of that which was ipso facto destructive to their happiness; but these
propensities of our Souls, which God has so infused into us, that we cannot
suppress them, are continual willings as it were against our wills, and are
therefore natural, and to be accounted of, as the effects of our present
defective state, and these I am induced to believe, will hereafter attain to,
what they have strained for here. But not to make any farther digression: Let
us enquire into the second thing requisite to true Pleasure, which is fruition.
It is not enough that there is in nature an Object suitable to the mind, but
there must be such an application of it to our persons, as may make us true
Possessors of it: and here I cannot say exclusively, that there is no fruition
in the Pleasures of sense, for were there not, the Devil would have no train at
his heels, but they will be found to be very inconsiderable, and equivalent
with none at all. And first let us consider the Glutton, who makes not that the
end of eating which he should, namely the support of his natural life; as St
Augustine, Confess. Lib. 10. Cap. 13.
Hoc mihi docuisti, ut quemadmodum Medicamenta sic Alimenta sumpturus accedam:
How soon does his sweet bit pass over the threshold of his tongue, and then his
Pleasure is over for that morsel, consisting but in ipso transitu; and although
he puts in another, and another, yet it cannot be long e're his stomach will be
filled, and then he must cease repeating it, till Nature or Art have disposed
of the Load after a Scene of sick Qualms: in the mean time the whole Machine is
out of frame, especially the Brain which can least be spared, and he fitter to
converse with the same Species of Creatures wherewith he has filled his
paunch, than with Men to whom he bears but an outward resemblance in the manner
of his extension, and figure of his body. How momentany is the lascivious man's
delight! he looks on a Woman, and lusts after her: if he gain not his purpose,
her face is looked upon by him, with an impetuous Lust, and discomposure at her
Chastity, so that her presence is a positive torture to him: if he gains her
consent; his furious lust hurries him to that bestial act, where his fruition
like a flash of lightning, dies in its birth, even in the midst of an impatient
desire. Arist. Eth. lib. 7. cap 12.
Aristotle speaking of Venereal pleasure, says, (...), Animum non exerceri in
illa. So likewise the Miser, how narrow is his Heaven! he procures his Money
with bodily pains, hazard, and base submission; and the far greater part of his
time being usually run out before he comes into his Kingdom, his reign is very
short; and although the fear of not arriving to it, be vanished, yet the fear of
loss, which is greater, rises up in the place of the former, besides the
apprehension that so small a part of his life remains to him, for the enjoyment
of what he has procured with so much difficulty. The Ambitious man what
enjoyment has he? who after much busling in the world, many dangers escaped,
much expense it may be of his purse, gains his Minion Honor, and then holds it
in Pride, which is a great pain to him that gives entertainment to that Vice;
because his Reverence seldom, or never answers his expectation: for the Wise
and Virtuous, (who are the venerable part of the world) cut off their respects
to him, out of a just disesteem of his Person, or it may be out of charity to
him; that the disregard he meets with, may be to him as a Julep, to allay the
Fever of his Pride; giving him only precedence, his Title, and the
compellations belonging to it, out of Duty to the King who has conferred them
upon him. From the immorigerous Nobility and Gentry, it is likely he receives
none at all; because their uncultivated stoutness will not stoop to any
circumstances of observance; and as for the common scrapings that are made to
him, he values not those submissions, because of the meanness of the Honourers;
it being a good Moral Thesis, that, Honor est in honorante. And now for the
good Fellows (as they are called,) what Pleasure have they? By the raising of
the Animal spirits to an undue pitch, they draw down their Souls; the Soul and
the Body being in this case like a pair of Buckets in a Well; as one rises, so
the other sinks, and being fallen from the delight of a sober Speculation, to the
pitiful ticklings of an impertinent mirth; what with broils, arising from
mistakes incident to such fantastic converses, or else the surprise of a
drowzy intoxication, he has very little time to enjoy his loss; Intemperantia
desinit in nihil, says St Chrysostom; Intemperance ends in nothing, or at
least in no good, which in the sense of the Schools, is nothing: but those
privations, or nothings, will I presume in the end, from the sad consequences
that issue immediately from them be concluded to be positive, and that Men's
Souls are not positively damned for doing nothing. But here it may be objected:
That although there be little, or no pleasure in excess, yet in the moderate
use of outward things there is. To this I answer: that there is indeed more,
but even this will be found to be very inconsiderable: For External things
considered as they stand alone, (under which notion I still consider them in
this discourse) and being not chosen in reference to greater ends, yield but
very little Fruition to their Incumbents. And one cause of this is, in that
they always glut the mind by reason of the deficiency of their being. The
first reason taken from the deficiency of their being.
If a man would please the sense of seeing by looking upon a handsome Woman;
when his eye by often repeated searches (since all the lineaments of Beauty
were never confined to the precincts of one face) has discovered all the
attracts, and impresses, with all the variations of Aspects occasioned by the
different motives either from within, or from outward objects, till at last he
is entertained with nothing but frequent returns of what he had seen before,
the disposedness of the mind to a perfect object, makes him covet to see some
circumstance of Beauty, which is not comprehended within the Scene of that
Woman's person: from whence presently arises dissatisfaction, namely from the
objects insufficiency which is inconsistent either with the duration or
solidity of Pleasure. Therefore Conjugal fidelities, are restraints put upon
the mind, whereby a man resolving to comply with the Divine Will, rescinds the
irregularities of his own. If we run through the whole series of outward things
we shall find them so: whereas on the contrary, as Seneca tells us, Magis
Veritas elucet, Sen. Tract. de Ira l. 2. c. 29.
quo saepius ad manum venit: The more we converse with Truth, the more we are
delighted with it. Again, Outward things have another great perplexity in them,
A second reason drawn from their multiplicity.
which the Sensualist often meets with, arising from the Multiplicity of them:
and that is, many of them present themselves to him at once, and though they
all differ from one another in their kinds, yet many times they are equal in
their attractiveness, and influence upon him; so that many times he is put to a
stand concerning his Election, which is a pain to him because it detains him
from Union; for where there is a love of any thing, there is a desire of being
united to it: but after a troublesome pause, the mind fixes upon one: not
because there is a decision made of the question, and that the debate is ended,
which of them deserves most; but because it is better to enjoy one than none:
so that all the rest of them, being equally approved of, he carries the Idea's
of them all in his fancy, though he do actually enjoy but one: which Impresses
and Images in the Fancy, being many in number, and likewise fresh, and
lively, draw him as forcibly to those which he has left (their number, and the
lively traces of them which remain in the Memory, being opposed to this one,
though present) and thus is he set upon a Rack in the midst of his fruition,
and so much the more, because the present enjoyment falls short of expectation:
which is another evil in outward things, that they never give so much as they
promise: A third reason, their false Appearance.
for which there are two reasons: The first is, a part Animae, because the
preliminary, and foregoing apprehensions, which the Soul has before enjoyment,
do ever anticipate more excellency and solidity than is to be found in the
object. The second reason is a part Rei, because all outward things are more
in appearance, than they are in experiment, and acutual probation: the reason
is, because the Soul looking on them in their approach, and doting on the gains
which is coming toward her, concludes they are as thick in substance, as
ravishing in their anterior fairness; but after they have met, and embraced,
she finds, that they are both in haste to be gone, and are but a bare
frontispiece of Beauty; like the Portraictures of Kings and Queens, painted
upon a flat, which behind, are nothing but dusty canvase. A fourth reason drawn
from the minds self-accusation.
Another thing which does much lessen the pleasure of them, is, that the Soul
in her reflex actions, is still accusing her self, and thus expostulating with
her self: Why am I thus conversant about transient things? how long have I
sought for true pleasure, and satisfaction in them but cannot find it?
certainly I was designed for matters of a higher concernment; since I find I
can look above them, and beyond them: how do I dishonor those noble Objects,
and injure my self in descending to these mean entertainments? These and the
like contrariant thoughts, are a great allay to those imaginary pleasures, and
being mixed with the enjoyments, give them a very disgustfull relish. These
circumstances well considered, will I suppose very much shrink up that bulk of
delight, which to the abused fancy seems to be united to outward things before
enjoyment: even within the limits of Moderation, when it is distinct from
Virtue. Let us now look into the third Postulatum, or circumstance required to
make up true pleasure, which is the certainty of its Duration. The death of all
men is so confirmed to us by Arguments a part ante, besides the Physical
reasons which are produced for the necessity of it, that he that should
question the continuation of it a Part post, may carry about him his
Fantastic head, to dispute it by himself, till it be laid at rest in its own
Grave, to receive conviction. Here then the question is, Whether the Sensualist
has any firm ground of hope for a reversion of his pleasures after Death. The
Alchoran makes fair promises to Mahomet's disciples, that they shall meet with
sensual Pleasures again in the next world, and if any Voluptuous man shall
presume to urge the authority of it, he is but that in profession now, which he
was before in Practice: But I do assert the contrary, that it is impossible,
that the Sensualist should be re-estated in the same Species of delight, in
which he solaced himself during his temporal life, or in any other, from
reasons Physical, Moral and Theological. First then; the body will most
certainly at its reunion with the Soul, exist after a manner as much different
from this which is temporal, as to be eternally durable, differs from being
dissoluble, or in a state of corruption: for eternal duration being that Divine
Boon which shall be conferred upon the Totum Compositum, the entire person of
man both Soul and Body; the Body which is the material part, and which will be
the Instrumental or intermediate cause, under God the Efficient, of its own
duration, being by the wisdom of God fitted with those affections, and
properties, which shall be requisite to that great end of Eternal duration,
will in degrees proportionate to those future consequences, differ from it
self, as it is now under a state of corruption. For take any two different
Effects in Nature, and it will be found, that the proximate, and immediate
causes of them, do differ between themselves in the same degree that the
Effects do: Ex. Gra. Take a piece of Wood and a piece of Iron; both of them
smooth, and of the same figure, and bigness; the Wood swims, the Iron sinks:
proportionably to the speediness of the Irons sinking, it must differ in
solidity, or closeness of parts, from the Wood which swims. This similitude is
very Analogical, and by the same reason the consistency of the Body in the
state of Glory will as much differ from its consistency here, as the
consequences of duration, and dissolution do, these being likewise two Effects
of two immediate causes. Now then to come to the thing that is to be proved:
therefore the objects of Pleasure must be likewise disparate from, if not
adverse to what we meet withal here, because these here are terminable, of
which nature there will be nothing after Death: For the Body and the Soul being
made durable to all Eternity, it is most reasonable to think that all their
Celestial Accommodations must be durable too; for else there would not be a
completion of happiness, there being a discrepancy between the recipient, and
the object. But to go a step farther: That a Sensual man should meet with his
old ones, or any other sort of Pleasures after death, is oppugnant to the
precepts of Morality. By a Sensual man I mean, such a one, as makes the
attainment of corruptible things his ultimate end, whether under a Notion of
moderation, or of excess: and the word excess is to be taken in a double
consideration; either excess as to the quantity of the thing, Excess as to the
quantity.
or excess as to the propriety of the thing. First, let us consider the person
exceeding as to Quantity: The Miser never has pelf enough to satisfy his
avaritious mind; for he is always coveting more, while his thoughts, and
appetite do terminate in Gold, and Silver as the ultimate object they aspire
to: therefore he loves nothing beyond that, or above it; for if he did, the
desire of that would in process of ^ime cease, and he would desire something
beyond it, or above it, since desire is a necessary effect of Love, issuing
immediately from it, as from its proximate, and contiguous cause: if then he
loves nothing beyond it, or above it, he sins against his natural Conscience,
which still presents the Deity to him, as an object which only merits the whole
stream of his affections; for ignorance of which he has no plea, since the
universal voice of nature proclaims a Divine power; and in this every man is a
Plato to himself. Here then is a Moral Trespass, or the Commission of an Act
against the secret impresses of Nature. Now the mind presently enters into
consideration, whether it ought to run counter to these infused habits, or not:
if a thought propounds to it that it may; it presently asks, why then these
Notions were Imprinted in it? either they were given in vain, or else that they
should be practiced: If in vain; that clashes with a Moral Axiom, Natura
semper agit propter finem; if to be practiced, then an accusation of Guilt
ensues: and from thence naturally arises, not an expectation of Pleasure, but
of Mulct, from the Original Justice of that first Cause which fixed these
Principles in the Mind. So much then for excess in Quantity that I may avoid
the surplusage of Argument. In the next place, Excess as to Propriety.
I must take a view of the Person who exceeds as to Propriety. Every Soul not
obstructed by some bodily Defect, is created with apprehensions and faculties
able to discriminate between common right, and common wrong. For instance: To
take any thing from another man which he holds by just right either of
Donation, or of Legal descent; this cannot but be apprehended by any clear mind
to be Morally Evil, that is, an Action of such a nature, that he cannot
justify the doing it by right Reason. So is it in all cases of force, where
men entrench upon that to which they have not this Natural Right: for I cannot
trace Right or Propriety farther than the first Possession: whence, I see yet
no reason so valid to the contrary, as this is, to make me conclude that the
Protoplast was Lord and Monarch of the Universe, he being not only actually
seized of it, but having likewise received an unlimited Commission from God to
exercise Authority over all things as we may read G. C. 1. from verse. 26. to
the end: from whence it appears, that absolute Monarchy was the first Power
that overlooked the earth, and that it was afterward propagated in the world,
(though not individually, or under one person for the whole) as we may collect
from the Prerogatives which the Kings of the Nations had in the time of Samuel,
1 Samuel Cap. 8.
(a place cited by Salmatius in his Defensio Regia) whereas there are no forms
of stipulated Government but appear to be accidental, and superinduced by
reason of succeeding dissentions, arising from great Communities of men. But to
return to my purpose: If then there are such primitive Aphorisms, and simple
Impresses of Truth, fixed in the Soul from its first Creation, that man cannot
but rationally conclude himself an offender against that Eternal Truth from
whence these communicable notions were at first derived, who goes contrary to
them does ill: for, as I said before, either these Principles are implanted in
us in vain, or else that we would conform our selves to them: to say it was in
vain, is profanely to impute to God the weakness of Idiots and Children, who
do Actions insignificant, and to no determinate end or purpose; if then they
were given to be put into practice, a man's natural Conscience must of necessity
bring him in guilty upon his deviation from these rules; but Guilt cannot
expect a reversion of the same, or an accession of any other kind of Pleasures
after death; but on the contrary, consigns the Delinquent to a certainty of
future punishment: and if in the third place any man shall say, that these
Notions were infused into us purposely to deceive us, his objection deserves no
answer, it being so horrid and impious. Having spoken of excess I am now to
examine what attends upon the moderate use of outward things; and in short, the
moderate and decent Sensualist will miss of future happiness, because his love
does acquiesce in the thing: for it is not the extravagancy of the Action, but
the proposed end, which separates it from being good; therefore the same
Argument serves for both, since these two persons differ between themselves no
otherwise than gradually, for no specific difference does result from the
inequality of bad and worse.^. And now to come to my third Argument; If the
Disciples of Nature cannot but expect correction, then by an argument a minore
ad majus, such as have been brought up in the School of Christ, and have known
Gods revealed will, cannot but expect confusion for their defaults, instead of
the return of the former, or of any other kind of Pleasure: for as the
Scripture says, (...)* Luke 12. v. 47.
And that servant that knew, etc. Thus have I made a short inspection into the
Nature of Externals, showing that they have none of those three conditions in
them which are required to the constituting of true Pleasure. First, that they
are not Objects suitable in their Natures, much less adequate to the mind,
since to make an Object adequate it is not only requisite, that it be
immaterial, Ens unum verum and bonum.
but likewise that it be Divine. Secondly, that although there be some fruition
of them, yet it is so often rescinded, and so much complicated, that it is not
to be reckoned of: and thirdly, that it is but temporary and ends in Death: and
after death, the result of sensuality is inevitable misery, when we look at
outward things as our ultimate end, not using them rightly, as instrumental to
the great designs of Religion: much more will they prove destructive to such as
are vicious to so great a degree, as that they run into intemperances, and make
these outward things become noxious to them by offending in the manner as well
as in the measure, Miser qui laetus ad miseriam descendit sicut stultus ad
crucem. Theophylact.
of using them, and so go on sporting to everlasting ruin: but if we be
careful in both respects to make a right use of Outward things, Genesis 1. v. 13.
they will prove Salutary to us, since every thing is delivered out good to us,
by the hand and verbal approbation of the Creator; but our abuses of them
poison them, and make them destructive both to our Temporal and Spiritual Life,
whereas they were prepared by God to usher in the solid joys of an Eternal
world.

FINIS.

