DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD, Ancient and Modern.

The Second Part.

Dedicated to LVCIAN in ELYSIVM.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. at the Foot of Parnassus Hill. 1685.

NEW DIALOGUES OF SOME ANCIENT DEAD.
The Second Part.
First DIALOGUE.
Herostrates, Demetrius, Phalerian. Herostrates. THREE hundred and sixty
Statues Erected in your Honor at Athens! It Is very much.


Demetrius. I seized upon the Government; and then you may judge the People
would be striving how to Honor me most.


Herost. How pleased were you, that you had thus multiplied your self three
hundred and sixty times, and met with none but your self throughout the whole
Town?


Them. I own it: but alas! this joy was but of short continuance; Affairs
altered. The very next day, not one of all my Statues was standing: Some were
beaten down, the rest all battered in pieces.


Herost. What a dreadful turn was this; and who performed this Noble Exploit?


Demet. 'Twas Demetrius-Poliorcetes, Son to Antigonus.


Herost. Demetrius-Poliorcetes! Would I had been in his place. What a pleasant
thing it was to pull down such a multitude of Statues that were made for one
same Man.


Demet. Such a kind of wish becomes none but him that burnt the Temple of
Ephesus. You are still the same.


Herost. I have been much upbraided with this burning of the Temple of Ephesus;
all Greece rung of it; but it is a sad thing, in earnest, Men are but weak in
their Judgments.


Demet. I think you had best to complain of the injustice has been done you in
detesting so brave an Action, and of the Law whereby the Ephesians forbad that
no one should ever pronounce the Name of Herostrates.


Herost. I have no reason at least to complain of the Effect of this Law; for
the Ephe^^^ns were good downright People, they were not sensible, that in
prohibiting me to be named, was the only way to render my Name immortal. But
what ground was there for this Law? I was desirous beyond reason, to make my
self spoken of, and I set their Temple on fire. Ought not they to think
themselves happy, that my Ambition was not more expensive to them. They could
not have come off at an easier rate. Another would have perhaps destroyed their
whole Town, State and all.


Demet. To hear you, one would say, you had a Right to spare nothing that might
make you be spoken of, and that People ought to take (as a favor) all the
Evils you have not committed.


Herost. It is easy to prove the Right I had to burn the Temple of Ephesus.
Why did they Build it with such Art and Magnificence? Did not the Architect
design to perpetuate his Name?


Demet. It Is like enough.


Herost. Well then, 'twas to perpetuate my Name too, that I burnt this Temple.


Demet. A fine Argument! is it lawful for you to destroy, for your Glory's
sake, the Works of another?


Herost. Yes. Vanity which built this Temple by the Hands of another, has been
able to destroy it by the means of mine. It is empowered with a Right over all
the Works of Mankind; Vanity made them all, and Vanity can reduce them again to
nothing. The greatest States of all, have no reason to complain that she
subverts them, when she has her ends therein; they could not make out an
Original Independent of Vanity. A King, who, to Honor the Funerals of an
Horse, should cause the Town of Bucephalia to be razed, would he deal unjustly
with it? I think not, for there was no thought of building up this Town, but to
insure the Memory of Bucephalus; and so by consequence, it is affected to the
Honor of Horses.


Demet. In your Judgment, nothing would be safe. I know not whether Men would.


Herost. Vanity sports her self with their Lives, as with all things else. A
Father leaves as many Children as he can, to keep up his Name. A Conqueror
destroys as many Men as he can, to perpetuate his.


Demet. I do not wonder that you make use of all manner of Arguments to justfie
Destroyers; but in fine, if pulling down the Monuments of another Glory, is a
means to set up ones own, it is at least the meanest of all means.


Herost. I know not whether it be meaner than the other; but I very well know
that it is requisite there should be such Persons as do use it.


Demet. Requisite!


Herost. Most certainly. The Earth is like a great Table Book, where every one
will Write his Name. When this Book is full, those Names which are already set
down in it must needs be blotted out, for new ones to be writ. What would it
be, if all the Monuments of the Ancients were in being? The Modern People would
have no room to set up theirs in. Could you hope that your three hundred and
sixty Statues would be of any long standing? Did you not perceive that there
was scarce place enough for your Glory?


Demet. 'Twas a pleasant kind of revenge that Demetrius-Poliorcetes did Execute
upon my Statues. Since they were once Erected all about Athens, had not he as
good have let them stood?


Herost. He had so; but before they were Erected, would it not have been as
well if they had not been set up at all? Our Passions do, and undo all. If
Reason did rule upon Earth, there would be nothing done then. They say that
your Pilots are most afraid of those Calm Seas where they cannot make Sail, and
that they desire a Wind, though with the hazard of a Tempest. Passions are
necessary Winds in Men, to give all things a motion, though they raise many a
Storm.


Second Dialogue.
Callirhea, Paulina. Paulina. FOR my part, I maintain that a Woman is in danger
so soon as she is beloved with eagerness. What does not a Passionate Lover
bethink himself of to compass his Designs? I stood it out a long time with
Mundus, a handsome young Roman; but in fine, he got the Victory by a stratagem.
I was very devout to Anubis the God. One day a she Priest of this God came and
told me from him, that he was in love with me, and that he desired I would give
him the meeting in his Temple. Mistress to Anubis! Judge you what an Honor. I
failed not to be at the Rendez-vous, I was received with great manifestations
of kindness; but to tell you the truth, this Anubis was Mundus. See whether I
could withstand him. They say indeed, that some Women have yielded to Gods that
were disguised like Men, and sometimes like Beasts; much more ought one to
yield to Men disguised like Gods.


Call. Truly, Men are full of Guiles. I speak by experience, and the same
chance almost has happened to me as to you. I was a Trojan Lass, and just upon
the point of Marriage I went, according to the usual manner of the Country,
attended by a vast number of Persons, and finely dressed, to offer up my
Virginity to the River Scamander. Having made my Compliment, out comes
Scamander from amongst the Rushes, and takes me at my word. I thought my self
very much honored, and so did every one else perhaps, I will not except my
Betrothed. All kept a respectful silence; my Companions did secretly envy my
happiness, and Scamander retired into his Rushes when he would himself. But how
surprised was I, one day, when I met this Scamander walking up and down in a
little Country Town, and that I understood he was an Athenian Captain, that had
his Fleet of Ships upon that Coast.


Paul. What? You took him then for the right Scamander?


Call. No doubt of it.


Paul. And was it your Country Fashion, that the River should accept the
Offerings which young Maids that were to be Married came to offer unto it?


Call. No; and if perhaps it should have accepted them, they would not have
been made. It was satisfied with the respects they showed it; without abusing
them.


Paul. You ought then to be very Jealous of the Scamander.


Call. Why so? might not a young Maiden think that all the other had not had
Beauty enough to please the God, or that they had made him but false Offerings,
whereunto he had not vouchsafed to Answer? Women are apt to flatter themselves.
But you, that will not allow that I was the Scamanders Culley, you were God
Anubis's Culley though.


Paul. Not altogether so. I did a little mistrust that Anubis was something of
a Mortal.


Call. And you gave him the meeting, there is no excuse for that.


Paul. What would you have? I heard all the Wiser sort say, that if we did not
help to deceive our own selves, our Pleasures would be but few.


Call. That Is a good one; help to deceive ones self! in all likelihood they
took it not in that sense. Their meaning was, that the most delightful things
of the World, if thoroughly looked into, had so little in them, that they would
make but small impression, if People did make the least serious reflection on
them. Pleasures are not designed for a strict Examination, and we are every day
reduced to befriend them in many things, wherein it would be improper for us to
make any difficulties. This is what your Wise-Ones --


Paul. It Is what I would say too; if I had stood upon Terms with Anubis, I
should even have found that he was no God; But I owned his Divinity, being
unwilling to examine it with over much curiosity. And where is the Lover that
would be entertained, if he were obliged to undergo an Examination of our
Reason?


Call. Mine was not so strict. Such a Lover might be found, as my Reason would
consent I might love; and it is in fine, more easy to believe one is beloved of
a sincere and faithful Man, than of a God.


Paul. In earnest, it is one and the same thing. I should have been as soon
persuaded that Mundus was true and constant, as that he was a God.


Call. Ah! there is nothing so injurious as what you say. If we believe that
Gods have loved, we cannot, at least, believe that such a thing has been
frequent; but we have often seen faithful Lovers that did not divide their
heart, but did Sacrifice all to their Mistresses.


Paul. If you take for true marks of Fidelity, the diligences, the eagerness of
Sacrifices, an entire preference, I grant there will be faithful Lovers enough
found out; but I don't reckon so. I strike out of the number of those Lovers,
all those whose passion has not been of that continuance as to have had time to
cease of it self, or so happy as to have had some cause for it. I have no more
to reckon, but such as have held out against time, and against favors, and
they are near as many in number as the Gods are that have loved Mortals.


Call. Still according to this same Idea, there must be some Fidelity in being.
For let a Man go tell a Woman, that he is a God, taken with her Merits, she will
not believe it; let a Man swear he will be true to her, she will believe him. Why
this difference? It Is because there are Examples of the one, and there are none
of the other.


Paul. For Examples, I hold the matter equal; but the Reason why we fall not
into the Error of taking a Man for a God, is that this same Error is not
upheld by the heart. We don't believe that a Lover is a Divinity, because we
don't desire he should be so; but we wish he may be faithful, and we believe he
is.


Call. You jeer now. What Woman would take their Lovers for Gods, if they did
wish them such?


Paul. I scarce doubt it: If this mistake were necessary for Love, Nature would
have disposed our heart to inspire it into us. The heart is the original of all
the Errors we need; it denies us nothing in this Point.


Third Dialogue.
Candaulus, Gigees. Candaulus. THE more I think on it, the more I find it was
not necessary you should put me to death.


Gigees. What could I do? The next day after you had let me see the hidden
Beauties of the Queen, she sent for me, she told me she had discovered that you
brought me overnight into her Chamber, and made me a very fair Discourse upon
the offense which her Modesty had received, the conclusion of it was, that I
must resolve to dye, or kill you, and then Marry her; for, as she pretended, it
concerned her Honor, that I should either enjoy what I had seen, or that I
could never boast of having seen it. I understood very well the meaning of all
this. The injury was not so great, but the Queen might have dissembled it, and
her Honor might have let you live, if she had been willing; but to be free
with you, she was out of conceit with you, and she was overcome with Joy, that
she had a pretense of Glory to rid her self of her Husband. You see well
enough, that in the alternative she proposed unto me, I had but one choice to
make.


Cand. I am much afraid, you were more taken with her, than she was disgusted
with me. Ah! how was I to blame that I did not foresee the Effects of her
Beauty upon you, and that I took you for an Honester Man than you proved!


Gig. Blame your self rather for the great delight you took in being Husband to
so handsome a Woman. Why could you not keep the secret to your self?


Cand. I should blame my self for the thing in the World most natural. There Is
no hiding a Man's joy in an extreme Happiness.


Gig. That would be pardonable, if it were a Lovers Happiness, but yours was an
Husbands Happiness; one may be indiscreet for a Mistress; but for a Wife! and
what would the World think of Marriage, if it did judge of it by what you did?
Nothing would be imagined more delicious.


Cand. But seriously, do you think we may be satisfied with an Happiness, which
we enjoy without Witnesses? The bravest Men desire to have Spectators of their
Bravery; and your happy Men desire likewise to be esteemed such, to perfect
their Happiness. Nay, how do I know but they would resolve to be less happy, so
they might appear to the World to be more happy? It Is however most certain,
that a Man does not make a show of his Felicity, without insulting, as it were
over others, that compleats his Joy.


Gig. According to what you say, a Man might easily revenge himself of that
insult. he need but shut his Eyes, and refuse those looks to People, or if you
will, those prickles of Jealousy which make a part of their Happiness.


Cand. Herein I agree with you. The other day I heard one of the Dead that had
been King of Persia make a Relation, How he was led Captive, and laden with
Chains into the Capital City of a great Empire. The Victorious Emperor was
Seated on a most Stately Throne, and environed of all his Courtiers; the People
were gathered together in a spacious Square, which was fitted up with
conveniences for the purpose. Never was Spectacle attended with greater Pomp.
When this King appeared in the Rear of a multitude of Prisoners and Spoils, he
made a stop full against the Emperor, and cried out with a merry Countenance,
Folly, Folly, and all is Folly. He said that these words alone spoiled the
Emperors whole Triumph; and I am so sensible of it, that I believe I should
not have been willing to triumph at that rate over the most Cruel and most
Dreadful of my Enemies.


Gig. You would not have loved the Queen any more then, if I had not thought
her handsome; and if, when I saw her, I had cried out, Folly, Folly?


Cand. I must needs say that my Husband-like Vanity would have been injured.
Judge you upon that score how sensible the love of an handsome Woman must
flatter a Man, and how difficult a Virtue discretion must be.


Gig. Here me, as Dead as I am, I will not say this to another Dead, but in his
Ear; the Vanity of gaining Love from a Mistress is not so great. Nature has so
well established the Traffic of Love, that there is but little left for Merit
to do. She has designed to each heart another heart; and she has not taken care
to match together, at all times, all such Persons as be worthy of esteem;
herein there is a great mixture, and Experience does make it too well known,
that the choice of a lovely Woman is of little or no avail to him on whom it
falls. Methinks these same Reasons should make Lovers discreet.


Cand. I declare to you, the Woman would not allow of this kind of discretion,
that should be grounded on nothing else, but that a Man should not purchase
much Honor from their Love.


Gig. Is it not sufficient to make ones full delight? tender love will reap an
advantage from that which I shall take away from Vanity.


Cand. No. Women will never yield to this.


Gig. But call to mind, that so soon as Honor gets in, it spoils all Love
concerns. At first, Women's Honor is concerned, which is quite opposite to the
Interests of Lovers; and then the wrack of this same Honor makes way for
Lovers to design another, that is very much against the Interests of Women. See
what it is to have placed Honor on the wrong side.


Fourth Dialogue.
Helene, Fulvia. Helene. I Must know of you, Fulvia, a thing which Augustus
told me of late. Is it true, that you had a kindness for him, but he making no
return, you encouraged your Husband Mark Anthony to enter into War with him?


Fulvia. Nothing more true, my Dear Helene; for among we Dead Women, this
confession is of no consequence. Mark Anthony was mad in Love with Citherida
the Comedian, and I wished I could be revenged of him, by making my self
beloved of Augustus; but Augustus was hard to please in Mistresses. He neither
thought me young enough, nor handsome enough; and though I let him understand,
that he was engaging himself in a Civil War, merely because he neglected me, I
could not possible make him comply in the least. Nay, I will recite you, if you
will, some Verses he made about this matter, but they are not much for my
Honor: Here they are,

Wherefore should Fulvia think that I,
'Cause Anthony is false to you
Can dote on Love's Antipathy,
And prize what could not make him true:
Because your Beauties want the Art
To keep your Husband to your Breast,
Gain not Reprisal on my Heart,
Nor make my Mind your Slavish Guest.
By the same Rule, all the decayed,
Forsaken Wives, and Widows too,
Will hope to ride me like a Jade,
Since I was such an Ass to you.
Love me, you say, or else prepare
With Death to Fight, or Anthony --
She Is ugly -- then, why should I fear!
Sound Trumpet, I had rather dye.

Helene. You and I then have been the occasion of two of the greatest Wars,
that perhaps, ever were; you, of that betwixt Anthony and Agustus; and my self,
of that of Troy.


Fulvia. But with this difference. Your Beauty caused the War of Troy, and my
Unhandsomness, that between Augustus and Anthony.


Helene. For amends, you have another advantage over me; it is that your War is
far more pleasant than mine. My Husband revenges himself of the Affront offered
him in another loving me, and that is pretty natural; your Husband revenges
you of the Affront done you, because you were not loved of another, that is not
very ordinary with Husbands.


Fulvia. Ay, but Anthony knew not that he made War upon my account, and
Menelaus knew well enough that it was for you he Warred. In this particular he
is unpardonable; for whereas Menelaus being followed by the whole Country of
Greece, did lay. Siege to Troy, for the space of ten years, that he might
recover you from out of the Arms of Paris, is not it true, that if Paris would
have yielded you up, Menelans had been obliged to withstand a ten years Siege
in Sparta, for not receiving you? In earnest, I see they had all lost their
Senses, both Greeks and Trojans. The first were Fools so demanding you again.
The other were yet greater Fools for retaining you. How chance so many Persons
of Honor did Sacrifice themselves to the Pleasures of a young Man that knew
not what he did? I could not forbear laughing, as I read that passage in Homer,
where after a nine years Siege, and a late Battle, wherein a world of Men were
lost, a Council is called before Priamus's Palace. There, Antenor is for
yielding you up, and methinks there was no doubt in the case; all is, they
ought to blame themselves they did not sooner think of this Expedient. Yet
Paris seems displeased at the Proposition; and Priamus who, as Homer relates,
is equal to the Gods in Wisdom, being troubled to see his Council divided upon
so difficult a Point, and not knowing which side to take, gives Order that
every one should go to Supper.


Helen. There was, at least, this of good in the Trojan War, the ridicule of it
was easily found out; but the Civil War of Augustus and Anthony, appeared
otherways than it was. When so many Roman Eagles were seen in the Field, People
could little imagine that the thing that did egg them on so cruelly against one
another, was Augustus his refusal to love you.


Fulvia. Thus go Affairs with Men. Their motions are great, but the ground of
them is commonly ridiculous enough. It is of great Consequence, for the Honor
of the most weighty Events, that the Causes of them should be kept reserved.


Fifth Dialogue.
Parmenisehus, Theocritus. Theoc. IN earnest, you could no longer laugh after
you had got down into Trophonius's Cave?


Parmen. I could not. I was extraordinarily (...)


Theoc. Had I known that Trophonius's Cave had that virtue, I had been obliged
to make a little Journey thither: I have laughed but too much much in my life
time, nay, my life had been of longer continuance, had I laughed less. An
unlucky Jest brought me into this place where we are. King Antigonus was blind
of one Eye: I had offended him most cruelly; notwithstanding he had promised he
would not resent it, so I would come and present my self before him. They did
in a manner force me to go, and my Friends, to encourage me, said to me; Go,
fear nothing, your life is secure, so soon as you have appeared to the Kings
Eyes. Ah! answered I, if I cannot obtain my Pardon without appearing to his
Eyes, I am undone. Antigonus, who was in a disposition to forgive me a Crime,
could not forgive me this merry conceit, and this unseasonable Jest cost me my
Head.


Parmen. I cannot tell whether I should not have been willing to have had your
Talent of fooling, though I lost my Head for it too.


Theoc. And what would I have given now to be of your serious Temper?


Parmen. Ah! you do not think of what you say. I had like to have died of that
serious Temper you covet so much. Nothing did delight me; I did all I could to
laugh, and could not compass it. I took no farther Pleasure in the ridicule of
the World, this Ridicule was become sad to me. In fine, being in despair upon
my proving so sober, I went to Delphos, and I begged earnestly of the God to
teach me a means to laugh. He turned me off in ambiguous terms, to the Maternal
Power. I thought that by the Maternal Power, he meant my native Country. I go
back again into it, but my Country could not overcome my serious mood. I began
to muse upon it, as in an incurable Disease, when by chance I made a Journey to
Delos. There I did contemplate with admiration, the Magnificence of Apollo's
Temples, and the Beauty of his Statues. He was all about in Marble, or in Gold,
and made by the best Workmen of Greece; but when I came to a Latona of Wood,
that was very ill made, and had the Countenance of an Old Woman, I burst out in
laughing, when I compared the Son's Statues with that of the Mother. I cannot
express how much I was surprised, satisfied, and taken with my having laughed.
Then I did conceive the true meaning of the Oracle. I made not an Offering to
all those Apollo's of Gold and Marble. The Wooden Latona had all my Presents,
and all my Vows. I made it I know not how many Sacrifices. I all besmoaked it
with Incense; and if I had been in a condition to bear the charge of it, I
would have builded a Temple, To Latona that causes laughing.


Theoc. Methinks Apollo might restore you the faculty of laughing, without
troubling his Mother. You would have discovered but too many Objects that were
fit to work the same Effect as Latona did.


Parmen. When a Man is in an ill humor, he finds that Men are not worth while
to be laughed at; they are made to be ridiculous, and they are so, that is no
wonder; but a Goddess that takes upon her to be so, that is very wonderful.
Moreover, Apollo in all likelihood had a mind to let me see that my serious
humor was a distemper not curable by any humane Remedy, and that I was reduced
to a condition wherein I stood in need of the help of the Gods themselves.


Theoc. That Joy and that Mirth which you earnestly desired, is a far worse
Distemper. A whole Nation was heretofore seized with it, and did suffer
extremely by it.


Parmen. What? There has been a whole Nation that was too much disposed to
mirth and joy.


Theoc. Ay, the ^irinthyans were the People.


Parmen. Happy People*


Theoc. Not at all. As they could not settle themselves to be serious in any
thing, all sell into confusion amongst them. If they met together in the
public Walks* a all their Discourses run upon Follies, instead of public
Concerns; if they received Ambassadors, they turned them into ridicule; if
they held the Town Council, the Advices of the Gravest Senators, were mere
Buffoonism; in short, a reasonable Word or Action, would have been a Prodigy
with the Tirinthians. They found themselves troubled with this Spirit of
merryment, at least as much as you had been troubled with your sadness, and
they went and consulted the Oracle of Delphos, as well as you, but for a very
different end, that is, they went to ask him by what means they might recover a
little seriousness again. The Oracle made answer, that if they could Sacrifice
a Bull to Neptune without laughing, they might have it in their power to be
more wise. A Sacrifice is of it self no pleasant action; however to the end
they might perform it in a serious manner, they used many preparatives. They
resolved to admit of no Young People, but Old People only, and not of all sorts
of Old Men neither, but of such only as were either full of Diseases, or up to
the Ears in debt, or very troublesome Women. When all these choice Persons were
upon the Sea side, to immolate the Victime, notwithstanding the Women, Debts,
Diseases, and Age, they were fain to settle their Countenances, cast their Eyes
down upon the ground, and bite their Lips; but by misfortune a little Boy had
crept in amongst them. They would have driven him away, according to order, and
he cried out; What? are you afraid I should eat up your Bull? This folly put
them quite out of those counterfeit gravities. They burst out into laughing,
the Sacrifice was interrupted, and the Tirinthians remained void of Reason.
They were much to blame, after they had miscarried in their Bull, they did not
bethink themselves of this Cave of Trophonius, that had the Virtue of rendering
People so serious, and that wrought so considerable an Effect upon you.


Parmen. It is true indeed, I went down into Trophonius's Cave; but Trophonius
his Cave, which made me so sad, is not what People take it to be.


Theoc. And what is it then?


Parmen. Reflections do the business. I had made some, and they put an end to
my laughing. If the Oracle had enjoined the Tirinthians to make some, they had
been Cured of their merry humor.


Theoc. I must confess I do not very well understand what Reflections are, but
I cannot conceive why they would be perplexive. May not one have some solid
foresights, that at the same time may not be melanchollick? Is there no Mirth
but in Error; and is Reason made for no other end but to destroy us?


Parmen. In all appearance it was not the intention of Nature that we should
think for she sets a vast price upon thoughts: You will make reflections* says
she to us, look to it, I will be revenged of them through the sadness they
shall cause you.


Theoc. But you do not tell me the reason why Nature will not let us think.


Parmen. She has set Men in the World to live in it; and to live, is not to
know what we do the most part of the time. When we make a discovery of the
little value of the thing that does take us up and of that thing which we are
concerned at we rob Nature of her only Secret? a Man grows wise, then he ceases
to be Man; he thinks, then he desists from Action; this it is that Nature
dislikes.


Theoc. But Reason that makes you think better than others, does however charge
you to act as they do.


Parmen. You say true. There is a Reason that sets us above all things by
thoughts; there is another that brings us back again to all things by Actions.
But upon that very same account too* were it not as well a Man had not thought?


Sixth Dialogue.
Brutus, Faustina. Brutus. HOw? Is it possible you could take a delight to pass
a thousand Infidelities upon the Emperor Marcus-Aurelius, upon an Husband that
was so condescending to you stand who was without contradiction, the best Man
of all the Roman Empire?


Faustina. And is it possible that you did Murder Julius Caesar, who was so
mild and moderate an Emperor?


Brut. I had a mind to terrify all Usurpers, by Caesar's Example, whose
moderation and mildness was no security to him.


Faust. And if I did tell you that I had a mind to strike such a terror into
all Husbands, that no Man should dare to think of being one, after the Example
of Marcus-Aurelius, whose goodness had been so ill requited?


Brut. A fine Design! There must be Husbands, for who should rule the Women?
But Rome stood in no need to be Governed by Caesar.


Faust. Who told you so? Rome began to be possessed with as disorderly Fancies,
and as strange Humors, as those which are attributed to the most part of
Women; she could no longer be without a Master, and yet she was not pleased
with having one. Women are just of the same Nature. It must be granted
likewise, that Men are over jealous of their Authority. They exercise it in
Marriage, that is already a main Article; but they would do the like too in
Love matters. When they require a Mistress to be faithful to them; by faithful
is meant subject. The Dominion ought to be equally divided betwixt the Lover
and the Mistress; however it always turns on the one side, or the other, and
ever on the Lovers side almost.


Brut. You are now strangely bent against all Men.


Faust. I am a Roman Lady, and am clearly for Liberty.


Brut. I assure you that upon that account the whole World is full of Roman
Ladies; but you will grant that Roman Men, such as my self, are a little more rare.


Faust. All the better, let them be more rare. I do not believe that an honest
Man would do what you have done, murder his Benefactour.


Brut. Nor do I believe that any honest Women would behave themselves, as you
did. As for my Wife, you cannot deny but she has been constant enough. There
was need of Courage, not to be touched with the kindness which Caesar did bear
me.


Faust. Do you believe then I stood in less need of Courage to withstand the
sweet Disposition and Patience of Marcus Aurelius? All my Infidelities were of
indifferent concern to him; he would not Honor me so much as to be jealous of
me; he wholly deprived me of the pleasure of having it in my Power to deceive
him. I was many times so mad at it, that I could willingly have become an
honest Woman. Motwithstanding I still kept my self clear of that weakness; and
after my death, did not Marcus Aurelius do me that injury, as to build me
Temples, allot me Priests, institute Faustinian Feasts in my Honor? What? make
me a solemn consecration to insult over me! Set me up for a Goddess by way of
contempt! These things are not to be forgiven.


Brut. Now I confess I do not understand Women. These are the oddest kind of
Complaints I ever heard.


Faust. Would not you rather have been obliged to Conspire against Sylla, than
against Caesar? Sylla, through his extreme cruelty would have stirred up your
Indignation and Hatred against him. I had rather have had a Jealous Man to
deceive; even Caesar himself, for example, whom we speak of. He was possessed
with an intolerable Vanity; nothing would satisfy him but the entire Dominion
of the World, and he would have his Wife to himself too; and because he saw
that Clodius was a partaker with him in the one, and Pompey in the other, he
could endure neither Pompey, nor Clodius. How happy should I have been with
Caesar!


Brut. But just now you were for the extermination of all Husbands, and at
present you stand up for the worst of them all.


Faust. I wish there were none at all, that one might be always free; but if
there be a necessity there should be some, I esteem the bad ones most, to the
end a Woman may take her Liberty with more delight.


Brut. My Opinion is, that for Women that are like you, it is best there should
be Husbands. The sense of Liberty is more lively, the more it is intermixed
with Malice.


NEW DIALOGUES OF SOME ANCIENT DEAD, With some other MODERN DEAD.
First DIALOGUE.
Seneca, Marot. Seneca. I AM overcome with Joy now you tell me the Stoics are
still in being, and that in these later days you owned your self to be of that
Sect.


Marot. Without boasting I was a greater Stoic than either your self, or
Crisippus, or Zeno our Founder. You might all of you play the Philosophers
without any trouble; for your own part, you were well stored with Riches: as
for the rest, they were not, at least, dispatched away into Banishment, nor
clapped up in Prisons; But I, I have been forced to undergo both Poverty,
Banishment, and Imprisonment, and I have made it appear that all these same
troubles did for upon the Body, without being able to reach the Soul of a Wise
Man. Discontent could never work upon me, in the least.


Seneca. I Am glad beyond measure to hear what you say, Your very speech
declares you a great Stoic. And were not you the wonder of the Age you lived
in?


Marot. I was so indeed indeed. I did not think it enough to bear my miseries
with an unusual constancy. I insulted over them with jeers. Constancy would
have been honorable enough in another, but I proceeded to mirth.


Seneca. O Stoic Wisdom, thou art then no Chymera, as People fancy. Thou art
in being amongst Men, and here is now a Sage whom thou made as happy as Jove
himself. Come away, I must present you to Zeno, and our other Stoics, I have a
mind they should see the fruit of their most admirable Instructions.


Marot. You Will highly oblige me, in making me known to such famous Dead-men.


Seneca. How may I call you?


Marot. Clement. Marot.


Seneca. Marot? that Name I know. Have not I heard several Modern Princes that
are here, speak of you?


Marot. That may be.


Seneca. Did not you make several small Poems to delight them?


Marot. I did.


Seneca. You were no Philosopher then?


Marot. Why not?


Seneca. It does not become a Stoic to write joking Stories.


Marot. Oh! Now I see you did not rightly understand the parfections of Joques.
Therein lies hidden all Wisdom it self: A Man may pick out something of
Ridicule out of all things; I could, if I had a mind to it, easily pick some
out of your Writings; but all things do not produce seriousness, and take my
Writings in what sense you will, I defy you to find any thing of that nature
in them. Is not that as much as to say, that your Ridicule does rule over all,
and that the concerns of the World were not designed to be managed in a serious
way? I Am told here, that your Virgil's divine Aeneid has been turned into
Burlesque Verses. I Am glad of it at my heart, there could be no better way
found out to make it appear, that State and your Ridicule are such near
Neighbors, that they even go hand in hand together. All resembles those
Prospective Glasses, wherein the dispersed Figures do represent you, for
example, a Caesar, if you look upon them one way; change the cast of your Eye,
there, you have a Shab.


Seneca. I pity you, because People did not conceive that your foolish Verses
were made on purpose to lead Men to such profound reflections. You would have
been more respected by far, had it been known how great a Philosopher you were;
but it was no easy matter to judge you were so by the writings you left the
public.


Marot. If I had writ huge Volumes to prove that Imprisonment, want of means,
banishment, ought not, in the least, to work upon the merry disposition of a
Sage, would they not have been thought worthy of a Stoic?


Seneca. No doubt of it.


Marot. And I have writ I know not how many Books which prove that in spite of
Banishment, Imprisonment, want of Means, I still retained my merry Disposition,
is not that better? Your Treatises of Morality are no other than Speculations
upon Wisdom; but my Verses were a continual practice of it in my several
conditions.


Seneca. I Am sure that your pretended Wisdom was not an Effect of your Reason,
but of your Temper.


Marot. And that is the best kind of Wisdom in the World.


Seneca. That Is a good one. Those are pleasant Wise Men, indeed, that are so by
Temper. If they are not Fools, no God a mercy to them. The happiness of being
Virtuous, may sometimes arise from Nature; but the merit of being so can
proceed from nothing but Reason.


Marot. That same thing which you call Merit, is commonly little set by; for if
a Man be endued with Virtue, and discovery made that is not Natural to him,
little account is made of it. One would think, though that the great Diligences
and Cares taken to purchase it, should procure it more Credit: it is not a straw
matter, it is a mere effect of Reason, and no Man will trust to it.


Seneca. There is less Reason to trust to the inequality of your Sages temper.
Their fits of Wisdom depend upon their blood; one should be acquainted with the
interior Disposition of their Bodies, to know how far their Virtue would
extend. Ah! is it not better far to put ones self altogether under the Conduct
of Reason, and become so independent of Nature, as not to apprehend the danger
of her Surprisals.


Marot. It were the best way, if such a thing were possible, but, as ill-luck
will have it, Nature does still maintain her rights, she influenceth the
motions in Man without control, and there is no help for it; they often get the
start of Reason; and when at last, Reason does its Duty, she finds all out of
order: and it is a question too, whether she can settle things again. Indeed, I
do not wonder that so many do under value Reason.


Seneca. It Is her right, though alone, to govern Men, and Rule all things in
the World.


Marot. She is but in a bad condition to make her Authority known. I have heard
say, that about an hundred years after your Death, a Platonic Philosopher did
beg of the then reigning Emperor, a small ruined Town of Calabria, that he
might build it up again, establish the Laws of Plato's Commonwealth in it, and
call it Platonopole; but the Emperor would not by any means grant the
Philosopher his desire, and had not so much confidence in divine Plato's
reason, as to give him the Government of this petty Town. See by this, how much
Reason is cried down. If it did deserve to be esteemed ever so little, who
should esteem it but men; however, Men themselves value it not.


Second Dialogue.
Artemisia, Raymond Lullus. Artemisia. YOU say there is a Secret how to turn
all Metals into Gold, and that this Secret is called the Philosophers Stone, or
the great Work of all. This is news to me.


R. Lullus. Ay, and I sought it along time.


Artemisia. Did you find it out?


R. Lullus. No; but every one thought I did, and does so still. To tell you the
truth, this Secret is but a Chymera.


Artimesia. Why did you seek for it then?


R. Lullus. I found my Error, but since I came hither.


Artemisia. There methinks you staid a little too long.


R. Lullus. I see you have a mind to jeer me. We resemble one another, though
more than you think.


Artemisia. Who I? I should resemble you? I, who was an example of conjugal
Fidelity, drank my Husbands Ashes, and builded him a most stately Monument; how
could I resemble a Man that had spent his time in seeking out a Secret, to turn
Metals into Gold?


R. Lullus. Yes, yes, I know well enough what I say: after all these fine
braggs, you became crackbrained, and you fell in Love with a young Man, that
cared not for you. You sacrificed this sumptuous Piece unto him, which might
have redounded so much to your Glory; and Mausolus's Ashes which you drank,
were no good Receipt for a new fashion.


Artimesia. I did not believe you had been so well acquainted with my Affairs.
This passage of my Life was private enough, and I thought no body had known of
it.


R. Lullus. You Will own then that your Fate and mine have been something alike,
insomuch as we have both been honored beyond our Merit; you, in being thought
always faithful to the memory of your Husband, and my self, because 'twas
believed, I had found out the Philosphers Stone.


Artem. I shall own it very freely. The People are designed to be the Cully of
some certain things; and a Body must take advantage of their Dispositions.


R. Lullus. But might-there not be something, else that were common to both?


Artem. Hitherto I am well contented to resemble you. Come, out with it.


R. Lullus. Did not we both of us seek for a thing that is not to be found;
you, the Secret how to be faithful to your Husband; and I, that of turning
Metals into Gold? I believe there is no difference betwixt Conjugal Fidelity,
and the Philosophers Stone.


Artem. Some People are so preoccupated with an ill opinion of married Women,
that they will perhaps say, that it is not impossible for the Philosophers
Stone to have a share in this comparison.


R. Lullus. Oh! I will warrant it you, as impossible as is needful.


Artem. But how chance Men seek for it, and how fell it out that you, who seem
to have been a Man of Sense, were given to that folly?


R. Lullus. It is true, that the Philosophers Stone is not to be found, but it
is fit Men should seek for it. In seeking for it, there are many rare secrets
discovered, which were not sought after.


Artem. It were better to seek out Secrets, which may be found, and not think
of a thing that will never be found.


R. Lullus. All Sciences have their Chymera, they hunt for it, and are not able
to lay hold of it; but they pick up by the way other very solid Notions. If
Chemistry has her Philosophers Stone, Geometry has its Circular square,
Astronomy her Longitudes, the Mechanics their perpetual Motion; it is
impossible to find all this out, but it is useful to look for it. I speak to you
of things which perhaps you understand not very well, but you may at least,
understand that Moral Philosophy has its Chymera too: and that is, a waving of
ones private Interest, true Friendship. Man will never attain to this, but it is
good to pretend to it; at least in pretending thereto, he will attain many
other Virtues.


Artem. Once more, I should be of Opinion, that all Chymeras ought to be laid
aside, and that People should be earnest in their pursuit of Realities only.


R. Lullus. Would you believe it? In all things Men must propose to themselves
a degree of Perfection, which does not so much as come within their reach. They
would never settle to any thing, if they believed they should attain no more,
than what they will really attain to; it is necessary they should propose to
themselves an imaginary scope of things to egg them on. Whoever should have
told me, that Chemistry could not have taught me to make Gold, I would have
forbore it. Whoever should have told you, that the extreme Fidelity, you so
much stood upon, in reference to your Husband, was not Natural, you would not
have taken the trouble upon you to honor Mausolus's Memory with so sumptuous a
Tomb. Men would be out of heart, if they were not supported by false Ideas.


Artem. There is no harm then in Men's being deceived?


R. Lullus. How, harm! If by mischance Truth should discover her self, all were
spoiled; but its manifest she knows the importance of it, because she keeps her
self always hidden.


Third Dialogue.
Apicius, Galileus. Apicius. AH! how sorry am I, that I was not born in your
time?


Galil. Considering your temper, I think you chose a good Age to live in. You
were minded to fare deliciously, and you happened to be in the World, and in
Rome too just at the time when she was Mistress of the whole World; thither
came from all parts the choicest sort of Fowls and Fish; to be short, the
whole Earth seemed to have been subdued by the Romans, to no other end, but to
supply them with necessaries for their good cheer.


Apic. But the Age I lived in was an ignorant Age; and had there been any Man
like you, I would have gone to the Worlds end to seek him out. I made nothing
of Voyages. Have you heard of that I made for a certain kind of Fish I eat at
Minternum in Campania? I was told that this Fish was much bigger in Africa; I
immediately fitted up a Vessel, and sailed away to Africa. The Voyage was
difficult and dangerous. When we drew near to the Coast of Africa, away come
several Fisher-Boats to me, (for they had had notice of my coming) and bring me
some of that kind of Fish; they proved to be no bigger than those of Minternum;
and in that very same instant of time, without being moved with the curiosity
to see a Country I had never seen, and without any regard to the Entreaties of
my Men, who desired to go and refresh themselves one shore, I ordered the
Pilots to sail back again for Italy. You may believe, I should willingly have
undertaken the like trouble upon your account.


Gal. I cannot imagine what your design could be. I was a poor Learned wretch of
a spare Diet, always intent upon the Stars, and very unskilful in Ragous.


Apic. But you invented Prospective Glasses; in imitation of you, some Body or
other made as much for the Ears, as you had made for the Eyes, and my meaning
is, that Trumpets were invented, they thicken the voice, and make it double
again and again. In fine, you perfected, and you taught others to perfect the
Senses. I should have entreated you to have used your endeavors for the sense
of Tasting, and fancied some Instrument that might have added to the pleasure
of Eating.


Gal. Very well; as though Tasting was not endued with its natural perfection.


Apic. Why has Taste that privilege above Sight?


Gal. Sight is likewise very perfect. Men have excellent Eyes.


Apic. And which are then the bad Eyes, that stand in need of your Glasses?


Gal. Marry, your Philosophers Eyes. These People, whose business it is, to
know whether the Sun be stained with Spots, or no; whethe Planets do turn upon
their Center, or whether the milky way be made up of little Stars, have not
Eyes good enough to discover these Objects so clearly, and so distinctly as is
requisite; but your other Men, who consider all these things with indifferency,
have an admirable Eyesight. If you will only enjoy things, nothing is wanting
toward your enjoyment of them; but toward our knowing of them, you want every
thing. Men in general stand in need of nothing, and Philosophers want all
things. Art has no new Instruments to bestow upon the one, and she can never
supply the others to the full.


Apic. I grant you, that Art does not furnish the generality of Men with new
Instruments, whereby to eat more deliciously; but I would have her afford some
to your Philosophers, in the same manner as she gives them Glasses, that they
may see better, and then I should think them well rewarded for their labors in
Philosophy; for in short, what good does she do, if she make no discoveries,
and what need is there of discoveries, if they be not upon the score of
Pleasures?


Gal. That matter has been sifted over and over, and out of date long ago.


Apic. But Reason does often purchase new advantages, why should the Senses be
debarred of that Privilege? If they had it, it would prove of far greater
consequence.


Gal. It would lessen them very much. They are so perfect, that they
immediately found out all the pleasures that could delight them. If Reason does
find out new notions, she is to be pitied; it is because she was naturally
imperfect.


Apic. And were those Kings of Persia Fools, that did propose such great
Rewards those, that could invent new Pleasures?


Gal. Yes, they were Fools. I am certain they did not undo themselves in these
rewards. Invent new Pleasures! They should first have created new wants in Men.


Apic. How? Should each Pleasure be grounded upon a Want? I should e'ne leave
the one for the other. Nature would have given us nothing then out of good will.


Gal. That Is no fault of mine. But you, that blame my advice, it concerns you
more than another, it should be true. If there were new pleasures, how would
you ever be contented, since you were not reserved to live in the later Ages,
where you might have made your Advantage of the Discoveries of all former Ages?
As for new notions, I know you will not grudge those that have them.


Apic. I Am of your mind, it suits with my Inclinations more than I believed. I
perceive the advantage of Notions is no great matter, since they are left to
any that will catch them up; and since that Nature has not troubled her self to
make Men of former and future Ages equal upon this account; but Pleasures are
of greater value, it would have been a very unjust thing, if one Age had
enjoyed more than another, so each Age shared alike.


Fourth Dialogue.
Plato, Margaret of Scotland. Marg. HElp, help, divine Plato, come and take my
part, or I am undone.


Plato. What Is the matter?


Marg. Here is a dispute about an hearty kiss, I gave a Learned Man, but huge
ugly. And it is in vain for me to say the same for my justification now, as I
did then, That I had a mind to kiss that mouth, which had uttered so many fine
words; here are I know not how many Shadows, that laugh me to scorn, and
justify it to my face, that such favors are to be bestowed upon handsome
Mouths only, and not upon them that speak well; and that Learning ought not to
be paid in the same Coin as Love is. Come away and teach these Shadows, that
the Eyes cannot discover that which is really worthy to stir up our passions,
and that we may be Charmed with Beauty, though wrapped up in a very ugly Body.


Plato. Why would you have me vent these Stories? They are not true.


Marg. You have vented them already above a thousand, and a thousand times.


Plato. I have so, but I was living then. I was a Philosopher, and I had a mind
to speak of Love; it would not have been handsome for one of my calling to
speak of it in terms like the Authors of the Milesian Fables; I hid those
matters under a Philosophical Gibbrish, because the World should not know what
they mean'd.


Marg. I do not believe, you know what you say now. It must needs be that you
spoke of some other Love, besides ordinary Love, when you described, with so
much pomp, those Voyages which the winged Souls make in Chariots upon the
lowermost vault of the Heavens, where they contemplate Beauty in its essence,
their unhappy falls from thence to the very Earth, through the unruliness of
one of their Horses, the beating of their Wings, their abode in Bodies, their
behavior when they meet with an handsome Face, which they own to be a Copy of
that Beauty which they beheld in Heaven, the growing again of their Wings which
they they endeavor to make use of, to fly toward their Beloved; in fine, the
Fear, Horror, and Terror which seiseth them, upon the sight of the Beauty
which they know to be Divine, the Holy Fury wherewith they are carried away; as
al^o their earnest desire to offer up Sacrifices to the Object of their love,
just as they do to the Gods.


Plato. I assure you, that the meaning of all this (rightly understood, and
faithfully expounded) is, that handsome Persons are apt to work strange effects
upon frail Nature.


Marg. But you will have it, that People are not touched with the Beauty of the
Body, which does only put them in mind of a Beauty infinitely more Charming.
How is it possible, that so many lively motions, as are described by you,
should arise from nothing but full Eyes, a little Mouth, and a fresh
Complexion? Ah! let the Beauty of the Soul be their Object, if you will
justify them, and your self too, for describing them.


Plat. Shall I be plain with you? The Beauty of the Mind stirs up Admiration;
the Beauty of the Soul Creates Esteem; and the Beauty of the Body begets Love.
Esteem and Admiration are peaceable and quiet enough, Love only is turbulent.


Marg. You are grown a Libertin since your Death; for, whilst you lived, you
did not only speak otherwise of Love; but you also put in practice those
sublime Ideas of yours. Were you not in love with Arqueanassa the Colophonite,
when she was Old? Did not you make these Verses of her?

The lovely Arqueanassa's true,
And has described my Faith in lieu.
You say she is wrinckl'd, but whole sholes
Of Cupids wanton in those holes.
You who have felt her Youth, whilst Harms,
Like Armies mustered in her Charms,
E're Cursed Age had plowed those Fallows,
And envious years those little hollows.
What Pleasure and what Pain 'twas sure!
Ah what did you not then endure!
It Is most certain, that this Troop of Amors, which lay sporting themselves in
Arqueanassa's wrinckles, were the pleasing dispositions, of her Mind, which Age
had rendered more perfect. You pitied those that had seen her in her Youth,
because her Beauty did work too sensibly upon them, and you loved her Merit,
which Age could not destroy.


Plat. You oblige me very much, in that you are pleased to make so favorable
an Interpretation of a small Satyr, which I made upon Arqueanassa, who thought
she could have made me fall in Love with her, though grown in years. My
Passions were not so Metaphysical, as you fancy, and I can prove it by other
Verses which I made. If I were alive again, I would perform the vain Ceremony,
which I make my Socrates use, when he begins to speak of Love; I would cover my
face, and you should not hear me, but through a Vail; but in this place, those
Circumstances are needless. Here are my Verses.

When Agathis who always used me hard,
Allowed me once a Kiss for my reward;
No greedy Falcon with such Joy does tower,
As my fierce Soul up to her Lips did soar,
To hunt, to chase, and the soft Pleasure to devour.

Marg. Who Is this I hear? Plato.


Plat. The same.


Marg. How, was Plato with his broad Shoulders, serious Countenance, and his
Head brim full of Philosophy, acquainted with these kind of Kisses?


Plat. Yes.


Marg. But do you observe, that the Kiss I gave my Doctor, was altogether
Philosophical, and that yours which you gave your Mistress, was in no manner
such; I acted your part, and you acted mine.


Plat. Herein I agree with you; Philosophers are the Gallants, whilst such as
were born to be Gallants, will needs be Philosophers. We suffer those People to
run after the Chymeras of Philosophy, that understand them not, and we weary
our selves about realities.


Marg. I find I missed of my aim, in calling upon Agathis's Lover to stand up
for the defense of my Kiss. If I had had any kindness for this ugly Doctor, I
should still have failed of my design with you. Nevertheless the Mind is able
to create Passions by it self, and that makes well for Women. They secure
themselves that way, if they are not handsome.


Plat. I know not, whether the mind does frame Passions; I only know, that it
puts the Body in a condition to frame some without the assistance of Beauty,
and supplies it with the delight which was wanting to it. And for proof of
this, the Body must make one in the case, and must always contribute something
of its own, that is, something of youth at least; for if it do not help it self
at at all, the mind is altogether unuseful to it.


Mar. Always something of substance in love concerns!


Pla. It Is the nature of it. Let it have, if you will, the mind only for
Object, you will do no good on it, you will wonder to see how it runs upon
substance. You loved your Doctors mind only; but why did you kiss then? It is
because the body is designed to reap the benefit of those Passions, which the
mind does suggest.


Fifth Dialogue.
Strato, Raphael Urbin. Strato. I Did not expect, that the Counsel, I gave my
Slave, would have produced such happy Effects. Yonder above it both saved me my
Life, and got me a Kingdom; and here it procures me the admiration of all the
Wise.


R. Vrbin. And what was this Consel?


Stra. I was of Tyr. All the Slaves of this Town revolted, and cut their
Masters Throats; but a Slave of mine had so much humanity in him, as to spare
my Blood, and secure me from the Fury of the rest. They agreed to choose him for
King, who, upon a certain appointed day, should first of them all discover the
rising of the Sun. They met together in a Field. This multitude of People did
fix their Eyes steady upon the Eastern part of the Sky, where the Sun should
rise; only my Slave, whom I had instructed, looked toward the West. I suppose,
you do not question but they thought him a Fool for it. However, whilst he was
thus with his back turned toward them, he first saw the Beams of the Sun,
which appeared upon the Top of a very high Tower, and his Companions were still
peeping toward the East for the whole body of the Sun. He was admired for his
quick Wit, but he freely confessed, he was beholding to me for it, and that I
was still living, thereupon I was immediately chose King, as though I had been
some Divinity.


R. Vrbin. I find your Counsel to your Slave proved very useful to you, but I
see nothing that is admirable in it.


Stra. Ah! All the Philosophers in these parts, will answer for me, that I
taught my Slave the very thing, that all the Wise should practice, would they
find out the truth? Let them go contrary to the generality of the People, for
common Opinions are the Rule of sound Opinions, provided they be taken in a
contrary sense.


R. Vrbin. Those kind of Philosophers, speak like Philosophers indeed. They
make it their business to speak ill of common Opinions and Prejudications, in
the mean time, there is nothing more convenient, nor more useful.


Stra. One may judge by what you say, that you were no loser by following them.


R. Vrbin. I assure you, if I am for Prejudications, it is not for Interests
sake; on the contrary, whilst I was in the World, they were a great Ridicule to
me. They were trying at Rome to save some Statues, that were fallen under the
Ruins, and I being a good Carver, and a good Painter, I was made choice of, to
judge whether they were Pieces of Antiquity or not. Michael Angelo, my
Competitor, did privately make a Statue of Bacchus, and rarely well he made it.
Having finished it, he broke off one of the Fingers, and buried it in a place,
where he knew they would dig. They had no sooner found it, but I declared it to
be a piece of Antiquity. Michael Angelo maintained it was a Modern Piece. I
grounded my Judgment chiefly upon the Beauty of the Statue, which, according to
the principles of Art, might pass for the Workmanship of some Greek Hand; and
being strongly opposed, I run this Bacchus up to the time, wherein Polycletes
and Phidias did flourish. At last Micha-An^^gelo shows the broken Finger, which
was an Argument not to be opposed. I was laughed at for my preoccupation; but
what I could I have done without this preoccupation. I was Judge, and that
quality forces one to a Decision.


Stra. You might have decided the Dispute according to Reason.


R. Vrbin. And does Reason decide things? By consulting her, I should never
have known, whether the Statue had been a piece of Antiquity or not, I should
only have known that it was a very fine piece. But Prejudication comes and
tells me, that a fine Statute must be a piece of Antiquity; here is a Decision,
and I Judge.


Stra. It is very probable, that Reason might not supply Men with undeniable
Principles in matters of so little Consequence, as this is; but in reference to
all that concerns the Conduct of Men, she is sure in her Decisions; the
mischief is, they do not consult her.


R. Vrbin. Let us consult her a little in some point or other, to see how she
concludes. Let us ask her, whether we should cry or laugh at the Death of
Friends, and Relations. Here she will tell you, they can do you no farther good,
you must Weep. Again, they are freed from the miseries of Life, Rejoice then.
These are the Answers of Reason; but the custom of our Country tells us, what
we must do in this case. We Weep, if the Custom be such, and that so bitterly,
that we imagine it to be impossible we could laugh, upon that score; or else we
Laugh, and that so heartily, that we think it impossible we could weep.


Stra. Reason is not always thus irresolute. When she meets with a thing, that
is not worth her concern in it, she turns it over to Prejudication; but how
exact are the Ideas, which she frames upon a World of considerable things; and
the Consequences she draws from them, are no less considerable.


R. Vrbin. I am very much deceived, if these exact Ideas you speak of, are so
many as you would have them to be.


Stra. It Is no matter. They only ought to be believed.


R. Vrbin. That cannot be.


Stra. Methinks, you make too positive a Conclusion. Why may it not be?


R. Vrbin. Because the infallible Maxims, which Reason proposes to us, are too
few in number, and our mind is made to believe more. Thus the surplusage of her
Inclination to believe redounds to the profit of Prejudications.


Stra. And may not a Man suspend his Judgment? Reason is at a stand, when she
cannot resolve which way to take.


R. Vrbin. You are in the right; Reason has but one Secret to keep her self
from going astray, and that is, not to move a step. When she finds the way does
separate in two, she is at a stand; but this is a violent State for the Mind of
Man; it is in motion, and must have its full career. It Is not every one, that
knows how to make doubts, to attain to that, a man had need of a good insight
into things, and strength to hold there. Moreover Doubt is void of Action, and
Men are for Action.


Stra. Prejudications should not be customary neither, if one man would act
like another; but if he will think as a wise man should, he must rid himself of
the Prejudications of the Mind.


R. Vrbin. It is better to keep them all. I see you do not know the two Answers
which the Old Samnite made for his Country Men, when they sent to know of him
what they should do after they had shut up the whole Army of the Romans, their
mortal Enemies, in the Straits of Candinium, and had it in their power to do
with them, as they pleased. The Old Man made answer, that they should put all
the Romans to the Sword. His Counsel seemed too hard and too cruel, and the
Samnites sent to him, to let him understand the inconveniences of it. The Old
Man's answer was, that they should spare the Romans Lives, without making any
Articles. Neither of his Counsels was followed, and they smarted for it. It is
just so with Prejudications, they must either be all preserved, or all quite
laid aside. Otherwise, those, which you have cast off, make you begin to
mistrust all your other Opinions. The unhappiness of being deceived in many
things has no amends from the pleasure of being deceived without knowing it;
and you neither enjoy the bright beams of Truth, nor the delights of Error.


Stra. If the Alternative, you propose, be unavoidable, a man need not stand
studying which side he will take. Away then with all your Prejudications.


R. Vrbin. But Reason will drive all former Opinions out of our mind, without
supplying it with new ones. Wisdom is a kind of Vacuum. And who can maintain
that? No, no, with that little Reason men are endued, they must still have
their usual allowance of Prejudications. They are the supplies of Reason. What
is wanting in the one, is made good in the other.


Sixth Dialogue.
Lucretia, Barbara Plomberg. B. Plomb. SInce you have such difficulty to
believe me, I will tell you once again. The Emperor, Charles the Fifth, had an
Intrigue with the Princess I told you of, and I was made use of for a Blind;
but the concern went farther; besides this, the Princess desired me, I would be
Mother to a young Prince newly born; to oblige her, I consented. Now you will
wonder! Have you not heard say, that whatever our Merit is, we must still be
above that Merit, through the little esteem we ought to make of it; that your
Wits, for example, ought in this manner to be above their Talent in that kind?
For my part, I was above my Virtue, I had more than I desired.


Lucretia. That Is a good one. You are foolish, one cannot have too much.


B. Plomb. Now I am serious, whoever would send me into the World again, upon
condition I should be a right accomplished Person, I do not think, I should
accept of the proffer. I know that in being so very perfect, I should be a
cause of vexation to many persons, I should be always wishing for some defect,
or some weakness or other, for the comfort of those, I should live withal.


Lucr. That is to say, that for the Women's sake, who had not so much Virtue,
you had qualified yours.


B. Plomb. I had qualified the appearance of it, lest they should look upon me,
as to their Accuser to the public, if they had thought me more severe than
themselves.


Lucr. They were indeed much obliged to you, and more particularly the
Princess, who was so happy as to find out a Mother for her Children. And did
she put but one upon you?


B. Plomb. No, but one.


Lucr. I wonder, she did not make farther use of the opportunity she had, for
you mattered not Reputation.

Now I will surprise you. Know then, that my indifferency for Reputation was
lucky to me. I do not comprehend, what the power of Truth is? but it was found
out at last, that the Prince, that went for my Son, was none of mine; I have
had more Justice done me, than I desired, and it seems as if People did desire
to make me satisfaction in that manner, because I made no show of my Virtue,
and because I had generously waved the Esteem, which was due to me.


Lucr. This is a fine kind of Generosity; there is no dispensing with the
Public upon this account.


B. Plomb. You think so! It is very humorous and sometimes it strives to fly in
the face of such, as would huff it into an esteem of them. You should know this
better, than any one. Some persons have been strangely scandalized at your
over-earnest desire of Glory; they have done what they could to undervalue
their death.


Lucr. And what way did they find, to quarrel with so Heroical an Action?


B. Plomb. How do I know? They said, you killed your self somewhat too late;
and that your Death had been far more creditable, had you not staid for
Tarquin's last Attempts; but that in all likelihood you would not kill your
self upon slight grounds without knowing wherefore. In short, it is evident,
People did you Justice with a very ill will; but they took a pleasure to do me
right; may be it was, because you were too eager of Glory, whereas I let it
come of it self, without so much as wishing for it.


Lucr. Say too, that you did your utter most to hinder it.


B. Plomb. But does modesty go for nothing? I was so modest as to be willing
that my Virtue should be unknown. On the contrary, you exposed yours in great
state; nay, you would not kill your self, but in the presence of your whole
Family. Is not Virtue contented with it self alone, without desiring Witnesses?
Is it not the property of a great Soul, to scorn this Chymera of Glory?


Lucr. Have a care of that. It would be too dangerous a piece of Wisdom. This
kind of Chymera is the only powerful thing in the World. It is the Soul of all
things, it is preferred before all things, and do but see what a world of
People it brings into Elysium. Glory brings us more Persons, than a Fever
does; I am of that number, so I may speak by experience.


B. Plomb. You may well be taken for Bubbles then; you, here, that died of that
Distemper, for at the very instant, that you come into these lower parts, all
the Glory imaginable does you no good.


Lucr. That is a Secret of the place, where we now are. The Living must not be
made privy to it.


B. Plomb. They are to be very much pitied, that they do not conceive how
insensible we are. Did they know it, they would not depend upon an Immortality,
that concerns them not.


Lucr. What matters it, whilst they are alive, they still enjoy the pleasure,
to believe it does concern them?


B. Plomb. Ay, but this Pleasure which they enjoy before hand, is all they will
ever enjoy; they had better rid themselves of an Idea that deceives them.


Lucr. Farewell all Heroical Actions.


B. Plomb. Why so? The consideration of doing their Duty, would put men upon
them; that is, a far more noble consideration. It is grounded upon Reason only.


B. Plomb. And that is the very thing that makes it too insufficient. Glory is
grounded upon nothing but the Imagination, and is far more Powerful Reason her
self would not allow that Men should submit themselves to her Conduct alone.
She knows but too well, that she stands in need of the help of the Imagination.
When Curtius was just going to sacrifice himself for his Country, and was ready
to leap, armed as he was on Horseback, into that Gulf which broke out in the
middle of Rome, if one should have said to him, You ought in duty to cast your
self into this Precipice; but rest assured, that no body will ever speak of
your Action: in earnest, I am much afraid, Curtius would have made his Horse go
back again. For my part, I cannot say, that I should have killed my self upon a
bare Consideration of my Duty. Why, kill my self? I should have believed that
my Duty was not injured through the Violence that was offered me: at the
uttermost, I should have thought to have made satisfaction with Tears: But to
make my Name Famous, I stabbed my self.


B, Plomb. Shall I tell you what I think of the Matter? These Actions were as
good let alone, as executed out of a Principle as false as that of Glory.


Lucr. You are a little too quick. All Duties, if rightly considered, are
fulfilled though not by way of Duty; all those brave Feats which Men should
perform, are duly performed: In fine, the Order established by Nature in the
World has its Course still: All that is to be said, is, That what Nature could
not have obtained from our Reason, she has it of our Folly.


DIALOGUES OF SOME MODERN DEAD.
First DIALOGUE.
Soliman, Julietta of Gonzaga. Soliman. AH! What Is the reason I have not seen
you till now? Why did I lose all those Pains I took in my Lifetime to seek
after you? I had had the Beauty of Italy in my Seraglio, and now I see a Shadow
only, without Features, and no ways differing from the rest.


Julietta. I cannot express my due Thanks to you for the Love you conceived for
me upon the Reports of my Beauty. It added much to the Reputation I had of
being Beautiful; and I am bound to you for those Moments wherein I took most
delight. It will ever be a Pleasure to me to think of that Night, above all
other, when the Pyrat Barbarossa, whom you ordered to take me up, thought to
have surprised me in Cajetto, and forced me out of Town all in disorder.


Soliman. What moved you to fly, if you were glad that I sent to seek you?


Julietta. I was pleased that I was sought for; and I was yet better pleased
they could not lay hold on me. Nothing was so pleasing to my Thoughts, as that
I was wanting to Soliman's Happiness, and that I was esteemed worth speaking of
in the Seraglio, a Place so replenished with Beauties: but I wished for no
more. The Seraglio is pleasant to none but such as are wished for there, and
not for them that are shut up in it.


Sol. I see now what you were afraid of; so many Rivals would not have suited
with your Humor. You were apprehensive too, perhaps, that among so many Lovely
Women, most of them might serve only for an Ornament to the Seraglio.


Jul. You charge me here with very pretty Thoughts.


Sol. What was there then in the Seraglio that was so dreadful?


Jul. There I should have been strangely offended at the Vanity of you Sultans,
who, out of ostentation of your Grandeur, do shut up therein I know not how
many fine Creatures, whereof the greatest part are of no use to you, and yet
are lost to the rest of the World. You force them into a Fidelity to you, which
does you no good; and Fidelity, even that which might be voluntary, seems
contrary to Nature: She did not intend that the Proceedings of Women should be
carried on in a straight and even manner, for the same reason that she did not
intend the Course of Rivers should be straight.


Sol. And why is not the Course of Rivers straight?


Jul. Because if they were, but few would be the better for them. Judge you by
this, how much Injustice you commit in the Seraglio, out of a foolish vanity of
not being betrayed, love or love not. Moreover, who could bear the intolerable
Pride of a Sultan, whose sole Declarations of Love are indispensible Commands,
and who makes his absolute Authority pass for languishing Complaints? No, I was
no ways fit for the Seraglio: You needed not to have commanded a Search for me,
I should never have made you happy.


Sol. How can you be so sure of that?


Jul. Because I know you could not have made me happy.


Sol. I do not very well understand the Consequence. Is it any matter whether I
had made you happy or not?


Jul. How? You fancy one may be made happy in Love, by a Person that does not
partake of that Happiness; that there are solitary Pleasures, as I may call
them, and such as need not be communicative; and that one may enjoy them, when
one does not bestow them? Oh! these Opinions cause Horror in well-disposed
Hearts.


Sol. I am a Turk; therefore I may be excused if I am not so tenderhearted as
I should be. However, methinks I am not so much in the wrong. Did not you just
now highly blame Vanity?


Jul. Yes.

And is not this Desire to render others happy, a Motion of Vanity? Is it not
an intolerable Pride in you to refuse to make me happy, unless I will make you
happy too? A Sultan is more modest; he receives Pleasure from many very lovely
Women, without concerning himself to afford them any. Don't laugh at this
manner of Argument, it has more solidity in it than you are aware of. Think of
it, consult the Heart of Mankind, and you will find that this Tenderness which
you value so much, is but a kind of a proud requital. Men will be clear of all
Ties of Obligations, they will owe nothing.


Jul. Well then, I grant you, that Vanity is necessary.


Sol. Just now you condemned it highly.


Jul. That which I spoke of, I did condemn; but I like this very well. Have you
any difficulty to conceive that the good Qualities of Man do hang by others
that are bad, and that it would be dangerous to cure him of his Failings?


Sol. But one does not know what to fix upon. What must we think of Vanity?


Jul. In one certain degree, it is a Vice; a little more on this side, it is a
Virtue.


Second Dialogue.
Paracelsus, Moliere. Moliere. IF it were but for your Name sake alone, I
should be in love with you. Paracelsus! A Man would take you to be either a
Greek or a Latin, and he would never bethink himself that Paracelsus was a
Philosopher of Swizerland.


Paracelsus I have rendered that Name as famous, as it is graceful. My Writings
are a great Help to all that are desirous to dive into the Secrets of Nature,
and most especially to those that aim at the Knowledge of Genius's, and those
other Elementary Inhabitants.


Mol. I easily conceive that those are the true Sciences. To know those Men one
sees every day, is nothing; every Body can do as much: But to know the
Genius's, which one does not see, is clear another thing.


Par. Doubtless it is. I have set forth in an exact manner their Nature, their
Employments, their Inclinations, their different Degrees, as also what their
Power is in the World.


Mol. How happy were you in having all these Insights! For it stands to reason,
that you perfectly understood Man, and yet a great many could not so much as
attain to that.


Par. Oh! Every petty Philosopher did attain to it.


Mol. I believe as much. You met with no farther Difficulty, than in what
concerned the Nature of Man's Soul, her Functions, her Union with the Body?


Par. To be free with you, It is impossible but there must always be some
Difficulties remaining about these Matters; but, in short, a Man knows as much
of them as is possible to be learned of Philosophy.


Mol. And you know no more?


Par. No: Is not that enough too?


Mol. Enough? It Is just nothing at all: And you hopp'd thus over Men, whom you
knew not, to get to the Genius of them.


Par. Your Genius has something extraordinary in it, that does egg on Natural
Curiosity.


Mol. It has so; but we ought not to mind them, till first we are assured, that
Man has nothing farther in him that is worth our studying. It seems as if the
Wit of Man had drained every thing, considering how it frames to it self
Objects of Sciences, that perhaps have nothing of Reality in them, and
wherewith it does entangle it self by way of sport: Yet it is assured, there
are real Objects enough to entertain it.


Par. The Mind does naturally wave the plainer sort of Sciences, and hunts
after those that are obscure and Mysterious. These only are able to make Work
for its Activity.


Mol. The Mind has the worst of that; what you say, redounds to its Infamy.
Truth offers her self to it; but because she is plain, it disowns her, and
entertains ridiculous Mysteries in her room, merely because they are Mysteries.
I am apt to believe, that if most People did see the Order of the World so as
in effect it is, by neglecting to take notice either of Virtues of Numbers,
Properties of Planets, or of the Fatalities attending some certain Seasons or
Revolutions, they could not forbear saying, What, is this all?


Par. You turn into Ridicule these Mysteries, which you could not dive into,
and which indeed are reserved for none but Men of great Parts.


Mol. I prefer those that do not understand these Mysteries, far before those
that do understand them; but by misfortune, Nature has not made every one
incapable of understanding them.


Par. But you, that take upon you to decide things with such Authority, what
Trade did you follow when you were living?


Mol. A Trade very different from yours. You studied the Virtues of Man's
Genius, and I studied the Follies of Men.


Par. A fine Study indeed. Is it not well enough known, that Men are subject to
commit but too many Follies?


Mol. We know it in grofs, and confusedly; but we must come to Particulars, and
then we are surprised at the extent of this Science.


Par. And in conclusion, what use did you make of it?


Mol. I gathered together, in a certain Place, as many People as I could; and
there I let them see they were all Fools.


Par. Your Arguments were terrible, sure, since you could persuade them to such
a Truth.


Mol. Not at all.: Nothing so easy. There needs no such great Eloquence, nor
premeditated Arguments, to prove their Follies. What they do, is so ridiculous,
that it is but doing the same thing over again before them, and you will presently
see them burst out into Laughter.


Par. I know your meaning; you were a Stage Player. For my part, I cannot
imagine what pleasure there is in Plays. People go thither to laugh at the
Humors and Manners which they represent; but why don't thy laugh at the
Manners themselves?


Mol. To laugh at the Passages in the World, a Man must, as it were, be out of
it; and Plays do withdraw you from it. They expose all to your sight, just as
if you were no Party concerned.


Par. But a Man is not long before he unites himself again to this all, which
he laughed at, and he begins to make a part of it again.


Mol. You need not doubt it. Whilst I was diverting my self the other day, I
made here a little Tale upon that Subject. A young Goose did fly with that
uncomeliness as is usual to the Kind; and during this Flight, of a moments
lasting, which raised it about a Foot high from the Ground, it insulted over
the rest of the Back-yard Inhabitants. Ah! you wretched Creatures, says it,
that I see underneath me, and that know not how to make your way through the
Air! But at the same time the Goose fell down again.


Par. What is the Benefit then of those Reflections which your Plays stir up in
Man, since they are like the Flight of this Goose, and since at the very same
moment he falls again into all common Follies?


Mol. It Is a great matter, that a Man mocked himself. Nature has made us very
apt to it, that so we might not become our own Bubble. How often does it
happen, that whilst one Part of us is doing any thing with eagerness, another
Part laughs at the former; and, if need were too, a third Part might be found
out that would laugh at both the two first. Does not Man seem to be a Compound
of Contraries?


Par. All this will not much trouble a Man's Brain. Some slight Reflections,
some merry Conceits, that are many times ill applied, such as these indeed
deserve no great esteem; but how must a Man strain his Thoughts to treat of
higher Subjects?


Mol. You come back again to your Genius's, and I keep to my Sots. However,
though I have done nothing but labor in these Matters, so exposed to the Eyes
of the whole World, I can foretell you, that my Plays will last longer than your
sublime Writings. All is subject to the Changes of the Mode; the Productions of
the Mind are not secure from the Fate of Clothes. I have seen I know not how
many Books, and several sorts of Writing, buried with their Authors; like as,
in some Parts of the World, they bury with the deceased every thing they most
delighted in whilst they lived. I perfectly know what may be the Revolutions of
the Empire of Learning; and besides all this, I dare warrant the continuance of
my Pieces. I can tell you the Reason of it. He that will paint to last for
ever, must paint Sots.


Third Dialogue.
Mary Stuart, David Riccio. D. Riccio. NO, I shall never be satisfied with my
Death.


M. Stuart. Me thinks, though, it was good enough for a Musician. The chiefest
Lords of the Court of Scotland, and the King my Husband too, were fain to plot
against thee; and never such Measures were taken, nor so much ado made to put
any Prince to death.


D. Ric. A Death so glorious as that, was not intended for a poor Player on the
Lute, whom Poverty had driven out of Italy into Scotland. You had better have
let me pass away my Days in quiet, as one of your Musicians, than raise me to
the Dignity of a Minister of State, which doubtless did shorten my Life.


M. Stu. I should have never believed that thou would prove to be so little
sensible of my Favors toward thee. Thou alone did sit every day at my Table
with me; was that but a small distinction? Believe me, Riccio, a Favor of that
kind was no prejudice to thy Reputation.


D. Ric. It did me no other harm, but that I was to die for receiving it too
frequently. Alas! I sat Cheek-by-Joul with you at Dinner, when I saw the King
come in, attended by the Gentleman that was chosen out to be one of my
Murderers, because he was naturally the frightfullest Scot that ever was born;
besides, he had been newly cured of a Quartan-Ague, which made him look more
frightfully. I cannot tell whether he bestowed any Blows upon me; but as much as
I can remember, the very fright he put me in, struck me dead.


M. Stu. I honored thy Memory so far, as to make thee be entombed with the
Kings of Scotland.


D. Ric. I am entombed with the Kings of Scotland?


M. Stu. Nothing more true.


D. Ric. I have been so little sensible of the good that did me, that you now
tell me the first News of it. But, O my Lute, was I so unlucky as to forsake
thee, and mind nothing but how to govern a Kingdom!


M. Stu. Thou complainest! Know then, that my Death was a thousand times more
unfortunate than thine.


D. Ric. Oh! but you were born in a Condition that was subject to great Turns
and Changes; but for me, I was born to die in my Bed. Nature had settled me in
the best Condition in the World; no Estate, of mean Extraction, something only
of a Voice, and a little Wit to play on the Lute.


M. Stu. Thy Lute does still stick in thy Stomach. Well then, thou did meet
with one unlucky Moment; but before that, how many pleasant Days did thou
enjoy? What would thou have done, if thou had never been other than a
Musician? Thou would have been weary of so low a Condition.


D. Ric. I would have sought my Happiness in my own self.


M. Stu. Go, thou art foolish. Thou have spoiled thy self since thou have been
dead, either by thy idle Reflections, or by the Conversation thou have had with
the Philosophers that are here. It Is a likely matter, indeed, that Men should
be happy in their own selves.


D. Ric. They want only to be persuaded, they may be so. A Poet of my Country
did describe an Enchanted Castle, wherein Lovers of both Sexes do seek for one
another with great concern and eagerness; they meet together at every turn, and
never know one another. There is a Charm of the same nature upon the Happiness
of Men: They have it in their Thoughts, and do not know it, it offers it self a
thousand times to them, and they wander afar off to seek it out.


M. Stu. Lay aside the Jangling and Chymeras of Philosophy. When there is
nothing to help to make us happy, are we of a disposition to take the pains to
be so by our Reason?


D. Ric. Yet Happiness does very well deserve as much as that from us.


M. Stu. We should labor in vain, our Reason and It cannot agree together. We
cease to be happy, so soon as we feel the Strifes we are put to, to be happy.
If any one did feel how each Part of his Body does labor to keep it self in
good temper, do you think he would be well in health? For my part, I should
take him to be sick. Happiness resembles Man's Health; he must have it in him,
without his own putting in; and if Reason does contribute any Happiness to him,
it is like Health that is maintained by force of Remedies, and is always very
weakly and uncertain.


Fourth Dialogue.
The Third False Demetrius, Descartes. Descartes. SUre I should know the
Northern Countries almost as well as you. I passed a good part of my time in
Holland, where I did nothing but play the Philosopher; and at last I went and
died in Suede, still a greater Philosopher than ever.


Demetrius. I see, that according to the Relation you make me of your Life, it
has been very easy; it was wholly applied to Philosophy. I was far from living
so quietly.


Desc. 'Twas your own fault. How come you to think of making your self Great
Duke of Muscovy, and of taking those ways to compass your Design, as you did?
You undertake to pass for Prince Demetrius, who has Right to the Crown; and you
have already before your Eyes the Example of two False Demetrius's, who having
taken that Name upon them one after the other, were found out what they were,
and perished most miserably. You ought at least to have bethought your self of
some newer Cheat: It is not likely, that that, which had been already worn out
of date, should take effect.


Them. Betwixt you and I, the Muscovites are no such Wits: They are so weak, as
to pretend to be like the ancient Greeks; but God knows what Ground they have
for it.


Desc. Yet they are not such Sots, as to let themselves be bubbled by three
False Demetrius's one after another. I am sure, that when you began to take
that Quality upon you, they almost all said, in a scornful manner, What, still
more Demetrius 's?


Them. Notwithstanding all this, I made my self a considerable Party. The Name
of Demetrius was beloved, People always ran after the Name. You know what the
People are.


Desc. And did not the ill Success of the other two Demetrius's make you afraid?


Them. It encouraged me. Who could believe, that any but the true Demetrius
would have dared to appear, after what had happened to the other two? It was a
Presumption too, had he been never so much the True Demetrius.


Desc. But suppose you had been the first that had taken that Name upon you,
with what Face could you take it, unless you had been assured that you could
make it good by some colorable Proofs?


Them. But you, that put so many Questions to me, and are so hard to please, how
did you dare to make your self the Author of a New Philosophy, which was to
contain all the Truths that were unknown till then?


Desc. I had made discovery of many things that were probable enough, and I
soothed my self up with a fancy they might be true; they were, besides, so new,
that they might easily make up a Sect by it self.


Them. And did not the Example of so many Philosophers (whose Opinions seemed as
solid as yours, yet were reckoned at last but sorry Philosophers) startle you?
A Man might name you a vast number of such; but you can tell me but of two
False Demetrius's besides my self: I was but the third of my kind, that had
undertaken to gull the Muscovites; but a thousand more, besides your self, did
make it their study how to impose upon Men.


Desc. You knew you was not Prince Demetrius; but I never published any thing
but what I believed was true, and I did not believe it without good Grounds. I
was not cured of Philosophy till I came hither.


Them. It Is no matter. Notwithstanding your good Belief, you must needs be very
bold, to affirm so confidently, That you had found out the Truth. People have
been deceived already by so many others that did aver the same, that when any
new Philosophers do offer themselves, I wonder they do not all cry out in one
Voice, What, still more and more Philosophers and Philosophy!


Desc. There is some Reason for People to be always cheated with the Promises
of Philosophers; there is a discovery made from time to time of some small
inconsiderable Truths, that amuse the World a little; but, I confess, there is
little Progress made into the depth of Philosophy. I believe also, that in some
considerable Points the Truth is now and then found out; but the mischief is,
Men do not know they have found it: For Philosophy (I think a dead Man may say
what he list) is like a Play which Children use, where one amongst them runs
blindfold after the rest: If he catches any of them, he is obliged to name him,
else he must let him go, and then run again. Not but that we Philosophers,
though our Eyes be very close hid, do sometimes lay hold of the Truth: But
what? we cannot justify it to her that it is she we have laid hold of, then at
that very instant she gives us the slip.


Them. It is but too apparent, that Truth is not made for us: So, at last you will
see, there will be no seeking after her, Men will be out of heart, and be at
ease.


Desc. I assure you, your Prediction is not right. Men are huge eager of those
things which they once take a fancy to. Each one believes, that which is denied
all others, is reserved for him alone. Within these four and twenty thousand
Years, there will come Philosophers, that shall make it their Braggs, That they
will root out all those Errors that were in being for the space of thirty
thousand years; and there will be those that will believe, that then will be
the time indeed that Men shall begin to open their Eyes, and see clear.


Them. What? 'twas a great Venture to try to deceive the Muscovites a third
time; and it shall be no Venture at all, for a Man to endeavor to deceive all
Mankind for the thirtieth thousand time? They are then greater Bubbles than the
Muscovites?


Desc. Yes, in point of Truth. They are more in love with it, than the
Muscovites were with the Name of Demetrius.


Them. If I were to begin again, I would not be a False Demetrius, I would
become a Philosopher: But how if People should chance to fall into a dislike of
Philosophy, and despair of ever finding out the Truth? I should still fear this.


Desc. You had far greater reason to be in fear when you were Prince. Believe
it, Men will never be discouraged. It would be great pity they could fall into
such Despair. Since your Modern People make as little discovery of the Truth as
your Ancient did, it is but just, they should at least have as great hopes of
discovering it. This Hope is pleasing, though it be but a vain one. If Truth be
no Right of the one, nor of the other, at least, they Both have a Right to
Error.


Fifth Dialogue.
The Duchess of Valentinia, Anne of Bullen. Anne of Bullen. I Admire your good
luck. S. Valier your Father commits a Crime, as it were on purpose to raise
your Fortune. He is condemned to lose his Head, you go and beg his Pardon of
the King. To be pretty, and beg Favors of a young Prince, does engage a Person
to grant some: And thus you became Mistress to Francis the First.


Duchess. My greatest happiness in this, is, that my Love to my Father did
bring me into this Gallantry. My Inclinations might easily lie hid under so
favorable a Pretense.


A. of B. But the Issue of your Inclinations did quickly discover whither they
tended; for your Gallantries out-lasted your Fathers Danger.


Dutch. That Is nothing. In Love-concerns, the Beginning is all in all. The
whole World knows, that he that makes one Step forward, will make many more.
The main Point is to begin this first Step well. I fancy my Conduct was pretty
suitable to the Opportunity Fortune did offer me, and that History will not
record me for an half-witted Creature. It Is looked upon as a great matter, that
the Lord High Constable Montmorency should be a Minister of State, and a
Favorite, to three Kings: But I was Mistress to two Kings; and I reckon that a
greater matter.


A. of B. Far be it from me to question your able Parts; but I think I out did
you. You held out as a Mistress a long time; but I made my self a Wife. A King
follows you close, so long as his Heart inclines toward you; that is no trouble
to him: If he makes you Queen, it is but when he is out of hopes of satisfying
his Passion otherwise.


Dutch. But a Lovers Passion must be nourished still, and entertained; and a
Marriage once made up, puts us off of all farther Concern. Love is easily
exasperated, when one ceases to comply with it; and it is a very hard matter to
quench it, when one yields to it. In fine, It was your part to refuse still
with your wonted severity; and I was forced to be still yielding, and study new
ways to please.


A. of B. Since you follow me thus close with your Reasons and Arguments, I
must tell you farther, That if I made my self a Wife, 'twas not because I was
over loaded with Virtue.


Dutch. And if I purchased my self a constant Love, 'twas not because I was so
very faithful.


A. of B. I will tell you yet more; I had neither Virtue, nor Reputation of
Virtue.


Dutch. I thought as much before; for I should have taken Reputation for Virtue
it self.


A. of B. Me thinks you should not reckon up, in the number of your Advantages,
some Infidelities you committed against your Lover, and which, in all
likelihood, were very private: They cannot add to your Glory. But when I began
to be beloved of the King of England, the People who had been made acquainted
with my Adventures, did not keep them secret, and yet I got the better of
Reputation.


Dutch. I could perhaps make it appear to you, if I would my self, that I was
unfaithful to Henry the Second, though not with so much mystery as to redound
to my Honor; but I will not insist upon this Point. The want of Fidelity may
either be hid, or the Breach made up again; but how is it possible to hide or
repair the want of Youth? However, I overcame it. I was full of Tongue, and I
made my self be adored; that is nothing; but I was grown in Years. You, you were
young, and suffered your Head to be cut off. Though I was a Grandmother, I
should not have suffered my Head to be cut off.


A. of B. I confess, that is the only Blemish of my Life; let us say no more of
it. I cannot yield to you about your Age neither, which you make such a
Business of, that was not so hard to disguise as my Course of Life was. I must
needs disturb the Brains of him that resolved to make me his Wife; but it was
enough for you, that you had prepossessed the Eyes of him that still thought
you handsome, and accustomed them by Degrees to the Alterations of your Beauty.


Dutch. You are not well versed in the Humors of Men. When a Woman appears
lovely to their Eye, she seems to their Mind what she pleases her self;
Virtuous, if you will, though she be nothing less: The only difficulty is to
appear lovely to them so long as she would her self.


A. of B. I yield, you have convinced me; but tell me your Secret, how you did
repair your Age. I am dead, and you may teach it me, without any fear that I
shall make an Advantage of it.


Dutch. In earnest, I do not know my self. We do all great things, without
knowing how we do them, and we are surprised when we have done them. Ask Caesar
how he made himself Master of the World, he may perhaps be put to it how to
answer you.


A. of B. A glorious Comparison!


Dutch. It is a just one. I stood in need of Caesar's good Fortune, to be
beloved at my Years. The greatest Happiness is this, that to Persons who have
performed such great things as he and I have, (the Feat once done) People do
not fail to attribute infallible Designs and Secrets to them, and honor them
far beyond what they deserve.


Sixth Dialogue.
Ferdinando Cortez, Montezuma. F. Cortez. OWn the Truth. You were very dull
People, you Americans, when you took the Spaniards for Men that came down from
the Fiery Sphere, because they had Cannons; and when their Ships seemed to you
to be great Birds that flew upon the Sea.


Montezuma. I own it: But I must ask you, Whether the Athenians were a fine
accomplished People, or not?


Fr. Cort. How? They instructed the rest of the World.


Montez. And what think you of the Means which Pisistnatus the Tyrant made use
of to get into the Citadel of Athens again, out of which he had been beaten?
Did not he dress up a Woman like Minerva? (For it is said, that Minerva was the
Goddess Protectress of Athens.) Did not he ride up and down the Town in a
Chariot, with this Goddess of his own making, she holding of him by the Hand,
and saying to the Athenians, Here I bring you Pisistratus, and I command you to
receive him? And did not these People, which pass for such Wits, submit
themselves to the Tyrant, because they would please Minerva, who had declared
her Mind to them with her own Mouth?


E. Cort. And who made you so well acquainted with the Athenians Concerns?


Montez. Since my abode here, I betook my self to the Study of History, by the
Conversation I have had with several of the Dead. But you will, in fine, grant,
that the Athenians were greater Bubbles than we. We had never seen Ships, nor
Guns; but they had seen Women: and when Pisistratus undertook to subdue them by
the means of his Goddess, he made it appear, he valued them less than you
valued us, when you subdued us with your great Guns.


F. Cort. There are no People but may be overseen once in their Lifetime. Men
are surprised; the Multitude oversways the more understanding sort. What shall
I say to you? There are besides other Circumstances which a Man cannot think of,
and which perhaps he would not take notice of, though he should discover them.


Montez. But was it by surprisal that the Greeks did believe in all times, that
the knowledge of future things was kept in a little Hole under Ground, from
whence it dispersed it self into Exhalations? And what tricks did they use to
persuade them, that when the Moon was eclipsed, they could bring her to her
self again by making an hideous Noise: And how chance a few Persons only did
dare to whisper it into one another Ear, that she was darkened by
th'interposition of the Earth? I shall take no notice of the Romans, nor of
those Gods they invited to eat with them upon their Days of Rejoicing, nor of
those Holy Chickens whose Appetite did determine all in the Head-City of the
World. In short, tell me of any one Folly committed by our Americans, and I
will presently match it with a far greater one of your Countrymen; and I will
be bound to reckon you none but Greek and Roman Follies.


F. Cort. Notwithstanding these Follies, the Greeks and the Romans were the
Inventors of those Arts and Sciences which you did not so much as dream of.


Montez. We were very happy in our not knowing that there were any Sciences in
the World: We should not perhaps have had so much Reason, as to have avoided
being Learned. People are not always in a capacity to follow the Example of the
Greeks, who took such care to preserve themselves from the infection of their
Neighbor's Sciences. As for Arts, America had found out such ways to live
without them, as were perhaps more wonderful than the Arts of Europe
themselves. When one can write, it is an easy matter to make Histories; but we
knew not how to write, and yet we made Histories. It is easy, for such as can
build in Water, to make Bridges; but the difficulty is, to build Bridges, and
not know how to build in Water. You must remember, that in our Grounds the
Spaniards met with a great many things that surpassed their Understanding: I
mean, for Example, Stones of such a prodigious bigness, that they did not
conceive how they were raised up to that height as they were, without the help
of Engines for the purpose. What think you of all this? Me thinks that hitherto
you have not made it very well appear what the Advantages of Europe are over
America.


F. Cort. They are sufficiently proved by all that may distinguish Civilized
People from Barbarous People. Civility reigns amongst us; there is no room for
Force and Violence; Power is moderated by Justice, Wars are grounded upon
lawful Causes: See besides how very scrupulous we were; we did not make War
upon your Country, till we had strictly examined whether we had any Right to
it, and decided the Question in our own behalf.


Montez. Doubtless you did therein treat Barbarians with more consideration
than they deserved. I believe your Civility and Justice to one another, is
answerable to your scrupulosity with us. Take away from Europe her Formalities,
she will differ little from America. Civility measures all your Steps, dictates
all your Words, embroils all your Discourses, and plagues all your Actions; but
no news of her in your Principles; and all that Justice which should attend
your Designs, is no where met with but in your Pretenses.


F. Cort. I cannot answer for Men's Hearts; we only see their Outside. An Heir
that loses a Father, and gets store of Means, puts on Mourning Clothes: Does he
grieve much? In all appearance, he does not. Yet if he did not put himself into
Mourning, he would injure Reason.


Mont. I understand your meaning. Reason does not rule among you, but she makes
a Protestation, That things should be carried on in another manner than they
are; That Heirs, for example, should lament their Parents: They admit this
Protestation; and for better proof thereof, they clothe themselves in Black.
Your Formalities serve only to show a Right which Reason has, and which you
will not let her execute; and you do not do, but you represent what you should
do.


F. Cort. And is not that very much? Reason bears so little sway among you,
that she cannot so much as come to give you the least hint of what you should
do.


Montez. But you think of her to as little purpose, as some of your Greeks did
think of their first beginning. They were settled in Tuscany, a Barbarous
Country as they thought; and they had by little and little so accustomed
themselves to the ways of that Country, that they had forgotten their own ways:
Yet they seemed concerned at their being grown Barbarous, and they met together
every year, upon a certain prefixed day; they read over their ancient Laws in
Greek, which they had laid aside, and scarce so much as understood them; they
wept, and then separated: They no sooner came out of that Place, but they
merrily betook themselves to the manner of Living of the Country. They stood
upon the Greek Laws, as you do upon Reason: They knew there were such Laws in
the World, they spoke of them, yet slightly, and without any benefit.
Notwithstanding, they did in some manner grieve for them; but you are not
concerned that you have forsaken Reason; you have taken an habit to know her,
and despise her.


F. Cort. By this means a Man may, at least, be more enabled to follow her,
than bettered in the knowledge of her.


Montez. And herein only we yield to you? Ah! How unhappy were we, that we had
not Ships to go and discover your Countries? And why did not we bethink our
selves of determining the Case, and declare, That they belonged to us? We
should have had as much Right to conquer Them, as you had to conquer Ours.


FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes.
NOVELS.
1 ZElinda, a famed Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4
Count Gabales. 5 Halige, or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Mad Lavalier
and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Mad. Colonna's
Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majork, two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of Portugal. 13
Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress. 14 Fatal
Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of Love. 18
Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and Qu.
Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis. 23
Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two Parts. 26
Meroveus, Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28
Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a Young Nobleman.
PLAYS.
1 Tartuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous
Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy.
8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. 10 Gloriana, or the
Court of Augustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mithridates King of
Pontus. 13 Oedipus King of Thebes. 14 Caesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the
Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17 The Fond Husband, or
the Plotting Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 19 Fool
turned Critic. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22
Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. 26 Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 27
Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 29 Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 30 Hamlet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marriage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limberham, or
the Kind Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes of Morocco, by the Wits. 37
Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 38 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna
Bullen. 39 King Leare. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 41 Town-Fop, or
Sir Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en tout, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice. 44
Country Wife. 45 City Politics. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King and no
King. 49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy. 51 Grateful
Servant. 52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or the Second Part of the Soldiers
Fortune. 54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valiant Scot. 57
Constantine. 58 Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers. 61 Woman
Rules. 62 Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar.
66 Fatal Jealousy. 67 Monsieur Ragou.

