THE FAIR ONE OF TVNIS or the GENEROUS MISTRESS



THE Fair One OF TUNIS: OR, THE Generous MISTRES.

A new piece of Gallantry.

Out of French.

Tibul. Eleg. 2. l. 1. -- fortes adjuvat ipsa Venus,
Quisquis amore tenetur, eat tutusque sacerque
Qualibet, insidias non timuisse decet.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WIthout regarding after what manner the World shall please to receive it, and
at the hazard of increasing the number of ill Authors, I have undertaken to
write a Book; which I have been the rather encouraged to do, by reason that so
many now-adayes take upon them that employment. The Booksellers pay no excize
that I know of: Our Masters (blessed be God) have not yet unbethought them of
imposing a Gabel upon that sort of commodity. I cannot however but confess it
would bring in a great Revenue; and it is pity the Officers of Excise should
loose so fair an opportunity of filling his Majesty's Coffers (or rather their
own.) For the number of ill Writers is much greater than any man would imagine,
and certainly a penny a Quire for all the Trumpery the Press sends out in a
Year, would amount to a pretty matter. But possibly they are afraid these
pretenders to wit should rise in Rebellion, and no body is willing to draw upon
himself a whole Library of Invectives. But be it how it will, found my self in
the humor, and at leisure to play the fool a little as well as others; I had
nothing else to do, and thought it was better to spoil a little paper at home
in my Chamber, than to wear out my shoes in walking the streets to no purpose.

In this, my first and principal design was to divert my self; my next (Dear
Reader) to please thee, in saying here and there some things, that I thought
were pleasant and rational enough. If thou like it, I have my end, and demand
nothing of thee in return, but that thou will confess it; which I shall hear of
by some body or another: only I think fit to give thee this Advertisement, that
it is really a true History, excepting that part of the Sultaness her escape,
with that of Don Pedro and Isabella Albirond only getting off clear in the
truth of the story; and therefore do not look upon it as a mere piece of
Invention, for it is no such thing.

Fu quel chi'o dico, e non n'aggiungo un pelo, J o'l vidi, J o'l so. It is not
so long since this happened neither, that we can reckon by any thing but the
months; and therefore has at least the grace of novelty, which no one can deny
it. If I would have taken the liberty of the Romance-writers, who make what
Adventures they please, and carry them on at the extravagant rate of their own
Fancy, I could per adventure have made this more modish, and much fuller of
affairs and intrigues. A few hours meditation would have done that; but for
once I paint by the Life, and not by invention. The aforesaid Gentlemen raise
their fabulous stories, to such a degree of surprise or impossibility indeed,
that they seem sometimes to drop out of the Clouds: but in the mean time Truth
is doubtless that which best pleases in a Narrative. If thou art of this
opinion, thou will take more pleasure in reading such a Piece of gallantry as
this, which has really come to pass, than one of those celebrated Fables, that
has hardly ever entered into more than one man's Imagination.

What there is more of rare in this is, that never any Bagatelle of Love came
out of Barbary till now. The Pirates of Tunis and Algier do not much intrigue
themselves in Gallantry; but another sort of Pirate is here come under the
Standard of Love, to carry away from these Barbarians the greatest beauty their
Nation ever had: Whether, or no it be lawful prize, do thou (friendly Reader)
judge; and if it prove otherwise, arraign him rather than me. I have followed
the Mesmoires that were delivered to me, to which I have only given words, and
wherein the workmanship has nothing defaced the natural truth of the story.

Farewell.
THE Fair One OF TUNIS: Or, THE Generous Mistress.
THe World, through several happy accommodations concluded amongst Christian
Princes, seemed to be rock't asleep in a profound and lasting Peace; but such a
one as however seemed insupportable to the unfortunae Albirond, who in the
untoward posture his affairs at that time were, would have gone in quest of War
to the remotest parts of the Earth: but the Stars who in these days are very
little inclined to favor men of execution, seemed jointly to have conspired
the ruin of the Janty sort of men, by a general cessation of Arms. It was by
no means safe for Albirond to stay in France; certain affairs that frequently
happen to men who carry the punctilio of honor upon the point of their Swords,
had driven him from thence, he must of necessity take upon him the employment
of a Knight Errant, as many others did.

In this condition of a wandering Knight, he had the opportunity of seeing the
most beautiful and the greatest part of Europe; and with a competent proportion
of wit that he was master of, and a handsome carriage he had made shift to
learn at home, he procured himself respect in all places, and acquired friends
wherever he met with men of the better sort of breeding, and added some such
passages, and adventures to the History of his Life, as were fit one day to be
the subject of a Romance. This carreer of his continued near upon two years*
and ended at the City of Ligorn in Italy, which is one of the most famous Ports
for traffic upon the Mediterranean Sea.

One day as he was at this place, walking pensive and alone upon the Sea shore,
and meditating which way for the future to dispose of himself, in the strange
irresolution and incertitude he then was what course to steer, a sudden whymsy
took him, wholly to throw himself into the arms of Fortune, and to that end to
put himself aboard the first vessel that should set out from the harbor, let
it be bound for what part of the world soever; and accordingly without further
examining this his extravagant resolution, he found a Vessel for his purpose,
that ready and laden, waited only for a wind to put out to Sea. He had but
little time to turn him in, wherefore in all haste he caused his baggage to be
embark't, and put himself aboard; where all things concurring with his design,
the wind within two hours after stood as fair as heart could with, and in six
days brought them before Tunis, one of the principal Cities of Barbary, and
the Metropolis of that Kingdom.

Albirond was not altogether a stranger in this Country, he had already been
acquainted both with Turks, and Moors, and had a smattering of their Language,
which he had learned in a voyage he had formerly made to the Kingdom of Fez,
and Morocco. So soon therefore as he came a shore, he went immediately to
salute the Beglerbeg, which is the King of the Country, to whom he gave an
account of his voyage. From thence he went to visit the Bassa, who there
represents the person of the Grand Signior, and after him the two Beglerbegs or
Generals of the Army, who are the four principal Lords of that Kingdom. I could
here perhaps satisfy the curious by insisting upon the manners, and particular
Government of this City; for although the Turks are all subject to one Prince,
and that they have all the same Law, yet the policy and manner of living of
those of Africa, are a little different from the other Turks of the East: but
it is not my design to mix any thing so serious, with what I only intend for a
pure, and uncompounded piece of mirth. Neither do I write this for the grave
Sr. Politic Woodbee's; the chief, and only end of my writing being to
entertain the amorous with a new piece of Gallantry.

These four Lords did all receive Albirond with civility enough, that is to
say, with as much as the humor of that Country will permit: but our Cavaleer
was nevertheless much better satisfied with Mahomet Lapsi General of the Naval
Forces, than with all the other three. This Lord at the very first dash,
offered him a Lodging close by his own Palace, and gave him two Slaves to
attend him wherever he went, together with a Moor to secure him from such
affronts and insolences to strangers, as are very usual in that barbarous
Country. It is true, that Mahomet Lapsi was really one of the finest Gentlemen,
not only of Africa, (where Travelers expect to meet with nothing but Lions and
Tigers,) but even of Europe also, where the world is more rational, and better
bred. His Stature and fashion had something in them of great, and Majestic
above the rest of the Africans, he was rather fair than brown, his complexion
was very clear and good, and there was nothing in him of the Turk to be
discovered, saving a certain Air of Fierceness, that became him well enough;
and his way of conversing with all sorts of men, was affable and obliging, much
above what is to be expected from a Barbarian. He had convers't with few other
than Merchants in his own Country, or if he had sometimes seen a Gentleman, it
was only chained to the Oar, which made him the sooner to observe something in
Albirond that was new, and extraordinary, and that obliged him to a particular
esteem of his person. This esteem in a few days improved it self into an
affection, and that affection increased to such a degree, that the Beglarbeg
seldom dined or supped without Albirond, and would also have him one in all his
matches of divertisement and recreation. Of these, hunting was that wherein he
chiefly delighted, and for this he had two or three fair Country-houses not
above a mile distant from the City. Of these nevertheless, the most magnificent
in structure, the richest in furniture, and the most pleasant for s^ituation
was called Bardou. At this place he had a Seraglio of three or four hundred
women, and one of the most beautiful Gardens in the world, neither was it long
before he treated Albirond at this house of his, but carried him thither in his
Coach, attended with three or four hundred Guards, where he treated him ala
Turque, that is to say, grossly and rudely enough; but if magnificence of
feasting consists in the number of dishes, a man might term this one of the
most sumptuous Entertainments that Albirond had ever seen in his Life, for
there was upon a Table of twenty persons, a most stupendous Piramid of dishes,
one pil'd upon another of no less than a yard and a half high. There were
present ^t this feast the chief persons of the City, the General of the
Galleys, and the principal men of the Divan. They sat a long time at the
Table, where they eat very well, but drank a great deal better; for although
Wine is a thing forbidden by their Law, ^^ey sorbear not, for all that, upon
occasion to make very great debauches, and are not only very perfect that way,
but have moreover very exquisite forms, and have an (...) method of drinking.
(...)om the Table, till eve(...) sufficient rattle in his p^^^; the Feast
lasted from eight of the clock in the morning, till three in the afternoon,
during which time they had sometimes a cessation from eating and drinking, to
smoke a pipe, that past from hand to hand thorough the whole company. All being
done the Beglerbeg taking Albirond by the hand, carried him to see the house,
of which the Richness of the Arms, and Furniture, and the prodigious number of
Jewels wonderfully astonished our Cavaleer, the things he saw being inestimable,
but above all the Beds, where nothing was to be seen, but Tissue, and
embroyderies in Gold laid on three inches thick. From thence they went into the
Garden, where the pleasure must needs be very charming, to see all the Trees in
the middle of Winter ^aden either with Fruits, or Flowers; a sight so ravishing
and so rare, that I could here me thinks find in my heart to make a little
stay, to give a beautiful Idea of a most delicate Garden; but least I should
importune any of my Readers (for there is nothing more tedious, and distastful
to Readers, then the Descriptions of Palaces and Gardens,) I leave it to every
ones imagination to represent to himself, that it must of necessity be a very
fine place, being that which by the Beglerbeg was preferred before all his
other Scituations, of which moreover the Flowers of the Orange and Citron
Trees, that are continually in the blossom may give some account; and besides
it is easy to believe, that seeing it was the sole Regal of so great a number
of very fine Women, it ought not to be unpleasant. Nevertheless they very
rarely enjoyed that diversion, and the Seraglio had only a prospect into it
through one little window, to which none neither, the Grand Sul^aness only
excepted, had the liberty to come.

Albirond was marvailously taken with this Garden, and forgot not the good
manners of highly commending it to the Beglerbeg, who in the good humor he was
of obliging this Cavaleer by all sorts of civility, offered him the Command of
his Coach, to carry him thither so often as he pleased. Albirond returned him
very many thanks for the honor he was pleased to offer him of his Coach, which
nevertheless he did not think fit to accept, but would by no means resufe the
privilege he gave him of coming sometimes into the Garden. Mahomet Lapsi was
wonderfully ravished, that he took that for so extraordinary a favor, and
thereupon immediately gave order to his Governor to receive him when, and so
often as himself should please as a particular friend of his, and to leave him
absolute Master of all. Albirond made very good use of this liberty, it was not
very far from the Town, and he failed but very few mornings of coming to divert
himself in that delightful place.

To a man in Love, solitude is very charming, especially in absence, where men
entertain themselves with their own thoughts, recollect all the pleasant
passages of their Lives, and meditate in full liberty at their own fancy;
insomuch that it often depends upon the humor a man is in at such times, to
render himself happy, or miserable. Albirond was too fine a Gentleman never to
have sight for some fair one, and his Love was accompanied with so remarkable a
Constancy, that it still continued with great ardor, after four or five years
of fidelity. In this it was that he chiefly found himself unhappy, neither
Banishment from his Country (for which he had a natural affection) nor the loss
of his Estate (which was very considerable) had been able to discompose his
brave soul; but his heart which was set on fire by the penetrating eyes of too
beautiful a person, alone suffered all the torments of a cruel Exile. He one
day sufficiently expressed his passion by these verses, which he engraved upon a
leaf of one of those Fig Trees of Barbary:

You tender issue of my Woe,
The blood the wounded Lover bleeds,
Soft tears, your heavy banks oreflow
T'allay the grief her absence breeds;
And you sad eyes, to end my smart,
Into salt tears distill my heart.
He had not promised to himself from Barbary, that he should pass away so many
happy hours in this delightful place. The whole Garden contributed to the
easing of his griefs; and it is most certain, that there is not a spot of Earth
to be found o^^ under the Sun, where the silence, the shades, the verdure, and
the day it self could be more delightful, than in this platt of Ground; the
leaves, the flowers, the Birds never depart from it, and I shall be never the
more a Poet for saying, that it is the habitation of Zephirs, and Cupids. In
every Cabinet, every arbor of this Garden, there is convenience of sitting
down, and reposing at length with the greatest ease, and delight; and every day
Albirond repaired thither to meditate with the greatest pleasure imaginable,
and represented things to his Imagination with so great felicity, and that
strength of fancy, that he once believed he had really seen his beloved Urania
(for so was that fair one called, with whose Idea he was so passionately
possess't,) and this conceit had made so strong an impression upon his fancy,
that he was not able to determine, whether it was a shadow or a real substance
that had appeared to him, which made him break into this sudden Rapture.

Art thou then absent, O thou dear
And only Subject of my flame,
Are these fair objects that appear
But shadows of that noble frame,
For which I do all other Form disclaim?
Am I deluded? do I only rave?
Was it a Phantasme only that I saw?
Have dreams such power to deceive?
O lovely shade thou did too soon withdraw,
Like fleecy snow, that as it falls does thaw.
Glorious illusion, lovely shade!
Once more deceive me with thy light,
It Is pleasure to be so betrayed,
And I for ever shall delight,
To be pursude with such a charming Sprite
Every thing in this Garden already proclaimed, and was full of Albirond's
passion, the trees were all wrought with his Ciphers, and the walls, nay the
very leaves that were not too tender to endure the Graver, were carved, and
graven with verses, and several other amorous fancies. There was in the whole
Garden but one place, that was priviledg'd from his sighs, and that was that
part that lay under the Seraglio, which in truth was the most delightful of
all; but as a man that was very well acquainted with the customs of the
Country, and how tender the Turks are of their women, he was discreet enough to
avoid that Quarter. This discretion of his nevertheless was not sufficient long
to resist the temptation of change of place, and to that desire that difficulty
does usually raise in generous and attempting minds; so that one day having
observed somewhat nearer at hand, that there was one little window only in that
Apartment toward the Garden, he could not so far conquer his curiosity, but
that it carried him into a great Pavillion, that covers a very fair Bath, where
Mahomet every Summer used to bath. This Pavillion is very ingenuously
contrived, consisting of six little Rounds or Circles, which are so many Beds
of green Turfe, so delicately laid, as seem to allure and invite the beholder
to lie down, and repose upon them. In one of these Cabinets it was that
Albirond designed to pass away the best of his time in Barbary, and was
inclined to believe, that there he might hope for some allay to his Torments,
which gave him occasion to speak after this manner the first day he entered into
it:

Ye solitary dark Retreats
Where the fresh Air, and silent shades
Preserve themselves, maugre the heats,
And light wherewith the Sun invades,
Can you not cure my hearts deep wound,
And in this Melancholy Grove
Is there no medicine to be found
Against the most unhappy love?
His fancy was too ravishingly delighted with the beauty of this place, not to
push so pretty a beginning a great deal further, when a most excellent voice,
which at that instant he heard over his head, put him quite out of his Poetry.
It is not here for me to tell you how strangely he was surprised, it is hard to
imagine it, and without having seen Albirond in the posture of his
astonishment, it is hardly to be believed. All his senses were contracted into
that one sense of hearing, he stood as motionless, and stiff as a statue, and
his soul seemed to have no other sentiment, than what was inspired into it by
this ravishing voice. The close interweving of the Boughs, and leaves so damp't
the sound, that he could distinctly hear no more, but these last words only,
which was enough to make him conclude the song to be spanish:

Non importa que los ojos matan se ressuscitan. The surprise, and the harmony
of this voice wherewith he had been so rapt at the first strains that touched
his ear; the song being ended, gave way to the curiosity he had to see a person
that sung so well: at the first he believed it to be some slave, and went out
of the Pavillion to be more fully satisfied. He thought it could only come from
the window of the Seraglio, and there indeed he spyed a person that endeavored
to conceal her self, and whom in so doing he perceived to smile, possibly at
his curiosity. The Cavalier at this stood still, and saluted her, to try if by
that means he could oblige her a little more to discover her self; which
thereupon she accordingly did; and in so doing, not a little surpised Albirond
with the number of Jewels she had on, which instead of dazzling him with their
luster, gave him to understand, that the person he had mistaken for a slave,
must infallibly be one of the principal Ladies of the Seraglio: so that without
further delay, he made her a most profound reverence, with a resolution to
retire, it being a respect due to the Ladies of that Country, to avoid their
sight, especially the Women of quality. This Lady (who perhaps had no mind to
drive him from thence) made him a sign to stay, and withal said something to
him, which he did not well comprehend, by reason that he was not so perfect in
the Language of that Country as to understand every word, when it was spoke
quick and roundly to him. He formed an answer however, telling her in the same
Language, that he humbly ask't her pardon, for having taken the liberty to come
walk under her Apartment, and that he had not thought any one could have come
to that window. To which she made answer again; but after such a manner that he
could not understand the one half of what she said, and therefore could answer
nothing to purpose. In the mean time he stood upon Thorns, and was very
impatient to put an end to this discourse, in which he should have been very
unwilling to have been surpised: but the Lady was by no means of his mind, and
with the delight she took in looking upon him, would have been glad she could
have made him better understand her. She then withdrew herself from the window,
biding him stay a little, and she would presently return, which she accordingly
did immediately after, bringing with her a slave, who spoke to Albirond, and in
Spanish asked him of what Nation he was. The Cavalier, who spoke Spanish very
well, replied that he was a French man, that it was by accident he was come
into that Quarter of the Seraglio, and therefore desired she would make his
excuse to that beautiful Lady. You need not, replied the Slave, trouble your
self about that, for I have already order to tell you from her, that she before
desired rather to see you walk under this window, than in the lower walks;
where you have used to be every morning. Albirond civilly made answer, that if
by that he might oblige so fair a Lady, he should be very proud to please her:
but that he apprehended it might be ill taken, and that he might be blamed,
should he happen to be discovered in that place. The slave thereupon assured
him, that there was no danger in the case; For besides that the Trees would
conceal him from being seen in that walk, it was now a time when the Garden was
free, and no one came to work there, as at other times. To which she added,
that he was to come a little more early, that he might at more liberty
entertain himself there with them, whilst the rest of the Seraglio were asleep;
which having said, she retired, and Albirond who understood it was to dismiss
him for that time, was about to do the same, had not the Sultaness commanded
him yet to stay a little longer. She said not very much to him; but her
diversion was to throw him down certain little stones, which the Cavalier
receiving in his hatt as they fell, first kis't, and after put them in his
bosom, as favors that he did very highly prize The Lady laughed at this action
of his, and pleasantly ask't him, since he put such a value upon those pibbles,
what he could do in case she should throw him something of greater price? To
which Albirond made answer, that he had no dearer repository than that, wherein
to put any thing of the greatest value; but that every thing that came from her
was equally precious, and that those pibbles would in his hands convert
themselves into Rubies and Diamonds. She still continued to say some things to
him, that were aerie, and obliging enough, and that the Cavalier was not so
thick-scul'd but to understand, and thereupon failed not to return the best
answers he could: but these little wantonnesses of theirs, continued something
too long, to a man that was in fear of being discovered; which he ever and anon
signified to her by a little unquietness he made to appear in his countenance,
and by evermore looking this way, and that, to see if no body came. The
Sultaness still bad him not to be afraid, but it was hard Counsel to obey,
where there was so much to fear. She was as dangerous to see, as there was
danger of being seen with her; and the perplexity was equally great, whether in
relation to her own eyes, or to those of any other.

Albirond was no sooner delivered from this dangerous enterview and parley, but
that he took a resolution to walk no more so near the Seraglio, nor so much as
to enter into the Garden; wherein peradventure his discretion will appear very
strange to such, as will not that a man who makes a profession of Gallantry,
should loose any one moment of time, when an occasion presents it self of
pushing any one home to its natural and proper end. But this way of fooling is
only proper for some Countries; and such as are never so little acquainted with
the Customs of this whereof I now speak, how fond soever they may be of those
little adventures, will approve of Albirond's discretion, in not daring to
hazard one of so delicate a kind. He had no mind, neither indeed ought he upon
a light occasion to offend the Beglerbeg, who every day laid so many
obligations upon him, and of whose favor he stood in so great need to live in
safety in so barbarous a place. This fair Sultaness notwithstanding was
eternally before his eyes; his mind was a little discomposed with her beauty,
so that whatever he was able to do to oppose it, he had by fits a certain
itching desire to break the resolution he had made, and some hankerings after
the Lady that disquieted his thoughts, and insensibly removed some scruples he
had, without taking notice whence that passion did proceed, or almost knowing
when the fit was upon him. Some moments there were wherein he would have been
in the Garden at what price soever, and yet at the same time he repented he had
ever been there: and to say the truth, this Sultaness was such a masterpiece
of Beauty, as was sufficient to stagger the resolution of the firmest of men.
Never was any thing so delicately shaped as she, and although Albirond had seen
but the one half of her, yet to be flesh, and blood, and a man, was enough to
be smitten. Her age at that time, might be about five and twenty, but in her
cheeks appeared the Youth, and freshness of a Girl of fifteen. All her
lineaments were exactly perfect; her hair, her complexion, her eyes, her mouth,
and her neck were things to be painted, and amongst all those Graces and
perfections, her manner of dressing was so gallant, and so rich, that it was an
additional enchantment to captivate Albirond. The luster of her sparkling
Jewels made her appear a constellation, but the fire of her delicate black eyes
put out the poorer light of the numerous Diamonds, as the whiteness of her skin
baffled that of the Pearls. All this Albirond acknowledged in his heart, and
although it was not possible, that he should ever cease to love Urania, or that
he should ever love any thing equally with her; nevertheless the power of a
person rendr'd attractive by so many titles of beauty, and armed with so many
not to be resisted charms, stood suspected to him, and he would willingly have
avoided the least shadow of infidelity. These two or three days that he
forbore going again to the Garden, was with him a very melancholy time, during
which he had a continual conflict in his Soul; but what good will a man's
constancy do him, when he is once possess't with the merit of an amiable
person: On the contrary, nothing makes one love more, than an endeavor to
resist it; and a heart comes off much deeper wounded by fighting, and opposing
a passion it has no mind to entertain. He thought the time intolerable long,
and it seemed to him that an infinite number of days were lapsed and gone,
since he had been in his beloved solitude. The delights of this Garden; or
rather the charms of this fair Sultaness made all other places appear
unpleasant, and seem tedious and uneasy to him; so that he must of necessity
either take a final leave of Barbary, or return to a place wherewith he was so
infinitely delighted. He fancied the Sun shone no where but there, and that
there was nothing but darkness in all other places. O frailty of humane Souls!
Albirond is overcome, he yields to the importunity of his inclination, and is
strongly persuaded that he shall have power enough over himself to go into the
Garden without coming near the Seraglio. Love made him believe so, but he
deceived himself, and under this Error it was; that the little God would take
his opportunity to establish his Empire in the bosom of the wavering Cavalier,
before he would declare himself. He goes then to the Garden, and true it is,
that his courage chiefly appeared in the violence he offered to his own
inclination, by limiting his steps within the bounds prescribed. Yet did his
feet now and then deceive him, and would sometimes insensibly carry him too far
beyond his limits, that he often wanted but very little of being totally
overcome: but then Urania always came in the nick into his remembrance to
divert him. He was now already as good as victorious; the time was already at
hand that he was to return to the City, and he was preparing to be gone, when
an arrow that wisk't close by his nose, did very much surprise him, and made
him stay to see what it might be. It fell not very far from him, as being
loos't with no great force, so that he went and took it up, and in so doing,
found there was a Ticket fastened to it with silk, which his curiosity making
him immediately to unty, opening the paper, he found these words writ in the
Spanish Tongue.

Donna Isabella the Slave, to the French Cavalier.
You certainly deceived us, when you told us you was a Frenchman. The Cavaliers
of that Nation acquit themselves a little better of the respect that is due to
Ladies, and are more dextrous at a piece of gallantry than you are. In two or
three days time that you have not appeared in this Garden, you forgot the
promise you made us; and it is now fit you should know to whom you engaged your
word, it is to the Great Sultaness the wife of Mahomet Lapsi, a person whom you
ought infinitely to consider, and respect, and who peradventure has a little
too much esteem for you. You would do well to manage an inclination of so great
advantage to you a little better, wherefore if you will take my advice, do not
this day depart the Garden without seeing us: For it is her pleasure you should
do so, and you ought not to hazard the disobeying her, without apprehending
that she will make you repent it.


On the top of the paper, and above the Letter, there was writ by another hand,
and in a very ill Character these words.

Ingrate, with this arrow I could pierce thy heart. Thou must yield Albirond
(cried he immediately upon the reading of the paper,) thou must submit to thy
Fate, who in despite of thy firmest resolution, will that thou see this
beautiful African. Alas! how little serves to over come my heart.

I thought I sighed with an immortal flame,
When in a trice, I know not how,
My heart that still was constantly the same,
To a new passion's yielding now.
What strange injustice, Heaven, is this!
That hurries Love to this capprice,
To force me to infringe my vow?
If he would have his Empire last,
He ought to make a heart
That for one fair once owns a smart*
Continue in that passion firm, and fast;
And rather choose a thousand times to die,
Than once it is faith to break, or falsify.
In ending these last words he was come up close to the Seraglio, where he had
scarce time to offer at some excuses, before the slave demanded of him why they
had not seen him of so many days; and the reason why he had not (now he was
come thither) walked on their side of the Garden, according to his promise.

Albirond though a little surpiz'd with so sudden and so brisk
Interrogatories, was not nevertheless to seek for some pretenses of affairs of
weighty concern, wherewith he had been perplexed; telling them moreover, That
the reason why he had forborne to approach the Seraglio was, because he had seen
no body at the window: but these excuses were not sufficient to defend him from
some reproaches the fair Slave cast in his teeth, in the behalf of her
Mistress; and the Sultaness her self putting on a very severe countenance,
ratt'ld him at a terrible rate; calling him ingrate, insensible, and unworthy
of the least kindness she had for him. These are the favors of that Country;
and it is after this manner, that the Ladies of those parts declare their
passion. Neither is it to be wondered at, that she should be so forward with a
man she had never spoken to but once, and had only seen at a pretty distance;
for there was nothing in the person of this Cavalier, that was not grateful: he
was evermore neat, and very finely dress't, and well enough understood the
secret of engaging a Lady, that is never so little sensible and inclined to be
in Love. And moreover it is the custom of that Nation, that the women commonly
are the first taken, and the men there revenge us to some purpose for what they
make us suffer in Europe; to all which you may add (if you please) that the
Beblerbeg had already acquainted the Sultaness, with the strict and particular
friendship he had contracted with Albirond; and had spoke so advantageously of
his person, his courage, and his wit, that she must of necessity be a little
prepossest in his favor.

The beautiful African having remained a little while without saying any thing
to Albirond, the at the last qualified her little displeasure with a Spanish
song, that her slave Isabella had taught her; which she sung with so
languishing and so amorous a tone, as perfectly made an end of absolutely
captivating her Lover. After which she would needs have him to sing too, which
also she entreated him by her slave to do. Albirond was not hard to be
persuaded into that little complaisance; for his voice was tolerably good, and
he sung passably well for a Cavalier. He therefore made choice of a little
Italian Song, that he himself was very much delighted withal, and that had been
made for him by a friend of his, of which these were the words

Tempra il cordoglio homai, non pianger piu
Deh! rasserena il ciglio
Porche ha Seco periglio
Suiscerato dolor,
E con Spietata Sort
Spesso corre alla morte
Addolorato core
Dasi gravi martyr che bramitu,
Tempra il cordoglio homai, non Pianger piu.
Whilst Albirond was singing, the Sultaness sent her slave for some
sweetmeats, which so soon as he had ended his song, she threw down to him; and
which without all peradventure, he gathered up with much better will than he
had done the stones the time before. It Is well when pibbles convert themselves
into Comfits, for the favors are then much sweeter. She threw him down also a
great deal of very excellent fruit, together with a very fine handkerchief to
carry them in; all which Albirond could not handsomely refuse, without
displeasing his new Mistress; for they make a refusal in such a case a capital
affront, and the greatest contempt that can be offered. After this manner the
Cavalier returned laden with sweets; but they would not suffer him to depart,
till first they had made him swear to come again very early the next morning:
but alas it was very little necessary to put Albirond to his Oath in such a
case, who found himself sufficiently engaged by a necessity much more binding
than his vow; and yet the sweets that had so charmed him, were not those he had
tasted in the Conserves, but they were the fair eyes of the beautiful African,
that in poisoning, had enchanted his heart. The simple inclination to Love with
which he had the foregoing days found himself only attainted, was now half
converted into a real passion. He now began better to understand what she said
to him, and so well, that he scarce lost a word. And, to confess the truth;
Love (for a young child,) is a very expert Deity, he understands all Languages,
he learns them all with very little difficulty; nay, it is sufficient being once
possessed with him, to have eyes only, to understand whatever one has a mind to.

In the morning, Albirond saw the Sultaness, and he went to wait upon the
Beglerbeg in the afternoon; but he past over the ensuing night with greater
disquiet, than any that had gone before. Urania already presented herself to
his imagination, and seemed to reproach him, and to demand satisfaction for his
inconstancy; but the charms of the fair Sultaness were already grown so
prevalent with him, that maugre his duty he owed, and the obligation he had to
his former Mistress, his feeble heart suffered them to possess themselves there
of a very considerable place, to the prejudice of Urania's title, and interest;
insomuch that all he could possibly do, was yet to preserve for her the first
and best room in his breast. The night was very long with our new wounded
Amoroso, or at least it seemed to be much longer than it was; and as if the
light of the day, ought to disperse the clouds and mists of his mind, as well
as dissipate the shades, and horrors of the night, he was in great impatience
to wait so long for the long look't-for morning. And indeed h^s gayety and good
humor, returned so soon as ever the day began to appear in his chamber, which
no sooner peeped through the windows, but that he immediately leapt out of his
Bed, and fell to dressing himself after the best manner he could devise, and
much finer than he had at any time appeared since his coming into Barbary,
before. Like a Gallant who was to go visit his Mistress, he omitted nothing
that he conceived might serve to set him the better off, but rifled all his
truncks, and tumbled over all his wardrobe, to find out what he thought might
please her best. In which spruce dress he sallyed out of his chamber, and in
the ardor and eagerness it may be imagined he was at that time, was not above a
quarter of an hour in going to the Garden. Being there come, he thought it was
a little too early for the Ladies, and no body yet appeared, notwithstanding a
little noise that he made in the Pavillion soon drew the Sultaness to the
window, who threw something down to make him come out into her view. Albirond
was wonderfully astonished at her sight, for if he had omitted nothing, that
might serve to make him appear with the better grace, and presence; the
Sultaness had also on her part been as curious to set off the luster of her own
Beauty with an infinite number of Jewels, and a most exquisite dress. Nothing
could be so rich, nor any thing was ever so fine; but it was withal a kind of
undress, wherein a certain negligence was to be observed, mixed with an
extraordinary pomp, but withal a negligence of very great Art. She had upon
her head a rich Cawle of Gold after the Turkish fashion, that served her in the
nature of a Vail, with which she covered part of her neck, which modesty seemed
to oblige her to conceal, but that love made her now and then to discover by
little accidental motions, but wherein there was nevertheless a great deal of
design. Albirond had nothing about his heart that was proof against these
enchantments, his eyes were ravished with the delight of beholding so beautiful
a person, and to such a degree, that, as if he had been charmed, he had not
once the power to open his mouth, to speak so much as one syllable to the fair
Sultaness: She was therefore herself constrained to break the Ice, and to ask
him how he had past the night. I am afraid, Madam (replied Albirond) that I am
to expect no more nights of repose, and if you will take the pains to consult
your Glass, you will there find, that it is very hard to behold you, and
afterward to sleep. To this she returned no answer, but took occasion to let
fall a very fair purse, which Albirond immediately gathered up, and was about
to present it to her, but the Sultaness bad him keep it for her sake, telling
him that it was full of kindness. The purse was a rich one made of Gold twist,
and wrought with a great quantity of little pearls, which Albirond having five,
or six times kiss't, he told the Sultaness (who saw and was very well pleased
with that action,) that if it was full of kindness, he was afraid it would be
the occasion of his death, because he had already more love than his heart was
able to bear.

It is not to be believed how naturally gallant the Women are in that Country,
there is nothing barbarous but the Men, neither are they barbarous to that
degree, they are represented to us; but as for the women, there is nothing they
are not expert in, that can any way contribute to the gaining of a heart; which
doubtless proceeds from this, that the men having commonly more wives than one
(they being permitted by their Law, to take to the number of four legitimate
wives) every one is industrious to gain the best room in his affection; and in
this these Brutes are more successful than others of a more refined reason; so
that this of whom we are now speaking, being the principal wife of the
Beglerbeg, it is to be supposed was no fool. She was Sister to the Basshaw, and
reputed the most beautiful woman of all Tunis; and though Albirond did not
perfectly understand her language, he nevertheless was such a proficient in it,
as to judge, that the fair Turk had a very great share of wit, for every thing
that fell from her tongue was marvailour aerie, and full of spirit, as well as
infinitely obliging. You should (said she once to him upon occasion of his not
well understanding something she had said,) by this time methinks have learnt
our language. It is Madam (replied Albirond) too short a time since I had first
the honor to see you, to learn so much as to be perfect in a Language;
especially, where the power of your fair eyes possessed me with a passion
sufficient to divert me. But (added the fair one) if one can love in one day, I
conceive also, that they may learn to understand in the same time, and I have
an opinion that should you speak to me in any language whatsoever, I should
make a shift to understand you. If it be that way you intend Madam (replied
Albirond again) I do understand you very well, and assure you of the same; but
it is also true, That this Language has no need of words, since the eyes render
it intelligible enough, without other expression: and after this manner mine
will soon enform you of what my mouth would perhaps be puzzled to explain. But
are the eyes (continued the Sultaness) so faithful as not to deceive you? Mine
are (replied the Cavalier,) and will not deceive you, when they give you to
understand, that they are charmed by the power of yours. If I have (said the
fair one) obtein'd over you so great a victory, I have succeeded in my design;
but you must know, that I intend to proceed further yet, and intend to
penetrate into your very heart, to see if there be there any room for mine.
Alas Madam! (replied Albirond with a deep sigh, and in a languishing accent)
you have perhaps done that already; for by the disorder I feel in my soul, I
know very well, that my heart is no more my own. I must then also give you
warning (said she smiling) to take heed, and fairly tell you before hand, that
I am one of those Conquerors who never restore the places I have taken by
assault, and am of an humor to reduce all things to fire, and blood, before I
will consent to be deprived of what is once my own.

I have no mind to repeat all that these new Lovers said to one another in
their first ardor, and besides it might perhaps importune my Reader; what I
have said is sufficient to let you see that they were already advanced pretty
far in their affairs. There is no mean to be observed in love, which is only
justified by its extravagancy and excess; and all things are excused, if not
allowed, in people that are in love. Albirond returned toward the City, and his
impatience was so great (as it commonly is in people possessed with this passion)
as would not permit him to forbear till he came home to his lodging, to examine
the purse. The work of it was exceedingly queint, and fine, which the better to
admire he turned and turned it above a hundred times; at last he made bold to
unty it, and without suspecting there was any thing within, drew out a Ticket
(written in a Character very different from that of the slave, who writ a very
fine hand) which contained these words in Spanish, which with much ado maugre
a great many pot-hooks, he made shift at last to unriddle.

The Sultaness Kahekma to the French Cavalier.
I Am afraid you already know what I am about to tell you, and you have too
much wit not to have discovered it before. It is, That I love you, and have
made choiceof this way to discover it, to no other end, save only to free my
self from the little perplexity I should have been in, to have told you so much
by word of mouth. If you are gallant to that degree you seem to be, you know
what use is to be made of such a declaration. Only remember, that to be
discreet is sufficient to make you happy amongst Ladies.


Albirond did by this letter what any other fortunate Lover in his place would
have done, that is, he read, and read it three or four times over, and over
again; and as often kissing the paper, tied it up again in the purse.
Imagination is very powerful over the minds of Lovers, to heighten and magnify
objects. Albirond fancied himself to be raised to the greatest pitch of Fortune
to which he could possibly arrive, a little piece of paper had elevated him
above the condition of the rest of men, and he flattered and hugged himself
with the greatest felicity imaginable; in which conceit so soon as he came to
his lodging, he fell to framing an answer to his obliging Mistress, which was
couch't in these terms.

Albirond to the adorable Sultaness Kahekma.
IF it be true that my eyes are faithful to me (as I assure my self they are,
and that they have not deceived me,) my glory is too great, and the obliging
words I have read in your Letter, render me the happiest Cavalier in the world.
I concluded my torments to have been without remedy, and in that belief
prepared my self to suffer without opening my lips to complain, neither is it
possible to express with what an excess of joy it is, that I find my self
delivered from that apprehension. Your charms (beautiful Sultaness) had
infallibly destroyed me, had not your Ticket come seasonably to my relief; a
little paper has relieved the place where you are pleased to lodge your heart.
How powerful then must your characters be, that can with so little ado produce
so great effects! It is true, that it is your own proper interest that you are
pleased to defend; and it had not been just that you should have abandoned it
to the torments of Love, seeing you are Mistress of the secret of raising it to
the supreamest degree of happiness, by the assurances you have been pleased to
give me of so glorious an affection.


Albirond did not hereafter proceed with so much caution as in prudence he
ought to have done, and there was enough contained in this letter to have
destroyed him, had his Mistress been false, or her slave unfaithful to him; but
when a man is once in love, he totally neglects his own conservation, which is
the cause that love with very good reason is painted with a fillet over his
eyes. In the mean time he past over this night with much greater content, than
any of those that had gone before, not that he slept much better, but there is
a sort of raving as nourishing and delightful as the soundest sleep, and that
in recreating the Spirit does nothing abate of the bodies force, and vigor.
Amorous souls are easily inclined to create to themselves very beautiful Ideas,
and are apt to flatter their own hopes with the fruition of the greatest
delights and advantages from the least things imaginable. Albironds imagination
had already placed him in the arms of the fair Sultaness, and he talked to her,
as if he had had her already really in his embraces. What ridiculous things
these Lovers are, with how great facility does love delude their fancies!

I see (he cried) my killing fair
Darting this way her amorous rays,
And with so languishing an air,
As an enflamed desire betrays:
From that snowy chest of thine,
A thousand sighs breath, in design
To come and wisper in my ear,
And in an amorous accent there
To say, oh Albirond! my heart!
If with love thou wounded art,
And have caught it from mine eye,
In thine arms oh let me dye.
At which my Soul sensible of thy smart
Knows in it is am'rousflame
With so much love, and so much heart,
As almost puts me out of breath again.
My senses in these moments sweet,
And these false baits amidst, that cheat
My fancy into joy and sweat,
Such new vigors do recover
As make me think I hold my fair embrast
And me too, really to taste
The true delights of the most happy lover.
Though Albirond past away a good many happy hours inthese pleasing
imaginations, yet that wherein he was again to go to visit his adorable
Sultaness was of too great importance to be neglected. This hour was already
come, just as he was up and ready dressed; wherefore taking a very pretty purse
he had, garnisht with ribons and putting his Ticket into it, he took his way
toward the Garden, where (for Love adds wings to the most tardy and slow of
pace) it was not long before he did arrive. His Mistress was already at her
window waiting for him; who so soon as he came within her reach, rained down
upon him a shower of fine flowrs together with certain dainty Nosegays she had
neatly made, and adorned with a great number of pearl; all which Albirond
gathered up, and put them into his hat; which being done he threw up his little
purse, which the Sultaness received with a very good grace, and kissed it with
the same Ceremony, and Affection that Albirond had done hers before. She very
much admired the Work, and was mightily taken with the gayness of it, which
was new to her who had never seen any of that fashion before. But her curiosity
chiefly appeared in the haste she made to open it, to see if there was not also
some Ticket within, and to her great joy she found that her dear Amoroso had
directed one to her; she immediately delivered it to her slave to interpret,
which whilst she was doing, the Sultaness in her eyes discovered how much she
was delighted with the Contents, which she also would sometimes turn toward
him, and in certain places of the letter with which she was best pleased, threw
little pibbles at him, calling him wag, wanton, and little fondling. After the
slave had three or four times read it over to her, the Sultaness commanded her
to entertain Albirond a while, and that she would immediately return. The
Cavalier took his opportunity of her absence to demand of Isabella, if she had
indicted her Mistris's letter, to which she made answer, that she had only
translated it out of the Sultaness her Morisco into Spanish, who had from her
transcribed it again in her own hand. This Slave had a marvailous share of wit,
and neither her face nor her fashion were like those of an ordinary Slave,
which Albirond had very well observed, and had he thought he should have had
time to do it, before the Sultaness should return, had a mind to have entreated
from her some short account of her life, and of the adveneure that had brought
her to this Captivity; but the moments, that the Sultaness enjoyed in his
conversation were too ravishing for her longer to forbear to return. She came
then laden with sweetmeats of which she made her Lover a very liberal
present, reserving only some few for her self and her slave, which they eat to
bear him company. He this day likewise received another purse also full of
Musk, and Civet, and Amber-Gris; and had this Cavalier had an avaritious Soul,
he might also have added to the conquest of the heart of so beautiful a person
a great number of Jewels, and knacks of exceeding great value: but he who never
had been good at receiving, and whose generous heart wholly inclined him to
acts of bounty, had he had wherewithal to obey his liberal humor, could never
have forgiven himself, and would have looked upon it as an unpardonable crime,
should he once have entertained so much as a thought of making use of the
bounty of this charming Sultaness to extract from thence advantages so mean,
and so unworthy a man of honor.

One day entertaining his Mistress at this rate, and telling her the despair he
was in that he could not approach nearer to her, to have the honor at least to
kiss her hand, and that the Sultaness manifested to him the same desire,
Isabella contrived a way to satisfy them both in that particular; bidding
Albirond go look a little below the old palace, where he would find a pipe of
Lead, through which in summer they conveyed water into the Bath, and there try
if he could not thrust in his arm. Albirond accordingly went, and found it true
the Slave had told him concerning the pipe, which went through the wall; and
returned to bring them the news. Upon which the Sultaness lost no time to go
meet her Gallant, who so soon as he heard a noise on the other side of the
Wall, thrust in his hand, which his Mistress taking she carrest it a thousand
pretty ways, and having done so a pretty space, put through her own to
Albirond's side, who kissed it a thousand thousand times, and paid it back the
civili^ies he had received. If I was not now speaking of Lovers, I know the
wo^ld would think me very ridiculous to insist upon these little foolings
betwixt them, but such as know any thing of Love, will confess to me, that
toying is none of the least delights, and that in the beginning of a passion,
one turns every thing to good fortune. This perhaps was one of the greatest
that Albirond was to expect or hope for, and he thought his sufferings very
well recompensed with this little favor. Nothing could be so lovely as that
hand of hers set off with a great number of rich rings; but notwithstanding
that which he prized infinitely more was the incomparable whiteness of it,
which in truth he was so strangly taken withal, that at that moment he would
not have exchanged that single hand, for the most beautiful body in the whole
world, that of the same piece only excepted. However this kind of sport ended
at last, after having both of them several times past, and repast both the one
hand, and the other, at one of which times the Sultaness took Albironds, and
laid it in her bosom, which Albirond was presently sensible of, both by the
Softness, and the roundness of what he felt. And this hole served them for some
time after with several grateful opportunities of enjoying yet more and newer
inventions of delight, in despite of the rude restraint of the Seraglio: but
that wherein the Traffic of Love seemed to be the most pleasingly maintained
betwixt them through this Conduit, was in the amorous Letters they conveyed by
this means to one another, so that nothing more could have been desired, but
that it had been a little bigger, that they might have seen one another; or
rather wide enough to pass through to a more perfect enjoyment.

These little Gantilesses having past betwixt them to their mutual
satisfaction, Albirond returned again to the window, where he was no sooner
come, but that the Slave gave him to understand, that the Sultaness was a
little offended with him; at which he was very much surpised, and asked her for
what, for that he could not imagine how he could any way have disobliged her.
It is (replied Isabella) because she expected you should have taken one of the
Rings from off her fingers, to have kept it for her sake, as she believes had
you had a real passion for her, you would have done. Hereupon the Cavalier
entreated Isabella to appease her Mistress, by giving her to understand, that
it was not the custom of the French Cavaliers to take any thing from fair
Ladies, but rather to present them, than to receive any thing from them, as it
was all the reason in the world they should. The Sultaness who was gone no
further but into her Cabinet to take thence a Letter she had writ the night
before, upon this immediately returned to the window, where Isabella presented
her with the excuses Albirond had desired her to make in his behalf, with
which, and without much difficulty, she soon put her out of her little pet; I
will nevertheless, said she, that Albirond hereafter accommodate himself to the
humor of our Country, so long as he continues in it, and afterward he may
pursue his own method with the Ladies of Europe if he please. We Women here are
as generous as the men are in his Country, and he is not to pretend to an
advantage over us in that particular. It seems then Madam (said Albirond) that
you will after this manner buy those hearts, which your own charms have power
sufficient to subdue to your devotion; it would also seem (replied the
Sultaness) that you would make a purchase of ours, which your own merits do
themselves enough deserve. We consider not all the value of the things we
present, we only seek the pleasure of giving; and that because it is a high
testimony of Love, when we frankly bestow our favors.

This was no ill passing away of a man's time in Barbary to be treated after
this manner by so beautiful a person; and had there been any bounds in Love,
with which a man could rest content, Albirond had certainly been in a very
happy condition, and had had all the reason imaginable to be highly satisfied
with his fortune; but it is not love when a man can stop there, and it is
impossible to love, and not to pursue it to the end. In the mean time this
passionate Amoroso could not tell how to hope for much more than he had already
received; he loved in a place where nothing but a spirit could get in, the door
of the prison of these fair Slaves was never open to any* but to those poor
Martirs of Jealousy; and what ways so ever Albirond could contrive to this
end, he found them all full of danger and impossibility: nay Isabella her (self
with all the wit she had) was to seek in this affair, and the Sultaness who^e
desire was equally great with that of Albirond, now began to consider, in what
an unhappy perplexity she had embark't herself, to love where there was no
possible hope of remedy. Alas! said she one day to her slave, into what a
misfortune (my dear Isabella) have I blindly precipitated my self; which is
such, that whether I love, or am beloved, I find my self on all sides environed
with ruin. For what advantage is it to me, that a dear Lover has a noble
passion for me, if I can no way relieve him? my own torment by that means only
becomes so much the greater, and I suffer at the same time all the miseries I
cause in him. What have I committed against Heaven to endow me with a destiny
so averse to Love! or why does Love make me love, where destiny has interposed
so many invincible difficulties betwixt my love, and me!

Isabella, who besides the obligation she had to her Mistress, had moreover a
particular inclination for her; did not here abandon her in her sorrow, but
shared with her the one half of her Tears. There was nothing she would not have
undertaken to ease her of her grief, in order whereunto she every day attempted
something; but still to no purpose, so that she was fain to referr it to time
to produce some happy alteration in the fortune of her afflicted Mistress. But
time brings a very slow and pitiful relief to the passion of Lovers to whom
every moment seems an Age. The Sultaness found nothing in that, that any way
contributed to her consolation; death it self would have been more welcome to
her, than those delays, and she desired, and indeed in the languishing
condition she then was, stood in need of a prompter remedy.

In the end she unbethought her self, that Albirond might perhaps come through
the Beglerbegs apartment to a window of her Chamber that looked into the Bath of
the Seraglio, which though it was shut up with a Gril it would nevertheless be
some ease to their torments, if she might once at least embrace him through the
Grate, to obtain which she had nothing to do but to corrupt the Governor of the
Palace; which she doubted not but Albirond might easily bring about. This
project of hers she communicated to Isabella, who upon the hearing of it
confessed, That Love was very inventive in the wits of those who were his
Proselites: For that she (she said) could never have thought of such an
expedient. She saw no impossibility in the thing, and the sole difficulty of
overcomming the Governor appeared unto her a very easy matter for Albirond to
effect; who being very much considered in the Palace, might with some little
Present make him do whatever he would have him. The Sultaness was mighty well
pleased to see her plot approved of by Isabella, and that she saw so little
difficulty in effecting it, wherefore so soon as Albirond came in the morning
she told him what she had thought on in order to some little enjoyment of each
other, and that it would not be amiss for him to take a little pains to try if
he could not bring it about. It is not to be presumed that so passionate a
Lover must needs be ravished with so fair an occasion, he promised therefore
that he would neglect nothing; but would use his best endeavor to overcome all
difficulties, and so departed. All the remainder of the day he spent in
meditating of the means and prepared himself for his undertaking, as a thing
upon which his good or evil fortune chiefly depended. It was nevertheless an
odd kind of satisfaction to see a fair Lady with whom he was passionately in
love through a few Iron Bars only, in which at once there would be pleasure and
pain mixed together; but yet (if we consider it) what a happiness it must needs
be to a Lover who had never seen her before, but at the distance of forty
Cubits over his head, is not easy to be imagined.

Now this Governor, that he was to deal withal, was a man of a Brutish and
difficult humor, who was not to be overeacht by subtilties and devices; and
therefore it was necessary to deal with him by hand, and to engage him by a
Bribe, and yet there was no safety in trusting him with so dangerous a secret.
It was therefore requisite to make the engine move without giving him any light
into the affair, and that was a thing of no ordinary difficulty. Albirond
nevertheless (hoping all things from Love and Fortune) made provision of some
bottles of excellent wine, together with good store of Fowl, and whatever else
was necessary for a handsome treat, with these he takes a case of very fine
pistols that he had brought out of France along with him, and followed by three
Slaves that carried all the good provision, goes early in the morning to the
Garden. Being come to the place he repairs forthwith to the Governors Lodgings,
whom he found in his Chamber, telling him at his entrance into the room, that
he was come to dine with him, and to that purpose had brought wherewithal to
make a tolerable repast, that therefore there remained no more care nor
trouble for him, but only to cause a good fire to be made to get ready the
Fowl, and so fall too. The Governor at this good news a little unbent his angry
brows, but that which chiefly made him clear up his sullen looks, was the sight
of the bottles of Wine, which was not familiar to him, it being a liquor that
he seldom tasted of but at such good times as the Beglerheg came thither to
make a debauch. A stoop of good Wine is an admirable passport wherever a man
goes, and better received in all places, than the best letters of
recommendation. This Governor had a drunken Soul of his own, which made him
receive Albirond at the first appearance of the Bottles with a civility not
usual to his brutish nature, but after he had drunk half a dozen Glasses, he
fell to caressing him with the greatest tenderness, and friendship imaginable.
He liked the Wine wonderfully well, which made our Cavalier, who would loose no
opportunity of setting all his engines on work, tell him, that if he liked that
sort of Wine, he might send for it if he pleased every day, a complement that I
do assure you, in few words, pleased; and prevailed upon him more than a long
set speech, penned with the greatest elegancy and art. The house was all on a
roar with joy, by the example of the Governor, whom his servants had not seen
in so good a humor of many a day.

Albirond took an occasion whilst dinner was making ready to go take a turn, or
two in the Garden, where being come, he saw no body at the usual Rendez-vouz,
and yet the hour appointed was already past, but by making a little noise he
drew the Slave to the window, who died with impatience to see him come, by
reason the Sultaness was in so great anxiety, that she was laid down upon her
Bed to entertain her melancholy, believing that since Albirond so long deferred
his coming, he was certainly frustrated in his design. She ran therefore in
all haste to tell her Mistress he was there, who thereupon presently appeared
at the window but infinitely sad, though with a sadness that immediately
cleared up upon the sight of her Lover, who there gave her an account of the
good forwardness their affairs were in. The Sultaness was very well satisfied
with the news; and was so confident of Albironds dexterity (as people are apt
to believe what best pleases them) that she doubted not of having that very day
the joy of embracing, and kissing her beloved Servant.

They then past away some time in flattering one another, with what delights
they should enjoy in this enterview, which also they already seemed to taste by
way of advance, when a certain noise interrupted their discourse, and made them
both shift as fast as they could to conceal themselves. This was the Governor
who himself was come to call Albirond in to dinner; and having run through all
the walks of the Garden, had left no place unsought but that side only
adjoining to the Seraglio, which like* wise he examined from the one end to the
other, without any news nevertheless of him he sought for, by reason that he
had concealed himself in the Pavilion, and who so soon as the Governor was gone
a little past him, stole out behind him, and taking the shortest cut out of the
Garden went into the Kitchen. Azem (for so was this Governor called) came in
also presently after, telling him that he had been all over the Garden to seek
him.

The Cloth was presently laid, down they sat, and to it they fell with very
good appetites; but they did not eat so well, but that they drank a great deal
better. Azem had moreover invited the three Guards of the Palace (for there
was no more) who likewise laid lustily about them, insomuch that it required
very little pains to make them drunk, for they drunk freely enough of
themselves, and voluntarily doubled the healths that Albirond began.

The dinner lasted a little too long for those Guards, who were obliged to be
continually at the Gates of the Palace, and it had been no less than present
death had the Beglerbeg chanced to come, and not found them there which made
them take leave of the Company, and return to their post, by which means our
Cavalier had the greater liberty to entertain the Governor, than he had during
the time of their being there. He made good use then it is to be supposed of
his opportunity, and so good that there past interchangeably great
protestations of love and inviolate friendship betwixt them, when it being now
time to give the last blow to the business, Albirond drew his case of pistols
out of his pocket, and of them made a present to Azem. The Turk at first made
some difficulty of receiving them, thinking it too great a favor, and
presently fell to rifling his Chamber to find out something that was fit to
give him in return of so great a bounty; and made him an offer of a very fine
Cimitar, no no (said Albirond embracing him in his arms) you shall give me
nothing but your friendship, only I shall desire of you, if you can do it, to
let me see an apartment in the Palace I have not yet seen, which I am told is
furnished with the richest furniture, and have a great curiosity to see it; I
mean that which is over the Mosque. That quarter (replied the Governor roundly
to him) is that which leads to the Seraglio of the Women, where indeed there
are some very fair Romes very richly furnished, and where is no spare of Gold
and precious stones; but no one is ever permitted to enter there, but with the
Beglerbeg; amongst which rooms there is one that looks through a greated window
into the Bath of the Sultaness, and it would be dangerous both for you, and for
me, to have you seen there, by reason this is the season wherein they Bathe. I
shall not offer to go into that room said Albirond, but shall satisfy my
curiosity by seeing as I pass through the other Chambers, the richest of the
beds, and Hangings I have heard so highly extold.

Azem was too deeply engaged to his liberality, or had perhaps drunk too deep
to deny him this; but it was upon condition, that he should never speak of it
to any one living, for that it was as much as his life was worth, should it
ever come to be known. Albirond made no difficulty to give him that assurance,
nor the other thereupon to deliver him the Key, and because he was of necessity
to go to the City to speak with the Beglerbeg about something that was to be
done in the Garden, he entreated him to stay till he came back, that he might
return the Key into his own hands.

In short all things favored Albironds design, and now the Sultaness who had
given out to her people that she intended to bath, had above a long hour
expected his coming, when he having opened some doors stole softly from one
Chamber to another, till at last he came to that where the window was, and
where (...) he at first discovered no more (...) and of his nose, to see if no
body was there. I dare not here take upon me to tell what joy he felt within;
for I should be afraid either of saying too much to be believed, or of saying
too little to express his transports. He had past through all the Chambers in
so great haste, and with so little regard to what he was doing, that he scarce
knew which way he had come; all the Guilding, all the Ornaments, all the
Diamonds; nor all the Pearls there had once the power to arrest his sight, and
his eyes were blind to all things but that window; but w^^^ charms, what
beauties did he then see?

Of Beauty all that Nature ever made
Of charming all that Love could ere invent;
Here to our Lovers sight were all displayed
To make him with his fortune most content:
What charms! what smiles! almighty Love in all
His trim was dressed for this great Festival,
So sweetly looked the lovely African,
By whom her happy lover at first sight,
Was shot with such a woe(...)ding flash of light.
That through his eyes he thought he had been slain.
The Sultaness was laid down close by the Bath under a Canopy of crimson Damask
upon a Bed of the same color, raised no more than half a foot only from the
Ground. There was in the Bath a stove that kept the place sufficiently warm,
from whence issued out a perfume of diverse odors, which dispersed it self
throughout the whole house, but the face and posture of this charming person
carried with them enchantments, that rendered all the Senses, but the sight only
of no use. She was in an undress fit to go into the Bath, her hair dishevelled,
her breast all open, her arms at liberty in great wide Sleeves of a Cambrick
smock, and for a covering to the best part about her, she had only a short Jupe
that reaching very little lower than the knee, gave the eye free access to
delicate legs, and feet dressed in rich buskins embroydered with Gold, and set
over with Diamonds: but in truth this picture I here give you of her, is very
differing from, and infinitely short of what I received from Albirond.

She was asleep when Albirond came first to the window, and he had made so
little noise in coming that he did not otherwise, than by violence of his sighs
disturb her rest. He was turned to a statue, at the sight of so many Graces,
and what has been fained of the Metamorphose's, was at this time true in him.
At last this adorable beauty awaked, and was the most surpised in the world to
see Albirond so near her, and blushing as if she had been ashamed of being
taken in that posture, called for Isabella who was at work in the next room to
bring her veil, which having thrown over her she went to her beloved love. You
have surpised me Albirond said she in a very odd posture, and I am afraid,
have seen something that you should not have done; I know not what you think of
me. What I have seen ( Madam) replied Albirond* has abated nothing of the
affection I have for you, and has only served to augment a Passion which I had
thought had been by nothing to have been increased. I, but for all that (added
the fair one) I ought to punish you for not waking me at first, which indeed
you should have done. If Madam (answered the Cavalier again) you would allow a
man's Soul more liberty when he looks upon you, one should then better know ones
duty, but a man turns Marble at the sight of so many charms, and if you had not
restored my voice, I do believe I should have continued all day without
uttering a word. But what ayld you (said she) that you could not speak. Alas
my Soul, Madam, my Soul (said he) that you have ravished, and do yet retain from
me, so that I know not if I am alive, or no, if you do not please to restore it
with a kiss. You shall not dye said the charming African for so small a thing
as that, and thereupon stretching his arms through the Grates, (the Bars
whereof were so wide as to allow room for half the head) she embraced, and
kissed him more than once.

Radoppia o bella bocca a mill, a mill
Hor sommessi hor profondi, hora tenaci
Hora humidetti I bacci, hora mordaci,
E^risuonar facian queste ville.
He received and gave all sorts of kisses, in which conflict his lips were so
well bit, that they spin'd out of blood in above twenty places. The desire with
which he was at that time enflamed, did not however so totally take away his
sense of feeling, that he was not sensible of this strange way of kissing,
which made him show his blood to the Sultaness, who only laughed at it, and
wiping his mouth with her own handkercher, called his blood the Soul of sighs,
kissing him over and over again, a thousand and a thousand times. Another kind
of amorous divertisement the Ladies have in that Country, is, to* take you
under the chin, where they will ^weak you so kindly, that for the most part,
they bring away the skin upon their nails. Albirond in revenge of this kindness
recompensed himself with his hands for the loss of his blood, and whilst the
Sultaness carrest him after this bloody manner, grop'd her all over, without
any manner of respect, which she was so far from being angry at, that she took
no notice at all of that action, no more than if she had not perceived it.

Time passes away marvailous swi^tly in these sweet occasions, but Albirond had
not so far lost his senses, that he did not very well remember the time; for
his departure already called upon him, and that though he had locked up himself
sa^e in this apartment, he ought by no means to stay till the Governor should
come back to call him out. This might have given him some suspicion, and t was
also high time for the Sultaness to retire, not to give any to the other Women
that attended her, who might have thought some accident had befaln her, should
she longer than ordinary have deferred to return from the Bath. They began
therefore to take leave, and to embrace, as they had been never to see one
another again, and so many tears were shed at parting as drowned all the
pleasures they had lately enjoyed. The Sultaness at this separation put a very
fair Diamond ring upon Albironds finger, and he also gave her another that he
used to wear, which were the pledges of their faith. What unconscionable Usury
does love make his poor subjects pay for two or three moments of delight! It
seemed to Albirond that he had lost the light, being separated from the fight
of his fair Sultaness, and not knowing which way for the future to come to see
her so near again, he could have wished himself dead. What he had seen, and the
satisfactions he had had that afternoon, so wholly possessed his mind, that he
past over the whole night in raving of it, without the least inclination to
sleep. The remembrance of which felicities, furiously augmented his unrest, and
enflamed his desires; and when he came to consider that this had been the
greatest, if not the last favor he should ever receive, he fell into a mortal
despair. The Sultaness in the mean time was no less perplexed, and took as
little rest as he; for Women are for the most part more violent in their
passions than men, especially when they are once arrived at such a point, that
there is but one step more to the height of their desires. This fair Lady fight
away the time upon a Bed which she bathed with her tears, as if she had been
the only person in the world that had the greatest reason to be afflicted, and
there was nothing but the company of her dear Isabella that did a little
consolate her for the loss of her dearest Lover. Pity my grief (said she to
her) my dear Slave; and if there be no cure to be had, find out at least some
way to deceive it. Invent some argument, if it be possible, to make me believe
I shall once again embrace my beloved Albirond, and receive some testimony of
his real affection for me, for without that I find I cannot live. Isabella
promised her to employ all the wits she had to try to serve her, and to find
some means to bring Albirond into her arms; telling her withal that she had
thought of one expedient which seemed to be the shortest way, but that it had
in i^ a little difficulty, which she much doubted whether Albirond, (though she
knew he had the courage to attempt it,) had yet the strength to overcome, which
was to come through the window they were wont to entertein him at to which end
she would let him down a Rope to help him.

This was in truth a design of the ^a^er sort, but that nevertheless appeared
almost impossible in the opininion of the Sultaness, who concluded the window
to be too high for any one to get up to it with the help of one rope only, and
therefore fell to contriving other projects, but could think of none wherein
the danger of Albironds ruin was not manifest; and almost certain; and indeed
to say the truth, there was no way but that of the window, that could give them
any hope to execute their design without apparent danger. They past over the
whole night in plotting their heads together upon this subject, and in the
morning so soon as it was day, and that Albirond was come into the Garden (for
he was grown a mighty early riser) Isabella ^^quainted him with the perplexity
her Lady and her self had all night b^^n in, to contrive some way to get him
into the ^^rag^^o, and that if he was no wiser than they, they could think of
no other, then that he must adventure to climb up the wall, and so come in at
the window. Albirond replied, that after having long tormented himself to find
out some invention, he had at last light upon the same thought, and that
therefore if she could help him to a Rope, he would presently try what he dould
do. Upon this the Slave went presently to fetch one she had already prepared
for the purpose, and returned bringing the Sultaness along with her, who would
also lay to her helping hand if need required. They tied the rope then fast to
the window, and afterward let it down to Albirond, who in the first ^^dor, and
hopes of his approaching happiness, mounted with admirable agility, and courage
the height of ten or a dozen cubits* but the rope that had been ill chosen,
though it was spick and span new, would not serve his turn upon this occasion
it was both too smooth, and too slender, there was not grasp enough to be taken
of it, and it cut his hands to pieces; nevertheless he put to his utmost force,
and redoubling his endeavor, mounted more than half the way. But his vigor
could no longer continue in the pain he felt of his hands, and his activity was
of so little use, where his strength failed him. It was too invincible a labor
to perform without the help of a better rope; and he was so weary, that he was
able to advance no further, he was therefore constrained to go down again, and
in so doing, to let himself slip so fast, by reason of the soreness of his
hands, that he thought he had broke his Legs, and did effectually put one aukle
out of joint with the fall.

The Sultaness was a woeful Spectatrix of this unhappy accident, and the cry
that Albirond made at the pain of his foot, pier^t so deeply into her very
heart, that she sunk down half dead into the arms of her beloved Slave. Our
unfortunate Cavalier was so totally taken up with the sense of his own pain,
that he took no notice at all of his Mistress swooning, and very much ado he
had to crawl three or four paces to lean himself against the wall of the
Pavillion; such as have had such mischances, know whether they are painful, or
no. In the mean time a little air that the Slave gave the Sultaness by opening
her bosom, made her come to her self again, who at the first opening of her
eyes, cast them upon her beloved Albirond with so languishing a look, as had
been of virtue sufficient to have taken away more than the one half of his
pain, had it not been a^waged before by the tender sense he had already seen
she had for his disaster. But he must no longer delay to get some remedy for
his foot; wherefore with intolerable pain he made shift to get to the Garden
door, where finding his horse ready for him, he immediately mounted, and in a
very little time arrived at the City.

The Sultaness saw him limp off in this miserable condition with a heart so
shrunk up with sorrow, that she was not able to give him so much as one word;
but went presently, and threw her self upon her bed, there to lament a
misfortune so bitter, and of which she accused her self for the only cause.
Alas (said the afflicted fair one) how miserable (my dear Albirond) am I, if I
no better reward thy fidelity and affection! are these the favors that I owe to
thy generous passion, and do I only love thee to destroy thee! Ye Destinies who
are so obstinately bent against me, what pleasure can you taken in making me
love after this manner, is it not enough that I am once unfortunate, but you
must double my misfortunes? Cruel Destinies! let me alone suffer the effects of
all your malice, but forbear to wound me in that part where I am so sensible;
be less cruel to so dear a Lover, and I will never complain of your utmost
severities. His courage, his address, his mind, and all those charming
qualities he is Master of to so eminent a degree, should methinks plead in his
behalf, and prevail upon your obduracy to afford him a better fortune; and
Heaven it self should, in my opinion, work something in his favor. Has he
merited your displeasure to that degree to be so ill rewarded for his kindness
to me? Oh, if it be possible exercise your power with less injustice, if you
will render your selves worthy of our devotion.

Sorrow was here more eloquent than powerful: when it is not excessive there is
a certain kind of pleasure in complaining, which the afflicted are sensible of
in evaporating their griefs. The Sultaness her self even in her disstress found
something of consolation in it, that gave some little ease to her heart; and
Isabella who never left her, did all that in her lay to mollify the cause of
her despair. She remonstrated to her, that the hurt Albirond had received was
not peradventure so great as she imagined it to be, that the next day she hoped
they should see him, and that he would be well, and that even for his sake she
ought not to torment her self after that manner; least by so doing she should
make her self sick* than which nothing could more crucify him. This Slave had
so ready, and so flattering a wit, that she could persuade her to whatever she
would; nevertheless it was not enough to this enamored Lady to see Albirond
only, if she could only see him as she had hitherto done, and though he should
be cured of his foot, his heart would still remain in the same wounded
condition, neither would that amendment in him cure her of her burning desire
wherewith she was continually tormented. Ah Isabella (said she to her upon this
subject) how furious a passion is love, when one has no hope of remedy! What
good will it do me to see him, if I do not see him here, if I continue still in
the same torments, and cannot obtein opportunity to manifest to him my amorous
transports, and mix my Soul with his? Well Madam (replied the Slave) have a
little patience; Love is ingenuous, and Albirond will I warrant you again find
means to see you in the Bath, by once more deceiving the Governor. That thou
art simple (replied the Sultaness with a little freedom) to believe that love
can be satisfied through an Iron Grate. There must be nothing betwixt us two,
but that God of our Souls, and Iron Bars are both too hard, and too cold to
permit us to taste the pleasures of an amorous and enflamed ardor. She spoke
with this liberty to Isabella, whose heart and fidelity were sufficiently known
to her, and also her torments were a little mollified by these discourses, for
a little thing will serve to ease the pains of these Lovers, and to qualify
them for a time. But in the morning when she saw that Albirond came not, she
then fell in good earnest into so great a sorrow, that she neither aet nor
drank any thing of all that day, giving Isabella to apprehend, that she would
fall into the last despair. The other Slaves that attended on her thought she
had been ill of some violent feavor, the rumor whereof was spread throughout
the whole Seraglio, and in the evening came to the ear of the Beglerbeg himself.

Albirond so soon as ever he came into the City, presently got his ankle set,
and by the advice of his Surgeon kept his Chamber. He did not however loose
his time, but having got a better rope than the former, he fitted it after such
manner, that it might be a little more useful to him in the execution of his
design. He tied it therefore full of great knots, and with another little cord,
that he had also provided, made here and there certain little Rounds or steps
upon which he might rest one foot when he was weary. He past over a good part
of the night in adjusting this device, and so soon as it was day, finding his
feet in a condition to support him without danger, he mounted to horse, and
himself carrying the rope along with him, repaired forthwith to the Garden.
Isabella who there expected him* with great impatience, was continually
watching at the window, to spy if she could see him come* and her Mistress
would dye if she saw him not that day. So soon therefore as ever she set her
eye upon him, she presently ran to carry the ^ydings to the afflicted Sultaness
who upon the instant started up, and flew with unimaginable swiftness* to the
place, though her weakness was such as upon any other occasion would hardly
have permitted her to set one foot before another, where being come she
appeared to her happy Lover in a funeral pomp, which did not ill set off the
whiteness of her skin, and which was a great black veil that covered her body
all over. Albirond discovered in the eyes of his beautiful Mistress, as well as
in her habit, something that was extraordinary sad, and even her posture was so
languishing; that he was afraid some dire misfortune had befaln her; which made
him in great anxiety of thought, demand of her the cause of so great sadness;
when the Slave seeing her Mistress return no answer, advanced to speak for her,
telling him that the Sultaness had like to have died for sorrow, at the
accident had the other day befaln him, which she did apprehend to be much
greater than it was, by reason he had not been there the day before, and that
that was the cause of the alteration he saw in her. Albirond then acquainted
them with the reason, and consecutively showed them the rope he had brought, at
the same time linking it at the end of the former, which yet hung down, and
which they also drew up to them, and made it fast to the window.

The trees did so shade the wall of that apartment of the Seraglio, that
Albirond could not possibly be seen. He therefore began his Scalado, wherein he
scrambled so well, and made so good shift, what with his hands, and what with
his feet, that at last with much ado he got up to the window. The Sultaness
had withdrawn her self into her Chamber for fear of seeing him receive another
disgrace, so that pulling the rope up to him, he followed Isabella, who led him
by a pair of stairs of fifteen or twenty steps, which mounted into her
Mistrisses Chamber. The Sultaness did not as yet appear, and the impatience of
our Amoroso was such as not longer to endure to be delaid from seeing her,
which made him with great earnestness demand of Isabella where she was, to
which the Slave made answer, that she was only gone to put on Ornaments more
suitable to the present joy of seeing him in that place, and would immediately
return. Accordingly she delaid not to come, and at her first entrance into the
room throwing herself into the arms of her amorous Gallant, she gave him by
that action an infallible testimony of an extraordinary passion; as Albirond
also by devouring kisses, and close embraces demonstrated his; in which
affectionate Contention they naturally strove who should exceed each other.

I shall not here trouble my Reader; nor my self with a description of the
furniture of this Apartment, within which was a Cabinet or Closet hung with
cloth of Gold, set all over with Emeralds and Diamonds, of which I shall only
in general give this short account; That it was a place sufficient in it self
to have created Love, had they brought none along with them. The Sultaness led
Albirond into this splendid Cabinet, where they both of them sat down upon
embroidered Cushions close by a bed of the Turkish fashion; and where being
sat, they looked upon one another without speaking one word, as both of them
knowing one another minds, without it being necessary that either of them
should break the Ice. These moments are none of the least happy, but they are
of very little duration, and the violence of passion does with great facility
transport us to delights of greater ardor. The Beds of that Country are the
most commodious in the world, for certain little wanton purposes; they are very
little raised from the Ground; and love had rendered the fair African so feeble,
that Albirond with one sigh blew her flat upon her back into the middle of this
by which they were seated.

Who that had seen these two young people in this posture, but would have
thought the hour of their happiness had been now come, wherein to communicate
their mutual fires, and to mix their souls; and that there was now no further
obstacle to their full enjoyment of one another: but Isabella came just in the
nick to spoil the sport, and made them to separate in so great haste, that it
was not a minute to be delaid. Ah Madam said she (as she entered into the
Cabinet pale, and almost breathless for fear) we are lost, we are undone, for
here is the Beglerbeg come in, and is already entered the Apartment. The very
name of the Beglerbeg, immediately frose up the blood of the two Lovers already
in the height of Circulation, and struck them into so great an astonishment,
that Albirond knew not which way to take, nor what to do: but the Sultaness
without standing to pause, hastily going out locked him in the Cabinet, from
whence he would with all his heart have thrown himself out of the window, had
it not looked into the Base-Court of the Seraglio. Neither could he go back by
the same way he came without danger of meeting the Beblerbeg, so that every
thing filled him with fear and confusion, and he fancied every moment that he
was already taken. He therefore fell to peeping up and down for some little
hole, or corner wherein to hide himself, but the place that in the end
concealed him, was too little to be by him discovered at first sight, and in a
hurry and fright wherein he sought it; though at last he found a little door in
a corner of the Cabinet behind the hangings, wherein by good fortune the Key
accidentally was, and in opening found that it was (sir-reverence) a house of
office. The place was very straight and capable of containing very little more
than one person only, especially one of his bulk and stature, however he
thought it at this time the finest place that ever he had been in, and very
glad he was that he had found it, and perhaps it was at that time of all others
the most proper for him. I cannot nevertheless affirm that his joy was
altogether perfect: For he was not oversafe there, and in the apprehension he
was, some one might perhaps have seen him climb the window, who had acquainted
the Beglerbeg with it, he could not but think he should presently be found out;
and it was no small cause he had to fear, for the least that could befall him,
should he be taken there, was to be roasted, or flead alive, and that without
appeal or any hopes of pardon. The Sultaness on the other side after she had
locked Albirond in the Cabinet, and put the Key in her pocket, went, and threw
her self upon the Bed in her Chamber, where she lay expecting Sidi Mahomet her
husband. In which condition she much needed not to counterfeit being sick; the
fear she was in, not a little contributing to make her look very pale and ill.

The Beglerbeg whom the report of his wives sickness had drawn thither so early
in the morning to cure her by his presence, at his coming into the room carrest
and kissed her a thousand and a thousand times; for you must know, that it is
ordinary with the Turkish Women, when their husbands never so little omit their
ordinary visits to them, to take it so hainously to heart, as to be effectually
sick indeed. Wherefore Sedi Mahomet thinking the Su^taness had no other Malady
but that, and no longer to defer the remedy he purposed to apply unto her, bid
his wife cause her Cabinet to be opened, for there it was that at his kindest
visits he usually past the time away with her: But the unfortunate Lady
concluding that there would be an end of Albirond if she should open it,
pretended to have lost the Key two days before. The excuse was passable enough
to be found out on the sudden, but it would not serve the turn, for the
Beglerbeg to show how impatient he was to content her, seeing the Key was not
to be presently had, commanded some of the Eunuch's to break open the door.

Whoever had at this time been in Albironds place, would doubtless, as well as
he, have been damnably afraid of his Carcass; he heard, and almost fell't every
bounce they gave at the door, and then it was that he really believed they knew
of his being there. Every blow of the hammer pierced quite through his head,
and so shook his very heart, that he was twice or thrice upon the point, rather
to let himself slip down through the hole of the privy, then to suffer those
cruel torments that he imagined were prepared for him. The Suitaness was in no
less fear than he, which made her fancy her self already half dead, and was
once resolved to discover the whole truth to her husband, and to make an offer
of her own life to save her friend.

The door was at last forced open, whereupon she first entered in, to hinder
the Beglerbeg from precipitating a bloody revenge upon her beloved Servant,
when being entered she was as much astonished on the other side, not to see him
there. She could not imagine what could be become of him, and therefore knew
not whether she should rejoice or be sad, nevertheless she feared the worst,
and could find nothing in her hope that could minister the least consolation to
her: but her good fortune was such, that what disorder, or emotion soever, the
Turk observed in the countenance of his wife, he never attributed it to any
thing but her disease, and therefore without penetrating further into the cause
of her confusion, past away with her half an hour upon the same bed where
Albirond had begun to be happy. After which he took her along with him to go
both together into the Bath, and then it was that the Sultaness cast her eyes
round for Isabella, to give her some account of Albirond, and what was become
of him; but she played least in sight, for the Slave out of the apprehension she
had conceived that Sedi Mahomet's fury should extend it self even to her (as it
was very likely it would) was gone to hide her self in a secret place of the
Seraglio, from whence also she came not out, till she heard the noise they made
in going to the Bathe. At this noise she took a little heart, and by reason she
heard no sound of anger or complaint, concluded that all was at peace, and well
in the Seraglio. In this opinion therefore she crept by degrees into her
Mistresses Apartment, where being come, not any one said one syllable to her,
and yet she knew not what to think to see the door of the Cabinet open, where
she still concluded that Albirond must needs be, and out of that conceit fell
to searching up and down for him; which having done a pretty while to no
effect, she then went to enquire of her compunions for the Sultaness. Upon
enquiry she found all things as well as heart could wish, and she was only in
pain for the unfortunate Albirond, whom she could not imagine what should be
become of, which made her again rumble up and down the Cabinet; to see if she
could not find him hid in some corner of the room. To this purpose she lifted
up the Arras quite round the Cabinet, and in so doing past twice or thrice by
the door of the house of office, but not seeing the Key in it, she concluded he
could not be there. Nevertheless, a little recollecting her self, and
remembering that she had left it in the door that morning, she had I know not
what kind of Jealousy, that Albirond was infallibly hidden in that place. There
was now no body left in the Appartment, all the other Slaves being by this time
gone down after the Sultaness, and she had made the doors so sure that no body
could get in but by her admission; so that she rapt at the closet door with
great assurance, calling Albirond aloud by his name, who presently made answer
demanding of her if the coast was clear, and if he might come out in safety, to
which she having made answer that he might, that she was all alone, and there
was no cause of fear, she so far assured him that be a little recovered his
lost Spirits at the good news, and ventured to come out. Isabella could not at
his first appearance forbear laughing, to see him look so dejected, and so
pale, and in that merry pin asked him, how he had past away his time in that
house of* ease; Why, much worse (replied Albirond) than any one can imagine,
and than any one unless they had been in my place, can believe. But what did
you think (added the Slave) would have become of you, and what did you resolve
to have done, had you been discovered? I had not my wits so much about me
(replied Albirond) to consider what I had to do, and all that I can tell you
is, A very ingenuous confession.
that never any one did their business better than I have done in this house of
office; and will further confess to you that my fear had very like to have made
me scummer my self to death. Love (continued he) is apt to commit many follies,
but I think it was more than an ordinary folly to purchase two or three hours
satisfaction at such a price; for it would not only have cost me my life, but
moreover that of the Sultaness, which is a thousand times dearer to me than my
own. These reflections (said Isabella) always come too late, and when there is
no need of them. if Love had not its dangers, the pleasure would not have been
half so great. I have known as wise people as your self, who have run as great
a hazard as this of yours, and have not come off half so well as you have done.
Alas! and here a deep sigh made a Period to the beautiful Slaves oration, and
that sigh was also accompanied with some A perfect Woman, that laugh, and cry
in a moment.
tears, which with her handkerchief she endeavored to conceal. I very well
perceive said Albirond (who was soon aware of the shower) what this means, and
I have before now discovered in your countenance, that you are not a person to
be enslaved, had not some extraordinary misadventure contributed to the mishap;
which also you ought not to conceal from me, for you see that I am upon very
good terms with the Beglerbeg, and that I have some interest with the
Sultaness, with which advantages I fancy at least, I may be able to do you some
Service. Deny me not then an account of your fortunes, I am your friend, and
you ought not to distrust me, who repose so absolute a confidence in your
friendship and virtue; prepare your self therefore to give me this
satisfaction, that I may contrive some way to serve you, and if you think fit,
let it be with the first opportunity; for at present I conceive it very
necessary for me to retire; and having done enough at this bout to escape the
fright I have been in, and therefore let me take my leave of the Sultaness and
depart. The Slave then told him that her Mistress was with Sidi Mahomet in the
Bath, where she usually continued with him two or three hours, and that unless
he intended to spoil all, and to loose himself, he was not to think of retiring
by the same way that he came, by reason that the Beg's attendants were many of
them in the Garden, and therefore he must of necessity stay till he was gone.
Albirond therefore remained still in the Cabinet, but with much less
apprehension, then before, when the Slave had assured him, that it was Sidi
Mahomet's custom, so soon as ever* he came out of the Bath to return
immediately to the City. The opportunity then being so favorable wherein to
satisfy his curiosity in the History of the fair Isabella, he would by no
means loose it, but looking very intentively upon her, the more I look upon you
(said he) the more I discover in you the Qualities of an extraordinary person;
I shall not however desire to penetrate very far into your secrets, forasmuch
as that may perhaps be troublesome if not offensive to you, I shall therefore
only desire to know so much of your life, as you have your self a mind to tell
me; but withal I cannot but declare that I have an extreme desire to oblige
you, and do assure you that you shall in me find the fidelity of a man whose
profession as well as ambition it has ever been to serve the beautiful sex, and
to be useful to the Commonwealth of Ladies. I see very well (replied the fair
Slave) that my tears have discovered to you, one part of my misfortune, and I
find my heart inclined to lay open its deepest wounds to your view, my eyes
have already told you too much for me to gainsay, and the esteem I have of your
person has so great an Empire over me, that though I were certain to perish by
my own confession, I could not nevertheless conceal any thing from you; perhaps
you had already heard the whole story of my unfortunate life, had I had
opportunity wherein to have made you the Relation, and seeing you have the
Complaisance to give ear to the complaints of a poor afflicted person, I will
not loose this of satisfying your curiosity in the particulars of a disasterous
fortune, wherein I will also disguise nothing of the truth: and if in the
conduct of my life you shall peradventure find any thing fit to condemn, yet
the franckness and ca^dor wherewith I intend to lay all things open to you,
will perhaps oblige you to pardon the follies of a heart subjected to Love.

The History of Donna Isabella de Penarocca, and Don Pedro de la Mera:
I Was born in the City of Valence in Spain, desoended from one of the noblest
Families of the Kingdom called Penarocca, and from Ancestors whose blood upon
several brave occasions has given testimony of their valor, and whose virtues
and merit have raised them to the principal Charges, and chiefest Commands in
Spain. My birth was happy enough. Nature having brought me into the world in
such a condition, and having been (if I may say so) too liberal both to my
person, and my mind for me reasonably to complain; and I was brought up under
the care of a Mother who was so passionately fond of me, that in leaving the
World, she had no other regret but only to part with me. Heaven (which it
appears had no intention to favor me long) began in her death to persecute me.
I was at the time when she died too young to lament her death to such a degree
as became the funeral of so excellent a Mother, and to be enough sensible of
the great loss I sustein'd; but time has since obtein'd that from my better
understanding which my innocence knew not how justly to pay to her obsequies: I
was left (together with one only brother) to consolate a Father, whom the sole
consideration and fear of making us unhappy, prevented in the resolution he had
taken to die, that he might not survive so sensible a separation. The passion
he had for his Wife was very manifest in the affection he ever bare to us; for
he would never marry again, though he was of such a vigorous age, as might
justly excuse it, but made it his whole concern to bring us up after such
manner as became children of our Quality. Our Family was very rich, and out of
regard to the portion. I had good reason to expect, there were a great many
Matches ready for me in Valence, even before I was of an age to be married. My
Father who was in no great have to marry me away, and whose only joy almost it
was to see me with him, would not so soon part with me, but suffered me at
liberty to enjoy those first years of You^h, which certainly are the sweetest
and most pleasant of ones whole life. I had at that time an Aunt who lived in a
very fair Countryhouse, two leagues only from the Town. She was a Widow, and
had no Children, and the Estate my Father expected she should leave him at her
decease, besides the affection of a Brother, obliged him to an extraordinary
complacency toward her. In this dear Aunt of mine I found almost the Love and
Fondness I had lost in a passionately affectionate Mother; she would have me
continually with her, so that whatever my Father could pretend in the necessity
of his affairs that required my presence in his own house, he was nevertheless
constrained to let me bear her company above the one half of the year. This
place also where I had more liberty than in the City, pleased me much more than
the other, and what with the pleasure of the Chase, and often going abroad, we
there past away our time in a more delightful leisure. We had there for the
most part very good company, but that which most delighted me was the pleasure
I took in enterteining my self sometimes alone in a little wood, that was not
above two hundred paces distant from the house. There it was that I used to
meditate under some overgrown Trees, the shades whereof were very proper to
nourish a little melancholic humor, to which I have all my life been a little
inclined.

One day that I adventured to walk a little further in this wood than I was
wont at other times to do, without other Company than a young Maid only that
attended on me, I was suddenly surpised with a noise of Horses, that
me-thought made directly toward me, and that by the carreer of their speed, I
judged would presently be upon me. I had curiosity enough to stay their coming
but withal a certain trouble that seized me to see my self thus alone, made me
resolve to return without seeing who they were. Nevertheless, I was diverted
from this resolution also by my Brothers voice, which I knew very well at
distance, though I could not understand what he said, and that gave me some
assurance, He was in company with Don Pedro de la Mera, and the Marquess de
Pignastella, both of them Gentlemen of the best quality of Valence, who
galloping full-drive toward me, cried out to me as loud as ever they could, to
look too my self; but I knew not of what I was to take heed, for I saw nothing,
and the very fear I was in made me incapable of any resolution. Don Pedro was
the first that came up, and very opportunely, to deliver me from the fury of a
wild Boar they had hunted from break of day in the morning, and that had it not
been for Don Pedro came to fall upon me, as if his only revenge had aimed at me
alone. This generous Cavalier seeing me in this manifest danger immediately
leaped from his Horse, clapped hand to his poignard, and with a brave resolution
expected the encounter of the furious Animal. He accordingly at his first
approach attacqu'd and wounded him; but the force of this Boar was so great,
that being after the wound more enraged than before, he put us all into extreme
fear of Don Pedro's life. He had buried his poignard all but the Guards in the
throat of this furious Beast, which he did not think fit to draw out again,
seeing him yet in so great a rage; he had also with his other hand seized his
neck; but for all that he was not Master of him, and he reasonably doubted to
come off with the worse in the end, which made him call out to my Brother and
the Marquess to shoot. My Brother who loved him infinitely well, and who was
afraid of making an unlucky shot, in killing the one instead of the other,
durst not adventure to fire his pistol upon the Beast, but bid the Marquess do
it, who accordingly did, though not so well nevertheless, but that in laying
the Boar dead upon the place, he also cruel^y wounded Don Pedro.

I beheld all this strange adventure with a trembling that I could not shake
off, nor persuade to leave me even after the Boar was dead. My Brother and the
Marquess both of them ran in to their friend to congratulate with him for his
deliverance, the joy whereof they could not however rightly relish in the grief
they had to see him yet remain so unfortunately hurt. It Is true, the wound of
it self was not very dangerous, but it might have proved so, had not the blood
been suddenly (...)ch'd, which (...)ssued out in very (...)bundanc^^ the (...)
of this it w(...) my handkerchief my (...) and whatever I had about m^ that was
proper for ligature, to (...)ice upon this occasion. In the mean time my Aunt,
who had heard something of his accident by the Maid that waited on me, and who
had run home again upon the first alarm, came with five or six of her servants,
who took up Don Pedro, and carried him to her house, where all the care was
taken of him, that a man of his quality could expect, and the service he had
done for me did justly deserve.

I was not much acquainted with this Cavalier, for I had never seen him but
once before with my brother, but the good Office he had so lately done me,
appeared to me so highly considerable, and the blood he had spilt only to
preserve mine, had touched my heart with so sensible a pity, that I conceived
the care of his cure principally belonged to me, and was as sensible of his
mischance, if not more than he was himself. He was handsome, had a great deal
of wit, and withal had so particular a grace in every thing he said or did,
that the least action of his was sufficient to make one love him. I was then
very young being not full sixteen, and the little conversation I had had with
Lovers made me so ignorant in those affairs, that I scarce knew what Love was.
The Marquess had been the first who had ever spoke to me of any such thing, he
indeed had pretended to me, who also being of a very illustrious Family, my
Father had not thought fit to forbid him. He therefore had spoke to me three or
four times to that purpose, which I had ever entertained and looked upon as the
discourses of a Man of wit, who spoke very well; and consequently without
taking any further notice of the liberty he took in declaring his passion, had
only laughed at that, whereat, had I understood my self, I ought to have been
offended, and gave him leave to say whatever he would upon that subject. His
affairs however were nothing the more advanced by those opportunities I gave
him to court me, and whether it were that he wanted a friend in my heart to
speak for him, or that he had not the art to gain it in his favor, his
Courtship made no manner of impression; but on the contrary I conceived such a
(I know not what) kind of animosity against him, from the time that he had hurt
Don Pedro, though he had done it out of a friendly design, that after that I
scarce ever saw him, but with a dislike, even to horror. I knew well enough
that he had wounded him with an intention to do him service, and that I had no
reason to think the more of him upon that account, yet could I not conquer my
aversion to him; I could have wished he had been more adroit and that he had
done what was impossible for him to do. To conclude, and to tell you the truth,
this wound was so fresh and bleeding in my heart, that I could not so soon
forgive him, what reason soever in my own sense he might have on his side to
plead in his behalf.

This injustice of mine toward the Marquess had perhaps no other foundation,
than the too tender sentiments I had entertained in favor of Don Pedro, whom I
was eternally commending for his generosity and courage, was continually and
openly declaring that I stood obliged to him for my life, and was evermore
keeping a great clutter and taking visibly upon me the care to see him well
looked unto, and carefully served. My Aunt and my Brother attributed this
diligence and passion of mine to no other cause, but only to the gratitude and
acknowledgment the signal service he had done me obliged me to, but the
Marquess, (whom Love had made much clearer sighted, and who interpreted the
care I took of Don Pedro like a jealous Lover,) penetrated deeper into the
truth of what began to spring in my bosom, and consequently from that time
forward began to conceive a Mortal and implacable hatred against his friend.
His jealousy soon discovered it self, and he was not long before he gave me
infallible testimonies of it, of which the first occasion he took was, when one
day he heard me enquire of Don Pedro's Valet de Chamber how his Master did. You
concern your self so very much (said he) for this sick man, that I think if he
quickly recover he will stand obliged to you for the best part of his cure. I
could be glad (replied I) that he should be obliged to me for it all, and yet I
should think I had not made a sufficient return for the Life Iowe to his
Valor. Could every one (said he) who would willingly expose themselves for
you, assure themselves of such an acknowledgment, they would be too happy. I
know not (answered I) who those are that would run the same hazard; but I have
seen Don Pedro do it, and that is enough. At these last words I would have gone
away to disingage my self from further parley with him, but he followed me
continuing to say after this manner to me; it is in truth ( Madam) a very
inconsiderable service once only to expose a man's life for you; there are who
every day die before your eyes, without the least reward of compassion from you,
and without your being in the least concerned for them. To this I would return
no answer, either because I did not on the sudden understand his meaning, or
rather (if you will have it so) because I had no mind to understand him, that I
might put an end to a discourse that was by no means pleasing to me; where my
Brother came in very opportunely to my relief, and delivered me from my
importunate Gallant, by taking him along to go see the fishing, for those great
fishes they call Gurnards.

This fishing was to be performed close by the Sea shore, not above a quarter
of a League distant from the house, so that my Aunt had also the curiosity to
go see it, whom I found ready to take Coach, and who would also take me along
with her, to be of the party. I doubt not Albirond but you have heard of this
fishing, the season whereof is every year in August and September, and make no
question but you very well know the greatness and the strength of this sort of
fish. It Is a sport of great entertainment, and very well worth the seeing; but
our Cavalier having told her that he had seen it, and that it was also in use
in his Country, Isabella past over the description. The Fishermen (continued
she) were ready, and only stayed our coming to give us the diversion; when
seeing us come they began to fall to their business to put themselves in order,
and to handle their Tridents, a sort of weapon they make use of against these
Fish. Our Cavaliers would also have a hand in the business, and would have
their share of the labor, as well as of the sport, and to that end mixed
themselves with the Fishermen, where they signalized their force and dexterity
against these overgrown Fishes. Of these there was a prodigious number, and of
a most prodigious greatness, the least of them being as big as a man, and the
manner wherewith they disingaged themselves from the hands of the Fishers, and
the resistance they made with their tails, had something of astonishing in it.
My Aunt and I were in a little boat by our selves, without the nets, to behold
the pleasure of the combat; but our pleasure was of very short continuance and
paid with a very great hazard we run of being both drowned. The nets were, it
should seem, old, and had been long used; and the number of the Fishes were so
great, that having met with a part of the net that was more rotten than the
rest, or perhaps already broken, twenty or thirty of them rusht through
together with so great swiftness and fury, that meeting our boat in the way
they presently overturned it, plunging my Aunt and me into three or four Fadom
depth of Water. The Marquess was the nearest to us, and first aware of our
disaster. There was no time to loose; he could swim very well, and therefore
threw himself into the water with so seasonable a promptness to my relief, that
he arrived at me just as I rose again from the bottom, from whence my clothes
had bore me up, where supporting me with one hand, and swimming with the other,
he presently brought me ashore, which also was not far from us. Two Fishermen
that were nimbler, or quicker at least than my brother, did the same service
for my Aunt, who suffered a little more by the accident than I had done, I
having been sooner relieved, and yet the fright which had wholly possessed my
Spirits, had reduced me to such a condition, that I lay for dead. They then
helped us to disgorge the water we had drunk in, by which we were something
relieved; but the weakness wherein I found my self was such, that I yet showed
very small sign of life. The Grief the Marquess was in to see me in this
condition is not to be expressed, but it was very visible in his face, and the
tears which he could not refrain were a speaking proof of the passion he had
for me.

So soon as I came a little to my self, I inquired news of my Aunt, and was not
a little surpised to find my self in the Marquess his arms, and yet more to
see his face all covered over with tears. I must confess, that in this posture,
he was an object to have touched the most obdurate person in the world with
compassion, and this tenderness of his spoke so highly in his favor, that it
had been to have had no heart not to have been a little sensible for him. He at
least merited my esteem; but to what use serves merit, when a man is destined
to be unhappy; for although every thing pleaded in his behalf, my heart
returned no answer, and was wholly possessed with the Love of another, so that my
understanding only paid him the acknowledgment due to his passion; and Don
Pedro was Master of all the rest.

In the mean time they put us into the Coach, in the pickle we were taken out
of the Sea, and presently brought us home, where we found all things necessary
to relieve us, and to bring us again to our selves. In this case fear was our
greatest evil, for we had received no harm from the Fish; and my Aunt who was
of a less delicate nature than I, in three or four days left her bed, and I
thought the time exceeding long, and my weakness was furiously afflicting to
me, in that it would not permit me to continue my little services to Don Pedro,
who now began to quit his Bed, and to walk up and down his Chamber. He faild
not immediately upon the disaster had befaln me, to send his Valet de Chamber
to complement me upon the occasion, by whom I returned this answer, go tell thy
Master (said I) that the greatest inconvenience I find in my sickness, is, that
it deprives me of the pleasure I had in contributing something to his cure.

Although Don Pedro had never seen me but that one time I spoke of before, when
my Brother brought him into the House, he had however at that very moment been
touched with the most tender sentiments it was possible to have for any person
with whom one is the most passionately in love. He had found ou(...) I know not
what kind of charms that engage people to love at first sight, without any
great reason why, and his passion was daily augmented by the difficulties he
found of obtaining means and opportunity to declare his affection to me.
Neither could he think of any way so likely, and so fair by which to obtein his
desire, as by contracting a strict friendship with my Brother, which also
without any great difficulty he brought to pass. He likewise fancied he had
given no ill beginning to his design in the service he had done me in exposing
his life against the surious Boar; but when he heard of the Marquis's good
fortune, and the new obligation I had to him for a second life also, his
jealousy faild but very little of throwing him into such a despair, as with his
own hands to tear open his wound, and wilfully to destroy himself. He knew very
well what a passion the Marquess had for me, that my Father approved of it, and
made no question but that this last adventure would totally gain me to him; the
thought whereof afflicted him in such sort, that whatever obliging messages I
had sent him by his servant, he perverted them wholly to his own disadvantage;
and poisoned himself with that which ought in reason to have been his cure. He
repeated from time to time the words had been brought him from me, and from
thence formed a fatal sentence against himself: Go (said the poor afflicted
Cavalier) and tell thy Master, that the greatest inconvenience I find in my own
indisposition, is, that this accident deprives me of the pleasure I took in
contributing something to his cure. Is not this (continued he) to give me
plainly enough to understand, that my Rivals last service has obliterated all
the obligation she could have to that she received from me, and that she cannot
without injustice do any thing in my favor? Yes, I confess it (charming
Isabella) he has performed more for you, than I could do, he has rescued you
from the merciless waves wherein you were about to perish, and in so doing
exposed his own life to manifest ruin: Yet (said he again presently after) did
not I also rescue you from as great a danger of death, and did not I also
venture my life more adventurously than he, and does that merit nothing? Have I
only escaped the Tushes of that enraged Beast, to dye by you? Ah how much more
happy had my fate been, in putting an end to my days to prolong yours, than
thus to wear it away in this miserable manner, without any hope ever to
approach the delight of my eyes, and my only bliss!

After this manner it was that Don Pedro afflicted himself in the best estate
of his most prosperous fortune; and to this degree of unhappiness was he
reduced, by being ignorant of his happiness, whilst the Marquess past away his
time much better than he; his Love flattered his hope, and after so great a
service as he had lately done me, in redeeming me from the Sea, he made no
question but that a generous heart, as mine was, must of necessity surrender it
self up to his passion. But what share could I give him in my heart, if the
destinies had already so favored Don Pedro, that it was no more my own? would
he have had me; or could he in reason expect, that seeing there was some
tenderness due to an action that had delivered me from death, I should be less
grateful to his Rival than to him, who had performed the same service for me,
and that with an equal, if not a greater hazard of his own life? perhaps he
imagined that there was only an acknowledgment due to the other, but alas!
there is little room for a bare acknowledgment in love; and we little insist
upon such poor returns, when we are once possessed with such sentiments as those
in the behalf of any person, our hearts then going altogether one way, and
there can be no rivality in hearts, though there is in pretenders.

I now began to rise from my bed, and was well enough to endure the Visits of
my friends; my brother therefore came bringing the two Cavaliers along with him
to see me, and in entering into my Chamber, I have brought here (Sister said he)
two of my best friends to give you a visit, to both of which you in a very
little space become indebted for your life, for the one has rescued you from
the fury of a Boar, and the other preserved you from the deep; so that after
what manner soever you shall consider these two generous actions, I doubt it
will puzzle you to determine to which of the two you think your self the most
obliged, and which way to recompense their services without rendering the one
jealous of the other, and dissatisfied with you. I was surpised to see them
both come in together, which made me blush, and put me into some disorder, of
which the Rival Cavaliers, who immediately took notice of it, made a various
interpretation. Don Pedro concluding it to proceed from the trouble of seeing
him there, and that served to confirm him in his former opinion: but the
Marquess more happy in his Ideas than he, took it quite after another Biais,
and turned it to his own advantage. In the mean time my heart was possessed with
thoughts quite coutrary to theirs; for it is true that I was a little out of
countenance to see in the person of the Marquess a man to whom I stood obliged
for my life, and whom I could find in my heart to recompense with no more, but
only a bare esteem, whilst my heart was wholly given up to Don Pedro. Could my
Brother have penetrated into my bosom, he might there have seen the effects of
my injustice, but withal of a necessary injustice proceeding only from this,
that having been too generous in favor of the first, I had no more left me but
a will only to consolate the other. I was a little perplexed with the question
he put to me, and Don Pedro very seasonably prevented me, to give me time to
think of an answer. I conceive (said he looking upon me) that we are both of us
sufficiently rewarded in the glory of these two adventures. Cavaliers make a
profession of serving fair Ladies, without pretending to other recompense, than
that of having served them. I know (said I) what esteem I ought to have both of
one, and the other; I acknowledge their merits to be equal, and know very well
what so considerable a service as that for which I stand obliged to either of
them, may reasonably exact from me: but you Brother (said I) who have so great
an interest in my life, will your self I hope acquit me of these obligations,
for I must ingenuously confess I find my self perplexed how to do it. Every one
pays their own debts Sister (answered my Brother laughing) and I shall not
engage my self for you to Creditors that perhaps I should not be able to
satisfy. If either of us (said the Marquess then) can pretend to any thing
more than the honor of having done you service, it is Don Pedro without doubt,
who has lost some of his blood to preserve yours, whereas it has cost me no
more but only the shifting of my Clothes. If either of our actions (replied Don
Pedro to him) be considerable, it is rather yours, wherein you exposed your self
more, than I did; who only lost my blood because I wanted dexterity to kill the
Boar. Sister (said my Brother) if we will believe these Gentlemen, it will be
no very hard matter to disingage you from your obligation; but I would
nevertheless hear you with your own mouth determine to which of them you think
your self the most obliged. I have already told you Brother (said I) how hard a
thing it would be for me to do it, I shall therefore rely upon your better
judgment, without engaging my self in a determination, that would infallibly
make me pass for an ungrateful person in the opinion of one of these two
Cavaliers. Upon this my Aunt came into the room, and we fell upon other
discourse; and, to tell you the truth, she came in very good season for me, who
was in great fear I should not very well disingage my self from a discourse,
wherein I saw I was too much pressed by my Brother. At last he went out, and my
two Lovers with him, each of them possessed with the same opinion that before,
saving that Don Pedro felt himself a little relieved from his former trouble,
and began to conceive a little hope from certain kind glaunces I had cast upon
him, and that might have made him promise to himself all he could have desired,
had he not been prepossest with such a jealousy as blinded his understanding.
However he observed enough to inform him that he ought to despair of nothing,
till he should first see further into the affair, upon laying open his heart
unto me; an opportunity that he longed for, and panted after with the greatest
impatience, and that he took hold of after this manner.

One night that they were all three in my Chamber, and that my Brother was set
to Cards with the Marquess, Don Pedro, and I, one on the one side of the Table,
and the other on the other to see them play, and sometimes talking to one
another of several things. I perceived the trouble he had in his heart, by what
I discovered in his face, and his eyes diseourst unto me quite another thing,
than what came from his mouth. A certain pleasure that I took in looking upon
him, by degrees dispersed all those clouds in his countenance, and I observed
that his sadness cleared up, as those innocent favors he received from my eyes
encreast upon him. He therefore took a little heart, and in truth it was high
time for him to declare himself, for he was to go away the next morning to
return to Valence. He could not approach so near me, as to whisper in my ear a
secret of so great importance as that of his Love; the Laws of civility, and
fair fashion not permitting such liberties in our grave and severe Country;
neither could he aloud open his bosom to me, in the presence of two of the most
dangerous witnesses he had to fear. He was therefore fain to make use of this
device, by which you will see what shift Love can make, and how ingenuous and
inventive it is in contriving how to declare and make it self known. He took
some Cards that were thrown out of the Game, and held them over the Candle till
they were all over black'd with the flame, which he did with so indifferent an
air, and without discontinuing his discourse, as though he had done it without
any manner of design. After which with the corner of another Card, he writ upon
one of those he had smutted for the purpose, some verses, which I think I yet
remember, and they were these.

Pressed with an amorous ecstasy,
Ought I to speak or hold my breath?
If I speak not, alas, I dye;
And if I speak, my saucy tongue
For offering to my fair that wrong,
Can nothing hope thereby but death.
After he had filled that Card, he past it over very dexterously to my side of
the Table, which whilst I was reading he took another upon which he continued
to write after this manner.

No, on this choice I stick too long,
Respect to her will tie my tongue;
She shall interpret, she, and she alone
Of the excess of my true flame,
And my death one day shall proclaim,
So great, and so discreet a passion.
He did by this as he had done by the other, and conveyed it to me to read,
without either my Brother, or the Marquess, (who were intent upon their play)
taking notice of us at all; after which I received a third also, no less
gallant than the other two; and of which as I remember these were the words:

The Paleness of my face, which with such art
Such speaking lines has painted out my flame,
Is Speech too eloquent not to proclaim
The power a fair one has over my heart:
And that no one can Amarillis see,
So fair and bright, but must her Martyr be.
I looked upon him twice or thrice in reading these papers, with an air,
sufficient to give him to understand in my eyes more than he could reasonably
have desired of me; but he was in such fear there to meet with the sentence of
his death, that he durst hardly lift up his to look upon me, but kept himself
in such a posture as would have moved my compassion, had I had no inclination
to love him. By this time I conceived he had said enough to me to deserve an
answer, and in that thought took one of the Cards also; after having defaced
the Characters of those he had writ upon it, and set my self to framing an
answer, by so much the more obliging, by how much I had no mind to suffer him
longer to languish, but to assure him of my heart. You see how easy a thing it
is for Love to triumph over a young heart, that has never been acquainted with
him. I here made a duty of a favor, that I ought not to have granted till after
the extremest violence of assault, and yielded him a confession by way of
advance, that ought to have been forced, and extracted from me with the
greatest power of importunity and prayer. I gave all the liberty to my sighs
they would themselves desire, under the shadow of a genorosity of mind,
believing the effects of my tenderness toward him, to be the effects of a
grateful heart. After this manner Love did his business so well, that he had
already instructed me how to answer a declaration of Love; and I found no great
difficulty in expressing my self upon this subject, but I was not so adroit as
he in conveying the Card over the Table. The Marquess who had his eye almost
continually upon me, and who had seen me write surpised me in the manner, and
so, that he had s^ateh'd it out of my hands, had I not been very nimble to
prevent him. This insolent action of his, and the vexation I was in to have
succeeded so ill in my design, put me to the blush, and were the occasion that
I spoke a little angerly to him. This is very bold (said I) to offer to snatch
a thing from me, that you have nothing to do withal, and that was not intended
for you. It is true (answered he) that it was intended for Don Pedro, but he
and I are so good friends, that I thought I might partake with him in a favor
that came from you. At this Don Pedro who had made a show of taking no notice
at all of what had past, was ready to break into fury, rage presently mounted
into his eyes, and he was just upon the point to have discharged his anger, but
I immediately appeased him with such a look, as gave him to understand, he
would oblige me in letting matters alone, and proceeding no further. I would
not so much my self as return the Marquess any answer, for fear of pushing
things on too far, which were in a better posture as they were, than if I had
made him never so good a Repartie. They then continued their play, and Don
Pedro who had exercised an extreme violence over himself in restraining his
passion, was constrained to make some pretense to go out of the room, that he
might unload his heart of the rage where with it was overcharged and oppressed.
It was not long before he returned again a little better composed, and at his
coming made me to understand, that he should be very glad of an answer from me:
but I had no mind to recommence a sport, wherein I had at the first assay faild
to succeed. The obliging manner wherewith I spoke to him, had been sufficient
of it self to give him comfort, had not his evil been extreme: but besides that
one is never enough assured of what they do with the greatest passion desire,
he moreover fancied the Marquess to be a very dangerous Rival.

His jealousy was very much augmented by a little squabble that happened betwixt
them the same night, and of which one of my gloves was the occasion. I fell, I
know not upon what foregoing discourse, to speaking at the Gloves that were
made at Valence, which I said, I thought were as good as those of Madrid, of
which that Don Pedro might better judge, I pulled off one of those I had on
which were of Valence, and gave it to him to smell unto, who kissed it two or
three times after a very amorous fashion, and afterward restored it to me
again, which as I was about again to draw on, the Marquess who had a mind to
have the same honor, entreated me to let him see it. To tell you the truth, I
was very glad of this opportunity, as well to revenge my self upon him, as also
to show Don Pedro a favor, which made me deny him in these words, that I spoke
something after a disdainful manner. It is not amiss Marquess (said I) a little
to punish you for your boldness to teach you to be more discreet another time;
but he from whom this preferrence had taken away all manner of reason and
discretion, stepped suddenly up to me, and without any kind of respect, at one
rude twitch s^atcht it out of my hand. This violence did very much surprise me,
and I was so highly offended at it, that durst I have discovered my indignation
before my Brother, I had doubtless past the bounds of a Virgin modesty: but Don
Pedro who had a particular reason, as you shall presently hear, that this glove
should not fall wholly into the Marquis's hands, did not in this sudden
surprise, neglect the care to rescue it out of his possession, but leaping upon
him, seiy'd upon one half of the Glove, and would never let go his hold; but as
they were tugging who should get it clear from the other, growing in heat with
the Marquis's opposition, who held as fast as he, he told him softly in his
ear, that it should cost him his life if he did not let it go: but that was no
good argument to the Marquess to persuade him, who more than ever stung with
jealousy and honor, strove with all the force he had to make himself wholly
Master of the Glove; answering Don Pedro with great vehemence, (but likewise in
his ear,) that it should cost him his life, if he longer persisted to oppose
his design.

^. My Brother, who as yet knew nothing of Don Pedro's passion, took a delight
in seeing them scuffle, and thereupon fell to railling the Marquess; but the
dispute proceeding at last too far to make any longer a jest of it, he began
to apprehend that they might in the end grow into extremes; wherefore being
very well acquainted with the Marquess his fierceness and Don Pedro's spirit,
without letting them grow to greater heat, stepping betwixt them, he entreated
them to forbear further contest, and to deliver the Glove to him. To this they
both consented, having both of them too great a respect for my Brother not to
acquiesce in his desire, and besides it was not the interest either of the one
or the other in their pretenses to me, to be upon ill terms with him. After
this manner then my Glove was restored back to me, but in a very ill plight;
they gave over their play, and the two Rivals parted, as we thought, very fair.
My Brother who observed them to be yet both of them very much incenst, did not
however make them embrace upon the instant, not thinking what had past betwixt
them to be of such importance that it ought to have been any more remembered
having slept upon it, especially by two persons betwixt whom he thought there
was so great a friendship, as was not to be broken by so small a difference, so
that they retired each of them to his own apartment, and left me at liberty to
go to Bed. Being left to my self, the first thing I did was to put my glove
into a better form, for it was betwixt my two Gallants strained out of all
manner of shape, when putting my hand into it to that purpose, I was a little
surpised to find a paper folded up like a letter: I opened it, and at the
bottom saw Don Pedro's name subscribed, and then presently understood the
reason he had to make such a bustle about the Glove to retrive it out of the
Marquis's hands, and then also perceived he had taken opportunity to write it
at the time he had withdrawn into his Chamber: but could not imagine with what
legerdemain he had conveyed it into my Glove; for though my eye had never been
off him whilst he had had it in his hand, I perceived nothing at all of the
conveyance. I was then impatient to know the Contents, and I will communicate
them to you, for I have ever carried all his Letters about me wherever I went.
In saying which Isabella took a little Casket she had in the very same Cabinet
where they were, from which drawing out several papers, and having tumbled some
time amongst them for the right one, she in the end found out this, which
opening she delivered to Albirond to read, who there found these words.

HAd I not (Madam) been withheld by the fear of offending you, the Marquess had
been punished upon the place for his insolence, and nothing but the absolute
power you have over me, could have hindered me from taking a prompt revenge.
Judge then, I beseech you, how great that power is, and how great the Passion I
have for you must be, by the vioolence I have prastised upon my self in this
occasion. I should never have dared to have spoke so freely to you, were it not
now high time to do it, I having this night only left me wherein to be rosolv'd
whether I must live or die. The Cards you read may perhaps have enform'd you of
the straight I am in; but I know not what I am to hope for from the answer you
then made me; and yet I shall not look upon it in the nature of an obligation I
have to the Marquess that he prevented me from seeing the sentence of my
mishap. For however I stand in your favor and esteem, it is a shorter way, and
much more welcome to die, than to live in the suspense wherein I now am, how
you approve of the most humble Protestations I here make you of a most profound
respect, and of a passion that is never to end but with my life.

Don Pedro.


After Albirond had read this Ticket, he returned it back to the fair Slave,
who after this manner continued his story.

I know not what effect this Letter might have wrought in another, but as for
me I must confess that being already a little prepossest in Don Pedro's favor,
I found my self strangely moov'd with it. Me-thought there was so much
discretion and respect in the manner of his adress, and so much passion in his
Letter, that I conceived I ought at least to have a very tender esteem for his
merit only, and that I could not deny the sentiments of a very kind friendship
at least to so great and so respective a passion. What cannot a Lover persuade
when he is acceptable to the person he pretends to? How easily does a heart
incline to love, when ones reason is once disordered? and with how great
facility do we find out fair pretenses to deceive our selves when we once
entertain a passion, and give our selves leave to love? Nevertherless I will
not here confess to you all my weaknesses, nor give you an account of all the
follies I was guilty of. I shall content my self therefore with only telling
you, that this Ticket mollified all the indignation I had this night conceived
at the Marquis's extravagancies and huffing carriage, and that I could not
permit any animosity in my Soul to co-habit with the joy and tenderness this
little Love letter had possessed me withal. So that I did not only excuse the
Marquess, but moreover entirely forgave him; and all this out of the sole
reason I had to be satisfied with my self, after being certainly assured of Don
Pedro's affection. I past over the whole night, caressing in my mind this new
and dear lover. I made him speak after my own fancy, and say a thousand little
things that the best could please me, which was in effect my self to labor to
make him absolute Master of a heart in which he thought he had as yet made no
impression. Yet how fixed soever I was upon this pleasing object, to tell you
the truth, the Idea of the Marquess did often confound the delight I took in
it, with the apprehension I had of appearing an ungrateful person. He had
performed so great a service for me, and the obligation I had to him for my
life obliged me to have some compassion on him. I had no mind to be accused of
a vice, which of all others my heart had ever the most abhorred: and yet I knew
not how to acquit my self toward him as I ought. I could not of my self afford
him any thing more than the bare sentiments of a real esteem, with which I was
very sure he would never be satisfied, if there should not be something more in
the case, and more I had not left to dispose of, and in the mean time the
credit he had with my Father, favored him on the other side. I knew very well
that he would ever be better received than Don Pedro, because he was heir to a
better fortune than he, though he was not of a more illustrious Family and that
his offer would sooner be accepted than that of the other, should he demand me
in Marriage. All these reflections did not a little perplex me, I saw how many
difficulties were in the way of my inclination, and that I could never hope to
be Don Pedro's Wife, so long as the Marquess should pretend to me. I therefore
resolved with my self to make an attempt upon his Spirit by freely confessing
to him part of the inclination I had for his Rival, and to try by the
principles of generosity to reduce him to reason, to obtein from him, that he
would not make use of my fathers authority and good disposition toward him to
obtein the conquest of a heart, of which another had already the possession.
But in truth he was too far gone in Love for me to hope for any compliance from
him in so delicate a point as that, and to expect he should desist from loving
me, out of love to my self. He was wounded to the Soul with the severity I had
practiced upon him, and the affront he had received in the presence of an
insupportable and triumphant Rival, had put him quite besides himself. Madness,
if fury be madness, seized upon him that very night, and to such a degree, that
he could not sleep one wink, and would a thousand times have plunged his
Steeletto into his own bosom, had not he had a design to have stabbed it into
that of his Rival. It was enough he had whispered to him in his ear, that it
should cost him his life, and he longed for nothing so much as the break of day
to determine the controversy betwixt them; a resolution that made him pass over
the night with some kind of pleasure, if a man can be capable of pleasure in
such a condition as he was in.

My Brother, who lay in the next Chamber to him, hearing part of the noise he
made in rising, and walking up and down all night, and the complaints he
sometimes uttered, knew not what to think of it, and would therefore himself go
see what the matter was, and whether or no he might not perhaps be ill. The
Marquess seeing him come into the room was extremely troubled, that the effects
of his ill humor had disturbed my Brother, and asked his pardon, telling him,
that in truth, he found himself not very well, but that it would signify
nothing, if he could but get a little rest. Upon which my Brother left him,
giving charge to the Servants to make no noise on that side of the House, but
that they should let him sleep all the morning. If melancholy and trouble of
mind do sometimes keep one from sleeping; they do yet sometimes also oppress
one with sleep, especially when the mind is agitated to such a degree as is
insupportable in it self; which was the reason that this sorrowful Lover, began
to sleep at the very time that he had determined to rise, and my Brother who
did believe him to be there really sick, went to Don Pedro to acquaint him with
it, and to deferr their departure till the next day. The morning was very fair,
and not knowing how to pass away the time they agreed to go Hauk at Partridg,
and to come home to dinner, and so they accordingly did.

In the anxiety of mind wherein the Marquess at that time was, his sleep it is
to be supposed could not be very long, so that he awaked very presently after
with a sudden start, but a little too late for his design; for his people told
him, that my Brother and Don Pedro were gone out a Hawking. It is not to be
imagined how infinitely he was troubled at this disappointment; he hated
himself for yielding to sleep at such a time as this, and on the instant fell
upon a hundred resolutions, which all ended at last in this, that he would take
this opportunity to see, and to talk with me, whilst there was no Body in the
House, to interrupt him. He would take hold of this occasion to make me declare
the choice I intended to make, that he might be certain of my intentions, and
be satisfied from my own mouth, if the ardor of his flame had not had the power
to move me in his favor. In this resolution he walked a great while up and down
his Chamber, to meditate after what manner he should break the business to me,
and after all, what he was to hope for; wherein his mind was agitated with
various thoughts, but amongst them all with very few that administered to him
any consolation at all. Every thing oppressed him, and he durst promise to
himself nothing of good, insomuch that he even prepared himself to be angry,
and meditated fit reproaches for my ingratitude.

The hour was come that he thought I might be up, and ready; he therefore asked
leave to see me and I saw him enter my Chamber with such a trouble in his
countenance, as at once begat my pity and my fear. He was totally in disorder,
and knew not which way to begin what he had meditated to say unto me; he pulled
off his gloves, and presently put them on again, and all without speaking a
word, and with so pleasant a countenance, that in earnest one had need of so
great an esteem as I had for him, to forbear laughing in his face. At last
seeing I assisted him not in beginning the discourse, he broke out almost
trembling after this manner. If ( Madam) in the sad condition to which I am
reduced by your disdain, I may yet be permitted to hope to be heard -- pray
give me leave (said I hastily interrupting him) first to explain my self to
you, before I hear what you have to say. I cannot deny you the privilege you
have of speaking to me, but take notice withal, that it would be a little
dangerous to you, not to use that liberty as you ought. I know very well that
you are netled to the quick; I perceive also that you think you have reason to
be so, and in this belief of yours, you may not perhaps have command enough
over your passion to forbear such expressions, as might injure, and justly
offend me. I am a little delicate in this point, and of such a condition as
cannot suffer without doing wrong to my quality, that any one should presume to
quarrel me upon any subject whatever, and there is, a certain distance to be
observed to such women as I am, that people sometimes repent they have
transgrest. The attention wherewith I observed the Marquess to give ear to my
discourse, though he durst scarce lift his eyes up toward me, was the occasion
that I framed my self to use him a little more kindly, than I intended to have
done had he carried himself after a less respective fashion to me at first;
which made me proceed to speak to him after this manner. I have not been so
little conversant in the World; nor am so ill read in it, not to know that you
are a Cavalier of very great merit; neither have I a soul so ingrate as not to
acknowledge that you have done me a very high and signal service, and at the
same time to confess that I stand indebted to you for my life; and if I was a
little more Mistress of my self than I am, I know after what manner I should
acquit my self of that obligation, and what I should grant to your passion,
over and above the esteem, that it is impossible for any one to deny you. But
Marquess, it is no more in my own power to dispose of my self, and to deal
sincerely and truly with you, the great service you did me came a little too
late for you. The same reasons I may justly have to favor you with my
inclination, I have also had to favor another, who (as you have done) did also
rescue me from the Jaws of death: Yet do I not so far wrong you in my opinion
as to think that Don Pedro has more merit, or that in particular he deserves
better from me than you do; but he has better fortune, and that which two
generous actions* which either of you have performed in my behalf, may each of
them reasonably challenge from me, his alone did first clearly carry, and I
remain in an absolute necessity of being an ingrate to you. I might have
concealed this from you; but I will be generous to the last degree toward a
man who has done so much for me, and indeed I should condemn my self for
unjust, should I not disabuse you, and not franckly confess unto you, that I
have nothing left wherewith to pay the obligation I have to your merit and
affection. Yet do not take this unkindly from me, but rather quarrel your own
evil fortune, and content your self with the regret I have, that it is not in
my power to make you a better return. If you are a man of reason, as I take you
to be, you will not ask that of me which it is impossible for me to grant; but
on the contrary will make a generous effort to overcome a passion, that some
other woman shall better deserve, and better acknowledge than I can do. I saw
Don Pedro interpose his person betwixt me, and the fury of a chaft and enraged
Boar, and expose his own life to save mine. I saw him covered over with the
blood of a wound given him by you, and which also pierced the very bottom of my
heart. Lay the blame then upon that unlucky shot of yours that has so much
contributed to your misfortune, and pity me in that having one life only I must
owe it to two persons at once, and that hereafter I cannot live without
appearing at one and the same time too generous and too ingrate. So then Madam
(said the Marquess with the countenance of a man condemned to die) I have
nothing to pretend to. You have done too much for me (answered I suddenly) to
obtein nothing from me, I confess it, and that I may not pass in your opinion
for an ungrateful woman I do promise you -- at which word Don Pedro, and my
Brother By'r Lady in very good time,
entered my Chamber; and the Marquess who would not for that loose the
opportunity of knowing upon the place how far his pretenses might go, and what
he was to hope for, well Madam (said he softly (after I had saluted our
Hawkers) what do you promise me? Alas said I (with as
a profound sigh, that I could neither wholly stifle nor in part disguise) I
doubt appears by this answer.
what can I promise you in the presence of Don Pedro? an answer with which the
poor Marquess was so suddenly and so deeply struck, that he had not been able
to any tolerable degree to have concealed the marks of his discontent* had not
the sight of his Rival rowz'd up his Spirits with the incitements of revenge;
and yet there remained such a disorder in his countenance, as sufficiently
denoted there was something extraordinary laboring in his mind. My Brother was
not nevertheless any thing at all surpised to see this alteration in his face,
imagining it to be nothing but the effect of an ill nights rest^i which made
him form his first complement to the enquiring after his health; but in the
disorder wherein the Marquess was, he only answered him by halves, and after
that manner went out of the room. He was immediately followed by my Brother,
who thinking his last nights distemper had again suddenly seized him, would go
offer him his service, and see what he might stand in need of.

By this means Don Pedro was left with me all alone, and a fit opportunity it
was, no body being by, wherein to declare his mind, neither perhaps could he in
his whole life ever again expect so fair an occasion; nevertheless as if we had
been afraid to deliver to one another what we had both of us so great a mind to
say, we both remained confounded and dumb. I confess I should have had more
confidence to have spoken to him, had we been at less liberty to do it; I
dreaded that liberty, but I was more afraid of my self least I should play the
fool in being too open to him, and let him see further into my heart than he
ought to do. On the other side he also who might be in suspense after what
manner I had received his Letter, did eternally apprehend; every moment to hear
a sentence pronounced, which he should know but too soon, if it were other than
favorable to him. Nevertheless during these strange revolutions in our minds,
our eyes by a mutual consent by little and little re-assur'd us, and he saw
nothing in mine that was of any dangerous portent. Yet did he not well know how
to trust to this favorable appearance, but creating courage out of the force
of Love, after he had sometime looked upon me, I know not ( Madam said he) what
your silence may intend after what I have adventured to do, that is after the
Letter I presumed to write to you, and that doubtless you found in your Glove.
If that liberty I made bold to take, carry any thing in it that may displease
you, and if the greatest and the most respective passion that ever man had,
deserve your indignation, for Heavens sake let it break upon me. Revenge your
self upon a rash and inconsiderate person whom Love has made to forget his
duty, and that too unruly an ambition has seduced into that offense. It is I do
assure you, high time to do it; for if you leave me longer in the miserable
suspense wherein I now am, you will find that my death will deprive you of the
satisfaction of having your self punished my insolence. He there made a little
stop to see if I would return him any answer; but seeing no signs that I was
about to do it, Ah Madam (continued he) since you are not pleased to speak to
me, I see very well, that I have attempted too far, and that I am my self to
revenge you of -- No, no Don Pedro (said I interrupting him) I should not be
silent if you had any way displeased me, which I had no sooner spoken, but that
he threw himself at my feet with tears of joy, transported to such a vibsile
degree, as I do assure you gave me very great content. My Princess, My Queen,
(said he) you have in three or four words made me the happiest person upon
Earth. I would by no means suffer him to continue longer in this posture, and
it was well I did not, for my Brother came in upon the instant to tell us; that
dinner was upon the Table. I therefore gave my hand to Don Pedro, who all that
day after was so well satisfied with himself, that one might see joy sparkle in
his eyes; but the Marquess was of a quite contrary humor, and all the time he
sat at dinner behaved himself like one that was really sick. He eat very
little, and was so infinitely abated with his passion, that one might see in
his face a notable alteration. My Brother did not well know what to think of
it, for he observed in him a greater melancholy than could naturally accompany
an ordinary distemper, and therefore tried in my eyes to learn if I did not
know the true cause of his disease. I, for my part, was more civil to him, than
I used to be at other times, and I should have yet been more, and have given
him more testimonies of favor and friendship had I not feared there by to have
discomposed Don Pedro, so tender we are of offending those we love.

My Brother then made a motion to them to go visit a Lady of his acquaintance
hard by, whom he had promised to see before he returned to Valence, which Don
Pedro readily consented to, but the Marquess would by no means hearken to it,
excusing himself by reason of his indisposition, and also that he must that
very day of necessity return to the City, though the truth of it was, he had no
mind longer to continue in the company of a man that he hated to death. My
Brother notwithstanding (who would not put off his visit) concluded with Don
Pedro, and therefore gave order for all the Horses to be sadled, for the
Marquess would also take horse to go away at the same time, and with Don Pedro
went out of the room to make himself ready as he pretended, but whilst my
Brother staid a little behind to enquire of me if I knew nothing of the cause
of this Cavaliers ill humor, one came running into the room to tell him, that
he had mounted with Don Pedro upon two of the first horses came to hand in the
stable, and that they were both gallopt together full speed toward the wood. I
then instantly told my Brother, that they were certainly gone to fight,
conjuring him to make all the haste he could after, to go and part them. My
Brother could hardly be induced to believe it, not being able to imagine that
for the little quarrel they had had overnight, they would offer to proceed so
far, especially in a place which they ought to respect in regard to him.
However he immediately went, and in all diligence, but came a little too late
for the Marquess, whom Don Pedro after having run him through the shoulder had
already disarmed* My Brother at his arrival upon the place highly complained of
their proceeding, telling them with some heat, that they had his friendship in
very little consideration, to offer to fight a Duel in a place where he had so
great an interest, especially upon a quarrel that in all men's judgments must
needs pass for a trifle; for he never dreamed of any other difference betwixt
them, but the little dispute they had had overnight about the Glove. Don Pedro
(to excuse himself) protested he knew nothing of the quarrel they had fought
about, and that the Marquess had in a manner compelled him to it, without
having given any reason why; but the Marquess declared himself much more to my
Brother, and so soon as they were together alone, that he could speak in
private with him, acquainted him with the reasons that had induced him to this
extreme; relating to him word for word, all that I had said to him of the
advantageous sentiments I had for his Rival. My Brother was for all this by no
means satisfied with him; but he was yet much more surpised at my behavior,
and the liberty where with I had declared my self in a choice, which ought not
altogether to depend upon my own liking, especially when in favor of a man to
whom he saw no likelihood that I should ever be united. He saw a great deal of
untoward work throughout the whole adventure: but he thought it necessary in
the first place above all things to reconcile the two Cavaliers; for he much
better than I foresaw the consequence of such an affair, and therefore would by
all means take up the quarrel, that the noise of it, which could not any way be
to my advantage, might pass no further. I confess, I for my own part did not
consider it with the discretion that I ought to have done, and the fear I had
been in of the event of the Combat, was wholly converted into an excess of joy,
when I saw Don Pedro return victorious and unhurt. Love deprived me of all the
resentment that I ought to have had against him, for having upon so light an
occasion exposed both his own life and mine, and it was not till having a
little better considered of the business, that I began to find out how much my
own had been concerned in his danger, and then I conceived, that I ought for
honor's sake at least, force my self to express a little anger against Don
Pedro. Nay, I was in hopes by that means to engage him to love me better, and
that a little severity upon this occasion would make him more considerate
another time in affairs where I was so much concerned. My Brother was so ill
satisfied with me, that of all that day he would never once come near me, and
moreover wholly turned my Aunt against me, by repeating to her what the
Marquess had told him. It was no hard matter for me to perceive all this, by
the cold carriage and angry countenance she put on, and consequently I doubted
not but that the Marquess had said my errand; but it was no longer time for me
to disemble my inclination and Love had too strongly fortified my mind to
disavow a thing I was resolute to persist in to the last hour of my life. I
feared nothing, and methought was strong enough, if my beloved Conqueror was
true to me, bravely to encounter all the Tempests that I saw were gathering
together against me. With the thoughts of him I so fortified my self as to be
able to conquer all difficulties, and the severity of a Father was not of so
terrible conscquence but my passion I thought would be able to overcome it. But
all this while Don Pedro saw me not, for my Brother after having reconciled the
two Rivals, had conjured them both to desist from any further pursuit, if they
were not resolved totally to break with him; adding withal, that he had already
reason sufficient to be diff^tisfied with their proceeding, and that to
prosecute it further, would be in either of them openly to declare themselves
an enemy to him. To this the two Cavaliers returned no answer, perhaps as well
to avoid the making him a promise, that neither of them had any intention to
keep, as also because they durst not deny him a thing, which they conceived was
not handsomely to be denied to the Brother of their Mistress, and a man who was
their own intimate friend. My Brother nevertheless took this silence of theirs
for consent, and thereupon rested himself assured of their future discretion in
that particular. In the mean time I had order not to stir out of my apartment
till they were gone, so that although they yet staid three days longer in the
house by reason of the Marquiss's wound; I remained all the while a prisoner to
my Chamber, without being seen by any of them. But the Pen is a great relief in
these occasions, it is that we make to speak when the use of the Tongue is denied
us, and we sometimes express our selves more willingly, and with much more
freedom by writing, than perhaps we could do by word of mouth. The first Letter
that I writ to Don Pedro was this.

Donna Isabella's Ticket to Don Pedro.
I Know not whether or no I can be so angry with you as I ought to be, but this
I know, that I have sufficient reason to be so. You have not had the
Consideration for me you should have had in the Duel you have fought, which
cannot but redound very much to my prejudice, wherein although my particular
interest had not the power to oblige you to a greater moderation, you ought
however to have taken notice, that in that action you put your self into great
hazard of loosing what you have given to me, and that consequently is no more
at your own dispose; and to have considered withal, that any disaster that had
befaln you, would have cost me my life, whereby the Marquess would have had the
benefit of depriving you of what he is never likely to obtein for himself.
Provide your self therefore of some excuses to appease me; for I have no mind
to be angry with you long, and desire to see you appear before the Tribunal of
my heart as innocent, as my reason assures me you are guilty. Farewell.


I easily enough found means to convey this paper to his hands by one of his
own Servants, who two hours after brought me another from him. This is it (says
she) in saying which she delivered a paper to Albirond wherein was writ as
follows.

To the adorable Donna Isabella, Don Pedro.
HAD not your Brothers severity deprived me of the liberty of kissing your
hands, I had ere this (excellent fair one) given you testimonies of my
submission, and had cast my self at your feet there to dye; or to obtein pardon
for an offense that I was compelled to commit. Heaven is my witness, that had
it been possible for me to have avoided it, I had never given you any reason to
complain of me; but my reputation, my glory, and my repose all of them
commanded me to do what I did, and I had been for ever unworthy your esteem had
I been a man to have refused a thing supported by so many and so powerful
Arguments. The Marquess gave me no leisure well to consider of what I did, but
pressed me after such a manner, that had there been nothing of honor in the case,
I had neither time to think of it, nor liberty to refuse it. After which
declaration, I leave it to you ( adorable Isabella) to judge of my conduct as
you shall think fit; assuring my self that you will be much less severe than
your Brother, who has condemned me never to see you more. If it shall not be
permitted me to appeal before those fair eyes of yours, and to hope for more
mercy from thence, you will soon hear news of my death, for it will not be
possible for me to live without some relief from those charming Assassins.


I read this letter with a satisfaction above what I can possibly express, or
that perhaps is possibly to be imagined. I now thought I had no more reason to
be angry with him, and in that opinion delaid not to write to him after this
manner.

Donna Isabella to Don Pedro.
WHat authority soever my Brother may have over me, he has nevertheless no
right to prescribe me so hard a condition. The bestowing of my heart is wholly
at my own choice, and he has only the liberty to dispose of himself. Nay, if my
Father shall command me contrary to my own liking, I shall not obey him. I know
very well what I owe to my self before any other person whatever upon Earth.
Let us therefore (Don Pedro) only prepare our selves to overcome all their
impediments, and we shall bring all things to the desired issue, when we shall
be united together, and that you will love,

Your Isabella.


This Ticket was as safe delivered as the other, and he sent me in answer to it
this that I will now show you. Whereupon she took another paper out of her
Casket, which she read to him after this manner.

To Sennora Donna Isabella, Don Pedro.
PRovided you will be on my side. I fear nothing; and all I fear, (and that
indeed I tremble to think of,) is, that your friends will perhaps persecute you
in design to turn me out of your heart. To morrow we shall separate, and I know
not when I shall be so happy as to see you again. This sole thought kills me,
and if you do not comfort me with some hope as to that particular, I dare not
undertake to you, to keep a heart alive that is only yours. Judge then, I
beseech you, by the passion I have for you to what torments I am going to be
abandoned in this cruel absence, and whether it were not much more easy for me
to dye. Oh, my beautiful Princess, what joys and what to^rments shall I feel at
once, in the assurance of your esteem, and in the privation of the light of
your fair eyes. Therefore for Heavens sake, if you have any care of my life,
advise me what to do to undergo so great a mishap, and let not so passionate a
Lover end his days by so cruel a death.


Every Syllable that Don Pedro writ to me, filled my heart with Love, and there
was nothing to be said that could content me, that I did not pick out of his
Letters, and interpret to my own liking and his advantage. I was ravished to see
him write after so passionate a manner, and it is true that the least syllable
is of infinite consequence from a person that one loves; I therefore writ him
another Letter much to this purpose.

Donna Isabella to Don Pedro.
IT IS not your death that I desire of you; Live Don Pedro, and live with the
design to please me. My life is too fast knit to yours, for you to perish
without drawing my ruin after you, and you can attempt nothing upon your self,
but what you must begin in me. No, no you are to meditate better resolutions,
and to think of making us both more happy than some desire we should be. If you
go away to morrow, it will not be long before I follow you; for my Father will
never suffer me after what has past to stay any longer here; but in case he
should otherwise resolve and that on Monday I return not to Valence, come
hither privately to see me, I will he about five of the clock in the Evening in
the Wood whither I will pretend to take a walk according to my custom, and you
will find me about the place where the Boar was killed.


Don Pedro then with the Marquess, departed for Valence, whither my Brother
also bore them Company, and where all the Town was presently full of this
affair; for these two Cavaliers were too considerable there, for this Duel to
be kept a seeret; and the Marquess who was not fully satisfied with Don Pedro
(as Lovers never are with their Rivals, unless they make them give way) had no
great mind to have it concealed. My Father was furiously incenst at me, and
whatever my Brother could say in my behalf to appease him, would needs send for
me home the same day, and accordingly dispatched away servants to that purpose.
But my Aunt who was better acquainted with her Brothers prompt and passionate
humor, than any other, not willing to suffer me to go home so soon, and just in
the heat, nor alone; would kindly accompany me; and therefore acquainting my
Father with her determination, demanded three or four days time, to settle the
affairs of her Family during her absence.

In the mean time Don Pedro was again solicited, both by my Fathers friends
and his own, not to think any more of me, unless he intended to pull mighty and
dangerous inconveniences upon himself: but to what use serves interdictions and
persuasions, with a Spirit wholly possessed with love, that fears no other death,
nor other torments, but what his passion alone can make him suffer. The Monday
I had mentioned in my letter to Don Pedro, was now come, and he heard no news
of my return, he therefore mounted alone on horseback, as if he went abroad to
take the Air, and after having fetched a great compass, that no one might know
the way he designed to take, slipping at last into the true Road, he
endeavored by hard riding to recover the time these little, but necessary
delays, had made him to loose. This precaution of his however served him to
very little use, or rather none at all; it was too light to pass in so new an
affair; he had spies every where set upon him to watch his motions, who so soon
as ever they saw him on horseback immediately went, and gave notice to my
Brother.

It is not to be questioned whether or no he did not presently guess whither he
went, for he did not so much as doubt it^ wherefore taking along with him three
or four of his servants well mounted, and well armed, he followed him so close,
and made so good haste, that he arrived at my Aunts about the time that Don
Pedro and I met at the appointed Rendezvous. He there immediately fell to
enquiring where I was, and being told that I was walked out toward the wood, he
was netled to the quick, therefore came upon the spur toward the place where
we were, and coming found us set both together under the shade of certain great
Trees that were proper for that purpose. I blushed to see him, and was so
confounded that I had not a word to say, we had seen him come at a pretty
distance but had no means to avoid him, nor to hide our selves without danger
of being discovered; which would have made it so much the worse, neither would
I have done it if I could, that I might not give him to suspect there was any
thing of criminal in a meeting, where there was nothing but honorable and
virtuous Love. My Brother was as full of fury to find us thus together, as we
of confusion, and his passion was such as hindered him from saying any thing to
us in his first heat; but he expressed himself much better in the fire that
darted from his eyes. He immediately alighted, and looking upon me with a
countenance full of fury and disdain, he took Don Pedro aside, and there
discharged his passion upon him, telling him that were it not for fear the
world should think that he took the unhandsome advantage of him of having three
or four men in his Company, he would upon the instant have taught him better to
have kept his word; but that he would do it at his return to Valence, and
therefore bad him prepare himself. Don Pedro made answer that he had made him
no promise at all, that his suit was honorable and fair, and that therefore if
he should be too much provoked, it should appear, that he was ready to answer
any man that should interpose betwixt him, and his pretense. An answer at which
my Brother was so netled, that they had certainly fallen foul, had I not stepped in
betwixt them, and entreated Don Pedro to retire, who immediately obeyed me
leaving me with my Brother who more incenst than ever, discharged himself in
most extravagant, and bitter language upon me.

And now all the whole house was bandied against me after this adventure, and
my Aunt had much ado to vouchsafe me so much as a look, who thereupon made
ready to go away in the morning, and my Brother would be gone the same night,
though it was very late to acquaint my Father with the business. The night was
very light and clear, and he did not think he had any occasion to fear, having
no other quarrel upon his hands, but that with Don Pedro, who likewise he
believed to be too brave a Gentleman to attacque him by night. In the mean time
he was no sooner got into the middle of a wood, through which his way lay
betwixt my Aunts house and the City, but that he saw himself suddenly beset and
assaulted by four Cavaliers. He had by misfortune taken only one Servant back
with him, having left the rest behind to attend upon us; however he did not
loose his courage for this advantage, but betaking himself to his sword and
pistol he upon this occasion performed actions, much more worthy of the days
light than the nights obscurity. He made no question but that this Ambuscado
was laid for him by Don Pedro's treachery, which made him calling upon his
name, to dignifie him with the Titles of Traitor, Coward and Villain, to see if
that provocation would make him discover himself amongst the Crew. On the other
side his enemies, who peradventure expected a generous defense, being much
better armed than he, pressed him on all sides, and so briskly, that he saw his
man, who for his fidelity and valor deserved a better fate, fall dead at his
feet. This blow instead of astonishing enflamed him the more, so that furious
as a young Lion he flew upon the first in his way, and run his sword quite
through his body, of which wound he fell down dead to the earth; yet was the
fight unequal enough to make him with good reason despair of the victory, he
had still three men, strong and well armed to fight withal, a disadvantage that
would at least have startled another man, and the blood which ran from five or
six wounds he had already received, could not but make him sensible, that his
forces could not long hold out; and he indeed perceived them every moment to
grow less and less, when a Cavalier arrived in the most opportune season that
could possible be to take his part. Ah cowardly Traitors (said he in rushing in
amongst the Villains) is it after this base manner that a single man is to be
assaulted with such odds? cease Rascals, cease further to attacque him, or it
shall cost you your lives. This seasonable relief so unexpected by my Brother
put new vigor into him, and restored the strength he had before with his blood
almost wholly lost, so that he put himself into a posture bravely to second his
generous def^nder. He was at that time too little himself to know this
strangers voice; but he very well observed by what he saw him do, that he was
no ordinary person. They had soon dispatched two of the Traitors, and the third
who saw it now so dangerous a game, would se^k that safety by flight, that he
absolutely despaired of by keeping his ground: but our new come Cavalier ceased
not to pursue him into the thickest part of the wood, and had certainly
overtaken him, had his horse that was wounded been able to have made good so
long a course, but his horse failing, he was forced to return back to my
Brother, and came to him just as he was swooning away with the faintness
occasioned by the bleeding of his wounds.

Never was man in so great a perplexity as was this Cavalier to see himself in
a solitary place in the night, far from any manner of help, and alone with a
friend that he most dearly loved dying in his arms: so that he knew not well
what to do, but yet had a care of the main concern, that is, that with his
scarf he bound up that of my Brothers wounds, which as it bled most threatened
the most danger; after which having set him upon one of the strongest Horses he
could choose amongst all those that were left upon the place, he himself
mounted up behind him, and after that manner brought him into the City.

It is not to be imagined what a strange astonishment my Brother was in, after
he had a little recovered his Spirits, and that the remedies the Chirurgions
had applied unto him had brought him perfectly to himself, to find that he was
in Don Pedro's House, and that he whom he had suspected for the Author of the
Treachery, was the man to whom he stood obliged for his life. An action with
which he was so ravished, and that so absolutely won his heart, that he could
not forbear protesting to him upon the instant, he was too sensibly touched
with his generosity, any more to have any design to oppose his desires: that
therefore he was only to try to conquer his Fathers aversion, and that as for
him he would favor his pretenses, like a true and intimate friend. Don Pedro
you may be sure was not wanting in his answer to so obliging a protestation,
but replied after so affectionate a manner as engaged my Brother more than ever
to honor and love him. In the mean time they made it their business to find out
the Author of this Assassinate, and in truth it was no hard matter to do by the
three men that my Brother and Don Pedro had killed, two of which were the
Marquis's own servants and the very horse upon which Don Pedro had carried my
Brother, was known to be his best Courser. It was known a few days after, that
it was not my Brother the Marquess had aimed at in this Treachery, that the
Assassinates had been mistaken, and that the Ambush had been laid for no other
but Don Pedro only; but for all that; the mistake did not hinder my Father,
from pressing on the affair with the greatest heat and vehemence, and so far it
was prosecuted, that the Marquess was necessitated to leave the City and
Kingdom, to go seek his safety in another.

It now seemed that Don Pedro's Love ought in reason the better to succeed, by
the ill posture his Rivals affairs were in, and that my Brothers friendship
after so recent an obligation, should infallibly make him happy in his desires;
but my Fathers obstinacy was invincible and frustrated all our hopes. My
Brother had like to have fallen into his disgrace for having one day spoken to
him in favor of my Love, whereat he was so offended as to forbid him upon the
instant, for having any friendship or correspondency with him upon pain of his
mortal displeasure, which you must know chiefly proceeded from an old grudg,
and a certain animosity he had ever nourisht again Don Pedro's whole Family,
ever since a preference his father had obtein'd at Court in a Government which
mine also at the same time pretended to. After this interdiction my Brother was
obliged to live after a less friendly manner with him, so as never to frequent,
or be seen in his company unless he accidently met him. The obstacles to our
happiness daily increast, and were so many, that I knew not which way to
overcome them, having no more the same liberty in the Town that I had before in
the Country; and Don Pedro who was yet more sensible of the inconvenience than
I, took it so grievously to heart, that it very often put him into despair. He
could not hope that my Fathers humor should ever come about to be favorable to
him, being an obstinacy not to be paralleled, or that was ever heard of; so
that even his own most intimate friends, he knew, could no better have prevaild
upon him. He was therefore to try his fortune, and to resign up that into her
hands which it was vain to entrust with any other, and that he knew not how to
work by any contrivance of his own. Yet knew he not which way to go about his
business, and the prison to which I was reduced was so close, and so well
guarded, that it was hardly possible to convey so much as a Letter to me,
without falling into my Fathers hands. My own kindred and relations were not
permitted to see me but by his especial leave, and with some other of his own
appointment, and even this favor was granted to none, but those of my nearer
Kindred. In all these difficulties what should this unfortunate young man do?
He took a resolution to go visit a Kinswoman of mine, with whom he was
intimately acquainted, and who sometimes came to see me, to try if by laying
open to her the most secret sentiments of his heart and the violence of his
passion, he could gain her over to his party. He thought that if he could once
move her with a little compassion, she would not deny him her assistance, and
that at least he should find some consolation in discoursing with her of me.
All that he could obtein from her at this first visit was, that she would be
ready to serve him; but that then he must take heed he did not put her upon any
thing that was inconsistent with the honor of a Maid, a point wherein she was
exceeding tender, and that especially he must excuse her from carrying any
Letters, Tickets, or any other thing whatever in writing: that she would speak
to his Mistress in his behalf; but that she was very sorry to see him engage
himself in an affair, wherein so many and so invincible difficulties, besides
those at present, wereto be foreseen. Whereupon she fell to saying a great many
fine things, and that were very rational upon that subject, to divert him from
further engaging himself in so dangerous affection; but it was all in vain, and
all the dangers she represented to him, did not in the least stagger his
resolution from prosecuting his design. He already loved too much to be capable
of any Counsel against it; and it was impossible for him to wrestle with a
passion, by which he was already overcome.

This dear Cousin of mine came the same day to see me, and needed not many
preambles to make me fall upon the discourse of Don Pedro; for as I had a very
great confidence in her, I had already committed the greatest part of my bosom
to her trust. She found me in an excessive melancholy, which a little to
divert, and to put me into a better humor, she acquainted me at the very first
with the visit she had received. I embraced her five or six times for joy, and
being she had a very great kindness for me, soon won her over to my side. Thus
did she every day comfort me, and consolate Don Pedro in carrying some message
or another betwixt us; but nevertheless this satisfaction was imperfect and
poor if it proceeded no further. I never discovered to her the one half of what
I had a mind to tell her and I had yet discretion enough to conceal part of the
flame by which I was devoured. At last, that she one day saw sorrow painted in
my eyes, and death in my countenance, she demanded of me what I ailed?
whereupon laying my heart a little more open to her than I had formerly done, I
by degrees wrought upon her to carry me a Letter to Don Pedro, which she having
engaged to do, I took Pen, Inck and Paper, and write after this manner.

Donna Isabella to Don Pedro.
I Have at last prevailed with my Cousin to deliver you this Letter, a favor
that she has granted in your consideration as well as mine, and that you are to
manage with your best discretion; she will not refuse to bring another from
you, and therefore loose not the opportunity, for above all things in this
world I long to be satisfied under your own hand that you still continue
constant and faithful to me. I do here franckly declare unto you, that it will
be no hard matter for me to dye, but it would be utterly impossible for me to
live without your love. Love me then (my dearest) and remember that the
indignation of a Father incenst to the degree that mine is, is nothing so
insupportable as the absence of him I love above my life. Farewell.


This beautiful young Cousin of mine was engaged too far in our confidence to
recede, and her severe humor with the aversion she had for Love intrigues, grew
pliant by degrees by conversing with so much flame; and although Don Pedro with
all his wit had not had the power to persuade her into that complacency, my
sufferings nevertheless had awaked her pity; and indeed the condition to which
I was reduced would have touched a soul of marble with compassion. She restored
my dear Lover from death to life in delivering my letter to him, there was
nothing of grateful and obliging he did not say to thank her, and he had in his
transport of joy thrown himself at her feet to embrace and kiss them (had she
not hindered him from doing it) for the favor. He was quite another man after he
had read it, and put on another countenance, his looks before overcast with
melancholy cleared up, and joy sparkled in his eyes. Which my Cousin seeing,
and that he was so thankful for so small a service, she could not forbear
making him a voluntary offer to carry back his answer, which he also sent me,
and which I will now show you; This is it.

To my Princess Sennora Donna Isabella, Don Pedro.
I Would here present you with an image of my affliction, did I not fear in so
doing to augment yours: but (my dearest Princess) what you already suffer is
more than sufficient, without adding to them the torments of a heart, that dies
for your love. You ask me if this heart still faithfully loves you. Ah! know
that it is only you that obliges me to live, and that there will be no more for
it to do in this life when it ever ceases to love you. Fortune has found a way
to stretch my patience to the utmost, in separating me from your sight; but if
you will (provided the courage I have observed in you fail you not) we shall
overcome Fortune. The Torments we are made to suffer are too intolerable, and
we must jointly endeavor to free our selves from them; be you therefore
pleased to consider of the means only, and rest assured in the courage of your
faithful Lover, that he will attempt all things to procure you the liberty to
make him happy.


My Kinswoman brought me this letter two days after, which I rewarded with a
thousand caresses and kisses, that I gave unto her, with which she was also
content, promising me the same service, so often as I would command it from her;
which generosi^y of hers I made very good use of, as also did Don Pedro, with
whom for about a month I continued this private correspondency, and answered
that she brought me after this manner.

Donna Isabella to her dear Don Pedro.
SO long as you shall continue to love me at the rate you say you do, I shall
have resolution enough to endure all the torments mankind can make me to
suffer, and there cannot be an affliction of force to pierce so far into my
heart, as there to disturb the joy I have to see my self so well established in
yours. Doubt not then of my courage, for you have too well persuaded me of the
greatness of your passion, not to have enough to follow you over the world. The
means indeed appear unto me very full of difficulty; but love, especially when
it is in despair is ingenuous enough, and makes us try all ways, and attempt
even impossibilities. Farewell, I shall think of something or other that
perhaps may succeed.


I cannot but confess to you Albirond that my passion proceeded a little too
farin making me resolve to do a thing so contrary to my Fathers command, and my
own duty; but alas! the Law of Love is the strongest Tie, and takes place of
all other obligations; it is born, and grows up with us, it neither learns, nor
is to be taught: Nature alone reads to us her Lectures, and imprints them in us
with her own hand. Where this Law commands, the powers of the earth can signify
nothing, since even Heaven it self obeyes it. Methought every thing was lawful
for me to do, in a captivity so strange, and so unjust; at least my disordered
Reason made me to believe so, for to tell you the truth, one is not always
willing to produce the best arguments, and such as they ought to do against a
design with which we are pleased, and if we reproach our selves with it as a
crime to be in Love; the weakest Arguments we can pick out for such a purpose,
we are willing to think is all that can be said.

In the mean time what way soever I could contrive for the execution of our
design, I found them all not only very difficult; but almost impossible to
succeed; and very well foresaw that if my dear Cousin did not assist me in this
extremity; my hope would utterly forsake me, and I must infallibly be a
victime to my Fathers cruelty, and my own life. I then after having laid open
to her the excess of my passion, with a torrent of tears, and in the best terms
I could express, proposed the business to her; but I was not so happy as to
perceive, that I did persuade her to it. She would by no means be drawn to have
a hand in an affair, that she foresaw must needs be a blemish to her honor, and
trouble her repose; so that all she would be induced to do, was through the
compassion she had for my sad condition, to mix with me some of her tears, and
try to comfort me. They already began to talk of an accommodation with the
Marquess, and of redi^tegrating the friendship of our two Families by a
marriage betwixt him and me. To which end several friends on both sides began
to treat, and every person, and every thing seemed to be conspired to the ruin
of our Loves. So that I saw nothing but death for my last refuge, which also I
would rather be married to, than to the Marquess; or than I would do that wrong
to my beloved Don Pedro, without whom I could neither live happily, nor live at
all. This dear Lover of mine heard all this news; he trembled at the good
success of his Rival, and already saw himself in his imagination deprived of a
Treasure for which he would have exposed a thousand lives, in which despair he
writ to me these words.

The unfortunate Don Pedro to his Princess L. S. D. I.
THere is of late a certain rumor spread abroad concerning you and the Marquess
that pierces my heart, and which, if it be true, will bring me to my Grave. I
dare not search into the truth of it for fear I should find it so: but I know
very well, that I was only born to be miserable, and that my Destiny did not
render me worthy to burn for the fairest eyes in the world, but with design to
make me see them possessed by another. Alas! since it is my fate, that I must
only love to perish by my flame, why may I not at least have the honor to dye
at your feet (my dearest Princess) and there render up a Soul that is wholly
yours. Ah what a joy would it yet be to me, that dying you might receive my
last sighs, and to hear you say, Dye Don Pedro, dye my dear, and since I cannot
be thine -- for Heavens sake do you make out the rest, for in the abundance of
tears that sally from my heart, I am able to write no more.


So soon as I had read this letter I threw my self upon my bed, there to
dissolve into tears, in which posture I continued all that day; and I had so
much the more reason to be so afflicted, because that that very Evening my
Brother and the Marquess were to be brought together to be made friends. The
Viceroy was the person their friends on both sides had applied themselves unto
to do this business, who being my Fathers intimate friend, was willing enough
to undertake it, and in order thereunto, had invited both parties to supper,
then and there to make the reconciliation. This it was that deprived me of all
manner of hope, forasmuch as upon this reconciliation I certainly knew a
marriage would suddenly follow; but I was resolved to beg of my Father in the
last necessity, either to put me to death, or to give me leave to go end my
days in a Convent.

With this determinate resolution my heart took a little truce, for there is no
more to do in the last extremes but positively to resolve upon something, to
gives ones heart a little ease. In this sad tranquillity I was, wherein people
usually are when they despair of all manner of relief; when about ten or eleven
of the Clock at night, I saw Don Pedro enter my chamber, who at his coming in
cried out, Madam, to see you I am come to brave my death, too happy if I may
receive it after this good fortune; for in the affliction I have lived ever
since I was blessed with your sight; nothing can be more welcome, and I shall die
content if the blow come, after I have been so happy as to kiss your feet. Now
you must know that Don Pedro having learnt that there were but two men left in
the house (one whereof was placed over me in the nature of a Keeper, and the
other had the charge of the Gate committed to him, whilst my Father and Brother
were at the Viceroys at Supper) had so well ordered his business, that having
by the dexterity of some of his servants (who had corrupted the Porter) made
himself master of the Gate, and killed the other whom they found asleep, he
came up to my Chamber without any other opposition, than that of some women,
whom the very fear of death withheld from crying out to give any Alarm.

If ever any person was surpised, it was I, when I saw Don Pedro; he seemed me
thought an apparition, I scarce knew how to believe my own eyes, and so many
different motions at once oppressed me betwixt the joy of seeing him, and the
fear least some mischief should befall him, that I knew not what to say. To
what shall I attribute this silence ( Madam said he) is it that you condemn me
to dye, and that my passion is not powerful enough to move your pity? Pronounce
my sentence; if my life seem any thing considerable to you, save it in escaping
your self out of the hands of my Rival. If you love me let me deliver you out
of this captivity; or if you will that I die by a cruel denial, I am ready to
satisfy and obey you. No, no, Don Pedro (answered I all confused,) I am not
insensible of what your heart suffers for me, but do not you forget, that it is
with a man of honor I entrust my self, and that it would be the greatest
unworthiness in you to abuse the credulity of a heart that loves you, and gives
it self wholly up to you. It would be the greatest of all infamous treacheries
(cried Don Pedro) could I live for any other but you, and could I be capable of
the least infidelity to a woman who has obliged me at the rate you have done. I
therefore swear to you by your self, by your own fair eyes by which I am so
charmed, and which I so much adore, that my faith is and shall over be yours
and only yours; after which words I gave him my hand, and he presently
conducted me down stairs out of the House, and out of the Gate of the City,
where we found a Coach ready to carry us to the Port which is no more than half
a league only from the Town, and where there lay a little Frigate that Don Pedro
had hired for the purpose, and that only staid our coming to hoist sail, and to
put out to Sea. I shall not here tell how transported with joy Don Pedro was
when he saw himself at a pretty distance from the shore, and that the
interposition of the Sea secured him from the pursuit of his enemies, neither
could he himself sufficiently express it by words, though he said to me all the
fine things that a tender and violent Love could dictate to a man who had a
great deal of wit, and a great deal of passion. He assured me a thousand times
over and over again, that his flame should be eternal; but the tears that fell
from his eyes, and with which he bathed one of my hands, which he held close to
his mouth, gave me a much better assurance.

I am now in a humor good enough to tell you what delight our Souls were rapt
withal in these first moments of our liberty, and how overjoyed I was at a
happiness I so little expected; but I fear the Sultaness will presently return,
and therefore must finish the rest of this unhappy story without insisting upon
particulars that now only serve to increase my misery, by the remembrance of
those past and vanished delights. You here see how Love feeds upon tears, and is
never satisfied; and you shall also see how he overwhelms with misery at the
same moments, that he seems to satiate with joy. The weather had been the most
favorable in the world for four or five days, and we were out of fear because
out of the reach of my Fathers anger, and we had not above forty Leagues to
sail to the Isle of Sardinia to which place we designed to go, by reason that
the Viceroy thereof was Don Pedro's Uncle: but when fortune has once designed
a man for unhappiness, every thing is a verse to him, every thing turns against
him, and the Sea upon which all the Elements are to be feared, is the Theater
where this inconstant Goddess plays the most and the best of her Game. One is
never there assured of any thing, at the same time we desire, we hope, and are
afraid. The Earth, the Air, the Winds, and the Element of fire, even in the
midst of the waves, are all of them mortal enemies; but men are more to be
avoided than all these. We were now in hope in one days sail to discover the
Isle of Sardinia, when one of the Sea men came to acquaint Don Pedro, that they
had discovered from the Coasts of Barbary, from which we were not very far, a
Galley that made toward us, and that therefore we must resolve by force of
Oars to recover the Isle of Corsica, if we would avoid being taken, for there
was no doubt to be made, but that they were Pirates.

This news put me into a much greater fear than it did my Lover, who was not a
man accustomed to tremble at any Alarm, and who thought himself raised to too
great a degree of fortune having me in his possession, to suspect so great and
so sudden a fall. He came then upon the deck to see what course this Galley
steered, and saw that in truth she came upon us with sayls and oars amain, and
that therefore there was no more time to loose. He then made them turn head
toward the Island of Corsica, to which place we had the wind to the Southward,
the most favorable that could be to our design: but the Galley had the same
advantage, and it stood rather more right for them than us, so that in case it
should stiffen never so little upon them, we could hope for no other but to
have them in three or four hours aboard us.

After then that he had given all the orders necessary to fly, or to fight in
case it could not otherwise be avoided, he came to find me in the Masters Cabin
where I was, and where in truth the one half of my courage had forsaken me. He
disembled the best he could the fear that began to seize upon him, not of being
taken, or of loosing his life, but of loosing me; yet could he not so well
disguise his apprehension but that I quickly discovered it in the little
disorder I saw him in, and the trouble I perceived in his countenance did but
too well enform me of what he had in his heart. I would therefore be the first
to comfort him, should our fatal design reduce us to the extremity of all
misfortunes, and creating courage out of my love to make some show of
resolution, Don Pedro (said I) it is no longer time to conceal any thing from
me, I see very well that fortune will not yet cease to prosecute us, and that
the danger wherein we are of being taken by this Galley allows us but a little
time to manage. Let us therefore make the best use of it; it is enough this is
no Galley of Spain; the Turks will have more compassion of us, than my Father
would have, and I shall be much better pleased to fall into their hands, than I
should have been to have seen my self in the arms of the Marquess: How hard
soever my servitude may be amongst these Barbarians, Love has already prepared
me with too long a habit of misfortune to apprehend it. The miseries of slavery
will be supported with pleasure, so long as I can preserve to you the faith
that I have promised to you, and that I again swear to you by all that is Holy
in Heaven -- at which the tears gusht into two Torrents out of my eyes, and
made an end of telling him that, which they stopped my mouth from expressing.
Don Pedro upon whose heart these words of mine had wrought the effect that you
may imagine they must needs do upon a heart tender and passionate to the degree
that his was, remained immovable as a Rock, and beheld me weeping in the
posture of a man that was about to expire, and who had lost all the sense and
faculties of life. Poor Don Pedro! what a sad condition was he in! he had not
the power to answer me one word, so that he only held my hand close to his
breast, endeavoring by that action to make me understand that his grief took
away his tongue, and that it was so great he was not able to express it. These
motions are too violent to continue long, and he must of necessity give them
more liberty in the end* and let them sally out of his mou^h to ease his heart.
Unfortunate man that I am (he began to say) who alone am cause of all the
disgraces that befall the person whom I adore above the world, and that I must
be born for no other end, but for her undoing and ruin! O Heavens, what
strange offense have I committed against you, that you should persecute me
above other men with so great injustice! Have I incurred your displeasure to
that degree? who is it that would not have done the same thing that I have
taken upon me to do? and what violent course have I taken, that Love did not
command, and compel me unto? My dearest Princess (continued he looking upon me
with an eye that pierced into my very Soul,) your constancy does equally
astonish, and afflict me; but I am overcome by your love, to see that I have
precipitated you into so dangerous a fortune as this that overwhelms my
courage, and that if we are taken (as it is very much to be feared we shall,
without a particular relief from Heaven) I deliver you up to the most cruel
race of people in the whole world; whilst in the mean time you fear nothing,
and the passion you have for me is such, that amidst a thousand reasons you
have justly to reproach me, you continue to overcharge me with bounties, that
are incomparably above all others, fit to charm a heart that is wholly devoted
to your virtue and are pleased in the midst of these extremes to give me new
assurances of your fidelity and affliction. An ( Madam) with how exemplary a
virtue is your brave soul endued! and why have I not a thousand lives to lay
them all down at this instant in the service to which the excess of this
generous affection of yours does oblige me. On the contrary Don Pedro (said I
interrupting him) if I have any title or power to obtein any signal testimony
of your love, it is to preserve that life of yours upon which mine does so
absolutely depend; for Heavens sake therefore do not precipitate your self into
the hazard of so unequal a fight, or at least remember that you cannot die, but
I must also perish with you. Good God! Albirond, how should I stir up your
compassion, should I repeat to you all that we said to one another upon this
occasion, which yet only served to make us more sensible of the sad extremity
to which we were reduced, and to make us more tender of one another, by the
protestation we mutually renewed of a lasting and inviolate faith.

The wind in the mean time freshned upon our sayls, and by that means had
assisted the Pirates also with so brisk a Gale, that the Galley had fetched us
up an hour sooner than we expected; notwithstanding by the force of more sail
that we had clapped on, we were got within fifteen Leagues of the Isle of
Corsica, when the Galley was come up only within Canon-shot. She gave us at her
coming up but one of her Chase pieces only, which at this first firing did us
no harm at all; but that as she drew within nearer distance grew to greater
danger, and having two that were full Canon played at last so full into our
middle deck, as at one volley cut of six of our men. Don Pedro had given strict
order not to fire on our part till the Galley should come up very near, that we
might give them a whole broad* side at once. The match was too unequal, for
they had aboard the Galley ten men to one that we had in the Frigot; for alas!
we little expected, and had less prepared for so dangerous an encounter:
nevertheless our men took heart by the brave example of Don Pedro, by whom they
were animated with such resolution as had been sufficient to have inspired
courage into the greatest Cowards in the world. In the end the Galley boarded
us, and was received with the same bravery with which she attacqu'd us. These
Sea fights (as you your self know) are the most furious, and bloody of all
other, and there is no place wherein there is more safety than another, all
parts o^ the ship being equally in danger, not only of the shot and the sword,
but also of the fire and the water, and to which the Conquerors are equally
subject with those that are overcome. Who had then seen Don Pedro with that
undaunted bravery he fought, and the vigor with which he suste^n'd and inspired
his men, would have ran^k'd him with the most famous Captains that ever put to
Sea. He made head in all places where his presence was most required, and
thrust himself into the mouth of dangers with so great agility and courage,
that one would have said there had been ten Don Pedro's instead of one; and
indeed a Mistress to fight for (and she too upon the place) is a wonderful
incitement, and so great a spur to valor, as will make a man perform things
even beyond the power of a man. But what could valor do in so unequal a fight?
every one of our soldiers performed acts worthy of a Triumph; but
notwithstanding sooner or later they must yield to the number of the enemy, and
such a one as was accustomed to overcome or dye. Three or four times they
attempted to board us, and as often were bravely repulsed, so that mauger the
odds against us, Don Pedro with his handful of men held the victory in
suspense. The courage and opposition of so little a number of so good men as
those of ours, made me despise the weakness of my sex, and I was never less in
fear of death than in this occasion; so that I followed Don Pedro which way
soever he went, who having three or four times entreated me to retire into the
Cabin, seeing it was in vain, and that I was resolved to share with him in the
glory of the action, it is not to be believed, what wonders my presence made
him do. The Turks still gave back where ever he made head against them, and
every blow he gave was death, insomuch that the ardor of the Barbarians began
visibly to cool, and the victory had peradventure turned wholly over to our
side, had not Fortune vowed an irreconcilable hatred against us; for in the
greatest heat of the fight, of which our people now began to expect an
advantageous issue, or at the worst to come off with equal honor; an unlucky
Canon-shot betwixt wind and water sunck our Frigot, and by that means put an
end to the engagement, where the Conquerors obtein'd less glory, than the
conquered, and where the victory strongly went over to the loosing side. There
were but few of our brave soldiers left alive when this unfortunate shot put
an end to the dispute, of which part were drowned, and the rest were taken up
either swimm^ng the in Sea, or susteining themselves upon the wracks of the
Frigot, some certain loose pieces whereof floated above water when the vessel
it self was sunk. I was of the number of those that were made slaves, and that
through the good favor of my clothes, that bore me up, and which in so doing
only preserved me from the fury of the waves, to make me miserably survive the
death of my beloved Lover. I thought from the first that he would certainly be
preserved with those they took up out of Sea, which I had the greater reason to
believe, because I had seen him upon a planck with which he was using all
possible endeavor to come and relieve me, just at the time when I was taken up
by the Pirates: but his despair without doubt made him to part from it, having
no more desire to live after he saw me in the hands of the barbarous enemy.
Alas! how unexpressible was my grief, when I could hear no news of him, and
into what a furious affliction did that news cast me, when they brought me
word, that he was with the rest swallowed by the waves. I a thousand times
cursed the hour I had not followed him to the bottom of the deep, and thence
forward sought for nothing but death; but the cruelty of my new Masters was
such, that to have the pleasure of seeing me dye once a day, they denied me the
means to do it once for all.

Isabella ended these last words with so lamentable an accent, and accompanied
them with so sorrowful a look, that Albirond was touched with compassion for
her to that degree, as himself to feel part of the young Lady's sufferings, and
so sensible he was of her misfortune and sad condition, as to offer and promise
her his best assistance to deliver her from the sla(...) very into which by her
adverse stars she had been unfortunately cast. He was also about to enter into
consultation with her about the means, when a great noise they heard at the
outer door of the Apartment, interrupted them from discoursing further
concerning that affair. And then it was that fear began anew to seize the
dejected Albirond and so far, that although Isabella assured him it was the
Sultaness only, yet whatever she could say, he was not to be persuaded by her,
but would needs return into his Kennel, and thought himself even there not over
secure. I know ^ot what judgment others may make of Albironds little resolution
in this case, but for my part I am of opinion, that naturally there was very
little to be taken, unless he had had King Agramants ring which was,

Dital virtue che chi nel dito ha quello
Contra il mal de gl' incanti ha Medicina:
or ^lse the body of Astolfo. But let the writer o^ Romances make their Hero's
play the parts of persons of the other world* Albirond was a man of this; and
the fear of being roasted alive would have made him have crept into a less
hole, than that of the house of office. Isabella then went to open the
Sultaness the door, who in an extraordinary anxiety of thought, at the first
word asked her news of Albirond, and if she knew not what was become of him. The
Slave presently appeased the mind of this p^ssionate Lady by what she told her
of her beloved Amoroso, and by assuring her that she should immediately see him
in the same Cabinet where she had left him. The fair Sultaness could not
possibly imagine it could be so (so timorous we are of deceiving our selves, or
of being deceived by others in a thing which we extremely desire;) and her own
eyes must give her the joy, her hearr durst not without their testimony
entertein. But how acceptable a surprise was it to her to find him indeed upon
the same Bed where she had left him! how infinite a satisfaction was it to her
panting heart, and how many sorts of caresses did it prompt her withal to
acquit her self for the sufferings and torments she had sustein'd, and felt for
the love of him, and the solicitude she had been in for his safety! O my
dearest dear (said she embracing and kissing him with all imaginable
tenderness) how highly are we this day obliged to Love, and Fortune? to the
one, for having preserved thy life which I thought by my means had been lost;
and to the other, for bringing thee again into my arms! In what danger
(continued she) did I see the! Oh, that I had need of infinite pleasures to
settle my heart, for the cruel suspense and torments I have suffered in so
terrible a fear! The fair one shed some tears amongst her words in the
transports wherewith she expressed her amorous desires, which tender tears
trickled so gently upon the face of Albirond* as extracted sighs from his
breast, which he knew also how to accompany with some expressions full of Love
and passion. Discretion had made Isabella withdraw into the next room; for a
third person unwillingly looks on to behold things wherein they themselves
would, but can have no share; by reason that one and one make two, and two and
two make four; Love only delighting in even numbers, whereas a third person
always spoils the sport.

The Sultaness who had no mind to loose any more time in talk, was laid
negligently upon the Bed with her head supported by one of her arms, and her
eyes fixed upon her lover, with such a look as demanded of him what the most
innocent might very well understand. The Bath she had been in though cold
water, had nothing quenched the ardor of her desires; but she felt all the
wanton fires with which Love had furnished the whole Cabinet, and which were
such as even made her melt with the flame; and she was so far spent with the
ardency of her affection that she had no other expression left her but her
sighs, and those, as it were, articulated with the trembling of desire. But
what think you did Albirond do in the midst of so much flame? Alas! it is
almost incredible, so hard it is to be believed; he was become upon the matter
insensible as a statue; at least, in plain truth, he had nothing left him but
the will, that boiled with the sameardor the Sultaness did. The fright he had
been in had so froze up his* Spirits for once, that he was cold as Ice, and had
no other feeling left him but upon his lips only, which his Mistress had ^haw'd
and warmed with a thousand kisses. But to what served these little dali^ances,
toyings and delays, save only to make her the more thirsty, and to set her the
more agog? Kisses do not quench an amorous thirst, no more than one fire
extinguishes another, notwithstanding this miserable impotent could do nothing
more; and the mischief on it was, that the shame of his miscarriage encreast his
impotency so, that he was at this moment by having too good an opportunity to
be happy the most unhappy person upon earth. The Sultaness already begun to
grow impatient, she knew not what to think of the courage of her servant, which
made her say to her self, What, in the name of wonder, is the matter with
Albirond! what does he stay for! what does he expect! is his passion dead or
asleep! and is it possible he can have so much insensibility where he meets
with so much Love! This made her offer at some little wantonnesses by way of
advance, which afterward she was a little ashamed of, and so as that the
apprehension of what she had done strewn her face over with a rosy blush.
Albirond understood all this well enough; he saw what she expected from him,
which he also would have desired more than she, had his passion had the same
power over what should animate his body, as it had over his understanding; but
all would not do, and he had only ^^n so great a hazard of his life to make
himself the most pitiful fellow in the world, at a time when he was the most
to have Triumphed in his fortune. Heavens, what am I become! (said he to
himself) what a dull pitiful Rascal am I! is it possible that so many beautiful
objects have not the power to move me? where is my soul? what is become of my
spirits, that they refuse to assist my passion in so critical a time, and in
the happiest opportunity that ever man was blessed withal! I have in my time done
wonders, where I have had no temptation of Love or beauty to allure me, and
must I now play the beast where my affection is so deeply engaged, and not only
my own reputation, but also the honor of my Nation (famous throughout the world
for feats of love) lies at stake! Go wretched member, and as thou now do,
hide thy head for ever; thou have for ever shamed and ruined thy Master.
Certainly my Blood is frozen up by enchantment, or otherwise this disgrace
could never have befaln me.

-- fuit Hectore quondam
Fortius, and tumido violentius Inguen Achille,
Ast modo torpet iners, and colla labantia flectit,
Tristius exangui monacho quatiente Cucullum.
And yet the charms that I see before my eyes, are rather of a nature to
produce fire in the snow, than to extinguish that I had in my heart; which
being said he redoubled his endeavors, and tried all the devices, that were
likely to put him into the humor of performing the part of a gallant man,
creeping a little closer to his Mistress, who seeing him begin to bustle up and
stir, thought that the happy hour was now come, which made her (to help him
forward artificially, and as if it had been without design, discover to him the
most beautiful treasures, that Love and Nature have in their fairest
Territories, and that were such as had been sufficient to have thawed the frost
even of old age it self. But the Devil was in it, all this would not do; neither
she, nor he, nor both their endeavors joined together could trinckle (as a
modern Author uses the word something to worse purpose) that stupid lump of his
into any manner of complacency; and Albirond although in the very flower of his
youth, was nothing moved with all these temptations, and all the allurements
she could expose before him (which were such as perhaps no In Turkey ^e means.
other woman had to show) did only work upon his mind without awaking in him in
the least the sentiments of Nature. By this time despair (as good reason there
was) had wholly taken possession of his soul, and he confessed in his heart after
so manifest a demonstration of impotency, that he was no more a man. Prodigious
effect of fear, to have Transprosed had been a better word.
transformed into marble, what a little before the fire of Love had almost
reduced to Ashes! Alas, that these accidents are cruel! that these
Metamorphosies are shameful! and that these coldnesses are very much out of
season, when a man should rather dye of too much vigor, and heat!

The amorous Sultaness takes offense and grows angry in the end; her passion
had already been stretched to the utmost, and her soul all on flame, could no
longer endure a man of marble so near her; she therefore start up from the Bed,
and with a look full of anger and disdain, leaves him without giving him so
much as one word, and retired herself into the other room to her S^ave. I think
Isabella (said she) that Albirond is not well, at least I am certain that he
has all the signs of a sick man upon him, for he saints, and is not able to
stir a member. Pre^hee go in to him, and try what thou can do toward the
bringing of him to himself again, and the restoring of his spirits, which he
very much stands in need of, that he may be thought to be yet alive. The
Sultaness said all this after so grave and serious a manner, that she took it
to be in very good earnest, and ran without staying to be better enform'd of
her meaning toward Albirond to relieve him. Coming into the Cabinet she found
him laid upon the Bed in such a posture, as did not ill represent a sick
person; and the rage and confusion wherein the Sultaness had left him
contributed to the persuading of Isabella that he had in good earnest been
swooning, especially seeing he said not a word to her at her coming in: she
therefore took a little vessel that stood full of A Chafen-dish of Coals and a
feather had been more proper for him.
water in the window, and approaching softly toward the unfortunate Cavalier,
asked him if he stood in any need of that to refresh him, and after what manner
he was held? There was in this salutation more than enough to increase
Albironds despair, and to put him out of all manner of patience to see himself
jeered, and abused after this manner, wherefore he coldly entreated Isabella to
let him alone, telling her that he wanted nothing at all. The Slave hearing him
answer her after this odd fashion, did not know really what to think; but she
knew very well by Albironds manner of speaking that there was something more
than a fainting in the wind: she did not perceive that he appeared to be very
sick, and therefore conceived that there might be rather some little falling
out betwixt the Sultaness and him, as it often happens betwixt the most
passionate lovers. She had an itch therefore to be a little better satisfied,
and to that purpose inquisitively demanded of him, if he had given the
Sultaness no occasion of offense; Albirond in whom the sole remembrance of his
impotency redoubled the vexation of his mind, straight imagined, that Isabella
had been sent on purpose to rail him after that cruel manner, and in that
opinion out of spite to be so used, neglecting to answer pertinently to the
question she asked him, only desired her to help him out, that he might go
hence to his lodging By this dogged reply of his, she was confirmed in her
former suspicion; but nevertheless made answer, that he could not depart till
first she had acquainted the Sultaness with his resolution; but that she would
go presently to her to know her pleasure, and return to him again: The fair
Sultaness could not on the sudden persuade her self to consent that Albirond
should depart from her, till first she had extracted from him some satisfaction
for the disappointment he had put upon her; but after some reasons that the
poor foundered Lover had sent to represent before her of the danger least the
Beglerbeg should ask for him, and least they at his lodging should make a
hubbub at his staying out so long; she gave him leave to go at last, but upon
this condition nevertheless that he should come again very early in the
morning, and that in the mean time he should take something to cure him of his
Lethargy.

After this manner did our Cavalier obtein his dismission; and although he did
not ask to see his Mistress at his going away, to avoid the having his shame
renewed upon him, by a sight which but for that he would have purchac'd at the
peril of his life: she nevertheless came out to him, having much ado to forbear
laughing, and kissed him five or six times before she would let him go. Isabella
went with him to the window, at which looking out, and seeing no body in the
Garden, she told him he might go down, which he also did, not with so much joy,
and so great ardor as he had mounted before; but at greater ease, and in a much
worse humor. The fair Slave was all this while mighty impatient to know what
had past, and what could be the matter betwixt the Sultaness, and Albirond,
whom she saw go away so discontent, and her longing was as quickly satisfied as
her impatience was great, her Mistress who had a mind to laugh with her about
it, telling her all as soon as she returned back into her Chamber, and in that
pleasant humor would needs have Isabella write him a railing letter about it,
of which commission she acquitted her self after this manner.

The Slave Isabella to the insensible Albirond.
I Know not what shift you made to get home; but in the weak condition you
parted hence, I cannot see, but unless you had some help you must necessarily
lie by the way. Poor Lover! is this all you are able to do, where you are so
passionately in love? and could your mettle proceed no further, than only to
dye in the arms of a fair Lady? In earnest you have mightily deceived me; for
to see with what ^igor and address, with no more help but that of a simple cord
only, you mounted the window of our Apartment, I could not have believed you
would have failed where there was so little to be done. Men half dead rise
again upon these occasions; and it is not at such a time that a brave Cavali^r
should dye of faintness. I cannot forbear to tell you, that I am infinitely
sorry you should so misdemean your self; and the interest I pretend to in your
reputation, obliges me to deal more freely with you, than I should have done,
did not this affair so highly reflect upon your honor. Consider with your self
what you are, and endeavor to repair so great a Cowardice: I can assure you it
is highly expected from you, and we are apt to hope better things from your
courage; the rather because you were observed to be in a better posture, and
better disposed to acquit your self like a man of honor, before the Beglerbeg
came to subdue that lusty humor, otherwise you would be in great danger never
again to be admitted to a second trial; Farewell, We expect you.


This Letter to say the truth was a little too free for a Maid, but it put the
Sultaness into a very good humor; whom Isabella made it her business by all
ways to please, and whose interest it was so to do; neither had she given the
reins to her wit upon any other account, but only to divert her. The Sultaness
commanded her presently to seal it up, and to carry it to the ordinary place
where they used to lay the rest, that is to say, to the conduit of Lead, where
Albirond and she had first shook hands; to the end that he, who never failed to
visit that place the first thing he did, might read the Letter so soon* as ever
he should come into the Garden.

Thus did the Sultaness, and her fair Slave divert, and make themselves merry
with the poor Cavalier's disaster; but our unfortunate Albirond was nothing in
so pleasant a humor, nor past away his time after so pleasant a manner; in his
life he had never been so dissatisfied with himself as he was at this instant,
and it wanted but little when he came home to his lodging, that rage and shame
had not put an end to his days. Despite, grief, melancholy, vexation, horror,
confusion, all sorts of ill humor, and all the other civil affections of the
mind that can any way persecute or torment a poor Soul, prompted him to dislodg
his from a body so wretched, and so destitute of vigor; and doubtless had it
not been for the hopes of doing better, when he should be a little better
composed and recovered from the fright he had been in, there had been an end of
a Monsieur. He now no more remembered the hazard he had run, nor the danger he
had been in, his memory and imagination being wholly taken up with the mortal
effects of a cold and impotent constitution. And though he had been certain to
dye all manner of deaths, he would a second time tempt the same fortune, to try
to repair so infamous a stupidity by feats worthy a man of his force and
mettle; and he was confident enough of his own abilities, not to fear twice
together to give false fire. Oh Heavens! what power has glory over a young
heart already replete with love! but especially when a fair Mistress is in the
concern. It is true that he had been engaged in several other encounters of
this nature, but such an accident had never befaln him before, and he might
safely say without vanity that in all his other amorous conflicts he had
behaved himself as well, and come as bravely off as any Cavalier in the world.
All the rest of that day he made very much of himself, and avoided all violent
exercise to keep his forces entire; but it is true withal, that he did eat but
very little, and that he did not sleep much better; for though he made no great
doubt but to behave himself better the next time, yet could he not banish from
his mind the grief of having done as he did, or rather of having been able to
do nothing at all.

In the morning (which proved as fair an one as could be wished for the
resurrection of the flesh,) he armed himself at all points, not for the camp of
Mars, but for that of Venus, and came into the Garden, much better dressed and
perfumed than he was wont to be; but in truth something with the latest for
him, by reason that a great many slaves which Azem had brought thither were
working at Sidi Mahomet's Bath, and had begun by the Aqueduct, to which the
pipe of Lead belonged where they used to lay their Letters. It is not to be
imagined with what astonishment and grief our unfortunate Lover saw these
people there at this time, it being as though he had seen so many persons
prepared to put him to death with a thousand several cruel torments. What fury,
what Tempests arose at once in his mind! to see the evil condition to which his
affairs were reduced by this accident, and the little likelihood there was,
that he could of a good many days acquit himself of his debt; which to do, the
impatience he was in was the thing that the most of all afflicted his mind. In
the mean time he was constrained to turn aside into another walk to avoid being
seen in that of the Seraglio where the Slaves were at work, and there the
working of his fancy carried him so far before he was aware of what he was
doing, or which way he was going (his thoughts being wholly taken up with the
deliberation of what he was to resolve upon) that he was got to the end of the
Garden before he almost knew where he was: but there coming a little to himself
he took notice of a Slave, that being withdrawn apart from the rest, was
reading a Letter, at the contents whereof (as it should seem) he skrew'd
himself into so many extravagant postures, as sufficiently denoted him to be at
the end of his wits, and either enraged or afflicted, or both, even to despair.
The odd and extraordinary gestures of this Slave possessed Albirond with a
certain curiosity to know who this fellow was, and what the matter might be;
which he might the better do by reason that by the favor of some trees in the
walk, he might steal pretty near him without danger of being seen. He advanced
therefore, and stopped not till he approached so near that he could very well
hear every word he said, which also he uttered very loud after this manner in
the Spanish Tongue. Ah ingrate! ungrateful woman (said he) I but too well know
thy hand, that thy false heart has here made use of to the violation of the
fidelity thou have so often, and with so many vows engaged to me: why was I not
born blind; or rather why was I born at all? To what cruel Destiny has Heaven
reserved me in delivering me from the fury of the waves, to no other end but
only to bring me hither with my own eyes to behold but too too clear and
killing testimonies of the blackest infidelity that ever was committed upon the
face of the earth! Let us doubt no more, my Soul, my eyes are too faithful
witnesses, I see and read it: This faithless woman has given up her self to
another, not by any* Law of equity, seeing she had no power to dispose of her
self anew, after having given up her faith to me, but by a Lawless Law, of a
^ickle and sensual Love. Ah cruel! was not that enough I have already suffered
for thee, but that thou must again deceive me? Heaven will I hope revenge me of
thy per^idy, and of the love that thou have bannish'd from thy inconstant
breast to make room for another. But why do I stay any longer in the world? or
why do I delay to go out of it since she for whom I only lived ravishes away my
life to give it to a Rival? Let us dye then, let us dye with the torments that
I suffer, since I am already dead to those delights I proposed to my self in
the enjoyment of the sweetest fair that ever betrayed a true affection. It Is to
have ceast to live, when we can propose to our selves no joy in living; let us
then cease to suffer, and part with a life that carries with it more misery and
torment than a thousand deaths. But ought I to dye without being first
revenged? and have I not means enough left me wherewith to punish this too
happy Rival, and too unfaithful Mistress? Let us then first revenge our selves.
Let us first kill those that murder me, and let us reserve our selves, my Soul,
till first I have made an end of them who have deprived me of my heart. The
Slave so soon as he had spoke these words, was about to turn back again to go
to his fellows; when Albirond who was not above three steps from him, stopped him
short, and in so doing strangely surprised him. He demanded of him what he
ayl'd to look so sad and dejected, or why he thus separated himself from the
rest, and whether he wanted any thing wherein it might be in his power to
relieve him? The Slave instead of returning a civil answer to so obliging a
Compliment as Albirond had made him, only paid him back with a look full of
scorn and indignation, as if his quarrel had been to him, and without any kind
of reply, strove to get his arms at liberty, by which the other held him. This
rude carriage of the Slave did a little astonish the Cavalier, who could not
imagine why he should behave himself to him after this manner; but he saw he
was of necessity to detein him by force, to be better satisfied in the
business, believing with good reason, that there was something more than humor
in the case; but for what reason the Slave should proceed after this manner,
quite contrary to the behavior of all the rest, he could not so much as guess,
especially toward him, who obliged them all by all the ways he could, and who
was respected by every one, upon the account of the friendship the Beglerbeg
manifested to him upon all occasions. He would therefore make use of a little
cunning to try to engage the Slave to tell him all, by repeating to him what he
had already gathered out of his own mouth. He then after a gentle and courteous
manner, asked him two or three questions, concerning his name the place of his
birth, and how he came to be made a Slave; to which the fellow grumbling
answered, that his name was Alphonso, that he was of Valence in Spain, and that
a Tagarin had sold him to the Beglerbeg his Master. But Albirond who was not
content with this, and that had a mind to learn something more particularly
from him, asked him again what made him so sad? and whether it was not that
Letter he had seen him read, that had put him into that ill humor? telling him
that he ought not to deny him that little satisfaction; that he should not
repent him of making him his Privado, and that if he knew him well, as he
believed he must needs do, he might believe, that it was in his power to do him
a good office to his Master. Alphonso so soon as ever he heard him mention the
Letter became more troubled than before, and like a madman wrested himself out
of Albirond's hands with these words that he said to him going away. Yes, I
have a Letter, but it shall be delivered to no other but the Beglerbeg himself,
who I hope will revenge me in righting himself from the injury that is
practiced upon him in his own house. These words were too plain not to put
Albirond to a damnable nonplus, he saw well enough that they were levelled at
him, and that it was no more to be doubted but that this Letter came from the
Sultaness. One is apt to fear every thing when every thing is in reason to be
feared; nevertheless upon examining the affair from the one end to the other,
he could not conceive what interest this Slave could have in it; nor of what he
would that the Beglerbeg should revenge him. He sometimes thought that he had
pierced into the marrow of the Mystery, when he was the whole Heaven vvide,
and the furthest off of all; for by the handsome mean of the Slave, and his
bold manner of speaking, he imagined him to be another of the Sultanes's
Gallants, whom she had favored before him; and these words of ingrate and
faithless that he had heard him exclaim with, did but too much confirm him in
this opinion. Here it was that Jealousy (a passion that had never before
possessed him upon the account of the Sultaness,) seized him after such sort, as
might peradventure have hurried him to some precipitous violence upon the
Slave, had he not been already at a good distance from him: but he being got
out of his reach, he turned into another walk to meditate upon some remedy in
so desperate an affair. One vexation drives out another; he had already forgot
that which had so much perplexed him but a little before, in that he could not
execute his design, and now his whole fancy was at work to contrive some way
to get the Slaves Letter from him, either by fair means or soul; that so he
might disengage himself from a perplexity, by which he was on all sides
strangely tormented. He walked on ruminating after this manner; when an arrow,
like that before, whishing by his ear, stopped his progress. He ran presently
to take it up, not doubting but it brought some Ticket along with it as the
other had done, and accordingly he found one tied to the shaft, which contained
these words.

ALbirond, think of disengaging us from the danger we are now falling into, and
wherein you your self, to our great misfortune, are equally concerned. Thus it
is, The Sultaness last night commanded me to write a letter to you, which I did
after so indiscreet a manner, as will cost us all our lives if you do not use
your utmost endeavor to recover it. I laid it, by her order, before we went to
bed, in the pipe of Lead, where I used to lay the others, that you might read
it so soon as you came into the Garden; and this Morning, this Company of
Slaves you See, are come er'e we were awake to work at the Bath, and have
unluckily begun by this pipe, which they have removed out of its place. The
letter must therefore necessarily either be still within it, or some of them
must have taken it out. For Heavens sake try your wits then to find it out, and
if you have any hopes of delivering us from the fear and trouble we are in,
make us a sign with your handkerchief, for the Sultaness is in a mortal
apprehension.

So soon as Albirond had read this Ticket* he no more doubted but that the
letter they spoke of was the same he had seen in the slave Alphonso's hands;
but yet he could not imagine what reason he could have to be so highly
concerned a^ it, nor what to think of his saying the Beglerbeg should revenge
him. He still fell into his former opinion, that this was some fovourite of the
Sultaness, and that upon a less account than an interest of Jealousy, a slave
could not pick any thing out of a letter that was not directed to him. All
these reasons, and all these different thoughts ended at last in a resolution
to retrive this letter by what way soever, at least to prevent it from being
carried to the Beglerbeg's hands. To this end he went presently to the palace,
and there enquired of the first of the Guards he met with, if he knew the slave
Alphonso? and that he must in the name of Governor Azem go fetch him thither.
The Turk made answer, that he did not well know which of the Slaves this was,
that he had only heard the Beglerbeg had bought such a one about fifteen days
since, but that he would immediately go bring him to him. As soon as Alphonso
came, Albirond bid him follow him; which the slave made no difficulty to obey,
knowing very well that it was in Albironds power to cause him to be cudgelled
to death if he commanded it only, without asking any reason why. When the
Cavalier had got him a pretty way out into the fields, attended only by two
Moors that continually waited upon him, he there asked him first of all, if he
had belonged to the Beglerbeg any considerable time? To which Alphonso making
answer, that in truth it was but a few days since he had been sold to his
Master, it served not a little to undeceive Albirond from his former error, and
at the same time possessed him with a greater curiosity than ever, to interrogate
him, What reasons he could have to concern himself so much with that Letter?
seeing that it was not possible that in so short a time this slave could have
made any particular acquaintance with the Sultaness, but he himself must
infallibly have had some knowledge of it. He pressed him then in very good
earnest, to tell him, why he should make such a business of that letter;
telling him in plain terms, that he would see it, to know what pretense he
could have to revenge himself of an ingrate. Yes (said Alphonso) who could not
very well avoid answering him, and declaring the whole business) of an ingrate,
that will betray you also, as she has already done me. I know not (replied
Albirond) of whom you intend to speak, you must therefore better explain your
self, and tell me who it is you complain of, for without doubt you are
mistaken. This Letter (replied the slave) has alone sufficiently enform'd me of
more than I ever expected to know, but I will never deliver it to you so long
as I have life; and it is enough for you to know, that it comes from the
Seraglio, to believe that a man may sufficiently revenge himself, who has as
much, or a greater interest there than you. But what pretense (said Albirond)
can you have in the Seraglio who are a stranger, and but newly arrived in this
Country? who do you know there, this letter does not come from the party you
imagine. Alas (said Alphonso) I know the hand but too well* and would to Heaven
that my eyes did not assure me that it comes from a faithless Maid, who writes
it to you: from a ^ickle one, for whose love I have crossed the Seas, to give my
self up a slave, and with my liberty to hazard the loosing of my life, that I
have only preserved for her, and that I ought rather to have laid down for any
other, than such a treacherous, and faithless Woman. For, to be short Albirond,
since I see my affairs reduced to this desperate condition, I care not much if
you know all, that you may have as much aversion, as perhaps you have love for
a creature, the most treacherous and false that ever set her foot upon the face
of the earth. This Isabella (Sir) by whom you are now enchanted, is the same
who betrayed me for you, after having promised and vowed to me her faith with a
thousand Oaths, above a thousand times, and after having given me such
assurances, as she cannot without dying of shame deny. Albirond had thus far
harkned to the Slave with a marvailous attention; but he had now said enough to
unravel all this adventure, and to discover the truth of an affair concerning
which he had been so much perplexed. After what Isabella had told him in the
story of her Lover, he had all the reason in the world to believe that this was
he, and that he had not been cast away as she thought; which, was also so much
the more likely, because she had said she saw him upon a planck. All which
being considered, Albirond without permitting the Slave to proceed any further,
cut him short, by demanding of him, if his name was not Don Pedro, and not
Alphonso? Yes (said the Slave) I am that unfortunate Don Pedro of whom that
traytress (he subject of my tears) has doubtless given you some account, that
Don Pedro who -- Here Albirond would needs interrupt him from proceeding any
further, assuring him that it was nothing but the fear of being seen by these
Moors that withheld him, from embracing and paying him all the respect that was
due to a man of his quality and merit; after which he endeavored to persuade
him, that he was his friend, and not his Rival: but he found that a thing
something hard to do, and was in the end constrained to show him Isabella's
second Letter, and even to declare unto him part of what had past betwixt the
Sultaness and him, thereby to dispossess him of his former conceit; and then it
was that Don Pedro began to pant with a little joy, after so many torments, and
so many miseries, that Love and Jealousy had afflicted him withal. He observed
something in Albirond so generous and so gentile and so little of the Traitors
mode, and together with his own protestations, helped wholly to clear his
understanding from his former suspicion, and to make him hope for better
things, and a better fortune than he before expected. Albirond also, on his
side, was not a little satisfied with himself for having brought so ticklish
and so difficult an affair to so good an issue, and which he had before judged
almost impossible to succeed to his advantage; at least without his being
necessitated to push things on to the last extreme. They entered from this time
forward into the most perfect friendship that could possibly be; Don Pedro
wholly relied upon Albirond for his fortune, he gave him the Letter which he
himself had found in the pipe of Lead, and had taken out thence without any one
having perceived him; and in the end both of them, without taking any further
notice of one another, returned to the Garden, where Alphonso fell to work
amongst the rest, and Albirond took another walk, where he might be seen from
the Seraglio to give the sign with his handkerchief, that all was well. He
there continued something longer, ^o stay as he was wont to do the hour o^
dinner, during which time he resolved in his mind with some delight the several
different passions he had been tormented with in that one morning. It is true
that the Nature of Love is quite another thing than what people imagine. It Is
like a fire, that shines at distance, and pleases our sight, but when one comes
to touch it,

Oh how it Burns, the Monster teeming (earth Never produced such a prodigious
birth. It Is a thing wonderful hard to deal withal, the world knows it not;
there is nothing so vexatious, nothing so wounding; nor any thing that kills
with so much impunity all that submit themselves to his power. Little Traitor
that he is! You would say that there is nothing so charming when he lies
sunning himself in the warm rays of a wanton beauty; that there is nothing so
sweet when he tempts you with a kiss, or with something of greater kindness;
but if he once takes a fancy against you, with what torments and miseries
does he overwhelm you, a thousand times more cruel than the pains of Hell; and
then it is that he is properly to be called Love without love. He makes a show
as if he would be familiar with you, that he invites you with two fair eyes
which have nothing in them but fair promises; but if one try them, if one
approach them, and if a man repose any confidence in them, you shall see with
what poison they shall regale you. Albirond did not exactly make the same
reflections upon the Sultaness; for she in truth had not dealt over rigorously
with him, and Love had more reason to complain of him, than he had to complain
of Love in this affair; which also he was so conscious of, that he thought of
nothing more but an occasion wherein to pay his arrears; upon which as he was
deeply meditating, another arrow came just in the nick to direct him. He
presently imagined that it brought another Ticket, as he found so soon as he
had taken it up that it did, and which untying from the shaft, he there read
these words.

WE have seen the sign you gave us with your handkerchief, which has restored
to us part of the joy we had lost; but in truth the fright the miscarriage of
my Letter put us into has so far possessed us that to be totally at rest, we must
be assured that the Letter is in your hands, or that you are in very good hopes
to be Master of it, to give us which satisfaction, you must make us another
sign with your handkerchief.

Albirond having read thus far without more delay, pulled out his handkerchief;
and waved it three or four times about his head, which being done, he went on
with the Ticket which continued thus.

As to the rest, we do not intend to acquit you for the slaves being here at
work: on the contrary we are willing to believe, that if you are the brave
Cavalier you appear to be, and that if the glory you have lost, in so fair an
occasion, does, as it ought to do, prompt you to repair your honor; you will
come in the evening and conceal your self in the Garden, after which so soon as
it shall be time (that is so soon as every one shall be a bed) we will give you
opportunity in a fine night, to repair the impotency of a day for you, as full
of dangers as of miscarriage. You very well understand what I mean. Farewell,
We shall expect you you know where.

These last lines, did not a little incite Albirond's ardent desires, at the
same time that they covered his face with shame and confusion at their just
reproaches. He immediately accepted the challenge, for which he suffered so
great a disquiet, that he would have been content to have died upon condition
he had first performed the duty of an able man; only that which most troubled
him in the business was Don Pedro (whom we shall hereafter call Alphonso) with
whom he had a great mind to have a longer conference, and to send for him that
very night; but an affair of Love commonly carries it above all others, and
Albirond had been to be excused, though he had quitted one of greater
importance, for an occasion wherein he was not only to satisfy his Love, but
was moreover concerned to vindicate his reputation.

Just as he was upon this deliberation, Alphonso very seasonably past by with
the other slaves, who were going to the Palace to dinner; whom Albirond having
caused to be called to him, and having taken him aside acquainted him with the
desire he had to have talked with him that evening had it not been for some
business, that he could not possibly dispense withal, but he assured him that
the next day he would send for him, when he would give him some account of his
Mistress, and where they would together resolve upon something in order to his,
and her liberty. He would at that time hold him no longer in talk, that he
might give no suspicion to the Guards who were apt to make a great deal of
cluttur about nothing, and to turn every whisper, and almost every look into
suspicion. Alphonso then thus parted from him; and Albirond took the way
toward the City, where all the afternoon he had made himself ready for the
Triumph that was preparing for him at Night. He went to make the Beglerbeg a
short visit, who was furiously importunate with him to stay supper, though he
made shift to excuse himself, and to get away, by telling him in how ill an
humor he was to drink. For the Ordinary of that Lord was a continual debauch,
and no one was to sit down to his Table unless he was resolved before hand to
drink to a very great height. This visit being over, his next care was to take
the order that was necessary at his lodging, that they might not wonder he lay
from home, as it had some times happened before upon other occasions; all which
being done, without suffering any one to go along with him, he went to the
Rendesvous, where by reason of the slaves being at work in the Garden, every
one almost went in and out at pleasure, without the Guards taking particular
notice of any; an accident that very much favored Albirond's design, who would
not that they should have observed him to go twice thither in one day.

He came there pretty betimes, the better to make choice of his place, and was
soon perceived by Isabella, who stood Sentinel on the Top of the Tower.
Immediately upon his coming he picked out a remote corner to keep himself as
much as he could from being seen; which it was no hard matter for him to do,
for the Garden was spacious enough, wherein twenty might have conceald
themselves without fear of being discovered. It is to be supposed that in two
or three hours time, that the shades of night delayed totally to cover the face
of Heaven; he had leisure to create to himself very beautiful Images of his
approaching happiness, and to represent with infinite delight to his imagination
those pleasures which he made no question but to take with a better gusto, and
to make better use of, than he had done the time before.

The night being at last come, and the Guards of the palace having gone the
Round of the Garden? our passionate, and impatient Lover began a little to
taste the sweet air of liberty. He went out of his shady prison, and
immediately took the shortest cut to the Seraglio, and would not go so much as
a step out of his way, for fear of loosing a moment of occasion, so soon as
Isabella should be come to the window; and being come under the wall he there
stayed expecting her coming with a wonderful patience.

Ad ogni picciol Moto ch'egli udiva,
Sperando ^he fusse ella, ill capo alzava
Sentir credeassi e spesso non sendiva
Poi del suo errore accorto sospirava.
The time ever seems intollerably long, when one is in expectation of any
thing, but especially in matters of love. The night was exceeding dark, that is
to say, the most beautiful to Albironds eye that ever he had seen, and it
seemed in nothing to dislike him but only that Isabella a little to long
delayed her coming, and so long it seemed to our impatient Cavalier, as at
last raised a furious conflict in his Soul betwixt hope and fear; but a little
noise, which he presently heard above at the window, immediately took up the
quarrel. He thereupon gave a little Hem, to signify that he was there; when
presently the Ladder was let down, which he had taken so much pains in making
the time before. He lost no time, but mounted nimbly, and almost at one breath,
up to the window, where Isabella stood waiting for him, who nevertheless was a
little surpised to see him so soon at the Top. She received him after a very
obliging manner, in return whereof Albirond told her in her ear, that he had
news of great importance to acquaint her with, but that it would require some
time in the telling, and a place where no one could over*hear them. For the
place (replied Isabella) I think there can be none more convenient than the
Sultanes's chamber, and we shall certainly have some spare moments in all this
whole night to confer together; for I have something also to tell you of a
dream I have had this night; but let us go, for the Sultaness stays expecting
I should bring her an account of you, and she will be overjoyed when she sees
that you bring it your self. You will find her in bed, but not of sickness,
unless Love be a disease. Prepare your self therefore for brave assaults, for
you never beheld any thing so lovely as what you are now going to see in all
your life. Upon this they came to the Sultanes her Chamber door, into which
Isabella entered first alone, to receive her Mistris' s orders, if she should
introduce Albirond, who stood waiting her pleasure at the door; at which news
the Fair one, as full of impatience, as of joy, start up, and was her self
going to meet him, Benche ne gonna, ne faldiglia haccesse: had not Albirond
(who was as impatient of delays as she) stepped in before he had leave given him
so to do. But how were the eyes of this happy Lover then struck with the most
beautiful object he had ever beheld! He has himself assured me that he was for
some time so dazzled, as if he had not seen at all. This fair Enchantress had
adorned the bed wherein she lay with all the richest furniture she had; but
there was nothing so fair as her self, though she was at this time stripped of
all other ornaments, but what were naturally her own; she had only a stripped
Satin Mantle, the ground whereof was Gold, with which she covered but the one
half of her bosom, and almost all the rest of her body was to be seen through a
smock, the transparent fineness whereof was very proper for the design she had
to hide nothing of those parts wherein she conceived lay the chiefest of her
beauties. Albirond approached her, where putting one knee to ground, he took
one of her fair hands which he kissed above a thousand times: but the Sultaness
(who worse than death feared a relapse of impotency, could not endure that this
ecstasy of her Lover, who uttered not one word, should so long continue) would
break this amorous silence, and also the Charms, that held him thus motionle^s
at her Beds-feet; a posture that she did by no means like to see him in. Well
Albirond (said she smiling) have you recovered your vigor since yesterday, and
may we now expect to know what a man of ability you are. You should not Madam
(replied her Amoroso with a languishing air) reproach me with a disgrace, of
which you your self were alone the cause, for if it was not an effect of your
Charms, I know not by whose enchantment I should be reduced to a condition I
never found my self in before: but (added he with a pretty confident smile) I
have to day taken an antidote, and if I am not mistaken in my own constitution,
I find something in my self more of a man than I had yesterday; at which last
words he had the courage to take off her mantle, which also she had only put on
for ceremony, and that she parted withal without any manner of opposition; and
there in this Palace of Love, he gathered the Roses and the Lillies he had
forgot the day before.

Hor sino'a gli occhi ben nuota nel golfo Delle delitie, e delle Cose bella.
How sweet those sorts of pleasures are, is not here by me well to be expressed
and Albirond himself, though he had at this time more than one tongue in his
mouth, would for all that have much ado to do it; they are delights so
ravishing, as are above all imagination, and such as a man can only advise
those to taste, who have a mind to know truly what they are. It Is a pleasing
kind of occupation, wherein a man cannot well say he is alive, forasmuch as he
is certainly all the while dying of joy and content: But this is most certain
that never Conqueror since the first practice of arms, came more puffed with
glory for the greatest victory he ever obtein'd, than Albirond came off from
this amorous encouter; where nevertheless there was not much blood to be spilt:
and so well satisfied he was with his own performance, that transported with
joy of his gallant behavior, he could not forbear asking the Sultaness, how
she liked the state of his body, and if she was satisfied with his abilities.
Go you ill conditioned thing (replied this fair one with the dying eyes) you
only disappointed me the time before, to make me relish this the better now,
and if you come again, I do verily believe I shall dye of delight. I will by no
means (answered Albirond) be the occasion of your death; but I know very well,
that if these kind of amorous enchantments kill* they also at the same time
revive. At which word he took the charming Lady again in his arms to give her a
proof of what he had said, and accordingly they both of them dyed a death, that
very few people would refuse. This was done, and repeated more than once, I
cannot say how often, neither ought I to do it, that I may leave to every one the
liberty of diverting himself in his own imagination according to his own humor
and constitution, with all that there past betwixt them during some happy hours.

In the end the Sultaness by being very well rocked, was fallen into a gentle
slumber, and Albirond who for some time had no mind to disturb her repose, and
who also himself stood in need of some little cessation, took this opportunity
to go to Isabella to tell her what he had promised. The fair Slave could not
forbear laughing so soon as she saw him come, not knowing which way to frame
her self to ask him, what she had a very great mind to know: but Albirond
presently put her out of her pain by speaking first. Well Isabella (said he)
shall I always be reproached with impotency? I know not (replied the beautiful
Slave who had not yet given over laughing) how well you may have behaved your
self to night; but I am certain there was once reason sufficient to reproach
you with it. After this they both sat down close by one another, where
Albirond told her all he knew concerning Don Pedro, which Isabella found so
surprising and thought so exceeding strange, that she had need of all the
confidence she had in Albirond's worth and integrity to believe it. Her joy
notwithstanding was infinitely great, and she was so much pleased with the
news, that she made him three or four times over and over again give her a
description of Don Pedro's person, to see if he was not deceived, and still
found that he gave a perfect description of his face, his voice, his stature,
his fashion and his manner of speaking, and to be short, the whole account was
Don Pedro himself throughout, so that she was certain it must be he, and now
panted for nothing but the happy hour, wherein she should be so blessed as to see
him. Let mine eyes but once more see thee (cried she above twenty and twenty
times together) but one moment, and then let me dye, I shall be satisfied with
my fate. Albirond then repeated to her at large all that had past concerning
the Letter that Don Pedro had found in the conduit, with the Jealousy it had
put him into, and the things it had made him say, at which poor Isahella
tenderly wept. But after all, they were to think of the means to make them both
happy, wherein Albirond saw no other way but only to try the power he had with
the Sultaness to obtein her liberty without making any mention of Don Pedro;
but that Isabella thought almost impossible, considering the intimacy and
friendship established betwixt her Mistress and her, who she thought would never
be persuaded to part with her, especially so long as Albirond should continue
in the Country, and that he himself would have much ado to disengage himself
from her if he did not do it by stealth, and without taking any formal leave.
Albirond told her that he would further consider of it; but did in the mean
time assure her, that he would evermore labor with all his interest and
endeavor to contribute to their happiness with all the power he had: that he
would talk with Don Pedro about it, and that they would conclude together once
for all, upon what resolution they were to take.

After he had given her these assurances of his good inclination and readiness
to serve her in what shouldlye within his power, he returned toward the
Sultaness, for fear least if she should happen to awake, she might be angry to
see him in private with her Slave; for in that Country the Women are jealous
upon the least possibility, and * Isabella And yet I do believe she might trust
him, as she had ordered the matter.
was handsome enough to give occasion even to those who were not naturally so.
He found her yet asleep, b^^ so that a little noise would serve to wake her,
and it was upon so charming a pretense, that she found no fault with being
disturbed. On the contrary she a little grumbled at him, that he would suffer
her to sleep so long, telling him that that had not in it overmuch of the
Gallant. Albirond excused himself, by telling her, he thought she might have
wanted rest; your self rather you mean (replied the Sultaness very roundly, and
with a pretty smile) who could not have pusht your courage much further without
the relief of this little drowsiness of mine, which seized me so opportunely
for you. I do not see at this time (replied Albirond) that you have any great
reason to complain of me, for -- No (interrupting and taking him in her arms) I
cannot complain said she, I rather fear to be oversatisfied, and least you
should one day make me pay for the pleasure of this night with a thousand
tears; but you ought to consider, that if you love me well, you ought to love
me so long as you live, and never to separate your self from me. Albirond was
about to reply, when Isabella's ^^ice, which they heard very sudden, and very
loud did a little surprise them. They could neither of them both imagine what
should make her ^kreek after that manner; Albirond presently ran, and hid
himself behind the Sultaness bed, and she for the fear she was in durst not
rise to go see what it might be; nevertheless Albirond hearing no more noise,
took heart, and would venture out to Isabella to ask her what was the matter,
but she prevented him by coming her self where she asked their pardon, telling
them, that a Cat had almost frighted her out of her wits, and that it was
nothing else. The Sultaness was not so well satisfied with this excuse; but
that she chid her a little, telling her, that if she was so timorous, she would
do a great deal better to stay in the Chamber with her, rather than to put her
into such frights as were enough to kill her. The Slave excused her self the
best she could, and so retired softly back again to her own Chamber.

Now the truth of the story was, that she had seen a man enter into her
Chamber, which on the sudden (as well it might, where she expected no such
thing) had so suspriz'd her, as had put her to the squeek, but that so soon as
the first fright was over, she knew to be Don Pedro. This Lover whom Jealousy
had tormented without his being able to overcome it, seeing nothing in
Albironds discourse that could presently satisfy him he was not in love with
his Mistress, apprehended a furious Jealousy at what he had said to him in the
Garden, that he would bring him news, and that he had an affair he could not
dispene withal, which hindered him that day from talking with him. Upon this he
asked leave of his Master that he might have the liberty to go to Albironds
lodging, telling him that he had commanded him to come to him; and accordingly
having leave so to do, he went, and was as soon as he came there, told, that he
could not see him that Night, by which his suspicion being infinitely more
augmented, he doubted not but he was by appointment to pass away that very
night in the arms of his faithless Mistress; and thereupon put on a resolution
to dye, or to know the truth once for all. Thus resolved, he departed that very
moment, and fortunately recovered the Gate of the City from whence he made
toward the Garden, to which nevertheless he durst not approach till it was dark
night. The hour being at last come, he walked up and down a long time on this
side, and on that, to see where he might best get over the wall; and at last
found a kind of Breach, which nevertheless was very hard to climb, but with a
little trouble being very active, he at last overcame the difficulty, and
entered the Garden at the same time that Albirond had just mounted the window.
He a thousand times searched every Corner, Arbor and Bush of the Garden, as if
he had been sure to find Albirond in some of those places with his ungrateful
Mistress, and in this diligent search of his he often past before the Seraglio,
where he listened very attentively to try if he could hear nothing there. Behold
here how Love made sport with a poor Lover, and how many ridiculous parts he
made him play. At last he was aware of a Rope that hung down, and was fastened
as he thought above to the wall: for the night was so dark, that it was no
wonder if he took notice of it by mere chance only, and it must also be very
near at hand, or otherwise he could not have seen it at all. This was the
Ladder of Ropes, which the Slave had either perhaps forgot to pull up to her
after Albirond was entered in at the window; or that possibly she had left
there on purpose, that in case of sudden need it might be ready for him, to go
down by, and to make his escape. However it was, Don Pedro presently guest to
what end it hung there, and as soon made use of it to get up by, which though
he did not perform so nimbly as Albirond, yet he did it well enough to get into
the window, from whence with a trembling pace he crept directly to Isabella's
Chamber, for there was no other stairs nor other way to go, but only that. He
found her laid upon her Bed half a sleep, and who waked not at the noise he
made in entering into the Room, because in truth he made none at all, excepting
that of some sighs that escaped from him, when he was come so near as almost to
kiss her, and that rousing her from her slumber made Isabella give that sudden
skreek, who presently coming to her self, said softly to him, is it you Don
Pedro, or do I yet dre^m, as I did to night before, that I was methought in
your arms? To this Don Pedro returned her no answer, but embraced her much more
amorously than before, when Isabella (who was afraid that the noise she had
made might have frighted the Sultaness,) prayed him to forbear a little, fearing
all would be spoiled should she come to know what Don Pedro had done, and
should see him with her, and so ran speedily to her Mistress to set her heart
at rest from the fear she might have put her into; which having done as you
have heard, she returned back to her Lover, whom she wholly satisfied, and
swept his fancy clean from all the naughty impressions he had entertein'd of
her Love and fidelity, which she had preserved inviolate to him, even after she
concluded him to be dead. They then talked, and consulted together a long time
about the means they were to take to put themselves into liberty; but they saw
no kind of possibility in it, unless Albirond could be won seriously and
faithfully to assist them.

After two or three howrs enterteinment with her Lover, Isabella thought it
necessary that he should first depart and wait for Albirond below in the
Garden, who also seeing the night far spent, told the Sultaness it was by no
means either convenient or safe for him to stay till day, and therefore now
took his leave of her with a promise to come again, and pass with her the night
following after the same manner. Upon these conditions she gave him leave to
go; but not until she had first given him a thousand kisses, and presented him
with several knacks of great value. Isabella went with him to the window, where
she told him in his ear, that he would find Don Pedro below in the Garden? but
that he must not wonder at it, for she would hereafter acquaint him with the
occasion of his being there, and in the mean time begged he would pardon him,
if not for his own sake, yet for hers, who was so much a servant of his.
Albirond could not but very much wonder at this news, and did so little
understand the meaning of it, that he would not have gone down, till first
Isabella had given him greater light into the business, if she had not again
assured him that Don Pedro would tell him more, and that it would be too long a
story for her to tell him then. Albirond upon this went down, and was no sooner
come to ground, but he was accosted by Don Pedro, who with a Congee down to the
ground asked his pardon for the effects of a cruel jealosy, which he told him he
would rather pity than be offended withal if he had himself ever been
passionately in love. Albirond caught him in his arms, and after having
returned him some Complements in exchange of friendship, heard him relate the
whole story of this adventure, in so passionate terms, as himself was sensibly
touched with the sense of his sufferings. All the danger that he found in it
was, what they would think at the Fondou (which is the prison for the slaves at
Tunis) when they should miss Alphonso at the shutting of them in, and the
danger wherein he had engaged himself in going out of the City at the hour that
he adventured to do it, and without leave. Notwithstanding fortune (that
sometimes favors Lovers) had so well disposed all things in his favor, that
the master of the slaves, having been at Albirond's lodging to enquire for
Alphonso, was there told, that in truth he had been there to ask for Albirond,
and was doubtless gone a long with him; an answer where with the Turk rested so
well satisfied, that he made no further enquiry after him, nor penetrated no
further into that affair. In the mean time Albirond who saw it was no good
staying for him in the Garden with Alphonso, (or Don pedro whether you please)
and that it was fit for them to shift thence before the day should break,
demanded of him which way he should get in; whereupon Don pedro leading him to
the place, they both of them got over to the other side of the wall, and took
into the wood, where they past away the short remainder of the Night. So soon
as it was broad day they returned to the Garden, where Albirond calling to him
one of the Soldiers of the Guard, he bad him conduct Alphonso to the work, and
in his name to excuse him to his Master, he having for that night employed him
in some affairs of his. This being done, he took up his way directly to the
City, where being come he went to take a little rest upon his Bed, which
without question he stood in very great need of, for the exercise he had been
at, had been something violent, and moreover he was to make himself ready the
night following to return to the assault.

In all the long consultation he had had with Don pedro they could not resolve
after what manner they were to proceed, to Deliver Isabella out of captivity;
for Don pedro was of opinion that they must steal her away, and carry her out
of the window, without so much as at all acquainting the Sultaness with the
design; but Albirond could not consent to play so unhandsome a part to the
prejudice of a person that he loved and by whom he was passionately beloved
again, saying moreover, that it would be a most vile ingratitude in him, could
he have the heart to run away from her without taking his leave, after so many
favors received, and that it was much better to proceed by fair and handsome
ways, which if they should not take effect, it would still be time enough to
proceed to extreamities, after all other more moderate ways had faild. After
this manner did Albirond argue the business; but Don pedro could by no means
relish this course, and could hope for no good issue from this way of
proceeding, fearing to loose all by endeavoring to save all, as he had often
seen it fall out in such affairs. After what manner soever Isabella was
delivered, provided she was at liberty, it was all one to him; nevertheless it
vexed him, that he should be come from Corsica (to which shore he had escapt by
swimming) on purpose to this place; that he had caused himself to be sold to
the Beglerbeg by a Tagarin (which is a sort of Religion amongst the Mahometans)
and that after all this, when he was upon the point to execute so brave an
enterprise, he must hazard the spoiling all for little niceties of honor which
he conceived they were not obliged so religiously to observe with people of so
naughty a Religion. Don pedro argued like an interested Lover, and Albirond
like a well principled man, and a Cavalier of honor, who would at once both
serve his friend, and observe the decorum of honorable proceeding.

He did nothing all that day but sleep, and in that one took enough for two,
or three to come. The hour was now come, that he was to go to the Garden, he
would else be to late. He went thither then, and so soon as ever the night was
shut-in, Isabella made a little noise at the window, and understanding by a
Countersign that Albirond was there ready, she let the Ladder down to him,
which she afterward pulled in again, for fear least some other might do as Don
Pedro had done the night before. So soon as ever Albirond was entered in, he
would without any more ceremony have run with his ordinary impatience to the
Sultaness Chamber; but the Slave advised him to have a little patience, and to
go leisurely to work, for that the Sultaness she said was asleep. During this
little delay they had leisure to confer together in the outer room, where
Albirond gave her an account of all that had been debated, betwixt Don Pedro
and him concerning her deliverance from captivity; but that he was by no means
of opinion she should depart without the Sultaness her leave and consent; or at
least without having first tasted her inclination as to that particular, and as
for his part he must needs confess, he could not find in his heart to separate
himself from her after so treacherous a manner, as not to bid her farewell. You
are then far enough (replied Isabella) from departing this Country. Not so far
neither (replied Albirond) for when the French vessel (which by the favor of
the Beglerbeg I have caused the Pirates to restore, as not fair prize, since
the treaty of peace) shall be made ready to put to Sea, I will embark my self
in her; and I think they are in so good forwardness, that in two days they
will only stay for me. You are not so near going away as you think, I do assure
you (replied the Slave) or at least the Sultanass suspects no such matter; for
that you may know all, as I was but even now talking with her about you, and
that she was according to her passion, multiplying the pleasures she had in
having so captivated your heart, she said, that for her love you were capable
of undertaking all things, since you had so often despised your own life to
come unto her. I then inquisitively demanded of her, if she thought those
pleasures were likely to continue, and whether besides the danger there was of
your being surpised at one time or another, she did not fear in the end to see
herself reduced to a necessity of parting with you for ever. To which she made
answer, that as to the matter of surprises, she would proceed with so great
care and discretion, that she hoped that would never come to pass; and that as
to the rest she could not believe that so long as she had your heart, which she
made no doubt but to keep, you could ever have the power to leave her. That as
to this particular, she had set down a resolution to pass with you the
remainder of her days. That the Beglerbeg could not live always, and when he
should dye, that she should have power enough over you to make you change your
Religon, and to marry her. All these things that Isabella told him, put
Albirond into a little Quandary; but nevertheless he did not much concern
himself at it, and it did by no means make him alter his opinion, that he ought
not to be ungrateful to the extreme affection this beautiful person had for him.

Just as they were upon this point, the Sultaness called Isabella, who
immediately ran in to her to receive her commands, and to let her know that
Albirond was just come, who also entered with her, where he found his Mistress
with a rosy complexion which she had got with some hours of repose, and that
presented her to the eyes of her Lover much fairer than ever he had seen her
before, at least he fancied her to be so, and drawing nearer began to
complement her upon that subject, telling her, that sleep had given her a new
luster. If I owe any thing to sleep (replied the beautiful Sultaness taking him
by the hand) it is for the pleasant dreams it has made me to dream, in the
little time I have been sleeping, for methought that you and I were together in
a rich and stately Palace, where we walked at liberty without fear of spies,
and of which methought you were the Master: Would to Heaven Albirond that this
Dream might prove true, as for my part I do not think it impossible but it may;
but what think you? I have no great faith in Dreams Madam (replied Albirond
with a most profound sigh) but if I were to wish for any thing upon earth, that
should be it, which to my great misfortune I know to be infinitely above my
hopes. Let me once more tell you Albirond (said she) that there is no
impossibility in it, and if you love me as you should do, you ought to hope it
will come to pass, as well as I. Albirond who by what Isabella had told him
before, saw very well what the Sultaness was aiming at in this discourse, was
put to a little nonplus, however he would not let her go without an answer. If
I love you! Madam (said he) it does a little surprise me that you should so
much as doubt it, at the same time when you see me run into the jaws of death
only for your love: but you must pardon me if I do not understand what reason
you can have to call for a testimony of my passion upon the vain hopes of a
Dream, wherein I see no appearance; nor so much as similitude of truth. I can
easily mend that matter (replied the Sultaness) for I have treasure enough both
for you and me, and since Heaven has so united our hearts, it may also one day
uni^e our Souls by a stronger tie, so that there may be no difference betwixt
us, and I may live with you with the same freedom that I now do with the
Beglerbeg my Husband. If therefore it be true that you love me above your life,
you ought to send up your vows to Heaven, that it may place you in that
condition, and not to destroy your own fortune by despair; for I shall no
longer live content, than I can hope it will be so. I here see my fair
Sultaness (said Albirond) that the passion you have for me is extreme, since it
eclipses your judgment in my favor: for though my fortune should be such as to
advance me to that degree of honor you are pleased to speak off, do you not
consider ( Madam) that you and I are of different Religion, and that such
marriages are not here allowed after my way? When there shall be no more but
the point of Religion in the case (replied the Sultaness) there will not be
much difficulty left to overcome. What! would you make such a scruple to change
your Religion for me? This proposition did not so much surprise Albirond, by
reason he was prepared for it before; but nevertheless he found himself very
much moved at the roundness of the question, which made him say to the
Sultaness a little more gravely than before. Do you believe Madam (said he)
that I am a man to renounce my Religion for any worldly consideration whatever?
Have you so mean an opinion of your servant? Ah ( Madam) assure your self I
might well falsify my Faith even to you, if I could fail in it to the God that
I adore -- Well (said the Sultaness interrupting him coldly) you shall not
falsify your Faith, you have done too much for me already, and the first fair
Wind you will return home to your own Country, without once considering that
you leave me here all alone abandoned to all the torments and miseries, that a
tender heart can suffer in the loss of the person it most dearly loves, and
that I shall never more behold so long as I live. Which so soon as she had
said, she drew out her handkerchief to hide an infinity of tears that trickled
from her fair eyes, and which she was not unwilling Albirond should take notice
of, as knowing very well that there are few things, which ^he tears of a
beautiful person, and especially of a person that one loves have ^ot power to
persuade. And indeed ^ese precious drops did accordingly something stagger the
resolution of our Cavalier, but not to that degree as to overcome him; for the
first motions of pity being a little over, his Religion immediately after got
the upper hand, Mauger the power of Love, of all other considerations, and
which was more of his own violent affection. He did the best he could to
refrain from such testimonies of weakness, and to try to consolate this
charming sad one with something of solid sense. We ought to have assured our
selves (my dear Sultaness said he) from the beginning of our engagement, that
we could not continue together all our lives, that our fortunes were such as
would one day oblige us to separate, if but to avoid so cruel a parting as that
of Death. I will defer my departure so long as possibly I can, and if four,
five or six days are not enough, I will make them ten or twelve, wherein to
assure you a thousand times, that in what part of the world soever I shall be I
shall eternally burn for you with the same ardor, that I at this instant do,
and that I will never -- Ah cruel! (said she interrupting him, and weeping wit^
greater violence than before) thou wi^^ then go, and thou have the heart to
te^^ me so. Tr^itor, thou love me not, and am the most miserable Woman in the
World, in that I cannot wean my heart from thy ungrateful Love. Alas, what
offense had I committed against Heaven the first day I faw thy face, and why
did thou come into this Country, if not to my ruin? But my dear Sultaness
(replied Albirond) what would you have me do? No, no (said she) depart so soon
as thou will; but know that it shall not be without me, and that I will follow
thee wherever thou go like thy shadow, and even into Hell if there can be
any thing there more cruel than thy unkindness, and the torments that
unkindness makes me feel. Speak, will thou refuse me? Albirond was more
interdict than ever to see this desparate resolution of hers, he already
repented him, that he had not taken Don Pedro's and Isabella's counsil, and he
had such a perplexity in his soul, as begot an incredible disorder in his
passions, which sided with his heart against his Reason. At last the more
honest and the more generous consideration carrying it above his own particular
interest. You have overcome Madam (said he) I can no longer resist, I am yours.
How (said she clearing up a little) thou consentest that I shall go with thee,
and that I shall have the satisfaction to be no more separated from thee,
wherever thou go? Not so my fair Sultaness (replied Albirond again) but
that I will stay here with you, which I swear to you I will do, but upon this
condition nevertheless, that you will no more tempt me in point of Religion;
for there is no kind of death that I will not rather choose, than to alter
that. Alas (said the Sultaness again) I do not ask so much of thee, pursue thy
former design; but for pity sake permit that I bear thee company, deny me not
this grace (my dear Albirond) for that Deities sake thou do so much adore; I
will take enough with me to make thy fortune, and Isabella shall also go along
with us.

The fair Slave who from the time her Mistress had begun to weep was returned
into the Chamber, was ravished with joy to hear her talk after this manner, and
to see her resolved to this course, which finding so much to her own
advantage, she joined with her against Albirond to persuade him to consent it
should be so; for more than one half of the concern was her own
properinterest; but Albirond was not so easily to be overcome. In the name of
goodness (said he to them seeing himself thus assaulted on either side) imagine
your selves in my place, and consider what a business it would be in me, after
so many obligations as I have to the Beglerbeg, after the friendship he has
shown me, and the favor I have daily received at his hands, should I in return
of all his kindness run away with his wi^e. What would become of my honor, what
a Cloud would overcast my glory after so black an action? Is not what I have
already done enough, or rather what Love has made me do, in betraying his
friend-shi^p and abusing his bed; but after having robbed him of some part of
his treasure, I must deprive him of the whole stock! (said he straining his
voice with greater vehemence) I cannot be infamous to that degree. Thou will be
then my death, barbarous Frenchman (said the Sultaness with a resolute air) and
I must satisfy thee before thou go from the place; at'which she start up on
a sudden, and ran to a poyg^ard that hung at the Beds head, which as suddenly
snatching out, before Isabella who was meeting in tears could prevent her, and
setting the point to her breast, speak, speak (continued she) choose which thou
do better like, or that I follow thee, or Death; for my soul at least thou
can not hinder from following thee. The glittering of the steel, and the
resolute action where with the Sultaness spoke these words quite disarmed
Albirond of his resolution, who was in such a condition with the surprise, that
he was ready to fall down in a swoond at his Mistrisse feet. Ah Madam (said he
in a languished tone) you know very well how to make use of the power Love has
given you over me, to overcome the little virtue I had left I see I must
sacrifice the remainder to you and treading under foot all the days of my
life, permit you to follow the fortune of a man, who was never so unhappy as
now that good fortune seems the most to favor and exalt him. Become securety
to me for your self (said the Sultaness delivering the poygnard to Isabella)
that you will never forsake me, and I fear not your Fortune, let it be as
dangerous as it can; I shall carry that along with me, wherewith to sweeten
that where of you so much complain. For my part (said Albirond to her again,
since nothing of all that I have been able to say, has had the power to divert
you from your resolution, I here swear to you a fidelity such a one as never
was, nor ever shall be equaled by any, and a love that nothing but Death shall
ever have the power to destroy.

After this they fell to talking of something else, and to examining the
speediest, and most secure means, by which they might make an enterprise of
this importance to succeed. Albirond had already a vessel prepared for the
purpose, which was as good as his own; for it was he that redeemed all the
Mariners from the Oar, and who had ecquipt her with all things necessary at
his own charge. Nothing then remaind but how to contrive to help the Sultaness,
and Isabella down from that high window; Albirond's Ladder of Ropes was not
sufficient for women, who are not always so active as men, but this was soon
thought on. Albirond, and Isabella were of opinion to make no mention as yet of
Don pedro, and the Sultaness who had eaten nothing of all day, had a mind to
take a little repast after so generous a resolution, of which they already by
way of advance tasted the delights. To which purpose Isabella presently went,
and fetched some sweetness, and some Wine for Albirond who bore his Mistress
company at this little Collation:

E Poi che di confetti and di buon vino
Di nuovo fatti pur debiti inviti
Entrarono ne profumati lini.
Or if you will that I explain my self better, after these two Lovers had eaten
sweetmeats their fill, and drunk to one another more than once, they were
willing to taste something more sweet, in those ravishing pleasures to drown
the trouble they had put one another into. Sweetmeats are no ill diet for this
purpose, nay I have heard it said, that one has more pleasure in kissing a
mouth after it has had another sweet added to its own natural sweetness.
Albirond did his business very well for a man of his sincere virtue, and the
Sultaness in this ardor of hers would have dried up many more tears than she
had shed; she often reproached him in the middle of this amorous conflict, that
he did not love her, since he dared to think of leaving her, and that he had
made so many difficulties of taking her along with him, and Albirond still
excused himself with his former reasons, which he said had been but too
rational and convincing, had he not been in Love. I, but does it become love
(said she) to be so rational, as to seek for reasons to abandon all? Ah you
vexed me to the heart (continued she) when you went about to persuade me to it.

The nights are very short in these occasions, and time insensibly steals away,
which Albirond was nevertheless aware of; and for fear the day should surprise
him in that place, he took his leave of the Sultaness to go take order for all
things, and to take his measures so right, that when they should once be upon
the execution of their design, nothing might be wanting that might endanger all
the rest. Isabella often desired him to remember that diligence was the parent
of success, that the sooner they put their enterprise in act, it was the more
likely to succeed, and that delays are always fatal in dangerous designs.

He slept not of all that day, but was perpetually running up and down from
place to place in order to his business. He first went, and talked with the
Pilot of his ship, who promised him the next day to be ready to depart,
whereupon he accordingly ordered the rest of his affairs, as they ought to be*
He caused good store of all sorts of provision necessary for the voyage to be
carried aboard; he took leave of all his friends, and particularly of the
Beglerbeg, who made him stay dinner. In earnest I have often wondered at
Albirond's confidence, who durst any more eat with a man after he had put on a
resolution to betray him: for this Cavalier wanted no honesty, but all things
are to be pardoned in Love; who has power to make men do any thing of what kind
soever. In the evening he went to the Garden, where he talked two howrs together
with Don pedro, who was ravished with joy at the good news, and with whom after
he had concluded of what they were to do, he sent him again to his work amongst
the other Slaves; and crept into the old place where he had conceald himself
the times before, till the approaching night should call him out to his
business. Soon after the time came that he was to steal out of his hole, which
he accordingly did, and went to the Seraglio, where Isabella was already
waiting for him at the window, for she now began to be more impatient of seeing
him than before, and died of longing to hear what news, and how their affairs
went on. The sign was immediately given on both sides, the Ladder immediately
let down, and Albirond quickly at the top, where he completed the joy of these
two fair Lovers, by telling them at the very first dash, that all was ready,
and that therefore they had no more to do but to prepare themselves against the
following night, when he would come with two horses to fetch them, and to carry
them to the Port. It is not to be expressed how infinitely overjoyed they were at
this good tidings, what caresses they gave him, and how extraordinary kind they
were to him, especially Isabella who was ready to leap out of her skin for joy:
and in earnest it is true, that people escape very willingly out of servitude
to go meet a Lover, which although it be but to quit one slavery for another,
yet the setters of the last are as easy, and pleasant to every one, as the
other are rude and intolerable. There was then that night great joy and
junketting in the Sultaness Chamber, but one often relishes joy with a very
great Gusto, of which they soon after repent, and mishaps fall heavier, when
they have first appeared in the livery of good fortune. Albirond past away the
remainder of the night with his Mistress, where you may be certain he was not
altogether idle, and an hour before day departed to give the last blow to their
design.

How heavy do these kind of enterprises lie upon the conscience of an honest
man, who has never been accustomed to do any thing without first weighing the
action in the balance of justice and honor! All the remaining part of that day
his soul was oppressed with melancholy, and with so great a number of untoward
presages, that death would at that time have been a wel-come remedy, but he was
gone too far to retreat. The Beglerbeg was this day gone a hunting, and the
Slaves had no more work to do in the Garden, and he had Don Pedro in his own
power, whom he had sent for to that purpose: in fine all things seemed to favor
his enterprise, and yet his heart could not be at rest; ^e had strange boadings
in his Soul, and his conscience already reproacht him with his treachery to the
Beglerbeg his friend. But a man must go through with what he has once begun,
and necessity must silence all these secret murmurings of honesty and reason.
He sent for a final Order to give notice to the Pilot to be ready to set sail
that very night, and that he should send out the long Boat to wait at the place
he knew of; so that there now remained no more to be done, but only to get
their two fair Mistrisses out of the Seraglio, which also had been a matter of
no great difficulty, had they been as much in see with Fortune, as they were
with Love.

Albirond had four very fine Horses that he had bought, and which he kept
without the City, whither he went with Alphonso to see and to put them into a
condition for present service; which having accordingly done, he sent his
people before to attend him at the Port, where making show as if he followed
(...)* (...) turned off by degrees, and made toward the Seraglio; where just
as the night was shut-in, he arrived. He made Don Pedro with two empty Horses
to stay in a wood there was about two hundred paces distant from the Garden
where he himself alighted, and went to climb the wall, to which purpose he had
the day before provided a Ladder of wood wherewith to serve the Ladies.
Isabella was at watch, and had been above an hour taking the air at the window,
where she fancied every leaf that fell to be Albirond, at the last he came,
where she let down the rope, by which he was to get up, and which also was to
assist them in going down. There was no talk of ceremony or caresses, all
things had been ready at the Seraglio from break of day in the morning, and the
Sultaness had no mind to carry any great lumber with her, for fear of being
encumbered with it by the way. That which she had of greatest val^^ lay in
little room, and was portable enough, though it contained sufficient to
purchase a little Kingdom, and that she would entrust with none but Albirond.
Isabella the^ immediately ran, and ^^^^^t some sheets fast tied together, a
machine of Albirond's invention to help them down with greater ease to their
tender hands, and it proved useful and strong enough, these being Women that
were pretty and light. They again mounted and descended the wall of the Garden
with the same facility, and so came all safe to the place where Don Pedro was,
who immediately threw himself off his horse to embrace his dear Mistress, and
to hold her the By which you may note that the Ladies rode astride.
Stir-up to get up. Albirond did the same for the Sultaness when being all
seated, and ready to set forward, they all started together, and galloped away
after so spritely and joyful a manner, that they seemed to fly. Neither indeed
had they any time to loose, for it was above three long leagues from the Garden
to the port of the Gullet to which place they were to go, and were also there
to arrive some hours before day, both for fear of being discovered by the
Blockhouse, as also that they might set sail before the search which the Turks
are accustomed to make in all Christian Vessels that are going out of the
Harbor. But to what serve so many precautions when one has not fortune on ones
side! we are apt to stumble at a straw, and it is to much purpose to dispose all
things to hook her in, when by a strange Capricio, she will in a moment
overthrow and destroy all that has with a thousand cares and cautions been many
days preparing.

This amorous Troop had not rid above a quarter of an hour, but that for all
the noise their own Horses made in galloping with the speed they did, they
heard another a greater, and which raised a great deal more dust. Whereupon
Albirond gave the word to make a little halt, to hearken from whence it should
come, and what the noise should be; but it was not hard for him, or any of the
Company to guess, and a little with the latest, that they were Horses, and a
great many Horses too, for they were hard at hand, and coming as they perceived
by the voices, and the trampling of the horses the very same way, and upon the
same rode that they were going* Albirond made no doubt but it was the
Beglerbeg, and though it had been said that he was not to return from hun^ing
of three or four days, nevertheless he could not imagine that any other than
he should come that way and so well accompanied. They were here to take a
speedy resolution, and his opinion was that the safest way would be to stip
into the wood to let them pass by; but the further they went that way, the more
they heard the Horses coming upon them, for it was on that side that they had
hunted, and that in truth the Beglerbeg was returning home. They then began to
think of turning quite back again, which they had done better to have thought
on at the first, by reason that the habits of the two fair Ladies, especially
that of the Sultaness, so sparkled in despite of the nights obscurity, as by
their luster attracted the Beglerbegs Cavaliers, who spurred after them full
speed. Albirond seeing no more remedy for their disaster, and that the match
was too unequal to be able to resist so great a number, as that of those who
pursued them; he told the Company in short, that there was no more hope, and
that every one was to shift for themselves, that whoever could escape the
present danger, should find a shallop within two hundred paces of the Gullet
that waited to carry them aboard the Ship; where if it should be his hap the
first to arrive he would not stir from thence till the last necessity. He said
no more but spurred away with much greater speed than before, all the way
encouraging the Sultaness, to whom he kept as close as possible he could. Don
Pedro and Isabella in a moment were vanished out of sight, and in the end they
were all so squandered in the thick of the wood, that they met no more, till
they met in another place.

Albirond who was acquainted with almost all the windings of the wood as having
often been a hunting there, soon found the way out, and after was not long
before he arrived at the water side. He found the longboat at the appointed
place which there waited for him, but would not step into it, till it should be
day to see if he could hear any news of the rest. He sent out two, or three
of the Mariners to see if they could spy any one coming, but in vain, for they
brought him back no news at all; but not long after came first Isabella full
speed, and within a quarter of an hour after Don Pedro running on foot:
Isabella with her face all scratcht, and her Clothes torn with the wood and Don
Pedro all bloody with two great cuts in his head, and a pistol shot quite
through his left arm: who seeing no one pursue them fell to enquiring of
Albirond for the Sultaness; and what was become of her. I know not (said he
weeping) alas to my eternal shame, I know not what is become of that beautiful
person, but I very well know my self to be the most wretched of men. Oh Heavens
(continued he) what offense have I committed against you, that you should at
once pour all your vengeance upon me? What fault have I committed that Love did
not compel me to? Why did you give me eyes to see, understanding to
distinguish, and a heart to love, if for adoring the most adorable creature in
the world I must be thus severely punished? Or why did not all your indignation
fall upon my accursed head, who was the cause of all, but that the sweetest,
the truest, and the best Mistress that ever man had must perish for my sake,
whilst I survive like a Coward, a Traitor, and a Beast, to run a way from the
Destiny, that she too Certain has already undergone, or must immediately
undergo, for the vilest, and the basest Villane upon Earth. Oh Heavens -- and
with that he sunck down to the ground in a swoon, without any signs of life.
Don pedro and Isabella, who were upon thorns to be gone, were very much
troubled at this disaster: but Albirond presently coming to himself, they fell
to comforting him, persuading him to hope for better things, or at least to
preserve himself and them by hasting speedily away, since there was no other
course now to be taken. They represented to him the danger of staying any
longer there, which would infallibly be the ruin of them all, if he did not
presently take hold of the opportunity fortune now offered him of making his
escape. To which Isabella added that without all doubt the Sultaness was well,
it being unlikely that any one should dare to offer any violence to her, since
even when she had been surrounded with them in the heat of their pursuit, and
moreover provokt by some wounds Don pedro had dealt among them, they had yet
forborne to hurt her out of respect to her Sex: that the Sultaness, she
believed, was certainly taken, which she was infinitely sorry for; but that it
could not be remedied, and she only lamented her for the sorrow she would
sustain in being separated from him whom she loved above the world; for as to
the rest, the Beglerbeg was so passionately fond of her, that in a little time
all would be forgiven, and she would be in the same condition that before. But
Albirond more afflicted with these consolations, in which besides that he saw
no appearance of her safety, he was however confirmd that she was for ever lost
to him, and either of those thoughts were sufficient to precipitate him into
despair. No, no (said he) she is lost, for ever lost, and if alive more unhappy
than if she were dead; and I, accursed I, am cause of all. Go make use of the
opportunity you have to escape, and may you be happy in your Loves: but for me,
who have violated the Laws of hospitality, the gratitude of a man, and the
common faith of men, and therein lost my Love, my honor, and the peace of my
whole life, I will here remain, and sacrifice a wretched life to her memory,
who has already sacrificed hers to my unhappy love. Go then, and prosper, and
leave me to my Fate, and all the friendship I beg at your hands, is, that you
will no more remember there was ever so unfortunate a person as Albirond, which
is the greatest favor you can do me, and the only dying request I have to
make. Don Pedro was a little startled at this resolution of his; as he saw it
would be absolutely ruinous to them all: yet could he not in his own judgment
but approve his generosity; and allow him to have all the reason in the world
to do as he did, seeing that in such a case a man of honor ought not to
out*live his Mistress: he could however have wished his venture had been single,
not altogether upon his own account, but out of the tender regard he had to
Isabella, whose affection would make her as great a looser as any of the rest,
and who he thought could never survive it. However his love gave place to honor
upon this occasion, and his noble heart disdaining to abandon a Cavalier
embarked with him in the same design, and by whose means alone they had thus
far succeeded in their enterprise, at the last gasp of his fortune, he returned
him this answer. Albirond, I am sorry for your own sake to see you thus
desperately resolved; but assure your self I am not a man to forsake you in
this last of extremes; but will share with you in life and death; and turning
to Isabella, My dearest Soul (said he) I must now take my leave of you for
ever: Honor, and my Destiny will have it so: we have done enough (if it be
done) in preserving you, and I have no great reason to complain of Fortune,
since we save the best of our venture: My death will doubtless reconcile you to
your Father, and the news you will carry him thereof will seal your own pardon.
I could have been glad to have lived with you a long, and I know it would have
been a happy life; but since I cannot live with honor, after having basely
abandoned my friend in his last necessity I should afterward be so unfit for
you, that it would not become you to love me; but now that I dye like a man of
honor you may love my memory, which I hope you will, and ever remember -- No,
no (said Isabella interrupting him, and weeping, as good reason she had) Don
Pedro I will never outlive you, and since you have the heart to leave me, for
whom, you made me believe, at least, you only lived, to dye out of Complement
only to a desperate Cavalier, my resolution shall be as great as your
generosity, and I dare dye with you, although you will not live with me. To
this point were they come every one of them, considering what they had next to
say, when on a sudden they heard a noise of Horses, which thundering amain
toward the place where they were, made them conclude that the pursuers were at
hand, and consequently to prepare for their defense.

Albirond besides his sword, had a case of pistols which he had secretly
carried under his Cassock for the worst of adventures, and in case of any
opposition, which though where ever he should happen to meet it whilst he was
on shore, he knew would be fatal to him: Yet that he might die like a brave
Cavalier, and carry some of his enemies a long with him, he had discreetly made
that provision. Don pedro had a sword only, which Albirond had likewise
furnished him withal, and now delivering one of his pistols to him; Let us dye
Don Pedro, said he, let us dye bravely, and sell our lives to these Barbarians
so dear, that they may be ashamed of the purchase, which having said they were
mounted in a trice, Don Pedro upon Isabella's Horse, and Albirond upon his own,
and stayed expecting the approach of the Enemy, which by this time were come so
near, that they discovered the foremost to be the fair Sultaness with five or
six Turkish Cavaliers pursuing at her heels; she was quickly with, and as soon
past them, but the pursuers being four or five Horse-le^gth behind, our two
Cavaliers had time to interpose, and so that at the very first encounter the
two foremost, with the two pistol-shot were laid dead upon the ground. By this
the match seemed to be pretty equal, two more only appearing near at hand and a
third spurring at pretty distance; but a fourth also immediately appearing in
the heels of the other, they thought it was time to make have with these; that
they might not have the disadvantage of having them all four upon them at once:
they advanced therefore to meet them, which as they were doing, Albirond at a
little distance received one of their Javelins in his thigh, which though it
took but about two fingers thickness of the flesh, yet piercing quite through,
nailed him as it were fast to his saddle: the other ^ail'd of its effect upon*
Don Pedro, and only wounded his Horse; so that they still went on to make good
the charge, where being joined horse-head to head the fell to the sword, and a
while disputed it with equal bravery. Don Pedro had forgot his wounds, and
Albirond had no leisure to take notice of his, so that fresh and full of vigor
they assaulted their adversaries, notwithstanding the disadvantage of wounds,
and loss of blood, with so resolute a courage, as sufficiently denoted, they
would overcome, or dye. In this posture was the combat when the two last came
up to the place, who seeing Don Pedro all bloody, and the Javaline sticking in
Albironds thigh, and at the same time the two Ladies who were now got together,
and standing by at the distance of some few paces, they either thought their
Comrades so secure of the victory, or else had themselves so much a greater
liking to the prey, that they past by the Combatants, and went to seize upon
the Sultaness and Isabella, who it is to be presumed were likely to make very
little resistance, and must have been their immediate prey, had not the
Mariners played the Men, as well as the two Cavaliers, who seeing the case
alike desperate for them all, betook them to their Oars, and such other weapons
as they had at hand, and therewith so belabour'd the two Turks that they sooon
laid them dead at their feet.

In the mean time the Monsieur, and the Don had so handled their adversaries,
having vvounded them in several places, without having received any other
damage from them, than what you have already heard, that they now evidently
saw they had the advantage of the Combat, and had there been no more enemies to
be feared, should have accounted it a certain Game: but remembering that in the
condition they then were, to be long in overcoming was in effect to be
overcome; and expecting every moment when more of the pursuers should come up,
to deprive them at once of their victory, and of their lives, and which was
dearer to them than all, of their dearest Mistrisses, they fought with
unimaginable ardor to put an end to the dispute, which lasted but too long for
their common safety. And it was not long before Albirond's adversary gave him a
notable opportunity to do his business; for the Turk thinking at every blow to
cleave him in two, made a furious blow at his head, which Albirond made so good
shift to avoid, that it only fell upon his shoulder, and there gave him but a
slight wound, the force of the blow being broken before, whilst in the mean
time he run the Turk quite through the body, who thereupon fell like a Tower
stone dead under the Horses feet. This happened just at the time when Don Pedro's
Horse sunk down under him of his wound, an accident that would have been as
fatal to him, had not Albirond came in seasonably to his relief, who finding
the Turk with his Cimitar advanced in the Air ready to discharge a mortal blow
upon Don Pedro (who nevertheless having disengaged himself from his Horse stood
bravely in his defense) struck him such a blow upon the vvrist, that his Sword
meeting with the joint, hand and Cimitar dropped down over his Horses ears, at
the same instant that Don Pedro ran him quite through the belly, of which two
vvounds he also fell dead to the Earth.

They did not stay long (you may suppose) to congratulate one another with
their victory, nor to insist upon commendations of one another valor, which
upon other occasions men very hardly forbear to do; but ^unning to the Ladies
without any more ceremony, than the drawing the Javelin out of Albirond's
thigh, or almost a word speaking, they got them into the Shallop, and rowed
away to ^he Ship, which so soon as ever they were aboard, they presently cut
the Cable, not staying to weigh Anchor, hoysted sail, and in a trice were got
out to Sea: it no less importing the Seamen than the Cavaliers to shift for
their lives, whose condition in being taken again had been much worse than
before, or upon any other account, they having now engaged themselves (though
they well understood it not at first) in a voluntary and unpardonable offense,
whereas before they had nothing but their Christianity to be objected against
them.

The day now began to break, and a brisk Gale of wind stiffned upon them from
the shore, which if it should but a few hours continue would soon carry them
out of sight of Land, and out of the danger of pursuit, which also they did not
much apprehend, there being never a Ship (which was a happy juncture for them)
ready in the harbor: but the Ladies were so fearful of being taken, that the
Cavaliers had enough to do to comfort and assure them, and yet they carried
their fears so well, that it did not hinder them from caressing their Servants
after a very tender and affectionate manner, and from taking care of their
wounds, which were none of them of very great danger, but nevertheless such as
obliged Albirond to halt a little before the best friend he had, and Don Pedro
to carry his arm in a sling. Several Complements past betwixt them, and a great
many fine things were said, both on the one side and the other; after which
falling to enquire of one another adventures, Isabella as being the first
after Albirond that came in to the Rendez-vous, told them, that Don Pedro and
she being environed with a great number of Turkish Cavaliers in the wood, her
Lover ha^ so laid about him, that the Turks neglecting her in the heat of the
fight, gave her opportunity to get unobserved into the thickest part of the
wood where she verily thought she should have been torn to pieces with the
thorns and brambles; but that at last Fortune guided her out, and so she made
full-drive to the shore, giving Don Pedro for absolutely lost. And so I was
very likely to have been (said Don Pedro) but that desperately rushing into the
thickest of them. I bore one of them horse and man to the ground, and got into
the thick of the wood, where I forsook my horse, and favored by the night
concealed my self in a hollow tree, till I heard the pursuers a great way from
thence, and then I stole out of my hole, and at last finding my self got clear
of the wood, ran in the posture you saw me on foot to the Port. And I (said the
Sultaness) had the ill fortune to be pursued by my Husband himself (as I knew
by his voice) with the gross of his Trayn* who being himself the foremost of the
Troop, was so eager in his pursuit, and in his eagerness took so little heed to
his way, that his horse stumbling at the stump of a Tree came over and over
with so terrible a fall, as I verily believe has broke his neck; so that the
most of the Cavaliers alighting to take him up, I was only pursued by those few
you saw, and have so roughly handled, and so came in after the manner your
selves know better than I, who was in such a fright that I scarce knew what I
did.

They were taken up with these, and the like discourses till the Sun being got
about an howr high, they conceived it was necessary for the Ladies to take a
little repose, which they entreated them to do, whilst they went out upon the
Deck to incite the diligence of the Mariners; which they also did, though that
was no very necessary care, their own fears adding spurrs to their endeavor,
with which together with the fair wind they had, and the lightness of the
vessel, of her self a good Sayler, they so skird a way before the wind, that
by noon they had almost lost sight of the Coast of Barbary, and doubted not in
a very short time (if the weather proved constant, as they believed it would,)
to recover the Island of Sardinia to which (as it was agreed betwixt the two
Cavaliers) they steered their course.

With the Suns going down the Wind slackned upon them, but kept the same
Quarter all that night, and the next morning they had another fresh gale with
which they made very good way, and now sailed on without any more fear of being
pursued, when about noon they discovered a head of them a sail, which at
distance put them into some fear, least it might be a Turkish Pirate, but they
soon found their fears to be vain, it being a Galley of Malta, who was looking
out for those Pirates, and was a brave tall Ship commanded by a Frenchman, and
a Knight of the Order, who was very famous in those Seas for many brave
exploits against those enemies of the Christian Faith.

The Galley was not long before she haled them in, a Summons that our Cavaliers
were very glad to obey, as seeing themselves now totally out of danger, and
therefore launcing the Longboat, Albirond would himself needs go aboard the
Galley, though the Sultaness was very importunate with him to stay, and to send
some other, for as yet the name of Christians (who were now to be her best
friends) was terrible to her. So soon as Albirond was come aboard the Galley,
he presently gave the Captain an account of his escape with another Gentleman,
and some Slaves he had delivered out of Captivity; at which he seemed to be
very glad, enterteining him with very great curtesey, and making him an offer
of any thing in his Ship, himself, or his friends might stand in need of; for
which Albirond returning him many thanks, and going to salute the other Knights
and Gentlemen of the Galley, he was there aware of an old acquaintance, and
particular friend of his, who with great joy embracing him, the first Ceremony
being over, told him, that his friends in France, from whence he was lately
come, were in very great pain for his absence, that they had made his Peace
with the King, and that he would be a wel-come man into his own Country: but
withal whispered in his ^ar, that his Mistress Madam Urania was lately married
to rich President a match her friends had with much importunity persuaded her
unto, and which she had at last accepted, out of a belief, by reason of his
long absence, that he was certainly dead. Of the first news Albirond was
exceeding glad, as he had good reason to be, seeing himself by the care, and
good Offices of his friends restored to his Country, and his Princess favor,
and was not very sorry for the last, as being now much better provided; neither
did he doubt, but with what the Sultaness brought along with her to purchase
such a revenue in France, as should settle him and his very well at their ease
for ever. Having been for some hour, or more entertein'd aboard the Galley, he
was at last dismissed by the Captain, with great demonstration of honor and
friendship, and returned back to his own Vessel, which afterward pursued her
voyage without any other adventure, till within a short time, to their general
joy they arrived safe at the Island of Sardinia.

So soon as ever they came to an Anchor, Don Pedro immediately sent off the
shallop, to acquaint the Viceroy with his coming, who presently sent out Boats
to fetch him, himself in the mean time coming down to the shore to receive him,
and all the Artillery of the Town and Haven thundered their wel-come. His Uncle
had heard the whole story of his troublesome affairs, and of his flight;
wherefore so soon as the first Complements to the Ladies were a little over,
taking his Nephew aside, he acquainted him, that Isabella's Father was lately
dead of an Apoplexy; that the Marquess was turned religious, and that
Isabella's Brother was shortly to be married to the Viceroy's Daughter of
Valence a Lady of very great beauty and virtue, with a portion of thirty
thousand Ducats; and now wanted nothing but the good news of his Sisters safety
to make him completely happy.

Thus after so many dangers; griefs and fears, did joy in torrents come
tumbling in upon our fairs Lovers; so that nothing now remained to perfect
their happiness, but the converfion of the fair African, which also was no hard
matter to do, and she had not run such and so many hazards to stick at any
thing; so that being instructed by the Bishop of the place she was within a few
days received into the bosom of the Church, and at the same time solemnly
married to Albirond.

They stayed two months in this place, in which time Isabella's Brother hearing
of her fortune, himself came to invite, and to wait upon her home, where he
carrest Don Pedro, as a man, to whom besides that he was to be his
Brother-in-Law he stood obliged for his Life. Don Pedro and Isabella would also
needs have Albirond, and his fair Sultaness along with him to taste the
Enterteinment of Spain; an invitation which they as readily accepted, and being
first entertein'd, and afterward dismissed, with great Love and Honor by the
Viceroy, the Wind standing fair, they took Shipping, and with a prosperons
voyage in a short time arrived at Valence.

They were no sooner entered the Haven, but news being presently carried to the
City, the Viceroy himself with all the Nobility, Gentry and the chiefest
Citizens of the Town came out to meet them, where as they were received with
all imaginable civility and respect, so were they enterteined with all the
magnificence of Triumphs, Feasting, Masks and Plays. The double Nuptials of
Don Ilian (for so was Isabella's Brother called) with the Viceroys Daughter,
and Don Pedro with Isabella presently ensued, which also were solemnized with
all the imaginable Triumph of Feasting, Tilting, running at the Ring, Ivego des
Cannes, and Ivego des Toros; in all which Albirond would ever be one of the
party, and although a stranger to the last, would needs try his Fortune, and
therein so signalized his dexterity and valor, as gained a singular applause.
In these kind of enterteinments they past away about six weeks of the most
pleasant season of the Year; when having graced their Friends Nuptials which
was the main end of their coming to that place, Albirond and his fair
Sultaness began to think of their own affairs; in order whereunto having made
ready their equipage, and taken leave of the Viceroy (by whom Albirond, was
immediately presented with two very fine Spanish Horses) and the rest of their
Friends, with a mutual protestation of perpetual Friendship, they took their
leave of Spain, and by easy and pleasant Journeys retired into their own
Country.

FINIS.

