A FEW WORDS TO ALL Who Profess Themselves to be OF THE Protestant Religion,
WHEREBY They may understand by what Spirit they were led, that Persecuted the
People of God in former Ages, for the Exercise of their Religion, and their
Tenderness of Conscience in matters Relateing to the Worship of God.

With a few Words of Comfort to the Suffering Lambs.

Written by him that would have the greatest of Persecutors to Repent, and
cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well, that so they might escape the Judgments
of the Lord.

F. E.

We unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness,
which they have-prescribed: To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take
away the right from the poor of my people, that Widows may be their prey, etc.

Isai. 10.1, 2. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there
any (...) against Israel, nor weapon formed that can prosper,

(...). 23.23. Printed in the Year, 1665.

A few Words to all, etc.
THe people of the Lord, who you in scorn call Quakers, may in this day truly
say as David said, that you and other Plowers have plowed a long time upon our
backs, and made deep Furrows, but now is the time coming, that the righteous
God, will hew your snares asunder, therefore fear and dread our God, for he is
come, in ten thousands of his Saints, to judge the World of ungodly Men, and to
rebuke all the ungodly amongst them, for all their ungodly deeds, and hard
speeches against him, and for this cause (and no other) have you in this day,
as well as those Rulers that our God cast out before you, risen up against us,
in persecuting, imprisoning, beating with Armed Soldiers, stocking, stoning,
fining, and shamefully abusing an innocent harmless people, who have in
patience suffered under you and them, ever since the Lord came to reign in us,
but now you have got to the height of your persecution, and not much higher
our God will suffer you to go, nor he never did any, when they grew to that
height of wickedness and cruelty, that now you are come unto, for the Lord
has suffered Persecuters to plow long upon his peoples backs, that so he might
try and exercise his peoples faith and patience, as he has suffered those
before you, and now has suffered you, but when plowing upon their backs would
not satisfy them, as beating, fining, and imprisoning of them, but they would
get a law, or Decree, made to root out, banish, or to kill, and destroy the
whole Seed of righteous Israel, and to boast as Pharaoh and his Host did,
Exodus 15.9.
I will pursue, I will overtake them, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall
be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them, (or I
will banish them out of my Land, except they will worship according as I shall
command them, I say when ever Persecutors came to this stature in wickedness,
then their time was near an end, and deliverance near to the persecuted.

The first that came to this stature in wickedness was Cain, who was the elder
Brother of all Persecuters, his punishment for killing his righteous brother
about Religion, was greater then he was able to bear (as himself confessed)
Genesis the 4.

Read the sin of the old World, Genesis 6. and 11. The Earth also (or the old
World) was corrupt before God: for the Earth was filled with violence. (or
cruelty) Persecution is cruelty, and for this the Lord swept away the World of
ungodly, and they perished in the Waters, but saved righteous Noah the
persecuted, alive in the Ark with his Family.

And read Exodus how wicked Pharaoh oppressed Israel a long time, Exodus 5.6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
but when the Lord sent his servant Moses to be their Conducter and Leader, out
of his house of bondage, then Pharaoh oppressed them more, when they desired to
go sacrifice to the Lord their God, then he said the peopleare idle, let them
have no more Straw given them, but let then go and gather it where they can
find it, yet said he to the Officers, let them diminish nothing of their days
works, but let them make their whole Tail of Brick as formetly, so the
Officers came and beat them, and threatened them, and they cried unto the Lord,
and the Lord heard the cry of the afflicted, and he delivered them, and sent
his plagues upon Pharaoh, and upon his Land and People, so that at length he
let Israel go, but as soon as they were gone out from him, Pharaoh came to
that stature of wickedness, both he and his people, as the Persecuters in
England are at this day, and they consented to pursue, and to destroy them at
once, (they would rid the Land of them) but the Lord delivered Israel, and that
which delivered them, was the destruction of Pharaoh, and all his Host, Exodus
14.

Now Moses wrote afterward that the Lord would raise his people up a Prophet
like unto him, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
from amongst their brethren, and him they should hear in all things, and
according to his prophecy, the Lord has raised up this Prophet, is the midst
of us, the Light Christ Jesus, and he has enlightened us, and the Lord has
sent him to be our guide, and Conducter out of spiritual Egypt, where formerly
he was crucified.

And now we may call to remembrance the days that are passed, as the Apostle
wrote, Heb. 10.32, 33.
that after Christ Jesus the light came unto us, and we received the Light, how
we have endured a great fight in affliction, and as it were in Egipe, after
Moses was sent of the Lord to lead his people forth, so it has been with us
ever since we received the Light, the Prophet Moses wrote of, how have our
Persecutors oppressed us, and in no wife they will yield that we shall
sacrifice to the Lord our God, as Christ Jesus the Light in us, shall direct
us, and they have far exceeded Pharaoh and his Taskmasters in cruelty toward
us (though we are freeborn, and Israel were strangers) as instance Pharaohs
bondage to Israel, was chiefly to the outward man, in oppressing of them with
hard labor, now if our Taskmasters would but do so to us, and not oppress
our consciences, we should look upon them to be merciful men, if they would let
us labor for our livelihood, for our Wives and little Infants in the Land of
our Nativity, but they will not, but cast us, and some of our Wives and
Children, into nasty stinking holes and dungeons, and there for their pleasure
keep us from laboring either for our selves, or for to get Bred for our
Families, and lay great penalties upon the cruel Goalers, that we may have no
liberty to go abroad, not so much as to breath in the Air, neither allow any
of us one farthing of Allowance, to keep us alive, within their stone walls,
and yet as Pharaoh lay heavier Taxes upon us to pay then ever, and yet will not
let us labor with our hands, to get therein, but sends their Officers to our
habitations, where our small Children are, and there tare away that little we
have left them, to pay the Kings Taxes, and to pay those false Prophets that
teach for Hire, oh cruelty of all cruelties, far exceeding Egipts bondage, for
we never read that they ever imprisoned the Israelites, and not let them
labor, but only oppressed them with labor; neither were they ever denied the
benefit of the Air to breath in, as our Protestant persecuters does (...) this
day; and we have cried to the Lord our God, and our innocent sufferings has
been spread before him, and he delivered us from the generation of Protestant
persecuters that were in Oliver's days; and his Righteous judgments has swept
them away, as he did others in days past. But yet I say, they were not grown to
that stature in wickedness, as now the Protestant persecuters are: For now we
are not only imprisoned, Math. 5.34, 35.
hundreds together, in noisome Goales (where many have sealed their Testimonies
with their bloods for the Truths sake,) but now we are cast into Prison,
because we will not break an express Command of Christ, (whom our Persecuters
falsely calls their Savior) who says expressly, Swear not at all, James 5.12.
neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath. And further, if we
will not break this Law, and swear by that Book, which says, we must not
swear, we must by their Law be banished from the land of our Nativity, from our
Wives and little Children, and dearest Relations, into foreign Lands, there to
seek our Bread among strangers; and if ever we return within seven years, we
are by the cruel Law to die without mercy; and whoever shall worship the true
God, if they be above the number of four besides the Household, except in that
way, time and place, which man has invented, he or she shall undergo the same
penalties as aforesaid.

To Persecutors in this Age, let it be told to those,
In Cruelty they have out-stript, Pharaoh and all that rose.
The next that we read of that was grown to this stature in wickedness, Numb.
22. 5. 6.
as to root out and destroy the Israel of God, it was Balak King of Moab, for
as the persecuters in this day would have the Lords own People that fear him,
to be all banished, so Balak in his day, he would have had them all cursed, (it
being all by one and the same spirit) what ever it cost him, and for money and
for reward Balaam would willingly have cursed them, but the Lord would not in
that day let Man (as he will not let his People be banished in this day) but
made Balaam bless them altogether, and we read that when Balaam went to curse
Israel, he rode upon an Ass, and the went, the Angel of the Lord stood in his
way with his sword drawn in his hand, and the Ass saw the Angel and tained
out of the way, and the foolish Prophet saw not the Lord stand in the way, then
the Angel went farther and stood in a narrow place, and the Ass seeing the
Lord again stand in the way, she rushed on the one side, and dashed Balaam's
foot against the wall, yet the mad Prophet all this while saw not the Lord, but
attempted the third time to go on again to have cursed Israel.

Now let all Protestant Persecuters read their figure. Balak King of Moab, he
by all means, what ever it cost him, would have had the People of the Lord to
have been cursed, that so he might have rid his land of them, and to have
destroyed them, and this was from the same spirit, that men in this day would
have the People of the Lord banished out of the Land, it is the spirit of
Balaam, the false Prophet, that has brought the people to this stature in
wickedness as to banish those that fear the Lord, and that cannot put into the
mouths of the false Prophets, for they are they that have in all ages and in
this age stirred up the Rulers and People to persecute Gods servants, and they
seeing that Imprisoning, (...), Beating, Cutting with armed Soldiers,
Stocking, Stoning, Whipping, will not make an end of them that (...) the Lord,
now they have got a Law (contrary to Law) to banish them, the Husband from the
Wife, and both from the little Infants, not at all regarding Age nor Sex,
rending ^^^ilies in pieces, O hard hearted Protestants! what, no pity to the
little Infants? must they be left crying day and night in thy streets O
England? and no care taken for them? me not your hearts harder then the flint?
what, banish Parents from their tender Infants, and the pitiful Mother from
our sucking Babe! and banish them into a foreign Land, and all because they
will not break the commandment of him whom you call your Savior and Redeemer,
and because they worship the living God in spirit and in truth according to the
Scriptures, you say you own and profess, O Protestant persecuters, you have
quite lost your natural affection, you have outstripped all that ever went
before you, go to the herbs of the field and they will teach you, does that
herb that is naturally hot, cause the other herb that is naturally cold, that
it shall not grow by it? no, they buth grow together close by one another in
unity, and go to the birds of the air, and they will instruct you, for they
live together, and do not strive to beat one another forth of the Country where
they have been brought forth, and go to little children and they will condemn
you persecuters, for they can play together in unity, but you have no pity to
the sucking babes, nor to the gray hairs, nor to him that leans upon his staff
for very age, and thus you have hardened your own hearts, until the Lord has
given you up to hardness of heart, which is the greatest of all judgments, and
the nearest to destruction, and so you go on and strive against your Maker, and
as yet you have not given ear to those whom the Lord has sent unto you, to
warn you of the evil of your ways, but you have hardened your hearts as
Pharaoh, and you will not let Israel go, but this I tell you all, who are
hastening to banish Gods People from amongst you, our God has set himself in
your way with his sword dravv^ in his hand, and the poor Seamen whom you make
your Asses, (or would do) they see the Lord stand in their way, and they have
these two times turned out of the way when they were a going to carry the
innocent into banishment, but the spirit of Balaam who would force them to
carry them, he sees not the Lord, the Lord has opened the mouth of the Seamen
both at Deal and also at Bristoll, and they have confessed to the whole Nation,
and given it under their hands, that they see the Lord stand in their way, the
first saw him, crossing them in all their outward things, ever after they
undertook to carry innocent Israel from their own Land; but at Bristol there
the Lord met them in a narrower place, viz. in the Conscience, and they gave it
under their hands, that their Consciences would in no wise let them be at
quiet, or peace; and that the plagues would follow them, (or others, who should
ever under take to carry them) whether soever they (...); and that they had
partaked of the plagues in their heart (...); and that they durst in no wise
carry them; because, (...) knew them to be innocent persons, and destred to
walk in befear of the Lord; and thus has our God opened the eyes Whose whom
you would make your Asses, (the poor Sea^^en) that they see the Lord, and also
their mouths to speak well of his people; 2 Pet. 2.16.
and for this cause has he opened their mouths, to reprove the madness of the
wicked Prophets that see not the Lord, therefore let it be a warning to all you
that still would have them banished, that the Lord ^^th promised shall dwell in
their own Land; Jer. 23.8.
that you make not a third attempt to ride the Ass out again, to drive on your
design, for our God stands still in the way, Numb. 22. 31. 32, 33.
and if you will not be warned, he will slay you, and preserve and keep the Ass
alive.

Therefore out of true love and pity once more to you, thus have I been moved
of the Lord to write to you, that so you tray fear and Repent, and cease from
the cruel and unheard of persecution; for the seed whom the Lord has according
to his promise, raised in this Northern Island, as Jeremiah foretold must dwell
in their own Land, Jer. 23.8.
the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

Then another we read of that undertook this wicked work of Rooting out the
Lords own people, it was wicked Haman, Est. 3. and 4. Chap.
in the days of Esther, and it runs parrallel directly with prosecutors in
these days, what do we read that proud Haman had or could justly charge the
seed of Israel with, as was evil in his days, but that Mordecai the Jew fat in
the Kings gate, and would not bow the knee to one who was of the flace of
Amaleck, Est. 3.1.
who were the first of the Nation that arose against Israel, when they were
coming out of Aegypt's bondage, Exodus 17 14.
whom God had formerly Cursed, whom the Lord said be would have war with (for
that Cause) from generation to generation, and he would blot out his name from
under heaven: Haman I say, being great with the King, and being filled with
envy, laid false accusations against an innocent people, and said to the King,
that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer them to live, and the King being
willing to gratify his flatterers, granted his r^quest, and sealed the decree,
not only against righteous Mordecai, but against the whole Seed of Israel, 2
These. 1.6.
that dwell amongst them, but then it was A right^^^ thing with the Lord to
render tribulation to them that troubled his People, Esther 7.10.
as it has been and will be ever, for the same tree that Haman commanded to be
built to hang Mordecai on, the the Lord caused it that he himself was hanged
thereon, and those who by that unrighteous law had power given them to have
destroyed Israel, Chap. 9.
the Lord brought it so to pass that they were slain themselves, as thou may
read Esther: so what has the People of the Lord (who in scorn are called
Quakers) done, that is evil against the proud Hamans in this day? has any of
them made Insurrection, Plot, or Conspicies, or any ways gone about to subvert
the Government, or have they any ways wronged any man in their outward goods
or good name, or have they been a people that have lived contentiously with
their neighbors, or in pride, idleness, vanity, or excess, let Gods witness
in the hearts of all people that have known us answer? or have we been a people
that have made a profession of scriptures, and lived contrary unto them in our
lives and conversations, let those who are our persecuters (and that are found
doing so) make it appear to the Nation if they can; but is not that the
greatest and chiefest cause of our persecutors wrath against us, that we cannot
respect their persons, nor give them flattering titles, Job 23.21, 22.
because the scriptures which they profess forbids us and says it is sin;
nay, though our persecuters have never so much favor or honor from the King,
and have what their hearts can desire, yet what does all avail them, while they
see poor righteous Mordecais brought before the judgment seats, John 5.44.
and cannot bow the knee to that which is out of the faith of Christ, and that
seeks honor, or receives honor one of another, and so those that walks
according to the holy Scriptures, are with such men counted of evil behavior,
and so at all times suffers under them for well doing, and not for evil, and
such men who are filled with envy against us, have (to satisfy their bloody
intents) falsely accused us before those that are in authority, and by that
means have procured that law to be made, signed and sealed against us, for
peaceable meeting together, to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, and so
by the execution of that unnatural Law, to root us out of the land of our
nativity, and so to race out the seed whom the Lord has raised in this
northern Island, Jer. 23.8.
but unto our God we make our appeal, he having raised in us the same spirit
that was in righteous Mordecai, and that was in the three Children, that we
know Our God is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us, Dan 3.17.18.
and in him alone we wait for deliverance, and he never yet failed any that
were by wicked men designed to be universally rooted out for their obedience to
the Lord in any age, as before mentioned (as we are by you at this day) but if
he should not deliver us, be it known to you our persecutors, that we will not
be of that Religion that you are of, to profess God, Christ, and Scriptures,
and walk and practice the clean contrary way to what you profess, and what the
scriptures declare of; Nay contrary to what your book of Common Prayer speaks
of, for that says that you should forsake the Devil and all his works, and
keep Gods holy will and commandments, Read your Common Prayer, and see whether
your practice be according.
and walk in the same all the days of your lives, and that you should hurt no
body by word or deed, but should be true and just in all your dealings, that
you should bear no malice nor hatred in your hearts, that you should do to all
men as you would they should do unto you, and not falsely accuse nor bear false
witness against your neighbors, and that you should not live in the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world, nor in the sinful lusts of the flesh, and
should ^ither follow nor be led by them, and it says (that the Lord says)
that we shall labor six days, and do all that we have to do, and when our
persecuters were sprinkled, had not they their sureties (or bondmen) who
undertook for them that they would see them brought up in living out of the
aforesaid evils, and when they came to age themselves, were they not bound to
perform the same? but do either their sureties or themselves keep their bond or
promises, but by their actions they are found walking contrary to godliness,
but be ye not deceived, for God will not be mocked by you, for that which you
sow that you must reap, and our God is (...) changeable, he is the same
yesterday and to day and for ever and therefore it is, that the true Israel
that fears and ob^y^^ him never has been consumed, nor never shall be.

For when Hamans envy is grown so great,
that Israel shall not live,
Then that is the time for God's own power,
deliverance for to give.
And again, Call 4 29.
he that was born after the flesh, would be persecuting him that was born after
the spirit, and in Nebu^had-nezzar's time, the persecuting spirit was gro^^ to
his full height in wickedness, and they after that the King had set up the
Golden Image, read Dan. 3.
and had made a decree that all his people should at the sound of the
Instruments, fall down and worship the Golden Image that the King had set up,
and in that day there were three of the seed of Israel that knew the true God,
and worshipped him, and they could not fall down and worship the Image the King
had set up, then those who were filled with envy, accused them before the King,
and incensed the King against them, and they regarding not the Kings decree,
said that they were not careful to answer the King in that matter, for our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the fiery Furnace, and he will deliver
us out of thy hands O King; but if not, be it known unto thee O King, that we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image that thou have set up;
then the Kings wrath arose, and he caused the Furnace to be he^^ ^^ven times
hotter than before, Dan. 3.20, 21, 22, etc.
and commanded to bind the three servants of the Lord; and those that undertook
to carry and cast them into the flames, the fire ^lew those (...) and burnt
them, and the Lord preserved the other in the flames, and had no hurt at all.

O Persecutors, Read these Lines, and dread our Mighty God,
Else he will strike and also smite you with his Iron Rod;
And again, how evident it is that persecutors in all ages (...) ^^ither in
this age, even regarded the works of the Lord, (...) never takes notice how the
Lord has ever in all Ages ^^^stly pursued this great sin of persecution (let
it be found in whom it will) with his dreadful Judgments; Nay, they will take
no notice, though in the same age, and though they hear how the Lord has swept
away others before their faces; read Dan. the 6. Chap
yet they being blinded so with envy, that they will attempt the same evil
themselves again, as we may read that Daniel, because he feared the living God,
and worshipped him inspirit and in truth, therefore those envious men that knew
well enough what the Lord had done to those that had a hand (...) the three
Children into the Furnace, yet those (...) would attempt the same evil against
Daniel, and they see they could in no wise catch him in any thing concerning
his life and conversation, but only concerning his God, therefore they
endeavored to persuade the King to make a Law (as the (...) envious spirit
has done often since) and the Law was this; that if any man asked any Petition
or Request of any (...) Man, save of the King himself, for thirty days, that
then he (...) be east into the Lions Den, and this wicked law was sign^^ and
sealed by the King; but for all this wicked Decree, (...) regarded not it, but
he not only prayed three times a day to the true God, but he set his window
open (let who would hear him) and prayed to his God as at other times, (...)
quickly this wicked decree did not long want executio^^^^, but those that
watched him, could the King, how Da^^^^ regarded not the Kings law, then was
Daniel according to the decree cast into the Lions Den, but in the Den there
the Lord appeared, and ^hut the mouth of the hungry Lions and preserved Daniel,
but then it was a righteous thing with the Lord, To render tribulation to those
that troubled his (...), and the King did righteously in causing Daniel to be
taken out of the Den, and also commanded that those (...) that caused Daniel to
be cast in, Dan. 6.24.
that they should be cast i^ themselves; and the text says, that the Lions had
the (...) over them and broke all their bones in pieces before ^^er they came
at the ground of the Den; now both these deliverances from the fire, and from
the Lions were (...) one age, and the Persecutors destruction also; and (...)
men in this Age who are of the same envious spirit, and (...) acting the same
evil against the Servants of the Lord. (...) would not take warning by others,
but went on, until (...) Lords judgments swept them away.

Know Persecutors we have a God
That is over you with his Might,
That can cause the Fire it shall not burn,
Nor let hungry Lions bite.
Now all you that in this day are so hard at work, and th^^ are doing the very
same evil in the ground of it, as the^^ that the Holy Scriptures has left you
upon record, for (...) your learning; and for that end the Lord gave the
Scripture forth by his Servants, that so you might see how wicked (...) dealt
with the Servants of the Lord in ages past, when (...) were grown to such a
stature in wickedness, as to get a (...) made by their Kings, or Rulers, to
root out and to de^^^^ the people of the Lord. And also, you may read in
Scripture how, when ever any of his Servants were in any Age (...) at by wicked
men to be wholly rooted out, from off (...) Earth; that then at all times, the
Lords power appea^^^ (...) wrought deliverance for his people, and ever brought
(...) struction upon the Enemies: But now if any are grow^^^ desperately
wicked, as not to believe nor to give any (...) to the Holy Scriptures, neither
will be learned by the^^ notwithstanding, he hears the Curses that are there
writ^^^ against such wicked practices, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
the wrath of the Lord (...) will smoke against that man or men whoever they
be, and (...) curse that is written in the Scriptures shall light upon (...)
man; and the Lord shall put out his Name from under He^^^^

And now all you that call your selves (or would be called Christian
Magestrates, or Rulers, can you read that ever (...) Christians or any that
feared the Lord, ever were found (...) such a work, as you are doing at this
day, to Ban^^^ innocent, harmless, peaceable, laborious people, that (...)
living God, from their dear Wives and tender Infants; (...) from their dear and
near Relations, into Foreign Lands, (...) to expose them to greater misery and
hardship, then Death it self: Will ever those you call Heathens and Infidels
(...) well of the Christian Religion? or ever have any love (...) be converted
unto it, when they shall hear of such cruel^^ acted by you? and that against
your own Brethren; as to ^^^ish them for their Consciences toward their God;
and ^hen they shall hear what large promises of liberty concering Conscience
you have made unto us, and yet regard it (...); but banish us as aforesaid;
Math. 5.16.
can they ever give credit ^^to your words; should not your Light so shine
before ^en that they might see your good works, and so come to ^^orifie God:
Now good works are Fruits of the spirit, as Love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, Gal. 5.22.
(...), ^eekness, temperance, against such there is no Law, to im^^^, fine, and
to banish those that fears the Lord, is not a (...) of the spirit, but a work
of the flesh; for the works of the flesh are manifest, Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, ^^^onness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, hatred, debate, amulations,
^^^th, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunken^^ss, gluttony,
and such like: and the Apostle said, That they (...) such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Now let (...) deceive themselves so much, as to
call themselves Chri^^^ Magestrates, and Rulers, while they are found doing
such things as are clear contrary to Christ's Doctrines, and the Holy
Scriptures; Now those that are found imprisoning, ^^ing, beating, and banishing
of those that fears the Lord, (...) would not have others do so unto them,
such are out of Christ's Doctrine, and such as fine, imprison, and banish those
(...) for Conscience toward God cannot swear, Math 5.34, 35 36.
because Christ and his Apostle forbids it, such are out of Christ's Doctrine;
and such as are parting Man and Wife, whom God ^^th joined together, and for
meeting together to worship the true God in spirit and in truth, these men are
out of Christ's Doctrine, and are contrary to Scripture, and such as will not
let peaceable people labor with their hands, and so to provide for their
Families, but shut them up in Prisons, and there keep them during their
pleasures, (...) by the Scriptures counted worse then Inside^s, (...) the Faith.

And wicked men in all ages have counted the people (...) the Lord that have
lived amongst them to be T^^^, read M^th. 3.
(...) themselves to be the Wheat, and such have in all (...) deavoured to act
contrary to Christ 's doctrine and (...) mands, and they by no means will let
them grow (or (...) by them, but they will be plucking out the Tares (as
themselves call them) but Christ bids such men let them able, and let them grow
together until the harvest, and (...) harvest (he says) is the end of the
World; but (...) who will not believe Christ 's doctrine are none of his, (...)
are the Tares which the Devil has sown amongst the W^^^, and such men for
want of true judgment have ever in all (...) mistook the Tares, and endeavor
to pluck up the (...) for never in any age, neither in this age, durst such
(...) ever go about to prove such to be Tares that they (...) gone about to
pluck up, which if they could prove the^ (...) be Tares, yet according to
Christ 's doctrine, they are (...) let them alone, and to let them grow
together until (...) harvest.

Now this I say unto you, who ever at this day are (...) persecuting, plucking
up, and rooting up Gods people (...) no evil don by them, James. 4.12.
but only for their conscience to (...) God, knowing him to be The alone
Lawgiver that is (...) save and to destroy, and no mortal Man whatsoever
(...) power to give laws to bind the conscience to the wor^^^^ (...) God,
because it is Gods throne which is the Kingdo^^ (...) Heaven within us, where
God fits chief Judge and ^^^giver, I say unto all you, that the Lord has by
hi^ (...) spirit given you the holy scriptures for to instruct, (...) and
reprove you, that so Kings, as well as their Sub^^^ might live answerable unto
them, and all their souls be^^^ subject to the higher powers, which power is
God; (...) you will not be subject unto this higher power, but (...) your
selves over Gods throne (the conscience) and (...) will make laws over it,
contrary to Gods laws, and (...) (...) Scripture, the Lords hand will be
stretched out a^^^ you, (for be never spared any that would by force (...) his
^hrone) but as you may read how he has done to (...), so he will do unto you,
therefore fear our God and (...), and cease doing wickedly against his people
before the evil day which is near, come upon you.

A few words to the suffering Lambs of Christ's that lie in his Fould of Rest.
DEar suffering Lambs, who are gathered into the fould of Rest, be not afraid
though the hungry Foxes you hear run barking about the Fould, (...) Shepherd is
watchful, he has, and will seed you agreen Pasture; and at his pleasure he can
take the ^^^le Foxes, stray not forth of your Fould of Rest; (...) be still and
quiet, be not troubled at the howling (...) the Foxes, for your Shepherd will
not give you to be a prey for them; it is the Lamb that the wild hungry (...)
of prey would devour; but our God will sud^^^ly rebuke the devourer, for he
has gathered you by his own power into his own Fould; and he has ^^^lerved
you, ever since he gathered you. You ^^y remember how your Shepherd preserved
you (...) those that sought to devour you in days past, and (...) be reb^ked
those devourers in O, C's days; and (...) he brought his judgments upon them,
for touch^^ of his Anointed, and for doing of his Prophets (...); and fear not
though now you are encompassed (...) ^very side with those that would devour
you; It (...) for a little time, for the trial of your Faith, and patience; you
have the Holy Writings of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, and you have
received them, to learn you, and to instruct you, and you are those who are
come to fulfill Scriptures, and they are fulfilled in you; having received the
same Spirit that gave them forth; and you are those that the Scripture speaks
of, that have broke your Swords into Sithes, and your Spears into pruning
books; and that have learned to war no more with Carnal weapons; and you are
the seed that the Lord has raised, in this Northern Island, as Jeremiah
foretold, and the (...) cut out without hands that must brake the Image to
po^der, and grow and fill the whole Earth. And you are the ^oble company of
Warriors that follows the Lamb, who is your Captain, to sight with the Dragon,
the Beast and false Prophets, and that shall be sure to have the Victory,
Revel. 19. and you are those that are coming out of great tribulation, having
washed your long white Robes in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore I say to you
all trust in the Lord, and wait upon him, keep to the Fould; for though you are
now designed to be rooted out, yet remember and believe that there is no pow^^
but what is in our Gods hand, and he never for^ook any that were designed by a
Law to be rooted out for their obedience to the Lord, as you are at this day:
And though he tried his people, and did not deliver until in the Furnace, nor
until Daniel was in the De^, yet then his power appeared for their
deliverance, and also for the destruction of their Enemies; so all ^e^^ Lambs
be faithful unto the Lord, and trust in hi^ for your deliverance will assuredly
come, as those three deliverances came to the Lords people, who were by a Law
(made by envious men) to be destroyed, and to be rooted out; and no more we
read of in Scripture, that were by a Law thus sentenced, as we are at this day:
and for our deliverance our God has appeared, and does appear, though our
Enemies shut their eyes and will not take notice of it, but still go on to
provoke the Lord, who has done so great things for them; and now that which
the Lord spoke through his Servant the Prophet Esdras, is now a fulfilling as
all may read, For there shall be in every place, and in the next Cities a great
Insurrection, upon those that fear the Lord.

71. Ver. They shall be like made men, sparing none, 1 Esdras 16.70, 71.
but still spoiling and destroying those that fears the Lord.

72. For they shall wast and take away their Goods, and cast them out of their
Houses.

73. Then shall they be known who are my Chosen, and they shall be tried as the
Gold in the fire.

74. Hear O ye my beloved, says the Lord, behold the days of trouble are at
hand, but I will deliver you from the same.

75. Be ye not afraid, neither doubt, for God is your guide.

76. And the guide of them that keep my Commandments and Precepts.

F. E.

The End.

