THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from JOHN Lord FINCH, late Lord Keeper, to his
Friend Dr. COZENS: WITH A Commemoration of the Favors Dr. Cozens Showed him in
his VICE-CHANCELLORSHIP.

UNTO Which is annexed a good Admonition to PROTESTANTS.

Printed in the year 1641.

A COPY OF a LETTER sent from JOHN Lord FINCH, to Doctor COZENS.
Dr. Cozens,
THe Quotidian familiarity of our Religion, did heretofore contabulate our
minds together, and did at this present time suggest me to recall our
affinity. And although the impetuous novercation of ambiguous Fortune, have
digested you from that fear of Honor, to which you were promoted, yet I have
not buried our former acquaintance in oblivion, but have been very sensible of
your misery. For you know I my self was subject to the same Destiny, and if I
had stayed any longer, they would have put the poor Finch in the Cage, and
have made me sing Prick-Song there but I had more wit then to stay, for I did
presuppose that there was a tempestuous storm arising. And kind Doctor, if
you had taken my course, you might have likewise escaped the danger that now
hangs over your head. But I deplore the vicissitude of your malignant fate; yet
I remember that Apothegmaticall sentence of the Lyrian Horace, Vt sementem
feceris, ita metes. For had not you sown such Antichristian seeds of Popish
introduction into the Church, you should never have reaped this harvest of
misery. For my part, I was Eagle-winged, and as soon as I perceived that
Limetwigges were laid for me, I did erect my self, and by the expansion of my
nimble wings escaped those snares into which you are fallen. But I beseech you
Sir, let me recall our inveterate Counsel by the fresh recordation of memory:
What, does your Chapel retain its former ornaments? Does the Crucifixe
remain? and do the Pictures, and graven Images a dorne it still, as in my
time? Does the Altar stand still? or do not nefarious persons wish you
facrificed thereon? Does the Triple Crown which you erected in Saint Mary's,
illustrate still the vulgar speculation? Sir, if the tumultuary imprecations of
the Vulgar do oppose you; yet macerate not your self, neither let passion
conquer your captive thoughts; for it is a true Apologization, Quod tibi facere
non vis, alteri ne feceris. But you did contaminate that sentence too much, by
the unjust exulceration of Eclesiasticall Innovations: Remember me to the
Archbishop, and desire him to put my good counsel in execution, that he shall
Excommunicate both Houses, before they divorce him from his Spouse* but (alas)
I fear his Cannons do requoile, and his Founders miscarrie, therefore set them
be new Cast. Remember me likewise to Bishop Wren, and bid him strain for it,
for he will be made to sing a note above Elie. Remember me likewise to Kilbert
and Abell, who (I think) are grown weary of two pound in a Tun, but I think
if their Hogsheads were pierced, that you would have wine at sixpence, and
twelve-pence again. Remember me to Judge Crawly, and tell him that I wonder
that Noverint universi should condemn him with such celerity. Remember me
likewise to the Gentleman in the cut-finger Gloves, and let him know that I
understand that Casus noster venit ad non suite jam -- Remember me to the
Physicians, for they have strong stomakes, and can digest a sum without fear
or prejudice of censorious Momus. Remember me to all Lawyers, and tell them
that I understand their Obligation is contrary to their condition. I think
their lines had some pernicious diseas either the running of the reins, or the
French pox, for they straddled as wide as any French man. Remember me lastly to
all the Taylers, and tell them that they have better luck then Pontificians,
for they do daily invent new fashions, and are commended for it, for which you
are taxed. But loving Doctor, perhaps my pen do seem too remiss, wherefore I
will contract my self in a compendiary Epitomy of my thanks unto you, for all
your favors shown me since the last time I was at the Vniverfitie, for
leting me kiss the Virgin Maryes Picture, and the Pope's Head, and for
innumerable other Courtesies, all which if I should express, I should not only
dilate my self in a too deveous expansion, but likewise transgreffe the limits
of your patience: therefore the few admonitions, and salubritie of Council which
I derove unto you briefly shall be these: First, That whither soever the
tempestuous Wind hurrieth, you would remember to keep your head warm.
Secondly, Although you climed up to that Honor upon other men's necks, have a
great care that you come down with your own. Reject not my good Council,
neither contemn my affectionate desire. Thus beseeching you to see the
Remembrance to my Friends fully executed, I commend you to Destiny, desiring
you to accept the will of,

Your engaged and obsequious friend JOHN FINCH.

Good council to PROTESTANTS.
SInce Pontificians cannot have their plots,
Full executed (whom the righteous Sc^ts
Do utterly detest) since Papists all,
Shall by the sacred sword of Justice fall;
Let Protestants Religion true profess,
And fully from impiety digress:
For lo! Here Baal's irreligious Priests
Nefarious Prelates, and all Atheists,
Are now abjected by the Parliament,
Whom GOD for Malefactors punishment,
Has piously clected, and has made
Them Authors, Honest men that in their Trade,
May prosperously flourish from base fees,
Projects, and impious Monopolees,
With their exactions which did lately make,
The threadbare Commons of the land to shak
Learn therefore by their punishment to hate,
All wicked Heresy, which now of late,
Did overspread the Church, with Cannons base,
With Ceremonies, and a Popish face,
Of Innovations, but to him above,
Be thanks immortal to Tri-une Iehove;
Let us extol his all-disposing power,
Who all our enemies will thus devour.
False Jesuits repent, false Prelates mourn,
False Doctors houle, who heretofor did scorn
True Doctrine, bewayl the numerous crimes
Which ye did introduce in former times:
But to the Protestant this I will say,
Prophets and Teachers false do not obey;
Confirm thy faith, and then if Envy durst
Presume to snarle, let envy snarle her worst;
Yet still confirm thy faith, and do not yield,
As a weak Coward to her sanguine field.
Stand firm: do, let her fret, fume some and fall,
Stark mad, yet stand thou firm, whilst in her gall
Of malice the base Bedlam taint and stink
In her polluted and contagious sink
Of all iniquity, if she chance to harm,
Thy steadfastness, yet stand thou still more
For God who pulls down each wicked shrin
Will set up true Religion more divine.
FINIS.

