THE SOLE PATH TO A SOUND PEACE. Recommended to the Honorable House of Commons
in a Sermon at their public Fast. Feb. 22. By John Ellis, Jun: Preacher of the
Word at Cambridge.

I am the way, Joh. 14. In me ye might have Peace. Chap. 16. Nihil Grande est,
pacem voce pretendere and opere destruere: Aliud verbis sonare concordiam,
aliud re exigere servitutem: volumus and nos pacem; and non solum volumus sed
rogamus, sed Christi pacem veram, pacem in qua non sit bellum involutum, pacem
que non ut adversarios subjiciat, sed ut amicos jungat. Hieron: ad Theoph: adv:
Joan: Hierosol: Quid dominationem pacem vocamus, and non reddimus unicuique rei
vocabulum suum? Idem ibid. London, Printed by John Raworth, for George Latham,
and John Rothwell, and are to be sold at their Shops in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

Die Mercurii. 22 Febr. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Master Rows
shall return thanks to Master Ellis, for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached at the entreaty of this House at St Margarets in the City of
Westminster (being the day of public humiliation;) And is likewise to desire
him to Print and publish his Sermon; And it is further Ordered, That no man
shall presume to Print his Sermon, but whom he shall authorize under his hand
writing.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I permit George Latham, and John Rothwell to Print my Sermon.

John Ellis, Jun.



To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHat I had to say unto you, I expressed my self at large, in that which I now
present you, with some fillings, which the time then permitted not to tender: I
shall now only add a word of excuse, and caution. Excuse I must, Because all
that speak to you do so; my self much rather; Because hearing of this service,
but some ten days before the Fast, in the midst of sorrow for the loss of an
only parent; I could not with that freedom of spirit, as I should, attend this
business. But your piety has I hope herein supplied my deficiency, in
receiving the matter with all readiness of mind; leaving the manner of
handling to those weak stomachs that cannot savor wholesome food, without a
great deal of curiosity in the dressing, Care, and Cleanlynesse, and Concoction
we commend: The work of the Lord is not to be done negligently; Too much
diligence we decline; for that argues suspicion, either of the food, or of the
guest. We would have your faith and godly affection, stand, not in the wisdom
of words, but in the power of God. I must also caution, Touching those words in
the entrance of my discourse, [ In a settled Church, the Ministry is to be
puclikely admitted to that employment.] I would not have it understood as an
approbation either of any unlawful office, or undue ordination in any
particular Church; but in general of all settled Churches. And that first in
respect of order, That every man be not at his own disposing, but abide in that
calling, whereunto God by the ordinance of man shall design ^im. 2. Of
advantage to his Ministry; that he may have more boldness with them, who have
acknowledged him as appointed to that employment. Which call (as I conceive)
lies chiefly in these particulars. 1. The inward ability, and upright intention
of the heart, to do Christ service in that employment. 2. In the public
approbation of such abilities after trial had, by the Church, both Ministry
and people of God, that are indeed able to discern. 3. A special call by some
particular people to be their officer in that kind (or an after approbation
from them) or else a more general commission from the Church, to a more
universal employment that way; such as was the sending of Paul and Barnabas,
by the Church of Antioch ^ Act. 13.
. All which is to be understood especially of the administration of the
Sacraments and discipline: For, as for preaching, it is a more common work;
which yet no man is to do to the scandal of the Church wherein he lives, nor
ordinarily without calling thereunto, if it be done in a public way. Which
calling (as other Church affairs,) that we may have more agreeable to primative
purity; we implore your assistance; as you can not effectually obtain the
vigor of yours, without our service. Magistracy and Ministry, though they be
not immediate relatives, yet do se mutuo ponere and tollere. So, as you are
Gods hands to us; shall we labor to be his mouth to you, and for you Isai.
45.17.
. To you; that no Council devised against you, shall stand, so long as you
make the advancing of This man, the Lord Christ, your aim: No weapon framed
against you shall prosper Isai. 9.6.
. And for you; That having such promises, you faint not, but proceed to the
finishing of the work with power: and be like your Master, the great and
wonderful Councellor and Prince of peace Isai. 9.6.
, who when he begins, does use also to make an end Isai. 66.9.
: That you may not be weary of weldoing, for in due time you shall reap if you
faint not Gal. 6.9.
.

So prays Your meanest servant In the Lords work. John Ellis, Junior.

The sole path to a sound Peace.
MICAH 5. 5. This man shall be peace: when the Assyrian shall come into our
land, and when he shall tread in our Palaces, then shall we raise up against
him seven sheepheards and eight principal men.
THat God might honor his Creature with a kind of partnership in his greatest
work Introduction to
2 cor. 6.1.
and that he might hide pride from man, Job. 33.17.23.
by making him stoop to be taught by man like himself; and that every man
might attend upon that employment wherein the great Master has settled him, 1
cor. 7.20.
though all the servants in Gods house, are of themselves luc. 12.57.
to take notice of the Masters will to do it, yea, and also to admonish,
instruct and comfort one another from his works and word, 1 These. 5.11.14.
yet some he has set as officers to this only purpose, Bph. 4.11.12;1 Timothy
4.15. Romans 13. 6.
and that's the Ministry; those who are ( in a settled Church) publicly
admitted to this employment, 1 Timothy 5.22. cap. 4.14.
and therefore may speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Tit. 2.15.


Now this entrance is not impertinent, because we must first assert our
calling if questioned, as now some do, before deliverie of our message, the
Ambassador must first show his letters of Credence, before his audience, Paul
being to write to the Romans, in the very first words proposes his vocation
Romans 1.1.
Now our whole employment is, as faithful and wise stewards to give to every
one in Gods household his due portion in due season, luc, 12.42.
or rightly to divide the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15.
that is to observe under what condition of providence those lie with whom they
are to deal, and then to apply such portions of the word as suits with that
estate, and being ^ Ez^k. 13 ^^i^cium.
as it is the whole duty of the people of God, to attend to, apply and practice
such parts of the word as their present estate whereunto providence has
brought them calls for, Iam. 5 13.14.
because the word conteynes the whole Council of God concerning us 2 Timothy, 3 15.
and the works of providence are the finger of God pointing to that portion
we have need of now.

This is a time of Jacobs troubles wherein he knows not what to do, but his
eyes are toward God, and a word from him, saying this is the way walk in it,
will be welcome now, and it is a time of Rachels weeping for her Children, and
some oil to this wound of Spirit would be suppling now; The Text
And it is a time of Ionahs unfeared perils, and a voice of rowsing would be
useful here, to save a drowning, Now all these the Prophet Micah will help us
to in the Text now read,

First, We shall understand it in some measure if we consider first the
coherence, ^opened
which will be playner if we reflect upon,

First, from 1 the time of this Prophesy.
the time when and the persons to whom this prophecy was spoken, that was in
the days of Iotham, Ahaz and Hezechiah Kings of Judah, the history of whom you
have, 2 Kings. cap. 16.17 18.19. and 2 Chronicles. cap 27 28.29.30.31.32.

Secondly, a occasion
the occasion of the Prophecy, and that was the provoking sins, and the
pressing calamities, viz. The Assyrian invasion, and the Babilonian Captivity,
inevitably hanging over the head of that people, the former whereof came to
pass in the fourth and fourteenth year of Hezekiah, a 2 King. 18.9.13. cap.
24 10.
the latter in the time of Iohoiachin Kings of Judah,

3 scope
that being warned they might be without excuse. 2 in regard of those that
belong to God, their humiliation, conversion, consolation and preparation for
the evil day certainly coming upon them.

Fourthly, 4 Arguments 1 humbling from 1 their sin in the 1 variety of it.
the arguments he uses for the attayning this end, which are of two sorts. I
such as serve for conviction and humiliation, and they are taken, from I their
sin, by opening I the variety of it. I against Gods corruption of his worship
by Idolatry, cap. 17. and the contempt of his word. cap. 2.6.

Secondly, against men by cruelty and oppression, cap 2. 2. treachery and
dissembling. cap. 6.12.

Thirdly, against themselves, intemperance, cap. 2.11. and pride, cap. 2. ^.
and there is added by Hosea, who Prophefied in the same time and to the same
people, diverse other sinners.

2 degree.
their Idolatry so gross, that it was in a spiritual as whoredom, yea
professed Harlotry in a bodily way, cap. 1.7. their oppression so horrid, that
it was like plucking of the skin, tearing the flesh and breaking the bones,
cap. 3.2. their intemperance so sottish, that they thought the Prophets that
did not countenance it unfit for that employment as, cap. 2. 11. is intimated
their deceit, so abominable that no relation natural or civil could be a
bar unto it, cap 7.5.

Thirdly, the universality and spreading of it, I Over the civil state, the
Princes hated the good and love the evil, 3 universal
cap. 3.1.
the rest of the people the best of them a Briar and the most upright a Thorn.
cap. 7 4.
Secondly over the Ecclesiastical, covetousness of the Priests and Prophets
as the end, flattery and cruelty as the means. cap 3.3.5.


Fourthly, 4 wilful
the willulnesle of their sin, they transgressed not in passion but with
deliberation. They imaginea msthese upon their beds. cap. 2.1.


Fifth, 5 Incorr rigible.
lastly, the incorrigiblenesse of their sin and security in it, the Heads
judge for reward, and the Priests taught for hire, and yet say, Is not the Lord
amongst us, none evil can come upon us. Cap. 3.11.
And therefore when reproved for these things by the Prophets, they said,
Prophecy not to them that prophesied. Cap. 2.6.


A second sort or humbling Arguments are taken from the judgments determined
upon their sins, 2 Arguments humbling from the judgments.
which also may be proportioned to them. 1 Many.
First, they were Various, war having in the womb of it all other
calamities. Secondly, 2 G^ievous.
Grievous, Zion shall be ploughed as a field, Jerusalem shall become heaps and
the Mountain of the house as the high places of the Forest, 3 Universal.
Cap. 3. 12. Thirdly, Universal The incurable mound had not only laid the
land waste, Cap. 7. 13. but was come up unto Judah even to the g^^e of
Jerusalem, 4 Deliberate.
Cap. 1.9. Fourthly, it was deliberate judgment pronounced long before the
execution. 5 Determined.
Fifthly, and lastly, an inexorable judgment, called therefore a Decree, Cap.
7.11. Cap. 3.4.

Secondly, 2 Consolatory where. 1 A caution premised.
for the comforting of Gods people, the Prophet does First intimate a caution,
viz. that he would not be understood as if they were to expect a total
avoidance of the affliction, for the coming of it was a determined, thing:
cap. 1.3.4. C. 7.13.
that which they were to expect, was only comfort and encouragement against it;
and that he first does by proposing many promises of supportation in, 2
Arguments of comfort propounded, by promises. 1 Secondary. 1 Fundamental in
christ, who is
deliverance from, and glorious times after the affliction of those days, Cap.
4. throughout. Secondly, By laying, down the ground and giving a pledge of
those promises in that fundamental one touching the Messiah, Cap. 5. 2. who
was both the means and the earnest of consolation in, and deliverance from all
their adversaries and adversities, for that seed of the woman was one day
utterly to breaks the Serpents head Cen. 3.15.
and in the mean time the Serpent should never be able to do more then bruise
his h^^lps, according to that all the promises of God are in him yea and in him
Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20
That is, sealed and delivered to the Church, hence the Psalmist being to
improve the promises of deliverance, lays that as the corner stone, Thou have
made a Covenant with thy chosen, thou have sworn unto 'David thy servant,
Psalm. 89.3.
That is, unto Christ whose Type David was, as Peter expounds it, Acts 2. 30.

Now that our Prophet might the more convictively set this encouragement on;
First, he describes him particularly, Described from, His place of birth.
From his place, Thou Bethlelem Judah art not the least among the thousands of
Judah, for out of thee shall come, etc. Cap. 5.2. Person.
From his person; ' It Is he whose goings out were from everlasting, either in
respect of his eternal generation, or in regard it is he that has been always
proposed to the Church as the anchor of its hope, Cap. 2.3. Office.
. From, his office, that he should be the Ruler and Shepherd of his people,
Ver. 2. 4. Time of appearing.
. From the time when he should be more fully manifested, and that was when she
that traveled should bring forth, Ver. 3. That is either the time of the
coming in of the Assyrian, or else the Babilonish captivity, and that
following time till Christ, which should be so grievous, as if men were in
travel according to that, Cap. 4.10. Thou shall go to Babylon, and there thou
shall be delivered: and that of another Prophet Ier. 306.
Does a man travelle with child, that I see every man with his hands on his
loins: or else as others O siander in (...).
think, it is to be understood of Christ's Nativity of the Virgin. Performances
for the Church.
. He describes him from his performances and success, he shall stand and feed
or rule (for Rulers should be Feeders) in the strength of the Lord, and shall
be great unto the ends of the earth. Secondly, he applies this to the security
of the Church in the general, Ver. 4. They shall abide, that is, be protected
by him in all places and occasions. 1 In General. a Applied to the comfort of
the Church in the present straight mentioned in the text whereof the


Comfort thence applied to the Church.
To the particular judgments of the captivity named before, and the coming in
of the Assyrian which he names in the Text, which proposes him especially as a
consolation against that enemy, as being then their most potent Adversary, and
indeed at that time master of the Babylonian, as appears 2 Kings 17 24. The
King of Assyria brought men from Babell and placed them in the Cities of
Israel; and besides, this calamity of the Assyrians happened before that of the
Captivity; and we may add, that the Babylonian is here included under the
Assyrian as is intimated, Ver 6. They shall waste the land of Assyria and of
Nimrod, which was Babylon, Ge^. 10. 10. As also because they were one nation
originally, G^n. 10. 10. 11. but divided after the death of Sardanapalus. The
text has the same sense though diverse pointings, several readings and some
variety of interpretation.

Diverse pointings.
Diverse pointings, some Munster Trem. Vat^bl u^^gat. Calvin.(...)
making the Colon at peace, thus, this man shall be peace: when the Assyrian,
etc. because Athnach the Hebrew accent is a note of a more full pause as
Gramarians observe; Latter English, Vatabl. in notis b^evior^h. C^malio.
others put the fuller stop further into the sentence thus, This man shall be
peace, when the Assyrians shall come into ourland: and so others Asontanus.
translatio corectior cum n^tis breviorib Vatable and the ancient English Which
cleeres and varies the senso.
read it in a continued sentence to the end of the verse only distinguished by
Comma's.

And this Criticisme touching the distinction is not idle, 1 because nothing in
scripture is so 2, because it cleares not varies some what the sense, for in
the first pointing it is not so clear when Christ should be peace, and so not
so comfortable as the other, which intimates that Christ should be peace even
then when that so feared judgment should be upon them and it may also hint the
referring of the former part to Hezekias time, the rest to those that follow
the Captivity. And the last pointing intimates that though there may be some
thing in the distinguishing, yet for the scope of it, it is the same.

Diven readings
, diverse readings, some rendering the particle this MI
by the Adverbe: [h^^e] shall be peace Calvin in loc. Hic eru pex.
but they expound it by he, i.e. Christ, others Septuag.(...)
by [ thu] referring it to peace, thus thus shall be the peac^, i.e. state of
the Church shall be under Christ flourishing with reference to Christ, others
The last English
by comparing this verse with the next, read it, This man shall peace, more
plainly and agreeable to the scope, 2 the word that we translate Shepherds,
is rendered by the Chaldee Kings; pf 78. ult
because their office is to feed, as well as govern, hence David d Item ibid.
fed the people with all his might, and ruled them prudently with his power.
And Cyrus is called Gods Shepherd by the Prophet Esaias 3. lastly, the word
which we expound principal men, Symmachus (...)
exprsseth by Christ's or anoynteds of men, because public offices must have
public and solemn ordinations to them, the ceremony whereof was anciently
anointing, which also the root from (...)(...)
signifies from whence the word comes, Aquila Septuay.(...) (...), N, 01, us
^u^^^num.
Cal^i^in loc
thus (g) grave and serious men, for such only are fit for works of
reformation, others (h) the biteings of men, because those that Christ and the
Church shall choose for their Instruments of delivery, shall bite ana devour
the adversaries, as verse. 8. the remnant of Iaacob shall be as a Lion among
the flock of sheep, interpretations
variety of interpretations, some refer the words at least the former part of
them, as they stand in our ordinary translation, to the coming in of the
Assyrian in Hezechias time, and this is the first literal and immediate sense
of the words as appears by the history, King. 18.
whence it is evident that when the Assyrian came they were then and at no
other time delivered from him, and Christ shadowed out by the legal worship,
Col. 2.17.
(which Hezekiah had newly 2 ch^on. 32.1.
restored) became peace unto them; others Calvin.
refer the text to the deliverance from the captivity, and so by Shepherds
and Pastors understand the Medes and Persians, and specially Cyrus who
delivered Judah from captivity and is called expressly Gods Shepherds as we
heard even now, and anointed Esa 45.1
as also to the time of Hester munster in loc 5 cav.
to the deliverance by Mordecay, and to the time of Antiochus, to that by the
Macchabees, vartablus
others c lvin
referie it to the time of Christ's incarnation, and understand by the
Assyrians, as the then most known enemy persynecdochen Speciei.
the Romans, and by the Shepherds and principal men, the Apostles and
Evangelists, by the sword that of the Spirit the word of God (...) among i e
greeks the sar elon. c times that (...). Lastly, f Calviain loc
it is referred (a) not only to the deliverance from the captivity and the
following time till Christ, but also to the times under the Gospel, when the
Church shall be freed from all slavery, and rendered sui juris to a state of
perfect freedom so that it shall have power to elect and appoint its own
officers in Church and State, Change not the Identity of
(says my author) Which diversity being but in some smaller particulars, detract
nothing from the main purport of the words, which in all the former variety,
hold forth for the, The sum of the Text; which
Sum of them. A Cordial to the Church against a fit of shaking, which it
should not prevent, but strengthen nature under its abate, shorten and in time
remove silicet, that Christ When the most formidable enemy should be upon
them, divides it self into.
would comfort them, release them, and ruin their adversaries, which general
breaks it self into these three parts. 1 proposed.
3 parts.
First, a supposition of the Churches future calamity, The Assyrian shall come
into our Land. 2 The principal means of the Churches remedy. This man shall
be peace.

3 The instruments or manner of its deliverance; Wet will raise up against him
seven Shepherds and eight principal men. And now should follow, explained
the explication or the seve rals in each of these, but this will conveniently
be added to every part in their order, which shall be considered, 1
severally, 2 jointly, 1 severally, and so the first will administer an argument
of humiliation (fitfor the time) unto the hardened; the Observations g^hered
(...)
of consolation to the humbled, the cons^dered ^ severally from whence.
of direction to the raised and resolved mind to do God service, 1 of
humiliation in this.

Observation, That where Any, whether man or nation have been scandalous and
uncorrigible in sinning, the Lorduseth to be toward such remarkable and
inexorable in afflicting, Illustrated from ^ the Text in regard of ^ severity
of the judgment evidenced from.


This the Text clearly holds forth, that this people were gross in sin and
refractory against amendment, was showed before in opening the Coherence, now
that God was severe and peremptory in correcting, besides what was said above,
the Text it self intimates; First severe, which appears from the nature of
the evil, namely, war which has the collection for variety, and the spirit
and bitterness for degree of all evil, ushered in by terrors, insomuch that
as the Orator says even by the very noise of a war, the profit of a whole
years revenue is lost, whilst tillage is deserted, trading given over, and
habitations forsaken, accompanied with silence of laws, and administation of
Justice, as at this day among our selves; so that impiety, injury, and vice
run headlong without bridle, besides the violence, oppressions, bloodshed
vastation, of a fruitful soil as the Garaen of Eden before it, yet behind it
a desolate wilderness^ as we see at this day in Germany, Ireland, and some
shadow of it among our seives. 1 Thons u^e of the evil.
Prolege Man^^a Non, ^lum aa^en^us ^^als sed et^am met^^^^, ^aafer^
c^l^^^^^tem, nam ^ec^^ el^nguuntur, ag^^cul ura ae^er^u, ^e ^a^or^^^nav^ga^^^
con^u^^, c^t.
Followed with scarc^^, dearth and famine, with infections diseases, as plague
and pestilence, and evil beasts, where such are, and therefore in scripture
often put together, the sword, the famine and the pestilence, ler 15.1. c.
42.1^. E^ek. 14.11, 15 17.19.
in a word so full of calamity, especially if in the bowels of a Kingdom as
this was, that David, a soldier himself, chose rather a fierce plague or a
long famine, than a short war. 2. Sam. 24.14.


Assyrian and Chaldean, for of both he speaks, as was showed before; from
whom the affliction was like to be more heavy, 1 because he was I in himself
I proud and insolent, as being 1 Master of the most ancient Empire, and most
From the person of ^^ adversary as ^eeing ^ in himself. ^ proud.
extended dominion in the world the successor of N^mo^ a victorious Conqueror
c comitis gen ^b. altes p^r^tus geren^ ^^uver.
wheresoever he came, and thence conceited his special favor with God, (^) ^
^ n^ull ^ Esa. 37.10.12.^ 10.
and hereupon a boasting and scornful Adversary, see him vaunting himself
both against God and man. ^ Kings. ^8 25.
Let not the God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, behold the Kings of
Assyria have destroyed all Lands; that opposed them, Where are the Gods of
Gozani etc. where are the kings of Hamath, Arpad? etc. ^ Genesis 10.10.11.


cruelty always accompanying pride, for the cruelty of the Assyrians, see the
Prophet Hasea, who having in one place Hos. 9.3.
prophesied of the captivity of Samaria and Israel by the Assyrians, says in
another, Cap. 13.16
I hat their infants should be dashed in pieces by them and their women with
child ripped up. And for the cruelty of the Babylonians, the history of the
captivity relates the slaying of the Kings sons before his eyes, the
slaughter of the Nobles and principal men, the burning of the house of God,
and the Kings house, and of the Nobles, breaking down the wall of Jerusalem,
and carrying such multitudes into captivity, Ier. 52.10,11,13,14,24,25,27.
Princes were hanged by the hands, the youths fainted in grinding, and the
children fell under the wood, Lam. 5.12.
nay they slew the young men with the sword even in the house of the Sanctuary,
and had no compassion on young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for
age, 2 Chro. 36.17.
and as the Babylonians and Assyrians were originally of the same nation,
Gen^o. 11.
so no doubt of the same spirit of cruelty and of pride.

3 An adversary that had in regard of his original a seed of hatred against
the people of God, 2 In relation to the Ghatch ^ an hab^^aile nemy.
an habit of enmity, for he was descended of Nimrod, and so of Cham, the
accursed seed Genesis 10.11.
and betwixt these an original enmity. Genesis 3 15.


4 An adversary that had an actual provocation from this people, 1. by
H^zec^ias reformation of the worship of God against his will; for it seems he
had a great influence into the Church too, as appears by Ahaz, upon his league
with him, following of him in his superstition, 2 Kings 16.
and this uses to provoke Idolaters exceedingly, that any should worship God in
spirit and truth. Actually provoked.
By Hezekiahs rebelling against him, and that as himself confesses, not
without fault. 2 King 18.7.14


5 An Adversary whetted on by what he had gained already the ten Tribes 2 King.
17.
and therefore the other two yet remaining, 3 Encouraged.
that they should be left behind was an eyesore,

6 An Adversary engaged to cruelty and violence by the end of his coming,
which was to make an absolute conquest, and to make them of Tributaries and
Subjects absolute Slaves; for he is not ashamed to tell them, that though they
yielded themselves, yet they were to expect to be transported into his
Dominions, and others to be planted in their land, as he had done to the
kingdom of Israel. ^ King 18.32.^ From he subject who were, ^ Gods people.
[3] From the subject, or persons suffering, employed in those words ( our lan^)
for I they were the people of God, and what a calamity for those that were the
Lords freemen to become slaves to those that were the vassals of Satan? for
Idolaters, what service they offer they do it to Devels, and not to God, ^ Cor.
10.20.2 Resc^ed from him
2 They were the rescued people of God from this Adversary, when he carried
away the other ten Tribes, ^ Kings 17.
and what indignity now to be overcome by him? Reformed.
They were a reformed people of God. Industrious
And an industrious people to secure theselves from this Adversary, 2 Cro.
30.11. Cap 32.4
and both these as it increased the violence of the Adversary, so it augmented
the calamity that they should lose their hope and the benefit both of the one
and the other. 4 Engaged to cruelty.
They were all the remnant of Gods people, Esaias 37.4
and when Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, then to proceed to take Benjami^
also, by whom shall Jacob arise or Abraham possess the promise if Isaac in
whom he received them must be offered up?

From the degree.
From the degree of this affliction and its prevalency; the enemy should not
come to, but into our lan^, and not only prevail over the meanest, but should
tread as Victor in the stately Palaces, so indeed the story has it, that he
took all the fenced C^ies of Judah ^ King. 18.13.
and came up to the walls of ^er^sulem; yea, and as some Heron
say, out of the Hebrew writers, took that too and left nothing to Hezeki^s but
the Temple and the Tower of Dav^d.

Incrorable judgment evidenced.
Thing in the observation, is Gods peremptory determination of bringing the
judgment, from whence he would not be removed, and this is intimated in the
word shall, which though often times is but conditional, 1 From the Contex^.
yet is here decretory, as appears by the Third foregoing verse where it is
said as of a concluded thing, that he should give them up till she that has
traveled, should bring forth: that is, till they should feel such calamity
as should afflict them, as a woman in travel, as Interpreters Ca^^in, Tremel.
Mu^ster, and others.
generally expound it, and Cap. 4.10. he says peremptorily, she should go to
Babylon and be there delivered, and Cap. 7.13. having in the verse before
promised a prosperous time of the Church; yet as expounding himself he says,
notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein,
2 From parallel places.
as was mentioned before: and for this we have the consent of many Scriptures;
1 Threatening
some whereof threaten so much: as after the making of the golden Calfe, though
the Lev^^es executed judgment to the slaughter of 3000 persons, Exodus 31.28.
and the people suffered it, and Moses was so importunate with God that he had
rather lose his soul then be denied; yea Verse 3^.
and the people mourned too when they heard God would not go up with them
himself but send an Angel, Cap. 33 2, 34.
yet God tells them in the day that he should visit, he would surely visit this
sin upon them, Cap 32 34.
and so in Deuteronomy Deuteronomy. 29.19,20, etc.
upon their blessing themselves in their own ways against all the curses of
the law, it is threatened that the Lord will not spare him; now sparing implies
entreating, but that the land should be made a desolation, carried into
captivity; for that is pointed at, in that place as appears by comparing the
context, De^t. 30.3.
and we know what fasting and praying was before the captivity, Ier 36 6.
and before this coming in of the Assyrian, not only by Micha 3.4
others: but Hezekiah himself and the godly then living, which yet God would
not remove before he had made them know that he was the Lord, the Assyrian not
being repelled till he had wasted and spoiled all the land, but two or three
Cities at the most: and the captivity not returning till seventy years, not
withstanding the lamentation of the Prophets, as Jeremy, and the many fasts
yearly celebrated Zach. 8.19
and not then neither without much importunity, as appears in Daniels fasting
and humiliation Dan 9
not but that God would then have delivered them, but that he might show the
difficulty of eluctating from the punishing of so great a provocation, he
stirred up by his spirit such importunities in the hearts of his servants. And
in the business of choosing a King, when God had before admonished them of it,
and showed them the manner of the King, and they would not be admonished; he
tells them that therefore when they should cry out unto him because of their
King he would not hear them, 1 Samuel 8.18.
according to that of the Proverbs, Cap. 1.24.28.
because ye would have none to my counsel, and despised all my reproof, they
shall cry but I will not hear them, they shall seek me early but shall not
find me, but they shall be filled with the fruit of their own devices; so also
the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 22.12.
of the voluptuous persons in the time of public calamity. That this iniquity
should not be purged until they dyed, Showing the execution of such threats
other places there are that show execution done according to such threatening
without all remorse or entreaty, no place being found for repentance, though
carefully sued for with tears. Ely the High Priest being admonished of the
disorder of his sons, and though admonishing them thereupon, yet not
restiaining them, as the Lord had threatened, that the sin of El^es house
should not be purged with Offering nor with Sacrifice, in regard of the
temporal punishment; so was it accordingly fulfilled in the death of his two
sons, of himself, and the loss of the Priesthood for many years from his
family: 1 Samuel 2.32. Cap. 3.13.14. Cap. 4 17.18.1 Kings 2.27.
Gods dealing with David after the matter of Vriah, is well known, The child
must surely dye, the sword must never depart from his house, his own son
must rebel, and his own wives defiled by him; horrid calamities, and yet we
know that David deeply repented and greatly humbled himself before the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.10,11 12,13,14 25,26. Psalm. 51.
good Josiah refusing the voice of the Lord by the mouth of the King of Egypt,
is slain in the battle, 2 Chro. 35.12.
and Hezekiah having received the peremptory denunciation of the Babylonish
captivity, never so much as opened his mouth against it, Esaias 39 8.
Hence God forbids the Prophet Jeremy to pray for them, and tells them, though
^Moses and Samuel (persons that had great prevalency with him) should never so
earnestly intercede; yet his heart could not be toward them, (...) 7.16. Cap:
5.1.
and in another, Ezekiel 14.14.
he says though Noah, Da^iel, and lob, yet they should save neither son nor
daughter, so this coming in of the Assyrian was peremptorily concluded
notwithstanding Hezekiahs reformation, Esaias 10.^4.
and that of the Chaldees notwithstanding Ios^^s, 2 King. 23 26.
and the Babylonish captivity came, because the Lord would not pardon 2 King.
24 4.
and the Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.30.
were struck with mortality and no discovery of the sin till many were taken
away, or if it were discovered, yet the evil, though no doubt they repented,
not removed, till by experience they had found that 'twas a fearful thing to
provoke the Lord to anger, and to fall into his hands for contumacy.

I have been the larger in the proof of this particular, Scripture.
Diverse express places of Scripture, in the Prophet Jeremy the Lord says,
When I speak concerning a land to pluck up, and to destroy it, if that nation
shall turn unto me with all their heart, I will repent me of the evil I
thought to do, IC^, 18.7,8.
and Hosea gives the reason why they were delivered into the hand of the
Assyrian, Because they refused to return, thereby intimating that if they had
returned, he should not, Hos. 11.5.
other places might be added, also there may be, Reasons.
objected reasons grounded in Scripture, 1 John 1.7.
takes away the cause of affliction and therefore the effect must needs cease.

Answer by distinction
To the scripture we answer by a double distinction, of Denunti^tion of
judgment
of denunciation of judgment where of some are purely minatory and threatening
upon supposition of non repentance, such as was that to the Ninevites, Jonah. 3.
and these upon repentance are always diverted, others are Decretory or
Determined absolutely foretelling what shall unavoidably follow, such was this
of the coming in of the Assyrian, the Babilonish captivity, and diverse others.
And we have ground for this distinction in that of Zephany, Zeph. 2.3.
before the decree bring forth, seek ye the Lord, and that of our Savior
Luc. 9.42
if thou had known in this thy day; and that of the Psalmist, P^. 95 8.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, intimating that if
they should not so is that place interpreted concerning those that lived in the
time of the preparation of the Arc, My Spirit shall not always strive with
mar, his days shall be 120 years. I.e. he shall have so long to repent. Genesis
6.2.


If it be inquired here when a threatening is minatory, and when peremptory the
observation will hint an answer scilicet when the sin has been very
provoking, Q ^
and the impenitence very obstinate we may gather that the decree has brought
forth, and that the fierce anger of the Lord is coming on, as the Prophet
spakes. Zech. 2, 2, Distinct,^. of promises.


A 1, 2.
either for prevention of the evil that it shall not come, or remove all of it
that it shall not continue for the first sort we say they are to be
understood with this proviso, that the repentance be seas^nable and speedy,
and not delayed so long till the honor and Justice of God be engaged to a
vindication, as he speaks in the Prophet when he had reckoned some of their
gross impieties and their incorrigible impenitency, he asks themselves the
question, how shall I pardon thee for this, and shall I not visit for these
things? Ir. 3.5.7.9.
and for the latter sort we say that they also are to be understood in a double
sense, literal and spiritual, in the former, they are not always fulfilled,
in the latter they never fail, all things are not ours literally, and yet it is
promised by the Apostles 1 Cor. 3.21.
but as our Savior speaks we have meat to eat which the world knows not of
I^h 4.32.
and so a deliverance spiritual from the body of sin, the power of
darkness, the curse of the law, and the wrath of God, Romans 7 24.^5
but temporally we may even for one sin be kept from entering into Canaan,
Col. 1.13.
and with David never have our Gal. 3.13. ^Th. 1.10.
house without a judgment.

That the scripture does not always comfort with the hope of prevention of the
affliction, no nor always temporal deliverance out of it, but with
supportation under it, Cor. 10 13.
Res. An^ 1.
san^tification of it, Esa 17 9.
final freedom from all by Christ, Esa 25 8.
and Reasons of the point.
reward also of our patience under it, for the merits of Christ's patience, it
we be in him, according to that of the Apostle, the light affliction works for
us an eternal weight of glory. ^ Cor. 1.4.
2 the Scripture has a greater motive to repentance then our deliverance,
scilicet. I the love of God whom by sin we have offended, and of Christ whom
by it we have pierced, 2 the glory of God whom by our professed repentance we
honor, thereby testifying he deserved better of us. Luc. 7.38.
f 2 Cor. 5.14. Zech. 12.10.


To the second reason we say that though the sin upon our humiliation and
faith in Christ be taken away as David's was, yet the affliction occasioned by
the sin may long continue as his also did ^ Sam 12.10.11.12,13.
not as a punishment, but as an exercise, as a prevention, or a warning to
others as a clearing of Gods impartiality, that every mouth be stopped, when he
scourges every one of his own sons so severely, if the end be hard of those
that obey not the Gospel.

For the grounds of this, two sorts must be laid down 1 negative; those that
seem to be, but are not; 2 positive, 1 appearing only.
those that indeed are the reasons of it.

1 The reason is not because he hates them, 1 appearing only.
though it is because he is highly displeased with them; those whom he had sent
into captivity he says I will acknowledge them, I will set mine eyes upon them
for good, I will be their God and they shall be my people, ler. ^^5. 6.7.
and the Apostle assures us, that if we endure chastning, God offers himself
to us as a Father to his child in whom he delights, Heb. 12 7.
and Christ tells the Church of Laodicea, That as many as he loves he rebukes
and chastens, Rev. 3 19.
and Paul the Corinthians, that they were therefore chastned of the Lord ( even
with death) that they might not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11 32.


David's sin was pardoned before any affliction came: 2 Samuel 12.13.
and that not upon us, but Christ, he has laid the punishment of it all; Esaias
5.3.6.
that he is reconciled by the blood of his Son, col. 1 20.
which takes away all so clearly that it leaves no spot or wrinkle, 1 Io^n
1.7.9.
no blame or accusation, Ephesians. 5.17.
so that it being applied by faith, God himself has nothing to lay to our
charge, Col. 1.22 Hib. 10.14.
but we have full peace with him and joy and glory in him. Romans 8.33,34. Cap.
5.1.
Now then where remission of sin is, and reconciliation to God, there is no
more satisfaction for sin, Heb. 10.18. Object.
But against this may be objected that of the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 40.2.
Comfort ye Jerusalem, say ye to her, her ^^^quity is pardoned for she has
received of the Lords hand double for all her sins; to which we answer,
Concreto, as the Church, the body is one with her head Christ, Ephesians. 22.23.
in respect whereof its sufferings are called the sufferings of Christ, Mat.
25.35. Col. 1.24.
and Christ's sufferings called the Churches sufferings; Rom 6.3,4,5,6.
the afflictions of Christ abound in me 2 Cor 1.5.
, it may be taken in that sense. As in all their afflictions he is afflicted
Esaias 63.9.
, so they in him, but the

2 Reasons truly such are of four sorts, Reasons truly such of 4 sorts.
Jeremy, Ier 2. 15.
The land is laid waste, the Cities burnt without an inhabitant; know therefore
and see that it is an ewill and a bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the
Lord thy God. [See] that referres to a representation; hence it is said in the
Proverbs, Prove. 1.31.
that those that refuse the admonition of God should eat of the fruit, that is,
taste by affliction the evil of their ways. All the denuntiation of the
Prophets to Manasseh, nor the bloody color of his sins, could make him see
the evil of them, till he was in captivity, and then he greatly humbled
himself before the God of his fathers, ^ Kings 33.12.
and this shows also why great sins must have great afflictions, because the
species or image, if it be a true one, must give the dimensions, the true
height and breadth of the body of sin.

If it be questioned whether God cannot some other way represent the sin; Q
^.
we answer God deals with the creature according to its nature; now whilst
we are in a lower Sphere of understanding, we perceive not causes, but by the
effect first; 2 The second thing to be apprehended and is represented by
affliction, is, Gods goodness, which, as all our other happiness we perceive
best by wanting it. And it is to be apprehended, and is by affliction
represented, And that 1 in apposition is sin and the effects of it.
1 in opposition to sin, and the effects of it: That of the Lord in Moses,
Deuteronomy. 31.17.
I will hide me till they say these evils are upon us because our God is not
among us; and that in Hosea, I will return to my place till they acknowledge
their offense and seek my face, in their affliction they will seek me early:
Mos. 5.5.
now affliction represents the goodness of God, Cap. 2.7.
in affliction she will say, I will returns to my former husband, for then it
was better with me then now. Deuteronomy. 30.19.
I have set before you life and death blessing and cursing. Psalm. 94.19
2 of the excellency of it, if it be of such sweetness mixed with the gall of
Asps, what would it be if it were tasted without mixture? 3 in relation to the
creature, as infinitely exceeding of it, whilst in the multitude of sorrows
that can refresh, yea and make exceeding joyful, 2 Cor. 7. 4. Whereas these
miserable comforters are they all, Prove. 11. 4. And this also shows a reason
why great sins must have great afflictions; that the height and depth and
breath and length of the love and goodness of God in Christ, might be
thoroughly discerned: When the Prodigal is almost starved, how pleasant is the
thought even of dry bread? Luc. 15.17.
when the dejected soul is even at the graves mouth, then if there be a
messenger, to reveal unto him Gods righteousness in his Son, it makes his
flesh with joy come again, as a young childs; Job 33.23.
Cor. 3.14.2.
that they might have a through exercise of their graces, faith, patience,
submission, that they might be perfectly conformed to the image of Christ.
lames 1.34.
General reason
general reason is in respect of God himself, in relation to his adversaries,
that his honor may be salved, that he might show he hates sin most, where he
loves best; hence it is that David must be severely afflicted, because he had
made the enemies of God to blaspheme; which scandal that God might take off,
he lets them see that in point of sinning, there is no respect of persons with
him. Sam. 12.14. col. 3.25.


3 Reason is, ^eason 3
for the Adversary, in respect of themselves, that they may be convicted of
Gods justice in their ^uine, and the horror that abides them; hence that of
Peter, ^ Pet 4.17.
if judgment begins at the house of God, what then the end of others? and that
of the Prophet, Ier. 25.18.
behold I begin to bring evil in the City which is called by upon my name, and
shall ye be unpunished?

Reason.
Reason is, the admonition of others; so Moses, all Israel shall hear and
fear, and do no more any such thing, Deuteronomy. 13.11.
the Apostle admonishes that the judgments upon the people of God in the
wilderness were for our examples, that we should not lust after evil things
as they lusted, lest also if we be partners in their sin, we be sharers in
their plagues. 1 Cor. 10.6.11.3 Use. 1 Info^mation 1 Of the evil of sin.


If we apply this, it will first inform us, 1 of the true nature of sin,
that though it be his own people, and the dearly beloved of his soul, Ier.
12.7.
so that his repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8.
yet such is the malignity of sin, that as a father, he must either draw
blood, or lose his child, and not suffer his soul to spare for his crying
Prove. 19.18.
. Oh therefore do not that thing which he so hates. Ier. 44 4.


Of the cause of our troubles
It will inform us of the true cause why God has showed himself inexorable
hitherto for Germany, Ireland, and our selves; wherefore we have fasted, and
he regards it not, and afflicted our souls and he yet stands off in this time
of trouble; that we have spent our money for that which is no bread, and our
labor for that Which profits not: ' It Is not a mistaken Council, it is not a
neglecting army; these, where there is such, may be the instruments, but not
the authors of our evil; no, ' it is the birth of a decree, Zeph. 2. 2. and the
execution of the Ier. 13.13.
judgment that is written for England; ^^y 29.14.
according to the tenor where of, the Lord has filled all the inhabitants of
the land, the Princes, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and the inhabitants
with drunkenness, and I will dash them one against another. And that there may
be no prevention of it, the wisdom of the wise the wise shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent shall be hid.

Resp. whatsoever this people were guilty of, Evidenced from the same occasion
that was in our Prophet vis. sin shown to be parallel with theirs in its, 1
Vari^y. 1 Against the whole law. 1 None.
that drew down this calamity upon them, whether we reflect, I upon the
several kinds of sin, against the whole law, some of us refusing to have
any at all; and there are two sorts of them, moving upon a contrary principle:
the first of profaneness, who will endure no yoke but that of Satan, to whom
they grind, even when their eyes are out: who live like bruit beasts made to
be taken and destroyed, 1 Timothy 1.9.
but yet confessed himself to be under one, to Christ. 2 Cor 9. 11.


Nothing else.
Others will have nothing but law and their own righteousness by it, and name
Christ but for fashion sake, like the old Jews, who having a zeal of God, if
they might please him with their own righteousness, came short or the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.7.


Mixtures of it.
Mixtures, 1 of law and Gospel together, making (the new cloth) with Mat.
9.16.1 with the Gospel
Christ's right consnes, only as a patch to stop holes in their own old garment,
whereby at length the rent is made worse; a greater injury then the crucifying
of him, for that was the occasion of his glory, his death for humbled sinners;
this his shame, that he could not perfectly do the work he came for; and the
greatest injury to the law. For they deprive it of its end, which is to bring
to Christ, and leave him to do the rest. Romans 10.4.
With sin.
Of sin and the law, buying liberty of God by one part of obedience, to
transgress in another: like Saul, that thought by reserving a Sacrifice, to
pacify God for sparing the Amalekite, 1 San^^. ^5.31.
whereas he that off ends in one point is guilty of all. James 2 10.
(...) precepti^
Against the several precepts of the law, 1 In respect of the evil forbidden,
1 in the first Table, Table. 1 Prohitions. 1 Idolatry. 1 Literal.
literally, our forefathers superstition, Idolatry and persecution, and we are
risen up in their stead a generation of sinful men, who are so far from
bewailing our parents sin that we pursue it, by favoring the professors of
such corruption, Papists, Arminians, Formlists, and hate with a perfect hatred
the contrary zealously affected, whose chief fault in them is zeal, but not
in their Adversaries; our Fathers slew the Prophets, and we fill their
Sepulchers.

But can you prove this charge? Proved.
Hearken oh Heaven, and give ear oh Earth, yea all the Elements give in your
testimony. The Earth in all the parts of it, Scotland, Ireland, Holland,
France, Germany, yea America, and the utmost corners of the world, whither our
persecutions of late days have driven many of Gods servants. The Sea, wherein
many of them in their passages have perished, and The Air and Fire unto one
whereof, we have scattered the limbs of many of Gods people by the help of
the other in this present war. And Heaven, which has been filled with their
cries to the Lord of Sabbath. James 5.4.


2 Myltically, I Idolizing of our selves, and like Satan, so far puffed with
our own gifts, that we fall into his condemnation, admire our selves, despise
our brethren, and walk nothumbly before God. Mic. 6.8.
2 Idolizing of the world, these having our first thought in the morning and
our last at night, Phil. 3.19.
3 Idolizing men, of which our Prophet here complains, that the statures of
Omri, Mic. 6.16.
were kept; and 'twas the vice of the Jews in our Saviors time, that were
more tender of Casars honor then of Christ's blood; ^ ohn 19.12.
like those among our selves that transgress the Commandemnts of God boldly,
but will seem to keep those of men conscionably. Mat. 15.6.


Table. Bloodshed.
2 In the second table, to instance but in one; all the blood shed in the
Scottish war; that deluge of it overflowing Ireland; and those arms of this
Sea that have drowned so many, and daily do amongst our selves, has been
occasioned by Papists, Arminians, Formalists, and profane persons, proud
spirits, the one for their end being subservient to the other, etc. All which
we have countenanced and fomented, and on the contrary opposed or deserted
those that appeared against them. Now can we wonder why, when we make many
prayers the Lord does not hear us? the reason is, our hands are full of blood,
Esaias 1.15.


Injunctions to good.
2 The good enjoined, 1 the distaste of it, and the means to it; prophecy
not, say many of us to those that prophecy. Micha 2.6.
Or 2 dainty mouthed in it, we relish it hot, cannot endure sound doctrine,
much less plain preaching of it, if nothing else but Christ and him
crucified, 1 cor. 2.2.2.
we must have him clothed with a scarlet robe, a Crown and a Scepter though
it be borrowed of his enemies, not satisfied with decent clothing him, but we
must have idle adorning; it shows an ill stomach that needs much sauce.

Or 3. partial and carnal judgeing of it, having the word of God in too much
respect of the persons teaching it, James 2.1.


4 Backsliding from it, that in heart our souls draw back, 1 cor. 1.12.
and then no marvel if Gods soul have no pleasure in us. Heb. 10.25.38, 39.


Degree.
The degree of our ^^nne, such as make Christians a shame to Turks, Protestants
a byword to Papists, the purer sort to profane men, to the dishonor of that
Christ, Protestant religion and power of godliness, which we profess, Ezekiel.
36.20.
it being so far from correction, that it is, become commendable,
covetousness in the effect of it, an honor; intemperance the glue of charity;
oaths the ornament of our discourses; uncleanenesse a kind of reputation;
corrupt indifferency moderation and prudence.

Universality.
The universality of our sinning; 1 Our Princes, i. e. our persons of quality,
(for they in the Hebrew Dialect are expressed by that word) many of them living
by reason of 1 Monopolies, Patents, etc. not upon the sweat of the poores
brows, for they brought them to that leanenesse, that there was no superduity
for that excrement; but upon their flesh and bones, as our Prophet speaks, Cap.
3. 2. that could not warm themselves, but the needy was the colder; nor feed,
but eating up the people they eat bread; nor array themselves, but the Orphans
and the Widow were the nakeder. It is not enough to break off this sin by more
uprightness, but repentance must be testified by special works of mercy, as
satisfaction to the poor, as the Prophet Daniel speaks. Dan. 4.27.


How long Lord, how long will thou cease to avenge our blood upon such a great
person? such a Knight? such a Gentleman? such a Bishop? and it may be such a
College. Revel. 6.10.
Not but that there is a difference; for some have had these put upon them in
stead of better lands taken from them; in other places there is enough
notwitstanding, and some have though little, yet too much in that employment.
But where an able minister may be had, and where means is not cometent, and
where it was not forced on them, (if this will hold plea with God) there, those
that do it not, are without excuse.

2 The Ministry (for we must all this day take shame to our selves, as Daniel
Daniel 9.
speaks, we and our Fathers and our Princes and our people have transgressed
thy covenant) they as those in our Prophet have fixed their ends, great estates,
wordly fullness, high places, much ease; as our fathers did, so do we; Dumb
Dogs living to slumber, that can never have enough, that say, fetch wine and we
will fill our selves: Esaias 56.10.
and the means they have used, such as our Prophets complain of, or 300
cruelty and flattery; they make the people err, bite with their teeth, and
cry peace, and those that put not into their mouth they even prepare war
against them, as it is at this day; Levy has not only his tongue but his
hand deep in this blood, and not only his pen in it, but even his sword too,
if the report be true, that so many scholars were found dead at Edgehill: If
Ahab will have them say he shall go up to Ram^th-G^lead, he shall have
hundreds cry, Go and prosper, 1 Kings 11.^2^
if in Church matters Ahaz will have such an Altar as is at Damascus, he shall
have an High Prie^t that will do according to all that the King commands him.
2 Kings 16.16.
If a novelty will take the people, you shall have those that will speak
perverse things to draw Disciples after them. Acts 30.30.


3 The people themselves, 1 affected ignorance, 2 Mole-like earthinesse, 3
Gross profaneness, 4 Notable opposing the purity of reformation, lest they
should be forced to be too heavenly, 5 Unworthy cowardice for want of making
their calling and election sure, and so fear death more then hell, which by
this they highly merit: 6 Uncertainty and fickleness, a while a go, an
Hosanna to the Parliament and a crucify them to the High Priests, and now
these can so persuade with them, that with the Keilites they will give up
David, that they may secure themselves: 7 A spiritual wantonness, zealous a
while after good things, but no sooner filled then cloyed with them, a Tim. 4.3.
of all which we may say with him, the Prophets prophecy lies, and the great
men (for so the word may be interpreted) bear rule by their means, and the
people love to have it so, and what then shall we do in the end thereof, Ier.
5.3^.
Wilfuln^sse.
the wilfulness of our sins, against light from God, against conviction of our
own consciences, against the strivings of the Spirit, as those of the old
world, Genesis 6.3.
so that many of us have been feign to shut on^ eyes or hush our consciences,
as Saul 1 Samuel 16.16.
with company, mirth, business, that we might not hear the clamor of it. Or
with Foelix, break off the discourse of righteousness and temperance, that we
might not tremble at the judgment to come, Act^ 24.25.
for the neglect of them.

Incorrigible against.
5 Lastly, the incorrigiblenesse of our sin. Admonitions.
Against Gods mouth in his word and all his servants pressing it, Micha 2.6.
against his hand opened, wherewith he filled us with plenteousnesse, and
would by this goodness have led us to repentance; Romans 2.4.
but we by turning this grace into wantonness or security, have treasured up
wrath against the day of it. Judgment.
Mercies.
His contracted hand of judgment in the persecution of Queen Mary, the
invasion of 88, the danger of November the fifth, the Pestilence in the year
1625, the calamity of these many years last past, yea and still upon us (for
these things we must put often in memory, seeing the Characters of them so
soon wash out of men's hearts) we may take up the complaint of the Prophet,
Amos 4 6.
I have given you cleanness of teeth; sent all diseases after the manner of
Egypt, etc. and yet you have not returned unto me: and that of Esaias, Esaias 1.5.
Why should ye be smitten any more? they will transgress more and more: we
have been like Solomon's Drunkard, they have smitten me but I was not sick,
wounded me, but I felt it not. Prove. 23.34.


3 Against the strongest remedies and firmest bonds of obedience, 4 Our own
late protestation.
the words of our own mouths, our solemn vows and promises in our late
Protestation, which is the last refuge of a Nation, Ezra 10.2.2 Chro. 15.12.
Nehem. 9.38.
and strongest engagement to obedience, and the violation of it a sin, which
God has always revenged with sweeping judgment, as the places in the Margin
will evidence, Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 29.25. Ios. 23.15. I^dg. 2.20.
take but an instance or two, the coming in of the Assyryan, and captivity of
ten Tribes, is ascribed to this. 2 Kings 17.15.
And Daniel concerning the Babylonish captivity mentions the oath; Pan 9.11.
And when they had transgressed a Covenant but concerning the poor servants in
letting of them go free, the Lord breaks forth in fearful threats which he
executed accordingly; I will faith he pro^laime a liberty for him to the Sword,
and to the Famine, and to the Pestilence, and I will make you be removed into
all the kingdoms of the Earth, and there your dead bodies shall be meat to the
fowls of heaven and beasts of the earth. Ier. 34.15,16,17
And he asks concerning Zedekiah the question, Shall a man break the Covenant?
though it were but with a man, Ezekiel. 17.15.
and be delivered? What Thunderbolts then may we think God is sharpning against
our faces? And Furnaces seven times hotter is be preparing for our torture.
who have protested before God and man, for God and man in the highest things
that concern both the pure worship of the one, and welfare of the other, and
yet not only slight but work many of us directly contrary to it: 1 Favoring
Papistry, against Protestant Religion: 2 Hazarding the Kings person in
unnatural war. 3 Opposing the power of Parliament: 4 Betraying the liberties
of the Subject, 5 and every person that endeavors to maintain them: 6
Conceal and countenance the Contrivers against them: 7 And hereby destroy the
union and peace of the three Kingdoms: 8 And become guilty of all the blood
that has been shed in them, and so renounce our vow and Protestation. And do
we wonder that God visits for these things? and that his soul does avenge it
self on such a nation as this? Ier. 5.9.
Reflect upon what was lately spoken to this honorable Assembly concerning the
Covenant revenging sword. Mr. Arrowsmiths Sermon.
Use of exhort^tion.
Now if we have justified this people by running parallel with them in all
their sins, upon whom the Decree passed,

2 We may be hence exhorted; Not to add drunkenness to thirst, lest our
chains be made yet more heavy; if we continue and add to walk contrary to
God, he will not only walk contrary to us, but will plague us yet seventimes^
more for our obstinacy; as he repeats these words four times together in
Leviticus, Levit. 26.^8.21,24,^8.
there is a vain conceit in men, as if God when he had deeply afflicted a
Nation would give over as satisfied; whereas we see in the example of his own
people, that he will have his will of us one way or other, if we refuse to do
we shall suffer his will: Voluma^ Dei s^t aut a te aut de se.
so in the Prophet Esaias Esaias 9.12,13,17,20,21.
it is repeated three times in one Chapter, For all this his hand is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still; yea, and in the same place Verse 13.
is the reason, for (says he) the people turn not to him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord, therefore the Lord will cut them off head and
tail, and branch, and root. In like manner in another Prophet, Amos 4.12.
when he had sent them cleanness of teeth, and yet they would not return to
him, he sends multitudes of other, as it follows in the text, and at the close
he says, because by these things they will not be admonished, therefore
prepare to meet thy God, there is yet a sorer judgment behind. Pity then
Ireland, the Northern and Western parts of this Kingdom that are almost
desolate; pity the children and those that suck the breast, pity the wife of
thy bosom; for if you go on, we can expect no better quarter of the Lord
then he gave to his own people, and that was upon their incorrigiblenefle. The
children shall be dashed in pieces and the women with child ripped up, (d) and
so it came to pass as we showed before. Go therefore thou intemperate,
worldly, proud, cold, hypocritical man, and sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee, John. 9.14.


or a banishing out of the kingdom. It is a part of preparation to be resolved
of the certainty; hence our Savior (a) bids his Disciples sink these things
into their hearts that they should suffer, and our Savior, if I must drink
they will be done.

2 By making sure of him who is here promised to be Peace, (especially to the
soul,) even when the Assyrian should tread in the Palaces, this is the rock
the storms cannot shake, and those that are founded on it, the strength of
man, no nor the gates of hell can prevail against, this the Ark that the flood
cannot reach, the Anchor by which we may ride out the tempest, of which more in
the next part.

3 By considering 1 the equity of God in it, it is that we bargained for with
him; Romans 6. (...) Genesis 2.7.
did we not agree with him for this penny, that if we did eat or drink
intemperately, be wanton, worldly, profane, cold, false, we would be content
to dye the death? have we not procured these things to our selves? Ier. ^.17.
why should therefore living men complain, a man for the punishment of his
sin, Lam 3.39.
this made not only Daniel confess, that God was righteous in all he had done,
though in the captivity, Dan. 9.7.
but even Pharaoh in those horrid plagues of Egypt. Exodus 19.17.


2 Consider the advantages, 1 To God we should say as they in the Prophet. Esaias
66.5.
Let God be glorified in our shame or ruin, let his honor which we have
bespotted be recovered what ever become of us; it should be dearer then our
souls, as it was to Moses and Paul. Romans 9.3.
2. To our selves, we shall be cured of that disease that would have proved
deadly to us as the Prophet says, Esaias 27.9.
all the fruit is that God may take away our sins, that though we dye
temporally we may be but chastned of the Lord, that we may not be condemned
with the world. Cor. 11.3^.


2 False and hollow brethren in the Church, members of the Commonwealth, will
be, as many have been already further discovered the Abiathars and Ioabs show
themselves when Adonijuh raises a rebellion.

1 Kings. 2.21.
4 By humbling our selves before him, for it may be he will rest content with
that; for though there be not a sudden and a total removal, Sa^is ^st
prostrasse.
yet now there is more ground for this exhortation, especially now the evil is
upon us, and so the decree in part satisfied, therefore partly Gods: it will
obtain certainly, 1 A mitigation for the Elects sake, that cry to him night
and day, these days shall be shortened, Joel 2.12.18.
after 70000 yet when David cries to God, and after all the land and Cities of
Judah, yet humbling Jerusalem is spared. Esaias 37.33.
2 Support 1 Cor. 10.13. He will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able. 2 Cor. 12.8,9.
3 Sanctification Hebr. 5. 8. Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience
by the things that he suffered. 4 Removal, Deuteronomy. 30. 1. When all these things
are come upon thee and thou shall return unto the Lord, then he will turn thy
captivity. 5 Perhaps thy security. Mal 3. 17. In the day that I make up my
Jewels I will remember them; every day of fast, every hour of prayer, is on
the file. Rev. 20. 12. 6 Return of thy prayer, Psalm. 35. 13. I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into my own bosom, though it did
no good to them. 7 If you forbear, Hester 4. 14. If thou forbear at all at
this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from
another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall perish. Remember that of
the Prophet, When the Lord called for weeping and mourning, and there followed
eating of flesh and drinking of wine; surely, says the Lord, this iniquity
shall not be purged till ye dye. Esaias 21.12. Use 4.
Is for direction, 1 to all those that seek reformation and use sinful
means to accomplish it, Surely the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no
purpose, Esaias 30. 7. Esaias 30.7.
It were better for us if the will of God be so, to suffer for well doing then
for evil, 1 Pet. 3.17. For then after our captivivity shall be accomplished
God will visit us, and perform his good word toward us. Ier. 2^.10.
2 Direction for this honorable assembly what they are principally to labor
in, and that is to cause the nation to break off their sins by repentance;
whilst that wildefire is in the thatch, the water of fasting and of all other
endeavors will but inflame the burning, Esaias 1. 16. and if so we shall be
fitted for the consolation which the second part of the Text propounds, for
it is with reference to the former, and supposition of the effectual working
of it, when the Assyrian is come into our land, and treads in our palaces, upon
our humiliation and application of our selves to him; then this man shall be
peace; where three things are considerable.

1 The extremity; 2 The opportunity; 3 The particular remedy: the extremity, 1
When the Assyrian, then and not before, from the Obs.
former.

Observe, The Churches great deliverie, especially after great provocations, is
not usually till it come to great extremity, but always at the due
opportunity. When the Patriarchs had sold Joseph into Egypt, themselves were in
bondage there four hundred years, and every day in worse condition then
other: before Subjects, after they became slaves, and afterward such, as it was
not thought fit that they should live. And therefore care is taken to murder
them in the birth: Exodus 1.16.
When Moses came to deliver them where before they were but dying men, now they
stunke in the nostrils of their adversary; Cap. 5.21.
and when they were delivered, yet worse, for where before they were scattered
in the land and some might hope to escape, now all gathered together fit to
have the neck cut off at once; as Nero desired the people of Rome might have
for the Sea before, and the Mountains on each side, and the Egyptians
pursuing, Cap. 1^.
so before God delivered the Israelites from the Philistimes, they were come to
that lowness, that they had neither Sword nor Spears nor a Smith to make
them. Sa^^. 13.19.22.
And another time, not till one Goliath made all the Host of Israel run like
Sheep, Cap. 17.^.
and the Famine in the time of I^ram not removed, till a fourth part of a Cabbe
of Doves Dung was sold for five pieces of silver, yea, till the women eat
their own children. 2 Kings 25.29.
And the people of God not delivered from the enemy in the time of Iehos^phat,
till he knew not what to do. ^ Chro. 10.11.
And Hezekiah not delivered from the Assyrian in out Text, till all the fenced
Cities of Judah taken, and came up to the walls of Jerusalem; 2 Kings 18 3.
And Christ came not to deliver, till the Scepter utterly departed from Judah,
and the Nation made slaves to the Imperious Romans; but when the condition is
such, then comes the deliverance, as in all these examples appears; for the
vision of deliverance is for this appointed time, and in it it will speak and
not lie. Hab. 2.3.


Reason 2. The grounds of this truth are such as these. 1 In respect of God
that the sole praise of the deliverance may be his, Gedeons company were too
many for God to deliver by; Judge. 7.2.
God is careful that we should not give his honor to another, which we
would do if we were not frustrated of all other helps, as in the Prophet;
Esaias 48.7.
I told thee before, lest thou should say, my Idol did it.

Reason 3. In respect of the enemy, that he may be manifested. First, in
regard of his malice and cruelty, that he may have opportunity to spit up all
his venom, and exercise all his rage ^ that men might know the wickedness of
the men.

2. That they may be convicted, first, of their impotency in opposing God and
his Church. That though they bring it to nothing, yet can they not then
prevail, as the Sea, when the Waves come to that part of the ground that is
lower then it self, yet it cannot overflow but their breaks Exodus 18.11.
; Secondly, Of the Justice of God in their ruin, that they may be
self-condemned before God do it, Ier. 2.19.
thine own wickedness shall reprove thee.

Isai. 1 25.
, and that the faith and patience of it may be thoroughly tried 1 pet. 1.7.
; and the graces of it publicly honored 1 Samuel 2.30. Use.
, as it was in the primitive persecutions.

For the consequence or use of this, it will be for our encouragement, The
Apostle 2 Cor. 12.10.
rejoiced in necessities, tribulations, afflictions, for when he was weak, then
strong; i. e. as he adds, for then the power of Christ was ready to rest upon
him; It Is so withal the Church, It receives the sentence of death, that it
might trust in him, who raised Christ from the dead. Our Savior being to
comfort his Disciples before his going, tells them of war etc. and adds,
when ye see these fulfilled, then lift up your heads for Luke 21.28.
, etc. a strange way of comforting, but it is God way. Is Ireland gone; Do the
States look on; does not Scotland help; is York, Newcastle, Oxford, Weles,
Reading, Cirencester taken? does France, Denmark, Spain, and the Irish Rebels,
all threaten; were all the fenced Cities taken, and came up to the Walls of
London, as they did the other day; does men's hearts fail, and the Pillars of
the Earth quake, those of whom we said, under their shadow we shall have peace;
Let not your hearts be troubled, The woman when shetravaileth, is near
delivery, and of obtaining a child; All these floods shall not drown, but make
glad the City of God Psalm. 46.3,4.
; David was not delivered till he was in his own sense cut off from the sight
of Gods eyes Psalm. 31.22.
, Jonah not till he was cast into the Sea, came into the belly of the Whale,
and descended to the Rooks of the Rock Jonas 2.4
. Peter not till he was to be brought to execution the next day Acts 12.6.
. Paul not till he had received the sentence of death 2 Cor. 1 9.
. Christ not till he was dead and buried; yea this Kingdom not till helpless,
and hopeless, and this Parliament never so much advanced, as since there was
but half an hour betwixt it is ruin and it.

But perhaps it may be objected,

Answ. 1. It Is more self-love then the Heathen would endure, some of them to be
unwilling to sink in their particular, so that the public might be preserved.

2. Though thy bread, and thy life too, Regulus. Cata. Cic. etc.
which it should sustain, be cast as it were upon the waters, yet in the
morning, sow thy seed, in the evening, withhold not thy hand, for after many
days it shall return Eccles. 11.1,6.
. 1. To thy self, even the least cup of cold water, if given, because he that
wants it, belongs to Christ, shall not loose his reward Mark. 9 41.
. God has upon account every penny, every Journey, every tear. 2. To the
Church for this loss of our estates and lives, are part of that extremity,
that the Church must come unto, before it be delivered, and it is a special
honor, that to us it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in
him, but also to suffer for his sake.

Is the special remedy the thing it self, 3. Partic. of 2. genesis Pet.
that should in this extremity bring seasonable deliverance; This man shall be
peace, which must be first explained, secondly, distinguished, thirdly, some
observation from thence raised.

1. Explained in the several expressions of i^.
. Explained. This man, Where two Questions, First, What is meant by this man?
Answ. The second verse of this Chapter compared with Matthew. 2. 6. clears it to
be Christ, 1.
as the Jewish Writers themselves confess, Herod asking where Christ should be
born, the Scribes answer him at Bethleem, quoting this place of our Prophets.
2. Question, Why is he here proposed as a consolation against this calamity of
the Assyrian. Answ. 1. To signify that Christ was he in all ages, that was the
Captain of salvation to his Church, as is intimated, Verse. 2. His goings out
still with the Church, have been from everlasting. q. d. Fear not the Assyrian,
you know on whose shoulder the Government lies, hence it is said, by the
Apostle 1 Cor. 10.4.
. That the Jews in the Wilderness tempted Christ. 2. Because Christ is the
Foundation, Pledge, and Assurance of all other mercies to the Church (as was
showed before) in him all the promises of God, are yea, and Amen 2 Cor. 1.20.
. And he that has given us his own son, how shall be not with him give us
all things else Rom 8.32.
.

Shall be. Why not, shall bring, or procure? Answ. Because Christ has a double
relation to the Churches happiness. First, as an efficient cause, obtaining
it. 1. By his merit. 2. Conferring it by his power. Secondly, As the Object
matter of it. Christ himself it is, in whom the Church rests satisfied in the
want of all things, according to that of the Lord to Abraham, I am thy
exceeding great reward Genesis 15.1.
; which is also expressly affirmed of Christ by the Apostle, he is our peace
Ephesians. 2.14.
, as the Husband is the Wives happiness; as the procurer of it, hence called
the Savior of the body Ephesians. 5.23.
. 2. As the chief part of it, as Elkanah to Hanna, Am not I better to thee then
ten sons 1 Samuel 1.8.
.

3. 3.
Peace. Which has a double notion, 1. Proper as Jehoram to Jehu. Is it peace
Jehu. i. e. Is it all quiet 2 King. 9 22.
. 2. Figurative, according to the Hebrew dialect by a Metonymy of the adjunct,
and a Synechdoche of the principal part, as pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
says the Psalmist. i.e. Desire all prosperity for it, as he expounds himself
in the next verse Psa 1 22.6, 7.
. Now both these is here understood, Christ brings both, as shall appear anon.

The words of this particular thus opened, fall into this division. 1. The
nature of the remedy answerable to the evil, and that is peace against Warn.
Distinguished.
The time it is in the future shall be. 3. The certainty of it, it is not only
shall in respect of time, but also in regard of the Assurance. 4. The procurer
of it, This man. 5. The chief matter of it, and that's he himself, This man
shall not only bring, but Be the peace.

3. Observations the ce first employed.
Observations thence. From the first particular might be this, That Christ will
be all in all to his Church. i. e. Not only a seasonable but a suitable remedy
in all its calamities. From the 2. From the 3. As the Assyrian shall come, so
then Christ shall be peace: But passing these: from the 4 and 5, as that which
is chiefly here aimed at,

Observe, 2. Chiefly intended.
That the only work of Peacemakers in a Kingdom, is to receive, retain, and
advance the Lord Jesus. This I confess might have been the use of a Doctrine
hence deducible; but because it is most sit for the memory of this Honorable
Assembly now in their Agitation of a Treaty for Peace, and because it
necessarily flows from the Text, I conceived it not improper to be the
principal Lesson.

Of it must be given, 1. The mind. 2. The truth. 3. The use and advantage of
it.

1 Expounded in the severalls
First, I say, The only work. In regard of eminency, This is the one thing
absolutely necessary Luke 10.41.
, all other in comparison of this we may call with the Apostle, dung and dross
Phil. 3.8.
, idleness, or evil occupation. 2. By way of sovereignty, it is the Queen and
end of all other employments undertaken in order to peace, and so denominates,
disposes, and makes them desirable, according to that of the Apostle, I live
not, but Christ in me Gal. 2 20.
, and to me to live is Christ; and whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, in word, or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Col. 3.17.
. i. e. In order to him. ^ Col. 10,32.


sufficient to give him some entertainment, but he must be bid to go up higher,
till he come to his own place, that is, to the head of the Table both in
Parliament and Convocation-House, i. e. the Church and State: the quarrel was,
That they would not have this man to reign over them Luke 19.
: of which anon.

3. I say, advance Christ, signanter, not Religion only, for Turks, Jews,
Papists, Schismatiques properly so called (which rent themselves from Christ
his Ordinances or People; not those that modestly refuse the counterfeit, or
corruptions of them) all these compass Sea and Land to make a Prosclyte Mat.
23.15.
, to advance Religion; yet are as far from Peace, as from Truth, because they
either deny or divide Christ the Prince of it.

2. The truth of the Observation will appear, 2. Proved by the (...) from
if we show, 1 That it is so; and then, 2 more fully, if we add the causes why.

The Text.
1. That the only work of the Peacemakers in a Kingdom is to set up Christ,
appears in the Text, which in this great calamity by the Assyrians, proposes no
other means in the first place, but this: after wards indeed he mentions
others, as the raising up of the seven Shepherds, and eight principal men; but
these are authorized from, and acted by the former.

(...)
2. From consent of other Scriptures; it was mentioned before out of the
Apostle, Col. 2.17.
That Christ was the body of all legal worship, and the end of the Law Romans
10.4.
. Now Hezekiah having restored this, builds his confidence of deliverance on
it, as including Christ that Ro^k against which the gates of hell could not
prevail: After these things were astablished, Senacherib King of Assyria came
and entered into Judah, and Hezekiah said, with him is an Arm of flesh, but with
us is the Lord our God to fight our Battles 2 Chronicles. 32.1.8.
. The Prophet Esaias in a case of War, by the invasion of Pekah King of Israel,
and Re^in King of Syria, when the heart of Ahaz and his people was moved, as a
Reed shaken with the wind Esaias 7.2.
; How does the Prophet remove this shaking fit? Why chiesly by proposing
Christ, as the assurance of deliverance, cause the Scepter was not utterly to
depart from Judah (howsoever it did from Israel) till Shiloh came: but because
'twas very unlikely so small a handful should be able to withstand two so
potent Adversaries, he proposes it in as unlikely an expression; A Virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, and ye shall call his name Emmanuel; Ver. 15.
that is, God with us, to help and save us: And then follows; Ver. 16.
the Land which thou fear, shall be forsaken of both her Kings which came
against thee. Nay, and that promise of Christ in that place, is set as an
Antidote against the terror of this Assyrian calamity in our Text; for he
adds Ver. 17,18,20
, The Lord shall bring upon thy people the King of Assyria; and yet having laid
down the promise of Christ before, he says, That butter and honey should every
one eat that is left in the Land; and that there should no more come up upon it
the fear of Briars and Thorns, Ver. 22.25.
i. e. Christ notwithstanding this affliction should bring them great
prosperity and security: So also in the next Chapter Esaias 8.7.
having threatened the coming of this enemy, Now therefore the Lord shall bring
upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the King of Assyria,
and he shall pass through Judah, and reach even unto the neck (Jerusalem) and
the stretching out of his wings shall fill thy Land, O Emanuel; the Battle of
which Warrior should be with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, yea
with burning, and fuel of fire (universal, you see, and extreme) he subjoyns
as the only direction to the King and State; to whom he had spoken before, a
repetition of this promise of Christ, for unto us a son is born, a child is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, q. d. it belongs to
Christ to secure his people: Therefore fear not, but apply your selves unto
him, for unto us a child is born, etc. Esaias 9 5,6.
And in the next Chap: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Be not afraid of the
Assyrian, the consumption decreed shall overflow: But in the next Chapter
(though the same discourse) it is promised, There shall be a root of Jesse,
which shall stand for an Ensign to the people: And it shall come to pass in
that day, That the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to recover
his people from Assyria Isai 10.24.23 cap. 11.1.10,11.
. And the Prophet Malachy; The day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, and
leave neither root nor branch; but unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of
Righteousness arise, with healing under his wings: And ye (by him) shall tread
down the wicked Mal. 2.4 3.
. It Is a direction to peace in the time of trouble, from the enemies of the
Church.

3. From the greater to the less, from Gods own example; the setting up of
Christ is his only work, when he would make peace in the world; he has made
peace by the blood of his son, and by him reconciled all things Col. 1.20.
. Hence when the Kings of the earth and Princes were all in an uprore, he
stills it with this, I have set my King upon him; and therefore now, O ye
Kings, kiss him, lest ye perish from the way Ps. 2.6.11.
. This work is called Gods Kingdom A majori. Gods own example.
because it is his whole business, as Kings in theirs; and whole contentment,
as we say one, is in their Kingdom, when they are about that they take pleasure
in.

Ab oppositio.
3. From the contrary none ever made peace, and excluded him, that prospered.
Pilate and the high Priests would have peace with Caesar 10.19.12, 13.
and the people M rc. 15.15.
; and the people with the Ruler Ver. 11.
; and they with the Romans 10.11.42.
; and to obtain, they destroy Jesus: now Pilate would have peace with all,
because an Adversary, and -- laid violent hands upon himself; Eusebius 1.2. c. 7.
and the Priests and people did not so much oppose the Romans by this act, as
provoked them by othe^s: Whereupon they came and took away both their place and
Nation: And Maximinus, that he might enjoy a continued Peace, interdicts the
profession of Christianity, and there follows a War with his own Subjects,
wherein he always went by the worse Idem lib 9. c. 7.
.

Ab Inductione.
4. From instances in all the several kinds of peace, peace (as we heard
before) is 1 literal, and so 1 negative, non-disturbance and quiet; this
Christ brought here to Jerusalem, he shall not come against this city, nor
shoot an arrow there Isai. 33.37.
. 2 positive; 1 proper, 1 With God; bring justified by faith, we have peace
with him Romans 5.1.
. 2. With men; Agrippa, Festus, and the whole Council all friends to Paul's
person, though not to his Religion Acts 26.
. 3. With our selves; My peace I give unto you; let not your hearts be troubled
10.14 27.
. 2. Figurative, all prosperity; Butter and honey shall every one eat that is
l^st in the Land; and though persecutions, yet after ward many times much
abundance, or with the afflictions many blessings Mark. 10 40. (...) may be
interpreted with, or after persecution.
. Solomon his Type the ri^ hest and wisest Prince: Constantine the first
Christian Emperor, the greatest Potentate of the world.

We have seen the truth, come we to the grounds of the Point; which may be,

1. (...) or Reasons 1.
Because Christ only can stop enmity at the head; the beginning of strife is
like the letting out of water Prove. 17.14
, easily stopped at the Fountain; Now Wars and Contentions come from above; the
star Worm wood which made the waters ( i. e. the people, Revel. 17. 14.)
bitter, fell down from heaven: By the anger of the Lord it came to pass that
Zedekiah 2 Kin. 24.20.
rebelled; And the lying Prophet from the Lord encouraged Ahab to the War at
Ramoth-Gilead. Now Christ only has access to the Fountain head, God himself;
1. To intercede; 2. To satisfy, and so to pacify: Now when that is done, he
will make his enemies to be at peace with him Prove. 16.7. Reason 2.
.

Matt. 28.18.
. Now there are three Incendraries; 1. The Leviathans that make these waters
boil, as Job speaks Job 41 31.
, great persons that move the multitude, as the Pharisees the people; now
Christ governs these; By me Kings reign, and Princes, and all Judges of the
earth Prove. 8.16
; and therefore when they are in tumult, God sends Christ amongst them, as the
master his son, when the servants are together by the ears, and he stills them
with a rod of Iron, and breaks them in pieces like a Potters Vessel Psalm ^.
.

2. The unruly multitude; These he quells too, he calms as the noise of the
seas, so the tumult of the people Psalm 56.7.
; so he over awed those of Nazareth, when they brought him to the brow of the
Hill, to cast him down, he passes through the midst of them, and goes his way
Luke 4.29.
; so did he master the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple, who wondered, that no
man laid hands on him, when they themselves were scourged out by him 10.2.15.
. In vain shall David use courtesy, or Rehoboam threatS, one Absalom, or
Jeroboam will seduce the Kingdom; but if they come with swords on purpose, if
Christ do but ask them, who they seek, they go backward, and fall to the ground
Ioh. 18.6.
.

3. Devils; Those lying spirits in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets, and Rehoboams
Council that incense to war and violence, these also are subject to Christ
Luke 10.17.
, for he has spoiled them, and triumphed over them in his Cross Col. 2.15.
; so defeated he their project in the tumult at Ephesus, when by Demetrius the
Silver-Smith, he thought to have made sure of Paul Acts 19. Reason 3.
.

3. Because Christ is the Prince of peace, the master of this office, to whom
the grand Commission of peace is directed; he shall be called the everlasting
Counselor and Prince of Peace Isai. 9.7.
; hence he says, That all Judgment is committed to the son Ioh. 5.22.
. Which is so large, that all differences full under some branch of it: if the
question be what is truth in point of Doctrine? he is a Prophet who has
promised to lead his into all truth Ioh. 16.13.
; if matter of power and authority; he is a King, and the Lord of them Revel.
17.14.
. from whom they have all derived their authority, it is his part to show the
limits of their Commission, and keep them withinbounds, that they abuse not
their power against their Master; if it be a matter of wrong or injury; he is a
Priest, who will be both the Advocate to plead, and satisfaction 1 Ioh. 2.1.
. so that it is to be busy in another man's office, yea invasion of the highest
regal power to attempt peace, without first engaging Christ.

Reason 4.
4. He has an inherent quality of pacification, a softing faculty; called
therefore the anointed, and his name is as an ointment powered forth Cant. 1.2.
. Now the property of ointment is to assuage heats, and allay tumors, the oil
of joy, he gives for the spirit of sadness, he makes the Wolf to dwell with
the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid, the Calf with the Lion, and the sucking
Child with the Ape, the weaned with the Cockatrice Isai. 11.6,7,8
; when I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw all men (together) to me,
though at never so much difference before Joh. 12.32.
. Christ cast amongst men, is like the carcass amongst the Eagles, that were
before fighting for a Worm, they forsake their contention, and both feed on it
Matt. 24.28
; How did he smooth Paul's spirit, before a rigid persecutor; and the Goalers,
who was now so full of pity, that he washed the wounds, which before he gave,
Christ so fills the soul, that it minds nothing else; either with admiration,
as Birds glaring upon the Glass, that you may take them; or else with
satisfaction, that the Assyrian may come into the Land So the ancient English
reads.
, and yet their hearts not quail for this evil tidings; they have provision
within, they fear no famishing Ioh. 6.
; and a sense without, they fear no slaughtering; for though the shell may be
crushed, the kernel cannot, their life is hid with Christ in God.

Reason 5.
5. Because Christ is the principal matter, about which dissension rises in
these times and places; the Question is, Whether Christ or Antichrist shall
reign. It Is the cause of Gods wars with men, as appears in the second Psalm.
Yet have I set my my King, says God, upon my holy hill of Zion: the Kings of
the earth thereupon rise up, and the Princes take Council together against:
Hence a Commission to Christ for war against them, for subduing them with a
rod of Iron Psa 2.
. And the cause of men's war one with another; This was in part the cause of
the Assyrians coming in, mentioned in our Text, as some conceive Wolfu^s in
, (not without probability, the Kingdom being now in vassalage to the Assyrian,
1 King. 18.
who as it seems had much influence upon Religion there,) in that Hezekiah had
made a Reformation, and restored Christ in the legal worship, against the
mind of his Lord the Assyrian. This was the original of the uproar at Athens,
whether Christ or Diana should reign in Ephesus Acts 19.
. This the pretended cause of the wars, betwixt Turks and Christians, Papists
and Protestants, Formalists, and the truly Reformed. So that if Christ be
advanced, the cause taken away, the effect ceases.

Application.
3. The use that may be made of this, is various, for peace, for there is no
peace to the wicked, says my God Isai. 57 21.
. For their Council, they shall be taken in their own craftiness Job 5.13.
. For their strength their Arm shall be broken Psalm 10.15.
. For both, they may associate themselves together, but they shall be broken in
pieces, take Council, but it shall come to naught. For God is with us, but
against them Isai. 8 9.
.

Use 2.
2. Humiliation might hence be urged for our ignorance of the way of peace, or
our injury to Christ the Author of it. We have taken Council for peace, but
not of him, and covered with a covering, but not of his spirit; Therefore has
the strength of Pharaoh been our shame, and our trust in the shadow of Egypt,
our confusion lsa. 30.1,5.
.

3. We might hence also infer matter of comfort, Use 3.
so far as we have endeavored to advance Christ; he must be taken out of the
Church, before the hope of peace be removed from it.

Object. But is not Ireland lost, many parts of Germany, and some of this
Kingdom not much better.

Answ. 1. Had there been more of Christ, we may boldly say, there had been
less of war. 2. If there be any thing of Christ left in them, even out of
the Bethleem, as it is in our context, of the Palatinate, and Germany, of
Ireland, and the wasted Countries of England, there will rise up in due season
seven Shepherds, that shall yet bring peace unto the people; Let us keep close
to our principle, Christ will be peace, and he will be with us, whilst we are
with him 2 Chr. 15.2.
, and will create peace upon peace Isai. 26.3 12.
, and work all our works for us, as he has done to other Churches, as France,
Netherlands, Scotland, that have appeared for him.

4. Use 4.
It will serve for exhortation, and direction to all sorts.

1. The Magistracy, and especially to this Honorable Assembly; It Is no
detraction from your Wisdom to be taught of God; no Arrogance in me, to put
you in remembrance from him. Your aim is to settle peace, and are now in
agitation of a treaty for it: write this text upon your hands; Let it be as a
frontlet between your eyes; describe it on the posts of your house of
Parliament, where you consult about it [ This man shall be peace;] Let it be
the principal verb, without which no sense in the discourse. Constantine is
said to have carried a cross in his Banner (which does no more countenance its
use now, then the Brazen Serpent, which being a Type of Christ, when once it
obscures the Antitype,) that he might show he expected victory, and peace from
him, that was crucified on it: Paul ingages the Pharisees, whom he knew to be
potent, in his quarrel Acts 23.6.
; and David, God himself, arise o God, plead thine own cause, remember how the
foolish man blasphems thee daily Psalm. 74.22.
.

Let me in one word propose a Motive to this, and in a few more some Means to
it.

Motive.
what the Iron Bar, with the best strength cannot open, a Key will. The heart
of the King, and a great part of the Nation, which have held out hitherto,
against all your humble entreaties, and forcible persuasions, yea, and
seconding providence: Now Christ has this Key of David Revel. 3.7.
, And he will give you favor with the King, and power over the Nation, as it is
promised to those that keep his words unto the end Revel. 2.26.
.

Those of Berea were therefore more noble then those of Thessalonica, because
they received Christ in his Word, with all readiness of mind Acts 17.11.
. Much more will it be put upon the advancing of him, So that Generations to
come, and the children which are yet unborn shall say, This is the Parliament,
this the King (for so we pray) These the Lords and Commons, who were the
restorers of the Churches breach, and the raisers up of its desolate places
Isai 58.12.
.

This man shall be peace; and the performance of it, when the Assyrian came;
and besides we have, 1. The faithfulness of a depositary, I know whom I have
believed 2 Timothy 1 11.
. 2. The credit of an undertaker, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose
mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in thee Isai. 26.3.
.

2. For the means and way, Means.
the observation hints to three. 1. Isai 9.6. Cap. 22.22.
; and much of what he has had, has been bestowed as courtesy, not as duty.

Now the method of his admittance, lies especially in three things. 1. In
breaking with his adversaries; Asa when he would persuade Benhadad, King of
Syria, to break his league with Baasha, King of Israel, uses this as an
Argument. That there was a league betwixt their Ancestors, which admitted not
correspondency with each others Adversaries 2 Chro. 16.3.
. Cast out the strong man, and the seven devils, which have long kept the
house, superstition, formality, profaneness. Possession must be in an empty
one. No man can serve two Masters, not Woman have two Husbands; we cannot be
Christ's, and Belialls. Cast him then out of the State, by abrogating the Laws,
that give him; Title out of the Church, by removing such will worship, and
opinions as give him footing; out of places of education, Schools,
Universities, and Innes of Court, by cleansing that which is his feeding.

2. Means 2.
We must break our hearts, for breaking with him. A false wife must not only
forsake her former lovers, but humble, and be reconciled to her Husband 1 Cor.
7.11.
: We must bewail as the Apostle intimates, with indignation, zeal, revenge, and
weeping, fasting, and mourning with the Ninivites, Jews, Magdalen, and the
Corinthians; the superstition, covetousness, uncleanness, and intemperance,
which we have committed Iona. 3.8. Joel 2.12. Luke 7.38. 2 Cor. 12. ult.
. The people of God, when they were to be received again to favor, and
returned to their own Land, we read of three several solemn humiliations
undertaken for them, and by them, mentioned in those three ninth Chapters of
Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah. neither is this legal, but Gospel Doctrine; we
urge not humiliation for satisfaction; when we have done all in this, This 2
particular cleared from exception.
We are but unprofitable servants: but that by the Spirit of God humbling us,
we may befitted for mercy, which God cannot with honor to himself, or safty to
us bestow, whilst we remain unbroken. The stain will not be taken from his
truth; and we our selves shall return to that folly, the bitterness whereof,
we have not tasted by repentance. Christ therefore knowing, either how short,
or slight entertainment, he shall have with such, will not come in at all.

3. Means 3.
Strike hands with him, pass a solemn act of perpetual service, Let him ^o^r
our car E^od. 21.6.
: plainly, as the Assyrian requires here, when he came into the Land 2 King
18.31
; make an agreement with him; or as H^zekiah then, make a solemn Covenant; for
that is employed in his Reformation: A Covenant National.
This in all public calamities has been the practice of the Church. In the
great decay in the time of A^a, being encouraged by the Prophet Obed, That if
they sought the Lord, he would be found of them; Grounds for it.
They betake themselves to this, as the only remedy; so the Text, They entered
into Covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their heart, and
with all their soul 2 Chronicles. 15.12.
. The like we have in Ezra, upon the fear of the breaking out of Gods special
indignation, upon occasion of taking strange wives, they sly to this refuge;
Now therefore say they, Let us make a covenant Ezra 10.3.
. And in Nehemiah, after the return from Captivity, [they returning to their
captiving sins again, after a particular confession of them, We make (say they)
because of all this, a sure covenant, and write it, and our Princes, Levites
and Priests seal unto it Neh 938.
. This is the only way of appropriating Christ, because he is communicated by
way of Covenant; 1. Betwixt God and him, in our behalf; I have made a covenant
with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant Psalm. 89.3.
. 2. Betwixt him and us; Behold my servant whom I have chosen; I have given him
for a covenant to the people Esaias 42.1.6.
. Hence the outward signs of receiving him (the Sacraments) are called Seals,
which are adjuncts of Covenants.

Rest.
from which when there is an Apostasy in particular; a special one, that
might humble for the breach, and bind more strictly to the observation of it,
does seem almost as needful as the former. 2. The Protestation is made but
before God, not to him; neither is there any confession for sin past; nor is it
so particular as the Covenant we exhort to should be: for we find in the
places before cited, especially in Nehemiah Neh 10 and cap 9.
, the Covenant to have expressed severally the sins, and duties concerning
which they covenanted: the Sacrifice was to be cut in pieces: and we have the
example and success of our neighbor Churches for our pattern and
encouragement, in later times. It is therefore to be proposed to the zeal and
wisdom of this Honorable Assembly, Whether there be not at this time amonst
us, the same need as was with them, of National, distinct, and publicly urged
Form of confession and covenant, (which upon special occasion, though not so
in ordinary occurrences, is not only lawful, but necessary) which might
contain such particulars as the wisdom of the Honorable Assembly of
Parliament, 2. Form of it.
by the advice of the godly Ministry, shall judge fit; As our guilt of blood in
the former persecutions, and those of later days; Our corrupting, or
countenancing the corruptions of Gods Worship; Dumb Ministry, Pluralities,
non-residency, Impropriations, favoring of Papists, heretical and (truly)
Schismatic Opinions, unlawful Offices in the Church, Oppressions in the
Commonwealth, by Patents, and such like; profanesse in conversation, as
intemperance, uncleanness, Worldly mindedness, etc. Such a Covenant, because
it has reference to the public no man may take the office publicly to
impose; but to this Honorable Assembly, as the public Authority of the
Kingdom, it properly belongs. And though there be something of late by you in
this kind published, yet it is left Arbitrary; an exact urging of it, under a
serious penalty, and more large and particular expressions, is that we sue for,
and that by example of the Scriptures named; in one whereof, the mulct of
noncovenanting was no less then death 2 Chronicles. 15.30.
: And for this we may take these few Motives: 3 Motives of it.


Persecution, Luxury, and Profaneness wherewith it has been long desiled,
because there has been no particular, formal, and National humiliation
enjoined for them. Shecaniah, We have trespassed against our God, yet there is
hope in Israel concerning this; now therefore let us make a Covenant Ezra
10.2.3.
. Enter into covenant With the Lord thy God, and unto his Oath, that he may
establish thee to day for a People unto himself, and that he may be a God unto
thee Deuteronomy. 29 12 13.
: And yet this people, as those formerly named, were in general Covenant with
God before. Which is our duty to do; whereof this, in such exigencies as these
(as was showed before) is a special part. admonish one another. By this the
Church of England might become as one Congregation, in serious profession,
separated from the world, as that of Gods ancient people was, united to Christ,
and enjoying holy Communion with him.
Particular.
2. Retain Christ by stablishing him. 1. Retain Christ
, as a special entertainment; For 1. then he will see he has some assurance
of continuance. 2. In every Law there is authority, and in all authority a vein
of Sovereignty; so that this will be as the putting of the Crown upon his head.

Sacrament, or as to your wisdoms shall seem fit. Thus when Christ has
assurance of quiet possession, he will set himself to do the Kingdom good; and
of this we have proof in the Churches of Scotland, and Geneva; yea, in the
example mentioned above in the time of Asa, upon the main Covenant they made
another, That whosoever Would not seek the Lord, and stick to the Covenant,
they should die the death, whether small or great, man or Women 2 Chr. 15 13.
.

Particular. 3. Advance Christ.
3. Advance Christ. The higher sphere the Star moves in, the greater
influence it has upon the inferior Orbs; hence when an excellent spirit was
found in Daniel, he was set over all the Province of Babylon; where Christ is
lowest, there is least peace; Witness Ireland, Wales, and the Northern parts
of this Kingdom. And here might I take leave, I should present a Table, not of
direction, but remembrance, in many severalls of our humble wishes in this
particular, much of which, though proper to the Ministry in point of advice and
execution, yet all belongs to you in regard of injunction and authority.

By giving him more room.
1. Then give him more room, that he may expatiate Himself; persons of great
ability, must have large Provinces to command and act in; cast him into
Ireland, Wales, and the Northern parts, and see, if his fruit be not peace. The
Lamps in these Earthen Pitchers, when they break, will encourage Israel, and
confound the Midianit's Judge 7.191
. Let no Candlestick then be without a burning, and shining one, if it may be,
nor any place without a Candlestick; some spheres are too large for the Agent;
too great Congregations are more for the Priests, then the Ministers or Peoples
benefit. It Is true here; We must divide if rule.

By providing for him
2. Make provision for him. 1 Plentifully; It Is not thrift but folly to starve
the light. Once indeed, and in one place upon a special scandal, 1.
Plentifully.
The Apostle Labors working with his own hands, but else where, he says, That
God has ordained, that those that preach the Gospel, as well as those that did
the Law, should live of it, and that Without muzling or straitness 1 Cor. 9 14.
: A little oil makes a dym Lamp; a small entertainment makes the guest
suspicious of his welcome. But

Prudently
2. Prudently; We desire you should know his quantum and proportion, Our
moderation must be known to all men Phil. 4.1.
; and the Ministry especially must show that the Kingdom of God is not in meat,
and drink, nor of this world; they especially must exercise the life of faith
for themselves and theirs, and having competency, be there With content Tim.
6.8.
; those that will not, are unfit for this service. They must; be like Birds,
that sip a little, and look upward. But this note may seem to some superfluous
here, that think this honorable Assembly means not only to pare the nails,
but cut the flesh. Notwithstanding we doubt not, but that of crrours, you will
decline the left hand one, as well as the other.

By providing him servants.
3. Furnish him with Instruments; Christ here was peace, but the means of
Communicating it, was by the seven Shepherds, and eight principal men. Fit
Christ with servants. 1. By principling those places of education, Schools and
Universities with him, That they may have more of Christ in them, and less of
the children of strangers Isai. 2.6.
, especially youth, till they know how to refuse the evil, and choose the
good. All sects season their Disciples first with the Tenets of their Master;
according to the story of the Abbot, that reproved the young Friar for reading
the Testament, bidding him first acquaint himself with the rule of Saint
Francis; here if any where, that of Solomon holds: Train up a child in the way
he should go Prove. 22.6
.

2. Those that are inclined to Christ's service in the Ministry, let them have
tuition and direction in that, as well as learning; in other faculties, yea,
and common trades, besides general abilities, men take special information:
in divinity theirs much more need, because the consequence is far more
dangerous: and here I know not whether the erection of Schools, or at least
Lectures, for Prophets, as well as Scholars, might not be as needful to us,
as it was sometimes to the ancient Jews. We sinde Samuel, Eliah, and Elisha, as
Tutors unto the younger in this art of prophesying 1 Samuel 10.1.
. And certainly much of the scandal taken from raw Ministers, 2. King. 6.1.
would by this comse be removed, when the Inceptors in this faculty shall be
instituted by the vcterani, and experienced soldiers of Christ in his warfare,
not only for 1. the knowing part of divinity, but 2. and especially the
practique.

1. For teaching; that they may be instructed, 1. How. 1. Orderly to inform
the Judgment. 2. Effectually to break the heart. 3. Soundly to comfort
conscience. 4. To quicken serioussly to the love of duty. 5. and lastly,
Clearly to resolve in point of practice.
2. When to do all these in their proper season.
2. For conversation, That they be lessoned to bear the yoke in their youth.
and enured to meditations of self doniall, necessity of the Cross and
suffering, that vain glory, pride and affectation be suppressed, if he be a
novice in the experimental knowledge of these things, he will be pust up, and
fall into the snare of the evil speaker 1 Timothy 3 6.
, As we have the Apostle s Tim ^2. ^2. and other places.
largely Catechizing Timothy in these particulars. 2. Suffer only such to be
put to Christ, for if a General have an unable or ill affected soldiery, the
adversary will prevail; notwithstanding his valor and prudence. Now this we
speak to you, for the Keepers of the Vineyard can not fence it, unless you
give them Stakes. 3. Let there be a particular direction, when they enter upon
his service; both for teaching, and worship; a fuller C^techisme, for
instructing youth, and an in offensive directory, drawn out of Scripture for
Preaching, Sacraments, and prayer. 1. For Doctrine, we read of a form of sound
words 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb 6.1.
. And 2. for worship, we have Paul directing Timothy how to behave himself in
the Church of God 1 Timothy 3.15
. 4. Free them from other employments, that they may not be entangled with the
affairs, or cares of this life. That neither necessity, employment, or
superfluity, occasion them business in other men's matters; but that they may
d^dicate themselves wholly to the Lord, and the Ministry of the Saints 1 Timothy
4.15 1 Cor. 16.15
. 5. Bind them to give a constant reckoning of their industry. The children of
this world; The Papists do so. 4. By unveiling his faces yet more fully.
Unveil him, That men may see his face, it will cause men to break off their
divisions, and to look on him, and so bring peace into the world. The glory of
God and all his beauty appears in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4.6.
; and it is promised by the Prophet, that under the Gospel, They shall see the
King in his beauty I sai;. 33.17.
; but that cannot be till the veil be taken away 2 Cor. 3 16.
in doctrine, worship, dis^ipline, and conversation.
1. Doctrine. 1. By a more exact wiping of the glass. i. e. Translation of the
Seriptures, which though for the bulk of it, that we have, be one of the best
extant, yet being a business of that consequence, there is yet desired. 1.
That it be published by common authority Quedomn^s tangis ab omnibus approbarl,
debet.
; this being done but by the Kings command alone. 2. Some things the Aspect of
the Stars then in their Zenith inclined the Agents to, perhaps besides their
natural motion.

The signs then of greatest influence were. 1. Absolute Severaignty. 2. Divine
authority of Episcopacy. 3. Necessity of Ceremony. 4 To which may be added some
unsound opinions then lu^king in Church in favor of the first; perhaps it was,
that the place, 1 Pet. 2.13.
which the former translations read, to the King as unto the Superior,
agreeably, as to other translations, so to the signification of the word (...)
, as themselves render it elsewhere Romans 13 1.
, is translated Supreams; though in a right interpretation we deny not that he
is so; but seeing the Apostle uses a word which expresses it rather in the
Comparative, then the Superlative, it seems it might as well have stood here as
in the former place, or else both rendered alike. In favor of the second,
doublesse it was, That the word in Paul's discourse to the Elders of Ephesus
Acts 20.28. (...).
, is rendered Oversecrs, which every where else they have translated Bishops.
And it seems a plain fraud to translate that word Bishops, without an
exposition, seeing they were only Ministers of Congregations. And it may be to
countenance the third, the word which is interpreted by them in one place
Ordinances 1 Cor. 11 2.
, is rendered in another Traditions 2 These 2 15
. The fourth has less appearing countenance, because it durst not so
evidently put forth his head, yet shows it self by the next thing we shall
add. But specially their birth in this kind lost some of its beauty, by those
stopfathers of the Church, who besides the prohibiting of the addition of notes
(which they were willing, and at that time most a le to do, by reason of their
consulting with many Copi^s, and Commentaries) did also alter their work after
it came out, which charge we shall be able to make good.

If it be objected, the cost will be great to the Kingdom. Answ. 1. If it be
duty, that plea is weak. 2. If once thoroughly done, it will be for a
continuance. 3. The profit will be beyond what the cost will come unto.



3. Make our contract of the Scripture, the 39 Articles more clear where
doubtful, more complete where defective, more contracted where superfluous, as
Article 36, touching the consecration of Bishops; Rogers upon it, in his first
edition, confesses it not to be any Article of faith, or at all held by the
reformed Churches, (though there be no such thing in the following editions,) I
instance but in this, because I have a patron of them for mine Author.

4. Command a full and entire body of all needful truths, both positive and
controversive to be compiled, that we might not be so often borrowing, and
sometimes of the Egyptians, who often with the food, give poison. Though
sometimes Goliahs sword serves to behead the Master. Nor yet be doubtful what
the Church of England, explicately holds in all the main parts of Religion,
both for doctrine and practice; nor let the fruitful Womb be any longer dry
breasted; nor glean in so many fields, what we might reap in one.

2. Unveil Christ in point of worship. 1. In preaching, that the affected,
nice, speculative, philosophical and too much controversall manner of
Preaching, be by your Authority, as it was by King James In a Declaration to
that purpose.
of glorious memory, damned and discountenanced. That in this service men may
know chiesty, if not only, Christ, and him crucified 1 Cor. 2.2.
, and see him as the Galathians did in Paul's Ministry, bl^eding, gasping,
dying, crucified amongst us Gal. 3.1.
I am enim and in ecclesi^s is it t q^aeruntur, on^^ saque Arostillcorum
simplicitate and p^^^^tale verborum, quasi ad Athenaeum Convenitur, ut oration
Rlxtoric^ art is fucata ^x^datio, quasiquae. dam m^rit^icul^ procedat in
publicum: ^^ntam traditura populos, quim sav^rem populi quesitura. Hi^o^
prooae;n'o^ lib. 3 Com. in Galat
.

Prayer.
2. In prayer, whatsoever was by Christ and his Apostles left arbitrary, bind
it not on as necessary twill be a vail. What on the contrary is objected, holds
as well against the Apostolical, and first primitive Church; and is
sufficiently salved by a directory.

Sacraments.
3. In the Sacraments; Those things that argue Christ imperfect in his
institution; That suffer the Dogs to eat the childrens bread; and that have a
show of countenancing Christ's enemy; these remove: that in this special
Ordinance Christ's luster may especially appear, and that these skreens keep not
his spowse from immediate Communion with him 1 Cor. 10.16.
.

Discipline
3. Unveil Christ in point of discipline, you have removed the Maskers and
false Christ's out of his Family, which like Thieves, or Cavaliers, commanded
with insolence the house that they had invaded by suttilty or violence. Now
there are many Antichrists Joh. 2,18.
, though one principal, take heed instead of one, of setting up another: Let
serious inquiry be made, what Officers Christ has set in his Church, and what
work he has appointed for them, and these settle.

Conversation.
4. Unveil him in the Conversations of men; that Heathens may see in
Christians, Papists in Protestants, Formalists in Professors, Christ living,
cating, drinking, trading, pleading, fighting, that they may not seek, but have
offered a proof of Christ speaking in us, and may be convinced by all, That he
is in us of a truth, to their conversion or conviction.

Government.
5. Lastly, Set him over the Kingdom as Nebuchadnezzar did Daniel. Lay the Key
upon his shoulder, unto whom the Government belongs; Let him be acknowledged
not as an honorable guest, but as the sole Master over his own house, for it
is part of his inheritance; so the donation runs; I will give thee the
Heath^n for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession, and thou shall rule them, be ye instructed now therefore ye
Judges of the earth, and kiss the some, give him this Symbol of snlmission,
least he be kindled and ye perish Psalm. 2.8,9.10,11,12.
.

First then set him over the State in casting the whole body of the Law, with
reference to this end the advancing of Christ, That the civil controversies
may be subordinate to the spiritual Peace. So Paul regulates the Law Suites of
the Cori^thians by the discipline of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.1.
Else, though we may be Christians in the state, yet not a Christian state;
which is not presently for every Law made in favor of Christ; but when the
whole Level of them refer to him as their sole scope; and so may trudy
receive denomination from him as their end; neither will this unsettle the
former principle of our, and all Laws; Salus populisuprema Lex.
Public safety: for In him we shall have peace Joh. 16.33.
, a perpetual one, Which no man shall take from us; yea Verse. 16.
, even when threatened with a most bloody war; yet then our Text assures us,
This man shall be peace.

2. In the Schools, both Trivial and Academick: That whereas these are the
waters that either make bitter, or sweeter, the City of God; and many times are
like those of the dead Sea, not only savourlesse, but mortal; Throw in Christ,
as Elisha did Salt into the waters of Jericho, and they will become Fountains
of living water. To this end put them upon the study of the mystery of Christ;
which is so great, that it cannot be well seen into, till we wholly give our
selves to it. Hierome professes his neglect of other learning for many years,
that he might, as it seems, attend this; not but that other knowledge is
necessary, but so, That the handmaid be not so long served, that there be not
sufficient for attendance upon the Mistress. In pro^^mio li^.


ad Gelat. comment. plus quam 15. anni sunt, ex quo in manus meas, nunquam
Tullius, nunquim Maro, nunquim Gentilium literorum quibet author ascendit.
Though this be not exactly to be imitated, yet is there great use to be made of
it.
3. In Innes of Court, That whereas too often it falls out, that the hopes of
Parents, Schools, and Universities almost ripe, are there blasted in the green
fruit, because this son of righteousnessc shines so obliqucly either in
teaching, or discipline: now, through your care, there may be ground of
expectation, That your posterity there formed for public service, may go on
with your work, and set up the Pinacles of that Temple, the Walls whereof you
have raised to so great a height.

4. In negotiations of war and peace, Whether at home or abroad. The raising
up of the seven Shepherds that should wast the Land of Assyrian with the
sword, (in the Text.) It was by authority of Christ, and his Church; for so it
follows, after the mention of them; It Is added thus; He shall deliver from the
Assyrian; The war was by direction from him, and order to him. State policy
has oftentimes betrayed the public to a false peace, by not putting Christ
into the treaty. Let nothing be concluded now, that may make the heart of the
righteous sad, by yiedling to any thing dishonorable to their Master;
creditable to his Enemies, or frustrancous to their hopes, who have held, and
set you up; they are the Pillars of the earth Matt. 13.29.
sink them not.

2. Advance Christ over the Church: that's more immediately his own house ^ Tim.
3.15.
. Let no man usurp to himself an intruding power here, you would not endure it
in your own. Let additions or detractions here, incur your curse as well as
Gods Col. 2.18. Nemorectoris parts sibi sumat. So Bezareads. Revel. 22 19.
. If they can not show. That they have received of the Lord, that which they
deliver unto you 1 Cor. 11.23
, let it be Anathema.

These things if you do, Christ will be peace in the Commonwealth; whereas now
nothing but bloodshed. Peace in our Schools of learning; whereas now nothing
but contentions. Peace in the Church; where now nothing but Schisms. Peace
with, or prevalency over foreign Nations, whereas now, it may be feared, they
are in preparations of war against us, and that upon great advantage. It was
Abijahs encouragement unto victory, and peace by it, against Jeroboam; That the
Kingdom, Church, and worship of God was in that frame that God had set it 2
Chro. 13.8,9,10.
.



We answer: his worship; Qui Doctrinam Christi adversam dicunt Reip. dent
exercitum talem, quales doctrina Christi esse mibiles jussit, dent tales
Provinciales, tales Maritos, tales Conjuges, tales Parents, tales Filios,
tales Dominos, tales Servos, tales Reges, tales Indices, tales denique
debitorum redditores and exactores ipsius sisci, quales esse praecipit doctrina
Christiana: and audeant eam dicore adversam esse Reipublicae. Aug. ad Marcell.
epist. 5.
and Mahomet rules in the state among the Turks, as well as in Religion; and
Antichrist amongst his vassals has been able to sway, the Scepter, as well as
the Miter: Shall these be the strong men, and Christ the weak? Sure we are,
that Gods own people had their Commonwealth squared according to the Church;
and the Government of the Prince regulated by the precept of God; as at large
is set down by Moses in the Law, touching the King Deuteronomy 17.14.
. Howsoever; If you do what your duty is, withal your soul, and with all your
might, This Court, and your persons, shall be guiltless: And the Kingdom, if
they will not have the Lord Jesus to reign over them, shall know; That there
have been Prophets to teach, and a Parliament to establish Christ among them:
That there is; a more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, then for this nation,
hanging over them. Shake off the dust of your feet, it shall be a testimony
against them.

I began the exhortation to this honorable Assembly, with some Motives to the
advancing of Christ, so let me end it.

Consider therefore, That Christ has done for you what in this kind he
requires of you.

1. He has brought you into a relation of his own, which is of public and
common persons: He is the chief representative person, that ever was; being
from all eternity given a head unto the Church Ephesians. 1. ult.
. Motives.
for to him is all power committed Matt. 28.18.
over the hearts of men) to commit their lives, posterities, and estates, yea
souls to your faithfulness, wisdom and courage.

put you out, and non-Parliament you. He sat in heaven and laughed them to
scorn; discovered their plots, enervated their force, and drew the hearts of
the people, their purses and persons, to cover your heads in the day of battle.
It Was the men only whose hearts the Lord touched that followed Saul, who was
then zealous to fight the Lords Battles 1 Samuel 10.26.
.

sword of the Law, with that of the word; to the slaying of the man of sin,
and casting down his strong holds: to purge his own house; set up his Lamps; to
take off the yoke from the neck of his people; to lay meat before them; to
execute the Judgment, that is written against his adversaries. Has delivered
you from the strivings of the people; has taught your heads to Counsels of
peace, your hands to actions of war, and has given you many glorious
victories in the day of battle. (Though sometimes the people of God have sled
before the men of Ai, because perhaps there has been an Athan in the camp, or
an Achitophell in the Council, or an evil and unbeleeving heart to depart
from the living God, not putting our trust in his help.) Now then for a
recompense, be ye also enlarged; Admit, retain and advance him, who has done
all these for you.

Ministry. who should be sons of peace; we preach-for peace, and behold
war: because we propose this opinion, and that reason, and the other
authority, but not This man. Our pressing of the Law, should end in Christ; our
exhortations to holiness, begin at him; so the Apostle in the Churches
Catechism, the Epistle to the Romans Room 3. c. 12
.

he is the Peace; both to the Kingdom; and (if they will receive him) to their
Consciences but with this proviso; That he himself be the peace they hope for;
because he that loves not the Lord Jesus, though never so desirous of his
benefits, shall be, faith the Apostle, Anathema Maranatha 2 Cor. 16.21.
. How can they expect peace by Christ; who oppose, or care not for his person,
Ministers, Ordinances, and people?

Thus far the second general of the Text: the Last propounds. 3. Part of the
Text.
The means or manner how Christ will be peace, when the Assyrian shall come;
and that is expressed in these words, We will raise up against him, seven
Shepherds, and eight principal men. Which we should first have opened, but
the discourse is much too large already; referring therefore the Text to
Hezekiahs time, as was noted before, for then only they were, according to the
letter, delivered from the Assyrian. And our Prophet was in Hezekiahs time Cap.
11
.

Observe: That a state being invaded in hostile manner, 3. Observation thence
to the overthrow of their Laws, and Liberties, contrary to Covenants and
Agreements, by those that should protect them; may defend themselves in the
same Way; raise up Officers, and draw others into their society for that
purpose.

This will appear by considering, 1. Evidenced from the Text and
The relation that Judah had to the Assyrians at this time; which was a
relation of subjection and servitude: and therefore it is said of Hezekiah 1 Kin,
18.7.
, when he brake this relation, that he rebelled and served not. 2. The occasion
of this relation, and that was the securing of themselves in the time of Ahaz
Cap. 16.
, Father to Hezekiah, against Rezin and Pekah Kings of Syria and Israel. To
which end Ahaz offers to Tiglath-Pilnezer, King of Assyria, his service; and by
consent of the Kingdom, (as it seems) emancipates it to him, in a perpetual
homage, and league offensive, and defensive; whereupon he came and delivered
them. 3. The violation; and that first on the part of Hezekiah Cap. 18 7.
, but that being reconciled, and satisfaction made, and accepted, (whereby the
relation was again renewed, and he became Senacheribs servant) it was afterward
broken by the Assyrian Verse 32.
; who would have them now not as servants any more, but as slaves; and would
have their persons: and estates to dispose of at his own pleasure: contrary to
Covenants, which extended only to hommage and acknowledgement of his
superiority and seigniory. Here upon the State. i. e. The King with the advice
of his Nobles 2 Chro. 18.21.
, 1. Denies him; and 2. when he labors forceably to put on what he had
illegally required, he resists him in the same way he came. i. e. By Arms: and
withal solicites, and obtains the Egyptians (as Rabsake^ 1 Kin. 18.21.
intimates) and the Ethiopians (as Interpreters Wolsius in loc.
conceive) to assist him: Judging, that as they were free from the obligation
of doing; so much more ( being a state) from the necessity of suffering;
unless God had given special command for it, as he did afterward to Zedekiah
Jer. 27.12.
. So Ahab King. 20.4. etc.
, when Benhadad King of Syria, to whom he was tributary, and his vassal; King.
20.4. etc. Other places.
, for he calls him his Lord the King King. 20 9.
, and confesses himself to be his, and all that he had Verse 4.
: yet when reason would not satisfy; but besides the Dominion, he would have
possession of all they had; Ahab, upon the advice of the Elders and people,
refuses; the Syrian invades, they stand upon their Guard, and by Gods blessing
utterly rout him.

The parts of the Text jointly. Considered whence a
2. It might be proved from the less, to the greater, the examples of
particular men, against the violence of their Princes, in Scripture: as of
David 1 Samuel 22.2. Cap. 23.12.
: the people rescuing Jonathan Cap. 14 39.44, 45.
: Elisha 2 King 6.32.
: the Priests resisting Vzziah 2 Chronicles. 26.17.
, etc. if time permitted, might be freed from exceptions brought against them.

3. From the practice of the Church downward, as the Macchabees 1 Maccab. 2 66.
; the Christians, as soon as they had Laws, as under Maximinus Eusebius. lib. 9.
cap. 7.
, and Valentinian Ambr. Epist. 1.5. cp 33.
; the reformed Churches Germany, France, Netherland, Scotland.
: our own Bishops, as Jewel, Abbot, Bilson, Andrews; and Princes; as Queen
Elizabeth In Her protection of the Hollanders.
, King James In His league with them.
, and His present Majesty, in His expedition to Rochell: but this Argument
being fully handled by others, we here pass it.

Thus far we have considered the parts of the Text severally; now consider
them jointly, and so there will flow this

Observe.
5. Observe. That When such an adversary as was the Assyrian, shall invade such
a Nation as was this of Judah at that time, Christ will then be peace to such a
people.

To clear this: consider 1. what kind of adversary the Assyrian was. 2. Who
the people of Judah were.

1. The Assyrian was of Cham the accursed seed Gen, 10.10
. 2. A proud insolent enemy, full of scorn and contempt of the people of God 1
Kin. 18.23
. 3. Full of blasphemy against God Verse. 35.
. 4. Pretending Gods authority for what he did Verse 25.
. 5. Pressing the consciences of Gods people, with the most horrid crimes that
might be against God and man; against God, overthrow of his worship Verse 22.
; against man, rebellion Verse. 20.
. 6. A cruel adversary, as was showed before Verse. 29.
. 7. An unreasonable enemy, that nothing would satisfy but religion, bodies
and estates Verse 32.
. He would carry them out of their own Land. 8. A persidious adversary; for
having accepted of Hezekiahs satisfaction, he yet returns with his Army Verse 14
17.
. 9, A seditious adversary, appeals to the people Verse. 27.
. 10. A flattering and fair promising Adversary Verse 31, 32.
; but aiming at ruin of Law, Religion, Liberty, Estates Verse. 32.
. 11. A slanderous adversary, against those that stood for the public good,
calling them deceivers, and imposters Verse. 29.
. 2. The people of Judah were, 1. The people of God, who had Christ among them
in the legal worship. 2. At this time, an humbling and reforming people; both
in point of Gods worship, and of themselves. 2 Chronicles. 19. cap 30. cap. 31.
. 3. A people submitting to any reason 2 Kin. 18.14.
. 4. A resolved people to keep the Religion, Law, and Liberty, God had given
them 2 Chronicles. 32.4.5.
, and industrious thereunto. 5. Prudent, to take all courses for their
security, and to prevent any advantage to the enemy Verse. 3, 4.5. ^ King. 18.35.
6. A people that rested upon, and were obedient unto, under God. those of
whose fidelity they had proof 2 Chr. 32.8. 2 Kin. 18.36.
. 7. Lastly, A people that carried it in a religious way, so as to keep God
with them, depending especially upon him, and resigning themselves up to him 2
Chro. 32.7,8
.


I Wrought for my names sake, that it should not be polluted among the heathen,
in whose sight I had Ezekiel, 20 9.14 22.
brought thee out, three times repeated in that Chapter. 2. In respect of the
enemy; shall not my soul be avenged on such a people at this Jere. 5.9.
? 2. Reason.
2. Gods truth only, which always, even upon humiliation has promised
deliverance, as multitudes of Scripture testify Deuteronomy. 30 1.2. Chr. 6 36. Jere.
18.17. Ezekiel 18. Joel. 2.etc.
: much more when the adversary provokes him to do it, as Sol: speaks of
rejoicing at an enemies hurt; that a man so doing, does provoke God to turn his
hand from him Prove. 24.17.
. 3. Reason.
3. Gods constancy; being he has once done it, we may not doubt him; for he is
without variableness or shadow of change. The Jews plead this to Pilate, to do
as he had ever done Mark 15.8.
; and Christ himself; our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them
Psalm. 22.4.
. The
Use Use.
is for encouragement, and exhortation, The enemy has done half our work by
being so bad. Let not us by our hardness of heart, loose the benefit, by not
doing the other.

To conclude therefore: There remains a rest for the people of God Heb. 4.9.
; and a Judgment written for his adversaries Psalm 149 9
. Let not us be as the old Israelites, whom God was forced to consume before
hand, that they might not see the good he would do for his people Deuteronomy 2.14.
. This do, therefore, and live: Humble we our selves this day under the mighty
hand of God God Jam. 4.10.
, That he may lift us up: apply we our selves unto This man the Lord Christ,
that he may be our peace. Resolve we to stand to our Protestation, of defending
him with our Lives, Liberties, and Estates. And then in that day it shall be
said: This ( to wit, This man in the Text) is the Lord, and we have Waited for
him; and we Will rejoice in his salvation; for in this place, shall the hand of
the Lord rest, and Moab(the false Brethren and implacable Adversaries of the
Church) shall be trodden down, as Straw is trodden down for the dunghill Isai
25 9
.

Errata.
Page 3. Line. 11. For Gods, read God; with a Comma. p. 6. l. 19. Put out so.
Same page last line but one, for thus this, r. thus; this page 7. lin. 4. fax
Chaldee Kings, r. Chaldee, Kings, p. 21. l. 23. put out with. p. 25. l. 8.
add, if there were an before Ahab: and for will, r. would l. 10. after
matters, add, there were an: and after Ahaz, for will, r. would. p. 27 l. 28.
after he, add, Papist and Cavalier. p. 28. last line but one, for mouth, r.
master. p. 30. 1 6 for partly Gods. r. ply God, p. 31. l. 10. for him, r. God,
p. 39. l. 17. for him, r. my holy hill, l. 27. after Pilate, add who, l 28.
for because, r. becames

FINIS.

