THE Form of the Proceeding TO THE CORONATION Of Their Majesty's KING WILLIAM
AND QUEEN MARY, The Eleventh Day of this Instant April, 1689.
[To be punctually Observed by all Persons therein concerned.]
April 8. 1689.
I do Appoint Edward Jones to Print this Account of the Proceeding.

NORFOLK, and MARSHALL.



DRums four Abreast. Drum-Major. Trumpets four Abreast. Serjeant-Trumpeter.
The Six Clerks in Chancery, in Gowns of Black Flowered Satin, with Black Silk
Loops and Tuffs. Chaplains having Dignities, in Scarlet, and Tippets with
Square Caps in their Hands. Sheriffs and Aldermen of London. Masters in
Chancery. Solicitor, and Attorney General. Esquires of the Body, in Rich
Habits. Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices
of Both Benches, in Judges Robes of Scarlet. These are to Meet in the Court of
Requests, where they are to be put in Order by some of the Officers of Arms,
and Conducted into the Hall. Lord Chief Baron, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, in Scarlet Robes, with their Collars of SS. Guilt. Master of the
Rolls, in a Rich Gown. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in a Scarlet
Robe, with his Collar of SS. Children of the Choir of Westminster, in
Surplices. Sergeant of the Vestry, Sergeant Porter, in Scarlet Gowns. Children
of the Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. Choir of Westminster, in Surplices.
Gentlemen of the King's Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. Sub-Dean of the King's
Chapel, in a Scarlet Gown, turned up with Black Velvet. Prebendaries of
Westminster, in Surplices and Rich Copes. The Master of the Jewel House, in a
Scarlet Robe. Privy Counselors of England, not Peers, in their usual Habits.
Two Pursuivants of Arms. The Peeresses to meet in the Painted Chamber. The
Peers in the Lords House; From thence, being put in Order, by the Officers of
Arms, and by them to be Conducted into the Hall. Baronesses two Abreast in
their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Barons in their Robes in like
manner. Bishops. Two Pursuivants at Arms, as before. Viscountesses two
Abreast, in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Viscounts in their
Robes, in like manner. Two Heralds, in their Rich Coats and Collars of SS. No
Train^ (...) but the KING (...) QUEENS, and Prin^^ GEORGE of DENMARK's.
Countesses two Abreast in their Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Earls in
their Robes, in like manner. Two Heralds, as before. Marchionesses in their
Robes, their Coronets in their Hands. Marquisses in their Robes, in like
manner. All the Knights of the Garter are to Wear their Collars and Georges.
Two Heralds, as before. Duchesses two Abreast, in their Robes, their Coronets
in their Hands. Dukes in their Robes, in like manner, who do not bear some of
the Regalia. The two Provincial Kings of Arms, in their Rich Coats and Collars
Guilt, and Medals, and Coronets in their Hands. Lord Privy Seal. Lord President
of the Council. Lord Archbishop of York. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Prince GEORGE of Denmark, with his Train born up by his Master of the Robes.
Two Persons to Represent the Dukes of Aquitaine and Normandy, in Crimson Velvet
Mantles, lined with Meniver, powdered with Ermine, each of them his Cap in his
Hand of Cloth of Gold, Fur'd and powdered with Ermine. St. Edward's Staff,
carried by the Earl of Manchester. The Gold Spurs, by the Lord Gray of (...)
The Queens Scepter with the Cross, by the Earl of Clare. The Kings Scepter with
the Cross, by the Earl of Northampton. The Third Sword, by the Earl of
Pembroke. Curtana, by the Earl of Shrewsbury. The Pointed Sword, by the Earl of
Derby. Lord Mayor of London, bearing the City Mace, in a Gown of Crimson
Velvet, Wearing his Collar and Jewel. Garter, Principal King of Arms, Wearing
his Collar and Jewel, his Coronet in his Hand. Sir Thomas Duppa, with the
Black Rod in his Hand. Sergeants at Arms. The Lord Great Chamberlain in his
Robes, with his Coronet and his White Staff. Sergeants at Arms. The Earl
Marshal of England, in his Robes, with his Coronet and Earl Marshal's Staff,
Duke of Norfolk. The Sword of State, carried by the Earl of Oxford. The High
Constable in his Robes, with his Staff and Coronet, Duke of Ormond. The Queens
Scepter with the Dove, carried by the Earl of Bedford. The Kings Scepter with
the Dove, by the Earl of Rutland. The Queens Orb, by the Duke of Bolton. The
Kings Orb, by the Duke of Grafton. The Queens Crown, by the Duke of Somerset.
The Kings Crown, by the Lord High Steward. The Paten, by the Lord Bishop of St.
Asaph. The Bible, by the Lord Bishop of London. The Chalice, by the Lord Bishop
of Rochester. The Canopy born by 16 Barons of the Cinque Ports, over the KING
And QUEEN. Gentlemen Pentioners. Supporter to the QUEEN, the Lord Bishop of
Bristol. The QUEEN in in Crimson Velvet Robes, on Her Head a Circlet of Gold,
Her Majesty's Train born by the Duchess of Somerset, assisted by the Lady
Elizabeth Pawlett, Lady Diana Vere, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, and the Lady
Harriot Hyde. The KING in Crimson Velvet Robes, a Cap on His Head of the same,
both Fur'd and Powdered with Ermine, His great Collar and George, His Majesty's
Train born by the Master of the Robes, assisted by the Lord Eland, Lord
Willoughby, Lord Lansdowne, and the Lord Dunblaine. Supporter to the KING, the
Lord Bishop of Winchester. Gentlemen Pentioners. A Lady of the Bedchamber. A
Gentleman of the Bedchamber. Two of the QUEENS Women. Two Grooms of the
Bedchamber. Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard. Captain of His Majesty's
Guard. Captain of the Gentlemen Pentioners, Lord Lovelace. Ensign and
Lieutenant of the Yeomen of the Guard. Yeomen of the Guard four Abreast.


In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones. 1689.


