An Exact ENQVIRY AFTER Ancient Truths, Both in Scripture and Fathers.

Touching The subsistence of the Church of God; Digested into Three Parts: VIZ.
I. True Worship. II. Dominion, or Divine Jurisdiction. III. Discipline, reduced
from our Father Adams time, through all Ages, to these present Times.


Very useful for these Times: By W: Fenwick, Utter-Barrester of Grays-Inne.

London, Printed for Edw: Husbands and Lawrence Blaiklock: and are to be sold
at their shops in the Middle Temple, and Temple Bar.

To the Right Honorable, Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Lord Percy, Lucy,
Poynings, Fitzpain, Brian, and Latimer; Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND, Knight
of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy-councell.
Right Honorable,
THe unworthy oppressed Author has not long since groaned under the severe
censure of the late high Commission for the ensuing speculations, which now he
adventures to present unto your Honor, hoping for a candid acceptance, and
interpretation of his poor endeavors for the good of Zion. Had not the rising
Sun of an auspicious Parliament dispelled those clouds of oppresion and
tyranny, that menaced a drowning both to me and them, they had been choked in
their embrio, and never enjoyed the happiness they have now attained in your
Honorable aspect. Pardon (most noble Lord) the enforced presumption of the
distressed Author, which implores and hopes for your honorable Patronage, and
humbly praying for the daily increase of your Honors health and eternal
happiness, remains

Your Honors most humble, most devoted Servant, William Fenwick.

The Errata.
PAge 1. line 27; for more, read most. l. 28. for right, r. light. Page 2. l.
29. for. 2, r. of. Line 34. for posterity, r. prosperity. Page 4. l. 24. for
endeavors, r. endnes. The second Treatise, p. 2. l. 33. for. the, r. thy. for
of, r. unto. Page 18. l. 3. for he, r. the. Page 10, l. 21, for in, r. from.
Page 11. l. 28. for what, r. with Page 15. l. 1. for Angelical, r.
Evangelical. P. 20. l. 9. for. penitent, r. impenitent. Page 23. lin 6. for A,
r. As. for of. r. to. Page 25. l. 9. read, are first. Page 54. l. 14. read
omitted. Page 55. l. 9. read, it is that. l. 29. read, All, And thus.

ZIONS REQVEST To her Honorable, and welbeloved Sons now happily assembled
in the long and much-desired Parliament of England.
RIght dear and well-beloved of God your Father in my Lord; by whom you are
begotten and borne, and welbeloved of me: not begot of mortal or carnal seed,
but of the immortal seed of the Word; neither borne nor brought forth of the
mandane womb of Rome: nor sprung from the native bowels of my humanity; but I
bore you and brought you forth of my celestial womb: the eternal council of
God; and I have nourished and brought you up in the royal City of divine
Solomon, my Lord and your God and Savior.

Prove. 1. 8.
My sons hear your Fathers instruction, and forsake not your mothers
teaching; for they shall be a comely ornament unto your head, and as chalnes to
your neck. You have seen with your eyes, and heard with your ears, how the
strumpet of Babell has boasted her self against me, and with her impudent
face affirmed her self to be Queen of heaven and earth, deluding the world
with outward apparantes, whereby many are mistaken by her outward glory,
supposing her to be my self.

But I desire you, my most honorable and dear children, to conceive of me
aright, and be not deceived with vain and glorious shows and worldly pomp;
For my glory is internal and heavenly, more splendent then the pure gold of
more curious embroderers, which no eye can see, but that Divine eye of right
which is given you of your Father. For I testify unto you, that I am not to be
considered by the pomp and glory of the world, nor yet by the wisdom of the
wise man, or by the nature of flesh and blood, for those are not heavenly, but
earthly sensual and divelish, and do not, cannot, nor will not please God,
but conceive you me to be heavenly, spiritual. and divine, such as your Father
has described me to be.

A mountain, even Mount Zion, a City, the City of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, filled with the society of innumerable Angels, and the
assembly of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and with the presence
of God in Trinity sitting upon the Throne, Judge of all, and with the unity
and communion of the spirits of just and perfect men, made perfect with that
individual union which they have with Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament, and with the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then
that of Abel, even the remission of sins to the imputation of righteousness
for justification of sinners, for he came to save sinners, by drawing sinners,
to repentance. And I pray you shake of all carnal apprehensions of me, and
conceive me to be really such in nature and condition as my Lord has revealed
me by the mouth of his blessed servant Peter, 1 Pet. 2. affirming me to be a
spiritual house or temple, 1 Pet. 2. 5. built and compact of living stones,
made a spiritual house a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, who is my foundation that living stone, on
whom I am built, though he be disallowed of men, yet chosen of God and
precious.

Neither suppose me to be a politic body, composed of a temporal head or
sovereign Monarchy, or a National and positive laws and customs (which
though they be ordained of God, yet in substance they are humane inventions
and traditions of men) nor consisting of civil and humane Magistrates, endewed
with moral gifts and virtues for the external government, power and
posterity of humane societies, politiquely and wisely providing for the
defects of depraved nature, and preventing the damage, danger and ruin, which
the malice of Satan and the corrupt nature of man, would draw upon the
societies of men in their terrestrial abode. Though I be sometimes called a
Kingdom in respect of my eternal King, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
and of his divine spiritual power and heavenly dominion, which never shall
have end: Yet am I never any where in Scripture described to be a temporal or
earthly Kingdom. But on the contrary, my Lord did plainly affirm and teach,
that his kingdom was not of this world, John 18. 26. Math. 20. 25.
and prohibited the subjects of his kingdom to take dominion and government
upon them one over another, nor set up a Hierarchy among them, as the Princes
and Lords of the world did, whose manner is to thirst after pre-eminence and
dominion, but that in his divine kingdom, he that would be the greatest,
should be the least, and he that should be found to take most diligent labor
and pains in ministration of his divine Word and food of life, should be
esteemed a faithful servant to his Lord and Master.

But consider me as I am the minister and dispensator of God, to whom is
committed the Administration of that hidden mystery of God, which was promised
since the world began, it was hid from all ages, Col. 1. 26. 27.
but now in these latter days made manifest to his Saints, To whom God would
make known what is the riches of his glorious Mystery among the Gentiles.

Which riches is Christ in you the hope of glory, and Christ is the Image of
the invisible God, the first begotten of every creature: that Word by whom all
things were created in heaven and in earth, and he is before all things, and in
him all things consist, and he is the head of the body of the Church, he is
the beginning, and the first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence, for it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell, And through peace made by the blood of that his Cross to
reconcile to himself through him (even through Christ) all things, both which
are in heaven, and which are in earth. Col 1. 15. 16. 18. 19.


This is that Mystery which is committed to me your mother, not that I should
add or diminish, but that I should deliver unto you, that which I have
received of the Lord; and for that this mystery my Lord Christ is my head and
Sovereign of my soul I am called his mystical body.

Therefore cast away all carnal and wordly conceits of me, and behold me in
that mystery, as I am growing up into (...) Ephesians. 4. 5. which is my head that
is Christ, by whom through the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, I am
a mystical body, like a natural body coupled and knit together by every
joint, for the furniture of the body, according to the effectual power, which
is in every part, whereby the body receives increase unto the edifying of it
self in love; And through this unity in my head, I and my head make one
complete mystical body, so there is one body, one spirit, called unto one
hope, of our vocation; 1 Chro. 12. 12.
one Lord, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above all, and
through all, and in us all.

But as a natural body is one, and has many members, and all the members of
the body which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body, even so is
Christ, for I am his own body by his spiritual union; but mark well and
understand, this body is not one member, as a Pope, or Episcopus, to take
pre-eminence, which would make division betwixt me and my head.

But in the body there are many members, so in me the body (...) Church of
Christ there are many members, and he is the only true and absolute supreme
head. And none but he can give many and diverse gifts and administrations as in
this, 1 Cor. 12 4. 5, 6, 7. but the same Spirit, the same Lord, and though
there (...) diversities of operations, yet one God is the same, which work
(...) all in all; Now if my head be God, and my endeavor the gifts of the
spirit, who can impose upon me any other gifts administration or operation,
but only my Lord, surely no Prince, no Pepe, no Prelate.

But consider me, my sons in this thing, that the administration of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, no member, nor person is to
receive this talent, and to hide is, for God does not light these lights to put
them under a bushel but to enlighten the whole house the Church; As every
member of the body is profitable to other, so are my members; Therefore to some
he gives the word of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge, to another
the excellency of Faith, to another the operation of great works, to another
prophecy, to another diversity of tongues, and to another interpretation of
Tongues; All these works one and the same spirit, distributing severally as
he lists, for Christ my Lord and head is God; And the Father is in him, and
he in the Father which is above all, and through you all, and in us all; who
gives unto every one grace according Ephesians 4. 7, 8.
to the measure of the gift of Christ; for it was prophesied of him, that when
he ascended (who had first descended into the lowest dejection of earthly
pains and debasement for the sins of man) he should also ascend, and fit on
the right hand of God, and lead captivity captive, and receive of God the
Father, gifts to give unto man; Not humane gifts to govern the terrestrial
affairs of this life, but divine gifts to guide and lead the sonles of men
into the way of peace and eternal felicitis.

Therefore seeing my ^^^d is the great mystery of God, and spiritual word of
Life, to whom I am united through the unity of the Spirit, I am his and he is
mine, and both one Christ, one Church and Mystical body or spiritual Spouse,
My Lord give me, all spiritual gifts to translate me, from darkness into his
glorious light; from carnal and earthly things, to be made a spiritual and
heavenly Spouse. For God which made light to shine out of darkness, is he
which has shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of that power, might be of God, and not of man;
For these causes he gave and ordained some members to have diversity of gifts
and administration; as first Apostles, secondly Prophets and Evangelists,
thirdly Pastors and Teachers; Then such as do miracles (for miracles follow
the Word, where there is need of confirmation) and gifts of healing, helpers,
as Ephesians 4. 11.
Deacons and Governors as Elders.

These are the instruments of ministration by diverse gifts distinguished into
diverse administrations and offices which are distinguished by their spiritual
operation and ministration of one and the same word and ministry of God.

This is that order, ordinance and government, or spiritual jurisdiction,
which my Lord God your Father has instituted for the repairing of the Saints,
for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ
his Church even me your Mother, and this is to continue, and not to be altered
and restrained until we all meet together in the unity of faith, and that
acknowledging of the Son of God unto a perfect Man, and unto the measure of
the age of the fullness of Christ.

Thus Right Honorable my Sons and Saints of God your Father, I have
presented my self unto the view of your heavenbred judgments and spiritual
wisdoms, that you may behold me all glorious within, and not judge by
outward appearance, nor by politic reasons, lest you be mistaken in my nature
and condition, and suppose me to be a terrestrial. Hierarchy to be governed
by positive laws, traditions, Decrees and Canons of men, which cannot search
the reins of the heart, nor cure the soul, nor lead her into bliss.
Therefore I request you to take into your consideration the heavy burdens
grievous to be borne, (which the Scribes and Pharisees of Rome, who pretended
to fit in Moses seat) have laid upon my shoulders: the Episeopall weight
whereof you my sons have heretofore borne, with much grief, whilst they
advanced themselves to the chief seats and most eminent dignities, loving to
be reputed great and excellent Rabbis, even above you the natural Peers and
Potentates of State.

And now I conclude, and do offer unto your sacred considerations the holy
Sinode of the Apostles, set forth for a perfect pattern of all Counsels and
Ecclesiastical causes. In the fifteenth of the Acts where you may observe that
Synod consisted of the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren. Their consultation was
according to the rule of the written Word, there conclusion and sentence was
thus; It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us to lay no more burden upon
you then these things necessary. That is, that ye abstain from things
offered to Idols and blood, which includes all Ceremonial inventions and
bloody sacrifices, and prohibits from that which is strangled with all cruelty
and oppression, and from fornication, which imports unclean conversation and
lusts, which if ye forheare ye shall do well.

And though I here claim of you the honor of being your Mother being the body
of Christ and Church of God, in whom you also have the honor and prerogative
to be the sons of God; yet touching my earthly habitation and abode I am
under your Dominion and tuition, whom my Lord has placed over me for my peace
and prosperity on earth. And that through Sovereign power and authority which
he has ordained over all men, to the end you may give his Gospel a free
passage, and be nursing and protecting Fathers of me in your Commonwealth,
that your Father may give you and your King a blessing of welfare and happy
being in my Lord Christ, in whom all Nations are blessed, and blessed is that
Nation whose God is the Lord.

A Breviate of the ensuing second Treatise.
THe subsistence of the Church of God composed of a threefold cord, 1. Worship.
2. Dominion. 3. Discipline.
In the Tractate of worship are declared 1. The nature of Divine worship. 2.
The nature of acceptable obedience. 3. How this worship corresponds with the
nature of God, 4. The manner of public worship from Adam till Moses. 5. The
Service used by the Patriarchs. 6. The same continued in the National Church.
7. The service used in the Synagogues. 8. The same observed by the Apostles. 9.
The testimony of the Fathers. 10. An amplification, and undeniable reasons for
the purity of Gods word and worship.
In the Tractate of dominion or divine jurisdiction; 1. Of the first gradation
of this Dominion. 2. How Christ ordaines his Vice-royes on earth. 3. Difference
betwixt Regal and divine power. 4. The Glass of Kings. 5. How Divine power is
derived unto man from the Father, by the Word, through the spirit. 6. How the
Word is the Divine power of God, and the authority committed to the Church.
In the Tractate of Government and Discipline. 1. Of the calling of Ministers.
2. The manner of their ordination. 3. The orders and degrees of Pastors, and
their 4. Denominations under the Law and Gospel. 5. Of Discipline and
censures. 6. Of Excommunication.

The subsistence of the Church of God.
The subsistence of Gods Church threefold.
THe subsistence of Gods Church is composed of a threefold thread, which cannot
easily be broken.

1. The first is spiritual and divine worship worship.
2. Spiritual and divine Jurisdiction, or Jure Divino. dominion.
3. Spiritual and divine discipline or government discipline.

I call this threefold cord of grace Divine and Spiritual because the
universal Minister of Gods dispensation of all saving grace; is the holy
Spirit, the third person of the Trinity.

These are correlative subsistences in the Church of God so depending one upon
another, that they cannot be separated or untwisled without either some defect
or dismembring of the Church in her self, or utter dissolving of her, in
essence and nature to be any true Church,

Also, without these distinct subsistences in the Church, she cannot exercise
the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, nor the functions and offices ordained of
God for ministration of the Word; For this cause I call them subsistences in
the essence of the Church like, unto the subsistences of the Trinity in the
essence of God himself.

Of Spiritual and Divine worship.
The nature of God is the
The Worship which God requires, must be such as is agreeable to his own
nature, and the good pleasure of his own will; rule of divine worship.
therefore true divine worship is tied to the prescript commandment of God, and
not to the devising invention of man, therefore to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of Rams. 1 Samuel 5. 22.


The nature of acceptable Obedience.
It is a supernatural and filial work of God internally and spiritually
wrought, seated and invested by Gods Spirit into the intellect, making man a
new creature created in Christ Jesus unto good works; which God has ordained
Ephesians. 3. 10.
that he should walk in them, being renewed in the spirit of the mind, to
offer himself unto God a living sacrifice in an understanding worshipping of
God. Romans 12 1.


This worship and sacrifice, is described by the Prophet The law required a
bloody sacrifice, the Gospel a contrite heart.
David to be a broken and contrite spirit, called a well-pleasing sacrifice to
God, presenting a sin-offering, as Psalm. 51, 17. also in the 116, it is called
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

How this Worship is correspondent to the nature of God.
The Lord does show it in the fourth of John 23. and 24. saying, the true
worshippers, shall worship God in spirit and truth, that is in the Spirit of
sanctification dwelling in the mind, helping our infirmities with sighs and
groans, which cannot be expressed; and in the truth of his Word dwelling in us
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, such as these the Father
requires should worship him, because God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in spirit and truth, and not in the ignorance of the
mind, nor in the invention and will worship of man; For this cause the Psalmist
says in the 51. 6. Thou O Lord love truth in the inward affections; and in
the 50. Psalm he says, Offer to God the sacrifice of praise, and pay the
vows of the most high, and call upon God; for the Lord loves truth in the
inward parts.

This is the pure and simple worship of God, without the glory and beauty of
outward Ceremonies, agreeing with the simple pure essence and nature of God
himself.

Consider well Paul's Caveat in the Coloss. 2, 8. 18. 20, 21, 22 A Caveat.
23. warning all men to beware of humane wisdom, and deceitful inventions
and traditions, according to the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ;
the outward show of holiness which puffes up men's hearts with self-conceit,
being burdened with traditions, which having a glorious show of holiness, of
wisdom and voluntary religion, wherein men are out of measure superstitious
in zeal, not sparing their bodily labor.

The manner of the public worship of Gods Church from Adam till Moses.
The domestical Church.
In this first age; whilst the Church was domestical in the family of Adam and
Noah, and Abram. The firstborn and eldest of every family was ordained of God
by creation, to be a King for the common good; A Priest to offer prayer to God
for them, and a Prophet to instruct them.

1 King.
Of this royal dignity we read, that God gave dominion unto Adam over his
posterity and all sublunary creatures, Genesis 1. 28. This is the fountain, of
Soveraigntie succeeding in the birthright of the dignity of the firstborn,
until Cain lost it by killing his brother Abel, Cham lost it for scoffing his
Father Noah; Esan sold it for a mease of portage; and Reuben lost it for
desiling his fathers bed.

Then God took it into his own hands, and reserved soveraigntie and the
dignity of pre-eminence of the firstborn for his own only begotten son,
the first begotten of every creature, the Lion of Judah, who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice.

Prophet. 2. Gen 2.
Also man in Creation was the Prophet of God, for God breathed in his face the
breath of life, and made him a living soul) even that word, which in the
beginning was with God, and was God, was the light and life of man; Adam Ioh.
16.
was taught of God before his fall, as in the second Chapter of Genesis: and
also after his fall, as in the third Chapter of Genesis: the seed of the woman
should break the serpents head, which doctrine he received of God, and taught
his posterity.

Priest.
His Priesthood was manifest, in that he taught his sons to offer sacrifices
of praise and thanksgiving to God; the outward signs thereof, they brought to
their Father as their high Priest a figure of Christ, V^^^ 1.
Genesis 4. 3. also Hevah gave thanks to God for her issue.

The services used amongst the Patriarks.
Their practice and service in this age was plain and simple, praise, prayer,
and thanksgiving to God: which consisted in confessing their sinfulness, and
acknowledging the mercy of God in his promise, as after the birth of Seth and
Enoch, then (it is said) began men to call on the name of God, Genes. 4. 26.
And in every family they taught and declared the promise of God to be the word
of life; as Lamech confessed at the birth of Noah, Genesis 5. 29. and Noah and
Enoch are witnessed to be Preachers of righteousness. This manner of worship
was more manifest after the flood, in the life of Abraham by his obedience, his
familiar talking with God, as in Chap. 15. 16, 18, 19, 20. and Isaacks
conversation, who went out to meditate and pray, in the evening; so Jacob
worshipped God leaning on his staff and blessed his son.

The primitive worship.
Thus the pure and unspotted worship of God, which was used both private and
public among his people, was only praise, prayer, and thanksgiving, with
teaching and Divine instruction; And to this manner of worship none durst add
nor diminish; only God himself did (in the days of Abraham) and unto this
worship, the sign of the everlasting covenant, Circumcision.
betwixt God and his saithfull servant Abraham, and his faithful seed; to make
a separation and visible distinction betwixt his people and the people of the
world, the seed of nature; under which Covenant was promised the spirit of
Regeneration, or spiritual Circumcision, in these words, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, the seed of regeneration. Here we may observe, that to the
spiritual and Divine worship of God, none can add any thing but God alone, and
God will add nothing but Divine Doctrine necessary to salvation: And that,
figured under plain and simple signs; lest the natural corruption of man
(prone to superstition and external sanctity) should lean and cleave to the
signs, and forget the heavenly things signified, and to seek holiness in the
action.

The same worship and service practiced in the National Church.
The national Church.
When Israel of twelve tribes became a multitude, and a great Nation, whom God
exercised and humbled under the bondage of Pharaoh, that he might show forth
his mighty power, mercy, and loving kindness to his people Israel, he sent
them a deliverer, even his servant Moses. Moses added nothing to the service of
the first age: but God added also the Sacrament of the Passover, to declare
unto them, that as Passover.
none was to be esteemed the people of God, but those that were under the sign
of the Covenant of God; so none should be delivered from the destroying wrath
of God: but those that were redeemed, reconciled, and washed, or sprinkled with
the blood of the unspotted Lamb of God; the promised seed of the woman, the
word of life, made flesh, in whose death and shedding of his blood, they were
saved and delivered from spiritual bondage and death; and this was to be
observed for a perpetual ordinance among Gods people for ever.

The word first ministered by God himself to Adam in the Garden, then by Adam,
Seth, Enoch and Noah, then by Moses, Aaron and by the Prophets.
And after the Israelites and people of God were congregated and gathered
together, and brought out of the bondage of Egypt, the Lord by the ministration
of Moses and Aaron; writ, divulged, and ministered, the Divine precepts of the
law of God: the knowledge and perfection whereof, man had lost and forgot by
transgression. Out of which law, Moses by the commandment of God, extracted
Ecclesiastical ordinances for Aaron, and the legal Priesthood and Levites, for
serving of the Tabernacle, to instruct the people by types and figures in the
Divine and heavenly mysteries of God under the law, (as by a Schoolmaster)
till the mystery of God should be manifested in the flesh, and dwell with men.
And of this Doctrine all the Prophets testified and writ declaring and
foretelling the coming of that Messiah.

All the glory of the Tabernacle, and after that the Temple with the typical
Sacrifices, was but to set forth that spiritual and Divine glory and power:
which was to come, and to be manifested in the flesh: and then the outward and
earthly glory should be abolished and done away, that the Divine and invisible
power thereof, might only remain, and shine in the hearts and souls of the
Elect, as the Prophet Joel 2. 28. And afterward will I pour out my spirit upon
all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, Ier. 31. 33.
After those days (says the Lord) I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and I say; this is the Covenant which I will make
with them, my spirit is upon thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed (says the
Lord) from henceforth and for ever.

The public worship under the law.
But in all this they held the daily public service pure and undefiled,
without rites or any other ceremonies, but only the reading of the word, and
ministering the Sacrament, and teaching on the Sabbath days.

And the Jews for their Divine Services had their Synagogues in every City
and Town; and Christ did by his own practice and presence observe the same
upon the Sabbath day, as it is Luke the 4. 16. 17. as his custom was, he went
into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read, and there was
delivered to him the book of Isaiah; and Acts 13. 14. 15. Paul and Barnabas
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day.

The form of service used in the Synagogues.
First, they began their Service with a general verbal confession, which they
gathered out of the Prophets, Levit. 26. 20. Numb. 5. 6. 7. Nehem. 9. 23. The
form of this confession is set forth in the Jews Talmond: We have sinned, O
Lord, we have done wickedly, we have dealt deceitfully in thy fight, we thy
people and all the house of Israel, we repent our selves thereof, and are
ashamed for the same: and therefore, O Lord, we beseech thee forgive us our
sins, our iniquities, and our transgressions, as it is written in the book of
Moses thy servant.

Then followed the reading of the Law and the Prophets, and then after followed
the expounding and exhortation, then the Service ended with a general thanks
for all things, and as Paul says for all persons, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. And thus
their Service was concluded with blessings upon the people from the mouth of
the Minister.

The same Service and Method observed by the Apostles.
Christ left no other form of Service in Gods worship, but only such as was
used in the Church of the Jews, naked and Acts 1. 13. 14.
simple prayer, praise, and thanks: reading, preaching, and exhortation with
the ministration of the Sacraments; commanding his Disciples to go teach all
Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit.

They avoided Rites and Ceremonies as burdens not lawful to be laid on the
people of God.
The Apostles observed their Masters commandment in every circumstance proper
for the ministration of those Divine mysteries; To all that Christ ordained
they neither added nor diminished any thing.

Springing from superstition of time, and place, and circumstances, for they
knew that Ordination was not tied to a day, an hour, or any solemn time or
season, but was instituted for the benefit of the soul of man, therefore they
thought fit to minister the Lords Supper every Lords day. Neither did they use
any other order or gesture, but after the same manner sitting as Christ did
institute it, fearing the curse of God to add or diminish; And held that
manner of order most worthy and fit to be observed in Divine mysteries, which
their Lord had formerly observed, knowing the power and efficacy to be of his
spirit, and not to consist in Rites and Ceremonies, or circumstances of time
and place.

After the ascension of the Lord, he Apostles and the whole Church (consisting
of 120 persons) assembled at Jerusalem in an upper Chamber, and abode together
with the 11 Apostles, and continued with one accord in prayer and supplication:
And then, and there, Peter taught and preached, and in the public assembly,
and with their whole consent, they chose Matthias to supply Judas his place.
Acts 1. 13, 14, 15. also 2. 42. and they continued in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer. In which words is set forth the
whole form of their Service and worship used in the Apostolic times, which
consisted in preaching the true Doctrine of Christ, their unity of faith and
love, ministration of the Sacraments and Prayer.

The Testimony of the Fathers.
Justinius Martyr. Apolo. 2. about the year 130.
On the day (says he) which is called Sunday (that is the Lords day) there is
an assembling and coming together of all manner of people, (dwelling either in
the Fields or in the Cities) into one place, and there are read the Acts, or
Records of the Apostles, and the Writings of the Prophets; so long as the time
would suffer, then when the Reader has left off reading, (that is to say, he
which was President or Chief in the assembly,) the Bishop or Pastor delivered
an admonition or exhortat: on by way of discourse, tending to the stirring of
them up, to follow and practice those good things. Afterward we rise all at
once, and send our prayers unto God. And prayer being ended, the bread and wine
is brought, and he that directs the action, delivers with all the power and
might he has, prayers and thanksgiving, the people assenting say Amen. Then
follows the distribution to every one present, and the communicating of the
things which were blessed by thanksgiving, and they send of the same to those
that were absent, by the Deacons; In the end, they which are of ability, and
are moved therewithal, give every one according as it pleases him, and that
which remains abides with him that is president, with which he makes
provision for the fatherless, widows, sick persons, captives and needy
strangers.

The same Author in another place of the same Apology: After (says he) that
we have washed, that is baptized him, that has received the fajth, and joined
himself with us, we bring him into the Assembly and Congregation of the
brethren, where they are come together to make their common prayers both for
themselves and for him, and for all manner of persons whatsoever; When prayers
are thus ended we salute one another with an holy kiss, and then there is
brought to the Pastor the Bread and the Cup, and he gives praise and glory to
the Father of all things in the name of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and
makes a great thankes-giving, for that he has vouchsafed to make them worthy
of these things: which being ended the people join and put their blessing
thereto, saying, Amen; Afterward the Pastor blessing them: those whom we call
Deacons gives to every one who are present, and they carry to those that are
absent; And this food is called the Sacrament of thankes-giving, which is not
lawful for any one to receive, which has not before received the truth of our
Doctrine of Faith, and has not been washed with Baptism of regeneration for
remission of sins.

Tertullian.
Also, Tertullian in his Apology about few years after; Now, says he; I will
declare unto you the practices of the Christian function, to the end that when
I have refuted the evil I may show you the good. We come together into one
Congregation to have recourse unto God by prayer, forcing him as it were by
joining together of all our prayers, and this violent enforcement is very well
pleasing to God; We pray for Emperors, for their Officers and Potentates; and
for the estate present; for the quieting of matters, we come together for
communicating of the holy Scriptures; as the present times do presseus, or to
prevent somewhat to come, or to make acknowledgement of the present; And thus
we feed our faith with holy speeches, we relieve and succor our hope, we make
strong our confidence, and therewithal likewise fortify our Discipline and
manner of government by the urgent and uncessant rehearsal, and renowing of
the memory of good precepts. In our Congregations is used likewise
exhortations, reprehensions, and the exercise of sacred censures, for then
matters are judged with great advisement, as is wont to be done, of such men as
assuredly know that the face of God is toward them; Behold and see their
doings, and it is a great foreshew of the judgment to come: if any one amongst
us have sinned so deeply as to be excluded from the Communion of prayer and the
Assembly; and of all manner of having any thing to do with this society and
fellowship, whereof the Elders that are best approved and found most faithful,
do sit as presidents in the Assembly advanced, and called to that dignity, not
through any sums of money; but by the weight and sway of the good testimony,
which they have given.

I have only reported the testimony of these two Authors of the Primitive
times to show the pure simplicity of Gods worship in their public service,
which was no other but the same in order and form with the worship used in the
Jews Church, only in this they differed from the Christians, that after their
services and exhortation they ministered the Sacrament of Baptism when there
was occasion. And then the Catechumeni were dismissed with this word (Missa:)
then the Elders which were all the best approved of Congregation were admitted
to the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood ministered with prayer under the
signs of Bread and Wine, and singing of Psalms, then the Minister blessed
them, and then with the same word (^ie Missa) the Congregation was dismissed.

The feigned and false original of the Mass.
This word did properly signify, depart or be gone or leave to depart, but by
use it did after signify the first service and the second service, which they
called the first Missa and the second Missa, and in corruption of time it came
to signify the Mass, and Idolatrous sacrifice, from hence the Papists lyingly
saigne to derive their Mass; from the Apostles and the Fathers of the
Primitive times.

We may also observe from the Apostles and the primitive Congregations, that
they had this tradition, they ministered the Sacraments every Sabbath, and every
one did bring something according to their ability to the Lords Table of
bread, meat, and wine, which was set on a Table in the midst of the house of
prayer, and this they called an offering, the more to encourage the people to
this bounty and charity, and this was covered till the first service was done,
and the preaching, then the Cloth was taken of, and then the Bishop, or
Pastor, or president came to the side of the Table, and gave thanks and prayed
for all men, and after took Bread and Wine, and consecrated them with prayers;
Sometimes only with the Lords prayer rehearsing the words of the Institution
of our Lord, as in the 1 Cor. 12. 11. And brake the Bread, and the Wine was
poured out, and distributed to the people thereto admitted;

The rest of the offerings were given to the poor, the needy and the widows
by the Deacons.

Platina. To tie the Ministers and people of God to set uniform: prayers is to
incarcerate the Spirit of God. In the whole time of the primitive Church we
find no other uniform prayer, save the Lords prayer used in administration of
the Sacrament.
And Platina in the life of Telesphorus says, that in the Apostles times all
things were done nakedly, plainly and simply in the action of this mystery;
And in Rome where the mystery of iniquity was to take root, and be seated,
all things continued, and were done after the same order, doctrines and
traditions, as the Apostles taught; As Irenaus does witness for twelve Bishops
successively from the Apostles unto Eleutherius; Nay; the simplicity and
purity of worship continued without addition or diminution until Constantine
the great his time.

An amplification what undeniable reasons for the purity of Gods Worship and
service.
It is evident and undeniable that Gods worship, and the Divine service has
been ever from Adam, and practiced by his posterity in the first age plain,
simple, pure, and naked prayer, praise and thanks, without any invention of
man, or external Ceremony, nor yet any Sacramental signs, save only that
Adam taught his sons to bring unto him, as to their high Priest presenting
the person of the promised seed, before the incarnation, their first fruits in
thankfulness, having only the naked and simple, ministration of the word
promised to be made man, preached by Adam, Seth, and Enoch, and Noah, to feed
their holy faith, God enlightening them with the inspiration of his spirit,
making them the Prophets of God.

Why God used no sacramental signs.
And the Divine reasons why God used no Sacramental signs, nor figurative
Sacrifices was, for that Adam and his posterity had not altogether forgot that
Divine light of life, which he was endued with in his creation, though he had
newly lost the possession thereof, yet he was more capable of inspiration, then
the next generations were, who had smothered even the light of nature by
multiplying their transgressions: And this was a principal cause why they
lived in this age above 960.

Why God shortened the days of man's life.
But in the second age God did not only for their overgrowth of sinfulness
cut short the days of man, but he also did choose himself a people from the
loins of Abraham, and renewed unto him the promise of his blessed seed, and
made him a great Nation and Church unto himself, and to this Church and people
God gave Sacramental signs to distinguish them from all other Nations to be
his own, and ordained them Statutes, Laws, and ordinances to instruct them as
under a Schoolmaster, and by signs to lead them unto the spiritual power,
and efficacy of the Incarnation of Christ and his death unto the remission of
sins.

But it is undeniable and manifest, that he required no other manner of
worship and service of them, then he did of the first people, for God is
unchangeable in his nature; therefore he cannot nor will not have any other
kind of worship: but one simple pure worship of praise, prayer, and
thanksgigiving, and feeding of this worship with the plain ministration of his
promised word of life preached unto them.

The reason why the second age was clogged with Ceremonies.
But why was this second age burdened with ordinances and figures? because
this age was drowned with the growth of sin, and incapable of light, for
sin by the law became more raging and sinful; and the law was weak, and
could not prevail with man because of sin, for man's sinfulness: was so
great, that the spirit of the law which is righteousness, could not dwell in
flesh and blood but it must be consumed: for this cause the law became death
unto man, and man, by the law became dead: for the law did not only reprove,
but condemn. But in this third age the righteousness of the law became
incarnate, and was made man, that man might be made the righteousness of the
law: Thus that Christ, who was promised to the first age, is become our
righteousness: so that now the spirit is communicated in a fuller measure, and
more evident and powerful then it was unto the Jews in figurative types and
ceremonies.

And this is the reason why all things are become more spiritual, and God will
have his worship now to be known to be only spirit and truth; for through him
we are become new creatures unto God the Father, created in Christ, not to a
new worship, but to the same worship more pure and perfectly to worship in
spirit then heretofore.

The reason (why Christ would institute no other worship, nor allow none to be
true-worshippers; Why Christ did institute no new worship, but approved and
practiced the old.
but those that worshipped in spirit and truth, simply, plainly, and nakedly,
is extracted from Gods own Essential nature, God is a spirit, and therefore
will be worshipped in spirit and truth. Also God is one simple pure spiritual
Essence, therefore he will have no invention, nor no mixture of any Rites,
Ceremonies, or observations but plainness. And again, God will with the
simple plainness of his worship and preaching confound the wisdom and
superstitious curiosity of man, 1 Cor. 2.
for the natural corruption of man not savouring nor discerning the beauty and
sweetness of spiritual things, Why man studies to invent new worship.
does out of a slavish fear and superstitious curiosity, seek a will worship
of his own invention which God hates; But the enlightened soul sees most
heavenly and glorious delights in the plain and simple ministration of Gods
word; for the mind not sticking in the outward form and signs of the
mysteries: she flies with the wings of Divine speculations into the presence
of God and his Angels, as Tertullian says speaking of the soul. We have a
sister (says he) among us, unto whom is given the gift of Revelation, in the
midst of Divine Service, she is east into an ecstasy, she is brought into the
company of Angels, and sometimes into the presence of the Lord himself.
Again, according to the Scriptures that are read, the Psalms that are sung,
the Sermons that are made, and prayers which are offered: new matter of vision
is administered and offered unto her.

Now those that have not this spiritual sense, and eye to taste and see how
good and gracious the Lord is, and to behold how beautiful his Tabernacles
are, The first inlet of set prayers compiled into a Service Book
they think it was the ignorance or poverty of the age that suffered the
worship of God, and his ministration to be clad in such base and mean array
and clothing, and comparing her to the worldly pomp of Idolatrous and
superstitious worship, they were ashamed to show the Church in such plain
roabes before the Gentiles and Jews; therefore every Metropolitan after the
Nicene Counsel having got the sole government into their hands, devised some
sentences out of the Scripture to beautify the service and the Sacraments, and
some rites and ceremonies to correspond both with Jew and Gentile in serving
God; All which things though at the first the Inventers had a good intent, and
the words and rites carried a glorious show of holiness; yet because they were
not the things that God ordained, nor thought fit to be done or to have done in
his service and ministration: Man's invention in the worship of God is of
dangerous consequence to the Church.
therefore they brought forth in the end a malignant effect both in worship and
Doctrine, Idolatry and Superstition with damnable heresies in the end; which
the first Inventers never dreamed of.

For when man adds other words; or some other thing to the Sacraments, then
Christ did use in his institution, does he not disallow of the wisdom of
God, and thereby make his own filthiness appears under his skirts? as the
Lord says, Exodus 19. last verse, where man is prohibited invention. To beware
of this, Cyprian in his Epistle to Adrian the Emperor, advises to hold our
selves fast to the institution of Christ's the Apostles did so as appears by
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 12. It is truth (says Cyprian) seeing that neither any
Apostles neither Angels from heaven could declare any thing unto us; beside
that which Christ has once taught, I cannot but mervaile how against all
Angelical and Apostolical Doctrine men dare to offer in some places water in
the Cup. Again he says, they should ask counsel of those whom they follow;
for if in the sacrifice which is Christ we should not follow any other then
Christ, it must of necessity follow that we must obey and do as Christ has
done and commanded us to do: so he says in his Gospel; If you do the things
I command you to do, I will call you no more servants but son; And the
Father does witness, that Christ is only to be heard, Aying from heaven this
is my beloved Son, hear him; thereupon we are not to regard what those
before us have judged meet; because we are not to apply our selves to follow
the customs of man, but the truth and verity of God. And the same Author to
stop the month of all will-worshippers faith; if any of our predecessors either
through ignorance or foolish simplicity have held otherwise then the Lord has
taught, either by his precept or by his example; God will pardon such his
simplicity through his rich and abundant mercy; But unto us now, who are
forewarned and taught the contrary by himself, it cannot be pardoned.

These enforcing and undeniable reasons cannot be withstood, but teach and
stir us up to seek the first purity, simple and plain manner of worship, and
to shake off all rites, ceremonies, and superstitions, and to rest satisfied
with the simplicity of preaching, and to cleave to the prescript Institution of
Christ in using the Sacrements.

Thus much for the worship of God.
Of Divine Jurisdiction, the second subsistence in the Church of God.
AS Divine worship is the first subsistence, in the unity of the visible
Church of God, in which all the faithful are congregated (as it were in one
body) Ephesians. 4. 4.
into the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, even so Divine dominion
must be the second subsistence dwelling in the Church, and filling the Church
with life and vigor through all members, as the soul in the body, also it is
like sinews and arteries knitting and coupling together the body by every
joint for the Furniture thereof (according to the effectual power which is in
the measure of every, part) receiving increase of the body unto the edifying of
it self in love.

Romans 12. 1.
Now all powers are of God from above from the Father of light, as from a
fountain from whence all good gifts and gracious givings do proceed by his
mighty Word Iam. 1. 17.
through his holy Spirit flowing into the vessels of humanity and running
through them with a perpetual successive duration, returning into the Ocean of
Gods glory.

Colos. 1. 15.
The first receptacle of all divine power and dominion communicated from the
Father is Christ the Mediator God and man to whom all power is given, both in
heaven and in earth, who is the first begotten of every creature; Dan. 7. 13.
And as Daniel saw in his Vision one like the Son of Man come in the clouds
of heaven, and approach to the Ancient of days, and they brought him before
him, and he gave him Dominion, Honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations
and languages should serve him, for this cause we are taught to conclude our
petitions with this obedient acknowledgement, for thine is the kingdom, the
power, or dominion, and the glory. The kindome of God is threefold.


This kingdom is one entire kingdom of distinct gradations, yet individual,
like the wheels in the vision of Exechiel, one within another, as the kingdom
of Providence, Providence. Grace. Glory.
the Church of Christ militant, with the Souls triumphant, and the dominions,
powers, and principalities of Angels ministering before him.

The dominion given unto Christ as he is the Son of man ( God, the anointed
man. Of God, the only proper Savior, Jesus. God by his Incarnation, has
united himself to his creatures, and supporteth and preserves all things by
his mighty power.
Christ God and Man) is the personal power of the Fathers eternal begotten
Word, by individual union of Divine nature, with the humanity communicated to
Gods elect. whereby he is the engraven form of the Fathers own person unto
the world, holding up all things by his mighty Word.

This Word by the ministerial proceeding of the holy Ghost is that Scepter of
righteousness, whereby he guides and rules his kingdoms, as David says,
thy Throne, O God is for ever, the Scepter of thy kingdom is a Scepter of
righteousness.

The word of God, is the pattern and rule of all goodlawes.
This is that Scepter of righteousness by the precepts and power whereof Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice; For this cause Christ is called the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only ruler of Princes.

Of the first gradation.
Dominion was by God given first to Adam the firstborn of man. Genesis 1. 28.
For the first gradation of Gods great kingdom, God by Divine ordination in
nature in the Creation gave a blessing and dominion unto Adam, to fill the
earth with his seed, and to subdue it under his obedience. For this cause it is
said, the heaven of heavens is the Lords, the earth he has given to the
Children of men; from hence God claims the first borne to be his substitutes
on earth, which honor in the beginning was due to them, as the dignity of
their birthright by Gods ordination, which continued in the Family of Adam,
This Dominion lost by the sons of Adam. Then to be conferred upon Christ the
Son of God and man.
till Cain lost it by killing his brother Abell; Cham lost it by scoffing his
father Noah; Esau sold it for a mess of Pottage, and Reuben lost it by
defiling of his fathers bed. Then by the law of that ordinance the dignity of
Birthright was of divine right conferred upon the Tribe of Judah, and reserved
in the line of Judah for the Lion of Judah, who is the image of the invisible
God, the first begotten of every creature, and for that all things were created
by him and for him, Restored in Christ to man.
and that he is before all things, and in him all things consist; And also
being the ordained Lamb of God before the foundation of the world, he is
therefore made the head of the body of the Church, King of Israel, that in all
things be might have dominion and pre-eminence both of things in earth, and
things in heaven; For it was the Fathers pleasure that in him all fullness
should dwell, from this fountain all soveraigntie is derived.

How Christ does constitute his Vice-royes on earth, Kings, Princes, and
Potentates, etc.
The first ordination of Sovereignty being thus (as I have showed) of Divine
right conferred upon the natural Son of God sitting upon his highest Throne
of glory, far above all powers and principalities, he does by his divine and
all foreseeing providence constitute whom it pleases him to sit upon his
earthly Thrones, over any Nation, people, or language, induing them with proper
gifts of his own spirit for rule and government; Thus does God constitute
Kings and Princes, and Rulers, after what manner soever it be done on earth,
whether by lineall descent or National choice, or by the sword, howsoever the
hand of Providence does direct, appoint and establish, 1 Samuel 2. 4. Psalm. 123.
He raises the pocre out of the dust, and lifts the beggar out of the dung,
to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory; Also,
he pulls down and sets up at his pleasure. Dan. 2. 21.


A digression.
It is profitable for us to observe that Adam by his transgression, lost
neither the natural faculties of his soul, nor the honor and dignity of his
birthright and dominion though at the first, (by losing that breath of life
which was the light and life of his soul, and that made him the perfect Image
of God) they were weakened and blemished in capacity. For if he had lost his
natural faculties, he had lost the form of his being, and if his birthright
and dignity of dominion had been abolished before it had been conferred upon
another, then should nature have been deprived of the ministration of
judgment, Justice, and equity, which would have brought forth an utter
dissolution of the whole generation of man; But after the sons of Adam, as it
were forfeited their dignity and birthright of dominion by multiplying
transgression, then God the Father conferred the pre-eminence thereof upon the
Son of Man (even Christ) that he might consecrate and appoint, whom it seemed
good unto him to sit upon his temporal Throne, so that birthright and
pre-eminence might be his in whom all fullness dwelt. And that by him
Judgment, Justice and equity might reign with men.

Thus the Regal power of Princes is derived from Christ by the rule of divine
ordination in nature, (for he that is the Author of nature, is the observerr
and preserver of all the ordinances in nature) so that this royal office is
restored to man by ordination in Christ; But the priestly and prophetical
office man has from God by union and communion with Christ, and by inspiration
and supernatural donation through the holy Ghost; For this cause a Tyrant may
be a lawful King by ordination of God, yet no Christian member of Christ.

Difference betwixt Regal ordination and Divine power.
From hence we may extract an evident difference betwixt the power of royal
ordination in nature, and the supernatural power of God which is given to his
Church on earth; That is a ministerial power to distribute Judgment, Justice,
and equity amongst men, with absolute power of coaction to punish actual
offenses, with corporal or pecuniary punishment upon body, lands, and goods.
This other is a supernatural power and divine efficacy properly given to the
elect of God by inspiration, whereby they have union and communion with Christ,
and one with another for every ones own particular prerogative of son ship,
and for the edification one of another, and to some men it is given in a
peculiar manner, and a greater measure of divine power and gifts, for the
ministration, writing, teaching, and preaching of the Word and Sacraments of
God, which is that which was revealed by God to the ancient Prophets, and that
which was taught by Christ, and after written by the Spirit of God, from the
pen and mouth of the Apostles; And this power is a ministerial power, mighty
in operation to bind and loose the conscience, to open and shut heaven and
hell, by declaring the judgment of God against unpentient sinners, and his
mercy in Christ to the penitent man, as he has taught and revealed; for this
power does not follow the judgment and will of man, nor succession of
profession, but is tied and limited to the power of the Word and will of God;
Therefore what they bind on earth by this ministerial power, Christ binds in
heaven by his absolute power. By this there is no power of coaction given to
the Church over the body, nor purse, nor life, but only over the soul and
conscience, and to rule by instruction, admonition, and correction. Civil
government is to cut sin by the middle, but supernatural is to pull it up by
the roots.
That makes men civil and sociable, and restrains vice for fear of
punishment: this other makes men spiritual and divine, meek and lowly, and
full of loving kindness, and rooteth out sin in the heart, making men
refrain and shun sin and wickedness, for the love of God and goodness it
self. Herein the kingdom of Providence and Grace do both agree to make man
happy and blessed in this life, and in the life to come; For this cause it was
said to Abraham; In thy seed all nations shall be blessed; And David says,
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord. The Church of God, is the soul of
a good Commonwealth, and as a sensitive soul is bestial, without the
rational, so is a body politic without the Church, bestiall and tyrannical.
For no Kingdom nor Commonwealth can be blessed, which does not entertain
the true Church of God in her bosom, or in which the Church is not involved;
For this cause God does make good Kings a blessing to his people, and commands
his Saints to pray for Kings, Princes, and Governors, that they may lead a
peaceable and happy life under them, and that there his Gospel may have a free
passage; And so Kings and Princes become nursing fathers, and nursing mothers;
And in this combination betwixt Church and Commonwealth, righteousness and
peace do kiss each other. But if they be wicked Princes, then they are sent
for a punishment and scourge of God to the the people, and when God has
whipped his people, then he burns his rods with judgments. Therefore be
wise ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in trembling, kiss the Son lest he be angry, 2 Psalm.
and ye perish in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly burn, blessed are all
they that trust in him.

The glass of Kings.
The glass wherein Kings are to see themselves by reflection, and the pattern
whereby they are to distribute judgment, The Trinity a true pattern to a
Christian King. Prove. 34.
justice, and equity, is the Divine nature and holy Trinity of God himself.

For as the nature of God is strong and mighty full of pity and compassion,
slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, whose purity of nature
expels and consumes every impure and imperfect thing, even so does God
require his King should be like unto him on earth, as he is in heaven, for he
has set none above him on earth. Therefore as God is in purity of essence a
law unto himself, and a consuming fire of evil, so ought a King in his
politic capacity to be a law unto himself by conforming himself in a
spiritual assimilation to the nature of God in purity of justice, punishing
the evil and cherishing the good.

Also as the person of the Father in its essence is the fountain of his
eternal law which he has begotten and ordained with himself for himself to
do all things by; so is the King in his politic capacity, the fountain of
politic laws which he has as it were begotten in his body politic to
rule and govern his people by.

And as the eternal law of God is the begotten Counsel of the Trinity in the
Deity, so are the laws politic the begoten Counsel of a politic Trinity
which is the Sovereign, the Nobles and Magistrates, and the Council of
Commons, resembling the Divine Trinity in Unity, the indivisible subsistence of
a Kingdom; So that Kings are by this pattern and rule bound to keep the laws
of their Kingdoms inviolate, and to do all things by their laws, as God does
all things by his word: And this is the greatest prerogative of a King, that he
keep his own laws freely without compulsion like God himself.

And likewise as the holy Ghost is the universal Minister and Divine
Dispensator of all divine powers, gifts, and graces of God, proceeding from the
Father and the Son; even so are the Peers, Princes, Judges, Magistrates, and
Ministers of Justice in a Commonwealth, proceeding from the King and his
laws: The universal Ministers of the Royal powers and laws of the Kingdom.
For though they be many as members in diversity of Dispensation of Justice,
Judgment, and equity of the laws, yet are they all but as one spirit of the
body politic, as the spirit of God being one, is by reason of the diversity
of Administrations properly called the seven spirits before the throne of God,
Revel. 1. And as the individual unity of this distinct Trinity is the
subsistence of the Godhead; Even so is the unity of the King with his Laws,
and his Princes and Magistrates, the subsistence of a body politic or
Commonwealth; Therefore Solomon says, Judgment and Justice is the
establishment of the Throne. For this similitudes sake, Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates are called Gods: I have said, says the Lord, ye are Gods, but ye
shall die like men, for they are in all things to be in their Commonwealth as
God himself; Therefore we are taught to pray, Thy will, O God be done on
earth as it is in heaven, that Kings may rule by thee, and Princes decree
Justice on earth as thou do in heaven.

This is that orb wherein Kings are to walk as the Sun in his sphere; but
if Kings make their own will and lust, their law and rule of Justice,
Judgment and equity, then they are exorbitant, and then God in whose hands
are the hearts of Kings, causes their Counselors to go as spoiled, and makes
their Judges as fools, and he loses the collar of Kings, and girdeth their
loins as with a girdle, and leads away Princes as a prey, and overthrows
the mighty, or Pwreth contempt upon Princes, and makes the strength of the
mighty weak, Job 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. When God withdrawes the love of
subjects.


How divine and supernatural power is derived unto man from the Father by the
Word through the Spirit.
A civil ministerial power of Justice is derived of Kings, Princes and
Magistrates from Christ, as he is the Son of God, and first begotten of every
creature, and therefore most worthy to have pre-eminence above all, in whom all
things consist, for the temporal bliss and happiness of man on earth. So is
divine and supernatural power derived from Christ, not only as he is the
first begotten Son of God, but also as he is the light and life of man, without
whom man cannot be a living soul, and as he is the eternal Mediator betwixt
God and man, that promised seed, the Redeemer of the Elect of God, the
predestined Lamb, slain from before the soundation of the world, for the
remission of sins, their ordained King, Priest, and Prophet, of God the
Father in a spiritual and more peculiar manner, and measure of mystical union
and communion, then either can be, or ever was, or ever shall be in all the
ordinances of God in nature, For this cause that all men might know that he
was, and is, the spiritual King of Glory, and that he came not into the world
to deprive Kings and Princes of their subordinate power and prerogative:
therefore he told them plainly, that his kingdom was not of this world, Ioh.
18. 26.
and he told his Apostles that among them there should be no such government
or dominion in his Church, as the Princes have on earth among men, Math. 20.
25, 26.
but the chiefest among them should be he that took the most pains to serve
the rest with food of life.

The Church is called a kingdom, because as in earthly kingdoms Kings and
Princes have power by their politic laws over the bodies, goods, and lives
of men: for their wealefull being on earth to the glory of God: so in this
kingdom Christ only and absolutely from the Father through the Spirit has
power by the divine. Word and law of God over the souls of men for their
eternal happiness and salvation of his elect, and to the just judgment and
condemnation of the reprobate, to show forth the abundant riches of his grace
in that, and in this to show forth his wrath and power, suffering with long
patience the vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, and in both the
exceeding excellency of his glory does appear and is effected.

Also, it is called the kingdom of God, because God the Father is the
immediate fountain from whence it flows; the person of the Son the head,
to which the whole body and every member really, and in a mystical manner is
united and incorporated into him their head, because God the Spirit is the
immediate minister and dispensator of all divine gifts, and spiritual
blessings in heavenly things; For this cause the Church in Scriptures is
sometimes compared to a house or building compact together and built of living
stones, Christ being the corner stone or foundation: and thus it is a
spiritual house of Saints. It is resembled to a natural body composed of a
head (Christ) and many members knit unto it, and one unto another; and
sometimes it is described by the similitude of a throne set in heaven, and he
that sits thereon is assimilated to be one in Deity, but three in distinct
subsistences, like to three precious Jewels; The first appearing like a Jasper
of a pleasant never fading flourishing green, the mother of all pearls; The
second a Sardine which is of a reddish flesh color; The third is in aspect as
a Rainbow that is of the Emerald color, as the eye can behold nothing more
sweet or delightsome.

These colors represent the nature of the Trinity of the Godhead, and round
about the Throne were twenty four Seats, and upon the seats twenty four
Elders sitting clothed in white raiment, and on their heads crowns of gold;
This name of Elders is here given to all the members and congregation of Christ
in his kingdom; and their white raiment is to express the righteousness of
Christ, which is imputed and freely put upon them, and making them Kings,
Priests, and Prophets to God the Father; Their Crowns are to declare their
Royal dignity which they have by Christ, for it is to be noted, that
whatsoever Christ is in himself, either personally, naturally, or officially,
all his members are partakers of the same, in some measure according to the
gift of Christ, by union, communion, inspiration, and through external and
isntrumental ministration of his Word.

This is the Church of God; now those things which are individually belonging
to the Church, at first the protecting power of God, which is always ready to
defend and revenge the cause of his Saints, for God takes their cause into his
own hand, saying, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. And God has said
touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; For this cause (in this
sign of the Church) there is said to proceed out of the Throne lightnings and
thunders, and voices, because God does punish the wicked horribly for the
Churches sake: none can escape his hands, that oppress his Saints, for the
Lord will roar out of Sion, and will put forth his voice out of Jerusalem.

A second sort of gifts are inward graces of Sanctification expressed in this
vision by seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God, which is the internal sanctification of Gods Spirit filling
every soul with gifts like oil of grace, and fire of zeal to burn with
praises before the Throne; Like to the lamps in the Temple, Exodus 27, 20. by
seven, signifying by a definite number, manifold gifts indefinite.

Next are outward gifts, which are allegorically called a sea of glass before
the Throne like Crystal, which expresses the spiritual pure and unspotted
worship of God, and the ministration of his Word as transparent to the eye of
the enlightened mind, as Crystal glass is to the eye of the body, through
which the Saints may see the glory and majesty of God in the face of Christ
Jesus. As this worship is pure without any spot of man's invention, and consists
(as in the first tract is said) of prayer, praise and thanks, arising and
always nourished by the doctrine of the word of God, which the sea does
signify, because it is an Ocean of living waters pure like Crystal; This Sea
therefore declares the whole worship of God. And in respect that the Saints
enlightened by the holy Ghost are called burning Lamps, it is to them like a
sea of oil to enrich and increase their lights.

Another outward gift is described to be four Beasts; And in the midst of
the Throne, and round about the Throne were four beasts, the first like a
Lion, the second a Calfe, the third a face like a man, the fourth like a flying
Eagle, and their bodies are full of eyes before and behind; These are the
ministers and servants of God, who attend the ministration of the Word and
Doctrine, and are placed betwixt the Throne and the Elders, as ambassadors and
messengers of God to his people, their place is in a nearer station to the
Throne then the Elders. They are compared to beasts to express their
qualities, which is required for the conditions of the times and seasons, as
the strength and courage of a Lion, the patience of an Ox, the prudence and
wisdom of a man, the Eagle-like contempt of earthly things, and sharper sight
in spiritual and heavenly things.

The number is four, to double the number of the tribe of Levi under the law,
to answer the number of Elders, which is double to the twelve Patriarchs.

Their bodies are full of eyes behind and before, which describes that
sharpness of riches and understanding in divine things, wherewith they are
inducd by the gift of the Spirit to discern things past, things present, and
things to come.

These beasts each one of them has six wings placed round about them, and
full of eyes within the wings; these wings are not for that use that the wings
are to the beasts in E^^^^^el, two to hide the face, and two to fly, and two
to hide their feet: but they are placed about their bodies as it were for
furtherance and assistance in their proper place, and not to fly withal from
place to place.

These wings therefore signify Governors, and assistants or helpers, by whom
the ministers are aided in their function, and do more swiftly and readily
afford succor to every part of the Church.

These wings are full of eyes within. These signify the inward gifts of
knowledge which are not placed in so near a measure to the Throne, as the eyes
in the body, but they are of the same nature of knowledge in divine things, to
this end they stand as in a watch tower, to behold and discern every ones
manners and conversation, and to reprove and exhort privately, and to help the
ministers in Censure and Discipline of the Church; therefore Paul says, obey
your overseers and leaders, and yield submission unto them, for they watch for
your souls, as those that shall give account. These gifts are limited within
and under the wings, as to meddle only with that which is committed unto their
power, 1 Pet. 5. 2. they are not to be strikers or busybodies, and they are
to watch over Christian people only, for what have we to doc to judge them
that are without ^ 1 Cor. 5. 12. 13.

They that desire to behold the pattern of Gods Church, as she is on earth in
Christ, consider well this vision, and read it seriously, as it is more fully
expressed by Master Brightmans Exposition upon the fourth chapter of the
Revelation.

This pattern is the perfection of the Church militant, as she is in Christ,
and in the judgment of God the Father, who only knows who are his. The
beauty and glory thereof is not seen with mortal eyes: for she is not
composed of mortal, but immortal seed, even begotten of the immortal seed of
the word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23. for it is the ministration of God the holy
Ghost, communicating the knowledge of the Word unto the hearts of the elect,
which does beget them anew or regenerate, and unite them unto Christ, and those
are the supernatural powers, the word of God communicated unto man, and
gathers them into one head Christ, and by a well compact union makes them one
Church all communicating of one spirit, one faith, and in one Lord and Father
of all, who is above all, and in all, and through us all, blessed for ever,

Amen.
How the Word is the divine power of God, and the authority committed to the
Church.
WHen we speak of the word of God, consider that the word in essence, and
property of being is God with God in eternity, eternity it self, as it is
described in the first of John's Gospel, and though it cannot be divided in it
self, yet it is to be distinguished after the personal order of the Trinity.

Therefore we may say the Word in the person of the Father is the unbegotten
Word in the person of the Son, it is the begotten Word, and in the person of
the holy Ghost, it is the proceeding Word. So that by the proceeding Word all
things flow from the Father and the Son.

By the order of this proceeding power the world was made by the word of God.
As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. By this proceeding
power of the Word man was made a living soul, as Genesis 2. 7. And God breathed
in his face the breath of life, and the man was a living soul; and Ioh. 1. 4.
in it was life, and that life was the light of man, not natural reason, but
supernatural light which enlightened nature.

By this proceeding word Adam was restored after his fall, by promising to make
the Word the seed of the Woman, and to break the Serpents head. Genesis 3. 15.
for God by the proceeding of the Word, saying he will put enmity betwixt Satan
(whose nature is wicked and evil altogether) and the humane generation or seed
which Satan had made like himself, he thereby promises that by his proceeding
Word, he would make his Word the feed of the Woman, whereby it should be of a
contrary nature to wickedness, of a heavenly pure and holy nature and
condition powerful against Satan.

Thus by the proceeding Word, the word (God) is made the word of promise, and
the Promise is made life, and thus it comes to pass that the Just shall live
by faith.

By this proceeding word all the Elect of the Father are called, are
sanctified, are washed, are inspired, and by inspiration are made sons of
God, Kings, Priests, and Prophets, for by inspiration of the proceeding Word,
God the Word dwells in them, for in the proceeding Word, is both the begotten
Word, and the unbegotten Word the Father, as Christ says, my Father and I are
one, and the proceeding Spirit is one with the Father and the Son, so these
three are one in themselves, and bear record in heaven, and they also agree in
one by inspiration in the souls of the faithful, or the Church which makes
three to bear record on earth, as the water of Sanctification, and the blood
of justification, and our spirit enlightened with the Spirit of God; it bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the sons and servants of God. For this
cause the faithful are called the Temple of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16. as
God has said, I will dwell among them and walk there, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. Also, know ye not that your body is the
temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have from God? Ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in body and
in Spirit for they are Gods.

As the proceeding Word has proceeded by inspiration to dwell in man, which is
his internal ministration: so he proceeds by external ministration to
divulge and write the same proceeding Word by the isntrumental pen and voice
of man for man's instruction, at first written by his Prophet Moses, and after
by the rest of Prophets and Apostles, and Evangelists to feed and preserve
their holy faith and worship of God among the faithful; As Paul witnesses, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able
to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable to
teach, to convince, to correct, to instruct in righteousness.

Thus the proceeding Word does proportion it self to man's capacity, first it
becomes the word of promise in the seed of the woman, then the inspirated word
to dwell in the mind, and also it is the ministerial Word, declared, written,
taught, and preached for man's instruction, and all is one Word: for this cause
the Apostle Peter says, we have a most sure word of the Prophets, to which ye
do well, that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts, and from hence
it is evident, that the Scripture is the very word of God, which proceeds out
of God by inspiration, by isntrumental publishing, and writing the same, and
the written Word being the same proceeding word of God, (even God declared in
writing.) The Scriptures therefore are the Fountains of living water, and the
ground of truth, for preaching, teaching, and instruction, exhortation and
correction.

And therefore the Scriptures are to be had in Divine estimation, for they
contain the divine Word it self, and the Pastors and teachers thereof (being
thereunto called of God by a full measure of inspiration) are to be esteemed
the Messengers and Ambassadors of God.

As the Scriptures were first given: so are they to be interpreted by
inspiration.
And this is always to be understood, that no man can attain to the
interpretation of the written Word by natural ingenuitie or humane learning,
or art or industry, though all be needful instruments and means of
knowledge, but only by inspiration of the proceeding Word, as ver. 21. 20. 21.
so that first ye know this that no prophecy of the Scripturis of any private
interpretation. For as the prophecy came not in old time by the will of men,
but holy men of God spoke ^^ they were moved by the holy Ghost; so must holy
then of God speak and interpret the Scriptures, as they are moved by the holy
Ghost.

A way to know the interpretation to be of the holy Ghost.
And that we may know the interpretation to be of the holy Ghost (being the
proceeding Word, and he that indicted the same Word from the Father and the
Son by inspiration) cannot give any other sense or understanding to the
written Word, then is agreeable to the nature of the Word in the person of the
Son and of the Father, and the Word in the person of the Son, is the
revealed will of God the Father made manifest in the flesh. Therefore we may
discern whether the interpretation be of the Spirit of God or no (by this)
John 4. 2. 3. The Papist confesses Christ in name, but denies his power in
the flesh, in that they say his death is not sufficient for actual sins,
thence are penance, pardons, satisfactions, Purgatory.
Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God, and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh is
not of God; For the confession is not an out ward confession of the lips, nor
an historical confession of the mind, nor a voluntary supposition and opinion
of carnal reason, but it is the confession of the Spirit of God, which
declares and manifests to the heart, that the Word that is come in the flesh is
the very true God (as Christ said) to know thee and him whom thou have sent,
Christ, to be the very true God (as Peter confessed) thou art that Christ, that
Son of God, and Christ told him that flesh and blood did not teach him this,
but his Father revealed it unto him.

This word of God not having been after this order known and considered, has
been the cause and occasion of much mistake and errors in the Church of God,
but understanding the Word in the true nature and property of Gods order and
manner of working, leads us by the hand from one gradation to another, and
stops the mouth of all men that speak against the Scriptures and the holy
Spirit.

For considering the word of God in these gradations we shall evidently
perceive and understand, that the power and authority given and committed to
the Church, is no other thing, but the proceeding word of God, ministering the
begotten Word from the Father manifested in the flesh, which ministration is
two fold, internal by inspiration through hearing of the Word, because man is
an intellectual Spirit, and therefore a proper Tabernacle for the divine Word
to dwell in; Also external ministration, because man dwells in an elementary,
earthly, and natural tabernacle, therefore the holy Ghost applies himself to
man's infirmity, and does use in his external ministration, elementary, earthy,
and natural instruments by which as a means and ordinance the proceeding
Word, and the power thereof is daily communicated unto man both to ingraft him
into the Word, and to nourish him in the Word unto everlasting life; For this
manner of external ministration is necessary for man so long as he dwells
in this body or earthly house.

The instruments which the holy Ghost does use in the dispensation of the
ministerial Word, are either proper, as some members of the Church set apart
for the work of the ministry, or less proper as the signs of the
Sacraments. I may call those the external gifts which God gives to his Church,
for it is said that unto every one of us is given grace or the gifts of the
Spirit, according to the measure of the gift in Christ. For we may discern
the Church is a compact body knit to the head Christ, and consists of many
members, yet in unity of the spirit they are one body, and although there be
but one Spirit, yet are there diversities of gifts, diversities of
administrations, diversities of operations, yet all one and the same spirit,
and these diversities of gifts, make diversities of functions; So there are
many functions in the Church, but God works all in all. But the manifestation
of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal, but peculiar gifts
without the which the Church cannot at any time be, and therefore most proper,
of which it is said that Christ ascended on high, and lead captivity captive,
and received gifts to give unto men, as some to be Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. Here is to be observed, that
the divine power by internal dispensation is given in common to all, and every
member of the Church, so that all have common interest in the word of God, and
peculiar power thereby to admonish, comfort and instruct one another, and pray
for one another, and bear one another burdens, especially they are all Kings,
Priests, and Prophets in their Families. For every Father ought to use the
office of an Elder in his house, Deuteronomy 6. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 4. 9.

But for the external dispensation of the Word, the power and efficacy thereof
is committed unto peculiar men, whereof Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and teachers, are in the first rank and functions, and the power and
efficacy which is given them, is only the ministration of the Word, they have
not that absolute power which Christ has, to know who are his from the
beginning, and to have compassion, on whom he would have compassion, and to
show mercy, on whom he would show mercy. For Christ had not this absolute
power as he was the Son of man, but as he was the person of God; For as he was
Man, he came not to do his own will, but the will of his Father; So likewise
when he sent his Apostles and Disciples to teach all Nations, he sent them, as
he was sent of his Father. So send I you, says he, which was not to do their
own will, nor to teach their own doctrine, but to do his will as he did his
Fathers will, and to teach his doctrine which he taught them, as his Father
taught him: so by the Word they are to do and teach, but nothing beside the
Word, or without the Word. More at large of this in the Treatise of Discipline.

Thus we see the word of life is God in the person of the Father, the
unbegotten Word, in the Son the begotten Word, and the incarnate Word, In the
person of the Spirit it is the proceeding Word, and the ministerial Word, and
this ministerial Word is the power, and the authority committed to the Church;
So the Ministers cannot do any thing but by the power of the Word, and this
Word is Christ who abides with them, and with the whole Church always unto
the end of the world; So Christ is the chief, and they are his servants and
ambassadors.

Of the third Subsistence of the Church Government and Discipline.
AS Divine worship cannot be without the divine power of the ministerial
Word, from whence it extracts both the nutriment and efficacy, so neither
worship, nor the Divine Word can be without order, government and discipline,
whereby the whole spiritual body (the Church) is preserved in spiritual
health and blessedness, shining in spiritual decency and divine beauty. As
Psalm. 45. 13. 14. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. And her heavenly
glory is most excellently set forth in Can^^^es 6. 10. Who is she that looks
forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, terrible as an
army with banners? Without external pomp, temporal confusion, or humane
policy; for God hates nothing more in the government of his Church, and in his
worship, then pomp and policy, and loves nothing more then to have his Church
excel in meekness, holiness, and simplicity, like himself, as he says,
Be ye holy, for I am holy. And learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. And he
exalts the humble and meek, but the proud he sends empty away.

The Church of God considerable in a twofold aspect.
When we speak of the Church, it is to be considered in what fence we take
the Church, for the Church of God is in a twofold aspect to be apprehended, one
as she is in a mystical union the body of Christ, the Spouse of Christ, the
Lamb, the Bride, in this sense she is spiritual, pure and holy without spot,
without wrinkle, his undefiled. The other as she dwells in her natural
humanity, and abides here on earth, wherein she is environed with manifold
temptations, infirmities and afflictions, fighting against the world, the flesh
and the devil, and in this condition she is elementary, natural and visible;
Therefore God in his wisdom and goodness to man has ordained external
dispensation, thereby to communicate the holy and invisible mysteries of his
Word to man through visible instruments, elementary and natural, proper for
man's capacity and nature, lest natural infirmities should become an excuse
that God should not speak unto man; For this cause God does minister the
mighty power of his Word, by the weak and simple voice of man; Teaching man by
letters, syllables, words and sentences, divine truth, and making evident to
the mind and senses of man, by elementary signs, tropes and allegories, and so
demonstrating inscrutable mysteries, and divine secrets of grace, power and
glory.

The first beams of the glorious gospel of Christ (which Paul calls the Image
of the living God) that shines unto man, is the public and visible
ministration, whose glory compared with the glorious ministration of the law. 2
Cor. 3. 7. (which none was able to behold and live, which made mountains
tremble, and the Israelites excuse themselves) is far more exceeding
glorious, which we all are able to behold with openface shining through the
veil of Christ's humanity, wherein as in a glass or Crystal we see the
glory of God in the love of the Father, and are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.

And the thing that is ministered, is the glorious gospel of Christ, which is
the doctrine of Christ, or the mystery of the Father; and it carries always
this Character with it to know it to be the true doctrine of God. Ioh. 16. 15,
16.
It gives all glory to God the Father by Christ, and it glorifies Christ
through the Spirit, for Christ says, that which is the Fathers, is mine,
therefore the Spirit shall take of mine, and give it you.

Outward ministration is called the face and countenance of God; Therefore the
Prophet David says, O. Lord God of hoasts turn us again, and make thy face
to shine upon us, and we shall be saved. It was David's delight, and his whole
hearts desire. Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I
require: that I may dwell in the temple of the Lord all my days, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple.

The first ordination of the ministration of the Word.
The first ordination of this ministration was instituted and practiced by God
himself in Paradise, preaching unto Adam in a created voice in the cool of
the day, and by that meek voice Gods presence was known unto man; I heard thy
voice and was afraid. The voice or word of God (for it is a significant voice,
making it self to be understood) howsoever God uses weak and despised
instruments to express himself to man's capacity, yet his voice is mighty, as
in the 29. Psalm. Read the whole Psalm. For the voice of the Lord is
powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty. And as Paul describes it,
it is mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing
through, even to the dividing of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints
and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
For this cause preaching is called the power of God unto salvation. But if the
glorious beauty and power of Gods ministration seem weak and foolish unto
some men, because it is ministered by the voice of man, and the weak signs of
the Sacraments being of no strength nor beauty in themselves, It is because the
glorious Gospel is hid unto them that perish, and becomes the savor of death
unto death, because the God of this world has blinded the eyes of them that
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should
shine unto them.

These riches are sent unto us of God (from the Father of lights by the Son,
of the fullness of all rich grace, through the Spirit the overflowing waters
of life and blessedness) and we have it in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may appear to be of God, and not of man, and those
that are sent of God, are qualified with the word of God, and by having the
Word, they are known to be seen of God; For they teach and preach not
themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and approve themselves messengers and
servants to the Saints for Jesus sake. For the word of God we are always to
conceive to be the eternal Son of God by generation, and to proceed from God
by spiration in creation, and to be communicated unto man since his fall by
supernatural inspiration, and united unto man, and man unto it by incarnation,
and ministered unto man by external dispensation. Thus the Word descends unto
man by inspiration, and dwells in man through the Spirit, for the Lord is that
Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is the Word, for the Word
and the spirit cannot be divided nor separated, they are one. For this cause
God uses the external ministration of his Word and Spirit, that he may
inspire and regenerate the mind of man. After this manner are the ministers and
messengers that are sent of God endued with the Word and Spirit of God.
Therefore let no man say that he has the Spirit, if he want the light of the
Word, neither can any man have the Word but by the Spirit, and the Word and
Spirit are both made manifest in this, that they reveal the hid things of God,
even the mystery of God in Christ. 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10. which in Col. 2. 3. is
called a full assurance of understanding in the knowledge of the mystery of
God in Christ, for he which commanded light to shine out of darkness, shines
into the hearts of the Messengers, to give the light of the knowledge of God in
the face of Christ.

Of the calling of Ministers.
As the external Ministration cannot be without the Word and the Spirit, so
the Church cannot be without Ministers and messengers of God, and as the
ministration is public and external, Pastors ought before their admission to
be well known to the Congregations where they are to reside.
so the visible Church and Congregations have power of divine right to call and
appoint, such as God has internally qualified, to the external and public
exercise thereof; For as by internal inspiration they are endued with a more
then ordinary measure of the Word and Spirit, so they ought to be well known,
and conversant in the Congregation or facietie of that Church wherein they
live, that by a mutual consent they may be approved and thought worthy to be
called to the public ministration and dispensation of the Word. This was the
practice of the Apostles and primitive Church, Acts 1. 21. 22. Wherefore of
these men that have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus, went in
and out with us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto the same day that he
was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his
resurrection, and they appointed two. Also, Act. 6. 1. 2. When the number of the
Disciples was multiplied, then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples
together unto them, and said unto them, it is not meet that we should leave the
ministration of the Word and serve tables, wherefore brethren look you out
among you seven men of honest report full of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business.

And it is to be observed, that nothing was to be done in the Church, either
by the Apostles, or by those that in the ministration succeeded them, without
the consent of the whole Church, which then at first were called Disciples.

Of the manner of their external ordination.
Touching the manner of their Ordination that we find in the first of the Acts,
they prayed and said; Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show which
of these two thou have chosen, and then they gave forth lots, and the lot fell
upon Matthias. And also afterward in the sixth of the Acts, the multitude of
the Disciples or brethren those seven and set them before the Apostles, and
when they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them.

In the first place of Scripture it is said, the Disciples appointed two, and
left the choice to God, and therefore they give forth lots, because it was an
extraordinary calling to an Apostleship to succeed Judas; But in the second
place it is said, they chose Srephin a man full of faith and the holy Ghost,
and Philip and Prochorus, and others, etc. And it is remarkable that the Church
received instruction from the Apostles as a rule to be observed in choosing
Deacons and Elders, as in the first of the Acts they were admonished by Peter
to choose such as were conversant in the Church from their beginning. By which
I conceive, they ought to be of known conversation, and men of good report,
and that they should be full of faith and the holy Ghost, as Steven was, or men
endued with the holy Ghost and with wisdom. These are the respects which
ought to be had in choosing Pastors, Deacons, and Governors in the Church;
For all gifts of learning and humane Sciences, howsoever they be excellent and
worthy much praise and honor, yet without these Characters of grace they are
nothing, and not to be esteemed.

Of the orders and degrees of Pastors, and their denominations both under the
Law and the Gospel.
It is evident that the orders and degrees of Ministers and Governors of the
Church of God under the Law were Priests, Levites and Elders, God also sending
among them Prophets of extraordinary inspiration, for revelation of the Word
to teach, admonish and exhort the people.

The Priest. Numb. 3. 10.
The Priests office was figurative, prefiguring Christ until his coming,
offering sacrifices to figure the sacrifice of his body, instructing the people
in the promised seed unto the remission of their sins, whose manifestation in
the flesh should be the accomplishment of all figures and shadows in the law,
which thereby were abrogated.

The Levite.
The Levites were given unto Aaron, as an addition to his office, as in Numb.
3. 6, 7, 8, 9. to minister unto him, to keep his charge, and the charge of the
whole Congregation to do the service, and to keep the instruments of the
tabernacle of the Congregation.

The Elder.
The Elders, (though every Father of a Family be called Elder, and also the
twelve tribes of Jacob) yet those are properly Elders who are chosen and
appointed to be Governors and Rulers both in Church and Commonwealth. For the
Governors in Pharaohs house were called Elders, and the Rulers in the Church,
as first in the Tabernacle, as Numb. 11. 25, 26. and Temple were also called
Elders. And the Lord stirred up Prophets among them both of the Levites and
Priests, and others, as occasion required, never leaving his Church without a
Prophet and Rulers till Shilo came.

And when that faithful Prophet of God came into the world, whose effectual
power, and fullness of all divine perfection abolished all figures and dark
resembling shadows, then in his own person and humane presence, he spread
abroad the glad tidings of his glorious Gospel, causing the light of his truth
to shine evident without veil or vizard, notwithstanding he neither altered
nor abolished the order of ministration, nor the manner of government, but
established the same by his own example, and the practice of his Apostles. And
therefore he said that Christ when he ascended on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, As Ephesians 4 11. he gave some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.

Apostles and Evangelists.
In this place of Scripture he only sets forth the principal functions in
the Church, whereof the first pair, as namely Apostles and Evangelists were of
immediate calling, and appropriated to the time, ordained by Christ, only for
the propagation and first progression of the Gospel, the gifts of prophecy
and working of miracles, attending the confirmation of their doctrine; As the
necessity of those times required, and as Christ had promised, Mark 16. 17,
18. And these signs shall follow them that believe in my Name: they shall cast
out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up Serpents,
and if they drink any deadly poison, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay
their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

Pastors and Teachers.
The second pair, are Pastors and Teachers distinguished by their ordination,
for these were ordained internally by the outward dispensation of hearing the
Word preached by the Apostles, then externally chosen by the Church, as Acts
the sixth, after consecrated by the Apostles, by prayer, and laying on of hands
of the Apostles and Elders, Acts 14. 23. This order of ministers is ordinary,
and to continue in the Church unto the coming of our Lord to Judgment.

Their Commission.
Both these paires are but one and the same function and office, and have but
one and the same Commission, which was given by the immediate ordination of
Christ to his Apostles. For as God the Father sent his beloved Son to be a
light unto the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel, in declaring unto
them the glad tidings of salvation in his death unto the remission of sins.
So Christ said to his Disciples; As my Father sent me, so send I you. John 20.
21, 22.

The Authority committed.
The power and authority committed unto them by this commission is the breath
of life, out of the mouth of Christ proceeding from the Father and the Son,
as it is said; Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceedteh
out of the mouth of God; Therefore he breathed on them and said, Receive ye the
holy Ghost. For the word which Christ spoke or breathed out of his mouth, he
affirmed to be spirit and life, saying, John 6. The flesh profits nothing,
but the word that I speak is spirit and life.

The substance of the Commission. Blessing them. The doctrinall part of it.
The substance of this Commission is mandatory, Matt. 28. 19. Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost.

The doctrinall part of their commission, is teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and Mark 26. 15. has it in these
words; Preach the Gospel to every creature. Now the sum of the doctrine,
which Christ taught, is set down more plainly by St. Luke. 24. 44. These are
the words that I spoke unto you, whilst I was yet with you, that all things
must be fulfilled, which were written in the law, and the Prophets, and in the
Psalms concerning me. And he (who was spirit, life and light) opened their
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures; and said, Thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and rise from the dead the third
day; And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name
among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And after this manner do the
Pastors and Ministers bless, teach, and sanctify the people.

Thus Christ by preaching and teaching unto them the word of God, out of his
mouth, he opened their understandings in the Scriptures, and thereby they
received the holy Ghost, for this is Christ's manner of breathing upon them,
John 20. when he said, receive ye the holy Ghost. But in Luke he says,
Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; Which is to say, I will send
a visible token of the Spirit upon you, or the efficacy of the Spirit upon
you. Therefore he said, Tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until you be
endued with power from on high. Not but that they had received the holy Ghost
before, but not the manifestation and evident power thereof, as afterward it
did fall upon them in the similitude of fiery cloven tongues, Acts 2.

The fruits and operative effects of ministration of the Spirit is set forth,
John 2. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. For this is the power and
efficacy of the ministerial Word (as has been formerly shown) which
flows from the absolute power of Christ, which was given unto him of the
Father, as he affirmed to his Disciples, Matt. 28. 18. All power is given me in
heaven and in Earth.

And this ministration of the Gospel is that key of David committed unto
Christ, by which he should open and no man shut, and should shut, and no man
should open. And in the 16. of Matthew 16 17. and 18. ver. it is evident, that
this power of the keys, is only the power of the Gospel of Christ, or rather
as Peter confessed the Lord Jesus to be that Christ, that Son of the living
God, which he received not by the intelligence of flesh and blood, but by
Revelation from God the Father, this power changes the whole corrupt nature of
man, and gives him another denomination or quality, making him a strong and
immovable rock, turning Peter to Petra. Thus after this manner is the
revelation and power of the Word, given in general to every one that receives
the knowledge of Christ, to believe that he is that Christ, that Son of the
living God, (God himself) against this rock the gates of hell, the powers and
principalities of darkness, and worldly Governors cannot prevail. But the
particular and public ministration thereof, is committed to the Pastors and
teachers of the Church of God, by whose ministration and public dispensation
of the Word, the hearts and consciences of men are opened and shut, bound and
loosed every day, as Lydia and others in the Acts, in which the Word becomes
the savor of life unto some, and the savor of death unto others; And this
ministerial power is also given unto them for divine censure and public
correction, to root out abominable and unsufferable vices in the Church and
Congregations, as shall be showed in his proper place.

Of the nominations under the Law, and under the Gospel.
Under the Law it is undeniable, that the Ministers and Governors of the
Church, were called Priests, Levites, and Elders. Also, in the Christian Church
(leaving out the extraordinary functions of Apostles and Evangelists) they are
called Pastors, Teachers, Helpers and Governors; As these ranks are expressed
in the 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Of helpers, we read they were added to the Christian Church in the sixth of
the Acts, Helpers in government.
whose office seems to be in the place of the Levites, as they are called
Deacons. Governors.
And Governors in the Church, as neither the Synagogue nor the Christian
Church could be well governed without, called Elders in both Churches; As
Ambrose speaking in his Homilies upon the fifth of Timothy, and the first
verse, says to this effect, Both the Synagogue and afterward the Church had
Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church (though in his
times they were almost lost, as he says in the same place) which (says he) by
what negligence it is grown out of use I know not, unless peradventure by
their negligence, or rather the pride of the teachers, whilst they alone would
be all, and do all. It these governors were so decayed in his time, how much
more are they now worn out of memory in these our days?

The good effects of this government in the primitive times.
But who list to peruse the history of the primitive times, may observe that so
long as this government stood in equal dependancie with their Pastors, there
could no heresy ever get footing in the Church of God; But after it was lost
and neglected, the Arrian heresy crept into the Church, and filled the
universal Church, and all Kingdoms with ambition, contention, heresies and
war, as in the Revelation.

Elders derived.
The name of Elders is now become an uncouth and abhorred name, though it has
been always used from the beginning both in Church and Commonwealth to
signify both politic and Ecclesiastical Governors.

For if we consider the derivation of the word (Priest) it is no other but
Elder, as in the Greek it is called ((...)) which in Latin is (Senex) (...)
being rendered Presbiter, and in English, Elder, being the comparative of (...).
And in this sense the Apostles called themselves Elders, as John in his second
Epistle, 1. verse. The denominations of Pastors, Teachers, Bishops and Elders
in the Church were promiscuously used, becau^se though they were distinguished
by particular duties and administrations, yet all was of one and the same
spirit and power, As Paul, 2 Tin. 1. 11. accounted himself a Preacher, and
teacher of the Gentiles as well as an Apostle.

Episcopus, unde and quid sit?
But there is no name that belongs to the functions of the Church of God, that
does so much trouble the Church, and the whole world, as the name Episcopus;
Which though I find it but once or twice named in the New Testament, (as though
the holy Ghost thought it not convenient often to use that name) foreknowing,
and foreseeing how much mischief it would bring forth to the Christian Church,
yet I find it a name much and frequontly used by the Ancient Fathers, and
Historians, insomuch as for the reverend and high esteem it got among them, it
is advanced to signify pre-eminence, and a spiritual office and dignity, and
honor above temporal Monarchs; or rather at least in some of their own
conceits and expressions higher then a Monarch, a Pope of universal supremacy
above all, that is called God. Notwithstanding, that the name derived from the
Greek (...) signifies no more but to survey, to consider of the deportment of
the flock, by God committed unto his charge, as of which he is to render an
account: so that the etymology of the word will not imply that lording power,
which they do arrogate unto themselves.

But (...), which signifies busie-bodyes, or medlers in other men's matters,
derived of (...), in Latin (alvis) and the word (...), which is in the
language of this age usually rendered Bishop, seems to me a very opposite word
to decipher the lording Bishops of our times, which like the Angels that left
their primitive station, omitting the proper work of their ministerial
functions do move in an improper orb of secular affairs, and so may well be
called (...), Busybodies, or busy Bishops.

The office of a Bishop delineated by Scripture.
If any desire to know the office and duty of a Bishop, as the holy Scripture
sets it forth, let them read the third Chapter of Paul to Timothy, and
also the first of Peter, the fifth Chapter, the second and third verses, where
the office of a Bishop is described under the name of an Elder.

Of ancient and primitive government of the Church of God.
The primitive government twofold.
The ancient Apostolic and Primitive Government was under Pastors, Deacons and
Elders in every Congregation.

The manner of their government was twofold, the first part whereof was
particular to every man in his function; The second part was jointly and
publicly together, and none without another.

The Pastors function.
The Pastor, Teacher, or Bishop, his particular function or office was as a
President, overseer, and director, not only as a Teacher, but also as an Elder,
watching over the health of their souls, and outward manners and conversation,
caring for the spiritual good, and salvation of every one, whose office is set
forth in the first of Timothy, the 3. chap. 2. 3. 4. and 6. verses. He must
be a man blameless, continent, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, nor greedy of filthy
lucre, no brawler, not covetous, one that rules well his own house, having
his Children in subjection with all gravity, he must not be a novice, lest
through pride he fall into condemnation, and he ought to be of good report
among the adversaries, that the word of God be not evil spoken of. Also Peter
exhorts Bishops under the name of Elders, Pet. 1. 5. 1, 2, 3.
(acknowledging himself also to be an Elder) saying, Feed the flock of God,
which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as though ye were Lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. And as Paul advised
Timothy to preach the word of God, Be instant in season, and out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. 2 Timothy 4. 2.
And after the same manner, and in the same sense Christ excited Peter, that
the more he loved him, the more he should labor, to feed his lambs, his
sheep, his flock.

But Lordly pre-eminence Christ did not only forbid, saying, The Lords of the
Gentiles have power over them, but it shall not be so among you, but also
says, He that would be the greatest among you, let him do most service to
the rest. Matt. 20. 25, 26, 27, 28.
But that fearful admonition of Christ, me thinks should shake the hearts of
our Bishops with fear, that use predominance over their fellows and Church of
God. Mat, 24. Who is a faithful and wise servant, whom God has made ruler
over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant
whom the Lord shall find doing so, he shall make him ruler over all his goods.
But if that evil servant, shall say in his heart, My Master does defer his
coming, and begin to smite his fellows, and to eat and With those that are
drunk with the desire and coveting of power and riches. The Deacons office.
arinke with the drunken: that servants Master will come in a day when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of: and will cut him
off, and give him his portion with hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

The office of Deacons, (of their ordination, I have spoken before upon the
sixth of the Acts) is that they stand in place of the Levites, to attend on the
hand of the Pastors, as well to help to catechize, to teach, administer the
Sacraments, as to care for the poor, and to take the charge of the goods and
revenues of the Church; but for their conversation and quality, it is set
forth by Paul, in the first of Timothy, the third chapter, the 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. verses. A Deacon must be grave, not double tongued, not given to strong
drink, not given to filthy lucre, holding the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience. Let him first be proved, then let him use the office of a Deacon,
being found blameless. Even so must their wives be grave, no slanderers,
sober, faithful in all things. Let a Deacon be the husband of one wife, ruling
their children, and their own houses well. For they that have used the office
of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in
the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

And if Pastors and teachers would have the like zeal and consideration with
themselves, which the Apostles had, Acts the sixth and the second, and would
have judged every thing an obstacle, whatsoever might withdraw and hinder them
in the preaching of Gods word, and their care of souls, and would make it
their delight and labor, to give themselves continually to prayer and
ministration, they would discern, that they can no more be without Deacons one
or two in a Congregation, then their bodies can be well without hands, neither
would they nourish that indigne opinion, that ignorant; Nay, often improbous
Churchwardens can serve in their place and office as some allege.

The office of Elders.
Now touching the particular duty and office of Elders, which in this our age
is taken in a corrupt and improper sense calling them lay Elders, which in
Scripture from the ancient original, are termed Elders of Israel, or of the
Tabernacle, as to say, Elders of the Church of God, or of the people of God, to
distinguish them from civil Elders and Governors: and they are either such as
by natures ordination are Fathers of Christian families, or such as are
publickely chosen by the several Congregations of the Church, and approved by
their Pastors and Teachers.

Ambrosius.
Their office and duties were such, as Ambrose said, without whose counsel
nothing was done in the Church; and that both the Synagogue, and the Christian
Church had Elders; They were to be chosen men, such as Jethro advised Moses,
Exodus 18. chosen out of the people, men of courage, such as fear God, men of
truth hating covetousness, and place such over the people to rule thousands,
hundreds, fifties, and tens. But these Elders are here rather to be for civil
affairs then Church cares; But thus we must conceive that Church Elders might
as well be exercised in ministration of Justice for the Commonwealth, as in
the ministration of Discipline for the Church. For this is the proper duty even
of Kings, Princes, and their Magistrates; as also of fathers of Families,
because the Commonweal of Israel is involved in the Church of God, and the
Church of God in a Christian Commonweal; For so ought our Christian Kingdoms
to be composed, as Magistrates may be chosen Church Elders in the Church of
God. For blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, Thus the Church is
incorporated in the Commonwealth, and the Commonweal in the Church.
And in such a Kingdom Christ reigns as a King in excelsis, and his Viceroy
by him, and for him, and the flourishing propagation of the ministry of the
Word is the soul of such a Commonwealth.

A clear difference and remarkable distinction betwixt Elders of the Church
and Commonwealth.
But there is an evident difference detwixt the Elders that govern the
Commonwealth, and the Elders that govern the Church; Distinct they are in
their ordination, and in their endowments, and in the manner of exercise, and
execution of their office; For Magistrates and Elders in a Kingdom are those
who are appointed of the King or chief Governor, as in the first of Peter 2.
13, 14. Submit your selves unto all ordinances of man for the Lords sake,
whether to Kings as superiors, or to Governors as sent of them, and their
office is for punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well. And these are such as Moses ordained by the counsel of Jethro before
expressed. But Moses by Gods express appointment did afterward ordain other
Elders chosen out of those Elders, whom God endued with the special gifts of
his Spirit, for helping of Moses in governing of the Congregation of the
Tabernacle, as it is set down Numb. 11. 16. 17. 25. 26. Then the Lord said
unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou
know that they are Elders of the people, and Governors over them: and bring
them unto the Tabernacle, and let them stand there with thee. And I will come
down, and talk there with thee, and take of the spirit which is upon thee,
and put upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, so
thou shall not bear it alone. So these were another sort of Elders. Then the
Elders that governed over the people, as in the 24, 25. and 26, verses. So
Moses went out, and told the people the words of the Lord; and gathered
seventy men of the Elders of the people, and set them round about the
Tabernacle. There the Lord came down in a cloud, and spoke unto him, and took
of the spirit that was upon Moses, and put upon the seventy ancient men: and
when the spirit rested upon them, then they prophesied and did not cease.

Here their ordination is of God, their indowment is of the Spirit, and their
office and duty is to prophecy, and not to cease; and the end why they were to
prophecy, is to bear the burden of the people with Moses, for the people
murmured, and often tempted and provoked the Lord to wrath. And though they
received daily instruction, and public ministration of the word of God from
Moses and Aaron, yet the seed of truth fell sometimes among stony ground, and
sometime upon thorny ground, and sometime in the high way, and either took no
deep root, or it was choked, or otherwise picked up and carried away by the
sowles of the air, so that their murmurings, grudgings, and rebellions were
such a burden to Moses, and an insupportable grief that Moses wished rather
to die than to live. Therefore God ordained these kind of Elders to be an
assistance in his public ministration, that as Moses among the Jews, and
Paul in the Church of God planted the Word in public. So these might be as
Apollo's to water it in private, and that by their vigilancie and diligence in
every place of the Congregation, they might be ready to suppress by divine
instruction, exhortation, and admonition out of the word of God. Murmurings,
grudgings, contentions, strife, cursings, railings, and all sorts of inordinate
walkings. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
This was the private and particular duty of these sorts of Elders by the power
of the Word to kill the Cockatrice in the egg, and to pull up the weeds of
sin by the roots. For this cause they are described in the fourth of the
Revelation to be the wings of the four beasts placed round about their bodies,
full of eyes within; for they are knit unto the Ministers in a peculiar and
inseparable neerenesse, and their discerning operation is not to extend beyond
the bounds of the Professors of the Church, for as Paul says, what have we to
do with those that are without?

The necessity of Church Elders.
These sorts of Elders are so necessarily annexed to the public ministration
of the Word, as that the Church cannot be without them, but that by the want
thereof she does expose her self to all kind of dangers external and
internal, like a bird without wings. Therefore Christ took not away this kind
of Elders, but rather established them in their function and office, both in
private and public, as in the 18. of Matthew. 15. 16. 17. If thy brother
trespass, got and tell him his fault, between thee and him alone: if he
hear thee, thou have won thy brother. If he hear thee not, take yet with
thee one or two that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
^^^firmed. And if he will not vouchsafe to hear them, then tell the Church.
Which is to make the offense and the offender known to the Congregation; the
Elders acquainting the Pastor, the Pastor acquainting the Congregation, they
all join in public censure and discipline.

Rules of private admonition.
Paul has some rules which pertain to private admonition, for it ought to be
done in all gravitie, prudence, and in much love. Galat. 6. 1. If a man be
fallen by occasion into any sin, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one
with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted.
Bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. The Elders ought
to excel in brotherly love and wisdom, and to use their exhortations with
much temperance, as Paul has set before them in another place. 1 Timothy 5. 1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a fathers and the younger men as
brethren. The elder women as mothers, and the younger as sisters with all
pureness.

Another duty of Pastors and Elders.
And there is another particular duty which pertaines to these Elders, as also
to the Pastors and Ministers, which is to visit the sick, and those that are
burdened or troubled in conscience, as James says, If any be sick, let him
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him
with oil in the name of the Lord. For oil is an emblem of the holy Ghost,
which by comfortable exhortations out of the word of God with prayer is like
oil unto the bones, or as wine that glads the heart. Such refreshment are the
Elders to the sick, for the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up, and if he have committed sin it shall be forgiven him.
And for this cause there is a mutual confession among Christians, when any
thing does vehemently oppress the conscience, therefore says James confess
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed,
for the prayer of a righteous man avails much; if it be fervent.

Of Discipline and censure.
Now I come to the second part of government, which consists also in these
three functions. The first sort is called promiscuously, Pastors, Teachers,
Bishops, for they have received the gift of one and the same spirit, according
to the measure of Christ, as Ephesians. 4. For the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ, until we all meet together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of
the Son of God unto a perfect Man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. The second sort is Deacons. The third is called by a
general name in common to them and the Pastors, Teachers and Bishops, which is
the name of Elders, for that in their public execution of Discipline, they
are jointly united, so that though the Pastor have the leading voice and
precedencie, Bishop our superintendent.
yet he is not to execute, nor pronounce sentence in the Churh ^^thout the
Elders, nor yet to ordain either Deacons, Elders, or Pastors, without their
counsel, and the general consent of the Church, so that the Pastors, Teachers
and Bishops, are not to bear the burden alone, it would be too heavy for
them, as it was for Moses, if they bore the like conscience to God as Moses
did; and if it were too heavy a burden for one man in those days, when the
Church was but one Nation, and but one Congregation, and had but one
Tabernacle; How must it not now needs be a far greater weight, when the
Church is many Nations, far and wide dispersed, and many distinct
Congregations.

But notwithstanding the Elders be joined in one power with the Pastors and
Bishops, so that nothing ought to be done without them, the Pastors have this
pre-eminence, that the work both of Discipline, censure, and ordination of
Elders, Pastors and Deacons, is attributed unto them as most proper to their
function; For this cause Paul tells Titus, in his Epistle, cap. 1. that he left
him in Crete: that he should continue to redress things that remained, and
ordain Elders in every City, as (says he) I appointed thee. And Acts the
1423. Verse 23.
And when they ordained them Elders by election in every Church, and prayed and
fasted; they commended them to the Lord, in whom they believed. For neither
divine censure, nor ordination could be done without them, neither would the
Apostles nor Pastors of the primitive times, for the space of two hundred and
fifty years, either censure or ordain any Elders, Pastors, or Deacons,
without the Election, and counsel of the Church and Elders. But a little after
these times, when pride began to creep into the hearts of the Pastors,
Teachers, and Bishops, and that the zeal and care of the Elders grew cold and
negligent, as Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, lib. 4. speaking of the cause of the
then present persecutions, among other things (says) What plagues, what
stripes, do we not deserve, when no not the Confessors and Elders do keep
Discipline? And from this degree of luke-warmnesse it came to be omitted, and
after the Nicene Council quite extinct, and wiped out of memory; So that no
marvel if our age call it the new-brought-in discipline and government of
Pastors, Elders and People.

In this discourse of Discipline, I must have relation to that which is gone
before, for that which is part of government in the theoricke is also a part of
Discipline in the practicke, therefore though I have showed that election and
ordination are necessary relatives in the Church, that as proper to the
Congregation, this other to the Pastors, and how they were practiced by the
Apostles, yet it is needful to reform the Judgments and opinions of men, to
show how it is most proper for Congregations to choose their Pastors and
Elders, and Deacons, and also their consent and counsel in their ordination.

The Apostles practice is the best of patterns.
To satisfy any indifferent judgment, it is best to make it a perpetual rule
and pattern, to follow the example of the Apostles, but it is an enforcing
reason, that is necessary that the people, whose summum bonum, does
instrumentally consist in their Pastor should be well acquainted, and
sufficiently experimented in his life and conversation, as also in his doctrine
which they ought to taste by their care, (for the earth tastes words as the
palate does meat) before they make choice of him, though it may be they
cannot, nor is it required at their hands to try his schollarship, but their
capacities (if it be a Congregation that has lived, and been nourished under a
wholesome and structifying ministry) may well judge and taste the sweetness of
the divine gift of Preaching by the care, and so try his doctrine, as the men
of Berea did the doctrine of Paul; and it may so happen in some Congregations,
that are well edified in the Word of God, that they may have among themselves
some of their Deacons able and sufficient to succeed their deceased Pastor, and
withal I do not think it fit to exclude the choice and presentation of the
Universities, nor to debar their Letters of commendation; nor for one
Congregation to supply the want of another, for all Congregations are members
one of another, and every Christian University is a Congregation, and they all
make but one Church to God.

But what shall I say of Patrons presentations? I know not, unless I should
say they are too frequently the seed of Simony; For except the Nobles and
Peers of this Kingdom do freely bestow their presentations. I fear there
are not many that do the like, and to speak truly of their first donation, it
was not done purely. For the Donors in reserving a presentation to them, and
their heirs, they kept back a part of the possession they had dedicated to
God, as did Ananias and Saphira; And so if they be righty considered, they are
are as unnecessary evils in the Church, as Deanes and Prebends, which no man
can tell to what use they serve in the Church. But if Patrons cannot be
admitted by our law, let them present three or four at the least, that the
Church may have her choice, and as much as may be avoid that horrid crime of
Simony.

Ordination.
And as for ordination, though the power thereof rest in the Pastors and Or
superintendour.
Bishops, yet it is great arrogancy and presumption to forsake the Apostolic
and Primitive practice, and usurp a singularity and predominancie to
themselves, as if they would disdain the humility of the Apostles, and
condemn the wisdom of the holy Ghost.

But that which does foster and nourish men in a good opinion of this error to
attribute such absolute power to the Bishops and Clergy, is that mystical
doctrine of Antichrist, which in that smoakie darkness thrust upon the world
for an undeniable truth, that the Church in her essence is to be conceived to
be the Bishops and Clergy, and that they only have the unerrable Spirit of
God, and that thereby they have power to do all things, as much, and as
absolutely as Christ himself when he was on earth, as once a Romish Priest
averred to me, that the Priests or Clergy were the soul of the Church.

The nourishing and maintaining of this opinion is the cause why the world has
so long, and so madly doated after Episcopacie; But if we think it fit to cast
away the pride and ambition of man, abhor this opinion, and let the work be
of God, and not of man.

Of Excommunication.
Now touching Excommunication, which is that supreme Discipline and divine
power which purges and segregateth the dross from the pure gold in the temple
of God. This part of Discipline is of so high and holy a nature and quality,
as that of a Christian, it ought to be had in a most reverend estimation above
all the powers of earth: for it is thunderbolt and lightning of God, that upon
whom it falls and pierces, it does consume with a terrible flame, and grind
him to powder with a direful fall.

Die Ecclesie, non Episcopo, non Pastori tantum.
This power is committed unto the Church, not to Bishops alone, nor to the
Pastors or Clergy only, neither have the Elders this power appropriate unto
them, but the Church. As Mat. 18 17. If he will not hear, then tell it unto
the Church. Now the Church is not properly to be conceived to consist in any
one person, who is but a member of the whole, nor can she be said to be any one
proper function in the Church, but the whole Church consisting of one head
Christ, and many members endued with diverse and many administrations and gifts
of one and the same spirit, and in this sense every particular public
Congregation is an entire Church, and a member of the universal Church
throughout the world, because a Congregation contains in it self the whole
Church of God, as she has one and the same head (Christ) one and the same
Spirit, and one and the same ministration of the same Word and Sacrament, and
one and the same God and Father of all, above all, in all, and through all, and
one. And thus having the same Word and Doctrine, the same functions of Pastors,
Teachers, Deacons and Elders, the same Sacraments, Administration, Discipline
and Government, so that hereby they are united one into another, and one in
all, and all in all.

The private admonition by Elders.
The private exercise of this part of Discipline I have spoken of, which by
degrees in private admonition, if it bring not forth the fruits of repentance
and amendment, proceeds to the first degree of public correction, (Tell the
Church.)

This information is made by the Elders, who have used the private discipline
of exhortation, with much wisdom and patience upon some particular persons,
who with hardness of heart have resisted the power of God through ungodliness.

They declare the offense to the Pastor, and the Pastor in the public
assembly acquainteth the people with the offense, and if the delinquent be
present, he is caused to stand upbefore the Pastor, who reproves him with the
sharp Judgments of God against his sin, by the Word seeking to enlighten
his mind, and mollify his heart; Which if it prevail with him, he falls
upon his knees, and desires the Congregation to pray for him, which done, the
Pastor pronounces unto him the remission of sins, if the Church judge him
penitent, if they find him still obstinate and of an unrelenting heart. then
they pronounce him debarred from the holy Communion of the Supper of the Lord
and continue him upon the stool of repentance with much exhortation, patience,
and long forbearing, till they convince him, or otherwise separate him from the
Congregation, for a time; if after he continue in his foulness of sin,
then he is again called to the Congregation and admonished, which if then it
take no effect, her is excommunicated by laying on of the hands of all the
Elders, after that he is accounted as an enemy, or as Paul says, Anathema to
the Church, and wholly and finally given over to Satan, according to the words
of our Savior, the 18. Matthew. 18. Whomsoever ye bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven, and whom ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Judge, I pray you, if all the politic wits in the world could ever have
devised such a pure and subtle discipline, as should spy into the inward
secrets of the thoughts, and intentions of the heart, and should purge the
conscience, and should cut off the consuming cankers, and rotten members from
the body of the Church. What Romish Apothecary could ever have composed such a
soule-saving medicine?

Observe how the holy Spirit has commanded this discipline to be always
practiced in the Church. When Achans covetousness troubled the Congregation,
by moving Gods wrath against them, a diligent search was commanded to be made,
and being found out, Achan and his house were cut off. Josh. 7. And also, if
there be a scorner or contentious person (says Solomon) cast out the scorner,
and so strife will go out, and so contention shall cease. Also, Romans 16. 17.
18. Now says Paul, I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which cause
division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them. And more plainly in the 2 Thessalonians. 36. 10. We command you brethren,
in the Name of Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that
walks inordinately, and not after the instructions which ye received of us.
And in the foureteenth verse he says; If any man obey not your saying, note
him by a letter, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, yet
account him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. But if he come to
the last degree Excommunion, then says our Lord Christ, let him be anathema.

But if you would see the Apostles practice in this discipline, See 1 Cor. 5.
chap. 4 and 5. verses, Paul having certain intelligence that there was odious
fornication among them, he writ thus unto them; When ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that such a one,
I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ be delivered unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

And out of this text make a profitable observation, that Paul will not have
Excommunication, (though but in the second degree) executed in any private
manner, but by the public assembly gathered together, neither does he allow
it to be done in any name, but in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; Neither
does he attribute the power, either to himself or the Church, but only to
the Lord Jesus.

Now, and lastly, I must conclude with the last part of Discipline, that is
Synodicall assemblies, which are of three degrees. The first is particular to
every Congregation, which consists of the Pastors the Deacons, and the Elders
of that Church, whose customs is the best reformed Churches to meet once a
week, or as need requires, to take an account of all things that concern the
duties of the Elders and the Church-revenues, the Pastor being their chief
guide; Those things about which they chiefly busy themselves, are first to
catalogue the Professors of their Congregation, their Catechuminists
distinguished from those that are thought fit to be admitted to the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, their Baptized, their penitents, their
Excommunicates, their number of Elders and Deacons, Pastors and Teachers, one
or two, as the place requires.

In this their assembly they consider the spiritual estate, and condition of
the flock, examine the revenues of the Church, and the necessities of the
poor, and what things soever they find meet to edification. The Pastor
exhorting the Elders to diligence, care, and zeal in the work of the Lord,
the Deacons to honesty, compasson, and a good conscience.

The Assembly or Synod of Presbyteries within a shire or Wapontake.
The second order of Synodes is in the reformed Churches, called the assemblies
of the Presbyteries, held monthly, or quarterly, under which they comprehend
the Pastors and Church Elders, for every Pastor brings with him two or three
Elders, after the quantity of the Congregation, and this Synod is a company of
Pastors and Elders of a shire or wapontake.

In these Assemblies they examine the spiritual condition of every parish,
take view of their order, diligence, doctrine, and manners, as well the
doctrine and manners of the Pastors and Elders, as of the younger people And
there they proceed to such further order and censure, as by the holy Scriptures
they are taught. And in these Synodes all errors in opinion, heresies and
Schisms, that are found noisome to the Congregation are reproved, and the
parties exhorted and admonished. In these their Synodes they always from time
to time choose one President to guide the affairs, and thus they avoid that
pre-eminence, which Episcopacie greedily hunts after.

The general Synod.
The third degree is the superlative assembly of Presbyteries, which is either
National or Provincial, which in some Churches are held yearly, or otherwise
as occasions fit; over which the prince and Sovereign is the Principal Elder,
and the Presbyters and Elders appoint one Pastor for the time President of the
assembly, who moderates and guides the affairs.

The matters handled in this Synod are a general review of both the former
Synods, and specially to take care of the preservation of the purity of
Doctrine, and suppressing of Heretics, and errors, and all misdemeanors,
and Schisms in the Church.

And whatsoever is done in any of these Synods is certified from one to
another, and through the National Church of all their most material censures
which may concern them in general, whereby the Church is preserved in a sweet
and pleasant decorum, unity, purity and peace.

The unerrable pattern of these Synods is taken from the practice of the
Apostles, Acts 15. showing by what rules of temperance and wisdom they ought
to judge and give sentence, taking the Scripture for their rule, the holy Ghost
for their guide, not laying any burden on the Church by Laws, Decrees, or
Canons, as I have before spoken.

And this Divine rule and pattern was kept and observed throughout all the
Primitive times, till the great Council of Nice, as by the Chronography of
Socrates. Scholast. may be observed, yet the earthly glory of Babel has so
long dazeled the eyes of most men, that they call the truth novelty.

But if men were of a free spirit and clear judgment, not inthralled with
prejudicate opinions, nor darkened with the more then Egyptian mists of Rome,
they might here behold the virgin purity of the Church of God, both in her
Worship, Jurisdiction, Doctrine, Government and Discipline, to have been from
the beginning of the world one and the same.

Thus have I adventured to present unto the eyes of men, the true face of the
Christian Church shining in her spiritual Iustre, and Christ Jesus our Lord
reigning and ruling over the souls and consciences of man, not intrenching
upon the temporal power of Kings and Princes.

Now the Lord give unto us understanding in all things, and with the holy
Apostle Paul I will bow the knees of my soul, unto the Father of my Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom is named the whole Family in heaven and in earth, that he may
grant us according to the riches of his glory, that we may be strengthened by
his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by Faith, that
we being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the
love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, that we may be filled with all
fullness of God. Unto him therefore that is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we can ask or think, according to the power that works in
us, be praise in the Church by Jesus Christ thorough all Generations for ever,
Amen. Ephesians. 3. 14.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

