RULES AND DIRECTIONS GIVEN BY Coll: Edmond Harvy, And the rest of the
COMMISSIONERS FOR THE CUSTOMS, To the Collectors and other Officers, to be by
them observed, in collecting the Customs, and the mannagement of their
respective Offices.

Ordine servato mundus servatur, at illo.
Neglecto pessum totus est orbis abit.
LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for T. Hewer, and Hannah Blacklock, 1655.

Rules and Directions given by Colonel Edmond Harvy, and the rest of the
Commissioners for the Customs, to the Collectors, and other Officers, to be by
them observed in Collecting the Customs, and the mannagement of their
respective Offices.
Notice to be given to the Collector of all ships coming in, and going out.
THe Surveior, Searcher, or other Officer attending in any Port, or Creek,
shall give notice to the Collector of the Head Port, to which they do belong,
with all convenient speed, of every ship that comes in, or goes out, at any
tide, by way of Merchandise, or with goods from any other Port, by Certificate.

Shippers Book.
There shall be one shippers Book outward, and another inwards, in every
Custom House, wherein every ship going out, or coming in by way of
Merchandise, or with Commodities to or from any Ports, by Certificate, shall
enter openly in the Custom House the name of the ship, and of the Master, the
Burden, of whence, and to or from what place it is fraighted, before he take
in lading, or discharge any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever; whereof
the respective Surveiors are to take care that the same be done accordingly.

The Master, or Purser to deliver in the Contents of their ladings on Oath
inwards.
The Master, or Purser, of every ship coming in by way of Merchandise, shall
deliver under his hand, and upon his Oath. before the Collector, or Checque,
one Bill of the particulars, and contents of the whole lading of the ship, with
the names of the several Merchants, and the Mark, Package, and outward form of
the goods and Merchandise, according to his knowledge; and shall also make
Declaration upon Oath, that he has not broken bulk, since he came into the
Port, nor into any other Port of this Nation, or the dominions thereof,
otherwise then in the said Bill shall be expressed, and shall answer to all
such other questions, concerning the goods laden in the said ship, as shall be
demanded of him by the said Collector: but in case he has broken bulk in any
other Port, then he shall deliver likewise upon his Oath, the particulars of
the goods so delivered in the Port where he did first break bulk, which entry
and Declaration so made as aforesaid, shall be entered into the ships Brook
inwards, after the ships entry, and be filed together in order, ^ with the
ships Book, and a The Oath to be recorded.
Memorandum of every such Oath as aforcsaid, upon the particular entry, shall
remain, and be kept safely in the Custom House for a Record thereof.

Outward.
Every Master of a ship that shall lade any goods, or Merchandise for the Parts
beyond the Seas, shall enter the ship with the Collector, before he take in any
goods, and before his departure shall give notice of his whole lading, with the
names of the Merchants that have laden goods in him, and shall answer upon Oath
to such questions, concerning the same, as shall be demanded of him, upon pain
of the forfeiture of one hundred pounds.

Ships to be entered within four days after arrival.
All masters, or pursers of ships, arriving from any foreign parts, shall
within four days after their arrival, make entry of their ship, or vessel,
in the said Port as aforesaid, and shall unlade, and discharge the same withal
convenient speed.

The Master to forfeit one hundred pound for goods shipped at unlawful time or
place.
The Master of any ship, that shall suffer goods to be landed or shipped
without payment of subsidy, and other duties, or at an unlawful time, or
place, does forfeit an hundred pounds, and make confiscable all the said goods.

Strangers vessels not to trade from Port to Port.
As person may lade, or carry any goods, or Merchandire, from port to port
within this Nation, in any Ship, or bottom, whereof any stranger is owner,
Master, or partner, upon pain of forfeiting the goods.

Entries Outward.
Every Merchant or other that will transport any goods by may of Merchandise
for foreign parts shall! make his entry particularly thereof with the
Collectors, by a bill under his hand or the hand of his Assign, with the name
of the Ship, the Master, the burden, of whence and to what place it is
fraighted, with the marks, and number of the packs, Cask, Fardels, or other
bulk, and the true Quantity and Quality of the goods therein contained, which
hill shall be forthwith entered into a Book by the Collector, and delivered to
the Checque to be entered by him likewise, and having received the same from the
Checque, shall file and keep a bill of every ship together, as they shall be
entered, and the true value of the goods, and of the Customs, Subsidies and
duties thereupon due, shall be likewise set forth and charged in the books at
the time the Merchant makes his entry.

Warrants etc. to be passed in Custom House only.
No entry nor agreement with any Merchant or others for custom or Subsidy
shall us made by the Collector, or other, nor any Cocquet warrant or
Certificate sealed, or subscribed, but openly in the Custom House.

The warrants to be delivered to the Officers before goods be landed or shipped.
The Searcher or Surveior shall have all Cocquets, Certificates and Warrants
delivered unto him, before the shipping, or landing of any goods therein
contained, and at the time of the shipping or landing thereof shall have the
said Cocquets, Certificates and Warrants with him, that the goods may be
thereby examined and tried.

Every Merchant to have Cocquet, etc. by himself.
Every Merchant shall pass his particular Cocquet and Certificate, by himself
sealed, and subscribed openly in the Custom House, by the Collector and
Checque, bearing date the same day he entered his goods.

Entries by License.
All entries Inwards, or Outward, by license, shall be endorsed upon each
particular license, with the name of the Merchant, the date of the Cocquet or
entry, and the particular quantities shipped or landed by virtue thereof shall
be also set out and entered in the books to which they properly belong.

Goods outward entered in one ship, but laden in another.
All Merchandise customed outward, in any ship or vessel, which for some cause
cannot be laden aboard the same ship, shall be appointed another ship by
Certificate, openly sealed, subscribed and delivered in the Custom House upon
the oaths of the Searcher or Surveior, and the owners thereof, openly taken,
that the said goods did not pass according to the former Cocquet.

Entries Inwards.
Every Merchant or other that shall enter Merchandise Inwards, shall make entry
thereof particularly, and deliver a bill thereof at large under his hand, or
the hand of his A^s^nes, to the Collectors, with the name of the ship, and of
the Master, the burden, of whence, and from what place it was fraighted, with
the marks and numbers of the Fardels, bulk, and Package in the Margent, and the
true quantities and qualities of the goods therein contained, and the said
Collectors shall with all convenient speed cast up the value of the goods and
Merchandise therein, according to the book of Rates, or otherwise if not
therein rated, as is by the said book directed, and the custom and subsidy
thereupon due, and write it upon the said bill, with the number and date of the
bill, according to which it shall be presently entered in the book Inwards, to
be kept by the said Collector, and then by him delivered to the Checque to be
likewise entered, according to which bill, another being subscribed by the said
Collector and Checque, numbered and dated as the former, shall be to the
Surveior or Searcher or waiter, a warrant to suffer the wares and Merchandises
therein contained to be landed and discharged accordingly, and the said
original bill, the said Collectors shall receive back from the said Checque.

Bills at sight.
All manner of wares and Merchandise that any Merchant entered at sight, shall
be taken up by a warrant for view, dated the day of the entry thereof,
subscribed, and delivered openly in the Custom House to the Searcher or
Surveior, who shall see the same brought to the Custom House key or wharf, and
give knowledge thereof to the said officers, which officers shall suffer the
said goods to be taken up in the presence of the Surveior, or Searcher, and
viewed in some convenient place, and the owner thereof shall forthwith make an
entry thereof partivularly under his hand or the hand of his assigns, with the
Collector and Checque, and thereupon a warrant shall be made for the clearing
and passing the wares and Merchandise as aforesaid,

The Collector to appoint Officers to the Ships.
In every Port where more then one, whether Searcher, Surveior, or Waiters, are
appointed to attend, there the Collectors of the same Port shall nominate, and
direct under his hand which of them and how many of them shall take charge of
every respective ship going forth or coming into the same Port either from
beyond Sea or from any other Port within this Nation, to see the goods and
Merchandise therein cleared and discharged, according to such warrants as he or
they shall receive from the Collector and Checque.

Bonds of Employment.
Every Merchant stranger that enters any Merchandise brought from beyond the
Seas, shall enter into bond with the Collector for Employment to be made
according to the statute.

The day of going out, and coming in of ships to be entered.
Every Searcher and Surveior shall enter into a book, the day of the going out,
and coming in of every ship by way of Merchandise, or by certificate from
another Port, with the name of the ship, and Master, and the date of every man's
Cocquet, Warrant, and Certificate, as they in order of the days of every month
shall fall out.

Officers making false warrants.
Every officer that makes any Cocquet, or Warrant, contrary to or disagreeing
to the entry of any goods, or Merchandise, shall be fined and punished
according to his offense.

Strangers Goods entered in English-mens names.
Every Merchant English or Stranger, that shall enter the goods of a stranger
in the name of an Englishman, shall forfeit and lose the goods so entered, and
all his goods personal.

Englishmen inhabiting in orraign parts.
Englishmen inhabiting beyond the Seas and sworn subjects to foreign Princes,
are to pay Custom, and other duties, as strangers, so long as they so continue.

Denizens to pay as strangers.
Every one born out of the Nation, and afterward made Denizen, shall pay like
Custom, as before he was made Denizen, except Merchants of the Still*yard of
London.

Searchers conniving at exportation of Bullion, etc.
If any Searcher shall give way to transportation of moneys, or unlawful
passengers, he shall be fined and punished according to the nature of the
offense.

Goods Customable.
In passing of goods from Port to Port within this Nation, the Collector and
other Officers are to understand, by goods customable all wares and commodities
growing and wrought or manufactured within this Nation, and all foreign
Commodities, and Merchandises, which have been imported, and remained in this
Nation, viz. by an Englishman above twelve months, and by a stranger above
nine months, and the property altered by the sale thereof made by the first
Importer And

Goods prohibited.
By goods prohibited to be exported, moneys, Bullion, otherwise then by
special Order and Warrants as in the compasition Trade, etc. Plate, Jewels,
Woollen Yarne, and Cloth undrest, Horses, Mares, Geldings, Oxen, Rine, Sheep,
Copper, Brass, Bell-metall, Pann^tall, Gun-metall, Shruffe, white ashes,
Butter, Cheese, Wood, Corn, when it is above the price limited by Satute, as
also Leather, Hides, Tallow, and all things made thereof, skins of Sheep,
Pelts, and skins of Stags, Hinds, Bucks, Does, or fawn, Goats, or Ridd, wool,
worsted Yarke, Woollen-Flocks, Woelfells, Fullers earth, And Clay of what kind
soever.

What is meant by Grocery and Saltery wares
It is further to be noted, that by Grocery and Saltery wares are meant
foreign Commodities only which have been formerly brought from beyond the
Seas, and the duties paid Inwards, and that no Merchandise or Manufacture of
England or Wales, are to pass under those general names.

Articles annexed to the book of Rates.
The Collectors and other officers of the Customs, are likewise diligently to
observe, and perform the Articles, Rules, and directions annexed to the
present book of rates, and such others as are directed by an Ordinance of
Parliament published the sixtenth of December, one thousand six hundred forty
and seven, or by a late Act, made for the raising and leavying of money by way
of Excise, or by any other Statute, Act, or Ordinance of Parliament, now
enforce, for or concerning the payment of the subsidy of Tunnage, and Poundage,
or the importation or exportation or transportation of goods Prohibited, and
all other Acts and Orders for any other duty or Impost, payable in the
Commissioners of the Customs. And to observe the several things that
respectively appertain to the duty of their places, and to take care that in
all things they proceed accordingly.

Rules and Directions for the Collector in levying the Customs.
What Englishmen and strangers shall pay.
HE is to collect five in the hundred, as a general subsidy, as well upon the
Merchant English, as the Merchant Stranger; and the petty Customs of three
pence in the pound more upon all strangers.

What strangers shall pay upon Native Commodities.
He is also to Collect five in the hundred over and above the five aforesaid
upon the Merchant stranger, for all Native Commodities, or Manufactures made
thereof and the Merchant Stranger for those Commodities, for which he is to pay
double Subsidy, or Custom, viz. for Lead, Tin, Woollen Cloth, and all or any
Manufactures made of Wool, or part Wool, is also to pay double Petty Custom;
and upon Woollen Cloth, he is also to pay the old Custom of xiij d. upon every
Cloth exported, and proportionably upon now Draperies, as they are reckoned for
a Cloth in the instructions annexed to the Book of Rates.

Lead.
All Lead exported, whether by Merchant English, or by Merchant Stranger, is to
pay over and above the Subsidy and Custom, the old Custom, viz. iij d. in the
Sow, which is two shillings upon the fodder.

Snowt Towe.
That Snowte Tow be rated at forty shillings per cent, as it pays in London.

Wines.
That all wines whatsoever be accounted of the growth of the Levant, except
Rhenish, and French VVines, and to pay Custom accordingly; and that Prizage,
no wines whatsoever be exempted from payment of Custom under pretense of
Prizage VVines, or the duty called Prizage.

Pan-tiles.
That all Pan-tiles from Holland, or elsewhere, shall pay after the Rate of
five pound per thousand.

Logwood.
That all Log-wood alias Block-wood, or Campeachy wood, do pay after the Rate
of eighty pound per Tun.

Beer.
That all Beer exported by English, do pay besides the two shillings Subsidy in
the Book of Rates, eight shillings six pence per Tun by an English man, and ten
shillings by a stranger per Statute.

Tobaccoes.
That one penny per pound be leavied on all Tobaccoes of the English
Plantations beyond Sea; and upon all other Tobaccoes of what Plantation soever,
six pence in the pound. And to the end every Collector may have a true
inspection into this matter, he is to take notice that he is to pass no
Tobaccoes to be of the English Plantations, but only such, as by sufficient
persons shall be attested upon Oath so to be.

Lead Oar.
That Lead Oar be rated and valued at vj. l. xiij. s. iij. d. per Tun, each
Tun containing twenty hundred weight, after which Rate and value, the duties
are to be lebied upon Englishmen, and it being an English Commodity, strangers
therefore upon exportation are to pay double Subsidy, and double petty custom,
that is to say, every Merchant Stranger is to pay the duty for every Tunn of
the said Lead after the Subsidy of xiij. l. vj, s. viij. d. Besides double
petty Custom, which is vj. d. upon every xx. s. value according to that rate.

Bays.
Whereas in many Ports Bays have been and are entered in the name of Tanton
Cottons.
Cottons the difference of the Customs whereof is very great, the Collectors
and Officers in those Ports are to take care, that for such as are Bays (in
whatsoever Name the Merchant may enter them) Custom be demanded and leavied as
for Bays.

Slat-stones.
That care be likewise taken, That Slate-stones which are rated in the book of
Rates at 15. s. the Thousand, pass not for Hilling-stones which are valued but
at iij s. iiij. d. per Thousand.

Horses and live Cattle.
He is to take custom for all Horses and live Cattle that shall be imported
according to the book of Rates, notwithstanding the exception of fresh fish and
bestiall in the Act for Tunnage and Poundage, for that by fresh fish is meant
only fish unsalted, and by bestiall fresh flesh for man's meat killed and brought
in unsalted.

Fish, as Herrings, and Pilchards.
In the shipping out of fish, as Pilchards and Herrings, these Rules are to be
observed,

That all Englishmen shipping Fish English taken in English bottomes are to
pay neither Subsidy nor Custom. All Englishmen shipping Pilchards in strangers
bottomes are to pay xi. s. the Tunn, and Herrings being shipped by Englishmen
in Strangers bottomes, are to pay according to the book of Rates.

All Strangers shipping Pichards in English bottomes, are co pay twenty
shillings per Tun Ssubsidy and five shillngs Petty Custom.

All Strangers shipping either Pilchards or Herrings in strangers bottomes, are
to pay the subsidy general according to the book of Rates, and the subsidy
special called Strangers Subsidy, they veing native Commodities, and also the
single Petty Custom.

In which, as also in all other cases of like import is to be noted Denizens to
pay strangers Custom.
That all Strangers made Denizens are to pay all Customs and Subsidies as
strangers.

What ships to be reputed strangers, and what English.
All ships wherein the major part of the Seamen are strangers, are to be
accounted strangers.

That all ship belonging to strangers, are to be accounted strangers bottomes,
though English built.

That all ships of which any stranger is part owner are to reckoned strangers
bottomes, though all the rest of the owners are English.

That all ships wherein the moiety or Major part of Mariners are strangers, are
to be accounted strangers bottomes.

Bullion and Foreign Coin.
In case of Bullion and foreign Coin (for the importation whereof free liberty
is granted by Act of Parliament) he is to take notice, that no seizure is to be
made thereof, so as the whole quantity be duly entered and care taken that the
quantity entered be imported, which entry is to be fairly registered in the
Collectors books; and upon signification given unto him by the Commissioners
(and not by others) Coin, is delivered into the Mint to be Coined, then, and
not before, the Merchant is to be permitted to ship out the other two thirds
thereof, and no more, he paying one per Centum, that is to say Twenty shillings
upon every hundred pounds Sterling thereof, being rated at sive shillings per
ounce, and so after that rate for every greater or letter quantity.

Upon all entries made for Bullyon or Foreign Coin, he is to pass a warrant
for landing thereof.

Prize Goods and Ships.
That upon all ships brought in as prize whether taken by the States ships or
other private men of war, after condemuation thereof, full custom is not only
to be received for all goods therein, as if they were imported by way of
Merchandise, but also for the ship, Tackle, Ordnance, and other furniture
belonging to the same, after the rate of five per Centum, as the same shall the
invifferently appraised, Ships bought beyond the Seas.
As also the like custom is to be received for all other ships that are bought
beyond the Seas, as the proper goods of any person or Merchant residing in
England.

Goods not rared in the Book of Races.
Where any goods or Merchandises shall be, exported, or imported and the same
rated or valued in the book of Kates, there the Collector is to set value upon
the goods, in which he is to have regard unto the benefit that shall accrue
unto the Tommon-wealth, by the importation or exportation of any such goods and
Merchandises, and accordingly to set the rate and value, but in no case to set
the rate and value of any goods below the intrinsicall value or worth thereof,
nor any Foreign Manufacture imported, at less then double the intrinsic value
thereof whether the same be imported by English or by strangers.

No allowance upon prize Goods.
And as for goods brought in as a prize, no defalcation or allowance from the
quantity thereof, or out of the sum of money due for custom and subsidy, by
way of abatement for being bad, damaged, or defective is to be made.

Coleseed and Colleseed oil.
He is to rate and value all Cole-seed oils, imported as rape-seed oils, and
all Cole-seed exported as Rape-leed is valued in the book of Rat^s, and to
leavy the Custom and other duties accordingly.

Wrappers.
That the Allowances to be made and given to Merchauts for wrappers, upon
shipping out of the old or new Draperies, in places where wrappers are allowed,
are not to exceed the directions and Instructions annexed to the book of Kates,
No allowance of five per Cent. outward.
and that upon all goods exported there is no allowance of five per Centum,
which Merchants have upon goods inwards nor any allowance other then as is
aforesaid to be made, or given therein.

Goods allowed for store, etc. to be rated.
All goods and Merchandises allowed for store, portage, or provision, inwards
or outward, shall be valued according to the book of Kates, or in casenot
there rated, according to the directions before mentioned for valning goods not
mentioned in the book of Kates. Althought the same neither does nor shall pay
and Custom or subsidy, and shall be entered in books distinctly, and apart by
themselves.

In the granting and passing thereof, the following rules and directions are to
be observed.

Store and Portage.
That no bill of Store or portage be granted, but that the name of the Ship
upon which it is to be served, and the Master thereof, and the persons to whom,
be therein mentioned, and none to be granted but to Mariners at their coming
in and going out. Except it be for Damage Goods, Mis-entries, Over-entries, or
by special order from the Commissioners, wherein all care is to be taken of
good husbandry, and moderation for the Common wealths interest.

That no bill of Store except as is before excepted, be granted, but with this
following clause viz. (to be void except it be served within four days.)

That all bills of Stores, as well as Cocquets and other Warrants, be delivered
to the Watter and not to the person to whom they are granted.

That no bills of Stores be served upon goods of any person whatsoever, other
then the person to whom they are granted, or out of or upon the same Ships
mentioned in the said bill, without the special directions of the
Commissioners, except such bills of Stores as are granted for Damage Goods,
Mis-entries, or Over-entries, or by special order as aforesaid.

Goods to be cleared according to the Standard.
That no Merchant or other person clear his goods in the Custom house
otherwise then according to the standard of England, as well that for measure
mentioned in the Saints of IIo. Hen 7. Cap. 4o. as that for weights mentioned
in several other Statates. And that the intentions of the Commissioners may be
known herein, the Collectors and other officers are enjoined to peruse the
Statute of 12o. Hen. 7o. Cap. 5o. and that they clears no goods otherwise then
according to the Bushel, in that Statute mentioned, which contains eight
Gallons; and to all goods which by the book of Rates are to pay custom,
Weights.
that there be allowed and accounted to the hundred subtle but ^ve score, and
to the hundred wight Gross, five score and twelve pounds: and for other goods
by the Tunn of weight, but twenty hundred weight of one hundred and twelve
pounds to each hundred, Measures.
to the Tunn of measure but two hundred fifty two gallons. and to the measure
of else and yards but according to the English Standart for an ell and a yard:
Only here is to be noted, that all Butts and Pipes, albeit by exact measure two
of them may not contain a full Tunn, yet are to pay Customs for a Tunn
notwithstanding and fours Hogs heads and three Puncheons of all other
Commodities are to pass and pay for a Tunn, although the gage be not so much;
but all goods coming in uncertains and nausuall Cask, which are to pay by the
Tunn, Hogs-head, Pipe or Barrel, are to be reduced unto the foresaid Number of
gallons to make a tunn and not otherwise, is use to be made for gageing or
computing, as to such Commodities, and where the book of Rates does direct that
any commodity is to pay by the s^mish or other out landish measure, there only
is the Custom to be collected accordingly, but upon all other Commodities the
Customs are to be collected, according to the aforesaid respective Standards of
Weights and measures, and in case any Goods or Merchandises shall be landed or
shipped out, the Customs and other duties not being paid or compounded for,
according to the aforegoing Rules, due seizure is to be made of all, or the
overplus, and proceedings to be had thereupon, and as by the Instructions
concerning seisures is hereafter particularly amongst other things set down.

Goods to be entered in their own denominations.
Especial care is to be taken, that all Commodities be entered in their own
denominations, according to their true nature and quality.

To the end the Collectors and all other Officers and persons, may know how to
regulate themselves, they are to take care, that the following Order of the
Commissioners, made in pursuance of an Order of the Committee for preservation
of the Customs, be punctually observed, viz.

Goods to be entered in the Owners names.
All persons are enjoined by Law, that they do enter all Goods to be exported,
imported or trasported, in the name or names of the proper Owner or Owners
thereof, and not in the name or names of any other person or persons
whatsoever, upon pain of the forfeiture of all such Goods and Merchandise as
shall be entered contrary unto the Law in that behalf. And we do hereby charge
and require all Officers of the Customs, to make diligent search and enquiry,
as to the observance hereof, and in case they shall find any to transgress,
by entering Goods and Merchandises, contrary unto the Law, as is aforesaid,
that they do make seizure thereof, and signiste the same unto us.

Given under our Hands and Seal of Office, at the Custom-house London, this
third of August, 1654. Robert Titchburn. Edmo:Harvey. Mar: Hildesley. Daniel
Tailor.


Ships unlading part and exporting the rest.
In case any Ship importing foreign Goods into any Ports, shall discharge part
of her Lading there, and intend to transport the rest over Sea, entry is to be
made of the whole, and Custom paid accordingly.

Allowance of 12. per cent for leakage.
That allowance of twelve percent. is to be made for leakage of Wines,
(excepting Wines brought in as Prize, to which neither this, nor any other
allowance is to be made) to Merchants demanding the same, by way of
defalcation, where no Wines are filled up on shipboard, and care to be taken
for preventing thereof. Which twelve per Cent. is not to be taken or deducted
out of the quantities of Wines, but out of the moneys received for the suvstdy.

The Collector to receive the States part upon seizures.
He is to receive the moyeties of all seisures demises, and Composstions for
Custom Causes, and to keep the money so received, in one account particularly
by it self, and upon receipt thereof, he is to remit the same to the Cashire
General, with a note expressing from whom, and for what Goods seized,
compounded for, or recovered, such money was paid.

Allowance of half subsidy.
Before allowance be made of the half subsidy for Goods exported, formerly
imported, or any free Cocquet granted for the same, these following Rules and
directions are to be observed.

The Collector is to be assured, that the Goods upon which the half subsidy is
to be paid back, it exported by, or for a strangers account, were imported
within nine months; and if by, or for an English man's account, within twelve
months; Then he is to make a Certificate under his own hand, that such Goods
were entered and paid Custom, and all other duties upon the importation thereof.

In which Certificate he is to express the time when the same were imported, by
whom. the quantity and quality of the said Goods, in words at length, and not
in figures.

The computation of the nine months, and twelve months above said, is to be
made from the day of the entry of the Goods inwards, whether by sight or
perfect warrant, to the day of the shipping of tehm aboard outward, and not to
the date of the Collectors Certificate.

Upon the said Certificate, the Merchant or some for him that can depose the
same, must make oath that the Goods which now be intends to export, are the
same which are mentioned in that Certificate, and for which the full subsidy
and other duties due upon the importation were paid; and if the said Goods have
been contracted for, or sold, he is to make oath to whom the same have been
contracted and to whom sold; as also for whose account the same shall be
exported. But if it appear unto him, upon such examination and enquiry, as be
shall think fit to make upon oath in the matter, that the quality and property
of the Goods have been altered from the first importer bepond the second buyer,
there is no half subsidy to be paid back, but in all such cases the Merchant is
to pay his Custom, unles in case of Goods to be exported by the Importer
thereof, as is directed by the seventh Article of Instructions, annexed to the
Book of Rates, upon oath made as aforesaid, in pursnance of the second Article
of Instructions, annexed to the said Book. And whereas the half subsidy is to
be paid back, he is to make out unto the Merchante a Certificate, Cocquet and a
Debentur, the form of which are as follows.

The form of the Certificate and Oath thereupon.
In the May den-Head of Pl^mouth, James Lotton Master for Mallago. John Green
Ind:

Five bales containing twenty hundred else net Linen. The subsidy inwards for
twenty hundred else net Linen, was paid by John Green Ind: the sixth of Jan,
last past, written 5 Martij 1651. A. B. Collector. C. D. Checque.

Juravit John Green, or A. B his Servant, the Goods above mentioned in this
Certificate to be shipped out, are the same which paid Custom, inwards, and are
to be transported and sold beyond the Seas, for the proper account of the said
John Green, without any preContract for the same.

Form of the Cocquet.
Know ye, that John Green Ind. for five bales containing two hundred else of
Linen Cloth net, late in this Port unladen, and now to be shipped in the
Maidenhead of Plymouth, Masterr James Lutton for Mallago, paid all duties at
the first discharge, the sirth day of January last past.

Dated 5o Martil 1651.

Form of the Debentur.
Plymouth, John Green Ind. did enter with us the 5o day of March, 1651. in the
Maidenhead of Plymouth, Mr. James Lutton for Mallago. five bales containing
two hundred else of Linen Cloth net, the subsidy whereof was paid inwards, by
the said John Green Ind. the sixth day of Ian. last past, as it does appear by
the Certificate of the Collector inwards, and for further manifestation of his
just dealing herein, he has also taken oath before us for the same.

Custom-House Plymouth, Die and anno supradict.

Upon which Debentur is to be first certisted, by the searcher that shipped off
the said Goods, the time when they were shipped; and the name of the Ship in
which they were shipped; and after the Ship is departed the Coast of England or
the Goods arrived in some Port beyond the Seas, the Merchant himself, and no
other person upon the Debentur, making oath that the Goods expressed in that
Debentur and Certificate aforesaid, being thereunto annexed, are really shipped
out, for quality and quantity, and are not, nor any part thereof since they
were last shipped out, relanded in any Port or Croek of England, Wales, or
Scotland, that then within one month after such oath made, the Collector is to
pay back the half subsidy only, and not part of any other duty whatsoever. and
upon the said Debentur, to take the Receipt of the Merchant, himself, or of his
known Factor or Agent for the sum aforesaid.

Note, that the searcher have it in charge, to examine and take care, that the
same Goods for quantity and quality, be shipped out, as is mentioned in the
Cocquet.

And whereas by the seventh Article of Instructions annexed to the Book of
Rates, it is directed, that if any Merchant having duly paid all duties
inwards, and in regard of bad sales, shall be enforced to keep the said Goods,
or any part thereof in his hands, without alteration of property after the
space of a year shall be clapsed, in which case be is to be permitted to ship
the same out for the parts beyond the Seas, (if he so think fit) without
payment of any subsidy for the same outward, upon due proof that the same was
duly entered, and subsidy paid inwards. But before the Merchant have any froe
Cocquet, to that purpose, a Certificate is to be made out, and subscribed by
the Collector, of the time when such Goods were imported, as also that the
Customs thereof were by him received, and that in the said Certificate be
expressed the quantity and quality of Goods imported, and desired to be
exported; as also upon the same the Dath or the party that paid the Custom is
to be made that it was paid, and the oath of the Bropriefor, and no other
person, that the said Goods are not sold or contracted for, nor altered in the
quality, since they were first imported but that they shall be exported upon
his own proper account, the form of which Certificate and Oath thereupon
hereafter follows, viz.

Form of the Certificate and Oath.
In the Mary of Poole; William Hammond Master for Rotterdam

John Green Ind.

Two bales containing ten hundred else of vittery Canvas. The subsidy in wards
for ten hundred else vittery Canvas was paid by John Green Ind. 6o Ian. 1649.
written Martij. 5o. 1651.

Iuravit John Green, the Goods above mentioned, have paid full Custom in ward,
and are to be transported on his own account, without alteration of property,
or contract made for the same.

All which being respectively done, and observed as aforesaid, and executed
accordingly, upon importation of all Goods and Merchandts res, he is in the
former case, viz. of the half subsidy to pay it back: and the like being
observed as aforeesaid, in reference to Goods and Merchandises to be exported
after the same have been imported above nine months by strangers, and twelve
months by English, to grant a free Cocquet, where it is desired, the form
whereof hereafter follows.

Form of the free Cocquet.
Know ye that John Green Ind. for two bales containing two hundrid else of
vittery Canvas ness, paid all dutiee inwards, the 6o. Iran. 1649. and now to be
shipped in the Mary of London, Will: Hammond Master for Rotterdam Dated 5o
Martij. 1651.

What meant by alteration of quality and property.
Mem. By alteration of quality is to be understood, that if Flax or Hemp be
imported, and after wards exported, the first be made into Cloth, or the second
into yarn or Kopes; or that linen Cloth being first imported, and afterward
being cut out into shirts or sheets, or any other necessaries; or if Goods or
Merchandises shall after their importation be died, dressed, or further
manufactured, these and the like are alteration of quality, and the selling and
contracting for any Goods or Merchandise, is an alteration of property.

No half subsidy upon Wines, etc.
He is like wise to take notice, That he is not to allow the half subsidy upon
the importation of any Wines, Tobaccoes, or foreign VVoolls.

Goods perished or lost at Sea.
He is not to make any allowance for Goods perished, or lost at Sea, or for
Goods or Merchandises entered outward, or discharged in some Port of this
Nation, under the pretense of contrary Winds or leakage of the Wessell, without
order of the Commissioners.

All entries to be daily registered.
He is not to omit any entries, but duly and daily to register the same in the
Record of the Port, and if any Defalcations.
defalcation be (although by Order,) that the same be signified near the said
entry, with the reason why the same is not drawn up in the sum thereof, and
added up with the account of moneys received.

Post-entries.
He is to regulate himself and the rest of the Officers in point of
post-entries by the following Order, viz.

6o Martii. 1649.

Committee Navy.

The Petition of the Governors and Company of Merchants, trading into the
Levant seas being read.
IT is thereupon Orders touching postentries.
ordered by this Committee, that in cases of short Entries of any foreign Goods
inwards, wherein upon examination to be taken before the Commissioners or
Collectors for the Customs, it shall appear that the Merchant had no intention
of Irand to the Commonwealth, and the goods unentred shall not exceed twenty
per cent. in the quantity thereof, in proportion with the goods mentioned in
the VVarrant (whereof the five per cent. allowed by the Parliament shall be
accounted part) that the Merchant shall be admitted to amend his entry without
seizure; but this Committee do expressly declare, that they do not intend this
Order shall be extended

1 To any entries of goods passing Outward in any case whatsoever. 2 Nor to
any goods entered inwards which shall be landed at unlawful time or place, or
without the presence of the Officer of the Customs properly concerned therein.
3 Nor in any cates where upon examination, intention of fraud to the
Commonwealth shall be discovered, or the goods landed and not entered shall
exceed the quantity above written.
But in all such cases, this Committee do require and expect, that seisures be
duly made, and prosecuted, according to the duties of the Commissioners, and
their officers, and the Laws in that behalf established.

To. Brewster. George Thomson. Ben. Valentine. Ri. Aldworth. T. Harrison.
In the Case of Exportation of Calveskins, the following Orders are to be
observed, Monday the second of October, 1654. At the Committee for preservation
of Customs.
Calveskins exported.
WHereas the Comissioners of the Customs have presented unto this Committee the
great difference between them and the Merchants and traders in the several
Ports of this Nation, arising from want of power to take their bonds for three
shillings and four pence of the duties payable upon the Exportation of every
dozen of Calveskins, as heretofore they could have done; and their enforcing
the said Merchants and others, to pay the whole duty of seven and four pence,
which is by them thought to be a greater duty then the nature of the commodity
will bear; and that hereby the said Commissioners conceive the Commonwealths
Revenue has in some measure been lessened, the chief Merchants and traders
therein having discontinued the Exportation thereof; and although others of
less value have undertaken the same, yet have they endeavored in a sculking
underhand way to export the same in Creeks and upon Beaches, and unusual
places, on purpose to defrand the Commonwealth of the whole duty thereof,
notwithstanding all due care has been taken to prevent the same; all which
this Committee having taken into consideration, do think fit, and order, That
the Commissioners for the Customs do henceforth permit and suffer Calveskins
(not exceeding the weight limited in the book of Rates) to be exported beyond
the seas, receiving only subsidy from the English men four shillings per
dozen, until this Committee shall give further order, who intend as soon as
opportunity shall serve, to report the same unto the Parliament; And that in
the mean time the said Commissioners for the Customs do take care that good
bonds be given by the Merchants and others, Exporters of such Calveskins, for
payment of three shillings four pence upon every dozen of such skins as shall
be exported, in case the Parliament shall think fit to continue the said duty.

William Roberts. John Stone. George Bennerts. John Bocket. A. Baines.
Horses to the English Plantations.
He is to permit Horses to be exported upon License from his Highness or
Council to any of the English Plantations in America, upon payment of twenty
shillings custom for each horse, according to an Ordinance of his Highness and
Council, dated the 30th of January, 1653.

Directions concerning the Levying the new Impost on Coals.
IN regard of many abuses in the measure and lading of ships with Coals at
Newcastle and Sunderland, Impost on Coals.
in both which Ports the measures are not only altered from the first
ostablishment, but do also much differ the one from the other, which ought to
be of the same gage. And that also the ships, though some more, and some less,
yet all do erceed and make ont more then the quantities which they do enter,
for which they take out Cocquets in relation to those measures now in use in
the foresaid Ports; and although the alterations of the seasons of the year,
and the wetnesse and dryness of the coals cause some small difference in the
measurs, yet it isevident, that these differences and uncertainties are made
use of to the advantage of the traders in coals, and loss to the Commonwelth
in the Impost pf twp shillings per chalder lately imposed, and in the custom of
coals transported; for prevention of which abuses, and that the aforesaid
Impost and Subsidy may be duly levied by the Collectors, these following rules
are to be observed.

That thirty sir bushels Winchester measure are allowed to a chalder.

A bushel contains eight gallons and one quart filled with water, and must
be nineteen inches and a half broad at the top from the outsides thereof.

According to this bushel the measure used in that Port must be tustly
computed, and the Impost received upon the Certifficate of the chief
Manistrate, and the report of the sworn Meater (if there be any) according to
the directions of the Act, or by such other Inspection and survey of the
discharge of the coals, as may perfectly satisfy the Collector in the delivery
of each ships lading.

Coalships entering for the Coast, and after arrived in some. Port going over
seas.
That if any Colliers from Newcastle, Sunderland, or any other place of this
Nation, do desire after arrived in Port to pay their customs for their coals,
and to go over seas, he is to take their entries upon sight of their Cocquets,
and to receive custom due for the same, as the same are rated in the book of
Rates London measure, viz. after the rate of eight pounds thirteen shillings
and four pence the chalder; and that according to the said rate he reckon, and
cause them to pay Custom for every chalder of Newcastle measure two of London,
and and he that will not pay after this rate, and the two shillings per chalder
Impost over and above, according to the said London measure, let him not go
over, but deliver his coals in the Port before departure; and in case of
refusal or resistance, that the Collector call to his aid the civil or
military Power, and certify his proceedings, and their miscarriage from time
to time unto the Commissioners.

That if any ships shall be forced over seas with their lading, being first
bound for the Coast, and offer to make entry and to pay the Customs for the
goods according to his Cocquet, that he in no case to meddle therewith, but
certify the same unto the Commissioners, and having first obtained order from
the Commissioners for the receiving chalder of Newcastle measure two of London,
besides two shillings Impost, and for every chalder of Sunderland measure three
of London, besides the two shillings Impost which he is to receive accordingly.

The collectors of the Creeks to give bond to the Collector of the head Port
about the Impost on coals.
The Commissioners do think sit further to order and direct, that in all creeks
belonging to any Port where any coals are imported, and the Imposition
thereupon due and payable, the Collector of such Port is to come to the
Collector or chief Officer of the respective creeks (who is to receive the said
duty) to enter into bond with sufficient sureties to his Highness, in such
penalty as he shall think fit, reasonable and answerable to the moneys that
shall come to their hands, with conditions to pay unto him, or such as the
Commissioners shall appoint, at the end of every four days, all such moneys as
shall come to their hands from time to time for the Imposition of such coals,
which be is to receive from them accordingly.

Rules and Instructions published by the Commissioners of the Customs, to be
observed by all their Officers in the ascertaining of the quantities of goods
and merchandises hereafter expressed, and not to be deviated from in any case
whatsoever, without the special advice and consent of the Collector and
Surveyor, and in the absence of the Collector, of the Surveyor alone; and where
there is no Surveyor, of the Collector himself.
A
Alum in cask, to be allowed for Tare twelve pound weight per cent. Almods in
cask, to be allowed for Tare fourteen pound weight per cent. Anniseeds in
searns and bags, containing above three hundred and three quarters, for tare
eighteen pound weight only. Anniseeds from Smyrna, with felts, containing
about three hundred and half, for tare twenty pound weight only. Without
felts, for tare fourteen pound weight only. Argall in cask to be allowed for
tare twelve pound weight per cent. Almods in bags, to be allowed for tare four
pound weight per vag. In searns and bags, containing two hundred weight, for
tare eighteen pound weight only. Ashes vocat. Potashes, to be allowed for
tare ten pound weight per cent.
B
BAcks for chimneys of half a hundred weight and downwards to be accounted
small, and upwards above that weight to be accounted great. Berrillia in double
searns, containing about three boundred weight, for tare twenty eight pound
weight only. In single searns, for tare fourteen pound weight only.
Beaver-wooll in Hogsheads or brisles, for tare seventy five pound weight only.
Beaver-wooll in crobyes, let them be tared, und allowance for Tare be made
accordingly. Benjamin to be tared, and allowance for tare to be made
accordingly. Books in vaists, each bail containing one hundred weight, eight of
them makes a maund.
C
CApers, one third part to be allowed for tare, but then no allowance of five
pound weight per cent. it being included in the one third part for tare.
Casteil-Soap in double searns, for tare twenty eight pound weight only. In
single searns, for tare fourteen pound weight only. In chests, containing
about two hundred and anhalf, twenty eight pound weight only. Cardamuans, the
bail, for tare fourteen pound weight only. Cochaneil, in chests covered with
skins, containing about one hundred and half. for tare forty two pound weight
only, and downwards proportionably. Cochaneil, in barrels, about one hundred
and half, barrel and bag, tare twenty four pound weight only. Cloves and
Mace, tare them, and allow for tare accordingly. Copper fats, for tare eight
pound weight per cent. Coperis, in cask, for tare twelve pound weight per cent.
Cotton-wool and Coats-wooll and Hops, for tare four pound weight per cent.
Cotton-yarn, for tare five pound weight per cent. Cotton-yarn, from India per
bail, containing about three hundred weight, for Tare thirty five pound weight
only. Currants, in buts, Carrateels, and quarter Rowls, for tare sixteen pound
weight per cent. In bags, containing about four hundred pound weght, for tare
ten pound weight per bag.
F
FLax. the last to be accounted to contain seventeen hundred weight. Feathers,
for tare to be allowed four pound weight per cent. Figs, in barrells, for tare
twelve pound weight per cent. Fruit, in baskets, for tare two pound weight pes
basket.
G
GAuls, from Aleppo and Smyrna, in double bags, for tare seven pound weight
only. In single bags, for tare four pound weight only. Gum-lack, Seed-lack,
and Shel-lack, in bales, for tare fourteen pound weight per bale. In chests,
tare them, and make allowance of tare accordingly.
H
HArnis, plates or breasts, each to be accounted for an fron double. Hemp,
vocat. Steel-hemp, in sats, for tare twelbe pound weight per cent.
I
INdico, in chests covoted with skins, containing about on hundred and three
quarters weight, to be allowed for tare forty two pound weight only. Indico,
in bales, covered with skins, containing about one hundred and a half, tare
fourteen pound weight only. Indico, in Churles, tare the Churles, and make
allowance of tare accordingly. Iron Wire Fats, for tare six pound weight per
cent.
K
KEttle Fats, for tare, eight pound weight per cent.
L
LOckeram, the plece, containing but one hundred and four Else, and should
contain, as per look of Rates, one hundred and six Else; therefore allowance to
be made, bessdes the five per cent. of two else per cent. for loss of measure.
Linen, of all sorts, take the contents, and allow seven per cent. of Flemish
measure, and of English contents allow but five per cent. Ercept Gentish of
Gentish measure, being contented by the Gentish measure, includes the allowance
of five per cent, and so no allowance to be made thereupon.
M
MAdder, in bales, great and small, single and double bags, for tare twenty
eight pound weight only. In Fats, for tare ten pound weight per cent Mirrhe,
the chest, tare the chest, and allow for the tare accordingly.
N
NVtmegs, in cask, for tare ten per cent. subtle.
O
Oils, in certain cask, one in ten for allowance of five per cent. and leakage,
under ten none, under twenty but one, under thirty but two. Oils, in Candy
barrels, for tare twenty eight pound weight only. Oils, in uncertain cask to
be weighed, and to be allowed eighteen pound weight per cent. out of the gross
hundred, for tare. Note, that seven pound and a half makes a gallon, two
hundred thirty six gallons makes a tun Civil gage. Olibanum, the hogshead, to
be tared, and allowance of tare to be made accordingly.
P
SAlt-peeter, in cask, for tare twelve pound weight per cent. Salt-peeter, the
bale, for tare thirty pound weight only. Pepper, the bags containing three
hundred pound weight and up wards: in single bags, for tare four pound weight
only. In double bags of the same weight, for tare seven pound weight only.
Prunes, in cask, for tare twelve pound weight per cent.
R
RAisons, in frails from Maligo, containing about three quarters of a hundred,
for tare four pound weight per frail only. Lippora Raisons. the barrel
containing about one hundred weight, tare per barrel fourteen pound weight
only. Raisons solis, in cask, for tare twelve pound weight per cent.
S
SMalt, or Powder-blew, in cask, for tare ten pound weight per cent. Silks, in
bales of Bolonia, package with sereclothes, containing about two hundred
weight, for tare twenty eight pound weight only. In bales of Naples, with
sereclothes, containing about two hundred weight, for tare fourteen pound
weight only. Fangats of Naples, containing about one hundred and a half, for
tare twelve pound weight only; And so proportionably downwards. Meslina bales,
throne and raw, for tare eight pound weight only. Raw Silk long bales of
Aleppo, with Cotton wool, containing about three hundred a quarter; and so to
two hundred and three quarters, for tare thirty pound weight only. Ardas Silk
in Aleppo, short bales, of the same contents, and packed with Cotton wool, for
tare twenty eight pound weight only. Fangats of Aleppo. containing two hundred
and a quarter, or two hundred and a half, for tare twenty four pound weight
only. Fangat of Aleppo, containing one hundred three quarters, or two hundred
weight, for tare twenty pound weight only. Fangats of Aleppo, containing one
hundred and a quarter, or one hundred and a half, for tare eighteen pound
weight only. Raw Silk of Smvrna, or Cyprus, containing three hundred and
upwards, for tare sixteen pound weight only: Downwards to two hundred, for
tare fourteen pound weight only. From two hundred weight downwards, for tare
ten pound weightouly Bales of Silk from Persia, containing about one hundred
and a quarter, for tare eighteen pound only. Synamon in skins, covered with
bags, fourteen pound weight for tare per subtle hundred. Without bags twelve
pound weight for Tare only. Sugar in bales from India, for tare thirty six
pound weight only. In Chests one fifth part for tare. In Cask one sixth part
for tare. Sugar Candy, tare them, and make allowance of tare accordingly. Sugar
of St. Thomas, in Cask, one fifth part for tare. Sugar in Cannisters, one
sixthe part for tare. Loaf-Sugar, Paper, Thread and Straw, for tare fifteen per
cent. Shumack in bags, contaning about three hundred and a half, for tare seven
pound weight only. Shumack in bags, containing about seven hundred weight, for
tare ten pound weight only. Succads the Chest containing about one hundred and
a half, for tare thirty two pound weight only.
T
TAllow from Russia in cask, and from Ireland, for tare ten pound weight per
cent. Thread, Sisters, Dutnell, Whited brown, Briges, or black and brown, is to
be told, and to pay by the Flemish pound as formerly. Tobacco, Spanish in
barrels, containing about two hundred and a quarter, for tare twenty eight
pound weight only. In half barrels, containing about one hundred and a
quarter, for tare eighteen pound weight only. Spanish in Pottaccos, without
Canvis, for tare twelve pound weight only. With Canvis, for tare fourteen
pound weight only. With skins for tare twenty six pound weight only. Virginia
in Dogsheads, for tare seventy pound weight only. Tobacco Barbados in Role per
stick, for tare four pound weight only. Tobacco Barmudas in Chests and
uncertain Caske, tare them, and make allowance accordingly.
W.
WOrm-seeds from Aleppo with Cotton-wooll, for tare twenty four pound weight
only. Worm-seeds and Anniseeds bailes, with Felts from smyrna, containing about
three hundred and three quarters, for Tare twenty pound weight only. Casteil
Spanish Felt wool, containing about two hundred and a quarter, for Tare
fourteen pound weight only. Estridge or Lambs wool, for Tare to be allowed
four pound weight per Cent. Polish-wool, for Tare to be allowed four pound
weight per Cent Spanish Cloth Wool, containing about two hundred weight, for
tare twenty eight pound weight only. Sigovia Spanish felt wool, containing
about two hundred weight, for Tare fourteen pound weight only.
Y.
CAble yarn in Winchis from Russia, for tare twenty eight pound weight only.
Yarn in Fats from Eastland, for Tare ten pound weight per Cent. Grogoram and
Moehair yarn, in bales from Aleppo with Cotton wool, for Tare twenty six pound
weight. Fangats of Aleppo, containing about one hundred and a quarter, for Tare
eighteen pound weight only. And proportionably downwards. Bales of Moehair yarn
from Smyrna with Felts, containing about four hundred weight, for Tare twenty
four pound weight only. Moehair yarn without Felts, about the same contents for
Tare sixteen pound weight only. Fangats of Moehair yarn, containing one hundred
three quarters, or two hundred, without Felts, for Tare twelve pound weight
only. Fangats containing about one hundred and half, without Felts, for Tare
ten pound weight only.
Directions to be observed in the Coast-businesse.
Book of Entries for the Coast-business.
EVery Collector is to prepare a Paper-Book for the entry of the
Coast-Corquets, Transtres and returns for the preceding year, ending always
the twenty fourth of Dccemb. and to be returned together with the Book
Accounts, every twenty fourth of June.

That this Coast-Book be ruled with a double Margent, the one to the righthand,
the other to the left hand, on each side; and in one part of it, he is to enter
all Cocquets and Transtres outward, plaring the name of the Port for which the
Goods are shipped, in the Margent to the left hand: on the other side the date
of the Certificate, or return from the Port where they were landed.

In another part of the Book he is to write, and enter all Cocquets and
Transtres for Goods inwards; and in the margent of the left hand, to enter the
name of the Port from whence the Goods came, and in the other margent, the date
of his Certificate or refurn.

In the body of the Book, between the two margents, he is to make an exact
entry of the Goods, as well in wards as outward, with the date of the
respective Cocquets or Transires.

He is carefully to examine and compare these Books with the Bonds and files,
before he return them into the Exchequer, and to file such returns as he
receives from the Ports, to the Bonds to which they belong, and so return them
all together, as well the Bonds for which there are returns; as those for which
there are none, the twenty fourth day of June, at which time he is so to order
his affairs, that he may with the most convenience come up to London; but in
case his affairs will not permit, he is to have a Commission issued out of the
Exchequer, for taking his Oath, and delivering in his books in the Country, and
in case he cannot come up, he is to give notice a month before, that a
Commission may in time be sent unto him.

The Collector, and the rest of the Officers of every Port and Creek, are to
take care, that no Goods whatsoever be shipped from Port to Port, before a
sufferance be passed for the same, nor any native Commodities, or manufactures
made thereof, be transported before a Cocquet be passed, and good security be
given for landing of the same, at some Port of this Nation, as is provided by
Law, nor any foreign goods, before a Transire te passt for the same; nor any
more, or greater quantities then are therein specified; and if any goods, or
Merchandise be brought into one Port from another, or shall be landed or found
aboard any ship, whether landed, or not landed; for which there is no Cocquet,
or transire, or being more in quantity, then is in the Cocquet, or transire
therein mentioned, that in such cases, seizure be made, and notice thereof
given to the Commissioners; and that the same be not discharged without order.
And as in all other Commodities, so especially care is to be used in the Case
of Fullers-earth, Wool, and Salt, the two first is exported, being dangerous
to the Nation, and the other if more shipped, or landed, then is in the
Cocquet, or Certificate expressed, is prejudicial to the receipt of Excise,
the same paying avery considerable Custom and Excise.

That no Collector make a Certificate, Return, or discharge, before some
Surveighor, or waiter, by endorsing the Cocquet, has certified his knowledge
of the landing of the Goods.

Fullers Earth, Tobacco pipe Clay, Wool, etc.
In as much as deceit in and about the transportation of Fulllers earth,
Tobacco pipe Clay, and other Clay, arises originally at the Ports and places
where the same is shipped in that more is shipped then the Merchant takes out
a Cocquet for, for prevention whereof it is required.

1. That diligent care be taken by the Collector and Officers, that no more be
laden on board any vessel, then for which a Cocquet is passed. 2. That no
ships that lie out of Command, be permitted to take in any of the aforesaid
Commodity, but that stay may be made of all lighters, or any other vessels,
that would carry any of the aforesaid Commodities to such ship. 3. That in case
any woollen yarn, woollen flocks wooll-fles, Fullers earth, Tobacco pipe Clay,
or any other Earth, or Clay, which may be used in the Art of Fulling, or any
other goods, be brought from any Port of this Commonwealth unto a Port by
Coast Cocquet, that care be taken, that the Officers do see the whole quantity
unladen in the Port, and the ships clearly unladen before departure. Remissness
in this particular, gives occasion to diverse persons, to land one half of their
goods, and what ever they please, and to get a Certificate for the whole, and
to transport, and carry the rest beyond the Seas, without payment of Custom.
And if any person, or persons shall transport, or enter to be transported for
the Coast, to any Port of this Commonwealth, any of the said woollen yarn,
woollon flocks, wool fels, earth, or clay; he shall take double security (over
and above double the value) for the three shillings for every pound thereof,
with condition, that the same shall be landed in some Port of this Nation, as
is directed by Law, and according to the Tenor of the usual Coast Bonds.

In this, and all cases, but this especially, very good secnrity is to be
taken, for that it is expected, that all diligence, and good conformity be had
thereunto.

Every person or persons, that will ship, or carry any goods, or Merchandises
prohibited, or whereof any the duties of Custom, and subsidy are payable, to
discharge the same, in any other Port, or place of this Nation, shall before
the shipping thereof declare, and manifest under his or their to the Collector
and Checque of the Customs, in the Port where the same shall be shipped in the
Custom House, the measure, length, number, and other contents, and value of
such goods, together with the name of the ship, and of the Master, the place of
whence, and for which he is fraighted, and with the approbation of the said
Collector and Checque, shall also make and enter into a sufficient Obligation
in the Law, in which he shall be bound with sufficent sureties in such sums of
moneys as shall amount to double the vain of the goods so declared and
manifested, with condition that the same shall be discharged at some Creek,
within England or Scotland, and is no other place, and in case any the laid
goods, or Merchandises shall be shipped in any ship or other vessel, to be
carried, or passed between Port, and Port as aforesaid, before such Declaratien
shall be made, and security given as aforesaid, that then all and every the
said goods, and Merchandise shall be forfeited and lost, the one moyetie, or
value there of to him, or them that will seize, or sue for the same, and the
other moyetie, or value thereof, or the fine, or composition for the same, to
be paid to the Commissioners of the Customs for the time being, for the use of
his Highness, the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth.

That every person or persons, that shall ship such goods, and shall be bound
as aforesaid, shall within four months next after shipping thereof, bring a
true certificate from the port or place, where he or they shall discharge the
said goods, testifying that the said goods so shipped, and the true nature,
length, weight, number and other contents or value thereof, are there
discharged, which Certificate shall upon discharge of the goods be delivered to
the party discharging the same, without delay, and all and every the said
bonds, for which Certificates are returned, shall be delivered half yearly unto
the Ezchequer; with the Certificate thereunto annexed, and endorsed also
thereupon, and every Midsummer (after the account of the Officer who did take
them is passed) the said bonds shall be delivered to every person that will sue
for the same, paying only twelve pence for delivery thereof, to the Officer
that has the Custody of them.

All other of the said bonds that be expired, and no Certificate returned
according to the conditions, shall be delivered into the Exchequer half yearly,
that excution may be had thereupon.

Directions touching Seizures and Demises.
Directions about Seizures.
THat every Officer, who shall make any Seizure, or Demise of any Goods or
Merchandise, as prohibited, or uncustomed, shall thereupon with all possible
speed acquaint the Commissioners of the Customs therewith and likewise
certify the same to the Commissioners and Register to be acquainted with all
Seizures.
Register of Seizures in the Port of London for the time being, that they may
be by him duly recorded.

Quantity and quality of the Goods seized, to be certified to the Register.
That such Officers do likewise certify unto the said Register, together with
the quantity and quality of the Goods so seized, the time when, and ground
whereupon he seized or demised the same, with such other circumstances as are
fit to be known for exhibiting an information in the Exchequer against the
same, in case the said Commissioners shall according to the trust reposed in
them think fit so to direct.

License to compound.
That in case any proprietor of any Goods seized or demised as aforesaid shall
procure a License to compound for the same, the Officer before he treat or
compound thereupon, do cause the said Goods to be apprized by virtue of a Writ
of apprizement out of the Exchequer, which Writ the said Register is hereby
required to procure at the request and charge of the said Officer, and to send
to the said Officer with all speed; and the Officer (having caused the said
Goods to be apprized) is forthwith to return the same Writ with the Indenture
of apprizement thereunto annered, unto the said Register, to be by him
registered, and afterward returned into the Exchequer, in order to further
prosecution.

The Officer not to compound at less then one third.
That for preventing of fraud in Compositions, no Officer do by virtue of any
such License compound for his part, at any less rate then the one third part
of the whole, according as the said Goods are apprized, unless the said
Commissioners (being first acquainted therewith) do give other directions in
the case.

The Officer to certify the Collector, what he compoundeth for.
That such Officer (having made his Composition) do forthwith certify the
Collector of the Port whereunto he does belong, what he has, or is to receive
by way of Composition for his part, for the Goods so seized or demised as
aforesaid, and for any charge of intelligence, or otherwise by him disbursed
about the same, and shall in the presence of the said Collector, endorce upon
the said License, in words at length, and not in figures, what the same
amounts unto in one entry sum and subscribe his name thereunto.

License to be returned to the Register.
That such Officers forthwith return the same License so endorsed to the said
Register, to be by him registered and entered in the Exchequer, and then to be
kept by him, until some seasonable opportunity be offered, whereby the Officer
may take his Oath in a legal way, according to what is endorsed and subscribed
as aforesaid, and that the said Officer do then likewise return unto the said
Register, the money for charges expended in the Exchequer in that fuse upon
intimation from him what the said charges are.

Goods seized, not to be delivered till the States part and Customs be paid.
That such Officer having made his Composition, do not deliver, nor suffer to
be delivered, such Goods out of custody, until the States part of such
Composition (which is the like sum compounded for,) as also the Customs due for
the same, be paid to the Collector of such Ports, for the use of the Common
wealth.

And security given for rating the Fine.
That in such cases, the said Collector take good security, or a greater sum of
money, then the charges of the Exchequer, in rating the fine and suing out of
the Quietus est, do amount unto, (which cannot be less to be deposited to that
end, then the sum of five pounds) of the proprietor, before his Goods be
delivered, with condition to procure his fine to be rated the next Term at
furthest, after he is informed by the Officer with whom such composition is
made, that Oath is by him made in a legal manner of his Composition upon the
License aforesaid, to the end, the Officer may be legally discharged of his
said seizure upon Record; and in default thereof, to leave the said sum
deposited.

The Officer to pay the States moiety for Goods condemned within twenty days.
That when any such Goods seized, are condemned in the Exchequer, the Officer
(to whom the benefit thereof does accrue,) do within twenty daves after such
condemnation enrolled in the Exchequer, and certified unto him by the said
Register, pay unto the Collector, the moiety due unto the State according as
they are apprized, and forthwith certify the said Register of the payment
thereof, and do likewise forthwith return unto the said Register, the charges
expended in the Exchequer, by reason of the said sure, being made acquaninted
by the said by the said Register, what the said charges are.

No Goods to be delivered by virtue of Writs of Delivery, till Customs be paid.
That no Officer of the Customs deliver any Goods from under seizure by virtue
of any Wait of delivery, until the Customs be paid to the Collector of such
Port for the same.

Goods secured.
That all Goods seized by any Officer of the Customs, in any of the out-Ports,
be brought into the States Warehouse belonging to such Port, where there is
any; and is case there be none, then into such other place, as the Collector
shall appoint for secuting thereof, until they be condemned, or otherwise
legally discharged.

That the Collectors of the several Ports, do take especial care, that upon all
apprizements made of Goods seized, the same be truly valued, and that they
receive Custom in all cases of composition of any Goods, And if they shall see
it, and judge, it most for the Commonwealths advantage, that then they take
the moiety of such Goods in kind, and forthwith acquaint the Commissioners
there with, to the end, they may receive direction therein, for the sale
thereof, and that all persons making seizure before dispesstion be by them made
of any part of the Goods and Merchandises by them seized, do in the several
out-ports, acquaint the Collector of that Port, where such seizure is made,
therewith, to know whether they will take the Commonwealths moiety in kind or
not.

How the Collector shall return moneys received for seizures.
That having received any any moneys for the Commonwealths part of any seizure
before the delivery of any Goods or Merchandises according to the Instructions
aforesaid, he do forthwith return the same by Bill of Exchange or otherwise to
the Cashier General. And that with the said Bill he send a Letter of advice,
signifying particularly, whether the said sum, or any part thereof by him
returned, be for a Composition, or upon a recovery, and to each express the
name of the person seizing, as also the person claiming, if there be any
Claimer, And in all cases of sums of money received by composition he is in his
Letters of advice, to express whether the sum of money received upon such
composition, be depesited until the fine shall be rated, or whether the same be
received by him, according to a fine already rated by the Barons of the
Excheguer.

He is to take notice, that he is not charge his quarter books, or yearly
Books, with the receipt of any moneys for fines or forfeitures, but to send up
yearly, or oftener, an account thereof apart by it siese.

Concerning the Collectors Accounts.
Collectors Accounts.
EVery Collector is to keep a Book in the Custom-house, where, in he is to
enter all Goods and Merchandises, as well imported into, as exported out of the
Port whereunto he is appointed, with the vain and Rates of Goods paying
subsidy, and with the product thereof, and of all other duties.

Every Collector is within four days after the close of each Quarter, to send
up a Book of all Entries passed in the Port and Members thereof under his
charge together with the subsidy, Custom and petty Custom arising thereby, or
any other sums of money by him receiveable or received, duly charged therein:
As also an account current of his receipts and disbursements, in which, as also
in all accounts, he is especially to mention

The name, surname and Office of every Officer to whom he shall pay any
salary, as also the time of the service for which such Officer is paid.

The particular services for which he shall disburse any sums of money upon
petty charges together with the name and surname of the party receiving the
same: upon payment whereof, he is to task Acquittances endorsed for his
discharge, as well as for the Salaries, and other payments of greater moment.

With this Account current, he is to send up all his Acquittances, and Vouchers
thereunto appertaining, for the better passing his Account in the Commissioners
general Account, with the Auditors of the Impressed, and both theirs, and the
Collectors discharge thereupon.

He is to divide every quarter into three periods, as from 25 Martij.
inclusive, to 1. May exclusive, form the 1. May inclusive, to the 1. of June
exclusive, from the 1. to the 24 June exclusive, And for the two first periods,
to send up an abstract of his Receipts for the said month, signed by himself in
order following, viz.

An Abstract of the moneys collected for Customs and Subsidy in the said Port,
from the 25o Martij inclusive, to the 1. May exclusive.
For Custom and Subsidy outward --
For the like inwards --
For petty Customs --
For Coals --
And the particulars of such other Receipts as by Authority shall be from time
to time settled and imposed.

In Toto --

Per A. B. Collectors.

And in regard the third month contains the close of the Quarter, he is to
make up his Quarter-Book, and to cause the same to be transmitted to the
Commissioners aforesaid, and the remaining days of that month, wherein is the
termination of any Quarter, are to be added to the subsequent month: which
Order is like wise to be observed in all the Member Ports, who do account to
the Collectors of the head-Port, and to be timely by them transmitted to the
Collectors, to whom they account, to be sent to the Commissioners aforesaid,
and may not be omitted by them; for albeit their Receipt should not produce any
thing in some of the said months, yet most of their monthly Abstracts be
returned with Nihil, and attested as aforesaid, That the Commonwealth may know
what to except at the end of each month; and neither the Commissioners nor
Collectors be unduly charged.

He is in every Quarter-Book, to mention what Bills of store or Portage he has
granted for that Quarter, the quantity of the Goods, the persons to whom, and
for what cause.

For the perfecting of this monthly Account with the Commonwealth, and freeing
the Commissioners and himself from blame, he is constantly to make use of all
Good, encounters, offering for returns of such moneys to the Commissioners, as
his Receipts shall from time to time afford, so as all his moneys received, may
be in readiness with the Commissioners here, to make good his Ports Receipts
within eight days after the close of each month and quarter; and in case of
failer of encounters, that he fail not to acquaint the Commissioners from time
to time, that they may timely provide returns for such moneys, or take order
otherwise to dispose thereof, for his discharge therein; for whether the moneys
arive or not, the Commissioners must make good the Receipts of each Collector
to the State, at the time appointed by them.

And for his satisfaction and discharge, and avoiding of all prejudice, which
may perchance by some be imagined to arise unto them, by parting with their
Vouchers, before their Accounts be determined, the Commissioners do declare,
that as without sight of the Vouchers, no demand can be allowed in Account; so
upon receipt thereof, if he send duplicate of his Account current, or a List
apart of such Vouchers as he sends up, the Commissioners will direct their
Accomptant General (whose signature they will own) whereby the Commissitoners
will acknowledge the Receipt of the said Vouchers, and charge themselves
therewith.

Every Collector is to send up unto the Commissioners (other and above the four
Quarter-Books, and the Accounts current, and all things relating thereunto, as
before mentioned) one years Book containing all particulars mentioned in his
four several Quarter-Books, which years Book is to determine every four and
twentieth of June.

And to the end, the Collector in the Member-Ports, who do account to the
Collector of the head-Port, may not be put to needless troubles in coming up
to London, to take their Oaths upon their yearly Account: The Commissioners do
direct, that the Collector of the head-Port, upon receipt of their Accounts
yearly, do administer this ensuing Oath unto them, viz.

You shall swear, The Collectors Oath.
That the Account by you made, contains the perfect Entries of all Goods and
Merchandises whatsoever, with the Subsidy and Custom, and all other sums of
money thereupon due and payable, by reason of exportation and importation
thereof into the Port of a member of the Port of As also, that the several
sum, or sums of money, mentioned in the said Account, to be by you disbursed,
are all true, And that there has not been received, or due, any other sum or
sums of money, for Subsidy or Custom, for or by reason of and Goods or
Merchandise exported out of, or imported into the said Port, from the time of
the commencement of the said Account, to the time of the determination thereof,
then are contained therein, And also that there has been truly and really
issued and paid within the time aforesaid, all and every the sums therein
inserted, to the best of your skill and knowledge, So help you God.

Which Dath is to be transcrihed at the foot of their Accounts, in their Book
of pearly account, and to be attested by the Collector as taken in his
presence, which will be sufficient for his discharge, as to that which relates
not to his own particular.

In case any Collector of any the head. Ports, cannot come up to London at
Midsummer, to take his Dath to the pearly Account, he is in such case to depose
the truth thereof before the Collector of the next Port adjoining in form
following, viz.

I swear, that the Account by me presented, etc, as in the Oath of a
Sub-Collector.

Which Oath is to be written, subscribed and attested as before, and sent up to
the Commissioners as before.

Account for the Impert on Coals.
He is over and above the Quarter, Books, within six days after the twelveth
of October, in each year, to send up to the Commissioners, an account of all
moneys by him received, by verfue of the new impost on Coals, from the first of
April, to the said twelveth of October inclussve; and the like for the
subsequent half years receipt upon Coals, from the 12th of October, to the
first of April exclusive.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
ARticles annexed to the Book of Rates. Page 4. Collectors Accounts. P. 27.
B.
Bonds of employment. p. 3. Beer. p. 5. Bays. p. 6. Bullion. p. 6. Books of
Entries for the Coast bufinesse. p. 22.
C.
The Collectors to appoint Officers to the ships. p. 3. Cottons. p. 6.
Coal-seed and Coal-seed Oil. p. 7. No allowance of five per Cent. ourwards. p.
8. Allowance of II 2 per Cent. for leakage. p. 8. Form of the Certificate and
Oath. p. 10.12. Form of the Cocquet. p. 11. 13. Calve-skins exported. p. 14.
Impost on Coals. p. 15. Coal-ships entered for the Coast, and bound over Sea. p.
15. The Collectors of the Creeks to give bond about Coals. p. 16. The Officer
to certify the Collector what he compoundeth for. p. 25. Foreign Coin. p. 6.
D.
Denizens to pay as strangers. p. 4.6. Form of a Debentur. p. 11.
Defaulcationt. p. 12. No Goods to be delivered by virtue of Writs of Delivery,
till Customs be paid. p. 26.
E.
Entryes outward. p. 2. Entryes by License. p 2. Goods outward entered in one
Ship, but laden in another p. 2. Entries inwards. p. 3. Englishmen inhabiting
in the parts beyond the Seas. p. 4. What Englishmen shall pay. p. 4. All
Entries to be daily registered. p. 12. Fullers Earth, etc. p. 22.
F.
Fish as Herrings and Pilchards. p. 6. Security for rating the Fine. p. 25
G.
Goods customable. p. 4. Goods prohibited. p. 4. Grocery Wares. p. 4. Goods to
be cleared according to the Standard. p. 4. Goods to be entered in their own
denominations. p. 7. Goods to be entered in the owners names, p. 7. Goods
perished or lost at Sea. p. 12.
H.
Horses and live Oattel. p. 7. Horses to the English Plantations. p. 12.
I.

K.

L.
Lead. p. 5. Log-wood. p. 5. Lead-oare. p. 5. License to compound for Goods
seized. p. 25. License to be returned to the Register. p. 25.
M.
The Master of Purser to deliver in the contents of their Lading upon Oath. p.
1. The Master to forfeit 100 l. for Goods shipped at unlawful time or place.
p. 2. Every Merchant to have Cocquet, etc. by himself. p. 21. Measures. p. 8.
The Officer to pay the States moiety for Goods condemned, within twenty days.
p. 26.
N.

O.
The Collectors Oath. p. 27.
P.
Prizage. p. 5. Pan Tiles. p. 5. Prize Goods and Ships. p. 5. No allowance upon
Prize Goods. p. 7. What meant by alteration of property. p. 12. Post-Entries.
p. 13. Orders touching Post-Entries. p. 13.
Q.
What meant by alteration of quality. p. 12.
R.
Goods not rated in the Book of Rates. p. 7.
S.
Notice to be given to the Collector, of Ships coming in, and going out. p. 1.
Ships to be entered within four days after arrival. p. 2. Strangers Vessels not
to trade from Port to Port. p. 2. Bills at sight. p. 10. Strangers Goods entered
in English-mens names. p. 4. Searchers conniving at the Exportation of Bullion,
etc. p. 4. Saltery Wares. p. 4. What strangers shall pay. p. 5. What strangers
shall pay upon native Commodities. p. 5. Snowt Towe. p. 5. Slate stones. p. 6.
What Ships to be reputed strangers, and what English. p. 6. Ships bought beyond
the Seas. p. 7. Goods allowed for store, etc. to be rated. p. 7. Store and
Portage. p. 8. Ships unlading part, and exporting the rest. p. 9. Directions
touching Seizures and Demises. p. 28. Allowance of half Subsidy. p. 10.
T.
Tobaccoes. p. 5. Tares. p. 16. Tobacco-Pipe Clay. p. 23.
W.
Warrants to be passed in Custom-house only. p. 2. Warrants to be delivered to
the Officers before Goods be landed or shipped. p. 2. Officers making false
Warrants. p. 4. Wines. p. 5. Wrappers. p. 7. Weights. p. 7. No half Subsidy
upon Wines, etc p. 12.

