The Good Old Cause Explained, Revived, and Asserted. AND The Long-Parliament
Vindicated. IN A Remonstrance to his Excellency the Lord Fleetwood and Council
of Officers. Being the Sense and earnest Desires of many thousands honest
well-affected Persons of the Army and People in this Nation. With several
Expedients humbly offered; 1. For the settling and securing of our Civil and
Spiritual Rights and Freedoms, and the public Peace of the Nation. 2. For the
speedy raising of Moneys to pay the Arrears of the Army and Navy, and future
supply of other Public Engagements, as the most probable and visible Way and
Means now under God left to accomplish the same; And preserve us from that
inevitable Confusion and Destruction which hangs over and threatens the three
Nations.

THe things contended for with the late King, in the late War, (wherein there
was great effusion of Christian blood, and vaste Treasure spent) Consisted
principally of these particulars:

1. That our Persons and Estates might not be disposed of at the Arbitrary will
and pleasure of the King and his evil Counselors, and other his loose
adherents; But secured and protected according to Magna Charta, the Petition of
Right, and other wholesome Laws made for the Defense and Safety of the People,
against Tyranny, Oppression, and Arbitrariness, which in those days were too
often exercised.

2. To have our Spiritual Rights and Freedoms secured unto us; and the honest
conscientious people preserved from the Rage and Fury of the Bishops and their
adherents, who grievously persecuted many for differences in Judgment in point
of Form and Ceremonies, and for not conforming to their Canons against the
dictates of their own Consciences; though holding forth and agreeing in
Fundamentalls warranted by Scripture.

3. Upon the whole, to have a thorough- Reformation of Religion, Laws, and
Manners. And to have Profaneness, Licentiousness, and Looseness of
Conversation discountenanced and suppressed; and true Piety, Sobriety, and
Uprightness of Conversation, Righteousness and Peace, encouraged and
maintained.

4. And lastly, to have the Militia of the Nation secured and disposed of in
such Hands, as might exercise the same for the Defense and Common Preservation
of our Lives, Liberties, Rights and Proprieties. And to prevent the future use
thereof, for the introducing and support of Tyranny, Slavery, and
Arbitrarinesse in matters Civil and Spiritual, so highly attempted by the late
King and his Party.

And it pleased the Lord of Hoasts (after many sharp Contests and bloody
Battles fought betwixt the King and Pa^liament concerning the premises) to
decide the Quarrel on the Parliaments side, by the total vanquishing of the
King and his Party; whereby the Parliament (who could by no other means prevail
with the King to a reasonable Condiscention to the just things demanded from
him) were now by the hand of Providence put in a capacity (without him) to
effect the same, and accomplish the premises; being the earnest and longing
desires and fervent prayers of the good People of the Nation, who freely
hazarded their Lives and Fortunes in this Good Old Cause, which no good Man
has cause to renounce, or be ashamed of. We say GOOD, Because it has a
tendency to the advancing of Gods glory, the maintenance and Reformation of the
Essentials and Body of Religion in its purity according to the Word of God, in
opposition to Popery, Atheism, Superstition and Profaneness; and the securing
of the Peoples just Rights, Liberties, Properties, Privileges and Immunities,
against Tyranny, Arbitrariness, and Oppression.

OLD, Because Anciently and Originally all Power was in the People; and the
design of setting up all Governments and Governors, was always professed for
the good of the People, who primarily had the power and choice of Electing
both. But lost it by the craft, policy, and sinister contrivances of
aspiring-persons, whose Ambition reached as high as the Heavens, and their
pride would admit of no Equal on Earth.

The regaining our Liberties and Rights, and the re-investing the Supreme
Authority in the Peoples Representatives in Parliament, has for many scores of
years been the great desires of the good people of this Nation, to accomplish
the ends aforesaid, being wearied with the former Oppression and Slavery, under
Kings, Lords, and Bishops: which long before the late Wars many thousands of
the Nations would (which many of them often declared and suff^red for it)
willingly have shaken off, but could not effect the same, until it pleased the
Lord out of his Almighty providence (after the total suppressing of the power
and interest of that party in these Nations) to put it into the hearts of that
good old Parliament, to settle the Government in the way of a FREE STATE; which
sort of Government is neither New nor Strange, The Venetians (the Bullwark of
Christendom) having for many hundreds of years lived happily and Victoriously
in the way of a Commonwealth. And our Neighbors the States of Holland, since
they shook off the Spanish Yoke, have lived very plentifully and comfortably,
and highly improved their Trade and Interest, whose freedom in the Exercise of
their Religion, does in no sort obstruct or disturb the Government or peace of
that State. Nor would it probably prove otherwise in this Nation, if once the
peoples Spiritual and Civil Rights, Liberties and Proprieties, were effectually
settled and established. So that this Good Old Cause is of far longer standing,
and has its essence and beginning before the ten years times prefixed in a
late printed paper, and long before the Author or his great Grandfather were
born.

And in order to the securing the ends of this Good Old Cause, See their
Declaration of 17 March. 1648.
the Parliament Declared the Grounds of their late proceedings; And of settling
the Government in the way of a FREE STATE: Which being seriously considered, is
sufficient to satisfy every honest conscientious well-affected man touching
that affair. The Office of Kingly Power, or under any other Name in a single
Person, being well weighed, and the Vaste Charge to support it, and the manner
and exercise thereof in these Nations duly considered, will appear to have
served mostly to satisfy their own boundless Ambition, Pride, and Cruelty,
grinding the faces of the people, and prodigally spending Christian Blood, and
the Treasure of the Nations upon punctillioes of Honor, personal Titles, and
particular revenge and dislastes, and other sinister ends, under pretense of
State Policy; Assuming to themselves that Supremacy in all matters, which none
may question, much less punish, how illegal, arbitrary, or unwarrantable
soever their actions may be. And their greedy Courtiers, attendants and
adherents trampling upon, and oppressing the Gentry and poor Commonalty with
their new invented Rates, Taxes, and Monopolies of all sorts, and other
Court-Inventions, Cum privilegio. And their Courts have been frequently
observed to be the Patterns, Nurseries, and protectors of covetousness, pride,
ambition, and looseness. The Excess of the Court, their relations and
attendants, proving an intolerable charge and burden on the People.

The Ends and Designs for which the Long Parliament did thus change the
Government from this Tyranny, into a Free State, appears in their said printed
Declaration, to be,

1. To prevent a new and further expense and effusion of the Treasure and Blood
of England.

2. To establish a firm and safe peace and an oblivion of all Rancor and
Ill Will occasioned by the late troubles: The establishing the Government in
any one single Person or Family, under what name or qualification soever,
serving only to intayle a war on us and our posterities, to maintain personal
interests, inconsistent with the good and welfare of the Nation.

3. To provide for the due Worship of God according to his word, the
advancement of the true protestant Religion, and for the liberal and certain
maintenance of godly Ministers.

4. To procure a just Liberty for the Consciences, Persons, and Estates of all
men conformable to God's glory and their own peace.

5. To endeavor vigorously the punishment of the cruel Murderers in Ireland,
the restoring of the honest Protestants and this Commonwealth to their rights
there, and the full satisfaction of all Engagements for this work.

6. To provide for the settling and just observing of Treaties and Alliances
with foreign Princes and States, for the encouragement of Manufactures, for
the increase and flourishing of Trades at home, and the maintenance of the poor
in all places of the Land.

7. To take care for the due Reformation and Administration of the Law and
public Justice, that the evil may be punished and the good rewarded.

8. To order the Revenue in such a way that the public charges may be
defrayed, the soldiers Pay justly and duly settled; that free quarter may be
wholly taken off, the People be eased in their Burdens and Taxes, and the
debts of the Commonwealth be justly satisfied.

9. To remove all grievances and oppressions of the People, and to establish
peace and righteousness in the Land.

The Parliament passed an Act, for the abolishing of the House of Lords, that
grand Badge and Relic of the Norman Conquest, 19. March, 1648.
which served only for a Negative voice against the Peoples just rights and
liberties, being the great obstructors of good Laws, and supportors of the
arbitrary unlimited will and pleasure of Princes.

It was Enacted,

19. May, 1649.
That the People of England, and of all the Dominions and Territories thereto
belonging, be constituted, made, established and confirmed to be a
Commonwealth and Free State, and shall he henceforth governed as a
Commonwealth and Free S^ate, by the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the
Presentators of the People in Parliament, And by such as they shall appoint
Officers and Ministers of the good of the People, And that WITHOUT ANY KING OR
HOUSE OF LORDS.

14. May, 1649.
And it was Enacted, That if any person shall maliciously publish by writing,
printing, or openly declaring, that the Government of the People, by its own
Representatives, or National meetings in Council, is Tyrannical usurped or
unlawful: Or that the Commons in Parliament Assembled, are not the Supreme
Authority of the Nation: Or plot, contrive, or endeavor to raise force against
the present Government, or the subversion or alteration of the same: And shall
declare the same by an open Deed, every such offense shall be adjudged
HIGH TREASON. Which Acts are yet unrepealed.

That the Parliament (though they were famous for their Heroic and worthy
Acts) not giving satisfaction to all men in all things, were by some (as is
conceived unadvisedly) interrupted 20 April, 1655. who have many of them since
(on serious consideration of the ill consequence thereof, and the hidden
designs and private ends of some amongst them,) heartily repented them thereof,
and openly confessed and declared the same, and their other backslidings and
fallings off, from that good old Cause.

By reason of which interruption, the Parliament were obstructed and
dis-enabled from accomplishing the good things hoped for and by them promised
and intended to have been wrought for the People.

And since that time, What great changes have happened both in the Government and
Governors? what daubings with untempered mo^ter, and flattering applications
have been made, and apparent violations of all former Oaths, Covenants,
Promises, Declarations and Engagements, deserting of their good old Professions
and Principles, even by many who before were eminent and precious men, for
their piety and integrity? And all to patch a Government distastful and
abominable to God and good men; and so repugnant to the Judgments, Consciences
and affections of the honest well affected, unbiassed people of the Nations and
this good old Cause, that their spirits were grieved and tormented; their
hearts trembled, their bowels did yearn within them for these great
abominations, and high breach of faith and trust committed in the face of the
Nation: who by the ambitious and covetous designs of carnal men, displeasing
to God, are brought low, the Trade, Treasure, and Honor of the Nation being
decayed, lost, and exhausted, and excessive debts contracted on them.

But to add iniquity to sin, and aggravate these their transgressions, How
many godly, honest and w^ll-affected people, have been since persecuted,
imprisoned, executed, banished, and oppressed for a good Conscience; their
Goods and Estates taken from them, contrary to the known Laws of the Nation,
and liberties of the People, which the Actors thereof so often vowed, promised
and declared to maintain.

What Inquisitors were set-up to block up and obstruct the ways of the
righteous; How many men of loose principles and carnal ends, were approved and
entrusted with the work of the Ministry; How many good men put by, and their
mouths stopped? And how many ways were used to suppress the Good old Cause,
and the real pro^essors and patterns of true Religion and Piety: We leave it
to the good people of the Nation to judge of. The Lord having eminently born
witness, and testified his high displeasure against these iniquities and
abominations.

And that which is wonderful in the eyes of all men, With what violence and
inconsiderateness the LAWYERS and other disaffected ambitious persons in the
late Parliament, did carry on the Design of Kingship: And the re-establishing
of King, Lords and Bishops, tending to the re-investing of Charles Stuart, and
his party. How ready they were to give away the Militia, Strength and Treasure
of the Nation, into the hands of a single-Person, contrary to the aforesaid Act
and all fo^mer Declarations, Propositions, and Engagements, pleading for, and
earnestly contending to inslave themselves and their Posterity. And at one
breath, to give away all the rights, freedoms and liberties of the People,
which during many years War with the price of so much Blood and Treasure they
had gained.

But the Lord our God having stirred your Spirits to put a stop to these
exorbitant and unsafe proceedings, and once more to give the opportunity to
advance the Kingdom of Christ, To propagate the Gospel, and to countenance and
support the profession and professors thereof, To repair and heal our breaches,
To regulate the Laws and Courts of Justice, And by Gods assistance, to lay a
sure foundation, for the future intailing and securing of our Civil and
Spiritual rights to us and our Posterity, that we and they may have cause to
pray for you, and God may bless and prosper your undertakings. And having
considered the present extraordinary vicissitudes, And that most rational men,
acknowledge the Legislative power, is primarily and originally in the People;
for whose only mutual good, all Laws and Governments ought to be constituted
according to that good old Maxim, Salus populi supremalex.

And all personal and private advantages and promotions in competition
therewith, ought to be laid aside, and wholly put out of remembrance, And every
individual person ought to study the general peace, welfare, and comfort of the
whole, Give us leave then in all meekness and humility of Spirit, to lay these
things before you, as so many mementoes of former actions, that you may thereby
avoid the like evil, and prevent those inconveniences which must consequently
attend all private and sinister respects, repugnant to the public, having no
cause to be jealous of your integrity. But the sad consideration of the
failings and total fallings away of many pious and worthy persons that went
before you, whose wings were clogged, and themselves ensnared with the worldly
temptation of Satan to our Savior, who have preferred and embraced an Earthly
Tabernacle, before the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven; we have better hopes of you.
And our prayers shall not cease to the Lord, that your zeal and affection to
his people, may not be abated for any terrestrial Concernments.

Proposalls for future peace and settlement of the Nations.
1 That the long Parliament, so, as aforesaid, interrupted in their
proceedings, who settled the Government in the way of a Free State, may be
forthwith convened and re-established. And for that purpose, The Army and other
good people of the Nation, would declare to stand by, and protect them in order
to an effectual settlement of the good things by them promised and held forth
to the People in their said Declaration of the 17th of March, 1648. And for
further provision to be made, as may conduce to the peace and welfare of the
Nations, being the most visible remaining Authority, and most probable persons
to effect the same, since the late Wars for the public satisfaction of all
persons, forms, and degrees of men in these Nations.

2. That all others of the long Parliament, that shall concur with them in
reducing the Government, in the way of Free State; And shall subscribe to, and
own their and the Armies proceedings against the late King and his party, be
afterward admitted, and all vacant places filled.

3 That after such settlement, an Act may be passed for an equal Representative
and distribution of Elections for the future, with sitting qualifications and
provisions for the future securing of our peace, rights, liberties and
privileges.

4 That the Militia of the Nation may be entrusted in the hands of persons well
affected to the Nation, and the Interest of a Free State.

5 That all Malignants and persons ill affected to this settlement that have
crept into places military or civil, may be amoved. And that those Officers and
Soldiers, that for their integrity to this Good old Cause, or for a good
Conscience have been put out, may be speedily restored.

6 That the Laws and exhorbitances of Courts of Justice and Offices, may be
regulated, and the People eased from the obstructions, charge, and delays in
Law proceedings.

7 That the Arreares of the Army and Navy, may be paid, and for the future
secured. And that no person be displaced in an arbitrary manner as formerly,
without due summons, examinations, and other legal proceedings against them,
according to the Laws, Martial and Civil.

8 That provision be made for tender Consciences, and others differing in
matters of form, and they freed from the former persecutions.

9 That an Act of Indemnity and Pardon, may be made for the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army; and others that have legally acted in public places,
suitable to the nature and exigency of those affairs.

10 That effectual means be used, to beget and continue peace, and a right
understanding betwixt Us and our Neighbour-Nations, hereby Trade and Commerce
may be encouraged and maintained, being almost lost and decayed, to the ruin
of many Merchants and Families.

Proposalls for raising of moneys.
1 That a grand Committee be appointed, and a sub-Committee authorized in every
County, to examine and take the accounts of all Committees, Commissioners,
Excisemen, Treasurers, Receivers, Farmers and Collectors of the public moneys
and Revenues belonging to the State, many sober knowing men, being or opinion,
that there remains above 100000 l. unaccompted for, out of the Tithes and
Church Livings in Wales, which was in great measure discovered, and under
examination in the last Parliament.

2 That either the Fees and Salaries of the grand Officers belonging to the
respective Courts of the Nation may be retrenched and regulated. Or rather, an
yearly Mulct imposed on them, suitable to the profits of their places, to
continue until the public debts of the Nation be paid.

3 That the Fees of the grand Officers of the Army, and of other public
employments, may be likewise retrenched, until the public debts and arrears
of the Army and Navy be paid. And that Companies and Troops shall consist of
full numbers, viz. each Company 120 besides Officers; and every Troop 100. And
that superfluous Officers may be spared, to ease the burden of the
Commonwealth, which seems but reasonable in time of peace, and otherwise
provided for, and encouraged in public employments.

4 That such eminent and wealthy persons, who were the chief and main
Instruments, in altering the Government from a Free State, and supporting the
same, such who have been isntrumental in oppressing the Nation, and exercising
Tyranny and arbitrariness on the good people, and Inhabitants thereof, and have
otherwise contributed to the great wrongs and grievances imposed on the Nation
and every individual member thereof, in misleading and misguiding the Army and
others the honest well-meaning people of the Nation; And such as have
endeavored, or effected the betraying of our Laws, Liberties, and
Privileges, in matters civil and spiritual; and the setting up of Kingship, or
the Powers military or civil, in one single person, contrary to the aforesaid
Acts, for settling the Government in the way of a Free State, may be sined to
the value of the 3d, or at least the 5th part of their Estates real and
personal, toward the pay of the Army and Navy, and defraying of other public
charges of the Nation. And an Act of Pardon and Indemnity for the rest, which
is both favorable and moderate, since it is humbly conceived, they have
forfeited their lives and Estates, by the strictness of those Acts of the 14th
and 19th March, 1648. And many of the offenders have gained vast Estates by the
late Wars and other public Employments.

Before we leave you, and you desert us, you are desired to consider,
1. THe Potency and Multitude of the Enemies at home and abroad, The Interest
of the Family of the Stuarts; The Treaties, Peace, Confederacion and Alliances
of Foreign Princes and States whom you have disobliged; and by your Divisions
and unsettlednesse rendered your selves almost incapable of Treaties and
Accommodation of Peace; your Faith, Credit, and Steadfastness of your
Resolutions being doubted as well by your Friends as Foes.

2. If you return to the Petition and Advice, do you not give your late
Representation and Address a denial? Have you done well to break the last
Parliament to assert the Good Old Cause, and immediately after trample it under
your feet; and wholly to desert your friends and principles, who will leave you
and your single Interest and Family to perish in your own self-seeking ways?
Must you not then call another Parliament? and will they answer your
expectations? or rather Chastise you for dissolving the last, and wholly
disband you.

3. Can the Interest of a single Family in opposition to the Stuarts, long
subsist? Will not the Interest of a Free State more probably support and
preserve us in peace, and answer the ends of the War, and the pressing Desires
of the People; whose general good and Interest will be involved therein, and
every man bound to venture life and fortune to maintain it; even the Cavalier,
who in honor and honesty cannot be either compelled or persuaded to set up and
support one Family-Interest against the other, who may have more of Law, Right
and Reason on his side, and many Oaths to Oblige them thereto; which will not
be so, if you establish a Free State.

4. Do you not find the Judgments, Affections, and Desires of the generality of
the good People for a Free State; And the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty
against a single Person and the Other House, which is so obnoxious to all men,
both for its Constitution and Qualification.

5. Will you adventure to set up a Council, Senate, or Parliament of your own
nomination which you may as easily pull down, new model, and change? and can
you imagine this Nation will submit to such arbitrary proceedings, and be
governed by the sole power of a Confused unsettled Army?

6. For your own and the Nations Common preservation, give life and motion to
the Convention of the Long Parliament, as the only refuge left for you and us,
under God, and the sole Chirurgions that can cure and heal our diseases:
Delays are dangerous.

FINIS.

