IUDAHS JOY AT THE OATH. LAID OVT IN A SERMON ON the 2 Chro. 15, 15. for
Englands example in embracing the Parliamentary Covenant with readiness and
rejoicing.

Hereunto is annexed a brief and moderate Answer to the Protestation
Protested; discovering the unsoundnesse of that interpretation of the National
Covenant, and the weakness of the grounds there suggested for Separate and
independent Churches.

By JOHN GEREE Master of ARTS, and PREACHER of GODS WORD in TEWKESBURY.

Published by order of the House of Commons.

PSALM 76.11. Vow and pay unto the LORD your GOD.

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the
sign of the gilt Cup by Saint Austins Gate, 1641.

TO THE Right Worshipful NATHANAEL STEPHENS Esquire, one of the Knights of
Parliament, for the County of Gloucester: Grace and peace in CHRIST JESUS.
SIR,
YOur courteous intelligence touching the Parliamentary Vow, occasioned these
meditations presented unto you: It is our Office to communicate the good which
we our selves are partakers of. That good news much refreshed me, The next day
after the opening of this text there entered into the Protestation above 400 of
the Inhabitants of the Town of Tewkesbury.
and I thought it my duty to comfort others with the same consolations, that
endeavor wanted not present fruit, some expressing present Joy, and very many
quickly Joining in so good a work. This encouraged me to make more common,
what was first provided for a few, and then I could think of no fitter Patron
then your self, not only for your long continued, and great respect to me, but
especially because this, whatsoever it is, had its first rise occasionally from
you: J expect not this should add any light to you, but to others it may, and
to you life. The work you have in hand needs much encouragement, not only in
regard of many difficulties which require Industry, but many affronts, and
censures, which need patience to digest them, and some congratulations to
balance them: the best need Encouragement: And respective expressions even of
Inferiors sometimes enliven Superiors in place and grace. When Sant Paul saw
the Brethrens respect in meeting him; Act. 28, 15. he thanked God and took
courage. This Treatise may a little discover unto you, what good acceptance
your Endeavors find with the best affected; They rejoice in you, bless God for
you, and this I hope will make you with Saint Paul, thank God, and if not add
to, yet confirm your courage for all good causes whatsoever the effect be:
that is the aim, and shall be the continual and earnest prayer of him who is

Yours, much obliged in the Lord Jesus, JOHN GEREE.
From my Study in Tewkesbury, Maii 24, 1641.
IUDAHS JOY AT THE OATH.
2 CHR. 15.15. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath.


TO be civilly wise (they say) it is requisite that we not only study Books,
but men: Experience of the dispositions of men being no less necessary to
complete prudence, then the rules of wisdom, but he that would be wise to
salvation, needs but the study of GODS Book; which God has so contrived, that
in studying it, we study men also: For it contains not only hagiographa, 2 Timothy 3, 15.
holy writings, holding forth precepts of divine wisdom, but historica
deciphering the tempers and dispositions of all men in Spiritual matters, that
it may make us expert to work, and wyn upon them, when we are to deal with
them in Spiritual things. And as all sacred stories conduce to this holy
prudence, so non more then these of Chronicles, and yet some it may be, may
count them superfluous, because in many things so jumping with what we read in
Samuel, and Kings; but that Argument is as strong against Deuteronomy, and 3.
of the Evangelists, as against this of Chronicles. Besides, this is not a bare
repetition, but with weighty supplements. After David's possessing the Kingdom
of Israel, there were some Additions to the Ordinances of Moses, and that more
then of mere order, as Music? This might have bred scruples in the minds of
men, that this was a usurpation by David; or governors have more power of
adding to the Ordinances of God, then other Scriptures allow them, had not the
story of Chronicles informed us that the rise of this Addition was the command
of God by his Prophets, 2 Chro. 29, 25. Furthermore between the former stories
and this, there is this remarkable difference. These after the division of the
Kingdoms into Israel and Judah, are exact in the story of the Kings of Israel,
and touch Iudahs story lightly: on the contrary, Chronicles touch Isreal's story
obiter, but that of the Kings of Judah at large, as may appear by this one
story of Asa, which in Kings is comprised in a few verses of one, but here
comprehends 3 whole Chapters; Two of which set forth his excellency, the third
his infirmity: the one for imitation, the other for caution; the one teaching
what we should be, the other what after a long profession we may come to be,
though we belong to God, that we may neither be secure of our standing, nor
austere in our censures. In the first Chapter is set down his carriage in War,
and peace; In peace there is declared his piety and policy. His piety is
commended v. 2. proved v. 3, 4, 5. it was complete in putting away evil, and
setting up good, and that by command. Things thus settled, least Asa should Act
Rehoboams part, and forsake the Lord, Zera is sent with a mighty Army, to try
and exercise his graces; Asa makes preparation, but relyes and prays to God,
and becomes victorious. This done he returns, and while their hearts were
warm with fresh mercy, Azariah who knew how good a word is, spoken in due
season, comes in the Spirit of the Lord, and strikes while the Iron is hot, and
gives good counsel, showing in Gods way, what help they should still find;
amplifyed by the contrary in Israel, forsaking God, and thence he infers a
strong exhortation, v. 7. The Son it seems was seconded by the Father, which
did so work on the good King that his heart is lifted up in the ways of God,
and sets to a more through Reformation, puts away the Idols ( Idols should be
put down as well as Jdolatry) and he made this reformation as large as his
dominion, and that with great success: God does use to prosper that courage
that is from him, and for him, stirred and directed by his word, and tends to
his glory. The people assemble, offer first their Cattle in Sacrifice, and then
themselves in Covenant, make a league offensive, and defensive with God, and
that with abundance of affection, as appears ver. 19. and not only in, but
after the doing as you hear -- And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath.

Joy is the inlargment of the heart for some present good. This Covenant joined
with an Oath, was apprehended as a Spiritual good, so they rejoiced. Here Is
then, 1 An affection, Rejoiced, 2 The Subject, Judah with its extent, Al^uda, 3
the Object, The Oath the Covenant, for cleaving to the true God and true
Religion. This is registered for our learning: hence then,

All that are truly Godly, should rejoice at a National Covenant, made for the
suppressing of the false, and the preservation of true Religion. 2 Chro. 30,
21, 23. We see joy at the restoration of Religion, then how much more when it
is done by Covenant, yea after they counseled to keep other 7 days (not
another Passover) but to spend seven days in the service of GOD, and who
knows whether this counsel were not such as Ezra's by Covenant, Ezra 10, 3.
Its most probable it was, and it was with joy; how ever we may argue a maiori,
so also from that of the Psalmist Psalm. 122, 1. But more full to our purpose is
that 2. Chro. 23, 16, 17. Where you have the Covenant, the fruit of it, and
how it was entertained with joy, ver. 21. so 2 Chro. 29, 10. And this was not
personal, but without question National: He did it as a King, and so the
Kingdom with him, as appears by the Issue, ver. 20. The Elders go along v.
28. there is a Congregation, and was not this with joy? See verses 25, 28, 30,
36.

Because this is a sign of the graces of God, God: To keep up Religion in
purity, requires grace, but to renew it and that by Covenant argues zeal and
undaunted and unconquered resolutions, as it was said of Iehosaphat, 2 Chro.
17, 6. his heart was lift up in the ways of God, carried on the grown wings of
Faith and zeal over all impediments. And should not we rejoice in this, to see
such signs of grace in a Kingdom? I am sure had we David's Spirit, we should 1
Chro. 29, 9. See what joy there was for that one discovery of good affection to
God, Phil. 4, 10. The Apostle rejoiced greatly, that their care of him did
flourish again, not for the profit he reap't, but for the grace they showed in
such a National Covenant; men's care of God does flourish again, care of his
service, and should not we much more rejoice? sure we should, and will if we
be not wicked, and so hating grace, or proud and envying it, which far be they
from us.

A National Covenant for reformation, suppressing the false, and setting up
the true Religion, so it is to be rejoiced at. That it is a means of
reformation experience may show. Where ever was it undertaken that it failed?
See here in Asa, in Hezekiah, in Joash, or Jehoaida's time, when this was made,
Idols and Idolatry went presently down, and the service of God as fast up,
see 2 Chro. 15, 16, and 2 Chro. 23, 17, 18, and 29, 10, 35, 36. and 34, 31, 32,
33. So Ezra 10.3, 5, 17. And how should it be otherwaves? For entering into
Covenant shows zeal, courage, and resolution, and when it is National, there
is outward strength added to strength of Spirit, and what can let? 2 Chro. ult.
he did it with all his heart, and prospered. When men Covenant, they do it with
all their might, and will prosper: when men come to this to renew their
Covenant with God, he will renew his Covenant with them, and bless their
undertakings. And if God be ^ith us, who can be against us? Josh. 1, 5, 6.
There be two promises made to Joshua, one subordinate to the other: The maine
the Apostle makes common, and with the same reason we may infer the latter; the
Condition is this, ver. 7. Be strong. Now the Covenanting shows this strength
of Spirit or resolution, and therefore all lets come down, and reformation
will come up; and if reformation be effected, then there is cause of joy.
Reformation is a thing that the people of God have always and should rejoice
in. Nehem. 8. the restoration of one ordinance what joy it caused, ver. 17. So
likewise 2 Chro. 30. and if any thing be cause of joy, Reformation is: That
which removes causes of sorrow, and brings many causes of joy, that will be
rejoiced in. But this reformation does, It removes causes of sorrow, for it
removes sin, It Is an healing of our backslidings, which is cause of sorrovv, so
of all corruptions in Religion; now what cause of sorrovv these be, see Ezra
93. Pet. 10. 1. Ezekiel. 36, 33. It removes fears, and fear has torment, 1 John
4, 18. When we are in our sins we have cause to tremble at the threatenings,
as Ezra 9, 3.4 It removes Judgments, so Hezekiah aimed and found, 2 Chor. 29,
10. and 2 Chro. 15.2, 3, 4, 5. Again, it brings causes of joy: For hereby God
is glorified, God is exalted, who was before neglected, false worship is a
provocation, giving his glory to another, going a whoring, Reformation is a
setting up his word for rule, and giving him the worship he requires. Now when
God is glorified, should not we rejoice, Psalm. 97. 1. Psalm. 42 10. He that was
so wounded at Gods dishonours, would not he as greatly rejoice at Gods glory?
without question, and nothing else was the cause of the joy. 1 Chro. 29, 9.
Again, the good of men's souls is furthered, for hereby men are brought into
the way of life and salvation, Poison is taken out of their food, leaven out of
their services, their Souls will be edified, services respected, persons
saved, and that we should rejoice in: There Is joy in heaven, for this, if for
one soul, much more for many. Act. 11, 18. 3. This is the way to prosperity,
to have God bless us in all we put our hands unto, for now we keep Covenant
with him, he will likewise keep Covenant with us, and that is to bless us in
all we put our hands unto. Deuteronomy. 28. So 2 Chro. 15, 15. And so in Hezekias
time, the Land recovered its pristine honor, and strength lost by wicked
backsliding Abaz. So then there is great cause to rejoice in a National
Covenant of Reformation, because it will produce Reformation which is
comfortable many ways; Its the regeneration of a Nation.

A National Covenant is a thing that in time of need all Godly hearts do
earnestly desire and pray for, therefore they will rejoice at it; Josiah, to
bring us into a Covenant of reformation. Now what we pray for, we should praise
God for, and can we praise God for that we joy not in; The denying or
prolonging of the desire is harsh, but the granting of it, is as the tree of
life, most refreshing and strengthening, Pro. 13, 12. All then that have had so
much goodness as to desire it, and pray for it, must needs rejoice in it.

Now if you inquire what a National Covenant is, it is a Bond wherein a Nation
joins together to bind themselves to God and one another, for the promoting of
any public good. Now this is done in diverse forms, sometimes by way of
single vow, promise, and Protestation; sometimes there is added an Oath, as
here there was, for that which is called a Covenant, ver. 12, is here termed an
Oath ver. 15. Yea sometimes there is further expressed a curse against those
that will not enter or fulfill it. Nehem. 9, 29. All kinds kind firmly, they
differ only in degree, Heb. 6, 17, 18. Word, and Oath, are said to be two
things which for God to break is impossible, and then for man to break either,
must be dishonest and damnable. Thus for proof.

1. This is useful, first for information, and it may inform us of 2 things,
1 What cause we have in this Nation, of joy, yea of great joy. May not I as the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts, say unto you as the Angels? Luk 2, 11. Fear
not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all
people; for in our Nation now is formed a National Covenant against
corruptions, and for Reformation. A Nation is either Collective, or
Representative: The Parliament is the Nation representative, and so the whole
Nation has taken it; not one of the house of Commons or Peers who were
present refusing: The Peers also subscribing it with their hands, according to
that expression Esaias 44, Nehem. 9, 38.
5. or as in Nehemiahs time they set to their seals. And this they have
published partly for our consolation, partly for our imitation, and have we not
in this cause to rejoice? May not Israel rejoice in those that made it? and the
Children of Syon be joyful in their Parliament, who have begun so good a work?

2. This may show us, that it is our duty to enter into this Covenant. That as
this Covenant is already by the Act of the Parliament National representative,
so it may be National Collective by the Act of every subject in particular.
Ought we not to do that which is matter of joy to the Godly? Jf it be so bad to
make the hearts of the godly sad, and of the wicked glad, Eze. 13, 22. Is it
not very good to make the godly glad, and damp the wicked? Our entering into
Covenant will do it. Nehem. 10, 28, 29. When the Nobles went before, all that
were of understanding, entered into Covenant after them. Our Nobles have gone
before, both noble in blood, and in Office, and ought not we now to follow? he
that joys not at the Covenant, is condemned by this text, and he that joys
and joins not, will be condemned of himself.

Object. But it may be some out of ignorance of the nature of this work, may
scruple touching the lawfulness of this present bond, for whose satisfaction
these Arguments following may suffice.

1. That which is set before us in the approved examples of Scriptures, and
has been in use in famous Churches and Commonwealths, that may lawfully be
undertaken by Christian people: But such is this Protestation for the
maintenance of true Religion, therefore it is lawful. In the days of Asa, 2
Chro. 15, 12. and of Josiah 2 Chro. 34, 31, 32. of Ezra cap, 10.3. and 5 of
Nehemia 9, 38. In all these times they made a Covenant for the maintenance of
Religion in its purity, according to the word: So in the Kingdom of Scotland
1680 and 81. So in our Kingdom to maintain the privileges of Magna Charta:
Therefore this present bond has good ground for it.

Ob. The Covenants of Scripture flowed from the King.

Ans. Not all, as that in Ezra's time, and Nehemiahs, when they were under
foraine power, yet they Covenanted his inconsultis. Secondly, Number. 30. we read,
vows may be made by those under Authority, only superiors have power at the
first notice of them to reverse them. But their silence is consent: so our
Sovereigns suffering is approving, and confirming: besides it cannot be
imagined that such things as are so unanimously consented to by both Houses,
should not be approved by the King, and the Protestation it self is Printed by
the Kings Printer.

2. A Covenant or vow, is an Ordinance of God, for the help of humane frailty,
to keep us fast to the performance of any necessary duty which we have or are
prone to recede from: whence thus I argue; an Ordinance of God undertaken by
fit persons on just occasion is lawful, but such is this vow or Protestation,
therefore it is lawful. Persons fit for a vow, must be such as are sui Iuris,
that is, free, or at least sui juris, in regard of the thing vowed.

Ob. But here the doubt arises, how Subjects that are under a King, can be sui
Iuris, and so be free to Covenant, especially in such a thing, wherein there is
possibility that their King may be their opponent, by such evil advise, as
has of late been given.

Ans. One may be sui Iuris, and free in one respect which is not so absolutely,
as a servant that has an estate free to himself, though he be not sui iuris,
in respect of his person, and so cannot make a vow to engage it, yet he is sui
Juris, free in regard of his estate, and may by vow engage that. Now though we
be Subjects, we be free Subjects, under the protection of Laws, which measure
our subjection, and our Sovereigns dominion according to which the King is
bound by oath, and equity to govern, receiving his Crown on these terms:
whereby it appears, that though the Subjects of England be not sui Iuris
absolutely, yet are they so in what the Laws tie them not to subjection. Now in
this Protestation we Covenant only to maintain things established by Law, and
that in legal ways, and to ressist illegal pressures, and therefore in these
things we are free to make a vow or Covenant: besides it is to be observed,
that this Covenant is made by the Houses of Parliament, the highest Court in
the Land, who have power to consult and decree what ever is according to Law
for public weal, and by them we are, though not commanded, yet permitted, yea
invited to enter into this Covenant, and therefore have freedom to enter into
it. And as the persons are fit, so are the occasions just, for what is a just
occasion of a vow or Covenant, to performance of any thing, but humane frailety
and corruption manifested in former violation? as in Hezekiahs and Josiahs
time, the Apostasy to Idolatry occasioned the Covenant against it: so likewise
in Ezra, and Nehemiahs time, former deviation produced the present Covenant to
prevent future, and res ipsa loquitur, yea clamat, what gross deviations in
all the particulars may justly require a Covenant that we may be more strong to
prevention.

3. Such bonds as are neither against Law, conscience, nor prudence, may be
lawfully entered into: But such is this Protestation, therefore it may lawfully
be entered into.

1. This bond is not against law, because it is only for the maintenance of the
law, and the prevention of oppressions and Innovations against Law, and by
lawful means, and in such a way as is forbidden by no law, therefore there
can be no illegality in it.

2. Nor is it against conscience, because it binds to nothing unlawful, that
bond only is against conscience, which is a bond of iniquity: Now this binds
only by good means to prevent corruptions in Religion, and oppression in
civil liberties or persons for standing for them, wherein if the persons to be
opposed be sometimes governors, we are bound to oppose not their Authority, but
their Lust, not to hinder their Government, but their Tyranny, which we are not
bound to submit to, and its their honor, and safety, that it should be hindered
rather then furthered, its better to have power curbed, then to abuse it: Its
better and rather to be chosen of a conscientious Christian, not to be a King
then to be a Tyrant.

3. Nor is this bond against Prudence, but this is the hardest task to
demonstrate, because it has not such fixed rules, yet we may prove it thus:
That bond which is in matters of weight answerable to the engagement needful
and possible, that is not against Prudence: But such is this present
Protestation, therefore it is not against Prudence.

1. This is in matters weighty, as in matter of Religion, for which if we
prefer the soul and the glory of God (as all ought to do) before life and all
outward things, we may enter into the strongest engagements: so for the Kings
person, estate, and honor, they that rightly esteem the work and care of
Sovereignty for the Subject, and thence the bond of respect from the Subject to
the Sovereign, will judge that they ought not to think any thing too dear to
engage for the safety of the King and his regal State and dignity, and for the
liberties of Parliaments, and of Subjects, he that considers that in these the
comfortable enjoyment of all we have is involved, will think nothing too much
to engage for the maintenance of them; so for mutual defense, if any suffer
for a common cause, all suffer in him, and therefore should stand for him as
for themselves, and for bringing to punishment the opposers of these, this is
as weighty as the things themselves which cannot otherwise be maintained, but
by suppressing those which undermine them. And lastly, for the peace of the 3
Kingdoms, they being now as it were one, the division of them is the way to
ruin, and so the whole matter of this Protestation is most weighty.

2. This bond was needful, for these things have been so violated, and the
violation and the violators so strengthened, that the friends of these
privileges have not been, nor would in likelihood be able to maintain them,
unless strengthened by such an unviolable Bond of union.

3. This Bond is a probable means to effect the thing Covenanted: If it were
impossible or improbable, then it were a certain or likely snare which
Prudence would dissuade, but its neither, there be so many that have so great
and cordial engagement in the things themselves, both Religion, Liberties, and
Concord, that if they do unite, the opposites are no considerable part, so that
the friends of these things want nothing to make them prevalent but union,
which this Covenant confirming, is a most probable means to make able for the
things Covenanted.

Obj. But what if some fall off, or enough will not come in, or these things
should be opposed by foreign force?

Ans. If so many should fall off, or that so great force should oppose that the
parties Covenanting could not by force maintain the things Covenanted, I
conceive the intent of the bond then is not to tie men to run on certain
ruin, but to maintain these things in a prudentiall way, to venture state and
life, when there is probability such adventure may effect the thing, or else to
wait for an opportunity when it may, and not to be drawn by any means fair
or foul, from this purpose or resolution.

Obj. 2. A man by this Covenant may be engaged to further the punishment of his
Father, Son, or dearest friend, and is not that a snare?

Ans. In matter of seducing from the true to false Worship, the case is clear,
we must bring any to punishment, how near or dear soever, Deuteronomy. 13, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. which may be confirmed by that of our Savior, Mat. 10, 37. He that
loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves
Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me: And in case of public
weal, if any persist enemies to it, and will not be reclaymed, affection to
the Country, and community must overrule natural and private affection, Cicero
in his third book of Offices (a precise book for matter of Justice) moves
certain cases of this nature, and concludes that though the things be most
heinous, if they reach not further then some present damage, as in robbing of
Churches or the Treasury. A Son conscious should be silent, but if his Father
affect tyranny, or would betray the Country when the things tends to the ruin
of the Commonwealth, then he must prefer the safety of the Country before his
Father, and further his punishment, and this resolution is rational, therefore
the persons we Covenant against, being such as endeavor what tends to the ruin
of the Commonwealth, the Father, and so all of kin, if they will not be
reclaymed by warning, may by us be furthered to punishment.

This is useful likewise for trial, All Judah rejoiced at the Oath: They then
that rejoice not at our National Covenant, are not of Judah, not true
Israelites in whom there is no guile: Were they (if they mistake it not) they
would surely rejoice, Psa. 126, 1, 2. When the Israelits had their Captivity
returned, they were even transported with joy. This Covenant is a kind of
returning of a Spiritual Captivity under which our Religion and Religious men
have been? And can we choose but rejoice? The Parliament are about to enact
that the taking or refusing of this Vow shall be a Touchstone to discover who in
profession be of us, who against us; who of Israel, who of Amaleck, But this
text will be a closer discovery, Re. 2, 9, and 3, 9. there is speech of some
that say they are Jews and are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan; in show
with the Jew, in substance with Satan: so some there be that be in word with us,
in heart with Rome. Now these will take the Protestation (if urged) so that
cannot discover them, but they will not rejoice in it, they will not be
Cordial, this will convince them: A Jew indeed will not only take it, but
rejoice at it, he that loves a thing will rejoice at the promotion of it, and
no man is Religious indeed, but he that loves Religion 2 These. 2, 10. Now this
Covenant is a means to promote Religion. Never did Shiboleth better
distinguish an Ephraimite then this Joy an Hyppocriticall professor of our
Religion. He may offer to take the Protestation; but he will say but siboleth,
he will lispe, he will not speak out cordially, rejoicing at the Oath, and so
is laid open.

This is for reproof of such as do not joy at the Oath, Scotland when they
renewed their National Covenant, they of them especially that had seen the
making, the breaking and renewing of their National Covenant, wept as fast for
joy at the renovation, as ever they had for grief at the breach of the
Covenant. And shall we have no enlargement of heart? what shame, what sin is
this? When we bring a man some special thing which we suppose he highly
prizeth, If he look disdainfully, nay carelessly upon it, we will presently
repent that we have done it for him. Is not this Covenant a mercy that God
looks England should prize? Will not sleighting of it, in not being affected
with it, show an unworthiness of it, and make God blast it, curse it? Oh then
let them be grieved and ashamed that joy not in it: It shows a cold Spirit, a
carnal Spirit, not like that of the godly, whose praise is in the Scripture.

Hence we may draw a threefold Exhortation, God? Rejoice to see him glorified.
Do you love the Parliament? Rejoice to see their zeal and other graces
flourish. Do you love your selves? Rejoice to see salvation coming to you? Do
you love the Nation? Rejoice to see Gods displeasure removed, his favor
procured, fear of judgments vanishing, peace and prosperity approaching. Do
you love your Brethren? Rejoice that the evil shall be restrained, the weak
preserved, the good protected. If Ministers now be silenced against Law for
Preaching down Innovations, or people vexed for refusing subjection to them,
they may go to any Peer or Parliament Man, and by his National Covenant (he
himself having first taken it) require and enjoy his assistance, to be
righted, and to have his oppressing persecutor punished, what ever he be,
layman or Prelate: Nay if thou can not look so high as these Spiritual
considerations, yet our Covenant is such as may make thee glad: For if any
shall now come upon thee with unlawful taxes, will streyne thy goods, imprison
thy person, etc. thou may go to any Peer or Parliament Man, and by virtue
of this, require assistance: and is not here cause of joy? Oh then be joyful
all the People of the Land, and serve the Lord with gladness. But because it is
the work of our Office, not to have dominion over your faith, but to be
helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1, 24. Give me leave to lay down a few means to
further this joy in you.

Then ponder the benefits of this Covenant, Means 1.
Its the head that must move the heart, holy motions flow from holy notions:
the more you apprehend and ponder the cause of any affection, the more it
stirs: what the eye sees not, the heart rues not, it is true in evils, and it
is as true in goods: What the mind apprehends not, the heart joys not, Psalm.
63, 5, 6. David was satisfied as with marrow and fatness, with joy in God: but
it was by meditating on him. So we by meditating on this Covenant, and the
benefits of it, may have our hearts delighted as with marrow and fatness: you
may be helped in pondering to see the good in it by the reasons before
alleged, which are convincing.

2. Look upon the examples of Scripture, in this and other places, and that
will work upon you; affection is very catching, seeing others grief or joy is
very apt to move us, and so will the consideration of the affection of the
Saints in Scripture: The Scriptures are a glass, but they are a strong glass,
a transforming glass that changes our souls to the likeness of that we see
2 Cor. 3, 18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord are changed into the same Image from glory to glory: so is the word
to us, when in it, as in a glass, we behold the gracious affections of the
Saints: Sure I am, they will make us blush if we be far short and unlike them,
and shame will stir us up to reform, as 2 Chro. 30, 15. The forwardness of
the people did shame the Priests and Levites, and make them sanctify themselves.

3. Excite and stir up your hearts, you know though a man find a dampe on his
Spirit sometimes, yet if he see cause of joy, and set himself to be
cheerful, he may attain it, as they did, Nehem. 8.9, 10, 11, 12. Call upon
your hearts then to be merry in the Lord, and say it is not a time of drooping
but of rejoicing.

4. If you find any of this holy flame inkindled in you by this Sermon cherish
it, blow it up, keep it up, The word is moving for the present, but the
impression will not stay long without renewing it: Repeat it therefore in your
houses in your minds: rub it again and again upon your Souls.

5. Pray: Joy is the fruit of the Spirit; pray for the Spirit to work this
affection to annoint you with this oil of gladness, to enlarge you to rejoice
in this good work: this will be acceptable to God, and no less to us; for
when we rejoice in Gods service, God will bless us, as may be seen 2 Cro.
30.26, 27.

We should praise God for it always, Exhor. 2.
that which is matter of joy, is matter of praise too: For they are both for
good things wherein we are interested: That praise is heartlesse that comes not
from joy, and that joy is carnal which ends not in praise, and therefore these
two are usually twins in the hearts of the Godly: joy is the elder Brother, but
praise holds him by the heel, Psalm. 126, 2. When their mouths were filled with
laughter, their tongues were also taken up with singing. When David settled the
Arc it was not only with joy, and exultation, but with a Psalm of praise, 1
Cro. 16, 7, 8. and truly this day is Religion settled in our Land, and
therefore this deserves praise, a Psalm of Praise, a day of Praise, and God
move the heart of the Parliament to this solemn thankfulness, as well as to
this courageous resolutnesse, that as they abound in other, so they may in this
grace also: In the mean time let us glorify GOD that has given such grace to
them, such mercy to us in time of need; Let this thankfulness then begin in
the soul in inward convincement of engagement, and inlargment to God
answerable to such a blessing, let thankfulness as a precious spice, flow out
in thankful speeches, blessing God with Ezra, who has put such a thing into
the heart of the Parliament to restore and beutifie Religion, Ezra 7, 26, 27.
And let us add thankfulness of life, which is the life of thankfulness,
giving our selves to God in all holy obedience, and specially to make and keep
this Covenant, which is the third and last Exhortation.

Enter into this Covenant, Exhor. 3.
you have been informed it is a duty, and every duty is to be practiced: There
is a service which is freedom, the service of Christ: and there is a freedom
which is servitude, freedom to sin, Io. 8, 31, 32, 34. There is a liberty
which is bondage, as that which is carnal, and here is a bondage which is
liberty: Take this Vow, it will make you free from the Antichristian yoke and
illegal Pressures: Fear not, for you have the Peers of the Land, and Lower
house of Parliament fast bound to protect you in this, with life and state.
Mot. 1.
To excite you, consider the examples in the Scripture, wherein upon all
occasions the people have been tractable, as has been formerly showed: Add to
them the noble example of both Houses of Parliament. It Is a very Jade that will
not follow, and he must needs be a dull Christian who cannot be moved with such
a cloud of such leaders. Shall we see the men of Israel and Judah contending
about priority, in bringing David back to his Kingdom, and shall not we rather
strive then strain courtesy, who shall be first hereby to bring Christ back
again to us, who was departing from us (as well he might) for he was driven from
amongst us; his truths being some suppressed, some disgraced, and Popery
countenanced, and by degrees introduced. Shall we show less respect to the
Antitype then they to the Type, to Christ then they to David? Has not the
Scotch Nation in this given us a brave example? shall we be behind them in
duties, whom God has made to outstrip in outward mercies? 2. If we enter not
this Protestation, we shall seem to desert the Houses of Parliament,
especially the House of Commons, from which this Protestation did first flow:
The House of Commons are chosen by us, entrusted by us, bear the burden for
us, spend their time, their strength for us, employ their gifts, engage their
persons and estates for us, and in this way have entered into this Protestation.
If they should stand alone in it, it might be misinterpreted, so become a
snare, and when they have don it for us, should we discourage them? what
ingratitude were that? what unworthiness? who would serve? who would venture
any thing for such unworthy ones? That Honorable House represents this whole
Nation: we have vertually all entered into it, in them we are engaged in all
their just and Honorable Actions, and ought to stick to what they have done, so
that our entering into this Protestation, will not be much more then what
already we are by consequent engaged unto, save only a more formal and actual
expression of that in our own persons, which we have already vertually done in
the persons of others.

3. If we enter not this Covenant, we shall desert the cause of God and be ill
Christians, for this is undertaken as an effectual means to confirm true
Religion, and wound Popery in these Kingdoms to the heart: And sure if any
means under heaven can extirpate Popery, this is it, which ingageth men not
only to reject it, but oppose it, not only in their own persons to depart from
it, but with all their might to keep it from coming in amongst us by the
wicked and profane plots of others. Now shall we pull our hand from such a
work wherein the honor of Christ, and the salvation of men's souls is so
deeply concerned? God forbid!

4. If we be not ready to this we shall desert the King and be wanting in the
duties of good Subjects, for herein we are to protest to maintain his
Majesty's Royal person, honor, and estate, and can we be backward to that
without impeachment to our Allegiance? Besides; much of the matter of this Vow
is concurrent with that of the Oath at his Majesty's Corronation, so the
entering into this will be a strengthening unto the performance of that, and
thereby we shall do no mean duty of Allegiance. 5. In denying this Vow, we
shall desert our beloved Country, and betray the liberties of it, which we
herein should protest to maintain, and this Protestation is a means to
vindicate them, so far entrenched upon. Now to be wanting to our Country, is to
be worse then Heathens, who for the preserving of public weal, have not
shunned the greatest dangers or sufferings, and Christianity should elevate
humanity, not take it off, but enable and carry on to all civil duties on
better and higher grounds. 6. Unless we be ready to this Vow, we shall be
injurious to the Court of Parliament for ever, which is the glory, safety, and
sinnewes of our Nation, the privilege whereof, if once impeached, farewell all
that is glorious in in free Subjects, we shall hear no more of such glorious
things done by Parliaments: These have been secunda Tabula post Naufragium, to
save a sinking State, these have been the refuge of the oppressed, if we want
Parliaments, if ever we grow downward, we shall have little hope of recovery:
and if Parliaments loose their power and privilege, we shall want them, though
we have them. 7. If we refuse we shall be enemies to our own comfort and honor?
For you see it is a thing to be joyed at, and a man cannot refuse, but
suspicions must needs rise concerning him; either that he is ill affected to
Religion, or tainted in Loyalty, or no good Patriot, lies under some secret
guilt, that makes him loath to enter into that which may return upon his own
head, or that he is a man of a base selfe-seeking Spirit, without true public
generosity to put on for any high and holy work and so indeed a Christian of no
value: but we have need of direction how to do it, as well as of Argument to
encourage to it: we must then observe these rules; We must do it
understandingly, Direction 1.
though we do it with company, yet not only for company: Others examples may
be inter Motiva, but not fundamenta, be motives, not the only grounds of
entering into the Covenant: we must understand what the Covenant is that we
undertake, and how good it is, and so embrace it. A man being a reasonable
creature, must do every thing understandingly, or else it is not reasonable,
and so cannot be acceptable service, Romans 12, 1. 2. We must do it sincerely,
not with the mouth alone, but with the heart: God discernes, and abhors
Aypocrisy, as they Covenanted 2 Chr. 15, 12. To enter into a Covenant with all
their heart, so they performed it, v. 15. 3. We must do it willingly and
freely, not forcedly, no not in a mixed sense, for fear of censure or
punishment, but voluntarily choosing it as that which is good and eligible: No
action is acceptable, but what is don willingly: some things are sinful which
are in voluntary, but none good. 4. Yea, we should do it joyfully, being glad
of an opportunity to do good, and approve our selves to God as they did here.
5. We must do it reverently; a Vow is an Ordinance of God, it is made with God,
before God, and when we have to deal with God more solemnly, who is glorious,
or with Ordinances that are so holy, should not we be reverent? Lastly, we must
do it conscienciously, not carelessly, I mean so that when we have don it, we
remember it, and make conscience of the observation of it, else we profane it,
we loose the end of it, we break many a strict charge in the word of paying
our Vows we have made and so indeed may get a curse insted of a blessing,
being to God as deceivers, which thing Jacob feared then, G. 27, 12. Our
Ancestors, at least, the Peers have bound their posterity in a Curse, if they
did not uphold the liberties of Magna Charta, which how well (or ill rather) it
has been observed, is no hard thing to conjecture, and why may not that Curse
be one main thing causing our woes? I am sure in the Original the words in
Jeremy may be rendered thus, Ier. 23, 10.
For the curse or execration the Land mournes: This Covenant is wiselier
contrived, being personal, not for posterity, who having not our occasions may
want our care, and may degenerate as we sometimes did: let us therefore who do
it out of fresh bleeding occasion, be conscientious in it to observe it, to
help us it is good to keep a Copy of what we have entered into: keeping it on a
table in our houses, may further the keeping of it on the table of our hearts.
And oh that that God, who when he had put it into the heart of Hezekia to keep
a Passover in purity, and declare it by Proclamation, gave to Judah one heart
to do the commandment of the King, and the Princes, by the word of the Lord,
would give England one heart in this manner, to enter this Covenant according
to the rule of Gods word: then would God give us rest round about, as he did to
these Jews, 2 Chr. 15, 15. Then would he do according to his promise, subdue
our enemies, make the haters of the Lord submit themselves, and feed us with
the finest of the wheat, Ps. 81, 14, 15, 16. He would do, do I say? nay do we
not see he has done? For is there not newly a grievous plot discovered,
defeated, and we preserved, which is like to turn to the further confusion of
the adversaries, the glory of the truth, and perfection of reformation: oh then
let this confirm us, and comfort us, in this blessed way, that we may prosper
here, and being faithful unto death, may inherit the Crown of life: Which God
vouchsafe, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Vindiciae Voti. OR A VINDICATION OF THE TRUE SENSE OF THE NATIONAL COVENANT,
in a brief and moderate Answer to the Protestation Protested: Discovering the
unfoundnesse of that interpretation of the COVENANT, and the weakness of the
grounds there suggested for Separate and Independent Churches.

BY JOHN GEREE, Master of ARTS, and Preacher of GODS word in TEWKESBURY.

Published by the Authority of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the sign
of the gilt Cup, near Saint Austins Gate. 1641.

Christian READER,
AFter I had sent up this exercise about the Protestation to the Press, there
came into my hands a Pamphlet named The Protestation Protested, or a
Remonstrance showing what is principally required of all those that have or do
take the Protestation: Which Treatise so far as it does concern this title,
seemed to me so irrational, that I thought all understanding Christians would
rather have smiled at the weakness, then have been any way moved with the
Sophistry of it; But finding by experience that not only many of the more
intelligent Christians, but even some of reputation in an higher rank, were
much taken with it, and the effect of it, that some were scrupled, some
attempted a tumultuous removing of things established by Law, under color of
this Protestation, I thought it necessary, that unto this Treatise, pressing
the taking of the Covenant, and directing to do it understandingly, I should
annex a brief Answer to the unsound interpretation of it by this namelesse
Author, lest those that have, or may enter into it, by my means, be afterward
by this bad gloss, cast upon either the incomparable burden of a wounded
conscience, or unwarrantable and illegal Actions, which will hinder, not
further, an holy, legal, and orderly Reformation.

AN ANSWER TO THE PROTESTATION PROTESTED.
THE very Title seems to me a riddle, seeing nothing in the Treatise to
answer it, this being not an avowing, but a glossing, or rather a glosing of
the Protestation, as will appear by the sequel: But least we should stumble
at the threshold, he has hanged out a light, adding, Or a short Remonstrance,
etc.

ECCLES. 5, 45. Page 1. When thou vowest a vow unto GOD, defer not to pay it
etc.

THe Author first lays us down a text of Scripture, from consideration of
which, compared with this Protestation, he is made to tremble at the small
account that many make of so solemn a vow, under which guilt by his exposition
he concludes the most of the best Ministers, and people of this Kingdom, who
have entered this Protestation; wherein thus far we willingly agree with him. A
vow to GOD is a straight and sacred Band, that should not be entered into
rashly, but with serious deliberation, Eccles. 5, 2. else in stead of an help,
it may become a snare, and be so far from acceptance, that it prove an
abomination, as in Iephtaes case, Ludges 11.30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 39. After avow
is taken, there ought to be as much tenderness to observe it, as caution
before we undertake it, else we shall but double our guilt, and increase GODS
displeasure against us. What we vow is in it self good, and so caries with it
an engagement to performance. Our Vow is second engagement super-added to the
first, if after it we be negligent, we break more bonds, and so must needs be
more guilty: Its not to be doubted but many enter this Protestation rather for
company then conscience, and so will make too little account of keeping it, and
need admonition to observe, as well as to enter this Covenant. But that this
neglect should be so general, as to include the generality of the Godly, as
this Expositor does make it, that I dare not assent unto, the Psalmist has
taught me more tenderness, Ps. 73, 15. If I will speak thus, behold I should
offend against the generation of thy Children. To condemn the godly was such a
thing to this blessed Psalmist, that he would renownce sense, and reason, and
set upon a serious review, rather then dash upon it: In whose steps had this
Author trodden, he would not have been so rash, to have put the fool upon
them: He might with less ado then the Psalmist have freed himself from
needless Horror, and the godly from unjust censure. But now to the point.

He gives us the ground of his Censure.

Page 2. THe Protestation is to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England,
so far as it is opposite to Popery, which they do not perform, so long as they
retain and maintain the imposition of the Liturgy, 2 the Discipline, 3 the
Government, 4 the Ceremonies.

Ans. In his very first Argumentation there is a most palpable fallacy, which
is so obvious, that its wonder to me, that any man that would undertake to
write a Book in a matter of this consequence, should either not himself see,
or should imagine that so many clear eyes that it must needs touch, would not
most easily discern, and discover it, for the Argument must be framed thus.

He that has solemnly vowed to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England,
so far as it is opposite to Popery, must renownce all Popery, and particularly
the imposition of the Liturgy, etc. or else he breaks his vow, and is a fool
etc. But the Ministers and people have protested to maintain the Doctrine of
the Church of England, so far as it is opposite to Popery. Therefore they must
renownce all Popery, and particularly the imposition of the Liturgy etc. or
else they break their vows and are fools, in whom GOD has no pleasure.

Now what a manifest fallacy is here, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter, from that which is spoken in some respect, to that which is spoken
absolutely; for the Protestation is not against Popery absolutely; but as this
Author expresses it, so far forth, as it is against the Doctrine of the Church
of England: what Popery then the Doctrine of the Church of England does not
condemn this Protestation does not include, being only to defend the Doctrine
of the Church of England against Popery and Popish Innovations. But then some
will demand is not the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery. I
answer, ad hominem. If the things here objected be Popery, then the Doctrine
of the Church is not against all Popery, for these things so far as they may be
termed Doctrinall, are yet according to the Doctrine of the Church of England;
unless you will say that the Doctrine of the Church of England is contrary to
the practice of the Church of England, whence then thus I Argue: Either the
Doctrine of the Church of England is not against all Popery, or else the
imposition of the Liturgy, Ceremonies, Discipline, Government, are not Popery;
for the Doctrine of the Church of England is not against them. If the Doctrine
of the Church of England is not against all Popery, he that vows to maintain
that Doctrine against all Popery, vows not against Popery absolutely, but only
as it is against that Doctrine: and then this Authors inference from this vow
against Popery, with this restraint, that we must therefore oppose all Popery
absolutely, is a manifest inconsequence: on the other side, if the Liturgy etc.
be not Popery, as they must not be, if the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND be
complete against it, then they are not abjured: So however it be, the
Covenanter is free from breach and folly: And this I conceive is so clear,
that it needs no further confirmation: yet a little more to evince the
absurdity of it, by other particulars in the Protestation, we protest to
maintain every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do
in the lawful pursuance of it. If a man should thence infer, that we must
defend him whatsoever he shall do in the pursuance of it, if he shall move
sedition or the like, were not this a violation of the sense of this Covenant?
and is not the same, when we stretch the opposing of Popery so far as it is
opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of England; to be meant against all
Popery whatsoever? though it be granted, it be maintained in the Church of
England? His foundation then is most rotten, and what firmness can be in the
building?

But he makes the objection, Page 2. which he endeavors to answer as well as he
can: The Objection is, that these things are established by the Law, therefore
we may not cast them off till the Law be abrogated, and we protest against
Popery, to cast it out so far as lawfully we may.

Thus the Protestor, wherein he has objected, what he has not well answered,
though all be don very rawly. For first he should have framed the Argument
thus, Those things are established by the Laws of England, where the Doctrine
of the Church of England is established, and therefore according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, these things cannot be interpreted to be
Popery; and so not within the Verge of that Protestation, which is against
Popery, as it is opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of England: which
objection if he ever answer, erit mihi magnus Apollo. The Objection which he
has made, he strengthens from the words of the Protestation, that we protest
to cast out things as far as lawfully we may, which clause does not at all
respect the matter protested against, but the means and manner of pursuance,
that we shall not do it in any tumultuous or seditious or illegal way, but by
honest and lawful means. A thing needful to be taken notice of by many
respective Readers of this Book, who while they learn of him that they must
oppose the things mentioned, as parts of Popery, from themselves infer, that it
ought to be done in a violent way, without waiting for the direction of
Authority which in private persons is not to oppose lawfully, but illegally,
and seditiously.

But now let us hear his Answer. First says he, All Laws are to be
interpreted according to their clear intention and end. Now the Law for
reformation never intended to allow or set up Popery in the Church of England.

Ans. This rule for the interpretation of Laws, in the (a) There is a twofold
intention of Laws, one general arising from men's goodness, and that may be
to remove whatsoever is evil, the other special arising from men's light, and
that is to remove such particulars as are discovered to be evil the latter
intention is the rule of interpreting Laws, not the former, and this Author
speaks of the former.
sense he takes it, is a device of his own, that has neither authority nor
reason, for the confirmation of it. Laws are to be interpreted according to
the mind of the Law giver, which the Grammatical sense of the words does
usually discover. Indeed in matters doubtful, where the words are capable of a
double sense, the intention of the Law may there clear, what sense is most
Genuine: but that the general intention of of the Law shall give a sense
contrary to the letter of the Law, is without doubt, a groundless and
dangerous fancy. Its true, the Law never intended to set up Popery, but the
question is, whether it be destructive of all Popery. The Law can reach no
further then the light of the Lawgivers, who if they saw not all Popery, could
not by their Laws condemn all, nor did, if the things in Question be Popery.
Lex Currit cum praxi. The general practice especially of those that are
regular discovers the mind of the Law, and the practice has been to maintain
these things, therefore its not the meaning of the Law to condemn them, nor of
this Protestation to abjure them.

Secondly he says, If humane Laws be found to be contrary to Gods word, they
are invalid and void ipso facto.

Ans. This rightly understood is in part a truth, but here misapplied, we are
subjected to all Terrene superiors by the Lord and under the Lord, when they
then command any thing contrary to GOD, the Laws have noe binding power,
because by a superior Law we are bound to the contrary: But yet such Laws are
not Ipso facto void, or if void, yet they are void in foro conscientiae, in the
Court of Heaven, not in foro politico, in Courts on Earth, though we are not
bound to obey them, yet we are without resistance to submit to such penalties,
under the danger of Sedition, which were there noe Laws, we were free from.
Again, this Thesis of his is misapplied, for thence he infers. Thirdly, that
having made this Protestation, we ought to have no communion with the aforesaid
particulars, notwithstanding they be confirmed by Law, which inference is
therefore faulty, because the Protestation is only against Popery as it is
against the Doctrine of the Church, and that which is confirmed by our law,
though it be Popery, yet it is not Popery opposite to the Doctrine of the
Church of England. If the Laws of the Land, and the Doctrine of our Church,
had their establishment in different Courts, then that which is established by
Law, might be against the Doctrine of the Church; but the Doctrine of the
Church, and the Laws of the Lands, having both their establishment in
Parliament, what is confirmed by Law cannot be Popery against the Doctrine of
the Church, and therefore this Authors arguing must needs be irrational.

But now we are furnished with a second Objection which we are to consider of,
and whether this Author has with any better success taken of, then he has
the former, what says he, If the Parliament did not by Popery understand the
Liturgy, Ceremonies, Government of our Church, and he gives good reason to
conceive they did not, for then many of them would not have taken it. What shall
we do then? that is his Quaere, now hear his Answers. First says he, we are
sure they intended in against all Popery. To which I answer; that its most
clear, and so he himself expresses in the former Page, they only intend it
against Popery, as it is opposite against the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and such Popery the mentioned things cannot be. Secondly says he,
They express, that the words are not to be extended to the maintaining of any
form of Worship, Discipline, or Ceremonies in the said Church: What does he
thence infer, why forsooth? that therefore we may not Protest for the
maintenance of these; why, was that the Question whether we should be bound to
maintain them, or whether we are bound to abolish them? What ridiculous
disputing then is this? But hence I Argue: If the Protestation do not include
them for confirmation, because they are no parts of Doctrine; it does not
exclude them for abolition, but leaves them for determination to another
opportunity. Thirdly says he, Suppose that at the first making of the
Protestation, that these particulars were not mentioned in the Catalogue of
Popery, yet no good Christian can or will deny, that the House of Commons did
not at all intend to exclude what ever should pertain to Popery as a branch
thereof. This Author is very good at bold assertions, but all as bad in
confirmations, for what a good Christian may do in weakness, I will not
determine; but no wise Christian, as far as I can conceive, can judge, that
what ever shall be found to be Popery, is included in this Protestation, but
what ever is found to be Popery against the Doctrine of the Church of England,
which is the term limiting Popery in the Protestation. Fourthly he Argues from
the hopes that we have by this Parliament, of such a Reformation, as will not
deserve the name of Reformation, if all Popery be not made to be packing. I
join with him in all comfortable hopes from this Honorable House, but what is
this to his matter in hand? All the Reformation to be expected from this
Parliament, is not expected by this Protestation, this is one degree to reform
whatever Popery or Innovation is against Law established, this done, the
Parliament is proceeding further to perfect hoped for Reformation, by removing
corruptions established by Law. Fifthly, Suppose says he, that it could be
imagined by any reasonable man, that the House of Commons had no thought
implicitly to include the foresaid things in the fardell of Popery: shall
private and particular Christians knowing these to be Popery, and
Antichristian, being bound by their solemn Vow and Protestation, never reform
themselves etc. I Answer no man can; if (as he is rational) he deal
rationally. But suppose that these things were not included in the Protestation
according to the intention of the House of Commons, which may appear by
unanswerable grounds.

1. Because the express words be against that Popery which is against the
Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, which these things mentioned, established by
Law in our Church cannot be.

Secondly, Since the general taking, and first making of this Protestation,
the Government and Discipline of the Church has been in strong dispute whether
it should continue or no, which had it been Protested against, there had been
no place for dispute, which yet does neither take off the friends of that side
from asserting, nor is used by the opposites to Prelacy, to overbeare their
Antagonists, which had been the easiest and speediest way of victory, if this
Authors fancy had had truth in it.

Thirdly, Under favor, though (as I shall make it appear) I am no friend to
the foresaid things, yet it was not rational that the Parliament should
include these things in their PROTESTATION; for these things being established
by Law, and fixed in many of the members hearts as well as Laws, to desire men
presently to abjure them, before a full debating of them, seems a point of
such rashness, yea Tyranny, as will not consist with the transcendent wisdom,
and Justice of that Honorable Court.

Fourthly, Nay further I conceive (under favor) that it would not have stood
with the duty of that House to their Sovereign (of which I know they are most
tender) nor that respect that they owe to the Laws of the Land, to protest
against things established by Law, till the Law it self be abrogated, for none
may Protest in such a case further then they are free: Subjects can challeng no
more freedom then the Laws allow them, where and while Laws do tie them, they
are in subjection: and therefore could not in point of duty Protest against
such things, in such a manner, to which the Laws binds them. The power of the
House of Commons (where this Protestation was framed) is no doubt great, far
beyond my apprehension, yet in this case I conceive their power over Laws is
with the consent of the Lords, and his Majesty, to abolish them, but not
Protest against them, while they are in force. By all which Arguments its
manifest that the Parliament neither did really, nor could rationally, intend
in the Protestation to Protest against these things established by Law, and if
we suppose truly they intended it not, this Author does suppose still falsely,
that we are by our Protestation bound to reject and oppose them, for its an old
sound rule, Oaths, and Protestations, are to be expounded according to the
meaning of the framer and giver, not of the taker, else by a dishonest
aequivocation, any thing almost may be eluded; therefore what the Protestation
meant not, we in the taking are not tied to. And if this disputer should think
this should bind us in the things mentioned, though the Parliament intended no
such thing, but the contrary: He may as well affirm that we are bound to
maintain his impendant Churches, for whereas we Protest to maintain the
lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every person that makes this
Protestation; he may infer, but independancy is in his judgment, a right and
liberty of all Christians entering into this Covenant, therefore we are tied to
maintain it: This inference has less dissonancy from the letter of the
Covenant, then that of his about the particulars questioned; yet though I
believe he has as good a will to this as the former; he dare not be so bold
as to draw such a conclusion, because though the letter may bear it, yet the
judgment of the compilers makes it manifest, it was far from their meaning,
which reason likewise might have kept him from including the particulars in
hand.

But now lastly, he comes in with other quaeries, What then, shall men never
reform themselves, but live and die Communicants, etc.

Ans. How does this follow, may not men Reform themselves in these things,
unless they do it by virtue of this Protestation; did not all that held these
unlawful, before this Protestation was formed, in their own practice withdraw
from these things, so far as they held them unlawful, and against the word of
GOD, and so may and ought to do still, though they be not included in the
Protestation? But to proceed, this Author next brings in his Scholars,
questioning how it may appear, that the forementioned particulars are branches
of Popery. And he faines them, speaking, that if their Consciences were
convinced thereof by the word of GOD, then by their Protestation, as well as by
GODS word, they were bound to renownce them:

Ans. But by his leave he makes them speak what many will not, and none ought
to speak. If these things be Popish, then by the word of GOD we ought to
renownce them indeed, but by this Protestation we ought not, unless they be
Popery opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of England. I my self must needs
account these things, or the most of them of the same alloy with many things by
the Doctrine and Laws of our Church already condemned and abolisht, else I
should not have been nor continued, as in part I do, a sufferer for witnessing
against them: And I do as earnestly desire Reformation of them as of any
thing; that little grace that I have, does as much Act that way to wrestle with
the Lord, for the rooting up of those plants which our heavenly Father has not
planted, as any way, but nothing engaged by this Protestation, but only by that
allegiance which I owe to Christ and his word. But some may say, If you be
against those things, why do you plead for them?

Ans. Mistake not, I plead not for them, but to clear the sense of the
Protestation, that it may not be wrested to include them, as it is by this
Author, of which wresting I see and fear manifest inconveniences.

First the Honorable Houses of Parliament are by it wronged, and are thereby
like to grow more opposite to the removing of the things here pleaded against,
and so (as it is usually) this making have will hinder the work it aims to
further, unless this conceit be seasonably corrected.

Secondly, This misinterpretation will hinder many from entering this
Protestation, which remora of so good a work, had need be removed, which this
Answer may further.

Thirdly, Many that have taken it, are partly troubled, because such things are
yet suffered that they think they have Protested against; which they think they
should not only omit to Act, but also by all means oppose; partly I see men
are taken off for praying for the abolition of such things, as they conceive
are already cast off by Protestation, and are inclined by carnal violence
under this pretense, to do that in the Church, which by a spiritual violence
they should endeavor to prevail for with GOD, that so they may be prevailers
with men, to have public corruptions purged by public authority, which is a
safe, comfortable, and honorable way.

Lastly, Some that think somethings in themselves lawful and tolerable, I find
by this Protestation Protested, to conceive them unlawful, as against the
Protestation though in themselves indifferent. As to instance, though they
think and justly, That the use of the Liturgy in the whole form of it, as a
complete service of GOD to be many ways vicious, yet they think the use of
some of the forms there, which are without exception, and most suited to the
peoples wants, to be in themselves lawful. Notwithstanding though not for his
Arguments, to prove them Popish, yet for the exposition of the Protestation
they refuse them, and not only refuse them, but lay imputation on those that
use them, as breakers of their Vow and Protestation. Now as I have proved, no
use of the Service Book is against the Protestation, so nor the use of some
prayers in such a manner out of the Book, can as I conceive, be justly termed
Popish: for suppose that the form we use be in the Masse-Book, why may we not
as well ask the same Christian Graces, that Papists and we both conceive to be
necessary to a Christian soul, as express the same faith touching the Trinity
or any other point wherein we agree in the same words, and that without the
guilt or imputation of Popery? And again, he that does thus use the Book, not
according to the whole frame of it, but selecting what is most holy, nor
according to the set words of it, but with liberty of correcting the
expressions, which to our times seem harsh, and unsuitable, does hereby as I
conceive, avoid his second Argument, the imposition makes it not Popish to him,
because he uses it with liberty of conscience; To this we may add further,
There is I conceive a true and useful distinction to be made of humane
constitutions: some are helps, and so are in genere boni, good in their kind,
the other have no ground, but mere imposition, and so are in genere mali, in
their kind evil. Now forms of Prayer are humane helps, and so good in their
kind: Prayer is an Ordinance of GOD, it requires a form of words, especially
in public; all men are not able to conceive a form, and therefore a composed
form to them is an help, The form of words in Prayer is not the service, but
modus, the manner of serving God in that Ordinance.
and so good in its kind. Now for the Governors of the Church where there is
need of a form, to tie to one form which they conceive pure, of purpose to
exclude others, which they conceive corrupt, is I conceive no usurpation upon
Christ. And this was the end of our Godly reformers in appointing this Prayer
Book: Now though many men need not this help, and it may be can conceive
better expressions, yet being that forms are human helps, and not in
themselves evil: I conceive we may use some of the Prayers without sin, for
though its often said, that we may not do evil that good may come thereon, yet
I never heard it proved, that we may not sometime do a less good, and not the
greater, for peace and order, and to enjoy the greater good at other times,
more fully and freely? This gives me satisfaction, and I believe many godly,
and so prevents division from the Church Assemblies, which is desirable, for
breaches if they be not necessary are justly scandalous. If any dissent from
us, we shall be more ready to contend with GOD then them; with God (I say) that
he would move the Parliament to remove this form so excepted against, and
corrupt in the general composure of it, and what ever other they prescribe not
exactly to tie the well guifted to it, but leave a liberty to vary as God shall
enable them, as I have heard it has been in our dear Sister Church of
Scotland: Or if they tie them to any form, that they will rather tie them to
the matter, then the words, to prevent the broaching of errors in Prayers,
which some think was the first occasion of set forms. There be Haereticall
Prayers as well as Sermons: A Socinian may vent his Haeresy against the person
of Christ, or the grace of Christ. An Anabaptist may vent his Haeresy against
the Magistrates of Christ, or Ordinances of Christ, in his Prayer as well as
Preaching, therefore the Governors may justly tie them to set heads of Prayer,
though they leave a liberty to the able, to use their own expressions; so
Haeresy shall be prevented, and no breach of liberty justly pretended: but this I
refer to the wisdom of that Honorable Court.

Another Evil of this Treatise, which needed cure, it has bred in some, and
nourisht in others, an opinion, that our Churches are not Churches, nor our
Ministers true Ministers, nor our Sacraments to be participated without sin,
whereby some are drawn to, and others confirmed in a neglect of the servants,
and service of God, which is no small evil, that deserves cure. Give me leave
therefore a little to examine his grounds. His first assay against our
Churches, is in the close of the proose of his third point, the Discipline of
our Church to be Antichristian, whence he concludes we want Discipline: and
from the Book-prayer, and pell mell admission to the Sacrament, he affirms in
his judgment, we want true Sacraments, and that the Preaching of the word, be
generally corrupted, then it wants a third mark of a Visible Church: for
answer, I conceive a distinction suggested by the assertor of the Scotch
Discipline to be very true, and here pertinent. P. 196. A Visible Church may be
considered, either Metaphysically, or politically. It is one thing to consider
men as living Creatures, endued with reason, another thing to consider them as
Magistrates, Masters, Fathers, servants, etc. So it is one thing to consider a
Visible Church in her essentialls, as a Society of men and women, separated
from the blind world, by divine vocation, and professing together the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, another thing to consider it as a complete political body,
in which the power of Spiritual government and jurisdiction is exercised, some
governing, some governed. Now a Church that wants government, or has one that
is corrupt, may be a true Church in the former sense, though not in the latter,
and being a true Church in the former sense, her members may communicate together
in these holy things, which fall under the power of order, which may be called
Sacra mystica, as word, prayer, Sacraments, though not insuch things as are
under the power of jurisdiction.

For his objections about Sacraments, the first I hope has received already
sufficient answer.

For his second objection of Pell mell admission to the Sacrament, if he
dispute against the Church of England in general, he must consider what her
Laws are, not what the practice of some is: Its true, the Law enjoynes all to
come, but its as true, that the same Law forbids those that are in contention,
or are otherwise offensive to the Congregation, to be admitted till
satisfaction given: So the command is general, that men may not be let alone
in prophanenes, and the admission is restrained, that men may not be suffered
to be prophaners.

And for his Third, The Preaching of the word generally corrupted, that shows
a mind to cavil, rather then any cause, seeing that corrupting of the Word,
was against the Churches Laws, by particular persons, and all such decrees
against Laws are declared invalid: But in this he has an if at the ministry
which he further proposes in his Fourth particular in these words.

And to these Curates consideration I refer it, whether they be able truly out
of good premises to conclude themselves the Ministers of Christ lawfully
called, when all of them do immediately derive their Ministry from the
Antichristian Hierarchy, as the sole foundation thereof; and under the name of
Curates, he comprehends all the Godly, and learned Pastors in the Church, and
dare he say, that the sole foundation of their Ministry is the Antichristian
Hierarchy? Are the precious gifts and graces that Christ Jesus has bestowed
upon them, and blessed and honored with the conversion of many souls, no part
of the foundation of their Ministry? Is the free choice of their people,
desiring them to take the oversight of them, no part of the foundation of their
Calling? Will not these in some men's judgments, and it may be of this
disputers, serve the turn without any thing else? Have they any thing from the
Bishops, but as it were, an external authorizing, to exercise their gifts in
a public way amongst their people? which if it be in some respects corrupt,
shall this corrupt complement make void the call of God, and of the people? God
forbid! undoubtedly Christ would never so ordinarily work by them as he does,
were they not his Mimsters, but Antichrists: Besides I believe this disputer
knows, that by Law the Bishop ought to have diverse grave Presbyters with him,
and then the imposition of hands is by the Presbytery, as was Timothies, not of
Episcopacy only.

But having answered his Objections Printed, its needful I answer some others
occasioned by him.

Object. Oh but say some, if these things be not included in the Protestation,
of what use then is the Protestation.

Ans. Very great; Is it not a great matter to fulfill that great charge laid
upon the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 14. Hold fast that which thou have: God has
given this Church some light, whereby almost all the erroneous Doctrines, and
superstitions of Popery are removed, which light by the audaciousnesse and
corruption of some Innovators, has been greatly obscured, our Churches
Doctrine in matter of Justification, Free Will, Free Grace; Gods eternal
decrees, etc. has been almost utterly overthrown: Altars, Images, etc.
brought in, and the adversaries were as great as naught, and had proceeded far
to work disturbance in the present proceedings: whereupon it pleased God to
move our wise and Religious Parliament (ever blessed be his name for it) to
make this Protestation to maintain the truths and purity by Law established,
which was an excellent means to hold fast that they had, and prevent apostasy,
give me leave to illustrate this by an homely comparison: When men are lifting
up a thing of great weight, or Horses are drawing some great burden up a steep
hill, when either are at a stand, wisdom teaches them to under-prop the
burden and stay it where it is, till breath is taken, or more help added to
raise it to a desired pitch. So was it with our worthy Reformers, they were
tugging to heave an heavy weight, and were at a dead lift; This Protestation to
defend our Doctrine that is pure, was an underpropping, that things might not
go backwards, till they could add more strength to raise things higher, which
God be blessed, they are busily indeavoring and if men will but wait, I hope
they shall see the Reformation raised as high as the Doctrines of Scriptures,
which ought to be the only rule, and I doubt not but is theirs.

Q. But if they were in the Protestation, ought we not with violence to pull
them down, and so deal with all superstitious pictures, etc.

A. To the consideration of the matters Protested against, we must join the
manner how we protest to oppose them, and that is lawfully. This Protestation
gives men no leave to break their Ranks, it puts not a sword of authority into
every private man's hand, but every thing is to be don in a lawful way, without
breach of that order that God has appointed in the world, or our Laws have
ordered in our Land. To answer this then distinctly: Things Protested against,
are either private things, or public, as for instance, some Crucifixes, and
other superstitious Pictures, are our own, at our own full dispose, some are
in public places and as it were of public interest, things that are private
in a private man's power, this Protestation does bind him to a present
Reformation of without further leave from any. But for things that are
public, private persons are to make their address to Magistracy, and entreat
them to proceed, and then the private persons may follow as Assistants.

Again, Some co^ruptions are in our own persons, as our own bowing to, or
before the Altar: some are in others; that in our own we are presently to
Reform, but if another continue corrupt practices, we may admonish them,
Protest against them, but not lay violent hands on them, but detect them to the
Magistrate, who by his Protestation, will be bound to punish and Reform them;
thus Gods work will be done in Gods way, with more beauty, safety, and
certainty, and suitable to the mature Judgments of the wise Compilers of this
useful Vow.

After he has done thus with the Protestation, he proceeds to other
objections, to overthrow all subordination in the particular Churches of a
Nation, not only to one another, which was never dreamt of, but to any general
government by Officers gathered out of all, and so set over all, and so he
lays a ground for independent Separate Churches, which he desires may be
erected in this Nation: but this task of his is undertaken and performed with
better order and strength, by another Author in the Presbyteriall Government
Examined. And yet that has received a solid Answer by the Assertor of the
Scotch Government, and that not only in the general, by the grounds there laid
down: but by a particular view and answer to the Arguments of the examiner,
and therefore thither I shall remit the Reader that will take pains for
satisfaction in those points. The full discussing of these things, is also
besides my purpose, who do only undertake the Answer of it, in reference to
what is said, touching the misinterpretation of the Covenants, as impeaching
the Doctrine that in the preceding Sermons I desired to publish, yet because I
perceive many are much unsettled (and that even of those to whom I have some
relation) with the things that are scattered in this discourse. I will endeavor
briefly to run over the things here that are material, especially such as have
not a full answer in the aboue-mentioned Treatise.

In this Authors Answers to his own Quaery, what shall be substituted instead
of Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, many things deserve examination. First
whereas he says, considering the Church of England to be none other then a
National Church, its incapable of constitution. This word National Church, I
find often used, and much put upon it, and yet neither is it a Scripture
phrase, nor do any give us a certain exposition of it, if by it they
understand a Church that has some common National Worship, by some common
Pastor, at some common place, as all the Jews had the same High Priest, and
Temple, and all the Males were to meet thrice a year at the place which God
should choose; In which respect I conceive the Church of the Jews was properly
termed a National Church; in this sense Christians have no National Churches.
But he seems to make a National Church to be when an whole Nation is taken
into a Visible Church, or Churches, having all of them the outward profession
of Religion, which he says, is impossible now, because particular Visible
Churches consist of none but Visible living members, and visible Saints under
Christ the King of Saints. But here I would feign know the reason why it is
necessary that the members in a particular Church, should be of better metal
then the members of a National Church: does not God require by his precepts,
as much of a National Church, and say as much of them, as of a particular
Church? See Exodus 19.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. how often is that Priest on the National
Church of the Jews, Be ye holy or Saints, for I am holy: The very same charge
that is pressed on Christians, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. where no more is required of
the members of Christian particular Churches, then of the members of the Jewish
National Church, and are not the members of the Jewish National Church called
holy or Saints, as well as be commanded to be so? How often is this reason given
by the Lord, for you are an holy people: See Deuteronomy. 7.6, and 14^, 21, and 26,
19. And many other glorious things are spoken of the church of the Jews. Ie.
2, 5. Ps. 1354 And was not Christ their King? Psa. 44, 4. If he were slain
from before the Foundation of the world, and the Redeemer of he Church under
the Law, was he not their King too? What difference then does Scriptures make
between the members of a National and particular Church, and who dares
distinguish where the Scripture does not? If they Answer that the National
Church of the Jews were holy in Profession, or are called holy in regard of
some that were so indeed, the denomination being from the better part; will
not, nay must not that answer serve us? were all the members of the
Apostolical Churches Visible Saints, otherwise then by profession? what those
that were carnal in Corinth? Cap. 3. and defrauders and scandalous contenders
too? C. 6. Those that were drunk when they came to the Sacrament too? Those
that denied the Resurrection too? 1 Cor. 15, 12. and those that had not
repented of their uncleanness, fornication, and Lasciviousness too? 2 Cor.
12, 21. And those that traduced the Apostle too. Cap. 11. Then what shall deny
the visibility of a Saint, or a living member? So I might ask touching some in
the Ancient holy Church of Rome, Romans 16, 17, 18. And the like of some in the
Church of Philippi. Cap. 3.18.19. So likewise in the Church of Sardis, Revel.
3, 1, 4. and Laodicea. Revel. 3, 16, etc. Can these be said to consist of
Saints, or holy people any more then the Jews, must they not have the Title of
Saints, in regard of their Profession? or the denomination from the better
part? Can Sardis in any other respect have the name of a Golden Candlestick?
And then I would know again, for what reason it should be more dishonorable to
Christ to be the head of a Congregation that are not all Visible Saints,
further then by profession and outward conformity, then to be the head of a
Nation, where all are not Visible Saints, or why Christians should be in more
danger, for being one by Profession in a Congregationall body, then Christ and
Prophets, for being one with such as were not Visible Saints in a National
body, these I confess are Riddles to me: Nay I conceive that though all that
do profess holiness and life should in duty be so, yet Christ in the parable
of the Tares and wheat, shows it will not be so, and a general separation is
not to be attempted till the end of the world, for the Tares signify the
workers of Iniquity that grow and are to be gathered out of the Kingdom of
him who is styled the King of Saints; and out of what Kingdom but the Kingdom
parabolized, The Kingdom of Heaven. Math. 13, 24, 41. and these Tares were not
secret Hypocrites, for the Servants did discern them, and tell the Master of
them, and not the Master the Servants: nor does it any way cross us that the
field is interpreted the world, as though the wicked and Godly should be in the
world together, but in distinct societies. For this cannot be? Why should the
Servants wonder to see the wicked in the world? how could the Tares come after
the wheat, as they are said to do, seeing the wicked were in the world, before
the Godly in the Church? see verses 25, 27: Why should the Servants consult
about the wicked in the world? What have they to do with those that are
without? yea if the wheat and the Tares be thus interpreted, there must by
this parable be nothing but wheat in the Church, no Chafe, no Judas, no
hypocrite, for all but the tares are righteous, and shall shine as the Sun in
the Kingdom of the Father. verses 41.43. But why then is the Field interpreted
to be the world?

A. For good reasons, because the visible Church was not to be limited to
Judea, but extended to the whole world that would entertain it. Secondly, the
word of this Kingdom, ver. 19. was to be Preached in the world and by the word
of this Kingdom, this Kingdom wa^ to be gathered in the world, in which
Kingdom should appear the Tares with the Wheat. These things are so suitable
to Christ's words and scop, that I do not at al doubt but that this is the true
exposition of this parable. Nor does the Argument so confidently held out
against it, any whit overthrow it: if you thus interpret the parable say some,
you must of necessity exclude all Church Censures, and so cross other plain
Scriptures.

A. There is no such necessity in it, neither, for its a rule in interpreting
parables, we must not extend them beyond their scope, now we must know wicked
men are of two ranks; one ordinary, that though they have no grace visible,
yet they are formal Professors, not guilty of Crimes, others that are guilty of
notorious crimes, as the incestuous person etc. Answerably there may be
conceived a two fold separation: One general of all the wicked, the other
special of those that are scandalous. This Parable treates of a general
Separation of all the wicked from the godly, which is here denied to belong to
the State of the Church in this world not of the particular Separation of the
evil scandalous by some crime which elsewhere is required to be done by Church
censures. And in this Answer I am fully confirmed by this Argument, Church
censures are an Ordinance that is to be used not only for the separating of
Tares, but Wheat for a time, nay sometimes of Wheat, not Tares, for
excommunication is for those that are scandalous, now a man may be in the
judgment of charity, godly in regard of his estate in general, and yet in some
particular scandalous, and so need, and deserve excommunication. And a man may
be so merely formal, that in the judgment of charity, he cannot be deemed
godly, and yet he may be faire-conditioned, without crime, and without
scandal, here the Tares will escape, and the Wheat undergo Separation, and
therefore since the Separation here inquired of, is of another nature, then that
which is effected by Church censures, to exclude Church censures by it, is to
rack it, and wrest it, beyond its scope. I have stuck the longer in this,
because this is the Cardo Controversiae, the Hing on which the rest is turned,
now I proceed. He after makes great complaint of the State of our Church, to
which I so far consent, that I could wish with Jeremy, my head waters, and mine
eyes fountains, to send forth rivers of tears, for the breakers of Gods Law.
But he takes up afterward, and tells us, that like Sardis, we have a few names
which have not defiled their garments, and the way of reformation he prescribes
it by separating these few names into a new Church, for which he cites 2 Cor:
6, 17.

But stay, is this Christ's way? does he so counsel the Church of Sardis? if
so, I will yield: if not, is not this way of his humane presumption exalted
against the wisdom of Christ? Now Christ's Counsel is to repent of the evil,
hold fast the good, ver. 3. to strengthen the things that are ready to die, ver
2. but not a word of separating the few. How dare any then presume to do it? I
have often sought, and long, a resolution of this doubt, but could never yet
find it, but this Author thinks he has found a command 2 Cor. 6, 17. Come
out from among them, and be ye separate. A strange thing (says he) be ye
separate; but a strange proof say I, That a command to Christians, to come out
from among Heathen Idolaters, and not to touch any sinful thing should be
thought to prove it the duty of Christians to be separate from formal profane
Christians, and not to touch any holy thing with them? what proportion is here
for an inference? And for my part, I must confess, I have wondered to see men
so strict in this, that they will not join in holy duties with the Profane,
which yet I see make no scruple to join in following vain fashions with them
which was wont to be counted an unclean thing: But this is further confirmed
by a direction to Jeremy, Ier. 15, 20. If thou take forth the precious from the
vile, but this is likewise as unfit a shaft for his Bow, for Jeremy lived in a
National Church, in which such a Separation as here this disputer strives for,
he confesses is not requisite, nor was it practiced by Isaiah 8, 18. though he
had occasion, or by any other. I marvel then that this Author, or any other,
should bring this place of Jeremy, to prove their Separation: There is a
Doctrinall Separation which is required in every Minister, if he divide the
word of truth aright, and that we are bound to as well as Jeremy, and the Godly
Ministers do carefully perform: but for such a Separation as this Protestor
requires, here can be no ground for, which they affirm was not required from
the Church of the Jews: But it is further affirmed, that after such an
Apostasy as ours, Churches must be gathered anew, as when the Apostles planted
Churches where the Gospel had not been Preached, this is only dictated without
proof, and yet is neither true nor probable, there being so wide a difference
between our Nation now, and when Joseph of Arimathea first planted the Gospel
in it, when it was purely Paganish: besides, If this were requisite, then must
God also give Ministers qualified to gather Churches, and not only to go on in
the ordinary work of the Ministry: that is, Ministers endued with
extraordinary gifts having immediate callings, to Preach where they will,
without the leave of men, with extraordinary assistance, without which
ordinarily no liberty can be expected to gather Churches, till therefore I see
the like gifts and callings, in some measure, I shall not believe the like
work or duty to lie on Ministers now.

But some may ask what shall then be done?

A. Can we have better Counsel then was given to Sardis, by Christ Jesus our
blessed Lord and Prophet? and that is to repent of what has been amiss;
publik humiliation, may fit public transgression, which the Parliament may be
entreated to apply to this malady, and then not separate from, but labor to
strengthen and rectify that which is ready to die. The Parliament are about a
great and good work of removing erroneous and scandalous Ministers, and seting
up godly and learned lights every where, and withal, giving or confirming
rather power to the godly Pastors, to keep off those that are unfit for the
Sacrament by gross ignorance, or scandalous life, by which means, Parishes
that are already taught, may be quickly brought into for better order, and
those that are not, may by teaching be brought to some good measure of
understanding, and desire of the Sacrament, and some at least outward
Reformation before they be required or admitted to Communion in the Sacrament.
But here we have another Quaere what we shall do, where profane and ignorant
persons are permitted Pell, Mell, to which he Answers, that if Gods Ordinance
be Profane (as they are) by ignorant and profaned persons coming to the Lords
Table) then others also that Communicate with them, are guilty of the same
profanation. What is this so without any exception? profane and ignorant
persons profane the Word, and Prayer, and Fasting, and these are Gods
Ordinances, cannot we perform this with them, but be guilty? this is new
doctrine. In the Church of Sardis to which he did compare us, were the few
names guilty of that profanation which the rest must needs do? do not the
Scriptures show the contrary? Revel. 3, 4. their Garments were undefiled, is
there no other way to keep our selves free from pollution, but separation? what
if we endeavor to remove the profane? is not that a better course? and that
which was the burden still laid upon the god^y? but never that in this case
they should separate themselves, or if they cannot separate the wicked, but do
their part, discovering them, and desiring their ejection, will not that free
them from guilt? I think it will: and if not, I believe he must not long keep
in any of his new Churches. But the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5, 6. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, so those that are corrupt will leaven all. A. That
is, If they be accessory to the corru^tions of others, not else: again, how
does leaven leaven the lump, but by diffusing a real quality into it? now
there being two things in sin, the guilt which is a relation, and in this
case must come by imputation, and the stain or vitiousnesse which is a
quality, and in this respect the corrupt will leaven only thus, when he is
suffered and countenanced, he is apt to infect others with his ill qualities,
Thus this sentence must be expounded, Gal. 5, 9. in egard of infection with the
same evils.
from which they shall be safe enough that bewail and distaste his ill
qualities, though they be at the Sacrament with him, yet if they can get
assistance, one effect of their distaste should be excommunication: But the
Apostle applies it to mixed Communion, ver. 8 but he misapplies that Text which
others more suitably interpret of ieading our lives, not eating the Sacrament.
And for that verse the 9. not to company with fornicators, its meant of
familiarity, not of the Sacrament. For you may see by the two following verses,
such an accompanying is there forbidden to a Brother which is allowed with an
heathen, and therefore cannot be meant of Communion in the Sacrament. But I
hope by the piety of our Parliament, every godly Minister will be enabled to
keep off all that be guilty of such crimes, if that will serve the turn, and
remove that objection. The place Ephesians. 5, 5, 7. Be not partakers with them, is
clearly meant in regard of their sins, not the Sacrament, as appears by the
following verse.

In Answering the next objection, he brings two places to prove that the holy
thing of God should not be profaned, but against what adversary? whosoever
taught so? but that the profaning of them by one, should profane then to
others, its denied: his place Isa 1, 1^. will only prove that God rejected
their service, whose hands were full of blood, not the sacrificers of the good,
else how will he excuse Isaiahs Communion with that Church? or Christ Jesus
after him, when they were as bad? or where is his inference made or practiced
by the Prophets or Christ from this place, of necessity of separation where the
profane be?

In answering his next quaere, he tells us that to Communicate with evil doers
is to partake of their evil deeds. This is affirmed, but not proved, nor do I
think it ever will, that my doing a good action well upon command of God, with
one that does the same good Action will make me guilty of his sin; sure I am,
then Christ and his Prophets, and Apostles, were all sorely defiled. His proof
2 These. 3, 6. is quite misapplied, for its spoken of withdrawing from him in
regard of company and respect which is free and Arbitrary, not of the
Sacrament, wherein they were not to withdraw from him, but if the quality of
the offense did require it, were to put him away.

In his next Answer he affirms that no Communion can be had in our Parish
Assemblies possibly, without setting up new Churches: But I hope in this he is
much deceived as in the rest. He compares us to Sardis formerly, yet I hope
there Communion might be had without this medicine of new Churches. Nay let
there be shown any example or any precept in the Scripture that in our case new
Churches should be erected, and not the old repaired, and brought back to the
rule from which they have swerved, and we will yield the cause: but if there be
no such precept nor example, then in vain are all such pleas as he uses, for
things which Christ has neither left precept nor pattern of. And when we see
God has heard the Prayers, and blessed the Nation for the prayers of the godly
in our Churches, as now they stand, and has made us a people saved by the
Lord, who is the shield of our help, and the sword of our excellency, more we
shall not expect by his new Churches, unless he convince the necessity of them,
by better evidence out of the word, which when he has proved, we will never
put him to trouble to answer inconveniences, but will with him buckle our
selves to digest them; but we will not cast our selves, nor will the wisdom of
the state suffer it to be cast on inconveniences for good men's fancies without
Christ's command.

Nor will we ever object it to be too strickt, pure or perfect, if the rule for
it be convinced, but we will affirm that being its strayter then the counsel
which Christ gave to Sardis, and different from it too, the pretense of purity
and perfection is not to be hearkened to, for it is not such in truth, but show,
because it is not after Christ. Col. 2, 8. The like we say for envying at them,
we will blame them that envy at them, if they discover the rule for what they
do, but till then we shall censure them we hope by this Parliament. The
Discipline of Christ will be set up in every Congregation, and this will be a
better or weaklier managed, as the Ministers and members are grown in Christ:
if then any Christian be where great scandalls are, they may remove to other
Congregations that have attained a better degree of Reformation, and this
without any breach.

His next quaere is what National government shall be set up by the Parliament,
for which he heartily prays, that God would direct them in so glorious a work,
and blesses God for such instruments, for such a work I thank him for his
affection, but yet if his Doctrine of the independancy of Churches be sound,
this prayer cannot be of faith, for a man cannot pray in faith that men should
meddle with that which is not within their sphaere or Calling, and sure if
independancy be a liberty of Christ, all the Parliament has to do, is to
assert this liberty, and what is more, is but usurpation. Then he tells us that
the government of a National Church has no pattern in the word: the full
answer of that I refer to the assertion of the government of the Church of
Scotland, which I doubt not but will give good satisfaction to the indifferent
Reader. Afterward he discovers (me thinks) too much uncharitableness and
self love. When he affirms, let them have their liberty, and do for the rest
what they will, it is indifferent to them, a little more care of the souls of
Christians might better suite with those that so far transcend others in
outward reformation.

His last objection is inconveniency of independent Churches, if they err as
they may, they want means of re^^^yming, which is better set on by the Scotch
Assertor, yet he has said more, then he has well answered, for having named
all the means which their independancy is capable of, and being conscious it
seems that they were too weak. He adds 2 other that quite destroy the
independancy. As first that other Churches may excommunicate them, how are they
independent, if under the Jurisdiction of other Churches? or how can they be
excommunicated by those under whose Jurisdiction they are not? sure this is
worse dependence then under the Presbytery, where a part is only subjected to
the whole, but here a part is subjected to a part.

And this second is no better, for if they be under the Magistrate for any
Haeresy, why not for all? those that are guilty will not confess any of their
Haeresies, for known Haeresies, but assert them for truth, and so challenge
exception for them, as well as any, and if that be a known heresy, which is such
to the judgment of the Magistrate, the^ for all heresy they are to be subject to
ce^sure, and their indepe^da^cy is a nullity. Thus have I gone through this
whole discourse without endeavoring to stifle, but rather sincerely to search
out what is truth in every particular. It is my desire and prayer, that I might
do nothing against, but for the truth, rather would I desire that God should
bring me forth to the severest sufferings for the truth, then leave me though
in simplicity of heart, to oppose any the least truth. What remains but that
while we that mind the same things, Christ's honor in the salvation of his
people, and right performance of his Ordinances, and differ only in the way,
labor to keep Unity of heart, till we have unity of judgment, and let our
Prayers be united at the Throne of Grace, though our persons be in different
Societies, that God may persuade the wanderers into the Tents of those, to whom
he has vouchsafed the better light: That God may have the more honor, and we
the more strength, and comfort by our free and scruple-lesse consociation:
Which mercy the Lord vouchsafe for Jesus Christ his sake, by the help of the
Spirit of truth, leading into al truth, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

