PROPOSALS To the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS, By John Goodwin, Gent. How to
Raise Four Millions in Five Years; or Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum,
without Demanding, Distraining, or Receiving one Penny in Money from the
Subject: Demonstrated thus,
First, THAT the People of England, by Computation, are 9000000. And that each
of them does Expend half a Peck of Bread-Corn per Week, at least; And that if
One Halfpenny Duty be laid upon each respective Half-Peck, it will amount to
975000 l. per Annum, Deduct 175000 l. for Poor, and Collecting the said Duty*
and then 'twill amount t 4000000 l. in Five Years, or 800000 l. per Annum.

To be Collected at the several Mills where the said Corn shall be Ground, and
the Overseers of each respective Parish, to Appoint such Times for the
Inhabitants to bring their Corn to the said Mills, as shall be most convenient
for them, and Surveyors to be Appointed to Attend at the said Mills, at those
Times, to take an Account of the Corn; The Duty to be received in Meal. Thus,
for every Peck of Wheat, Mastling or Rye, One Pennyworth; and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity; The Miller only to be
Accountable to the Surveyor, and to be Chapmen for the same at the lowest
Market-Price; which shall be set by the Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter Sessions, or other Meetings, which will be the same Trouble to the said
Justices, as giving the Assize of Bread to the Bakers, and the Miller to have
Credit for the same to such Times as shall be Appointed by the Collectors.

Object. 1. That the People will be Liable to be Defrauded by the Miller.

Answer. That the Justices of the Peace do Award how many Ounces the Miller
shall Receive for the Pennyworth per Peck Duty; So that the People cannot be
wronged one Grain comparatively.

The Overseers to give a List of the Poor at the Meeting of the said Justices,
and the Justices Certificate of such Poor to the Collectors, shall be
sufficient, and the Poor to be Allowed Half a Peck a-piece, Ground or Unground,
per Week; and this to be unaccounted between the Miller and the Surveyors.

If any Person or Persons shall bring their Corn at other Time or Times than
Appointed, it shall be Forfeited to the King; or if the Miller shall Receive
any Corn without the Surveyor's Knowledge, That he shall be Liable to such
Penalty as this Honorable House shall think fit.

Object. 2. Why shall those that have Convenience to Grind at Home, be obliged
to bring their Corn to the Mill?

Answ It may be thus Ordered, Such Persons shall give an Account of the Number
of their Families to the Collectors, and be Chargeable for the same Half-Peck
Duty, in the Nature as the Miller.

That it will be a great Charge to Collect this Duty.

That One Person, being placed in the Center, may Collect Twelve Mills; which
will not amount to above 12 d. in the Pound.

If this Pass into an Act, no Bank or Fund whatsoever, but will Advance a
Million, either by way of Loan or Farming the same upon so certain a Revenue,
that while the People eat Bread, cannot fail nor alter.

And that no good Subject will Grudge a small slice of Bread, once a Week, for
so great a Support to the King and Government against their Enemies: And this
Duty amounts to no more.

And I hope my Well-wishing, when Corrected and Amended by my Superiors, may
be Serviceable, as designed by your most Humble and Obedient Servant.

