Good Counsel AND ADVICE UNTO THE Magistrates and People OF NORWICH: With a
brief Relation of some of the Sufferings of the People of God, called, QUAKERS
In the said CITY.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

TO THE Magistrates and People of NORWICH,
A Relation of your Proceedings against your peaceable Neighbors called
Quakers, coming to our View, we, in the pure Fear of Almighty God seriously
read and considered the same; and we find them so contrary to the Command of
God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine and Practice of the holy
Apostles and primitive Christians, That we are really Sorry that you should be
found in such a Work, who do profess Christ Jesus to be your Lord, and the holy
Command, given by him, mentioned in the holy Scriptures to be your Rule and God
to be your Father, etc.

We desire you in the Tender Love of God, seriously to consider how contrary
these your proceedings are to the Command of Almighty God, whose express
Command is, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, thou shall not bear
false Witness against him, thou shall not covet his Ox nor his Ass, nor any
thing that is his, etc.

And also consider how contrary these your proceedings are to the Command of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whose Unalterable Command is to all
Christians to love one another, and not only so, but also to love their
Enemies, and to do good unto them, etc.

And we do desire you to take notice that Christ Jesus has left no Command not
Example for you nor any who do profess to be his Servants to persecute, spoil
Goods and imprison about Faith, Worship and Obedience to him; for Christ and
his Apostles did never persecute about Religion; for True Faith is the Gift of
God (as the Holy Scripture says) and the Holy Apostle says, That which is not
of Faith is Sin, and also says, let every man be fully persuaded in his own
Heart, etc.

And we do desire you seriously to consider and obey the Command of Christ, who
says, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them.

This Rule of doing as you would be done by, uses to be highly commended in
Words in England, and by many called the Golden Rule: We do from the Bottom of
our Hearts desire that the Magistrates, Teachers and People of England and all
Nations, may come to the Practice of this Golden Rule.

We do also desire you to consider that God almighty is a pure Fountain of Love
(as the Holy Apostle says) and he also says, They who dwell in God, they
dwell in Love: Love in Mankind one unto another is the fulfilling of the Law of
God in them; Love (says the Holy Apostle) thinks no Evil; it does not behave
it self unseemly or uncomely; but your spoiling the Goods of your peaceable
Neighbors, and imprisoning some of them (only for waiting upon God, and for
worshipping him as he does teach and command them by his good Spirit which he
has promised, and given to lead his People into all Truth) is certainly highly
displeasing unto Almighty God, and of an ill Savor and uncomely in the Sight
of all Tenderhearted People, who come to hear of your Harsh and Unchristian
Proceedings against your peaceable and industrious Neighbors, and therefore in
Tender Love to your Immortal Souls we do desire you to desist from such
Proceedings; for verily, if these proceedings be not unfeignedly repented of,
and forsaken, they will certainly bring the Wrath of God upon you. Oh consider
seriously the time hastens, wherein you must give an Account to Almighty God
for your Deeds done in the Body, and must receive a Reward accordingly; to him
we do leave you, and truly desire that you may be found in those things which
may please him, that his Blessing may be upon you in this World and that which
is to come,

John Osgood, William Mead, William Shown, Henry Snooke, Gilbert Latie, Arthur
Cook. William Gibson, James Claypool, Philip Ford.

London, the 11th of the 8th Month, 1676.
The Relations of the Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers in Norwich
are as follow.
ON the 1st of the Month called March last, John Shapen jun. for being at a
peaceable Meeting to wait upon God, in Norwich, the 27th of the 12th Month
last, had taken from him, by one Beak and John Stone Constables, by Warrant
from John Manser then Mayor, John Tennyson and Charles Tennyson Informers, 5
pair of Shoes called Flyers and a Cake of Tallow.

Ditto John Fedman, for being at the same Meeting, had taken from him, by
William Poole Constable, Goods worth 8s. 6d.

John Dilerance, for the same Cause, had Goods taken worth 10 s. for a Fine of
5s. by Edward Trull Constable, William Chessen Overseer, and Tho. Leman
Churchwarden.

Ditto, Anthony Alexander, for being at the same Meeting, was fined for
himself, and the third part of 20 l. for the House, and had as many Splightings
or Hides taken out of his Fats as were worth 8 l. 17s.

Note, Erasmus Cooper entering Anthony's House, in a sudden surprising manner,
said to the Man's Wife, who was big with Child, He came to seize all she had
for the King: She said, That was hard, to seize all for 7 l. Fine: He replied,
He would not leave her a Bed to lie on: And he went to the Shop Door, and
finding it locked, he fetched a Pickax, and broak it open, and he and the rest of
his Companions were so Cruel and Vnneighbourly, that it caused Tears to trickle
down the Checks of some of the Neighbors, who beheld them; the Names of his
Assistants are Nic. Becket Constable, Robert Clarke Warden, Edward Cullier
Overseer, Edw. Makins and Richard Pie.

In the third Month last the same Officers accompanied with two other ( viz.)
Isaac Wolfill and Nath. Ponder Overseers, went into the Yard of the said
Anthony Alexander privately by the Crick Side in a Boat, with a Warrant from
John Manser Mayor and Francis Bacon Steward, for the third Part of 20 l. being
a Fine imposed on him for the Cause aforesaid, for which they took seven Dozen
of Calf-Skins worth 8 l. 8 s. and commanded his Man to assist them to pull the
Ware out of the Fatts, which he refusing to do, they gave him abusive Words;
Anthony said, It was unreasonable to require the Man to assist in taking his
Master's Goods from him; Robert Clarke answered, They were their Goods.

Robert Hutchison on the 4th of the 5th Month last, for being at a Meeting,
had Houshold-Goods taken away to the Value of above 7 s. by Warrant from Tho.
Checkering Mayor, by Richard Lusbrooke and John Allen Constables, and John
Freeman Warden, and Christopher Hastead Overseer.

Samuel Duncon in the 5th Month last had taken from him for meeting to worship
God, Houshold-Goods and Wares to the Value of 42 l. 19 s. 5 d. by Warrants
signed by Francis Bacon and John Manser Mayor; and John Crow and Gamaliel
Sugden Wardens, Tho. Southgate Jun. Edward Mayhew Overseers, William Pool
pretended Constable, Charles Tennyson Informer, Tho. Giddens Carter, Tho.
Woods, John Brown and Robert Phebee, Helpers together with the Hangman.

Note, The aforesaid Officers took Possession of Samuel Duncon's House, and
there kept Night and Day, from seventh Day in the Afternoon till the second Day
in the Afternoon, loading away his Goods, as if they had been their own, and
breaking up Locks at their Pleasure, keeping Samuel's Wife, who was big with
Child, as a Prisoner in her own House the first Night, not suffering her to
speak with any so much as at the Door, nor any to come to her, till some of the
Magistrates being spoken to abate it (for Shame and Cry of the People) ordered
it.

And the Reader may take Notice of the Insolency and Vileness of one of the
aforesaid Informers, who boastingly said, He would make the Mayor wait upon him
as often as he would at his Pleasure: Oh a sad Age, that such ungodly, vile,
idle, profane Men should be encouraged thus to vaunt themselves against, or
rather over the Magistrates of this Nation, whose Sword in Justice ought to be
a Terror unto them, they being Evildoers in the Sight of the just God, who
hates Oppression, and in the Sight of just Men; and it is to be lamented, that
under. Officers are forced to proceed in making Havoc of their peaceable
Neighbors Goods against their Consciences, to satisfy those greedy Informers;
as witness the aforesaid Pool Constable, when he went with the Informer to the
Meeting in Norwich the 16th of the 5th Month, and hearing the Truth declared,
he cried with Tears in his Eyes, What shall I do? I know the Power of God is
among you, and told the Informer, That if there were a Curse hung over any
People upon the Earth, it was over the Informers, and said to S. D. afterward,
That he confessed he had sinned against his Conscience in doing what he did.

And Note further, that since the taking of the said Samuel Duncon's Goods,
John Tennyson one of the said Informers is laid up in Prison upon an Execution
for Debt; and he has confessed he never prospered since he took in Hand that
Work, and said, he knew not what to do, and said, if he were at Liberty, he
would never meddle more: So People may see how badly his ill gotten Goods
prosper with him.

Note, John Crow would not suffer an Account to be taken of the Goods he and
the rest of them took away of Samuel Duncon's, but when a Man was taking an
Account, he snatched it from him, and put it in his Pocket; and the said Crow
finding Samuel Duncon's Shop set open the second Day in the Morning, shut it up
again himself; thus acting like Plunderers in Time of War, which is a Shame to
Magistrates, that they should suffer such Things in Times of Peace.

Since the other Account, Nich. Becket Constable, Robert Clarke and Robert
Sellers Wardens, Nathanael Ponder Overseer, by Warrant from Tho. Chickering
Mayor (for a Fine of 10 Pound imposed upon Anthony Alexander for the
Meetinghouse) did with the Help of Andrew Cooper and William Drayton, carry
away from the said Anthony fifteen Splitings, worth 9 l. 15 s. four
Horse-Hides, worth 1 l. 10. and eleaven Couple of Wombs, worth 14 s. 8 d. in
all to the Value of 11 l. 19 s. 8 d.

Some Part of the Goods that were taken away were bought by these Persons
following.

Mary Cumber of Gregory's Parish bought six Cushions, which cost 3 s. 6 d. a
piece, for 3 s. 6 d. the Widow Crane of Giles's, and Edward Cook's Wife of the
same, and one Eaton a Cobler's Wife in Gregory's Parish, and one Bernard a
Schoolmaster bought several of the said Goods.

For the Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise
(says the Lord) I will set him in Safety from him that puffs at him, Psalm.
12. 5.

For the Needy shall not always be forgotten, the Expectation of the Poor shall
not perish forever.

THE END.

