

A BRIEF CHRONICLE OF All the chief Actions so fatally falling out in these
three Kingdoms; viz.

England, Scotland and Ireland, From the year, 1640. to this present twentieth
of November, 1661.

CONTAINING The unhappy Breaches, sad Divisions, the great Battles fought,
number of men, with the Eminent Persons of Honor and note slain, with several
Debates and Treaties.

ALSO, The happy Escape by a Wonderful deliveverance of His Majesty at
Worcester, more fully expressed then hitherto: with His Majesty's happy return,
together with what passages of note happened to this present November, 1661.

The like exact account has not as yet been printed.

LONDON: Printed for William Lee, at the Turks-Head in Fleetstreet. 1662.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
This useful Manual which has been so long desired, now offers it self to your
hands, the English Iliads in a nut-shel, being comprised in such an Epitomy and
Abridgement; yet with so much perspicuity, faithfulness and truth, as would be
allowance enough for a reasonable volumn.

Even same small and minute actions, where (like little wires that give motion
to the grand Engine) they had to the main design, are here registered, with a
most exact Chronology of their time; but as to passages of greater moment, the
actions of the Field, Leagures, Stratagems, storming of Towns and Castles, they
have roomy place here, without that bustle they made in the Kingdoms.

And that the memory of those Noble and Valiant Persons who fell, and who
survived this fatal War, might be orderly transmitted to posterity, we have
also inserted them in their several stations of Command, Life and Death, the
irreparable loss of whom fell chiefly on the Royal and justest side.

Abundance of English blood has been shed profusely in several Quarrels, both
at home and abroad before, but never such a slaughter as this, so that it
passes easy Arithmetic, which causes that the gross of the numbers slain,
is as much (of the multitude) as could be recovered.

But behold the greatest misery of this War, the issue of it when it was past,
was ten times worse then the War it self, like the Viper, that expires in the
production of many: The Medusa of War, brought forth a Hydra of Peace, in a
Serpentine Commonwealth, and Democratical Anarchy, we had lost what was
pretended to be fought for, as soon as we had done fighting: such our fury,
such our strange fate.

This obliged the Collector of this Chronicle to proceed in the tracing of
those (till then) untrodden steps of Government, through all the changes and
variations during the Usurpation; wherein you shall find all the most
considerable passages and remarks of State, of the War and Treaties abroad with
Foreign Princes and Commonwealths, particularly set down, so conform to the
Originals, that herein you will have the pleasure to see all over again, which
with sorrow you so lately underwent, with the happy restitution of His
Majestic, and other passages deduced to this present day.

Olim haec meminisse juvabit. Thine, W. Lee.
November 18. 1661.
A Brief CHRONICLE OF THE Civil Wars OF England, Scotland, and Ireland, From
1640. to the end of the Year, 1661.
NO higher or greater cause can be assigned for this war (setting aside the
sins of all Times and Nations, to which the Justice of Heaven is seldom long a
Debtor) but the fate and catastrophe of Kingdoms and Monarchies, which do at
certain periods of time taste of that vicissitude and mutability, to which
other sublunary things are more frequently subjected.

The secondary causes of it, are so many and so uncertain, so variously
reported and believed, that it would spend the paper allotted to this Epitome
in ascertaining them; therefore to contain and keep within the limits of this
designment, something only stall be said of them that was obvious to every
eye, not favoring of partiality or affection (...).

Many disorders and irregulari^^es there were in the State no doubt contracted
through a long and lazy peace bolstred up with an universal trade which
procured a general wealth, the patent of wantonness; the excess of National
riches being but as the burden which the A^ carries, and mistakes for
provender; people being only the better enabled to sustain the future misery
with their present plenty.

These conceived abuses in the menage of the State, like ill Humors, where they
find an equal resistance, or over power of Nature, sunck and descended upon
the Ecclesiastical regiment too impotent to sustain those general assaults
which were given it. The first complaint of the people was maladministration
and delinquency of some about the King; this terrified but a few, though it
reached the life of that incomparable Statesman the Earl of Strafford; some
others dreading more the popular fury then their objected crimes, withdrawing
and absenting themselves from the present storm impending.

After the Earl of Strafford was beheaded at Tower hill (the King being forced
to assent to the Bill for his execution) all things ^un a main with^unany stop
to the ensuing breach and confusion. The Axe had but tasted of that blood, of
which it soon after glutted it self, all persons of all rank; and conditions,
King, Lords, Bishops, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Mechanics, suffering
under its edge. A remarkable thing, the paralle^ of it being no where in our
English Chronicles, but so that blood of Straffords was at last expiated, (...)
will be seen in the series of our late unhappy troubles.

When this fatal business was over, then began the cry, No Bishops, no Bishops,
who were at last by an Act of Parliament extorted from the King devoyded and
barred from sitting and voting in the House of Lords, or exercising any
remporal Jurisdiction; to this the Parliament were the better induced, and the
more strongly inclined from several complaints made to them, which were before
famous through the Nation, of their haid and barbarous usage of several
Ministers and others, for the business of non-conformancy: Amongst the rest the
case of Mr. Pryn, Mr. Burton, Dr. Bastick were very notorious. These men at
this time in the beginning of our troubles were brought from their prisons in
distant remote parts of England, in triumph to London, and soon after most of
the Bishop; committed to the Tower, under no less then a charge of High
Treason, which being not to be evidenced, most of them were after some time
dismissed upon bail, only the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Ely were
reserved to their Justice.

Many honest Patriots there were no doubt of that party which inclined to the
clipping and abridging the power of the Hierarchy which they so unhappily
mistook, the importunities of the people made others, otherwise principled to
swim with the stream; but no sooner this Fit was over, but we were ^eised all
over with the disease of a Civil War.

The King had been so affronted with the daily tumults which those for Justice
against Straford, and No Bishops brought with them, and had so often moved for
the prevention and remedy thereof, in vain, that having certain intelligence
who the Grandees were that abetted those riotous Assemblies, and also had had a
hand in the Scorch Troubles, whose untoward issue and conclusion lay heavy upon
his heart, he resolved to seize them in the Parliament House, and so bring them
to a speedy Trial.

This was attempted by the King, but the birds were flown, notice being given
the House of Common by one Langrish, a Servant of the Queens, of the Kings
coming thither to demand the Five Members: But the business ended not so, the
House vote it a breach of privilege, and complain o^ evil Counselors about
the Kings person, who not able or willing longer to endure those indignities
oftered daily at his Court gates, leaves Whitehal, and departs from Hampton
Court, and soon after the Five Members return to their places in the House,
guarded thither in much bravery by the Trained Bands by water.

This added fuel to the fire, that was now ready to flame; nor could another
combustion in the sister Kingdom of Ireland, which broke forth in October some
two months before give them caution to look to this at home.

The manner of the breaking forth, and the discovery of that Irish Rebellion
was as follows.

Anno Domini, 1641.
ON the 23. day of October, 1641. that horrid Rebellion broke forth there, that
day they intended to seize the Castle of Dublin, the Irish being every where
else risen and in arms, but the design was discovered by one Owen Conally, an
Irish Gentleman by birth and family, but a retainer to Sir John Clotworthy, who
being acquainted with the plot by one of the Rebels leaping over a set of
pales, whether he pretended to go and ease himself, escaped by the favor of a
dark night, ran away, and informed the Lord Justice Parsons with the whole
design.

Upon this discovery the Lord Mack Gutre, October
and one Mr. Mac Mahon were seized in Dublin, the Town, though in a most
terrible fright, was presently put into a posture of defense. Advice was sent
thorowout the Kingdom of Ireland of the Rebellion, but all too late, for it was
universal, and no part of the Kingdom where they were not risen; so that a
Proclamation against them, and all raising of Arms, was the best present remedy.

Notwithstanding the Rebels under the command of Sir Phelim Oneal as General,
Novem.
seize all Vlster except the Castle of Eneskelin, sparing for a while the
Scotch Plantations there; but growing so numerous, that they dreaded not any
supplies from the vicinity of Scotland, they at last force them, plunder them,
and garrison the cheil places of strength.

Sir Phelim Oneale takes Dundalk, December.
and publishes his Declaration, called, The Declaration of the Catholic
Confederate Subjects of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, s^uft with many
shows of their Religion and Loyalty as could be; and which is notable,
asserting that they did it to remove that Tyranny put upon their consciences,
in imitation of their fellow subjects of Scotland, who got a privilege by that
course.

Presently after they besieged Tredah, (...) ^^odah ^^^eged
but after several encounters betwixt the besieged, their relief being defeated
at Gillington-bridge, by reason of a mutiny amongst them and the Rebels: The
Town was at last freed by a strong assistance and supply sent them from Dublin,
under the command of Sir Henry Titchburn, who soon after, upon the dislodgement
of the Enemy from the Town, F^^* relleved
followed him, overtook him, and routed him, recovering Dundalk again by storm,
putting all to the sword, while Oneale hardly escaped over the river, and so
fled.

Leave we this Kingdom in a forlorn, miserable condition, and cast an eye
homeward. Jan. 10. T^^ King removes from the parliament.
The King was departed from Hampton Court, thence in company with his Queen and
his Daughter the Princess of Aurange to Dover to see them shipped for Holland;
he returned straight to Greenwich, from thence having the Prince in his company
to Theoballs. Still the difference widened more and more according as he
removed from London, to which he was importunately desired to return by both
Houses by the members thereof who continued sitting; though the Grandees of the
Faction were well contented with what distance he kept from them, as rendering
their pretended jealousies and fears more and more credible to the deluded
people. From Thoballs the misundestandings still increasing betwixt the King
and his Two Houses, he removed Northward, first to Royston, thence to
Newmarket, and in conclusion to York, having received and answered several
messages from the Parliament by the way.

The principal difference between the King and them was the Militia, this was
disputed betwixt them, the King claiming it as an unseparable right of the
Crown, and the Houses urging the management of it for present satisfaction and
safety, and had thereupon nominated Officers, which designation the King
disallowed, and now the rupture was visible.

Anno Domoni 1642.
THe Gentry and the Generality of the County of York, proffer to raise a Guard
from amongst themselves for the Kings person; March. The King at York
in the mean time, the Parliament desire him that the Magazine might be removed
from Hull; at which the King being displeased, goes from York, and demands the
said Town, stores, and Magazines therein, to be delivered to him, which the
Governor, Sir John Hotham, presenting himself on his knees upon the walls,
refused to do, save, that if the King with some small retinue would enter,
Excluded H^ April.
he freely might.

This affront very much ne^led his Majesty, so that he did very sharply
complain of it to the Parliament, but they rather justified Sir John Hotham,
then gave the King any satisfaction, which made him attempt, for his Honor
sake, something against the Town by force, in which enterprise some twenty of
the Kings Guards were killed, and so he retreated to Beverley; where he found a
very great addition of Gentlemen from all parts of the Kingdom, who with their
duty, presented him their service.

In the mean while the Parliament was intent on the business of leavying Arms,
May
though several Patriots of both Houses did what they could to persuade to an
accommodation, amongst whom Sir Benjamin Rudyard was one of the chief, who all
along warned them of the miseries of a Civil War, and what a shame it would be
to them in after times, and so consequently to all Parliaments, if when the
King had condescended so far they should proceed to the effusion of blood upon
so unnecessary a quarrel; he dyed soon after the first blood was drawn; and
that speech of his on his deathbed is very remarkable, Mr. Pym and Mr, Hamden
(says he) the Grandees of the then Faction) told me, That they thought the
King so ^ll-beloved by his Subjects, that he could never be able to raise an
Army to oppose them, which mistake of theirs cost many thousand live.

Nom the Militia was on foot, June, the militia set on foot.
every where the Parliaments Cause had the precedence of affection, their
Ordinances being obeyed like Acts; wherefore the King prohibited by
Proclamation any Levies, Musters, or of his Subjects any where in England,
without his command and set^on foot his Commission of Array; which the
Parliament likewise inhibit to be obeyed any where, but neither of them
signified any thing to those that were bent and inclined to each Cause; so that
the preparations for War both of Men, Horse, Money and Arms went on very fast,
especially on the Parliament; side at London, where all persons of all ages and
Sexes contributed so excessively to the furtherance of the War, that the sum
which it amounted unto is almost incredible. This money was borrowed upon the
credit of the PVBLICK FAITH, a name much adored then, and as much contemned and
hated now.

The King finding how the pulse of these distracted Kingdom; July
did beat, giving symptoms of some violent disease and distemper approaching,
redoubled His instances to the Houses for peace, adjuring them to prevent that
bloodshed now so threatening and imminent, and they regest the like entreaties
and obtestation^ upon him (but not bating an ace, or receding a tittle from
their first Demands) so that there was no hopes or likelihood of a Pacification.

His Majesty therefore having called the Gentry of York together at a
Rendezvous, protested his unwillingness, as well as unprovidedness for a War,
desiring (if he should be thereunto compelled) their assistance in the
maintenance of His most just Cause, and then departed for Lincolnshire to
Newark whether he had sent before his Letters Mandatory to my Lord Willoughby
of Parham, charging him to desist from raising levying opexercising any forces
within that County, by virtue of his Commission from the Parliament, wherein
nevertheless he had proceeded. Here the King convened the Gentlemen of this
County, and made to them the like protestations, and having received some small
Supplies returned back again to York. At the same time the Parliament were
listing men apace, appointed their General, and the Superior Officers of the
Army.

At York the King made the Marquess of Hertford Lieutenant General of the
Western Counties, intending forthwith himself to set upon Hull (a place he had
designed once to have made a magazine for Ireland to reduce those Rebels,
which he had often declared to the two Houses, but they would by no means
consent to it) but upon deliberate advice he pass by ^t, only making one
attempt near it, to show his just indignation, and to satisfy his Honor, where
^e lost unhappily some twenty men, and marched directly into Nottinghamshire.

About the beginning of August he came to Nottingham Town, August, the Kin^
sets up his Standard at Nottingham.
and on the tenth of the same Month, published his Royal Proclamation,
commanding and enjoining all his Subjects to the Northward of Trent and twenty
miles Southward, to Rendezvous at Nottingham the 23. of that instant, where he,
according to the purpose of his Proclamation, set up his Standard, where
appeared 5 or 6000 m^n.

After a view and Muster of these Royal Volunteers, the King proceeded to the
nomination of a General, who was the Right Honorable the Earl of Lindsey,
August
General formerly for the Ro^hil Expedition; and the Parliament made Robert
Earl of Essex, their Captain General, the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse,
Essex about this time departed from London in great state and magnificence.

The King leaves Nottinghamshire and marched into Staffordshire, Sept. the King
(...) Shrewsbury.
thence into Leicestershire, caressing the Gentry all the way he went, so into
the Confines of Wales, and sat down at last in Shresbury, where he much
increased his strength; whereupon the Earl of Essex was ordered to advance
toward the King, and hinder his new Leavies, having then Commission to rescue
the King out of the hands of his evil Counselors. He marched therefore from S.
Albans into Northampton, being strong, to the number of 14000 men.

Portsmouth was now taken by Sir John Merrick, Portsmouth taken, Aug. 2.
having first surprised Southsea Castle, and held for the Parliament: Co^^o.
Goring being forced to yield it, the Town being commanded by that Castle,
before the Marquess of Hertford could come to the relief of it, being then
besieged in Sherburn by the Earl of Bedford; Goring, according to agreement,
passing for the present over into France.

The Earl of Essex advances into Worcestershire, A skirmish in Worcestershire
while the Army staid still at Shrewsbury, expecting forces out of Southwales;
to prevent the conjunction of whom, Essex sent a party of horse under the
command of Colonel Sands, betwixt whom, and Prince Rupert, and the Lord Byron,
happened a smart encounter in the lanes near Worcester City, where at first the
Parliament Army had the better, but Prince Rupert falling in the Rear, forced
them to leave their design: Colonel Sands was desperately wounded, his Major
Douglass was killed, with the loss of threescore men, nevertheless, Essex
hastily advancing, the Cavaliers quitted Worcester, which was Garrisoned for
the Parliament.

While the Earl of Essex staid here about settling the Militia, the King passed
directly away from Shrewsbury, where he had coined money out of the Plate
freely brought him by the Gentry, to London, having got the start of Essex, who
thereupon doubled his have after him; the King therefore resolved to fight him,
and staid at Keynton, whether next morning came the Essexians.

Sunday the 23 of October. Octo 23. Edg-hill Fight.
being the same day twelvemoneth, the Irish Rebellion broke forth, both Armies
met at the bottom of Edgehill, from which the Kings forces descended to the
fight. The Earl of Linsey commanded the main body, Prince Rupert commanded the
right wing, the left was commanded by the Lord Wilmot. Of the Parliaments side,
the Earl of Essex commanded the battle, Sir James Ramsey the left wing of
horse, and Sir William Balfour, and Sir Philip Stapleton the left. Prince
Rupert suddenly overthrew the left wing of horse under Ramsey, but
overcharging, and following the pursuit too far, Essex seeing the Kings foot
destitute on that side, charged furiously, where the General Lindsey fighting
with a half pike in his hand afoot, was wounded (of which he presently died)
and taken, and his Son the Lord Willoughby coming to his rescue, was taken with
him; The Standard Bearer also, Sir Edmund Varney (so valiantly the
Parliamentarians pressed upon the Kings foot) was killed, and the Standard
seized, but freed again by Sir John Smith, who was Knighted under it, and it
committed to his defense. Here was also killed the Noble Lord Aubigney, with
sundry other inferior Officers. On the Parliaments side were slain the Lord S.
John of Bletso, who died presently of his wounds, being offered in exchange for
the Lord Willoughby, and Col. Tho. Essex newly come from Worcester. The number
of the slain on both sides was very near equal, in the whole amounting to near
5000 men, and the victory remained as equal betwixt them, the Earl of Essex
lodging that night (which parted the fray) upon the field where they fought,
and the King ascending the hill from whence he came down that morning, keeping
great fires all the night.

The Earl of Essex next day marched toward Coventry, and the King by Ayno,
where his Army refreshed themselves, to Banbury, which was presently delivered
to him, and so to Oxford.

The King marched from Oxford, Novem.
where by the way to London, came Commissioners from the Parliament, rendering
Propositions, and desiring that during the Treaty, the Kings Army should march
no nearer this way, to spin time, while Essex could recruit his Army; therefore
the King advanced from C^lebrook, and came to Brainford, Nov. 1 Bramfor Fight.
where part of the Parliaments Army, being the Regiments of Col. Hollis,
Hambden^, and the L. Brooks, for a while maintained themselves stoutly, but
being overpowered, some were driven into the river, and there drowned, and 300
slain, and as many taken prisoners. This brought a general consternation upon
the City of London, all shops were shut up, and all the Regiments, both
Trained-Bands and Auxiliary were drawn out, so that the Earl of Essex had a
most complete and numerous Army o^ a sudden. Hereupon the King presently
marched away, fearing to be encompassed by the Parliamentarians, over
Kingston-bridge (which he broke down, to stop the pursuit Essex made after him)
to Reading, and so to Oxford, where he took up his Winter quarters.

The Cities of Winchester and Chichester delivered to the Parliament, Decem^
Marlborough to the King, and my Lord Hopton prevailed against the Earl or
Stamford; several Towns taken for the King in the West, others for the
Parliament in the North.

Cyrencester had been Garrisoned by the Parliament Forces of Gloucester,
Cirencester stoemed Febr. 1. March
being the midway betwixt that City and Oxford, upon this place Prince Rupert
had a design, though his march that way was given out for the regaining of
Shudly Castle, out of which Col. Massey had smothered the Cavaleirs with wet
hay, for after he had passed some ten miles beyond Cirencester he suddenly
returned back, and surprising the Guards, within two hours time became Master
of the place, putting the Earl of Stamfords Regiment to the sword, who made a
stout opposition, taking 1100 prisoners, and 8000 Arms, and other provisions
for war, it being newly made a Magazeen. From thence the Prince came before
Gloucester, summoned the Town and departed.

The Lord Brooks and Northampton were in Arms against each other in the
Counties of Warwick and Stafford, My Lord Brook killed at. Litchfield.
where several small skirmishes had been between them, at last in March the
Lord Brook came and besieiged Litchfield Close, garrisoned by the King, and as
he was viewing the approaches to it out of a window in the Town, a single
bullet from the Close shot him in the head through the eye, of which he fell
down dead, nevertheless the siege was continued, and the Close delivered to the
Parliamentarians.

In the North the Queen landed at Bridlington Bay with some supplies of money
and Arms for the King, and with her, Lieut. Genesis King, she was conveyed to
York, and afterward met the King at Edgehill where the fight had been. And so
ended this year with the surrender at Malmsbury to the Parliament again, and
the defeat of the Lord Fairfax, who was chief of the Parliaments forces in the
North of 'Bramham, by the Earls of Newcastle and Cumberland. Scarborough
delivered to the King by Brown Bushel.

Anno Domini, 1643.
PRince Rupert having coasted the Country from Gloucester into Wales, May
Litchfie^ ^etaken ^y the King.
returned back by Litchfield, intending to reduce it again, he had not long
lain before it, but he compelled the Garrison to surrender: To the releif
hereof Sir John Gell, and Sir William 'Brereton, having gathered a considerable
strength marched; these were met by part of Prince Ruperts forces, and some
under the command of the valiant Earl of Northampton, TheE of Noth^mprton slain.
where the said releif was defeated, Sir John Gell routed, though the victory
cost dear, through the loss of that brave Earl, who refusing quarter was killed
by a private Soldier.

After General Essex had recruited his Army with new supplies, April 6 Reading
besieged
the first thing he attempted was the siege of Reding, which being manfully
defended by Sir Arthur Aston till he received a wound on his head by the
falling of a brick-bat, and the releif brought by the King himself from Oxford
being worsted at Caversham-Bridge, after ten days siege was yielded by Col.
Fielding (then substituted Governor) to the Parliament.

In the North things went something equaller then before on the Parliaments
side, May
Sir Thomas Fairfax had defeated the Kings Forces under the Marquess of
Newcastle at Wakefield, and hoyed up the sinking interest of that Cause.
Monmouth likewise was taken by the Parliaments Forces, as also Worder Castle;
but in the West the King prevailed, my Lord Hopton commanded there, 16 Stratton
fight.
being a valiant and expert Royalist, for the Parliament the Earl of Stamford,
and Colonel Chidleigh, these opposite Forces met the 16. of May in
Stratton-field, where the Parliamets foot stood stiffly to the business, but the
Horse either through treachery or cowardice, not seconding or releiving their
Foot, an entire Victory fell to the Cavaleers, some 1500 of the
Parliamentarians being slain and taken prisoners, but do of great account lost
on either side. Chidleigh afterward came over to the King; and my Lord Hopton
was made for this good service Baron of Stratton.

Now the Parliament flew high in their Consultations at home, the Grandees
working upon the sober part of the Parliament, that this action of the Queens,
in bringing over Arms, Money and other provisions for the assistance of the
King, was a dangerous, destructive business, wound up the anger of the Two
Houses to such a pitch that the Queen was proclaimed Traitor, and at the same
time, down went all the Crosses throughout England, particularly the third of
this month, Cheapside-cro^s was demolished.

After this beginning of Reformation, June. The Covenant taken.
the Parliament took the Solemn League and Covenant at Westminster; this was
first framed in Scotland, and was generally taken by them in the year 1639. the
main drift of it was against the Episcopal Dignity, and was now for the mutual
endearment of the two Nations (assistance being promised the Parliament from
Scotland) pressed upon all in England, where the Parliaments power was
paramount, being taken throughout London the fifth of this month.

The Earl of Essex advances from Reading to Tame, where a general sickness
seized upon the Army: during their quartering thereabout: Hambden killed.
Prince Rupert fell into part of their quarters, but the Essexians taking the
Alarm, and drawing out, the business came to a fight in Chalgrave field, where
Colonel Hambden was mortally wounded. It was observeable, that in this place
the said Colonel Hambden first listed and trained his men in the beginning of
the war.

The Lord Keeper Littleton having fled with the Great Seal to Oxford, according
to the Kings Command, the Parliament voted a new Great Seal to be made.

The Parliament to redress their affairs in the West, July.
had made Sir William Waller Major General of those Counties, and had sent him
down with a well-furnished Army to meet the Kings Army under my Lord Hopton,
who having cleared Devonshire, after Strafton fight marched Eastward, where in
Somersetshire Sir William had taken Taunton and Br^dgewater. Landsdown Fight.
July 5.
Both these Armies met at Landsdown near Bath, July the fifth. The Cavaliers
were less in number, but supplied that with valor; the fight began about three
in the afternoon, and was maintained till near the same time next morning. Here
my Lord Hoptons powder was blown up, by which he was hurt himself, and was
compelled for want of it to quit the field, and shelter his Army in the
Devices; of his side were lost in this fight about a thousand: The persons of
quality slain, were Sir Bevil Greenvile, Mr. Leak, my Lord Denicourts son, Mr.
Barker, Mr. Lower, and other Gentlemen: The loss of private soldiers was as
great on Sir Williams side, but no persons of extraordinary note.

Upon my Lord Hoptons taking into the Devices, Sir William Waller presently
pursued him, and cooped him up, whereupon a Messenger was dispatched to the
King, to inform him of the desperate condition my Lord was in, if not timely
relieved. Prince Maurice, the Earl of Carn^van, and my Lord Wilmo^, were sent
presently with a party of fifteen hundred horse, who made such expedition, that
on the thirteenth of July, by break of day, July
they presented themselves alike to besiegers and the besieged (to whom they
gave a signal of their relief) upon a rising ground, and presently in an entire
body charged Sir Williams Army, being received by Sir Arthur Hazelrigs
Curaziers at first; but they being broken, the Fortune of the day soon fell to
the Royallists: The Parliaments Foot, after a little execution done upon them,
(the besieged also being ready to fall upon them) laid down their Arms, and
submitted: Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur, with much difficulty, and
greater speed, escaped, and came throughout to London with the bad news. Here
were slain near a thousand men, four thousand taken, four brass Guns, twenty
eight Colors of Foot, and nine Cornets.

This loss soon reduced Bristol into the Kings hands, being delivered by
Colonel Fiennes after three days siege; July 27. Bristol surrendered.
for which surrender he had like to have lost his head.

These successes drew the King into the West, where Dorchester, Portland,
Weymouth, and Melcomb, submitted themselves: The like in the North, Exeter
delivered. August.
Beverley taken by the Earl of Newcastle, Bedford, Appleford, and Barnstable,
surrendered; and after a little dispute before Exeter, and some Grenades thrown
in, and firing part of the Suburbs, the great Sconce being taken in storm, that
City was delivered to Prince Maurice, and Sir John Berkley made Governor.

It was therefore concluded to set upon Gloucester, 10 Gloucester besieged.
being the only considerable place that held out for the Parliament in the
West, and lay very inconvenient, hindering the intercourse betwixt Wales and the
Kings Countries; the King therefore the tenth of August came himself from
Oxford in person before it with a Royal Army, (while it was hardly imaginable
where the Parliament could raise another Army) and that done, to march for
London, which proved a fatal mistake to the King, for if he had gone directly
for London, there was no opposition in readiness against him, not any place to
stay him. The King therefore summons Gloucester, to which the Governor and Mayor
return a negative answer; so the Guns were set on work, many attempts on both
sides, Gloucester relieved. Sept. 8
till the besieged had little or no ammunition left them, when on the eighth of
September, Essex having made up an Army with the Trained-Bands of London, and
new raised men in the respective Militia's and associated Counties, then
entirely at the Parliaments devotion, came to the releif of it, having been
encountered at Stow in the Would by several parties of Horse under Prince
Rupert, but he could not be stopped from advancing. Being come within five miles
of Gloucester, upon the brim of a steep hill he discharged two pieces of Canon,
as a signal of their releif, which was answered by the Town, whereupon the King
drew off from before the siege, and marched hastily away, intending to
intercept Essex from returning, his men being almost wearied, and tired out
with their hard march and weather. But Essex having releived the Town, with all
manner of provision, directed his march back again, and falling into
Cirencester, from whence the King dislodged the day before, and had lest some
baggage behind him, Auborn Chase sight. Sept. 19.
took 400 prisoners, and the next day matched toward; Newbery, and by the way
was attaqued in Auborn Chase, by several Squadrons of the Kings Horse; here was
killed that French Marquess Mous. De la Vejuville, having behaved himself
valiantly.

The next day the King possessed himself of Newberry, the place Essex aimed at,
Newb. first fight Sept. 20.
so that both Armies met h^re, and began the fight early in the morning;
abundance of resolution and valor, was manifested on both sides, but
especially the Trained Bands of London, performed far beyond releif. Prince
Rupert was repelled and beaten back to the right wing of the Kings Army, but
returned again to the charge with greater fury. This Battle, like Edgehill was
dubious as to the success, but something more bloody. The Kings General here
was the Lord Ruthen, made lately Earl of Brentford. On the Kings side were
slain near 2500 men, among whom were the Earl of Carnarven, who had done the
King special service, the Earl of Sunderland, and the learned Lord Faulkland
very near the Kings person, with Col. Constable. Of the Parliaments side, not
any of note slain, save Col. Tucker, and some few Officers, the number of their
slain being near 3500 men. After the fight was over in the field, a party of
Horse under the command of Col. Hurrie followed the Parliament Army in the
Lanes toward Reading, and put them into some disorder, but the body facing
about they were repelled back again with loss: And so the Parliamentarians to
Reading, the Trained Bands to London, whether soon followed the General, and
the King returned to Oxford.

This month the King pressed by his Protestant Subjects of Ireland, who were
not able to subsist longer under the war, conclude a Cessation with the Irish
Rebels, and in November following received a Supply of 3000 men of his
Protestant Army which landed in Wales, November
under the command of Sir Michael Ernely, the renowned Col. Monk (now Duke of
Albemarle) and others, which being by Prince Ruperts order divided into other
Regiments were made unserviceable; pat of them, with the said Colonel being
being surprised at Nantwich, by Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Mr. Pym a great stickler of the Faction, December 8.
and the only Grandee of the times died. Hawarden, Arundel and Beeston Castles
rendered to the King, Graston House taken by the Parliament, and Arundel in the
next Mon^th taken again by Sir William Waller.

Now according to stipulation and Compact, January
the Scots enter England with an Army of 2000 in maintenance and purstiance of
the end of the Covenant, against this invasion the King protested as a
Rebellion, and sent the Marquess Hamilton prisoner to Pendennis, as having
deceived the trust the King put in him, he all along suggesting that the Scots
would never attempt such a thing, and yet maintaining correspondencies with the
chief of that Cabal. Several Towns and Castles lost and taken by both parties.

Anno Domini, 1644.
SIR William Waller after his reducement of Arundel Castle, Mar. 29 Charrington
Fight.
marched to find out my Lord Hopton, to cry quits with him for his defeat at
Roundway Down, both Armies were near one another a good space, for my Lord
hovered about Winchester and those parts; at Brandon Heath near Alesford,
Hopton was drawn up (having a little before in his intended march to the releif
of Arundel beaten Col. Norton into Chichester, who endeavored to impede him)
and stood ready to receive Sir William, who had taken the advantage of a hill,
from which the Cavaliers with fury beat him and drove him to another, where
under the shelter of some bu^hes and trees, he so galled the Kings Horse that
they were forced in disorder to retreat on their foot. There was a hollow
betwixt both Bodies which each endeavoring to gain, many men found it for
their graves on both sides. My Lord Hopton therefore seeing the slaughter that
was made, and likely to continue upon his men, timely drew off his Artillery
and Canon, toward Winchester, and then wheeling about marched for Basing; and
so presently to Oxford: In this fight was killed on the Kings part, that
valiant person John Lord Stuart, second Brother to the Duke of Richmond, who
died at Abbington of his wounds received: Here Sir Iohn-Smith, Col. Sandys,
Col. Scot, and Col. Manwaring, with diverse other persons of quality wounded,
among whom was Sir Edward Stawell, eldest son to Sir John, and Sir Henry. now
Lord Bard, besides private soldiers above 1400. Of the Parliaments side few
men of note, killed about 900 common soldiers; Colonel Dolbier wounded, and
Colonel Thompsons leg shot off by a Canon buller.

The Earl of Essex, April.
and Waller, (who had followed my Lord Hopton to Basing) and there showed a
mind or besieging the House, now joined their Armies together, amounting to a
very great strength, with intention to set upon the King at Oxford; wherefore
the Queen was sent away with a sufficient Convoy to Exeter; in the mean time
Essex plunders Abbington, and makes a Garrison of it afterward. The King, in
the mean while, marches with his Army from Oxford to Worcester, which caused
the two Parliament Generals to divide their forces again; Waller was to go
after the King, April.
as they termed it, A King-catching, while Essex marched with another gallant
Army into the West, which was totally lost from the Parliament. The King had
but few forces about him, by reason that Prince Rupert was sent with the
greatest part of the Army to the relief of York, then besieged by the joint
power of three Armies, the Scots, Manchesters, and Fairfaxes. Prince Rupert in
his way storms Bolton, and plunders it.

The King having traversed his ground, ^une.
came back again from Worcester, and Sir William Waller from out of the skirts
of Glocestershire, Cropr^dy bridg^ ^ight. ^une 29.
was ready at his heels; so he overtook him near Banbury, at a place called
Cropredy-Bridge, Waller drew up in Bartalia on a hill, expecting the advantage
of the Kings pasting the Bridge, which the King adventuring to do, Waller
descends from his Post, and fall, upon the Kings Rear beyond the Bridge, where
he was so gallantly received by the Earls of Cleveland and Northampton, that he
was quite routed, 600 killed, and 700 taken prisoners, his Train of Artillery,
and many of his Officers, so that Sir William was forced to fly to have
recourse ^o London for another recruit.

It was therefore resolved upon this defeat of Waller, Leistithiel surrender.
that the King should immediately follow the Earl of Essex, who was advanced so
far, that the Queen who was delivered of the Princess Henrietta at Exeter, the
sixteenth of June, in the month of July, was fain to be gone from Exeter for
fear of a siege, and carry the young Lady along with her into France, where she
landed on the 25th at Breast in Britany. At the beginning of August the King had
overtaken the Earl of Essex at L^stithel, his force, in so ill a condition
through their long march, Aug. 5. The Earl of Essex vanquished in Cornwall
and their want of necessaries which the Country people kept from them, that it
was concluded an easy thing to conquer them: The King therefore resolved to
coop them up, and keep all manner of provisions from them. After two or three
days league in this manner, the Parliament horse broke through the Kings Army
by night; the General, and the Lord Roberts, at whose instance this expedition
was undertaken, got by boat from Foy to Plymouth, and the foot being destitute,
and deserted by the horse, under the Command of Major General Skippon, came to
a Capitulation, by which it was agreed, they should render their A^ms,
Ammunition, Artillery, and Stores, into the hands of the King, and have
liberty, as many as would, to pass home, they engaging never more to bear Arms
against the King; so that by this defeat the Parliament were quite undone in
the West, as to present appearance.

But though success crowned the King here, (...) Fight.
it failed him as much in the North, whether Prince Rupert was advanced, as was
said before, for the relief of York: For upon notice of the Princes approach,
having with him the bravest Army that ever was seen in England, both for number
and persons, The Confederate Forces of Scotch and English drew of^ from before
the City, and drew up into a fighting posture. On the (...) of July, the
Marquess of Newcastle and the Prince joined their forces together: On the third
both Armies met one another upon a great plain, called Marston-Moo^; the Prince
being General, commanded the right wing, General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and
Col. Tillier, the main body, and my Lord of Newcastle the left wing, who had a
stout Regiment of White-coats, called his Lambs. At the first onset the Prince
totally routed the Scots, who were opposed to him, and out of desire of revenge
for their unnatural siding with the Parliament of England, pursued them so lar,
that he came not back time enough to the assistance of his own: But most
remarkable was the valor of the English under Manchester, led by Lieutenant
General Cromwell, who being the Reserve of the Army, when the Prince was so far
engaged, fell in so impetuously with the Curaziers, that they bore down all
before them; the field was now almost cleared, the Scots and Fairfaxes men on
one side being fled, and giving the day for lost, and the main body of the
Kings being discomfited, and Prince Rupert just returned to see the overthrow,
so that there was none standing in the field save only my Lord of Newcastles
men, upon whose Lambs a terrible slaughter was committed, while they discharged
the parts of valiant, expert and Loyal Subjects, refusing quarter, and casting
themselves into rings, till there were very few of them left; and it had been a
shame for the enemy to have killed such gallant and brave persons. In
conclusion, the Cromwellians prevailed, killing of the King, Army 4000 men, and
rather more prisoners: The slaughter that was on the Parliament; side was 5000,
which fell most upon the Scots, on whom the Prince did fierce execution.

The Fight being thus over, ^000 killed at Marston ^loor, ^uly 16. York ^iel^ed
^o the Parlia^ent.
which was the bloodiest of all the Wars. Prince Rupert fled into Lanc^ire, and
so Westward, and the Marque^ of Newcastle, and the other Lord with him, took
shipping at Newcastle, and departed the Kingdom, and soon after York ^ndred it
self, by its Governor Sir Thomas Glenham, to the Parliament.

During the Kings absence in the West, and the Princes in the North, Sir
William Waller had recruited himself, and joined with the forces of Col.
Norton, and Col. Morley, who had drawn down before Basing, a house of the
Marquess of Winchesters, (...)
garrisoned by him, and kept for the King, which being distressed, for want
both of Ammunition and provision, was distressed by the enemy; many brave
salleys they made, and a multitude of men they slew, so that it was afterward
called B^sting-House. Waller was resolved not to rise, cost what it would; at
length relief was put into it, under the conduct of Col. Gage, nevertheless he
persisted in the enterprise: Till after Newbery fight, ^iege of ^asing ^^ised.
the King marching that way, the forces left to block it up, rose and departed
without it; a little before which Banbury siege was also raised by the said
Col. Gage, afterward made Governor of Oxford, and the Earl of Northampton.

Hitherto the King seemed to have fortune inclineable to him, saving in that
unfortunate business of Marston-Moor. Now the case began to be disputed, Essex
had raised another Army, aided also by Waller, and other forces, resolved to
fight the King; so it came to another battle at the same place of Newbury; Nov.
21. Newbery second Fight.
the Parliamentarians to revenge their disgrace at Lestithiel, the Cavaliers to
repair their loss at Marston-Moor, it was a cruel fight, only no more were
killed in this then in the former, what advantage was lay on Essexes side; few
men of note were slain on either side, save Sir William S. Ledger of the Kings,
and a Colonel of Foot of the Parliaments. The Earl of Cleveland making good the
Kings retreat, was taken prisoner, and had it not been for the darkness of the
night, the King had hardly escaped them: Sir George Lisle performed here signal
service for the King, and the Trained-Bands for the Parliament. Essex had
clearly the field, and from thence marched to the siege of Dennington Castle,
under whose walls the King had sheltered and drawn his Artillery.

Somewhat before this Colonel Massey had defeated and slain Col. My, Colonel
Massey defeats Mine, and takes Mon-mouth.
and by intelligence with one Kirle, had surprised Monmouth Town, and had some
other successes against Prince Ruperts parties, while he staid about Bristol,
upon design of new Leavies.

Dennington Castle was, as said before, but the King sending a considerable
force to relieve it, the besiegers drew off, and marched away, to the great
scandal of the Earl of Essex, and the Officers then in command under him.

After this sad experience of one another strength, the Parliament sent
Propositions to the King at Oxford, December
which begat the Treaty at ^xbridge, (...)
before the meeting whereof, the Parliament had executed Sir John Hothum, and
his Son, their first Champion, for endeavoring or designing to render Hull to
the King, from which he had formerly shut him out: As also (...) Alexander
Carew, for betraying his like trust of Pl^ (...) Fort.

Also during the designment of a Treaty, the Com^ (...) ^er-Book was abolished
by Ordinance, and a Directo^ (...) in the room thereof; and for consummation of
all, the (...) Bishop of Canterbury was beheaded likewise.

Though the project of a Treaty was now in hand, yet never was the design of
the War carried on more fiercely and subtly. T^^^ my modelled, and Gen
Fa^rfax declared
The Independents now first appeared, the Army must be new modelled, another
General, and other Officers, and no persons, Members of the House, to have any
Military Command, (only Cromwell got himself excepted) This design was not
nosed by the Presbyterians, who were convinced of some deficiency in their old
Commanders, so that Sir Thomas Fairfax was unanimously agreed upon for General,
and under him all factious Sec^aries, and wild principled men obtained Command,
whilst the former Officers were reduced to the condition of Reformad's,
amongst whom, not long after, they cashiered Colonel Massey, Jan. 11.
having shifted him from his Government of Gloucester, to a Command in the Army.

Al^ngdon had been garrisoned by Essex in his expedition into the West, Colonel
Gage, the Governor of Oxford, had a design upon it, and in the attempt was
killed at Cullam bridge.

The thirtieth of January, that fatal day, began the aforesaid Treaty at (...),
30 Vxbridg ^^^ty.
which continued some 23 days in dispute, without any power of the Parliament
Commissioners to conclude without them, and so ended on the 22 of Feb.

The Parliament forces surprise Shrewsbury, but Col. Rossiter is defeated in
Leicestershire, an active man for the Parliament, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale
relieves Pont^sra^l Castle, and defeat, the besiegers, twice superior to him
in number.

About this time there was a kind of Faction in the King, Court at Oxford, and
some alterations betwixt the party, concerning the Kings Council, so that some
Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, were confined, and the Parliament, that is,
the Members of the same Houses at West^inster, who adhered to the King, who by
the Kings Order were the year before convened o^ Oxford, were so some reasons
adjourned till the tenth of October, but that Parliament signified nothing.

The House o^ Commons voted, that in their new Generals Commission, Mar. 2^.
the words, For Preservation of His Majesty's Person, should be left out, and
accordingly they were so; and so ended the year 1644. the last of the King,
felicity.

Anno Domini, 1645.
WE will begin this year, though we post-date the time, that we may recite all
the exploits in Scotland together, with the actions of the Renowned Marquess of
Montross, appointed Governor of the Kingdom of Scotland. The year before he
came into Scotland, attended only by three men, much ado he had to pass, the
ways being so strictly guarded, during the Scotch Army was in England: At his
arrival in the Highland, being supplied with a 1100 men from the Marquess of
Antrim out of Ireland, and another addition under the Lord Kilpont, and the
Earl of Perths son, he matched to find out the Army of the Covenantes, then
gathered under the command of the Earl of Tullibarne, the Lords Elch and
Drummond, consisting of a great force, into Perthshire, where at Tepper-Moor he
obtained a great victory, his Soldier; for want of Arms and Ammunition making
use of the stones, lying advantagiously on the fighting ground. Here he killed
no less then 2000 men; whereupon Perth City opened its Gates to the Conqueror.

To withstand and repress so dangerous an Enemy within the bowels of the
Kingdom, another Army wa^ raised, and put under more expe^ienced Captains; in
the mean while, Montross had fallen into Argyles Country, where he made
miserable havoc, intending utterly to break the spirits of that people, who
were so surely engaged to Argyles side. Here the Earl of Seaforth followed him
with an Army, and the Marquess of Aogyle had another of the other side;
Montross therefore resolved to fight with one first, and so tell upon that
party under Argyle, which he totally ^outed, killing 1500 on the place, the
rest escaped, and so the Marquess of Montross, bent his way after the other
Army, which he defeated at Br^^hin, being newly put under the command of
Colonel Hurry, afterward offers battle to Bailey, who had another Army ready to
fight him, but he waited for advantages; whereupon he marches after Hurry, who
had re^^uited, Alle^ne fight.
and was pressing the Lord Gourdon (having taken Dun ice in his way) and at
Alderne discomfits him killing ^300 and dispersing the rest.

He seeks out Baily, to whom was joined the Earl of Lindsey, and at Ale^fo^d
hills forced them to fight, utterly routed them, July 22.
and obtained a remarkable victory; but that which lessened the triumph, was
the death of the Lord Gourdon, one that was as the right hand of Montross, a
very Loyal Right Noble Gentleman, being eldest son to the Marquess of Huntl^y.
After this, he comes to S. Iohnstons, where he alar^m'd the Parliament there
sitting, and so into the Lowlands, where the Kirk had another Army in
readiness, Kilsith Field.
under the command of the aforesaid Baily.

At a place called Kilsith, both Armies met, and a cruel battle it was, Aug 27.
but in conclusion success and victory crowned Montrosses head, and almost 6000
men were slain in this fight, the p^rsuit being eagerly followed for a great
way, and the Covenanters at first fighting very resolutely, but the fortune of
Montross still prevailed. The Nobility now every where readily assisting him,
and the Towns and Cities declaring for him, so that that Kingdom which
afforded men and assistance for the invasion of another Kingdom, was not now
able to defend it self. The Governor, so was Montross dignified, being seized
of all places almost of strength, even as far as Edinburgh, where some Royal
prisoners were delivered him. The Estates of Scotland therefore send for Dav^d
Leshley, while Montross expected forces from the King under the Lord Dighy,
which staid too long, and were afterward defeated at Sherburn in Yorkshire.
Upon the arrival of Leshley, most of the forces under Montross, not dreading an
Enemy so soon out of England, were departed home; so that Leshley finding
Montross in a very weak condition at Philips-Haugh, fell upon him before he
could retreat, almost before his Scours could give him intelligence, and there
routs him: He at first resolved to lose his life with the field, but being
persuaded of better hopes, he resolutely charged through, and brought the
flying remains of his Army safe into the Highlands, where he began new Levies,
but the fortune of the King failing every where, he was the next year ordered
by the King then in the Scots custody to disband, and depart the Kingdom. And
so we leave him, till a more unhappy revolution of time.

The memory of this man had almost caused an Oblivion of some things done he^e,
during his great successes, for Sir John Hotham and his Son, for intending the
delivery of Hull, which they had so unhandsomely before denied to the King,
were beheaded; Vide^ spee^hes pages 5.
as also Sir Alexander Car^w, and at last the Right Reverend Archbishop of
Canterbury, for many pretended crimes of innovation and disaffection in matters
of Religion, was executed the tenth of January. These men's deaths happened in
December and January, 1644. and are therefore here inserted.

To begin therefore the year 1645. Dennington Castle was the very 25th of March
delivered to the Parliament, which was counterpoised with a defeat given Col.
Massey by Prince Rupert at Lidbury, April
being surprised there, and his foot routed, his house consisting most of
Officers, with himself hardly escaped to Gloucester. At the same time, the Army
being new modelled, Lieutenant General Cromwell was sent by Fairfax, to hinder
a conjunction of forces at Oxford from Worc^ster, which he did, defeating the
Queens Regiment, and afterward took Blechington House by surrender, for which
Col. Windbank was shot to death at Oxford.

Notwithstanding which interruption, the King matched from Oxford, May
intending Northward, to recover what he had lost there, with a very complete
Army; and coming to Leicester, then garrisoned by Sir Robert Pie for the
Parliament, after s^mmons refused, 31
stormed it and took it, the Soldiers for a while plundring the Town, which
had been the residence of a Parliament Committee from the beginning.

In the mean while, June.
General Fairfax was advanced from London with his new modelled Army, and by
Order of the Committee of both Kingdoms, had besieged Oxford, where he had
received a notable salley, but upon news of the Kings success at Leicester,
presently raised his siege, resolving to fight the King as soon as he could
overtake him.

The King was now in a dispute, whether he should march upon his first
intendments Northward, or staying for some forces out of the West under Colonel
Goring, march for London. When he had notice of Fairfaxes advance after him,
whom he thought to be taken up at Oxford; whereupon, by the ill late of things,
the King was advised not to delay time, but even at midnight to dislodge from
his quarters, whether Fairfax was nearly come, and the next morning to seek him
out, and to give him battle. June 14


This happened to be at Naseby field, on Saturday June the 14. Naseby Fight.
where at the first encounter the Kings Army had the best on it, his right wing
of horse discomfiting and overthrowing the left wing of the Parliaments under
Skippon, taking Ireton the Commissary General prisoner; but the left wing,
consisting of Northern horse, under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who were clearly
for the Kings going Northward^ to their own Country to relieve Pomfret Castle,
made no defense at all. The King was very courageous and active in this field,
but the same overeagerness of Prince Rupert half lost the day, the foot being
destitute, after some slaughter, threw down their A^ms, and were taken
prisoners, to the number of four or five thousand; the Kings Coach, and in it
his Cabinet, afterward most disloyally and dishonestly published to the world,
with other Letters and papers; all his Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, bag and
baggage taken, himself hardly escaping to Leicester that night, and from thence
to Ashby de la Zouch. After this battle, the Kings Cause and Arms visibly
declined every where.

Leicester regained by the Parliament upon surrender, Leices^ ^ake^
while the King made have toward Wales, to the relief of Chester, and there to
form a new Army, but Poyntz, Middleton, and Brereton. Rowlin Hea^h Fight. Sept.
24.
rising from their siege, met him at Rowton Heath, where in the beginning (as
usual) the King had the better; but the Parliament being supplied with fresh
forces, the King was vanquished there also, and the right valiant Lord Bernard
Stuart, Earl of Litchfield slain, with above six hundred more: Soon after
followed the rendition of Chester, the King flying back to Oxford.

The Sects had besieged Ca^lis^e almost a year after Marston-Moor fight, June
28.
now it was surrendered by Sir Thomas Glenham; but the like success they had not
at Hereford, from whence they rose with disgrace, and came and sat d^wn soon
after before Newark.

General Fairfax marched after Naseby fight into the West, leaving the King to
pursue his ill fortunes, and took in Bridgewater (having before defeated
General Goring at Lamport, July 10. Lamport Fight.
newly raised from the siege at Taunton by Colonel Wellen, who relieved the
Governor Colonel Blake, though with some losses) a^ also Bath and Sherburn,
and sat down before Bristol, Br^oll ^e^verd Aug 1^.
which after a short siege was delivered by Prince Rupert upon Articles, and
the said Prince, and his Brother, came soon after to Oatlands, in order to
depart the Kingdom.

Cromwell also came with a party to the reinforcing of the siege of Basing and
by smothering of wet hay, ^^^^ng House to me^. Sept. 14.
made his approaches, and stormed it, taking the Marquess of Winchest^r
prisoner, with other Officers and Soldiers, to the number of 600 persons.

Several House, Novem.
Castles, and Towns, were d^l^vered to the Parliament, while the King kept
close in Oxford: The Prince of Wales being sent West, and under the care of my
Lord Hopton, in company with my Lord Capel, and others, but General Fairfax
following him into Cornwall, Hopton accepted of conditions (afte^ the firing of
Torrington, and the delivery of Lanceston, Saltash, Lizard, Dartmouth,
Mount-Edge, Foy, all being qu^tted by him gra^atim) and disbanded, the Pr^nce
taking sail from Pendennis Castle to the Isle of Scilly, and thence into France.

Hereford was also about this time surprised by Colonel Birch, ^auary.
Belvoir Castle taken, all places now submitting to the power and fortune of
the Parliament; and for a conclusion, Exeter was now delivered by Sir John
Berkley, upon very honorable and advantageous articles, to the Lord Fairfax;
and the Lord Astley defeated at Stow in the Would, two thousand killed, and
taken prisoners; and so ended this year, the next beginning with the same face
of affairs, several surrenders being made to the Parliament.

Anno Domini, 1646.
AFter the delivery of Woodstock, it was not held safe for the King to continue
longer in Oxford; April.
but the siege approaching to that City also, the King disguised, in the
company, and as a servant to Colonel John Ashburnham, with one Mr. Hudson a
Minister, by virtue of a Pass from Cromwell, left Oxford, and soon after put
himself upon the Scotch Army, then lying at the siege of Newark, who sent him
away with their Guards to Newcastle, and soon after the Scotch Army followed
him, upon surrender of that Garrison of Newark.

The King being in their hands by their persuasions and desires, and his own
resolvedness for peace, gave Order to all his Governors to make such terms as
were most suitable and convenient for them, and deliver their respective
Governments to the Parliament, that so the War might be at an end; whereupon,
all the Garrisons in the Kings hands came to a capitulation, June 3, Septem.
Oxford, Tarringdon, Wallingford, Borstall-House, Ludlow, Litchfield-Close,
Worcester, Ragland, Conway, Pendennis, and Scilly Isle surrendered; at which
time also died their former General, the Earl of Essex, and was most
magnificently interred in Westminster Abbey.

General Fairfax came in triumph to London, Novem.
while the Treaty was on foot betwixt the Parliament and the Scots at Newcastle
concerning the delivery and disposal of the King. In fine, upon the price and
payment of 200000 pound, the Scots perfidiously, after many disputes, whereby
they affirmed it unlawful and dishonorable for them to do it, sold their
Native Prince to his English Subjects, and so departed over Tweed into
Scotland, according to agreement.

Anno Domini, 1647.
THe English Commissioners, June.
deputed thereto by the Parliament, having received the King from the Scots,
brought him to Holmby-House, one of his Palaces in Northamptonshire, according
to the stipulation and hypocritical salvo made, that the King should be treated
honorably; but with no attendance of his own, either servants or Chaplains,
and a Guard upon him perpetually, till in conclusion, Cromwell beginning his
projected Sovereignty, by an Order from him, to which the General tacitly
consented, The King was taken from the Commissioners, and removed by one Corner
Joyce from Holdenby to the Army, they pretending an extraordinary kindness to
the King and his Patty, even to the deceiving of the King himself, by their
Declarations and Protestations for Public Liberty.

In the mean while, the King is carried about from Holmby to Childersley,
Newmarket, Royston, Hatfield, Windsor, in progress with the Army to Caversham,
Maidenhead, to Latiner, to Stoke, to Oatlands, being treated with a far greater
show of honor then the Parliament allowed him, with much hopes and many
promises of his speedy restitution: His Chaplains, and other persons, engaged
on his side, having free access to him, with the free exercise of the
Common Prayer, etc. At last they bring him to Hampton Court, where Propositions
as bad as any they tendered, were offered to him again, but there for their
unreasonableness being rejected by the King, he being informed of a plot to
murder him by some of the Army, fled from Hampton Court privately to the Isle
of W^ght, the said Colonel Ashburnham being with him in this disguize also, and
rendered himself into the hands of Hamond, the Governor of the said Isle, who
forthwith certified the Parliament, and they presently vote, that no more
Addresses should be made to the King, nor no Papers received from him.

While the Army were thus coasting the King about, fell out a tumult in the
City of London, the Apprentices and Citizens flocking down to Westminster about
the establishing of the Militia in the same hands it stood before the Army had
interposed, and by their instance had made the Houses alter the persons named
the fourth of May, as being suspected favorers of the King: Whereupon the
Lords readily assented to the impowring those of the fourth of May, to act as
before in the Militia; and so after a little dispute, did the Common, some of
the same multitude not consented with this, brought back the Speaker into his
Chair, the House being risen, and compelled him and the Members back to the
House, July 26.
to vote, that the King should come to London to treat. After this tumult
(which the King observes in his book to be justly retaliated upon them) the
Speaker of the House of Commons, with some forty more, privately departed to
the Army then at Windsor, complaining of the force; the other remaining, to the
number of 140. meeting according to their adjournment, finding not the Speaker
nor his Mace, chose another Speaker, as did the Lords also, their Speaker
having withdrawn himself likewise to the Army.

The Army seem to be highly incensed at these Riots of the Citizens, and take
upon them the rectifying of those disorders, the fugitive members are
entertained, and consultation is held between them what is fit to be done, while
the Parliament sitting at Westminster, are advising about listing of forces,
appointing Massey, Poyntz, and others, for General Officers, and recall those
Members against whom the Army had exhibited a full charge.

But the Army advances near London, so that all these preparations, and the
stomach of the City soon were dashed, and new agreements made, their
Fortifications and Works to be demolished, and the Army admitted to march
through in triumph; so the fugitive Members were reseated again with their
Speaker, and all things put in the same bad state and condition they were
before, and several Lords, the Lord Mayor, some Aldermen, and diverse Citizens
of great wealth and quality, are, the one committed to the Black Rod, and the
other to the Tower, so that now all things passed in both Houses according to
the disposition of the Army, the Parliament being wholly subservient to their
designs, having made my Lord Fairfax Generalissimo, and Constable of the Tower
of London.

In Ireland, June
after the Marquess of Ormond had delivered up by capitulation, the Government
to Colonel Jones for the Parliament; the said Colonel marched out, and fought
with the Lord Preston, but was forced to fly, being overpowred by him; but the
business came to a second encounter, near Trym, where the victory fell to
Jones, killing 5470 foot soldiers, taking a very great booty, and a number of
prisoners; and the Lord Inchequin defeats another Army under the Lord Taaf,
where were slain 4000 more of those Rebels; and Sir Charles Coot gave them
another defeat, so that most of the Towns were reduced, and the Rebellion near
extinguished: The Scots therefore were desired to retreat with their forces out
of Vlster.

Anno Domini, 1648.
BEgin we now with the 24th year, being the last of King Charles the First,
1648. wherein the King seemed as formidable in his interest, as ever he was
from the beginning of the War. The Parliament was divided, and jealousies
betwixt them and the Army increased every day, Trading stopped so that on the
ninth of April another tumult happened in London by the Apprentices, who seized
the Gates, took a Drake from the Lord Mayors, and planted it at Ludgate, but
the Army horse entering with their General at Aldersgate, marched to
Leaden Hall, and after a little skirmish dispersed them: Several Petitions for
restitution of the King came from several Counties.

But in Wales a stronger Insurrection broke out, Major General Laughorn, Fagans
^ight. say 8.
formerly a great man for the Parliament, Colonel Poyer, and Colonel Powell, of
the same side, refuse to disband, and presently seize upon Pembroke Castle,
Tenby Castle, and declare for the King; Chepstow Castle is likewise taken by
Sir Nicholas Kemish for the same side: Against these Colonel Horton is sent
with three thousand men; Horton receives a brush, by falling with part of his
men under Colonel Fleming into an Ambuscado: Whereupon Laughorn hearing of
Cromwells advance also, resolved to fight Horton; so the business came to a
fight at S. Fagons, where the Welsh being taken on a sudden, not intending to
fight that day, were presently after the first onset routed, above five
thousand of their eight being taken, a great many killed* and the rest sheltred
in the two Castles aforesaid. Sir John Owen was up in Arms in North Wales, and
had defeated the Sheriff opposing him, but was afterward taken himself.
Cromwell storms Tenby Castle, and takes it, and after a sbort resistance,
Pembroke yielded upon discretion, as to the lives of those three Commanders,
whereof one Colonel Poyer died by lot; and so Cromwell having quieted Wales,
(Sir Nicholas Kemish being slain by the storming of Chepstow Castle which he
had newly taken) marched into Lancashire to meet the Scotch Army, who under
their General Duke Hamilton, having joined with those English forces under Sir
Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Phil^p Ma^grave, were advancing for London to
restore the King. This Army consisted of 24000 men effective.

At the same time also the Kentishmen having seen and heard the usage their
Neighbors of Surrey had for petitioning for peace, being some of them killed
by the Army-guards in Westminster Hall, resolved to ask or demand with their
sword in their hands, that which the Surrey men had been refused. Maidstone
Fight, June 2.
They rose, to the number of ten thousand, and had designed the Duke of
Richmond for their General, which upon his refusal, was conferred upon the Earl
of Norwich. To suppress this rising, whether abundance of stout valiant young
men resorted out of London, General Fairfax was sent in person, and to gloss
with the Londoners, the old Militia was again confirmed. At Maidstone, a part
of the Kentishmen opposed themselves against the General, maintaining the
Bridge so resolutely, that it came to a very hot encounter, so that the General
was forced to alight out of his Coach, and led in his men himself. After they
had passed the Bridge, they were forced to fight every hedge before they came to
the Town, where the fight was continued with the like gallantry, and had any
relief come, it would have been a question whether it had not utterly routed
the Parliament

Upon this defeat, the other greater party that were at Rochester, slipped away
to Black Heath, and from thence ferried and passed over into Essex and made
their Head-quarter at Bow, but the City stirred not in favor of them, but a
party of horse of the Army was sent thither, where after some light skirmishes,
they removed further into Essex, where many Gentlemen joined with them, my Lord
Capel, June
and others, and so to Colchester, whether the General presently after followed
them.

To second this, part of the Navy revolts also, and set ashore Col. The N^vy
revolt^
R^nsborough their Commander, and Pontefract Castle was surprised by Col.
Morris; and now the Parliament having so many irons in the fire, null those
Votes of non-Address to the King, and resolve of a Treaty as the best expedient.

To further which purpose, the Prince of Wales having imbarqued himself in the
Reformation, came into the Downs with 25 Sail of Men of War, where he landed
^ome men, and had Deal and Sandwich Castles delivered him; but the E. of
Warwick and Sir George Ayscue making into the Dow^s together, and the Prince
lacking victual, Augu^
he set sail for Helvo^t Sluice (not being able to do any thing for his friends
at Colchester) whether Warwick also followed him.

This was not all that was done for the King, for this very same time the Earl
of Holland, the D. of Buckingham, his brother the Lord Francis, July. Kingston
Insurrection.
the Earl of Peterborough, and others, assembled at Kingston, and declared for
the King, being about a thousand, and more hourly expected; but Sir Michael
Livesey falling upon them suddenly; they were forced to leave the Town, losing
that Noble Gentleman the Lord Francis, who refu^ed quarter, and so speeded to
S. Neots in Bedfordshire, where Colonel Scroop fell upon them in their
quarters, killed Colonel Dalbeir, and took the Earl of Holland prisoner, with
some forty more, (the Duke and the Earl of Peterborough hardly escaping) and
dispersed the whole party.

The Scotch Army was advanced now as far as Preston in Lancashire, ^reston
^ight. Aug. 17
where Lieutenant General Cromwell, being joined with Major General Lambert,
awaited them. At this time also Scarborough declares for the King, Sir Matthew
Boynton being Governor there. August 17. both Armies faced one another, and
within two hours time the Scots begin to flinch, so that the brunt of the fight
fell upon the English, who sided with them. The Scots being ready to fly, the
Parliament Army doubled their courage, and put them to the rout two several
ways. The next morning, being the 18th of August, the Scot, made a stand, and
did some notable execution on the p^r^^^ers, but the Army coming up, they fled
again, crying Mercy, Mercy, so that they might be heard five miles together an
end; multitudes were killed, and more taken prisoners, being in number
equivalent to the Army that vanquished them. Duke Hamilton fled first to
Namptwich with three thousand horse, there the Country took five hundred of
them, and thence to Vttoxeter in Staffordshire, where he was taken by my Lord
Gray of Grooby: Monro escaped with part of the Scotch Horse to Berwick, and so
into Scotland, but Middleton was taken by the way thither.

After it was known which way Hamilton took, ^^omwel ^st into ^tland
Cromwell followed after Monro into Scotland, and there begun intelligence with
some of those Scots in tendency to his a^ter-design, and after they had cajoled
one another, he departed into England, having received the thanks of the
Committee of Estates for the service he had done their Nation.

Upon the news of this defeat sent in by General Fairfax to the besieged in
Colchester, a Council of War was held what to do, ^lche. (...) ^lded. ^gust.
it was once agreed, to make an eruption out, and attempt the whole Army
beleaguring them; but this, through some suspicion amongst the Soldiers of
being deserted by their Officers in the action, was frustrated; whereupon it
came to a resolve of treating with the Enemy: and so it was concluded (the
besieged having eaten all their horses and the dogs in the Town) that the
Officers should be left to discretion, the soldiers to have their lives, and
the Town to pay 14000 l. to preserve it from plunder: Whereupon the Town being
surrendered, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, were shot to death
presently, and not long after the Lord Capel was beheaded by a sentence of the
High Court of Justice.

In the perplexity of these affairs, Treaty at the Isle of Wight. October.
the Treaty was voted in the Isle of Wight, and accordingly effectually
prosecuted, the King being in a kind of Regality in the said Isle, and so far
had it proceeded, that in November the Parliament voted the Kings Concessions
to be sufficient ground for them to proceed on to the settlement of the
Kingdom, when the Army being now Lords and Masters through their late success,
came and put a force upon the House of Commons, excluding above 140. and by the
remnant of their faction in the House, unvoted these Votes, and the Army next
removed the King from Wight to Hurst Castle, then to Winchester, then to
Windsor, and so to Saint James, and last to the High Court of Justice, where
after four times being at that detestable Bar, and refusing to own their
Jurisdiction, they pronounced the Sentence, and the order, place, and time of
the execution was referred to Colonel Harrison, etc. who appoint Tuesday, Ian.
30. before Whitehall gates, in the open place, where accordingly that execrable
murder was perpetrated by the hands of a Vizarded Executioner, to the amazement
of the whole world, and to the unexpressible sorrows of this Church and
Kingdom. The Kings last words on the Scaffold, being the sum of the Life,
Trial, and Death of that most incomparable pious Prince, are here fully
inserted, to serve for all.

scene of Charles' execution

I shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word
to you here: Indeed I could have held my peace very well, if I did not think,
that holding my peace, would make some men think, that I did submit to the
Guilt, as well as to the Punishment: But I think it is my duty to God first,
and then to my Country, to clear my self, both as an honest man, a good King,
and a good Christian.

I Shall begin first, with my Innocence; and, in tr^ath, I think it not very
needful for me to insist long upon this: For all the world knows, that I did
never begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament; and I call God to witness,
unto whom I must shortly make an account, that I did never intend to incroach
upon their Privileges: They began upon me; it is the Militia they began upon:
They confess the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit to have it from me.
And to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of their
Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declaration, he will see clearly,
that they began these unhappy Troubles, not I. So as far the guilt of these
enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope that God will clear me out. I
will not (for I am in charity) and God forbid that I should, lay it upon the
two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free
of this guilt; but I believe, that ill Instruments between them and me, have
been the chief cause of all this bloodshed: So that as I find my self clear of
this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too; Yet for all this, God forbid,
that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say, that Gods Judgments are
just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by an unjust Sentence, that is
ordinary: I will only say this, That unjust Sentence that I suffered to take
effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me. So far I have said, to show
you, that I am an innocent man: Now to show you, that I am a good Christian; I
hope there is a good man that will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all
the world, and even those in particular, that have been the chief causers of my
death: Who they are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive
them. But this is not all, my charity must go further, I wish that they may
repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray
God with S Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge: And withal, that
they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for my charity
commands me, not only to forgive particular men, but to endeavor to the last
gasp, the peace of the Kingdom. So (Sirs) I do wish with all my soul: (I see
there are some here that will carry it further:) that they endeavor the peace
of the Kingdom. (Sirs) I must show you, both how you are out of the way, and
put you in a way. First, you are out of the way, for certainly all the ways
you ever had yet, as far as I could find by any thing, is in the way of
Conquests: Certainly this is an ill way for Conquest, in my Opinion, is never
just, except there he a just and good cause, either for matter of wrong, or a
just title; and then if ye go beyond the first quarrel that ye have: that makes
it unjust at the end, that was just at first: for if there be only matter of
Conquest, then it is a great robbery; as a Pyrate said to Alexander, That he
was the great Robber himself, himself was but a petty Robber. And so, Sirs, I
do think, for the way that you are in, you are much out of the way: Now, Sirs,
to put you in the way, believe it you will never go right, nor God will never
prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my
Successor) and the people their due; I am as much for them as any of you. You
must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, according to the
Scripture, (which is now out of order.) and to set you in a way particularly,
now I cannot; but only this, A National Synod freely called, freely debating
among themselves, must settle this: When every Opinion is freely and clearly
heard. For the King, indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly
instruct you for that; therefore because it concerns mine own particular, I
only give you a touch of it. For the People, truly I desire their liberty and
freedom as much as any body whomsoever: But I must tell you, that their
liberty and their freedom consist in having Government under those Laws, by
which their lives and theirs may be most their own; it is not in having a share
in the Government, that is nothing pertaining to them: A Subject and a
Sovereign are clean different things; and therefore until you do that, I mean,
that you put the people into that liberty, as I say, certainly they will never
enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that now I am hither come, for if I would have given way
to an arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I need not have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it
be not laid to your charge) that I am the Martyr of the people. Introath Sirs,
I shall not hold you any longer, I will only say this to you, that I could have
desired some little time longer, because I would have put this, what I have
said, in a little better order, and have had it a little better digested then I
have done; and therefore I hope you will excuse me; I have delivered my
Conscience, I pray God you take those courses, that are best for the good of
the Kingdom, and your own Salvation.

After some Ejaculations, he laid down his Head upon the Block, and stretched
out his hands (The S^gn) (...) had it severed from his body at one blow, by the
Vizarded Executioner, who presently held it up, and showed it to the people:
His Head and Trunk were afterward coffined in Lead, and exposed to public
view at S. James's; till lastly, the Duke of Len^^, the Marquess of Hartford,
the Earl of Southampton, and the Bishop of London, begged the Body to bury it,
which they conducted to Windsor Chappel-Royal, and there interred it; with only
this Insc^^ption upon the Co^^^; CHARLES, KING OF ENGLAND, MDC.XLVIII.

After this most (...) murder, January.
they declared themselves to be a Free State setting out a Proclamation wherein
they declare, that no person has Right to the Crown o^ England, abolishing
thereby the ^ingly ^overnment, and debarring of our Rightful Sovereign ^om any
claim, etc. declaring him also a Traitor, with the rest of the Royal Issue; for
refusing the publication of which the Lord Mayor Reynoldson was outed,
imprisoned, and fined 2000 l.

In March they proceed with their High Court of Justice, Vide speech page 3^.
newly modelled, and a new President, to the Trial of these Noble persons they
had in custody, about the last years risings, whereof Duke Hamilton, Vide
speech page 32.
Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen, were
condemned to be beheaded; the Duke, and Holland, and Capel, were accordingly
executed in the Palace-yard, the other two with much ado were pardoned.
P^nt^fract Castle was now rendered to the Parliament by Colonel Morris, being
the last Garrison for the King in England.

Now they had leisure to look toward Ireland, whether Lieutenant General
Cromwell was sent with an Army of 10000 men, Dublin freed, and the Marquis of
Ormond defeated
which landed about this time at Dublin, where a little before, Colonel Jones
the Governor having received a supply of 1000 men, had sallied out, and beaten
my Lord of Ormond from off the siege, where he lay with 20000 and upwards,
through the carelessness and treachery of the Guards: Here were slain to the
number of three thousand, and five thousand taken prisoners; this proved the
loss of all Ireland, which was then entirely for the King, save this City and
Londonderry.

Anno Domoni 1649.
Cromwell upon his arrival, sets presently forward toward Tredah, whereinto
the Lord Lieutenant Ormond had put a Garrison of choice English, and some
Irish; to this Town he gave three assaults, and was valiantly repulsed, but in
conclusion of the third, the Town was entered and man, woman, and children put
to the sword for three days in cold blood, with the Governor himself, Sir
Arthur Aston, a well experienced and valiant Captain.

Anno Dom. 1649. and 1650.
Upon this success Trim and Dundalk yielded themselves to him, August
the Marquess of Ormond hovering near him with his Army, but yet not daring to
attempt any thing. Wexford was the next Town he attaqued, which by storm he
took also, putting all in arms to the sword; thence to Passage Fort, and so to
Waterford, from whence he (considering the Winter approaching) drew off to
quarters, having already possession of most of the Towns of Ireland, Limrick,
Galloway, Clonmell, and Kilkenny excepted, which soon after were reduced by him
and his Successor Ireton, and that Kingdom was wholly brought in subjection to
the Parliament.

The next thing that busied the new Commonwealth, was the affairs of Scotland
who had long before proclaimed the King, and were now treating with him;
therefore they recalled home Lieutenant General Cromwell, whom upon Fairfaxes
refusal of going against the Scots, they now advanced to be General: He came
June the last to London, having landed at Bristol and was highly treated by the
Parliament.

Dorislaus that drew up the charge against the King, was killed at the Hague,
in May last; and Ascham that was sent on the same errand to the King of Spain,
was killed also by some English men in his Inn at Supper; this did mightily
inrage the new Commonwealth, that their Min^sters could no where be protected.

According to the conclusion of the Treaty between the King and his Subjects of
Scotland, he took shipping at Schiveling in Holland, and landed, after some
dangerous weather, safe in the Spey in Scotland, having narrowly mist some of
the Parliaments Frigots, that lay in wait for him. Cromwell therefore expedited
his march, and entered Scotland with a well-appointed Army of 18000 men, against
which invasion the Scot; did very much expostulate, and more fiercely prepared
to defend themselves.

The English Army therefore, July 22. advanced from Berwick into Scotland, ^uly
22.
the Scotch Army lying encamped in the fields about Muscle^orough, strongly
entrenched, diverse skirmishes past, and it was wet weather, which very much
incommodated the English; nevertheless they take two houses by storm, and both
Armies then faced one another, the great Guns playing on both sides, but the
Scots declined the Engagement, which the English perceiving, marched back to
Dunbar, and in a corn field, half a mile from the Sea, in a low ground, lodged
there September. 1. whether the Scots drew and encamped in the high ground above
it, making sure of a victory; but Cromwells forces charging resolutely to gain
the pass, and having mastred it, the whole Army on a sudden fell upon the
Scots, and after an hours dispute, though inferior in number, routed them,
killing 4000. and taking 10000 prisoners, 200 Cornets and Colors, 27
Fieldpieces, 10000 Arms, and three Lords: These Colors, with those taken at
Preston, were afterward set up in Westminster Hall, as also those of Worcester
thereafter. The Scot; quit Leith and Edinborough, which are possessed by the
English, who advance to Sterling, and fortify L^nl thgow.

Several encounters, and parleys were between Cromwell, and Colonel Ker, and
Straughan, for the Kirk alone; in one whereof Ker was defeated, and taken
prisoner; and by the other Straughan was brought over to side with the English.
Edinborough Castle had been long besieged and undermined, but at last the
treacherous Governor Dundasse delivered it upon Articles.

Colonel Eusebius Andrews, ^uary.
Sir Henry Hide, were beheaded about this time, and Doctor Lewen hanged about
the matters of the King, who was soon after crowned King of Scotland at Schoon,
where they had news of another loss, the rendition of Hume and Tim^tallon
Castle.

While the Army in Scotland made this progress, another war was breeding at
home betwixt the Dutch and us: S. John's had been sent Ambassador thither, and
had been very highly affronted; upon his return an Act was made, prohibiting
and impeding the liberty and freedom of the Dutch at Sea, which they not
brooking, the business came to be decided by blows.

Anno Dom. 1651.
BLackness Castle was taken by Colonel Monk, and at the same time the
Presbyterian Plot, laid by Mr. Love, etc. for a rising in Lancashire, where M.
G. Harrison had order to attend, was discovered, for which the said Love, and
one Mr. Gibbons, were beheaded at Tower Hill, August 22.

The Scots had raised another Army, whereof the King was General: This Army was
compounded of Cavaliers and Presbyters, being in all 21000 men; with these the
King marched from Sterling to Torwood, and there regularly encamped; thither
came Cromwell, hoping to draw them out to fight, but could not, only he stormed
Calendar House in their view: Nevertheless, in the interim, Colonel Overton, by
boats, had passed part of the Army from Le^h into Fife, who being seconded by a
greater force under Major General Lambert, the Scots being alarmed at this
unexpected invasion, send down Sir John Brown to drive them out; whereupon a
bloody fight ensued, but the victory fell to the English, near 1500 Scots were
slain, and 1000. with Sir John, taken prisoners.

After the Army thus was landed on Fifes fide, and had given the Kings forces a
defeat, it was advised the King should presently desert Scotland, (the English
having now shipped most of their men over, and so given the King the advantage of
two days march from Sterling) and by the way of Carlisle speedily march for
England, which was accordingly put in execution; and after a very troublesome
march, some opposition being made at Warrington Bridge by Major General
Harrison, (since executed, and there worsted) on the 22 of August, having
marched three hundred miles in three weeks time he arrived at Worcester with
his Army, consisting of 11000 foot, most whereof were Highlanders, and 3000
horse, made up with some additional English, under the now Right Honorable
Earl of Shrewslury, Colonel Howard, and other Knights and Gentlemen, who had
escaped with the Earl of Derby thither, after the defeat given the said Earl by
Colonel Lilburn at Wigan.

After the King had rested his Army a while at Worcester, and summoned in the
neighboring Counties to a rendezvouze, in order to a conjuncture; upon which
some small appearance was made (the Rebels drawing near to attaque the City)
the King betook himself to make some fortifications, such as time would permit,
at Vpton bridge, and about the Town.

By the beginning of September, Cromwells whole Army, after a sufficient
refreshment, and additional forces of the Militia, which were speedily raised
in every County, presented himself on every side of the City; the number of
them consisted of very near 50000 men well armed; the first places attaqued was
Vpton Bridge, which Colonel, now Sir Edward Massey, stoutly defended, till
being over-powred, and himself wounded, he was forced to retreat, and leave the
enemy free passage.

Wednesday the third of September, the Enemy resolved to fall on, which they
did at several places, first at Powick bridge, whether the King himself in
person went, and beat back the Brigade^ assigned to that post; but being
necessitated to go back into the City to give other Orders, his forces lacking
Ammunition, were forced to give way, and make a disorderly retreat into
Worcester. Presently upon this, the Enemy charged furiously upon another part,
where his Majesty himself in person gave not^ble proof of his valor, Duke
Hamilton receiving a shot hard by him, of which lie afterward died; but fresh
supplies coming in every minute, and the slaughter falling upon the new raised
men ( Cromwell reserving his Veteranes for the last) the King quit the field:
(Some impute it to David Les^leyes not coming with his horse to his succor in
time) and drew within the walls: But the Rebel pursued their success, and
having cast up a sudden battery, compelled the Fort-Royal to surrender, while
another part of the Army entered at another place, and fell in mediately to the
plunde^ing o^ the City: By fix of the clock the whole Town was gained, and the
street; filled with blood, a great slaughter being made that unfortunate day.

Between six and seven a clock, in the dusk of the evening, the King,
accompanied with the chief of his Nobility, and some sixty horse, departed
Northward out of S. Martins gate: Having rid a little way, and upon
consultation held what to do in that distress of affairs, the Earl of Derby
advised the King to fly to a house called Bos^abell, where he himself had sound
security in his flight from Wigan aforesaid: To that intent, one Mr. Giffard,
an Inhabitant thereabouts, was called for, who with the assistance of one Mr.
Walker, formerly a Scoutmaster in the ^ings Army, with some difficulty, (the
King riding all the night) brought him to a place called the W^ite-Ladies, a
mile b^v^nd Boscabell, to avoid suspicion of staying there.

At their coming to White-Ladies on break of day. Thursday September. 4. one
George Pendrill, the youngest brother of the four, being awakened with the loud
noise they made at the gates, and hearing distinctly Mr. G^ffards voice calling
him, ran down in hi^ shirt and opened the door; whereupon the King and the
Noblem^n presently entered the house, the Kings horse being brought into the
Hall, where another consultation was held what should be done for the safety of
the Kings person in this exigence: At last it was concluded, that this George
should go presently to Tongue, and enquire what news, or whether any parties were
stir^ing or no; and in the mean while one Martin was sent by Colonel Ros^anrck,
by order of the Earl of Derby, for William Pendrill, the eldest Brother, who
presently came, and there met his Brother George, who had brought Richard by
Mr. Giffards order along with him, and informed the King, that the coast was
yet clear.

Whereupon all dispatch was made to get the King out before any further danger;
the King hair was first out off by my Lord Wilmot, then rounded by William
Pendrill; and at the same t^me Richard had, by direction from Mr. Giffard,
fetched his b^st clothes, being a jump and breeches of green course cloth, and a
Doe-kin leather doublet, the hat was borrowed of Humphrey Pendrill the Miller,
being an old gray one that turned up its brims; the shirt, which in that
Country language they call an Harden, or Noggen-shirt, a kind of linen that is
made of the coursest of the hemp, was had of the aforesaid Martin, George
Pendrill lent the band, and William Creswell the shoes, which the King having
presently unstript himself of his own clothes, did quickly put on: His
^uft-coat, and linen doubler, and a gray pair of breeches, which he wore
before, he gave into his brothers hands, who forthwith buried them under
ground, where they lay five weeks before they durst take them up again. The
Jewels off his arm he gave to one of Lords then departing.

Straightwith William Pendrill was brought to the King by the Earl of Derby,
and the care and preservation of his most Sacred Majesty committed to his
charge, and the rest of the Brothers (the Earl himself would have staid, but
there was no undertaking security for them both) so presently the Lords took
their heavy leave, and departed, every one shifting for himself. The Duke of
Buckingham, Earl of Derby, Lord Talbot, the Earl of Lauderdale, and the rest of
that party, being overtaken at Newport, in their march Northward, and routed:
the Duke escaped, and found a hiding place at a friends of his Family in
Shropshire; the rest were taken (the Earl of Derby most inhumanely and unjustly
beheaded at Bolton, with Sir Timothy Fetherston-Haugh, and some others
elsewhere) and imprisoned; only the Lord W^lmot (since decea^ed, during the
Kings Exile abroad) staid behind, and wa^ by John Pendrill, through many
difficulties, and trials o^ several places, conveyed safely to Mr. Whitgrea^s
at Mosely.

Now the King and his company being departed, having taken a Woodbill into his
hand, went out with Richard into the adjoining wood, called Spring Coppice.
William departed home, and George and Humphrey went out to scout, and lay
hovering about the woods to hear or see if any approached that way. You must
note here, that these Brothers had taken into their assistance one Frances
Yates, their Sisters Husband, who was also with the King in the wood, they
being by profession woodcutters: But the King had not been an hour in the wood,
before a party of horse, in pursuit of him, was come to White-Ladies, and had
enquired, and sound out by some of the Inhabitants, that the King with a party
had been there, as they supposed, but they affirmed directly, that he was gone
away with all speed from thence in the said company Northwards. Upon which
words, spurred on by the expectat on and greediness of their prey, supposing
the King and his Lords were all together, they made no stay, or further
inquisition or search (save only in the house) and rode away as fast as they
could possible. This the King was informed of by his two aforesaid Sco^ts, who
stragled for intelligence near the village.

This Thursday the King continued all day in the wood, upon the ground, Richard
Pendrill being constantly with him, and sometimes the other three: It proved to
be a very rainy day, and the King was wet with the showers; thereupon Francis
Yates his wife came into the wood, on whom the King at first looked something
dubiously, yet resolutely asked her, whether she could be faithful to a
distressed Cavalier: To which she replied, Sir, I will die rather then discover
you: She brought with her a blanket to keep the King dry, and his first meat he
eat there, viz. a mess of milk, eggs, and sugar, in a black earthen cup, which
the King guessed to be milk and apples, and said he loved it very well. After
he had drank some, and eat some in a Pewter spoon, he gave the rest to George,
and bid him eat it, for it was very good. There was nothing of moment passed
this day in Court, but only his Majesty exchanged his Woodbill for Francis
Yates his Broom-hook, being something lighter.

The King was hardly brought to fashion himself to their gate, or to bend his
straight body down to his feet, the language in his stay and passing to
Worcester, he could tune pretty well; most of the day was spent in conforming
him to their words, till about five a clock that evening, the King with his
gallant Retinue of Richard, Humphry, George, and Francis Yates, left the wood,
and betook himself to Richards little house, where he went under the name of
William Jones, a Woodcutter, newly come thither for work. At his coming, the
good wife for his entertainment at supper, was preparing a Fricass of Bacon and
Eggs, and while that was doing, the King held on his knees their Daughter Nan:
He eat very little, ruminating and pausing on his intended passage into Wales.

After supper ended, the Mother of the Pendrills came and kneeled, and took her
leave of the King; so did the rest of his poor mean attendants, only Richard
went along with the King, to conduct and guide him, it being then dark, and the
way troublesome.

Their intended journey was to Mr. Wolfes of Madely, some 5 miles distant from
White-Ladies, of whom the King had a good character from his servant Richard.
By the way they were put to a fright at a Mill-water, by a Miller that had
taken into his protection some of the same undone party, so that Richard was
forced to wade through, and the King to follow him by the ^atling music of his
leather breeches.

It was late at night before they got to Madely; wherefore Richard very
confidently knocked at Mr. Wolfes door, which his Daughter opening, he desired
to be let in, telling her the King was with him: So they both entered, till Mr.
Wolf came and welcomed the King, who though wearied, and his feet extremely
sore, yet held it not convenient (of which Opinion Mr. Wolf was also) to lodge
in the house. Here he was informed (which was his main business) that there was
no passage to be had over Severn into Wales, the river being so guarded and
watched, that there was no attempting of it without extreme hazard and peril.
After some other discourses of the like tendency, the King was conveyed to an
Heyloft, where he and Richard reposed themselves (though the Kings sore feet
very much troubled him) that night, and next day, being Friday, and on that
night, the same hour they arrived, they set forward to Boscabell, having had
provision, and some money from the said Mr. Wolf, his Daughter also bringing
the King into his way some two miles, and then she returned.

At his coming to Boscabell, the King was so wearied, his feer being blistered
with traveling in such course and stiff accoutrements as he had on his legs,
and lying in them, that he was scarce able to stand or go, which Will. wife
perceiving, she stripped off his stockings, and cut the blisters, and washed his
feet, which gave the King some ease.

The same time Colonel Carelos, one that made good the Kings Rear at Worcester,
and gave the King time to escape, having seen the last man killed in that
lamentable fight, was also come to Boscabell, a refuge he had used before,
where the King met him, the Colonel most humbly and joyfully welcoming him to
that most sure retreat.

After a short conference together, it was judged by them both, as the
probablest means of security, that the King should betake himself again to the
wood: Accordingly, Saturday the sixth of September, in the morning, they went
into the wood together, the Colonel leading the way to that so much now
celebrated Oak, where before he had been lodged himself: William Pendrill
brought a Ladder, by which they got up into the boughs and branches of the
tree, which were very thick, and well spread, and full of leaves, so that it
was not possible for any to see through them.

When they were both up, William brought them up two Pillows to lie upon, where
the Arms and branches were thickest; and the King being over-wearied with his
journey and sore travel, waxed very heavy, with a propensity to sleep. The
Colonel to ease his Majesty the best he could, desired him to lay his head in
his lap, and rest the other parts of his body on the pillow, which the King
did; and after he had taken a good sleep (while William and his wife Joan went
peaking up and down with anxious thoughts gathering of st^cks with a Nut-hook)
awaked very hungry, and wished for some victuals: That desire was soon
satisfied, the Colonel pulling out of his pocket a good lunchion of bread and
cheese, which Joan had given him for provant that day, and had wrapped it up in a
clean l^nnen cloth, of which the King fed very heartily, and was well pleased
with it, and highly commended his good fare: Some other pittance of relief in
drink he had also, which was put up to him in a bottle by a long book-stick.

The King intended not long to stay at Boscabell; therefore Richard was sent to
one Mr. Manwaring, an acquaintance of Colonel Ca^elos at Woller Hampton, some
three miles from Boscabell, with some instructions, and to enquire if he knew
not o^ any security for one of the Kings ruined party, Mr. Manwaring returned,
that himself could not, but would enquire if a friend of his, naming Mr.
Whitgrea^ could: So Richard returned, and brought with him some wine, and other
refreshments from the Town.

Neither was Humphrey idle or unimployed, but was sent abroad to lay out for
intelligence, which the ea^ilier to come by, he was sent to one Captain
Broadwayes of Shesual, a Captain of the new raised Militia, under pretense of
paying his Mistresses money for a man that was taxed upon her for that service:
While he was th^re, a Parliament Colonel came in to understand of Broadwayes,
what further discovery was made at White-Ladies since the time the King
escaped; to which Broadwayes answered, he could say nothing more to it, but
there was one of that place below, that might perhaps give him better
satisfaction. Humphrey was called and examined, but he resolutely denied any
knowledge whether the King went otherwise then Northward; but that party being
taken, and the King not among them, made the Colonel believe he staid behind,
and therefore told him there was a proffer of a thousand pound to any that
would discover him, and did thereupon earnestly press Humphrey about the
business; but all was in vain, there was no prevailing upon his conscience and
duty. The news of this afterward something amused the King, but the Colonel
told the King there was no danger in it, for upon his life they should prove
constant and faithful to his Majesty

At night, the King and the Colonel came down from the Tree, by the same Ladder
they gat up, and was brought into Boscabell garden, where he sat in the Bower
of it, and drank part of the wine which Richard brought from Woller Hampton,
till 'twas very late. But the King was hungry again, and his appetite then
served him for a joint of Mutton, though hi^ Dame Joan (so the King then called
his Host) had provided him a dish of Chickens: To which William replied, that
truly he had none, and to go to the Market would be very suspectful, for they
used not to buy such cheer, but if his Majesty would have some, he would make
bold, and borrow one of Mr. Stauntons: to whose Sheepcote he and the Colonel
presently went and fetched one, and brought it home into the Cellar, where the
Colonel stabbed it with his dagger, and both of them dressed it as well as they
could, and brought the King up a Hind-quarter of it, which the King presently
sliced part of into Scotch Collops, and the Colonel and he fried betwixt them;
which pleasant passage yielded a merrier dispute afterward in France, when it
was questioned which of the two was the Cook or the Scullion.

The next day being Sunday, John came to Boscabell from my Lord Wilmot, having
been sent before to White-Ladies, but mist of the King, by reason of his being
at Madely then, to acquaint the King with the convenience of Mr. Whitgreavs
house, there being such a secret place in it betwixt two walls, that a safer
could not be imagined: Upon this news it was resolved, that the King on Sunday
night late should go to Mosely, to the said Mr. Whtigreavs, and the Colonel to
shift for himself: All that day being Sunday, the King kept himself in the
secret place where he lay that night, having been much discommodated through
the shortness of it. As soon as the appointed hour was come, Humphrey the
Miller was ready with his horse that should carry the King, for none other with
safety and convenience could he had. This was a kind of War-horse, that had
carried many a load of provision, meal, and such like; but now there was put on
him a bridle and a saddle that had outworn its tree and irons.

The horse standing at the door, the King came out, intending to have none
along with him but John; but the other five brothers insisting on the danger of
his going so ill attended, so many straggling soldiers lying up and down the
Country, he agreed to have them all along with him, and so took his farewell of
Colonel Carelos, who very disconsolately parted from him.

The King being mounted, the six Brethren guarding him behind, and before, and
on each side, Humphrey leading the horse, they began their journey: The way wa^
something dirty, and every where the horse blundering, caused the King to
suspect falling, and to bid Humphrey have a care; to which he returned, that
his horse had carried many a heavy weight before, but never the price of three
Kingdoms; and therefore he might be excused by reason of his extraordinary
burden,

When they came within a mile of the house, they made fast the horse, and came
the foot-way through the fields thither: before the King went into the house,
he took his leave of all of them but John, they upon their knees crying and
praying for his safety and preservation. As they were departing, the King
called them back, and said, I am so full of care, that I do forget what I do;
but here is my hand (giving it them to kiss) if God bless me, I will remember
all another day. A promise his Majesty has most graciously perfopmed.

When he came into the house, with none but John, he was most submisly and
cordially welcomed by Mr. Whitgreave, who presently conducted him to my Lord
Wilmot, in the secret place, who with infinite gladness ^ell down and embraced
his knees, The first thing they did, was to shist his Majesty, by taking off
that course shirt, and putting on a ^^er, and changing his stockings and shoes:
Next they consulted about his Majesty's manner of escape out of England;
whereupon Col. Lane was propounded as a very fit and necessary instrument in
that business, and agreed on, and accordingly transacted, as before designed by
my Lord Wilmot, which was, that the never-to-be-forgotten Lady Jane Lane, under
some pre^ence of visiting her Sister, and other affairs in Bristoll, should g^t
a Pass for her Man and her self, and that the King should be the Man, and ride
before her.

This was concluded on and done, Mrs. Lane sending some Spring Water, in which
Wallnuts had been boiled to discolor his hands and face, and other parts open
to view; and on Thursday night, the eleventh of September, Colonel Lane came
with her, all things fit for his Majesty's journey being provided, to a field
adjoining to Mr. Whitgreaves house, where the King was mounted before her, and
from thence they immediately set forward, having directions given to know the
Country, and recommendations also to the Allies, friends and acquaintance of
her Family, if any sinister rancounter should put them to trial.

At one Town in their journey they met with a Troop of horse, but the Captain
perceiving they rid double, commanded the Troop to open to the right and left,
and so past them.

Being come to Bristoll, they endeavored to get a passage thereabouts for
France, his Majesty being Nobly and secretly entertained at the house of Mr.
Norton (at Leigh hard by Bristoll) since Knighted for his loyalty; but it not
succeeding there, and my Lord Wilmot being come to Bristoll, it was agreed to
go for Salisbury, where the King had entertainment by the Relations of Sir
Edward Nicholas, his Majestics Secretary. Here Colonel Gunter fortunately came
to know the King, by whose conveyance the King was brought sale into Sussex, to
the habitation of this Noble Gentleman, and a Bark b^b^ means procured for
fifty pound, to transport two Gentlemen, upon account of a quarrel and Duel
lately fought, into France: The Master not knowing otherwise, while at Sea, who
safely and dutifully landed them at Deep in Normandy; from whence the King went
immediately to Paris, where he was welcomed by that Court, but most joyfully
received by our Queen his Mother, and the Duke, and that most affectionate
Uncle of his Majesty's, the late deceased Duke of Orleans, of famous memory.

De Bello ducit Pax laeta Triumphos.

Anno Domini, 1652.
After this defeat, Scotland is with little difficulty (General Mon^ seizing
most of the Scotch Presbyterian Nobility at Ellas, where they were in Council)
reduced to the obedience of the Parliament; Garrisons were placed every where,
and four Citradels most impregnably fortified at Leith, S. Iohnstons, Air, and
Innerness; so that the total Conquest of that Nation was by the English then
accomplished, and so far forth secured for ever.

This Triumph swelled the new State to other great enterprises; the Dutch had
stood upon some punctilio of honor with them, as being the junior state; and
for their relation to the Prince of Aurange, their General, were suspected
(though many variations in that compass) of adherance to the King his
Brother-in-law, the said Prince being lately dead. For these reasons, the
Parliament published an Act (by them made) for the encouragement of Navigation,
the most advantageous and pleasing to the English Mariners, and as hurtful and
displeasant to the Hollander, forbidding any goods to be exported from any
place, but what were of the growth and manufacture thereof in any other vessels
but their own, and English, which totally excluded the Hollander, saving some
petty Merchandises of Linen, Maderas, etc.

The States of Holland hereupon arm, and set forth a Fleet of ships under
Admiral Van-Trump, who meeting with our Fleet at the Downs, in the beginning of
May, under Bourn, who was soon relieved by General Blake, the Flag being
refused by the Dutch; the fight began, and continued about four hours till
night, the success lighting on the English.

This attempt made by the Dutch, highly exasperated the then State, who were
used to the excesses and uncoutroulments of Fortune, so that the Ambassadors
here could not allay their fury, but departed home.

Sir George A^scue, one of the Parliaments Captains over a Squadron of ships,
being about Plymouth, met with a Sail of fifty Dutch Men of War, and by night,
after some conflict, parted equally from them.

General Blake roving about the Downs, met with the French Fleet, then bound
for the relief of Dunkirk, besieged by the Spaniard, which he took altogether,
and thereupon that Town was rendered to the Archduke Leopold.

On the 28 of September, Sept. 28.
the English met the Dutch Fleet at a place called the Kentish-Knock, where
some of the greatest English ships struck on the Sands, but getting off again,
they so fiercely plied the Dutch, that they were forced to fly, saving
themselves from a greater loss then the disabling of some six ship;, whereof
the Rear-Admiral was one. This was recompensed by the Dutch, who took a Man of
War in the Stra^ts, by Porto-Longone.

On the twentieth of December, December 20.
Van-Trump with a new rigged Fleet came again to the Downs with 100 Men of War,
and Fireships, where Blake unhappily with a small number met them, and was
forced to sail for it, being much endangered himself: Here were lost the
Garland and Bonadventure, and two other Merchants Ships, besides the Vanguard
and Victory very much shattered.

The Dutch crowed upon this Victory, and with a numero^s Fleet of Merchantmen
sailed to Rochel, Feb. 18.
giving out, that they would sweep the Seas of the English; but at their return
the English met them at Portland, and gave them such a re-encounter, that after
three days fight (very terrible) the Dutch fled, nine Men of War being taken,
and fifty Merchantmen, much slaughter on both sides, but the most on the
conquered: Van-Trump to Calice, and thence to the Weilings; the English to
Dover, and so to Ports.

This a second time was repaid us, by an overthrow given us in the Straits,
where five of our Ships being not longer to be protected by the Duke of
Florence, coming out of Legorn, were over-powred by a Dutch Fleet of 24 Soil,
and the Leopard, and another Bonaventure taken, with other damages to the
Levant Trade.

But such was their great preparations at home, that the Parliament minded
nothing else, waving all public businesses from the King of France, concerning
the Ships taken at Dunkirk, and another message from Bourd^aux, and for a while
deferring the Portugal Ambassador, who came to offer restitution. And yet in
the height of this grand design, an unexpected, or at least an unwardable blow
quite undid them and their designs, leaving them, as became, the laughter and
scorn of the Nation, while their General having turned them out, and dissolved
them, made himself, after a short intervall of time, the Supreme Magistrate.

Anno Domini, 1653.
FOr on the twentieth of April, April.
1653. Cromwell suddenly and forcibly turns out the Parliament, who had for
four years, and as much as from January to April this year, since they
murdered the King, tyrannized over the three Nations.

After this violation of that violencing Parliament, July 4.
Cromwell and his Officers call a new Representative, and erect a new Council
of State, wherein not one man of (but only such as were revolters from) the
Commonwealth were admitted. By the FACE of this new erected Council, a
Convention is assembled of 120. who did nothing but folly and mischief against
Church and people, particularly by their lawless act of Marriages, and vote
against Tithes, and then the cunninger part of them reassigned their Trust and
Power to the same hand that gave it, having made an Act also for a Tax,
according to the old mode of 120000 pound per mensem.

By this shift of power, December 12.
Cromwell was, as they and he said, invested with the Supreme Authority, it
being devolved unto him by the late resignation; and therefore a new device of
Government was now projected, which was contained in an Instrument consisting
of 42 Articles; whereby he is made Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and solemnly installed before the Lord Mayor of London, on the
sixteenth of the same month. This was pretended to be drawn out of Magna
Charta; but what need we say of it?

Some struglings there were about the beginning of the new year in Scotland and
Ireland; in the first for life, the other of death, the Scotch hoping to
recover themselves, and the Irish at the l^st gasp, all places and persons
being near reduced to the Usurper,.

During this intermission of Government in England, yet there was no vacancy of
War betwixt us and the Hollanders, who sensible of their own weakness, and the
new Protectors troubles, in his ambitious aspiring designs, sent over
Ambassadors to treat. While they were here, the Fleets of both States being
prepared, and out at Sea, happened two dismal encounters; the first on the 23
of July, (the Dutch having before conveyed one Fleet out toward the East and
West, France, Spain, and the Levant, about by Scotland; and conveyed two
Fleetshome, one from the Baltic and Northern Sea from Prussia, and another
that came about from France, Levant, etc.) which continued for three days
fighting and flying; in the first whereof General Dean was slain with a Canon
bullet hard by General Monck (so Providence distinguished betwixt a
King-Murderer and a King-Restorer) and the two next, in seizing and entering
several ships in the pursuit, until such time as they got into the Weylings,
having lost seventeen Men of War, whereof eleven taken and six sunk, and many
prisoners taken; and which was worst, the Coast of Holland was so blockt up,
that no ships could safely arrive in their harbors, nor no joining of one part
of the Fleet (then a rigging new, to remedy this overthrow) with another.

All preparations were therefore made by the Hollander, to recover not only
their credit, but their livelihood and subsistence, which was to drive the
English from the coast; and General Van-Trump having fitted himself with the
choice of his Country, both for men and ships, resolved for to effect it;
whereupon on the second of July he sailed from the Weylings, and soon after
joined with a Fleet from the Texel, at the sight of which Fleets the English
weighed, and on the 23 in the afternoon, part of the English under General
Monk, then Admiral, charged through them; the next day the whole Fleet came up,
but being blustrous weather could not engage, but on Saturday both Fleets fell
to it, and made an end, the Dutch being worsted, and miserably shattered,
thirty six ships taken, burnt, and sunk, the rest escaping into the Texel, from
whence were lately some of them equipped.

This was the parting blow of that War, the Dutch Ambassadors concluding a
peace presently, which was transacted by Oliver, and concluded by him, for the
facilitating his vaster designs at home, this adding reputation to his future
undertakings; and so the quarrel for the Dominion of the Seas ended.

This War so ended, with such honorable success and advantage, Cromwell
having, as before is said, the power resigned into his hands, took upon him to
act as chief Magistrate, urged thereto by the Army and the well-affected
people, and installed himself, as before, at Westminster the sixteenth day of
December, Lord Protector of the three Nations.

Being also now proclaimed by his Council, with the style aforesaid, endeavors
were used every where to countenance it with Addresses, but the main one, was
the invitation of the City for him to dine at Grocers Hall, which they
sumptuously performed, and he ambitiously enough received, Knighting the Mayor
for the Cities kindness.

But kindness would yield no money, therefore cruelty must; a plot against the
Protectors life by one Colonel John Gerrard, Mr. Fox Mr. Vowel, and others, who
not being chargeable by the Laws for any such attempts, were brought before a
High Court of Justice, and Colonel Gerrard and Mr. Vowel condemned, and
severally executed; with Gerrard was executed Don Pontaleon, the Portugal
Ambassadors Brother, who had made a Riot in the New-Exchange, and slain a
Gentleman, to whose rescue this Noble Gerrard very bravely ventured, and yet
their fate was one.

General Middleton lands in Scotland, with some supplies from the King;
whereupon Glencarn and Seasort join with him, and put a new face upon the Kings
business there; but in conclusion all came to nothing, the Earl of Middleton
being defeated at Longherry, who had marched through all the Highlands after
him, and there overtook and worsted him, Middleton himself escaping, and the
Earl of Glencarn, and the Lords of the Royal Party, coming in upon conditions,
till all was quieted in that Kingdom.

Anno Domini, 1654.
King Charles the Second about this time departed the Kingdom of France, upon
intimation of a Treaty then on foot betwixt that Crown and the Protector, whom
soon followed his Brother the Duke of York; and the Duke of Gloucester, being
tempted to turn Papist, was fought out of the Jesuits College by the Marquess
of Ormond, according to the command of the King his Brother.

Now according to the Instrument of Government, Cromwell called his first
Triennial Parliament, which had sit but just five lunary months, spent in
debating the aforesaid Instrument, and Cromwells Authority, when Cromwell came,
sent for the House to the Painted Chamber, and dissolved it with a very ted^ous
and deceitful speech.

Now another plot, after this dissolution of the Parliament, which ended with
much public discontent, and therefore was thought a very fit juncture for such
a business, was found out, and discovered from abroad by one Manning, one of
the Secretaries to the King then at Colen: The first eruption of this general
design was at Salisbury, on the sixteenth of March, of some three hundred men,
under the command of Sir Joseph Wagstaff, in chief, and Colonel Penruddo^k, and
Gr^ves, consisting altogether o^ men of quality and condition: These proceeded
Westward, where at Blandford they proclaimed the King, but Oliver knowing the
plot before hand, had sent some horse that way, who forthwith pursued them,
they bending toward Devonshire, where at Southmolton they were surprised in
their quarters, Wagstaff escaped, but Penruddock and Groves, though after
quarter promised by Colonel Vnton Crook, who took them, with some twenty more,
were beheaded and executed (...) several places.

Another party at the same time surprised the Town of Shrewsbury, and
endeavored to take the Castle, but were discovered, and so failed of their
enterprise: The like rising also in Montgomerysh^re, in Sherwood Forest in
Nottingham^hire, and in Yorkshire and Northumberland, so that though it was
laid generally through the Nation, yet by the treachery of that Manning, the
design was fr^strated, which soon brought after it a trick called Decimation of
the Cavaliers Estates for their old and this new (so termed) Delinquency.

The Protector had feared himself, December
as he thought, pretty fast in his new Usurpation, he had concluded a League
with the Dutch, and Whitlock had made another for him with the Swede, and now
the French had also entered into the like Confederation, prevening the Sp^n^ard,
the first design whereof proved to be an attempt upon the King of Spains
West Indies, advised by Cardinal Mazarine, and vigorously put in execution by
the Protector; for on the nineteenth of December, a well-appointed Fleet set
sail from Portsmouth to the Barbados, where, and not before, the General, had
order to open their Commissions, ( Venables for the Land, and Pen for the Sea
forces) no body certainly knowing their design, an occasion of much mischief
afterward to the expedition, neither Commanders nor Soldiers being
sufficiently provided for so long a service with necessaries.

On the 29th of January, the whole Fleet, except the Charity, where the horses
and other provisions were put aboard, arrived at Anchor in Carlisle Bay at the
Barbados, and landed their men, where having made up the three thousand they
brought with them from England, to the number of eight thousand, March
with Planters from the adjacent Isles, the 31 of March they set sail from the
Barbados, and six days after, at S. Christophers, took in thirteen hundred
men more (Volunteers) and from thence on the thirteenth of April arrived at S.
Domingo. Here a Council of War was called, and it was determined, that Gen
Venables should land with seven thousand men, and three days provision, ten or
twelve leagues Westward to the Town, the Army being very joyf^l, and expecting
nothing less then heaps of gold; accordingly they landed, but then a
Proclamation was made, that no man should touch or plunder to his own use any
plate, money, etc. which so deaded their hearts, that what with that, and the
incommodiousness and thirst they suffered in that hot passage, being forced to
drink their own Urine, they were so disheartened and dismayed, that at the very
first encounter of the Enemy their courage failed them, and an inconsiderable
Enemy made great execution on them.

Anno Domini, 1655.
This first succesless combat struck a panick fear through the whole Army, so
that they began to grow afraid of the rustling of the leafs of those thick
woods they wandered in; but at last up they came to a Fort near S. Domingo,
where having made ready their Mortar Guns to play upon it, orders were given
for the dismounting and hiding of them, and the next day with all have the Army
reimbarqued again, having neither provision, nor any thing else fit for their
long return to Windward for Barbadnes; May
and therefore it was resolved, that they should steer directly before the wind
to Iamaica, where they arrived on the eighteenth of May, and meeting no
opposition landed, and possessed themselves of the chiefest Town; whereupon
ensued a Treaty betwixt the Spanish Governor and the General, which spun out
time, till the Inhabitants had conveyed away their best goods and cattle; and
soon after this worthy adventure, the two Generals returned into England, and
for shew-sake were clapped up in the Tower by the Protector, and presently again
released. But great was the mortality of this expedition, scarce one in four
surviving; and the same misery befell them that were afterward sent thither,
being two thousand stout old Soldiers, under the several commands of Colonel
Humphreys, and Lieutenant Colonel Brayn, who was sent last to command in chief
in that new-gained Island.

But what honor was lost here, was something compensated by the valor of
General Blake, who at the same time that this Fleet went for the West Indies,
was sent with another into the Straits to repress the violence of the Pirates
of Algiers, who had so infested those Seas, that commerce was not free for any
Nation: Therefore having anchored before Algiers, he demanded restitution, and
had a civil answer, from thence to his satisfaction; thence he arrived at
Tunis, demanding as before; to which the Dye or Vice-King returned answer, that
there were the Castles and Ships of the Grand Seignior, that he might do his
worst, they were not to be scared with his Fleet: whereupon a Council of War
being called, it was resolved, to attaque the Castles and Port of Ferino,
wherein lay nine Frigates of War, and to burn them, which accordingly, and in
despite of all their Ordnance and Castles they effected, with a very small
loss: The news hereof was carried to the Grand Seignior, to the glory of the
English Nation.

About this time a massacre was committed in Piedmont on the Protestants there
(many say not for Religion, but Rebel on) and vast sums of money were raised
by a Declaration of the Protectors, resenting their miserable estate, most part
of which came into his own purse at the Conclusion; yet while he was taking
money in one hand for the Christians account, he had another open for the
Jewish, who about this time had offered large sums for their readmistion into
this Kingdom, this could not be done without an odium, and yet the Protector
kept what he had in hand as earnest from them.

The next design was a Turkish one, having erected the office and power of
Major Generals, equal to Bashaws, for the several Counties, but they being
upstarts, and something eclipsing his own entire greatness, he soon after laid
them aside, (but never totally abrogated them) having made use of them to levy
his new extortion of Decimation.

A War now was declared betwixt the Spaniard and the Prorector, who sent the
two Generals, Blake, (and Montague new made one) to block up the Port at Cadiz,
and to way-lay the Plate-Fleet in its return from the Indies (nothing was
omitted to get money, which the people of England would not part with to him)
while the French peace was then proclaimed, which had been agreed on, as
before. Before Cadiz, the English lay, hoping to draw the Spaniards out, but he
would not stir, imagining the English must remove for fresh water homeward, but
that was found nearer there, at Wyers Bay in Portugal, whether the Generals
being gone for the aforesaid purpose, leaving Rear-Admiral Stayner to have an
eye upon the Coast, and port of Cadiz, he crusing up and down, espied a Fleet
making thitherwards, whereupon being to Leeward, he made all the possible speed
he could to get up to them, they supposing his Squadron to be but Fishermen,
and having received false intelligence the day before, that the English were
departed, and presently engaged: The Spaniards were eight tall Galeons, he but
three that fought; viz. the Speaker, the Bridgewater, and the Plymouth; the
fight was soon over; of the Spanish two were taken, two burnt, one sunk, two
ran ashore, and one escaped: In one of those that was taken great riches were
found, both in Plate and in Cocheneal, but in the other little save hides: For
this Victory a Thanksgiving day was ordered, and much rejoicing at Wh^tehall.

Anno Domini, 1656.
Nevertheless this money would not serve turn, and therefore the Protector
resolved to put it to trial what he could do by a Parliament, hoping this
success, and his reputation abroad, might have begot a dread and reverence upon
the people, so that he summons a Parliament by his own Writ, to be held at
Westminster the 17th of September; where finding the Election, not answering
his intendments, many of the late Assembly being returned again for this, he
imposes a recognition of his Authority to be taken by every Member, before he
should sit in the House; and thereupon excludes far the major part. Others
also, offended at this manner of proceeding, voluntarily absented themselves,
and retired into their respective Counties; so that having packt this
Convention according to his mind, the remnant chose Sir Thomas Widdrington
Speaker, and fell to work, enacting several things for the Protector first, for
security of his person and dignity, which had lately been attempted by one
Syndercomb (and for which he was convicted and condemned at the Kings Bench
Bar, then called the Upper bench, and was supposed to prevent his execution, to
have poisoned himself the night before in the Tower, from whence he was drawn
naked at a horse tail, and burned under the Scaffold at Tower Hill, and a stake
drove through him) and the next, the life of the Cause, for raising of money to
maintain the War against Spain, and for continuing Tonnage and Poundage;
another was, an Act for preventing buildings in and about London, a whole years
Revenue to be paid for all such houses as had been built upon new foundations
since the year 1620. and an Act confirming and continuing the Excise: But the
chiefest of all was, a device called, The humble Petition and Advice, wherein
Cromwell was entreated to be King, but his ambition durst not venture upon it,
as things yet stood, so he was contented to be installed again Lord Protector,
June.
by the Authority of Parliament, which was wanting before, and that solemnly
and very stately was soon after celebrated, and the Parliament adjounred.

Anno Domini, 1657.
Leave we the Protector awhile, and return to General Blake on the Coast of
Spa^n, where finding nothing to do, being informed that the Plate-Fleet was
arrived in the Canary Islands, and unladen, he resolved to sail thither, and
fire the Galeons in the Harbor of Sancta Cruz, which with much bravery, though
with as much danger and hazard, on the 20th of April, was attempted first by
Sir Richard Stayner, and seconded by the whole Fleet, so that in four hours
space they fired sixteen ships, and slew many hundred Spaniards on board and on
shore, losing only, some 50 slain, and 120 wounded. For this exploit the
General had a Diamond, nigh worth five hundred pound sent him, and Captain
Stayner was Knighted by Oliver, but since the King, out of respect to his
merit, has confirmed him a Knight.

On the 19th of April a conspiracy was found out of the Fifth Monarchists; at a
house in Shoreditch, several Arms and Colors were taken; as l^kewise Major
General Harrison, Colonel Rich, Vice Admiral Lawson, Venner, and others of that
party were secured; it came to nothing then, but burst out dangerously since.

This Summer the Protector, according to compact and agreement with the French,
had sent over some forces to join with the French King against the Spaniard in
Flanders: These, under the Command of Commissary General Reynolds, landed in
Picardy, and about the end of October, the French and he came and sit down
before Mardike, a Fort near Dunkirk, and of concernment to the taking of
Dunkirk it self: This place, after a short siege, was rendered, and by the
French put into the English hands, and so the French betook themselves to their
winter quarters, while the Spaniard, under the leading of the Duke of York,
attempted by storm in the night time to regain it from the English, but were
valiantly repulsed.

General Blake returning home from hi^ Triumphs over the Spaniard, died on
Shipboard, in sight of English Land; and General Reynolds returning out of
Flanders to England, was cast away in the Goodwin Sands, and with him Colonel
White, and others.

By one of the clauses of the humble Petition and Advice, it was declared, that
the Parliament should consist of two Houses; therefore Cromwell, during the
adjournment, filled up the number of that Other House, that was its name,
consisting of sixty two persons, most of them Officers of the Army, and his
near Relations, most of them of mean extraction: These nevertheless, at the
expiring of the prorogation appeared, and took their places in the House of
Lords, according as the ancient custom was, whether the Protector came and
sent for the House of Commons, where he made a canting speech to them, but the
Commons returning to their House, having admitted all their Members, would
neither own the new Lords, nor him that made them so, but fell into high
disputes about the Government; so that Cromwell seeing how the game was likely
to go, came, and in a great ^ury within ten days after their resitting,
dissolved them.

Anno Domini, 1658.
After the dissolution of this Parliament, as of course, and according to
custom another plot was discovered, and this was clearly of Cromwells own
making; the City was to be fired, and a general insurrection and massacre of
the well-affected: Vide Speech
In this snare were taken Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor Hewet, and Master, now Sir
Thomas Woodcock, John now Lord Viscount Mordant, and others of meaner rank, as
Colonel Ashton, Thomas Bettley, Edmond Stacy, and others; Sir Henry Slingsby
and Doctor Hewet, were beheaded at Tower Hill, and the three last hanged and
quartered in the streets of London.

Dunkirk, June.
after a gallant defense, and a field battle, in attempting the relief, where
the English had the honor, and the French and English the victory of the day,
was on the 25th of June delivered to the United Forces, and by the French King
put into the English hands; Lockhart, formerly Ambassador in France, and then
General of the English, being made Governor thereof.

Now it pleased God suddenly after this tyranny and cruelty, committed on those
innocent persons abovenamed, to call this Protector to an account, who
lingering some time with an ague and a pain in his intestines, on the third day
of September, his great fortunate day, breathed out h^s last, his death being
ushered by a most terrible wind, and the coming of a Whale up the River of
Thames, of twenty yards long. Thus ended that wretched Politic.

After Oliver Protector war dead, his Son Richard, according to an Article in
the Instrument o^ Government, by which he was to declare his Successor, was by
his Fathers Council proclaimed Lord Protector of these three Nations, with the
usual solemnities, and accordingly owned by several addresses from most parts
of the Kingdom, but drawn and subscribed by some particular persons of the
times, who obtruded them upon the rest. He was courted also by the French,
Swedish, Dutch Ambassadors, who all condoled him for his Fathers death.

After a little respit of time, Richard was advised to call a Parliament, the
Courtiers thinking, that what with the Army and the Lawyers, they should make
their party good for the Protector in the House of Commons, being sure of their
other House of Peers, and in the mean time took care for his Fathers Funerals;
which were solemnized in most ample manner, above the expenses usual to any of
our Kings deceased, November 23. 1658.

The Parliament being convened on the 27th of January, the Protector and his
new Lords gave them a meeting in the Lords House, where he made a speech to
them, which was seconded by the Keeper Fiennes, and so departed to Whitehall,
the Lords keeping their seats, and the major part of the House of Commons, not
vouchsafing audience, betook themselves to their own house, and elected
Challoner Chute for their Speaker.

The Parliament being in some measure, fuller then it used, by reason of
Knights and Burgesses from Scotland and Ireland, began with the old Trade of
questioning the power. In conclusion, the debate came to this result, that they
would recognize the Lord Protector, but so that nothing should be binding, till
all other Acts to be prepared by the Parliament should likewise pass and be
confirmed: For the other House also, that no stop might be put to the great
design of settling the Kingdom, which was then aimed at, and that question of
owning them being but a baulk to their proceeding, they resolved to transact
with them for this Parliament as a House of Peers, not excluding the right of
other the Peers of England.

The Protector, at the instance of the King of Sweden, had rigged forth a Fleet
for the Sound, which being ready to set sail, the Parliament ordered that for
this time the Protector should have the mannagement of the Militia in this
expedition, reserving to themselves the Supreme right thereto; that Fleet,
after six months time, returned back again, re infecta.

Now the debates flew high in the House of Commons, tending to the lessening
the power of the Sword, which was grown so exorbitant; therefore the Army being
sensible whereto such consultations would finally tend, resolved to break up
the Parliament; and accordingly, having secured the Protector, made him sign a
Commission to Fiennes to dissolve it, which accordingly was done, though the
House of Commons, to prevent it, adjourned themselves for three days; but then
out came a Proclamation, forced likewise from the Protector, whereby he
declared that Parliament to be absolutely dissolved.

Now the Army, and some of the tail of the Parliament which were turned out by
Oliver in 1653. join their heads together, and so make way for their free
Commonwealth again. Richard Protector is laid aside, the Officers of the Army
playing some eight days with the Government, and then resigning it to those
men, who very readily embraced the motion, and met May 7. in the House the Old
Speaker, and some forty more making up a Quorum, and forthwith published a
Declaration, how that by the wonderful Providence and goodness of God they were
restored, which to most seemed the saddest judgment could befall the Nation.

Presently they fall to their old trade of squeezing money, and providing sure
for themselves against any more attempts of the Army, leisurely purging out
those that had been active with Oliver against them, but by all means refuse to
admit those Members that by the like force were formerly secluded in 1648. They
depose the Protector, and make him sign a Resignation, yet promising him the
yearly allowance of 10000 l. per annum, and the payment of his debts, so that
they thought themselves now cock-sure, levying money by taxes before hand, to
gratify the Army, for the peoples love they never expected, and then settle
the Militia in confiding hands.

Anno Domini, 1659.
But this then exclusion of their Members, and taxes, and the fear of other
pressures, the Nation having had too late and long experience of their
Government, so stomacked the people, that designs were every where laid to turn
them out of their new acquired Authority: But the most powerfullest attempt
against them was in Cheshire, Sir Geo^ ^ooth ^feated (...) 20.
under Sir George B^ooh, with whom there rose to the number of 4000 or 5000
men, and most of the Gentlemen of that County. Against these, Major General
Lambert, then highly in favor with the Rump, so it was commonly called, was
sent with an Army, which with addition; out of Ireland, very near equalled that
number: At a place called Northwich, a small skirmish happened between them,
some fourteen killed and wounded; whereupon those under Sir George Booth fled,
and Chester was delivered; with some other holds newly possessed by the Cheshire
men to Lambert, and Zanchy, whom he left behind him to reduce them, while he
himself passed through Lancashire to his house at Craven, where with his
Officers plotted the dissolution of the Rump, which accordingly upon his coming
up to London, was put in execution, October the 11th; and now the Army had the
sole power in their hands again.

Lambert hereupon, for we must suppose he is the Agent for his own ambition,
though also agreed upon by Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers, erect a
Committee of Safery of some thirty of the most eminent amongst them, into whose
hands they devolve the Supreme Authority.

But the Members o^ the Rump resolve not to be baffled so, Sir Arthur Hazelrig
in December possessed himself of Portsmouth, and General Monk in Scotland
declares his unsatisfiedness in these proceedings of the Army at London, so
that while Lambert was engaged in the North, and attending the issue of a
Treaty with General Monk there, the Members return from Portsmouth to London,
through the division they had wrought in the Army, the way they chalked out to
their own ruin.

The Lord Fairfax was also risen with a sufficient force, restraining Lamberts
men from free quarter; so that lacking money, and news arrived of the
Parliaments sitting at Westminster, he comes back to London, whither
immediately followed him General Monk, having been courted all along his march
by the Gentlemen of all the Counties of England for a free Parliament.

At his coming to the Parliament, he declared the sense of the Countries
through which he passed, but nothing less was minded by them then a new or free
Parliament; but this, and other his actions, rendered him very suspicious to
them, nor was any man assured of his intentions. To try him therefore, the Rump
having been denied moneys by the City, and therefore offended with them; to
ruin both, by their express Command, the General was sent with his Army into
the City, pulled down their Gates and Portcullises, seized several Citizens at
the Guildhall, and sent them to the Tower; this seemed to portend some dreadful
conclusion: But in the interim, the Rump voted, that the Government of the Army
should rest in five persons, making the General one of those; which procedure
of theirs, presently drew the Curtain to the Scene and design ensuing.

Anno Dom. 1660.
For now the General having rendezvcuz^d his Army in Finsbury fields,
acquainted his Officers with the necessity of introducing the secluded Members
ever since 1648. into the Parliament, in order to the well-settlement of the
Nations, to which they assented, and forthwith the whole Army marched into
London, where upon the joyful news of this miraculous turn, (expecting nothing
but massacres and plunderings) they were most welcomely entertained, nothing
being thought too good for these Guests, whom they little before more then
suspected for their Enemies.

This was Saturday the of February in the afternoon, so that at night the Town
was all of a blaze, every door having a bonfire, where all the contumely and
disgrace that could be done a perdite and hated sort of men, by burning,
roasting, and frying of all manner of Rumps of Creatures, was most spitefully
performed, their Speaker getting home with much danger to his house in
Chancery Lane.

A fortnights time the General let them alone, minding them only of their
dissolution, which time they spent in making qualifications for the Members to
serve in the ensuing Parliament, which were so many, and so strict and
unreasonable, that the General delayed no longer, but on Monday, having
convened the aforesaid secluded Members at Whitehall, went with them to the
Parliament House, and there put them in, to the confusion and astonishment of
the Rumpers, many of whom forbore to sit thereafter in company with them, as
knowing what would ensue,

The said Members being thus settled, addressed themselves immediately to the
settlement, etc. making the General Captain General of all the Forces in the
three Kingdoms, and nulling some former destructive Votes, and establishing a
Militia of well-affected and loyal persons in the several County of England,
and then according to the contract and compromise with the General, on the day
of March, dissolved that long and fatal Parliament, having ordered Writs to
issue out for a new one to sit down at Westminster the 25th of April next the
year 1661.

In this interval, the Government was lodged in a Council of State, who
persisted in the same ways for a settlement, leaving the Top-stone to be laid
by the Free Parliament, a term unusual to our Ancestors, but to this Generation
a delightful novelty, after so many forces and violences upon so many in so few
years. Colonel Lambert, at the instance of the General, had by the Rump been
sent to the Tower, from whence now he broke and escaped, and came to Edge-^^ll,
where was intended a great Rendezvous of the Phanatick part of the Army then
male-contented with the proceedings; but his design failed of the expected
assistance, Colonel Ingoldsby being sent in pursuit of him, and dispersing his
small party at the same place, from whence he was brought to London, and
committed a safer prisoner to the Tower aforesaid.

On the 25th of April the Parliament convened in both Houses, to whom a week
after their sitting came a Letter from the Kings Majesty, with another to the
General, and one to the City of I widon, brought by John Lord Viscount Mordant,
and Sir John Greenvile, now Earl of Bath, which were all with due humility and
gladness received, and a Vote passed in Parliament, that their most humble
thanks should be presented, by Commissioners appointed to attend his Majesty
then at the Hague for his gracious Letters, and he should be desired to return
with all convenient speed to the exercise of his Kingly Government; and Sir
Thomas Clarges was first dispatched by the General on the same Errand, where at
Court he was very much welcomed.

Tuesday the eighth of May, the King was proclaimed with all the magnificences
usual, but with the unusual and extraordinary joy of the people, who made great
bonfires that night, and seemed as it were to be in a kind of ecstasy: On the
25th the King landed from Holland, being attended by a gallant Fleet, commanded
by the Earl of Sandwich at (...), where the Genral met him (the Sea, and
Heaven, and Earth, ^ung with the peals of Ordinance) and so to Canterbury, to
Rochester, and on the 29 day, being Tuesday, his most auspicious Birthday,
triumphantly and peaceably entered his Royal City of London, where the
acclamations and shoutings were so loud and hearty, that it is impossible to
echo or express them, to the great pleasure, and yet disturbance of the King,
who about six in the evening came to his Palace at Whitehal, where in the
Banqueting House both Houses attended him. All the way the way through the
City, the General rode bareheaded next before his Majesty, his two Brothers,
York and ^^oncester riding of each side covered. After a short congratulation,
the King being weary, went to his Bedchamber, where he supped, and so to his
rest, having come 27 miles that day, besides his going through London; and
within two days after, his Royal Brethren having taken their places in the
House of Lords, came to the Parliament, where he made a Speech, earnestly
pressing the Act of Free pardon and indemnity, which he had promised in his
Declaration from Dreda.

The next thing he did, was the emitting a Proclamation, requiring all those
who had a hand in the execrable murder of his Father, to render themselves
within such a time, which some obeyed, the rest fled; those that came in, were
(by the Act of Pardon, which came out soon after with some other) respited,
till another Parliament should determine of them either to life or death: This
was in favor for their ^endring themselves.

On the day of August, dyed the most noble and accomplished Prince Henry Duke of
Gloucester of the Small Fox, at Whitehal, to the very great sorrow of the whole
Kingdom, being a Prince of singular virtues and endowments.

In October, 1661. they, with the rest that were apprehended for the said
(...), were severally arraigned at the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey, before
Sir Orlando (...) where after Trial, they were all found guilty, and convicted
of High Treason, for compassing, contriving and bringing about the death of the
King; for which 26 of them (...) sentence to be drawn, hanged, and quartered,
sixteen of them, who rendered themselves according to the aforesaid
Proclamation, were respited till the Parliament should by an Act determine of
them; but the other ten: viz. Mojor General Harrison, John Carew, John Cook,
the Solicitor to the pretended Cour^ o^ Justice, Hugh Peter (...) Thomas Scot,
Gregory Clement, John Jones, Adrian Scroop, Francis Ha^ker, and Daniel Ax^el,
were executed according to the sentence, eight of them at Charing ^ross, and
the two last at Tybur^; their Heads set upon Westminster Hall and
London Bridge, and their quarter upon the Gate^ of London.

In December the King dissolved the Parliament, which he honored with the
Epithere of The Healing Parliament; and on the 24 of December dyed also that
most illustrious Princess of (...). His Majesty's Sister, of the same disease
which snatch away her Brother the Duke o^ Gloucester, to the extreme grief of
the King, ^he Queen Mother, and the whole Court.

The Queen Mother had come over some while before, with her Daughter the Lady
(...), and now prepared for her depath^ed, feating the disease might run in the
blood, the young Princess being not very well, and accordingly the King in
company with them, to bring them to the water side, came to Portsmouth in the
Christmast time, and thence the Ladies took shipping for (...)

While the King was but this short while absent, happened that despera^e
Rebellion and Insurrection in the City of London, by the Fifth Monarchists, at
two sundry times on the ninth of January at night, being Sunday; where they
alarmed the City, marched through the gates, threatening to take down their
Masters, those Regi^ide; quarters, killing some four men, and so^sc^lked till
Wednesday morning next^ at which time they (...) again, and resolutely fought
with the Trained Bands, and a Squadron of the Life guard of Horse, in Woods^^^t
(...) their ground till they were surrounded, and (...) they began to retreat
but still in order: There were killed (...) some eighteen, and they killed as
many. Venner^ a Wine Cooper, who was their Leader, was taken, and twenty more,
(...) of which were executed with him at several places in London, being
convicted of High Treason for levying war against the King.

On January 30. 1660. the bodies of Oliver Cromwell, (...), and Hinry Ireton,
were removed from their Interments, in Westminster Abbey, and hanged at Tyburn,
and there buried, their heads set upon Westminster Hall.

In Michaelmas Term this year, there was a call of fourteen Sergeants at Law,
and the Courts at Westminster were filed with Judges; the names of which most
Grave and Honorable Persons are as follows, Sir Robert Foster, Lord chief
Justice of England, Sir Thomas Mullet, Sir Thomas Tw^sden, Sir Wadham Windham
of the Kings Bench, Sir Orlando Bridgeman Lord chief Justice, Sir Robert Hyde,
Sir Samuel Brown, Sir Thomas Tyr^yl, in the Common Pleas, Sir Matthew (...),
Sir Edward Atkins, Sir Christopher Turner, Barons of the Exchequer.

Anno Dom. 1661.
HIs Majesty at His dissolution of the Parliament, having promised to call
another with all convenient expedition; issued out Writs for the election
thereof, and appointed the eighth of May for their sitting down at Westminster;
where they accordingly convened, and ratified several Acts made by the
preceding Parliament, which being not summoned by the Kings Writ, was not by
Law held sufficient; the Act of Oblivion was first confirmed, being very much
urged and pressed by the King, as the foundation of a sure and lasting
settlement.

At the opening of the Parliament, the King acquainted them with His
resolution, of marrying Donna Catharina, the Infanta of Portugal, which they
very joyfully received, by a Vote passed to that purpose in both Hou^es: There
likewise passed an Act in repeal of that 1 Carol. 17. against the Civil Power
of Bishops, thereby debarring them from their Privileges as Peers, which by
this Repeal are to be restored fully unto them; with many other Acts of
Public concernment, and then adjourned till the November 20. instant.

The Right Honorable the Earl of Sandwich, having sailed with a Fleet of men of
War to the Coasts of Barbary, to confirm the League between those Pirates and
this Nation, came to an Anchor at Algeir, where he entered into a Treaty with
the Governor of that Port, which not succeeding, the Fleet weighed and stood
into the Harbor; where after the had fired some ships, and done some execution
on shore, he came out again, having received some little loss both of men and
rigging. From thence he set sail toward the Coast of Spain, leaving Vice
Admiral Lawson to guard the said Port.

By a Commission from the King, the Right Honorable the Earl of Peterburgh was
made General for the expedition to Tanger, a strong place and Fortress of the
Portugals, on the streights of Gibrala^r; and Forces are now ready to imbark in
company with that Fleet which is going to bring home her Majesty the Queen
from Lisbon.

About this time happened a fray, or conflict on Tower Hill, at the Reception of
the Swedish Ambassador, betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors Coaches for
Praecedency, where seven or eight were killed, and the French worsted: This so
highly incensed the French King, that he sent to Madrid to demand satisfaction,
but received none; so that upon, this and some other janglings, there is now a
kind of a petty Hostility between them. During this clash, the Prince of
Spain, dyed, and to the King of France was born a Daulphin, Christened by the
name of Jews To^s Saints, because he was born on All Saints Day.

October. Col. Lambert, Sir Henry Vane, Sir Hadress Waller, Col. Cobbet, were
sent away from the Tower, to several remote places, for their own preservation,
as well as security of the peace, and diverse others secured upon account of a
Plot, a Narrative whereof cannot be given yet, not in this piece, which has
attained its conclusion.

FINIS.

