GODS EYE ON HIS ISRAEL.

OR, A PASSAGE OF BALAAM, out of NUMB. 23.21.

Containing matter very seasonable and suitable to the times; Expounded and
cleared from Antinomian abuse; With Application to the present estate of things
with us.

By THO. GATAKER, B.D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

PSALM. 94. 9. He that planteth the ear, shall not he hear? he that formed the
ey, shall not he see?

10. He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches man
knowledge, should not he know?

11. The Lord knows these thoughts of men, that they are vanity.

12. Blessed is the man, whom thou chastenest, O Lord; and teach him out of
thy Law.

LONDON* Printed by E.G. for Foulke Clifton, and are to be sold at his shop on
new Fishstreet-hill under Margarets-Cuurch. 1643.

TO THE Religious, Judicious, and Ingenuous READER: For such should I desire
all that read me to be; Religious, that willing to be informed of the truth;
Judicious, that able, when held out, to discern it; Ingenuous, that ready, when
convinced of it, to acknowledge it.
Or, Because this is matter rather of wish, then of hope, To any READER
indifferently; Those especially of mine own Congregation, either untainted, or
tainted with Antinomian opinions.
HAving in the course of my ministry among mine own people delivered, and in
conference with others elsewhere declared, my judgment, concerning a passage
in Balaams prophecies, much pressed by our Antinomian Teachers, for the proof
of one of their principal Positions, concerning the present estate of
justified persons, and Gods sight of sin in them; I have by diverse of those,
who thereby took notice of it, been since solicited, yea by some of them
importuned, to explain it more fully, and to make it more public. Which
motion, albeit I did for some space of time entertain with a deaf ear, as
being one well-neere spent, and too well conscious to my self, how unfit, at
these years, and this weakness, (which might justly plead a discharge from
such employments) to be drawn forth into the field, and engaged in matter of
controversy, further then the safety and welfare of mine own flock might
there in be concerned; yet for some considerations, which I shall not need here
to relate, I have at length been induced to condescend to the desires of those,
who have herein been so earnest with me. and this the rather, that I might
thereby take occasion, to vindicate my self from some aspersions, which some
of these men's followers have endeavored to fasten upon me; as if I had falsely
and unfaithfully related their opinion, in the point especially, which they
ground on that passage of Scripture here dealt with; whereby they affirm, that

God does not, will not, cannot, in those times, see any sin in any of his
justified children.

Which Position, albeit with much confidence they maintain, and with no less
eagerness contend for, as hereafter shall be made to appear; yet when it is
charged upon them, their disciples are wont to cry out and clamor, that they
are belied, wrongfully traduced, and injuriously dealt with, as being charged
with that, which they neither teach nor maintain. And indeed, to mere
strangers, or even to some of their own followers, who being but novices yet in
the school of these mysteries, may chance to boggle and startle somewhat at
such assertions as these, they may peradventure refuse, (as your brokers for
Popery are in the like case wont to do with some of their grosser points, as
the Non est dicendum in concionibus ad populum, imagines ullas adorari debere
cultu latriae, sed e contrario non debere sic adorari. qia hoc dicere, non
caret magno periculo. Offendit aures catholicorum. praebet occasionem
haereticis liberius blasphemandi. Bellar. de cult: sanct. l. 2. c. 22. qin and
qo idolatriae crimen amolirentur, imagines ullas omniuo ^i se coli, negarunt
apud nonnullos quidam sacrificuli; and in collationae Caleti mecum habita, duo
fraterculi.
worship of Images, and the like) to be acknown of that which yet they hold, or
at least seem to hold, (for whether they can work their own hearts really to
believe what in some things they say, may not unjustly be doubted) and, where
they may be bolder and freer, stick not (...). Chrysostom. in Babyl. (...).
Lucian. Pseudolog.
nakedly, without mask or vail, to propound, and peremptorily to avow and
maintain as an undeniable truth of God, and a main principle of faith.

Nor is it any marvel, that they should thus do; since that, however Veritas
non qaerit angulos, non amat. Bern. in sermon.
truth, as we use to say, seeks no corners, wherein to shroud it self, in
times of liberty especially, such as at present we live in; Nihil veritas
erubescit, nisi solummodo abscondi. Tertul. ad Valent. c. 3. unum gestit, ne
ignorata damnetur. Idem. apolog. c. 1.
nor shunneth any thing more, as being of nothing more afraid and ashamed then
not to be seen, and to appear in her own native and naked shape; yet error on
the other side, as conscious to it self of its own unsoundnesse, is wont to
seek lurking nooks, wherein to lie hid; and starting holes, whereat to slip
out; and (...) Basil. orat. 14. and Simeon orat. 1.
shifts and sleights, wherewith to disguise it self; shunneth nothing more then
the light, (...). Aeschyl. arm. jud (...). Eurip. Phaeniss. Theodoret. therap.
l. 1. Julian. orat 7. Stob. c. 11.
and is most Abscondit se, quantum potest, totamqe prudentiam in latebrarum
ambagibus torqet, alie habitat, in caeca detruditur, per anfractu^ seriem suam
evolvit, tortuose procedit, nec semel totus, luci fuga bestia. Tertul. ad Val c
3.
loath to be seen and appear in its own likeness. and when it is therefore
pursued, that it may be attached and brought forth to light, it either beddeth
it self with the Eel in the mud, or with the (...). Oppi^n. Pisc. l. 3. Vbi
sensere se apprehendi, effuso atramento infuscata aqa absconduntur. Plin. l. 9.
c. 29.
cuttle-fish, so discoloureth the waters about it, that men seem to have lost
the sight of what they even now saw, and to be as if they wotted not what were
become of that, Vt aspersae falsitatis nebulis seductus, pe e amisisse se
videat, qod jam certum tenebat, and intra tenentis manus totus amittatu^, qi
totus ante videbatur. Greg. p. st. l. 3. c. 1. 12.
which erewhiles they deemed themselves to have had, either clear in their eye,
or fast in their hand.

This practice discovered it self over-sufficiently in those Mr. Randall, Mr.
Simson, Mr. Lancaster.
three grand patrons and ringleaders of this faction, what time they were
convented before the worthy Committee of the honorable house of Commons in the
Star Chamber. Where being required, or requested rather, to deliver their
opinion in diverse points then propounded unto them, for the clearing of
themselves and the doctrine taught by them, they sought at first by all mean^
to decline giving any answer at all; and, being pressed upon it, when they
could not well avoid it, the answer they gave was in such general, obscure and
ambiguous terms conceived, as that they might seem to say somewhat to the point
propounded, and yet conceal what their mind might be in the main matter
intended.

My chief entendement therefore at present shall be, not so much to debate or
discuss the points in controversy between us and them: (I shall leave that to
those that have better abilities and more leisure: and the truth is, that in
some particulars their assertions are so gross, that the very Demonstrare
solummod^ dest^uere est. Tertull. adv. Valent. c. 3.
discovery by uncasing and devesting them of those veils and dressings wherewith
their paterouns are wont to disguise them, is refutation sufficient:) but to
make manifest and lay open only what it is that they maintain; that it may not
be deemed, as their fautors and followers use to affirm, that in dealing with
them, we fight but with (...). Plato de leg. l. 8.
shadows and Cum larvis luctari. Plin. praefat.
spirits of our own raising, or (...). Plato leg. l. 8. (...). Chrysostom. in
Mat. orat. 33. (...) Lucian. de sect.
shoot at a man of straw that our selves have set up, or to hack and hew Contra
palum in terram defixum, tanquam contra adversarium, cum crate and clava,
dimicabant tyrones. Veget. milit. l. 1. c. 11. and l. 2. c. 23. Inde, pali
vulnera, Juvenali sat. 6. etc. cavat assidu^^ sudibus, Scutoqe lacessit.
a post, which instead of an adversary, when we have none, we have made choice
of, whereon to exercise our arms and our arms.

The question then is, what it is that these men maintain, concerning Gods
sight of sin in the faithful. which (to state aright the controversy, as it
stands between them and us) is not either concerning the efficacy of
justification in general; or concerning Gods sight of sin generally in such as
believe and are justified; (that which would be observed, to discover the mere
impertinency of a multitude of allegations, which out of orthodox autors
concerning those points these men heap up to no purpose) but whether God do, or
will, or can see sin in the same manner in persons so qualified and estated
now, as in former times he did. In which question we maintain the affirmative,
to wit, that God sees sin in such as well now, as in former ages he did;
they are stiff for the negative, to wit, that albeit in former ages God did
see and take notice of sin in such, yet in these days he does not, he will
not, he cannot so do.

That this is the true state of the controversy between us and them, may
appear by a prolix Treatise of this argument, generally received, and highly
esteemed with them, the book bears this title.

The Honeycomb of free justification by Christ alone: collected out of the
mere Authoritie^ of Scripture, and common and unanimous consent of the
faithful Interpreters and dispensers of Gods mysteries upon the same;
especially as they express the excellency of free Justification.

This is said to have been preached and delivered by John Eaton, while he
lived, and was since his decease published in Print by Robert Lancaster: the
same man that set out some Sermons of Dr. Crisp.
another, now, I hope, with the Lord; which yet, in regard of diverse passages
too much tending to the countenancing of some of these men's unsound assertions,
it may well be wished, had rather died with the Author, that so the errors,
which had escaped him, tho a pious person otherwise, might have rested, if it
might be, with his remains.

The main subject of this book is to prove the point abovementioned, to which
purpose, that we may not mistake him, he makes Honeycomb chap. ^. page 98.
a distribution of believers or justified persons in regard of their estate in
this behalf according to three distinct times; the time of the Law the time of
John Baptist, and the time of the Gospel: the first, glorious; the second, more
glorious; the third, most glorious. And if it be demanded, wherein the
difference of these degrees of glory in those several times consisted; he thus
lays it down.

Page 98.
The first time of the Law was glorious; because Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ was in it; and Psalm. 87.3.
glorious things are spoken of the City of God that then was* yet Christ and
those glorious things were veiled and greatly obscured with the bondage and
terrors and legal government, not only of the ceremonial law, as the Papists
hold, but also of the moral law, whereby sin was severely taken notice of, and
also punished sharply in Gods children.

Page 102.
The second time between the Law and the Gospel, to wit, the time of John
Baptist, continuing unto the death of Christ, was more glorious then the
former; Page 103.
because in it the former legal severity, that then lay upon the Children of
God, began now to slack and cease. For although John laid open their Culpas.
sins, and the danger of them; yet we read not De poenis.
of any punishments inflicted on Gods children. whereupon tho Matthew. 27.70, 74.
Luke 22.60, 61.
Peter's foul fault of denying and gross for swearing his Master, and other
sins were taken notice of in this middle age, yet no punishments were
inflicted upon them for the same.

Page 106.
The third time, the most glorious, is since Christ groaned out his blood and
life upon the Cross, by which the Culpa.
sin it self, and Reatu^.
guilt, and Poena.
punishment are so utterly and infinitely abolished; that Page 41. and 108.
there is now no sin in the Church of God; and Page 108.
that God now sees no sin in us: Page 39.
and whosoever believes not this point, (thereby Page 108.
robbing this third time of her glory, and Christ of this full revealed
efficacy of his blood) is undoubtedly damned.

To the strengthening of this his fiction concerning this last period of time,
he abuses diverse places of Luther, Calvin and other worthy Divines, who in all
likelihood never once dreamed of this his fancy; (which I will not stand now to
discuss;) those words of the C^eed, Page 41 and 108.
One holy Catholic Church; (as if Gods people before Christ's appearance in the
flesh were not Deuteronomy. 14.^1. and 28.9. and 33.3 Psalm. 16.3 and 30.4. and 31.23.
holy, as well as they that now live) and among other Scriptures, that of John
1 John 3.5.
he came to take away sin; and in him (that is, Page 108.
says he, in his body the Church) is no sin. So that the main glory of the
state of Christian men, or the believers of these times, he makes to consist in
a freedom from Gods sight of sin in them, and his being offended with them
for it; (as The Author of the bloody Tenent. Propos. 6. See (...) use last of
the ensuing Discourse.
some other the fruit and effect of Christ's coming in the flesh, in a
procurement of permission for all sorts of religions) that tho they now sin
never so grievously, yet God is not so much as angry with them for any of their
sins, much less does he chastise any of them for the same, as in the first
period of time he did: yea that he does not so much as see it, much less take
any notice of it, as he did yet in the second* and his main conclusion
therefore is, that Honeycomb Chap. 3. page 35
God sees now no sin at all in his justified children. I add, that, as he
does not, so he will not: for, Chap. 4. p. 61.
God, says he, sees all things, saving that which he will not see, and which
himself undertakes to abolish out of his sight, that he may not see. and yet
further, that he cannot. for how can God see sin, where no sin is? as was
before by him averred. and Chap. 3. p. 77.
it is impossible, says he, for us to hope that God should love us, till our
sins are clean put out and abolished. and again, Chap. 3. p. 25.
He that believes that Christ has taken away his sin, is as clean without
sin as Christ himself.

Hence then it appears, that the matter in controversy, as before was said,
between us and these men, is not, how far forth sin is removed or abolished
in believers, or how far forth it is by justification abandoned, or in what
sense God is said to see, or not see sin, or to t^ke notice of it, in
believers and justified persons; but whether God do see, and take notice of,
and chastise sin in such now, as in times past he did. and you see the point
determined directly for the negative, that God does not, will not cannot, see,
or take notice of, any sin in any believer, much less chastise any such
(albeit in former times he had wont so to do) for ought that now he does
amiss. in plainer terms, that tho a believer fall never so foully, or live
never so loosely, God does not see it, nor take notice of it, nor is at all
offended with him for the same. For example; suppose a Christian traveling
into Turkey, and falling into the hands of Mohammedan pirates, who by torture
would enforce him to deny Christ and Christianity, if such an one, to escape
torment and attain liberty, should with oaths and execrations deny Christ, and
abjure his Christian profession; that God would not so much as take any notice
of it in him; albeit in Peter, when he offended in somewhat the like case, he
did. again, that howsoever, when 2 Samuel 11.4.15, 27.
David committed adultery with Bathsheba, and to smother his sin and enjoy
her, took away the life of her husband Vriah; God beheld it, took notice of it,
was displeased with him, and 2 Samuel 12.10 11, 14.
chastised him very sorely for it: yet in these days, if the like wickedness
should by any believing persons be perpetrated, to wit, that a stranger should
solicit a man's wife to uncleanness, and she admit him to her husbands bed
Prove. 7.19, ^0.
in his absence, being either about public service, or private employments,
abroad; and they should afterward both further complot together, to take away
the life of her husband, that they might the more freely enjoy either other;
God would not so much as once so see it, as to take any notice at all of such
villainy; or be at all angry, either with the one, or the other (supposing them
to be such as David was) for so doing; or ever so far forth call them to a
reckoning, as to chastise either of them in the least degree, for the same.
which doctrine, whether it be not such as removes a main curb of restraint to
keep men and women (in secret especially) from sin: and whether it be a
lesson fit to be instilled into the minds and heads of young women, in the
times especially of their husbands more then ordinary occasions of absence; and
whether they deal wisely and discreetly, or are not injurious to themselves,
that in such case give entertainment to the teachers of such doctrine, such of
them especially, if any such be, or shall be, as either are not, or have not
been wholly free from some scandal themselves; I leave it to any sober-minded
Christian to judge.

This then it is, that these men directly avouch, and with an high hand contend
for, pressing it upon us, yea upon all persons, (as ye have heard) to be
believed and received, under a peremptory penalty, of no less then everlasting
damnation. And this because we contradict and oppose, averring on the other
hand (for that is all that in this particular we maintain against them) that
God does see and take notice of, the sins, slips, and excesses of his Saints,
as well in these days, as in times past, and does often chastise them, and that
sharply also sometime, for the same; we are therefore by them branded with most
opprobrious imputations, and loaded with the vilest aspersions that may be.
which if you can endure with patience to hear, as we must bear, be pleased to
consider with me a while, how the Honey-combs author has behonyed us; and from
him learn, what the usual dialect concerning us is among his disciples. In
this manner then is he pleased to bedaub us with his honey, such as it is.

These men, says he, Honeycomb page 44.
tho they be Protestants in name, and profess themselves utter enemies to
Papists, yet shake hands with them in the main points of salvation. and, Ibid.
by reason^ of their being in a dead faith, understanding not the doctrine of
justification, but conceiving it after a carnal and humane witted fashion;
Page 45.
talking of what they hold, as men in a sheep, and running round, as blind
horses in a mill; and with John 3.4.
Nicodemus accounting the (...). 2 Cor. 2.10.
deep things of God absurd; Page 44.
they nullify free justification, and make it as good as nothing. for Page 48.
they have as much faith as an Ox or an Ass; believing nothing but what they
see and feel; Pag^ 54.
following merely their present sense, as a beast: and Page 58.
stumbling at this block of their sight, sense and feeling, they break the neck
of their faith, and so endanger to break the neck of their souls. for Page 66.
by breaking the neck of their faith, they make it a dead faith, good for
nothing, neither to glorify God, nor to save their souls. thus Page 39.
they make God no God; but make reason, sense, and feeling their God. for Page
52.
prattling idly and talking by the light of nature, of Gods power and
presence, and all-seeing and all-searching nature, after a Gentilish and
heathenish manner; to the frustrating of his word and promises; and Page 58.
seeming to stand for and defend the same; Page 55.
by cavils and allegations, Page 52.
Heathenish, and Gentilish, and Papisticall; yea Page 55.
beastly, ungodly and blasphemous; Page 59.
breathing out nothing but unbelief; Page 58.
which, as a blind bayard, goes about to make God blind, that he cannot see
his own work wrought upon his children; and like a bold Betteresse, makes God
to her self impotent, blind, and a lier; Page 52.
they reject faith, dishonor God, rob him of his power, spoil him of his
truth, find him no more our God, then the Gentiles and Heathen did; and seeming
to glorify him, rob him of the glory of his Godhead: Page 64.
making him impotent in his power, false in his word and promises, blind, that
he cannot see his own and his Sons proper work in and upon us; and so by
unbelief abolish to themselves the whole Godhead.

Again, Page 113.
lisping in speech, and limping in practice, yea halting downright in the
doctrine of free justification, and Page 114.
sliding back to the legal teaching of the Old Testament, in promising rewards
to the followers of righteousness, and threatening punishment to transgressors;
they sow up* again the veil, that was Matthew. 27.51
rent from the top to the botome, and shut up the holy of holies. Page 137.
and by mingling the Law and the Gospel together, as if one should mingle black
and white, they mar both; and not only blemish and darken the doctrine of
grace, but take away Christ, and all his benefits; secretly undermine, and
utterly overthrow the Gospel, Page 65.
and all the benefits of it; Page 59.
deny the nature and essence of faith, deny baptism, deny Christ, Page 1^5
deny his satisfaction; and Page 86. and 137.
by perverting the Gospel of Christ, become of preachers of the Gospel,
Ministers and Apostles of the Devil. and Page 137.
by making a miscilan and mixture of the Law and the Gospel, they preach
neither good Law, nor good Gospel, but a miscilan and marring of both; and
thereby make Gal. 4.25.
miscilan Christians, that is, mere hypocrites* for Page 142.
they expel the filial, and bring in a servile fear; and make Gods children
serve him with eye^service, which in them is abominable; and so Page 60.
nourish hypocrisy, but Page 140.
greatly hinder true sanctification, true repentance, and holy walking, Page
115.
by legal threats and rewards; which cause but a constrained hireling
sanctity, which is hypocritical legal holiness; or else cause people to run,
tho more cautiously, yet the faster, into sin.

Furthermore, Page 110.
they bring forth a rod, to whip, if she tread her foot a little awry, the
bride in her Apoc. 19.7, 8.
marriage attire, Page 115.
the Queen in her Psalm. 45.9.
royal robes, and pulling the wedding garments off, over the brides head; and
Page 136.
putting on her a mourning garment of blows: Page 144.
stripping the Queen and bride, and making her stand naked, to be whipped with
rods of crosses and afflictions, at her marriage feast; Page 64. and 57
they frustrate and make void the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness;
Page 57.
which hereby is made one, in regard of the being of sin it self, and Gods
sight of sin in his, with the hypocrisy and security of the wicked: and Gods
covering is made all one with man's covering; nay rather with the deceitful
covering which the wicked make to themselves: and the justified in regard of
Gods seeing the being of sin in them, are made all one with the reprobate and
wicked. Ibid.
every one of which points is horrible blasphemy against Christ and his
righteousness.

Besides that, hereby Page 150.
they rob God of the glory of his justice, and infinite hatred of the least
sin: which Page 57. and 65
being the image of the Devil, Page 150.
is a thousand times more filthy and loathsome in Gods sight, then the
loathsomest dung can be to the eyes of a Prince; and Page 141.
being horrible poison of hell, so poysoneth us, and all our walking of
sanctification, that (as Ma^k 7.21.23 Page 65.
Christ says) it defiles all unto damnation: yea Page 140.
is such a plague sore of our soul, as makes us unable to do any spiritual
duty. and as therefore Page 65.
the justified must needs be, not only more foul and loathsome, then any
spider or toad full of loathsome poison, or any swine defiled over head and
ears with mire, in our sight, but even as foul as ugly Devils in Gods sight, if
he see any sin in us; and Page 50.51.
they are to be condemned of filthy hypocrisy, that dare press into Gods
presence with the least sin in them and upon them: so Page 65.
God, being the fountain of justice and righteousness, cannot but detest and
abhor us, as long as he sees us in our sins; nor will the holy Ghost dwell in
such foul hogsties; nor will Christ knit such ugly members, much less marry
such a foul sow, and such filthy swine, to himself; nor will God acknowledge,
much less adopt for his sons and daughters, those whom he sees full of the
image of the Devil. Page 64.
for if God see any one sin in them, seeing it is sin it self, and nothing
else but sin, it is sufficient to defile them so in Gods sight.

Lastly, Page 138.
they paint out God like an angry father, ever seeing sin in us, and ever
standing with a rod or staff in his hand, lifted up over our heads, with which
by reason that he ever sees some fault and blame in us, he is ever ready, if
not to strike us down, yet to crack our crowns, and sorely to whip us, and to
becudgel us thoroughly.

Thus you see, with what language the first founder of this faction among us,
salutes all those, and what liveries he b^stowes on them, that either oppose
him, or dissent from him in this his groundless and godless conceit. which to
requite, and that much more deservedly, with the like, tho it would be a matter
of no great difficulty, yet I shall willingly forbear: only desiring the
intelligent Reader seriously to weigh, and advisedly to deem of, these ensuing
propositions.

1. Who they be that blindfold God, and make him Honey comb. ^ag. 58.
a blind God: they that say, he sees sin, wheresoever, and in whomsoever it
is; or that say, he does not at all see it, nor can see it in some.

2. If Gods covering of sin, do so Page 24.32.37
utterly abolish all sight of any remains of corruption in those, whose sins
are by God said so to be covered, how it came to pass, that in those former
ages, God saw and took notice of sin and corruption in those, Psalm. 85.2.
whose sins yet he is in these times said to have covered.

3. Whether of the two make men more Multum refraenat homines conscientia, si
credamus nos in conspect^ Dei vivere, si non tantumqae gerimus, videri desuper,
sed etiam qae cogitamus, aut ^oquimur, audiri a Deo putemus. Lactant. de ira
Dei c. 8. Magna vobis necessitas est indicta probitatis, qi ante oculos agitis
judicis cuncta cernentis. Boet. consol. l. 5. and Bern. medit. c. 6.
conscientious of their ways; they who teach and maintain, that Job 34.21, 22.
Psalm. 119.168. Prove. 5.20, 21.
God has an eye on them, as well when they do evil, as when they do well; or
those who say, Job 22.13, 14. Psalm, 10.11. and 94.7.
that he has no eye on them, when they do amiss, either to take notice of it,
or to be displeased with them for it.

4. Whether this doctrine, that God sees when men sin, and takes notice of
it, be a likely means Honeycomb. Page 115.
to make men run out the faster into sin; or the contrary teaching rather,
whereby it is avowed, that he does nothing less.

5. Whether the former doctrine and the teaching of it, when time was, did then
Ibid. page 60.
nourish hypocrisy, and tended to the making of Gods people, that then lived,
Page 137.
mere hypocrites.

6 Whether David's Psalm. 16 8.
setting God always before his face, and his persuasion that Psalm. 119.168.
all his ways were in Gods sight, did make him, or other of the faithful,
that then lived, and were likewise so persuaded, either See Honeycomb. Page
140.
the more slack, or less sincere, in their service.

7. Whether any of the faithful in the time of the Old Testament, did ever
Honeycomb Page 138.
paint out God like an angry father, standing always with a rod or staff in
his hand over his children, ready, because he saw ever some fault or blame in
them, therewith, if not to strike them down, yet to crack their crowns, and
whip them sorely, or becudgel them thoroughly: and whether it was not a
notorious calumny for any man to say they so did; albeit they did, and (by this
Autors own grounds and graunts) might truly, teach herein then, the same that
we now do.

8. Whether in the times of the Old Testament, there were Ibid. Page 57.
no difference at all between persons justified, and the wicked and reprobate,
in respect of sin it self, the being of it, and Gods seeing of it, in them.

9. Whether Ibid.
Gods covering of sin in those times, when he is acknowledged yet to have seen
it, was all one with man's covering, or with the deceitful coverings that
wicked men make to themselves: or Ibid.
the garment of Christ's righteousness, (which they also had a right to and a
share in, as well as we now have) all one in that regard, with the security and
hypocrisy of the wicked.

10. Whether the very being of the remainders of sin, that were in the
believers, (tho justified persons) of those times, and Gods sight of the same
in them, did Page 140.
utterly disable them unto the performance of all spiritual duty; Page 141
defiled all their holy walkings, even unto damnation, Page 65.
made them as foul as Devils, Page 50.51*
so abominable in Gods sight, as that without filthy hypocrisy they could not
proffer any petition unto him, or press into his presence; Page 65.
so vile and ugly in his eyes, that he could not but detest and abhor them;
such hogsties, as that the holy Ghost would not dwell in them; such foul sowes
and filthy swine, as that Christ would not unite, much less mary them, to
himself; and so full of the Devils image, that God would not own them, much
less adopt them for sons and daughters.

11. Whether the faithful in those times, when God saw, took notice of, and
chastised sin in them, and they believed that he so did, Page 52.
found him no more their God, then the Gentiles and Heathen did.

12. Whether in those times, those who taught, that God saw sin in such, Page
150
robbed God of the glory of his justice, and hatred of sin* or, Page 64.
made him impotent in his power, false in his word, and blind, that he could
not see his own and his sons proper work in and upon them; and so by unbelief
abolished to themselves the whole Godhead.

All which assertions concerning God himself, his Saints of former times, his
covering of sin with them, his sight of sin in them, his detestation of
them, and their dismal estate and condition in that regard, if it be most
repugnant to Gods word, yea no less then horrid blasphemy, for any man to
aver; then are we, not only acquitted from those hideous imputations, that
these men would fasten upon us, for affirming no more of the faithful and
justified ones that now live, then themselves by evidence of truth, agreeably
to Gods word, are enforced to confess and acknowledge, concerning those
faithful and justified ones, that lived in times past before Christ's appearing
in the flesh; but the crime of blasphemy may also not unjustly be retorted upon
them, whose positions do necessarily infer all that has been said concerning
those blessed Saints and faithful servants of God, who then John 8.56. and
12.41. Heb. 11.13. and 13.8.
believed in Christ as well as we now do, were Romans 4.3, 5. 2 Cor. 4 13.
justified by the same faith that we now are, and Acts 15.11.
saved by the same grace that we partake in with them.

The result of all that has hitherto been said then, is this.

1. That we wrong them not in that which we charge them to maintain, to wit,
that God does not now see, or take notice of any sin in any justified person,
nor is at all displeased with him, much less does at any time chastise him,
for the some; albeit that in his best Saints and children in times past he so
did.

And 2. that they wrong us, in charging us with blasphemy and such horrid
crimes, as following necessarily from that, which we maintain contrary to this
their assertion; when as the same may as justly be charged upon that, which
themselves hold, concerning the faithful of former times, and on the
Scriptures that hold out the same.

Now because it may be said, that this was indeed the opinion of Mr. Eaton
while he lived: but that that opinon of his died with him.

It were to be wished indeed, that it had so done, but as by the late
publishing of his discourse concerning it, the contrary appears; so for
further satisfaction herein, I shall entreat the Reader, to consider and take
notice of these ensuing Positions, which, with others of the like nature, at a
public hearing before a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons in the
Star Chamber, were by sufficient witnesses proved to have been delivered by The
parties beforementioned.
three of the chief leaders of this faction among them, some in public, some
in private, some of them in the Pulpit, and some by the Press.

1. Mr. Randall, and Mr. Simson.
That the moral Law i^ of no use at all to a believer; no rule for him to
walk, nor to examine his life, by. and that Christians are free from the
mandatory power of it.

Whence (it may well be) proceeded those exclamations of Mr. Simson.
one of them in the Pulpit, Away with the Law; away with the Law: and that
horrid Averred by not a f^w, that then heard him.
speech of his, The Law cuts off a man's legs, and then bids him walk.

2. Mr. Randall, at Martin Orgars.
That it is as possible for Christ himself to sin, as for a child of God to sin.

3. Mr. Randall; delivered by him in private, and defended in public.
That a child of God need not, nay ought not to ask pardon for sin: and that it
is no less then blasphemy for him so to do.

4. Mr. Simson.
That God does not chastise any of his children for sin: nor is it for the sins
of Gods people, that the Land is punished.

5. Mr. Simson.
That if a man by the Spirit know himself to be in the state of grace, tho he
be drunk, or commit murder, God sees no sin in him.

6. That when Abraham Genesis 12.13. and 20.2.
denied his wife, and in outward appearance seemed to lie in his distrust,
lying, dissembling, and equivocating, that his wife was his sister, even then
truly all his thoughts, words, and deeds were perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.

To which may be added that wholesome exhortation, then also averred, to have
been delivered by Mr. Simson.
one of them likewise in the pulpit, which might well pass for an use of the
point, Let believers sin as fast as they will, there is a fountain open for
them to wash in.

By these their assertions then it is evident enough, that as Mr. Eatons book
is in great request and high esteem with them, so his doctrine is still
constantly held and maintained by them.

As for Abraham's example, which to that purpose they abuse, being taken out of
Mr. Eatons book, where it is verbatim Honeycomb chap. 5. p. 79* 80.
so found; and he endeavors by this observation to add strength unto; to
wit, that Chap. 4. p. 72.
tho men did reprove him, yet we read not that God took notice of any sin in
him, nor did once rebuke him all his life, after his calling for any one sin.

1. I should demand, whether this be a good argument to prove, that God
approved, or did not mislike, or take notice of, or was displeased with, any
sinful act in any person, because he is not read to have reproved the party so
offending for the same. For if so, we may consequently conclude the same of
Genesis 9.21.
Noah's being drunk; of Genesis 19.33, 35.
Lots daughters making their father drunk to make way for their incest, and of
their incestuous companying with him; of Genesis 27.27.
Jacobs deluding his father Isaac with a lie; of Ibid. v. 9, 10.
Rebekkah his mothers putting him upon it; of Genesis 38.14, 15, 18.
Iudah^ lying (tho upon a mistake) with his daughter in law Thamar, and of her
disguising of her self to enduce him thereunto; of Genesis 35.22.
Rubens defiling of his fathers bed; of 2 Samuel 11.4,
Bathshebaes yielding to David's adulterous desire; of Joabs murder, first of 2 Samuel 3.27.
Abner, and after of 2 Samuel 20.10.
Amasa, etc. all which, tho sinful acts and excesses, God is no where recorded
to have rebuked them for, or to have reproved in them.

2. I demand, which of the three periods of time beforementioned, Abraham's
life is by these men referred unto. For if they will say, that he lived before
the Law; and that therefore it was then with him, as it is now with us.

1. Moses his example will herein control them, who lived also before the Law
given in mount Sinai; and yet did God so far forth see and take notice of sin
in him, as that upon his hanging back, when he called him to go on his message
to Pharao, he was Exodus 4 14.
very angry with him; and for the neglect of his child's circumcision, he was
like Exodus 4.24.
to have slain him.

2. It will overthrow the main ground of their assertion; to wit, that this
privilege took not place, Honeycomb chap. 3. page 38. and 40. and chap. 6.
page 106.
until Christ had groaned out his blood and life on the cross. Or, if they
shall grant, that by virtue of his blood then shed it was formerly enjoyed,
they shall by that grant again overthrow their own assertion, concerning those
that lived after the delivery of the Law; unless they will affirm, that the
Law was given to abridge the virtue, and impeach the efficasy of Christ's blood.

3. Let it be observed, to what intent and purpose this of Abraham, and that
also, with so many downright terms of deep aggrevation, is produced; namely,
to prove, that tho a man now do, as they say he then did, dissemble, ly, and
equivocate; yea more then that, cheat and cosen those he deals with, swear
and forswear, or worse then all this; yet if he be a believer, (as every one
almost is over-prone to believe himself to be, and they most many times, that
have least cause so to do) or if by the Spirit he know himself to be in the
state of grace; (which too many presume of, upon the report and suggestion, not
of Tit. 1.2. John 16.13.
Gods never erring, but of their own corrupt and Ierem. 17.9.
deceitful spirit; but being granted that such they are, or may be) that then
God does not see, or hear, or regard, or take notice at all of what they do,
or the less mislike them for so doing.

4. I desire to have it considered, whether according to these tenants, a man
may not well expect honest and faithful dealing, rather at the hand of an
heathen, holding at least a deity and a providence, or of a conscientious
Papist, then at the hands of an Antinomian thus principled. For (...) Epi^h^rm.
apud Clem strom. l. 5. Eusebius. praep^r. l. 13. c. ^3. Theodor. there. l. 6.
Thales interrogatus, (...). respondit. (...). Laert. l. 1. (...). Ep^ct^t l 2.
c. 14. Idemqe l. 1. c. ^4. (...); Socrates apud Xenoph. memoral. l. 1. (...).
Indegnomica illa, (...). Et, (...). Et, (...). apud Plut. ad Colot c 9. Justin.
de monarch. Clem. strom. l 3. Eusebius. praepar. l. 13. c. 10 M^nandro alii, alii
Philemoni tribuunt. Salust. ad Caesar. Nam mihi pro certo constat, omnium
mortalium vitam numine invisi; neqe bonum, neqe malum facinus cujusqe pro
nihilo haberi, sed ex natura diversa praemia bonos malosqe seqi. Silius bell.
Pun. l. 15. ^qecunqe capesses, Testes factorum stare arbitrabere divos. Plaut.
Capt. 2.2. Est profecto Deus, qi qae nos gerimus, aud^tqe and videt. Is uti tu
me hic habueris, proinde tuum illic curaverit Been merenti been prosuerit, male
merenti par erit. Sen. ep. 83. Nihil Deo clusum est. interest animis nostris,
and cogitationibus medus inervenit.
heathen men, so qualified as has been said, have by the light of nature
acknowledged and professed to believe, that God did see and take notice of
whatsoever they did, or spoke, yea or thought, and was offended with them when
in ought of these they failed; and even Papists also, by those grounds which
they hold in common with us, as also the (...). Justin. apolog. 2. (...); Clem
paedag. l. 2. c. 10. (...). Isidor. l. 4. ep. 47. (...). Basil. in Psalm 33.13,
14. Deus author omnium, ac speculator omnium, a qo nullum potest esse secretum,
tenebris interest, interest cogitationibus, tanqam alteris tenebris. Faelix
Octav. Oculum non in te intendit suum qi fecit tuum? Aug. de verb. dom. 10.
Speculator adstat desuper, ^Qi nos diebus omnibus Actusqe nostros pro picit, A
luce p^ima in ^^esperam. Hic testis, hic est arbiter; Hic intuetur, qicqid est
Humana qod m^ns con ipit. Hunc n^mo fa^lit ju licem. Prudent. cathemer. ^. Nil
absente Deo l^qimur: nil abdita clausum pectoris antra te^unt: cernit Deus
omnia praesens. Juvenc. hist. Evang. Man^t spectator desuper cunctorum D^us,
bonis praemia, malis supplicia dispensans. Boet. cons. l. 5.
Christians of former ages, do here in accord with them. Whereas our
Antinomians, you see, flatly deny, that God does see or take notice of any
evil, or failings in ought of theirs, (presuming them to be in the state of
grace) no, not of d^unkennesse or murder, much less of a fraud, of a ly. yea
they stick not to say; and it follows unavoydably indeed from their
principles, that God is no more displeased with them, when they ly, then when
they speak truth, (that which indeed, I believe, makes so many of them such
notorious liers, as I have by experience my self found some, and by credible
report heard others of them to be) no more when they be drunk, then when they
keep themselves sober; no more when they commit adultery, then when in wedlock
they live loyally.

Again, if it shall be said, that some of the abovementioned assertions, may
yet bear an orthodox sense. as indeed they did endeavor, when time was, by
some qualifications to allay the horridness of some of them. for, who can
deny, may some say, but that there is a fountain ready open for sinners to wash
in, tho they have never so often sinned, Zech. 13.1.
upon their repentance? and for a believer, as Mr. Randall.
one of them sought to salve it, to ask forgiveness of his sin, as if Christ
had not made full satisfaction to God for it, were a point of much impiety. and
further, that in diverse sound authors of former ages some such speeches are
found, as these men now use to press, in the venting and vindicating of their
positions.

To all this I answer, 1. that the Apostle by precept enjoyneth Timothy, to
(...). 2 Timothy 1.13.
keep a form of wholesome, as well words, as doctrines. as also by his own
practice he admonishes us to speak (...). Acts 26.25.
the words as well of sobriety, as of truth. but these their forms are sure far
from sobriety; and from wholsomnesse as far.

2. That these men deal with orthodox Authors, I cannot say, (...). Justin. ad
Tryph.
as flies, that leave the whole hide where it is whole and sound to seize on
some sore or unsound part; (tho prone enough, I doubt not, they would be (...).
Plut. de curios. and consolat. ad uxor.
so to do, if they could light on ought thus tainted in the^) because those
writers were sound enough in those places, which these men, thereby to
countenance their own unsound opinions, do abuse. and yet, I may well say,
(...). Pl^t de ^ranquil.
as flies, that are wont to slip away from the glass, where it is slick and
smooth, but to fasten upon it, where they find any scratches in it. for they
pass by those places in them, and those their speeches, where and wherein they
plainly and familiarly deliver themselves and their mind, in terms most proper
and suitable to the truth and nature of the doctrine they deal with; and pitch
upon some high and harsh expressions, which carried in an hyperbolicall strain,
do sometime fall from them; the rather thereby to amuse silly people; who are
Flebecula ind^cta qicqid non inte^lig^t, plus miratur. Hieron. a^ Nep^t.
prone most to admire, what they least understand; and to beguile such, as are
not able to distinguish between propriety of speech, and rhetorical, tho
sometime more emphaticall, mere flourishes. where they might do well to
remember, that it is a dangerous matter, as from Theologia symbolica, typica,
vel tropica, non est a^gumentativa. De Valentinianis Tertul. c. 27. Omnia in
imagines urgent, plane and imaginarii ipsi Chr^stiani.
typical, so from tropicall speeches, hyperbolicall especially, to raise
points of doctrine, and to strain that to propriety, that is spoken by a
figure. But herein they deal as the Papists do in some controversies between us
and them; who to justify the invocation of Saints deceased, passing by, yea
Videantur Indices expurg. Hispan. and Belg.
crossing out sometime, those clear places of the ancients, wherein they are
most pregnant for invocation of God in Christ only, use to press us with
those passages in their panegyricall discourses; where they break forth into
rhetorical compellations of the blessed spirits deceased, as they do sometime
the like, Ita, paschatia festum. Greg. Stas orat. in S. Pascha Aqae elementum,
Ambros in Luc. 10.
of the senseless, yea and livelesse creatures; and to make men believe that
their late forged monster of transubstantiation is no novelty, but a doctrine
held and believed in the ancient Church, letting slip the plain and pregnant
speeches of the ancients to the contrary; which yet they cannot be ignorant of,
being inserted Videantur ex Augustino adducta a Gratiano de consecr. did. 2.
some of them, even into the corpse of their Canon Law; fasten upon and urge
against us, some sacramental, metonymicall and hyperbolicall expressions, as
in heat of affection, and eager pursuit of their matter, have slipped at some
times from the lips, or dropped from the pens of those Worthies; which yet diverse
of them (unless they will venture as far as Ibid. in Confessione Berengario
praescripta.
Pope Nicolas, whom the gloss it self is ashamed of) in See of this kind out
of Chrysostom, in the defense of my Treatise against Transubstantiation, D^vis.
14. 9. p. 219.
propriety of sense themselves dare not admit. Nisi sane in^elligas, in majorem
incides haeresin, qam Bereng. ipse habuit. Gloss. ibi.
where by the way, tho a little out of the way, I cannot forbear in a word to
intimate; how herein also these men imitate the patrons of Popery: for look
what imputations they cast on us, because we refuse to receive contrary to the
evidence of our sight and sense, the grounds of sound reason, and principles of
Religion, that hideou^ conceit of Christ's whole body comprehended in a little
thin Wafer-cake, which they have now made Council. Trident. sess 13. de Euchar
Sacram. cap. 1.
an article of faith; that Ita passim illi; and inter reliqos Anonymus ille, qi
Tractarum ea de re meum impugnare aggressus est.
we are mere carnal creatures, preferring sight and sense before faith; that
we make Christ a liar; deny the truth of his Word, and the power of his deity;
the very self-same aspersions, as at large you have heard, full as soul, if
not fouler, do these corrupters of the truth of God, bedew and bedaub us with,
because we will not See Honeycomb, chap. 9. p. 180, 181.
abandon sense, reason and religion, so as to believe that, which they press
as a fundamental article of faith, to wit, that believers have no sin that God
can see in them, tho they see and feel it in themselves; and that Ibid. c. 4.
p. 65.
God cannot but abhor them, and refuse to own them, if he should epsy but the
least mote or spe^k of sin in them.

3. The scope and drift of these men (far different from theirs, whose
speeches they make use of) would in these their expressions be observed. which
is, (as by the main course of their teaching plainly appears) 1. To keep men
from making conscience of any sin, in regard of Gods sight of it in them: and
so to take off from men's consciences all such kind of curb and restraint, as
might thereby repress the remainders of corruption in the heart of a Christian.

2. To dissuade them, from being at all in that regard troubled, when they have
been so overtaken; and from endeavoring by the practice of humiliation and
renewed repentance, to make up again those breaches, that have been made
between God and them by their sins; and by persuading them that their sins have
no hand in the procurement of the present calamities, to divert them from being
humbled in that regard for any sins of their own; whatsoever they may be for
the excesses of others. Which are such consequences, as those men never
intended, but would have extremely abhorred, whose expressions and speeches,
(as with diverse passages of holy writ they likewise deal) contrary to their own
minds and intents, they do wretchedly abuse. The Apostle tells the Romans,
that Romans 5.20.
where sin had abounded there* grace did much more abound. but does he
therefore infer, Let men sin therefore as fast as they lust; the more they
sin, the more shall Gods grace abound in the abandoning of their sin? Nothing
less. nay rather, having by way of preoccupation propounded, what some corrupt
heart might hereupon have suggested, Romans 6.1.
Shall we sin then the more, that grace may abound? with detestation he
rejects it, and with an absit answers it, God forbid; as if he should say,
Far be it from any Christian heart to entertain the least thought looking that
way. and as far would it have been either from the Apostle, or from any of
those, whose speeches these men cite and press concerning Gods free grace and
the power and efficacy of Christ's blood, for the taking away of sin, to have
added upon their discourses of either subject, such an inference as this, Let
Christian men therefore sin a^ fast as they list, there is Christ's blood at
hand ready to wash all away. Sure it is, let their intendement be herein what
it will; as they remove hereby one main means of restraint from sin, Gods
sight of it in his, when they sin; so they take away one main ground of
sincere repentance, to wit, that 2 Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow and grief for sin, whereby men are grieved, because by their
sins they have Ezekiel. 6.9.
grieved God, and Esaias 63.10. Ephesians 4.30.
vexed his good Spirit. for, as we use to say, Vulgo dicitur, Q^d oculus non
videt, cor non de^a. Bern. in sest. omn. Sanct. sermon. 5.
What the eye sees not, the heart ^ues not. nor can God be grieved, nor his
Spirit vexed by us, with that, which he neither sees, nor takes notice of at
all in us; nor can any man be grieved with the apprehension of that, which he
believes not to be.

4. It is to be considered, that these their assertions thus grossly
delivered, may, and do in likelihood pass for current with many of their
hearers and followers, these their qualifica^ions and modifications of them
being concealed from them, and reserved to themselves. And herein also they
deal just as our Popish teachers do in many points of their religion. For
example; to gull the people, and draw money from them, they tell them, that
through the Popes pardons they may have free and full remission of all their
sins whatsoever, even Siqis virginem Ma^iam vitiosset ac gravidam fecisset.
Tecelius fraterculus indulgentiarum p^ntificiarum institor. Jo. Slei dan.
comment. l. 13. an. 1531.
that sin not excepted, which tho the Friar in the Pulpit shamed not publicly
to mention, I abhor to relate: whereas when they come to debate and dispute
the point in the schools, they are by evidence of light enforced to confess.
Bellarm. de indulg l. 1. c. 7.
1. that they cannot free Non a culpa. qia tolli non potest s^ne infusione
gratiae.
from the fault it self: for that cannot be without infusion of grace. 2. nor
from the Per indulgentias non absolvimur, vel solvimur, a reatu culpae ullius,
nec letalis nec venialis.
guilt of any sin either mortal or venial: 3. nor from any Non liber amur a
poenis naturalibus.
naturally penalty, as sickness, death, or the like: 4. nor from any Nec
possunt tollere poenas, qae in foro externo, vel civili, vel ecclesiastico
in^^iguntur.
civil or ecclesiastical censure. but from what then? only from those pains
which a man should have suffered Itaqe Roffensis noster adv. Luther. artic. 19.
Qam diu nulla fuit de Purgat^rio cura, nemo qaesevit indulgentias. nam ex illo
pendet omnis Purgatorii existimatio. si tollas Purgatorium, qor^um indulgentiis
opus erit?
in Purgatory for his venial sins, had he not made satisfaction for them,
while he lived here. but while they dispute the point thus in the schools, the
poor people mean while take for Gospel what in gross they tell them, that
their sins are so blown away so soon as the Popes Bull blows upon them,
that they shall never more hear of them, or be reckoned with for them. so in
the matter of image worship; they teach the people to ado^e images, and the
cruc^fix as Christ. and when for such doctrine and practice we charge idolatry
upon them; they tender us a many distinctions to salve the matter withal; that
they Non coli imaginem, sed exemplar coram imagine. ita nonnulli apud Bellarm^
de cult. Sa^ct. l. 2. ^. 20.
worship not the image it self simply, but that by it, whose image it is; or if
Perse, and proprie, ita ut ipsae terminent venerationem, ut in se
considerantur. Bell. ibid c. 21.
the image it self, yet not with the same, but with Honor mino^i qim ipsum
exemplar. ib. c. 20.
a lower degree of worship, then that wherewith they worship that whose image
it is; or if Eodem genere culius, qo exemplar ipsum colitur. ibid. c. 23.
with the self-same worship, yet Non proprie. Ibid. c. 24.
not properly, but Impr^prie, qando imago accipitur loco exemplaris. Ibid. c.
23.
improperly, as the image stands in Gods, or in Christ's stead, like Vt
legutus, Regis l^co honoratur. Ibid. c. ^0.
an Ambassador representing the person of his Sovereign, to receive for either
the worship due to the Deity, or Proprie, sed per accidens; qando tanqam
imagine vestitum adoramus. Ibid. c. 23.
if properly, yet not by it self, but by accident, as a man conceives God or
Christ invested with that image, and so worships it with the same act of
worship, that he worships God or Christ with, as Sicut qi adorat regem purpura
vestitum, vestem sive purpuram simul adorat. Ibid^ c. 20. and 23.
a man worships the royal robe, that the King wears, when he worships the
King. mean while the common people not able to sound these subtilties
(supposing, that being aright conceived and observed, they could free from
idolatry) are taught to practice, and encouraged to commit gross idolatry
without fear; as they cannot but know, who thus mince out the matter in their
scholasticall, or rather sophistical, disputes. In like manner here, suppose
we, that by such reserved qualifications (as these men are sometime enforced
unto, when the points in controversy are pressed upon them) these assertions,
some of them, could in some sense be maintained, as free from those horrid and
even blasphemous tinctures, that they carry with them in the forehead; yet
being thus crudely and rudely propounded to many shallow headed people, either
not at all acquainted with their nice distinctions, or not well able to
understand them, they are by them swallowed without more ado, unto the
poisoning of their souls; being the rather prone to entertain them because
tending to that, (...). Sophocl. (...). Plut. in Artaxer. (...). Diodor. hist.
l. 12. (...). Greg. Nyss. apud Anton. meliss. l. 1. c. 16. (...). Greg. St^s.
de pace 3. (...) Ibid. 2. (...). Idem apolog. vide Socratis cum Cali^^^ scorto
collationem apud Aelian. l. 13. c. 32. Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit.
Juvenal. sat. 1. Non gradu, sed praecipiti cursu a virtute descitum, ad vitia
transcursum. and ubi semel deerratum, in praeceps pervenitur. adeo mature a
rect^^ in prava, a pravis in praecipitia pervenitur. Pater^. hist. l. 2.
Facill^ in proclivia vitiorum decurs^^ est. Sen. de ira. l. ^. c. 1. Etiam sine
magistro vitia discuntur. Idem qaeest. not. l. 2. c. 30. Ingenium est omnium
hominum a labor proclive ad libidinem. Ter. Andr. 1.1.
which the bent of man's nature is of it self over-strongly inclined unto.

Lastly, I desire that it may be advisedly weighed, what a wide gap may be
broken up for the venting and spreading of all manner of strange fancies and
impious assertions, to the poisoning and destroying of the souls of silly
people, or such as are of themselves forward to embrace new upstart opinions
and uncouth paradoxes, such as have not been formerly received, or heard; when
tho they sound pure blasphemy, as they are delivered, yet they shall go for
sound and orthodox, because by the help of some concealed nice subtilty, they
may be wrung and wrought into some such sense as is agreeable unto truth. For
example; A child of God, says one of these men, ought not to ask God
forgiveness of his sins: yea it is blasphemy for him so to do. and how is
this assertion salved from being it self blasphemous? why? it is blasphemy for
him so to do, as if Christ had not made full satisfaction for it. for that were
to deny the efficacy of Christ's death. Now I desire to have it considered
whether by this his practice, I say not, any Popish, but any atheistical
point, may not be divulged; and afterward by some such gloss as this, when it
has done much mischief, be salved up and excused, as containing nothing but
what is sound and true. For may not a man, whose wit itcheth to set such
novelties and impieties on foot, by the like reason, presume to aver, that it
is blasphemy for a man to confess his sins to God. and then say he meant it,
supposing thereby to acquaint God with that, which he was ignorant of before.
for that were to deny Gods omniscience. that, it is blasphemy to entreat God,
to have compassion on his people; or to make good his gracious promises to
them. but his meaning is, presuming that he is not of himself ready and prone
thereunto. for that were to question Gods fatherly affection and disposition
toward his people; and his faithfulness in performance of his promises.

And, I beseech you, give me leave a little further to exercise your patience,
by instancing but in one particular; the rather that thereby you may guess
(judging (...). Aristid. orat. Platon. 3. (...). Diogenian. ^dag. 4^ 6.
of the whole piece by the list) what manner of stuff it is, that these men
are wont to vent in private, where they suppose none but their own present,
none at least able to contradict or control them in what they deliver. That
which I shall herein acquaint you with, is no other then has been averred,
both by the word, and under the hand, of a Reverend Divine of good note, who
being present at a collation made by Mr. Randall.
one of the parties before mentioned, but standing out of sight, both heard
what was delivered, and took notes of what he heard. And I am therefore the
bolder to make it more public, because I understand that a copy of the
collation it self is abroad in the hands of his hearers, reported by them to be
approved of by him, with a purpose, (as they give out) for the clearing of
himself, to present it to the Honorable House of Commons.

The Scripture he handled was, John 1.9, 10. The world there spoken of, in
which Christ is there said to have been; and to illighten every one that comes
into it, or, (as he adds) is within it; he affirms to be the whole creation,
Heaven, Earth, and Hell; yea all their creatures in their several divisions,
spirits, devils, men, etc. and hence he concludes, that Jesus Christ is in
every creature, in men, beasts, horses, dogs, every thing. and that he gives
light to every one of them. not that Jesus Christ is every creature, but that
he is in every creature; and every creature is light in him and by him. and
that in this sense, as the world is round, so he knows no difference between
good and bad; they have all one life and death, one joy and comfort. yea that
he is persuaded (and he wills them to mark what he says) that that spirit
that rules in the children of disobedience (which the Apostle, I am sure,
Ephesians. 2.2.
says is the Devil) is the same spirit, that is in the Saints.

Now what sec^et shifts this man has, or will be able, if occasion be, to
produce, whereby to clear these and such like assertions, from being deemed
blasphemous, I shall for the present leave to himself, whom it most concerns,
to consider. but how silly women, who admire this profound and mysterious
discourse, as a principal Master^peece; do apprehend them, and what fancies
their brains may be thence possessed with, other men may guess as well as my
self. Sure it is, that such expressions as these, either argue some monster,
that these men go great with, or that they desire at least to fill peoples
heads with such monstrous notions, as may raise an admiration of them, as
speaking new and strange things, such as others are not acquainted with, in the
minds of the common sort; Praeceptor q^ndam meus Gregorius Nazian rogatus ^ me
ut exponeret, qid sib^ vellet in Luca Sabbatum (...), eleganter lu^u; Docebote,
in^iens, super hac re in ecclesia, in qa mihi omni populo acclamante, cogeri^
invit^^ scire qod nescis: aut si ce^ie solus ^acuer^^, sol^^ ab omnibus
stultitiae condemn^beris. Hieron. ad Nepot.
ready so to entertain such things, as neither they understand, nor those
themselves that deliver, many times, know well what they would have in them.
Mean while they are not likely to breed, either good blood, or good spirits in
any, but to produce much corrupt matter, that may 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
spread like a gangrene, if not speedily suppressed, (and indeed has done too
much already) to the perverting and subverting of the faith of not a few. which
I wish those, that are in authority, advisedly to weigh, and effectually to
take to heart; as having a strong obligation lying upon them, Deuteronomy. 13. per
totum. 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11, 12. and 15.^, 12, 13. and 19.4. and 29. per tot. and
30.1 -- 12. and 31. per tot. Nehem. 7-30. 1 Timothy ^.^.
to have an eye as well to the vindication of Gods honor, and the safety of
the souls of his people, as to their civil society and bodily welfare.

But to return to our first and principal subject at present; a very sad and
lamentable thing to me it seems, to see and consider, that after so long, so
much light, people should be, either so dim-sighted, or so wilfully blinded,
that they should not be able to discern the vanity, folly, and impiety of such
fantastical teachings, as would blindfold God to them, and keep not him from
seeing, but them from the sight of him seeing their sins. It is recorded in
Scripture as the impious speech, or imagination at least, of ungratious
wretches, men abandoned to all manner of mischief, that Psalm. 10.^1, 13. and
94.7.
God sees not, nor regrards, what they do. but that it should in these days be
the conceit of those that profess themselves Gods people, and of some of those
among them, that would seem in a more special manner to Esaias 58.2.
draw near unto God, seems to me a dreadful prodigy, and direful presage
of some further evil ready to break in upon us. For let it, I beseech you, be
seriously and sadly considered, what a curb we cast off for the restraint of
our corruption, which remains too much in the best, and unruly more then
enough, even where it is best managed, and most overruled and mastered, when
we expel and exile this persuasion of Gods eye upon us, and of his angry eye,
when we wilfully give way unto evil. And let us take heed, how by intertaining
such kind of thoughts we make our selves like those foolish persons, who (as
the Polyb. hist. l. 4.
Greek historian observes) suppose themselves safe and secure enough, as (...).
if others could not see them, or discern what they do, when they have so shut
their own eyes, that they cannot see themselves. Which fond and sottish
affection, howsoever in (...). Callimach in D^an.
little children, in regard of their natural simplicity, as also in the Ea est
struthiocameli stoliditas, ^t cum col. la frutice occul^averit, latere se
existimet. Plin. l. 10. c. 1. (...). Diodor. hist. l. 2. ^^ 50. qi tamen and
aliam hujus rei rationem assi^nat.
Ostrich and some Perdix alias astuta, in hoc fatua, qod capite occultato,
totam latere se credit, and cum neminem videat, ^ nemine videri. Author Anonym*
de not. rer. Verum perdicem eam vult ille, qam rusticam Maltial. l. 13. ep. 76.
alii Rusticulam; nos a Woodcock* De Sciaena Oppian. l. 4. (...). De Mugile
Aristot. hist. anim. l. 8. c. 2. (...).
other brute creatures in regard of Job 39.17.
an inbred stupidity, may be deemed more excusable; yet in men, who in regard
of their years, should have 1 Cor. 14.20.
more wi^ then little children, in regard of their endowments, Job 35.11.
more understanding then brute beasts, that grave writer not undeservedly
brandeth, as (...). Polyb. ubi sup.
a mixture, or medly of badnesse and madness. Let us consider, what a foul
blemish it is, not to man's nature only, but even to God^ grace, when men
endowed with Genesis 1.26, ^7. and 9.6. 1 Cor. 11.7.
Gods image by nature in part, (for the remains of it are found even In gehenna
ipsa imago Dei uri poterit, non exurit ardere, sed non deleri. Bern. in Annunc.
ser. 1.
in the reprobate, and in the very damned spirits themselves) and professing* to
have it further by grace Ephesians. 4 23, 24. Col. 3.10.
renewed and repaired in them, should by their own wilful depravation, make
themselves guilty of that folly, which in babes and brutes themselves are wont
to make sport with, and to Mugilum natura ridetur, in metu, capite abscondito,
totos se occultari credentium. Plin. l. 9. c. 17.
deride; and withal remember we seriously (for this indeed is no sporting
matter) what one of the Ancients well says, that by such fond and ridiculous,
or rather impious and irreligious persuasions as these, Te mihi absconderem,
non me tibi. Aug. confess. l. 10 c. 2.
howsoever we may keep our selves from beholding of God, yet we cannot keep God
from beholding of us; we may hinder our selves from seeing his eye upon us, but
not his eye from seeing and taking notice of our ways and our works, whether
public, private, or secret. yea that thus, as another well, Te fallu, non
Deum. Bern. de grad. humil.
beguile and gull our selves we may, but beguile him we cannot; who, as the
Apostle tells us, (...). Gal. 6.7. Derideri, aut circu^veniri Deus non
potest, neo aflutia aliqa falleme deludi. perspicit ille abdito, and secreta
atqe occulta considerat. Je^. 23.24. videt corda and pectora singulorum: and
judicaturus non tantum de factis, sed and de cogitationibus nostris, omnium
mentes voluntatesqe in ipsis adhuc clausi pectoris latebris intuetur. Cypr. de
laps.
is not, nor can thus be deluded, or beguiled.

But I fear, courteous Reader (for such I will presume thee to be) that I
trespass too much upon thy patience and presumed courtesy, by somewhat an
unmannerly and uncurteous, tho in some regard not unnecessary, detaining of
thee so long in the porch; especially if (...). Plato de repub. l. 4. sive* ut
Method. apud Epiphan. haer. 64 (...). Sed jam non sustineo vos morari. scio,
qam sit odiosa Circensibus pompa. M. Sen. praefat. controv.
desirous to look into the house, and to see what there within may be found.
Let it suffice therefore for the present, that it has been evidently and
undeniably made to appear, that herein we charge these men with nothing but
what they professedly maintain. As for the ensuing discourse, my first and
principal intendement therein, was to remove only one main pillar of that
their pernicious opinion. Wherein yet, if by such occasional explication and
prosecution of the Scripture by the maintainers thereof wronged, ought else
shall be found, that may conduce unto the clearing of any other passages of
holy writ, (of which nature somewhat peradventure may be) or if thou shall
therein meet with ought, that may otherwise be useful to thee, for the staying
and settling of thy faith in these staggering and tottering times, for the
bearing up of thy spirits under any present pressure, confirming of thine heart
against cross and unwelcome occurrents, or steering of thy course and
directing of thy carriage, amidst the common calamities and disturbances of the
times; give God the glory, and afford thy requests (I beseech thee) at his
throne of grace, for the support and strengthening in his (...) Psalm. 141.7.
(...) Psalm. 9.13. (...). Oppian. pisc. l. 5. ad leti portas. Maro culic.
limina, Lucret. l. 3. Vestibulum ante ipsum, primisqe in faucibus orci. Maro
Aeu. l. 6. (...). Lucian. apolog. aetate devexa and praecipiti, in extrema
consistens tegula. Sen. ep. 12.
approaches to the pits-brinck, of

His unworthy servant, and thine in him, THO. GATAKER

GODS EYE ON HIS ISRAEL. An Explication and Application of Balaams words
recorded Numbers 23.21.
THat which had wont to be said of Afric, that it was (...). Aristot. de
gener. animal. l. 2. c. 7. Vulgar Graeciae dictum, Semper aliqid novi Africa^^
afferre, Plin. hist. not. l. 8. c. 16. inde Anaxilas Hyacinth. (...). it^
potius restituendum metrum, qam ut Scalig. aut Grot. comici verbis demendo.
Habet Athenaeus l. 14. apud qem and de eadem, non Eubulus, ut Campens. and
Grot. sed Eupolis, (...). Excogitat novi quid Musica jugiter.
ever producing some new monster or other; is too true of the age, I would I
might not say of the land, wherein we live. But the thing it self is so
notorious, that lamented it may be, concealed it cannot be. We have many
strange and uncouth, some even monstrous and prodigious opinions, daily started
up amongst us: which men of corrupt, either judgment, or affection, or both,
taking liberty to themselves, from the present distractions of the state, and
disturbances of the times, stick not to broach and disperse, as well in
public as in private: whereby multitudes of people, of the weaker sort and
sex especially, are seduced and misled; grievous rents and schisms are made
both in Church and State; the doctrine of the Gospel is much wronged and
abused; and a wide gap is laid open unto all manner of licentiousness and
loosnesse of life.

Among these none to me seems more pestiferous and pernicious, then that of
those, who from one of the first Authors thereof are commonly called
Eatonists, from their opposition to the mandatory and obligatory power of the
Law moral, or the Decalog, Antinomians or Antinomists; and such as have
further built on the grounds by them laid; whereby they maintain, among other
erroneous conceits, that John Eaton, Honeycomb of free justification. chap. 3.
p. 36.
God sees no sin at all in his justified children: one covering Mr. Eaton.
the hour-glasse, that he preaches by in publik, an other Mr. Randall.
the Bible that he collateth by in private; and affirming withal, that God no
more sees any sin in any justified persons, then the auditory then present
saw, either the Glass the one, or the Book the other; and consequently, that he
takes not notice of it, nor is at all displeased with them, fall they never so
foully, or live they never so loosly, for ought that such do: nor does he
inflict ought on them, or on any other, as the Land or State they live in, and
are limbs of, either by way of punishment, or in way of chastisement, for any
sin by them committed. Yea that therefore, they neither need to crave pardon
for any sin or excess, nor to afflict and humble themselves for the same:
one of them affirming, that Mr. Randall; as was averred by testimony of those
that heard him affirm it.
what Psalm. 51.
David did in this kind, after his grievous excesses in the matter of Vriah,
proceeded in him from weakness: as also, that Mr. Randall openly by word of
mouth in the Star Chamber.
what Math. 27.7^.
Peter did in the like kind, after his foul fact of denial, issued from the
weakness of his faith. On which their principles others raising further super
structures, have so far proceeded as to affirm, that Christ's counsel to
Laodice^.
neither faith, nor repentance, nor humiliation, nor self denial, nor use of
Ordinances, nor doing as one would be done to, are duties required of
Christians, or such things as they must exercise themselves in, or they can
have no part in Christ. Albeit the John 3.18, 36 Mark 1.15. and ^6.16. Luke
13.3, 5. Mat. 16.24. and 18.3. and 6.20. and 7.1^. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Scriptures be so pregnant, and so express to the contrary.

One principal pillar or shore, that has by these men been erected and
applied to the bearing up of that their first main assertion beforementioned,
is hewn out of, and taken from Number. 23.21.
a passage of Balaam, delivered in a speech of his to Balak, thus commonly
read, Geneva Translation*
He sees none iniquity in Jacob; nor sees no transgression in Israel.

Or somewhat nearer to the original, thus, Last English edition.
He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob; neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel.

Which place, because it is not only grossly misexpounded and mis-applyed by
them, but is also, as I conceive, commonly mistranslated and mistaken by the
most; I have thought good to impart such thoughts as long since I have had
concerning the same to the publik; thereby endeavoring to give some further
light, if it may be, to the Text; to clear it, at least, from that wicked and
wretched abuse and wrong, which from these men it does sustain.

In prosecution hereof I shall use this method: Parts 4.
1. Deal with the sense that these men fasten on it. 2. Deliver and debate the
versions and expositions rendered by others. 3. Discuss the several branches
and terms of the Text. 4. Draw forth and pursue that Doctrine that the place
understood aright affords.


To begin with the first of these; against the sense that these men would
fasten upon it, to wit, Part 1.
that God saw no sin at all in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel, Antinomian
Exposition.
I shall use a fourfold prescription or plea.

First, that this can not be the meaning of the place, Exception 1.
because it evidently crosses the main tenor of the story, and the truth of
Gods Word. For how could God but see those sins in that people, which so often
he grievously Exodus 32.8. and 33.3. Number. 14.11.
complains of, professes to take Exodus 32.9. Deuteronomy. 9.13.
notice of, and to be highly displeased with, threatens to avenge, yea not
threatened alone so to do, but severely, and that frequently also, Deuteronomy. 9.19.
Number. 11.1, 10.
Exodus 3^.35. Number. 11.1.33. and 16 49. and 21.6. and 25.9.
punished by plagues and judgments of sundry sorts; yea for which he destroyed
in the wilderness the main body of that people which he brought out of Egypt,
Exodus 32.10, 33, 34. Number. 14.12, 22, 23, 35.
reserving only their issue, to enter upon, and enjoy the Land promised them,
in their stead? Or what reasonable creature can be induced to believe, that all
this should by God be done, when he had so hoodwinked and blindfolded himself,
that he neither did nor could see that, for which he did all this? Deuteronomy. 2.15,
16.


Exception 2.
Secondly, that Balaam, who uttered these words unto Balak, did not so
understand them, nor was of any such mind. That which appears by the advice
that he gave unto Balak. For as the Nobles of Babylon, being well assured that
Dan. 6.5.
they should never be able to get any advantage against Daniel, whereby to
ensnare him, and bring him into danger, save in something that might concern
him in his duty to his God, Dan. 6.7, 8.
solicited Darius to enact and publish such an edict as might straiten him that
way: Number. 31.16, Rev. 2.14.
so Balaam well wotting, that no advantage could be gotten against that people,
whereby the enemy might be enabled to have the better of them, but by making a
breach between them and their God; Number. 31.16, Rev. 2.14.
advised Balak therefore by the enticements of the daughters of his people to
endeavor to enduce them to fornication and superstition, to adultery and
idolatry, (two sins that are Number. 25.1, 2. Hos. 4.13.14. Rev. 2.15, 20.
wont to go hand in hand together) that so the wrath of God being incensed
against them, and his protection withdrawn from them, they might either ly
Exodus 32.25.
open to the enemy, or be Psalm. 106.41, 42.
delivered up by God unto them, to be scourged and punished for their sin.
But in vain had it been for Balaam to give such counsel to Balak, or for Balak
to have practiced what Balaam suggested, had God been so affected toward this
people, that he could not, or would not see, or take notice of what was done
amiss, either in that, or in any other kind, by them, nor would be displeased
at all with them for it.

Exception 3.
Thirdly, that this sense of the words will not stand with other their own
principles, but directly crosses that which themselves otherwhiles aver. For
when we object unto them, against this their position, the examples of holy men
recorded in Scripture; as of Moses, of whom it is said, that God was Exodus 4.14.
angry, yea very angry with him, Exodus 4.24.
for his flinching and hanging back, when he was to go on Gods errand to
Pharaoh; had like to have slain him in his Inn by the way for the neglect of
his child's circumcision; was Psalm. 106.32, 33^ Number. 11.11,-13 21, 22. and 20.12.
displeased with him and Aaron for their incredulity and failings in some
unadvised carriages; Deuteronomy. 9.20.
with Aaron also for having an hand in the calf; and punished them both with
Number. 20.24. Deuteronomy. 3.25, 27.
exclusion from possession and enjoyment of the promised Land: of David,
concerning whom it is affirmed, that the thing he did in his folly with
Bathsheba, and in the murder of Vriah, was 2 Samuel 11.27.
evil in Gods eyes; himself also confessing, that those his sins were
committed Psalm. 51.4.
in Gods sight, as also that his other sins, such as he had (for some he was
Psalm. 7.3, 4. 1 Samuel 24.9.
falsely charged with) were Psalm. 69.5.
not hidden from him; and that God by Nathan sharply 2 Samuel 12.9.
reproved him for the same; threatening withal to 2 Samuel 12.10, 11.
repay his sin in either kind by the like; which 2 Samuel 13, 14.29. and 16.22.
and 18.14.
accordingly also he did: and again that upon the numbering of his people, which
1 Chro. 21.1. 2 Samuel 24.1. Vbi Jun. cum incitasset adversarius Davidem. at
Pisc. audax supplementum* Ipse audentior; Jehovah ipse incitavit. Verum neutrum
horum hoc loco necessarium est. potest indefinite and passive sumi. ita
Castle. impulsus est D. qo modo Genesis 41.13. Deuteronomy. 32.37. Number. 26.59. 2 Samuel
22.8 1 Kings 22.38. Mal. 1.4. Luke 12.20. Addo posse reddi, eo qod impulsus
est, sive, quon^am impulsus est. Vau saepe causale est, Psalm. 60.11. and 75.1.
and 108.12. Isaiah 9.11 and ^4.4, 5.
Satan and his own corrupt heart had put him upon, 2 Samuel 24.10.
his conscience smote him, as having done that, which he knew God would take
notice of, and take to heart, as the event shows that he did; for God not
only signified so much to him by Verse. 12.13.
Gad, but made him Verse. 1^.
smart for it in his people: of Iehoshaphat, whom for his assistance of Ahab,
God 2 Chro. 19.2.
by Iehu ^s messenger summoned to answer it, and gave him notice of his wrath
incensed against him for it; Of Ezekiah, with whom for a vain Isaiah 39.2.
ostentation of his wealth and state to the Babylonian Ambassadors, he was not
a little displeased, and in displeasure, to his no small grief (no doubt) made
known unto him, Verse. 6, 7.
what in after times should become, not of all his treasures only, but of his
posterity. When, I say, we object unto them these and the like examples of Gods
people, recorded in Gods Book, whose excesses and oversights God beheld, and
that also with an angry and wrathful eye; they use to tell us, that these
persons were under the cloud, See Honeycomb, c. 6. p. 97.
they lived in the times of the Old Testament: that it is not now as it was
then; God saw that in them then, which he sees not in us now: It is true, that
in those times God saw sin, and took notice of it, and punished it, even in
his own justified ones; but he does not so now adays. For, not to insist on
that, which in way of reply might be returned hereunto, to wit, that the
Apostle Paul acknowledges no other kind or manner of justification, then that,
whereby Romans 4.3. Gen^ 15.6.
Abraham, and Romans 4.6. Psalm. 32.1, 2, 5.
David were justified; from whose examples he draws an argument to prove, men
to be in these times Romans 3.24* 25, 28. and 4.12, 22, 24.
justified freely by faith, as they also in their times were: as also that the
Apostle Peter affirms* that those that lived in those times were Acts 15.1*
saved by the grace, yea the free grace (for Romans 11.5, 6 Nullo modo est
gratia, qe non est omni modo gratuita. Aug. de Pecc. mer. and rem. l^ 4. c. 24.
unless free, it is no Promissio de remittendis peccatis, ei^ qi confientur
Deo p^ccata sua, non videtur ulla extare in divinis literis Bellarm. de poenit.
l. 2.^ 4* loc. 4 Locus ille Prove. 28.13. loqitur de confessione, qae fit
hominibus, Jdem ibid. c. 11. except. 3. qi and cap 3. eodem trahit illa Lev.
5.5 Number. 5.7. sicut and Annot. Duac. in Number.
Grace) of God in Christ Jesus, as well as we that live in these days. Not to
insist, I say, and stay hereupon; but to turn them over to their own tenants;
these men herein deal with us in this argument, as the Papists do in some
others. For as they to make good, that Priests under the Gospel have a power to
hear confessions and remit sins, produce some places out of the Old
Testament to prove it; whereas yet they themselves confess that Nondum data
erat sacerdetibus potestas remittendi peccata Bellar. ib. 3.^.3
the Priests in those times had no such power: and to confirm invocation and
intercession of Saints deceased, they produce likewise some passages Job 5.1.
Annotat. on Doway Bible. Genes. 48.16. Bellar. de sanct. beatit. l. 1. c. 20.
Alfons. de Castr. apud Chamier panstr. l. 20. c. 2. Sect. 10. The triple Cord,
^ 16.95.
out of those Scriptures; when as yet being pressed with the practice of the
holy men that then lived, who used no such invokements of any deceased, they
are wont to answer, that Bellar. de Christ. l. 4. c. 10. and de purgat. l. 2.
c. 6. and de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 20.
the Saints in those times deceased could not hear prayers, or be prayed to,
because they remained shut up in limbo, and were not gotten yet into heaven. In
like manner do these men, To prove that God sees no sin now in his
justified ones, Eaton Honycomb, c. 3. p. 35, 37. etc. 4. p. 57.
they allege these words of Balaam, spoken of the Israel that then was, as
affirming that God saw no sin in them; and other places likewise, where he is
said upon their repentance to have Psalm. 32.1. and 85.2.
hidden all their sins; (as also to the same purpose they Honycomb, c. 3. p.
29.30.
produce those passages, where God is said, to have Psalm. 103.12.
removed their sins as far from them, as the East is from the West; and to
have Mic. 7.19.
taken them, and cast them into the bottom of the sea:) whereas yet they are
enforced by evidence of truth to confess, that Honycomb. c. 6. p. 98, 99.
in those times God might and did see, take notice of, and punish sin, even
in the best that then were; and this cannot therefore be Balaams meaning in
this place, if what themselves hold be true: nor can they allege this place
for the proof of what they herein maintain, without crossing and
contradicting that which otherwhiles they acknowledge.

Exception 4.
Fourthly, that this Affirmanti in cumbit onu^ probandi. Paul. in Digest. l. 22.
tit. 3. leg. 2. and Vlp^an. ibid. leg. 24.
burden lies upon them, who undertake to ground such a point as this upon this
place, to prove, that this, not only in probability may be, but of necessity
must be, the true sense of the words, which they give; for if the words will
bear any other sense as well as that which they assign, then cannot the
Doctrine, which thence they endeavor to deduce, be raised necessarily from the
place.

But that the words of the Text may well admit and bear some other orthodox
sense, then this which they strive and contend (all they can) to fasten upon
it; and that very aptly also agreeing with the drift and course of the context;
shall by Gods assistance be showed in the ensuing discourse.

Which yet before I come to make manifest in that, Part. 2.
which is herein principally intended; I shall crave leave to spend some time
in considering and discussing the diverse versions and expositions, that I find
given of the same by others.

And here my purpose is not to make any long stay upon such of them, as depart
much, either from the Original, Translations and Exposition les common.
or from the Translations with us commonly received, which alone may seem to
intimate some such thing as these men, whom at present we deal with, would
have them to hold out: Those of this sort may well be referred to two principal
heads. Chaldee. (...) Latin.
The former is of the Chaldie Paraphrast, who renders th Text thus, He
beholds no (a) worshippers of Idols in Jacob, nor sees any (b) workers of
falsehood in Israel, and the Vulgar Latin, that gives it much to the same
purpose, Non est Idolum in Jacob, nec videtur simulacrum in Israel.
There is no Idol in Jacob, nor Jmage seen in Israel; of which we shall, God
willing, say somewhat more hereafter: for as for that of Aug. Steuchius in
Pentateuch.
a learned writer, (who would look also that way,) Non declinabit vanitas ad
Jacob. (qod (...) potius esset, qam (...)) nec videtur opificium in Jsrael.
Greek.
Vanity shall not decline unto Jacob, nor workmanship be seen in Israel; it
runs so far wide from the Originals, that it is scarce worth the taking notice
of.

The latter head is of the Greek Interpreters, who thus yield them, (...).
No toilsome travel shall be in Jacob, nor pain, or painful labor seen in
Israel. Which version both the Philo* in vita Mosis, Origin. in Number. Latin.
Greek Interpreters, and the Non est labor in Jacob, neqe dolor in Israel.
Ambr. l. 6* Epist. 37. Non erit, etc. Hieron. in Eccles. 3. Hugo Ca^din* and
alii. Non est labor in Jacob, nec afflictio in Israel, Ferus.
Latin also diverse, as well ancient, as modern, either in whole or in part,
following; expound Hieron. ab Oleastr. Non videre fecit fatigationem in I. and
non vidit laberem in I. non permisit eum plus aeqo in itinere laborare, neqe
fatigari. Videre pro sentire, pati* Jer. 20.18. Psalm. 89.48. Sed (...) est
intueri; non sacere ut qis intue atur
some of Gods providence over the people of Jsrael in keeping them from being
over-toiled and tired out in their tedious passage through the wilderness; or
his Ferus. Promittitur facilis victoria contra hosts. (...) Cajetan. qia non
erat iniqitas in Jacob; factum est, ut non esset labor in Israel, ad hosts
debellandos, and terram eorum possidend^m
powerful assistance in enabling them with ease, to subdue their enemies and
surprise their Cities: others Origin. in Number. hom. 16. Futurae vitae statum
denunciat. Hieron. in Eccl. 3. cum de his nos. Dominus in futuro liberaverit.
of the state and condition of Gods elect in the life to come, wherein there
shall be no pain, nor travel; the glorified Saints then Revel. 21.4.
being freed from all grievance, and Rev. 14.13.
resting wholly from their labors. And true it is that the words here used
signify affliction and vexation, as we shall hereafter at large show. But
neither do the versions come exactly home to the Original, nor do the
interpretations of them suit well with Balaams intendements; Nor shall we need
to be over-solicitous about them; because tho admitted, they would not afford
the least color, for the maintenance of that erroneous conceit, that these men
would thence assert. They may serve only to show, that the words have not
anciently, or generally been taken, either in such a sense, the latter, or in
such a latitude of sense, the former, as is now usually given them.

Translations more common
Pass we on therefore to consider of the several interpretations of the words
so read as we have them in our English translations, and as before we have in
part related.

The Bishops Bible.
He beheld no vanity in Jacob, nor saw transgression in Israel.

Or, The Geneva Translation.
He sees none iniquity in Jacob, nor sees no transgression in Israel.

Or, The last Edition.
He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel.

In the exposition hereof Interpreters (none that I have seen, taking them
simply, as they may seem at first reading to sound) distinguish, some of the
object or thing seen; some of the act, the sight, or manner of seeing here
mentioned.

Of the Object, or thing seen, they distinguish two ways.

Exposition. 1.
First, some more strictly taking iniquity and transgression, not for sin in
general, but for one species or particular kind of it only, to wit, idolatry.
So, (as you heard before) both the (...)
Chaldee Paraphrast understands it, and the Idolum, simulacrum.
old Latin translator, whom Lyranus, Lorinus, Ferus, alii.
the Popish commenters most follow; nor do Vict. Strigelius, Mart, Borrha.
Deodat^. and alii.
some of our Protestant writers herein depart from them. This sense some build
on the word used in the former branch, some on that in the latter; some on the
word (...)
Aven in the former branch, translated iniquity. Jo. Wee^se of Law. Moral Com.
2. exerc. 5. attrib. 3. p. 81.
He saw, says a learned Writer of ours, no iniquity in Jacob: that is, no
id^latry. The reason whereof he thus renders. God, as he is, ens entium, is
benum, goodness: Matthew. 19.17.
(none good but God only, having his goodness of himself) but Idols by way
of appropriation are called sin; So Jeremy, Lam. 1.8.
My people have committed a sin; that is, idolatry, and, Exo. 32.22
This people is prone to sin, that is, to idolatry; and in this sense is that
of Siracides to be understood, Eccl. 49.5. Exception 1.
All the Kings of Israel were sinners, except David, Josias, and Ezekias, that
is, they were idolaters. Thus he. wherein some things seem not so sound, not
of so clear truth at least. For first, no one of the places produced, do prove
that for which they are alleged; to wit, that an Idol is in Scripture termed
sin. for no man will expound either those words of Jeremy, Lam. 1.8.
My people have committed an Idol, or those of Aaron to Moses, Exo. 32.21.
This people is prone to an Idol; nor does this Author himself so expound
them: it is true indeed, (which had been a a fitter allegation then any of
these are) that Moses speaking of the golden Calfe says, Deuteronomy. 9.21.
I took your sin, meaning the Calfe they had made; but sin is there put by
Metonymia adjuncti. Pisc.
a metonymie for the object of their sin, Exception 2.
that wherein they had sinned.

Secondly, there is no necessity by sin in those places to understand
idolatry; since that the people there spoken of, both had committed many
hideous and horrible sins besides their idolatries, and were prone to many
other sins as well as to the worships of their Idols: but, Lam. 1.8.
They have si^n^d sin, says Jeremy, that is, Peccatum peccavit. i. graviter
peccavit. Pisc. (...) Chald.
they have greatly and grievously sinned; as David Psalm. 25.11. (...) qamvi^
magnum sit* ut Psalm. 23.4.41 4. Genesis 8.21. Josh. 17.18.
of himself, tho his sin were not such: nor do Aarons Exodus 32.22
words imply any more, but that they were a people (...)
bent unto evil, as the word there is; or sat upon mischeife, as our English
has it: nor need the son of Sirach^ Eccl. 49.5.
words be taken so strictly, but that the Kings of Israel (thereby meaning, not
those of the ten Tribes, so most commonly 1* King. 12.20. and 14, 19. and
15*17. ^ King. 3.1, 4* 5 9, 10, etc. and 5.5, 7, 8, etc.
styled, by a denomination from the greater part; but of I^dah, to whom 1 King.
12.21, 23.
Benjamin still stuck fast, as appears by the Kings he mentions; sometime
also 2 Chronicles. 11 3, and 12.1, and 15.17, and 21.2, 4. and ^9.^1, 24
so termed, by a denomination from the better part) were all grievous
offenders in some one kind or other; those three only excepted: for to say
that the rest of them were all idolaters, were not agreeable to truth* since
that neither 2 Chronicles. 17 6. and 19.4.
Iehoshaphat was an idolater, tho he wanted not 2 Chronicles. 18.1. and 19.2.
his wants and weaknesses; nor 2 Chronicles. 15 8, 16.
Asa, tho he had 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 9, 10, 12. 1 King. 15.18, 19.
his failings and faultings: and that therefore which is said of him, that 1
King. 15.14. 2 Chronicles. 15.17.
tho the high places in his days were not utterly abandoned, yet his heart was
upright with God all his life long; is by good Interpreters understood of his
constancy in retaining and maintaining E^ga Iehovam, i. erga cultum ejus,
quamvis reliquam vitam huic studio non conformaverit. Iun. and Pisc.
Gods true service and worship (not withstanding his other over-sights and
excesses) to the last.

Exception 3.
Thirdly, In this passage of Balaam, there is neither of the words specified in
these two other places neither evil, nor sin: and albeit therefore those other
places were so to be understood as this Author would have; yet would they
hardly come home to give any great strength to the like exposition of the word
here used.

Exception 4.
Fourthly, it is yet true indeed, that the word (...)
Aven here used is sometime given to an Idol. Esaias 66.3.
He that burns incense, says Esaias, as if he blessed (...)
Aven, an Idol. And the word is joined with (...)
Teraphim, which signifies Genesis 31.19, 30. Jud. 17.5. and 1^.14* 18, 24.
Images, (...) 1 Samuel 15.23.
elsewhere* but it seems to be attributed unto them, not so much in regard of
the evil and sinfulness, as in regard of the Vanitatem, J^n. Esai. 66.3. rem^
va^^^ Pi^c*
vanity and nothingnesse of them; which the word also sometime imports, and
some Steuch^^. Tigurina ver^^^. Tindals translation.
here render it. In which regard likewise is the word (...)
shakar given to Idols, which signifies falsehood or a lie; (Is there not a lie
in my right hand?) As they are opposite to the Deity, Esai. 44.20.
non qa bonum, sed qa verum, not as God is good, but as he is true. Jer. 10.10.
The Lord is the (...) De^^ veritas.
true God: says Jeremy, but Jer. 10.14. and 51.17.
the image (whether graven or molten) is (...).
a lie: and they Romans 1.25.
turned the truth of God. (that is, the true God) into (...).
a lie. As for the same cause are Idols also termed (...) Levit. 26.* Psalm.
96.^.
Elilim, as a thing of (...) nihil, res* nihili. Medici nihili. Job. 1^.4.
Pastores nihili. Zech. 11.17. (...) mendacium and res nihili. Ier. 14.14.
naught: and are by the Apostle said to be 1 Cor. 8.4. (...).
nothing in the world. And hence it is, (which shows how this term is
applied unto Idols) that that place which had been formerly called Bethel,
that is, the house of God, in regard of Genesis 28.17 19.22.
Gods appearing there to Jacob, and Genesis 35.^* 6, 7.
Jacobs solemn worshipping of God afterward there; when in process of time it
became infamous for idol-worship by 1 King. 12.28, 29.
the golden Calfe ^^at Jeroboam had there erected; it was in stead of Bethel
styled Hos. ^.15. and 5, 8. and 10, 5
Bethaven, that is, the house of falsehood and vanity; as both the
Chaldee^Paraphrast, and Jairu^, and Camius.
the Jewish Doctors interpret it: and God by Amos threatening the ruin of it,
says, Amos 5.5.
Bethel shall be brought to Aven, that is, as the Chaldee well, it shall be
brought (...) nihilum ut Job. 26.7
to nothing, it shall have no being.

Thus then we have showed and seen, how far forth this sense either may, or
may not; receive footing from the former word here used.

Others assay to infer and enforce it upon the latter word, the word (...)
Amal used in the other clause. This word indeed the Old Latin renders
Simulacru^
an image, and our Tindals Translation.
Old English, idolatry. And those that here would have it understood of idols,
go upon two diverse grounds.

For whereas the word (...)
Amal has a twofold signification, it is sometime taken for labor or work.
Eccles. 2.11
I beheld, says Solomon, all (...)
the labor, wherein I had labored, and, Ec^l. 6.7.
All a man's (...)
labor is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled; or, Tho all a
man's labor Ori ejus obveniat. Jun.
fall out to his own mind, as himself would have it; yet his soul, or his
desire, is not satisfied. Sometime for pain and grief or trouble. Job 7.3.
I have been made to possess (...)
nights of pain, says Job: and Esai. 10.1.
Woe be to those, says Esaias; that enact grief; that is, decrees of grief,
grievous decrees; Some would have this term here given unto Idols, Steuch.
in the former notion, because they are nothing but Opificium.
Workmanship, Ps. 115.4. and ^35.15.
the work of men's hands; others L^rin.
in the latter, because (...) Psalm.16.4.
they bring nothing but pain and grief in the end to their worshippers and
followers; (...)
whereof they have (...)
another name commonly given them in holy Writ. And of that other name indeed
it cannot be denied; for it is almost as frequently found in Psalm. 135.15. and
106.38. ita 18es reperitur.
the one sense, as in Genesis 3.16, 17. and 5.25. ita 19es legitur.
the other. But for the word here used, no place is, nor (I suppose) can be
produced, where it may be fitly so understood.

Exception.
Howbeit, tho it were granted that this latter were sometime used for an idol,
as that the former is, has been showed; yet could not that be the sense of the
words in this place: since that it cannot be said that this people kept free
from (...) and idolatry, while they abode in the wilderness. For, besides that
the story of Exodus 32.6. Psalm. 106.19.
the golden calf evidently evinceth the contrary; and Exodus 32.22.
Aarons words taken with the abovementioned Autors gloss on them, would
further enforce it; God both by Moses and Amos expressly upbraides them
therewith; the one taxing them for Deuteronomy. 32.17.
sacrificing to devils, the other Amos 5.25, 26.
to idols. (which yet comes all to one; for 1 Cor. 10 20
what was offered to idols, was in them offered to devils) not unto God.
Whereby it appears, not only that they were faulty therein, but that God also
so saw it as to take notice of it. That which the sequel of the present
history more fully confirms; where we shall Number. 25.4, 5, 9.
find four and twenty thousand of them at once taken away, for this very sin
of idolatry; partly by an immediate stroke of Gods hand, and partly by
execution of justice done at Gods command upon them. And thus much for the
exposition of those, that restrain to idolatry the sin or iniquity presumed
here to be mentioned.

Exposition 2.
Others so distinguish of the sins which they suppose here meant, in regard of
the nature and q^lity of them; as if it were meant, not that no sin at all
were to be seen in them, but Calvin. Deodate*
no such heinous and grievous sins, as did reign among other people; they
being Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14 2.
an holy people, as whom God had sanctified and set apart to himself; and Romans
11.16.
branches in reputation at least holy, as springing up from an holy root.

Exception.
And true it is indeed, that such they were by external vocation, and by
profession; as also by inward disposition of heart, and in holy life and
conversation, they Levit. 19.^* and ^0.26.
ought to have been. But that they came far short of what they should have
been; yea, were Scimus Israelitas pessimis qibusqe vix suisse meliores. Calvin.
Ezekiel. 5.6, 7.
utterly cross, (for a great, if not the greater part of them) and took
courses clean contrary unto what they professed, and were called to; the
freqent exprobrations and manifold complaints of Moses, and God by Moses and
other his Prophets, twitting them with, and taxing them for, their continual
Deuteronomy. 9.27.
stubbornness, Deuteronomy. 9.7. and 33.3.
rebelliousnesse, Exodus 32.9. and 31.27. Deuteronomy. 9.6, 13.
stiffneckednesse, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
perverseness, crookedness, Psalm. 78.8.
tempting God, Number. 14.22. Psalm 95.9. Psalm 78.40.
provoking him, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
spurning against him, Exodus 16.28. Psalm. 81.11.
shaking off his yoke, Esaias 63.10.
vexing and grieving his holy Spirit; that their Vines were Vines of Sodom, and
their slips slips of Gomorrah, their Grapes, that is, their fruits and works,
gall and bitterness, and the Wine that came of them, the issue and effect of
them, as the poison of Adders, and the cruel venom of Aspes; these, I say,
and the like opprobrious terms by the Spirit of God justly and deservedly
given them, do too evidently evince. Besides, that this their external
condition and profession was so far from lesning and extenuating the guilt of
their sins, or concealing them from Gods sight, that it served rather to
aggravate them, as being found in those, among whom the contrary virtues and
duties ought to have reigned; Deuteronomy. 32.33. ibid. v. 33.
and Certe meliores esse debemus, and hoc utiqe deteriores sumus, si meliores
non sumus, qui meliores esse debemus. Salvian de Provid. lib. 4. cap. 8. Possum
nostr^ and Barbarorum vitia esse paria, and nostra tamen in his vitiis graviora
esse peccata, qia etsi eadem agant, qae nos agimus, nos tamen majore offensione
peccamus. ibid. c. 9. Impugnamus enim professionem nostram moribus nostris, nec
sumus id qod profitemur. ibid. cap. 10.
who having been better taught, and professing better things, might justly
therefore be deemed worse then other, tho they were no worse, yea or not so
bad; because they ought to have been, and might have been, much better. For
which cause also God threatens, the rather Amos 3.2. Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8, 33, 34.
to punish them for their sins before and above other people, whom he had not
known and owned, as he had done them, that is, Psalm 147.19, 20.
whom he had not afforded the like favor unto, nor taken into special
covenant with him.

Nor does this sense therefore satisfy: and that as little, Exposition 3.
that Non esse populum violentiis and injuriis deditum* Calvin.
they were not a people given to injurious and vexatious courses: because
Vocabula hic usurpata, ea iniqitatum genera significant, qae ad ^omines
laedendos, vel ad nocendum and damnum cum injuri^ inferendum cum tendunt. Idem.
such kind of sins the words here used imp^y: (and indeed they so do, as shall
hereafter appear) for that they were not free from such sins also as these,
yea rather that such abuses also abounded among them, Exception.
some of the Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33.
passages above-recited do as clearly prove, as the like Esaias 59.5, 6.
expressions (...), used by the Prophet Esaias, concerning those of his times.

Exposition 4.
That which Abraham Ezrae filius.
one of the Jewish teachers has, were more probable, if the Text would admit
it; who knitting this passage with the foregoing Verse. 19.
proposition, makes this to be the meaning of Balaams words here, that God
would not repent him of protecting them and going along with them, so long as
he saw them not break out into some outrageous evil. Which, if he should see
them do, he would not be with them, as formerly he had been. And refers us
for the proof hereof to that passage in Jeremy, where God tells the Prophet,
that as Ierem. 18.7, 8.
upon a peoples repentance he would repent him of the evil that he had
threatened to inflict on them, when they sinned; so on the other side Ibid. v.
9, 10.
upon a peoples revolt or relapse, he would repent himself of the good that he
had promised to do them, while they continued in a godly course. Withal Aben
Ezrae ib.
adding, that this very speech of Balaam gave Balak an hint to attempt what
Number: 25.1, 2. and 31.16.
afterward he did, to draw the children of Israel to fornication and idolatry.
And it is true indeed, that albeit the people were never without sin, (for 1
Kings 8.46 Eccles. 7.20. (...). Clem. paedag. l. 1. cap. 2. (...) Exception.
(...). Crates Laert.
who ever is?) nor without much sin the most of them, (for Matthew. 17.13, 14.
(...). Eurip. Iph. Taur. (...). Chrysostom. in Romans orat. 9. (...). Clem. strom.
lib. 1. (...). plures mali. Bi^^. Auson. lud. (...), Plut. de orac. cess. Major
ubique pars vincit meliorem. Livius l. Haec pars major est: ideo pejor. nunquam
enim tam been cum rebus humanis actum est, ut meliora pluribus placerent. Sen.
de vit. beat. c. 2.
the greater part, even every where is generally the worse) yet God did not
usually proceed in any severe course of exemplary execution upon them, but upon
some very heinous and notorious excess. But the Rabbines analysis of the Text
here, as often elsewhere, seems not so natural; nor will the sense he gives be
made up out of the words without some unnecessary supplies.

Hitherto then we have considered the expositions of those who distinguish of
the object or the thing seen.

Others distinguish of the act, of the sight, or manner of seeing.

God, say some, s^eth not, that is, Exposition 5.
Non videt, ut austere nimis vindicet, ut in maledictionem imputet, ut pro
meritis ufciscatur. Pelican. Annotat. on Tindals Translat.
does not so see any sin in them, as Neque patitur eum deleri, utu^ illud
commer^atur. Pisc.
to destroy them for it, or to give way to any that should endeavor so to do.
That which was Balaks intent in hiring Balaam to curse them; and was Gods
purpose concerning those people whom he cast out before them.

And indeed true it is, that Psalm. 106.26, 27. Nec poena semper, sed
poenitentia saepius contentus esse. Tacit. in Agri.
God, tho they provoked him full often thereunto, and gave him just occasion so
to do, yet did not deal with them according to their due desert, nor destroy
them utterly, as he justly might have done, and sometime Deuteronomy. 9.19.
threatened to do; but in much mercy forbear them, upon Psalm 106.23.
Moses his intercession, and their own, (tho many times Psalm. 78.34*38.
not sincere, but self-seeking only) humiliation.

But this seems not to be the thing by Balaam, Exception.
or Gods Spirit speaking by Balaams tongue here, intended. For, besides that
God did see and take notice of their excesses, Psalm. 99.8. Cum ultionem sumeres
de actionibus eorum in gravissimis offensionibus, intercedente Mose and
sacerdotio Levitico, condonan^ parcensqu^ populo. Jun.
to take vengeance on them for the same; by Number. 11.1, 33 and 16.47, 49.
destroying whole multitudes of them: it neither sorteth well with the words,
as they are above rendered, that imply no sight, or taking notice at all of any
sin in that people; nor with the scope of Balaam, which seems to be Number.
23.21, 24.
the setting out of the goodly, glorious, potent, and impregnable condition of
that people, as having God himself residing as their Sovereign in the midst
of them, and as with great state and pomp, as Commander in chief, conducting
them and marching along with them; so protecting them against all the might and
malice of their adversaries enabling them to prevail against them, and rendering
them succesfull and victorious in all their undertakings. Now what commendation
were it of a people, or how suitable hereunto, to say, that tho they be never so
bad or debauched, yet God does not so see, or take notice of their loose and
loud courses, as to destroy them utterly for the same?

The like exception lies against that other exposition of some others, that
God is said not to see or behold their sins, Exposition 6.
Respondent qid^m, non conspici, qi^ Deus non imputat. Calvin.
because he does not impute them unto them but Non imputat in suis, sed (...)
per gratiam. Pelican, tegit, remittit, purgat. Jun. cond^^^^. Pisc. (...)
fidelis, sed st^^im con^^^tur ei p^c^^^um. V^t^bl.
does hide them, remit them, and wash them away in, and for Christ.
Understanding them of the better sort of the people, the godly and faithful
among them, the John 1.47.
true Israel, the Gal. 6.16.
Israel of God, only.

And true it is indeed, that in ordinary speech we use to say, that a man will
not know or see that, Posthac etiam illud, qod ^cies, nesciveris; Ne videris,
qod videris. Plaut. Mil. 2.6. Tu pol, si sapis, qod scis, nescis. Ter. Eun.
4.4. Nescias qod scis; si sapis. Idem Heaut. 4.4. Proverbiale est. Donat.
which he refuses to take notice, or will not be acknown of. Nor is it less
true, that when God upon man's repentance has remitted sin, he does no more
regard it, so as to alienate his fatherly affection from the party now
repentant, or to cast him off and condemn him for the same, then Ezekiel. 10.6.
as if he had never seen it, or taken notice of it, or been incensed against
him, or displeased with him for it. In which sense also he is said, where he
forgives sin, to Esaias 43.5. Jerem. 31.34.
forget it; that is, no more to regard, in the respects beforementioned, what
has been done amiss by his people upon their repentance, then as if he had
forgotten it, yea then as if it Etiam si qod factum est, infectum esse non
potest; Deo tamen, non imputante, sic erit, qasi non fuerit. Bem. in Annu. Ser.
1.
never had been either done by them, or known to him. To which purpose is that
speech of Hieron. nom. in Psalm. 31.
one of the ancients, writing on those words of the Psalmist, Psalm 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is remitted, or (...) Levatus Iun. sublatus.
Pisc.
removed, and whose sin is covered; (to which may be adjoined that parallel
place, Psalm 85.2.
Thou had remitted the iniquity of thy people, thou had covered all their
sin.) Quod tegitur, non videtur; quod non videtur, non imputatur: qod non
imputatur, non punietur.
What is covered, is not seen: what is not seen, is not imputed: what is not
imputed, shall not be punished. As also of Augustine in Psalm. 31.
another to the like effect on the same place, Si voluit tegere, noluit videre;
si noluit videre, noluit advertere: si noluit advertere, noluit animadvertere:
noluit agnoscere; maluit ignoscere.
What God is willing to hide, he is unwilling to see: what ^e is unwilling to
see, he is unwilling to mind: what he is unwilling to mind, he is unwilling to
censure. He is not willing to take notice; more willing to wink at, to pass
by, and pardon. All which is most true, and may from those passages of
Scripture be averred, as well of the faithful that lived before Christ's
coming in the flesh, (...). Pisc.
as of those that live in these days: and no way therefore furthereth or
favors the Antinomian conceit.

Exceptio.
But yet, besides that so to expound the word here, considering the maine drift
and scope of the wisards speech, would, as Calvi^ observes well upon the place,
afford but Dilute resp^n^dem. Calvin.
a flashy sense: the parties here spoken of under the names of Jacob and
Israel, are not the better sort alone, or the faithful ones only, tho more
especially indeed, and most principally they; but Number. 22.4, 5, 6.
the main body of the people that came out of Egypt, and were now on their
march toward the promised Land; and whom Balak was afraid of, and hired
Balaam to curse.

However therefore some of these expositions of this Scripture, (to say nothing
of the rest) are much more probable then that, which these corrupt teachers
would fasten upon it, and were consequently enough to stop their mouths: (for
if but as probable an exposition, as theirs is, can be produced, it is enough
to show, that it is not of necessity so to be taken as they require) yet
because some just exception may be taken unto each of them, as has already in
part been showed; I shall in the next place proceed to lay down what I conceive
to be the true and genuin sense of the words; Part 3.
and then further endeavor by collation of other Scriptures, both to clear,
and to confirm the same.

The Text sounds word for word thus from the Original,

He has not beheld wrong against Jacob; nor has he seen grievance against
Israel.

And may more fully and familiarly to an English ear be thus rendered,

He has not beheld, or, he does not, or will not behold wrong offered to
Jacob; nor has he seen, or nor does he, or will he see, grievance done to
Israel.

For the further opening and strengthening hereof, we shall consider these four
things: 1. What the words (...)
Aven, and (...)
Amal here used do signify. 2. Who the Jacob and Israel here spoken of, are.
3. How the particle beth prefixed and affixed to those two proper names, may be
here taken. 4. What manner of sight it is, that is here intimated.


For the first of these, the words Aven and Amal here used, Considerat. 1.
do neither of them, either properly or generally signify sin, but the
former of them does properly signify affliction, and iniquity (as it is
usually translated) or Wrong of wr^ng.
wrong rather, (for there is (...) (...)
another word that more properly answers to in^quity) as it is a means of
affliction to the wronged, as that which causes them by putting them to pain)
(...) ab (...) dolere, lugere. Esaias 3.26. and 19.8. Lam. 3.39. Hos. 9.4.
to mourn and lament. The latter signifies labor, travel, trouble,
grievance, vexation* nor is ever found taken simply for sin.

The common use of the words to be such as is said, may by these places appear.

1. For the proper and native sense of them. Job 5.6, 7.
Affliction, (...)
says Eliphaz, comes not forth of the dust: neither does trouble, (...)
or grievance spring out of the ground; but man is born (...)
to trouble. not to labor; (tho that also be Genesis 2.15. and 3.23. (...).
Antonin. Imp. l. 8. 19. (...); Idem l. 5.91. Videatur Aristot. Ethic. l. 10 c.
6. Neque enim ita genera^i a natura sumus, ut ad ludum jocumque facti esse
videamur, sed ad severitatem potius, and ad qae dam studia graviora atque
majora. Cic. offic. lib. 1. Homo ad laborem natus est, non ad honorem. Bern. de
consid. lib. 2.
true; and the word sometime also Eccles. 2.10, 18, 19, 20. and 4.4. and 6.7.
Psalm 105.44. Esaias 53* 11.
so signify) but (...). Eurip. Iphig. Aulid. (...). Idem Thyest. (...). Soph.
Mysis. Stob. c. 98. (...). Phalar. ep. 144.
to trouble; by Asaph called therefore the trouble of man in his present
calamitous condition, where he says of the wicked that seemed exempt from it,
Psalm: 73.5.
They are not in (...)
the trouble of Enosh nor are they plagued with Adam. That is, they have not
their share in those troubles that mortal men are subject to, nor in those
plagues that men ordinarily endure. And, Psalm 90.10.
the days of our years, says Moses, are threescore and ten years; and if by
reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and
sorrow. Or, as the words may well be translated, the days of our years make
up, or consist of, threescore and ten years; or with the strongest of
fourscore: but the very (...) excellentia, Jun. superbia, Pisc. potentia. inde
Rahab Aegyptus a superbia and potentia sic dicta. Psalm. 87.4. and 89.10. Esaias*
51.9.
pride (or prime) of them, (when they are at the best) is but labor and
sorrow; or trouble and travel. Hence those complaints of Job and Jeremy in
some fits of impatience; the one wishing that he had never been born, or had
perished in the birth, that Job 3.10. (...)
sorrow ot grievance might have been hidden from his eyes; that he might never
have come to see it: The other bemoaning himself that ever he was born, Ier^m.
20.18. (...)
to see labor and sorrow; or vexation and affliction. So Solomon, Prove. 12.21.
There shall no evil, or, no (...)
affliction rather, (for it is not the evil of sin that is there spoken of)
befall the just: but the wicked shall be filled with (...)
evil, or mischief. They shall have their fill of that, which the other shall
be freed from. Yea so may we well translate that of Esaias, Esaias 1.13.
Your calling of solemn meetings I cannot endure; it is (...) id enim (...) vox
affinis significat Psalm. 107.39. Esaias 53.8. vox ipsa est (...).
affliction and vexation to m^. And David, Psalm 25.18. (...)
Behold mine affliction and my pain, or my grievance.

2. For the figurative and metaphorical acception of them. Job 4.8. (...)
The ploughers of iniquity, or wrong, says Eliphaz, (those that plough it, or
plough for it) and (...)
the sowers of trouble, (wickedness, says our English) they that sow it for
others, reap the same. Those that deal wrongfully, and thereby procure trouble
to others are paid in their own coin; that through Gods judgment is repaid to
them, that they have been autors of to others. As Solomon, Prove. 22.8.
He that sows (...)
wickedness, shall reap (...)
affliction. Affliction, or vexation, I say, with good autors, rather then
vanity: and so it may well be translated in that of Eliphaz also. And again,
Job 15.35.
They conceive (...)
mischief, (so our English) or grievance, Molestiam. Iun. Piscat. calamitatem.
Tigurin. infortunium. Castle. Qui aliis molestiam creat, ipse qoqe molestia
afficietur. Pisc.
and bring forth (...)
wrong, or iniquity; (our English, vanity) and their belly prepares deceit. He
compares wicked men to a teeming woman, that is always breeding, never
without a great belly. They are continually, says Eliphaz, contriving of some
mischievous plot, and producing of some wrongful design, and going great with
some fraudulent device or other: no sooner delivered of one, but projecting
another. Where why I rather translate Aven wrong, or iniquity, then vanity,
besides the course of the context, and the use so frequent in that common
phrase of (...) Job 34.5.22. Psalm 5.5. and 6.8. and 144. and 28.3. and 36.12.
and 64.2. and 92.7, 9. and 94.4, 16, etc. Esaias 59.4.
workers of iniquity, or wrong-doers, (for it is nothing else) parallel places
speak for it. For so the Prophet Esaias pursuing the same metaphore, and
retaining the same words, (r) They conceive (...)
mischief, or grievance; and bring forth (...)
iniquity, or wrong. And the Psalmist, Psalm 7.14.
Behold, he travelleth with (...)
iniquity, or wrong; and has conceived (...)
mischief, or grievance; and brought forth (...)
falsehood. he is delivered of some false and fraudulent business; as the word
is Exodus 23.7.
elsewhere used. some deceit, as Eliphaz Job 15.35.
before. or, but he shall bring forth falsehood, or aly. Frustrabitur spe sua
atque conatu. Pisc.
He shall fail of his purpose, his expectation shall be frustrate. Again, of
the like (...) person, ^
His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit, and fraud: (...) his tongue is ^
mischief, or grievance; and vanity; or, iniquity and wrong rather, the very
words here used. And again, where the latter of them, ^
the words of his mouth are ^
mischief and fraud. And yet again, speaking of a wicked State given to
oppression, ^
J have seen violence and strife in the City; ^
mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it. Where the former word is
translated mischief, as the latter was before. As also V^s 3.
in the same Psalm, where we have it thus rendered, they (...)
cast (...) vanitatem, falsitatem. perfide mecum agunt. Camius.
iniquity upon me. as if the meaning were, that Obtrudunt* iniquitatem mihi.
Leo Jad. i. imputant. Vatab. comminiscuntur in me crimen. ita Chald. and Jairus.
they wrongfully charged him with some crime. which Calvin justly censureth as
Argutum nimis, and a contextu dissentaneum.
a nicety, not well agreeing with the context. others rather translate it,
Devolvunt in me afflictionem. Pisc.
they throw down affliction upon me. Calvin, and Moller.
by injurious, vexatious and pernicious courses, seeking to work mine
overthrow. as Deodat.
alluding to a siege, wherein the besieged are wont to throw down on the
besiegers, stones, and dirt, and logs* and firebrarnds, and whatsoever else may
destroy, or annoy them.

Lastly, to heap up no more places, tho many more might be; that of Esaias shall
close up all; where he denounces a Esaias 10*1.
woe against those rulers that (...)
enact decrees of wrong, that is, unjust and wrongful; or, of affliction, that
is, afflicting and vexing, decrees; and that write (...) molestiam, pro
decretis molestis. vel decreta molestiae. (...).
grief, or grievance, decrees of grievance, grievous ones, such as are made of
purpose to vex and molest poor people. By these p^aces then it does evidently
appear, what the usual and constant signification is of the two terms here
used. Which Calvin also does accordingly observe to signify Qae ad alios
laedendos tendunt C^lvin. Considerat. 2.
such kinds of iniquity or evil doing as do tend to the wronging and hurting,
or molesting and vexing of others.

The second thing to be considered, is who they be that are here styled Jacob
and Israel.

Where first, that by Jacob and Israel is not meant the Patriark himself who
was at first Genesis 25.26.
named Jacob, because at his coming into the world, like a cunning runner or
wrestler, as he followed his brother, who had got the start of him, close at
the heels, so he caught him and held him fast by the heel, as intending to
supplant him, and recover ground of him: which in process of time also
accordingly he did, as Hos. 12.3.
the Prophet intimates, and Genesis 27.36
his brother supplanted by him comp^aineth: and was afterward, upon his
wrestling with the Angel, and by a godly and Grata Deo vis haec. Tertull.
apolog. c.
grateful kind of violence, prevailing over him, Genesis 32.28
new named, and in stead of Jacob styled Israel, by the Angel, Hos. 12.3.
whom he had so strived and struggled with, at their parting: that not the
Patriark himself, I say, who bare both those names, and is indifferently called
by either, is here meant; but his issue and posterity, called sometime, Psalm.
77.15.
the sons, and Psalm. 105.6
the seed of Jacob, sometime Psalm. 148.14.
the sons, and Esaias 45.25
the seed of Israel, and sometime Number. 23.7.23. and 24.5.17. Esaias 9.8 and 27.6.
and 40.27* and 4^.8. and 42.24. and 43 1. and 44.23 and 45.4.
Jacob and Israel simply, as in this place, so elsewhere, there is no doubt
made, nor is it denied by any.

But secondly whether the whole body of that people, then abiding in the
wilderness, or some special part of them only, be here understood, may be
and is by some questioned. And that the rather, because the Apostle, when he
says, that Rom* 9.6.
they are not all Israel that are of Israel; as also elsewhere, by way of
eminency, tearming some Gal. 6.16.
the Jsrael of God; does thereby seem to imply, that there is a twofold Israel;
John 1.47.
a true and genuine, and Rev. 2.9. and 3.9.
a counterfeit and bastardly Israel: an Israel according to man, and an Israel
according to God; an 1 Cor. 10.18
Israel after the flesh, and an Romans 2.29. Phil. 3.3.
Israel after the spirit. Now some restrain to the former only, what is here
spoken, and make it to be either a privilege of such alone as were holy and
upright in that people, or a prophecy of the faithful that should live in
these times.

But this, as in part we have formerly showed, is groundless; yea, is directly
against, both the course of the story, and the current of the context.

For first, the Israel here spoken of is said to be Number. 23.22 and 24.8.
the Israel, that God brought out of Egypt. But it was the main body of the
people, that was thence brought forth, consisting as well of unfaithful as
faithful, as well of those Number. 14.29, 32.
whose carcasses for their disobedience and rebellions fell in the Wilderness,
as of those, who Deuteronomy. 4.3, 4 Jud. 5. 1 Cor. 10.5. Deuteronomy. 2.14.16.
continuing steadfast in covenant with God, either Number. 27.3.
deceased by the way, or Number. 14.24 30.
entered into the land of promise.

2. They are those whom Balak hired Balaam to curse. But those that he hired
him to curse, was the main body of that people, Number. 22.4 6. Josh. 24.9. Deuteronomy.
23.4.
which he feared, by their multitude would lick up and wast the wealth of his
land, as a drove of Oxen licketh up grass, and depastureth a ground.

3. They are those that Number. 23.13, 24 and 24.2, 5, 6.
Balaam beheld when he uttred these words* but Balaam beheld them under no
other notion but as a numerous and powerful people, encamping and marching
under Gods conduct and safeguard; not distinguishing between them in regard of
any inward disposition, which his eye was not able to discry.

4. The Israel here mentioned, is that Israel, Number. 23.23
against which Balaam by no sorcery or enchantment was able to prevail. But it
was the mixed body consisting of both sorts, which by no sorcery or such like
evil art he was able any way to impeach.

Of the main body therefore of the Israelites, which came out of Egypt, were at
present encamped on the confines of Moab, whom Balak being afraid of, hired
Balaam to curse, and whom Balaam beheld, but durst not curse, nor by any of his
divelish arts was able to do ought against, it is apparent that Balaam under
the names of Jacob and Israel here speaks.

Consideration 3.
The third question is concerning the signification of the particle beth before
the names of Jacob and Israel prefixed, and affixed thereunto.

It is usually indeed taken subjective, as denoting the subject of some
attribute. As when it is said by the Psalmist; Psalm. 139.23, 24.
Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: and see if
there be any wicked way in me. And, Psalm. 7.3.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands. And,
Ier. 23.13.
I have seen, says God by Jeremy, folly in the Prophets of Samaria. and,
Ibid. v. 14.
I have seen also an horrible thing in the Prophets of Jerusalem, and so the
most Interpreters here understand it.

But it is taken also sometime objective; as denoting the object, or matter,
whereabout something is employed; as Genesis 37.4.8, 11.
Joseph was the object of his brethrens envy; 1 Samuel 24.14. and 26.18, 20
David the object of Saul's cruel persecution; Job 1.12. and 2.6, 7.
Job the object of the Devils malice, and the like. Thus is this particle also
frequently used: as where it is said, Exodus 14.25.
God fights against (...)
Egypt for Israel; that is, against the Egyptians* for the Israelites. And,
Exo. 20.16
Thou shall not bear fals-witnesse (...)
against thy neighbor. And, Number. 12 1
Miriam and Aaron spoke (...)
against Moses. And Esaias 21.13
The burden upon Arabia. or, A burdensome prophecy (...)
against Arabia. And in the Psalm, Psalm. 119.133.
Direct my steps in thy word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
or, Gressus meos firma. Pisc.
Confirm, and strengthen, my steppings according to thy word; (that is, As
verse* 38.76.123.
thy promise) and Ne des potestatem in me ulli iniqitati.
let no iniquity prevail (...)
against me; or, Sicut Number. 23.19* and mentietur, and poenitebit; pro, u^
mentiatur, ut poeniteat. Josh. 24.9. and bellavit, pro, ut bell^ret. Psalm.
14^.7. and si Simili^ ero, pro, ne simili^ sim* Mal. 1.9. and miscrebitur, pro*
ut misereatur.
that no iniquity prevail against me. no iniquity, that is, no injurious
course of any mine enemies and opposites. or no iniquity or wrongful dealing,
for, no injurious and wrongful dealers, as pride, for proud men, in those
words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 36.11.
Let not the foot of pride reach me; nor the hand of the wicked stir me. And
as in those words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.4.
Ye have not yet resisted unto blood striving against sin. (...)^
against sin, that is, (as Piscat. and alii.
Interpreters of good note) either against the wickenesse of the enemies of the
Gospel, who by cruel and bloody courses strive to force men from the faith: or
against sin, that is* against (...)^ verse 3.
sinners; such wicked ones, as he had spoken of in the verse next beforegoing.
and that the Psalmists words are so to be taken, and understood; not of his
own, but of other men's iniquity, the very next words evidently show, where he
says, Psalm. 119.134.
Deliver me from the oppressions of men. As also that of the Apostle may well
be understood, 2 Timothy 4.18
The Lord will deliver me from every evil work. not that might be committed by
him, but that by wicked men might be plotted, or attempted against him. The
like may be said of those words of the Psalmist, where he says, Psalm. 49.5.
Why should I fear in the day of evil, (or, why should I be afraid in the
time of As Eccl. 9.12. and 12.1. Mat* 6.34.
adversity) when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? that is,
(as the most judicious Calvin. Moller*
Interpreters understand it) when wicked men Cant. 1.8.
that trace me, pursuing me close at the heels, or Ps. 56.6.
observing my heels that is, my steppings* and seek to supplant me, do on every
side beset me. So do also the Greek Interpreters, and the Latin, that follow
them, understand Ps. 65.3^.
that place in the Psalm where we read, Last Editi.
iniquities prevail, or Geneva B^b^e, praeva^uerunt. Lat.
have prevailed, against me. Taking iniquities, or wickednesses, for (...),
Greek. verba iniqorum. Lat.
unjust, or wicked men. The words are, word for word, (...) verba i^iqitatum.
words of iniquities. But words seem there, as often (...) (...) negotium
jejuniorum. Est 9.30. and v. 31. (...) res, sive neg^tium dierum, seu festi,
sortium, and Jer. 14.1. (...) res, sive negotium, cohibitionum, pluviae scil.
elsewhere, to be put for things. Nor is it needful indeed that iniquities
there be taken for unrighteous men. Howbeit the iniquities there spoken of
seem, not David's own, but his adversaries, not committed by him, but Impiis and
iniqis hominibus servire coger. Theodoret.
practiced by his enemies against him; whose unjust courses, albeit they had
sometime prevailed to the molestation and vexation of himself and of Gods
people, Abr. Esdrai.
in whose person he there speaks; yet God upon their serious seeking to him,
Tu eis ignosces peccatis, propter qae nos effecti sumus captivi, unde etiam
liberabis nos. Euthym. ego tamen de liberatione praeterita malim intelligere,
ex contextus serie, qam de futura. de exhibita jam, qam de expectata and
exhibenda. Temporum enallage est freqentissima.
had been propitious to them, in remitting their sins, which had given their
adversaries such power against them, and vouchsafing them deliverance from
them. And I shall make bold to propound it only and so leave it, to be weighed
and deemed by better judgments, whether in that passage of the Psalmist if it
be applied unto Christ, Psalm. 40.1^.
Evils without number (...) circumdederunt super me, non ad latus omne tantum
obsident, sed capiti etiam incumbunt. Calvin. circundantia invadunt me, Jun.
assail me on every side; they have so fastened upon me, that I am not able
Suspicere. verse. Anglic.
to look up, (they Lam. 1.14. Luke 13.11.
press me down in that manner;) or, that I cannot Di^picere. Jun. videre.
Tigur. Vet. Lat.
see, (mine Psalm. 6.7. and 38.10. Lam. 5.17.
eyesight through grief, and faintness failing me;) or, cannot Prospicere.
Psalm. 119.123. and 142.4.
look out, look about me, for means of escape or relief; (being as one at his
Psal^ 107.27.
wits end;) they are Psalm. 69.4.
more in number then the hairs of mine head: Et relinqit me cor meum. incido
in deliqium animi. Pisc. et, pro, adeo ut, Jer. 14.19.
in so much that my heart fails me. Whether, I say, in this passage, those
words, mine iniquities, or my wrongs* may not thus also be understood; not of
inquities, or wrongs committed by him, but of as Psalm. 65.3.
iniquities, or wrongs done unto him. I am not ignorant, that there is no
necessity of expounding them of Christ, albeit some passages in that Psalm be
applied unto him: since that Psalm. 41 9. ad Judam and Christum transfertur. cum
tamen qae verse. 8. dicuntur, in Christum competere nequeam. (...). Athanas. de
incarn. verb. nec qod verse. 4* peccavi in te, qu^ Christus peccatum non no^it*
2 Cor. 5.21. i. nec contracerit, nec fecerit. Bern. i^ Cant. 1. Joan. 3.5. Sed
nec qae Psalm. 22.2. licet multa ibi de Christi perpessionibus habeantur. Joan.
10.^^.
it is not necessary that every particular be understood of him in those
Psalms, wherein some typical prophecies of him and his sufferings are found;
and I know that other sound and probable Iniqitate^. i. poenae, ex collatione
membri praecedentis. Pisc. ut Genesis 4.13. Iun. Sic. 1 Samuel 28.10.
expositions are given of them, by others, who understand them as spoken in the
person of Christ. One thing I am sure of, that those grossly abuse them, who
taking their rise from Luthers Luther in Gal. c. 3. edit. Franco^ 156 3. p.
4^3.456.
application of them, with some harsh expressions, unto Christ, strain them so
far, as to dissuade Christian people from troubling themselves about confession
of their sins, as being Mr. Simson preaching o^ that Text.
enough for them to believe, that Christ here has confessed them for them
already. But not to insist on this* being not so clear, or certain, as those
others are before alleged: As in those places the iniquity mentioned, is not
subjectively, but objectively theirs that complain of it, and desire either
protection against it, or deliverance from it: so the wrong and grievance of
Jacob and Israel by Balaam here spoken of, seems to be, not that which they
had, or did exercise on others, but that which by others was, or might be
exercised on them. such (...) Sicut (...) Deuteronomy. 26.7. molestiam, sive miseria^
nostra^, non q^ alios afficiebamus, sed qa ab aliis afficiebamur ipsi.
grievance, or grievous misery, or vexation of Israel, as Iud. 10.16. and verse.
7.8.
God is said to have been grieved for, when the Philistines and the Ammonites
sometime sorely oppressed them.

Thus then I suppose the particle beth here to be used: as also without it, in
a kind of defective speech, words either the same, or the like to these here
used, appear oft-times to be of necessity understood. As where Sara being
despised by her handmaid Hagar, says to Abraham her husband, Genesis 16.5. (...)
My wrong (not done by me, but done to me, by my servant) be upon thee. Where
Gods people of the Babylonians, by whose cruel oppression they had endured
much misery, Ier. 51.35. (...)
My violence (that is, as our English well) The violence done to me, be upon
Babel. Let the guilt of it lie heavy on them, and from God be avenged with
them. And where Rebekkah to her son Jacob, when he was fearful of incurring
his fathers curse, Genesis 27.13. (...)
Upon me be thy curse. Not the curse wherewith he should or might curse any,
but the curse wherewith he feared his father might curse him, for attempting to
beguile him; let the curse, if any shall be by the father darted at thee, light
upon me, let me bear the burden of it. But here the particle is expressed,
which in these latter forms is concealed; and which I am the rather induced
thus to take here, because I find it within a verse or two by Balaam himself so
used: where howsoever the Greek and the Vulgate Latin, (which the Hugo, Lyra,
Oleast. alii.
Popish writers, and some of Tindals Translation. Bishops Bible. Geneva Trans.
ours also have formerly followed) taking this particle in the former sense,
read the words thus, There is no sorcery in Jacob; nor soothsaying in Israel.
Yet the Calvin. Jun. Piscat.
later and sounder writers, upon more sedulous and exact consideration, (and as
the (...). Eurip.
latter thoughts are usually the more advised; so the Qo juniores, eo
perspicaciores. Salmeron.
later Interpreters are generally the quicker-sighted) take the particle (as I
here also do) in the latter sense, thus rendering the text, The Kings edition.
There is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against
Israel. and in like manner here, no iniquity or wrong done to Jacob, nor
grievance, molestation, or vexation offered to Israel; either projected and
plotted, or attempted and practiced against him, that God can endure to s^.
Consider. 4.


And this leads me on to the fourth question, to wit, what sight, or manner
of seeing it is, that Balaam here speaks of.

There is therefore Lombard sent. l. 1 did. 36. c. 3. and Durand. ibid. qaest.
1.
a twofold sight, as with man, so with God: to speak of him 1 Cor. 15.32.
(...). Romans 6.19.
as humane capacity is able to conceive the things of God, and to utter them in
such language as our infirmity will affoard.

There is first, Visio* contemplationis, sive considerationis.
a vision or sight of simple contemplation or consideration; whereby God
vieweth and takes notice of all things in the world, and among the rest, of
all men, and of all men's actions, good and bad. For, Psalm. 113, 5.6.
tho God dwell on high; yet he stoopeth so low, as to behold and take notice of
the things that are and are done, not in heaven only, but on earth also. Job
28.24.
He beholds the ends of the earth, Sub omnibus coelis. Iun. Sub coelo toto.
Castle.
and sees all that is under any part of heaven. And there is Prove. 15.3.
an eye of God in every place, beholding both the good and the bad. For Psalm.
33.13.15.
the Lord looks down from heaven, and beholds all the sons of men: from his
dwelling place he viewes all that dwell on the earth: and as he framed (...)
Pariter. ut Job. 31.38. Psalm. 49.10.
alike the souls of each of them, (as well of one as of another) so he
considers all their works. Job 34.21, 22. Et videus neqitiam, non
considera^et? Iun. verti tamen potest, et videret injuriam, sive vexationem,
nec animadverteret? impunitam videre sustineret?
His eyes are upon all the ways of men; and he vieweth all their goings: he
sees every step they take: and there is no darkness, nor deadly shade,
wherein wrong-doers can be sheltered and concealed from his sight. Of such a
sight therefore the words of seeing and beholding here cannot be understood.
For thus Job 11.11. (...)
he sees wickedness, or wrong, and considers it too, says Eliphaz: and,
Psalm. 10.14. (...)
he beholds mischief* or grievance, and spite, says the Psalmist. And that
then especially, when it is done to those that are more peculiarly his: Evod.
3.7. Acts 7.34.
I have seeing seen, I have certainly, considerately, wistfully seen, the
affliction of my people; says God to Moses, when they suffered so much in
Egypt. and as he sees it, so he takes notice of it, and takes it to heart.
Eccles. 5.8.
If thou see, says Solomon, oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a Province; marvel not at the matter, (be not
troubled so much about it, as if there were no redress for it) for he that is
Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. Horat.
car^^. l. 3. od. 1. Omne sub regno graviore regnum est. Sen. Thyest. 3.3. Nil
ita sublime est, -- Non sit ut inferius, suppositumqe Deo. Ovid. Trist. l. 4.
and 7.
higher then the highest of observes it, (to wit, God; by Job styled the Job
7.20. (...) Custos hominum qi instar custodis observas qid agant homines, ita
ut te nescio nihil boni vel mali agere possint. Pisce Visio comprobationis and
complacentiae.
observer of men) and there Trinitatis insinuatio. ut Josh. 24.29. Psalm. 58.11.
be higher then they: who therefore both can and will call them to account.

2. There is Genesis 7.1.
a vision of comprobation and complacency, wherewith God is said so to see
things, that withal he approves and likes well of them. Thus says God to
Noah, Genesis 7.1.
Thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation. when looking upon the
whole world besides, Genesis 6.7, 11, 12.
he saw it all corrupt, and full of wickedness. and Esaias 38.5.
I have seen thy tears; says God to Ezekiah: I have beheld them with
acceptance. and, Esaias 66.2.
I will look unto him, that is poor, or lowly, and of a contrite spirit, and
that trembles at my word. to approve his person* and accept his service. So on
the other side in the Lamentations of Jeremy, Lam. 3.34.36.
For one to crush prisoners under his feet; to turn aside, or, Esaias 10.2. Prove.
18.5.
overthrow a man's right before the face of the most high; and to subvert a man
in his cause, the Lord Dominus ignoravit. Vetu^ Lat. non novit. Leo Jud* non
vidit. i. ne cogitavit qidem. Vatabl. non aspicit. Psalm. 10.11.13. Esaias 40 27.
and 49.14. Calvin.
sees it not; that is, the Lord Last Translat. non probat. Vatabl. Jun.
delights not in it. Geneva not.
approves not of it. tho some reading the words by way of interrogation,
understand it rather as spoken in the former fense, and of the former sight,
Non videret? Pisc. malim, non videt? et sic Deodat.
Does not God see it? But so, without all question, in a place parallel to
this: where the Prophet, as he complains to God, that Habb. 1.3. (...)
he had made him to see wrong, and (as the words are almost generally Facis ut
aspiciam. Leo Iud. facis ut intuear. Jun. Pisc. reliqi fere omnes.
rendered) caused him to behold grievance; (the very terms by Balaam here used)
in the former sense: So he affirms of God, that Habb. 1.3.
he is of purer eyes (...) Praevidere malum. ut Genesis 27 1. Psalm. 69.23.
then to see evil: and that (...)
he cannot behold, or look on, vexation, or grievance. that is, he is one, that
cannot endure to see or behold it, but with detestation and dislike. and by way
of expostulation therefore, he demands of him, Habb. 1, 3.
why he himself Afflictionem aspicis. i. sustines videre, cum punire debeas.
Vatabl. laborem aspicis. Verbum (...) pro facere ut intueatur qis, nusqam
reperitur. Drus.
beholds grievance: for so indeed the words would be read* and some render
them aright: and Psalm. 10.14. Habb. 1.3.
do thou, or will thou, behold grievance? or, Cum aspicias. Drus. vel, dum
aspicis. ut Jer. 34.1. Mar. 15.25.
while thou thy self beholdest the grievances, Hab. 1.13.
that the godly sustain at the hands of the wicked: as they elsewhere, Esaias
26.17.
we have been afflicted so and so, in thy sight. and again; as Ester sometime
to Assuerus, Ester. 8.6.
How can I endure to see the evil of my people, and the destruction of my
kindred? so Hab. 1.13. (...).
how he can endure to look on, (as if he (...) cum voluprate and delectatione
intueri. Psalm. 22 17. and 54.7. Obad 13, Drus. observe. l 3. c. 21.
liked well enough of it, or did not greatly mislike it) and be silent, as if
he were Surdum ageres. Jun. Psalm. 38.13.
deaf; hold his peace, and say nothing, while the wicked devoureth him, that
is more righteous then himself: Hab. 1.14.
and make, or Sicut Psalm. 119.10, 116. Esaias 63.17.
suffer men to be as the fish of the sea; that are without ruler; and (...).
Hesiod. oper. l. 1. (...)* Oppian. pisc. l. 2. (...), Ib. l. ^. (...). Ixion
apud. Athen. l. 4. (...). Strabo lib. 1. Pisces majoribus minores pro esca
nasci: Ital. Prove. Scalig de subtle. exerc. 189. Imo Graecu^, (...). Polyb. l.
15. (...). Athenag. apolog. (...). Nemes. de not. hom. c. 1. (...), etc. Basil.
hexam. orat. 7. Avaritiae potentiorum subjecti ubiqe inferiores funt. qo qisqe
infirmior, eo praedae patet. minor esca majoris est. rursus ipse major a
validiore invaditur; and fit esca alterius praedator alieni. Ambr. hexam. l. 5.
c. 5. Qi pote plus, urget: pisces ut saepe minutos Magnu' come. Varro
Margepol. Ad utilitatem gentium regnum positum est a Deo, ut timentes hoc, non
se ^^^trutrum homines vice piscium consumant. Iren. l. 5.
live (...). Pindar. Nem. 1.
without rule: where the greater preyeth upon, and swalloweth down the lesser.
as the most Abraham Esdraid. Hieron. Theodoret. Theophylact. Cyrill. in Hos. 4.
Lyran. Hugo. Remig* an Haimo. Calvin. Jun. alii.
Interpreters expound that place. or, as some other; and make men to be as the
fish of the Sea, Sat. Jairus.
whom who will may catch without control; and as the creeping things, as worms
that crawl on the ground, Dav. Camius.
which men kill at pleasure; because they have no governor, either Prove. 30.27.
to order them, or Jerem. 8.19. Hos. 8.3. and 13.10. defensore carent. Iun.
to protect them against the violence of others, not fish, or creeping things
of their own kind, so much, as either Ribera.
men in general the one, or Ierem. 16.16. Amos 4.2.
fishermen more especially, the other, who d^aw up whatsoever comes to hand,
with the hook, and sweep all away hand over head, with their net. as Habb.
1.15.
in the next words, (whereto such, tyrans and oppressors of Gods people, are
compared) the Prophet explaining himself, does complain.

Now as in that passage of the Prophet, it is said of God, that Habb. 1.13.
he cannot endure to see evil, and behold grievance; so in the wisards speech
here, the like is said of him, concerning wrong and grievance done to his
people. and the words may be rendered, either in the time past, he has not seen
wrong, nor beheld grievance done to his people by any adversary hitherto, but
has righted and revenged it. witness his judgments executed on Genesis 15.13,
14. Exodus 1.12, 14, 15. Psalm. 78.44*51. and 106.28*36. and 136.10, 15.
Pharao and the Egyptians for their cruel oppression, hard usage and malicious
pursuit of them; and that sad, severe, and irrevokable sentence passed upon the
Exo. 17.14, 16
Amalekites, for their molesting of them in their passage. Or in the time to
come; (for the Number. 23.7. adducet, pro, adduxit* and v. 9. aspiciam, pro,
aspexi, vel aspicio. Number. 24.17. processit, pro, procedet, and v. 9.
incurvavit, cubuit, pro, incurvat, cubat, vel incurvabit, cubabit. Joel 2.32.
vocavit, pro* vocabit, Acts 2.39.
tenses in the original are often promiscuously used) he will not see any wrong
done to Jacob, or grievance done to Israel. as we use to say, I will not see
such an one wronged: when our meaning is, that we will not endure it; but will
either protect and secure them against it, or be revenged on those that shall
either attempt it, or do it. Or in the time present, but as in a potentiall
form; (which in Genesis 19.14. Exodus 12.29. 2 Kings 3.27: Number. 23.9, 10. Jerem.
2.11, 23. and 11.12. Lam. 3.37. Job 15.3. and 22.14.
either tense is not unusual) He cannot endure to behold wrong offered to
Jacob; nor to see grievance done to Israel. Or, putting all together, as all
closely employed, and jointly both intended and included, He has not seen, or
beheld, will not see, cannot endure to see, or behold any wrong or grievance,
that has been, shall be, is or may be, by any offered unto, or attempted
against, his Jacob, his Israel. And this I conceive to be, as the true and
genuine, so the full and entire sense of the place. and it is indeed in effect
the same with that which Calvin not without some good approbation relates, as
the exposition of some before him; to wit, that God is said not to see wrong or
molestation in, or against Israel, Qia permittere nolit illum injuste gravati
vel affligi.
because he will not suffer them to be wrongfully vexed and grieved, nor endure
to see the same: and Si qis injuste nocere velit huic Populo, Deus nullam vim
nec injuriam admittet, sed potius se opponet, etc.
if any therefore shall attempt to harm them, he will not admit any violence or
wrong against them, but will oppose himself thereunto. whereunto also he
adds, that being so understood, it may be Malim verba indefinite accipere.
nam Hebraei saepe ubi verbum sine subjecto ponunt, generaliter ad qosvis
extendunt rem ipsam de qa agitur: and tunc verba activa in passiva commode
resolvi possunt, Calvin.
indefinitely and passively thus rendered, (as of 2 Samuel 24.1. and alii loci
sup. Except. 3.
many other places the like may be showed) No wrong Ita Graec. (...). Lat.
Videtur, videbitur. Calvin.
shall be seen done to Jacob, nor molestation beheld done to Israel. and Ita
melius fluet contextus.
so, says he, the context will run more clearly. the Reddi causa videtur.
reason thereof being rendered in the words next ensuing; because Jovah Deus
ejus ipse praesto adest. Part 4.
God is present with them, ready at hand, to protect them, and to oppose any
that shall attempt to wrong or to molest them.

Thus then it appears, that an other sense may be given of these words, then
that which these corrupters of Scripture would fasten upon them; and that such,
as well agrees, both with the truth of story, and the analogy of faith;
(whereas theirs agrees with neither) and receives further confirmation, from
the ordinary and most usual signification of the words, from the connection of
them with the residue of the context, and from the collation of other
Scriptures.

And the result of all that has hither to been said, is this, that that which
these men would make them to speak, does directly cross the tenor of the
story, and the truth of Gods word; does contradict their own tenants, and is
inconsistent with them; could not be the mind and meaning of him by whom they
were uttered, nor can duly and justly be by them pressed as a ground for such a
point of doctrine as they would build thereupon, since that they may well bear
another sense.

Let us in the next place proceed, now we have the true sense, to consider,
what the proper doctrine is of the place.

The Text then thus cleared, the point of instruction that of it self it
naturally yields and affords us, is this, that

Doctrine.
God cannot endure to see any wrong or grievance done or offered unto his.

This he manifested and made known to the world, from the very first beginning
of his sequestration of persons and people to himself. When, Psalm. 105.12* 14.
albeit they were but (...) homines numeri, qui recenseri facile poterant: sic
Genesis 34.30.
few in number, yea very few, and those strangers in the lands wherein they
lived; what time they wandered from Nation to Nation, out of one Kingdom to
another: when the paucity of them, together with their present estate and
condition, as not Jnter extraneos facile est inimicos invenire. Tertul. apolog.
c. 1.
strangers only, but (...). Homer. Odyss. o.
travelers, might in all likelihood expose them to contempt and despite, and
consequently to much wrong and abuse; yet it is said, that even then Psalm
105.14
he suffered no man to do them wrong, but sharply reproved, yea and severely
punished Kings themselves, and that not one alone, (as Genesis 12.17. and 20.3, 18.
the sacred stories show) for their sake; for attempting to wrong them. And
when they were grown now to a greater multitude, to be a numerous people, tho
Genesis 15.13. Exodus 1.11.
he suffered them for a while to be oppressed in Egypt, yet as he had Genesis 15.14.
long before threatened, Psalm 135.9. Exodus 14.28.
on the King and people that so oppressed them, he executed judgment, and that
in such manner as made all the world ring of it, and the fame of it being
spread abroad far and near, Exodus 15.4, 14, 15. Number. 22.3, 5.6
made other Nations also to stand in aw of them. Too long and tedious it would
be, to trace this point, as might easily be done, through the whole body of the
holy story: to relate thence the heavy doom, first Exodus 17.14, 16. Number. 24.20.
past, and after 1 Samuel 15.2, 3
executed, on Amalek, for molesting them in their passage: the overthrows and
slaughters, Number. 21.23, 24, 33, 35. Psalm 136.18, 20.
of Sihon and Og with their forces, that denied them passage through their
Land, and opposed them in their way; and of those numberless multitudes of the
2 Chronicles. 14.9, 13, 15.
Cushites, 2 Chronicles. 20.1, 22, 29.
Syrians, 2 Chro. 32.1, 21.
Assyrians, and others, that invaded them in their own Country under Asa,
Iehoshaphat, and Ezekiah; together with the 2 Kings 19.36, 37. Esaias 37.37, 38.
shameful flight of Senacherib, and the execution done on him by the hands of
his own sons: and of the Ester 3.9. and 6.13. and 7.10. and 9.10.
exemplary judgment showed on Haman and his whole house; who by plotting and
attempting the ruin of that people, ruined himself, and all his. Suffice it may
in general to have observed, that no people or person are in Gods book read
of, ever to have either wronged Gods people, or attempted so to do, but that
first or last they have paid full dear for it.

The reasons hereof may be drawn, either from those relations that such have
unto God; or from Gods own nature and disposition, as in general, so more
especially, toward those who in more special manner are his.

First, I say, the relations that such have unto God: and these are manifold
and various, but all herein concurring, Reason 1*
that they necessarily imply, that affection in God toward them, and care of
them, that is intimated in my Text.

For they are his anointed ones, his adopted ones, his firstborn, his
first fruits, his deer ones, his darlings, his spouse, his turtle, his people.

1. They are Gods anointed ones. Psalm 105.15.
Touch not, says he, mine anointed. Relation 1.
take heed how you but Attingat terram, liqescit. Amos 9.5. Attingat montes,
fumigant. Psalm 104.32. Qur tetigerit, haud insons futurus est. Prove. 6.29.
Attinge, in re ulla, Job 1.11. tu cavebis ne me attiga^; si me tagis, etc.
Plaut. Asinar. 2.2. si attingas cum manu, extemplo puer paedagogo ^abula
dirumpit caput. Idem Bacch. 3.3. Et mox paedagogo pueri pater: Ne attigas
puerum. etc. et Pers. 5.2. cavesis attingas: ne tihi hoc scipione malum magnum
them. and Rud. 3.5. si illas attigeris, dabo tibi magnum malum, ibid. 4. tange
uttamvis digit^l^ minimo modo, etc.
touch them, how you offer the least wrong to them, how you make the lightest
or sleightest attempt against them. they are mine anointed; whom I will not
have once touched. Kings are justly deemed (...) Exodus 22.8, 9.28. Psalm 82.1,
6. and 89.51. Eccl. 10.20.
sacred; because they are Esaias 45.1.
the Lords anointed. and, 1 Samuel 24.7. and 26.9, 11. 2 Samuel 1.14, 16.
who can be guiltless, says David, that shall stretch forth his hand against
the Lords anointed? and God himself of David, Psalm 89.20, 22.
With mine holy Oil have I anointed him: and the enemy therefore shall not
exact upon him; nor 2 Samuel 3.4. and 4.10.
the sons of any wrong-doers afflict him; I will beat down his foes before his
face; and plague them that hate him.

They are Frustra sunt ergo e nostris unus and alter, qi de regibus
interpretantur.
not indeed such anointed ones, of whom God there speaks, and in whose behalf,
he claims this prerogative and privilege, and proclaims such immunity and
indemnity as you have heard. they are Kings, whom he speaks to, and whom he is
said to have rebuked, for their sakes, of whom he there speaks. But the
anointed he there speaks of, and for whom Kings are said to have been reproved,
were 1 John 2.20, 27.
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, with their issue and retinue; so termed in regard
of that spiritual ointment, that being powered John 3.34.
without measure Psalm. 45.7. Esaias 61.1.
on Christ their head, does John 1.12.
from him descend and is derived, Ephesians. 4.7.
in its due measure, unto (...). Psalm 133.2. Clem. strom. l. 6. ut ne minima
quidem fimbri^ unctione caruerit. Bern. de temp. ser. 40. and 91. Potho de dom.
Dei l. 3. Petr. Celes. de pan. cap. 24.
every member of that body whereof he is head; by virtue whereof they are
enabled to become Exodus 19.6. Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. 1 Pet: 1.9. de horum enim
unctione constat. de prophetis haud itidem. 1 Reg. 19.16, 19.
Kings and Priests unto God. and so Ita Chrysostom Theodoret. Euthym. Augustine.
Prosper. Hieron. nom. Arnob. nom. Cassidor. Lombard. Hugo. Lyran. alii.
all sound interpreters generally, as well ancient as modern, expound that
place. Howbeit, if the material anointing make those other inviolable, no
marvel, if this spiritual anointing have with God the same effect in regard
of those that partake of it, that he will not endure to see them in the least
degree wronged, whom he holds as his anointed.

2. They are Gods adopted ones; Relation 2.
adopted to be John 1.12. Gal. 3.26.
his children and Romans 8.16, 17. Gal. 4.5, 6.
coheires with his Christ. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
I will receive you; I will Deuteronomy. 4.34. Ephesians. 2.19. and 3.15.
take you to me, take you into my family: and will be a father unto you; and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. And, Deuteronomy. 8.5.
understand and consider in thine heart. says Moses to this people, that as a
father chastises his children, so the Lord chastises thee. And does he carry
himself toward them as a father, in Heb. 12.7.
chastising of them only; and not in taking care of them also, in matter 2
Cor. 12.14* 1 Timothy 5.8.
of provision, in case of protection? yes undoubtedly, as well in the one kind
as in the other. For is it not so with earthly, mere natural parents? yea even
with the dumb creatures, with brute beasts? How chary are affectionate parents
wont to be of the safety and welfare of their children? more chary of theirs
ordinarily then of their own. Qis non magis filiorum salutem qam suam curet?
Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 2. Instituente natura, plus fere filios qam nosmetipsos
diligimus. Pacat. pan^g.
it is an usual speech with parents, when their children are ill used, Do to
me what you will, but meddle not with my children. yea nature has taught, and
by a secret instinct does incite, not (...), ( Iliad. ^. v. 134.) (...);
Plutarc. de amor. prol.
the stronger and stouter only, but even (...). Plut. ibid. (...). Idem ibid.
(...). Jdem de solart* animal. videatur Oppi^n. cyneg. l. 3. v. 118. etc. "Ex
hoc ipso affectu, qo amare nos fecit pignora nostra, intelligere nos v^luit,
q^ntum ipse amaret pignora sua, ^ qo affectum omnes qu^ pignora nostra amamus
accepimus. Deus ergo, qi etiam minimis animantibus hunc affectum proprii operis
inseruit, se solum suorum amore privavit? imo amorem erga nos suum, per eum,
qem nobis erga nostros dedit, voluit intelligi. Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 6.
"Plus nos amat Deus, qam filium pater. Salvian. ibid. (...). Chrysostom. in
Matthew. 7.11.
the weakest, the most timorous and cowardly, of the creatures, to expose
themselves and their lives to hazard, for the safety and indemnity of their
young. And is not Gods affection as great and as tender to his, as the
affection of any parent can be to his child, or any creature to its issue?
Catulorum ^mor in venabula impingit seras. Sen. ep. 7^.
"Yes undoubtedly, and infinitely much more, it being he that has put this
affection into them. Hence, Esaias 59.14, 15, 16.
when Sion complains that the Lord had forsaken her, her God had forgotten
her; can a woman, says God, so forget her sucking child, (that is ever in her
eye, never out of her lap or arms almost, ever and anon at her breast) that she
should not have compassion on the fruit of her own womb? the some should prove
so unnatural as so to do, yet Esaias 44.21. Ierem. 31.20.
cannot I forget thee. I have engraven thee Cant. 2.6.
upon the palms of my hands; (that I may no sooner open my hands, but I may be
put in mind of thee) and thy walls (which lying desolate Lam. 2.7, 8.
as a rufull spectacle, can not but Psalm. 102.14.
move to compassion) are continually in mine ey. And, when he hears Ephraim
bemoaning himself with hearty remorse and regret for his forepassed unruly and
rebellious carriages, Ier. 3^.18, 19, 20.
Is this Ephraim, says God, my dear son? is it Heb. a child of delights, as
Esaias 5.7.
the child I delight in? (for so the words would there be read) to wit, that
bemoaneth himself in this manner: Surely even since I spoke against him, I do
still Remembering remember. as Deuteronomy. 7.17.
seriously, or constantly, remember him. Notwithstanding my sharp reproofs, and
severe menaces, I have him in mind still, tho I may seem not to regard him, yet
I cannot but remember him. mine affection continues entire and tender still
toward him. my bowels within me are troubled, they yearn, or Esaias 63.15. Hos.
11.8.
sound for him. they work and yearn toward him, as a 1 Kings 3.26.
tender mothers are wont to do toward her child, when it lies in pain, or
when it is in danger and distress. I will Miserando miserebor.
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. In a word, imagine we, how ill an
affectionate Si a qoq^m filius verberetur alienus in supplicio filii pietas
paterna torqetur. Salvian. de provid. l. 8. c. 4. Relation 3.
father or mother, Princes and great ones especially, that think theirs
privileged above others, can endure to see their children, whom they are so
tender of, ill entreated: and thence may we well gather, how ill God can brook
any ill-usage of his.

3. They are Gods first born. not his children only, but his first born. God,
when he will most pregnantly express his tender affection to David, and his
singular respect of him, Psalm 89.27.
J will make him, says he, my first born. And men can have but one such; but
Gods children are all such with him. (...). Heb. 12.23.
the assembly of the first born, says the Apostle. in allusion to the Law;
wherein Exodus 13.2.
all the first born were consecrated to God, were peculiarly his. The affection
of parents to their children, where many are, is in some sort entire to each.
and there is somewhat usual in each, out of which, tho it be but some
weakness, yet a tenderhearted parent can pick matter enough, whereon to
ground his affection. if there be nothing else, that is enough, Quod de patria
Se^. ep. 66. patriam amat qisqe, non qia magna, sed qia sua.
that they are hi^. But if the affection be in any considerable degree carried
more to some one than to the rest, it rests commonly in the greatest eminency
(unless Genesis 49.3, 8. 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2.
some other by-consideration abate it) upon the first born. he is Deuteronomy. 21.16;
17
the prime of his strength* and the head of the house. and as the care
therefore of provision for the first born, is the greatest: so the grief for
the loss of the first born is the most grievous. Zech. 12.10.
They shall mourn, says he, as one mourns for his only child, and grieve
bitterly, as one grieveth for his first born. If then the Quod de patria Sen.
ep. 66. patriam amat qisqe, non qia magna, sed qia sua.
affection of parents to their first born be such; no marvel if Gods affection
be no other to his first born: and such are his all to him. It is the argument
he uses by Moses to Pharao; Exodus 4 22, 23
Israel is my son, even my first born. and I say unto thee, (take it from me;)
Let my son go to serve me. Or, if thou refuse to let him go, I will slay thy
son, even thy first born. and God made his word good. for so upon his refusal,
after many other sad judgments, at last Exodus 12.29.
accordingly he did.

4. They are his first fruits. as his first born, Relation 4.
so his first fruits too. Iam. 1.18. Rev. 14.4.
Of his own will he begat us, says the Apostle, by the word of truth, that we
might be the first fruits of his creatures. As the first born, so Exodus 22.23.
and 23.19. Romans 11.16.
the first fruits were holy to God, and were therefore Deuteronomy. 26.2, ^0 14.
reserved and preserved for his use. and for any to detain them, or to imbecil
them, was sacrilege. nor is it any less, or lower a degree of Sacrilegii
genus est, Dei cultores odisse. Salvian. de provid. l. 8. c. 4.
sacrilege, to abuse or wrong any of these Gods spiritual first fruits. It is
the plea that God by the Prophet uses in the behalf of his people; Ierem. 2.3.
Israel is holiness to the Lord. he is consecrated to him, as the first fruits
were. he is the first fruits of his increase. and what follows? all therefore
that devour him shall contract guilt by so doing. some evil or other shall
befall them: as it fared usually with those, that Prove. ^0.25.
devoured any holy thing.

5. They are Gods darlings, his deer ones. Psalm 22.20.
Save my soul from the sword, says David; my darling from the hand, Relation 5*
or Prove. ^0.25.
power of the Dog. my darling, says he. and, thy darling, he might as well have
said. as Psalm. 49.15. 1 Samuel 17.37.
for David was indeed one of Gods darlings. and so are all the faithful, his
darlings, his de^r ones, his Jer. 12.7* (...)
deerly beloved ones: as dear and precious to him, yea Charior est illi homo,
qam sibi. Juven. sat. 10.
more dear and precious to him, I may safely say, then to themselves. Lam. 4.2.
The sons of Sion, are precious one. and, Esaias 43.4.
Because thou wast precious in my sight; says God to his Jacob, to his Israel.
If it be demanded, how precious, how dear. even as precious and dear as to
any of us is the ball or apple of our eye. Psalm. 17.8.
Lord, keep me, says David as the apple of thine eye. There is no part of the
body more tender then the eye. The least moat of dust, that gets into it, is
very troublesome to it. It is well observed, that the Ministers of the Word,
being as 1 Samuel 9.9.19 Esaias 30.10.
the eyes of the Church, are inhibited all 2 Timothy 2.4.
intanglement with worldly affairs and employments, because tho the hands and
the feet may without any great inconvenience be deaiing with the dust, and
paddling in the dirt, yet the Dum pastoris sensus terrena studia occupant,
vento tentationis impulsus Ecclesiae oculos pulvis excaecat. Greg. pastor. cur.
l. 2. c. 7.
eye cannot* without damage or danger admit ought of either. Now, as there is
no part of the body more tender then the eye: so there is no part, whereof we
are more tender then of it. Quinti, si tibi vis oculos debere Catullum, Aut
aliud, si qid charius est oculis; Eripere ei noli, multo qod chariu^ illi Est
oculis, seu qid charius est oculis. Catull. Hoc ego sim vobis, unus sibi qisqe
qod ipse est: Hoc mihi vos eritis, qod duo sunt oculi. Apul. Dii me, pater,
omnes oderint, ni magis te qam oculos nunc amo meos. Ter. ^eeyr. 4.5. Dispeream
nisi tu vita mihi charior ipsa, Atqe anima, atqe oculis es, mea Hyella, meis.
Dispeream, nisi ego vita tibi charior ipsa, Atqe anima, atqe oculis, s^^, mea
Hyella, tuis. Auger.
as deer unto us, we use to say, as our eyes. and to express our entire
affection to some, Gal. 4.1^. Dandames Scytha, qo amicum ^ Sauromatis captum
redimeret, oculos effosso^ (...) dedit. Lucian. de amic. 1 Samuel 11.2. Oculos,
and qicqid chariorem est vitam facturum, inter precaria numerat. Sen de tranq.
c. 11.
we could be content to bestow our eyes on them. So dear to each one is his
eye; and that part of it more especially, wherein the sight consists, and in
regard whereof Oculi pars corporis pretiosissima; ut qi usu lucis vitam
distinguant a morte. ^lin. l. 11. c. 37.
the eye is esteemed so precious a piece, because that failing, the creature
together with the sight losing all use of light, is as one adjudged to a
perpetual night, condemned to live thenceforth all his life long in a dark
dungeon. Neither indeed is there any part almost of the body, that nature, or
the God of Nature rather, has so carefully guarded and curiously fenced against
all manner of emergent dangers. For besides Vide Galen. de usu part. l. 10.
Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
the several filmes, as so many inward fences, with the humors as waters
enclosed between them; there is without as a strong wall of hard bone round
about it, to secure it against the violence of any more forcible matter; and
over that the eyelids as curtains ready to be drawn over it upon occasion of
ought making toward it, that may impeach or molest it; and those fringed also
with a double set of short hair, that may neither hinder its prospect, and yet
may help to shroud and shelter it, by keeping off such slighter and lighter
occurrents, as might casually annoy it. Now like to this precious part of man,
the eye: and to that more precious part of that part, the ball, or apple of the
eye, that is so curiously guarded, does David desire to be with God, in regard
of his tender care over him, his constant providence and continual protection
of him. And such does God himself profess his to be unto him; and his care
therefore of them and affection to them consequently to be such, Riber. in Z^ch.
as ours is wont to be of that part which we so pretiously esteem. Such it had
been toward this people from the first. For so Moses in his song penned, Deuteronomy.
31.19.
by Gods own appointment, to mind them of his mercies and favors showed them;
Deuteronomy. 32.10.
He led them, and kept them, as the apple of his eye. And such he promises it
should be Esaias 46.3, 4.
to the last toward them. Zech. 2.5.
I will, says he, be unto Jerusalem, as a wall of fire round about her. he
says not, a wall Murus Lapideus. Nehem. 4.1.
of stone, or Murus chalibeus, vel^aheneus, ut Flaccus. Jer. 1.18. and 15.20.
of steel, as one well observes; tho that might seem to imply safety and
security sufficient: but a wall Murus igneus, an ignitus.
of fir^; such as may not only secure her, but anno them that assault her, may
both Qi cominus arceat, ^minus terreat.
fright them afar off, and destroy them at hand. And yet further, because
intestine evils may spring up; and those many times prove more dangerous then
any from without: Zech. 2.5.
My glory, says God, that is, my glorious presence shall be in the midst of
her. and if Psalm 46.5.
God be in the midst of her, she cannot be moved. she cannot but be safe; she
cannot miscarry by any evil whatsoever, either from within or from without.
And what is the reason why God is so careful and chary of the safety of his
people? Zech. 2.8.
For he that touches you, says he, touches the apple of mine eye. Ad
exprimendam pietatis suae, teneritudi^nem tenerimam partem humani corporis
nominavit, ut apertissime intelligeremus eum ^am parva sanctorum su^rum
contumelia laedi, q^m parvi verberis tact^ humani visus acies laederetur.
Salvan. de Prove. l. 8.^.4. Relation 6.
He makes choice of the tenderest part of man's body, and that which men are
most tender of, thereby to show and assure that he is as much agreeved and
offended with the least grievance that is offered to any of his, as the least
touch of the eye, or eyesight is offensive unto us. and he sends his
messeng^r therefore to the Nations round about them, to warn them to take heed
how they attempt ought against her, lest they bring mischief thereby upon
themselves.

6. They are his Spouse, whom he has contracted himself unto, to be unto them
as their husband, as their head, Hos. 2. 19.20.
I will espouse thee unto me, says the Lord by Hosea, in judgment, in
justice, in faithfulness, in loving kindness, and in much mercy. and, Esaias
54.5. (...) voces plurales, ut Job 35.10. Eccles. 12.1.
He that made thee, Ephesians. 5.23.
thy Creator, says Esaias, will marry thee. Now the husband, says the Apostle,
is the head of the wife, as Christ is of the Church. and his office is to
protect her, as Christ does it, being the Savior of his body. What kind
husband can endure to see his wife wronged? or can without grief and discontent
behold that done, that shall vex and grieve her? no, her grief is his; yea it
is more his. then if it were personally his own. Nor is God therefore less
chary and tender of his Church, and the welfare thereof; then any the kindest
husband of his dearest wife, and of her comfort and contentment. Esaias 63.9.
In all their afflictions, says the Prophet, he was afflicted. it was an
affliction to him to see them afflicted. and Judge. 10.16.
his soul was grieved, says the story, he was grieved at the very heart, to
see the grievance, or the misery of Israel; to see what a calamitous estate
they were in at present, through the cruelty of the enemy, Iud. 10.6, 7.
Relation 7.
into whose hands they had been sold for their sins.

7 They are his Turtle. for that also would not be omitted. Psalm. 74.19.
O deliver not, says the Psalmist, or, Ier. 12.7. Romans 4.23. and 8 32.
give not up the soul of thy Turtle, (that is, the Jun. and Pisc.
life of it, or thy Turtle simply: for it is often times no more then so; as
where it is said, Psalm. 3.2.
How many be they, that say to my soul? that is as much as, to me: save that it
makes the speech the more Sic Psalm. 105.18. ferrum subivit anima ejus. i.e.
ipse, Jun. sed habet Emphasin* qasi diceretur; he was poor soul laid in Irons.
emphaticall by such an Cujusmodi sunt illa, Iud. 5.21. Ier. 4.19. and 12.7.
affectionate expression) unto the troop; (to wit, of her adversaries that are
ready to seize on her, or that have seized on her already, Verse 3.4.9.10.
in whose hands she now is) or (...). Graec. bestiae, vet. Lat. ferae. Pisc.
unto the wild beast, the beasts of the Abraham Esdraid. qi and (...) agri
subintelligi monet. Sic Psalm. 68.20 (...) seram arundiuit. i* seras agrestes,
utpote apros, qi in arundinetis degunt. Jairus. aut catervam. arundiseram. i.
hastis instructam. Abr. Esdraid. and D^v. Camius fustibus oblongis. Vatabl.
sagi^is* Jun.
field: unto such ravenous beasts as are wont to prey upon such feeble fowl as
is the Turtle and the like; unto which fierce and fell creatures the Churches
enemies are here, and Psalm. 22.12, 13, 16, 20.21* and 57.4. and 80.13.
elsewhere often, compared. The Prophet Nathan, to bring David about by a slight
to a sight of the grievousnesse of his (...) c^^^ui. Tigur. catervae. Jun. ita
m^x hoc versu* et 2 Samuel 23.11, 13. and Psalm. 68.10. ita Jairus and Camius.
sin, in 2 Samuel 12.9.
taking Vriahs wife away from him; tells him a tale of 2 Samuel 12^1.4
a poor man, that had a Cade-lamb, brought up by hand, which he was so taken
with, that he used to feed it at his tabl^, and lay it (...) in grem^o suo.
Esaias 40.11.
in his lap; and of a rich man, that took this poor man's lamb, and killed it,
to entertain his guest therewith: thereby implying, what a wrong men would take
it to be, to see any sorry creature wronged, or to have it taken from them,
wherein they take such delight. And I might well appeal, to those, either rich,
or poor, but the former especially, that keep for pleasure, Turtles, or
Finches, or Linnets, or Nightingales, and the like, be they for singing or
sight desired; how chary they are wont to be of them, how careful to cage
them, and keep them in places of security, out of the reach of such ravenous
creatures, as Cats, or the like, that would otherwise be dealing with them; and
how they are wont to take it, when through the malice of any ill-affected to
them, or the neglect of those that have charge of them, any mischief befalls
them. Vide Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 43.
such a matter as that has sometime cost a man no less then his life. And so
is it here. Gods Church is his Turtle, Cant. 2.14 and 5.2. and 6.9.
his Dove, much more deer to him, then any such toys (for so in comparison I
may well term them) are or can be with those, that do most affect them, and
set the highest rate on them: and is consequently as chary, yea more chary of
his, then any man or woman is, or can be of any such creature, which they are
most taken with, and wherein they most delight.

Lastly, they are Deuteronomy. 9.19^
his people: the people, Relation 8.
with whom he has entered into Exodus 24.7, 8. Deuteronomy. 5.3. and 29.12.
covenant, whom he has taken into his protection. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
they are his servants, and he their liege Lord; they are his subjects, and he
their Sovereign. Now it is the honor of a King to protect his people: the
office of a Sovereign to secure his subjects from violence and wrong. Yea a
good King accounts Sicut, si servo^ nostros qisqam caedat, nos in servorum
no^trorum caedit injuria: ita and cum servus Dei a q^qam l^ditur, ipsa majest^
divina violatur. Salvian. de provid. l. ^. c. 4.
himself wronged in the wrong of his people, nor can he with patience endure to
see that done whereby any, even the meanest of them, is unjustly molested and
injured. Psalm. 72.4.
He shall judge, says the Psalmist, that is, Deuteronomy. 3^.36. Psalm. 7.8. and 26.2.
and ^8.3.
judge for, right and avenge, the wronged poor of the people: Psalm. 72.12 --
14*
he shall deliver the needy, and him that has no helper: he shall save their
souls, that is, their Psalm 72. and 71.10.
lives; and redeem, or Psalm. 107.2.
rescue, their soul. as Psalm. 16.10. and 17.13. and 23 3. and 49.15.
them from fraud and violence: he shall protect them against all damage and
danger, that by any injurious course, either of circumvention or oppression, in
regard of their poverty and inabi^ity, they may at any time be exposed unto:
Psalm. 72.14.
and precious shall their blood be be in his sight. no drop of their blood, but
he shall set an high rate on it, and make those therefore pay full deerly for
it, that shall, either draw, or even attempt to draw it. And surely if earthly
Princes, who are but 2 Chronicles. 29.23. 2 Chronicles. 19 6. Vicarius Dei. Eleuther.
epist. ad Lucium.
Gods vicegerents and Rom 13.4.
ministers, either are, or ought to be so affected toward those, who being
indeed Ezekiel. 45.8.
Gods people, are by him Psalm. 78.71.
committed to their care and charge: how much more is God himself thus affected
to his people, Psalm* 82.3, 4.
of whose safety and welfare he requires them to be so cautious? that which is
there spoken being in deed and truth but a type of that, the truth whereof is
most eminently found and fulfilled in him. Psalm. 146.7.
He it is indeed, that helps those to right that suffer wrong; and that then
also when those that should here do it, Esaias 3.16, 17. and 5.8. Eccles. 3.16.
refuse to right them, or in steed of righting them, do themselves wrong them.
that executes judgment in the behalf of his oppressed ones. and of whom it is
avowed, that Psalm. 116.15.
the death, and the blood, consequently, of his Saints is precious in his
sight. And surely if the tears of Gods people, that by such courses are wrung
from them, are so precious in his esteem, that he is said to reserve them by
him, as in a bottle: no marvel if their blood be precious in his sight, if he
set an high rate on every drop of it. Psalm. 56.8. De Romano Prudent. hymn. 10.
Guttam cruoris ille nullau^ perdidit. Hic in regestis est liber coelestibus,
Monimenta servans laudis indelebilis, Relegendus olim sempi^e^no judici,
Libr^^ine aeq^ ^i^^be^um pondera et praemio^rum co^pa^abit copias.
Thou countest my wanderings, or flittings, says David; put my tears into thy
bottle: are they not entered in thy book? yes, (e) this I know. I am assured
that so it is. as if he had said, there is never a step that I take, when
through the wrongful and violent persecution of mine adversaries, I am
enforced to (f) fly and flit from place to place, but thou take notice of,
and keep a due account of it. and if thou keep so exact an account of my
steps, then sure thou can not but take as exact a tale of my tears. thou
have a bottle for the one, and a a book for both. there is never a tear that I
shed, that falls besides the one; never a step that I take in these my
flittings to and fro, but that together with each tear that I shed, stands
registered, as upon record, in the other.

Thus then have we seen the point confirmed unto us, Reasons ^.
by reasons drawn from those relations that such persons have to God: we pass
on to such Arguments as may be taken from Gods Attributes; from the nature of
God, and his disposition, as toward all in general, so more specially toward
those, whom in a more special and peculiar manner he has taken to be his.

First then, God is a just and a righteous God. Attribute 1.
Psalm. 92.15.
To show that God is just; and there is no unrighteousness with him. And as he
is a just and a righteous God; so he loves righteousness. Psalm. 11.7.
The righteous Lord, says the Psalmist, loves righteousness. and indeed he
were not righteous, if he loved not righteousness. Nondum est justus, qem non
delectat justitia: nec delectat, qod non amatur, Aug. de Verb. Ap. 17.
he that loves not righteousness, is not truly righteous, tho he may deal
righteously. Again, as he loves righteousness, so he hates unrighteousness,
Psalm. 45.7.
Thou love righteousness; and hate wickedness. the one follows
necessarily upon the other. and, Psalm. 5, 4, ^, 6.
Thou art a God, that delightest not in wickedness: but hate all
wrong-doers; and abhorrest all bloody and deceitful persons. and Psalm. 11.^.
The Lord tries, that is, Jam. 1.12. 1 Cor. 11.^8.
upon trial approves of, the righteous: but the wicked and such as love and
delight in iniquity, his soul hates; he abhors them from his heart. And as
Psalm. 11.7.
his countenance therefore does behold the upright, to wit, Psalm. 17.2.
with approbation and delight: so he is Hab. 1.13.
of purer eyes then to behold evil, or to look upon iniquity, but Esaias 59.16.
with detestation and dislike Psalm. 11.4.
His eyes behold the sons of men; of all sorts, Prove. 15.^.
as well bad as good; and Psalm. 11.4.
his eyelids try them; with their ways and courses. but Psalm. 1.3*6.
the one to approve them and preserve them, the other to testify his dislike
of their practices, by the destruction of their persons.

2. He is a jealous God. as a just and righteous, Attribute 2.
so a Exodus 20.5.
jealous God; jealous of his own Esaias 42.8.
glory, his reputtaion, his credit, his honor. Now it is no small dishonor
and disgrace to a Prince, if he shall see and suffer his subjects to be
wronged, and 2 Samuel 15.3.
do not right them, whether it be, because he cannot, or tho he can, because
he will not, much more: there is a note of impotency lying upon him in the one;
a blot, which is far worse, of iniquity in the other. Nor does Gods honor
seem to be less engaged, and to lie at the stake, when his own people are in
his own sight and presence oppressed. Esaias 2^.17.
We have been, say they, so and so in thy sight. Esaias 52.5.
My people, says he, are oppressed: and my name is blasphemed. and, Ezekiel.
36.10.
My holy name was profaned by the Nations, among whom my people was dispersed,
in that they (...) ut Genesis 20.20.13. and 26.7. Psalm. 91.11. Matthew. 4.6. Heb.
1.7.
said of them, These are Gods people; and yet are gone out of his land.

And indeed in sundry respects does the honor of God suffer in such cases.

1. In regard of his power, as if he were not able to protect or deliver his.
Ezekiel. 20.13.14.
I had said (says God, of this people, when having brought them out of Egypt,
they proved disobedient and rebellious) that I would pour out my fury upon
them for their rebellious courses, and destroy them utterly in the wilderness;
and I had so done, but that I had respect to my Name, that it might not be
polluted before the Heathen, in whose sight I brought them out. And Josh. 7.4.5.
when the host of Israel had received a repulse before Ai, Verse 8.9.
Oh Lord, (says Joshua in his complaint of it to God) what shall I say, when
Israel turns the (...) cervice^, ut Exodus 23.27. Psalm. 18.40. ^er. 2.27.
back before his enemies? For when the Canaanites, and all the inhabitants of
the land shall hear of it, they will beset us on every side, and cut us clean
off; and what. will thou do to thy great name? what will become of thine
honor? how much will it be impaired thereby? and how will it be again
repaired? And if it be demanded in what regard Gods. name would have been so
polluted, and his honor so blemished, either in the one case, or in the other;
Moses will enform us, where pleading with God in the behalf of his people, Number.
14.12.
when he threatened to destroy them, Verse 17.
They will say, says he, that therefore thou slewest them in the wilderness,
because thou wast* not able to bring them into that land, which thou had
sworn to bestow upon them. and the like would they have said, had he suffered
them to be destroyed by the inhabitants of the land. To which effect also was
that taunting speech of those other Nations, among whom in the time of their
captivity they were scattered, wherein God himself professes that his name was
profaned, Ezekiel. 36.20.
These are his people; and yet gone out of his land, as if God had not been
able to keep them in it, albeit he had given them possession of it, because he
suffered them to be dispossessed of it again. And you know well, who it was that
said to those the Lords three stout champions, Dan. 3.13.
What God Liberabit. pro, liberare poterit. ^t Esaias 66.7. Jer. 10.5.
is able to deliver you out of my hand? as being prone to presume, that it must
needs be for want of power on Gods part, if they were not delivered, who had
hazarded their lives in this cause.

2. Gods name suffers in such ease, in regard of his purity and holiness. as
if he were a God, that liked well enough of iniquity, at least misliked not
such wicked courses. Psalm. 50.21.
These things, says he, thou did; and because I held my peace, and held my
hand; (for Gods silence there, Psalm. 35.22. Esaias 42.14.
as elsewhere, is no other then his forbearing, either to stay their hand, and
restrain their rage and riot, or by his revenging hand to make them know how he
stands affected therewith) Deos esse sui similes putat. Plaut. Amphitr. 1.
Parum est. qia mala facta tua placent tibi, vis placere and mihi. Deum, qia non
pateris ultorem, vis habere participem^ suspicatus es, qod ero tibi similis,
'dum non v^^ tu esse mihi similis. Aug. in Psalm. 49 Vult te Deus facere similem
sui. and tu conaris Deum facere similem tui. Idem de 10. chord. factorum
approbatorem, non adversatorem. Idem in Psalm. 74.
thou thoughtest, that I was like unto thee; thou supposedst me to be such
another as thy self. Yea they stick not to say, when they escape scotfree, and
thrive with their sinful courses, that Mal. 2.17.
any one that does evil, is Eccl. 7.26.
good in Gods eyes, is accepted with God; and that he delights in such, he
likes well enough of them. or where is the God of judgment? he would else
execute judgment upon them, and thereby manifest himself to be otherwise
minded.

3. In regard of his providence, as if he did not see, or regard, and take
notice, what is done here on earth, Psalm. 94.5, 6.
They break thy people in pieces, O Lord; and make havoc of thine heritage:
they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless: such as Exodus
22.22. Psalm. 68.5.
God has more specially taken into his protection, and are as Res est sacra
miser. Sen. epigr. 4.
sanctuary persons. and when they so do, because they are suffered to do so,
Psalm. 94.7.
they say, The Lord sees it not; the God of Jacob regards it not. Job 22.12,
13 14.
God is aloft in the heavens, that are far higher then the stars; and much more
then above the clouds. and how can he then discry and discern through the (...)
Deuteronomy. 4.11. Esaias 60.2.
dark passage that lies between us and him, what is done by men here below?
(...) Psalm. 18.11.
the thick clouds so hide him, that Et non videbit. i. ut vi^dere neqeat sicut,
Psalm. 78.7. and Jer. 10.5. non l^qentur* i. loqi neqeunt*
he cannot see them, while he walks his round in heaven.

4. In regard of his justice, as if he would never call them to any account,
for that which he did not reckon with them for at the present. Ps. 10.1, 2.
While thou, Lord, says the Psalmist, stand aloof of; and do not show
forth, but hidest thy self in these troublesome times* the wicked does with
insolency eagerly pursue the oppressed; and Ps. 10.8, 9, 10.
what by privy plotting, what by open violence, makes a prey and a spoil of
them. and Psalm. 10.11.
he says in his heart; he Psalm. 14.1.
thinks the whiles with himself, that God has forgotten: he thinks not on
the poor, whom he so oppresses: he hides his face from them; as Psalm. 10.1.
they complain that he does: he will never see, or look after them; much less
call him to account, for ought that he does to them. For so it follows in the
Psalm; Psalm. 10.12, 13
Arise, O Lord; to relieve the oppressed: lift up thine hand; to smite their
oppressors: forget not the afflicted; tho men suppose thou so do. For why
should the wicked man reproach God, while he says in his heart, that thou will
not require it?

Thus does Dum malignitatem insoles centem sustinet, sua sibi patientia
detrabit. Tertull. de pa^ient.
God suffer in his name by his suffrance of such* at whose hands his people
suffer. and how can it be then, that, being so jealous of his honor as he is,
he should endure to see that, but with much detestation and dislike, whereby
his honor is so much, and so many ways either imp^ached or impaired?

Attribute 3.
3. God is a faithful God. faithful and true, in his promises to his;
faithful and firm, in his affection toward them.

Mal. 1.2.
I have loved you; says the Lord to his people tho they ungratiously and
ungratefully, yea shamefully, or shamelesly rather, demand of him, Ibid.
wherein he had loved them; that is, showed any love to them. when as yet in
truth he had Qod Senec. de benes. l. 1. c. 3. ^inge illu^ beneficiis tuis, ut
qecunqe severterit ibi te videat.
so beset them with the fruits of his love, so environed them on every side
with the effects of it, that which way soever they should turn themselves, they
could no sooner draw their eyelids asunder, but great variety of such objects
would offer themselves to their eyesight, as might be evident arguments of his
love to them more then ordinary. And this love of God to his, is no fickle, but
a constant love. whom he loves once, he loves ever. John ^^.1.
His, that he loved, says the Evangelist, he loved to the last. and, Jer. 31.3.
I have loved thee, says God by the Prophet to his people, with a love
ever-lasting. Now those that love entirely, cannot endure to see the least
wrong done to those, whom so entirely they affect. and much less God (...)
those whom so entirely, so constantly he loves. How was Number. 12.1.
he displeased with Aaron and (...) but for murmuring and (...) somewhat against
Moses, and manifested his displeasure Number. 12.^.10
as by checking them both, so by smiting the one tho in regard of his place of
high priesthood (...) spared the other, with that foul disease of leprosy,
that Levit. 13.44-46.
excluded from all society, as well civil as sacred. Number. 12.13, 14.
Nor could she be restored, but upon Moses his entreaty; and not then neither
instantly. she must be taught by the delay of her recovery to learn, what it
was to murmur or mutter ought against Moses. And Job 42.7.
Gods wrath, it is said, was incensed against Jobs three friends, (tho
otherwise, for ought that appears in the story of them, good men) for the wrong
they had done him in their over-harsh censures past on him. nor would God be
pacified and reconciled again to them. until they had reconciled themselves to
him; until they had satisfied him, and he made suit for them. Ibid. v. ^.
Let my servant Job, says he, pray for you; and then I will accept you.

Again, as he loves his entirely and constantly, so he has, out of this this
love to them by promise engaged himself, to be ever procuring of their good. It
is one branch of his covenant with them* (and as his love, so his Ier. 32.40.
covenant, it is everlasting; nor is there 1 Kings 8.23.
any God herein like him, that keeps word and covenant so as he does with
his) that Ierem. 32.40.
he will never cease from doing them good. yea that Ibid. v. 41.
he will rejoice over them, to do them good. it shall be his greatest joy, the
joy of his heart, to see them do well, and to be doing them good. As elsewhere
also he is said Psalm. 35.27.
to delight and take pleasure, in the prosperity of his people. And surely he
that rejoices in doing them good, cannot but be grieved, to see evil done
them whom it is his joy to do good unto. He that delights and takes pleasure in
their prosperity and welfare, cannot but be grieved in and at their afflictions
and adversity, and incensed against those by whom any such evil befalls them.

4. God is a merciful God. a God Exodus 3*^^. Psalm 86.5. and 103.8.
abundant, Attribute 4.
and Ephesians. 2.4.
rich in mercy. One that loves mercy, that likes it, that delights in it. Micah
7.18.
What God is there says the Prophet, like unto thee* pardoning iniquity, and
passing by the transgressions of the remnant of thy people? he does not retain
his anger for ever* because he delights in mercy. And, Ierem. 9.24.
I am the Lord, says he. that exercise, mercy, justice, Psalm 103.9.
and judgment: for in these things I delight. I delight both to do them, and
to see them done. Now this is the peculiar nature and property of mercy, that
it makes men sensible of other men's sufferings; makes them to be affected with
the afflictions of others, even as if they were their own. Yea thence mercy
has its name, and is so called, because by it Inde dicta est misericordia,
qod* cordi nobis sit aliena miseria. Zanc. de not. Dei. l. 4. c. 4. q. 1.
men take to heort the miseries of others, and do in some sort Inde
misericordia nomen accepit, qod miserum cor faciat compatientis and condolentis
alieno malo. Aug. contr. advers. leg. and proph. l. 1. c. 20. Isidor. orig. l.
10. Misericordia est aegritudo animi ob alienarum miseriarum speciem. Sen. de
clem. l. 2. c. 5. Misericordia vicina est miseriae. Ibid. c. 6. misereri sine
animi miseria non fit. Ibid. Quando humana fragilitas ejusmodi capere possit
affectum, qi sine miseria mis^reatur. Bern. de verb. Orig.
even partake with them therein. And as to cruel and merciless persons it is
Oculos sanguine p^scere. Vitel. apud Sue^on. c. 14. Cruciatu atqe supplicio
oculos pascere animumqe exatura^e, Cic. Verr. 5. Non tam crudelitas, qam
feritas, cum voluptati saevitia est. Sen. de clem. lib. 2. c. 4.
a pleasure to behold the pains of men in torture: so to merciful men it is a
pain to see men in pain* they feel what they behold in others; they suffer what
they see. Heb. 10.32, 33, 34.
You have endured, says the Apostle to the faithful Hebrews, (...).
a great conflict of sufferings; partly being (...). 1 Cor. 4.9.
made a gazing stock (as being brought your selves on the stage) by reproaches
and pressures; and partly by being partakers with others that were in like
manner used; and by (...).
suffering together with me in my bonds. and Heb. 13.3.
Remember those, says the same Apostle, that are in bonds, (...).
as if your selves were in bonds with them; and those that are ill entreated,
hardly used, as being your selves also in the body; and liable therefore to the
like. Yea, I may well say as being in the same body, as well with the one, as
in the same bonds with the other. For men of tender bowels, pitiful persons,
do many times by compassion endure as much, sometime more, then those do, that
do personally suffer; and are more affected and afflicted with the pains and
sufferings of others* then are they themselves that suffer them. What I endure,
(says Aria Caecinae P^ti uxor.
a Noble Lady to her husband under Claudius condemned to die, and by her own
voluntary act dying with him) (...). En, Paete, non dolet. Dio. l. 60. ubi
puerili errore, codices excusi, (...). and interpres, viden', puer, me non
dolere? and Zonar. tom. 2. ubi errore diverso, (...). Ecce feri. qod feci, non
dolet, i^qit, Sed qod tu facies, hoc mihi, Paete, dolet, Martial. epigr. 1.14.
paineth me not; that paineth me that thou endurest. Nor is it unlikely, but
that he might well have quitted her with the like language, had his courage
been equal. Certainly for 2 Kin. 25.7.
Zedekiah to have his sons slain in his sight, might well be more bitter to
him, then it was unto them; who might rather have wished to have been slain
before them, then to have survived to see that cruel execution done on them.
Is it thus then with men? and is it not so with God? Sure of Christ it is said,
that he is such Heb. 4.15.
an High Priest, as has (...).
a fellow-feeling of our infirmities. being, tho freed now from feeling, yet
Compassio etiam cum impassibilitate perdurat. Bern. de grad. humil.
not free from fellow-feeling; and tho now above all passion, yet not void of
compassion. For tho he suffer not now in himself, yet he suffers in his. Acts
9.4. me, inqit, non meos. Aug. de sanct. 14. and de diverse. 45. tanto nos
affectu amare dignatur, ut qod nos patimur, ipse se pati testetur. Idem homil.
15.
Saul, Saul, says he, why do thou persecute me? and, Matthew. 25.42, 43.
J was hungry, and ye gave not me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me not to
drink: I was naked, and ye clad me not; sick and ye prison, and in visited me
not. He is affected with what they feel, as if he suffered it in them, Non eget
ex miseria; sed eget ex misericordia non eget ex deitate pro se, sed eget ex
pietate pro suis. Salvian. ad. Ecces. l. 4.
who professes himself to suffer hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and
sickness, and imprisonment in them: and who to Saul complains of the
persecution of his Saints, as the persecution of himself. Acts 9.5.
I am Jesus, says he, whom thou persecutest. Yea of God himself it is
affirmed, as before we showed, that Esaias 63.9.
in the afflictions of his people he himself was afflicted. or, because that
place admits (...) ei, and (...) non. non affecit eos angustia. Jun. and
Pisc. pa^ lectio gemina, Job 13.15. Psalm. 100.3.
a double reading, and to some therefore may seem doubtful; take that other
place out of the holy History above also mentioned where when the Philistines
and Ammonites grievously oppressed Gods people, it is said that Judges 10.16.
his soul was grieved for the grievance of Israel. It grieved him to the very
heart to see them so grieved; their grievance went to the very heart with him.
I am not ignorant that these and the like are figurative and metaphorical
expressions, (...) enunci^^^.
taken from man's weakness, and used for the help of man's weakness, thereby to
decipher to us such a disposition in God, that is yet wholly free and far from
all taint and tang of such weakness, as they intimate in us. Howbeit, sure it
is, that that God, who thus expresses himself to be affected with the wrongs
and sufferings of his Saints, cannot but with exceeding much dislike and
displicence see and behold ought, wherewith he professes himself so to be
affected. A merciful God cannot endure any merciless carriage in man to man;
and much less toward those, whom among men he most affects, Exodus 22.22, 23.
Ye shall not afflict any widow, or any fatherless child: if any wise ye do,
and they cry unto me, J will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall be
incensed: and I will slay you with the Sword; and your wives shall be widows,
and your children fatherless. And why will God be so fierce and fiery against
such as so do? the reason follows a little after; tho inferred on a less
matter, the oppressing of the poor by retaining his pledge. Exodus 2^.27.
When he cries to me I will hear, for I am merciful. and as I love mercy,
therefore; so I abhor cruelty; and will execute judgment without mercy on
merciless men. James 2.13. Misericordiam qi non praestat alteri, tollit sibi.
Petr. Raven. sermon. 42. (...). Thucyd. l. 3.
There shall be judgment without mercy, says the Apostle, unto those that
show no mercy to others.

Add hereunto, that, albeit it be (...). Demosth. contr. Mid.
no injustice to pay cruel men in their own coin, ( it is (...). Eurip. Orest.
no cruelty, says one, if such be cru^lly dealt with, as have dealt cruelly
with others.) Yea it is not unjustly deemed sometime, a kind, not of (...).
Antonin. l. 9. ^ 5. Aeqe iniqitas est, non punire nocentes, ac punire
innocents. Rob. Grosthed. epist. 48. Non eris innocens, si aut punias eum, cui
parcendum esset, ^ut parcas ei, qi fuerat puniendus. Bern. ad Eugen. l. 2.
injustice only, but of (...) Improbis parcere crudelitas est. In doctorum
Hebr. ^nomis. Est misericordia saeviens; est and crudelitas parcens. Aug. ep.
54. (...). Pythagor. apud Stob. c. 40. Bonis nocet, qisq^^ malis pepercerit. P.
Syrus. Parcit qisqe bonis, perdere vult malos. Cleobul. apud Auson. Dum paucis
sceleratis parcunt, bonos omnes perditum eunt. Cato apud Salust. in Ca^il.
cruelty, to spare such, and not to proceed with severity against them: Yet are
merciful men wont to be moved with compassi^n even toward those that so
suffer; tho they suff^^ nothing, but what others have before suff^red from
them, and what themselves by such their doings have well deserved. Even the
pains that malefactors suffer by the hand of justice are no pleasing object to
a merciful man's eye. Tears have been seen to fall from the Judge when he was
to sentence such, in commiseration of the delinquent, tho in consideration of
his offense he were constrained to pass on him an heavy doom. Nor is it
otherwise with God. when the whole world was so deeply defiled with sin, that
it could not be cleansed but by a general deluge, as Genesis 6.11, 12, 13.
it repented God, that he had made man; so Genesis 6.6.
it grieved him at the heart, to consider with himself, that he must now
destroy man again, whom he had so made. And when, by execution of justice, he
comes to Esaias 1.24.
^ase himself of his adversaries, and to Psalm 119.119.
take away as dross the Esaias 1.2^, 25. Ier. 6.28, 29. Ezekiel. 22.18. and 24.12*
14:
scummy part of his people, that the residue may be the purer, he goes about
it as with grief. And when he had Judge. 3.8, and 4.2.
sold his people into the hands of their enemies, tho they suffered justly for
their sins; Psalm. 106.43, 45. Etiam qos injuriae invisos faciunt, gratiosos
miseriae (...) c. 3.
nevertheless, says the Psalmist, be considered, he took to heart, their
affliction, when he heard their cry, (...). Pindar. Nem: 4. Non ^st injuria,
pati qod feceris. Sen. de ira. l. 2. c. 30.
(...). Lucian. Phalar. 1.
and remembering his covenant, according to the multitude of his mercies, he
repented him of the evil, that he had inflicted on them for their sin.

In a word, Ierem. 9 24.
God delights in doing good: Psalm. 119.68.
thou art good, says he, and do good:) that is most agreeable to his nature.
and he is therefore called Pater misericordiarum. 2 Cor. 1.3.
the father of mercies; tho the D^us ultionum. Psalm 94.1.
God also of vengeance; as if that flowed most naturally from him, (...). Domi
habet. Ter. Adelph. 3.3. domi nascitur. Cic. ad Var^on.
he has it at home, as I may so say, from himself. but he delights not in
punishing: that is forced as it were from him, and he forced upon it; the
occasion, and first motive to it arises De suo optimus, de nostro justus.
Tertul. de resur. c. 14. optimus ex naturae proprietate, justus, ex causae
necessitate. ibid.
from without, it comes from the creature. Lam. 3.33.
He punishes not (...)
from the heart; or, with the heart. he goes Contra animum, and qasi invitus
facit pater miserationum, ut affligat nos. Jun.
not about it with a good will. it is Est pige^ ad poenas Deus, est ad praemia
velox: Qiqe dolet, qoties cogitur esse serox. Multa metu poenae, poena qi pauca
coercet; Et jacit invita fulmina rara manu. Ovid. pont. 1.3. Qui cum triste
aliquid statuit, fit trictis and ipse; Cuiqe fere poenam sumere, poena sua est.
ibid. 2.2. Torquetur ipse lenis, qando irascitur. Plin. jun. l. 9. ep. 21.
a grief to him, to be grievous to us: it is a pain to him to be punishing of
us. Ezekiel. 33 11.
He delights not, (himself Jurat nobis, per qem juremus: nec potest ab ipso
qisqam falli, quo invocato non licet impune mentiri. Cassiodor. Var. lib. 8.
ep. 3.
swears it) in the death of the sinner; whom he would Redire mavult, qam
perire. Gul. Malm. gest. Angl. l. 2. c. 10. suffundere maluit hominis sanguinem
qam effundere. Tertul. apolog.
rather have to repent and return, than to go on and suffer for his sin. And
if it vex and grieve him, even to see wicked ones perish; or if to see his own
(...). Aeschyl. suppl. (...). Herodian. l. 4. Inclinat animus qo sors deterior
trahit. Sen. Theb. 3. Miseros magis fortuna conciliat suis. ibid.
suffer, tho deservedly, for their sins; how much more tenderly is he
affected with those afflictions that his people wrongfully endure from the
hatred and malice of wicked men?

All which laid together, whether we shall consider the sundry relations and
tials that Gods people have unto God, or the affection and disposition that he
bears unto them; we cannot but conclude, that he cannot endure, without much
dislike and displeasure, to behold any wrong or greivance done unto them.

The Doctrine it self then being thus grounded and made good, an Objection or
two would be answered, ere we pass to the use of it.

For first, may some say, these relations that you here mention, Objection 1.
and the dispositions that you speak of, are such as concern only the
faithful; nor can any other then such lay any just claim thereunto: whereas
the passage of Scripture you treat of, is by your self affirmed to extend it
self unto the whole body of that people of whom it was uttered, consisting of
both sorts, as well unfaithful as faithful, as well bad as good.

To this I answer, first, that even those wicked and unfaithful ones, Answ. 1.
being members of the body politic of that people, which at that time was Gods
Church, yea his only visible Church, for ought we know; were as the Esaias 1.22.
dross that is mixed with the good metal, while it remains yet unrefined; as
the Matthew 3.12.
chafe that lies blended with the grain, while it abides in the floor; as
the Matthew. 13.24, 25, 38.
weeds, that grow until harvest time, among the bread-corn in the field. And
as the metalist keeps carefully the whole lump together, consisting of dross
and good metal, until it be tried, not for the dross sake, but for the good
oar, with which it lies in one lump; and the husbandman diligently fenceth
the field, wherein Matthew. 13.30.
corn and weeds grow together, not for the weeds, but for the corn, among which
they grow; and has a care of the whole heap, tho containing, it may be, more
chafe, then pure grain, until the fan or screen have severed the one from the
other, not for the chafe sake, but for the grain, wherewith it lies mingled
in one heap: so does Gods care and compassion extend it self to the whole body
of his people, tho consisting of mixed multitudes; (not unlike the Matthew. 13.24,
25, 26.
fi^ld that has (...). non viciae. qod est granum utile. nec (...), lolium, ut
Suid^^, peculiariter sic dictum* nisi si cum Hesychio (ex Theophr. hist. plant.
lib. 8. cap. 5.) (...) intelligamus. sed generalius, (...), ut Etymologus, qae
inter sata sponte sua provenire solent, herbae noxiae and inutiles. non tamen,
qasi (...), ut ille, sic dicta. sed ab Arabico (...) zevanan. Schindler. itaqe
malas herbas recte verterunt Lu^herus and Castalio. nos uno verbo Anglice
weeds dicimus. nec assentiri possum Brederodio, qi apud Scultetum observe. in
Matthew. c. 37. de frugum corruptelis exponit, qae in mess praeter paleam and
pulverem producunt nihil* qo enim modo seminari possunt, qae semensuum nullum
habent?
weeds in it as well as good corn; and the (g) d^ag-net, that draws along
with it as well trash as good fish;) not so much in regard of those unsound
ones among them, as in respect to the better sort among whom they abide. He
that (l) blessed Labans house, tho an idolater, for Jacob; and Genesis 39, 5*
Potiphers* tho an uncircumcised Egyptian, for Iaseph; does preserve and
protect such wicked ones as live mixed among his in one body with them, Genesis
30.30.
out of his tender respect unto those among whom they live. Jerem. 29.7.
Pray for, and seek, says he, the peace of the place ye abide in. for by the
peace of it shall ye have peace. If God afford continued peace unto Babel, for
his own peoples peace, that lived, tho as captives and exiles, among them, that
they might be the quieter: no marvel, if he afford safeguard unto those bad
ones, that are as embarked in the same ship with his Saints; (the Lord, says
the Angel to Paul, Acts 27 24.
has given thee the lives of all that sail with thee.) whereas good and bad so
(...). Aristaen. l. 1. ^p. 17 (...). Basil. epist. 51. (...). Philo de provid.
apud Eusebius. pr^par. l. 8. c. 14^ In eadem es n^vi. Cicer. ad Cur. l. 2. eadem
navi vecti, periculorum sunt suturi participes. Ammian. lib. 30. c. 12.
embarked, are like to endure the same storms, to enjoy the same calms, and to
be either wrecked or saved, either with other. Psalm 140.11.
Evil, says the Psalmist, shall hunt the violent dealer to destruction. The
whole heard, ye know, is often hunted, till the game be singled. and as Gods
wrath may pursue Judge. 9.23, 24. (...). Hesiod. op. l. 1.
a whole State for one Abimelech; Josh* 7.^, 5, 1^. Etiam unius facinus pestis
fuit multorum. Salvian. de provid. lib. 7.
a whole Army for one Achan; Ion. 1.12. vetabo qui sacrum Vulgarit, sub iisdem
sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum Solvat phaselum. sape Diespiter neglectus
incesto addidit integrum. Hor carm. 3.2.
a whole Fleet for one Jonah. so on the other side, Genesis 19.21.
a whole City may be saved fot one Lot, Genesis 18.32.
a whole State of bad for some ten good, yea Ier. 5.1.
for but one or two righteous. Genesis 8.1.
God remembered Noah, and the cattle, and every living thing that was with him
in the Arc. (...). Propter nos and nostra curat. Theodoret. qaest in Genesis 52.
God for our sakes takes care even of Job 1.10. Number. 20.8, 11.
our cattle, and of our chattels. yea not the Israelites cattle only, but
even the Esaias 41.17, 18. and 43.20.
wild beasts themselves also fared the better, for the people of God, while
they passed through the wilderness; making use of, and receiving benefit by,
those springs and streams of water, that for Gods people were broke up and sent
abroad to relieve and refresh them in their passage. Deus malis qoqe multa
tribuit. sed illa bonis paraverat. contingunt autem etiam malis, qia separari
non possunt. Satius est autem prodesse malis propter bonos, qam bonis deesse
propter malos. Sen. de ben. l. 4. c. 28.
Many benefits do the wicked share in with the good, that were principally
intended for the good, while they remain and abide as in one body with them.

Secondly, I answer, that even those evil and unsound ones, Answ. 2*
tho no covenant-keepers, yet are in Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11.
covenant with God; and in regard of outward profession, of the number of Gods
people. Ierem. 2.32.
My people, says God, have forgotten me, days without number, time out of
mind. and Ierem. 2.11.
My people have exchanged their glory for a thing of no use. or, Job 15.3. Ier.
7.8. Lam. 4.17.
that cannot profit, that can do them no good, can stand them in no steed. his
people he calls them still, tho they had forgotten him, tho they had
exchanged him for Esaias 44.10. Habb. 2.18.
an idol. And albeit such by their sinful courses do make forfeiture of their
right to and interest in those privileges, that appertain to Gods faithful
people; yet God does not always instantly take advantage of that their
forfeiture, but continues his mercy and goodness even to such,
notwithstanding their ill desert. Tho 2 Kings 13.21, 22, 23.
Joas the son of Iehoabaz did that that was evil in Gods sight, and departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, but went on
obstinately therein; yet when Hazael the Aramite oppressed Israel, God was
gracious to them, and had respect unto them, for his covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; and would not destroy them, nor cast them out of his presence
and protection as yet. And albeit 2 Kings 14.24, 26, 27.
Ier^boam the second his son, took the same courses, and brought on himself
the like judgments; yet when God saw the affliction of Israel, that it was
very bitter; and that there was Deuteronomy. 32.36. 2 Kings 14.14. and 21.21. Nec domi
conclusus, nec in agro derelictus. R. Levi. tam in urbe, qam in agro, tam domi,
qam peregre agens. Calv. nihil posse aut captivum, aut qi hostium manus
evaserit. Jun. neminem esse, ut ^lausum in arcibus, aut in captivitarem non
abductum. Vtabl. nihil esse; actum de eis esse tam qi in hostium manu conclusi
tenebantur, qam qi manus eorum evaserant. Pisc.
not any shut up or left; scarce any left either in hold, or abroad; either
under restraint, or left at large; nor any helper to Israel; as no power from
within, so no aid from without; and he had not resolved yet to blot out the
name of Israel from under Heaven, to make an utter riddance of them: he saved
them by the hand of Jeroboam; by Exodus 35.29. and 38.21. ^ Kings* 9.36. and
14.24.
the ministry of an ungodly King he delivered an ungodly people.

Now thus deals God also often times in regard of his own honor, that seems
nearly to be touched, when those that are deemed his, and are esteemed to have
relation unto him, are left and given up to the wicked, who acknowledge not
him, unto whom they profess, and are deemed to belong. Esaias 52.5.
My name, says God, is blasphemed, while my people is oppressed. and, Ezekiel.
36.20.
These, say they in derision, tho captived for their sin, are Gods people,
that are gone out of his Land. When the Syrian King came with a very puissant
army against Ahab (tho 1 Kings 16.31, 32.
an idolater, and one that had 1 King. 21.25.
sold himself to sin, yet) being King then of Israel, still accounted Gods
people; 1 King. 20.13
Do thou see, says God by his messenger to him, this great multitude? I
will deliver them all this day into thine hand. that it may be known, that I am
the Lord. and so Verse 20.21.
accordingly he did. And again, when Verse 23.25.
the Syrians told their Lord, that the God of Israel is God of the, hills* (for
so we may well read the words Verse 28.
by good warrant from God himself) but not of the plain: and that this was the
reason why they prevailed against them when the battle was fought on the hills;
but they should be sure to have the better of them, if they fought with them on
the plain; God sends Ahab a second message, Verse 28.
because the Syrians say, The Lord is God of the hills, but not God of the
valleys; therefore will I deliver this great multitude into thine hands: and it
shall be known that I am the Lord. God would save them, tho wicked ones, and
unworthy of ought and give them victory against their blasphemous enemies; to
save, his own credit, and maintain his own honor.

Hereunto may be added, that even for their profession, men, tho not inwardly
sound, yet may outwardly suffer. Men may persecute piety even where it is not,
in an hypocrite: and wrong Christ even in those, who in truth are none of his,
nor have part in him: and dishonor God in those, whom Mat. 7.22, 23. Nun quam
novi vos. pro meis non habeo. Psalm. 1.6. and 37.18. John 10.14, 27. Romans 7.15.
he does not own, or acknowledge, because false-hearted, or loose-lived. A man
may suffer for wearing a Noble man's livery, tho but bought at the brokers, if
he fall into the hands of some adverse party: and a servant or retainer in like
case fare the worse for having his Masters cloth or cognizance about him; tho
he have been for his misdemeanors discharged of his service; and much more, if
tho being in no grace or favor at all with him, he do yet retain, or profess
himself to retain still un^o him. In like manner may a man suffer, yea many so
do, as well inwardly rotten-hearted, as outwardly debauched, for 2 Timothy 3.5.
Tit. 1.6.
the profession they make of piety, and for pretending to that interest in God,
which yet in truth they have not. whom God may therefore, and does often afford
protection unto, in regard not only that they suffer wrongfully, being out of
malice oppugned, but that himself suffers in them, being therefore maligned,
because they are esteemed to have some special relation to him.

In these respects therefore it may truly be said, that God cannot, but with a
wrathful eye, endure to see wrongs and reproaches offered unto the main body of
his people, tho there be many among them, that have no such special interest
in him, as the better sort of them have, whom he principally respects, but
either profess, or are deemed only, in truth to be his.

Objection 2.
But again it may be objected, that God is often read to have Jer. 12.7. and
81.12. and 78.61, 62. Psalm. 74.1.
delivered up his people into the hands of their enemies; yea to have Psalm.
13.1, 2. and 22.1.
left his, even the best of them, such as have been highest in his favor and
deepest in his books unto the malice and cruelty of their inhumane adversaries.
hence those grievous complaints of Gods people, that Psalm. 44.12, 13, 22.
God had sold them for naught, made them a reproach and scorn to their
neighbors round about them, that for his sake they were daily, or (...) Verse
8.15.
incessantly slaughtred; and that all this they had endured, while he stood by
and Esaias 26.17.
looked on, as if he regarded not, either them, or the cruelty exercised on
them. and how then, may some say, is it affirmed, that God cannot endure to see
any wrong done to his?

Answer 1.
To this, in way of answer thereunto, we return; first, that God often times
suffers such things to befall his servants for their sins; and 2 Chronicles.
12.7, 8.
makes use of wicked men, as of scourges, to chastise his children with for
their excesses. In which his dealing he has an eye, not to them alone, whom he
does so chastise, nor to those alone, Heb. 12.10.
whose good also in such his chastisements he intends, 1 Cor. 10.6. 11.
(...). exempla, non figur^
while he makes those whom he so chastises, examples of more cautious and
circumspect carriage to others; but he has an eye also to himself, and to his
own credit. For howsoever it is true indeed, as has been said, that wicked men
take occasion to question his power and his providence over his, when they see
them so to suffer: yet it would redound much more Romans 2.24. In nobis Christus
patitur opprobrium, in nobis patitur lex Christiana maledictum. Ecce qales
sunt, inqiunt, qi Christum colunt. talis est sect^, qales and sectatores. hoc
sunt, qod docentur. si bona discerent, boni essent. sancta a Christiania
fierent, si Christus sancta docu^sset. aestimari de cultoribu^ potest ille qi
colitur. qom^^o bonus magister est, cujus tam malos videmus esse discipulos?
Salvian. de pro^^d. l. 4. c. 11.
to his dishonor another way, if he should suffer those, that are esteemed his
people, his servants, his children, to go unpunished, or unchastised, when they
sin. for should he so do, he would be deemed to be a patron of impiety, of
impurity, of iniquity; a maintainer of his in the practice of such things. And
surely, as Gods name is often dishonored by the sufferings of his servants; so
much more also by their sins. 2 Samuel 12.9.11
Because, says Nathan to David, thou have set light by Gods word, in taking
the wife of Uriah, Verse 16.18.
and slaying him by the sword of the children of Ammon; therefore the sword
shall never depart from thine house; and I will raise up one out of thine own
bowels, that shall abuse thy wives in the sight of all Israel. and again, Verse
14.
because thou have hereby given the enemies of God occasion to blaspheme, the
child that was born in adultery shall surely die. Neither could David with all
his fasting and prayer, and more then ordinary humiliation, get that heavy
doom revoked.

Howbeit, tho for such and other the like causes, God gave the wicked sometime
power over his; yet the cruelty that in such cases they exercise on his people,
is not in regard thereof any whit the less odious and offensive in Gods sight;
as himself also expressly avoweth. Esaias 10.5.
O Assure, says he* or, As Esaias 10.1 and 18.1.
Woe to Assure, the rod of my wrath; the rod, wherewith in my wrath I have
chastised my people* Qamvis. sicut Hos. 5.2. Zech. 12^3.
tho the staf of mine indignation be in their hand, albeit I make use of him at
present as an instrument, for mine own ends and purposes, in the execution of
my wrath, yet woe be to him for all that. E^ay 10.6.
I shall send him indeed against a Ita malim, qam hypocritam. ut and Job 15.14.
and 27.8, 13 and 34.30. Psalm. 35.16. Sic Jer. 31. and 23.15.
profane Nation, a people whom I am displ^ased with; furnished with a
commission to take the spoil and the prey; and to trea^ them down, Psalm. 18.42.
Esaias 28 18.
like mire in the street. Esaias 10.7.
but he means not so; he minds nothing less; but it is in his heart to
destroy, and to cut off Nations not a few. his entendement is only to advance
himself, and to enlarge his dominions, by the ruins of other people. he little
dreameth of doing God any service herein. and Esaias 10.12.
when God therefore has by him wrought his own work upon Sion, he will then
punish him also for his proud and stout heart, and his high looks. when he has
done chastising his children by him, he will Vtitur Deu^ creatura rationali,
sed malevola, ut virga, qam correcto filio, pater in ignem, tanqam sarmentum
inutile, abjicit. Bern. de great and lib. arb.
throw the rod, wherewith he chastised them, into the fire. And of Babel; Esaias
47.6.
I was wroth with my people; and gave them into thine hands: and thou 2 Chronicles.
36.17.
shewedst them no mercy; but even Lam. 4.16. and 5.12.
upon the aged, not regarding their age, did thou lay an heavy yoke* Thus
Ier. 50.17. (...) comedit eu^^ Wasted his flesh, cast him into a consumption,
as Psalm. 69.9.
Israel became as a scattered sheep: the Lions chased him: first Assure wasted
him; and after that the King of Babel Bone^ him. as necked, Esaias 66.3.
brake his very bones. But what follows? Ier. ^0.18.
Therefore th^^ says the Lord ^f hoasts, the God of Israel; even he that
delivered them into the hands of either, Behold, as I punished the King of
Assure; so will I punish the King of Babel. and Esaias 33.1.
Woe then to him that spoiled, when himself was not spoiled: for when he shall
cease to spoil others, others shall spoil him. and Ier. 25.14* and 27.7
as Babel has served her self on other nations, and Gods people among the
rest, so ma^y nations shall serve themselves on Babel. when as God has used
them (...). Plut. de ser. vindict.
for executioners of his wrath and indignation upon others: so will he use
others as instruments of his just judgment upon them, (...)^ Synes. epist. 57.
even for those things that by his just judgment, tho to them unknown, they
have done. nor could God with approbation see that done by them, for which he
will in due time execute just judgment upon them.

Answer 2.
Secondly, God leaves his sometime to the malice and cruelty of the enemy, for
the trial and exercise of his grace in them. For sundry graces of Gods
children, as their faith, their patience, their courage, their confidence, are
as the stars, that (...). Proverb. Stellae interdiu latent, noctu emicant. ita
vera virtus non apparet in prosper^^, eminet in adversis. Bern. in Cant. 27.
Qae latet, inqe bonis cessat non cognita rebus, Apparet vireus, arguitur^e
mali^. Nas^. ^rist. 4.3.
lie hid in the day, but shine forth in the night. appear not, to speak of, in
times of prosperity; but have their chief luster in times of adversity and
trouble, do most appear, when they are most opposed. The light of fire is
least seen by day: and the pillar therefore that conducted the Israelites in
their march, appeared Exodus 13.21.
as a cloud by day, as fire by night. and the fire burns dimmest, when the
sun shines most upon it. Ar^tur, Typhi, jacet, sinon si^ in aeqore fluctus.
Si valiant homines, ars tua, Phoebe, jacet. Naso trist. 4.3.
Nor is the Physicians skill known in time of health; (...)^ Lucian. de amic.
Gubernatoris artem tranqillum mare, and obseqens ven^us non ostendit: adversi
aliqid incurrat oportet, qod animum probet. Sen. ad Marc. c. 5.
nor the Mariners skill seen in a calm; Gubernatorem in tempestate, in acie
militem intellig^^. Idem de provid. c. 4.
nor the Soldiers valor and worth, in times of peace, when he is out of
action; nor any man's patience unless he be crossed; Ad animose for^^terqe
faciendum, opus est aliq^ rerum difficultate. calamita^ virtutis occasio est.
Sen. de provid. c. ^ Marc^^ sine adversario virtus. Idem. ad Marc. c. 5.
adversis probitas exercita rebu^, Tristi materiam te^pore laud^^ habet. Naso
trist. 5.6.
nor his courage, until he meet with some strong opposition, Patientiae in
prosperis nullus est usu^. Gregor. mor. l. 11. c. 19.
until he be put to some straight. Jam. 3.11.
Ye have heard of Jobs patience; says the Apostle. but we had never heard of
it, had Job always continued in the same constant tenor of a quiet and
comfortable estate, had he never been laid so low, and so (...). Chrysostom. in
Matthew. orat. 13. Cicuta Socratem magnum fecit. Sen. ep. 13.
afflicted as he was, by the malice of Satan, and the unkind carriage of his
friends. But on the other side, the darker the room is, the clearer the candle
burns, and the brighter the fire: the more dangerous and desperate the
disease is, the more is the Physicians art manifested in the cure of it: the
more violent and impetuous the storm is, the more is the Mariners skill showed,
in carrying his ship through it with safety: the hotter the fight or service
is, the more will the valor of the soldier appear, in his standing constantly
and undauntedly to it, whatsoever the issue be: the heavier the cross, and the
greater the danger, the more is the Rev. 13.10. and 14.12.
patience and courage of that man seen, that shall quietly bear and undergo the
one, and that shall cheerfully and confidently carry himself in the other. the
greater Jobs sufferings and distresses were, the more evidently, and eminently
did the excellency of his heroik spirit shine and show it self forth in them.

Again, as the spirits of men are not seen so much as in such cases; so nor are
they tried so thoroughly as by occasions of this kind. There is no trial of a
soldier, whether he be courageous or a coward, but in the field, and in fight.
the veriest dastard can at court, and in company word it and brave it, as well
as the stoutest and valiantest champion that is. but bring them to (...).
Aristoph. Lysistr.
action; and that will soon distinguish them, and determine, if any be, the
doubt. Nor is the sincerity of men's hearts to Godward, so thoroughly by ought
tried, as by constant standing in times of opposition and persecution, to his
cause. The Matthew. 13.5.20, 21.
blade on the stony ground, makes as fair a show, tho it have no deep rooting,
as that that is well rooted in the good ground, until the height of summer
come; but then the beat of the sun shining forth in his strength, parcheth up
the one, when it impaireth not, but cherishes the other. The Matthew. 3.12.
chafe stays together with the grain in the floar, until the winowing time
come; but then Pal^ae inter frum^nta latitarunt: venit palu^, and paleae
avolaru^ Aug. in Psalm.
the wind of the fan or sheet carries the light chafe away; and it flies
before it out of the floor, when as the grain unde (...) lapillus, scrupulus, a
pondere, respectu paleae. Pisc.
having weight staieth and abides still by it. Prove. 26.23.
Earthen pots guilt over, when they stand on the cup-board 2 Timothy 2.20.
among massy plate, may not be discerned the one from the other by the eye:
but when they come to the scouring, being rubbed to the purpose, the one, its
surface failing, will show what it is, when as the other will be sure to appear
still the same that before it made show of. drossie and base stuff often makes
as fair and goodly a show as rich oar; and counterfeit slips, as current coin;
until they come Jer. 6.27, 28.
to the test the one, to the touchstone the other. When the Devil accused Job
to God for a counterfeit; How will that, says God, appear? why? Job 1.9-11.
It is not for nothing that he fears thee, says Satan. he serves thee now,
but to serve his turn upon thee. thou have enriched him; and heapest still more
and more upon him: and thou have hedged him in; set such a strong fence about
him and his estate, that nothing can break in upon him to disturb or annoy him.
and no marvel then, if he be willing to serve so bountiful a master, to live
in obedience to so careful and powerful a protector. he knows not how, or
where to mend himself. but should thou but once offer to stay thine hand, or
to stretch it out (...) in re ull^. ut Levit. 5.2, 5. Ezekiel. 18.13.
on ought that thou have bestowed on him, to as Psalm. 105.15 see before Reat. 1.
touch him never. so little in any part of his estate; as he is now but an
hireling, so he would then prove a changeling; thou should then soon see a
strange change and alteration in him; he would curse thee as fast, as he
bl^sseth thee now; he would even curse thee to thy face. Well; God, as Jobs
advocate is content to join issue with the Devil herein: Let that, says he,
be the trial. Job 1.12.
his estate and Job 2.6.
his person are both in thine hand. do the worst thou can to him; not
bereaving him of his life. And what says Job himself of all this? Job 23.10.
God, says he, knows me, and tries me: and when I have been tried Esaias 48.10.
in the furnace of affliction, I shall come out of all my tribulations, as
gold, as precious metal (and indeed so he did) out of the furnace, out of the
fire. And, Psalm. 66.10.12
Thou, Lord, have tried us, says the, Psalmist, (...) silver is tried. and how
had he tried them? Thou broughtest us into a net: thou laiedst (...) cingulam
asinariam: Jun. vo^erinariam, malim. aut etiam, clitellariam. Cingulam ^umbos
(...). Pisc.
a straight, or wringing girt upon our loins: thou suffredst us to be girt as
beasts are wont to be, that bear burdens, to be used as pack-horses or the
like: thou have caused men to ride Juxta comminationem. Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44. Jun.
over our heads* caused us to be used Non equitem do^so* non fraenum depulit
ore. Flacc. l. 1. ep. 1^.
as hackney-horses, over whose head his rider sits reaching out himself to
manage him; or A camell^ tractum. nam vidi qi cameli colio insideret and
voheretur. Pisc.
as Camels, on whose neck they are said sometime to sit, that rule and direct
them: we have gone through fire and water. Thou have tried us with all manner
of tribulation; and upon trial found us sound and sincere. For, Psalm. 44.17.
tho all this have befallen us, (as elsewhere they profess) the thou Psalm.
44.22.
have cast us off, and put us to shame; and go not forth with our
h^asts; but make us turn our back upon our enemies, and suffer those that
hate us to plunder and spoil us; have given us as sheep for meat, and dispersed
us among the heathen; have sold us for naught, and exposed us to shame and
scorn: Verse. 19.
have broken us, Verse 10.14.
Ellips^, qalis Psalm. 89.39, 44. Esaias 14.12. and 21.9.
and cast us down into the deep, where the Genesis 1.12. Lam. 4.3.
Whales abide, there to be in all likelihood either drowned, or by them
devoured; and covered us with a deadly shade; with darkness so thick, or a
shadow so dark, that the very Horre^^^qe (...) imminet umb^^. (...)
horror and dread wherewith it possesses men, is enough to damp their spirits,
and to strike them stone-dead: yea tho Psalm. 44.22.
for thy sake we are daily, or continually, slaughtered; no other reckoning
being made of us, th^n as of sheep, not kept for their milk and fleece, but set
apart for the shambles: yet Verse 17.18.
for all this do we not forget thee, albeit thou seem to have forgotten us;
nor do we deal disloyally in breaking our covenant with thee: we make bold
Psalm. 74.20.
to mind thee of thy covenant with us: our heart is not for all this turned
away from thee; nor are our steppings turned aside out of thy way. we continue
still constant with thee: and for their constancy and sincerity, they dare, as
Job 10.7. and ^3.10.
Job also, appeal Psalm. 44.^0.21
to God himself. And, James 1.12.
Blessed is the man, says James, that thus endures temptation, that so
undergoeth trial. for, when he has been thus tried; and upon his trial
approved, (for so the word must be taken there, as it is also Psalm. 11.5. 1
Cor. 11.28. Gal. 6.4.
elsewhere) he shall receive the crown of life; which God has promised to
those that love him; by such trial now appearing to be of the number of those
that sincerely so do.

Besides as in such trial the metal often passing the fire and abiding the
same; is thereby not approved only to be good, but is much Psalm. 1^*6.
improved also in its purity and worth, the drossie and earthy matter, that was
before mixed with it* being severed from it by the fire: so by afflictions and
sufferings are the gifts and graces of Gods people, not tried only and
exercised, and approved as sincere, but much improved also and furthered in the
growth of them, while through the gracious and powerful operation of the
spirit, joining with them, and working by them the remainders of their
spiritual dross and dregs are wrought out of them, and their endowments
raised up to an higher degree of holiness, which that baser mould much
impeached and impaired before. Ier. 9.7.
I will melt them, and try them; says God. for what should I do else for the
daughter of my people? and, Esaias 1.25.
I will turn mine hand on thee; and burn thy dross out of thee; as the wicked
ones from among thee; so the remainders of corruption out of the residue. And
again, Esaias 48.10. constabo. Jun. constando expurgabo. Pisc.
I will refine thee; but not as silver is fined. not so exactly and
exquisitely, as silver or gold is wont to be fined, which the finer keeps in
the fire, until the dross be wholly wrought out of it: (but should God do so
with us, we should never be out of the furnace, while we live here.) howbeit I
will Electum efficiam. Jun. purum reddam instar argenti electi. Pisc.
choose thee, or make a choice one of thee, make thee a vessel fit for my use,
and for an honorable service; having purified thee in some good measure, by
the furnace of affliction. And* Zach. 13.9.
I will bring a third part of them through the fire, and will refine them, as
silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried; and then they shall call upon
me* and I will hear them. having made them by their afflictions fit for my
service. And, Dan. 11.33.35.
Many of those, says Daniel, that have understanding, shall fall, by fire and
sword, and by plundering and thraldom. but to what end? or with what effect?
to try them, and to purify them, and to whiten them. and Dan. 12.10.
many accordingly shall be purified, and whitened, and tried, And, Mal. 3.2.4.
The Lord, says Malachie, when he comes in judgment, shall be as the finers
fire, and as the fullers soap: and he shall sit down, as a finer, or trier of
silver, to refine the sons of Levi, and to purify them as gold or silver.
that the offerings they offer, may be righteous offerings, and wel-pleasing to
the Lord.

Hereunto might be added, that as no trials are usually sharper or fiercer,
then those that Gods people sustain at the hands of their malicious and
merciless adversaries, and their reproachful and despitefull usages: the
rather because Psalm. 42.3, 10. and 74.1^. and 115.2.
therein they seem to insult, not so much over them, as over God himself in
them. so in no trials does the courage and confidence of Gods people more
manifest it self, then by their undaunted, constant, and unmovable carriage in
such cases. Nor is God himself in ought more glorified; nor the might of his
grace in his by any means more magnified, then when Gods people, tho they seem
left to the will of their cruel enemies, yet notwithstanding all their might
and malice, all their rage, and excess of outrage and cruelty, they
Invictisque viris. Maro Aen. l. 11 cum supra dixisset, Bis capti Phryges. sed,
ut E^nius, Qi vincit, non est victor, nisi victu' fatetur. vinci ^^cuntur, qi
se dedunt hostibus. Servius. Et cuncta terrarum subacta, Praeter a^rocem ^nimum
Catoni^. Flacc. carm. 2.1.
cannot have their own will on them, are Fecerunt de illo (Jo^nne, Mar. 9.13.)
qicqid vol^bant. sed nunqid faciebant, ut ab illo fieret. Bern. de great. and
lib. arb. (...). Calanus ^d Alex. apud Phil^n. de libert. and Clem. strom. lib.
4.
not able to work them to what they would, but that Torquentem vincit, qisqis
occiditur. Quintil. declam.
they conquer them then, when they seem to be conquered by them, they prevail
against those that seem to prevail against them. John 21, 18, 19.
When thou wast young, says our Savior to Peter, thou did gird thy self, and
walkedst whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch
out thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
would not. and withal it is added, that this he spoke, signifying, by what
death he should glorify God. and, Rev. 13.1, ^, 7.
There was power given to the beast, to make war upon the Saints, and to
overcome them. and yet did they prevail against him, and overcame him, (as they
had done Rev. 12.11.
the Dragon before him) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony; (or, Vt, verbo pot^ntiae su^. Heb. 1.3. and, verbum patientiae meum.
Rev. 3.10.
by their word of testimony, their free and undaunted witnesse-bearing to Gods
truth; or, by the Sicut 1 Reg. 14.13. Dan. 10.1. Luc.1.37.
matter of their martyrdom, whereby they gave a real testimony thereunto:)
and by (...). Lysias epitaph.
not loving their lives unto death: by being willing to lay down their lives in
Gods cause, and to seal both the truth of it and their love to it, with their
blood. for thus had they Rev. 15.3.
the victory over the beast, and over his mark, and his image, and the number
of his name; even then, when he seemed most victorious against them; to wit,
when Rev. 20.6.
refusing to worship the beast, or his image, or to bear his name on their
forehead, or hand, they were beheaded, or suffered otherwise for their
refusal. And; Romans 8.37.
in all these things, says the Apostle, we are not conquerours only, but
(...).
more th^n conquerours, even triumphers, (as he (...). 2 Cor. 2.14.
elsewhere expresses it) through him, that has loved us. John 12.32.
When I shall be (...).
advanced, says our Savior, thereby intimating what death he should die: as
if the John 3.14, 15.
lifting of him up on the cross, had been the lifting of him to some chair of
estate, or some seat of honor, some royal throne, or some triumphant Charet.
that which the Apostle also seems to intimate, where he says, that Col. 2.15.
on it, he triumphed over principalities and powers; and (...).
led them in triumph, as captives, Captains and great commanders especially,
taken in war, had anciently in solemn manner wont to be, as to their greater
ignominy, so for the greater honor of him, by whom they had been subdued. And
as Crux Christo currus triumph^lis fuit. T. Cart. in harmon. Evang.
the cross was as Christ's triumphant charet: so are the constant sufferings of
Gods servants their conquest's, their triumph: since that thereby they
overcome, and even Repugnamus, perseverantes in eo, qod oppugnant: and illos
nun^ qam magis detriumphamus, qam cum pro fide^ obstinatione damnamur. Tertull.
apolog. c. 27.
triumph over the might and malice of the adverse party; thereby acquiring
abundance of glory to God* and atchieving a large measure of true honor to
themselves, in the eyes and minds both of God and man.

The consideration whereof also makes Gods children, tho not willing, if no
need were, (and so take we that John 21.18.
before spoken by our Savior of Peter) to undergo such sad and heavy things as
these usually are: yet (in regard that their sufferings bring so much glory to
God, and as from them, are a service very acceptable unto him) to be not only
not unwilling, but most ready and forward, with much alacrity and
cheerfulness, to offer themselves unto them, or rather to offer themselves up
to God in them: esteeming it as no dishonor, but an honor, to be dishonored
for Christ, and for his cause; so no pain, but a pleasure, to endure, be it
what it will, or can be, that they suffer for Christ, or for the good of those
that are his. Acts 5.40, 41.
They went from the consistory, says the story of Peter and John, when they
had been rated and beaten, rejoicing that they were (...). Casaub.
vouchsafed the honor to be dishonourably used for Christ; that they had been
so much graced as to be disgraced for him. And, Col. 1.24.
Now I rejoice in my sufferings, says the Apostle Paul to the Colossian^, for
you; while I help for my part to fill up, or fulfill in (...) flesh, wh^^i^ yet
behind, or remains to be made up, of the sufferings of Christ, (besides what
he personally endured, by Gods appointment for other ends, such are
abovementioned, and the like, to be sustained by the several members of his
body, each of them his portion assigned him in his turn and time) for his body,
which is the Church. And to the Ephesian^ at Miletus, on the way in his journey
to Jerusalem, Acts 20.22-24.
Behold I go to Jerusalem, bound in the spirit, Matthew. 4*1.
by a solemn, tho secret, instinct of the Spirit led thither, not knowing what
things will there befall me: whether I shall there end my days or no: save
that the holy Ghost, by persons therewith inspired, some or other, in each
City, where I come, assures m^, that bands and imprisonment there abide me:
but none of these things at all move me, nor is my life dear unto me, so I may
consummate my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received from the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. and after that, when
some of the Disciples at Tyrus, Acts 21.4.
speaking by the Spirit, said to him, that he should not go to Jerusalem. that
is, (...). Theophylact.
by divine inspiration foretold him what would there befall him, and withal
out of their kind, but corrupt, affection, gave him carnal counsel, such as
Mat^h. 16.^2.
Peter did before-time in the like case to our Savior, that he would forbear
to go thither: and Acts 21.10, 11.
Agabus a Prophet at Caesarea, with Paul's girdle binding himself, showed by
ocular demonstration, how he should be bound hand and foot at Jerusalem: and
the brethren Acts 21*12.
there present, thereupon likewise were earnest upon him, with tears
beseeching him that he would not go thither; Acts 21.13.
What mean ye, says he, thus by weeping to break my heart? I am ready not to
be bound only, but to die at Ierusal^m for the name of the Lord Jesus. And
when he had been Acts ^^.14.
bound at Jerusalem, and being sent from thence to Rome, he was Acts 28.16.
a prisoner now there, writing to the Philippians; Phil. 1.^0*
Mine earnest expectation and hope, says he, is, that I shall no way be
abashed; but that with all freedom, as well of speech, as of spirit, as at all
times formerly, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, be it by life
or by death. and what is the reason why he sets so light by his life, that it
is all one to him whether he live or die, so long as Christ may be magnified by
either? he resolves you in the next words himself, if they be rightly
understood. not. as G^^^ra Bible.
our former translation following Calvin* and Beza.
Beza and some others, had it, For Christ is to me both in life and in death
advantage. that is, whether I live or die, I shall be a gainer; I shall gain
Christ, or gain by Christ, in either. that is true indeed; but that respects
himself, rather then Christ, not Christ's glory, but his own good; tho these two
are inseparable. nor as our later edition, and some others Piscat.
interpreters of good note, because they Non cohaeret ratio cum praecedente.
Pisc.
mislike the connection, returning to Mihi enim vivere Christus est, and mori
lucrum.
the old Latin, For to me to live in Christ, and to die is ga^n. or, in
handsomer English, Vita m^hi Christus, mors lucrum, patria coelum. G. Godwin.
epit. lac. Maurit.
Christ is my life; and death is my gain. which yet as little agrees with the
Apostles drift as the former. but, as a Dr. Airay.
reverend Divine of ours, (if I mistook him not, for it is long since I read
him.) which I conceive to be the genuine sense of the place; (...).
F^^ gain to m^, or, my gain, both in life and death, is Christ. that is all
the gain that I seek and aim at, either in my pains taking while I live, or in
my sufferings, if I die, is Christ; is to magnify him, to bring glory to him,
to do service to him, and for him to his. That which elsewhere he says of all
true Christians with himself, Romans 14.7, 8.
None of us lives to himself; nor dies any of us to himself. for whether we
live, we live to the Lord; or whether we die, we die to the Lord. that is, to
Christ. our aim both in life and death is to serve him; not to receive ought
from him, (that is true, that Matthew. 5.12. and 6.4, 18. and 10.42. and 19.29.
we shall so do; yet not here intended) but to do him service. To which purpose
also he further tells the Philippians, that Phil. 1.22.
concerning his stay here, he was in some doubt what to choose, or what might
be deemed (...). operae p^etium. Beza.
most be^^ofefull: and Phil. 1.23.
that he was (...).
in a great straight, what to pitch upon. for when he considered himself and
his own good, he had a strong inclination to a desire of (...)* dissolvi Lat.
Vulg. and Calvin. (...). Plato Gorg. (...). Sof^ius apud Stob. c. 119. ad
dimissionem. Beza. melius Ca^er. Pisc. Castel^. migrationem, discessum. 2 Timothy
4.6. ^ nauti^ tractum, qi (...) dicuntur, Homero Odys. ^. ora solvere, Fabio
instit. l. 1. and 4.
departure, that he might be with Christ, whom he was 2 Cor. 5.6* 8.
absent from, tho employed in his service, while he abode here in the body;
which was indeed (...).
by far much the better for himself: but when he looked upon the Philippians
and other of Gods people, to whom his abode in the flesh might be more useful,
he was well content to stay longer here, tho with delay of his own greatest
good, his personal enjoyment of Christ's glorious presence. Yea, he adds
afterward in his ensuing discourse, that if his death might conduce any way to
their spiritual improvement, and it might be thought more advantageous to
them, Phil. 1.24, 25.
for him to die for them, then to live with them, he was right ready* not
willingly alone, but even cheerfully to condescend thereunto. Phil. 2.17.
Yea if I be offered up, says he, or (...). 2 Timothy 4.6. pro libamento o^^erar.
Bez.
poured out, (...).
upon the sacrifice and service of your faith; if my blood, as a
drink-^ffering, (which Number. 15.5, 10.
was wont to be poured out upon the body of the beast sacrificed, to consummate
the sacrifice) by being shed in Christ's cause, may help further to strengthen
your faith; I shall therein joy and rejoice with you; I shall for your sakes be
exceeding glad of it. You see what the gain was, that he aimed at, as well in
life, as in death; not his own, but Christ's, and the gaining of others unto
Christ.

It is not therefore without great cause, and good ground, that God thus gives
way to the sufferings of his servants, so much conducing to his own glory, and
their honor and good; nor are they, as his (...). 2 Timothy 2.3.
soldiers, and (...). 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Cor. 9.25. (...). 2 Timothy 2.5.
champions unwilling so to be employed in his service, to be (...). 2 Cor.
12.15.
spent in his cause.

Howbeit this hinders not, but that God disliketh and abhors the rage and
cruelty, that such wretches, Psalm. 74.4, 23. and 83.2. and 89.51.
his enemies, as well as his people, do for him and his sake thus exercise on
them; no more then his Acts 2.23. and 4.28.
purpose* concerning the death of our Savior for the salvation of his elect,
did any way extenuate, much less excuse, or make less odious in Gods eye, the
wickedness of those, that had any way (either by Mat. 26.3, 4.
malicious contrivance, as the Priests, or Mat. 26.16, 48.
treacherous employment, as Judas, or Mat. 27.22, 23.
importunate clamor, as the people, or Mat. 27.26.
judiciary sentence* as Pilate, or Mat. 27.27-35 Luke 2^.63-65. Use 1.
despightfull usage, and acts of violence, as the Soldiers and other Officers)
an hand in the procuring and execu^ing of it. And nothing therefore can thence
be concluded, to hinder but that God neither does, nor can, without much
indignation and detestation, endure to behold, whatsoever wrong or violence is
offered unto his people* either in this kind, or in any other.

Now for the use and application of the point thus made good:

First, the consideration hereof may serve, as by the hand to lead us* where to
find the cause of Gods so often chastising his children. Psalm 73.14.
I have been smitten, says Asaph, every day, day after day; and ^hastised
(...) (...) 101, 8. Esaias 33.2.
every morning. as if no day had past over his head without some stroke from
Gods hand; and God had usually made it his first mornings work to be dealing
out somewhat in this kind to him; his constant wont were to make him break his
fast with the rod. and lest we should think that this was his lot alone, he
tells us in the words ensuing, that this his dealing was not unusual with
Psalm 72.15.
the whole race of his children. And indeed, Heb. 12.7.
There is no son, says the Apostle, whom God does not chastise; Prove. 3.12.
love he him never so well. H^b. 12.6. (...).
he scourges every one whom he takes into family, to be a son, or a servant.
For is God so affectionate unto those that are his, that he cannot endure to
see any the least harm done to them? how comes it to pass then, that he
deals so harshly often with them himself? surely this leads us to seek the cause
hereof somewhere else; not in him, but in our selves. If we shall see and
observe one, whom we know to be a very chary and tender parent, one that cannot
abide to see the least wrong done, in word or deed, either by servant or
stranger, unto any of his children, yet to be often chiding with them, and
chastising of them himself, so that neighbors take notice, how the rod walks
in his house, and his children, some or other of them, come daily under the
lash; we will easily conclude, that there is sure somewhat amiss in them, that
he would have reformed, their carriage is some way or other such as it should
not be; and the cause therefore of his so dealing with them, contrary to his
own disposition otherwise, is not from ought in himself, being of himself
averse thereunto, but from somewhat in them, that induces, or even
constrains him so to do. In like manner, when we shall see and observe how
God, who is so chary of the good and welfare of his children, and so tender
over them that he cannot endure to see them sustain the least injury at the
hand of any other; yet to be so frequently correcting the^ himself, and dealing
with them so severely, as oft-times he does; we may well thence conclude, that
there is not somewhat only, but very Ioh 9.3. Psalm 19.12. and 40.12. and
130.3. and 143.2. Jam. 3.1. non dixit, Offenditis, sed, offendimus, inqit: and,
In multis, praemisit; Omnes, subjunxit. Beda.
much amiss with them, Ierem. 30.14.
many things out of order, that he would have reformed and amended in them;
that it is Nos calamitatum nostrarum autores sumus. Deus enim pius and
miserico^s est. sed nos coelestis irae ignem accendimus, and excitamus incendia
qibus ardeamus. nos adversum nos omnia facimus. nihil est nobis crudelius
nobi^. nos nosmetipsos etiam Deo nolente cruciamus. verum est, a Deo punimur:
sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur. qum autem puni^e. nos ipsi facimus, cui dubium
est, qin ipsi nos n^stris criminibus puniamus? qi^ qiacunqe dat causam ut
puniatur, ipse se punit. Salvian. de prove. l. 8. c. 2.
from them and their corruption, not from himself, or his own disposition, that
he deals in such wise with them. It is that which the Prophet thence inferres,
in that dispute of his, wherein he debates and discusseth the ground and causes
of those afflictions, that his people then in captivity sustained. Lam. 3.33.
The Lord, says he, does not from his heart afflict, or grieve the sons of
men. and yet he does it. that is acknowledged. For, Lam. 3.37. (...) sicut Ier.
2.23.
Who is he that can, or dare say, that Mundi u^us est rector, qi universa,
qaecunqe sunt, verbo jub^t, ratione dispens^t, virt^te consummat, Cypr. de
idol. and ad Demetr. arbitrio ejus ac nutu cuncta geruntur, nec qicqam fieri
potest. nisi qod aut fecerit, ^ut fieri ipse permiserit. (...). Antonin. l. 8.
27. (...). Idem l. 7. 31. Decernuntur ista, non accidunt. Sen. ep. 96.
ought comes to pass, and the Lord has not commanded it? It is he that Esaias
45.7.
creates evil as well as good; as well darkness as light, as well war as
peace. and Amos 3.6.
there is no evil in City, Country, or family, no evil whatsoever that
befalls persons or people, which he has not done: he has ever a hand, tho a
pure and a just one, in it. and, Lam. 3.38.
as well evil as good comes out of his mouth: either comes (...). Sophocl.
Ajac. (...). Homer. odys. o.
by his appointment. But, if he do what is done, and yet that which is done
goes against the heart with him; surely there must be somewhat without him,
that incites him to do what he does. yea, that is true, says our Prophet, the
cause of the evils we sustain is in our selves, not in him. Lam. 3.39.
Why does the living man complain? what is the first and principal procuring
cause of his grief? man suffers for his sin. it is his own sin that is
the procuring cause of his sufferings. it is man's sin, that kindles wrath in
God. Esa. 64.5.
Thou art incensed, Et peccavimus. pro, qia peccavi^^^ ut Psalm 108.12. Esaias
53.2, 11. and 57.17.
because we have sinned. it is sin, that Cupit nolentibus subvenire* invitus
in reos vindicat. Aug. de verb. Dom. 3. Ipse illum demens in me saevire coegi,
Mitius immensus qo nihil orbis habet. Ipsaque delictis victa est clementia
nostris. Naso trift. 4.8. Nos vim Deo facimus* iniqitatibus nostri^ ipsi in nos
iram divinitatis armamus. nolentem ulcisci cogimus, volentem parcere non
permittimus. Salvian de provid. l. 5. c. 8. Et l. 4. c. 5. Cum ejus naturae sit
men's Dei atque majestas: ut nulla iracundiae passione mo^ea^u^* tanta tamen in
nobis est peccatorum exacerbatio, ut cogatur i^ asci. vim facimus pietati su^,
ac manus ^fferimus misericordiae suae^ cumqe ejus fit benignitati^ ut velit
nobis jugiter parcere, malis nostris cogitur, qae admittimus vindicare.
exacerbamus enim Deum impuritatibus nostris, and ad puniendos nos trahimus
invitum.
wrings and wrests it as by force and violence from God. 2 Chronicles. 36.12.16.
Zedekiah did evil in the sight of the Lord his God; and would not humble
himself before Jeremiah the Prophet at the commandment of the Lord: but
stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart, that he might not return to the
Lord God of Israel: all the chief of the Priests also, and the people
transgressed exceedingly, according to all the abominations of the Gentiles*
and polluted the Lords house, which in Jerusalem he had hallowed. Yet the God of
their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising early and sending; because
he had compassion on his people, and on his place of abode among them, and was
loath to destroy either. But they mocked his messengers, and sl^ighted their
message, and misused his Prophets, until his wrath was incensed, that there
was now no remedy. he bare with them so long, Jerem. 44.22.
that he could no longer forbear: till he were even Ierem. 15.6.
wearied and tired out with repenting and revoking of his former doomes of
destruction. Hence so frequent in the holy story, the book of Judges
especially, Judge. 2.7, 8, 12. and 4.1, 2. and 6.1. and 10.6, 7. and 13.1.
Objection 1.
The children of Israel sinned against God; and God thereupon sold them into
the hand of this or that oppressing enemy.

Objection 1.
And because it may be said, that the sins there mentioned are mostly the sins
of idolatry, and the sins of the worse, tho the greater part of that people.

Answer.
To omit what might be replied hereunto, that tho such sins, are most commonly
named as the chief, yet Esaias 1.15, 21* 23. and 3.12, 14, 15, 16. and 5.7, 8,
11, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, etc. Ier. 5.7, 8, 16, 28.31, etc.
other sins, no doubt, were rise also among them: and for other sins also,
as well as these, are Gods judgments threatened by Gods Prophets. as also, that
both sorts as well Ezekiel. 21.3, 4.
good as bad had their share, and suffered either with other, in the common
calamities of the times. It is apparent by the confession of Gods own choice
people, that they also had their Psalm 19.12. and 40.1^*
failings not a few; and that the hand of God for those defaults of theirs was
often heavy also upon them. Psalm 38.2, 3
Thine arrows, says David, stick fast in me: and thine hand presses me sore.
there is no soundn^sse in my flesh by reason of thy wrath; nor rest in my
bones, because of my sin. and, Psalm 32.3, 4
while I kept silence, concealing my sin, my very bones wasted; so that I
ro^red for pa^n and grief all the day long. For night and day incessantly thy
hand was so heavy upon me, that the moisture of my body was all clean dried up,
it was turned into a summers drought.

Objection* 2.
And because it may again be objected, that See Honeycomb. chap. ^. page 98,
106.
thus it was before Christ's coming in the flesh, in the time of the Old
Testament, but it is not so with the faithful now, since the death of Christ,
under the New.

Answer.
Not to insist on that, which yet well we might, that Mal. 3.6.
God is no changeling: and that his affection to his children has been ever
the same. The Apostle even in the New Testament tells us, that 1 Cor. 11.30.
for their sin in irreverent and unworthy repair to Gods board, and unseemly
carriage of themselves there, some of them at Corinth were from God smitten
with weakness, some with sickn^sse, and by sickness some of them unto death.
Nor will it serve to say* that these were of the infidels at Corinth; for they
had 1 Cor. 11.17, 20.
access to the Lords Table: or that it might be spoken of some profane and
unsound ones among them; such as 1 Cor. 15.34. 2 Cor. 1^.21.
many in that Church might be. for to omit, that he says no^ (...).
the unworthy receiver, but (...). 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
he that unworthily receives: he that tho in regard of his personal estate is
not unfit to be a guest at Gods board yet comes not so fitted and prepared as
he ought, or demeanes not himself as is meet, when he is there, is not so
cautious, as he should and might be, in the manner of his address, or of his
approaches thereunto. To let this pass, which yet is of some moment; it is
added presently after by the Apostle, putting himself also in among the rest,
that 1 Cor. 11.31. (...).
if we would judge, or sift, our selves, to wit, so as to repent of and
redress, what upon search we find amiss in our selves, God would not judge
us, by inflicting such sad and heavy things upon us. and that, Ibid. v. 32.
when God does so judge us, we are chastened by him in the world, that we may
not with 1 John 5.19.
the wicked world be condemned hereafter. In which words the blessed Apostle
plainly implies, that those he spoke of, were such as God chastised for their
amendment here* that they might not perish hereafter. and withal also, that
God does usually meet in Ibid. v. 31.
judgment with his, for not keeping a stricter course in the due Ibid. v. 28.
examination and careful sifting of themselves. And it was no small
presumption therefore for that chief ringleader of the Antinomian faction among
us, so confidently and peremptorily, Mr. Simson, in the Star chember.
in the public hearing of so many hundreds, to avow, that he did not believe,
that any sin of his, or of any believer, had any hand in the procuring of the
present judgments of God, that lie so heavy upon our land.

Nor does it any way derogate, either from the free grace of God, or from the
merit of Christ's death, to affirm, that God chastises his children, as well
now, as formerly, for their sins: See Honycomb, chap. 7. p. 129. and 140.
because it is said by the Prophet, (in a passage of Scripture by these men
much abused) that Esaias 53.5.
the chastiseme^t of our peace was upon him as if God could not chastise in
these times for sin, because he chastised him before for us, and so chastised
us in him. and it is not consonant, either to equity, or to Gods free grace, to
chastise us for that, which Christ our surety has been chastised for already.

For first, (that which we touched also in part before) as well they that lived
before Christ's coming were Acts 15.11.
saved by the grace, yea the free grace of God in Christ Jesus, (as James
avoweth it) as well as we now are: and had as deep a share in the death of
Christ, and in the merit of his sacrifice; (which to that purpose was as Mors
ejus prosuit, anteqam uit, Bern. in Cant.
effectual, even before it was effected) as any have that now live. Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ in regard of the benefit of his passion, being yesterday, and to
day, and for ever the same.

2. Nor again was it the end of Christ's suffering for us, to free us from Gods
chastising hand; (that we might thenceforth sin the more freely without fear
of check or control, of curb to restrain, or scourge to reclaim) no more then
to free us from temporal death; but Non ut non sint sed ut non obsint. Aug. in
Psalm.
to take away the sting both of the one and the other, that neither of them
might impeach us in our spiritual estate. Christ was indeed, as the Apostle
terms him, a Heb. 7.22.
surety intervening between God and us, of Gods gracious covenant made with us.
Gods surety to us, for the performance of his promises. ^ Cor. 1.20.
For in him are all the promises of God yea and amen. and our surety to God,
for the discharge of our debt. For, as the Prophet says, Esaias 53.7.
when (...) Exigitur. Jun^ malim, Exigebatur. ut 2 Reg. 23.35. Esaias 59.3.
verbum est impersonale hoc loco.
it was exacted. (...) and il^e respondebat. ut Ezekiel. 14.4, 7. sive spondebat.
Lud. Cappel.
he answered; he undertook it, and discharged it. and, Esaias 53.6.
God made the iniquity of us all to (...)
meet in him, and light on him* In regard whereof it is truly said, that Esaias
53.5.
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, because the guilt of our sin,
whereby we were Esaias 59.2.
severed from God, and stood liable to his eternal Romans 2.8, 9.
wrath and Gal. 3.10.
curse, being wholly abolished by his sufferings, called sometime a (...) Esaias
53.10.
sinne-sacrifice, or trespasse-offring, and sometime a (...) Ibid. v. 5.
chastisement, both in reference to our sins, for which he suffered, the Ephesians.
2.1^.
enmity between God and us is removed, and we are now Romans 5.10.
reconciled to him, and Romans 5.1.
at peace with him, with whom we stood Prove. 15.29.
at a distance, and were Col. 1.2^.
at e^^ity before. Thus then by Christ's sufferings there being full satisfaction
made to Gods justice for our sins, we are freed indeed from Romans 8.1, 2. 1
Cor. 15.56, 57
the condemning power of sin, and of the Law for sin, and from Gods
revenging wrath; but yet not from Gods Esaias 27.7 9. and 57.17.
paternall indignation, or the fruits and effects of it, which are exercised on
us Heb. 12.^0.
for our good.

Howsoever therefore it is true, as has formely also been acknowledged and
avowed, that God for other ends and purposes, has and does at sundry times
chastise those that be his, reconciled unto him in his Christ; yet it is no
less true, as has also been evidently showed, that ordinarily and usually he
does it for sin: and that therefore considering his tender affection and
affectionate disposition, we should thereby be led, when his hand is upon us,
to Job 10.^.
seek the procuring cause of it in our selves, every one of us in his own
bosom, in his breast; endeavor, as Solomon speaks, to take notice of the cause
of 1 King. 8.38. (...) plagam co^dis su^plagam, cujus vim senserint cord suo.
Pisc. vel cujus causam intra se subsistente^ deprebenderint. peccata, sive
patentia, sive secreta and abscondita. Vide P. Martyr.
the stroke in his heart, and so take to heart the stroke it self. It is the
Prophets own inference in the place above mentioned; where, having laid down
these two grounds, that Lam. 3.33.
God punishes not from his heart; and, that Ibid. v. 39.
men procure e^ils to themselves by their sins; he subjoyneth, Ibid. v. 40.
Let us search and enquire into our ways. let us make a privy search each one
of us, into his own heart, and his life, ransack every corner of either; that
whatsoever evil lies lurking, either in the one or in the other, being
discovered and brought to light, it may by sincere repentance and serious
reformation be removed. so Deficientibus lignis, deficit ignis. Prove. 26.20
the fuel being withdrawn, that at first Deuteronomy. 32.22.
kindled, and still Esaias 9.17, 18, 19.
feeds, the fire of Gods wrath, we may well hope, that it will speedily go
out of it self.

And this leads us to a second use, Use 2.
and that is for encouragement; to encourage Gods people, when they lie under
such pressures, exposed to the rage and cruelty of their malicious opposites,
to repair unto their God, with hope of relief and redress; he having professed
his affection and disposition toward his, to be such as has been showed. It
is a shrewd discouragement to a poor suppliant in case of danger or distress,
if he know or hear that the party, whom he is to make suit to, is one (...)
void of bowels, an hard-hearted man. for to seek and sue for favor and mercy
to such, is as if (...). Suid. (...). Di^gen. Et, (...). Suid. homo videbatur
n^vi^ saxo supplicans.
the ship should in a stor^^ repair for safety to the rock. a man many times
does but Crudelis lacry^is pa^citur, (...) frangitur. P. Syrus.
the more enrage them, and either aggravate his own misery, or hasten his
ruin, by addressing himself, tho in the humblest manner that may be, to such.
But it is not so here. we go not to a God, in whom ought is found, that gives
in this regard any ground or occasion of discouragement unto any; to any
especially of his own, toward whom he is so tenderly affected, that he cannot
endure to see any evil befall them, but it goes to the very heart with him. It
was that that encouraged Benhadad to seek unto Ahab, notwithstanding* that he
had but a little before 1 King. 20.3, 5, 6, 10, 20.30.
so insolently insulted over him, and most despitefully abused him, by his
imperious and tyrannical demands, which he had also twice attempted to put in
execution, and had as often been repulsed, and compelled by shameful flight to
save himself; with hope yet to prevail for a renewed reconceilement, and a
burial of his former contumelious carriages toward him in oblivion; Ibid. v.
31*
We have heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings. But much better
encouragement have we to repair and have recourse unto our God in the like
case, then Aram had to seek to Ahab; with hope, that although we have carried our
selves wickedly and wretchedly, ungratiously and unworthily toward our good
God, far otherwise then was meet either for us to do, or for him to endure; yet
he will upon our sincere repentance and serious humiliation be pacified towa^d
us* Psalm. 86.5. and 103.8. and 145.8, 9.
and reconciled again unto us. We have heard, say they, that the Kings of
Israel are merciful Kings. but we know that the God of Israel is a merciful
God. they built upon the bare hearsays concerning the Kings of Israel, of such
as might easily be mistaken in them; upon Fama, tam sicti praviqe tenax, qam
nuncia very. Maro. Aen. l. 4.
reports, which being many times raised from, or taken up rather, upon mere
shows and semblances of what in truth is not, do consequently fail and fall
short, when it comes to the trial, and so frustrate the expectation of those
that rely on them. Whereas we have (...). 2 Pet. 1.19.
a surer ground whereon to build our hopes, even the word of that God, who is
(...) Jer. 10.10.
truth it self, and therefore Tit. 1.2.
cannot lie; concerning himself* whom none knows so well as himself, yea M^t^h
1.27.
none knows indeed perfectly but himself, none in any part but from himself;
and who therefore cannot be mistaken in himself, as men Gal. 6.3. James ^.22.
even in themselves, and Jer. 17.9.
in others much more ofttimes are. He has published and proclaimed himself, 1
Cor. 2.11.
to be a God Exodus 34.6.
merciful and gracious, of long sufferance, and abounding in goodness, or
kindness, and truth. He has assured us, Ezekiel. 33.11.
and with an oath confirmed it, that he delights not in the death and
destruction of sinners, his own people especially; but would rather have them
repent and return, then to die in, and so perish by, their sins. he has
professed and protested it, that Jer. 3.1.
tho a man will not receive a wife again, that has gone from him, and joined
her self to another, Deuteronomy. 24.1.4.
nor did his own law allow any man so to do. yet notwithstanding our re^olt
from him and disloyal dealings with him, he will dispense with his own law, he
will upon our Jer. 3.2. vide. i. considera, p^rpende.
taking notice of, and Verse. 13. cognosce. pro, agnosce. ut Psalm. 51.3. Esaias
59.12.
acknowledgement of our sins, revoke his Ibid. v. 12. faciem, ira^am scil. ut
Psalm. 34.16.
wrath; Ibid.
because he is merciful; and upon our Ibid. v. 10.12.
hearty retu^n to him, Zech. 1.3. Mal. 3.7.
return unto us, and Hos. 14.2.
receive us into grace and favor again. And as upon this ground Moses assures
his people, that Deuteronomy. 4.27.
tho God for their sins should at any time dispossess them of their land,
wherein he had seated them, and disperse them into forain parts; yet Verse 29.
if out of those places whereunto they were dispersed, they should seek
sincerely to him, and Verse 30. Chap. 30.2.
return to obey him, God would Verse 31.
not so leave them, nor destroy them, but would Deuteronomy. 33.3.
turn their captivity, or reduce their captives, and have compassion upon them,
and Return and gather. as Genesis 26.18. Zech. 2.1.
gather them out of those nations, whither they were scattered, and Deuteronomy. 30.5.
bring them home to their own land again. Deuteronomy. 4.31.
for the Lord thy God, Psalm. 126.4.
says he, is a merciful God. So the people of God themselves, when they were
so Lam. 1.3, 5, 8, 17.
dispossessed of their land, and removed into forain parts, do upon the very same
grounds conceive and nourish hopes, that howsoever Lam, 3.42.
they had trespassed and rebelled, and God had not spared them; but Verse 43.
had overspred them with his wrath, and the dismal effects of it; had pursued
them, and slain them, and that (as might seem) without pity; the enemy into
whose hands he had given them, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. Esaias 47.6.
showing no pity or compassion at all on them; yea tho he seemed to have Lam.
3.44.
wrapped himself in a thick cloud, that their prayers might not pierce, or find
passage, to have access to him, and appear in his presence; yet that Verse 31.
he would not utterly cast them off, Psalm. 103.9.
nor retain So Lev. 19.1^
his wrath for ever. but that he would Psalm. 90.13.
return and Psalm. 106.45.
repent, and have Lam. 3.32.
compassion again upon them, according to the multitude of his mercies:
considering that Verse. 33.
he did not punish with his heart; it (...)^ Greg. Stasim. orat. 6.
was against his own disposition to deal with them, as he did; and would not so
have done, had not they Lam. 1.5, 8. and 3.39.
by their sins provoked and enforced him thereunto. It was inducement
sufficient to the King of Nineveh, notwithstanding that peremptory Jon. 3.4.
sentence past upon him and his people, yet to conceive some good hope, that
upon their seeking to God, the doom might be reversed; Jon. 3.9.
Who can tell, but that God may return and repent, or, as Genesis 26.18 Psalm.
78.41. Jer. 18.4.
repent him again, and turn from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? But
there was more in it then so, that made Ion^^ so jealous of the issue of his
prophecy. Jon. 4.2.
I knew, says he, that thou art a gracious, and merciful God, slow to anger,
and of great goodness, and one that repentest thee of the evils, that thou
denouncest against persons and people. Ier. 18.8.
upon the repentance of those, against whom they are denounced. he had certain
knowledge of that by God, whereof they had only some uncertain surmises. and
the same grounds that Jonas had to build on, are not wanting to us. they are
Romans 15.4.
left upon record, for our comfort and encouragement. Only let us remember to
take the same course, that the people of God beforementioned propound, and
that the Ninevites before them practiced. let us, Lam. 3.40, 41
search out our sins first, and turn from them; and then let us lift up our
hearts (...) ad manus. pro, cum manibus. ut Ezekiel 16.26. vel, ad nubes. ut Job
36.32. Drus. misc. l. 1. c. 39. i.e. ad calum. inde (...) ^uid. Hesych. and
(...) Lycophr. nubes sagittarum. Casaub. ad Athen. l. 11. c. 9.
with our hands unto God, and Ion. 3.8.
cry mightily to him for mercy. for, Ion. 3.10.
when God saw that they turned from their evil ways, then it is said, that
God repented of the evil, that he had said he would do, and did it not. This
is it that God Ier. 8.6.
listeneth after; this is that that he Esaias 30.18.
waits for; that he would hear of from us, and see with us, that he may show
mercy on us; which he even travelleth of and is in pain with, until he be
delivered of it, in such a season, and in such a manner, as may make most for
our good. But till this be, let us assure our selves, that we may Esaias 1.15,
16. and 58.3*5.
cry long enough, and loud enough; but in vain and to no purpose; like the Esaias
1.15, 16. and 58.3*5.
Patient, that calls upon the Physician for the cure of his disease, but will
not admit the means, that should remove the cause of it; or cries to the
Surgion for ease of his pain, but will not suffer Sicut nullum proficit
medicamentum, nisi serrum pri^^ exirahatur, ita nihil proficit oration il^li^,
cui transfixo cord culp^ mu^ro non ^duci^ur* Grego^. moral. l. 10. c. 18. and
Isidor. se^^e^t. l. 3. c. 7*
the splinter or s^ing to be drawn out of his flesh, which sticking there
procures the pain.

A third use may be for caution. Use 3.
Is the Lord so affectionate a God to his people; so tender of them, that he
cannot endure to see ought done to them, that may vex and grieve them? this
should be a very forcible motive unto them, that they be exceeding careful to
shun and eschew the doing of ought, that may vex and grieve him; that they be
tender of wronging him in ought, who is so tender of seeing wrong done unto
them. Rom 2.4.
Gods goodness and patience, says the Apostle, should lead men to repentance.
the consideration of it should cause men to be Ezekiel 6.9.
grieved for this, that by their sinful courses they have grieved him, who
has been so gracious and good to them. Nor should the consideration of this
tender affection in God toward us, prevail less with us for a preventing care
of such carriage, that it be not committed, then for the working of us to
repentance, after it has been committed. Yea the rather should it prevail with
us for prevention, not in regard of God only, but in regard also of our
selves; that we may be freed from that after-grief, which our grieving of God
will necessarily enforce on us, if we belong unto him, or there be any due
respect and sincere love of him in us. Vide atur Isidorus Pelus. l. 2 ep. 188.
and l. 3. ep. 157. Mala praevenire, qam punire tutius and s^lubrius. Tacit.
Agric.
preventing justice, we use to say, is the best justice; and preventing physic
the best physic: so is (...)^
forecast more behovefull then (...)^ Menan. Stob. c. 1
afterwit; and (...)^
fore-care much better then (...). Plut. ^^ tranq. s^ve, (...)^ Idem. ib.
after-grief. His masters beneficence to him, and kind usage of him, was a very
forcible argument with Joseph to keep him from wronging him, who had been so
good and kind unto him. much more forcible should the consideration of Gods
affectionate disposition be with us, to make us fearful of doing ought,
whereby we should wrong him, and tho not alter his disposition toward us, yet
convince us of failing in the like disposition toward him.

To which purpose let us yet withal further consider, Genesis 39.7, 8.
that our God, as he is a gracious and merciful, so he is a wise and discreet
God. It is not with him, as it is with some earthly parents, who where they are
very affectionate, are withal often indiscreet: Nonne vides, qanto aliter
patres, aliter ma^res indulgeant* illi excitari jubent liber^^, (...) studia
(...), seri^^^ qoqe dieb^^ non patiuntur esse ^^iosos, and sudores illi^,
interdum lachrym^s excutiunt. at ma^^e^ sovere in (...), continere in umbra
volunt; nunqam flere, nunqam trist^ri, nunqam laborare. Sen. de provid. c. 2.
mothers indeed mostly, but fathers also as well as mothers, as if they were
mothers rather then fathers, faulty sometime and much failing herein. who, as
they cannot endure to see any servant or stranger, upon any occasion, so much
as once to touch their children,; so they have no regard, tho they do amiss,
to rebuke, much less to chastise them, themselves; being therein (if we
believe Solomon, and experience too well seals up the truth of what he says)
their Prove. 13.24. and 29 15. Peremptores, non parents. Bern. ep. 111.
Disciplinam qi negligit, qi non dat, crudelis est. Aug. in orat. dom. unicis qo
plus indulgetur, p^pillis qo plus licet, corrup^ior est animus. Sen. de ita. l.
2. c. 21.
foes, rather then their friends. Of Adoniah, you know it is said, that 1 King.
1.6.
his father David would not at any time upon any occasion displease him: that
which encouraged him to be Hostem in se nutrire, qi filio indulget nimis. Pius
2. apud Platin.
over-bold with his father, in attempting to take the crown from his head,
while he yet lived. nor is old 1 Samuel 2.29.31. and 3.13.14.
Elies indulgence to his children unknown: that which in the issue proved the
ruin both of him and them. But it is otherwise with God. He has as the
heathen man himself could observe, Tam paternum animum, qam maternum affectum.
as well a Patrium habet Deus adversus bonos viros animum, and illos fortiter
amat. Sen. ubi sup.
fatherly discretion, as a motherly affection. as he is tender over them; so
withal he tendreth their good. as Psalm. 89 22.
he will not have others to wrong them; so Psalm. 89.30.32
he will not suffer them to wrong him. as he will not permit others to deal
unduly with them; so he will not endure them to carry themselves undutifully
toward him. if they do, they shall be sure to hear of it, it may be smart for
it too, from him. It was that that 2 Samuel 24.10.
David expected, so soon as his heart misgave him, and began to check him, for
his numbering of the people. he looked ere long to hear of it, to his grief; and
notwithstanding all the means he could use to prevent it, he so did. God would
lesson him, 2 Samuel 24.15.
by lessening his people, in whose multitude he prided himself, to be more wary
another time; and by chastising of him, warn others, what to look for, tho
never so near or dear to him, if they offend in like sort. Let us therefore be
admonished not to presume on Gods lenity and his tender disposition: but
remember, that discreet parents, even out of a tender care of their childrens
good, are wont to keep Cogita filiorum nos modestia delectari, vernularu^
licentia ^illos discipliis tristiori contineri, horum ali andaciam. idem tibi
de Deo liqeat. Sen. de provid. c. 1.
a stricter hand over a son, then over a servant; and will endure some things
in a servant, which they will not in a son; and tho they will not suffer
others to wrong their children in ought; yet will not forbear to correct
misdemeanors in them themselves; and that sometime also so severely, when the
quality of the offense requires it, and the child's ability will bear it, that
neighbors, who know how chary they are of them in regard of others, do wonder,
how they can be so sharp and severe to them themselves. That God that cannot
endure to see any wrong done to his Jacob, or molestation to his Israel; yet is
said, to have Esaias 42.24, 25.
given his Jacob to the spoil, and his Israel for a prey; when rhey trespassed
against him, and refused to walk in his way, and to listen to his law: and that
therefore he powered out on them the fierceness of his wrath, and the fury of
war, and kindled such a fire in the mi^st of them, as burnt them up on every
side. And the like may we expect from our God, if we carry our selves in like
manner toward him: yea rather in the like manner has God in part already dealt
with us, because we have been exceeding faulty in such like carriage toward him.

Howbeit, let the fourth use be for admonition; to warn the enemies of Gods
people, that they take heed, Use 4.
how they touch them, of whom God is so tender. Discreet parents, albeit they
correct their children themselves, and that sharply also sometime* when they
have cause so to do; yet can they not abide to see others use them otherwise
then well; they will not endure to see them wronged by any, but will be sure to
right them, if it lie in their power. And God, tho Heb. 12.10.
he lov^ his children too well, to wink at evil in them* and be often
chastising them therefore for their good: yet can he not, nor will he, endure,
to see wicked wretches, reproaching them, oppressing them, trampling on them,
insulting over them, yea or vexing and grieving them in the least degree. Psalm.
105.15.
Touch not mine anointed; says he. and even Ibid. v. 14.
to anointed ones, to Kings themselves, he speaks it. he gives warning
beforehand of it; and that even unto the greatest. And he extends elsewhere
the warning he there gives, for the persons in whose behalf it is given, unto
the very least and lowest of those that are his. Matthew. 18.10
Take heed, says he, how ye offend any one of th^se little ones. let not the
meannesse of any of them encourage thee to wrong them in ought. but remember
and consider, that even Deuteronomy* 29.10, 11, 12.
the hewer of wood and drawer of water, (the most Josh. 9.23.
servile offices that were in those times) entered into covenant with God, as
well as the heads of houses, and the rulers of people; he Judge. 16.21. Lam.
5.13. Luke 17.35.
that grinds at the mill, may be one of Gods adopted ones as well as he that
Exodus 12.29.
sits on the Throne; thy Col. 3.24, 25.
servant, thy slave, the sorriest drudge that thou keep, may for all that be
Gods son and heir. But why should we be so cautious of offending such?
Matthew. 18 10.
For, I say unto you, says our Savior, take it on my word, as little as they
are, or as mean in your account, their Angels in Heaven do continually see the
face of my Father in Heaven. so deer are they to God, and so chary is he of
them, that even those glorious creatures, that are of Gods celestial guard, and
whose office it is to See Ier. 52.^5.
stand in the nearest place of attendance about him, are by him employed to
take special care of them. Luke 16.22.
Lazarus, tho a poor beggar, had his soul conveyed hence to Heaven by a Troop
of them, when he died: nor were they, you may be sure, wanting in their
attendance about him, while he lived, that were so ready at hand to perform
that honorable office about him, at his death. Psalm. 119.12.
He has given his Angels, says the Psalmist, charge (...) Matthew. 4.6. ut
(...) de eo. Est. 3.2. and 2 Samuel 11.7. Livel. sic Psalm. 3.2. Genesis 20.13. Drus.
of thee; to keep thee in all thy ways. that is, Nec est necesse, ut Diabolo
mutilatae vafre Scripturae crimen appingamus, ^od clausulam hanc omiseri^*
whither soever thou go, and wheresoever thou art: and they shall bear thee
in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. they are as servants
set to attend little children, to be ever near at hand about them, being they
are subject soon to take harm, if they be not constantly attended; and to carry
them in their arms, or lift them up from the ground, where they may be in
danger of stumbling, or tripping, by a stone, or the like, that lies in their
way. And is God so careful of them to secure them against such casualties, as
may befall them from the senseless creatures? and is he not as careful, think
we to shelter and protect them against such evils as may befall them from the
hands of malicious men? yes undoubtedly. The same Angels of his are said Psalm
34.7.
to encamp about those that fear him; (whence Jacob also Genesis 32.1, 2.
gave the name to the place, where he met with a Troop of them, assigned by God
to guard him, in his return from Laban, against the forces and fury of his
brother Esau) to safeguard them, and procure deliverance for them. Yea, as to
deliver them; as they did 2 Kings 6.17.
Elisha, from the Syrian Troops by Benhadad sent to attach him: so to destroy
all those that assail them, or attempt ought against them; as they did the 2
Kings 9.35. Esaias 37.36.
Assyrian host, sent by Senacherib to besiege Jerusalem, and surprise Ezekiah.
and all those their adversaries therefore may read their doom in those words
delivered by the Prophet from God, for the comfort and encouragement of his
people. Esaias 41.14.
Fear not, thou w^rm Jacob; thou that to these men seem so Psalm 22.6.
contemptible a creature; and ye men of Israel: Esaias 41.10*13.
for I will help thee; I will be with thee; I will stand by thee; I will uphold
thee. all they that are enraged against thee; shall be ashamed and confounded:
all The men of thy strife; or, thy men of strife. as Job 31.35. and so in the
rest.
that strive with thee, shall perish: they that contend with thee shall have no
being: all that wage war against thee, shall come to naught, they shall be as
nothing, and as a thing of naught. Esaias 41.15, 16.
Behold I will make thee, as a new threshing Esaias 28.25, 28. Micah. 4.31.
cart, with wheels full of sharp spokes, or teeth; that thou may Judge. 8.7.
2 Kings 13.7. Amos 1.3.
thresh the Zach. 4.7.
mountains, even the mightiest of thine adversaries, until thou Esaias 41 2.
Psalm 18.42.
beat them to dust; and Ierem. 4.11. and 15.7. and 51.1, 2.
fan them like chafe, until they be carried away with the wind, and dispersed
with the whirlwind. but thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the holy
One of Israel. To which we may add those pithy and pregnant expressions, out
of Zachary, tending to the same purpose. Zech. 12.^.
Behold, I will make Jerusalem a Esaias 51.17, 22.
cup of trembling, (of such strong and strange liquor, as makes those that
drink of it, to shake and quake every limme and joint of them) to all those
that are in siege against her. Zech. 12.3.
I will make her as a weighty stone, (such as men are wont to try their strength
with, by assaying to lift it) that shall bruise and break to pieces all that
attempt to take it up; tho all the people in the world should join together in
the attempt. Zech. 12.6.
I will make her rulers, as an hearth of Psalm 83.14. Obad. 18.
fire among s^ar wood, and as a torch lighted among sheaves; and they shall
devour all the people that are in hostility against her, on the right hand, and
on the left. This is, and will be Esaias 17.14. (...). Theophil. ad Autol. l. 2.
ex Archilocho.
the lot of all those that oppug^ Gods Church; the portion of all those that
oppress Gods people. they do but with Esther 9.24, 25.
Haman contrive their own mischief, work their own ruin and downfall, while
they plot and practice, as they intend and imagine, against them. Psalm 37.12,
13.
The wicked, says the Psalmist, plotteth against the righteous, and gnasheth
upon him with his teeth: but the Lord, the whiles overlooking him, Psalm 2.4.
laugheth at him; because he sees that his day (the day of his own
destruction) is coming. The wicked have drawn out the Sword, and bent their
Bow, to destroy and slay, (either by open might, or by privy slight) the
upright poor. but their Sword shall pierce their own heart; and their Bow shall
be broken. Ierem. 50.27, 31.
their plots and contrivances shall all be frustrate; and their designs and
attempts end in their own destruction. Psalm 37.14, 15.


Yea we may further hence learn how to Deuteronomy. 32.13.
suck honey out of the rock, and fetch oil out of the flint: Use 5.
how to draw matter of comfort for Gods people, (and let that be a fifth use)
even from that that does usually most daunt and dismay them, and may in the
eyes of flesh and blood seem to give just cause so to do; to wit, when they
shall see the enemy, having gotten head, to proceed most outragiously, in the
exercise of all manner of crue^ty upon Gods people, Psalm 44.22. and 79.2, 3.
murdering and butchering them, as beasts, without mercy. For if God be so
tender hearted, and tender-eyed, in regard of his people, that he cannot endure
to see them ill-used: then sure the more furious and outrageous their enemies
are in the prosecution of their bloody and barbarous designs against them, the
more they provoke God to hasten, both his peoples relief, and their ruin. So
that they work for Gods people* and against themselves, when the^ work for
themselves as they think, and against them. For the more extremity and cruelty
men use against them, the more they v^x and Esaias 3.8.
grieve the gracious eyes of Gods majesty; and the more his eyes are vexed and
grieved by them the more is he provoked to execute judgment on those, that so
vex and grieve the same. Yea it may well be said, that the enemies rag^ and
cruelty is no less prevalent with God to dispeed their destruction, and his
people deliverance, then the prayers and ^upplications of his people themselves
are. Psalm 74.2^, 23.
Arise, O Lord, says the Psalmist, maintain thine own cause. forget not the
cry of thine enemies: the tumultuous rag^ of them that rise up against thee,
goes up daily more and more. He says not, forget not the cry of thy people;
but, forget not the cry of thi^e enemies. the enemies cruelty has a cry, and
that a loud one; as loud, if not louder, then the cry of those that are
oppressed by them. Genesis 4.10.
A^els bloed, tho himself silent, cried aloud to God for vengeance, yea so loud
a cry sometime has the enemies cruelty, that it Qo modo (...), dixit Basil. in
Psalm 28. and Lucian. de amicit. (...).
outcries and drowns the cry of the sins of Gods people, it moves God
sometime to mercy, when their sins plead for the contrary. Do we behold then,
or hear, that the enemy grows more cruel and outrageous every day then other,
and that they strive in cruelty and outrage to outgo one another; let it not
daunt and dismay us, but put us in hope rather, that their fury and rage is
drawing near to a conclusion, that they are not far from the utmost end of
their tedder. As Rev. 12.12. Sic vulneratus anguis ictu spiculi, Ferrum
remordet, and dolor s^vior, Qassando pressis immoratur dentib^^, Fur^re pestis
pejor in novissimo. Prudent. steph. 10*
the devil rage^^ most fiercely, when he knows his time to be short: so when
he rages most fiercely, it is a sign, that his time is short, that his fury
being at its height, will not hold or last long. when Genesis 15.16:
the wickedness of the Amorite was come to the height, he was then Rev.
14.15.^^
ripe, and ready for destruction: and when the fury of Jacobs adversaries is
come to the height, it is then Psalm. 119.126
high time indeed, for God to strike in, and to take down it and them at once.
And tho God may seem to linger and delay relief, while his people are in some
Esaias 26.16* 17
lingering pains; yet when their throws come thick, and their pains grow
extreme, and Esaias 37.3.
the birth is come to the (...) (...) matricis. Esaias 66.9. Hos. 13.16.
breach, but there is no power to bring it forth, the Lord is then wont to
hasten delivery, that his people may not perish under the hands of those, that
put them unto such extremity.

Again, has God such a tender eye on those, and over those, Use 6.
that are his? the consideration hereof may in the next place serve for
encouragement; to encourage them to go on constantly in Gods cause; and not to
flinch back, or give over, for fear of any evil, that thereby may accrue unto
them, or of miscarrying and perishing in the pursuit of it. For how can he see
or suffer any Psalm 91.10. Prove. 1.33. and 12.21.
evil to befall them, whose wrongs and sufferings he is so affected with? or
how can he permit any of them to perish, whom he cannot endure to see undergo
any hard measure at the hand of those that hate them? Psalm 34.22.
The Lord rescueth the souls of his servants, says the Psalmist: and none that
trust in him, shall perish. and, Psalm. 34.15.
The eye of the Lord is upon the righteous; and, Psalm. 33.18, 19
upon those that fear him, and trust in his mercy. God has a continual eye
to them, and on them. because Psalm. 147.11.
his delight is in them. But to what end is his ey so always on them, to
deliver their souls, that is, Psalm 54.3. and 56.6.
their lives, or Psalm 3.^. and 7.2.
themselves, their persons, from death. and how can they perish, whom Gods eye
is never off; whom he has always an eye unto? John 10* 27-29.
My sheep, says our Savior, hear my voice, and I know them; I take special
notice of them: and they f^llow me: and I give them life eternal: and they
shall not perish. My father that gave me them is greater then all: and none can
take them out of his hand. they that are ever in Gods eye, the eye of his
perpetual providence, that are ever in Gods hand, the hand of his most
powerful protection, how can they but be safe? how can they possibly perish?

Objection.
But how is this made good, may some say, when we see, that they do often perish;
and a^e so far from being protected or delivered* that they die in the qarrell?

Answ. 1.
I answer, 1. they Qui per virtutem peritat, baud it interit Plaut. Cap. 3.5.
perish not, when they seem to perish. Esaias 57.1.
The righteous perish, says the Prophet. that is, they (...). Plato apolog
profectio est, quam mortem putamus. Tertul. de patient. mors migratio est. Cic.
Tusc. l. 1. migrare magis qam mori* Velleius, l. 1. non emori, sed emigrare.
Hieron. in Nepot. Mundo digredi. Ammian. l. 2.1. and 29. Abiit, non obiit,
Ambr. in Theod. (...), Luc. 9.31. Greg. Stas. de bapt. Excessus de corpore.
Tertul. de resur. (...). Chrysostom. and Theophyl. in Joan. 13.1. transitus. Sen.
ep. 65. non exitus, sed transitus. Cypr. de mortal.
depart, they decease; (for such only is their death) and to the eye of flesh
and blood they seem indeed to have perished; and men lay it not to heart; and
good, or godly men a^e gathered: and men do not consider; that the righteous
are (...) Genesis 25.8. Psalm 27.10.
gathered from the evil to come; that they 2 Kings 5.^9.
go in peace, and depart this world, 2 Kings 22.20.
before troubles come, while outward peace yet continues, and with inward
peace of mind, quietly; or, go unto peace, pass hence unto peace, Luke 16.22.
Phil. 1.23.
the soul to a place of joy and bliss, Eccles. 12.7.
the body to lie down and sleep, till the resurrection, in the grave, provided
as a bed, or (...).
room of rest for it. God does with them, as men are wont to do with their
corn, when it is catching weather, they are careful to get it in before the
rain fall; or as with their fruit, when they see the clouds gather* make haste
to pluck and house it, before the storm come. So he took away 1 Kings 14.12, 13.
Ieroboams son before the fall of his fathers house; 2 Kings 22.20.
Josias, before the dismal destruction of his people. Luke 2.29.


Job 7.21. and 14.12, 13. 1 These. 4.14.^7.
Answ. 2.
Secondly, (...). Plato apolog. Nec cuiqam bono mali ^icqam evenire potest, nec
vivo, nec mortuo. Cic. Tuscul. l. 1.
no evil does or can befall them, by ought that in this kind does betide them.
Psalm 69.4. John 15.25.
Hated they may be, but (...). Chrysostom. tom. 7. orat. 2. (...). Plato apolog.
(...). Maxim. Tyr. dissert. 2.
harmed they cannot be: 1 Samuel 26.20* Psalm 56*8.
hunted and hurried to and fro* yea and Psalm 44.22. Heb. 11.37.
murdered and massacred they may be; and yet (...). Epictet. dissert. l. 4. c.
8. (...). Marc. Imp. l. 2. 1.
hurt they cannot be. as he said sometime of his adversaries, so may a
Christian much better say in the like case of his; (...). Socrates in Plat.
apolog. Epictet. enchi^. 79. and dissert. l. 1. c. 29. and l. ^. ^. 23. Clem.
strom. l. 4. Theodores. therap. l. 8. Plut. de tranq. Max. diss. 2.
Kill me they may; but hurt me they cannot. And as the Cynik sometime answered,
when one told him that some mocked him; Mock they may, but (...). Diogenes apud
Plut. de i^a cohib.
I am not mocked; and the Apostle, of God, that howsoever men, therein worse
the^ devils, dare mock at him, at his word, at his works, at his ministers and
messengers, yet (...) Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked: Esaias 5.19. Ierem. 5.12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. 2 Pet. 3.3.
so here, wrong men may do them; and yet are they not wronged. (...). Max. ibid.
wrong, I say, men may do them: because they intend, desire, and endeavor so to
do; and (...). Max. ibid. Potest aliqis nocens esse, qamvis non nocuerit. latro
est, etiam anteqam manus inqinet, qi ad occidendum jam armatus est, and habet
spoliandi and occidendi voluntatem. non minus la^ro est, cujus telum elufum
est. Veneficus est, qi sopo^em, cum venenum crederet, miscuit. Venenum dando,
scelere se obligavit, etiamsi non nocuerit. exercetur, and aperitur opere
neqitia, non incipit. Se^ec. de sap. constant. 3. and de benes. l. 5. c. 14.
Nam scelus intra se tacitum qi cogitat ullum, Fact crimen habet. Juven. sat.
13.
their very intent and desire is sufficient to make them wrong-doers. and yet
are (...). Simoca^* epist. 40* (...). Ibid. (...). Max. diss. 2. Potest fieri,
ut faciat aliqis injuriam mihi, and ego non accipiam: Sen. de sap. constable. c. 3.
not they wronged: because (...). de Job Chrysostom. tom. 7. orat. 2.
no damage can accrue unto them, by any wrong that is done them. as every 1
John 3.15. Qantum ad ^e pertinet, qem edisti occidisti. Aug. hom. 42. Res mira;
homo vivit, tu tamen homici. la es. mulier casta est, tu tamen adulteres. Idem
hom. 5. and de verb. Dom. 43. Vide and council. Tolet. 11. c. 4*
malicious person is a murderer; albeit the party maliced by him, be not
murdered. and Matthew. 5.28.
every one that looks on a woman, (...). donec, vel ita ut concupiscat. Pisc.
ut Marc. 13.22.
so as, or, until he lust after her, is 2 Pet. 2.14.
an adulterer; although the woman so looked on, and lusted after, be (...).
Gregor. Stasim. in Cyprian.
free from any adulterous either act, or thought. Amnon was 2 Samuel ^3*14.
an incestuous violat^r of his sister: and yet was not she, either (...) Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 95* (...). Isidor. l. 2. ep. 215.
incestuous, or at I^vita virgo, vexari potest, violari non potest. Nec vexatio
turpis est, nisiqam libido praecessi^: nec alien^ libidine potest pudicitia
violari. Aug. de mend. c. 7. and 19. Violentia nec in carne violatur
integritas, si mente servetur. Idem ep. 180. Tantum enim in mente valet
integritas casti^ati^, ut illa inviolata nec in corpore possi^ pudicitia
violari. Idem ep. 122.
all violated. Deuteronomy. 22.25, 26.
in the party forced, says God himself, there is no fault. and Sacrilegi dant
po^^as; quamvis nemo usqe ad Deos man^s porrigat. Sen. de ben. lib. 5. cap. 14.
sacrilegious persons, are guilty of Injuriam sacrilegus Deo qidem non potest
sacere, qem extra ictum sua divinitas posuit: punitur tamen, tanqam si Deo
secerit. Idem l. 7. c. 7.
wrong done to God, albeit Coeles^ia humanas manus effugiunt: and ab his, qi
templa diruunt, simulacra conflant, nihil divinitati* nocetur. Idem de sap.
constable. c. 4. (...). Soph. Antig.
no wrong can possibly reach unto him: no more then those shafts, that are
(...). Suid. Zench. adag. 246. Qod and in gentes illas competit, qae in coelum
sagittas mittunt. Olaus l. 3. c. 2. et qae solemn orientem occidentemqe diris
imprecationibus prosequntur. Mela. l. 1. c. 8. Plin. l 5. c. 8. Solin. c. 34.
ex Strab. l. 17. and Herodot. l. 4. Qae nervo tormentisve in al^um exprimuntur,
cum extra visum exilierunt, citra coelum tamen flectuntur. Sen. de sap. constable.
c. 4. Cum ^^olidus ille rex multitudine telorum diem obscurasset, ullam
sagittam in solemn putas incidisse? cum in coe^um insanitis, sacrilegium
sacitis, sed ope^am perditis. Ibid.
shot against the sun, can come any thing near it, much less lessen its
light. Men may set up the godly man Job 7.20.
as a mark, whereat to level all their Psalm. 64.3, 4.
envenomed arrows: but they can Comicorum manus in Socratem venenatos su^s
sales effudit. Sen. de beat. c. 27.
Non re^ert, qo^ conjiciantur in illum tel^, cum sit nulli pene^rabilis. Idem
de constable. c. 3.
no more fasten on him to hurt him, then as if they met with a rock, where they
cannot enter so much, (tho they may be Daritia silicis nulli magis qam
ferientibus n^ta est. qi^qid incurrit, malo suo vim suam exercet. Sen. de beat.
c. 27. Tela a duro resilium: and cum dolor caedentis solida seriu^tur. Idem de
ira. l. 3. c. 5.
shattred themselves,) as to make the Incursu^ omnes respuit, nec ulla
saevitiae vestigia ostentat. Idem de constable. c. 3. Videantur and qae de r^pe
^ive scopulo idem ibid. and de beat. 27.
least dint, or to leave the least print behind them. For consider a while with
me, what men can do to thee, if thou be one of Gods peculiar ones, or wherein
they can endamage thee. They may take thy goods from thee, but (...) Chrysostom.
ibid. Tollit pecuniam; nunquid fidem? caedit famam, nunqid conscientiam? nunqid
innocentiam? Aug de verb. Domi. 16.
can they take away thy (...). Maxim. ser. 2. (...). Ibid. (...). Stilpo apud
Plut. in paedag. (...). Epict. l. 3. c. 22. Antonin. l. 11. Sect. 36. (...).
Plut. (...)^ Aeneas Gaz. epist. 5.
grace? that is thy Luke 16.11. Ephesians. 1.7. and 2.7. 1 Timothy 6.6. aliae divitiae
nec verae, nec vestrae. Bern. de bon. deser*
true treasure. and while thou retainest that, thou may say more truly then
the Stilpo Megar. Plut. in paedag. Laert. in Stilp. Sen. de sap. constable. c. 6.
Philosopher, when the City, he dwelt in, was sacked, that thou have lost*
nothing. Yea suppose a man be plundered, as Job was, of all that ever he has:
to let pass what one of the ancients says of him; that tho Job, when he was
stripped of all that he had been formerly possessed of, might seem to be in a
very miserable condition, yet was he even then in a most happy and blessed
estate. in what respect, or how so? you will say. why? because, says he,
albeit Perdiderat omnia qae dederat Deus; sed ^abuerat ipsum, qi omnia dederat,
Deum subtraxit data, non subtraxit datorem. manet qi dedit, and abstulit qod
dedit. Aug. in Psalm. 66. pro eis qae perdidit, eum qi abstulit, tenuit Hugo de
patient. c. 11.
he had lost all that God gave him; yet he had that God still that gave him
all: and he had all, yea Col. 3.11. Omnia ^erdiderat, and plenus erat. Aug. de
diverse. 12.
more then that all by much, in him. Job 1.21, 22. and 2.3. and 10.7. and
13.15. and 23.10. and 27.4, 6. (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. orat. 13. (...). in 1.
Cor. orat. 16. regnum atqe opes Eripere qivit, at virtutem non qiit. Telepbus
Accianus apud Macrob. Sat. l. 6. c. 1. Toll qod habeo: non ^ollis, qod intus
habeo. Aug. de diverse. 13.
the Devil had taken from him his goods; but he could not take away his God,
nor his goodness neither. But not to insist, I say, upon that; I demand what
less or damage does a man sustain, suppose never so much be taken away from
him, if reparation be made him with advantage; if all be restored him, not
twofold, as Job 42.10.
with Job, but an hundred fold, in one kind or other. and this is that which
our Savior Matthew. 19.29. Mar. 10.^9, 30.
promises unto all those, that shall lose ought in his cause, that shall
forego ought for his sake. and no marvel therefore if the faithful even Heb.
10.34.
with joy sustain the spoil of their goods: since that it is no loss or damage
to them; but good and great gain. they know well enough, which way they shall
be repaired, and repaid largely, for whatsoever they so part with.

Yea but men may take away, not my living only, but my life to. Objection
Answer 1.


Thy life? what life? thy bodily life, thy transitory life. that is the worst
they can do. Matthew. 10.28.
They may kill the body, says our Savior; but they can go no further. and not
that neither, unless God give them leave. If they cannot kill Matthew. 10.29.
a Sparrow, one of the soriest birds that is, against Gods will; much less any
man, or any of those, whom God takes more special care of, then of any other
creature. Matthew. 10.30
Yea the very hairs of your head, says our Savior to his* are numbered. and
sure if the hairs of their head are numbered, then the Dies non minus utiqe qam
capilli sunt numerati* and sicu^ pilus de corpore, sic momentum de tempore non
peribit. Bern. de diverse. 1.
days, yea minutes and moments, of their life, much more. Illi de animabus
suis pertimescebant. ille etiam de capillis dabat secu^itatem. Aug. in Ps. 109.
qid timeam ne carnem perdam, qi nec capillum perdo? Idem de sanct. 13. times ne
pereas, cui capillu^ non peribit? si sic custodiuntur superflua tua, in qanta
securitate est anima tua? non perit capillus, qi cum tondetur, non senti^, and
perit anima per qam sentis? Idem homil. 14. Times ne animam perd^^ ^i capillum
non perdis. Idem in Ps. 96. Caro incisa dolet, capillus non dolet. cur ^imetis
ne pereat, qod (...) and illud in vobis perire non potest, qod incis^m non
dolet? Grego^. in Evang. 36.
they were solicitous for their lives, and Christ gives them security, says
one, even for their hairs. which yet is not so to be understood, as if God kept
a tale, or strict account of their hair, Frustra ergo est qum ex hoc loco,
etiam capillo^^m qicqid accisum est, in resurrectione restitutum iri, concludit
Aug. de civit. Dei. l 22. c. 12. and 14. and 19. and 21. and in Psalm. 96. and
de verb. Dom. 4 and 6.
how many each of them had growing on his head, and how that number diminished,
as daily in likelihood it did; but that thereby he would intimate, that without
his permission not so much as an hair could be plucked from their head, there
could not the loss of so much as one hair befall them, and much less could
they be abridged of any one minute or moment of their live^; it was not in the
power of any creature to hasten their end a minute or moment sooner then God
should please to permit.

But suppose God do permit any to take thy life from thee: what hurt do they do
to thee? Answer 2.
They may Matthew. 10.28
slay thy body* but they cannot come at thy soul: (r) what they cannot see,
says he, they cannot slay. they may hack and hew thy body to pieces: but (...)
(addas licet, (...)) (...)^ Simot. ^p. 4 ^. (...)^ Antonin. l. 8.. 41.
no hurt or damage can thereby accrue to thy soul. and thy soul it is, that is
the (...). Plato Tim. (...)^ Anton. l. 7.. 55. qod principatum tenet. Cic. de
univers.
principal part of thee. that is the jewel, thy body is but the case; that is
the sword, the body is but the Dan. 9.17. (...) Vagina. 1 Chronicles. 21.27.
afflatus divini v^gina. Tertul. de resur. c. 9. Cremato corpore, inimici
remeanti animae q^si vaginam ademerunt. de Hermotimo Plin. l. 7. c. 52.
sheath. Men's cujusqe is est qisqe, non ea figura, qae digito demonstratur.
Cicer. somn. Scip. Ergo qi videtur, non ipse verus homo est, sed verus ille
est, (...) qo regitur, qod videtur. Macrob. l. 1. c. 13. (...) Anima rationalis
est vere homo. R. Judas in Cozr. l. 1. c. 89. (...)^ Plato Alcib. 1. (...)^
Aristot. ethic. l. 9* c. 4. (...)^ P^ilo de agricu^t. (...)^ Idem de haered.
(...). Anton. l. 10.. 38.
Every man's soul, could the heathen man say, is every ones self* all is well,
where the soul is safe. be careful to keep that in its due posture, and
nothing that befalls the outward man, shall annoy thee. Observe we the words
of our Savi^ur. Luke 21.16*19.
Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake: and some of you shall be slain. but
there shall not a hair of your head perish. only in patience possess your
souls. May it not well seem strange, that our Savior should tell them, that
they should some of them lose their heads, and yet they should not lose an
hair? that tho their heads were shorn from their shoulders, yet not an hair
should be plucked from their heads? But Christ's purpose is, by a 2 Samuel 1.4.11.
proverbiall form of speech, (...)^ Anton. l. 10.. 38.
to give them assurance of the greatest indemnity, that may be imagined, even
to an hair. 1 King. 1.52.
and the meaning is, that not so much as an hairs harm should befall them, so
much as the loss of an hair might be deemed; that (...)^ Aristopran. unde
emendandi Suid. and Diogen. ne pilum qidem. Cic. ad Attic. l. 5. ^p. 20. ne
pilo qidem minu^. Idem ad Q. fratr. l. 2. ep. 15.
not so much damage or detriment, as the value of an hair might amount unto,
should accrue unto them, by ought that they were to endure. In regard whereof
even an Heathen man could say, that (...). Maxim* sermon. 2.
a good man might not smile only, but even laugh outright, to see wicked men,
what a coil they keep, when with all their might and malice they set on him, as
if they would do him a world of mischief, whereas they cannot do him the least
evil that is. But the use of the phrase elsewhere will further help to clear
this, as in the next passage shall appear.

Thirdly therefore we say, that the godly in these cases, Answer 3.
as they perish not, when they seem to perish; so they are delivered even then,
when they seem not to be del^vered; yea to be never better delivered then at
such times they are. If you ask me, how? I answer you briefly; as the
passengers were saved, that sailed with Paul. An Angel of God appears to Paul,
and tells him, that Acts 27.24.
God had given him all that sailed with him. that is, that for his sake God had
bestowed their lives on them. This as the Angel assured him, so he as
confidently assuring them; Acts 27.34.
Not an hair, says he, shall fall from the head of any of you. But what means
he by this? Ibid. v. 22.
There shall be no loss of any man's life, says he, but of the ship only.
Your lives shall not be in the least degree impaired: all the loss that shall
befall you, shall be of the ship. and so accordingly it was. for Ibid. v. 41.
the ship striking on ground, and there sticking fast, was broken to pieces;
but Ibid. v. 44.
the passengers all escaped, and (...)^ Salvos ad ter^am evadere. ita Act.
23.24. Jer. 30.10. Zech. 8 7, 8. (...). Plut. de Socrat. d^mon. (...)^ Galen.
de affect. dignosc. and cur. c. 4. (...) Julian. de Cynism. 1.
came safe to the shore. and just so is it here. the brittle bark of this frail
body being battered and broken, (...). Plut. de tranq. Socrat^^ e carcere in
c^^um transtulit calix venenatus. Sen. ep. 67.
the soul swimmeth away out of it, as out of a l^^king vess^l that can no
longer hold out, and arriveth instantly, without let or stay, at the haven of
eternal rest and bliss. Nor are Gods servants ever better delivered, then
when delivered in this manner. for at other times they are delivered, it may
be, out of some one trouble, and fall shortly after, as it often falls out, into
some other; and after that, if they escape it, meet, it may be, with a third.
and indeed it is so very usually with them; that Finis unius mali, gradus est
futuri* Sen. Herc. fur. 2.
the coming out of one is but the stepping into another. in this case they are
delivered, not out of one trouble, but Psalm. 34.17.19. Petrum eruit de cacer^?
and non eruit de cruce? eruit tunc, and non eruit nunc? forte plus postea qam
prius, quando vere de omnibus pressuris eruit. nam posteaqam primum eruit,
qanta ille pertulit? illuc misit postea, ^bi nihil mali pati posset. Aug. in
Psalm.
out of all; not from some by times, but from all at once. whereas formerly
they were so delivered, that they stood still in need of some renewed
deliverance, they are then Ita liberatus ut liberari ulteriu^ opus non habeat.
so delivered, as they need no deliverance again. yea in this regard does the
deliverance of Gods servants surpass the deliverance of Paul's associates,
which we resembled it by before: for that there, there was an utter loss of
the ship, being cast away without recovery. whereas there is no loss of ought
at all here. for the bark of the body, tho it be wreck^, and by violence beaten
all to pieces, yet shall it rise, and be repaired and restored again, with all
her tackle and furniture, in more 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. Phil. 3.21.
ample and excellent manner then ever. No cause is there therefore for any man
to fear any evil of damage or detriment by his constancy in Gods cause. by
deserting it he may (...)^ Perieramus, nisi periissemus. Themistocles apud
Plut. in apoph. and de exil. and Tele^. de exil. Stob. c. 40. Salvus sum, qia
pereo: si non peream, plane inter^^m. Plaut. Truc. 4.1.
undo himself; but by standing constantly to it he may save himself. For Matthew.
16.25. Mark 8.35. John 12*25. Abdicare itaqe a teipso, ne abdiceris a Christo:
repudia te, ut recipiaris a Christo: perde te ipse, ne pereas. Salvian. l. 5.
c. 10.
he that will save his life, shall lose it; says our Savior: but he that for
my sake will lose it, shall find it to life eternal. shall by losing it in
some sort here, gain it and enjoy it everlastingly hereafter.

Use 7.
Again, is it Jacob and Israel, Gods people, that God has such an eye to? this
may serve as a motive to persuade persons of all sorts and degrees; if they
desire safety, and to be under such an eye of God; to adjoyn, to associate
themselves unto such. Psalm. 47.9.
The (...)^ Graec. principes. Lat. Psalm. 113.8.
Princes, or, the Voluntarii. Jun. Pisc. 1 Chronicles. 28.21. Psalm. 110.3.
volunteers, of the people, or (...) Graec. populorum. Lat. Sic Psalm. 117.1.
peoples rather, of other people, more then one, have joined themselves to the
people of the God of Abraham. and why to them? because the (...) scutuli.
pro^ectio. Ps. 7.10. and 84.9. and 144.2.
shields of the earth belong unto him; unto the God, whom they serve. And it is
to them, and among them, that he is Psalm. 84.11. (...)
a Sun and a shield. nor is there any surety of Psalm. 91.1, 2.
safeguard, but under his wing, of Psalm. 84.4, 10, 11.
protection, but within his courts. Not Psalm. 68.17.25
the Tabernacle, or Psalm. 74.3, 7.
the Temple alone, or the Esaias 48.2. and 52.1.
City, but the whole Exodus 15.17. Esaias 63.18.
land, the whole teritory, is termed a Sanctuary: and as a Sanctuary it was as
well Deuteronomy. 23.15, 16.
to the stranger that fled thither, as to the natives themselves, that were
bred and born there. The Egyptians that dwelt among the Israelites Exodus 9.26.
and 10.23.
in Goshen, escaped some at least of the plagues, that all Egypt besides felt.
and those that were not of Jacobs posterity, yet by being and abiding in the
same body with them, partaked, as in some other Number. 9.14. and 35.15. Deuteronomy.
1.16. and 10, 18, 19.
privileges with them, so in that protection, that God was pleased to afford
them. And so may thou by being embodied with Gods people, tho thou be not
yet one of them. tho thou be not yet a thorough convert, there, and there
alone* are the means to be had, whereby thou may in Gods time be thoroughly
converted. Only take heed, that thou be not among them, as Genesis 21.9.^
a scoffing Ismael, as John 6.70, 7^.
a treacherous Judas, as Number. 16.1, 3.
a murmuring, and a mutinous Corah, Dathan, or Abiram against Moses and Aaron.
the Kings court is an ill shelter, either for a known traitor, or a seditious
party nor can God worse endure any, then such, as under pretense of joining
themselves to his people, are either openly autors of sedition among them, or
underhand plotters of mischief against them. Psalm. 55.12.15.
Let them go down quick into the grave, says the Psalmist of the one: and Number.
16.30* 33.
they went down quick into the grave; says the story of the other.

But chiefly, and above all things, endeavor by all means, to be, not among
them only, but John 1.19.
of them, one of the John 1.47.
true Israel, of the Gal. 6.16.
Israel of God; not a partaker only in this protection with others, but one of
those for whose sake God affords it unto others. for the (...). John 1.1^.
privilege indeed is theirs, tho others may share in it sometime with them.
they of right may claim it, and assure themselves of it; others no further then
God is pleased, with them, and for them, to impart it. Besides, what will it in
the end avail a man, to enjoy Gods protection here with his people for a short
time, and after that short term expired, to go out of it for ever? to enjoy
some common fruits of Gods favor a while here, and to lie under his
displeasure everlastingly hereafter. Psalm. 106.4.
Remember me, O Lord, says the Psa^mist, with the favor of thy people. with
that special favor, which thou bear unto them, who are yet, in a more
peculiar manner then ordinary, thy people. O visit me with thy salvation. as
well spiritual, as corporal; not temporal only, but eternal. Psalm. 106.5.
that I may see, Psalm. 34.12. Jer. 17 6.
that is, enjoy, the goodness of thy chosen. that goodness of thine, which
thou show to thine elect: and that I may rejoice with the joy of thy nation.
with such Romans 14.17. 1 Pet. 1.8.
joy, as thou by thy Spirit art wont to fill the hearts of thy faithful ones
with: and glory with thine inheritance. Romans 5.1, 2. (...).
glory with them, that are Heb 1.14.
heirs of salvation, in hope of that glory, which with them I look hereafter
to inherit. and this favor of God is that indeed, which the faithful only
have their share in; and Prove. 14.10. Rev. 2.17.
wherein no stranger is, or can be intercommoner with them. as for the other, of
external protection and preservation, that even the worse sort of men also
usually pa^take in, either by Genesis 19 21, ^2. Jer. 29.7.
the abode of Gods people among them, or by Jer. 35.7.
their abode among Gods people.

Nor do worldly men therefore understand, how injuri^us they are to themselves,
when they malign and oppugn, seek to mischief and make away those, by whose
means, and for whose sake, they enjoy that peace and safety, that otherwise
would be soon removed. The Genesis 6.11, 12 14.
wicked world wished Noah once in his Ark they liked not his 2 Pet. 2.5.
preaching of repentance and righteousness. but Genesis 7.7.10.
no sooner was Noah once safely stowed in the Ark, but the deluge began, that
drowned the whole world. The Genesis 19 8, 9.
Sodomites could not brook Lot. they would set him going ere long. as 2 Pet.
2.7, 8.
their lewd life was an eyesore, yea an heart-sore to him: so was his holy
life no less offensive to them, as giving (...). Isid. l. 2. ep. 50. Wisd.
2.12.16. Redarguere videtur, qi dissentit Lactant. Malos qi^qis non imitatur,
offendit. Cyprian.
a severe, tho silent, check to theirs; and his admonitions much more. but Genesis
19.23, 24. Luke 17.29.
in the very same day that Lot set foot out of Sodom, came that storm of fire
and brimstone, that destroyed the whole City. It is for that sorry handful of
sincere professors, so much maligned and traduced with us, that our Land and
State has been hitherto preserved from utter confusion. Esaias 6.30.
As the (...) fulcrum, statumen. Iun. Pisc. proprie statu^ columna, Genesis 35.14.
columen.
support (...) in Shallechet. V^^abl. Deodat.
at Shallecheth is in the elms and the oaks; so is the holy seed, says Esaias,
the support of the State. that is, as the trees, that grow on either side of
the (...) ascensus. 1. Reg. 10.5. (...) 1 Chronicles. 10.16 (...) 2 Reg. 12.20.
aggestum, agger.
causey or terrace, that reaches from the Kings Palace to the Temple, at the 1 Chronicles. 26.16. porta Shallechet, non, injectus, ut Jun. sed, emissionis, ut
Deodat. qa cineres evebebantur.
gate of Shallecheth, supporteth it, and Terram alioqi ruituram firmitate sua
continent. Jun.
by keeping up the earth, that would otherwise be crumbling away, keeps the
causey from decay: so the holy seed, the small residue of religious and
well-affected people in the land, are they that Justus est fundamentum seculi
R. Moses in paenitent. c. 3.. 7. (...). Justin. ep. ad Diognet.
support and bear up the State; which but for them might be soon utterly
overthrown and destroyed. The (...). Hippocr. ep. ad Abderit.
making much therefore of such is a means to secure a State: the maligning of
them, and making away, or chasing away of them, (that which has been formerly
too much practiced among us) is the next way to overthrow it. It bodes no good
to a State, when God sweeps, or picks such away. It was a sign that Sampson
meant to pull down the house on the Philistines heads, when he attempted Jud.
16.26, 29, 30.
to stir the pillars. and Esaias 3.2, 3. (...)^ Plato apud Anton. Meliss. l. 1.
c. 45. See Jeroboams sons decease. Point. Spec. 2.
when God takes away the pillars and supporters of a state, it is a shrewd
sign that God intends it no good. But when a people shall themselves expel
such from among them, they do therein but imitate Salomons foolish woman, that
Prove. 14.1.
pulls down the house with her own hands.

But, to proceed to a further use, has God such an eye as we have heard, on
his? then should they also have an eye on him, and to him.

We should have constantly an eye on him, and his conduct; Use 8.
as he has an eye on us. And indeed we cannot expect, that he should have such
an eye constantly on us; unless we have our eye constantly also on him. Ps.
18.21, 22.
I have (...) observavi. Deuteronomy 6.3. Psalm. ^6.6.
observed, says David the ways of the Lord; and have not wickedly gone aside
from my God. for all his (...) judicia ejus. ut Ps. 119.20, 31. Ezekiel. 18.9, 21.
commandments were before me: nor did I put any of his statutes away from me.
He seems to allude to the Israelites journeying through the wilderness. where
they were to follow the conduct Number. 9.15.23. and 10.33.
of the Ark and of the cloud; to observe which way God led them by either of
those, and that way to go, tho it seemed never so far about, in regard of the
land that they were bound to. so did David. and so must we do, in our passage
through the wilderness of this world, if we desire to pass in safety under
Gods protection. our eye must be on Gods conduct; observe which way he directs
us, by the pillar of his word, by the light of his law; tho he seem to carry us
far about, in regard of those ends and aims that we propound to our selves; and
desire to attain ento. For as it was with them; they were safe, while they
followed the cloud and the Ark; but when Number. 14.44, 45.
they left either of them, going out of Gods protection, they fell foul on the
Amorites and were beaten down by them: so must we expect, that it will fare
likewise with us. So long as we follow the directions of Gods word, that should
be the cynosura and load-star of all our designs, we are sure to tread safely,
we may be Prove. 10 9. Nihil est ad defendendum puritate tutius, nihil ad
dicendum veritate facilius. fiducia magnae securitatis est simplicitas
actionis. Gregor. past^r. l. 3. c. 1.. 12.
confident of success. But if we shall offer to step aside out of the (...).
Jam. 2.8. Legem regiam. ut viam regiam. Number. 20.17.
rode way, that it leads us in, and betake our selves to other bypath, by
indirect courses seeking to compass our ends, and to bring things about; we
shall miss of our aim, fail of obtaining our ends; and while we go out of Gods
protection, by declining his conduct, expose to peril of miscarrying, both our
selves, and the affairs, whereabout we are employed.

Again, we must have an eye, as on God, so unto God: as to him and his conduct,
so Psalm. 34.5. Esaias 45.2^.
to him, for his safe conduct, his safeguard, if we desire that he should have
such an eye unto us. Psalm. 25.15.
Mine eyes are continually upon the Lord; says David. And Plal. 123.1, 2.
unto thee, say Gods people, do we lift up our eyes, O thou, that dwell in
the heavens. as the eyes of a servant are to the hands of his master, and the
eyes of an handmaid to the hands of her mistress: so are our eyes unto the
Lord, till he have mercy on us. we must have our eye constantly fifth up unto
him, if we will have his eye constan^ly cast down upon us. For tho he profess
and promise to have such a tender eye over his, yet does he look to be sued and
sought unto for the same by us. Ezekiel. 36.37.
Yet for all these things, says he, which I have promised to do for them, will
I be Neqe enim placet qod Jun. ex Psalm. ^11.2. q^s^^a. i^ ex^^sita, adeo
promp^a, ut ea qaerere ampli^^ non sit opus. qod est ^ex^um ^lane perve^^ere
and co^^umpere.
sought to by the house of Israel* where tho the main scope of the place be to
intimate, that there should be a constant repairing of Gods people again to
Gods Temple, there to prefer their petitions unto him, as in former times
before the captivity they had done; yet withal it is implied, that God
expected from time to time to be Vult a se requiri Deus, etiam qod pollicetur.
and ideo multa, qae dare disp^suit, prius pollicetur, ut ex promissione devotio
exci^e^ur* Bern. de temp. Sermon. 11. 2 Samuel 7.25.
petitioned for the performance of his promises. God must therefore be sought
to, yea and constantly sought to, if we desire to have his eye constantly on
us, in that manner as he is* here said to have had on that people. The case of
them in their conflict with Amaleck, will show it. Tho God could not but with
dislike, yea with deep detestation, behold Exodus 17.14, 16. Deuteronomy. 25.17-19. 1 Samuel, 15.2.
Amaleks base and injurious attempt against them, and by a solemn oath engaged
himself to be avenged on him for it: yet Exodus 17.11.
no longer then Moses held up his hands in prayer, did Israel in sight prevail
against Amalek. When our eyes grow weary of looking up unto God, no marvel if
Gods eye grow heavy in looking after us. Our slumbring in this kind, may make
him also to slumber; who tho he can Psalm 121.4.
neither slumber nor sleep, yet upon our neglect of him Psalm 78.65.
seems many times to sleep; and tho he be sometime awaked with the very noise
and outrage of the adversary, yet he would rather be Psalm 7*6. and 44.23. Esaias
51.9. Use 9.
awaked with the cries and clamor of his people.

Give me leave to add an use of application hereof to our selves. What Balaam
a voweth here of Jacob and Israel that then was, has been abundantly verified
of Gods Israel among us. God has not endured to see wrong done us, nor
grievance attempted against us; but has from time to time in much mercy
protected us, and executed judgment on those that have but attempted to wrong
us. How many plots and practices of the popish faction, in Queen Elizabeth's
reign, in King James his time, in our Sovereigns days that now is, have been
discovered, defeated, and Psalm 7.16. autorem scelus repetit. Sen. Plerc. fur.
2.
returned on the heads of those, that were either plotters of them, or employed
in them? And whereunto can we ascribe these so many and manifold defeats of
them, and deliveries of our selves, but to that good eye of our gracious God,
that was upon us for our good; that pitiful eye of his, that could not endure
to see that spoil made of his people with us, that must needs have ensued, had
those plots and practices taken effect? What was it else (to omit all other
deliverances of a lower alloy) that dispersed that invincible Armado, as they
termed and esteemed it, whereby they made full account to have made an utter
riddance of us, and gave them up to the mercy of the winds and waves, that in
merciless manner intended to have preyed upon us; wrecked them that would have
wrecked their rage and cruelty upon us; and swallowing them up quick, buried
them in the bowels of the deep, A metaphor taken from ravenous beasts, that
devour their prey so suddenly, that it seems to go quick down their throat.
Verse. 6. Ierem. 51.44. Psalm 27.2. and 56.1. or from devouring fish. Ion. 1.17.
and 2.2. or from the grave Psalm. 5.9. and 55.15. Prove. 1.12. or from the deep.
Psalm 69.15. verse 4.5.
that were fully bent in their implacable fury to have swallowed up the whole
body of Gods people with us. Well may we sing, and say with Israel of old,
Psalm. 124.2* 6.
If the Lord had not been with us, and stood by us, when these men rose up
against us; then had they in the fierceness of their wrath against us
swallowed us up, or, down, quick; then had Psalm 69.2. Esaias 8.7, 8. and 59.19.
the waters overflown us, and the stream overwhelmed our souls; the (...)
super^ae. ut (...) superbia fluctuum. Job 38.11. and (...) superbia mari^.
Psalm 89.9.
swelling waters had overwhelmed our souls; had utterly drowned us and
destroyed us. but blessed be God, who gave us not as a prey unto their teeth.
Or what else was it, that brought to light, and by discovery frustrated that
devilish design of the Powder plot, so cunningly contrived, and so covertly
carried, that it was by the authors of it, and agents in it, deemed a thing
impossible, that it should by any means miscarry, or fail of its intended
effect? as well here might we say with that other Psalmist, Psalm 127.1.
Unless the Lord had kept the City, the watc^man (yea or watchmen, had they
been never so many, or so mighty) had waked but in vain. For surely, had not
the Prove. 15.3.
all seeing eye of Psalm 121.4.
Isreal's keeper, who never slumbreth nor sleeps, watched over us then for our
good; tho we had denied Psalm 132.4 Prove. 6.4.
sleep to our eyes, and slumber to our ey-lids; yet in vain had we watched,
being altogether ignorant of any danger we were in, nor being aware, where the
evil lay lurking, against which we should have watched. Had many thousands, or
ten thousands; yea never so many millions of men been up in arms, for the
safeguard of our Sovereign, his Royal consort, his Princely issue, our Peers,
our Prelates, the main body of our Nobility, the prime flowers of our Gentry,
and Communalty; all could not have secured them, from being blown up at one
blast, and dispersed into the air, to find what sepulture, if any at all, they
could, where their disjected limbs, or their battered bodies should light. And
what further mischief would have followed throughout the whole Land, had that
hellish design taken effect, it is not easy to imagine. Only this we may
upon good grounds conceive, that those that should have survived to see the
ensuing miseries, would have Lam. 4.6, 9. (...). Homer. Odys. ^. O terqe
qaterqe beati, Q^is ante or^ patrum Troiae sub moenibus altis Contigit oppetere
Maro Aen. l. 1.
deemed them thrice happy that had perished in that hideous execution at first,
and have wished that they had born them company therein. And what can we say
let, that it took not effect, when it was so near upon the point of
execution; but that Gods tender eye over us could not endure to see that
hellish cruelty acted upon his people, which those monsters of men would have
Mic. 4.11.
beheld with delight? Nor can we justly ascribe the discovery of so many
several plots and conspiracies, as have been since the beginning of our
present troubles, set on foot by the adverse party; but having been brought to
light before they could be hatched and seeing the light before their intended
time, have by that means miscarried; unto any other cause, save the watchful
eye of our good God over us, and his tender care of his people among us, and of
those that are entrusted by them in the public affairs of Church and State
for their good.

And let this in the last place, mind us, of our duty to God, Use 10.
for such his mercy to us. Is it so then, that God is so chary of the welfare
and good of his people, that he cannot endure the sight of ought that tends
to their evil or annoyance? Then undoubtedly it is the duty of Gods people, to
be in like manner affected toward him. it stands them upon, to be as chary
of his glory as he is of their good; and no more to endure ought that may
impair his glory, then he ought that may impeach their good. it is but right
and equal, that it should so be. yea it is more then equal, that what God
freely does for us, we should endeavor at least, in way of requital, to do
deservedly for him. And such indeed has been the disposition and practice, in
a very eminent manner, of some prime ones among Gods people. Moses one of Number.
12.3.
the meekest and mildest men upon earth, by the testimony of truth it self: yet
in Gods cause, how zealous? how fervent? how fierce? how furious? (as might
seem to some of another temper, of another spirit; so transported was he with
passion) when he saw God dishonored by divine worship done to an idol? Exodus
32.16, 19, 20.
he throws out of his hand the tables of the Law, Gods own workmanship; not
considering what might, and indeed did thereby befall them. he stamps the idol
to powder, casts the powder into the water, compels them to drink that, which
erst while they had adored: causes some three thousand of the people to be
slain; when as Ibid. v. 28.32.
for the saving of the residue he made offer to have his name raced out of Gods
book. David likewise, tho in his own concernments exceeding patient, even to
wonderment. Psalm 38.13, 14.
I was, says he, as a deaf man, that hears not; as a dumb man, that cannot
open his mouth: I was as one that could not hear; or that were not able to
return a reproachful answer. And so it was indeed with him, (as the story
shows) when Shimei 2 Samuel 16.5-8 13.
railed on him, 1 Kings 2.8.
cursed him with a grievous curse, threw stones at him and his train, and
carried himself most contumeliously and despightfully toward him. 2 Samuel
16.10-14.
he went on his way as quietly as if he had not either heard ought that he
spoke, or seen ought that he did. But when ought came in his way that tended to
Gods dishonor, then Psalm 69.9.
the zeal of thine house, says he, has even (...) ^^medit me. ut Ierem. 50.17.
wasted me. (the indignation that he conceived at the consideration of such
things done, as seemed to tend to the disparagement of Gods honor, in the
abuse of his house, did cast him into a consumption, did even waste him to skin
and bone) and the reproaches of them that reproach thee, are fallen upon me.
such reproachful speeches as profane persons did cast out against God, he
took to himself; he reckoned himself reproached in them, and in him: and Prove.
9.7, 8.
by reproving them for their reproachings of God, brought reproof and reproach
upon himself. And again, Psalm 119.139.
My zeal, says he, does even consume me, or, eat me up, because mine enemies
forget thy words. as if he had said; It is not so much the wrong that mine
enemies do me, in their cruel pursuing of me and plotting against me, that
troubles and vexes me, as their forgetting of God, and failing in their duty
to him, and the dishonor that in pursuit of their malicious practices against
me, they do to him. nor could he therefore without much Psalm 119.158.
grief, and whole Ibid. v. 136.
rivers of tears, behold how regardlesse wicked men were of God and his Law.
their sins and excesses, were not an ey-sore only, but even a heart-sore to
him, as 2 Pet. 2*7, 8.
the like in the Sodomites, among whom he lived* was before-time to Lot. And
well were it with us, could we be in the like manner affected; could we work
our spirits to such a temper; not so much to regard in the present troubles,
what our selves, as what the cause of God, suffers; nor so much in our
endeavors, courses, and counsels to eye and aim at, our own private emoluments,
the reparation of our own losses, or improvement of our own estates, as the
public interest of Gods Church, the reparation of the dishonor that has
been, and is still daily done to his Name, his Word, his Service, his Worship,
his Sabbaths, his Sacraments; and the advancement of his glory, in the purity
of his Ordinances and the power of piety wrought into the hearts and expressed in
the lives of those, that profess themselves to be his people: but to be well
content to dispense with the one for the promoting of the other; thinking
nothing too dear, not our lives themselves, much less our outward estates, to
be (...). 2 Cor. 12.15.
expended and laid out, tho but for laying a foundation of that, that future
ages may enjoy. This tender care and respect had we unto Gods cause, in way of
thankfulness to him for that tender care that he has from time to time had of
us: and did we make it appear in our courses, and carriages, that men might
thereby see, that it were this indeed that did most affect us and sway with us;
it would win the hearts hoth of God, and of good men, as well at home as abroad,
very much unto us and to our cause. and we should have the better grounds to
conceive the stronger hopes, that God would be pleased to continue his
watchful eye still over us, for our further and future preservation. Whereas
on the other side, if we shall regard Gods honor no further, then as it stands
with our own interest; nor respect piety, but as it may be subservient to
policy; if we shall give way to, or connive at Antinomian teachers, and other
the like Sectaries, that with their pernicious opinions poison the souls of
Gods people; by blindfolding God rom all sight of sin in them, and so
encouraging them to make no conscience of any sin in regard of Gods sight; by
discharging them of their duty to God and his Law; removing one of the
strongest curbs to restrain them from sin, and dissuading them from all
sorrow for sin, after they have sinned; As do the Autors of those books
entitled Liberty of conscience: The power of love; Christ's counsel (...)
^^^dice^; Answer to Mr. Pryns 12 Qu^res; The compassionate Samaritan; The
bloody Ten^nt; which last in express terms affirms, that It is Gods will and
command, since Christ's coming, that a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish,
Turkish, or Antichristian Worships be granted to all men, in all Nations and
Countries.
pleading for toleration of all sorts of religions and opinions, tho never so
blasphemous and abominable, so long as they disturb not the public peace, nor
hinder civil obedience; if we shall, I say, give way to, or wink at, such as
these and the like, out of fear of losing a strong party, and so being by the
malignant party overpowerd; it may be just with God to withdraw his protection
from us and to deliver us up deservedly to be destroyed by the one, while we
vainly fear to be deserted by the other. The Lord in mercy grant us grace, so
to depend upon him, that no such false fears may force us out of his way, or
make us forgetful of our duty to him; lest thereby (...) Epictet. lib. 2. cap.
1. Dum verentur infamiam falsam, veram incurrunt, instar ferarum, qae
circundantur pinnis, ut cogantur in retia. qibus qoniam deest ratio, in verum
exitium vand sormidine contruduntur. Nescio qis (uti August. praefat. contra
Julian.) apud August. de nupt. and con^up. l. 2. c. 3.
we become like the timorous deer, which while out of fear, they seek to shun
(...). Oppian. venat. lib. 4. Et pisc. lib. 4. (...). Digera^ i^nexas no^ un^
ex alite pinnas. Namque ursos, magno^qe sues, cervosqe fugaces Terrificant,
liniqe vetant transcendere septum. Nemes. de venat. Picta ^ube^ti linea pinna,
Vano clandat terr^re feras. Sen. Hyppolyt. dum pavidos formidine cervos
Claudat, odoratae metuentes (...) Pinnae. Lucan* l. 4. Punice^qe agitant
pavidos formidine pinnae. Maro Georg. lib. 3. punicea sep^um formidine pinnae.
Idem Aen. l. 12. ^vagos dumet^ per avia cerv^s circund^^ macul^^. and mult^
in^^gine pinnae. Aus^n. epist. 4. Nec formida^^es cervos includi^e pinnis. Nas^
fabul l. 15. Ma^imos ^^rarum gr^ges linea pennis distincta continet, and in
in^^di^s agit ab ipso effectu dicta formid^. v^^is enim (...) terrori sun^*
Sen. de ira l. 2. c. 12. in ex Jobi 6.16. Lat. vars. desumptum.
a few feathers or papers, set on purpose to affright them, forsaking their
covert, where they might have been safe, run full upon the Bows that stand
ready bent to shoot them, or into the toil ready pight to receive them, and to
surprise them to their fall. Remember we, what the Qi timet pruina^, irr^^t
(...) cum nix.
Latin proverb says* He that is afraid of the frost, shall be overwhelmed
with the snow. And take Vide Gregor. moral l. 8. c. 12.
Gregory's interpretation thereof with it; He that Esaias 51*7, 8, 12, 13. Matthew*
10.21. Luke 12.4.5.
fears man's displeasure, which as lying here below, might without peril be
overpast; shall be surprised with Gods wrath, which Esaias 24.17, 18. Ier. 30.23,
24. Romans 1.18.
coming down from above, can by no means be avoided. And let the fear of God,
and our due respect to him, so prevail with us, as to incite and enable us, to
con^emn and trample upon all such base and groundless fears: the rather
considering, how even with those cowardly creatures, yet Fera^ lin^^ and p^una
(...) a tergo (...) incessat: (...) fugam per ipsa (...) fugerant* procule
abun^ge f^rmidi^e^. (...) clem. l. 1. c. 12.
urgent necessity of procuring their own safety, upon the hunters eager pursuit
of them with his hounds at their heels, does so prevail, as to make them rush
on, or (...) over those vain feather, or paper-works, which they were so shy
and fearful of before; as also their Vide supra ad Rat. 1. Relat. 1.
tender affection to their young ones, running along by their sides emboldneth
them* to turn upon, make head against, and trample on those beagles, Matthew 6.9.
Luke 11.2.
(I have seen a Do do it in defense of her Fawn) whose least opening, tho a
loose off, at other times they durst not endure.

To conclude let it be our principal care to have our practice in this kind
correspondent to our prayers. That as we are taught by our Savior, to pray in
the first place, that Gods name may be sanctified, so in our practice we
prefer the seeking and procuring thereof before all other things, even our
own outward safety it self. God beholding us to have such a regardfull eye to
him, and to his glory, will (no doubt) have no less regardfull an eye unto us
and to our good; and may the rather be enduced to afford that safety unto us*
which we are willingly and readily content rather to hazard, then to fail in
our duty to him.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Thomas Gataker.

Esca^es, (...) ^pplied.
IN the Preface read, p. 6. l. 4 them. the* p. 14. l. 17. those times. p. 15.
l. 12. it were not.

In the margent, p. 5. lit. p ^ qem c^vat. p. 21. l. b (...).

IN the Treatise, page 7. line 32. Greek Expositers. p. 10. l. 16. in those
two. p. 23. l. 18. wickedness. p. 27. l. 13. highest of them. p 32. l. 14. any
son of iniquity, any wrong doer. p. 43. l. 2. in his cause. p. 47. l. 7. sick
and i^ prison, and ye visi. l. 32. if in any wise. p. 64. l 3. other. p. 65. l.
19. peoples. p. ^1. l. 28. on them? p. 83. l* 16. Ammon. p. 88. l. 8. but in
th^s.

In the margent, p. 11. lit. y (...) p. 22. l. i. dele cum. p. 23. l. r. and
simili^. p. 3^. l. t Petr. Celens. x Cassiodor. p. 52. l. h aut ciausum* ibid
Vatabl. p 64. l. g (...) ibid. oram. p. 66. l. ^ qia qicunqe. p 70. l. c Bern*
nom. sermon. in (...). Dom. p. 79. l. z (...) p. 80 l. b Ammian. p. 1^. l b
Facti. cr. l. c (...). p 86. l. a Simoc. p. 89. l. e scuta. i. prot. p. 91. l.
^ (...). p. 49-ad lit. h add. P.m. non ultiomum, aut judiciorum; qod miserendi
cau^am and originem sumat ex proprio, judicandi vel ul^ciscendi magis ex
nostro. Bern. in Not. Dom. sermon. 5.


