A JUST DEFENSE and VINDICATION OF Gospel Ministers AND Gospel ordinances
AGAINST The QVAKERS many false Accusations, Slanders and Reproaches.

In ANSWER to John Horwood his LETTER, and E. B. his Book, called, A Just and
lawful Trial of the Ministers and Teachers of this Age, and several others.

Proving the Ministers Calling and Maintenance Just and Lawful, and the
Doctrine of Perfection by Free Justification, preached by them, agreeable to
the Scriptures. With the Quakers Objections answered. And the Quakers
Perfection by harkening to, and obeying a light within them, proved contrary to
the Scriptures. And their Practices in ten particulars proved contrary to the
Commands and Examples of Christ and his Apostles.

By a Lover of Gospel Ministers and Gospel Ordinances.

Contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints,

Jude 3. Now, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall
proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifested to all men, as theirs
was,

2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. London, Printed by W. G. for the Author, and are to be sold by
Isaac Pridmore at the Sign of the Golden Falcon near the New Exchange* 1660.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Know it will seem strange that I should spend so much time in writing An
Answer to those people called Quakers; for I confess it seems strange to my
self. For when I first entered upon this Work, I did not in the least intend to
have written so much, nor that which was written should have come to public
view in Print. I shall therefore give the Grounds or Reasons, moving me both to
write, and to publish what I had written.

Wherefore know, that the first Reason moving me to undertake this Work, was
because of that great Malice and Envy against the Ministers at that time. When
the black Cloud appeared, the Quakers, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries,
threatening the utter ruin of our Ministers; not only by their reviling
Reproaches, false Accusations, and the like, but by their laboring to get
hands to Petition those then in Authority, to take away their maintenance
settled by Law, and that because they were no lawful Ministers; as is expressed
in one of their Printed Papers, presented to those then in Authority: and by
those many Pamphlets printed against Tithes and our present Ministry;
Published by the Quakers and Anabaptists; and when those failed, by getting the
Army to join with them to turn the Parliament men out, and setting up
themselves in their stead to rule all by their giddy heads; theatning that now
all the Priests should be turned out as unprofitable burdens to the
Commonwealth: Notwithstanding all this, the Misters were for the most part
silent, not willing to foul their pens by writing against such a wild
generation; but in patience committed their cause unto God by prayer, who has
in some measure answered them. For whose sake, next my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, I did undertake this Work, hoping they and all others will except of my
poor weak endeavors, and pass by my weaknesses wherein I have slipped, either
in impertinences or otherwise; nor regard the rudeness of my Style, but look on
the scope and end of my poor Labors to maintain a Gospel Ministry, and Gospel
Ordinances, although defended without Eloquence or humane Arts; in which I hope
I have pleased the Adversaries, though I despise them in other things.

The second Reason was, because of those many Letters and printed Books sent
unto me by several Quakers, some of themselves reporting they are unanswerable.
And considering what Solomon the wise says, Answer a fool according to his
folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. And I perceive the not answering
these men, is one ground of their self-confidence, and being wise in their own
conceit. And although this Answer be plain, without humane Art or Eloquence,
yet considering, that the persons with whom I have to deal are such as despise
all such Learning, and mock at Universities, and Colleges. I suppose this
Answer may best fit their spirits, coming from a private person, who has not
the help of outward Learning and Tongues no more then themselves, of which they
boast that they can write so many Books without those humane helps, and that
what the Priests (as they call them) write, that is only by their humane
learning, which they think is ground sufficient for them not to regard what is
written by them: But I hope they will have so much regard as to read what I
have written, seeing we are on even terms in that particular.

The third Reason of writing and publishing this Answer, because of the great
growth and increase of these Errors, by reason of the diligence of the Devils
instruments, in writing and printing so many Books, to spread abroad their
Errors; some of them have affirmed in my hearing, That there is a thousand of
their erroneous Books printed every week, and most of them given away on
purpose to delude ignorant people, and that there are above thirty thousand
Quakers in England, and that within less then 3. years they shall stop the
mouths of all our Priests, as they call them, they having but one string left
to their bow, and that Gods Sword was now drawn to cut that, and then they are
gone; Wherefore considering the great diligence of these men and women for
promoting of Error, not only by writing and printing their erroneous Books,
but by their diligence in running or going about from one place to another to
spread their errors, not only in England, but in Ireland, Scotland, Barbadus,
and new England, Holland, and other places. I was ashamed to see how cold and
backward we are in opposing their errors, and defending the Truth of the Gospel
Ministry, and Gospel Ordinances, against the many assaults of the
adversaries; and is it not a shame, That Sectaries should be more zealous in
promoting the kingdom of the devil, then we are in promoting the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ? and yet how many of us have solemnly engaged our selves by Oath
or Covenant to endeavor the extirpation of Superstition, Herisie, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine,
and the power of Godliness, lest we partake in other men's sins and thereby be
in danger to receive of their plagues? The consideration of which, has been a
chief motive to undertake this work, and to cast in my Mite, others having
brought forth out of their Treasure.

The fourth Reason moving me to under take this work, and publish the same,
was, because many of my old friends and acquaintance are seduced from the Truth
to these errors, of whom I may say as the Prophet David said, We took sweet
counsel together, and went unto the public assemblies together; and not only
friends and acquaintance, but some of near relation, for whom the bond of
nature binds me to endeavor their recalling back, and the rather, because I
believe in Charity, that they are honest hearted, and strict in their lives,
and yet through ignorance, and the fair shows and pretenses of a strict holy
life, are seduced and drawn away; but I hope, not so far gone, but that they
may be reclaimed and brought back to the truth: To that end I desire them
seriously to examine what I have written by the Scriptture rule, and if they
can show me my error by that, and that their religion is more agreeable
thereunto, I shall lay down all my weapons and join with them, for I strive not
for victory, but for truth; but if they cannot, I hope they will remember from
whence they are fallen, and repent and do their first works: but if any of them
are so obstinate, that they will go on in their delusions, my soul shall mourn
for them in secret, but I hope better things, at least of some.

The fifth reason why I writ and published this, was to strengthen such as are
wavering through ignorance and weakness. For I observe, that when the Quakers
come into a Parish to vent their errors, many ignorant people are ready to
hearken to their errors, and be taken with their pretended shows of zeal and
holiness; and when they see none to oppose them, nor answer them, they are
ready to think and say, it it is, because they are unanswerable, which I have
heard some say in the place where I live, the which did move me to enter into
disputation with them several times, until they gave over their meetings there;
and what I have written is the same that was spoken in reasoning with them more
enlarged; and I hope the reading hereof may be a means to stablish and settle
some that are wavering, and keep them from those baits and snares which are
laid to draw and catch them by these seducers.

The sixth reason was to clear my self from those lies and slanders raised by
some Quakers, as that they laid me in the dirt, and that because I was not able
to answer them, I was a great persecutor of them; the truth of which I refer to
the impartial Reader to judge, and some of them have reported, that I am fallen
from those Principles, that I formerly held and and published in a Treatise of
the grounds of Religion, called The Christians Profession, the truth of which,
I refer to those that have read the same, and that shall read this: And although
I know it is their usal manner to revile and slander all that oppose them in
their wild opinions; yet I see too many are apt to believe what they say,
because of their pretended show of holiness, and some think them so perfect
that they cannot err: wherefore lest my silence should be taken for a
confession of being guilty, I thought it necessary to publish this, to clear
clear my innocence: for if a man be bound by the law to pleasure the good name
and credit of his neighbor, surely he is bound by the same law to preserve his
own.

Lastly, the reasons moving me to publish this in print, was first, the desire
and request of several friends to whom I was engaged to grant their desires, in
what might be for their and the public good.

2. Because if I had only sent a written Copy to the Quakers, they would have
kept it from the knowledge of such, whom they feared might be drawn away from
them, and would have raised several falls reports, and I could not have had so
many of my friends who are Quakers, have had the sight thereof, because I could
not have gotten so many written Coppies, because of the largeness thereof, so
that it would have been like the Tallent hid in the earth.

3. Because I conceive it may be more profitable by being in many hands then in
a few; Although I know I shall thereby incur the revilings of some, and the
mocks and scoffs of others, and the sensour and judgeing of many; all of which
I am contented to pass through, so that my poor labor may be profitable to any.

And I know some will Object, That I spent more time then I needed, in regard I
have written not only against the Quakers, but the Anabaptists also, who write
nothing to me.

I Answer, That they do so nearly join together in some things, as that I could
not Answer the one without the other; For the Quakers both in their Printed
books, and in their Disputations, do make the Baptism of Infants their great
objection against our Ministers and Churches: also the Quakers and Anabaptists
are both of opinion, in denying the lawfulness of singing Psalms, and some
Anabaptists agree with the Quakers in harkening to Revelations and impulses of
the Spirit, and in harkening to a light within them in things contrary to the
light of Scripture; and they agree in opposing our Ministers and Churches with
great eagerness, although in many other things they disagree and oppose, and
are contrary to one another: Like Sampsons Foxes, whose heads were all contrary
one to the other, but they were tied together by the tails with a firebrand to
set the corn on fire; Even so do those Quakers and Anabaptists seem contrary
one to the other, and oppose each other, and yet they knit and unite together
to set the Church on fire, by their fierce and fiery opposing our Churches and
Ministers; witness the several books written and published by the Anabaptists
against our Ministers and their maintenance; as John Can his book, called The
first and second voice from the Temple, and several others; cmpared with Jona
Dell his book, called A voice from the Temple, and several others; by which it
appears that they agree in one in opposing our Ministers, because they knew if
they could destroy the Ministry, it were an easy matter to persuade people to
any Religion, as a man that has lost his guide in a wilderness may easily lose
his way. Also, who knows not that the Anabaptists were the first Original
from whence the Quakers came? for most of the Quakers were first Anabaptists,
as Mr. Baxtar has at large proved; wherefore considering how these agree in
several opinions and practices, I have by the way, as I found occasion, written
against their errors, not their persons.

Also some will Object against my writing against the Quakers, because they say
they are a people that live very strict holy lives.

1. I Answer, That for their strict holy lives, I refer the Reader to those ten
Particulars I have proved against them. 2. I Answer, That the holiness of a
Christian life, does not consist in Negatives only, but in Affirmatives, as
well as Negatives; now that they do live in the neglect and contempt of many
Christian Duties commanded by Christ and his Apostles is plain, by what I have
written. 3. I Answer, That the living a strict moral life only, does not prove
them, nor manifest them nor any other to be Christians; for many heathens have
done as much, as Histories relate, and many Papists have walked with as much
strictness in their lives as any Quakers; as Luther writes of himself when he
was a Monck, and of several others. Also the young man in the Gospel said, All
these Commandments I have kept from my youth; and I believe many of the
Pharisees were as strict and zealous in their way as they; and the Apostle Paul
testifies of himself, while he was a Pharisee, that touching the righteousness
which is in the Law blameless. But all, that his and their righteousness did
not make them, nor manifest them to be Christians, because they did do those
works not from an inward principle of life, but for life, to be justified and
saved thereby, as the Papists and Quakers do. Now, what the Devil spoke in this
sense is most true, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has will he give for
his life; and what would not a man do and suffer for the saving his soul, and
gaining heaven? But all that a man can do and suffer will not make him a
Christian, nor manifest him to be such, if he believe not the Gospel, nor
profess the same; For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved, says the Apostle, Romans 10. 9, 10. for with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation; and
therefore Luther says, that Doctrine is heaven, and practice is below here
among men, and therefore I am of the opinion or judgment of those that
understand Christ his words, You shall know them by their faces, to be meant
their doctrines, as well as their lives, because generally false Prophets, and
false teachers are such as walk very strict in their lives; yea, the devil is
more cunning then to send men of profane lives to vent and spread errors, for
he knows people will not be easily deluded by such; and therefore, he sends
such as cover over their errors with the sheeps clothing of a pretended strict
holy life, then any others, as the false teachers did among the Galatians, and
the ringleaders of all sects and errors ever since have done; wherefore I
return their own Argument upon their own heads which they often bring against
our Ministers, that they are the false Prophets, Christ spoke of. I say, their
teachers are the false Prophets, because I know them by their fruits, their
errors which they hold, and teach, as well as their practice. Judas was a true
Apostle, called by Christ, and yet a covetous wretch, and a devil; but that did
not prove him a false Apostle, he being called by Christ, and teaching the
Doctrine of Christ; Also Christ says, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
seat; Wherefore what they command you that observe and do, for they say and do
not; so that by Christ's commanding to hear them, it does appear that the
Pharisees not walking according to what they taught, was no ground to prove
them false teachers, nor to refuse to hear them, they being called to teach,
and teaching the truth. It is one of the cunning wiles of Satan to persuade
people, as the Quakers do, not to hear any Minister that walks not perfectly
in his life, and that they are no true Teachers that have any failings in their
lives, though lawfully called, and teach the truth: and one of the other hand,
to persuade people that those are the only true teachers that walk with an
outward show of holiness, though never called to teach, and teach false
erroneous doctrines, contrary to the grounds of Religion; and this the Apostle
Paul proves, saying, false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is
translated into an Angel of light; wherefore the Apostle warns the Galatians,
though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that
which we have preached, let him be accursed; the false Apostles and false
teachers pretended to be the only holy men, for they taught, That faith alone
was not sufficient to justify, but that they must join their good works; and
that the Apostle Paul's Doctrine, tended to carnal liberty, and taught people to
live in sin, as the Quakers say of our Ministers, and their Doctrine. But the
Apostle charged the Galatians and the Corinthians, not to hear them for all
their pretended holiness, seeming like Angels, because they preach another
Gospel of their own, as the Quakers do, for they teach the same Doctrines those
the false Apostles taught, namely, that we are not justified and saved by
believing what Christ did and suffered for us, but by harkening to, and obeying
not Gods Commandments, but a light within us; and some of them do deny Christ's
Body to be risen from the grave, and to be in Heaven; and are not these
sufficient grounds to write against such people, that hold, teach and maintain
such erroneous doctrines, I mean not their persons, but their errors? What
esteem soever many have of them for their outward pretended holiness; I say
outward, for did people see their hearts they would see them foul; the Lord
said unto the Prophet Ezekiel, Son of man, these men have set up their Idols
in their heart; he did not say, they did worship Idols with their bodies; and
do not the Quakers set up idols in their hearts, when they set up their inward
works in the room and place of Christ? What do they else when they say and
teach, that they are not justified and saved by what Christ did, and suffered,
but by what they do in obeying a light within them? and is not this to make an
idol of their own works; which is worse then the Papists Images made of wood
and stone? and is not their maintaining that they can perfectly keep the law,
by living without sin, a making of themselves equal with Christ, for it is his
Prerogative only to have no sin, that Satan found no sin in him? and to say,
which of you can accuse me of sin? and do not they thereby Idolize themselves,
and will people still be so mad to Idolize them, by saying, they have no sin,
and that they never sin? Wherefore I hope I have answered that Objection. There
is one objection more which I have heard against others writing against them,
and I must look for the same; Wherefore I shall endeavor to answer that, and so
conclude.

The 2. Objection, That it is lost labor to write against them, because they
are a peeople so wedded to their own opinions, and so self-conceited of their
own knowledge, that they will not be convinced, let any man say or write what
he will against them.

Answer I confess it was an Objection that did stick much with me before I
began to write, and did keep me back for some time from writing; but I did
satisfy my self before I began, and shall endeavor to satisfy the Reader.
Wherefore I say first, That I have heard and known some that have been
convinced and called out from among them, and that by being reasoned with and
reading some books written against their errors; and who knows whether God
has not a purpose to call others out from amongst them, and who knows what God
may do by small weak means? and if the Lord please to convince one soul, I
shall think my labor abundantly satisfied.

Secondly, I say, that there is some hopes of stablishing some that are
wavering, and that I have had experience of in some, that have been ready to
close with them, that by reading and conference have been settled again in the
Truth.

Thirdly, I say, That supposing neither of these prove, yet I shall not think
my labor lost, because in Answering them, I have written several Fundamental
Truths; in writing, which I found much benefit to my self, and it may be that
some may receive some benefit in reading, which shall be my Prayer to God, and
then I know my labor is not lost in writing, being written at such leisure
times, as I could best spare from other Employments. And I hope, that some may
find some spare time which they may spend in reading, as I did in writing;
Desiring all that read, may lay aside all prejudicate Opinions, and accept of
the good will of him, whose desire and Prayer is, that the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, his Ministers and Ordinances may be defended and maintained, and all
Error, Heresy, Superstition, and Idolatry, suppressed and destroyed.

J. G.

To John Howard one of the Quakers, Teachers, and all such as plead for, and
maintain their erroneous opinions and practices.
HAving received thy Paper, which thou did read, or cause to be read, at your
meeting in William Bond's house at Cheeswick; and finding in the same, many
false railing accusations against all the Ministers of the Gospel, calling them
Parish-hirelings, Deceivers, and false Prophets, deceivers for money, such as
stand up in the strength of the Dragon against the Lamb, and in the way of
Balam; Ministers of Antichrist, such who keep people in their sin, by teaching
that none can be perfect and free from sin so long as they live in this world.
And for my self, to whom you direct your black Paper, you do write many false
slanders and revileings, saying that I came into your meeting in a raging
envious manner, uttering forth my malice and poison against the truth, barking
like a Dog; vomiting up my poisonous stuff, and venomous stuff, with many
other the like. But I may not expect to fare better than my Master? for all
that have read your Papers, or heard your words, know that you make it your
chiefest studies to utter forth railing, cursing, revilings against all persons
that are not of your opinions: But for all such as are of your opinions, you
call them in your Letter, the Servants and Children of the Lord God, the
innocent Lambs of Christ, the holy seed, the called, the chosen of the Lord,
the witnesses, the Saints, the Children of the Light, the perfect ones; these
are your words, and many more; and that the truth of this heavy charge against
the Parish-teachers as you call them, and my self may appear, and the
innocence of your self and others Quakers may appear unto all that have the
Spirit of discerning, I shall by the help and assistance of Almighty God
vindicate both the Ministers, and my Self, from your false accusations: And
that I may keep some Order and Method, which you despise, I shall first show
the occasion and manner of my coming into your Meeting, and shall appeal to all
that heard and saw me whether I writ not the truth: I hearing thee prate into
the next house, and into the street, that the grace of God did condemn man, I
came into the Room, being much troubled at thy many false non-sensical
speeches, telling thee that thou did talk of the Gospel and the grace of God,
but thou did not know what the Gospel was, nor the grace of God; where I did
prove that men are saved by the grace of God, and that the Gospel is glad
tidings bringing peace, and that the Law was called the Ministry of
condemnation, and not the Gospel, which thou could not gainsay; when and
where in a peaceable manner I demanded of thee by what Authority thou did
come there to teach; thou said that God did send thee, and that thou wast not
sent by men, as the Parish Priests were: I replied, that all Ministers that
were lawfully called to Preach now, are not only called inwardly by the Lord,
but by the Church; our Office bearers of the Church; which I then proved by
plain Scriptures, which I Have here writ, the better to help your memory, and the
rather because it is one of your Objections, that our Ministers (as you call
them) are not lawfully called, as the Ministers and Elders in the Primitive
time were: And, that you may the better persuade and delude people that they
are no lawful Ministers of Christ, but of Antichrist, you do write many
reasons to prove them (as you think) to be the Ministers of Antichrist; all
which reasons I shall set down in order, and then give you the Answer to every
particular. Your first Ground you allege is, that they are not called by the
holy Spirit, and made overseers by the holy Ghost, but by Men. Your second
Ground is, because they go to Oxford or Cambridge, to learn Natural Arts and
Languages, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, Logic and Philosophy. Your third Ground,
because they study for what they say, and get their lessons as a Scholar. Your
fourth Ground, because they study old Authors, the writings of those called the
Ancient Fathers, Popish Writers (as you call them.) Your fifth Ground is,
because they take money for Preaching by the year, or Tithes, or Glebelands, or
Augmentations. Your sixth Ground is, because they keep People in their sins,
teaching none can be perfect nor free from sin so long as they live upon the
Earth. Your seventh Ground is, because of those fruits which do spring up among
Teachers and People, as pride, and many other sins you name. These are all your
Grounds which I have gathered out of your confused Paper, where the same things
are often repeated, as your manner is both in writing and speaking; and now I
shall answer your grounds in order, which answer in writing, is the same in
fact, which I have formerly spoken to your self and others of your company, at
your Meetings at Will. Bond's house, and other places, as many other persons
which were then and there present can witness; and I am the rather moved to
take this labor of writing, that other sober-minded people may judge, whether
those things spoken were poisonous, venomous stuff, barking like a Dog, as you
write in your Paper, and others of your company have spoken.

Your first ground is, because the Parish Hierling-Teachers, as you call them,
are called and made Ministers by men, and not by the Spirit and holy Ghost.

For Answer to which, 1. Answ.
I shall first lay down this proposition, that all Ministers, since the
Apostles days, are not called immediately by an extraordinary call, as the
Porphets and Apostles were, but mediately in an ordinary way of calling. Which
calling is not the calling of men, but the calling of the Holy Ghost; because
that calling which the Holy Ghost has revealed in the Scripture, and that I
shall prove by Scripture; for after that he was ascended into heaven, Acts 1.
20, 21. 22.
Judas being fallen from his Apostleship, and another to be chosen in his room,
the Apostles being met together, concluded from what was written in the
Scripture, that another should take his charge, wherefore they presented two
out of the number of those who was conversant among them, from the Baptism of
John, and they prayed, Act 1* 23, 24, 25.
and gave forth their Lots, and the Lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered
with the eleven Apostles. No man pretended that he had the Spirit, and
therefore that was a sufficient call; neither did God call any by revelation,
or a Voice from Heaven, to that place of an Apostle in his room. Also, after
the Apostles had gathered Churches, Act. 14. 23.
they ordained Elders by election in every Church; Titus 1. 5.
and the Apostle Paul says, that he left Titus in Creet, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
that he should ordain Elders in every City; and the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.
writing to Timothy, says, Despise not the gift that is in thee, 1 Timothy 4. 22.
which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery or Eldership. And Paul directed him whom to make Bishops or Elders.
And also the Apostle does not only direct him, but also charge him, among other
things, that he should lay hands suddenly on no man. One of your Speakers or
Praters, at one of your meetings at William Bond's house, hearing some in the
Street threaten to pull them out of the house, cried out lay hands suddenly on
no man, as if the Apostle had meant of striking men suddenly: But the Apostle
says that a Bishop or Elder must be no striker. By which you may see how you
are mistaken in the meaning of Scripture, who pretend to have the infallible
Spirit, by which the Scripture was written, as I have heard some of your
company say. And Jona Dell, in his Book called The Voice from the Temple,
writes. But your Spirit of error in misapplying Scripture is plainly discerned
by all that have the Spirit of discerning; and now I pray mind these things, to
use your own phrase, and consider of these Texts of Scripture here written, and
let the Light of the Scripture enlighten your dark minds, to see that those who
have an external call, as well as an internal call, are the lawful Ministers of
the Gospel, and such are our Ministers. Can you believe that God has appointed
order and government in a Commonwealth, and in a Family, and has appointed
none in his Church? Now is it a sufficient warrant, for a man to execute the
Office of a Justice of the Peace, a Constable, or any other office in the
Commonwealth, because he has sufficient gifts and inward qualifications,
without an outward call, by those who are in authority, either by Commission or
otherwise; and it is lawful for any man to execute the the Office of a public
Minister, without a lawful call from those who are in public Authority. But I
know your opinions are against all order or offices in the Church, and so much
you write in your paper, making it to be a great fault that our Teachers bear
rule: Now, that I may show you your error, mind these Scriptures, that prove
Ministers, to be Officers, and such officers as are to rule in the Church. 1 Timothy 1. 4.
The Apostle Paul writing to Timothy says, If a man desire the Office of a
Bishop or Elder, he desires a good work; and showing how he ought to be
qualified, says, he must be one that rules well his own house, else how shall
he take care of the Church. And the Apostle writing to the Corinthians says, 1
Cor. 12. 28.
That God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, Secondarily Prophets,
Thirdly Teachers, helps to Government. Also, the Apostle writing to the Romans,
Romans 12. 7, 8.
says, All Members have not the same Office. Wherefore he that is a Minister,
let him wait on Ministering; or he that Teaches on Teaching, he that rules
with diligence; Also the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, says, Heb. 13. 7. and
13. 17.
Remember them that have the rule over you, and who are they? the Apostle
says, such who have spoken unto you the Word of God; and in the same Chapter,
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls. But though you are like Korah and his company, Numb. 16. 1, 2,
3.
who were many, Two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the
Congregation, men of renown; who gathered themselves together against Moses and
Aaron, and said (as you Quakers do to other Ministers and Magistrates) you take
too much upon you, Numb 16,
seeing all the Congregation are holy, and the Lord is among them. So you say,
Have not we the same Spirit the Apostles had? Are not we all holy? wherefore do
you Priests take so much upon you? But what became of those men? God caused the
Earth to open and swallow them up; and take heed lest God show some special
Judgment upon you, by delivering you up to blindness of mind, and hardness
of heart. Korah and his company, had the same pr^^ences that you have; but
know, it is not the inward gifts and qualifications only, that makes a public
Teacher, as I have proved, but the lawful ordaining a man to that office; and a
man that is so called, although he want the power of that which he teaches, as
the Sons of Ely were lawful Priests, because lawfully called, though, they
were wicked men; Matthew. 23. 2, 3.
and the Pharisees and Scribes, Christ says, sit in Moses Seat all; therefore
whatsoever they bid you observed, that observe and do, but do not ye after
their Works, for they say and do not: Now, by their sitting in Moses Seat, was,
that it was their office or calling to teach the Law, and therefore Christ
spoke both to the Multitude and to his Disciples to hear them; Acts 1. 17.
and Judas was a true Apostle, and one that preached as the rest of the
Apostles, for it is said, he had part in this Ministry: But all those who are
authorized for that work, ought to be careful that they ordain none but such
who are inwardly fitted and called, and to that end the Apostle charge
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
that he lay hands suddenly on no man; but to try and examine both himself and
others, of his fitness and ability, lest he be partaker of other men's sins
Consider what I have here written in answer to your first Ground. And now I
shall answer your second Ground, which is, because they go to Oxford or
Cambridge, and learn Latin, Hebrew or Greek. To which I answer, I know many
Ministers that never went to these places to learn these languages, and yet
think they are not the abler Ministers, but less able; and yet I do not deny
but they are lawful Ministers, being lawfully called. But I wonder that you
make these things to be a ground of their unfitness, which is rather a ground
of their fitness; for do you not read of the schools of the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14. 18.
and Paul does thank God that he spoke with tongues more than they all; which
he would not have done, if it had been a sin so to do; and Paul was brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel, a learned man in all tongues: Act. 22. 3.
and if there had been no Scholars that had learned the Hebrew and Greek
tongues, I wonder how we in England should have understood the Scriptures,
seeing the Old Testament was written in Hebrew, and the other in Greek; and
they are not so perfectly translated, but that there is need of the Hebrew and
Greek tongues to explain some texts of Scripture: And for the Latin tongue,
how many learned godly men have written several excellent books in the Latin
tongue useful in the Church, which we had neither known nor understood, if
they had not been translated out of the Latin tongue into English: And
besides, the Latin tongue is a help to Reading and Writing in the English
tongue; and by this we may see what friends Quakers are to Religion, that would
have no helps, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
either for understanding or reading: But the Apostle says, that a Bishop must
not be a novice; and the Apostle Peter says that there are some things in Paul
his Epistles hard to be understood, ^ Pet. 3. 15, 16.
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest as they do also the other
Scriptures unto their own destruction; and are not you Quakers such unlearned
unstable persons, who plead against Learning? And that you are unstable, does
appear, because, for the most part, you have been of several opinions in
Religion, running from one opinion to another, and now grow obstinate for the
most part in your opinions. But I know your objection, that Peter and the rest
Apostles were not brought up at Schools, nor had no humane Learning: To which I
answer, that as they had an extraordinary Call, so God did in an extraordinary
manner endow them with the gift of Tongues, as you may read in the Acts of the
Apostles, where it it said, They were all filled with the Holy Ghost, Act 2. 3,
4.
and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. Now
when I see or hear you Quakers have the gift of Tongues, to speak all manner of
Languages without being taught, in a miraculous extraordinary manner, as the
Apostles had, then shall I believe you have such an extraordinary Call as the
Apostles had, and till then I shall believe you are a company of deluded,
bewitched people. To say no more to this particular, Fox the Quaker.
but beware the Geese when the Fox preaches, who has more Subtily then
Learning or Solidity. And now I shall answer your third ground against our
Ministers, [Because they study for what they teach] To which I answer, that the
Apostle Paul writing to Timothy says, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given by prophecy, meditate upon these things, give
thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto
thy self, and unto thy doctrine, continue in them; and is not Meditation study?
if you say it is not, then read what the Apostle says in the second Epistle to
Timothy: 2 Timothy 2. 15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God a workman, that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. You Quakers are wiser than the
Apostle, you say your teachers need not study, and Timothy was, I believe, more
able to preach without study, than any of your Quakers, who take upon them to
Teach without study, and therefore I marvel not that your Teachers, Men and
Women, speak so much nonsense, and use so many vain repetitions of the same
things: But for dividing the Word or Doctrine, which the Apostle exhorts
Timothy to use, I never heard among any of the Quakers so often as I heard them
speak; also the Apostle exhorts him that* is a Minister to wait on
Ministering, Romans 12. 7, 8.
or he that Teaches on Teaching; the Apostle would that they should make it
their business or whole work, Give thy self wholly to them, says Paul to
Timothy. I know your objection is, that the Apostles preached without study,
and Paul did work, and we Quakers have the same spirit that the Apostles had.
To which I answer, That as the Apostles had an extraordinary Call, so they were
endowed with extraordinary gifts above any man of an ordinary Calling; and
although all Ministers have the same Spirit the Apostles had, yet have they not
the same measure of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
for as the Apostle says, there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit,
to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, to another the word of
Knowledge, to another the working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, but all
these works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will: Now, if you Quakers have the same measure of the Spirit
as the Apostles, had, why do you not work miracles as the Apostle did? when I
see that, then shall I believe you can Preach without study, and t^ll then, I
shall believe you Prate, and not Preach. And now I come to answer your fourth
ground, which is, that our Ministers study old Authors, the writings of the
ancient Fathers, and Popish Writers: For answer to which, I do marvel how you
Quakers know those ancient Fathers to be Popish Authors, seeing most of their
writings are in Latin, and you count it a sin for a Minister to learn Latin;
and surely if you Quakers had formerly learned the Latin tongue, yet now you
dare not read Latin books; wherefore you have no ground to say they are Popish
Authors from your own knowledge, but from hearsay of others, and so you are a
false witnesse-bearer: But it is no new thing for you to count all men Popish,
that are not of your wild opinions; but if you had not plowed with the Papists
heifer, you had never known nor learned so many of their errors, as I shall
prove hereafter you have: but I do believe it is lawful for a Minister to read
Popish Authors, and to study what they read, else how shall they know what they
hold, and how to confute their errors, unless they do as you do, take all by
hearsay: But the the Apostle says, 1 These. 5* 21.
Try all things, and keep that which is good, and the Apostle writing to Titus,
that he should oppose those that say against the truth; Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11.
for says he, There are many disobedient and vain talkers, and deceivers of
minds, chiefly they of Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped, which
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not. And that their
mouths might be stopped, the Apostle alleges what one of their own Prophets
said, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies; Tit. 1. 12, 13.
This witness is true, wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound
in the faith: Now, if the Apostle did quote a Heathen Author to confute error,
surely it is no sin for a Minister now to quote Authors to confute error. Also
the Apostle writing to Timothy of false teachers, says, Of this sort are they
which creep into houses, and lead captive silly Women laden with sins. Now,
says the Apostle, as Jannes and Iambres withstood Moses so do these also,
resist the truth men of corrupt minds or judgments, and reprobates concerning
the faith.

Now I would know of you where you read in the Scripture of Jannes and Jambres
withstanding Moses: wherefore it is supposed that Paul did read it in some
ancient writing* and did allege it for conviction of those false teachers. But
I know you cannot endure Antiquity, because you know you have taken up a new
Religion, which none of the ancient Fathers knew; nay, I believe you cannot
produce any modern Writer, that ever writ in the maintaining of your new wild
opinions; and is it to be supposed or imagined that the truth of the Gospel
has been hid a thousand six hundred years, and that Christ had no Church upon
earth till you Quakers sprung up, which ^^th been but of late years? if so,
then Christ ceased to be a Head, or else he was a head without a Body, which is
folly and madness for any man to imagine.

But I shall show you hereafter of what antiquity many of your opinions are,
and so pass from your fourth ground, and come to your fifth ground, [that The
Ministers are no lawful Ministers, because they take money for Preaching, or
Tithes, or Glebe lands, or Augmentations:] But say the Apostles preached
freely, to all which I shall give you answer: And first, I shall lay down this
for a ground from the Apostles words, that God has ordained, 1 Cor. 9. 14.
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; and this Christ
and his Apostles taught contrary to you Quakers opinions; for Christ when he
gave his Apostles their charge, to go abroad to preach the Gospel, commanded
them to take or provide neither silver nor gold in their purses, Math. 10, 10.
nor scrip for their journey, nor coats, nor s^aves, for the workman is worthy
of his meat; so that Christ did promise to the Disciples a sufficient
maintenance for meat, drink, and apparel at that time, when there were very few
that durst profess the Gospel.

After Christ Ascension, when the Gospel was more spread abroad, Act. 4. 37.
the people sold their Land and Houses, and brought the money and laid it at
the Apostles feet: and Ananias and Sapphira having sold their possession, and
kept back part, Act. 5. 1, 2, 3.
were struck dead; and do you think the Apostles were not maintained out of
that common stock? after that the Apostles had gathered Churches, he complained
of the Church of Corinths backwardness in allowing him maintenance; 1 Cor. 9.
4* 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
saying, Have not we power to eat and to drink, and to lead about a sister, a
wife? who goes a warfare at his own charge? who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit? for it is written, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn: does God take care for Oxen? or, says he,
Is it not for our sakes altogether, that he that ploweth should plow in hope?
if we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your
carnal things? do we not know, that they which minister about holy things, live
of the things? even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
And the Apostle says, That he robbed other Churches, taking wages to do the
Corinthians service: 2 Cor. 11* 8.
That is, to speak plainly, the Apostle did take maintenance from other
Churches, when he preached to the Corinthians; and so many Ministers at this
time take maintenance from other Churches, because the Parish or people unto
whom they preach, are not able or not willing to allow them sufficient
maintenance, which I know of a truth. Also many Ministers have the greatest
part of their maintenance from a few honest godly persons, when many of far
greater abilities, and that of right ought to pay far greater share, pay far
less; and many in a Parish, to my knowledge, neither give nor pay any thing
toward the Ministers maintenance, and many but four pence a year for their
whole families; in which sense, many of our Ministers may say, they rob other
Churches, or Christians, to do other service; and yet you Quakers cry out, that
all our Ministers are Hirelings, and false Prophets, because they ^^ke wages or
yearly stipends; and may you not (...) say so of the Apostle, seeing he says
of himself, that he did take wages? also the Apostle writing to the Calatians,
says, Let him that is taught in the word, Gal. 6. 6.
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things; but few that are taught
do so communicate unto their teacher, as Luther complains in his Sermon upon
the same verse in his time, Luther on Gal. 6. ver. 6. fol. 246.
for Satan, says he, can abide nothing less then the light of the Gospel,
therefore he goes about with all main and might to quench it; and this he
attempteth two manner of ways: First, by lying Spirits, such as you are, and
then by Poverty, and that he endeavors by withdrawing the Livings of the
Ministers, that they being oppressed with Poverty and Necessity, their persons
and ministry should be brought into contempt, or forced to forsake the
ministry to work for their livings, and so the people being destitute of the
ministry of the Gospel, should become in time as savage and wild beasts;
where he complains of many Magistrates, Noblemen and Gentlemen, who take away
the Church goods, whereby the Ministers should live, and turn them to other
uses.

And I could wish that we in England had no cause to take up the like
complaint: I hope I have not offended you in quoting what Luther writes,
seeing he was one of the greatest enemies the Papists ever had, and therefore I
hope no Popish Father: But to proceed, mind what the Apostle writes to
Timothy; 1 Timothy 5. 17* 18.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the word and doctrine. Now that the Apostle does mean by one
of the honors the honor of maintenance, is plain by the words following, for
the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn,
and the labourer is worthy of his reward; and the Apostle in the same Epistle
says, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
That a Bishop or Elder must be given to hospitality. Now, if a Minister must
live upon the Charity of others himself, have shall he have wherewith to
relieve others? and by given to hospitality, can be no other thing meant. Also
the Apostle says, If any man provide not for his own family, he has denied
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel; and if all men, then surely Ministers
ought to provide for their Wives and Children, unless you would have them
worse than Infidels; and you say they are Infidels because they do provide for
their Wives and Children, for you say they ought to preach for nothing, and
most of them have nothing else to maintain themselves, Wives and Children, but
what they have by their ministry, and must not Ministers Wives be maintained,
and Children brought up and educated as well as other men's Wives and Children?
must their Wives and Children be lest destitute of all means and maintenance,
and rely only upon the charity of others? if they should, I believe you Quakers
would rather see them starve than relieve them.

But you will say, if that Ministers must have maintenance yet not by Tithes as
our Ministers are.

To which I answer, that none of you Quakers have answered those books that
have been written to prove the lawfulness of Ministers maintenance by Tithes,
nor are able to answer them. But having proved by Scripture that Ministers
ought to have a sufficient maintenance, I marvel why not in that way which God
first appointed: are you wiser then he? there was Tithes paid long before any
ceremonies were appointed, as you may read Genesis 14. 20. and God complains
that the Jews robbed him: (...). 3. 8, 9, 10.
but ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings?

Now I would have you prove where the Lord does forbid paying of Tithes in the
Scripture? if you say that Tithes were to continue but till Christ came, I say
that is more then you can prove, for Christ reproving the Pharisees, says,
Matthew. 23* 23.
Ye pay tithe of Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith; these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone. Now, if Christ had said, these ye ought to
yave done, and to leave the other undone, then I should be of your mind; but
seeing Christ says the contrary, I am bound to believe him before you Quakers,
or any other whoever he be, and shall not spend any more time about proving
Tithes of Divine Right, but shall prove the lawfulness and equitablenesse of
paying Tithes to Ministers by humane right, and that I shall do from an Author,
who has written An Item against Sacrilege, whose name is not to his book, but
I shall make bold to quote his words, because they are so pertinent to the
point in controversy, and being a subject about Lawfulness of Tithes, I
believe few Quakers have ever read it, but I hope, though you count in a sin to
quote ancient Fathers, yet you will not count it a sin to quote ancient
Statutes.

The Author aforesaid does allege, See Sir Henry Spelman Cancil. Anno 855.
that Ethelwolp Son of King Egbert, who had brought the Saxon Heptarchy into a
Monarchy, had all the Lands in England for his Demeasne, as is acknowledged by
Sir Edw. Cook in his Commentaries upon Littletons Tenures, and conferred the
Tithes of all his Lands and Goods by his Charter Royal upon the Church, and
adding in the end, That who so should increase that gift, God would please to
prosper and increase his days, and if any should presume to diminish the same,
that he should be called to an account for it at Gods judgment seat: and this
he did not only as Lord Paramount, but as proprietor of the whole Land, the
Lords and great men of that time, having no Property or Estates of permanency,
but as accomptants to the King, whose the whole Land was, and yet they also
gave their free consents, which the King required, that thereby they might be
barred from pleading any Tenant-right, as also to oblige them to stand in
maintenance of Tithes against all pretenders.

Because the people can have no right or propriety in them, for they never
bought or paid for them, neither could they come by inheritance, for that which
was not their Fathers could not descend to them. Now consider whether it be
agreeable to Piety, Prudence, Justice and Equity, to alienate Tithes from the
Ministry, which have been so freely given by our Christian Kings, out of zeal
to advance Gods glory, confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, of times renewed
and reiterated, as by Magna Charta thirty times confirmed, and many other
Statutes since.

Now consider whether the ministry in England has not as good a propriety in
Tithes, as Noblemen, Gentlemen and Freeholders have in their Lands; Seeing
Tithes were so freely given, and confirmed by so many Acts of Parliament, who
are the Representative of the whole Nation, and those Parliaments have taken
several Oaths and Protestations to defend and maintain the same; and is it not
a great sin for any man to endeavor to bring the guilt of so many Oaths and
Protestations upon the land?

As for Augmentations and Glebe-land, which you also complain of; I answer,
that, what is freer than gift? is it a sin for a Minister to take that which
was and is voluntarily given toward the Ministers maintenance? do not your
Teachers take what is given them? have they not maintenance? can they live
without meat, drink, lodging and clothes, while they wander up and down from
place to place? Now, what have our Ministers more than maintenance for
themselves and families, and those who give the Ministers, do it according to
the light within them.

I shall Answer your objections against Ministers taking maintenance, 1 Object.
which is, that the Lord complains against such Priests and Prophets that did
teach for money, and look for gain from their quarters, that fed themselves and
not the flock.

To which I answer, Answ.
that the Lord complains against such as only teach for Hire and not for
Conscience, nor love of Souls, else why did the Lord complain against such as
withheld the Tithes; Mal. 3.
saying, You have robbed me, but ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes
and Offerings. Also, the Lord does not simply complain against the Sheepherds,
Ezekiel. 34. 3.
because they eat the fat, and were clothed with the wool, but because they
did so only, and did not feed the flock, and mind that, he calls them
Sheepherds; and in Isaiah where he complains by the Prophet, against such,
the text says, Esa. 56. ^0, 11.
His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are dumb dogs that cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, they all look to their own way,
every one for gain from his quarter: Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and
we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day,
and much more abundant. That which the Lord reproves by his Prophet, is not
because they had maintenance, but because they cared for nothing else, they
were ignorant, lasie, blind, gluttons and drunkards. Now, I wonder you are
ashamed to compare our Ministers to such, sure I am you know none such now that
are so lasie that they Preach not, nor such as give themselves wholly to
gluttony or drunkenness: Such there have been, but blessed be the Lord they are
all, for ought I know, or can hear, cast forth as corrupt and unprofitable
members; and the Lord complaining by the Prophet Zephany, makes complaint
against the Princes and Judges, Zeph. 1. 3, 4.
as well as the Prophets and Priests, saying, Her Princes are roaring Lions,
her Judges are ravening Wolves; and yet the Lord calls them Princes and
Judges, for the wickedness of the person does not disanul his office, being
lawfully called thereunto, neither in Magistrates nor Ministers, until they be
degraded from that office.

You farther object in your paper, 2 Object.
That the Apostles did take only that which was freely given them.

I answer, Answ.
That our Ministers do take nothing, but what was and is freely given, either
by their ancestors or otherwise, and who ever pays the Ministers T^thes,
pays nothing of his own, but that which was freely given; for no man in
buying any Land, or leasing any Land does buy the Tithes, because by Law they
cannot be sold.

You farther object, 3 Object.
That the Apostles did work with their hands to maintain themselves, because
they would not be chargeable to others.

I answer, Answ.
That the Apostle Paul and Barnabas did work, but the rest did not, as
appears by the Apostles words, Or I only and Barnabas, 1 Cor. 9. 4.
have not we power to forbear working; by which the Apostle plainly shows,
that the rest did forbear working, and they had power to forbear working, but
that the Apostle did, because of the poverty of the Church of Corinth, and
because he would give no offense to any, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22, 23.
He became as a Jew to the Jew, to them that are without Law, as without Law he
became, made all things to all men, that he might by all means save some; to
that end he caused Timothy to be Circumcised, Acts 16. 3.
that he might gain the Jews. Now why do not you Quakers follow the Apostle in
that, as well as in your Teachers working, which I think is very seldom.

Besides, as I said before, the Apostles had extraordinary Gifts, as well as an
extraordinary Call, and were able to Preach without Study, but the Apostle
writing to Timothy, commands him to meditate upon those things, Give thy self
wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all; [Minde] 1 Timothy 4. 15.
and do you Quakers think that you are more able to preach without Study than
Timothy was? and that you can work on your ordinary Callings, and preach too,
when Paul commands Timothy the contrary.

And now I answer your sixth Ground, against the lawfulness of our Ministers,
and that is you say, because they teach, that none can be perfectly freed from
sin while they live here.

For answer to which, I say, that you Quakers neither know nor understand what
our Ministers preach; wherefore that you may know, and be better instructed, I
shall by the assistance of Almighty God, show you what our Ministers do preach
and hold, concerning this great point in controversy, of being perfectly freed
from sin, and that, according to what I do believe concerning the same,
according to that measure of light within me, according to the Scriptures. And
I pray God to open your eyes, that you may be able both to see and believe the
same, without which there is no salvation.

Wherefore know you, that our Ministers do both Preach and Write, that all and
every one that does by a true and lively Faith, believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ for Life and Salvation, are perfectly freed from all sin here by
Justification, and that alone by the blood of Christ, and are made perfectly
righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed, and that all those who are
so justified by the blood and righteousness of Christ, are truly sanctified by
the spirit of Christ: Which Sanctification, is, perfecting all our life here,
and perfected at the end of our lives, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
according to that of the Apostle: Having therefore these promises (dearly
beloved let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God; not perfected, but is always a doing.
Now that I may prove these two points, and explain them, I shall first show you
by the Scriptures, that we are made perfectly free from sin, and made perfectly
righteous by the blood and righteousness of Christ; for as Adam in the estate
of innocence was not only without sin, Ephesians. 4. 24.
but made in an estate of righteousness, being made in the Image of God, which
as the Apostle says, Colos. 3. 10.
consists in knowledge, and righteousness, and holiness, so all that are
saved are by Christ the second Adam, made perfectly free from all sin by his
death, resurrection, and intercession, and made perperfectly righteous by his
righteousness. Wherefore I shall plainly prove both these to be by
Justification, in and by Christ alone, according to that of the Apostle* being
justified freely by his grace, Act 13* 38, 39.
through the redemption that is in Christ; And, be it known unto you therefore,
men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness
of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which
ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses; but to him that works not,
Romans 4. 5, 6, 7.
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted unto
him for righteousness. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the
man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works; saying, Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. 2 Cor. 8, 18, 19, 20, 21.
All things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. Heb. 10. 14.
To wit, That God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, for he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, and by one
offering he has made perfect, or has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.

You see the Apostle does make our perfection to be by that, which Christ alone
has suffered and done for us, and not by what we work or do: But I know this
is a strange new doctrine unto you, and hard for you to believe, because you
dote so much upon a Light within you, and Righteousness within you; wherefore
I shall endeavor to make this doctrine appear plain unto you, if you will not
shut your eyes against the Light, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
or that the God of this world has not blinded your minds, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto you. Werefore mind what I
shall write from the Scriptures.

First, I shall show how this perfection by Christ was typed out in the time of
the Law, as in the Scapegoat the Lord commanded; saying, Levit. 16. 21. 22,
23. [Minde]
Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess
over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and
shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness. And the Goat
shall bear upon him all their iniquities, into a land not inhabited, and he
shall let go the Goat in the Wilderness. Now mind how this type was to set
forth Christ's taking away all our sins that believe on him, as may appear by
the Prophets prophesying of the same, as the Evangelical Prophet Esaias; Surely
he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Esa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he was
wounded for our iniquities, the chastisements of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have
turned every one to his own way. [ Minde] And the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all. Also the Prophet Daniel plainly showed this, Dan. 9. 24,
25, 26.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of Sins, and to make
reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness. And
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself.

Mind who it is that makes an end of sin, and brings everlasting
righteousness, namely Christ the Messiah; this the Prophet Zachariah
prophecyeth of, saying, Zach. 3. 8, 9.
I will bring forth my servant the Branch, for hehold the stone that I have
laid before Joshuah, upon one stone shall be seven eyes. Behold I will engrave
the graving thereof, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of
the Land in one day: Joh. 19. 30.
What day? surely that day when Christ suffered, when he said, It is finished,
according to that of the Apostle to the Colossians. And you being dead in your
sins, Colos. 2. 13, 14.
has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses:
Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances that were against us, Colos. 1. 21,
22.
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. And the Apostle says to the Colossians, Though you were sometime
alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, Colos. 1. 28.
yet now has he reconciled. In the body of his flesh through death, to present
you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, whom we preach, that
we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, not in your selves, or by any
thing you work, suffer, or do, but by what Christ suffered and did in the body
of his flesh, even by that one offering, says the Author to the Hebrews, Heb.
10.
has he perfected for ever: hereunto agrees that of the Apostle to the
Ephesians, That Christ loved the Church, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, tha^ ^e might present it to himself, a glorious
Church not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

By these Scriptures I hope you may see how our perfection is in and by Christ:
By what he did our sins are perfectly abolished, not out of us, as the Papists
and you Quakers hold, but fully satisfied for by Christ, God having received an
atonement for them by Christ. This also was typed by the brazen Serpent, that
Moses by the Lords appointment caused to be put upon a pole, Numb. 21. 9.
and any man that was bitten with a Serpent, when he beheld, or looked upon the
Serpent was healed; Mal. 4. 2.
and this was prophesied by the Prophet Malachi, saying, The Son of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings: alluding to the wings of
the Cherubims, Exodus 25. 21, 22.
that covered the Mercy-seat upon the Ark, which Ark was also a lively type of
Christ: This the Lord also promised by his Prophet I saiah, saying, Esa. 57.
18, 19*
I have seen his ways, and I will heal him, I create the fruit of the lips,
peace, peace, to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord,
and I will heal him. This the Lord also promised by the Prophet Jermiah, Jer.
50. 20.
In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the Iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for, and there shall be none, ad the sins of Judah, Jer 31. 31.
and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them. This also is set forth by
several other metaphorical prophesies and promises, Esa. 34. 17. and 44. 22.
as that the Lord will not remember their sins, Mica 7. 9.
that he will cast them into the depth of the Sea, to cast them behind his
back, to wipe it away like a cloud; and this John Baptist pointed at Christ,
saying, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. Joh. 1.
29.
And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of
man be lifted up, Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life,
Colos. 1. 14.
for God so loved the world, 1 John 1. 7.
that he gave his only begotten Son, Rev. 1. 5.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have eternal life, by
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. And
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. This is the perfection
from sin by Justification which our Ministers teach, and not a perfection
inherent in us, as your Quakers, Papists, Catharists, and Familists teach; and
as they teach a perfection from sin by Christ alone, so do they teach, and so
do I believe, that Christ has wrought perfect righteousness for all the
elect, according to the Scriptures.

For it is not sufficient to bring us to Heaven to be freed from sin, for a
Horse has no sin, but there must be perfect righteousness, without which no
man can enter into Heaven; for, as I said before, Adam was not only made
without sin, but was made righteous, and we must be restored to an estate of
righteousness, by Christ the second Adam; and this was typed by the two Tables
being put into the Ark, Exodus 25. 21.
and there to be kept, to show that Christ the true Ark kept and fulfilled the
Law; and this the Prophet David prophesies of Christ; Psalm 40. 7, 8, 9.
Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of the book, it is written of me, I
delight to do thy will O God, yea thy Law is within my heart. I have preached
righteousness in the great Congregation. I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart: This also is plainly set forth, in the prophecy of Zachariah;
Zach. 3. 4, 5, 8.
saying, Take away the filthy garments from him; and unto him he said, Behold,
I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with
change of raiment; for behold, I will bring forth my servant the Branch. [
Minde] that his iniquity was not only to pass, but be clothed with change of
raiment, which is the righteousness of Christ called the Branch; and surely
shall one say, In the Lord have I rigteousnesse, in the Lord shall all the seed
of Israel be justified.

This is that the Church rejoices in, Isa. 61. 10.
saying, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness

And as this righteousness was typified, prophesied of, and promised in the
Old Testament, so did Christ accomplish the same; Matthew. 3. 15.
for says Christ, It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, wherefore the
Apostle Paul says, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus ( not in your selves) who
of God is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: He is made wisdom for
our folly, he is made righteousness for our unrighteousness, and
sanctification for the corruption of our conception, birth and conversation,
and redemption for our bondage; the same Apostle also to the Romans says, Romans
3. 21, 22.
But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God which is
by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe, for all
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

The Apostle calls it the righteousness of God, because wrought by him, that
is God, to show the worth, virtue and excellency of the same; Romans 5. 18, 19.
also the Apostle says, For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one, much
more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness,
shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ; Therefore as by one man's disobedience,
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous. [Minde] the Apostle says, Matthew. 22. 11, 12.
as, and so that is, as by Adams sin, or disobedience, we were made sinners, so
by Christ's obedience we are made rigteous; this is the wedding garment, without
which we have no acceptance, but are abominable and filthy in Gods sight; as
Christ says to the Church of Laodicea, Thou say I am rich, Rev. 3. 17, 18.
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and do not you Quakers say
the same in effect? for they thought they were rich by doing good works, and
had need of nothing; do not you Quakers say you are so perfect by what you do
and suffer, that you have no need of any teaching or exhortation, reproof or
admonition? But what said Christ to them, and take it home to your selves, And
know not that thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and
naked; because they were destitute of the true wisdom and righteousness of
Christ, and hasted to a wisdom and righteousness in themselves: But Christ
says, I council thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, Rev 3. 18.
that thou may be rich, white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that
the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; which is the merits and obedience of
Christ, to put him on, as the Apostle says; this is that righteousness that
Christ said, Romans 13. 14.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the rigteousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Pharisees
thought themselves the only righteous people in the world, Matthew. 5. 20.
as you do; for said the Pharisee, I thank God I am not as other men, nor as
this poor Publican, for I do many good works; like those Hypocrites spoken of
by the Prophet Esaias, Stand farther off, for I am holier than thee. But they
were ignorant of the righteousness of Christ, Romans 10. 3.
as the Jews were, who went about to establish a righteousness of their own
works; for says the Apostle, They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.

Again, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32.
What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which
is of faith. But Israel which followed after the law of rigteousnesse, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith; and this the Apostle knew by himself, as may appear by his own words,
Touching the righteousness of the Law blameless: Phil. 3. 6.
But he was an enemy to this righteousness of Christ, because he was ignorant
of the same; and are not you Quakers ignorant of this rigteousnesse, Faith? for
some of your Speakers have said to me, when I have spoken the same things among
you, that here, with Hold thy peace and speak no more, thy dirty puddle, thy
stinking stuff; and some of you in your printed Pamphlets have written against
this Doctrine of Justification by faith. Burrowes his Book.
But may I not justly return the same unto you? [hold your peace, and speak no
more, nor write no more your dirty dungy righteousness.] Phil. 3. 8.
For if the Apostle Paul counted all his righteousness to be but dung, in
comparison of the righteousness which is of God by Faith, well may I count and
call yours so, for while you pretend to be the only friends of Christ, you are
his greatest enemies; I, Traitors to Christ and his Gospel, Traitors to his
Church and Children, and Traitors to your Bodies and Souls; seeming great
friends to all these, but betraying every one of these with a Judas his kiss;
because you are enemies to this perfect righteousness of Christ by faith, by
which alone we are justified and saved.

But you maintain a perfection within you by the Spirit, saying, that you are
freed from all corruption of sin. Wherefore having at large proved, that all
believers are perfect by Justification, I shall now prove, that all those who
are perfectly Justified, are not perfectly freed from all sin and corruption in
themselves, and then I shall answer your objections against both.

And to make this appear to be true, according to the Scriptures, I shall first
lay down this proposition.

That all Believers are Justified by the blood and righteousness of Christ,
are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, which Spirit of Christ does remain and
abide in them, together with the body of sin, which I shall plainly prove; to
that end, know, that this body of sin is sometimes in Scripture called Flesh,
sometimes Concupisence. Now you do deny that there is both Flesh and Spirit in
one person, which is the thing that I undertake to prove by the Scripture.

Wherefore mind what Christ says to his Disciples, The Spirit is willing,
Matthew. 26, 41.
but the Flesh is weak. The Apostle Paul says, It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me; and after that, When I would do good, evil is present
with me; and yet in the next verse, I delight in the Law of God, Romans 7. 21,
22, 23.
after the inward man: But says he, I see another Law in my members, warring
against the Law of my mind.

Now, dare you say the Apostle had not the Spirit of Christ at that time?
seeing he says, he delighted in the Law of God, which none can do that have
not the Spirit of God. Besides, consider what a gross error and absurdity will
follow by denying the same, which is this, that if Paul had not the Spirit at
that time, then was not the Spirit the author of that Scripture contrary to
that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pe. 1. 20, 21.
Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Besides, if Paul
had not the Spirit at that time, then he had lost it, unless you say he had
not the Spirit while after he had written the seventh Chapter to the Romans.
Also the Apostle Paul complains in his Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, 2
Cor. 12. 7.
That a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffer me, which is
taken to be some corruption. Also, Gal. 5. 17.
the Apostle writing to the Galathians, says, For the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other. So that ye cannot do the things that ye would, according to what he
said of himself before. Also the Apostle Peter that Pillar of the Church, which
the Papists your Fathers do so much boast of, that he could not err, as you
Quakers say of your selves: To pass by his sin in denying Christ before Christ
suffered, you may read in the Epistle to the Galathians, that the Apostle Paul
withstood the Apostle Peter to the face, because he was to be blamed. Why? for
what? the Apostle says, That before the Jews he dissembled, fearing them of
the Circumcision, and that Barnabas was also carried away with their
dissimulation; But says the Apostle, When I saw that they walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel.

Now, this sin of theirs was not a sin of Ignorance but of Knowledge,
dissembled; and now I am writing of Barrabas, I call to mind that great strife
that was between Paul and him, that although they were put apart together, for
the ministry of the Gentiles, Acts 15. 2, 3, 9.
and had traveled through many regions, and preached unto them the Gospel,
that then they should so fall out one with the other, that they should part
asunder; there must needs be a fault either in Paul or Barnabas, and surely
they both had the Spirit of Christ at the same time, and were Justified and
Sanctified.

Also this passion of theirs brings to mind what the Apostle James writes,
James 5. 17.
concerning the Prophet Elias, That he was a man subject to like passions as we
are, and that you may read of him in the Book of Kings. Now, if Elias that was
taken up into Heaven, was a mah subject to passion, and Paul, and Barnabas;
dare you Quakers say, you are more holier then they? I, James 3. 2.
the Apostle says, That in many things we offend all; and was not the Apostle
a true teacher because he taught such doctrine? as you say our Ministers are
not. 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10.
Also the Apostle John says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. [Minde] the Apostle does not say, if you, but we,
putting himself within the nnmber. Also he says, If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. I marvel not that you
Quakers do so often give Men the lie, seeing you give God the lie, for so says
the Apostle that knew better than you; for you know not your own hearts, if you
did, you durst not so speak: you never yet knew the Spiritual meaning of the
Law, that the least evil thought or motion to sin, though not acted, is a
breach of the pure Law of God, if you did, then would you say and pray as the
Prophet David did; Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults, or sins. If the Prophet David, who was a man after Gods own heart, and
a penman of holy Scripture, confessed that who can? which interrogation is a
negation, none can understand or know all the secret sins of his life, and
prayed to God to pardon them. Do you Quakers know more? and are you more holy
than he? I know you are so in your own opinions; But I shall have occasion
hereafter to discover the falsenesse of your opinion in that particular.

Now, to make this appear more plain, consider that there is no need of Christ
his mediatorship, propitiation, or intercession; for if the Church and people
of God do not sin, why then does the Apostle John say, And if any man sin, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous; And he is the
propitiation for our sins. [Minde] the Apostle says, We have an advocate, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, the Apostle includes himself within the
number. Also the Apostle Paul says to the Romans, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8. 33, 34.
why? [Minde] the Apostle does not say for they have no sin: But it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us; he includes himself. Also the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Wherefore he is able also to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25.
them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them.

Now consider, that this intercession of Christ is necessary for the Saints, in
regard of their best works. For the Prophet Esaias says in the name of the whole
Church: Esa. 64. 6.
But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our [Minde] rigteousnesses are as
filthy rags. Also the Apostle Paul says of himself, Yea doubtless, Phil. 3.
6, 7* 8, 9.
and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss all things, and do
count them but dung, that that I may win Christ. Now the Apostle counted his
righteousness, which is of the Law, to be such, that he might be found in
Christ, not having his own righteousness, but that which is through the faith
of Christ.

This intercession of Christ for the Saints, for to take away the pollution of
their best actions, was typified by the High Priest. Exodus 28. 36, 37, 38.
Aaron was to have a plate of pure gold, and engraven upon it, holiness to the
Lord. And it shall be upon Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity
of the holy things, that the Children of Israel may be accepted before the Lord.

A Man's best works, as they come from Man, are unclean, because there is
corruption in the best men, for all men are conceived and born in sin, as David
confesses of himself; Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, I was shaped in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Now
this original corruption is in the best Man, what ever you say or think to the
contrary.

Now as water that is pure and clean in the fountain, if it run or come through
a corrupt pipe or channel, it will be foul and unclean; even so the Spirit of
God in Man, being the fountain from whence all good comes, is pure and clean,
but passing through Man's corrupt nature becomes defiled. And therefore you may
read, that the Angel stood at the Altar, Revel. 8. ^, ^
having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was
before the throne; and the smoke of the Incense which came with the prayers of
the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.

Now, that Altar was Christ, and that Incense was nothing else but Christ's
merits and mediation, by which alone the prayers of all Saints are perfumed,
and so become acceptable with God, or before him; for we do not conceive that
Christ now in Heaven makes any vocal prayers to to God the Father for us, but
that he does continually present the virtue of his Death and Sufferings before
his Father, whereby not only our persons are accepted, but our services also.
Now whoever does deny this intercession, or mediation of Christ, does in effect
deny Christ, because they deny the end of Christ his coming; 1 John 2. ^3.
and all such the Apostle John says, 2 John 7.
That whoever denies, that Jesus is the Christ, is Antichrist; and many
deceivers are entered into the world, which confess not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh; this is a deceiver and an antichrist.

Now all those that do deny the end of Christ's coming in the flesh, do deny his
coming in the flesh; and all those that deny perfect Justification from all
sin, in and by Christ's Death, Resurrection and Intercession alone, do deny the
end of Christ's coming; and that you Quakers do, for you say you are made
perfect, not by what Christ did and suffered, but by what the Spirit works in
you. I, some of you have affirmed, that Christ never rise from the Grave, and
that his body is rotted in the Grave, and some of you have made a mock of this
Doctrine of Justification, by the Imputation and Intercession of Christ, and
some have written against it in these Pamphlets. B^rrows the Quaker.
Now I pray you that revile against all others that are not of your mind,
calling them Antichrist, and the brood of Antichrist: Now see whether you are
not the Antichrists your selves, and the deceivers spoken of by the Apostle.

We know from whence you learned this Doctrine better than your selves, and
that is from your Fathers the Papists, as I said before, for all you cry out
against them, and all others that are not of your mind to be Popish: and as
this Doctrine of the Papists and yours, does make Christ and his Mediatorship
void and useless, so it does make Faith to be useless; for if a man be
justified and saved, not by what Christ has done and suffered for us, but
being free from sin inherently in us, by following and obeying the light within
us, then we need not believe our perfection, because we see and feel it in our
selves. Now the Apostle defining Faith what it is, Neh. 11. 1.
says, That Faith is the substance of things hoped for, Rev. 1. 17.
the evidence of things not seen; Gal. 3. 10.
and the just shall live by Faith; 2 Cor. 5. 7.
and we walk by Faith and not by sight, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
even as Abraham the Father of the faithful, is said by the Apostle to believe
against hope, and believed in hope, and being not weak in faith, he considered
not his own body n^w dead, neither yet the deadness of ^arahs womb, though he
did see and feel nothing in his body nor Sarahs, whereby to believe that he
should have a Son, yet he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief,
but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God: And being fully persuaded, that
what he had promised he was able also to perform: and therefore it was imputed
to him for righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it
was imputed to him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed; If we believe
on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised for our justification.

Now the Apostle does argue, that as Abraham believed the promise, contrary to
what he saw or felt in himself, so also should we. And as this doctrine does
make Faith void and useless, so does it also make Repentance useless; for if
a Christian can live without sin, then he need not repent for sin Now the
Doctrine of Repentance is of use in the Church, as we may see by what the
Apostle writes, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
saying, Godly sorrow causes repentance, never to be repented of; also Christ
says to the Church of Ephesus, I know thy works, Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them which are
evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles and are not, and
have born, and have patience, and for my name sake have labored, and have not
fainted: Such a commendation as never any Quaker deserved, and yet Christ said,
nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do the first works.

Now these were the first Churches, and lived in the purest times, and yet had
need of repentance, and dare you Quakers say, you are more perfect than they? I
know you are so in your own eyes: but Christ knows you are solely pride and
^ypocrisie; and how you hold and maintain the Popish doctrine, That a man is
not justified and saved by Faith, in believing only what Christ has done and
suffered for us, and for our salvation, but those works of the Spirit in us,
in being obedient unto the light within us. Now, that you may see and know,
that this is an old Popish doctrine, I shall shall show you what Luther writes
concerning the Papists judgment in this particular, who knew better than you
do, because he was trained up many years in the same Religion, having been one
of their Monks.

I shall write his very words in his Exposition of the Epistle to the
Galathians, Fol. 66.
upon chap. 2. ver. 16. Know that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. We have always, says he, recourse to
this article, that our sins are covered, and that God will not lay them to our
charge: not that sin is not in us [minde] as the Papists have taught; saying,
that we must be always working well, until we feel that there is no sin
remaining in us. Yea, sin is indeed always in us, and the godly do feel it,
but it is covered, and it is not imputed unto us of God for Christ's sake.

Also on the chap. 3. ver. 20. Who loved me, Fol. 86.
and gave himself for* me; the Papist, says he, use this Verse, God will no
more require of man,
Than of himself perform he can.


Moreover they say, that nature is corrupt, but the qualities of nature
notwithstanding are sound and incorrupt, upon which ground they reason, that
man's will and understanding are sound and incorrupt, are pure and perfect in
him; and therefore do infer, that a man is able of himself to fulfill the Law,
and to love God with all his heart, and so consequently to be justified
thereby. It is well known by all that have read the Jesuits writings, or have
had any conference with the Papists, Armenians, Pelagians and Familists, that
they all hold, plead and maintain, that there is a light in every man's
conscience, which if he improve and husband well, they may attain Salvation; by
which you may see, how much you are deluded and deceived, that think your
selves run so far from the Papists, when you are run to their chief principles
of Religion.

I do not much wonder at your change, seeing you are fallen from this article
of Justification by Faith alone, for as Luther well observes and foretold;
Luther on Gal. 2. 20. Fol. 88.
Wherefore, says he, I say as I have oftentimes said, that there is no remedy
against Sects and Errors, or power to resist them, but this only article of
Christian Righteousness: if we lose this article, it is impossible for us to
withstand any Errors or Sects, as we may see at this day in the fantastical
Spirits, the Anabaptists and such like, who being fallen away from this article
of Justification, will never cease to fall, err, and seduce others, until
they come to the fullness of all iniquity. Luther was a true Prophet for what
he foretold, Germany, and England have found most true.
[Minde] There is no doubt but they will raise up innumerable Sects, and shall
devise new works, but what are all these things, though they have never so
goodly a show of holiness, if we compare them to the Death and Blood of the
Son of God, who gave himself for me? and is it any strange thing to see a man
go astray, when he has lost his right way? Now, Christ is the way and the only
way, all other ways are bypath of a man's own invention; he is the rock of
ages, the chief cornerstone, and who ever stumbleth on him, he must be dashed
in pieces; and though a man do err in many things, as we all do, yet if he
hold fast the foundation, he shall be safe, and this doctrine of Christian
righteousness, or the righteousness of Christ alone, apprehended by Faith, is
this sure foundation; and if we miscarry in that, we perish eternally; but
holding that fast, we shall be safe to all eternity.

And now I shall endeavor to answer you and the Papists objections, concerning
this doctrine preached and maintained by our Ministers, that a Christian is
made perfect by what Christ alone did and suffered, and not by any thing done
in us or by us.

Now you Quakers and the Papists do object against this doctrine, that it is a
doctrine that gives people liberty to sin, and to neglect good works; for say
you, if we lay all our sins upon Christ, then we make him a pack-horse for to
bear our sins, and it matters not how we live in sin, Christ having satisfied
for them.

For answer to this, I say, that this doctrine is a doctrine of Christian
Liberty, and not a doctrine of Carnal Liberty; but such who have carnal hearts,
and never felt the life and power of Faith, have abused this doctrine of
Christian Righteousness to Carnal Liberty, and will abuse the same, for the
best things are most subject to abuse; but the abuse of any thing does not take
away the lawful use of it. In the Apostle Paul's days there were such, for the
Apostle having preached the doctrine of Free Grace, Romans 5. 20.
That where Sin abounded, Romans 6. 1, 2, 15.
Grace did much more abound, what then shall we say? shall we continue in Sin,
Matthew. 18. 7.
that Grace may abound? God forbid. Offenses will come (says Christ) but woe
be unto those by whom they are given. Some followed Christ for by-ends, and
there were many in the Church of Corinth, and Galatia, and Philippa that walked
disorderly, but yet the Apostle Preached and writ this doctrine of Free
Justification.

We know in civil things how apt men are to abuse them, as Wine and strong Beer
to Drunkenness, good Meat to Gluttony* shall we say therefore they are not
good nor lawful to be used? and we know a sick Stomach cannot well digest the
best meat, and shall we therefore say the meat is not good? do you not know
that Christ says, that many are called, but few chosen? many called to the
external profession of the Gospel, but few that live answerable thereunto. But
the Gospel is still the same, and to be Preached, as the Apostle says, I am
called to Preach the Gospel, and woe is me if I Preach not the Gospel; and the
chief cause why so many walk disorderly is, because people do not believe this
doctrine of Free Grace; for The Grace of God which has appeared and brings
Salvation, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
teaches us, That denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. The apprehending of the
love of God in Christ, is that which draws the heart to love God, and love
our Brethren, as it is said of Mary Magdelen, Matthew. 12. 47.
Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much. Her loving much was
not the cause of her sins being forgiven, but her sins being forgiven was the
cause of her loving much, as appears by Christ's own words, But to whom little
is forgiven, the same loves little.

As for the other Objection, That this doctrine of being Justified by the
righteousness of Christ alone, is a means to make men neglect good works.

I Answer, That no man can do one good work, before he be justified by Faith in
Christ; Heb. 11. 4, 6.
for, The person must be accepted, before the work can be accepted; By Faith
Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain; but without Faith
it is impossible to please him: Genesis 4. 4.
The Lord had respect first to Abel, then to his offering; for as Christ says,
Matthew. 12. 33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt

Now we are made good trees only by b^^ng ingraffed into Christ by Faith, and
all the works that men do before Faith, though never so good for the matter,
and morally good in themselves, yet are they but beautiful abominations in
Gods sight, the person being not Justified; the works that a man does, though
good in themselves, do not make any man good, no more than the good fruit on a
tree makes the tree good; but because the tree is good, therefore the fruit is
good.

But you Quakers and Papists say, then it matters not whether a man do any good
works, seeing they make him not good: By which you manifest your gross
Ignorance of the truth, for the Scripture does teach, that good works do
declare and manifest the truth of our Faith, that it is not a dead, but a
living Faith: as the fruit which the tree bears, does show and manifest what
the tree is; if the fruit be good, then is the tree good, if the tree bring
forth no fruit, then it is a barren tree, or a dead tree; and that is the
Apostles meaning when he says, James 2. 14. 18.
that Faith without works justifies not. The Apostle treats of manifesting
and declaring the truth of our Faith, that it is a living Faith, and not a dead
Faith, or rather a bare profession of Faith; Matthew. 5. 16.
for says the Apostle, What does it profit, though a man say he has Faith,
and have not Works, show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee
my Faith by my Works; according to Christ's own words, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see you good works, and glorify your father which is
in Heaven. Also the Apostle Paul writing to Titus, Titus 3. 8.
I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God,
might be careful to maintain good works, these things are good and profitable
unto men; as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 16. 2, 3.
My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth.
So that there is a necessity of good works, though not for our Justification,
namely, Gods glory, it being the end of our Creation and Redemption, and the
good and benefit of others, for we were not made for our selves, but for the
good and benefit one of another. Also good works, the fruits of Faith, I
conceive are necessary, and profitable for those that do them in Faith, to
evidence and manifest the truth of their Faith unto themselves, though Doctor
Crips and several others were of a contrary opinion; for although it be true
which Christ says, John 13. 34.
By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another; yet it is also true which the Apostle John says, 1 John 3. 14.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren; He that loves not his brother abides in death: also, in that prayer
which Christ taught his Disciples, Matthew. 6. 12.
Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.

Now, when God has given us a heart to forgive the wrongs and injuries of men
against us, it is a good sign of Gods forgiving of us, and this the Disciples
of Christ does evidence, Luke 17. 4, 5.
when Christ said unto them, If thy Brother trespass against thee seven times
a day, and seven times a day return, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him;
and the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our Faith. The Apostles
apprehended, that they had need to have their Faith increased, to believe the
forgiveness of their sins, that so they might forgive their Brother so many
trespasses against them; for if a man have no apprehension of Gods mercy in
forgiving his sins, he can have no true seeling bowels of mercy to forgive
others.

But having by Faith apprehended the free love and favor of God in Christ, 2
Cor. 5. 9.
in forgiving our sins, our hearts are so warmed and inflamed in the same, that
we cannot but forgive others: 1 These. 4. 9.
for as the Apostle says, The love of Christ constrains us, and ye your
selves are taught of God to love one another.

Now I hope by this you will be convinced, that this doctrine of being
Justified and Saved, only by the righteousness of Christ is no doctrine of
carnal liberty to sin, and to live idly, without doing good works; but
contrary, that it is the only ground and foundation of all good works.

But because I have often heard some of your Teachers say, that a man is saved
by the harkening to the light within him, and obeying the same, which is a
doctrine I have heard taught in the open street, in Branford Market, by
Benjamin Wallis, A better Hangman then a Butcher.
one of the Quakers teachers. Wherefore I shall endeavor to clear that to your
understandings, if you will not shut the eyes of your understanding against the
truth.

Now, that there is a light in every man, which is a false light, by nature
teaching him, that by doing and obeying the Law of God he shall be saved; I
deny not, but that this light is Christ, that I deny: but say it is the light
that is naturally in every man, since the fall of Adam. For as Adam did lose
the estate of Innocence, by disobeying Gods Commandment, in eating of the
fruit of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil; so did he naturally think,
that by obeying or doing, he should recover himself again, and therefore The
Lord placed at the East end of the garden of Eden, Genesis 3. 24.
Cherubims and a flaming Sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life; knowing that Adam naturally did think to recover his estate, by
eat^ng of the tree of Life, as he lost it by eating of the tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, and this is natural to all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, to
believe that they shall come to an estate of blessedness and happiness by
what they do; and therefore the Lord, when he gave the Law of the Ten
Commandments, gave it with Thunder and Lightning, and Fire, so that the
Children of Israel were afraid, and desired Moses that he should go near and
here all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the
Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it; and the
Lord said, I heard the voice of the words of this people, they have well spoken
all that they have said. Now Moses was to stand between God and the people, in
which Moses was a type of Christ; The Lord your God shall raise up a Prophet
among your selves like unto me, him you shall hear, which was Christ, for God
never gave the Law to that end, 2 Cor. 3. 9.
that men should be Justified and Saved by it, but that it might be the
ministry of condemnation to drive them unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24.
for the Law is a Schoolmaster to drive us to Christ, and so long as we live
to show us ous sins, and be a rule of obedience unto us; and yet the veil of
Moses Law is still upon the hearts of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles unto
this day; 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15.
for as the Apostle says, The Jews which followed after the Law of
righteousness, have not attained to the Law of righteousness. Romans 9. 31, 32.
Wherefore? because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law; and thus you may see the natural light in many others, did lead them
and teach them this way of doing or working for life and Salvation. The young
man in the Gospel, that came unto Christ said, [Minde]
Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
Christ answers him according to his question, Matthew. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22.
and says, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments; and asking
which Commandment, said, all this have I kept from my youth up, what lack I
yet? and then Christ sets him such a task, that he knew he would not do; If
thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have and give to the poor, and he
went away sorrowful. Now the end of Christ's words, was to convince him of the
impossibility of attaining eternal life by doing.

Also the Jews that came unto Christ at Capernaum said, [Minde] What shall we
do that we might work the works of God and Christ? John 6. 28, 29.
answered them plainly. This is the work of God, That ye believe on him whom he
has sent.

Also those that were convinced at Peter's Sermon, said unto Peter and the rest
of the Apostles; Act. 3. 37, 38, 39.
Men and brethren what shall we do? that false light within them taught them
nothing but to do: but the Apostle Peter answers them, Repent and be Baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, for
the promise is unto you and to you Children.

Also the Keeper of the Prison came to Paul and Silas, and brought them out and
said, Act. 16. 30, 31.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? and they answered and said, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. The light in him could not direct
him what to do, without the Apostles teaching, who taught them to do nothing,
but to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; but if the Apostles had been Quakers,
they would have said to him, Hearken to the light within thee, and obey the
same, and thou shall be saved; but the Apostles knew no such doctrine.

The false Apostles taught such doctrine, for after the Apostle Paul had
planted the Church of Galatia, by the preaching of the Gospel there, presently
after came false Teachers, who bewitched the Galatians with this doctrine, That
the works of the Law, Gal. 3. 1.
are to be joined with Christ's righteousness, for our Justification and
Salvation. The Apostle says, Gal. 1. 6, 7.
I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called yon into the grace
of Christ, unto another Gospel which is not another, but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. [Minde] The Apostle does
not marvel that they were so soon removed from him that called them, to hearken
to the light within them, and obey that, but that called you into the grace or
favor of Christ, and tells them, that those which taught them to join Faith
and Works together, in the point of Justification, were not Preachers of the
Gospel, but perverters of the Gospel; Gal. 5. 5.
for says he, We through the Spirit wait for the hope of the righteousness by
Faith. [Minde] the Apostle does not say, we wait for the revelation of a light
within, nor a shaking quaking fit by the Spirit, that is from the spirit of the
Devil, and not from the Spirit of Christ. And as these Galatians had a natural
inclination after the doctrine of Justification, and were soon drawn away by
that, and the false Teachers; so is there the same in all men naturally,
because Man naturally would fain sacrifice to his own Net, he would have
something in himself, he cannot endure to be robbed, and spoiled of all his
good works; he would fain have some glory to himself, like the Pharisee, who
thanked God he was not as other men, but did many good works; and like those
proud hypocritical Jews, who said, stand farther off, I am holier then thou:
But now this doctrine of free Justification, in and by the righteousness of
Christ alone without works, takes away all glory from a Man, robs him of
all, and gives all glory to God in Christ alone.

Now take this for a sure rule for trial of doctrine, that doctrine which
gives most glory to God, and takes away all glory from Man, that is the true
doctrine: but this doctrine, of being perfectly justified in, and by the
righteousness of Christ alone, does give most glory to God, and take glory
from Man, therefore the true doctrine of Christ. Having answered your
objections against this doctrine of being justified in and by the
righteousness of Christ alone; I shall answer your grounds, upon which you
build your perfection in your selves, by the harkening to the light within you,
Matthew. 5. 48.
and obeying the same. Christ says, be ye perfect as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect: To which I answer, that a Christian is said to be perfect by
Sanctification, in regard of the parts of Sanctification, because every part is
Sanctified; as a Man child is said to be a perfect Man so soon as it is born,
in regard it has all the parts of a Man, but those parts are not grown to
perfection; so a Christian is perfect, in regard of all parts of perfection,
but not in regard of the measures or degrees, and that is Christ's meaning; be
ye therefore, which therefore does imply a wherefore, and does relate to the
words going before: Ye have heard it has been said, Matthew. 5. 43, 44, 45, 46,
47.
thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despightfully use you, and persecute you, that you may be
the children of your Father which is in Heaven; For he makes his Sun to shine
(or rise) on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just, and the
unjust; Be ye therefore perfect as your Father is perfect.

Have you the same part or quality of perfection as your Father has? but who
can say, he loves his enemies in that measure and degree, Joh. 3. 16.
as God our Heavenly Father loved his enemies? Romans 5. 10.
that he sent his only begotten Son to dye for his enemies. I am certain to
Quaker has that perfection, for in stead of blessing and praying for their
enemies, they curse them, as I shall show more at large hereafter.

Also, perfection is sometimes taken for the sincerity of Man, or singleness
of heart, in opposition to a double-minded hypocritical man; and so is it said
of Job, that he was perfect and upright, Job 1. 1.
that is, he was a man of a single heart; for if we mark what Job said of
himself, we shall find that he was a man that confessed his own infirmities
and weakness; Job 9. 20.
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, if I say I am perfect,
it shall also prove me perverse. Job 12. 5, 6.
Also he says, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine
eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Surely
Job was no Quaker, for they say they are perfectly freed from sin, and in stead
of abhorring themselves, they justify themselves.

Again, Object.
you object that the Apostle Paul says, that he preached Wisdom among them
that are perfect, and let as many as are perfect be thus minded.

To which I answer, Answ.
that the Apostle speaks of the perfection of Justification, in and through
the righteousness of Christ, and not of inherent perfection: For the Apostle
in that third Chapter to the Philippians says of himself; Not as though I had
already attained either, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.
were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. By which, the Apostle declares
that he was imperfect, in regard of his apprehending of Christ; for as he says
in another place, Phil. 3. 15.
We all know but in part, and believe but in part, but we are perfectly
apprehended of Christ, and he has already perfectly redeemed us, and saved us:
Wherefore we that believe, should be of the Apostles mind, to forget those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before. I press toward the mark, for the price of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded; that is,
as many as are perfect by Justification.

But you will say, that the Apostle was then in his warfare, as you say he was
when he writ the seventh Chapter to the Romans. To which I answer, that the
Apostle, and every Christian, are in a warfaring condition, so long as they
live in this world, else why does the Apostle exhort the Ephesians, to take
unto them the whole armor of God; Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
For we wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, against Spiritual wickedness in high places. 2 Timothy 2. 3.
And the Apostle writing to Timothy, says, He is a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
and says, fight the good fight of Faith: For every Christian has three great
enemies to fight against so long as they live; The Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; and I say you are no Christians, if you do not find these enemies to
fight against. Christ is called the Captain of our Faith. Heb. 12. 2.


I marvel that you Quakers are so proud, to think and say you are more perfect
than the Apostle Paul, but you say that Paul had overcome his corruptions.

To which I answer, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
that the Apostle says, that he had a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him; for this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might
depart from me, and he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee.

Now, by that thorn in the flesh, is understood some corruption, or some
temptation which he was troubled with, and was to war and fight against it so
long as he lived; for the Lord denied his Petition to take it away, but
answered him, My Grace is sufficient to support and uphold thee.

Wherefore know, that so long as the Church of God in general, or any member in
particular, have spiritual enemies, so long are they in a warfare: But the
Church and people of God have spiritual enemies, so long as they live in this
world, therefore are in a waring condition, so long as they live in this world.

But you object, Object.
the Apostle John says, He that commiteth sin is of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8.


I answer, Answ.
by the committing of sin is meant, for a man to give himself up wittingly, and
willingly to sin, to love it, and delight in it; now a Christian may say as the
Apostle Paul said, Romans 7. 16, 17.
I do the evil that I would not, so that it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me.

Also the Apostle says, 1 John 3. 9.
He that is born of God sins not, for his seed remains in him. To which I
answer, that as a Christian is regenerate or born of God, the regenerate part
sineth not; but there is in every Christian an unregenerate part, Romans 7. 23,
25.
which some time, as the Apostle says, rebelleth against the Law of my mind,
or regenerate part, and leading me captive unto the Law of sin, which is in my
members. Then I my self, though an Apostle, in my mind serve the Law of God,
but in my flesh, or unregenerate part, the Law of sin.

But some of you do farther object and say, that Adam in Paradise was perfect,
and in his Innocence had no sin in him, and all that are regenerate and born
again, are as righteous as Adam was in Innocence. To which I answer, that every
believer is as righteous in and through Christ the second Adam, as Adam was in
the estate of Innocence, and has a more excellent righteousness than Adam had
before his Fall; for Adams righteousness was but that righteousness, in which
he was created, the righteousness of a man subject to be lost: but the
righteousness which every Christian has in and by Christ, by which alone he
is Justified, is the righteousness of God, as the Apostle says, we are made
the righteousness of God in him, for it is the righteousness of him who is
God. [Minde] in him, not in your selves, for if our righteousness were in our
selves, then might it be lost, as Adams was: but that conceit of yours, of
being as righteous in our selves as Adam was in Paradise, you Quakers learned
of the Familists and Adamites; and as the Adamites did many of them go many
times naked, to manifest that they are as perfect as Adam was, so have many of
your Quakers go^e up and down naked, to manifest that they are as perfect as
Adam was in Innocence, who was naked and was not ashamed: And some of your
company have justified the lawfulness of their going naked, because Adam and
Eve were naked in Paradise, and were not ashamed.

But all this does proceed from your ignorance of the righteousness of Christ
by Faith, by which alone we are made perfect, not in our selves but in Christ;
according to that saying of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us, that being justified by his Grace, we should be made heirs,
according to the hope of eternal life. But I say, you being ignorant of this
righteousness of Justification, go about to stablish an imaginary
righteousness in your selves, by which you rob Christ of his glory, and take
the glory due to him unto your selves; and I have been the larger in this
point, that so you may be convinced of this your gross error, for if you err
in this, you err in the foundation, and stumble at Christ the Cornerstone,
who will break you in pieces. But if a Man hold the foundation, and build upon
this foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: If a man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved* yet so as by fire.
Wherefore, I say, if you did hold the foundation for your other stuff of wood,
hay and stubble, I should believe you might be saved, yet so as by fire. And
now I hope I have proved, that our Ministers do not preach to maintain people
in sin, but contrary, they Preach that we are justified and made perfect in and
by the righteousness of Christ alone, which righteousness apprehended by
Faith, does draw the Soul out in love to God in Christ, which love of Christ,
does constrain them to walk in all works of righteousness toward God, and
love to their brethren; and these works are evidences of the truth of their
Faith; and negatively, wheresoever these good works are wanting, there is no
true saving justifying Faith.

Now I come to your last ground, by which you would prove our Ministers to be
false Teachers.

Your seventh and last ground is, The Seventh ground answered.
because there is no better fruits of or by their Preaching, for say you, there
are many sins, in which both Priest and People do live in.

For answer to which, I say, that if this be a ground to prove a Minister to be
no true Minister, because the People unto whom he Preaches, lives in many
sins; then I say by the same ground, you may as well prove that the Prophets
and Apostles were no true Teachers; for the Lord sometimes sends his Prophets
among a people, not for their conversion, but to harden them in their sins, and
to leave them without excuse. Noah was a Preacher of righteousness, and
Preached to the old world, to have them repent, and yet they repented not, but
God brought a Flood, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
and drowned the whole World, except Noah and his Family; and will you say that
Noah was not therefore a Preacher of righteousness, or a true Preacher? and
afterward, was not Noah overtaken with drinking the Wine that he made of the
Grapes, that he was drunk, and yet that sin of his did not prove him to be no
true Teacher? Also Just Lot, so called, did labor by Teaching, Reproving and
Exhorting the Sodomites to repent and turn from their wickedness, but could
not prevail, and God destroyed them with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. And
Lot after that great deliverance fell into gross sins, namely, Drunkenness
and Incest: was he not therefore a good Teacher? 1 Samuel 8. 7.
Also the Prophet Samuel, what pains did he take with the Children of Israel to
reclaim them from their sins, but could not prevail, for the Lord said, they
have not rejected thee but me; was he not therefore a true Prophet? Also the
Prophet Elias, how little did he prevail with the Children of Israel to reclaim
them, insomuch that he saw none but himself, that was not fallen to worship
Ball? saying, They have slain thy Prophets, and I am left alone. Also the Lord
said unto the Prophet Esai, Go and tell this people, Esa. 6. 9, 10, 10, 11.
Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive not. Make
the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes,
least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their heart, and convert and be healed. Then said I, Lord how long? and he
answered, Until the Cities be wasted without Inhabitants, and the Houses
without Men, and the Land be utterly desolate. Esa. 65. 2.
And the Prophet complains, that all day long I have stretched forth my hands
unto a disobedient and a gainsaying people. And was not the Prophet Isaiah
therefore a true Prophet? but you will say, these were before Christ was come
in the flesh: Wherefore I shall show you the same in effect after Christ his
coming in the flesh; to omit what Christ complains of concerning the
obstinate Jews, in which I might be large, only take that one complaint of his,
Matthew. 23. 37, 38.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? behold your
houses are left unto you desolate.

Now if Christ, who was God as well as Man, complains that Jerusalem would
not be gathered or converted unto him, is it any strange thing that those that
follow him do see such small fruit of their labors. Wherefore take a view of
what followed after Christ his Ascension, and after the full accomplishing of
Christ's promise to send the Holy Ghost. The Apostle Paul, after he had with
much labor by preaching, gathered a people in Corinth, what fruits did spring
up and grow among them? there was great divisions and contentions among them;
every one of you, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12, 13.
says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.

Also the Apostle says, that it is reported commonly that there is Fornication
among you, 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
and such as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, that one should love
his Fathers Wife, and ye are puffed up and have not rather mourned. Also the
Apostle complains that there were divisions among them about the Lords
Supper: 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19, 20, 21.
For in eating every one takes before other his own supper, and one is hungry,
and another is drunken: and was not the Apostle therefore a true Teacher of the
Gospel of Christ? and was not the Church of Corinth therefore a true Church of
Christ? according to you Quakers tenets or opinions, they are no true Churches
in which there are divisions, and in which there are any sins and corruptions,
and so much is employed and expressed in your Paper, where, by the way, I shall
now write something to confute that error of yours, in which you are not alone,
for you have too many that err with you for company, besides Quakers.

Now I have read several of your Pamphlets, in which you write, that the Church
is in God, and is Spiritual, and that there is no true Church, where there is
divisions, and where there is sin; this Richard Farnworth, Buroughs, and
several other wr^teth: wherefore I desire you to take notice, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
that the Apostle Paul writes to these Corinthians, and calls them the
Church of God at Corinth, 2 Cor. 1. 1.
notwithstanding those corrupt Members that were among them, such as you can
scarce find in the worst of our Congregations. Also the Apostle writing to the
Galatians calls them the Churches of Galatia, and that the Apostle says, O
foolish Galatians who has bewitched you, Gal. 1. 2. and 3. 1. and 3. 3.
that you should not obey the truth? and are ye so foolish having begun in the
Spirit? are ye now made perfect by the flesh? that is, by the works of the Law,
which the Apostle calls Flesh.

Also the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 1.
calls them the Church of the Thessalonians which is in God, and yet the
Apostle says, 1 These. 5. 14.
there were some unruly persons among them, and some disorderly persons which
the Apostle calls Brethren; 2 These. 3. 6, 11, 14, 15.
That the withdrawing your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly,
for we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at
all, but are busy bodies; And if any man obey not our word, by this Epistle,
note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. [Minde]
Yet count him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. Surely the
Apostle was no Quaker, for they deny to call any man or woman Brother or
Sister, though they walk never so orderly, if not of their mind; but say they
are Heathen; this I have heard several of your company speak.

Also Christ himself unto the Church of Ephesus says, That Thou have left thy
first love; Rev. 2. 14, 15.
and unto the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, That thou have them that hold
the doctrine of Balam, so have thou them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. And unto the Angel of the Church of Thiatira,
Rev. 2. 20.
I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel,
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants; like
the women among you Quakers, that take upon them to Teach. Rev. 3. 1.
And unto the Angel of the Church of Sardis, I know thy works, that thou have a
name, that thou live and art dead. Rev. 3. 15, 16.
And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, I know thy works, that
thou art neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm: The worst of all tempers in
Religion.

Now mind, that Christ does commend what ever was good in any of these
Churches, and reproves them for their evil, but calls them Churches, and
the Ministers Angels: But you Quakers will take no notice of any good that is
in any of our Churches, or Ministers, but are like the Crow or Raven, that love
to feed upon Carren; so your only delight is, to revile against our Ministers
and Churches, and to publish any fault you can find in them; but I never read
in any of your books, one word of commendation of any Minister or Church but
your selves, neither did I ever hear any of you Quakers speak in the praise or
commendation of any Minister, or any Church or people but your selves, but
railing and reviling, I have heard more than enough of. But surely you Quakers
have no love to any but your selves, for the Apostle says, That Love covers
a multitude of faults, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.
and that Charity (or Love) suffers long, Or is not rash.
and is kind, envieth not, vanteth not it self, is not puffed up, thinks
not evil, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things. But you
Quakers vant your selves, are puffed up with spiritual pride, think and speak
evil of all persons that are not of your mind, calling them Reprobates,
Heathens and Dogs, and that you are the only Church of Christ, being pure from
sin, and so do not only condemn all other Churches now in being, but all that
ever have been: I, the famous Churches of Asia, Corinth, Galatia and
Thessalonica, who were the first Churches, and were (as Brightman in his book
called A Revelation of the Apocalips) the best and the purest Churches: His
words are, the Apostles Church was most perfect, and was not to be made
perfect, by the inventions of them that come after. Let the old customs hold:
behold, whatsoever is first that is ^rue, and whatsoever is later that is
false. Chap. 3. page 113. There was, says he, a godly Discipline, did not
tolerate men in any sort living wickedly. Chap. 2. page 37. which Discipline
ought to be in every Church.
for after the Apostles days, greater corruptions sprang up in the Church.

Now, if there were such corruptions in the Church in the first and purest
times, shall we think to have the Churches in our times free from all
corruptions? I do not write these things to plead for sin and corruption, I
rather desire to mourn and be humbled for them: But I write these things to
show you your great mistake, in that you say there can be no true Church nor
Ministers, where such fruits are: but beware of condemning the generation of
the Just, because of miscarriage of some persons, that live in the Church or,
because of the faults and infirmities of the godly men in the Church; Genesis 9.
21, 22, 23, 24.
remember what a curse Ham brought upon himself, for uncovering his Fathers
nakedness, and what a blessing Shem and Japhet brought upon themselves, for
covering their Fathers nakedness. But above all, take heed of slandering and
belying our Ministers, and Churches, by accusing them falsely, a sin that is
too frequent among you it is better to err in over much charity, then in
sensoriousnesse and rash judging. But that I may the better rectify your
judgments, and all other that separate from our Churches, I shall endeavor to
show you your mistake in, and about the perfection of the Church of Christ,
which I conceive is, because you do not distinguish between the outward visible
Church of Christ, and the invisible Church, the mystical body of Christ. Now I
say, that the invisible Church is perfect in Christ, because all the members of
that Church, are members of the body of Christ, being joined in one Spirit, and
to such the Apostle Peter does speak unto. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2.
Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout
Pontius, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; Elect, according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
Also the Apostle to the Hebrews says; But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, and unto the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly, and Church of the first
born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the
sprinkling of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than the
blood of Abel. Now mind, the Apostle says, they are elected or chosen the
Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven: but when Jesus Christ
speaks of the visible, external Church, Matthew. 22. 14.
he says, Many are called, but few are chosen: that is, many called to the
profession of the Gospel of Christ, but few of those are elected and chosen to
Life and Salvation. Also Christ says, Matthew. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4.
The Kingdom of Heaven is likned unto ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and
went forth to meet the Bridegroom, and five of them were wise, and five were
foolish. [Minde] They were all Virgins, and they all had Lamps, that is, they
all had the outward external profession of the Gospel, but the wise Virgins
only had the oil of Grace. Matthew. 13. 47.
Also Christ says, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net that was cast
into the Sea, and gathered of every kind good and bad: Now, by the Kingdom of
Heaven, is not meant the Kingdom of Glory, but the Chruch visible here on
earth, in which there are good and bad.

But you say that our Ministers are no true Teachers, because they profit not
the People; to which I have answered in part before, where I showed, that the
Prophet Esai profited not the People of Israel, and yet was a true Prophet: But
I do deny what you speak to be true, and say, that our Ministers do profit the
People, what ever you say to the contrary; because a blind man cannot see the
Sun, therefore does not the Sun shine? because you Quakers, who are blinded
with error, and cannot see that our Ministers does profit the People, do they
not therefore profit the People?

I shall show you what I see and know of a truth of their profiting the People:
I have known several Ministes, who have come to Parishes to Preach, where the
People have been generally Ignorant, Profane, and Superstitious, and God has
so blessed the labors of the Ministers among those People, that they have been
generally reformed from their Ignorance, Profaneness, and Superstition* and is
it not profitable to People that were Ignorant, to be instructed? for those
that were Profane, to be morally civil? for those that were Superstitious, to
be brought off from their Superstition? and many that have been, not only
convinced of their sins, but truly and really brought to believe and repent of
their sins, and many that have been in great horror and trouble of conscience,
even ready to despair, have been by their means, as instruments, raised up,
and have received true spiritual comfort, and are not such profitable
Ministers? Also they do by their Preaching, strengthen and confirm the Faith of
Believers, for it is the work of a Minister of Christ, not only to convert, but
also to strengthen, and confirm those that are converted, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
that they may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
though you Quakers say you are so perfect, that you cannot grow in knowledge,
nor grace.

Also know, that were it not for our public Ministers, people would in time,
grow Atheistical, and become like Savage, brutish Heathens; as for those sins
which you say do abound among Teachers, and People: I say it is no new thing
for you Quakers to accuse, revile, and slander all men that are contrary to
your judgment: But if such sins did abound among us, that does not prove our
Ministers to be no true Ministers, nor our Churches to be no true Churches, for
I have proved that there has been as great sins in the first age of the
Church, as in Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, and the Churches of Asia, and yet
they were all true Churches, and the Ministers true Ministers; but for your
selves, you are like the Pharisees, that could find faults in others, Matthew.
7. 3.
but could see none in themselves. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in
thy Brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? which
brings me to the trial and examination of the perfection among you Quakers,
that it may appear whether you be the innocent Lambs of Christ, the holy Seed,
the Called, the chosen of the Lord, the Witnesses, the Saints, the children of
the Light, the perfect ones, for so you write in your Paper, but it had been
better, if it had been written or spoken by others, than by your self; but you
follow your Fathers the Pharisees, who praised themselves, and your Fathers the
Papists, who say they are the only true Church, which cannot err, as you
Quakers say of your selves.

Wherefore I shall now endeavor to examine your perfection, whether you have
that perfection, which the Scripture does hold forth and teach. I have at large
proved the perfection which our Ministers teach to be by Faith alone, in
believing what Christ has suffered and done for us. Also I have proved, that
there is no perfection in our selves, that is to say, no man is able perfectly
to keep and fulfill the whole Law, in thought, word and deed; but you Quakers
say that Christ has abolished the Law, an old Antinomian error, which has
been often confuted, wherefore I shall not trouble my self about it, but I
shall exaamine whether you Quakers do perfectly keep and obey the commands of
Christ and his Apostles, and whether you walk according to the example of
Christ and his Apostles. Now Jesus Christ has given forth several commands,
which you Quakers do not obey, but teach men that they ought not to be obeyed:
Matthew. 5. 19.
now Christ says, that whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven;
that is, none at all. Now, if Christ threaten such as teach men to break one of
the least of the commands of the Moral Law, how do you think to escape, that
teach men to break his commands, which he gave forth with his own mouth, in the
time of the Gospel, and that near the time of his Suffering, and Ascension? but
you will say, this is a false accusation, wherefore it remains on my part to
(...) it. And to that end, I shall first begin with that (...) which Christ
gave to his eleven Disciples. Math. 28. 18, 19, 20.
And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, all power is given unto me, in
Heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you
always, unto the end of the world.

Now, I do affirm, that this command of Christ was given by him, not to the
Disciples only, but in them, to all the Ministers of the Gospel that shall
succeed them, unto the end of the world; and that this command, of baptizing in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the baptizing with Water, which
ordinance is to continue unto the end of the world, or Christ his second coming.

Now you Quakers do deny the observing of this command of Christ, and teach
men, not to obey the same, but say, it was a command that was to continue only
for a time, until the coming of the Holy Ghost; this several of your Teachers
have affirmed unto me, at several times, and Jona Dell, in his book called, A
voice from the Temple, says, that Baptism and the Lords Supper, were but
ceremonies that were to last but for a time.

Wherefore I shall prove, that this command of Christ to his Disciples, was to
continue in the Church, until his second coming, and was not to cease at the
coming of the the Holy Ghost, as you say it is: Now, [Minde] the words, and
they do plainly prove it, for Christ says; I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world: Now the Apostles did not live always unto the end of the
world, but some of your company say, by the end of the world. Christ does not
mean the time of dissolving of all things in the world, or Christ his second
coming, but till the world was ended in them, and that was, when they were
perfect: but consider what an absurd interpretation this is, for if that be the
meaning, then it must needs follow, that Christ left the Apostles, when the
world was ended in them: but I would know, where you find the end of the world
in Scripture, to be taken for the end of the world in a Man; but while you go
about to defend one error, you run into many: but I shall show from the
Scripture, that this ordinance of Water-Baptisme, was practiced in the Church,
after the sending of the Holy Ghost, and after the Holy Ghost was received by
many* In the Acts of the Apostles we read, Acts 2. 4.
that the Apostles were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Surely no Quaker ever
had such a measure of the Spirit, and yet the Apostles after that baptized with
Water, as we may read in several places in the Acts; to instance one, which may
serve in stead of many, the Apostle Peter being sent for by Cornelius, by the
Lords own appointment, and coming into Cornelius's house, preached the Gospel
unto him, and many other Gentiles. And to him give all the Prophets witness,
that through his name, Act. 10. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins; While Peter yet
spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word.
[Minde] Peter's Preaching is called the Word. Then answered Peter, Can any man
forbid [Minde] Water, that these should not be Baptized, which have received
the Holy Ghost, as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name
of the Lord.

Now, can you tell how to deny this practice of the Apostle Peter? if Christ
his meaning were, that this Baptism, should last but while the coming of the
Holy Ghost, then did not Peter know Christ's meaning, for he obeyed that command
of Christ, baptizing them after they had received the Holy Ghost.

But as you are ignorant of the Covenant of Grace, so are you ignorant of the
Signs or Seals of the Covenant: for when God made a Covenant with Abraham, he
gave Circumcision for a sign or seal of that Covenant, Genesis 17. 11.
And ye shall Circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token
of the Covenant between me and you. Romans 4. 11.
Also the Apostle says, that He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of the Faith which he had, yet being nncircumcised.

Now, as Circumcision was a sign and seal in the time of the Law, before Christ
his coming in the flesh, so has Christ ordained Baptism, a sign and seal of
the righteousness of Faith, in the time of the New Testament, to the end of
the world; according to that of the Apostle Peter, in the days of Noah, while
the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22.
that is, eight souls were saved by Water. The like figure whereunto, even
Baptism does now save us; that is, it is a sign or seal of Salvation by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand
of God. [Minde] he says Baptism does now save us, I never read of a Light
within us that saves us.

Also the Apostle John says, ^ Joh. 5. 7, 8.
that as there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, so there are three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and
the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one.

Now, by Water can be meant no other thing, than the Water in Baptism; that as
Water does wash away the filth of the Body, so does the Water in Baptism
witness, that Christ by his Blood, has washed away the filthiness of sin;
but one of your Teachers asked me, if I were so Ignorant to believe, that the
Water in the Thames, or any other Water, could do a man's Soul any good? To
which I answer, that Water simply considered in it self, it has no such
virtue, but consider it in relation unto Gods Ordinance, used according to his
command, and appointment, it is profitable to the Soul.

But you speak and believe like Naaman the Assyrian, 2 Kings 5. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14.
who coming to the Prophet Elisha, to be cleansed of his Leprosy, when the
Prophet sent him word, to only go and wash himself in the waters of Jordan
seven times, he was in a great rage, saying, Are not the Waters of Damascus,
better then all the Waters of Israel? he considered not, that Gods command does
give virtue and efficacy to the thing, for which it was appointed: and this
cleansing of Naamans Leprosy, by the Water of Jordan, was an emblem or type of
our Baptism; we know God did make the Walls of Jericho fall by the blowing of
Rams horns, Josh. 6. 4, 20.
because he had commanded and appointed so; it is a great sin to disobey Gods
command, although the thing commanded, seem never so small and contrary to our
sense and reason.

We know what the Lord did unto Moses, because his Son was not Circumcised
according to Gods command; And it came to pass by the way in the Inn, Exodus
4. 24, 25, 26.
that the Lord met him and sought to kill him. Now if the Lord would not bear
with Moses his neglect, of Circumcising his Son, how do you Quakers think to
escape Gods displeasure, who not only neglect Gods Ordinance of Baptism, but
also teach, that it is abolished and useless, and make a mere mock at
Water-baptisme? but the Apostles of Christ did highly esteem of that Ordinance
of Baptism. I, Christ himself did not only command it, but honored it, in
being Baptized himself, who had no need of it, for himself, but that he might
be an example unto us* for says he, Thus it becomes us, Matthew. 3. 15.
to fulfill all righteousness. [Minde] Christ calls it righteousness.

Also God the Father did highly honor Baptism, in that he opened Heaven at
the Baptism of Christ, Matthew. 3. 16, 17.
and sent the Spirit, descending like Dove, and lighting upon him, and a voice
from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And as God the Father, Christ his Son, and the Apostles, did honor this
Ordinance of Baptism, so did the Ministers of the Gospel, since the Apostles
days, highly esteem the same. I shall allege what Calvin writes concerning
Baptism, I hope you do (...) count him a Popish Father, in his 23. Sermon on
Gal. 3. 17. his words are these; And in good sooth all of us profess the
Gospel, and yet we shall find a number of people that know not the true use of
Baptism, nor whereto it avails, nor to what end it is ordained; but such
shall pay dearly for taking such a pledge at Gods hands, he will show them that
it is too costly a thing to be abused, for as much as it is said to be a Seal,
whereby we are assured of the benefits of Christ his Death, and Resurrection;
that whereas many have lived, some twenty, some forty, some fifty years in the
world, without knowledge to what end they were Baptized, it were better for
them that they had been born dead, and to have been sunk a hundred times in the
earth, than so to have unhallowed so holy a thing. And therefore let us bethink
our selves the better, and learn that, although there be but a little water
cast upon our heads, yet notwithstanding it is not a vain figure; for the
Heavens are opened upon us, and God speaks in it, as it were from Heaven, and
Christ is there present with his blood, as witnesses of the usage and operation
of the Sacrament. Let us think well upon these things, and let them be well
rooted in your hearts, by which you, and all others, Calvin's Instit. chap. 11.
Sect. 1.
may see what an esteem Calvin had of Baptism. Also in his fourth book of
Institutions, chap. 11. concerning Baptism, his words are these; Baptism is a
token and proof of our cleansing, or to express my mind better, it is like a
sealed Charter, whereby God confirms unto us, that all our sins are
cancelled, and abolished, that they may never be rehearsed nor imputed.

Also Beza, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
in his Annotations upon the fifth chapter to the Ephesians, ver. 26, 27 Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Read those Annotations in the
Bible, the Geneva Print.
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water, through the
word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing. (o) Baptism is a token, that God has consecrated
the Church to himself, and made it holy by his word, that is, his promise of
free Justification and Sanctification in Christ; ( p) because it is covered and
clad with Christ his justice and holiness. I have written what these two
eminent Ministers did believe and maintain, concerning Baptism, who lived in
the Church of Geneva, because that Church has and is counted one of the best
reformed Churches from Popery, and therefore I hope you will not say they were
Popish writers, and I am certain they were no Quakers, for they observed Christ
his ordinance of Baptism, which you deny, teaching, that it is of no use now
in the Church, in which you disobey Christ his command, and walk contrary to
his practice, and walk contrary to the practice of the Apostles, and all the
Ministers of the Gospel, in the best reformed Churches, and therefore are not
perfect.

But you say, that if it be lawful now to Baptize, yet is it not lawful to
Baptize Children, and therefore our Ministers do, that which Christ never
commanded, which is the thing you all fly unto, Which E B. I conceive to be
Edward ^urrowes; the Book was given me by one Be^ch a Quaker.
when you are put upon the trial of the lawfulness of Baptism, and that is
one of E. B. his objections against our Ministers, in his book called, A just
and lawful trial of the Teachers, and professed Ministers of this age, and
generation, by a prefect proceeding against them, and justly weighed, measured
and condemned. Which book was given me by a Quaker in London, as being
unanswerable.

I have answered already all the chief grounds and reasons alleged in the said
book, E. B. page 2. 4th Ground.
against our Ministers, but this being one ground, that our Ministers Baptize
or sprinkle Infants, and tells them they are Christians before they preach to
them, contrary to the practice of Christ and his Apostles.

Now although it was not in the least any part of my intention, when I began to
write, to meddle with that controversy of Baptizing Childen, because I was to
write against Antibaptists, not Anabaptists, yet finding since that, Quakers,
who are Antibaptists, in that they deny all Water-baptisme, do make that one of
their chief grounds against the lawfulness of our Ministers, both in their
writings and disputings.

I was moved to bestow a little more time and labor, in answering you in that
particular, although I might have saved that labor, in regard Mr. Richard
Baxter has so plainly proved the lawfulness of Infant Baptism, in his answer
to Mr. Tombs: but because I know you Quakers do not usually read any books,
And to show you what were, and are the grounds and reasons, that kept me from
turning to the Anabaptists, and I hope shall ever keep me, though often
assaulted by them.
but such as are of your own stamp, or such as are written in opposition to
your opinions, I shall write such grounds and reasons, as I conceive are
sufficient to prove the lawfulness of Infant Baptism. Wherefore I shall first
lay down this assertion, That the Covenant of Grace, which God made from the
beginning with Adam, and renewed unto Abraham, is the same for substance, which
we have now in the days of the Gospel; and as he did give Circumcision, a Sign
and Seal of that Covenant before Christ his coming in the flesh, whereby they
and their children were distinguished from the Heathen Gentiles; so has the
Lord Christ appointed Baptism, a Sign and Seal of the same Covenant in the
days of the Gospel, whereby all those that believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
they, and their children, are also distinguished from Heathen Infidels, that
believe not the Gospel.

Now, the Covenant of Grace was made to the children of all those that are
within the Covenant, Genesis 17. 7.
I will establish my Covenant, between me and thee, and thy seed after thee,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

Now, all those that are of the Faith of Abraham, are the seed of Abraham; Gal.
3. 29.
and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to the
promise, and the Father to them that are not of Circumcision, Romans 4. 12.
but also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham.

Now, the children after Christ his coming in the flesh, were counted within
the Covenant, so as to be accounted visible Members of the Church, and so
capable of the outward external Sign and Seal of the Covenant; I shall prove,
(...)
first, by the words and example of (...) himself, when they brought Infants
unto him (...) saw it, and they rebuked them, but (...) and said, suffer little
Children to (...) not, for of such is the kingdom of God. Now, if children
belong to the Kingdom of God, then surely the Seals of the Kingdom do belong
unto them. Matthew. 28. 19.
Also when Christ gave Commission to his Disciples, he said, Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Now, are not children part of the Nations? and if you say they must be taught
first, I answer, that Mr. Baxter has proved, that by Teaching is in the
Original, Disciple them; where he also proves, that children are Disciples, as
well as others. Also the Apostle Peter said unto those converts in the Acts,
Acts 2. 38, 39.
Repent and be Baptized, every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins; For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to
all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Now, if the Promise did belong unto their children, surely the Seal of the
Promise does belong unto them, and it cannot be Circumcision, for that was
abolished: wherefore it must needs be Baptism, which is the Badge or Seal,
whereby Christions are distinguished from others.

Also the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, some men having unbelieving
Wives, and the Women unbelieving Husbands, were in doubt whether they might
live together, the Apostle therefore does resolve their scruples, telling them,
that there was no cause of separation; for, says he, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
The unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband, and the
unbelieving Husband, by the believing Wife, else were your Children unclean,
but now they are holy.

Where the Apostle cannot be understood of any inherent holiness, but rather a
relative holiness, which makes the person capable of being a member of the
visible Church, by the Ordinance of Baptism. I know the Anabaptists say the
meaning is, else were your children Illegitimate, that is, base born; but that
cannot be the Apostles meaning, for the Apostle says, that the unbeliever is
sanctified by the believer.

Now, I never read in Scripture, that being lawfully Married, made children
holy or unholy; for I believe Jews and Turks are lawfully Married, but that
does not make their children holy: but if that interpretation were granted, it
will serve to prove the point in controversy, for no Bastard was to be
admitted into the Church, and Congregation of the Jews, and were therefore not
to partake of holy things; but all children that were born, being not Bastards,
were admitted visible members of the Church, and were capable of that federate
relative holiness; and if the Apostles meaning be, of their being not base
born, but legitimate, then I say, he does thereby intimate, that then their
children were capable of being made visible members of the Church by Baptism,
as well as the children of the Jews by Circumcision; or else, the Jews and
their children, had a greater privilege in the time of the Law, before Christ's
coming in the flesh, than we Christians in the days of the Gospel since his
coming: for to be out of the pale of the Church, was counted an unholy, unclean
condition; I, they were counted Dogs by Christ's own words, Matthew. 15. 27.
It is not lawful to give Childrens bread unto Dogs, and without are Dogs;
and if the children of the Church of the Jews were externally holy, Revel. 22.
15.
by being visible members of the Church, and Christians children unholy,
because no visible members of the Church: Are not our children in a worse
condition than theirs, and so we have less privilege than they? now the
Scripture declares, that the Church and People of God, in the days of the
Gospel, have far greater privileges than the Church of the Jews, and this
Christ himself shows, where he says, Verily I say unto you, Matthew. 11. 11.
among them which are born of women, arose there not a greater then John
Baptist, notwithstanding the least in the kingdom of Heaven is greater than
he: whereby Christ would teach us, that John the Baptist was the greatest among
all the Prophets that went before him, because he had the presence of Christ
pointing at him: Joh. 1. 36.
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; and yet the
least believer in the Kingdom of Grace is greater than he, because Christ had
not then actually suffered for sin, nor was not risen from the dead, but the
least believer does now by Faith see Christ has actually taken away sin by his
Death and Suffering, and is risen again for our Justification: Matthew. 13. 16,
17.
Also Christ says, Blessed are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they
hear, for verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have
desired to see those things which you see, and have not seen them, and to hear
those things which you hear, and have not heard them; And are not these great
privileges? Also the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, in the eleventh Chapter,
writes a Catalogue of the faithful, ^^b. 11 39, 4^.
and in the end concludes; And all these having obtained a good report through
Faith, received not the Promise. [Minde]
God having promised some better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect: The Apostle Peter also testifies the same, ^ Pet. 1. 10. ^^.
^^.
Teaching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ, which was in them
did signify, when it testified before hand the Sufferings of Christ, [Minde]
and the glory that should follow, unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us, they did minister the things which are n^w reported
unto you; of which Salvation, the Prophets have inquired and searched
diligently who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. By which
Texts of Scripture, ye may plainly see, that the Church and people of God, in
these times of the Gospel, have greater privileges then the Church of the
Jews, and therefore our Children as well as theirs, have the privilege of
being outward visible Members of the Church, which is only by Baptism.

But you Antibaptists, and the Anabaptists say, that although Believers, have
now greater privileges then the Jews, yet it does not follow, that our
Children are to be admitted visible Members of the Church, because there is no
express command, nor example for baptizing Children.

To which I answer, that whatsoever may be proved from the Scripture by
consequence, to be the scope and meaning of the Scripture; it is sufficient
proof, and that is already made good: But seeing you do both stand to have
express word of Command, or express Example, I shall desire you, or either of
you, to show me one command or example in Scripture, for the baptizing of those
that are grown up, whose Parents, one or both were Christians, by professing
the Gospel of Christ.

Now, if you have no rule nor example in Scripture, as I am sure you have not,
why do you condemn another, when you Anabaptists are more guilty in that you
baptize those that are of years, whose Parents profess the Gospel of Christ,
and were formerly baptized in the name of Christ? Unless you count all those
that profess the Gospel of Christ, to be Heathens, that are not of your
Churches, which is a most uncharitable opinion.

But you farther object, Object.
that the Apostles baptibaptized, none but such as did believe and make a
profession of their Faith.

To which I answer, Answ.
that it is more then you can prove, seeing the Apostle baptized Households, and
it is more then you can tell, 1 Cor. 1. 16.
there were no Children in those Households, Act. 16. 31.
unless you know it by revelation.

Secondly, I say, that those whom the Apostles baptized, who were of years,
were such as were converted from Judaisme, or Heathens, and neither they, nor
their Parents, ever professed the Gospel of Christ; and did any of you, or any
other, know any of our Ministers baptize any Jews, Turks, or Indians, not
professing the Gospel; they have baptized some, that have come from those
parts, after they have been converted, and made a profession of their Faith,
according to the example of the Apostle.

Thirdly, I answer, that elect Infants may have the root or habit of Faith,
though not the act of Faith, if you believe Christ's words; Matthew. 18. 2, 5, 6.
For Christ called a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
and said who so shall receive one such little Child in my name, receives me,
but whosoever shall offend one of these little ones [mind] which believe in me. By
which words it does appear, that elect Infants, may have the seeds of grace in
their hearts; we read that some have been sanctified from the womb, and that
must be by the Spirit, for so the Text says, speaking of John Baptist, And he
shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, Joh. 1. 15.
[mind] even from his Mothers womb.

It is the opinion of many ancient and modern Ministers, that elect Infants do
ordinarily recieve the Spirit, in, or at their Baptism, as Christ at his
Baptism, had the Holy Ghost descending like a Dove, Matthew. 3. 16.
and lightning upon him. Now Christ was full of the Holy Ghost before, for in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Coloss. 2. 9.
And therefore the descending of the Holy Ghost, at that time, was to teach us
to have a high esteem of that ordinance, as most of our protestant Ministers do
hold and teach, and as Dr. Burges does at large prove, in his Book called
Baptismal Regeneration; Where this point of elect Infants, ordinarily receiving
the Spirit, or seal of the Spirit, in their Baptism, is fully handled, with all
objections against it answered; and I do the more press this point, because the
Baptism of Infants is so much slighted, neglected, and contemned, by many in
our days; For I suppose that elect Infants, being mere patients in the work of
Regeneration, are as capable of the Spirits sealing, or applying the blood of
Christ for the remission of their sins, as those that are of Age; for if there
were a power in Adam by h^s sin, to make us sinners, before we did actually
sin, much more there is a power in Christ, to make elect Infants righteous,
before they have actual faith, else how shall those that dye in their Infancy
be saved; and it is the Apostles own Argument, how strange soever it seem unto
you. Romans 5. 1^.
For as by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Ephesians. 2. 5.
And by grace are you saved.

Now, Infants are objects of Gods grace and free favor, as well as others, and
therefore capable of the seal of the covenant of grace, being Children of those
that profess faith in Christ; Baptism.
for it is not faith, as it is an act that saves, but it lays hold on Christ
the Object, and so it is necessary to assure us, that we are in the covenant of
grace, but does not make us in covenant.

And if you still object that there is no example for baptizing of Children; I
further answer, that seeing you do so much stand upon the express Letter of the
Scripture, I shall prove by the Letter of the Scripture that Children were
baptized; Exodus 12. 37.
For you may read that there came out of the Land of Egypt 600000 on foot, Men
besides Children, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
and the Apostle says, That all our fathers were under the Cloud, and in the
Sea, and were all men, women, and Children, all baptized unto Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea.

Now, that Baptism of theirs was written for our example, says our Apostle,
that we should not build too much upon outward privileges, in that we are
partakers of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, as the Israelites did, for
they were, many of them destroyed in the Wilderness, notwithstanding that they
were baptized, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ; and there passing thorough
the Sea were baptized, whereby they were saved from their enemies, the
Egyptians; and their enemies there destroyed in the Sea, did set forth our
Salvation by Christ, according to that prophecy of Deliverance by him, He will
subdue our iniquities, Micah. 7. 18, 19.
and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. That is, into
the Sea of Christ's blood, where all our spiritual enemies were destroyed,
Matthew. 1. 21.
and we saved; Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people
from their sins.

I shall now give you one reason more, which does sway much with me, for Infant
Baptism, and that is, the constant practice of all reformed Churches, ever
since the Apostles, days; I cannot be so uncharitable, as to think or believe,
that all the Churches of Christ ever since the Apostles days, lived in the
practice of that which was against the will and mind of God; and this reason
did sway much with that truly noble person, Robert Lord Brook deceased, which
I make bold to mention, because I have heard several persons of late affirm,
that he was against Infant Baptism, Wherefore I shall write his own words, in
his Book, called A Discourse opening the Nature of that Episcopacy, which is
exercised in England, written a little before his Death, in the year 1641.

In which Discourse he labors to prove the unlawfulness of Episcopacy, Page
98 Sect. ^. Chap. 7.
as it was then exercised in England, and therefore fit to be abolisht; where
he does start a Question or Objection, Whether the remedy will not prove worse
then the Disease, by the change of this Church Government? That Anabaptism,
Brownism, and Separatism, will increase, and every Ley-man will turn Preacher.
I wish the thing feared had not come upon us, but the reason of the growth and
increase of all sorts of errors among us, does proceed, as I concieve, not from
the change of Church Government, but by reason of having none at all, but
suffering a wicked sinful tolleration of all manner of Heresies, and
Blasphemies.

Now, that noble person was for a change of our Church Government, not for none
at all; For we see that in Scotland, Geneva, and other reformed Churches, where
they had no Episcopal Government, they kept Heresies and Heretics out, better
then we did here in England, in the time of the Episcopacie. This by the way,
to return to what that good man does write concerning the niceness of
Anabaptism. The nature of Episcopacy.
I will not, I cannot, says he* take on me to defend that, men usually call
Anabaptism: Sect. 2. c. 7. p. 99, 100, 101.
Yet I concieve that Sect is twofold; some of them hold Free will, community of
all things, deny Magistracy, and refuse to baptize their Children. These truly,
Surely this honorable person was not of our new State-mens opinion.
says he, are such Heretics or Atheists, that I question, whether any Divine
should honor them so much as to dispute with them? Much rather sure should
Alexander's Sword determine here, as of old at the Gordian knot.

There is another sort of them who only deny Baptism to their Children, till
they come to years of Discretion, and then they baptize them. But in other
things they agree with the Church of England.

Truly these men are much to be pitied, And I could heartily wish that before
they be stigmatized with the opprobrious brand of Schismatics, the truth might
be cleared to them.

Many things, says he, prevail very much with me in this point; The first he
names to be this, because for ought I could ever learn, it was the constant
custom of the most purest and primitive Church, to baptize Infants of
believing parents; for I could never find the beginning and first rise of this
practice. Whereas it is very easy to track Heresies to their first rising up,
and setting foot in the Church. Again, says he, I find all Churches, even the
most strict, have generally been of this Judgment, and Practice, yea, though
there have been in all ages some that much affected novelty, and had parts
enough to discuss and clear what they thought good to preach, yet was this
scarce ever questioned by men of note, till within these last Ages. And sure
the constant Judgment of the Churches of Christ is much to be honored and
heard in all things that contradict not Scripture.

Now, I believe that this noble person, so much to be honored, both for his
piety and Learning, had read more Ecclesiastical Histories, to find out the
rise and beginning of Baptising of Infants in the Church of Christ, then all
you Quakers, unless some Jesuits among you, that go under the Name of Quakers
and Anabaptists. And yet he could never find the beginning of it, it being
constantly practiced in the Church, ever since the Apostles days.

But it is an easy matter to find out the beginning of Anabaptism, for if you
would take the pains to read that Book called The Rise and Growth of the
Anabaptist in Germany, you may find their beginning, and the beginning of your
selves, although the name of Quakers of far later time, yet those that spring
up there were your Forefathers, they laid the foundations of your opinions.
And, face does not more answer face in a Glass, then you do answer each other;
as I can show you in several of their opinions and practices compared with
yours; Their reviling against Ministers and Magistrates, their denying to take
an Oath before a Magistrate.
as their harkening to a light within them, and revelations which they followed
contrary to the Scripture, some of them, running about the streets naked, as
many of you have done; some of them burning their clothes, as some of you have
done, although at their first springing up, they seemed to be such meek humble
Saints, that they would suffer any thing; yet after they had gotten a
sufficient number and strength, I wish that we had not too much experience of
the Anabaptists practicing the same things here in England, for have they not
been the chief Instrumen^s of destroying K. and Parliaments, the freedom and
liberty of the people after they had gotten the Sword into their hands.
then they showed themselves in their Colors, for then it was revealed that
John of Leyden, may be a King, and that all the wicked must be destroyed, and
King John and his Disciples must govern all, and have all the goods of the
wicked, because they had no right to them; to which end they fortified Munster
against the Emperor, persuading the people that God would feed them by a
miracle, it being so revealed to them, by which the poor people were many of
them starved, and at last King John and his company taken himself, and two more
of his chief companions hanged, and put in three Iron Cages and set on the top
of the three high Towers or Steeples, the rest banished, two ships laden with
them, the Author says came into Great Britain, where they first sowed those
seeds of Heresy, from which have spang up all those errors of Anabaptism,
Familism, Antinomianism, Adamites, Seekers and Quarkers.

I hope you will be convinced by all that I have written, that your Practice in
denying the ordinance of Baptism, is contrary to the example of Christ, and his
Apostles, and therefore in that you are not perfect.

And now I come to a second particular, in which I shall prove that you walk
contrary to Christ command and example, and the example of the Apostles, and
that is in that you deny the partaking of the Lords Supper, and teach that it
is abolished, and not to be used in the Church of Christ, as Jona Dell in his
Book, called A Voice from the Temple writes, and several others.

Wherefore, I shall briefly prove, that it was Christ's command and Example, and
the practice of the Apostles and all the reformed Churches, ever since the
Apostle days.

Now, Christ before his Death, did institute and appoint this ordinance, as you
may read in Matthew, Mark, and Luke. Luke 22. 19, 20
And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying,
this is my body, which is given for you, this do remembrance of me. Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood
which is shed for you. Where we are to take notice, that Christ says, this do
in Remembrance of me, which is a command for them to do as he had done, and
that it was Christ's meaning to have them do the same after his Ascension is
plain, because the Apostles did practice the same afterward, which they would
not have done, had it not been Christ's command, and the Apostle Paul does
plainly prove it to be Christ command. For I have received of the Lord, 1 Cor.
11. 23.
that which also I delivered unto you; and what was that, but the Supper of the
Lord? as the words following show; but you will say, how long was the practice
of that to continue? The Apostle does tell you; For as often as you eat this
bread, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. But you say,
Christ is come by his Spirit to every believer, and that is the meaning of it
till he come.

To which I answer, that I wonder you Quakers are not ashamed, to give such a
sense of the words; and had I not heard it from several of your Mouths, and
read it in several of your Books, I should not have believed it.

Wherefore, to convince you of your error, pray tell me, Whether Christ was not
come to his Apostles by his Spirit, and to all others that believed the Gospel
of Christ? If Christ was not come to the Apostles by his Spirit, how did they
write the Scriptures? Besides, the Scripture says, That the Apostles were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 4, 42.
and began to speak with other tongues; and yet the Apostles practice was to
break bread after that; and therefore the meaning of the Apostle, to eat this
bread, and to drink this cup, for so often as you eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he comes, must needs be meant of
Christ's second coming, namely, his coming at the end of the world, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
16, 17.
when he comes to Judgment, when the Saints bodies shall be raised out of
their Graves, and those that are then alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we
ever abide with the Lord; where then we shall have no need nor use of
Sacraments, because faith then shall cease, being swallowed up in vision. But
till then we have need of these outward ordinances, to help strengthen our
faith, the Supper of the Lord being appointed by Christ himself, to that end,
where we may see a representation of Christ crucified before our eyes, to help
strengthen our faith; for the Apostles themselves had need of these ordinances;
the Apostle Paul says, We know in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12.
For now we see through a glass darkly, But then face to face, [mind] Now I
know in part but then shall I know, even as also I am known.

Now is it not a horrible pride in you, to say, you are more fuller of the
Spirit than the Apostles, that you have more knowledge, and stronger faith than
the Apostles? for you see, the Apostles made use of this ordinance to
strengthen their says, and if you say, you have no need of this partaking of
ordinances, do not you declare your selves to be more perfect than the Apostles?

But Jona Dell in his Voice from the Temple, does affirm that you Quakers have
such an infallible knowledge, that you cannot err; but we can smell from
whence you sucked in this poison, even from your Father the Pope, the great
Antichrist, who only claims this infallible Spirit. But this by the way.

Also Jona Dell in the said Book says, that this outward ordinance of the
Lords Supper, has been much abused, and therefore not to be used in the Church
any longer, as that Ceremony of the brazen Serpent, after it was abused by the
Israelites to Idolatry, it was broken in pieces, and not to be used any more;
and so he calls it a Ceremony and shadow, and all other ordinances, which
having been abused ought to be abolished.

For Answer to which, I shall only mind you of the Example and practice of the
Apostle Paul concerning the same, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, who had so
abused the Supper of the Lord, as I have not heard of greater, nor the like;
for says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24.
In eating every one takes before other his one Supper. And one is hungry and
another is drunken. What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise
ye the Church of God? By which it seems by the way, that the place where the
Corinthians, met, was not a house, but some place set apart for them to meet in.

But what did the Apostle order and appoint in that case? did he say, you
Corinthians have so abused this Supper, that I command you not to use it any
longer?

No, the Apostle was no Quaker, for he exorteth them, and instructs them, how
to reform these abuses, and how to receive the Supper of the Lord aright, and
that he does:

First, by laying down Christ's institution and command unto him, for the use of
that ordinance.

And secondly, shows the great danger of unworthy receiving.

Thirdly, directs them how to receive the same aright.

But let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup. As if the Apostle had
said, though there be such danger in unworthy receiving, You have abused.
yet would I not have you neglect the same: But examine your selves, and so
come. And in the end of the chapter tells them, Last Verse.
that The rest I will set in order when I come. But you Quakers will have no
order.

And as this was the practice of Christ and his Apostles, so has it been the
practice of all reformed Churches since the Apostles days.

You Quakers are alone in this practice, and woe be to him that is alone, and a
woe be to them who are so wise in their own conceit, as to think themselves
wiser then Christ and his Apostles, and all the Churches of Christ, ever since
the Apostles days, which I leave to your serious consideration; and be your own
Judges, whether you be perfect, who walk so contrary to the command and example
of Christ and his Apostles? Seeing the Apostle exhorts, Be ye followers of me
as I am of Christ. And so I come to a third particular, wherein your Practice
is contrary to the example and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and all
reformed Churches.

The third particular is, your different practice from Christ and his Apostles
in singing of Psalms.

Wherefore I shall lay down this for a truth, That singging of Psalms with a
Voice, is a part of Gods worship now in the days of the New Testament, as well
as in the days of the old.

For proof whereof, take the example of Christ and his Apostles, Matthew. 26. 30.
Who sang a Psalm or Hymme together after the administration of the Lords
Supper, which was a time of Sorrow and Heaviness; for Christ had newly told
them before of his being betrayed, and the time of his suffering was near at
hand, and yet they sang a Psalm together, which surely was for our example;
also the Apostle Paul and Silas being in prison, Act. 16. 25.
Sang praises unto God; also the Apostle Paul instructs and exhorts the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. 19,
to speak one to another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; Coloss. 3.
16.
and so to the Colossians, Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs.

Also the Apostle commands the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16.
that such as sing in the Church, should not only sing in the Spirit, but with
understanding.

Also those who sang when they had gotten Victory over the Beast, are said to
sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3.
by which it seems, that the Song of Moses did suit with that deliverance.

But it is objected by you and others, Object.
that these were not the Psalms of David, but some other Hymns, or spiritual
Songs immediately inspired; which you like well, and sometimes persuade your
selves, that you have such inspirations, and fall a singing mere nonsense,
which edifies neither your selves nor others.

Wherefore I shall show, that all these three Titles, are given to David's
Psalms; some are called Psalms, some are called Hymns, some are called Songs,
that is, spiritual Songs.

The Prophet David has given these titles or names to them. Psalm 13. 14, 15,
18, 19, 20.
To the chief Musician a Psalm of David; also a Psalm and Song, Psalm. 30. 46.
at the dedication of the house of David, To the chief Musician for the sons of
Korah, a Song upon Alamoth.

Now, And Hymns is the general title for the whole Book of Psalms, though it
be translated the Book of Psalms of David and Asaph, as Mr. John Cotton Teacher
of the Church of Boston in New England, shows in his Book called Singing of
Psalms, a Gospel ordinance, who knew the original tongue better than you
Quakers, which Mr. Cotton left his living at Boston, and left his native
Country old England, and went to New England, because he could not in
conscience conform to the Bishops ceremonies, therefore no Popish Author.
what reason can be given, why the Apostle should direct us in our singing, to
the very Titles of David's Psalms, if it were not his meaning, that we should
sing them; so that you must exclude the Psalms of David, from the name of
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs; or else you must be forced to
acknowledge, that we are exhorted to sing them as well as any other.

Is it not better to sing those Psalms or Hymns of David, 2. Answ.
which we know to be indicted by an infallible Inspiration of the spirit, Some
make no difference between David King, and David a King and a Prophet, but say
he was a Lay man.
then to sing such Songs or Hymns as men invent of their private spirits, or
pretend to be immediately inspired by the spirit, which appears to be their own
fancies, by the distractions and contradictions that are in them?

Do you not think that Christ was better able to indite and sing new Psalms
or Hymns then you Quakers, 3. Answ.
and yet we have not the least intimation in Scripture, of any new Psalm or
Hymn, indicted or sung by Christ and his Apostles after the Lords Supper, which
certainly would have been recorded by the Evangelist, who records far less
matters in things which pertain to Gods Worship. And it is supposed that Christ
did sing with his Apostles, one of these Psalms appointed or used to be sung at
the end of the Passover, and some affirm that it was the 118 Psalm, which
Christ did sing. I confess by the suitableness of the Psalm to the occasion,
there may be some probability, but I think no certainty.

But our Psalms are not the same in meeter, Object.
nor the same tunes which the Jews had.

That seeing the singing of Psalms is a duty commanded, Answ.
and amongst others those of David, and has hid from us the Hebrew tunes,
wherewith the Psalms of David were wont to be sung, it must needs follow, that
the Lord has left it to the liberty of the Church to sing them in such plain
grave tunes as may fit the solemnity of Gods Worship, and that because that
tunes are but circumstantial and not the substance; and the Church now in the
days of the Gospel is not in her minority or young age, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
but in her man-age or full grown age, as the Apostle speaks, and therefore
fitter to appoint circumstantial things in Gods Worship then the Jews, being in
their nonage.

But David's Psalms are to be sung with David's Spirit, Object.
or the same Spirit which David had, but in your Churches wicked persons sing
that have not the Spirit.

That the whole congregation of the Church of the Jews did sing the Psalms of
David, 1. Answ.
and do you think that all those among the Jews that sung David's Psalms, had
the same Spirit which David had in composing of them?

Though Spiritual gifts are necessary to make melody unto the Lord in singing,
2. Answ.
yet are they not the only cause and ground of singing; Mr. Cotton, chapter 9.
page 44.
but the chief ground is the moral duty lying upon all men by the commandment
of God, If any be merry let them sing Psalms; now wicked men are merry as well
as godly, though they have no true cause.

All men in general are by the commandment of God and by the light of nature
taught to pray to God for his blessings and to praise him for his mercies: 3.
Answ.
although I know you Quakers say and maintain the contrary, having several
times heard you affirm it. But I shall make good what I have written by
Scripture, James 5. 13.
that it is a duty incumbent to all good and bad to pray unto God for his
blessings; Is any afflicted let him pray, is any merry let him sing Psalms.

Also the Lord has given a general Commandment to all men upon earth, Psalm
91. 1.
Sing unto the Lord all the Earth, make a joyful noise unto the Lord, Psalm
100. 1, 2.
all the Lands come before his presence with singing. Psalm 68. 32.
Sing unto the Lord all the Kingdoms of the earth. O sing praises unto the
Lord. Now, by all the Earth, all the Lands, all the Kingdoms of the Earth, is
to be understood all the People of the Earth, Psalm. 95. 2, 3.
Lands and Kingdoms, and surely all are not Saints in them. Psalm. 96. 4.
The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods, and therefore make a
joyful noise to him with Psalms, he is to be feared above all gods, and
therefore sing unto him all the earth. So that Gods greatness and goodness in
his works of creation and providence that concerns all the sons of men in
general, are grounds of prayer and praises: Psalm 145. 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 21.
The Lord gives food to all flesh, therefore let all flesh bless his holy
Name, Let every thing that has breath (wicked men have breath) praise the Lord
for his mighty Acts, and for his exceeding greatness, and let us call upon him
and praise him, for it is he that made us, and not we our selves. Now, God made
all men, the wicked as well as the godly, and therefore they are bound to pray
to God, and praise God as well as the godly; Je^. 10. 25.
and therefore the Lord threatens that he will pour out his wrath upon the
Heathens, and all the Families that call not on his Name.

What then shall become of you Quakers, that not only neglect this Duty of
Prayer and Praising God in your Families, but sit down to meat, and rise from
it more like Swine then Christians.

But you teach men so to do, telling them that it is a sin, and so teach men to
sin, while you teach them to disobey Gods command. Jona. 1. 6, 14.
The Heathen that were in the ship with Jonah may rise in judgment against
you; for they by the light of Nature knew that God was to be prayed unto, and
the Heathen Nincvites repented, proclaimed a fast, and surely prayed as well as
fasted, Jona. 3. 5, 6, 10*
and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them: Also
wicked Ahab, when he humbled himself before the Lord by fasting, and prayer,
the Lord said to Eliah, 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me, I will not bring this evil in
his days.

But you Object, That the Prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the
Lord, and so their Praises; for what have thou to do to take my Name in thy
mouth, and hate to be reformed?

I answer, That it is said also by the same Prophet, That the plowing of the
plowman is sin, and it is a truth, that the eating and drinking of every man
out of Christ is sin. Will you therefore say that wicked men ought not to plow?
I fear then we should want corn; and if wicked men should refrain from eating
and drinking, would they not strave, and would not they then be guilty of
their own death, and so be self murderers? But you must learn to distinguish
between Actions morally good, and divinely good, and between actions civilly
good in themselves, and divinely good.

Now to plow or do any other action or work of a man's calling, are good civil
moral works in themselves; and yet the person doing them being not justified
they are not good unto him, because, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: will
you therefore teach that no wicked man ought to do the works of his calling,
nor eat nor drink, because they are sin to him in doing them.

The reason is the same in moral works, to hear, read, pray, sing Psalms, and
giving of thanks; they are works morally good, being commanded by the Lord, but
the person doing them being not justified they are not good to him: but yet ye
may no more neglect these duties then the civil duties of your calling. For if
a wicked man neglect these moral duties, he sins more then in doing of
them; for in doing of them he may have a temporary good, as Ahab, and the
Ninevites; and we read that when the young man in the Gospel said to Christ,
Mark 10. 20, 21.
All these have I kept from my youth, that Jesus beholding him loved him; so
that Christ did show his liking and approving of those moral works which he
said he had done.

Wherefore, to conclude this answer, I believe that although a wicked man
cannot be saved by his doing works morally good in themselves, yet he shall
have less torment in Hell then those that do them not, For he that knows his
Masters will and does it not shall be beaten with many stripes.

I have made a little digression in answering these Objections, because I
desire to take in all your Objections by the way, and answer them, hoping you
will not be offended seeing your selves are often guilty of the same fault, if
it be a fault, I aim only at your good to rectify your judgments.

But you Object, That in our Assemblies many sing they know not what, and many
do know that they sing many of the Psalms that are not suitable to their
condition, nor suitable to the time and season, as when they sing O Lord I am
not puffed in mind, they being proud; and My hearts desire is bent thy Laws to
keep, when their hearts is against the Law; This I have heard some of you often
object unto me, and others against singing of Psalms.

That the ignorance of men in discerning the true matter, 1. Answ.
or the right manner of a duty does not exempt them from performing of their
duty; for if a man know not what to pray, nor how, yet that will not excuse him
either from praying himself, or from joining with others that are better
acquainted with Prayer then himself: So what if many a man know not what to
sing, nor how to sing to Gods praise, yet that will not excuse him either from
singing himself, or joining with others that have more spiritual skill in that
kind then himself.

That none are compelled to join in singing any Psalm in or with the
Congregation, 2. Answ.
and if any through ignorance do sing that which is not suitable to their
condition, may not, or must not others in the same congregation sing those
things that are suitable to their condition.

That the Psalms to be read by such is no sin, 3. Answ.
unless you count reading the Scripture to be sin; and why may they not as
well sing them as read them, seeing the one is a duty as well as the other, and
they may sing them doctrinal as well as read them doctrinal, as the truths
contained in the Psalms, and such may be convinced by singing them as well as
reading them, as in the particulars objected, O Lord I am not puffed in mind; may
not a proud person be convinced that he ought not to be proud, and when a
wicked man sings, My heart is bent to keep thy Law; may not he thereby be
convinced and taught by that Doctrine, that his heart ought to be bent to keep
the Law.

That it is ignorance of a man's own condition, 4. Answ.
and of the matter contained in the Psalms to think or say that the Psalms
are not suitable to our conditions: for every Psalm sets forth either the
Attributes and works of God and his Christ, or else describes the estate and
ways of the Church and People of God, or describes the estate and ways of
the wicked, or else it does lively express mine own affections and afflictions,
temptations and comfort. But whatsoever the matter of the Psalm concerns,
either of God or his Christ, the godly or the wicked, my self or others, the
good or evil estate of one or other, it ever ministers fit matter and occasion
to me of singing forth the praises of the Lord, since the name of God is to be
blessed in and by all, whether it go well or ill with our selves or others;
and I believe that there is no condition the Church is or can be in, in
general, nor no condition which any Member is or has been in, but there are
Psalms suitable to the same, and several Clerks are able to choose such Psalms as
are fit and suitable for all times, and for all states and conditions of the
Church, and suitable for all Ordinances, and suitable to all Doctrines.

And lastly, the general practice of the Churches of Christ, is to me a thing
much to be considered, and that it was the practice of the Churches of Christ
after the Apostles days, Master Cotton singing of Psalms, a Gospel Ordinance,
cap. 12. page 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71.
several Histories do testify, as Mr. Cotton does largely prove in his book
written in defense of this Ordinance of singing of Psalms against the
Antipsalmist. But you follow the Papists your Fathers, who are as great enemies
to singing of David's Psalms as your selves; and I could wish that some
Protestants were not too much tainted with that Opinion. The Papist in contempt
of singing of Psalms, call them Genevah Jigs, as you Quakers and other
Sectaries, the brood of Antichrist, scoff at our Ministers, and people for
singing of Psalms, calling them Hopkins Jigs.

But I hope I have sufficiently proved that we follow the example of Christ and
his Apostles, Some Quakers call Ministers Balladsingers, in contempt of singing
Psalms*
and all reformed Churches, and that you do sin in not following the command
and example of Christ and his Apostles, and therefore are not perfect; and so I
pass from this particular, in which I have been the longer, in regard I have
been so often opposed by you for practicing this duty.

And now I come to a fourth particular, in which you walk contrary to the rule
of the Scripture, and that is your practice in suffering and maintaining women
to teach in your meetings, Sarah Blakbury.
which you call your Church. Now this practice I have not only heard of, but am
an eye and ear witness of, having heard two several women speak and teach in
your meetings, where I heard them speak such nonsensical erroneous stuff that
it is a shame to write it. And this practice is justified and maintained in
Print, by one of their chief teachers Richard Fanworth, for so he says is his
name in the flesh, who has written a Pamphlet called, A woman forbidden to
speak in the Church, the Grounds examined, the Mystery opened, the Truth
cleared, and the Ignorance both of Priests and People discovered; where by the
way take notice, that where ever the letter of the Text does speak directly
against your errors, then you say there is a Mystery in it, and that none can
open, but your selves.

But where the Letter of the Scripture seems to speak for your errors, then
you say, away with your mystical meanings, the Scripture is to be understood as
they speak according to the Letter, which I have often heard from your own
mouths, and read in your books.

Wherefore I shall endeavor to prove Mr. Fanworths Mystery opened, to be the
mystery of iniquity, proceeding from the spirit of Antichrist, being directly
against the Doctrine of Christ contained in the Scripture. For says the
Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, Let your women keep silence in the Churches, 1
Cor. 14. 34, 35.
for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under
obedience; as also says the Law; And if they will learn any thing, let them
ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the
Church; also the Apostle to Timothy, Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to
be in silence.

Object. But you Quakers say, that there is a mystical meaning, which none know
but your selves. And that is, that by the woman is meant the flesh, and by the
speaking is meant the Spirit, which is in the Saints, and that may speak in the
Church, whether in man or woman, male or female; this Farnworth writes, in
opening the Mystery.

Also Sarah Blackbury, when I alleged the Apostles words to her in William
Bonds House, after she had been three or four hours there, a teaching or
prating on the Lords day, she made me this Answer, thou art the woman for thou
art Flesh, that is, weak, and therefore thou art to keep silence, and I may
speak, because I have the Spirit, by which the Scripture was written; but thou
have not the Spirit, and therefore hold thy babbling, for thou know not the
meaning of the Scripture. To which I replied, but what is meant by the
Husbands, that the women are to learn of, and to ask them at home? To which
Susan Bond answered, Christ was the Husband, and of him they were to be taught;
and Sarah Blackbery seemed to like the Answer well, for she made no exceptions
against it, neither can she, nor any one else, if their doctrine be true, that
they all have an infallible Spirit, and cannot err, else they cannot be
perfect, for error is sin; and I shall prove this to be an error, when I have
taken away the false Vizzard, which you have put upon the these Texts of
Scripture.

Wherefore to show you your error, I shall show you the great absurdities, that
do follow upon your interpretation, and for a full clearing of the text in the
Corinths, consider the words before; The Apostle says, ye may all prophecy
one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 31, 32, 33, 34.
that all may learn. For God is not the Author of confusion.

Now, lest the women from the word, [ all] should think themselves permitted to
prophecy, as well as the men, the Apostle, to prevent their mistake, whom he
knew loved to speak too much; says, Let your women keep silence in the
Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak; where take notice, that
the Apostle speaks in the plural number, women, and not permitted unto them
to speak. The Apostle always when he speaks of the flesh, speaks in the
singular number flesh; also the Apostle speaks in the plural number,
Husbands, and not in the singular Husband; by which you may see, what most
barbarous conclusions will follow upon your interpretation; For if by the women
be meant the flesh, and by asking their Husbands, be meant Christ, then is
Christ the Husband of the flesh, and that there are more Christ's then one,
seeing the Apostle says, ask their Husbands at home; by which word, home, it
will follow, that Christ and the flesh dwell together, and that Christ is the
fleshes home; so that you may see by maintaining an error, you run into many
gross errors. But you will say the Apostle to Timothy, says, woman, in the
singular number.

To which place I answer, that there will several errors follow, if by the
woman be meant the flesh in that place, Let the woman learn in silence, if by
the woman be meant the flesh, 1 Timothy 2. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
then is the flesh to learn; But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence. If by the woman be meant the
flesh, then the flesh can teach, and can usurp authority over the Spirit; for
Adam was first formed, then Eve; if by the woman be meant the flesh, then is
the flesh Eve, and was of Gods forming. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in
childbearing, if they continue in Faith, and Charity and Holiness, with
Sobriety; if by the woman be meant the flesh, then may the flesh be saved in
childbearing, and may have Faith, Charity and Holiness, with Sobriety.

Now let your selves and others judge, whether you have an infallible Spirit,
the same Spirit that the Apostles had that writ the Scripture, and that you
know the true meaning of the Scripture?

And whether such are fit to be Teachers of others?

Whether men or women that give such interpretations of Scripture, and maintain
such gross errors.

Also the example of all the Churches of Christ, is a ground why women ought
not to speak in the Church.

But if any man seem to be contentious, 1. Cor. 11. 16.
we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.

But you object, F^rnworths Mystery opened of women speaking in the Church.
Page 2. 3, 4.
that several women did prophecy., as Deborah, and that one man had four
Daughters and Virgins, and they did prophecy. And your Sons and Daughters
shall prophecy.

Answer, that those women and virgins, who prophesied, were extraordinarily
called, by an extraordinary gift which is now ceased; and they did not take
upon them to be Teachers in the Church, but did prophecy of such things as
were extraordinarily revealed or done in the Church; for the prophecy in the
Prophet Joel, the same was accomplished in the Acts, for says the Apostle
Peter, These are not drunken as ye suppose. Act. 2. 15, 16, 17.
But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, I will pour out of my
spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy.

I would have any of you, show any one example, where a woman took upon her to
be a Teacher in the public Church? 1 Timothy 2. 12.
if any did take upon them so to do, the Apostle teaches that they did
transgress; for it is to usurp authority over the man, which is a sin, and for
a woman to take upon her to be a Teacher unto men, is to exercise the authority
of a man, for we read of no women Teachers in the Church: But you say that none
are to exercise authority over others.

But are all in the Church equal and alike? which brings me to a fifth
particular, wherein your practice is contrary to the command, example, and
practice of Christ and his Apostles, and therefore are not perfect.

The fifth is your not giving any reverence, honor, nor civil respect unto your
Superiors and those that are in authority, but are in your carriage tou
Superiors more like Heathens then Christians. Now it remains on my part to
prove that Christ and his Apostles did both command and walk contrary to your
practice herein. Luke 12. 17*
Christ said, Give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods. Now the name Caesar was a word of Honor given unto all
the Roman Emperors what ever their names were; as we used to call our Supreme
Magistrate King: Now Christ though a King himself did not say, Give unto
William or John the things that are his, but give to Caesar; He gave him the
same title of Honor that the Romans gave him, though a heathen Emperor.

Also Christ teaching his Disciples humility, Luke 14. 8, 9, 10.
When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest
room, left a more honorable man then thee be bidden of him, and he come and
say, Give this man place, he being a more honorable person: but when thou art
bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, that when he that bad thee comes,
he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher, then thou shall have worship or
honor in the presence of them that sit at meat; by which Christ does teach
that some persons are more honorable then others, and such are to be honored
of others.

But which of you having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, Luke 1^. 7, 8* 9,
10.
will say unto him by and by go and sit down to meat, and will not rather say
unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me, till
I have eaten and drunk, and afterward thou shall eat and drink; now though this
be to teach us that we are all Gods servants, and that when we have done all,
we are commanded to say, we are unprofitable servants. We have done that which
was our duty, yet Christ uses this similitude, because of the equitableness
and justness of the same.

And as it is contrary to what Christ taught, so is it contrary to the practice
and doctrine of the Apostles; for when Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles was
brought before Agrippa to speak for himself, Acts 26. 2, 24, 25.
Paul said, I think my self happy King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my
self this day before thee: (mind) The Apostle does not only say Agrippa, but
King Agrippa, though he were a Heathen King.

And when he spoke for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, Thou art
beside thy self, much learning has made thee mad; Paul said, I am not mad:
(mind) most noble Festus, though a Heathen Governor, he gave him the title of
Honor, that of right did belong unto him. Paul's being a Christian did not make
him brutish and uncivil, the Apostle knew that Christianity did not destroy
good manners, and what the Apostle practiced, the same he taught unto others,
as you may read in his Epistle to the Romans, Render therefore to all their
dues, Romans 13. 7, 8.
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
and Honor to whom Honor; and in the next verse, Owe no man any thing but to
love one another, implying that it is a debt, that is owing to men in
authority, and whosoever does deny the paying of these dues of Tribute to whom
Tribute is due, and Custom to whom Custom, and Fear to whom Fear, and Honor
to whom Honor, are debtors to them, though they be Heathen Governors, for
there were no other among the Romans at that time*

Also the Apostle to Timothy, exhorts, That first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men; For Kings, and
for all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godlyness and honesty. The
Apostle was no enemy to Kings and other Magistrates, but commanded to pray for
them though they were Heathens, and persecuted the Christians; but you Quakers
instead of praying for them, or owning, the name or titles of Kings or Nobles,
revile them and curse them, calling them at the best but by their ordinary
names. Also the Apostle exhorts Children to obey their Parents: Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.
for this is right. Honor thy father and mother, (which is the first
Commandment with promise.) But you teach that the ten Commandments are
abolished; and is it honoring of Parents to call them William or Jone? Also
the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all
honor, though heathens. If any man teach otherwise, as you Quakers do, and
consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
doctrine, which is according to godlyness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings. Now, do you think that those servants who call them
only by their names, and deny that title of Masters, as some do, do count them
worthy of all honor.

And the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
That the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially,
they that labor in the Word and Doctrine; but you deny that any should either
rule in the Church, or have any honor.

Also the Apostle Peter exhorts to submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 5, 6.
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors; and fear God, honor
the King. Surely the Apostle was no Quaker, for the Apostle gives the title of
King to the Supreme Magistrate, and would have him and all other Governors to
be honored, but you will give no honor, nor titles of honor to any man.

Also the same Apostle exhorts, Wives to be subject to their own Husbands,
and brings the example of Sarah for their imitation, Even as Sarah obeyed
Abraham calling him Lord. Whose Daughters or Children ye are as long as ye do
well.

We never read that Sarah called her Husband Abraham, or that ever she left her
Husband and Family, to go up and down from one place to another place to teach,
as some of you women Quakers do, contrary to the Apostles command, Titus 2. 5.
Keepers at home, obedient to their own Husbands, that the word of God be not
Blasphemed. This by the way.

Also the Apostle John, directs his second Epistle Unto the elect Lady and
her Children. 2 John 1.
And now I beseech thee Lady.

You Quakers never learned of the Apostle to call a Lady Gammer, To persons of
honor in Cheeswick.
nor persons of a noble descent Gaffer, and Edward, as some of you Quakers have
done.

Also the Keepers of the Prison fell down before Paul and Silas, Act. 16. 27,
28, 29. 30.
and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? Now the word Sirs is a Title of
Honor, as much as to say in our Language, Lords, and if it had been a sin in
them to give them that Title, surely the Apostles would have reproved them for
it, as they did those that would have worshipped them with divine worship,
saying, We also are men of like passions with you. Acts 14. 13, 14, 15.
Why do ye these things.

Now, by all these examples of Christ and his Apostles it appears, Fear GOD and
honor the KING.
that there is, and ought to be, honor and reverence given to Superiors.

But you are so brutish and ignorant, that you cannot distinguish between
divine honor and civil honor, forgetting that Scripture.

But you object, that the Apostle says, that in Christ Jesus, ye are all one.
Gal. 3. 27. 28.
There is neither bond nor free, male nor (...), Shall honor God.
and thou answer, that a Christian is to be considered two ways.

First, We must distinguish between divine honor and civil honor.
as he is in Christ, that is in the matter of salvation, there is no difference
nor respect of persons, but all are equal and alike.

Secondly, Christians are to be considered, as they are Members of a
Commonwealth, or of a Family, and so there is a great difference and
inequality of persons, and that I would have you mind.

For if the woman should be the man, Object. 2.
if the Subject should be the Magistrate, Christ says Be not called Master.
if the Son should be the Father, if the Servant should be the Master, would
not these things bring a confusion of all states, and of all things, for it is
impossible that mankind should be governed without these differences of
persons, Answ.
states, and degrees of men, both in the Church and Commonwealth, Christ also
says call no man your father upon the earth Matthew. 23. 9. and Ministers are
called Master of Assemblies.
which persons ought of right to have the honor and respect due to them, by
all persons, Christians, as well as others, unless you would have Christians
more brutish then Heathens; and in that you do deny the same you show your
selves so to be, and therefore are not perfect, and so I come to a sixth
particular, Eccles. 12. 11.
in which you walk contrary to the command and example of Christ and his
Apostles.

The sixth particular is, 6. Particular.
your judging and condemning all persons that are not of your judgment and
opinion. That it is your practice so to do, is apparently known to all that
have read your Books ore, that have had any society or conference with you.

Jona Dell in his Voice from the Temple, says that all that are of the Baptist
opinion, are in the state of Reprobation.

And Benjamin Wallis, one of your Teachers in Branford, on a Tuesday being
Market day, and Lecture day, said in the open street, that they were all damned
that followed the teaching of the Priests; also he said in Cheeswick in an open
field in the presence of many, that all that followed the Teachers Doctrine
that taught in the Steeple houses were all damned.

Now that this is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is plain
by these Scriptures,

Judge not that ye be not judged, Math. 7. 1, 2, 5.
says Christ, and in the fifth Verse shows, that this rash judging is a note
or character of an Hypocrite. Thou Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine
own eye. Also the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Thou art inexcusable, Romans 2. 12.
O man! whosoever thou art that judges.

Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
who both will bring to light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts.

But why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy
Brother? Romans 14. 10, 11, 12, 13.
for we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Then every one of
us shall give account for himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one
another.

Who art thou that judge another man's servant? Romans 14. 4.
he stands or falls to his own Master; We are all the Lords servants, and
are all at his disposing and appointment, and therefore what have we to do to
judge any particular man or woman? Much less to judge and condemn all the
Churches that are not of your minds and judgments, to be Antichristian, and in
the state of condemnation, and that they know only the Letter and History of
the Scripture, and that you only know the mystery and meaning of the Scripture,
like the Pharisees that judged and condemned all that were not of their Sect.
Th^^ people that know not the Law are cursed. Joh. 7. 49.


Now consider what a most horrid uncharitable thing it is, to judge all the
Protestant Churches, before you sprang up, to be false Heretical Churches; for
then Christ had no Church for sixteen hundred years, for there were none of
your opinions heard of while these late years, and then Christ was a head
without a body.

And is it not a most unchristian thing, to judge and condemn all for
Heretics, and the brood of Antichrist, that are not of your wild opinions.

Surely you make the Church of Christ to be a very small remnant, far less
than Christ has made them; for though Christ's flock be a little flock
comparatively, in regard of the great multitude of the world; yet consider them
apart in themselves, they are a great multitude, as you may read in the
Revelation of St. John the Divine, if the word Divine do not offend you.

And I heard the number of them which were s^aled, Rev. 7. 4, 9.
and there were scaled an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes
of the Children of Israel. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues.

But if none but Quakers are of the number, surely they might soon be numbered.
By all which you may see, that your practice in judging and condemning all that
are not of your opinions, is contrary to the command and example of Christ and
his Apostles, and therefore you are not perfect: and now I come to a seventh
particular of your practice.

The seventh particular is your railing and revyling against those that are
against your opinions; 7. Particular.
for proof whereof, I need go no farther then your own Letter, where you say,
my speaking was barking like a Dog, that I vomited up my poisonous stuff; and
you call all our Ministers, Antichrists Ministers, Hierlings, such as recieve
the wages of Balaam, and are in the way of Cain, and is it not the same
Language you all use, both in your writings and conferences. Witness Naylors
books, and Fox his books, and Buroughs, Tomlinson his loyal word of reproof to
the Priests or Ministers page 6. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and Tomlinson, in which there is such railing, reviling Language, as cannot be
paralelled from any differing from us, in Religion, calling our Ministers dumb
dogs, wolves, sorcerers, serpents, wandering stars, seducers, deceivers, false
prophets, Antichrist, liars, and say all our preaching is an Idol, with many
other such like stuff; and for your words in reasoning with any that is
contrary to your opinions; I believe you can, and do go beyond any Billingsgate
Scolds, I have had experience of your Language by what I have heard.

Thou Liar, thou great Whore of Babylon, thou Serpent, thou Devil, thou
Heathen, with many other such like reviling speeches to my self and others.

Now I pray consider how contrary this is to the command and example of Christ
and his Apostles.

Our Lord and Savior, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
when he was reviled, reviled noe again. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
See that none render evil for evil unto any man. Speak not evil one of another
He that speaks evil of his brother, Jam. 4. 11.
and judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law.

Christ and his Apostles, when they were brought before the Priests and Elders
being falsely accused, never used such reviling Language as you do use.

The Apostle Jude met with such spirits in his time, these despise Dominion,
Jud. 8* 9.
and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with
the Devil about the body of Moses durst not bring against him a railing
accusation. Jud* ^^*
But said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things which
they know not. Michael the arch Angel durst not bring a railing accusation
against the devil, but you dare bring railing accusations against men, I,
against good men, against the Ministers of Christ, and against Magistrates.
Christ commanded his Disciples to love their enemies, Matthew. 5. 44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you, and persecute you; but in stead of loving your
enemies, and praying for them, you revile them and curse them, with which I
shall conclude this particular, that you are not the perfect innocent Lambs of
Christ, as you call your sevles in your letter.

The eight particular practice used by you contrary to the command and example
of Christ and his Apostles, 8. Particular.
is your silent meetings, which is a usual practice among you to come together
and sit still, hanging down your heads like so many dumb Idols liker then
Christians. Now when Christ did come with his Disciples, he opened his mouth
and taught them; and when he was with his Disciples alone, his practice was to
teach and instruct them, either by asking questions or instructing them, Matthew.
5. 1. 2.
but, never read of his sitting still and being silent. Matthew. 16* 13, 14, 15,
17.
Also the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, Not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10. 25.
but exhorting one another: The Apostle never said, assemble your selves
together and be silent, that ever I could read. Jude. 19* 20.
And the Apo. Jude says, these be they who separate themselves, sensual,
having not the Spirit, but ye beloved building up your selves on your most holy
faith, praying in the holy Ghost. It seems that those who separated themselves,
as you do, had not the Spirit, and did probably* when they met sit still and be
silent, and yet pretended to be the only holy people, but they did not build
up themselves in the faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; but ye beloved; building
up your selves on your most holy faith, in the Holy Ghost. But if they sit
still and be silent they do not build up themselves on their faith, nor pray
as is your practice: and for Prayer, some of your company are not ashamed to
say and write, that Ministers praying before and after Sermon is a
will worship; and that you know not one example left for it, either by Christ
or any of his Apostles, and that praying is for the honor and magnificence of
our Idol, and that is preaching; they are Tomlinsons own words. But let all
sober minded persons judge whether your silent meetings or praying and
preaching is will worship, Tomlinson, In a Book called A word of Reproof to the
Priests, page 11. line 20.
and an Idol. If you have no example of Christ and his Apostles of such silent
meetings, then it is an Idol and a will worship of your own devising, which I
challenge all you Quakers to bring any one example of Christ or his Apostles of
any such meetings, or any example of any Church since the Apostles days,
whether Separate or any other; and do you think that the Apostles and all the
Churches were ignorant of any part of the Service of God, while now of late
days you Quakers have found it, or rather invented it, had not they the light
of Christ within them to direct them, seeing you say all men have the light of
Christ within them. Wherefore I conclude, that this your light is darkness, and
this your practice is a mere invention of your own brains, and therefore are
not perfect.

A ninth particular practice used amongst you, 9. Particular.
is your Quaking fits, with which many among you are strangely taken, falling
on the ground, their arms and legs shaking, their mouths foaming, their
bellies swelling, and some of them purging; to which I may add your strange
kind of disfiguring your faces and countenances, hanging down your heads or
holding them awry, looking like a company of forlorn dejected condemned
persons, that were afraid to look up to Heaven.

Now for those quaking fits from whence you have the name of Quakers, many are
of opinion that they are Diabolical by a kind of witchcraft, and to that end I
have heard strange relations of enchanted ribins, of giving of drink, after
which the persons have been taken with quaking fits, and some say possessed
with the devil. And when I have read John Gilpins Book, In which he confesses
that he was possessed with the Devil.
called The Quakers shaken, and John Toldarns Book, called The foot out of the
snare, in which they relate such strange kind of actings and workings of their
bodies, besides the relations of several others, and compare them with those
whom we read of in the Evangelist Luke; Quakers shaken, page ^4. Luke 9. 39.
I confess there is a likeness and a resemblance between them, The said John
Gilpin says that his quaking and tremling was of the Devil.
And lo a spirit takes him, and he suddenly cries out, and it teareth him,
that he foameth again and bruiseth him: All which actions the Quakers have had
in their quaking fits, as you may read in the two forenamed books, and many
have been eye witnesses of the same effects in others, in which fits some of
the chief Quakers have said, that now the good spirit was driving out of the
bad. But however if it be not a bodily witchcraft, sure it is a spiritual
witchcraft whereby the minds of the people are bewitched to believe that those
shakings and quakings of the body are from the Spirit of God. Gal. 3. 1.


I have read in the Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
that the Mystery of iniquity in the spirit of Antichrist, even him, whose
coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying
wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish,
because they received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved. And
for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie. I believe these are some of those signs and lying wonders, with which the
followers of Antichrist shall be deceived. The Papists who have deceived you
Quakers, as that divine Lawyer M. Will. Prin does at large prove in his book,
called The Quakers unmasked. Also I have read in the Scripture, that God has
caused such shaking and trembling to fall upon wicked men as a punishment for
their sins, Dan. 5. 7.
as Belshazzar, that his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, 1 Samuel 14. 15.
and his knees smote one against another.

And in the Philistians Camp or Loft, there was trembling, and among all the
people, the Garrison and they all trembled, Dut. 28. 65*
so it was a very great trembling; and among those curses pronounced in
Deuteronomy against wicked men, this is one, The Lordshal give thee a trembling
heart. Psalm. 69* 23.
And it is threatened as a curse upon the wicked, Let their eyes be darkened that
they see not, and make their loins to shake. I wish it be not your condition,
that your eyes be not darkened, in that you take shaking for a blessing when it
is a curse, the Devils are said to tremble.

But you object that we read in the Scripture of shaking, Object.
quaking and trembling, rejoice with trembling, Psalm 2. 11. and work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. and Paul is said to tremble,
Acts 9* 6. and the keeper of the prison came trembling before Paul and Silas,
Acts 16. 29.

By trembling, Answ.
I understand no other then the fear and trembling of the heart generally
spoken of in Scripture, and not a quaking and trembling of the body, as is
usual amongst you Quakers and that fear and trembling is twofold.

First, that which is at the first Act of conversion, as that of Paul and the
Jailer, whose trembling I understand of the soul, and if it were of the body,
it was extraordinary, and not to be brought to a rule, and that fear or
trembling of the soul at the first act of conversion is general to all that are
truly converted, Romans 8. 15.
called the spirit of bondage, Ye (...) not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear, and those that were converted at Peter's Sermon, being about
three thousand souls, Acts 2. 37.
they were pricked in their hearts: We read not of any trembling or quaking of
their bodies, but that they gladly received his word; and this fear or
trembling of the soul at the first conversion is not in all alike, but in some
more, and in some less, though in all some. We read that the Lord opened the
heart of Lydia, hearing the Apostles, Acts 16. 14, 15*
that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul, and she was
baptized and her household* We read not of any fear or trembling, much less
quaking, and yet no doubt but she had a conviction of her own unworthiness; 1
John 4. 18.
the Apostle John says, that perfect love casts out fear, that is, all
slavish hellish fear.

Secondly, there is a son-like fear after conversion, which is a fear, whereby
the soul is fearful of doing any thing that is contrary to the will and mind of
such a good loving and kind God and Father, and this fear or trembling is no
ways agreeable to the quaking and trembling of the body practiced amongst you,
nor to the disfiguring your faces with holding down the head, and holding it
awry with dejected countenances, which as I said before is usual among you
Quakers.

Now to show you your error in these things, mind what the Lord says by the
Prophet Isaiah concerning the Hypocritical Jews in his time, Isai. 58. 5.
to bow down the head as a bulrush; Matthew. 6. 16.
and Christ does describe the hypocrites in his time by the same, saying, they
are of a sad countenance, for they disfigure their faces.

Now consider how contrary these practices are to what the Scripture holds
forth in the days of the Gospel; the Prophet Isaiah prophesiing of Christ's
coming in the flesh, says, Isai. 42. 10.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praises from the end of the earth; ye
that go down to the Sea, and all that is therein, the ^sles and the Inhabitants
thereof. By the Isles some Interpreters do understand, Isai. 43. 1.
our Islands of Britain. And fear not, Isai. 51. 11, 12.
I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by my Name, thou art mine: Therefore
the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing unto Sion, and
(mind) everlasting joy shall be upon their head, they shall obtain gladness,
and joy, and sorrow, and mourning shall flee away; I, even I am he that
comfort you, who art thou that thou should be afraid? How beautiful are
the feet of him that brings good tidings, Isai. 52. 7, 8, 9.
that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that publishes
salvation, thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; With the voice together shall
they sing, break forth into joy, sing together: (mind) The Ministers of the
Gospel, their feet are beautiful, they bring good tidings of peace and
salvation, they shall lift up the voice, with the voice together, with the
people shall they sing contrary to the practice of your teachers or praters,
who revile against singing. But the Prophet David prophesiing of Christ's
Kingdom, says, The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of
the the righteous; Psalm. 118. 15.
and this salvation made the Virgin Mary to sing, Luke 1. 46, 47*
My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 2. 13, 14*
and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, and this salvation caused the
heavenly Host to sing Gods praises, saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will toward men; And Christ said to his Disciples, Luke 10.
^0.
Rejoice that your names are written in heaven; and the Apostle Paul says, The
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 14. 17.
but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The Apostle did not
place the Kingdom of God in meat and drink, nor apparel as you Quakers do.

And the same Apostle exhorts the Philippians, Phil. 3. 1, 3.
to rejoice in the Lord, and to rejoice in Christ Jesus and rejoice in the Lord
always, Phil. 4. 5.
and again, I say rejoice; and he commends the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
that they received the word in much affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost, 1
These. 4. 16.
and exhorts them to rejoice evermore; and this joy of the soul though it be
inward in the heart, Prove. 15. 13.
yet it is manifested in the countenance an outward gesture, as Solomon the
wise says, A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, and a sad heart a
dejected countenance: Genesis 4. 5, 6.
a^^ example we have in Cain, having a guilty conscience, it is said, his
countenance fell, and the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou worth, and why is
thy countenance fallen? The Lord would have Cain know that his countenance did
discover the guilt of his inward part, his soul.

I cannot believe that those who have true inward peace and joy, can have such
heavy dejected countenances as most of you Quakers generally have. I can know
you by your countenances, though I never saw you before, nor heard you speak:
and I wonder not that you are generally of such heavy dejected countenances,
because you do not believe that you are justified by faith, but by what you do
act and work or by what is acted and wrought in you* Now the Apostle says,
Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom also we access by Faith into this grace, wherein we stand and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and hope makes not ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts and not only so but we also joy in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have now received the Atonement.
Oh that the Lord would by his Spirit persuade your hearts to believe this
Doctrine of Justification by faith alone, and then I doubt not but you would
soon change your countenances.

And yet I know, the natural constitution of the body, does much prevail with
many, for those that are of a melancholy constitution, cannot so well express
the joy and comfort in the heart, as those that are of another temper; and it
is my charity to believe that most of you Quakers are of that melancholy
temper, which does much help forward your Quaking fits, and your dejected
countenances. But if your hearts were well grounded in the Doctrine of
Justification by free grace, it would bring you some of your quaking fits, and
would make you strive to express the peace and joy of your hearts, by your
countenances; for I believe it is a sin to walk so heavily, with such dejected
countenances, because I conceive it brings dishonor to God, that his people
should walk so, as if God had never sent a Christ to save them and redeem them,
and purchased heaven for them; is he not gone to prepare a place for them? Joh.
14. 3.
It is for wicked men who have not tasted nor seen the goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the Living, whose portion is only in this Life so to walk.

Also it is a sin, because it is a means to hinder others from coming into the
society and company of the godly; for will not they think and say, Surely these
are none of Gods children, that look as though they never had any joy or
comfort in all their lives. I have heard some persons say, when they have come
to the Quakers meetings to hear them, and seeing in what posture they sit,
hanging down their heads, sighing and groaning; I will never be of this
Religion, for these people look like a company of condemned persons, that were
going to be executed, liker then Christians that hoped to be saved by Christ.

Wherefore I conclude this particular, that this your practice of Quaking and
dejected carriage, is a sin, and therefore you are not perfect. And so I come
to the tenth and the last, which I shall trouble you and my self with.

The tenth particular practice, 10.
much used by you Quakers, is, Lying; now that ling is a sin I need not trouble
my self to prove, I hope you will all confess it; I wish I could convince you,
that you are guilty thereof, which I hope I shall plainly prove; and first, Do
not you say that you are perfect, free from all sin, which I have already
proved to be false, therefore you maintain a lie, nay you do make God a lier, 1
John 1. 8, 9, 10.
for so says the Apostle John, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. If we say that we have not sinned, we make
him a liar, and his word is not in us; you make God a lier, because he says,
Romans 3. 4.
All men are liers; you are men, therefore liers, and therefore sinners in
themselves, which I have formerly proved at large.

Wherefore I should insist upon those lies, which you have written, and
printed, and reported.

For those untruths which thou John Horwod have written in thy Letter
concerning the Ministers and my self, I shall but briefly touch them.

Thou say that our Ministers keep people in sin, abominable lie; For they
preach against sin: Thou say that our Ministers know nothing but by Tongues
and Art, and that they preach for nothing but money: Most gross lies: If our
Ministers did not preach for Conscience, to discharge their duties in
publishing the Truth, how, and why have so many of them suffered the loss of
their lives and estates, and so many lost their Livings, and suffered
Imprisonment, and some Banishment.

I never heard of any Quakers, that suffered so much for their Religion, nor
never shall, for it is not worth suffering for; but you cry out of suffering
and persecution, when none hurt you, and that is another of your lies, that you
are persecuted, when you are only persuaded out of your errors.

And this I know by experience, Some Quakers reported, that I caused the boys
to put Benjamin Wallis into the Thames, when he came to bring John Horwoods
letter to me, which is a lie, for I was not at home, and did not see him.
and shall endeavor to clear my self from your lying slanderous tongues: for
some of your Quakers did report to several of my friends and acquaintance in
London, and to some of near relation, that I was the greatest persecutor of the
Quakers in all the Country, which is a most gross lie; for I never did do
them the least harm, but endeavored to do them all the good that lay in my
power, both by laboring to convince and reclaim them from their errors, and by
endeavoring to restrain people from offering any violence against them; I was
sent by the Magistrate to desire a man at whose house they met, to come to him,
where the Minister of the place was present; and the Magistrate and Minister
both did use all the love and meekness that could be expressed to persuade and
convince him of his error, and did bring such plain proofs from Scripture, to
prove him to be seduced and brought into several errors, that both of them
and my self did hope that the man was convinced, he promising to come to the
Ministers house for a Catechize of the grounds of Religion, and to read the
same; but after the man came to his old company of Quakers, they turned him to
his errors, and did continue their meetings at his house on the Sabbath day,
and on the Thursdayes where I had several conferences with them and their
Teachers; and seeing many rude boys and others come about the door; I desired
the Magistrate to send the Officers of the Parish to fetch them away from the
House, lest their should be any disturbance; which he did. And now let all
persons that hear this judge whether there were any persecution in all this,
and whether it was not a lie? to say, that I was the greatest persecutor of
them in the Country; For at Branford some of them were set in the stock, And
at Hammersmith, one of them was put in the Cage, and sent to prison: none of
them were so used at Cheeswick.
some sent to Newgate, and indicted at the Scessions, and several of them
beaten, and was my reasoning with them, and endeavoring to reclaim them and
endeavoring to restrain rude persons from disturbing them worse than all that
they suffered at Branford, which I never knew of while afterward?

But the first time that I met Sarah Blackbury at Cheeswick, after some
discourse with her, she looked on me and said, Thou will be a great, or the
greatest Persecutor of Gods People in all this country: and I suppose, because
she would be counted a true prophetess, she raised this lie on me, which was
soon spread abroad by her Disciples, for she was counted one of the chief
Teachers, and does send several of them abroad to several places to teach, or
rather to seduce and spread their lies abroad, which are so many, that I should
weary my self to write them, and others to read them; wherefore I shall only
make mention of the lies in Print, which are the greatest lies in Print that
ever I read; and that is in a Book or Pamphlet, called, A just and lawful
Trial of the Teachers and professed Ministers of this Age and Generation, by a
friend to Englands Commonwealth, for whose sake this is written and sent
abroad. E. B. Which Book being given me as a piece unanswerable in the conceit
of him that gave it me, I did engage my self to answer it; One Beech.
I saw it was nothing but revilings and slanders, and lies against our
Ministers, and indeed they are the Buts at which they shoot their Arrows; and
the truth is, I had answered all the chief grounds alleged in the said Book
against our Ministers, before I saw it, in answer to John Horwood.

But for those many Lies in the said Book, I shall give answer to some of the
chiefest, proving them to be gross Lies, and therefore, that he who writ the
same being a Quaker is not perfect.

The first of E. B. E. B. his Book A Just and lawful trial of the Teachers and
Ministers. p. 7.
his gross Lies against our Ministers is, that our Ministers do things,
contrary to the Spirit of Jesus, and they have seen nothing but lying vanities,
and divinations; whereby they seduce the people, for Life is promised him,
though he be wicked and ungodly, living in all unrighteousness.

Now I appeal to the Consciences of all that hears this, whether this be not a
gross Lie; for was there ever any Minister in the worst of times, or the worst
of Ministers, that ever taught such Doctrine, or speak such words? but how does
this profound Lier prove these words? for, says he, they tell him that Christ
is his righteousness to justify him; and then he thinks he needs not turn
from his sin, and so their hands are strengthened, that they cannot turn from
their sins. By which E. B. does discover his gross Ignorance as well as
Malice. For he does believe that the Doctrine of free Justification by Christ
his righteousness, is a Doctrine that does teach peole to live in all
unrighteousness. But does not this Lier make the Apostle Paul to be a false
Teacher, and one that had seen nothing but lying Vanities, as well as our
Ministers, seeing the Apostle taught the same Doctrine, Now to him that works
not, Romans 4. ^, 6.
but beleiveth on him that justifies the ungodly, His faith is counted for
righteousness. Even as David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, for as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, Romans 5. 19.
that is, Christ shall many be made righteous, Romans 3. 24.
being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ.

And did not the Apostle John teach the same Doctrine? And if any man sin, 2 John 2. 1, 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 4. 10.
and he is the propitiation for our sins. And herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our
sins. And were these Apostles false Teachers, and did they teach the people to
sin, because they taught this Doctrine of Justification by the blood and
righteousness of Christ?

I know the false Apostles, did slander the Apostles as you do. For the
Apostles teaching this doctrine of being justified freely by the righteousness
of Christ, says, We be slanderously reported, Romans 3. 8.
and as some affirm that we say, let us do evil that good may come thereof. And
the Apostle says, Where sin abounded, Romans 5. 20.
Grace did much more abound. What then shall we say (as you Quakers do) then we
may continue in sin, that grace may abound; Romans 6. 1.
God forbid, says the Apostle, that any should make such a conclusion from
this Doctrine, and you are not under the Law but under Grace. Romans 6. 25, 26.
What then? shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under Grace, God
forbid, the Apostle knew, that those whose hearts God has touched with the
apprehension of this Doctrine, of the Free grace and Love of God in Christ,
would not make any such conclusions. For says the Apostle, The grace of God,
that brings Salvation, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, We should live Godly, Titus 2. 11. 12.
righteously, and soberly. The Doctrine of free Grace, does not make Christians
carnal Libertines, but ingageth them to walk in all thankfulness unto God, the
Love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle. The Sons of Agar that are in
bondage, 2 Cor 5. 14.
they are frighted from sin by the terrors of the Law, Gal* 4, 21. 22.
and fear of Hell, but those that are of the free woman in the new Covenant of
grace, they are free, their hearts are chiefly enlarged by the apprehending the
free Love of God in Christ, Who so loved the World, Joh. 3. 16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 10. 11.
that whosoever beleiveth in him should not perish. And Christ is the good
Shepherd that gives his life for the sheep.

And can any man, that by faith apprehends this love, go on in sin, as you
say?

No, no, You know not what you say, take the example of Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.
47.
Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much: Her loving much, was not the
cause of the forgiveness of many sins, as the Papists say, and you Quakers.

Now consider, Whether Christ and his Apostles did not teach the same things
which our Ministers do, and you may as well, and as truly say, they taught
people to live in sin, as you may say, that our Ministers do so, for they
preach the Doctrine of Justification no other way, nor to no other end, and
this I proved before, in answer to John Horwood; but I shall not think my
labor ill bestowed, if the Lord do convince any one of you of your error in
this Doctrine of Justification: And now I come to a second Lie.

The second Lie is; that our Ministers if any be wounded, and cries out because
of the burden of sin, and be sick, and broken, and trembles at the word of the
Lord. Such they cry out is deceived, E. B. his Trial (...) 8.
and mocketh at them.

I wonder with what face any man can affirm such such a Lie? For our Ministers
do labor by their preaching to bring people to a sight and sense of their
sins, that they may feel sin to be a burden unto them. When they see or hear
any of you Quakers fall into your Quaking fits, they may say you are decieved
and do pity them, but not mock them as you falsely accuse them.

A third Lie is, E. B. his Trial p. 15, 16, 17.
that our Ministers have no maintenance, but what is compellled from the
people, by the Law and the Magistrate, to pay them Tithes and other things, and
if, the Magistrates hold their hands, from causing people to pay them Tithes,
by their orders and Writs, they must either beg or work; or a worse thing, for
a lively hood, or else perish; so little love is there in the hearts of their
own people toward them. For because of their wickedness, God has left them,
and all honest true hearted people has left them, therefore what a condition
are the Teachers in, who deserves not the love of men, because of their cruel
heartedness toward them? And they deserve not the Love of God, because they
are so wicked against him, and concludes,

I might yet more fully describe and declare, wherein they do exceed the
Deceivers and False Prophets of old.

But of this, according as the Lord moves and leads.

For answer to this bundle of Lies, for here are many Lies together, and of
these he says, you shall have more as the Lord moves and leads. Which I
understand to be the great Lord Beelzebub, that leads unto all Lies, for
surely the Devil did help to invent all these lies. For that they are Lies, I
do it not by hearsay, and out of Malice.
I shall plainly prove, by what I know by my own experience, and I question
not, but that the experience of many thousands, knows they are Lies.

Now, to prove that these are Lies, by what I know by experience, for I have
lived in London and Middlesex many years, and have well observed the carriage
and dealing, both of Ministers toward their people, and people toward their
Ministers or Teachers, and by what I have observed, I know these things to be
lies.

For that many Ministers are maintained by the voluntary love and affections of
their people, and not by the Magistrates or the Laws compelling them.

I know not only by what I have heard, by inquiring of neighbor Parishes both
in Middlesex, and Surrey, and London, but by what I know by experience. For I
have for many years recieved the Ministers maintenance, in the Parish where I
live, and I never received any money, or any Tithes by compulsion, by the Law
and by the Magistrates orders, but did only receive what the people were
willing to give, and many have given more shillings to the Minister, then of
due I could demand pence. And never demanded money, or any thing else of poor
people, thought by right of Law, many of them ought to have paid to the
Minister.

But the Minister has said, I had rather give to the poor then take any thing
from them; and when poor people have told him they were not able to pay him, he
has said, I will then give it you, and has given them money besides, and he
never demanded any maintenance from any Anabaptist, or Quaker, or any other
Sectary, that refused to pay their dues. And I have spoken with several men,
that have received the Ministers dues both in London, Middlesex and Surrey, and
they have affirmed the same, and is not this Quaker a Liar to affirm the
contrary? But they measure others corn by their own Bushel. For because they
will not pay the Ministers their dues, but by the Law and the Magistrates
orders, therefore they conclude that all men are as unjust as themselves; I
confess, if all people in our Parish, and all other Parishes, were Anabaptists
and Quakers, then the Ministers should have no maintenance but by the Law and
the Magistrates, and if there was not a Law to compel the payment of the
Ministers dues, they must work or beg for a Livelihood, or starve, so little
Charity there is in the Quakers, and other Sectaries, as E. B. confesses. But
the Papists, have more honesty and conscience then these, for they will pay the
Ministers their dues, without compelling them by the Law.

And whereas the Quakers say, if there were no Law, to compel people and
Magistrates to aid and assist them, they must work or beg, or do worse, or
starve; I say this is most false, for has not the Lord, in times of
persecutions, when the Laws and Magistrates were against the Ministers,
provided maintenance for them without working or begging, or worse, and is not
God the same?

You Quakers will find, you will be disappointed of your expectations, for if
you should prevail with the men, in present power, to take away all the Laws,
for Ministers maintenance, Which God forbid:

Yet God will find a way, to maintain them without working, or begging, I mean,
working with their hands, for their Labor or work, is greater then any of your
Quakers, Teachers, who run idely about the Countries, and take meat and drink
for nothing, I, for worse then naught, for telling Lies.

But the Quakersaith, how can they then be maintained, seeing their own peoples
Love and hearts, is gone from them, and God has left them, and all honest true
hearted people has left them, because of their wickedness, and they deserve
not the love of God nor man.

I confess, if these things were true, then were our Ministers in a sad
condition.

But I wonder with what brazen face, this man can write such lies, and cause
them to be printed, for that they are lies, by what I have written before, of
the peoples voluntarily maintaining the Ministers, may be sufficient proof. But
I shall add something more, for to prove that our Ministers, people of their
own Parish, all that are honest and godly, do love them, and their hearts are
toward them.

I shall instance in one particular, in the Parish where I live, the Vicarage
house belonging to the Minister, was like to fall, and there is no law to
compel the people either to repair, or new-build the Ministers house, for by
the Law, the Ministers are to repair their Vicarage or Parsonage houses.

But such was the Love of the honest hearted men in the said Parish, that they
did in love to their Minister, pull down the old house, and build a new one,
which did cost them near three hundred pound; and if these people had not loved
the Minister, I the Ministry, would they have voluntarily given so much money to
build the Ministers House?

I know they that did do it, desire not to have a Trumpet sounded of their good
works. But I may say for my defense herein, as the Apostle said, I am become a
Fool in glorying, 2 Cor. 12. 11.
ye have compelled me to glory; and boast of the love and affections of our
people to their Ministers; I believe none of you Quakers can boast of such love
to your Teachers.

But I shall tell you who they are in all Parishes that love not the Minister,
and that is the profane rude people love not their Minister, because they
reprove them for their sins, and the Papists love them not, because they are
the greatest enemies to their Religion; and you Quakers join with these and
love them not, because they would persuade you that you are seduced and drunk
with error, because they tell you the Truth you are become their enemies, I
greater enemies then any of the former mentioned, and are not you a most proud
censorious Generation, that dare say, that all honest true hearted people have
left our Ministers; for do you not thereby plainly declare, that you count none
honest, but Quakers, Papists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, for none but
such have left our Ministers, unless it be some Atheists and Rantars, which
sprang up from amongst your selves.

But you say, our Ministers deserve not the love of God, because they are so
wicked; but it implies that you are so godly and perfect, that you deserve the
love of God. I can easily discern how you are Jesuit ridden; for you learned
this Doctrine of deserving or meriting Gods love from them, for they were the
first Founders thereof.

Our Ministers will confess they do not deserve Gods love, but will confess
that they deserve Gods wrath, and say with the Apostle Paul, Romans 5. 7, 8, 9,
10.
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us, much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath, (through him, and not through our merits) For if when we were
enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, 1 John 4. 10, 19.
not by our merits. Also the Apostle John says, Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, before we loved him; we love him, because he
first loved us. But you are so grounded in the old leven of Pharisaical
righteousness, and the old Popish Doctrine of Merit, that it is a very hard
matter to beat you off.

But what is that great wickedness, that our Ministers deserve the hatred both
of God and man, and no love? Why, you tell many strange stories in your book,
but they are all lies: E. B. his trial page 8.
you say that our Teachers cries peace unto all that put into their mouths,
though people be never so ungodly; but if they put not into their mouth they,
prepare war against them, by suing them at the Law, and castin them into
prison; if they deny to pay Tithes or money, and prepare open war against them,
by destraining their goods, and taking treble damages; and in page 12. if a
poor woman have but ten eggs in all the world they will have one, or but ten
Chickins they will have one, or but a fire in their house they will have a
penny for the smoke, and such like Woolvish destroying ways: And these he
says, Westmerland and Cumberland can witness. You do well to tell us that
these witnesses are a great way off, for you think people will rather believe
your lies, then go so far to disprove them.

For my part I shall never believe them, for I know and have proved the
contrary here about, and I never heard of a tenth egg, nor tenth chickin, nor a
penny for the smoke; If any such custom be in any place, I do not believe any
Minister will take these of poor people, however they should take the smoke for
the penny, rather then give a penny for smoke.

But suppose that in these parts where the Quakers first sprang up and grew so
numerous and insolent, they did abuse both the Ministers and the Magistrates,
not only by detaining the Ministers dues from them, but by disturbing them in
the exercise of their Ministry: and of this I have heard several Relations,
upon which the Ministers for their own quiet were forced to complain to the
Magistrates, and when they have been brought before them, they have abused
them, upon which several have been sent to prison and I think justly.

But that any Ministers committed any to prison, for not paying Tithes, that I
deny, and say it is a false lie: for suppose that some Quakers in those
Countries or other Countries, would not pay the Ministers their dues, and these
Quakers have been sued, and the Jewry according to Law has given their verdiet
for payment of so much money, and they refuse to pay, but will rather go to
prison then pay their dues; they put themselves in prison to save their money,
for neither the Minister nor the Law could put them into prison if they would
pay their dues; and that Tithes are the Ministers due, I have already proved;
and suppose they were not due of Divine Right, yet being due by a Civil right
in regard of the Laws and Customs of the Nations.

I say, they have as good right to them, as any man has to any house or land,
or money; and if you plead it is against your conscience to pay Tithes, as you
do say; I say, suppose you should say it is against your conscience to pay any
money you borrow, as I hear some of you have done, being asked for money lent,
have answered, what conscience have you to ask me money, seeing Christ says,
Give to him that asks; if you should be sued and would not pay, might not you
justly be cast into prison, and no sin in him that seeks his own, and I say
the case is the same, and Christ by his example never taught you to deny
payment of Tribute, for when they demanded Tribute of Christ, though (says he)
the children be free, yet lest we should offend them, go and take the money out
of the mouth of the fish and give them for me and thee, because it was a Law
and a Custom, Christ would not offend them. And by this you see all your great
clamours and accusations against our Ministers are proved to be mere lies and
slanders: with which I shall conclude that you Quakers are not perfect, because
you do publish so many lies.

I have proved ten several Particulars against you, all of which shall be
witness against you, that you are not the perfect holy innocent Lambs of
Christ, as you call your selves; But you may all confess as it is in our
English Liturgy, We have left undone those things that we ought to have done,
and we have done those things that we ought not to have done, and there is no
truth in us; And pray, as Christ in that perfect form of Prayer, And forgive us
our trespasses, Though some have said, they thank God they have forgotten that
Prayer. And may not we say so of you, as Agur said, There is a generation that
are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

But I know your Objection, Prove. 30. 12.
by what I have heard from you in disputing with you, ^sai. 8. 20.
and that is, that what I speak is not from the Spirit, but from flesh, and
from the Letter that I have read in other men's Books or lines; with which you
think to wipe off all, that I have said or written.

For Answer to which, I desire you to consider and examine, what I have written
by the rule of the Scripture, and if it be not according to that rule, or what
ever part, is not according to that rule, I shall confess it is from the
flesh; neither do I pretend to an infallible Spirit, so as that I cannot err
as you do; and I desire you to examine your own by that rule, and let that be
the Judge between us, according to the Prophet Isaiah his exhortation; Isa. 8.
20.
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. Where mind, that the Law and the
Testimony is called this word, and those that speak not according to this word,
there is no light in them, if no light in them, then no Christ in them.

Now, you say, all men have the light of Christ in them.

I say they have not, because the Scriptures say, if they speak not according
to this word, it is because their is no light in them. So that all men have not
the light in them. But seeing you say, all men have the light of Christ in
them, I may say then, I have the light in me, as well as you, and why may not,
or why does not, the light inlighten me to speak or write the truth, as well as
it teaches you. This I do declare to you, and all that shall read these lines,
that what I have here written, is according to that light within me, and I hope
from Christ the true light.

For I believe there are false lights, with which many are decieved, as there
are false fires, that leads people about in dark nights into bogs and water.

And I believe, that what you write and speak, is according to the light within
you. But I fear it is a false light, that has led you into many dirty errors.
It is your own phrase, wherefore let what you have written, and what I have
written, be laid to the line, the Law and the Testimony, and let that be the
Judge between us, whether the light in me be the light of Christ, or whether
the light in you be the light of Christ. 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3.
Try the Spirits whether they be of God, for many false Prophets, or spirits,
are gone out into the World. The Apostle shows how to know such Spirits as
are of God, and such as are of Antichrist. Every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ, is come in the flesh, is of God. And every spirit that confesses
not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that
Spirit of Antichrist.

Now, let us examine who they are, that deny that Christ is come in the Flesh.
I say, you are they, and what I say I shall prove, for whomsoever does deny the
end of Christ's coming in the flesh, does deny his coming in the flesh. But you
do deny the end of Christ's coming in the flesh. Therefore you do deny his
coming in the flesh. For when the Apostle does write of such as deny Christ's
coming in the flesh, he does not mean the Jews, or other Heathens, which denied
that Christ was come; But of such as did confess that Christ was born of the
Virgin Mary, and yet did deny he was come in the flesh, because they denied the
end of his coming in the flesh: Now, 1 John 2. 18, 19.
that the Apostle does speak of such, is plain; 1 These. 2. 4.
For the Apostle says; Now are there many Antichrists. They went out from us,
but they were not of us, even as you went out from us: And the Apostle Paul
says, Antichrist sits in the Temple of God.

Now, the thing that I am to prove is, that you do deny the end of Christ's
coming in the flesh; and to that end I shall first show what was the end of
Christ's coming in the flesh. Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26.
The Apostle Paul to the Romans, says, Through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. Whom God has set forth* (or sent) to be a propitiation through
faith in his Blood, To declare their righteousness for the remission of sins.
To declare I say at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
Justifier of them which believe in Jesus. Where the Apostle shows, that the
end of God his sending Jesus Christ, was that he might be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare Christ his righteousness, for the
remission of sins, that he might be just, and the Justifier of all them, that
believe in Jesus.

Now you deny this, E. B. his first Trial p. 9.
for E. B. says that our Ministers tell people a Lie, and why, they tell him
that Christ is his righteousness to justify him, which he denies, for you
teach that Christ did come to send a light into every man, and by harkening and
obeying that light, he shall be saved, which is the old Popish Antichristian
Doctrine.

Also the Apostle to the Hebrews says to Christ, Heb. 10. 8, 9, 4, 19, 20.
Lo, I come (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will O
God. By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. For by one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified Having therefore, brethren, boldness, to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus. By a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the vail, that is, his flesh By which words it is
plain, that the end of Christ's coming in the flesh, was to do the will of God,
by the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all. And by that one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified. But you deny that we are sanctified and perfected for
ever, by Christ his doing the will of God, and through the offering of his body
once for all; and that we have boldness, to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through
his flesh. But you teach that you are sanctified and perfected by harkening to
a light within you, and obeying the same, by which you deny the end of Christ's
coming in the flesh, and are of the Spirit of Antichrist.

Also you do some of you deny, that Christ rose from the dead with his Body,
but his Spirit rose, and deny that he ascended into Heaven with a Body, and
there remains with a Body; by which you deny the Scripture, and deny Christ
(...) Mediatorship: For the Apostle says, There is one God, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and one Mediator between God and men, (mind) The Man Christ Jesus: Now if
Christ have no Body, how is he a Man? Do not you make Christ a monster, if he
be a Man without a body, what a Mediator do ye make?

And great is the Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God was manifest in the flesh, received up into glory; according to that
Scripture in the Acts, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven?
Acts 1. 11.
this same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner as you have seen him go into Heaven; and that he shall so come, Christ
himself has declared; and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds
of heaven with power and great glory. Matthew. 24. 30.


Now those that deny these Articles of our Faith, are not they of the spirit of
Antichrist, for they do invent a fantastical Christ in their brains?

But you say, you have a Christ within you, and by that Christ within you, you
shall be saved. Christ in you the hope of Glory.

To which I answer, that I deny, that you or any man have a Christ within you;
you cannot have the body of Christ within you, because the Heaven must contain
it until his second coming, unless you be of the Papists opinion, that say
they receive Christ's body into their mouths, and then must Christ have many
bodies, or his body must be torn into many pieces. Wherefore, that I may, if it
may please God, show you your ignorance even in this particular; I shall show
you how I do believe Christ is in every true Christian, and that is by his
Spirit. These things have spoken unto you, Joh. 14. 25.
being yet present with you; But the comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, Joh.
14. 26.
whom the Father will send in my name. Joh. 16. 7.
But now I go my way to him that sent me, and it is expedient for you that I go
away. For if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you, but if I
depart, I will send him unto you.

By which Christ shows, that he must depart and go to the Father, and that he
must there abide. But his Father should send that Comforter his Spirit, which
should abide in them.

But how does Christ by his Spirit abide in a Christian?

Answ. Not essentially, Negatively.
as the Familists hold and aver to many Quakers; Affirmatively.
but operatively, by the operation and working of the same, Gal. 4. 6.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
whereby you cry Abba Father. Ephesians. 1. 16, 17.
In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our Inheritance, to be strengthened by his Spirit in the
Inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith.

By which Scriptures, and many more, we may see how Christ is in us by his
Spirit of Adoption, by his Spirit sealing the promises of the Gospel, by
strengthening us in the inner man, 2 Cor. 5. 17, ^.
and Christ dwells in our hearts by faith; and as Christ is said to be in us
by his Spirit, and by faith, so we are said to be in Christ, and to dwell in
Christ, which is by faith. Gal. 3. 18.
If any man be in Christ, for ye are all one in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
but of him ye are in Christ Jesus. 1 John 5. 20.
That we may present every one perfect in Christ Jesus. Joh. 17. 21, 23.
And that Prayer of Christ, That they all may be one as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they all may be one in us, I in them, and thou in me, that
they may he made perfect in one. And as Christ is said to be in us by his
Spirit, and by faith, and we are said to be in him by faith, and by the Spirit,
because the same Spirit that dwells in Christ, does act and work in us. So also
we are said to be in Christ by Love, and Christ to be in us by Love, as Christ
teaches, that the Love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them, and I in
them, and we have known and believed the Love that God has to us; God is Love,
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, 1 John 4. 13.
and God in him. And that I may make it more plain, I will set this forth by a
similitude.

We know that the Sun does shine, and give light and heat by its beams or
operation, Joh. 17. 26.
and we do say, the Sun shines into such a house or room, 1 John 4. 16.
and the Sun does warm such a place and such a creature.

Now, the body of the Sun remains in the Firmament, but its beams, and light,
and heat, are in several places here below. So in like manner Christ, his body
is in Heaven, but he sends abroad his light and heat, several operations and
workings of his Spirit, in the hearts of his people; and this Metaphor of the
Sun is often used in Scripture, wherefore I shall allege some of those
Scriptures, because they do fitly serve to illustrate this truth.

The Prophet Malachy prophesies of Christ, saying, but unto you that fear my
name, Mal. 4. 3.
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings. And as it is
the property of the Sun to give light and warmth or heat, and to expel mists
and fogs that do infect the Air, and to complete and enliven things that seem
to be dead in the Winter, so is Christ to his Church and people here on earth,
though he be in Heaven, Isa. 61. 3.
he is the light of his Church, as the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 44. 22.
Arise shine for thy light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising. And this Sun of righteousness is said to expel the of his people,
as a thick cloud is expelled by the Sun.

And the Lord is said to be a Sun to his people, that is, in Christ, for out of
Christ he, is a consuming fire.

Object. But you say that Christ does enlighten every man as the Sun gives
light to all, and by harkening too, and obeying that light, all may be saved. I
have answered this before, but for a farther answer.

Answ. That I confess Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the
world in some sense, for as the Sun in the Heaven does give light and heat unto
all, so does Christ as the Creator give a common light of nature. Matthew. 5. 45.
He makes his Sun so shine or rise upon the evil and the good.

All that common light of Knowledge and understanding that wicked men have,
Coloss. 1. 16.
and all outward blessings come from Christ; Act. 17. 25.
In him, says the Apostle, we live move, and have our being: but that Christ
does give a spiritual light of grace unto all that are born, that I deny. For
we are all born blind and dark, in regard of spiritual light, Ephesians. 5. 8.
so says the Apostle, Joh. 1. 5.
ye were once darkness, and St. John says, That the light shines in darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not; as the Sun shining on a man that is born
blind, he receives no light from the Sun; and every man that has this
spiritual light, has it, or receives it from God, in and through Christ, as
the Apostle Paul says, For God who commanded light to shine out of Darkness, 1
Cor. 4. 6.
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ. This light is a free gift, and we were not
born with it. If we were, what need Christ have dyed for our sins? Or what use
is there of his intercession, if all men have a light within them, by harkening
to which, and obeying it, they may be saved? I have taken this by the way,
because it is one of your chief grounds, upon which you build your religion.
But it is a sandy one, that has no foundation on Christ or the Scriptures. For
you do not make the Scriptures to be the rule of your faith and practice, but
some revelations or impulse of Spirit. And therefore you object against what is
spoken or written, by reading or study, or reading other men's works, which is
the last of your objections, that I know of, with answering of which I shall
conclude.

For Answer, I say, that your slighting of reading and studying the Scripture,
and reading of the writings of godly Ministers and others, that have written on
them, is a chief cause of all your errors. Job. 5. 39.
For Christ exhorts all to search the Scriptures, and that cannot be without
reading them. And the Apostle Paul exhorts Timothy To give attendance to
reading, and to meditate upon these things and give thy self wholly to them. ^
Tim. 4. 13, 15.
Surely Paul knew Timothy was no Quaker, for some of you Quakers have said,
that they may not read the Scriptures. But the Apostle commends Timothy, That
from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, ^ Tim* 31. 5.
which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation. If he had not been a Reader
of Scriptures, he had not known them, for although many read the Scriptures,
that never knew the will and mind of God revealed in them; yet ordinarily none
knows the Scripture, but those that have read them, or heard them read or
preached upon* and as faith comes by hearing, so by reading some have been
converted, if we may believe their own testimony in History; which brings me
to the second part of your objection, The reading of other men's Books or
writings: To which I say, that the Apostle Paul, though a man endued with
extraordinary gifts of revelations, Yet he did read other men's Books or
writings, as you may see by his writing to Timothy, (...).
When thou come, bring with thee the books, but especially the parchments.
Now if the Apostle did not read them, what need he to have sent for them; but
that the Apostle did read other books, besides the Scripture, 2 Timothy 4, 5.
is plain, for the Apostle writes of Jannes and Jambres withstanding Moses,
and he must read it in some other book or writing then the Scripture, for there
is no such thing there. Also the Apostle to Titus does allege what one of the
Cretians own Prophets said, which he had read in some of their books; Titus 1.
12.
and the Apostle Jude says, that Michael the Archangel strove with the Devil,
and disputed about the body of Moses; Jude 9. 14.
and Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of such men, saying, Behold,
the Lord comes with thousands of his Angels.

Now, we read of none of these in the Scripture, and therefore the Apostle did
read them in some other books or writings, and will you say the Apostles did
not bost in other men's lines, as you say of us? surely if the Apostles made use
of other men's writings, much more may we: and to what end has God given gifts
unto men, if they may not improve them by writing; for sometimes they have not
opportunity to exercise them otherwise, unless you would have them hide their
Talents; and to what end do you Quakers write so many books, and spread them
abroad, if the reading of other books beside the Scriptures be not necessary,
unless you believe what some of your fellow Quakers have said, that James
Naylors books are of as Divine authority as the Scriptures, because he is
inspired by the same Spirit the Prophets and Apostles were when they writ the
Scripture; in which you are like your Fathers the Familists, for such like
Titles and Styles I have read in their books written by H. N. and have heard
some Familists call them his Gospels, and that they (...) of equal authority
with the Gospels of Jesus (...) such blasphemous Familists and Quakers errors,
good Lord deliver us. And the Lord open your eyes that you may see your errors,
that you have patched up your new Religion with the old errors of the Papists,
Arminians, Anabaptists, Antinomians and Familists, and the Lord give you hearts
to repent, and do your first works.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Courteous Reader,
SInce the writing the foregoing answer to the Quakers, I had some conference
with a woman Quaker, one of my ancient friends, whose name I forbear to mention
about the said answer; after which the said friend did write me a letter, the
Contents whereof were as follows:

That my written paper is higher then Vanity, because, as she says, I
confessed that I was not led by the infallible Spirit, therefore it must needs
be flesh, for the Spirit of God is infallible and cannot err, which she
desires I would consider by the light of Christ that convinces me of sin, and
that lest I be found fighting against God; wherefore she says, in love to thy
soul, I warn thee. Wherefore lest the said woman, or any other Quakers should
say that I have not answered all their Objections, I resolved to answer the
said letter, though the things objected in the said letter are in part answered
before; yet for a more full answer, I desire the said friend and all other
Quakers, whether friends or enemies, to mind and consider what I have written
in answer to the said letter.

Having received thy letter, I was moved to write an answer to show thee thy
error in misunderstanding and misreporting my words; for I neither writ nor
said that I was not led by the infallible Spirit, but said, that I do not
pretend to an infallible spirit so as that I cannot err; For I say that all
the faithful are led by the Spirit of Christ, which Spirit is infallible; but
I say they are not so led by that Spirit that they cannot err, which is the
thing you maintain, but I deny; And yet I say, that all the Prophets and
Apostles were led by the Spirit infallibly guiding them in writing the
Scriptures, so as that they could not err, and that all the faithful are led
by the Spirit, so as that they err not in the foundation or fundamentals of
Religion: but in other things I say they are subject to err, and the best men
that ever lived that that we read of in Scripture have erred; Christ Jesus who
was God and Man excepted, and this I shall plainly prove by Scripture; the
Prophet David, a man after Gods own heart, and a Penman of holy Scripture,
said, Lord who knows the errors of his life, cleanse me from my secret sins,
Psalm. 19. 12. and he having a mind to build the Temple, and spoke his mind to
the Prophet Nathan, the Prophet said to the King, Go do all that is in thine
heart, for the Lord is with thee; they being both Prophets were both mistaken,
they were not infallible, for that night the Word of the Lord came to Nathan to
the contrary, that David should not build the Lords House, but his Son Solomon;
but you Quakers will say, this was before Christ his coming in the flesh, and
before the fullness of the Spirit was sent, wherefore mind what is written in
Scripture after that time.

There arose a dissension and a disputation among the brethren about
Circumcision, Acts. 15. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and Paul and Barnabas with others were sent to Jerusalem to the Apostles and
Elders to have their advice, and there were great disputations between them
about it, no one pretending by an infallible Spirit to determine the same; were
not Paul and Barnabas led by an infallible Spirit, what need they then to have
gone to Jerusalem to the rest of the Apostles and Elders? surely if they had
been infallible, they made a needless journey, and the rest of the Apostles and
Elders made a needless disputation.

Also there arose a doubt amongst the Corinthians, about believing husbands
having unbelieving wives, and believing wives having unbelieving husbands, and
other things concerning which they wrote unto the Apostle Paul to determine the
matter. Was there never a man among them that had an infallible spirit, so as
that he could not err? surely then they were no Quakers, for then they needed
not to have sent to the Apostle to have the matter determined; and the Apostle
in his answer concerning some thing, says, I speak this by permission, 1 Cor.
7. 6.
and not by command; and concerning Virgins I have no commandment from the
Lord, yet I give my judgment. I suppose, says the Apostle; but had he been a
Quaker, and of your opinion, would he not have said, why, or what need you
write unto me to know the lawfulness of these things, are you not all led by an
infallible spirit that cannot err? But the Apostle was so humble and modest,
that he said, I suppose, he would not say, I am sure, or I know certainly, I
having an infallible spirit I cannot err. No, the Apostle confesses of
himself and others, we know but in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9.
But you Quakers say, you have such an infallible spirit that you cannot err;
But God resists the proud, and has promised to teach the humble: also the
Apostle says, If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble, where the Apostle plainly proves, that Christians
do sometimes build upon the foundation, wood, hay, and stubble, that is, some
things of their carnal spirits, for there is some carnality in those that are
in Christ, for says the Apostle, I speak unto you as unto carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
even as unto babes in Christ; now there being flesh as well as spirit, and
sense and reason as well as faith in every christian, is it any wonder that
they sometimes err? And therefore honest Luther says, That there being flesh
as well as spirit, and sense as well as faith in the best men; that therefore
sometimes that will fall from their tongues, and their pens, that savours of
the flesh as well as of the spirit, and of sense as well as of faith; and
therefore says he, All Christians should be like the clean beasts that chew
the Cud, and devide the Hoof, that is, they should meditate and examine what
they hear and read by the Scriptures, and devide the truth from the error, as
those men of Barea did, they searched the Scriptures, to see whether those
things which they heard, were according to the Scriptures. They did not hearken
to a light within them, to see whether they were true. But if you Quakers had
such an infallible spirit, that you cannot err as you say you have; then all
that you speak and write musts need be truth, and then we need not examine them
by the Scriptures, to see, whether you write and speak the truth. But I am not
of that implicit faith, to believe what you write, without examining the same,
by the Scriptures; and by them I find you have a falable lying spirit that
leads you into error; but seeing you say you are so infallible that you
cannot err, give me leave to examine some of your Books in Print. Besides,
what I have already examined, and proved, many gross errors in them, therefore
not written by an infallible spirit, so as that you cannot err. I shall
examine some particulars in your new Primer, made by George Fox the younger,
and some others, in which there is as many errors as Pages. I shall mention
some few particulars, by which we may discern what the rest are of the said
Primer. Page 15.
Children, such are Deceivers who tell you that the way to come to know the
truth is by the Scriptures.

Now, if this be a true Doctrine, then was Christ and his Apostles Deceivers,
for they taught the same. Christ exhorts to Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39.
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they that testify of
me. Now, if the Scriptures testify of Christ, then the reading of the
Scriptures is a means to know the truth, unless you deny that Christ is the
truth if you do, he affirms it saying, I am the truth: It was a true saying,
of a good man, that The whole Scriptures are the swaddling band that foulds the
Child Jesus. Also Christ says to the Saduces, ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures. Then by consequence the way to avoid error, and to know the truth,
is by the knowledge of the Scriptures, and therefore Christ would have all to
search the Scriptures. And the Apostle Paul said, Pet. 1. 19.
that Timothy had known the Scriptures from a Child, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, and that is, by knowing the truth. And the Apostle
Peter says, We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that
ye take heed. But you are enemies to the reading the Scriptures, or expounding
them, Page 15 Of the said Primer. Children, such are no Ministers of Gods word,
who tell you the Scriptures are the word of God. Now if this be an infallible
truth, then I say the Prophets and Apostles were fallible, and were no
Ministers of Gods word, for the Prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and most of
the small Prophets, said, that The word of the Lord came unto them, and they
spoke the word of the Lord. I believe you may find what the Prophets preached
called the word of the Lord or God, above a hundred times: and in the 20. of
Exodus, God spoke all these words, and what God spoke is Gods word, and what
Christ spoke and preached, is the word of God, unless you deny Christ to be
God. Also the Apostle James exhorts, Jam. 1. 12, 13.
Be ye doers of the Word, and if any be hearers of the word and not doers, etc.
And do you think the Apostle means the word of man, or the word of God. Also
the Apostle Peter says, We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
And if the Apostles call the Scripture; the word, surely they are Gods word,
and by the word of Prophecy can be meant no other word. I marvel that you
Quakers, who pretend to an infallible Spirit to know all things, do not know,
that as Christ is called the eternal word of God, so are the Scriptures
written, called the revealed will or word of God, or his word revealed. As when
we write our mind, or cause another to write our will or mind to another, we
are properly said to send word, or what is so written to be our word. Page 33.
Of the said Primer. That by the blood of Jesus Christ, cleansing you from all
sin, is meant the life of Christ. Now I would know where you ever read in
Scripture, that we are cleansed from all sin by the life of Christ, or whether
the blood of Christ were ever taken for the life of Christ in Scripture? I
would fain know your meaning of this dark mystical expression. Whether you do
believe that the blood which Christ shed upon the Cross, when he suffered
without the Gates of Jerusalem, be that blood that cleanses from all sin. I
know partly your meaning, by what I have heard from several of your company,
and read in several of your Books, wherefore that I may show you what I believe
concerning the same, according to the Scriptures. [ mind] the Apostle says,
Without shadding of blood is no remission. And he appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 22.
and in the body of his flesh, Heb. 9. 26.
through death to present you holy and unblamable and unreprovable in his
sight. Coloss 1* 20, 21, 22.
And having made peace by the blood of his cross. But I fear you are strangers
to this blood of Christ, and it is a mystery hid from your eyes, who pretend to
know all mysteries, but they are mysteries of iniquity, while you count the
blood of the covenant an unholy thing. Heb. 10. 29.
And as you are strangers to this blood of Christ that cleanses from all sin,
so I fear you are Ignorant of the life of Christ. For I would know, whether by
the life of Christ, you mean the life that Christ lived in the days of his
converse on earth, from the time of his Birth, to the time of his suffering
death on the cross, or the life he now lives in heaven; or whether by the
life of Christ you do not understand the life of a leigned Christ in you, or a
life imitating Christ his Life. I know by what I have heard from the mouths of
several, and read in several of your books, that you are strangers, to the true
life of Christ mentioned in Scripture, and is a mystery hid from your eyes. But
[ mind] what the Scriptures says, Romans 5. 10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Wherefore he is
able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. By which texts of
Scripture you may see, that we are justified or saved by Christ his life living
now in heaven, to make intercession for us. But I never did read in the
Scripture that our sins are washed away, and that we are saved by what Christ
wrought in us, nor by imitating the life of Christ; and yet I say, that all
those who are saved by the blood and the life of Christ, have faith wrought in
their hearts by the Spirit of Christ, whereby they believe this blood of Christ
shed for them, and that Christ now lives in Heaven to make intercession for
them, and this faith is not a dead idle faith, but a lively working faith,
working love to God and man. ^ath 5. 6.
Faith works by Love. But this faith does not save, as it is an act or work
in us, but as it apprehends and lays hold on Christ the Object. And what
ever infallible knowledge you pretend unto, without the knowledge of this you
are in Ignorance, and know nothing as your ought. But the Devil has beguiled
you, as he did Adam and Eve, when he made them believe they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, but they became like the Devil by sin.

And as the Devil has deceived you, so has the Pope your Grandfather deceived
you, by sending his Jesuits and Friars here to seduce and delude you, as Mr.
William Prynne that Patron and Defender of his Countries Laws and Liberties
has plainly proved, in his Book called The Quakers unmasked; in which he
proves that several Friars of the Franciscan order, have been chief Speakers
in your metings, as Coppinger and others. And I know none but the Pope and his
Church, and you Quakers that do pretend to an unerring infallible Spirit, and I
know none that hold and maintain more errors then the Pope and you Quakers,
whom I conceive are made drunk with Popish errors, for all your pretending to
an infallible Spirit, that cannot err by an inward light. What I have here
written is by the light within me, which you advise me to consider and hearken
unto, because it convinces of sin. Concerning which, we had some discourse,
when I affirmed, that the Law in the heart does convince man of sin in the
estate of Nature, according to the Apostle Paul his words. The Gentiles which
have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14, 15.
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while else accusing or excusing
one another. Also those that accused the woman taken in Adultery; Christ said,
Joh. 8. 7, 8, 9.
He that is without sin cast the first stone, and they that heard it being
convicted in their own conscience, went out one by one, the Law in the
Conscience convicted them of sin. And as the Law in the heart convinces men of
gross sins, though they never had the Law written. So does the Law written,
convince of lesser and smaller sins. As the Apostle Paul says, I had not known
sin but by the Law, and that he means the moral Law, Romans 7. 7.
is plain, for says he, I had not known Lust, except the Law had said thou
shall not lust. Also the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, to reform the evil
custom of men wearing long hair, says, Does not nature it self teach you,
that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair. And if it had not been sin,
they had no cause to be ashamed, and the Apostle says, That nature does teach
it to be a shame. But I see some Quakers that are not ashamed to wear long
hair; for I have observed some of those men Quakers wear longer hair then
ordinarily Ruffins or Roysters wear, and in stead of shame, do defend and
maintain the same to be lawful. But I shall not believe them for all their
pretended infallible Spirit but rather think they are such as Christ spoke of,
whose light is darkness, If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness? Matthew. 6. 23.
and like those Locusts that came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, Rev.
9. 2, 3, 8.
who are said to have hair as the hair of women. But this by the way But you
objected then, that Christ says, the Spirit will reprove the world of sin. To
which I Answer, that Christ and the Apostle does not contradict one another; I
shall show how they agree, The Law in the conscience convinces them of sin, by
discovering what is sin, as the Apostle expounds. I had not known Lust,
except the Law had said thou shall not Lust. Romans 7. 7. But the Spirit
reproves for sin, by showing or discovering sin to rest upon the conscience,
by reason of unbelief, as Christ expounds the meaning of sin, Joh. 16. 9.
because they believe not in me, that is, the Spirit shall convict by their own
conscience, that because they believe not in him, there is nothing but sin, for
because of unbeleif sin rests on the conscience, and by beleiving in Christ
only, sin is abolished and taken away. Wherefore Luther says, If the whole
world did believe in Christ, God would see nothing but a mere cleansing;
according to that of the Prophet David, Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy
people, and covered all their sins. Selah. Psalm. 85. 2. This have written in
love to thy soul, and the rest of your profession, to undeceive thee and
others, who are lead by a fallible erring spirit. Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures. I desire you to examine what I have written by the Scriptures, and
let them be the Judge between us. Whether those that are lead by the Spirit are
not subject to err, though the Spirit of God is infallible and cannot err,
yet the man that has the Spirit is fallible, and does err; and so I commit
you, and what I have written, to the blessing of Almighty God, and remain a
friend and lover of thy Soul.

FINIS.

