THE K. of France. The k. of Eng.


Good and bad News FROM JRELAND: In a Letter of Credit from YOUGHALL, Not
forged, as are most of Pamphlets lately Published.

The Particulars are these The good News.
The Relieving of Youghall, by Sir Charles Vavasor. The Defeat of 800. Rebels
at Bandonbridge, by my Lord of Kilmeakell. The Relief of Cork by my Lord
President of Munster.


The Bad News.
The Revolt of Waterford and Lymericke, and the loss of the Castle of
Piltowne, which Castle put Sir Charles Vavasor to a hard task to relieve
Youghall.


London, Printed for Nath: Butter, at Saint Austens Gate in Paul's Churchyard,
at the Sign of the Pide Bull. March 14. 1641.

Good and Bad News, FROM IRELAND: In a Letter of Credit from YOVGHALL not
forged as are most of Pamphlets lately Published.
SIR,
IT is no small joy unto us here, that Sir Charles Vavisor is well arrived with
his Regiment, which puts us in heart again; whereas otherwise, we could not
have held the Town much longer: For amongst other our wants, the want of fuel
was none of the least, for we had no coal came a long time out of Wales, and
the River was so commanded all down from Capperquin by the Rebels, that no
wood could come down. They have taken the Castle of Piltowne, and come in
multitudes every day, to the Ferry Bank, which is within Musket Shot of the
Town, on the otherside of the water; and since the revolt of Water-ford they
have gotten three Pieces of Ordnance, which they have planted on Piltowne land,
to block up the harbor, so as Sir Charles Vavisor got in with much ado. The
loss of Waterford is a great loss unto us; for besides that it is a strong
Maritine Town, it had in it 56. Pieces of Artillery; besides, as the rumor
goes, they were well stored with powder, and all other necessaries; but I hope
Waterford or Rosse shall do us little hurt, so long as the Fort of Dunrannon
holds out, where we hear that Captain Thomas Aston, and Captain William
Welden are arrived with two hundred men, which is a good supply for that place.
My Lord of Kilmeakell at Bandonbridge has played the part of a brave
Gentleman; for when near eight hundred of the Rebels drew near the Town in a
bravado, he sallied out of the Town with one hundred and fif-foot, and about
eighty horse, and gave them a charge, in which he routed them, put them to
flight, killed about an hundred, and took the Arms of about three hundred of
them. We hear for certain, that Limmericke is revolted, which is a strong
Town, and very rich, so as when our Army comes over again to retake it,
there will be brave booty.

My Lord of Mountgarret, in the county of Kilkenny, and Baron Loghman, in the
county of Tippary, are very strong, and imperious, and we feared daily their
approach, until our new supply put life in us again, which I hope will
deter them from assayling of us.

My Lord President of Munster, has with seven hundred Foot, and two hundred
Horse, made his retreat into Cork, which I fear not, but that he will make
good, until such supplies come, that he be able to keep the field, and the
Fort at one end of the Town, and Barriscourt, (which is a Castle of good
strength) at the other end; it will being well manned, I believe will defend
the Suburbs; but as for the Town it self standing in an Island, and well
walled with navigable Rivers on each side, will hold a long siege without
treachery, of the Papists in the Town, which is feared, as it is our fear
here, until we quit our selves of many of them, which also quitted our fear.

My Lord of Dungarnon, and Sergeant Major Aplegard have been very vigilant
here, or else we had been betrayed long long since: And had not my Lord of
Cork nobly of his own Tenants, on his own charge have drawn down two
hundred men from Tallogh, and other parts to re-enforce our Garrison, so that
by that means we were a shelter to all the English Protestants that fled
hither, to whom we afford what relief we are able, and furnish them with
shipping for England.

We shall now again draw down some Pieces of Ordnance to the little new Fort
on the Key; which was abandoned only for want of men to man it, and we hope
when my Lord of Kery shall get a Regiment, he will be appointed this way,
where his experience of the country will lead him to do the best service.

If I knew any thing more in these parts for news, I would certify you of it,
but having nothing else at present, but my best respects unto you, and duty to
my Uncle Pain, my love to Cozens all, I take leave and rest.

Youghall the 28. of February. 1641. Your obliged friend, and servant, Ia.
Gibbes.

FINIS.

