Wholsome Severity reconciled with CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. OR, The true Resolution
of a present Controversy concerning Liberty of CONSCIENCE.

Here you have the Question stated, the middle way betwixt Popish Tyranny and
Schismatizing Liberty approved, and also confirmed from Scripture, and the
testimonies of Divines, yea of whole Churches: The chief Arguments and
Exceptions used in The Bloody Tenent, The Compassionate Samaritane, M. S. to A.
S. etc. examined. Eight Distinctions added for qualifying and clearing the
whole matter. And in conclusion a Paraenetick to the five Apologists for
choosing Accommodation rather then Toleration.

Imprimatur. Ia. Cranford. December. 16. 1644.

August. contra primam Gaudentii Epist. c. 5. Absit autem ut ista persecutio
dicenda sit hominum, cum sit potius pro hominibus liberandis persecutio
vitiorum, qualem facit aegris etiam diligentia medicorum. Idem contra Epist.
Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7. Prius enim preb^^^ se non esse Haereticos vel
Schismaticos, ^^m demum de indignis poenis suis lividam emittant vocem, etc.
nos corporum persecutores vocant, se animarum interfectores non vocant. LONDON,
Printed for Christopher Meredith, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

To the Christian and courteous Reader.
IT cannot be unknown to any, except such as are ignorant of Satan's devices,
and altogether strangers to the Histories of former times, that when* the
Church comes out of Idolatry, and out of bitter servitude and grievous
pressures of conscience, all her storms are not over her head, but she begins
to be assaulted and afflicted more then before with heresies, schisms, and
homebred disturbances. Which through the manifold wisdom and overruling
dispensation of God, who works all things according to the counsel of his
will, is Englands lot this day, that this may be to those in whom the Lord has
no pleasure, a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, that they may go and
fall backward, and be broken; and snared, and taken: that others, who are
approved, may be made manifest; yea, that many may be purified, and tried, and
made white; and that in the issue God may have the greater glory in making a
sovereign remedy out of poysonfull Ingredients, and his people may say, blessed
be the Lord God of Israel who only does wondrous things.

But now will the Sectaries be contented (as Christ's witnesses in former times
were) to be examined and judged according to the word of God, and if they be
found to be what they are accused to be, then to suffer accordingly? Nay, if
so, they fear they shall run too great a hazard. Therefore they cry out for
toleration and liberty of conscience, hereby going about not only themselves to
fish in troubled waters, but to improve at once the manifold advantages of
sympathising with the principles of the most part of men amongst us; for as it
is a common plea and bond of union among all heretics and sectaries, how many
soever their divisions and subdivisions be among themselves; See the Review of
the Covenant.
yea, they give (in this) the right hand of fellowship to the Prelaticall* and
malignant party, for they also put in for liberty of conscience: and as carnal
and profane men desire nothing more then that they may not be compelled to any
religious duty, but permitted to do what seem good in their own eyes. So
liberty of conscience is a sweet and taking word among the less discerning
sort of godly people, newly come out of the house of bondage, out of the popish
and Prelaticall tyranny; I say the less discerning sort, because those of the
godly who have their senses exercised to discern good and evil, know that
liberty of heresy and schism is no part of the liberty of conscience which
Christ has purchased to us at so dear a rate. But is there no golden hook and
taking bait for the Magistrate? yes sure; for his part he is told that he may
punish any breach of peace or civil justice, or a trespass against the State
and against civil authority, but yet not put forth his power against any man
for heresy or schism, being matters of religion and of conscience. As if both
Politicians and Divines had been in a great error when they said that the end
and use of Magistracy is to make bonum hominem, as well as bonum civem, a good
man as well as a good commonwealths man. Shall I add further, that all who
wish well to the public from principles either of religion or policy, want not
here their own tentations, persuading to a toleration of sectaries, in regard
of the necessity of an union against the common adversary, and the great
hazard, if not certain ruin, of the cause, by our own ruptures?

Under these fair colors and handsome pretexts do sectaries infuse their
poison, I mean their pernicious, God-provoking, Truth-defacing, Church
ruinating, and State-shaking toleration. The plain english of the question is
this: whether the Christian Magistrate be keeper of both Tables: whether he
ought to suppress his own enemies, but not Gods enemies, and preserve his own
ordinances, but not Christ's Ordinances from violation. Whether the troublers of
Israel may be troubled. Whether the wild boars and beasts of the forest must
have leave to break down the hedges of the Lords vineyard; and whether ravening
wolves in sheeps clothing must be permitted to converse freely in the flock of
Christ. Whether after the black Devil of Idolatry and tyranny is trod under our
feet, a white Devil of heresy and schism, under the name of tender
consciences, must be admitted to walk up and down among us. Whether not only
pious and peaceable men, (whom I shall never consent to persecute) but those
also who are as a pestilence* or a Gangrene in the body of Christ, men of
corrupt minds and turbulent spirits, who draw factions after them, make a
breach and rent in Israel, resist the truth and reformation of religion, spread
abroad all the ways they can their pernicious errors, and by no other means can
be reduced; whether those also ought to be spared and let alone. I have
endeavored in this following discourse to vindicate the lawful, yea necessary
use of the coercive power of the Christian Magistrate in suppressing and
punishing heretics and sectaries, according as the degree of their offense and
of the Churches danger shall require: Which when I had done, there came to my
hands a book called The storming of Antichrist. Indeed, The recruting of
Antichrist, and the storming of Zion, (if so be that I may anabaptize an
Anabaptists book) Take one passage for instance, pa. 25. And for Papists, says
he, though they are least to be borne of all others, because of the uncertainty
of their keeping faith with Heretics, as they call us, and because they may be
absolved of securements that can arise from the just solemn oaths, and because
of their cruelty against the Protestants in diverse Countries where they get the
upper hand, and because they are professed Idolaters, yet may they be born with
(as I suppose with submission to better judgments) in Protestant government, in
point of religion, because we have no command to root out any for conscience,
etc. Why then? is this to storm Antichrist? or is it not rather a storming of
this party, in the prevailing whereof God will have far more glory then in the
prevailing of the Popish and Prelaticall party, as himself speaks, pa. 34.
And if he will storm, sure some of his Ladders are too short. If any one rail
against Christ (says he, p. 23.) or deny the Scriptures to be his word, or
affirm the Epistles to be only letters written to particular Churches, and no
rule for us, and so unsettle our faith, this I take may be punished by the
Magistrate, because all or most Nations in the world do it. That all the
Nations* in the world do punish for these things, I am yet to learn: and those
that do, do they not also punish men for other ways of unsetling the grounds
of faith besides these? The declining of some of the Epistles as being letters
written upon particular occasions, and no rule for us, is an error which has
been pretended to be no less conscientious then those errors which now he will
have indulged. Lastly, if he would needs storm, why would be not make some new
breach? I find no material arguments in him for liberty of conscience, but
what I found before in the bloody Tenent, the compassionate Samaritane, and M.
S. to A. S. so that my ensuing answers to them shall serve his turn. And now
Reader buy the truth, and sell it not. Search for knowledge as for hid
treasures. If thou read with a unprejudiced mind, I dare promise thee
through Gods blessing a satisfied mind.

THE TRUE RESOLUTION of a present Controversy concerning Liberty of Conscience.
COncerning this Question there are three opinions; two extremes, and one in
the middle. So it is resolved not only by D. Voctius, in his late Disputations
De liberate conscientiae, but long before by Calvin, in his Refutation of the
errors of Servetus, where he disputes this very question, Whether Christian
Judges may lawfully punish Heretics.

The first opinion is that of the Papists, who hold it to be not only no sin,
but good service to God, to extirpate by fire and sword, all that are
adversaries to, or opposers of the Church and Catholic Religion. In 2am* 2^
disp. 1. quaest. 11. punct. 3.
Upon this ground Gregorius de Valentia tells us there were 180. of the
Albigenses burnt under Pope Innocentius the third; and in the Council of
Constance were burnt John Hus and Hierome of Prague.

Suarez de triplice virtute, Tract. 1. disp. 23. sect. 2. lays down these
Assertions. 1. That all Heretics who after sufficient instruction and
admonition, still persist in their error, are to be without mercy put to death.
2. That all impenitent Heretics, though they profess to be Catholics, being
convict of heresy, are to be put to death. 3. That relapsing Heretics, though
penitent, are to be put to death without mercy. 4. That it is most probable,
that Heresiarchs, Dogmatists, or the authors of an heresy, though truly
penitent, yet are not to be received to favor, but delivered to the civil
sword. 5. That a heretic who has not relapsed, if before sentence past
against him, he convert of his own accord, he is not to be punished with
death, but with some smaller punishment, such as perpetual imprisonment, or
the like. Ibid. Tract. 3. disp. 12. sect. 12. he says, that Schismatics may
be punished with almost all the punishments of Heretics.

Azor. Institut. moral. Tom. 1. lib. 8. cap. 14. Vtrique vero, tum relapsi, tum
alii, quando pertinaces sunt, vivi igne exuruntur: si vero pertinaces non sint,
prius strangulari solent, and postea comburi. See the like, Becan. Summa part.
3. Tract. 1. quaest. 6. and 9. Turrian. in 2am 2^ disp. 56. dub. 1. Some of
them also maintain the compelling of Infidels to be baptized, as Scotus in
lib. 4. Sent. did. 4. quaest. 9. and they who follow him.

The second opinion does fall short, as far as the former does exceed: that
is, that the Magistrate ought not to inflict any punishment, nor put forth any
coercive power upon Heretics or Sectaries, but on the contrary grant them
liberty and toleration. This was the opinion of the Donatists, against which
Augustine has written both much and well, in diverse places: though himself
was once in the same error, till he did take the matter into his second and
better thoughts, as is evident by his Retractations, lib. 2. cap. 2. and epist.
48. In the same error are the Socinians and Arminians. See Peltii Harmonia,
Artic. 21. Nic. Bodecher. Sociniano. Remonstrantismus. cap. 25. See also Grotii
Apologeticus, cap. 6. page 130. Theoph. Nicolaid. Refut. Tractat. de Ecclesia,
cap. 4. p. 33. The very same is maintained in some Books printed amongst our
selves in this year of confusion: viz. The bloody Tenent: Liberty of
Conscience: The Compassionate Samaritan: John the Baptist: and by Mr. Goodwin
in his ^EOMAXIA, page 50. and in his Innocencies Triumph, page 8. In which
places he denies that the Magistrate, and particularly that the two Houses of
Parliament may impose any thing pertaining to the service and worship of God
under mulcts or penalties. So M. S. to A. S. page 53. 54. 55. etc. disputes
against the coercive power of the Magistrate to suppress Heresies and Sects.
This power the Presbyterians do ascribe to the Magistrate, as I shall show by
and by: Therefore I still aver, that M. Goodwin in denying and opposing this
power, does herein (as in diverse other particulars) ascribe much less to the
Magistrate then the Presbyterians do: which overthrows that insinuation of
the five Apologists page 19.

The third opinion is, that the Magistrate may and ought to exercise his
coercive power, in suppressing and punishing Heretics and Sectaries, less or
more, according as the nature and degree of the error, schism, obstinacy, and
danger of seducing others, does require. This as it was the judgment of the
orthodox Ancients, (vide Optati opera, edit. Albaspin. page 204. 215.) so it is
followed by our soundest Protestant Writers; most largely by Beza against
Bellius and Monfortius, in a peculiar Treatise De Haereticis a Magistratu
puniendis. And though Gerhard, Brochmand. de magist. polit. cap 2. quaest. 3.
dub 2. Fatemur idololatras istos crassos, qui a^^os seducunt, ^^^dendos esse.
Et in^^a. Haereticos qui e territorio principis exire jussi, detrectant
obsequium, ac pace^ publicam turbant, vita plecti posse, damus faciles. Et
infra. Haereticos tanquam falsarios, castigandos and pu^endos esse censemus,
sed non morte, verum carcere, exilio, excommunicatime. Vide Cal^in. Refut.
error. Mich. Serv^ti, page 694. inter opusc. Scimus tres esse errorum gradus:
and quibusdam fatemur dandam esse veniam, aliis modicam castigationem
suffic^re, ut tantum manifesta impietas capital. suppl^cio plectatur. Fideles
saepius Paulus ^ortatur ut se invicem tolerent, quamvis aliqua sit inter eos
dissensio: nempe siqua levis superstitio and inscitia simplicium men^es
occupat; ut ^am patientia corrigere potius studeant, quam intemperanter ad
vindictam e^^erveant. Secundum errorum genus, etsi castigationem meretur,
mediocr^^ tamen adhibenda est severi^as: tantum ne indulgentia alatur eorum
improbitas and contumacia qui fidei unitatem scindere cuperent. Sed ubi a s^is
fundamentis convellitur religio, detestandae in Deum blasphemiae proferuntur,
impiis and pestiferis dogmatibus in ^x^tium rapiuntur animae; denique ubi palam
defectio ab uni^o Deo, puraque doctrina tentatur, ad extremum illud remedium
descendere necesse est, ne mo tale venenum longius s^rpat. This Treatise is
approved by Bulling^r in an Epistle to Calvin. Vide Calv. Epist. p. 197. where
he adds: Dudum D. Vrbanus Regius un^ cum omn^bus Luneburgen. Ecclesiae
ministris, edito etiam l^bro Germanico, ostendit jure divine and humano
coerceri Haereticos. Concerning moderation he says after: Scio tibi nec
crudele esse ingenium, nec te ullam atrocitatem approbare: quis n^sciat etiam
hic modum adhibendum esse? At quomodo Serveto Lernae haerese^n and
pertinacissimo homini parci potuerit, non video. When Monfortius had stated the
question thus: Sunt quidam qui volunt omnes Hereticos, hoc est, ab ipsis
dissent entes, interfici, etc. Beza answers him: Ergo si potest, vel unum
nominet qui a^t omnes Haereticos censuerit interficiendos, aut ita sibi
placuerit ut alios omnes diversum sentientes pro haereticis habuer^t.
Brochmand, and other Lutheran Writers, make a controversy where they need
not, alleging that the Calvinists (so nicknamed) hold as the Papists do, that
all Heretics without distinction are to be put to death: The truth is, they
themselves say as much as either Calvin or Beza, or any other whom they take
for adversaries in this Question, that is, that Heretics are to be punished by
mulcts, imprisonments, banishments, and if they be gross idolaters or
blasphemers, and seducers of others, then to be put to death. What is it else
that Calvin teaches, when he distinguishes three kinds of errors: some to be
tolerated with a spirit of meekness, and such as ought not to separate betwixt
brethren: others not to be tolerated, but to be suppressed with a certain
degree of severity: a third sort so abominable and pestiferous, that they are
to be cut off by the highest punishments?

And lest it be thought that this is but the opinion of some few, that the
magistrate ought thus by a strong hand, and by civil punishments suppress
Heretics and Sectaries: let it be observed what is held forth and professed
concerning this business, by the Reformed Churches in their public
Confessions of Faith. In the latter Confession of Helvetia, cap. 30. it is said
that the magistrate ought to root out lies and all superstition, with all
impiety and idolatry. And after; Let him suppress stubborn Heretics. In the
French Confession, art. 39. Therefore he has also delivered the sword into the
hands of the Magistrates, to wit, that offenses may be repressed, not only
those which are committed against the second Table, but also against the first.
In the Belgic Confession, art. 36. Therefore has he armed the Magistrate with
the sword for punishing them that do evil, and for defending such as do
well. Moreover it is their duty not only to be careful and watchful for the
preservation of the civil government, but also to defend the holy Ministry,
and to abolish and overthrow all Idolatry, and counterfeit worship of God. Beza
de haeret, a magistr. puniend, tells us in the beginning, that the Ministers of
Helvetia had declared themselves to be of the same judgment, in a book
published of that Argument. And toward the end he cites the Saxon Confession,
Luther, Melancthon, Brentius, Bucerus, Wolfangus Capito, and Bullinger. The
Synod of Dort, Ses. 138. in their sentence against the Remonstrants does not
only interdict them of all their Ecclesiastical and Academicall functions, but
also beseech the States General by the secular power further to suppress and
restrain them.

The Arguments whereby this third or middle opinion is confirmed (that we may
not build upon humane authority) are these.

First, Stratag. Satan. lib. 3. pa. 150, 151. Sed sunt qui tantum usque ad
Christum viguisse ^am lege^ putent, etc. Et poenam illam corporalem aeternae
damnationis typum fuisse, etc. Quae quidem conjectura a^eo mihi non inepta visa
est, ut quamobrem rejici possit non inve^irem; nisi ei^^atin in lege posita
refragaretur. Est en^m in lege: Vt omnis Israel audiens timea^, neque (...)* ac
quicquam admittat ej^smodi. Quae certe ratio perpetuo v^get.
the law, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. concerning the stoning and killing of him, who
shall secretly entice people, saying, Let us go after other gods. If it be
said, that this law did bind the Jews only, and is not moral nor perpetual. I
answer, Jacobus Acontius, though he be of another opinion concerning this
question then I am, yet he heartily and freely confesses, that he sees
nothing in that law, which does not belong to the New Testament, as well as the
Old; for says he, the reason and ground of the law, the use and end of it, is
moral and perpetual, ver. 11. All Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do
no more any such wickedness, as this is among you. But yet, says Acontius,
this law does not concern Heretics, who believe and teach errors concerning
the true God or his worship; but only Apostates who fall away to other gods:
Pelargus in Deuter. 13 Qui blasphemi sunt, qui Ecclesiam and Rempub. aperte
t^^^bant, qu se (...) sunt m^ritas incurr^^^ poeras: cae^^^^ corrige^di sunt,
modisque alas (...), ex^mplo Theodosii and Justiniani Imperatorum, apud
Socratem lib. 5. c. 10. Theodosius (...) u^be ej^cit.
In this I shall not much contend with him; only thus far, if Apostates are to
be stoned and killed according to that law, then surely seducing Heretics are
also to receive their measure and proportion of punishment; The moral equity
of the law requires thus much at least, that if we compare Heresy and Apostasy
together, look how much less the evil of sin is in Heresy, so much and no
more is to be remitted of the evil of punishment, especially the danger of
contagion and seducement, being as much or rather more in Heresy then in
Apostasy; yea, that which is called Heresy being oftentimes a real following
after other gods. But the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. for punishing with death* as well
whole Cities as particular persons, for falling away to other gods, is not the
only law for punishing even capitally gross sins against the first Table. See
Exodus 22. 20. He that sacrifices unto any god, save unto the Lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed, Exodus 31. 14. Every one that defiles the Sabbath,
shall surely be put to death, Levit. ^4. 16. And he that blasphemeth the Name
of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, 4* 5. If there be
found among you within any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee,
man or woman, that has wro^ght wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God,
in transgressing his Covenant, and has gone and served other gods and
worshipped them, etc. Thou shall bring forth that man or that woman unto thy
gates, even that man or that woman, and shall stone them with stones till they
die.

It will be asked, But how does it appear that these or any other Judicial
Laws of Moses do at all appertain to us, as rules to guide us in like cases? I
shall wish him who scrupleth this, to read Piscator his Appendix to his
Observations upon the 21, 22, 23. Chapters of Exodus, where he excellently
disputes this question, Whether the Christian Magistrate be bound to observe
the Judicial laws of Moses, as well as the Jewish Magistrate was. He answers
by the common distinction, he is obliged to those things in the Judicial law
which are unchangeable, and common to all Nations: but not to those things
which are mutable, or proper to the Jewish Republike. But then he explaineth
this distinction, that by things mutable, and proper to the Jews, he
understands the emancipation of an Hebrew servant or handmaid in the seventh
year, a man's marying his brothers wife and raising up seed to his brother, the
forgiving of debts at the Jubilee, marying with one of the same Tribe, and if
there be any other like to these; also Ceremonial trespasses, as touching a
dead body, etc. But things immutable, and common to all Nations are the laws
concerning Moral trespasses, Sins against the Moral law, as murder,
adultery, theft, enticing away from God, blasphemy, striking of Parents. Now
that the Christian Magistrate is bound to observe these Judicial laws of
Moses which appoint the punishments of sins against the Moral law, he proves
by these reasons.

1. If it were not so, then it is free and arbitrary to the Magistrate to
appoint what punishments himself pleases. But this is not arbitrary to him,
for he is the Minister of God, Romans 13. 4. and the judgment is the Lords,
Deuteronomy. 1. 7. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. And if the Magistrate be Keeper of both Tables, he
must keep them in such manner as God has delivered them to him.

2. Christ's words, Mat. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, are comprehensive of
the Judicial law, it being a part of the law of Moses; Now he could not
fulfill the Judicial law, except either by his practice, or by teaching others
still to observe it; not by his own practice, for he would not condemn the
Adulteress, Joh. 8. 11. nor divide the Inheritance, Luke 12. 13, 14. Therefore
it must be by his doctrine for our observing it.

3. If Christ in his Sermon, Mat. 5. would teach that the Moral law belongs
to us Christians, in so much as he vindicateth it from the false glosses of the
Scribes and Pharisees; then he meant to hold forth the Judicial law concerning
Moral trespasses as belonging to us also: for he vindicateth and interprets
the Judicial law, as well as the Moral, Mat. 5. 38. An eye for an eye, etc.

4. If God would have the Moral law transmitted from the Jewish people to the
Christian people; then he would also have the Judicial law transmitted from
the Jewish Magistrate to the Christian Magistrate: There being the same reason
of immutability in the punishments, which is in the offenses; Idolatry and
Adultery displeases God now as much as then; and Theft displeases God now no
more then before.

5. Whatsoever things were written af^retime, were written for our learning,
Romans 15. 4. and what shall the Christian Magistrate learn from those Judicial
laws, but the will of God to be his rule in like cases? The Ceremonial law was
written for our learning, that we might know the fulfilling of all those Types,
but the Judicial law was not Typical.

6. Do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Mat. 5. 16. How shall Christian
Magistrates glorify God more then by observing Gods own laws, as most just,
and such as they cannot make better?

7. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. Now when the Christian
Magistrate punishes sins against the Moral law, if he do this in faith and
in assurance of pleasing God, he must have his assurance from the Word of God,
for faith can build upon no other foundation: it is the Word which must assure
the Conscience, God has commanded such a thing, therefore it is my duty to do
it, God has not forbidden such a thing, therefore I am free to do it. But the
will of God concerning Civil justice and punishments is no where so fully and
clearly revealed as in the Judicial law of Moses. This therefore must be the
surest prop and stay to the conscience of the Christian Magistrate.

These are not my reasons (if it be not a word or two added by way of
explaining and strengthening) but the substance of Piscators reasons: Unto which
I add, 1. Though we have clear and full scriptures in the New Testament for
abolishing the Ceremonial law yet we no where read in all the new Testament
of the abolishing of the Judicial law, so far as it did concern the punishing
of sins against the Moral law, of which Heresy and seducing of souls is one,
and a great one. Once God did reveal his will for punishing those sins by such
and such punishments. He who will hold that the Christian Magistrate is not
bound to inflict such punishments for such sins, is bound to prove that those
former laws of God are abolished, and to show some scripture for it. 2. That
Judicial law for having two or three witnesses in judgment, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
Heb. 10. 28. is transferred even with an obligation to us Christians, and it
concerns all judgment, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, Mat. 18. 16. 2
Cor. 13. 1. and some other particulars might be instanced in* which are pressed
and enforced from the Judicial law, by some who yet mind not the obligation of
it. To conclude therefore this point, though other judicial or forensecall
laws concerning the punishments of sins against the Moral law, may, yea, must
be allowed of in Christian Republikes and Kingdoms; Provided always, they be
not contrary or contradictory to Gods own Judicial laws: yet I fear not to
hold with Junius, de Politia Mosis cap. 6. that he who was punishable by death
under that Judicial law, is punishable by death still; and he who was not
punished by death then, is not to be punished by death now; And so much for the
first argument from the Law of God.

A second argument we have from diverse laudable examples in the Old Testament;
Moses drew the sword against Idolaters, Exodus 32. 27. the children of Israel
resolved to go out to war against the Reubenites and Gadites, when they
understood that they were building another Altar. Jos. 22. 12. Elijah commanded
to slay the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 40. In Asa his time there was a
Covenant for putting to death such as would not seek the Lord God of their
Fathers, 2 Chro. 15. 13. Iehu slew the Priests of Ahab, and the worshippers of
Baal, 2 Kings 10. 11. 24. First, searching and making sure that there were none
of the servants of the Lord among them, ver. 23. Josiah sacrificed the Priests
of Samaria upon their own altars, 2 Kings 23. 20. Nebuchadnezzar, though an
Heathen, being convinced that there was no god like the God of Israel, made a
Decree, that whosoever speaks blasphemy, or utters any error against God,
shall be cut in pieces, and their houses made a dunghill, Dan. 3. 29. As for
those whose errors and corruptions in religion were not so great, there was
some (though not the highest) severity used against them: Moses was so angry
with the people that were seduced into Idolatry, that he burnt the ^alf which
they had worshipped, and ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the water,
and made the Children of Israel to drink of it, Exodus 32. 20. Thereby teaching
them (as Hierome and others give the reason) to abhor that Idolatry, while
their Idol did pass from them among their own excrements. Asa did remove his
mother Maachah from being Queen, because of an Idol which she had made in a
grove, 1 Kings 15. 13. Josiah caused all that were present in Jerusalem and
Benjamin to stand to the Covenant. 2 Chronicles. 34. 32. which could not be without
either threatening or inflicting punishment upon the transgressors; there being
many at that time disaffected to the Reformation.

O but says M. S. to A. S. page 51, 52. Idolatry and Idolaters were the
adaequate object of that coercive power in matters of religion, whereof we
read in the Old Testament. Nor do we read that ever the Jewish Kings or
Magistrates attempted any thing against Sectaries or Schismatics. I answer, 1.
The object of that coercive power of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 32. was generally the
matter of the Covenant, that is, the taking away not only of Idolatry, but of
all abominations, and a walking after the Lord, and keeping of his Testimonies,
and Statutes, and Commandments, ver. 31. 33. Nehemiah did drive away the son of
Eliashib the high Priest, not for Idolatry, but for marying the daughter of
Sanballat, and thereby defiling the Covenant of the Priesthood, Nehem. 13. 28,
29. Ezra made the Chief Priests, the Levites, and all Israel to enter into a
Covenant and to swear, that they would put away the strange wives, and that it
should be done according to the Law, Ezra 10. 3. 5. and whosoever would not
come to Jerusalem for this thing, was not only himself excommunicated from the
Church, but all his goods forfeited. v. 8. Artaxerxes decreed punishment for
all who should oppose the Law of God, and the building of the Temple: wherein
he is so far approved, as that Ezra blesses God for it, Ezra 7. 26, 27.
Whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, etc. which does not
concern Idolatry only, but generally the laws of God, v. 25. Set Magistrates
and Judges which may judge all the people, all such as know the laws of thy
God. He who wrote Liberty of Conscience. p. 27. 28. is so far confounded with
this laudable Decree of Artaxerxes, that he can say no more to it, but that it
was the commandment of God, not an invention of men which Artaxerxes did thus
impose, which is as much as we desire. But 2. Sects and Schisms are to be
punished as well, though not as much as Heresy and Idolatry. There are degrees
of faults, and accordingly degrees of punishments. Augustine wrote an Epistle
to Bonifacius upon this occasion, Tom. 2. Ep. 50.
to show that the Donatists had nothing to do with the Arrians, and so were
not to be punished with such rigor and severity; yet he advises that moderate
mulcts and punishments may be laid upon them, and that their Bishops or
Ministers may be banished. In his 127 Epist. he intercedeth most earnestly with
the proconsul of Africa, that he might not put to death the Donatists, but
repress them some other ways. We have also a scripture example for punishing
Sectaries who are not Heretics. It is agreed among interpreters, there were in
Judah two sorts of high places, some on which God was worshipped, others on
which idols were worshipped, and it is most manifest from 2 Chro. 33. 17. and
from the reconciling of 2 Chro. 15. 17. with chapter 14. 3. 5. the one sort was the
high places of Idolatry, the other, the high places of wilworship; yet the
Priests of the latter, as well as of the former, were punished by Josiah, as
Tostatus proves from 2 Kings 23. and the text it self is clear, for he put to
death the Priests of Sama^ia, who had sacrificed in the high places of
Idolatry, verse. 20. but as for those who sacrificed in the high places of
will worship, because they sacrificed to the Lord only (as the word is, 2 Chronicles.
33. 17.) therefore Josiah did not put them to death, only he caused them to go
out of all the Cities of Judah, and to cease from the Priests office, so that
they durst not come up to the Altar of the Lord at Jerusalem, only they were
permitted to eat of the unleavened bread among their brethren, ver. 8, 9. which
is parallel to that law, Ezekiel. 44. ver* 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. a prophecy
concerning the Christian Temple, and the times of the New Testament, which
reaches a blow to another silly and short-sighted evasion, used both in the
Bloody Tenent, and in M. S. to A. S. that all this coercive power exercised in
the Old Testament was typical, and therefore not imitable now in the New
Testament. Whereunto I further reply, 1. The reason of all that coercive
severity was moral and perpetual, as was showed before from Deuteronomy. 13. 11.
Next, why did they not prove that it was typical? shall we take their fancy
for a certainty? They have neither Scripture nor Interpreters for it. 3. They
confound the Judicial laws of Moses with the Ceremonial, making the
Judicatories and Justice typical no less then the Ceremonies. 4. They do
utterly overthrow the investiture of Christian Princes and Magistrates with any
power at all in matters of Religion, from the Old Testament. So that one may
not argue thus: The godly Kings of Judah did remove the monuments of Idolatry
and Superstition, therefore so should the Christian Magistrate do. The most
arrant malignant may answer in the words of Mr. Williams, chap. 109. that the
Civil power or State of Israel, so far as it attended upon the spiritual,
was merely figurative: Or in the words of M. S. page 51. There are two reasons
very considerable why the Kings of Judah might be invested by God with a larger
power in matters of religion, then Kings or Magistrates under the Gospel have
any ground or warrant to claim from them. First, they were types of Christ
(but by the way how does he prove that Asa, Jehu, and Josiah were types of
Christ?) which no King under heaven at this day is. Secondly, not the people
only, but the very land over which they ruled were typical. 5. The punishment
of persons was a part of their reformation, as well as the destruction of
monuments, and why must we follow their example in the one, more then the
other? If we smart under both their diseases, we must apply both their
remedies, or neither.

The third argument is drawn from the New Testament. The magistrate bears
not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute
wrath on him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. But I assume; Heretics and Sectaries
do evil, yea much evil, especially when they draw many others after them in
their pernicious ways. It was the observation of one of the greatest
Politicians of this Kingdom, See Bacous Essays page 11, 12.
That heresies and schisms are of all others the greatest scandalls: yea more
then corruption of manners. One of his reasons is, because every sect of them
has a diverse posture or cringe by themselves, which cannot but move derision
in worldlings, and depraved politics, who are apt to contemn holy things. I
know it will be answered, If any Sectary make a breach of peace, or disturb the
State, then indeed the magistrate ought to redress it by a coercive power. So
John the Baptist, page 57. So Mr. Williams, chap. 52. answers, Romans 13. 4. is
not meant of evil against the Christian estate, but of evil against the
Civil State. M. S. page 53. 54. tells us that he is not for the toleration of
Sects and Schisms, except only upon this supposition, that the professors or
maintainers of them be otherwise peaceable in the State, and every ways
subject to the laws and lawful power of the civil Magistrate. I answer, the
experience of former times may make us so wise as to foresee that heresy and
schism tends to the breach of the civil peace, and to a rupture in the
State as well as in the Church. What commotions did the Arrians make in all the
Eastern parts? the Macedonians in Greece? the Donatists in Afric? How did
the Anabaptists raise and foment the bloody war of the Boores in Germany,
wherein were killed above 100000 men?

Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum.
How satanicall was Julians design to bring the Christians to naught, by
granting liberty of conscience to all the heretics and sectaries that were
among them? But suppose the Commonwealth to run no hazard by the toleration
of Heresies and Schisms, I answer further, 1. The Text, Romans 13. 4. speaks
generally, and we must not distinguish where the Scripture does not
distinguish. 2. Those that are in authority are to take such courses and so to
rule, that we may not only lead a quiet and peaceable life, but further that
it be in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. The magistrate is keeper of
both Tables, and is to punish the violation of the first Table, as well as of
the second. 3. Willany man, says Angustine, who is in his right wit, say to
Kings, Do not care by whom the Church of God in your Kingdom be maintained or
opposed: it does not concern you in your Kingdom, who will be religious, who
sacrilegious: to whom notwithstanding it cannot be said, It does not concern
you in your Kingdom, who be chaste, who whorish, etc. Is the souls keeping
faith and truth to God a lighter matter, then that of a woman to a man? He
confesses in the same Epistle, Epist. 50. Nonnull ^^fratribus videbatur, in
quibus and ego eram, quam vis Donatistarum rabies usquequaque saeviret, non
esse petendu^ ab Imperatoribus, ut ipsam haeresim juberent omnino non esse,
paenam constituendo eis qui in illa esse voluissent: sed boc potius
constitueren^, ut eorum furiosas violentias non paterentur. Notwithstanding he
acknowledges a great mercy of God in inclining the Emperors heart another way.
Hive ergo factum est ut Imperator religiosus and pius perlatis in notitiam suam
talibus causis, mallet piissimis legibus illius impietatis errorem omnino
corrigere, et eos qui contra Christum Christi sign^ portarent, ad unitate^^
Catholicam terrendo and coerceudo redigere, quam saeviendi tantummodo auferre
licentiam, and errandi ac percundi relinquere.
that he and some other African Divines were sometime of that opinion, that the
Emperor should not at all punish the Donatists for their heresy or error, but
such of them only as should be found to commit any riot or breach of peace,
especially the furious and violent Circumcellions. But afterward he confesses
that the Emperor had as good reason to repress their pernicious error, as
their furious violence.

A fourth Argument is drawn from the names which the Scripture gives to
Heretics and Sectaries, holding forth the extreme danger of tolerating and
letting them alone. They are called ravening wolves, Matthew. 7. 15. and grievous
wolves not sparing the flock, Calv. Re^ut. error. Mich. Serveti. Porro
crudelis est ista quam laudant clementia, oves exponere in praedam ut lupi^
parcatur. Et infra. Quid enim absurdius est, quam furta severe puniat Judex,
sacrilegiis licentiam dare? quam suum cuique honorem salvii tueatur, laceranda^
impiis exponere Dei gloria^?
Act. 20. 29. thieves and robbers, John 10. 8. Their word eats as a canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. and is as a little leaven leavening the whole lump, Gal. 5. 9.
They are troublers of Israel, Act. 15. 24. Gal. 5. 12. Shall the troublers of
the State be punished, and the troublers of Israel go free? Shall Physicians cut
off the member that has a Gangrene in it, because it indangereth the whole
body, and shall the great State physicians suffer the Gangrene to spread in the
Church? Shall men's bodies, goods, and purses, be so far cared for, that
thieves and robbers must not be suffered, but justice done upon them; and shall
those have immunity who steal away souls from Christ, and rob us of the
pearl of truth? Nay shall the poor sheep be so much looked to, that the
wolf must not be spared; and shall we suffer the soule-destroying wolves to
enter, yea abide peaceably among the dear-bought flock of Jesus Christ?

Other Arguments might be added, but let these suffice at this present. I come
next to answer all the material objections which I have either read or heard
(to my best remembrance) alleged against this coercive power of the Magistrate
in matters of Religion.

First, Tossanus in locun. Sunt qui hoc loco abutuntur ut probent non esse
sumend em supplicium de baereticis. Cart. wright. Hist. Christi ex 4. Evaig.
lib. 2. p. 145. Sed hoc (...) Haereticorum patroni ad clientum s^or^
in^unitatem aserendum abut^ntur. Quibus vel ex hoc ipso loco resistitur. Et
primum quidem quoniam hoc loco de to a improborum universitate extirpanda
agitur. Nihil igitur impedit quominus quidam ex improborum turba del bati,
supplicio trad^ntur. Quo ^nisi^ita sit, quo fundamento verbi Dei fares,
homicidae, pr^ditores, and c^nsimiles ^orte mulct^n^r? Nam si salva hujus
parabolae doctrina, ^i in crucem agi aut capite truncari possint, nedum
baer^tici multo magis mortis poena plectantu^. Si enim peritura bona and hanc
vitam ^ripi^n^^s, etc. Si Principie majestatem v^olans, etc. n^dum, etc. Deinde
modo ita evellantur ut triticum non n^a eradicetur, bona cum parabob^^ venia,
ex^mi posse liquet.
the Parable of the Tares is objected: Christ will not have the tares to be
plucked up, but to grow together with the wheat until the harvest, Mat. 13. 29.
30. In this argument Mr. Williams in his Bloody Tenent puts a great deal of
confidence. But I am as confident to discover the strength of it to be less
then nothing. For first he takes the tares to be meant neither of hypocrites
in the Church, whether discovered or undiscovered; nor yet of those who are
scandalous offenders in their life and conversation, but only of Antichristian
Idolaters and false worshippers: which is a most false interpretation. Christ
himself expounds it generally, verse. 38. The good seed are the children of
the King dome: but the tares are the children of the wicked one. And verse. 41.
the tares are expounded to be all that offend, and which do iniquity. This
being the clear meaning, it will follow undeniably, that if the Magistrate
must spare those who are meant by tares in the Parable, then he must spare and
let alone all scandalous offenders, murderers, adulterers, drunkards, thieves,
etc. when any such are discovered in the visible Church. But this cannot be the
meaning of the tares in the Parable, says Mr. Williams, chap. 24. that wicked
livers, opposite to the children of God, should be understood. For then, (...)
writing upon this par^b^e moves this do^b^: Si proh^be^ur eradicati^, (...) ad
messem^enenda est pati^^is, quomodo ej^c^eadi su^t quidam de med^o nostrum?
I Will answers Inter triticum et zizania qued nos appellamus la^ium, quamdiu
bed a est and nondum culmus venit ad spicam grandis simil^tudo est, and i^
d^sce^endo aut nulla aut perdiss^^^ dista^ia. Praemanet ergo Dom^nus, ne ubi
quid ambiguum est, cito s^^entiom proferamus, sed Deo Jud^ci terminum
reservemus.
says he, when Christ says, Let the tares alone, he should contradict other
ordinances for the punishment of evil doers by the Magistrate. But this is a
base begging of the question: for he well knew that those against whom he
disputes hold that his exposition of the Parable contradicts the ordinance of
God for punishing Idolaters and Heretics, the question being whether this be
not an ordinance as well as the punishment of scandalous livers. Besides, if
the tares be Antichristian Idolaters, and they must not be plucked up, but
suffered to grow till the harvest, as he expounds, this contradicts other
Scriptures, which say that the sword must be drawn against Antichristian
idolaters, and they thereby cut off, Revel. 13. 10. and 17. 16.

But I proceed to a second answer. If by tares I should suppose only to be
meant Idolaters, Heretics, and false worshippers (which is a gloss contrary
to the text, as I have demonstrate) yet their argument will not conclude the
forbearing or sparing of such, except only in such cases, and so far as the
true worshippers of God cannot be certainly and infallibly dignosced from the
false worshippers, as the wheat from the tares: as Jehu would not destroy the
worshippers of Baal, till he was sure that none of the servants of the Lord
were among them, 2 King. 10. 23. The reason why the tares are not to be plucked
up, is, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them,
verse. 29. Now when a man is sure that he plucks up nothing but tares, or rather
thorns, without the least danger to the wheat, how does the Parable strike
against his so doing? If M. S. will not believe me, let him believe himself,
page 50. For my part, says he, when the Civil Magistrate shall be far
enough out of this danger of fighting against God, I have nothing to say
against his fighting with superstition, heresy, schism, etc.

Thirdly, what if I shape yet another answer to the argument out of Mr.
Williams own words? chap. 27. I acknowledge, says he, this command [Let them
alone] was expressly spoken to the messengers or ministers of the Gospel, who
have not civil power or authority in their hand, and therefore not to the
civil Magistrate, King or Governor. Now therefore what a blockish argument is
it, to reason from this Parable against the coercive power of the magistrate in
matters of religion? If there must be a forbearance of any severity, we must
forbear Church censures and excommunication a way of rooting out the tares,
which Mr. Williams himself justifies as much as we do.

Fourthly, and if the utter extirpation and plucking up of Heretics by
capital punishments, should be understood to be forbidden in the parable, (as
it is not) yet the stopping of their mouths, the dissipating and suppressing of
them, some other coercive way, is not forbidden, as Chrysostom notes upon the
place, whom Euthymius and Theophylactus do follow in this, allowing of
coercive, though not capital punishments.

Fifthly, Calvin, Beza, and our best Interpreters, take the scope and intent of
that parable, not to be against the immoderate severity of Magistrates, but
against the immoderate zeal of those who imagine to have the Church rid of all
scandalous and wicked persons, as wheat without tares, corn without chafe, a
flock of sheep without goats, which has been the fancy of Novatians, Donatists
and Anabaptists. The parable therefore intimates unto us (as Bucerus upon the
place expounds it) that when the Magistrate has done all his duty in
exercising his coercive power, yet to the worlds end there will be (in the
Church a mixture of good and bad. So that it is the universal and perfect
purging of the Church, which is put off to the last judgment, not the
punishment of particular persons. Neither do the servants in the parable ask
whether they should pluck up this or that visible tare, but whether they should
go and make the whole field rid of them; which field is the general visible
Church sowed with the ^eed of the Gospel; and so much for that argument.

Another negative argument is this. Such a coercive power in matters of
religion, makes men hypocrites and seven times more the children of hell.
Christ's Ordinances put upon a whole City, or a Nation, may more civilize and
moralize, but never christianize them; says M^ Williams, chap. 82. I answer,
this argument does utterly condemn Josiahs Reformation as sinful, for the
caused all Judah to stand to the Covenant, as we heard before from 2 Chronicles. 34.
32. yet Judah became thereby more hypocritical. Treacherous Judah has not
turned unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly, says the Lord, speaking of
those very days of Josiah, Ier. 3. 6. 10.

2. This argument makes also against the punishment of adulteries, murders,
thefts, robberies, etc. for unless filthy lust, hatred, and covetousness in
the heart be mortified, and men convert freely and sincerely, the reducing of
them to a moral conversation makes them hypocrites, and nearer hell then
before.

3. There are two sorts of Christ's Ordinances: some for the communion of
Saints: others, for the conversion of sinners: It is far from our thoughts to
admit, much less to compel, a whole City, or Nation promiscuously, to the use
of the former. But yet converting or reducing ordinances may and ought to put
upon all whom they concern. The means must be used and men's hearts left to God.

Object. 3. This Doctrine of the Magistrates coercive power, makes many to
stumble at the Presbyterian Reformation, as a bloody Reformation, as a building
of Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Mic. 3. 10. Answ. 1. We have
not so learned Christ, we abominate the Popish and Prelaticall tyranny. We know
that the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient: In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. yet he who said so, could also say, I would they were even cut
off which trouble you, Gal. 5. 12. It is my souls desire that the secular
coercive power may be put forth upon those only who can by no other means be
reclaimed, and who can be no longer spared without a visible rupture in the
Church, and the manifest danger of seducing and misleading many souls. A
Presbytery is not so ill a neighbor, that no man who has the least differing
opinion may live beside it.

But 2. this objection does as much strike against the New England government,
as against the government of the neighboring reformed Churches. For in New
England there has been severity enough (to say no worse) used against
Heretics and Schismatics. Th^s does Augustine argue against the Donati^s who
pleaded so much for liberty of consc^ce to themselves, and yet gave no liberty
of conscience to others where they were able to hinder it.
And here I must appeal the consciences of those who now plead so much for
liberty of conscience and toleration in this Kingdom, were they able to root
out the Presbyterians and their way, and could find civil authority inclinable
to put forth the coercive power against it, whether in that case would they not
say, that the Magistrate may repress it by strong hand, if it cannot be
otherwise repressed. It is not without cause that I put this Quere to them; for
M. S. page 50. (a passage before cited) does allow of the Magistrates fighting
against a doctrine or way which is indeed superstition, heresy, or schism,
C^nt^aluer. Petil.^. 2. c. 89. Noli^rgo^d. ce. c, absit* absit a nostra
co^sciertia, ut ad n^stram fide^ aliquem compell^mus facitis enimubi potestis;
ubi autem non facitis, non potestis, sive legii sive invid^ae timore, sive
resistentium multitudine.
and only pretends to be from God, when it is indeed from men. Also that
pamphlet called As you were, p. 3. tells us that it was neither Gamaliels
meaning nor Mr Goodwins meaning, that every way pretending to be from God must
be let alone, but that only we are to refrain and let alone, till we are
certain that we are out of danger of fighting against God, while we endeavor
to overthrow it. Now I assume, there are some who plead for liberty of
conscience, who profess that they are certain and fully assured, upon
demonstrative proofs, that the Presbyteriall way is not from God, nor according
to the mind of Jesus Christ (which is hinted to us both in the pamphlet last
cited p. 5, 6. and in (...) page 25.) Therefore according to their principles
they must allow of the putting forth of the civil coercive power against the
Presbyteriall way. And if so, what a grand imposture is this? what a deceiving
of the world? what a mocking of the Parliament and of the Kingdom? to plead
generally for liberty of conscience, when they intend only liberty to
themselves, not to others that are opposite to them. Which appears yet
further by the compassionate Samaritane, page 10. he says that no man is to be
punished or discountenanced by authority for his opinion, unless it be
dangerous to the State, page 23, 24. he discourses against the opinion of
Presbyterians as most dangerous to the State. Therefore he would have the
Presbyterians discountenanced and punished by authority, and intends liberty
only to the Separatists, Anabaptists, and the like.

I have done with three objections, but I have three words more to speak with
the compassionate Samaritane, i^ answer to his three arguments for liberty of
conscience, in which though all the strength of his discourse does lie, I hope
to make him ashamed of them, if he can at all blush.

His first argument is this, Whatsoever a man's reason does conclude to be true
or false, to be agreeable or disagreeable to Gods word, that same to that man
is his opinion or judgment, and so man is by his own reason necessitated to be
of that mind he is: Now where there is a necessity, there ought to be no
punishment, for punishment is the recompense of voluntary actions, therefore no
man ought to be punished for his judgment. Answ. 1. The question is not
whether a man ought to be punished for his judgment, but whether a man ought
to be punished for such professions or practices in religion, as are found to
be pernicious, hurtful, and destructive, to the glory of God, the truth of the
Gospel, the Ordinances of Christ, the reformation of Religion, the peace of
the Church. I know he will be ready still to set on foot his argument, for that
a man's judgment and reason does so necessitate and conclude him that he cannot
choose but profess and practice as he does. Therefore I add 2. this argument
of his strikes against the justice of the Parliament done or to be done upon
Malignants, for as much as their judgment binds them, and their reason does
necessitate them to judge and speak and act as they do. 3. It strikes at the
very justice of God upon reprobate and unbeleeving men, for as much as they
cannot receive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. cannot hear the words of
Christ, Joh. 8. 43. cannot receive the spirit of truth, Ioh. 14. 17. But 4. the
formal solution is this; there is a gross fallacy in the argument, for we
must distinguish necessity, there is a natural necessity, which takes away the
(...), and a moral necessity, which takes away the (...) of a man's being of
another judgment or way. Again, there is an absolute necessity, and a
hypotheticall necessity. Now the necessity of a Heretics judging thus, because
his reason concludes him thus, is not a moral necessity or obligation upon
him, as if it were not lawful to him to judge or do otherwise, (nay he ought
and is bound by the word of God to judge otherwise, and do otherwise) but it
is a natural necessity, (I mean of sinful nature) and that not simple and
absolute, neither, but hypotheticall only, and upon this supposition that he
has not yet opened his eyes to receive more light, nor set his heart singly
and in the fear of God to seek more light. So that the plain English of this
Samaritan argument is this: Though Gods word binds a man to such a duty, yet
if his own erroneous, perverse and corrupt judgment conclude him so far
that his opinion cannot agree with the word of God, and himself cannot be
brought to the practice of that necessary duty; such a man ought not to be
punished. Or as if one should argue thus: He that has borrowed from me a
thousand pound, has by his own sault disabled himself to pay it: therefore I
may not call him to an account for it.

But let us see whether this Samaritan be happier in his second argument. Which
is this: It Is known that the Fathers, General Councels, National Assemblies,
Synods and Parliaments in their times have been most grossly mistaken: and
though the present times be wiser then the former, etc. yet since there
remains a possibility of error, notwithstanding never so great presumptions to
the contrary, one sort of men are not to compel another, since this hazard is
run thereby, that he who is in an error may be the constrainer of him who is in
the truth.

Answ. 1. Farewell Parliaments, if this argument hold good. The Parliament may
fine no man, imprison no man, banish no man: they may compel no man to
Assessements, Taxes, Excise, Billeting of Soldiers etc. And why forsooth?
because they may not presume of an insallible and unerring spirit, but may
err, and have erred as well as other men.

2 He argues from the hazard of compulsion, it may fall out that he who is in
the truth may be constrained and persecuted. True: it may fall out so; and the
Lord save us that we never be accessory to the persecuting of any who is in the
truth, for so it may be again through men's corruption and abuse of the
magistrates power, (so the best things may be abused.)

But the liberty of conscience which he pleads for, runs a far greater
hazard, even the hazard of not only shaking but overturning truth, and peace,
and religion, and ordinances, and Church, and souls, and all. To the ruin of
all these, and to a thousand mischiefs, this kind of liberty prepares a
broad way, and opens a wide door; and it is better, as he said, to live
where nothing is lawful, then where every thing is lawful.

3. It follows not that because Parliaments may not presume of an unerring
spirit, therefore they cannot be certain that they are in the truth concerning
this or that particular, so that they may confidently compel men to it,
without fear of fighting against God. The acknowledgement of a possibility of
error, and that we know but in part as long as we are in this world, may well
consist with men's fullness of persuasion from the light of Gods word,
concerning this or that truth to be believed, or duty to be done.

I make haste to his third argument. To compel me, says he, against my
conscience, is to compel me against what I believe to be true, and so against
my faith; now whatsoever is not of faith is sin: to compel me therefore
against my conscience, is to compel me to do that which is sinful. And,
Again I am counseled by the Apostle to be persuaded in my own mind of the
truth of that way wherein I serve the Lord, etc.

Answ. 1. This also shakes loose Parliamentary authority; though the Gentleman
who wrote these arguments pretends to stand for it, as much as any other. His
argument will conclude (if it concludes at all) that the Parliament may not
compel Malignants, disaffected persons, Rebels, to any thing which they are
not persuaded in their own minds to be right. It is against my conscience, will
the Antiparliamentary malignant say, to contribute to the war, to acknowledge
this for a Parliament, as long as the King does not acknowledge it; to reveal
such a design, or to confess this or that plot against the Parliament, when I
am examined; therefore I shall sin if I do so, for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, and the Parliament shall compel me to sin, if they compel me to do
so. For though the thing may be in it self good, yet if it do not appear to
be so to my conscience, the practice thereof in me is sinful, which therefore
I ought not to be compelled unto, says the Samaritan. If he say his argument
is only concerning matters of religion, I answer, Whatever his intention be in
offering the argument, the very nature and force of the argument it self
drives universally against the compelling of a man to any thing whatsoever
which is against his own conscience, except he will say that it is a sin to
serve God against my cons^ience, but it is no sin to serve the Parliament
against my conscience. Says not the Apostle, WHATSOEVER is not of faith is
sin: and, He that doubts is damned?

But 2. when the Apostle says so, An es de Cons^. l^b. 1. cap. 5. Agere saepe
lc^t, man^nte dub^tatione speculativa.
he does not exclude all manner of doubting, as the Casuists well observe, but
only practical doubts: for a man may have his conscience morally and
practically certain, so that he may do such a thing lawfully, and with
confidence that he is doing the will of God, and yet withal he may be perhaps
fluctuating in some speculative doubts concerning that very thing. For
instance: a Christian may come to the Lords Table with so much faith (I mean
not now the faith of the person which justifies before God, but the faith of
that action) as makes his coming lawful, though his thoughts be exercised
with some doubts concerning the truth of his repentance and faith. A soldier
may in faith go out to war, being assured that what he does he may do
without sin, but yet he has happily his own speculative doubts concerning
the nature, causes, and ends of the war. A man may with freedom and
persuasion of mind (so far as concerns his practice) submit to
Presbyteriall government, who yet perhaps has not thoroughly satisfied himself
concerning the grounds and warrants which it has from the word of God.

The Samaritan will reply (it may be) that he has no faith at all concerning
the practice it self, and that he may not be compelled to do any thing
against his conscience, for that were to compel him to sin. To take off
this, I add 3. If the thing be indifferent, I confess no man is to be
compelled to it against his conscience, for this has been the tyranny of
Papists and Prelates, to compel men against their conscience to certain rites
which themselves acknowledged to be merely indifferent, setting aside obedience
to authority in such things, which (say they) is not indifferent. But if the
word of God either directly or by necessary consequence, make the thing
necessary, and such as we cannot leave undone without sin and breach of duty;
if there be such an obligation from the word, then may a man be compelled to
it, though against his conscience.

But then you will say, I am brought into a necessity of sinning, for if I obey
not, I refuse a duty; if I obey, I do it against my conscience. Answ. This
necessity is not absolute, but hypotheticall, is not perse, but per accidens,
so long as a man retains the error of his conscience, which he ought to cast
away. You will say again, supposing that my conscience cannot be satisfied,
nor made of another opinion then now I am of, whether in this case, and so long
as it stands thus with me, may authority compel me to obey against my
conscience, and so to sin? or whether ought they not rather permit me not to
obey, because my conscience forbids me. Answ. The thing being necessary, as
has been said, it is pars tutior, yea, tutissima, that a man be compelled to
it, though it be against his erring and ill informed conscience. I know so long
as he has such an erring conscience he cannot but sin in obeying. But the sin
of not obeying is greater and heavier: for this is a sin in the fact it self;
that a sin in the manner of doing only, being not done in faith: this is a sin
of it self, that is a sin only by accident: this is a sin materially; that is
a sin only interpretatively to him, because he thinks so: this is a sin for
the substance; that a sin for the circumstance: this cannot be made to be no
sin, for the nature of the duty cannot be altered; that may cease to be a sin,
for the man's conscience may through Gods mercy and blessing upon the means, be
better informed. So that there can be no doubt but this is every way a greater
sin then that, and consequently more to be avoided. And thus I have dispatched
the Samaritane who did undertake to pour oil into the wounds of the Separation.
Medice cura teipsum.

The next thing comes in my way, is an argument brought for liberty of
conscience, from Gamaliels speech in favor of the Apostles, Act. 5. 38, 39.
Refrain from these men and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be
of men, it will come to naught. But if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. The strength of his
argumentation did lie in this D^lemma; this doctrine or way is either of men,
or of God. If it be of men, you shall not need to repress it, for it will come
to naught of it self, which he proves by two Historical instances of Judas and
Theudas. If it be of God, it is in vain to strive against it, for it must
prevail, and the counsel of heaven must stand. Therefore be what it will be,
there is no danger to let it alone. But on the other side, if ye go about to
repress it, ye run the hazard both of fighting against God, and of provoking
the displeasure as well of the Romans who have not permitted unto you the
liberty of capital punishments, as of the people of the Jews who magnify
these men and their way. This is the whole substance, sense, and scope of that
speech of Gamaliel in the Council. Hence did some argue for a toleration to
Servetus and other Heretics. And though this their way was then discovered to
be their folly, yet their posterity approve their sayings. The same argument is
used in that pamphlet called Liberty of Conscience, p. 34, 35. Upon the same
foundation does Mr Goodwin build in his (...), and the Paraenetick for
Christian liberty, page 2. and 11. supposing the credit and authority of
Gamaliels speech, for matter of truth to be one and the same with other
scriptures, and that there is nothing in all that speech but what is fully
consonant with the word of God, unquestionably so acknowledged. So Mr Goodwin
affirms, p. 10. and after him one P. P. which is by interpretation, Poor
Pamphleter, falls in the same ditch; he might well call it As you were, for he
makes that party to be never a jot more in the right. First of all he will
contend with us that Protestant Interpreters do commend Gamaliels speech,
Calv. Refut. Error. M. Serveti. Gamalielis authoritas perperam abillis
adducitur, etc. Gamaliel amb^g^ns quid rectu^ sit, quasi caecus in tenebras,
neque buc n^que illuc se con^er^e audet: sed saspendi^ senteatiam. In erim ex
veris p^incipiis malam conseque^tiam clicit, nihil adbiben lum esse co^sisi^,
quia deus quod suum est tuebitur: quod autem ab hominibus est, p^ssum ibit,
etc. Putidius est quam ut refu^ati^ne ind^g^a^, quod quidam ex prophanorum
ho^mnum dictis colligu^, Si de cultu dei and legis doctrina hab^tur quaestio,
non esse crimen morte aut vinculis dignum. P^^^rgus in Act. 5. Sic in causae
qualitate s^spensus haeret; nec proba^e ^n^c improbare potest apostolicam
doctrinam. Et infra. Ex judicio hominis in foro prudentis, n^utiquam Theologice
conclud^ndam, quod a paenis and correctionibus sit cessandu^, quia deus ad
scandala toll ida and m^la prorsus eradicanda ipse sufficiat. Magistratus enim
officium ex 13 Romans v. 4. and aliunde notum est.
and justify M^ Goodwins Doctrine. Sure I am, Calvin takes Gamaliel to be a
godless Politician, and a Neutralist, and his speech to have a great error in
it. So says Pelargus upon the place.

But to save me a labor in looking upon other Interpreters, because the Poor
Pamphleter appealeth first to Piscator and Beza, and afterward to Gualther,
(as Mr Goodwin did before him) let him be judged by these and no other.
P^scator says plainly, Piscat. Non suit rectum (Gamaliclis consilium) ratione
illius connexi, Si^est ex hominibus consilium sic eopu ho, disse^^tur^ q^atcaus
voluit collegas inde college e, ^^mig^tur esseipsis clahorandum ut opus illud
dissolvant. Nam etsi novationes bumano consilio and aulac^^a sasceptae, tandem
dissolvnn^ur: tamen officium Magistratus est, operam dare ut illas compes^ant
and prohibeant, and ejusmodi novatores pro merito pumant, sed prae^u^te
legitima c^gn tione causae. Beza, Noncerte quod Evangelio faveret (Gamalicl)
nisi Discipuli sui Sauli fait dissimilis, (infra 22. 3.) sed quod homo esset
moderatus and vereretur ne caedem Apost^hrum contra Roma^orum authoritatem
factam, gravius aliquid sequertur. Gualiher. Perniciosissimi dogmatis
occasionem hinc venantur, quo nullius conatus quantumvis improbes, nullius
etiam err^res quantumvis impios and blasphemos vi coercenlos esse c^amant. Vnde
aliud sequi non potest quam universae disciplinae ^um politicae tum
ecclesiasticae cen^ulsio: frustra enim geret Magistratus gladium.
that Gamaliels speech was not right, while he says, If this counsel or this
work be of men, it will come to naught, his meaning being that therefore they
should let it alone. Beza thinks Gamaliel spoke not from love to the Apostles,
but from fear of the Romans. Gualther thinks it a most pernicious Tenent which
some build upon this place, concerning the toleration of heresies and errors.
Yea, Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, cites and approves Calvin's
judgment, condemning Gamaliel for Neutrality, and his speech of error.

These learned Divines have so well opened and cleared the point, that there is
no place left for what the Poor Pampleter has said, yet two things more I
must take notice of in him. He says it was not for any fear of the Jews or
Romans that Gamaliel gave this advice. Not for fear of the people of the Jews,
for that would be but at the Apostles apprehension, not execution. What
nonsense is here? the people were angry at laying hands on the Apostles, but
there was no fear of their wrath if the Apostles should be killed. Not for fear
of the Romans wrath, which, says he, they often regarded not, as Acts 23. 27.
A place which confuteth himself, for when the Jews would have killed Paul,
Claudius Lysias came with an army and rescued him: a danger which we must think
the wisdom of Gamali^l and the council could better foresee, then that rude
and furious multitude, which would have killed Paul.

Next he will not yield so much as that Gamaliel did doubt whether the Apostles
doctrine were from God or not, and that he made it an uncertain case. In this
Sir you have faced about, sure you are not As you were, for Mr Goodwin himself
THEOAXIA, page 11. says, that Gamaliel in point of judgment or conscience,
was still but where he was, doubtful and in suspense with himself about the
business. Well, but why has he now denied that Gamaliel made it a doubtful
and uncertain case? He might, says he, and in all likelihood did thus express
himself for fear or policy: So did Hushai strangely for an honest heart in that
case of David's, in his counsel to Absalon, 2 Samuel 17. yet Hushai made a round
lie, even against his knowledge. Look about you my Masters, know whom ye trust;
here is a generation of men, pretending to a more perfect and Saint-like
reformation then others, but yet they think it no fault to lie and dissemble
for good ends. Nay that is not all, page 4. answering to an objection made
against those who do commend and magnify themselves, for greater gifts and
graces then other men have; He tells us it is no fault for a man not only to
compare, but prefer himself to another, and that on purpose to heighten his
own estimation. Which how sweetly it agrees with Paul's doctrine, Phil. 2. 3. In
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves; let every
sober and moderate spirit judge. How now, poor Pamphleter? is it not enough for
you to defend a lying tongue, but you will needs defend pride too? those are
two (I am sure) of the seven things which are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6.
16, 17. And here I leave the poor Pamphleter with this black mark upon him; I
will not proceed to answer a fool in his foolishness, lest I be like unto him;
thus far I have answered, lest he be wise in his own eyes.

Only I add one thing more in answer to that argument for liberty of
conscience, from Acts 5. 38, 39. Suppose Gamaliels principles to be good, and
this speech to be of truth and authority, (which I have proved it is not) yet
it is not applicable to the toleration of heretics and sectaries now, that
case of the Apostles being extraordinary, and great miracles wrought by them,
to the conviction of their most malignant opposites, Act. 4. 16.

Some it may be will object further from Isa. 11. 9. a place objected in the
Paraenetick, page 3. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain.
And Luke 9. 54. And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord
will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them,
even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. A place objected by Nicolaides Refut. tract. de Eccl.
cap. 4.

Answ. That prophecy concerning the Christian Church, Isa. 11. 9. is not to be
understood generally, as the word sounds, for then adulterers, murderers,
etc. are not to be hurt and destroyed by the Christian Magistrate. The meaning
therefore is, that those who have formerly been as Lions and Wolves to the poor
Lambs of Christ, shall either be renewed and changed in their nature, or (which
is more probable) shall be so restrained and overawed by the power and
providence of God, that it shall not be in their power to hurt or destroy any of
the Saints for the truth or the Gospels sake. (...), Neither shall they be
able to destroy any: So the Septuagints. God shall so preserve and protect his
Church, that she shall be like a Lamb among Wolves, or like a Kid among
Leopards, or like a Child putting his hand on the Cockatrice den, and yet
shall not be hurt nor destroyed thereby. And as this prophecy guardeth and
protecteth none but those who are in Gods holy Mountain, professors and lovers
of the Gospel, and the ordinances of Jesus Christ: So our Lord Christ's rebuke,
Luke 9. 54, 55. strikes not against any just and necessary severity, but
against a private vindictive spirit, and carnal blind zeal: It being the
purpose of Christ, then, most of all other times, not to exercise violence, (as
tyrants do in conquering new dominions) but to conquer and subdue souls by
his doctrine and miracles, with a spirit of meekness, especially having to do
with the Samaritans, or any other who had never yet known nor received the
Gospel. Even those who say most for a coercive power to be put forth against
Heretics and Schismatics, do not allow of the compelling of Infidels,
Pagans, or Jews, by external punishments to receive the Gospel.

But now after all this debate upon the question in hand, and after all these
arguments for the affirmative and for the negative, some will happily desire
and expect some further modification and explanation of the matter in certain
positive conclusions or distinguishing assertions. For whose satisfaction I say,

First, there are five sorts of toleration proceeding from five different
principles. 1. Of indifferency. 2. Of policy. 3. Of pretended conscience and
equity. 4. Of necessity. 5. Of charity.

The first is when the Magistrate is a Nullifidian, Neutralist, and
Adiaphorist, esteeming as Gallio did, questions of the law and of the
Ordinances of Christ, to be of words and names, or things which he cares not
for, Acts 18. 14, 15.

The second is when the Magistrate tolerateth heretics and sectaries for his
own profit, or some such interest of policy, such as makes the Pope to
tolerate the Jews in Italy, yea in Rome it self, where they have their
synagogues, circumcision and liturgies, because his profit by them is greater
then by the very Courtizans; yea, besides their certain tribute, he does
sometimes impose on them a subsidy of ten thousand crowns extraordinary for
some service of the State, as Europae speculum, page 221, 222. has represented
to us. And whether the States of the united Provinces do not grant tolerations
upon the like interests of their own profit, I leave it to the judgment of
their own consciences.

The third is the toleration pleaded for here, by Mr Williams, the
compassionate Samaritane, etc. as if justice, equity, duty, and conscience
should make the Magistrate forbear all coercive power in matters of religion.
All these three I utterly condemn, and the former arguments do strongly
militate against them.

The fourth kind of toleration, Kekerman. curs. philos. disp. 35. probl. 14.
does agree to these words of the Jesuit Becan^s. Ta^^tsi princeps aut
Magistratus Catholicus omnibus modis impedire debeat, libertaetem rel^gionis,
^t dictum est: si tamen i^l facere non pessit sine graviori incommodo boni
publici, potest eam tolerare tanquam minus malum, ad evitandum majus, quod
^alioqui sequetur. Polan. com. in Dan. 3. 29. Magistratum Christimum d^cet
veram rel^gionem, etc. in (...) repub. constit^ere, and quidem solam, etc.
Incidunt lamen nonnunquam tempora quibus optimi Reges ac Magistratus, pa^is
publicae retinendae causi, vita^darumque intestinarum seditionum necessitate
a^ducti, c^gun^r exemplo peritorum (...) veluti tempestati cedere, and
superstitiosos errantesque f^rre: ut potius aliqua and respub. and rel^gio
habeatur quam nulla. Both these Writers do purposely frame this answer to the
question concerning toleration.
arising from necessity which has no law, may well be mourned for as an
affliction, it cannot be condemned as the Magistrates fault. Even a David may
have cause to complain that the sons of Zerviah are too strong for him. In such
cases as these, our Divines have given a relief to the conscience of the
Christian Magistrate, purging him of the guilt of this kind of toleration;
provided always, that he has endeavored so far as he can to extirpate
heresies, and to establish the true religion only. Which has nothing to do
with that principle now defended, that the Magistrate though he may never so
easily, yet he ought not nor cannot without sin exercise a coercive power in
matter of religion.

The fifth and last is that kind of toleration whereby the Magistrate when it
is in the power of his hand to punish and extirpate, yet having to do with
such of whom there is good hope either of reducing them by convincing their
judgments, or of uniting them to the Church by a safe accommodation of
differences, he grants them a Supersedeas; Calv. Be^ut. Error. Mich. Servet^.
(...) hic tene^^a est prudentia and moderatio, ne vel pro causa (...) tamul^u
(...) esserveant principes, vel immani sevit and sanguinum (...) imrua^.
or though there be no such grounds of hope concerning them, yet while he might
crush them with the foot of power, in Christian pity and moderation, he
forbeareth so far as may not be destructive to the peace and right government
of the Church, using his coercive power with such mixture of mercy as creates
no mischief to the rest of the Church. I speak not only of bearing with those
who are weak in the faith, Romans 15. 1. but of sparing even those who have
perverted the faith, so far as the word of God and rules of Christian
moderation would have severity tempered with mercy: that is (as has been said)
so far as is not destructive to the Churches peace, nor shakes the foundations
of the established form of Church government, and no further: these last two
kinds of toleration are allowed; the first three are wholly condemned.

My second distinction is concerning the punishments inflicted by the
Magistrate upon Heretics. (...). etc. Sed timor dei, aequitas and prudentia
judicis intelliget ex circumstantis quomodo punienda (...) sedactoribus and
seductis (...) and pervicax rebellio, (...) and minime (...).
They are either exterminative, or medicinal. Such as blaspheme God or Jesus
Christ, or who fall away themselves and seduce others to Idolatry, ought to be
utterly cut off according to the law of God. But as for other Heretics, they
are to be chastened with medicinal punishments as mulcts, imprisonments,
banishment, by which through Gods blessing they may be humbled, ashamed, and
reduced. Not that I think the proper end of civil and coercive punishments to
be the conversion and salvation of the Delinquent, (which is the end of Church
censures and of Excommunication it self) but that the right method of
proceeding does require that the Magistrate inflict the smaller punishments
first, that there may be place for the offenders bringing forth of fruits
worthy of repentance, and he may be at least reduced to external order and
obedience, being persuaded by the terror of civil power, which may and does
(when blessed of God) prove a preparation to free obedience, as the needle is
to the thread, or the law to the Gospel, servile fear to filial fear: and
that the Magistrate step not up to the highest justice till other punishments
have proved ineffectuall: which made Constantine punish the Heretics of his
time not with death, but with banishment, as is manifest by the Proem of the
Council of Nice. In such cases it may be said to the Heretic of the
Magistrate* He is the Minister of God to thee for good, more good I am sure,
Magisilla persequebatur Saram superbiende, quam illam (...): illa enim dominae
(...) i^juriam, ista impen^bat superbiae disciplina. Ep 50. Beza de Haeret. a
Magistr. puniend. Tacco quod toties adversus (...) istas and Circumcell^^nes
Augustinus testatur experientia ipsa ^doctus, pl^rosque ^o esse inge^io ut
nulla re magis quam severitate in efficio contincantur: a^^o ut quod initio
poenae formidine vitae unt, id ipsum postea libenter fugiant, and asperitatem
illam sibi saluberrimam faisse tes^entur.
then if the golden reins of civil justice should be loosed, and he suffered
to do what he list. Therefore Augustine likeneth this coercive punishing of
Heretics to Sarah her dealing roughly with Hagar, for her good and
humiliation. I conclude, connivence and indulgence to Heretics is a cruel
mercy: correction is a merciful severity, and a wholesome medicine, as well to
themselves as to the Church.

Thirdly, we must distinguish betwixt the coercive power of the Magistrare in
matters of religion, and the abuse of that power; when we justify the power,
we justify not the abuse of it; and when we condemn the abuse, we must not
therefore condemn the power. Acontius Stratag. Stat. li. 3. page 147. builds
much upon this notion, let a man imagine that his lot is fallen in those times
when the truth is persecuted by authority, when the Magistrate justifies the
wicked and condemns the godly, (which has been the more ordinary condition
of the Church) and then let him accordingly shape the resolution of the
question concerning the Magistrates punishing of Heretics. Will not a man
think (says he) it had been better that Heretics had not been punished, then
that upon pretense of coercive power against Heretics, the edge of the Civil
sword be turned toward the Preachers and Professors of the truth? But
notwithstanding of all this, truth must be truth, and justice must be justice,
abuse it who will. Parliaments and Synods have been many times enemies to the
truth, and have abused their power in matters of religion: must we therefore
deny the power of Parliaments and Synods? or must we cast off any ordinance of
God because of the abuse of it? If the thing were indifferent, the abuse might
take away the use: not so, when the thing is necessary. I add (which is well
observed by Calvin) when Jeremiah was accused and arraigned as worthy to die,
his defense is not this, You ought not to vindicate religion with the sword,
nor put any man to death for the cause of conscience, but this is it, Know ye
for a certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood
upon your selves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of
a truth the Lord has sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears,
Jer. 26. 15. Neither did ever the Apostles (though often persecuted) plead the
unlawfulness of persecuting men for heresy, but they pleaded the goodness of
their cause, and that they were no Heretics.

Fourthly, I distinguish betwixt bare opinions or speculations, and scandalous
or pernicious practices, as Mr Burton does in his Vindication of the
Independent Churches, page 70. You must distinguish, says he, betwixt men's
consciences and their practices. The conscience simply considered in it self is
for God, the Lord of the conscience alone to judge, as before. But for a man's
practices (of which alone man can take cognizance) if they be against any of
Gods Commandments of the the first or second Table; that appertains to the
civil Magistrate to punish, who is for this cause called Custos utriusque
Tabulae, Bullinger. ubi supra. Dum enim fides falsa in animo sepulta latet, no^
inficit quenquam nisi infidelem, puniri^^ potest infidelis: ubi autem fid^s
laten erumpit in blasphemias, ac deum palam ^^cerat and proximos quosque
infi^it, coercendus est blasphemus and seductor, ne malum latius serpat.
the keeper of both Tables: for this he cites Romans 13. 3, 4. and adds. So as
we see here what is the object of civil power, to wit actions good or bad, not
bare opinions, not thoughts, not conscience, but actions. And this is his
answer to the Interrogatory concerning the lawful coercive power of civil
Magistrates in suppressing heresies. In which he handsomely yields the point,
for who does advise the Parliament to punish men for their thoughts, or bare
opinions, or for conscience simply considered in it self? It is for preaching,
printing, spreading of dangerous opinions, for schismatic, pernicious and
scandalous practices, for drawing factions among the people contrary to the
Covenant, for resisting the reformation of religion, for lying and railing
against the Covenant, the Parliament, the assembly of Divines, or against the
reformed Churches.

Fifthly, we must distinguish the persons who are in the Error, whether
Heresiarchs and ringleaders, or whether followers only, and such as do
actiagere; whether schismatizing, or schismatized; whether more weak, or more
wilful; whether seducers, or seduced; whether pious, or profane, or
Pharisaicall; whether peaceable, moderate, calm, docile, or turbulent,
factious, fierce, railing, obstinate, incorrigible. So that when the thing is
brought from the Thesis to the Hypothesis, there is very much to be trusted to
the prudence, circumspection, The Papists fall very far shor^ in
distinguishing the persons, and proportioning the panishments. For instance see
Tannerus Theal. Schol Tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 8. dub. 6. n. 129. Hac poena
(mortis) ubi recepta est, affici, tumon nes r^lapsos, etiamsi couverti denuo
veli^t, tum omnes post admonitione pert^nace^, etiamsi nunquam relapsi sint.
A^^ veroqui nec re^apsi sunt, nec in pertinac^a perseverunt, nec ali^s
perverterunt, licet in r^gore mortem nihilominus promereantur, ordinary tamen
mortis poena assici non s^len^, sed carceris perpetui. As for that punishment
commonly called Irregularity, he will have it to fall not only upon the
Heretic himself but upon his sons and nephews. Ib. n. 111.
and observation of those who are in authority, to set apart those for
punishment who resist Reformation, as Jannes and Jambres did resist Moses, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and are said to trouble the Churches, Act. 15. 24 Gal. 1. 7. and 5.
12. and to trouble them more or less, as they are more or less troublers of
Israel. Let not the Magistrate fear to say to every Achan, Why have thou
troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day, Jos. 7. 25. Other seduced
ones the Magistrate is to command sub poena, and cause them stand to the
Covenant of God, as Josiah did, if they cannot be persuaded to do it
willingly. If the Magistrate miscarry in a misapplication of his coercive
power, let him answer to God and his conscience for his error. It is not in my
thoughts either to plead for or allow of the persecuting of pious and peaceable
men.

Sixthly, as the reformation and preservation of religion differ much from the
propagation of religion: so the coercive power put forth in the suppressing of
Heresy or Schism, is a thing of another nature then the compelling of
Infidels by the sword to receive the Gospel. Let the Pope, and the Spaniard,
and Mahomet propagate religion by the sword; that is not it I plead for. None
of the Gentiles was of old compelled to be circumcised, but being circumcised
he might be compelled to keep the Law of Moses. Also if strangers of the
Gentiles were sojourning or trading in the land of Israel, they might be
compelled to abstain from the public and scandalous breaking of the moral
Law, Nehem. 13. 16. 21. Exodus 20. 10. which things did belong to the
preservation, not to the propagation of religion.

Seventhly, to establish by a law the toleration, liberty and immunity of such
a Sect or Way, so as all that will may join in it, is a thing of most
dangerous consequence. But to permit such or so many persons of a Sect to enjoy
the liberty of their own consciences and practices, with such limitations as
shall be found necessary, is a tolerable Toleration, I mean a thing though not
to be wished, yet to be allowed. T. Livius Decad. 4 l^b. 9. p. 696. edit.
Basil. 1549. Datum deinde consulibus negotium est, ut omnia Bacchana^ia Romae
p^imum, deinde per to^am Italiam derac. e^t: extra quau si qua ibi vetusla^ara,
aut sig aum c^nsecratu^ esset; in reliquum deinde S. C. c^u^um est, ne qua
Bacchanalia Romae, neve in Ital a essent. Si qui^tale sacrum s^l^nne and
necessarium duceret, nec sine religione and piacul^se id omittere piss apud
Prae^orem urbanum profi^er^tur: Praetor Senatum consuleret si ci permissum
esset, cum ^n Senatu centum non minus esse^t, ita id sacrum faceret, dum ne
plus quinque sacrificio inttressent.
The Romans in their Heathenish way did put a difference betwixt these two:
when they abolished the Bacchanalian festivity and discharged it, they granted
no toleration to such as pleased still to observe it: only they were content
that some few upon leave first obtained from the Senate, and upon certain
conditions, might be permitted to continue their own practice, as to their
part.

Eighthly, there is also a great difference betwixt Toleration and
Accommodation. By accommodation I understand an agreement of dissenters with
the rest of the Church in practical conclusions, so that if any difference be,
it is in their principles, not in their practices, and so not obvious, apparent
and scandalous to people. I had rather go two miles in an Accommodation, (yea
as many as the word of God will suffer me) then one mile in a Toleration. For
in that way there is no schism, no rent in Israel, but the Lord one, and his
name one. In this way there is Temple against Temple, and Altar against Altar,
Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and they both against
Judah: a mi^esy from which the Lord deliver us. I do not deny but if a safe
and happy Accommodation be impossible, such a Toleration as I have formerly
spoken of, is not to be disallowed. But the Accommodation is a more excellent
way, and that which is to be rather embraced, yea endeavored for and followed
after, according to the Apostles rule, Phil. 3. 15, 16. (which Isidorus
Pelusiota did long since observe to be the best and happiest way of putting an
end to divisions and dissentions in the Church) Let us therefore as many as be
perfect be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

If it be said, Quorsum haec? what do I conclude from all this? It is to leave
this confirmed and sealed truth in the bosom of the High Court of Parliament,
and of all inferior Magistrates according to their place and interest, under
them, That it is their duty, without respect of persons, to endeavor the
extirpation of Heresy and Schism, and what soever shall be found contrary to
sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, left they partake in other men's
sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues; and that the Lord
may be one, and his name one in the three kingdoms: And to endeavor the
discovery of all such as have been or shall be evil instruments, by hindering
the reformation of Religion, or making any faction or partice amongst the
people, contrary to the solemn League and Covenant, that they may be brought
to public trial, and receive condign punishment, etc. Which as they had
great reason to swear and covenant, so now they have greater reason to
perform accordingly; and as it is in it self a duty, and we tied to it by the
oath of God, and his vows that are upon us, as ^^rai^ly as ever the sacrifice
to the horns of the altar: So we are to take special notice of the unhappy
consequents which follow upon our slacknesse, slownesse and sl^^thfulnesse, in
fulfilling that sacred Oath, viz. The hindering of uniformity, the continuing
and increasing of a rup^ure both in Church and State, the re^arding of
Reformation, the spreading and multiplying of Heresies and Sects, while every
one does what is right in his own eyes; the great scandal given both to
enemies and friends: to enemies, who are made to think worse of our Covenant,
because we do not perform it: The Review of the Covenant, printed at Oxford,
upbraideth us with this: that Heresy and Schism was never more suffered, and
less suppressed in London, then since we swear to endeavor the extirpation of
the same: To friends also, who are mightily stumbled by our promising so much,
and performing so little in this kind: Judicent conscientiae vestrae, quomodo
omne Haeresium genus inultum permitti, multifaria schismatum scmina impune
spargi, and prophana er^orum dogmata passim in vulgus proferri possint
i^^llacivitate, quae tam expresso, sancto and severo juramento sese coram D^o
devinxit, ad omnes errores, h^rese, schismata e domo D^i ejicienda.
which the Wallachian Classis in their late Letter to the Reverend Assembly of
Divines at Westminster (printed before Apollonius his Book) does sadly and
seriously lay to our consciences.

A Paraenetick.
BEfore I end, I have a word of exhortation for the five Apologists, and such
others as shall (I trust) agree with the Churches of both Kingdoms, not only
in one Confession of Faith, but in one Directorie of Worship. Me thinks I hear
them calling to me to say on. Et tu mi fili? said Caesar. And must you also
brethren, give a wound to the body of Christ? Do not, O do not involve your
selves in the plea of Toleration with the Separatists and Anabaptists. Do not
partake in their Separation, lest you partake in their suppression. Let us
hear no more Paraeneticks for Toleration, or liberty of Conscience: but as
many as you will for a just and merciful Accommodation: a thing mentioned by
that Author, pa. 3. but not sought after. If you be the Sons of peace, you
shall be characterized by this Shibboleth, you will call for Accommodation, not
for Toleration; for one way, Genesis 13. 7, 8.
not for two. Let there be no strife between us and you, for we be brethren:
and is not the Canaanite and the Perizzite yet in the land? O let it not be
told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Ashkelon, Let it not be said,
that there can be no unity in the Church without Prelacy. Brethren I charge you
by the Roes and by the Hind^s of the field, Cant. 2. 7.
that ye awake not nor stir up Jesus Christ till he please; for his rest is
sweet and glorious with his welbeloved. It shall be no grief of heart to you
afterward, that you have pleased others as well as your selves, and have
stretched your principles for an Accommodation in Church government, as well as
in Worship, and that for the Churches peace and edification; and that the ears
of our common enemies may tingle, Act. 9. 3^.
when it shall be said, The Churches of Christ in England have rest, and are
edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the joy of the Holy Ghost
are multiplied. Alas, how shall our divisions and contentions hinder the
preaching and learning of Christ, and the edifying one another in love! Is
Christ divided? says the Apostle. There is but one Christ, yea the head and
the body makes one Christ, so that you cannot divide the body without dividing
Christ. Is there so much as a seame in all Christ's garment? Is it not woven
throughout from the top to the bottom? Will you have one half of Israel to
follow Tibni, and another half to follow Omri? O brethren, we shall be one in
heaven, let us pack up differences in this place of our pilgrimage, the best
way we can. Nay, we will not despair of unity in this world. Jer. 32. 3^.
Has not God promised to give us one heart and one way? Ezech. 11. 19.
and that Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Isa.
11. 13. 14.
but they shall flee upon the shoulders of the Philistims toward the East, Joh.
17. 21.
they shall spoil them of the East together? Has not the Mediator (whom the
Father hears always) prayed that all his may be one? Brethren, it is not
impossible, pray for it, endeavor it, press hard toward the mark of
Accommodation. How much better is it that you be one with the other Reformed
Churches, though somewhat straightened and bound up, Pro. 17 1.
then to be divided though at full liberty and elbow-roome? Better is a dry
morsel and quietness therewith, then a house full of sacrifices with strife.
Does not the Solemn League and Covenant bind you sincerely, really, and
constantly to endeavor the nearest (mark nearest) uniformi^y and conjunction
in religion: and that you shall not suffer your selves directly or indirectly
to be withdrawn from this blessed union and conjunction. I know there is a
spirit of jealousy walking up and down. O beware of groundless fears and
apprehensions. Mat. 7. 1.
Judge not, lest you be judged. Judge not according to appearance, Joh. 7. 24.
but judge righteous judgment. Many false rumors and surmises there have
been concerning the Presbyterian principles, practices, designs, Expertus
l^quor. I am persuaded if there were but a right understanding one of another
intentions, the Accommodation I speak of would not be difficult. Brethren, if
you will not hearken to wholesome counsel, you shall be the more inexcusable. I
have in my eye that law of God, Lev. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Pro. 27. 6.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend. Therefore love the truth and peace.
Zech. 8. 19.
Yea, seek peace and pursue it.

Consider what I say. 1 Pet. 3. 11.
The Lord guide your feet in the way of peace. And O that God would put it in
your hearts to cry down Toleration, and to cry up Accommodation!

Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

