An ANSWER To a Popish Pamphlet, called The TOUCHSTONE of the Reformed
Gospel* made specially out of themselves.

MATH. 15 13. Every Plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. By WILLIAM GUILD, D. D. and Preacher of GODS WORD.

ABERDENE, Printed by JAMES BROWN 1656*

To the Right Honorable, SIR Thomas Mudie, PROVES^ of DUNDIE. John Scrimgeor,
William Duncan, Alexander Watson, and David Yeoman, Baylies: AND To the Remnant
of the Honorable COUNCIL of that Burgh. Grace and peace.
Right Honorable,
THe sedulitie of that Apostatick Church of Rome, who like these Locusts Revel.
9. swarm every where in our Country, and neighbor Nation, like Pharisees of
old to make proselyts to themselves, and misleade simple souls, should move
the Ministers of Christ, and Sions Watchmen, to be ashamed to be less
diligent in a better cause and for a better Master. These are dispersing their
popish Pamphlets, and every where, and every way, sowing secretly and
subdolouslie their pople and Tares in the Lords Field to seduce, And should not
we then be much more sedulo^s and solicitous every way, by word and write to
discover their fraud, to arm against Error, and labor to reduce. The
conscience of which duty for my part, has moved me to answer a late
Pamphlet, called. The Touchstone of the reformed Gospel. Which is in every
Papists hands, and almost whereof they vainly brag as being unanswerable. which
answer I have framed with as great brevitie and perspicuitie as I could, and
the better to stop the adversaries mouths, and detect their Wresting of
Scripture (as PETER speaks 2. Pet. 3. 16.) to their own destruction, I have
answered such scripturall places as he objecteth against us, either by the
exposition of Fathers for most part, orelse of their own Doctors, Neither of
which without impudence they can reject, and so cannot allege (as he does in
his Preface) That we chop and change the Text of Scripture by some
interpretation or other of our own.

These pains then which I have been pressed by sundry Reverend Brethren and
others, for the public good to put to the Press, I have (Right Honorable)
Dedicate to you, as a Testimony of my inteere affection both to your selves
personally, whose kindness and courtesy to my self I have ever at all
occasions found, as also to that Place wherein you govern, in regard of my
relation thereto, which moved me, as I did Dedicate the first Fruits of my
Studies in my youth long ago to the Magistracy and Council of Aberdene, the
place of my own Birth and breeding; so now to Dedicate the latter and ryper
Fruits of my old Age to the Magistracy and Council of the Birthplace and
breeding of my deceased Father of Godly Memory. For whose care of my
Education in Letters, as I did owe him all filial duty and gratitude while he
lived, so do I still in Remembrance of him carry all affectionat respect to
that place where he had his first being and upbringing, and whose prosperity I
shall ever heartlie wish, and that the Lord who has shown it hard things that
it might have said, call me Marah, may so sanctify to it that sad visitation,
and prosper that Place hereafter, that it may be Naomi, or as the Prophet
speaks (Isai. 61. 3.) He may give it Beauty for Ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. Which shall be
the hearty prayer of

Your most affectionat, in Christ to honor and serve you, WILLIAM GUILD.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
IN answering this TOUCH-STON of the reformed Gospel, I thought good to
advertise thee of some things. First, That the Impudency and malice of this
Pamphleter beside his Ignorance, is such, that to make the Protestant
profession the more odious to his Proselyts, he would charge our Profession
with such Doctrines and Tenets, which we never taught nor owned, So that whil
he fights against such, he beats the wind and fights only with his own
shadow, A few Instances in place of many are these. First,. 5. That we say,
That a man by his own private spirit, may rightly judge and interpret
Scripture. Next,. 6. That PETER'S Faith failled. 3.. 9. That the Church was not
ever to remain Catholic. 4.. 10. That the Churches unity is not necessary in
all points of Faith. 5.. 17. That the actions and sufferings of the Saints
serve for nothing to the Church 6.. 21. That good works are not necessary to
Salvation. 7.. 29. That Angels cannot help us. 8.. 39. That the bread in the
Supper of the LORD is but a figure. 9.. 45. That Fasting is nos grounded on
Scripture, nor causes any spiritual good. Thus heseeks not only unnecessarlie
to multiply feigned Controversies to deceive the simple, but also to make our
Profession the more odious to such as will believe him, imitating herin Satan
who by like lyeing would made God odious to our first Parents.

2 As if to name only, and by a false Master to multiply the citations of
Scripture and Fathers were enough, without the setting down the words of
either; he labors to seduce simple souls and make them believe, that both
Scriptures and Fathers were on their side only, whil as these who are
judicious and impartial may see that if the maine places of Scripture and
Fathers, whose words he sets down, be proven in this my ensueing. Answer to
be either altogether impertinent and wrested, or to make against himself. Then
much more may any judge the like of such places as he only points at, but
neither seteth down, nor dare set down their words. Wherefore 1. As for his
references to places of Scripture. First, They are such that if I should
particularly discuss their impertinencie, not only should his gross ignorace
and deceat be seen the more, (which is clearly enough discovered (I hope) by my
answer to such places whose words he sets down) but my Answer should also
grow to a hudge volume, whereas I strive to as great brevitie with perspicuitie
as I can, and that to make my Answer only to be a pocket and portable Book.
2. His references, (for ostentation only, and delusion of the simple) are so
numerous, as Page 20. for the Churches infallibility, where he brings but
four places of Scripture, whose words he sets down, he makes reference to 22.
places, most impertine^t and wrested. Like wise page 59 To prove good works to
be meritorious, he brings but four places of Scripture in likemanner, but
relats to 21. more, which a^ to no such purpose, the like he does p. 27. 51.
54. 63. 67. 72. and elswher, Next, as for his references to the testimonies of
Fathers, mentioning oftimes neither Book, Chapter no^ words, It were an
infinitely laborious task to answer, a man knows not what, and would likewise
accrease to a voluminous bulk, especially seeing either ignorantly, or (I may
justly fay) deceatfully and impudentlie he cites places in Fathers. 1. whom
themselves rejects as spurious and counterfite: For example. In the matter of
purgatory, he cites Ambrose upon 1. Cor. 3. whereas Bellarmin De
scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, testifies* That these are thought not be his
works and not without cause (says he) Again for Sacramental Coufession he
cites Clements Epistles, which Bellarmine in his Book of Ecclesiastical
Writters declares and proves to be counterfit.

2. He cites some works of Fathers, which are not in rerum natura, for
example, For invocation of Saints, he cites ATHANASIUS Sermon. de Annunciatione,
where-as there is no such piece either in his works or in Bellarmins index
which he has set down of his works, in his Book of ecclesiastical writters.
Again, For works of Supererogation he cites Gregory Nicen. 1. Morals cap. 5.
Whereas, he never write any such book, or is it to be found.

3. He cites some places of Fathers for him, who in these places are clear
against him. For example, for Man's abiiitie to keep the Law, he cites Jerome
his third book against the Pelagians, whereas in that whole book throughout,
he strongly proves the contrar.

4. He cites some places in Fathers so generally and looslie, that it were
impossible to find out such whereat he he aims. For example, For worshipping
of Images, he cites Jerome in his Epistle to Marcella, whereas Jerome write many
Epistles to Marcella, in none of which is any such thing to be found. 2.
concerning predestination he cites Augustine. lib. 1. de Civit, Dei. but no
Chapter or words, whereas there are 36. Chapters in that book. In likemanner he
cites for the same purpose Ambrose. lib. 2. de Cain and Abell, but no Chapter,
whereas there are ten in that book. 3. Against Assurance of Salvation, he cites
Jerome lib. 2. adv. Pelag. but no Chapter, whereas there are eleven long
Chapters in it. 4. For extreme Unction, he cites Augustine in speculo, but no
Chapter, whereas there are 33. Chapters in that book* I could instance a number
more, were not to avoid prolixitie. whereby any indifferent man may see how
fraudulently these men deal, by a false Muster of Scriptures and Fathers to
delude the simple, and make them believe that both these ar on their side,
whereas I shall show (Godwilling) that there is no such thing, and whatsoever
is set down in this TOUCHSTONE, to be either grossly mistaken, wilfully
perverted, slanderously imputed, or so weaklie performed, that he has relied
not so much on the strength of his Cause, as on the weakness and tractablenes of
his simple and ungrounded Proselyts, whom they persuade, fide implicit^, to
take all upon Trust, and Believe as the Church believes, and that they are the
Church, contrar to that Berean practice Act. 17. 11. And that Apostolical
precept. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Beloved, Believe not every Spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out in the World,
at whose credulity I could not but wonder, how they can be catched in such
Cobweb snares, and be seduced by such weak arguments in the time of
Gospell-light and means of resolution, were not that (as the Apostle speaks
2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.) That they are given over by the deceivablenes of
unrighteousnes to believe lies, because they received not the love of the
Truth, and therefore as BHRNARD says of such. Sermon. 66. in CANTICA, They are
not convinced with reason, because they understand not, nor by Authorities (to
wit of Scripture) because they receive them not (says he) nor are they moved
by persuasion, because they are perverse and yields not. For all which
notwithstanding, my hearty wish shall be, that as the LORD did to PAULL, Act.
9. 18. the scales of error and ignorance may likewise fall from their eyes,
that GOD may have Glory, His Church joy in their conversion, and their own
souls salvation in the Day of their account,

Amen.
AN ANSWER To A Popish PAMPHLET Called The Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel.
AND. 1. To the Preface.
IN the Preface the Pamphletter First glorying that he confounds Us by our
own Bible, most impudentlie First begins with a General accusing of the
Translation thereof, in a number of gross corruptions and falsifications,
whereof notwithstanding he instances not one, nor is able to do. Whereunto
therefore I shall answer not only by retortion in the general, but in
particulare shall instance in their vulgar Latin Translation whereof He
speaks, and so much extolleth as free of the like. First, Gross corrupting
of the Text, contrary to the Original. 2 Adding to the Text of Scripture. 3.
Taking from the same, both contrar to that sad commination Revel. 22. 19. and
4. which is worst of all, clear contradicting of Scripture and in place of a
Multitud of each sort, I shall only for brevities sake bring a few examples.

1. Then of corrupting Scripture* Genesis 3. 15. where it is spoken of Christ as
the seed of the woman. It shall bruise thy head. It is said in their vulgar
Translation, She shall bruise thy head, blasphemouslie (as their use is)
ascribing to the virgin Marie the victory over Satan in the work of our
Redemption. Which is only proper to CHRIST. Likewise Heb. 13. 16. where it is
said of Doing good and communicating, that with such sacrifices God is well
pleased In their Translation, for establishing of the merit of works, it is
said, For with such sacrifices God is promerited. also Romans 1. 4. where it is
said, That CHRIST was declared to be the Son of GOD, It is said in their
Translation, that He was predestinat to be the Son of GOD. which is a lurd
error.

2. Of adding to Scripture, Act. 5. 15. is adduced in this Touch-ston, to prove
miraculous virtue of Relics, to which these words are added, which are not in
the Original, That they might be delivered from their infirmities. Next, unto
these words of our Savior, Math. 26. 26. This is my Body. In their conjuring
of consecrating of the bread, they add a fifth word, (enim) or (for) Which they
make operative in producing their Transsuhstantiation. And the fyve words to be
answereable to such mysteries as Gabriel Biel has set down in the like number
of fyve in his 38. lecture of the Canon of the Mass, Fol. 65.

3. Of taking from the Scripture. ps. 99. 5. It is said according to the
original. Worship at His Footstool, as it is in likemanner said verse 9.
Worship at His holy Hill, and yet in their Translation, for the maintayning of
their adoration of images, they take out the word (at) and say Worship ye His
footstool. Next, Romans 11. 6. the words, But if it be of works, then no more
of grace, otherwise work is no more work, ar in their Translation quyte purged
out, because they make so clearlie against their Justification by works. Again
Heb, 1. 3. it is said, having by himself purged our sins, in their
Translation, these words (by Himself,) are taken out, to make place thereby to
men's satisfactions. Likewise, Math. 9. 13. where it is said, I came not to call
the righteous but sinners to Repentance, these words (to repentance) are taken
out, which show the end of Christ's coming and calling of sinners, I might
instance many more places, as Ioh. 5. 16. 1. Cor. 15. 54, where a whole
sentence is rased out, but these shall

4. Which is grossest of all, I shall instance where their Translation is
directly contrary and contradictory to the Original, as 1. Gen, 49. 24. it
is said concerning JOSEPH, The arms of his hands were made strong, but in
their vulgar Translation, the words are, The arms of his hands were made
weak. Next JOSHUA 5. 6. it is said, Unto whom the LORD did swear that he
would not show them the Land, but in their Translation it is quyte contrar,
That he would show them the Land. Again, JOSHUA 11. 19. it is said, There was
not a City that made peace with the Children of Israel, save the Hivits, but
in their Translation is said the contrar, There was no City which did not
render, or make peace. Likewise, Psalm. 68. 22. it is said, I will bring my
people again from the deepes of the sea, but the co^trar is in their,
Translation, saying, I will bring my people down to the deepths of the sea. In
likemanner in the new Testament, 1. Cor. 15. 51. it is said, We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed, but in their Translation it is thus, We
shall indeed all rise again, but we shall not all be changed. Where we see
gross alteration, as well as contradiction. And again verse 55. where it is
said, O Death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? We see again
in their Translation gross alteration, the words being these, Death where is
thy victory? Death where is thysting? and no word of the grave at all. The like
of which gross corruptions, adding to Gods Word, taking from it, and
contradicting the same, I defy all the Iesults, Priests, and papists in the
World to challenge in our Translations.

Yea the more yet to convince this Pamphleter, and all Romanists whatsoever,
concerning the vi^iositie of their vulgar Translation, (as is said, Deuteronomy. 32.
31. Even our Enemies being Judges) I shall instance only two or three
examples, in place of many) wherein themselves in their English Rhemes
Translation of the new Testament are forced to aknowledge the vitiositie of
their vulgar latin, by departing therefra, and translating these places just
as we do. as 1. whereas Ioh. 12. 35. in their vulgar latin the words are,
adhuc modicum lumen in vobis est, that is, Yet a little while the light is in
you, the Rhemists themselves translate it thus, as we do, and according to the
Original, Yet a little while, the light is with you. Next, Romans 12. 19.
whereas in the vulgar latin it is, Non vosipsos defendentes, that is, not
defending your selves, against reason and scripture forbidding lawful defense,
the Rhemists translate as we do, Not revenging your selves. Again 1. Cor. 15.
34. whereas in the vulgar latin it is, ad reverentiam vobis loquor, that is,
I speak it to your reverence or honor, the Rhemists translate as we do,
according to the Original, I speak to your shame.

The next thing to which in his Preface I am to answer, is concerning the
sense and meaning of the places of Scripture contraverted, which he says is,
The ever constant and uniforme judgment of the Church and ancient Fathers, who
in every age since CHRIST, have understood the point in question in that sense
(says he) which Catholics now do. Conform therefore to these his words let
us put to this Touchstone, (which he calls the Rule of faith) some chief
points of Popery, and see whether they agree with Scripture, as the same is
expounded by the whole stream of the ancient fathers in the primitive Church,
who have written thereon, or if they disagree not as far therefra, as Light
does from darkness, As.

1. To begin with the main point of Popery, The Popes supremacy, which the
Pamphleter says is grounded on Math. 16. 18. Thou art Peter and upon this
rock w^ll I build my Church, understanding Peter to be this rock whereof Christ
speaks, and yet by the constant and unanimous judgment of the ancient
Fathers and Church in their time, that Text imports no such papal
supremacy, nor that, by that rock Peter is understood, but either CHRIST
himself, or that faith of CHRIST whereof Peter made confession. As 1. All the
greek Fathers, and the Eastern or greek Church, who oppose papal supremacy
even unto this day, and in particulare to speak b^^h of greek and latin
Fathers, Origin Tract. 1. in Math. 16, Chrysostom Tom. 3. sermon. de pentecoste,
Isidorus Pelusiota his disciple, lib. 5. Epist. 55. Theophylact in Math. 16.
Augustine. Tract. 10. in 1. Epist. Johannis. and Tract. 124. in Johan. Cyprian.
de unitate Ecclesiae. Ambrose in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 2. Hilare lib. 6. de de
Trinit. and Pope Gregory himself, Moral. in Job. lib. 28. cap. 8. and many
more, which consent of Fathers made Cardinal Cusanus to say, de concord;
Cathol. lib. 2. c. 13. although it was said to Peter, Thou art Peter and upon this
rock I will build my Church, yet by this rock, (says he) we understand CHRIST
himself, whom he confesses, and if Peter were to be understood by this rock,
as a ground-stone of the Church according to S. Jerome, are not (says he) the
rest of the Apostles ground-stones of the Church inlikemanner? of whom it is
spoken in the Revelation. Where, by the Twelve stones of the foundation of that
City Jernsalem, which is the holy Church, no man doubts (says he) but all
the Apostle: are to be understood, And therefore says that same Cardinal) we
know that Peter received no more power from Christ than the other Apostles, but
were the self same that Peter was (says Cyprian de Uni. eccles.) endued with
a-lyke fellowship ^oth of honor and power.

And not only does the forenamed fathers expound that place of Matthew as is
said, severally, but the whole Fathers co^veened in famous general and
e^umenicall Councels, have decreed against any such Papal supremacy, which
Romanists would prove by that wrested place of Scripture, as 1. That first and
famous Council of Nice, anno. 325. of 318. Bishops in the 6. Cannon thereof.
2. The Council of Constantinople, anno 380. of 150. Bishops, Can. 5. which as
Bellarmin confesses (pref. de Romans pont.) withstood altogether any such
suptemacie. 3. The Council of Ephesus, anno 434. of 200. Bishops cap. 4. and
the last is the 4. Council of Chalcedon, anno 454. of 430. Bishops, which
decreed peremptorly Act. 16. against any such supremacy, as Bellvrmin grants
in in his preface forenamed, but (non sine fraud) or, not without deceat,
(says he) such is popish pretended reverence of Antiquity when it makes
against them. And yet the present Roman Church does so far disagree from
this exposition of Scripture which they pretend for papal supremacy, and from
the famous Counsels and Fathers forenamed who opposed the same, as not to
adhere to their sense of that place of Matthew, or to their judgment of papal
supremacy were now a-dayes damnable and rank heresy.

2. Next to come to that proud doctrine of merit, against which is that clear
Text of scripture, Romans 6. 23. where it is said, The wages of sin is death,
but Life Eternal is the gift of GOD. Which by the unanimous judgment of the
ancient fathers and Church, is acknowledged to be against merits, therefore
says their own Cassander (consult. art. 6.) with a full consent all the
ancient Fathers deliver, that our whole confidence and hope both of pardon and
eternal life is to be placed in the only mercy of GOD, and merit of Christ.
As we see particularly in ORGEN. l. 4. in Romans cap. 4. Hilare in Math. can. 20.
Ambrose in psalm. 118. Octon. 20. Et in exhortatione ad virgins. Basil. in
psalm. 52. and 114. Jerome lib. 17. in Isaiam cap. 64. Chrisostom. in Coloss.
hom. 2. Augustine in psalm. 36. con. 2. and psalm. 32 con. 1. and psalm. 83. circa
fine^, As also psalm. 109 ^irca i^itiu^. Cyril also of Alexandria, hom. 4.
paschas. Gregory the first in psalm. 7. poenit. Fulgentius ad Moninum lib. 1.
cap. 10. and Haymo in psalm. 132. 1. Bernard ser. 1. in annunc. Mariae, and many
more. And yet the present Roman Church differs so far from Scripture, and
the stream of Antiquity expounding the same in this point, That the Council
of Trent in the decree of the sixth Session thereof, can. 32. has accursed all
those that hold not the doctrine of man's meriting of eternal life, by his own
good works, and the Rhemists declare on Heb. 6. 10. That they are so fully
worthy of eternal life and are the cause of salvation, that God should be
unjust, if he rendered not heaven for them.

3. For perfection of scripture, against doctrinall traditions, that place Gal.
1. 8. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other, beside that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed by the constant and unanimous
judgment of the Church, and all ancient Fathers that ever write on that place,
the same is expounded to be the scriptures of the old and new Testament only,
beside which no other thing ought to be taught under pain of a curse, as Basil
in his sum of his Moralls 72. expounds, so likewise Augustine in his third
book against Petilian cap. 6. saying, If an Angel from heaven preach to you
any thing besides that, which is in the scriptures of the Law and Gospel, which
ye have received, let him be accursed (says the Apostle) so also Vincen.
Lyrinen. adv. haeres. c. 35. and 10. Neither says the Apostle, if they teach
any thing contrar or repugnant (says Chrysostom and Theophylact. on that
place) but if they teach never so small a point beside that, that is add never
so little more then that, let him be accursed. And yet so far does the
present Roman Church disagree from the true meaning of this Text of scripture
which is given thereon, by the whole stream of antiquity in this point, that
she has decreed contrar thereunto in the Council of Trent for doctrinall
unwritten traditions, 1. decreto sess. 4.

4. Against that idolatrous worshipping and prayer to Angels, that Text Coloss.
2. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntare humility and
worshipping of Angels. is expounded not only by the ancient Fathers singly
writing thereon, as condemning all prayer to be made to them, as we see in
Chrisostom. in Coloss. 2. hom. 9. and in Origin. l. 7. and 8. contra Celsum,
and others. but likewise by a whole Council conveened together (as Theodoret
testifies on Coloss 2.) saying, The Council which conveened at Laodicea the
chief city of Phrygia, by a law did forbid prayer to Angels, condemning the
same as Idolatry, whereby the communion both of Christ and his Church was
forsaken, and therefore accursing the practisers thereof, Can. 35. saying. if
any man be found to give himself to this private idolatry, let him be
accursed. And yet the present Roman Church does so far disagree from this
Apostolical precept, expounded by an unanimous consent of ancient Fathers
conveened in Council, that she will have prayers put up to Angels and
consequently she is declared Idolatrous and accursed.

5. I could instance many more places in points co^troverted, wherein they
admit not that sense which the stream of ancient Fathers gives thereon, as
Coloss. 3. where it is said, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly. Which
by the constant and unanimous exposition of Fathers, is for peoples reading and
knowledge of scripture, as we see in Chrysostom hom. 9. ^n Coloss. and 10. in
Johan, Augustine sermon. 55. de tempore. Theodoret lib. 5. de Cur. graec. affect.
and others; which made their late Bishope Espenceus, on Tit. 2. to say, By the
doctrine of the Apostle, and conform practice of of the primitive Church, it
is manifest that of old the reading of scripture was permitted to people, and
as venerable Beda shows in his third book of the English ecclesiastical
history. cap. 5. but the forenamed shall suffice to show that in the points
controverted, they admit not that to be the rule of faith, which they pretend
to be the rule, but when it makes against them, they disdainfully or
impudentlie does reject the same.

Lastly* As for his Thrasonick brags, wherein he exceeds all moderation and
truth, I pass by the^, as not worthy of any answer, but that which in
realitie and a solid way shall be seen (God willing) in this ensueing reply,
to discover his frothy emptines and fraud, to any who is but indifferent and
judicious, howsoever to others the blinded and imbrutished proselyts of such,
every thing that comes from them is counted as of old the Oracles of Delphos
were, or as Diana was cried up by the confused multitude, Act. 19. 34. saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

AN ANSWER To the Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel.
1. That there is not in the Church one, and that, an infallable rule for
understanding the holy Scriptures, and conserving of Unity in matters of says.
THis assertion of our's (as he calls it) is contrary (says he) to the
express words of our own Bible, which he names thereafter. To whom I answer
1. In general, that he begins with a gross cal^mny, affirming that to be
our assertion which is not, for we deny not to be in the Church an infallable
rule of faith, or for understanding the Scriptures, and conserving unity in
the matters of faith, as our Confession of faith shows, anno 1581. art. 18.
but affirms this rule of faith to be the Scripture it self, which is
therefore called the Canon or rule of Scripture, and that the right
understanding thereof in all matters of faith is to be had from the scripture
it self, and that analogy of faith clearlie set down therein or deryved
therefra. as Pope Clement speaks (did. 37. cap. 14.) saying that we should,
Ex ipsis Scripturis sens^m capere veritatis, that is, Take the meaning of the
Truth out of the Scriptures themselves, which he calls there, integram and
firmam regulam veritatis, or, The full and firm rule of Truth.

Next for answer to him in particulare, he adduceth four places of Scripture
most impertinent, which nowise makes against any assertion of ours, but
whereby he only beats the wind, These are 1. Ro^. 12. 2. where it is said,
Having then gifts according to the grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy
according to the proportion of faith. the second is, Phil. 3. 16, which says,
Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained, let us mind the same thing.
the third is, Gal. 6. 16. which says, And as many as walk according to this
rule, peace be on them and mercy. the fourth is, 1. Cor. 11. 16. which says,
We have no such custom nor the Churches of God. The First, proving only (as
their own Estius Professor at Duay shows) that all the doctrine of Teachers
should be squared according to the rule and analogy of faith, which we also
mayntaine and is contained in Scripture, the second (as the same Estius
shows) exhorts only to Christian Unity and concord, The third (as the
same Estius likewise out of Chrysostom and Theophylact proves) that the
Apostle speaks not there of the rule of doctrine, but of life, which verse
15. he calls the new creature, or holiness, to which he exhorts them, and
as to that which he subjoyneth 2. Cor. 10. 15. as Cardinal Cajetan, Catharinus
and the ordinary gloss expounds, The Apostle (taking the Metaphor from
workme^ to whom severally as by rule o^ line their task is measured out) does
understand the limits only of his Apostolical mission and jurisdiction, which
was to the Gentiles, of whom the Corinthians were a part, as PETER was to the
Jews specially, and as we see Gal. 2. 7. And the fourth (as Estius also
shows) speaks only that the custom of the Church is not to be
contentious.

As for the testimonies of Fathers which he brings here, and along this
whole Pamphlet, First, I may answer to them in general, not in my words, but
in their own Gabriel Biels on the Canon of the Mass lect. 41. saying, Their
authority co^pelleth no man to assent to their sayings, except (says he) they
be grounded on holy Scripture and divine reveltion. Therefore before this be
manifest, it is lawful to control their sayings, (says he) and to be of a
contrary judgment, wherefore, says S. Jerome, If I say any thing which I
shall not prove by one of the two Testaments, let me not be believed. (no
word then of traditions) and S. Augustine (says he) in his 8. Epistle to
Jerome speaks thus, saying, This honor is only to be given to the holy
canonick Scriptures, that whatsoever they say, therefore it must be believed
to be true, but as for others, I read them only upon this condition, that
however famous the^ be for holiness or learning, I think it not true therefore,
because they have thought so, until I be otherwise persuaded by canonick
Scriptures or probable reasons that they have not erred from the Truth. and
which is more (says he) we see that one holy father sometimes contradicts
another, as holy Cyprian contradicts Augustine concerning the rebaptising of
Heretics and Scismaticks, as likewise he contradicts Jerome concerning
Paul's reprehending of Peter, and so of many other like examples I might speak
(says he.) These are all their own B^e^s words, and what little reckning
Jesuits make of Fathers or their exposition of Scripture when they disagree
with them, and jump with those whom they call Calvinists, I will show by this
one instance, Maldonat. on Ioh. 6. 62. brings Augustins exposition of that
place, (which is also Beda and Ruperts exposition) and with it another
exposition whereof he says, He will not deny that he has no other man as
Author thereof, but yet (says he) I will rather approve it than Augustins
which of all other is the most probable, because that this is more repugnant to
the meaning of the Calvinists. But not taking advantage either of Biels words,
or of these I come in particulare to Vincentius Lyrinensis words which he
brings, saying, That the line of Prophetical and Apostolical exposition
should be directed according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic
sense, but he forgets the words of that ancient Author, both before and after
cap. 2. and 35. where he says before these words. That the Scripture is a
perfect rule, full, and more than sufficient for decision of al controversies
in points of faith, with which therefore all Ecclesiastical and Catholic
sense must agree, and that only must be held which has been believed ever,
every where, and by all. And so this testimony makes nothing against us, and
to which rule and words of Vincentius if we will apply the points of Popery,
as I have shown by five particulars in answer to the Preface, we shall find
them quyte contrary and disagreeable, yea, and to be only mere novelties.

And albeit with Vincentius, Bellar. (lib. 4. de verbo c. 7.. ad hunc.) as also
the Jesuit S^lmeron in 1. Johan. 3. disp. 25.. 30) affirm That when he Fathers
all of the^, or almost all agree in one judge-ment, or in the exposition of any
place of the scripture, that then they gi^e a sure and inevitable argument of
Catholic verity and of a sure and sound exposition of Scripture, yet
according to this rule, let trial be (beside the former five) but in this one
point of popery, to wit, The Virgin Mari's conception without sin (decreed
in the Council of Trent, decreto 5. Sess. 5.) whether it be of Catholic
verity or not, and (I hope) it shall be found but a lurd error and a
blafphemous noveltie. And that they go closs and cross against the unanimous
exposition of Scripture which all the Fathers give and agree therein. For
example Romans 5. 12. It is said of Adam. In who^ all have sinned. from which
text all the holy fathers with one mouth (says their Bishop Canus loc.
theol. lib. 7. cap. 1. affirms the blessed virgin to have been conceived in
original sin, of whom he cites 18. and their words in particular, The like
does Cardinal cajetan in his treatise concerning this matter which he wrote to
Pope Ieo the tenth (^om. 2. opusc. tract. 1. cap. 5.) The like also does the
master of sentences witness, lib. 3. did. 3. saying, It may be truly said,
and we must believe according to the unanimous testimonies of the holy fathers,
that the flesh which Christ took was formerly subject to sin, as the rest of
the Virgins flesh, but was sanctified and made pure by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, therefore Bernard in his 174. Epistle to the channons of Lions,
having disputed that point Learnedly, Concludes, that Christ only being
excepted, of all others that have been borne of Adam, it may be said, which
humbly and truly (says he) David says of himself, I was shapen in iniquity
and in sin did my mother conceive me, and therefore in the same place he
calls the feast of her conception without sin, a presumptious noveltie, the
mother of rashness, the sister of superstition, and daughter of inconstancy.
and whosoever denies that all others without exception, (except Christ) are
conceived in sin, he is found (says Augustine lib. 5. con^. Julian. cap. 9.)
to be a detestable heretic, because herby (as Salmeron testifies in Romans 5.
disp. 49.) Aquinas says, that this were to equal the virgin Mary with Christ
himself.

And yet notwithstanding of so clear a place of scripture, so unanimously
expounded by all the ancient fathers, which Billarmin and Salmeron calls a
sure and inevitable argument of catholic verity, and soundexposition of
scripture.

Yet for all this (says Bellarmin co^tradicting himself, lib. 4. de amissa
gratia cap. 15.. ab hac) seeing the Council of Trent has decreed the contrary,
as likewise Pope Sextus 4. and Pius 5. they are not to be accounted catholics
that esteems this an error, and consequently all the ancient fathers, are not
to be accounted Catholics, nor Cardinal Cajetan, bishop Canus nor there master
of sentences, and canonized Aquinas, and many more besides.

We see then howsoever they pretend tradition, or the unanimous consent of
fathers to be the rule of faith, or exposition of the scripture, yet when they
please, and finds the same displeasing to them, they vilyfie and rejects the
same, therefore thus says the Jesuit Valentia, in the last chapter of the 5.
book of his analysis, that any by gone tradition without the authority of the
present Church is not a sufficient judge ^f controversies of faith. So also
speaks Cardinal Cajetan in the beginning of his comentars on Genesis, as also
Baronius tom. 1. annal. anno 34. number. 213.

And if we will consider what certainty, or rather what fluctuating uncertantie
is in the modern sense, or exposition that the present Roman Church now puts
upon scripture, whereon to build their faith, Let Cardinal Cusanus words
testyfie (epist. 2. ad Bohemos page 833. and 838.) who says, That one time
the Church iuterprets the Scripture one way, and at another time another way,
and that the understanding of the scripture, must follow her practice, and when
she changes her judgment, God also changes his, then which, I know not what
can be grearer blasphemy.

Next, for answer to that testimony which he brings out of Tertullian, where
he says, we admit not our Adversaries to dispute out of scripture, till thy
can show who their ancessors were, and from whom they received the scriptures.
These words of Tertullian makes no ways against us, whereby he denies not
that the scripture is the rule of faith, or of disputes concerning the same, as
he shows, against hermogenes, cap. 22. saying, let these of Hermogenes shop
show that it is written, and if it be not written let them fear that woe which
is allotted to such as add or take away. but he shows only, that
Apostolical churches (and not Rome only) which were founded by them, and to
that time had kept the truth which they had delivered in the scriptures,
committed to them, could only lay best claym to them, which heretics who
dissented from these scriptures and apostolical churches of these primitive
times could not do.

As for Ireneus, whom only he cites, but not his words, he has nothing in
that place that favors tradition, as an unwritten rule of faith, for so he
should not agree with himself, who says lib. 3. cap. 2. that these things
which are to be shown in the scriptures, can not be made manifest but by the
scriptures themselves, and lib. 3. cap. 1. That the scriptures is that which is
the foundation and pillar of our faith, and not tradition or any unwritten rule.

Tertullian also that he is of the same mind, I have shown out of the for^cited
testimony, concerning Hermogenes, and who in that same 22. Chapter. says,
that he adoreth the fullnes of scripture.

Chrysostom also, hom. 3. in. 2. cor. calls it a most exact rule and
balance, which it could not be, if either it were A partial rule only (as
Bellarmin calls it) or that tradition were the rule of faith.

A^gustin also de bono viduitatis, cap 1. calls it, a fixed and sure rule, in
opposition (as it were) to unsure tradition.

Yea Bellarmin himself (lib. 1. de verbo, cap. 2.) having shown that the
rule of our faith should have these two properties first, that it should be
most sure (which tradition can not be, luke 1. 4. (2. pet* 1. 19.) and 2. most
known, he concludes, that the scripture is the most sure and best known rule
both of faith and manners.

But what shall I speak of a Cardinal, when a Pope, to wit Clement in his
first book of recognitions, cited, did. 37. cap. relatum calls the
scripture a firm and sound rule of faith.

Basil also hom. 13. in Genesis says, these things which may seem to be
ambiguous and obscure in some places of the holy scripture, must be explained
by these which elsewhere are more plain and manifest.

Augustine likewise, cont. Crescon. Lib. 2. cap. 31. speaking of an epistle of
Ciprians, I am not bound (says he) to the authority of this epistle, because
I account not Ciprians writting, as canonical, but I examine them by these
that are canonical, and that which is agreeable in them to the authority of
divine scriptures, I receive, and that which is not agreeable, I refuse. Here
then we see that Augustine would have the scriptures only to be the rule of
faith, and of divine authority.

2 THat in matters of faith we must not rely on the judge-ment of the Church
or her Pastors.
Which he says is contrary to Math. 23. 2. Where the jewish people are
commanded by Christ, To observe all whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees did
bidd the^ observe, not only (says he) in some principal matters, but in all
whatsoever without distinction or limitation. For answer to whom, I can not
admire enough the man's impudency or ignorance, seeing First, our Savior
himself shows the contrary, where, Math. 16. 6. 12. lie bids his disciples
and others, Beware of their leaven, which be expounds to be their false
doctrine. 2. The Author of the ordinary gloss (with whom agrees Lyra) on
Deuteronomy. 17. 10 says, Note, that the Lord requires, that whatsoever the Priest
does teach thee according to the Law do thou, because otherwise thou art not to
obey them. Ferus also a spanish Friar and Preacher at Mentz. on this place
speaks thus, Christ would not that they should receive all the doctrines of
the Pharisees (says he) but so far only as they agreed with Gods Law, else
they should have admitted all the false glosses which our Savior refuteth,
Math. 5. from verse 21. to the end. To this also agrees the Jesuit Maldonat
upon this place, And that Christ spoke not of their own doctrine, but of Moses
doctrine and the Law which they were to deliver. The publication only being
theirs, but the doctrine the Lords; as we see Math. 28. 19.

The next place which he brings is Luke 10. 16. where our Savior says to
his Apostles, He that hears you hears me. To which my former answer may
suffice. Therefore also says Ferus, It is heerby evident that the Apostles,
themselves, were to be heard in so far only as they were Apostles, that is.
Did Christ's message, and preached and taught what he commanded them, but if
they should teach otherwise, or any doctrine contrary to Christ's, then they
were not Apostles, but seducers (says he) and therefore not to be heard.

His third place is Math. 16. 19. where our Savior says to Peter, What
soever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. giving us to
understand (says he) that not only the bands of sins, but all other knots
and difficulties in matters of faith are to be loosed by S. Peter and his
successors. To whom I answer 1. Their own Cardinal Cusanus speaks thus de
concord. Cathol. lib. 2. cap. 13. There was nothing said to Peter, which was
not said to all the rest Likewise, for as it was said to Peter, whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, etc. was it not said also to all the rest, whatsoever ye
bind on earth, and^. (says he) whence it will follow that all knots and
difficulties in matters of faith are to be loosed by the successors of all the
rest of the Apostles wheresoever, as well as by S. Peter's pretended
successors. Next if by loosing the solving of all doubts and difficulties in
matters of faith be meaned, then by binding (which is co^trar to loosing) the
making of knots and difficulties in matters of faith must be meaned, whernone
were before, which is absurd to affirm. And which when Peter's successors
does on earth, God must also do the same in heaven. As Cardinal Cusanus says
Epist. 2. ad Bohemos, p, 838. That when the Church changes her judgment, God
also changes his. Which is open blasphemy.

3 THat the Scriptures ar easy to be understood, and therefore, none ought to
be restrained from reading them.
Which says he is contrary to the express words of 2. Pet. 3. 16. Where
Peter speaking of Paul's Epistles, says In which are some things hard to be
understood. To which I answer. 1. That by saying some things ar hard to be
understood, it follows, that the rest (which is the greater part) are not
hard but easy to be understood, For the exception of some only, clears the
rest from obscurity, therefore from the greater part of the Scripture easy to
be understood which concern faith and manners necessary to salvation, we
rather conclude the plainness of Scripture^ and that people should read the
same, then because some things are hard to be understood, to put obscurity
upon the whole Scripture, and therefore to debar people from reading thereof.
Cheiflie seeing not only Augustine lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 9. But
Bellarmin also consenting to Augustins words, lib. 4. de verbo cap. 11.. ultimo
testifies, That all doctrines which are simply necessary for all men to
salvation are plainly set down in scripture, where upon (speaking to the
people in his 55. sermon. de tempore, he says, Neither let it suffice you
that ye hear the holy Scriptures read in the Church, but also in your own
houses either read the^ your selves, or desire others to read them. And so
likewise says Chrysostom con. 32. de Lazaro and hom. 2. in Math.

The next place which he bringes is Act. 8. 30. where Philip says to the
Eunuch. Understands thou what thou reads? who said how can I without a
guide? Whereunto I answer, 1. This place was a prophecy, and such are hard to
be understood, till they be fulfilled, and the Eunuch was a Proselyte and a
Novice only in religion, therefore from one place which was prophetical and
dark to a Novice in religion, to conclude that the Scriptures in whole are dark
and obscure, and therefore not to be read by people, is an absurd consequence.
Yea this place rather makes against papists, seeing the Eunuchs practice here
was reading of the Scripture, which Philip did not reprehend in him (as popish
Priests would have done) but only explaineth unto him the Prophecy, of whom it
was meaned, and that it was* fulfilled by Christ's suffering, and so makes him
thereby to be a Christian convert, the occasion of which benefit, the reading
of the Scripture did afford unto him. Whereupon says their own Carthusian,
Great was the care of that Heathen man (says he) and his diligence
condemns our negligence in learning holy Scriptures. Therefore also
Chrysostom gives this direction to people in reading holy scriptures, saying,
(in his 10. homily on John.) That which is easy to be understood get by
heart, and these things that are obscure, read the^ over often, and if by
doing so, you cannot findout the meaning, go to thy teacher.

The third place which he brings is, Luke, 24. 25. where Christ expounds to
his Disciples al things concerning himself. To which I answer, that this
makes nothing against peoples reading of scripture, commanded by Christ
himselse, John 5. 39. enjoined by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 17. Coloss. 3. 16. and
for which Timothy was commended, 2. Tim. 3 15. That from a child he had known
the scriptures, but only shows that hard places specially, such as
prophecies, are to be expouned to people, as Christ did here to his disciples,
and as the former place Act. 8. 30. and that speech of Chrysostom shows.

The fourth place which he adduceth is, Revel. 5. 1. concerning the sealed
book which none was able to open, and which this pamphleter would have to be
the book of scripture. whereunto I will only answer in the Jesuit Ribera's
words on that place, saying, The prophecy of these things which shall fall out
in the last times is here only meaned, as Andrew Archbishope of Caesarea
expounds it (says he) and proves that hereby the book of the scripture
cannot be meaned, because eve^ then John saw this book sealed when this
revelation was made unto him, before which time most of the Apostles were dead,
So that if by this sealed book the scripture were understood. then it would
follow (says he) that the rery Apostles upon whom the holy ghost descended,
in their time understood not the scripture, but it was sealed even to Peter and
Paull, and to the rest who died before this revelation was made unto John.
which were absurd to say.

But I cannot but marvel that he should bring so manyplaces of scripture to
prove that people should not be permitted to read the scripture because of the
obscurity thereof, seeing that their late and famous Bishope Espenseus, on
Titus, 2. testifies, that the withholding of the scripture from the people
was neither in the Apostles times, or agreeable to their doctrine, nor yet was
it in the time of the primitive Church. his words are these.

It is manifest (says he) by the doctrine of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16. and by
the practice of the primitive church that of old, the reading of the scripture
was permitted to people.

As for the testimonies of fathers which he brings, none of them does prove
his point, for 1. in Irenus there is no speech at all to his point or purpose,
nor tells he in what book of Origin. any such thing is to be found, and as to
Ambrose testimony which calls the scripture a sea, and depth of prophetical
ridles, I answer, that no man denies but that (as Gregory, also speaks in
his epistle to Leander) it is as a sea, and deep wherein an Elephant may
swime, as also so shallow wherein a Lamb (says he) may wade. containing both
high mysteries, for exercising the most learned, as also most easy
instructions, (as David speaks psalm. 119. 130) To give understanding to the
simple. Next, to Augustins testimony, where he says, that the things in
scripture which he knew not, were much more then these which he knew, I answer,
that this shows only his humility, as the Apostle also professes, that in
this life he knew but in part, but this neither makes for proving the
obscurity of scripture, the contrary whereof he affirms in the place
forecited, de doct. Christ, lib. 2. cap. 9. not yet makes it against the
peoples reading of scripture, whereunto so earnestly he exhorts them, Sermon. 55.
de tempore, and as for Gregory we differ no ways from him in the place
forecited.

As for S. Dennis testimony (as he calls him) where he says, that the
matter of the scriptures was far more profound, then his wit could reach
unto, I answer, that by nature it is true of all, except (as David prays
psalm. 119. 18.) The Lord open men's eyes that they may understand the wonders of
his Law, But this proves not that therefore the scriptures are not to be read.
or are every where obscure.

4. THat apostolical traditions, and ancient customs of the Church (not found
written in the word) are not to be received, nor do obleidge us.
Which he says is expressly contrary to 2 Thessalonians. 21. 5. where the Apostle
bids them, Hold fast the traditions which they had been taught, whether by
word or Epistle. and which traditions by word, he says are of equal
authority with what was written, if not more, because first named.

I answer, Nicephorus and Theodoret on that place, shows that the Apostle
speaks not of diverse doctrines of faith, some written by him, and others not
written, but left to verbal tradition, but he speaks of the same doctrines
diverslie only delivered, to wit, first by word when he was present with them,
and the same thereafter by Epistle, being absent from them, even as he
speaks, Philip. 31. saying, To writ the same things to you, (to wit, which he
had preached before) To me indeed is not greevous, but for you it is safe,
which Bellarmin also confirms, (lib. 4. de verbo cap. 11.) while he grants,
That al things, were written by the Apostles which they preached to the people,
or which was necessar (says he) to salvation. whence it follows, that what
was not written by the Apostle thereafter to the Thessalonians, was not taught
to them before by word, as also what was not written by the Apostles, that the
same is not necessar to salvation, and consequently that uuwritten doctrinall
traditions are not necessary to salvation, for of such only is the question,
and not of any other sort of traditions, rituall, historical, or explicatory,
which does not derogate from the perfection of scripture.

The second place which he brings, is 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Where the Apostle
commands, The^ to withdraw themselves from every brother that walks disorderly,
and not after the tratradition which they received of him, to which I answer,
that Cardinal Cajetan on the 14. verse shows that what he calls tradition
in the 6. verse, he calls the same, his word by Epistle in the 14. verse, and
therefore written.

Aquinas likewise on this 6. verse shows that the same is meaned by
tradition, which is meaned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. which we have already cleared, to
wit, that doctrine which was delyvered both by word and writ, by word first,
and by writ after, but the most simple exposition is this (says their Estius)
that the Apostle speaks in general of the institution of a Christian life,
The derection whereof no man can say but is set down in scripture.

The third place which he brings is, 1. Cor. 11. 2. where the Apostle
praises them that they kept the traditions which he had delivered them,
whereunto I answer, that in that text, there is not a word of tradition, but as
their own vulgar and Rhemes Translation has, is, that they kept his
Precepts, where the deceatfulnes of this Pa^pleter is to be noted, that to
seduce the simple when he pleases, he departs from the vulgar
Translation, which at other times he so magnifieth as only authentic, and
does idolize.

As for the testimony which he brings out of Basil, where he says, Some
things we have from scripture other things from the Apostles, both which have
alike force unto godlinessis. I answer. First, that the most learned except
against this Book as corrupted, as B. Andrews shows (opose* con^. Peron p.
9.) 2. he speaks of these that were received from the Apostles and not of
such as the Romanists themselves acknowledge not to have been taught by the
Apostles, neither by word nor write, as the invocatio^ of saints is confessed
to be by their own Ecksus, Enchird. c. 15. and many more such 3* he speaks
not of doctrines of faith necessary to salvation, all which Bellaer. himself
grants to be written (l. de verbo c. 11) but of things relating to order and
decency in celebration of holy mysteries, according to that general rule 1.
Cor. 14. 40. and the Apostles speech, cap. 11. 34. where he says, The rest I
will set in order when I come, whereby he understands (says Estius) such
things as belong to a worthy, honest, and orderly celebratio^ of holy
mysteries, and so speaks also Lombard, Aquinas, Cajetan, and the Jesuit A
lapide.

OF ANCIENT CUSTOMS.
Next to traditions, he would have the ancient customs of the Church equally
to be received, though he bringes no proof from scripture or fathers for the
same. Wherein tho I might answer with Cyprian (epist. 63.) saying, we must not
taek heed what any has done before us, or has thought meet to be done, but
what Christ has done, who is before all men, for we must not follow the
custom of men (says he) but the truth of God. For as in his 74. ep. to
Pompeius he says, Custom without truth, is nothing else, but inveterate
error. As also says Basil, ep. 80. We think it not just that custom which
has prevailed, be held for a law or rule of true doctrine, but let us stand to
the decisio^ of divine inspyred scripture.

Yet to convince him, I will instance. 9. points of popery to show how far
they reject the Churches ancient customs, as.

1. Against the Popes universal Supremacy in matters ecclesiastical, that
first and famous Council of Nice, convocat by Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, anno 325. in the six canon thereof it was decreed That the Bishope of
Alexandria should brook the like jurisdiction within his province, as the
Bishope of Rome had in his. which limitatio^ of every ones jurisdiction within
their own precincts without subordination, is there called (...), or the ancient
customs, from which ancient custom confirmed by so famous a general Counsel,
how far the pope has swerved since, let any one judge.

2. For the Popes usurpation of jurisdiction over Princes in temporal things,
what was the old custom of the Bishops of Rome, Bellarmin tells us, (lib. 1.
de Council. cap. 13.) who speaking of that time which was many houndrehs of
years after the Apostles, says, That at that time the Bishope of Rome in
temporal things was subject to the Emperor (says he) and because he
acknowledged the Emperor to be his temporal Lord, therefore he made
supplication to him that he would conveene a Council, but thereafter their own
charter monck author of Fasciculus temporum, tells us, That in the time of
Boniface the 2. this ancient custom was rejected, for, remarke (says he) that
about this time the Popes began to oppose themselves to the Emperors even in
temporal things, far otherwise the^ they were wont of old. And after the 1200,
year of god the same author tells us, That Boniface the 8. rose up to that
hight of pride (says he) that he called himself Lord of the whole world as well
in temporal as in spiritual things. Which thing their Sigebert (in anno
1088.) in his Chronicle calls not only a noveltie, but little far from
Heresy.

3. For prayers in an unknown tongue, LYRA and AQUINAS (on 1. Cor. 14.) as also
Cassander (consult ar^. 14) freely acknowledge, what was the ancient custom of
the primitive Church, saying. In the primitive church. Thanks givings and all
other common service was performed in the vulgar tongue, but how far the
Roman Church has swerved from this now, every one knows.

4. If we ask also concerning paepall indulgences (depending on purgatory)
what was the ancient custom, their own Alfonsus a castro will tell us. (lib.
8. adv. Here Is. tit. indulgentia) That their use is only of late in the
Church. (says he) and if we ask what was the ancient custom then used of
indulgences, lar. will tell us, (lib. 1. de indulg. c. 8.) saying. I confess
that the form of dispensing with a number of years or days, appointed for
penance, which was of old in use, is now clean left off.

5. Concerning invocation of saints, Their own Eckius (in his Enchrid. cap.
15.) confesses, That there is no warrant for the same in the scriptures, and
that the Apostles neither by word nor write left any such thing behind the^ to
be done, so that it was not the Churches custom in the Apostles times. But
next, to the Apostles times, if we ask what was the ancient custom of the
church herin. Augustine will tell us, (lib. 21 de civit. Dei. cap. 10) That at
the celebration of the holy Mysteries the names of the Martyrs and saints in
their own order and place are named, but nowise invocated, (says he.)

6. For having Images in Churches, what was the ancient custom, is to be seen
in that epistle of Epiphanius to the patriarch of Jerusalem, translated by
Jerome, and insert in his works, where it is said, that this was against the
custom of Christian religion, and therefore prohibited also in that famous
Council of Eliberis and 36. canon thereof, which made their own Nicolaus
Clemangis (lib. de non celeb. non instit.) to say, Of old the whole universal
Church did decree for their cause who were converted from gentilsme to the
faith, that no images should be set up in Churches, but how far the now Roman
Church has swerved from this Ancient Custom, every one knows.

7. Concerning adoration of images, what was the ancient custom in the
primitive, yea, in the western and Roman Church, Pope Gregory in his Epistle
to Serenus Bishope of Marsils, shows (lib. 9. epistle 9.) forbidding any
adoration of such. As also that decree of that Council of Frankford, convocat
by Charles the great, at which the Legates of the Bishope of Rome were present*
Wherein all sort of religious adoration of images was condemned and forbidden,
as not only contrary to Scripture, but also to the doctrine of the ancient
Fathers and custom of the then Roman Church, as Cassander relates (consult.
art. 21.) and may be seen in Baronius his annals. (Tom. 9. in anno 794* but
how far contrary to this ancient custom the doctrine and practice of the
Roman Church now is, is notour to all.

8. Concerning the giving of the Cup to the people, what was the ancient
custom of the Church, the very Act of the Council of Constance which decreed
the contrary, does clearelie confess; to wit, That as Christ instituted this
venerable sacrament in both kinds of bread and wine and gave it to his
Disciples, so also (say they) in the primitive Church, the same was received by
the faithful in both kinds, and it is sufficiently certain (says their
Cassander consult. art. 22.) that the universal Church of Christ to this day
did celebrate the sacrament in both kinds, and the Western or Roman Church
more then a thousand years after CHRIST (says he) gave the same in both
kinds of bread and wine to all the members of the Church of Christ, as is
manifest out of the innumerable testimonies both of Greek and latin Fathers.
But how far the now Roman Church has swerved from this ancient custom, and
her own ancient practice, is likewise more tha^ clear and evident.

9. lastly Concerning their solitary Masses, wherein the Priest only
communicates, if we ask if this was the Ancient Custom of the Church, their
very canon of the Mass will tell us the contrary, as their Cassander observes
(consuit. art. 24.) wherein the Priest prays not only for himself, but also
for all the^ who do communicate with him, saying, Be merciful to as many of us
as baue been partakers of this Altar. And chiefly in his prayer after
communicating, saying, That which we have received with our mouth, grant Lord,
that we may have received the same with a pure mind. And of a temporal
benefit it may be unto us an everlasting remedy. Thus in nine maine points
of Popery we see how they have swerved wide from the ancient custom of the
Catholic Church.

5. THat a man by his own private* spirit may rightly understand, and
interpret Scripture.
Which he says is contrary to 1. Cor. 11. 8. Where the Apostle speaking of
the diversity of gifts, says, That to another is given the gift of prophecy
or interpretation of scripture, as also which is contrary to 2. Pet. 1. 20.
where its said, That no prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation, as
also is contrary to 1. John 4. 1. where the Apostle bids Try the spirits
whether they be of God.

For answer to whom, 1. We disclaim any such Assertion as the harmony of
confessions witnesses, and ours in particulare 1581. art. 20. And so the
places which he adduceth makes no wise against us. For we put a distinction
between a private man and a private spirit, and of a private man we say, that
sometimes such a man may have more knowledge of the true meaning of scripture,
that public persons, as ignorant Bishops, such as their own Stella (on Luke
6. p. 184) tells were at the late Council of Trent, yea, then Popes
themselves who pretend infallibility, of whom their own Alfonsus a Castro
speaks thus (lib. 1. adv. here is. cap. 4.) Seeing it is certain that many of
them were so unlearned (says he) that they were altogether ignorant of the
gra^mer, how could thy then interpret Scripture? (says he) But we say, that
such knowledge private men have not from their own private spirit, but from
the spirit of God speaking in his word, comparing Scripture with Scripture, and
obscurer places with playner, and with David psalm. 119. ^8. using prayer for
illumination, and such other means as conduce to that end, and that this is
not only our doctrine, but the doctrine also of most famous Romanists, we may
see in Panormitan, (cap. Significasti, de electione) and in Gerson, (part 1.
de examinatione doctrinarum.) who say, That one private man's opinion is to be
preferred, even to the Popes and a whole Council, if that private man be moved
by better authority of the old and new Testament, the practice whereof Gratian
shows (36. q. 2. c. ultimo) That Jerome by authority of the scripture
withstood a whole Council, and had his judgment preferred before them, as
Paphuntius also had done before in the Council of Nice in the matter of
Priests marriage.

6. THat Peter's Faith failled.
Which is contrary (says he) to Luke 22. 32. where Christ says to PETER,
I prayed for thee, that thy faith faill not. To whom I answer first, That we
hold no such Assertion contrary to this Text, which speaks of Peter's own
particulare saving grace of faith, which never failed, and not of his
infallibility of profession, wherein he failed when after this he denied his
Master. 2. If he would have Peter's infallibility to be grounded on these
words, There is no doubt (says their own Carthusian) But he prayed there for
all other his Apostles, having also said, Satan has desired to vinnow you. 3.
The exposition of the parisian Doctors, as Gerson, Almain, Alfonsus also a
Castro, and Pope Adrian the 6. is. That in the person of Peter (as a figure)
the Lord prayed for his universal Church, as Bellarmin acknowledges (lib. 4.
de pont. cap. 3.) and therefore it infers no more infallibility of Peter in
particular, than it does of the whole Church in general, and the members
thereof. And giving that it infers only Peter's infallibility, who was an
Apostle and Penman of scripture, yet it inferres nothing of the popes
infallibility as his pretended Successor, this being personal to him, but not
transmitted to others.

His next Testimony that he brings is Math. 16. 18. where our Savior says,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. To which I shall
answer in their own Cardinal Cusanus words (lib. 2. de concord. Cath. cap.
13. who^ Ferus also on this place follows, and both of the^ the stream of
ancient Fathers) who speaks thus, Tho it was said to Peter, upon this rock I
will build my Church yet by the rock (says he) we understand Christ himself
whom he confesses, and if Peter were to be understood by this rock as a
groundstone of the Church, are not the other Apostles (according to S. Jerome)
groundstones (says he?)

His third place of scripture which he brings is, Math. 23. 2. to which I
have already answered in the second Assertion, but cannot pass by this, that
he matcheth the Pope sitting in Peter's Chair, with the Scribes and Pharisees
Christ's greatest enemies, sitting in Moses Chair, and indeed herein they
fitly agree.

The last place which he brings is, John 11. 49. where speaking of Caiphas
words, it is said, That he spoke not this of himself, but being High Priest
that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the Nation, which (he
says) the High Priest spake-truly-speaking out of Moses Chair, which Christ
commanded to be heard and obeyed, touching matters of faith. To whom I answer
first, That his alleged speaking truly in this point, cannot be attribute to
the Chair of Moses, nor to him as High Priest who sat therein, for then he had
not erred so groslie there-after in it, when he pronunced Christ to be a
blasphemer. But 2. Cardinal Tolet answers for us clearly, saying, Remarke that
Caiphas sentence in that sense, which he conceived it, was both wicked and
false. False, because it was neither lawful nor expedient to kill an innocent
man for the te^porall safety of a Republic, And Wiked, because it was against
justice to kill an innocent, thersore Caiphas (says he) sinned most grievouslie
therein, and all who consented with him. Let any then consider how this makes
for the Popes infallibility.

7 THat the Church can err, and has erred.
Which he says is expreslie contrary to Isai. 59. 21. To which before I
answer, I will state the question, and show what is truly to be held of the
Churches infallibility, to wit, as their own Cardinal Turrecremata in his
summa de Ecclesia lib. 2. cap. 91. declares, saying, That the Church cannot
err, is so to be taken, that GOD does so assist her even to the the end of the
World, that there are ever some, albeit not all, who have true faith which
works by charity, and who holds the true profession thereof. As were the
7000. in Israel who had not bowed their knee to Baal, and the few orthodox,
when (as Lyrnensis speakeh) The whole world groaned and wondered that it was
become Arrian. But when the papists speak of the Churches infallibility, they
understand not the universal church, but the Roman and western part thereof.
Next they distinguish the Roman Church into the Collective Church, which is the
whole number of Teachers and professors. And into the Representative, which
is, Bishops and others assembled in a general Council. And thirdly, into the
Virtuall Church, which they call the Pope, and to whom only in end they
ascribe infallibility, as Bellarmin teaches lib. 4. de pont. cap. 2. and 3.
And with him Suarez, Valentia and others.

Now to come to the places of scripture which he adduces. First, I answer to
them generally, that none of them proves the Popes infallibility, to whom
only they ascribe the same, 2. I answer to Isai. 59. 21 that says, As for
me, this is my Covenant with them (says the Lord) my spirit that is upon thee
and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy see^s-seed from
hence forth and for ever* according to Hugo Cardinalis; That these words are
spoken to Christ by the Father, (as Turrecremata also speaks) promising that
God should so assist his Church, and the Elect therein which are this seed
spoken of, even to the end of the World, that there should ever be some that
should hold the true profession of faith. Which answer serves also for Ioh
14. 16. 17. where Christ promises to his Apostles the Comforter, who is the
Spirit of truth. whom the World cannot receive. because they are not Elect, and
who should dwell in them and be in them. as he is only in the Elect likewise.

The third place is Math. 18. 17. And if he neglect to hear the Church, let
him be to thee as a Heathen and publican. To which I answer, that this place
speaks only of a particulare Church. Which Papists grants may err, as
also relates only to discipline and Church censures, and not to doctrine or
determination in matters of faith, but of fact and scandale.

The fourth place is, Ephesians. 5. 27. where it is said, That he might present to
himself a glorious Church without spot or wrinckle. Whereunto I answer. That
their late Estius out of Augustine shows that the Apostle speaks, not of the
Church Militant, but Triumphant, and as she shall be after the blessed
Resurrection, and this is also the exposition of Jerome lib. 3. dial. cont.
Pelag. as also of Primasius and Thomas. (says he.)

As for the Fathers whom he only cites, but not their words, never one of them
in these places does prove his point.

But before I leave this point of the Popes infall^bilitie, into which the
Churches at last does resolve, I will insist herein a little more, seeing it
concerns the whole Fabric of popery, and is the basis whereon it stands,
being that rock whereon the Church is built, as Bellarmin teaches (lib. 4. de
pont. cap. 2. and 3.) And will batter the same with four arguments furnished by
themselves unto us. Whereof the First is, That this very question it self
amongst Romanists. Whether the Pope may be deposed for heresy, presupposes
that he may be an Heretic, and that he may be deposed for heresy, Bellarmin
grants (lib. 2. de pont. cap. 30.. 5.) saying, We cannot deny, but that Pope
Adrian with his Council at Rome yea, with the whole eight general Council,
thought that the Pope for Heresy might be judged, add this also that the
estate of the Church, (says he) should be miserable, if it should be forced
to acknowledge him for their Pastor, who were a ravening Wolf 2. Howsoever it
is now the most common opinion that the pope cannot err, yet, it is confessed
that many Roman Catholic Doctors of great note, do maintain the contrary, to
wit, that he may err not only personally, but also as Pope and judiciallie,
which (as Bellarmin confesses lib. 4. de pont. cap. 2.) was not only the
opinion of Nilus, Gerson, Almain, and the Doctors of Paris, but also of Pope
Adrian the 6. and Alfonsus a Castro. To whom he might have added the Councels
of Constance and Basil, also Ockam, Michael Cesenas, Cardinal Cameracensis,
and Cusanus, Waldensis, Picus Mirandula, Lyra, Canus, Erasmus and their late
Stella, with all others who mantaine that the Council is above the Pope. These
two assertions then being directly contradictorie, that the Pope cannot err,
and that the Pope (even as Pope) may err, and this last being maintained by
famous Doctors and Councels of the Roman Church, (as said is) we may not
only see what there bragged of unity is, but also that papists have no sure
ground of their faith at all, who build upon the Popes infallibility, so much
controverted amongst themselves, and as yet in question.

3. It is manifest that the Popes have foullie erred de facto, and been
Heretics, therefore it follows, that they may err, and so are not
infallible. And that they have erred and been Heretics, is witnessed by most
famous Romanists, for it is manifest (says Alfonsus a Castro (lib. 1. cont.
here is. cap. 4.) That Pope Liberius was an Arrian, and Anastasius the second a
Nestorian, so likewise does Canus testify (Loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 8.) that
Honorius was a Monothelite, and by the sixth and seventh general Councels
condemned as an Heretics, and their late Didacus Stella on Luke 22. 30.
shows that many Popes have been gross Heretics and Idolaters, as
Marcellinus (says he) who sacrificed to Idols. Liberius who was an Arrian (as
Platina and Bellarmin also witnesses, lib. 4. de pont. cap. 9) and Anastasius
the 2. who for the crime of Heresy (says he) was rejected of the Church,
and many others who persisted not in the Catholic faith, but were against the
same. Wherefore (says their own Lyra) on Math. 16.) It is evident that the
Churches stabilitie consists not on men, either in regard of their
ecclestiasticall dignity, or secular, seeing many Princes and Popes too, have
been found to have made Apostafie from the faith.

4. Out of their own grounds I argue against the Popes infallibility thus. 1.
If he have any such infallibiliitie, he has it as he is Bishope of Rome, and
consequently Peter's alleged successor. 2. He cannot be Bishope of Rome, but
he must be in holy orders. 3. He can not receive orders (which papists call a
sacrament) but from him, who has power to ordain or give orders, upon which
grounds that are granted, I reason thus, in respect That the validity of a
sacrament depends upon the intention of the giver, as Bellar. teaches (lib.
3. de justifi. cap. 8.) Which none can know but the giver. Therefore none can
know that this Pope or any other, is or has been infallible, because he
cannot be so, except he be in holy orders from one that had power to give them,
and that he that had that power, had also an intention to give the^, (whose
intention (says Bellar.) none can know, and consequently a primo ad ultimum,
none can know whether such a Pope be truly Pope or no, and by a second
consequence, whether he be infallible or no, according to the pretended
privilege as he is Peter's successor. And so upon what an unsure and sandy
foundation papists build their faith, and consequently their salvation, let
any man judge. But I cannot admire enough Bellarmins impudency that says
(lib. 4. de pont. cap. 2.) That all Catholics agree in this, that if the Pope
alone, or with a particular Council decerne in any thing that is doubtful,
whether he err, or not, yet he is obedientlie to be heard by all the
faithful (says he.)

8. THat the Church has been hidden and invisible.
FOr stating this question aright, we say not that the Church professing the
Christian name in common has been at anytime invisible, but in it we say that
the true and sincere professors may be some times brought to that estate. as
the 7000. were in Israel who bowed not to Baal, and as the sound and
persecuted Orthodox Christians were, by that prevalent faction of Arrians, who
then usurped the title of the only true Church, although they were only but a
prevailling faction therein.

But this Pamphleter contendeth for a constant and conspicuous visibilitie to
all, of the Church of true and ^ound professors, like a City on a hill, etc.
by these Texts following.

1. Math. 5. 14. Where our Savior compares his disciples to a City on a
hill, etc. To whom I answer shortly, that this is meaned of the Apostles, (who
as their own Jansenius as also Maldonat expounds) were a light to the World,
by their preaching and holy life, Therefore says Maldonat, That by these
three similituds of salt, a light, and a city, our Savior would declare one
and the same thing, to wit, how far beyond other common Christians his
Apostles and their successors should eminentlie shine in life and doctrine,
and so does Chrysostom, Theophylact Lyra, Ferus, and Carthusian expound this
Text, and not of any constant and conspicuous visibilitie of the Church to all.

The second place which he brings is Math. 18. 17. (tell the Church) to which
I answer, that Origin, Chrisostom and Hilarie on this place shows, that a
particulare Church, and the Rulers thereof are meaned (as has been said) which
is indeed visible to it own members, specially in time of peace, whereas in
time of persecution, the Rhemists themselves on 2 Thessalonians. 2. tells us, That
this is like to be the case of the Roman Church it self under Antichrist, that
the faithful shall lurk and have their communion amongst themselves only in
private, and so to have no conspicuous visibilitie to all, and whence it
follows that what may be the case of the Church at one time, the same may
be, or has been the case of the Church at another.

The third place is 2. Cor. 4. 3. which says. If our Gospel be hid, it is to
them that are lost. To which I answer, that there is no word here of a Church
or of persons, but of the gospel it self, which being preached to any, if it
be not believed, is said to be hid from misbelievers, as is said in the words
following, Whose minds the god of this world has blinded, that they should not
belie^e, as the Lord threatens Isai 6. 9. which is the exposition both of
Aquinas, Cardinal Cajetan, and their Bishope Catharinus, with their late
Estius.

The last place which he bringes, is Isai. 2. 2. where it is said, That in the
last days the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.

To which I answer, that this is a Prophecy only of the calling of the
gentiles to the faith of the gospel by the Ministry of the Apostles, and
shows how firmlie the Christian Church should be built, and be of greater
eminency and amplitude beyond the jewish church, in respect also of
universalitie, clearer light, and dispensation of grace* which is the
exposition of their own Lyra, Procopius, Pintus, and Perusin on this place.
And not that they prove there by a constant and conspicuous visibilitie of the
Church to all.

As for the testimonies of Fathers which he adduceth, they nowise prove the
point, the first whereof is Origens, saying, That the Church is full of light,
which shows only that (as she is described, Revel. 12. 1.) she is glorious
by the light of the truth, which she holds forth in profession, and
therefore he subjoyneth this reason, seeing she is the pillar and ground of
truth (says he.)

2 He brings a testimony of Chrysostom, where it is said, That it is
easier for the sun to be extinguished, then for the Church to be darkened,
which testimony receives the same answer with the former. For no more can the
Church lose the light of the truth, than the sun can lose his light, though
sometimes he may be eclipsed, or by a thick mist or cloudie day he may be
unseene to some.

3. He brings a testimony out of Augustine, who says That he is blind
that sees not so great a mountain. To which I answer, that he speaks not
there of a constant and conspicuous visibilitie of the true Church to all, and
at all times, but only of the visible condition of the Church which was at
that time, disputing against the Donatists who affirmed that the Church was no
where but amongst them in Africa: whereas on the contrary, he says that in
Europe and elsewhere they may see famous and flowrishing Christian Churches,
like to a mountain that may be seen, except they were blind, and yet we
know that a mountain that may be seen to all that are not blind in a clear
day, may in a dark night time, or dark mistie day be unseene, till the sun
rise or a clearing of the mist be. Therefore says the same Augustine (de
unitate Ecclesiae. cap. 20. and in psalm. 10. and epist. 80 ad Hesychium) Some
times the Church is not apparent when wicked persecutors rage against her, and
again in his sixth book of baptism against the Donatists, cap. 4. Sometimes
like the Moon (says he) she may be so hid and obscured, that (as in Elias
time) the members thereof shall not know one of another.

9 THat the Church was not ever to remain Catholic or universal. And that
the Church of Rome is not such a Church
THe first part of which Assertion we disclaim as a most unjust aspersion, as
the harmony of confessions shows, and ours in particulare, 1581. art. 17. And
as to the last, That the Church of Rome is not universal we justly affirm,
seeing it is a plain repugnancie in the adject (as we say) to be particulare or
Roman, and to be Catholic or universal. as their own Cassander
contradistinguisheth between these two in his consultation. art. 22.

As for the places which he adduceth out of the psalm. 2. 8. and Colos. 1. 3. 4.
they no wise make for him, or against us, but only speaks of the Churchs
inlargeme^t under the Gospel, the first by the conversion of the Gentiles to
the faith, and the second, of the Colossians in particular.

Next he brings, Romans 1. 8* where the Apostle thanketh the Lord for them,
That their faith was spoken of through the whole World. For answer whereunto,
1. This no more proves the Church of Rome to be universal, than the like
words of Paull 1 Thessalonians* 1. 8* proves the Church of Thessalonica to be the
universal Church For as Romans 1. 8. it is said That their faith was spoken of
through the whole world: so is it said 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. That from them sounded
out the word of the Lord, as also in every place their faith to God ward was
spread abroad. And that this is the only thing which these words import, their
late Estius on Romans 1. shows.

As for testimonies of Fathers, and 1. to that of Cyprian, who writting to
Cornelius says Whilst with you there is one mind, and one ^oyce, the whole
Church is confessed to be Roman, I answer 1. That Cyprians words are
perverted, which are these, dum ap^^ vos, unus animus and una vox est, Ecclesia
omnis Romana confessa est, that is, Whilst with you there is one mind, and one
voice, the whole Roman Church has confessed, Cyprian thus commending the
Church of Rome, for an unanimous confession of faith before heathen
persecutors: as others had done, which indeed proves the soundnes of the Roman
Church in Cyprians time, as a member of the catholic church, but not that she
only then was the Catholic Church. 2. Giving that these were the words of
Cyprian as they are alleged, they would import only, that whil the Roman
Church kept the unity of the true faith, that all other orthodox and sister
Churches of these times would acknowledge themselves to be of her communion,
and this we may see confessed by Stapleton (relect. con. 1. q. 5.) who gives
this to be the reason why by the ancients, the Roman and Catholic Church were
held for one thing, because her communion (says he) with the whole Catholic
Church was then most evident and certain, whence it follows, that she her
self then was not the whole Catholic Church. 3. where it is said to Pope
Cornelius, Whilst with you there is one mind, and one voice, that is, as long
as you keep the truth and profession thereof, this speech being conditional
and limited, it imports that she might lose the same, (as she has done)
Therefore not only was she forewarned, Romans 11. 20. Not to be high minded but
fear, but also Cyprian ad Pompeium, accuses Pope Steven who succeeded
Cornelius, that he maintained the cause of Heretics against the Church of God,
the Pope then and Roman Church under him, in Cyprians estimation maintayning
Heretics against the Church, could not the^ be accounted by him to be the
Catholic Church, nor yet to be infallible.

The second testimony of Augustins, where he says, That they who dissent
from the body of Christ, which is the Church, they are not in the Catholic
Church, proves nowise that the Roman Church is this only Catholic Church.
But rather (as the words of that testimony bears) The whole body of
Christendom.

And as for Jeroms words, That it is all one to say, the Roman faith and the
Catholic faith, I have already answered, that this was because of her
communion with the Catholic Church, when Rome was orthodox, and (as Isai. 1.
21) The faithful City was not become an Har* lot.

10. THat the Churches unity is not necessary in all points of faith.
I answer, that this is an impudent Calumny, as the Harmony of Confession of
reformed Churches shows, and ours in particular, of 1581. art. 16. For we
maintain that a twofold unity is necessary to be in Christ's church, to wit,
An unity in Truth and an unity in affection, both which we should pray for
and promove, that (as the psalmist speaks 122. 7.) peace may be within her
walls and prosperity within her palaces.

And because they brag so much of unity in doctrine and all points of faith,
for stopping the mouths of all Romanists ever hereafter, ut ex ungue Leonem, I
will only amongst many, instance but in one or two maine points of popery,
that their unity is like the division of tongues which was amongst the
builders of Babell,

The first is, papal Indulgences and Pardons, which are so lucrative, and
depends on their Purgatory, wherein thus they vary. 1. Some of the old
schoolmen (as Bellar. witnesses lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 2.) they doubt of this
spiritual treasure, and Francis Mayro on 4. sent. D. 19. makes question in
particular (says he) of the treasure of Christ's overflowing satisfactions
laid up in the Church. Again, Durand. likewise (on 4. sent. D. 2.) doubts if
the satisfaction of saints belong to the treasure, but S. Thomas and
Bonaventure (says he) thinks that both belongs thereunto. Again this is
denied by sundry ancient Divines (says Bellarmin lib. 1. de Indulg cap. 7.)
That pardons delivers men from punishment, not only before the Church, but
also before God, and very grave Authors (says he) as Alfonsus, Durand.
Paludanus, Pope Adrian, the 6. Petrus a Soto and Cardinal Cajetan hold, That
pardons were never given but for enjoined penance, but Aquinas, Ioannes Major,
Sylvester, Dominicus a Soto, Michael medina, Ledesinius, Antonius Cordubensis,
Navarrus, Panormitan, and Ioannes Andreas (says he) these maintain the
contrary.

2. For the Persons that have power to give pardons, it is questioned (says
Bellarmin lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 11.) by what law Bishops may give pardons,
for some hold that they may do it by Gods law (says he) but others deny it,
yea Angelus in summ^, and Bartholemus Fumus do hold that all Priests who may
hear confession, may also grant pardons (says he) and they bring for their
warrant Pope Innocentius and Panormitan. but the common opinion (says
Bellarmin) is contrary to these.

3. For the persons whom they avail, thus they vary, for amongst the
Catholic Doctors (says Bellarmin lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 14.) Ostiensis in
summa and Biel on the canon of the Mass, lect. 57. have taught that pardons
nowise profit the dead (and so this ma^teth soul Masses) but other Catholics
(sayeh he) do hold the contrary. Again if they help the dead. Bellarmin (lib.
1. de Indulg. cap. 14.) shows that it is controverted, whether by way of
suffrage or otherwise, and that they are divyded in three opinions. Last of all
(says Bellarmin in the same place) the hardest question of all is, Whether
pardons do help the dead upon any justice or condignitie, or only of the mere
and free favor of God and congruitie, some hold the first (says he) as
Dominicus Soto (on 4. sent. d. 21.) and Navarrus, and others hold it to be
meerlie of the mercy and bounty of God. And so holds Cajetan, Petrus a Soto.
Cordubensis and others. Now in such a division of tongues and Pen's in this
point, what is popish unity, let any man judge?

The second grand point which I will instance, is Transsubstantiatio^, whereon
is grounded the Idol of their Mass, and that idolatrous adoration of their
Hostie, wherein (says the Jesuit A^lapide on Isai. 7. 14.) by the words of
consecration as the bread is truly and reallie transsubstantiat, so Christ is
brought forth, and as it were begotten upon the Altar, so powerfully and
efficaciouslie, as if Christ were not yet incarnat, yet by these words (this is
my Body) He should be incarnat and assume an humane body, therefore (says he)
the Priest is as the Virgin that bare him, the Altar is the manger, the little
Emmanuell which he bears, is Christ brought forth under the little Hostie,
Than which, what can be grosser blasphemy let any man judge?

1. In this point the^ let us see what is their catholic unity in the ground
whereon they build this their transsubstantiation. Which is commonly alleged
to be express scripture, and in particular these words, Math. 26. 26. (this
is my Body.) but concerning this, Gabriel Biel on the canon of the Mass,
lect. 40. says Whether Christ's Body in the Sacrament be by conversion, or
without any conversion, the substance and accidents of bread still remaining,
is not found expreslie in the canon of the Bible. nor can it be proven by any
scripture (says bishope Fisher) cont. Captiv. Babyl. number. 8. (Cardinal
Cajetan likewise affirms) as witnesses Suarez tom. 3. disp. 46.) That these
words of Christ are not able to prove Transsubstantiation, but that they may be
taken in a figurative sense, as these. 1. Cor. 10. 4. (Cajet. 3. q. 78. art.
1.) yea Cardinal Bellarmin speaks thus. (lib. 3. de Euch. c, 23.) It is not
altogether improbable, that there is no express place of scripture, which
without the Churches determination, can evidentlie enforce a man to admit of
Transsubstantiation for albeit the scripture seem to us that they may compel
any that is not refractarie to believe the same, yet it may be justly doubted,
whether the Text be clear enough to enforce the same (says he) seeing the
most sharp witted and learned men such as Scotus was, have thought the
contrary.

2. We have sundry Roman Catholics who have denied Transsubstantiation upon
any ground whatsoever, as, 1. Bertram a priest in his learned treatise of the
Body and Blood of Christ, written to Charles the bald King of France, about
the year 880. 2. Rabanus Maurus a^ Abbot in his treatise of the Eucharist,
which is also extant. 3. Aelfricus Archbishope of Canterbury in his saxon
sermon on the sacrament or housell, (as he calls it) anno 996. and yet to
ascend higher, Gelasius a Pope in his treatise against Eutyches, of the two
natures of Christ, where he says, Tho in the Sacrament we receive a divine
thing, to wit, the Body and blood of Christ, yet the substance and nature of
the bread and wine ceasseth not to remain (says he) and Biel on the canon of
the Mass tells us that in his time concerning the sacrament or any
conversion therein, amongst Catholics there were four opinions, whereof the
first was, That the substance of bread remained still (says he)

3. In the manner or sort of conversio^, which they pretend to be in the
sacrament, Papists they vary, and disagree mightily. For, 1. Bellarmin
tells us (lib 3. de Euch. cap. 11.) that Durand. holds That one essential
part of the bread, namlie the form is turned, but that the other part which is
the matter or substance is not turned, and so did pope Innocent the 3. teach
(says Durand. Rational. Divin. lib. 4. f. 63.) but others have taught the
contrary (says Bellarmin) That the matter of the bread is turned into Christ's
Body, but that the essential form remains, but as for Lombard their great
Master of sentences, his words are these (lib. 4. sent. d. 11) If it it be
asked what sort of conversion it is, whether formal or substantial, or what
other sort it is, definire non sufficio (says he) that is, I am not able to
define it, and so he quyteth the matter. Biel again on the canon of the Mass,
lect. 40. he says that there are four opinions concerning this conversion. The
First, That the substance of the bread remains still together with Christ's
Body, The 2. is, That the substance of the bread remains not still, but
after consecration becomes the body of Christ. The 3. is, That tho the bread
remains not, yet the accidents of bread as weight, color, and taste remains,
and that Christ's Body begineth to be under these accidents, And the fourth
opinion is contradicting all the former, That neither does the substance of
bread remain, nor yet is it converted into Christ's body, for the absurdities
that follow thereon, but is annihilat, or redacted to nothing, or else resolved
into that which they call materia prima. Bellarmin also in the forecited place,
says, that Abbot Rupertus maintained an opinion diverse from all the former,
to wit, That the bread is personally assumed by Christ in the same manner that
the humane nature was assumed by him* and of this also Cardinal Aliaco (in 4.
sent. q 6) says. That this is possible and more agreeable to reason and easier
to be understood. But thereafter in the same place, (he positivlie says,
That the conversion of the bread (according to his judgment) into the body of
Christ is successive, as the night is turned into the day, because, as after
the night the day comes, so (says he) after the breads departing, there is
Christ's Body. But Bellarmin (lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 18.. ex his) will not have
this co^version, productive, nor successiue, but adductive (as he calls it)
that is, whereby Christ's Body preexistent before this conversion in heaven,
begins to be (says he) under the accidents of bread where it was not
before, which indeed is no conversion at all, but only a mere translocation.

Moreover (says Bellarmin lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 5.) There has been two
opinions devysed in the Schools for unfolding the greatness of this mystery,
one of Dura^ds (on 4. sent. d. 10.) who holds it probable, that the substance
of the body of Christ is in the Eucharist without greatness or quantity,
another is of some ancient Divines, whom Ockam follows, who say, that there
is in the sacrament the very magnitude and quantity of Christ's body, which
notwithstanding they think cannot be distinguished from the substance thereof,
but that all parts do so run one in another, that there is no shape in Christ's
body, nor any distinction or order in the parts thereof. But the common
opinion of the Schools and of the Church (says he) is contrary to this,
and that in the Eucharist or little hostie; there is whole Christ with his
magnitude and bigness, and all other accidents, and has both order and shape
agreeable to a humane body. Which is the eight miracle of the eleave^ that
Durand* makes the priest daily to work in the Mass, (lib. 4. ration* divin.
f. 63.) which miracles notwithstanding are not seen, whereas Cardinal
Cameracensis (in 4. sent. q. 5.) sa^eth, I ought not to believe that he works
any miracle (says he) except I see the same. And indeed these are such as
are foreprophecied 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and are called lieing signs and wonders.

4. They agree no better in this point, to wit, Whereby did Christ produce in
his last supper Transsubstantiation? Concerning which, their Biel on the canon
of the mass lect. 36. says, There are four opinions. The 1. That Christ did
make this conversion, not by any words which he uttered, but by his divine
power without any words, and that Pope Innocent 3. was of this mind. The 2.
That Christ blessed and consecrated the bread, but with a secret benediction
unknown to us* whereby he Transsubstanti^^ the bread into his Body, of which
the Evangelists makes mentie^, when they say, that he took bread and blessed
it, so that heerby Christ's Body behoved to be preexistent in the sacrament by
that blessing, before he said, this is my body, that so, that speech of his
might be true. The 3. is, That our Savior by these words (this is my body)
made that co^version of bread into his body, but ttha be spoke these words
twice, though it be written but once, and that first he spoke them softly and
unheard, whereby he made the conversion and thereafter audiblie, to teach them
how thereafter they should make this conversion. And the 4. opinion is, That by
these words (this is my Body) which be spoke audiblie he made this conversion
of bread into his own Body.

5. Herin again they greatly controvert, to, wit, whereby the Priest daily
does make this conversion. 1. Some say (as Durand. in his rationale divinorum
lib. 4. f. 63. and Biel on the canon of the mass lect. 47. with others) That
the same is by virtue which Christ has placed and made wherent in the words
themselves of (this is my Body) 2. Others say, That this conversion depends
upon the intention of the Priest as Bellarmin says, The whole Church holds,
(lib. 3. de justifi. cap. 8.) whose words are these, The Sacrament without the
intention of the priest cannot be made a Sacrament. 3. Lombard their great
Master of sentences (lib. 4. did. 13.) says, That it depends upon an
Angels descending from heaven to consecrate the Hostie. Whose words are these,
It is called the Mass because of the coming of the heavenly Angel (says
he) to consecrate the body of Christ, according to the Priests prayer*
saying, Omnipotent God, command that these things be carried by the hands of
thy holy Angel before thy high Altar, therefore except the Angel come, it
cannot be called a Mass, (says he) seeing therefore (as Bellarmin has told
us) that it cannot be a Sacrament without the Priests intention, and that no
man can know the intention of another (says Bellar.) and far less be sure of
an Angels coming down to comsecrate the bread, and turn it into Christ's
body. I would the^ on these grounds of their own, ask any papist when he
adoreth the hostie, how he can be sure whether he adoreth Christ's body, or
only a piece of bread, which were most gross Idolatry, as all must confess.

6. To come to the words of consecration themselves. 1 in general, next in
particular, let us see how they agree herein, 1. The most common opinion is
that in general they are to be taken properly, and not figuratively, but on
the contrary, Bertram and the others with him forecited, as also Cardinal
Cajetan (in 3. q. 78. art. 1.) holds that they are, and may be taken
figuratiuelie and after a Sacramental manner of speech, as we see in
Circumcision and the Passover, yea more, in the Popes own canon Law, (de
consecra. did. 2. c. hoc est) it is said there, That the heavenly Sacrament
which truly represents Christ's flesh, is called Christ's Body, but
improperlie and not in verity of the thing (says that place) but by a
mystical signification, so that the meaning is (says the gloss) it is called
Christ's Body, that is, it is a sign of his body.

7. Next to come to the words in particular, 1. The Catholics do not agree
says Bellarm. lib. 1. de Euc^. cap. 11) in the manner of explicating, what is
properly meaned by this Pronowne (hoc) or (this) in the words of consecration
(this is my Body) and in this there are two famous opinions (says he) the one
that this pronowne (hoc) signifies the Body of Christ, the other is of S.
Thomas (says he) that it signifies not the body of Christ precis^ie, nor yet
the bread (as some hold) but in common that substance (be what it will) which
is under these forms, so that the meaning is, hoc, this, that is, under this,
and th^se forms or accidents is my body. Neither determinating it to the
bread (says Biel in can. Missae, lect. 48.) because so, this speech should be
false, this bread is my Body, nor to the body of Christ, for this were absurd
to say, this body is my body (says he) as also, seeing the virtue of the
words of consecration depends on the pronouncing of the last word (meum) as
Biel shows in the same place, therefore by (hoc) Christ's body cannot be
understood. Again the same Biel in the place forecited, says, that
concerning this, there are diverse opinions, which he reduces to two. 1. That
by (hoc) nothing at all is demonstrat, and this Durand. also declares, (lib.
4. rat. divin. f. 64.) 2. Some say that by (hoc) the bread is demonstrat, so
that the meaning should be, this bread is my body, that is, in a Sacramental
way, the sign of my body. But because this would seem (says he) to be
heretical, therefore says Richardus de sancto victore, that it is a mixed
demonstration, partly to the sense, partly to the understanding, so that the
meaning is, this in which the bread (which is seen) is to be transsubstantiat,
is my body (which must be believed) and so the word (is) must be expounded in
the future, (shall be) and this is likewise the opinion of Richardus de media
villa and others, but Alexander Ales expre^slie will have by (hoc) the bread to
be demonstrat, and thereafter to be transsubstantiated by the words of
consecration.

8. They controvert no less likewise, in the next words ( corpus meum or my
body) as Gabriel Biel shows in his 37. lecture on the canon of the Mass,
Whether that body which Christ gave to his Disciples was his mortal and
passible body or that which was immortal and impassible, to these who say the
first, it is objected that then (says he^ it is not the same body which is
now given in the sacrament which is immortal and impassible, and that the
Mass is therefore called an unbloodie sacrifice, Again, in the contrary to
these who hold that it was his immortal and impassible body, it is likewise
objected, that, this co^ld not be, because his Body did afterward suffer and
die, being yet unglorified, and therefore was mortal and passible. Therefore
(says Biel) Hugo Cardinalis being straightened on both hands by the former
contradictions, concludes for his part, siding with neither of them, saying,
That in this question as in such like others, I profess (says he) that I
will rather reverence than dispute such secrets, and in simplicity of faith. I
think this sufficient, if we say, that Christ gave them such a body as pleased
Him to give, because He was Omnipotent. And so leaves the matter in doubt
which of them it was, and uses a short and easy way to solve all questions.

9 In the words also that follows (which is broken for you) as they are set
down 1. Cor. 11. 24. They are again like the Midianits, Judge. 7. 22. Every
man's sword against his fellow, For 1. Pope Nicolas the 2. with his Council at
Rome, as we may see (decret. 3. p. d. 2 cap. 42) affirms, That it is Christ's
Body sensuallie that is broken and torn in pieces with the teeth of the
receivers, which yet (says Bellar. lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 24.. quartum) cannot
be spoken of Christ's body or flesh without great blasphe^ie. And which a
little after that time, made that great physician and learned Philosopher
Averroes to say (as B. Esponceus reports lib. 4. de Euch. ador. cap. 3.)
mundum peragravi* etc. that is, I have traveled through the world (says he)
and I never saw a worse and more foolish ^ect than that of the Christians is,
because with their teeth they devour that God who^ they worship, and which I
may say is at this day the greatest scandell to Turks, Jews and Pagans that
scarreth and debarreth them from embracing Christianity, as sir Edmund Sandys
shows in his speculum Europae p. 230. Next, their master of sentences Lombard
(l. 4. did. 12.) tells us that this definition of the Pope and his Council
is false and erroneous, seeing Christ's body is now incorruptible, immortal,
and impassible, and that Christ rebuked the carnal understanding of his
Disciples (says he) who thought that his flesh was to be divyded in parts, or
torn in morsels as other flesh is, therefore says he (did. 11.) because it
is nefarious to devour Christ with our teeth, he has recommended his flesh
and blood to us in a mystery. 3. Others again (says he) affirms that there
is no real breaking there, as men seems to see with their eyes, but that it
is said to be broken, sicut fit in magorum prestigiis, etc. that is, as uses
to be done by magic tricks or Iuglers, who by delusion deceives men's eyes
(says he) that they seem to see, that which is not (a right comparison
indeed of mass priests) 4. Others again (says the same Lombard) affirm
that by the wonderful power of God, there is a breaking there, where
notwithstanding nothing is broken. (a gross contradiction) and this Durand. in
his rationale divinorum. lib. 4. f. 36. makes to be the fourth miracle of the
eleven, that is daily wrought by the mass Priest, to wit, That in the Mass
that which is indivisible yet is divyded, and tho it be divyded, (says he)
it remains whole. 5. Biel also on the canon of the Mass, lect. 36. faith,
that, That which Christ brake, and the Priest now breaks, is the sacramental
species, as whytnes, roundnes, but neither Christ's body, nor yet any thing
that is white and round. (a strange Chimera indeed.) The like says Lombard
lib. 4. d. 12. That it is neither Christ's body that is broke, nor bread (though
the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 16. the bread which we break) but this fraction
is of the form only and shape of the bread, sacramentallie done (says he)
which was also the opinion of Pope Innocent the 3. And so speaks Cardinal
Cameracensis in 4. q. 6. saying, That this is the common opinion, that the
accidents of the bread which remain without any subject ar only that which is
broken. Than which Assertion there can be no greater absurdity.

10. No less digladiation is amongst Romanists, concerning what is eaten in
the sacrament, according to Christ's words, Take, Eat, For 1. (as has been
said) according to pope Nicolas judicial defyning, It is Christ's body and
flesh that is eaten with the mouth and torn with the teeth, (which Bellarmin
calls blasphemous, and Lombard heretical.) But on the contrary, Alexander
Ales) p. 4. 11. memb. art. 2. (as also Bonaventure) in 4. sent. d. 12. art. 3.)
Affirm that the eating of Christ's body is mystical, and not orall or
corporal and gives this as a reasone thereof, that whereas three things are
employed in corporal eating, to wit, 1. a masticatio^ or chewing with the
teeth. 2. a trajection into the stomach and belly. And 3. a Conversion of the
thing eaten into the substance of the eater, this last which is most essential
in eating, cannot agree to the body of Christ, which is not turned into our
substance, but rather in a mystical manner turns us into it self (say they)
to which they might also added that which our Savior ^peaketh of that which
goes in at the mouth, that it likewise goes out in the draught. Math. 15. 17.

Again, if a Mouse or Ratt, or any such beast happen to eat the consecrated
Hostie, it is controverted what is eaten by such. 1. then in the Roman missall
and cautel's of the Mass, it is affirmed that they eat Christ's body, for
these ar the very words, Item ^^ corpus Christi a muribus vel araneis
consumptum vel corrosum fuerit, etc. that is, If the body of Christ be
consumed or gnawne by Myce or spiders, if these vermin can be found, let them
be burned, and what remains of that which is gnawn by them unconsumed, if it
may be done without horror, let it be eaten. But Lombard in the contrarieus
(lib. 4. d. 13.) says, That Christ's body is not eaten by such beasts, though
it would seem that it were, and if any will ask (says he) What is it then
which is eaten by such? he answers very bl^ntlie, saying, Deus novit, that
is, God knows, not he. But Durand. in his rationale divinorum. lib. 4. f.
63. tells us that Pope Innocent the 3. resolves the matter otherwise, and
says, That as the substance of the bread is miraculously turned into the
body of Christ when it begins to be in the Sacrament, so does bread
miraculously return when Christ's body ceasseth to be there, and therefore,
that the mouse or any such beast eats only the bread that miraculouslie is
so furnished unto them by God. Even as the same Durand tells a tale there, how
a Matron that furnished bread sabbathlie to Pope Gregory did laugh when she
heard the Pope affirm, that to be Christ's body which she knew to be bread
that her self had baken, whereupon the Pope to co^vince her of her error, by
his prayer he converted the hostie visiblie into a finger of flesh, and when
here on she was converted, he prayed again, and turned the finger of flesh
into bread again. And so here were three pretty co^versions, si credere fas
ect. The first, of the Hostie into Christ's body invisiblie, the next, of the
Hostie into a finger of flesh visibly, and the third, of the finger of flesh
back again into bread visiblie. Quis talia fando temperet. etc,

11. Here again in the other Element of the Sacrament, they contend one
against another, concerning the mixture of water with the wine, and the
Transsubstantiatio^ of both. 1. Then Cardinal Aliac^ (in 4. sent. q. 5.)
tells us that Scotus did hold That water is not simply necessary at all to
be used in the sacrament, seeing there is no mention thereof in the institution,
but only that it is the precept of the Church (says he) and that the Grecian
and Eastern Church uses it not to this day. But others again pleads the
necessity of the mixture of water, and therein places a mystery. Next,
Whether the water mixed with the wine be both converted in Christ's blood, it is
controverted (says Biel on the canon of the Mass, lect. 35.) and of this
(says he) there are three opinions. 1. That the water remains still in it
own kind and substance, taking only the color and Taste of the wine. 2. That
the wine is turned into Christ's blood, and the water into that which came out
of Christ's side on the Cross, but to that it is answered (says he) that the
words of consecration extends not themselves to the conversion of water at
all, and specially into that which came out of Christ's side, The third opinion
(says he) is, that the water is turned into wine in the mixture thereof, and
then, that both together are turned into Christ's blood, and so that there are
two Transsubstantiations of the water whereof no mention is in scripture. I
could instance more concerning the adoration of the Hostie, whether it should
be absolute or conditional, as also their disagrement in every other point of
popery, beside the dissentions and divisions between the Scotists and
Thomists, the Dominicans and Franciscans, the Sorbone and the Jesuits, and all,
in weighty matters, but studying to brevitie, these shall suffice, wherein I
da^e challenge all the Priests and Papists in the world to instance the like
amongst us, especially in one point of doctrine. Whose differences (wherewith
they upbraid us] ar like molehills in regard of these mountains, and rather in
matter of government or ceremony, nor in any point of fundamental doctrine
and substance, so that these Pharisee-like papists, should first take the beam
out of their own eye, before they spy the mote in their neighbors, and
henceforth cease to brag of their Catholic unity, and from all which
disagrements and digladiations amongst themselves. I shall only conclude in
Bellarmins own words (lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 10.. add.) That it is a most
sure Note of false doctrine, that heretical authors agree not therein amongst
themselves.

11. THat S. Peter was not ordained by Christ, the first head, or chief amongst
the Apostles.
Which he says is contrary to Math. 10. 2. where Peter is first named, and
therefore concludes that he was first not only in order, but in power and
jurisdiction above the rest. Which is an absurd inference, that of twelve
persons of one equal function, because such an one is first named, therefore
he has authority and jurisdiction over all the rest, for so, Gal. 2. 9.
where James is first named before Peter, it would follow that James had
jurisdiction over Peter. Whereas all were alike in power and jurisdiction, as
Cyprian (de unit. Ecclesiae.) says, The rest of the Apostles were the self
same that Peter was, endued with alike fellowship both of honor and power, And
we know (says Cardinal Cusanus. lib. 2. de concord. Cath. cap. 13. That
Peter received no more power from Christ than the other Apostles.

The second place which he brings is, Math. 16. 18. Upon this rock I will
build my Church. Which he adduced before for the Popes infallibility, and to
which I have already answered in the sixth Assertion. And now he brings it
to prove the Popes supremacy, whereas beside Cardinal Cusanus forecited words
on this place, their learned Ferus says thus, It is proper only to Christ to
be called this rock, as Peter himself calls him. 1. Pet. 2. 4. and whereby it
is evident (says he) that Christ built not his Church on Peter, or any other
man, for there is no man so firm and constant, who cannot be moved, which in
Peter himself we manifestly see, therefore Christ himself is that rock whereon
his Church is built (sayeh he) according to 1. Cor. 3. 11. other foundation can
no man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ.

The third place is, Math. 16. 19. I will give to thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, Whereunto I answer, that not only all the fathers (except
Origin) declares that all the disciples received the power of the keys as well
as peter (as Maldonat on this place confesses) but also Cardinal Cusanus
(lib. 2. concord. cath. cap. 13.) and with him Ferus and others, say, that
Peter received no more power hereby from Christ, than did the others. John 20.
23.

The fourth place is, 1. Cor. 3. 4. where one says, I am of Paull, another I
am of Apollos, another I am of Cephas, another I am of Christ, where Peter is
named next to Christ, ascending from the lesser (says he) to those whom he
would have esteemed greater. To whom I answer, 1. from nomination in order (as
has been said) to conclude jurisdictio^ over others in power, is an absurd
consequence. 2. If the ascending be here from the lesser to the greater, then
it will follow that Paull who is named here first, is lesse^ (though an
Apostle) than Apollos which is absurd.

The fifth place is, Luke 22. 31. where it is said to Peter, When thou art
converted confirm thy Brethren, that is (says he) practice and exercise
greatness and do^inion over the^. I answer, that this is a strange gloss
indeed, for to confirm, is a duty of Ministration, but not a dignity of
Donation, as is said Act. 15. 32. That Judas and Silas exhorted the brethren
with many words and confirmed them, which is not that they excercised greatness
and dominion thereby over the^, but far otherwise, as Theophylact on this place
teaches (and with him Beda, Lyra, Stella, and Maldonat) Our Savior showing
that Peter having after his denial gotten such mercy from God, and restoring
to his dignity of Apostle-ship, he should from this experience confirm the^
that were (...) of mercy and not to despair, if through frailty they should
fall, and did there-after repent (says he) which duty also we see David in
the like case promises to perform. Psalm. 51. 13.

The sixth place is, Luke 22. 26. where Christ says, He that is greater amongst
you let him be as the younger, which shows (says he) that amongst the
twelve one was greater tha^ another even in Christ's account. To which I
answer. 1. The Evangelist Matthew, cap. 20. 16. shows, that it was not, that
amongst the Apostles one was greatest or chief in Christ's account, but that
some would have been so, as we see in the mother of Zebedes sons petition,
Math. 20. 21. Next their own Lyra Carthusian and Stella, shows that here the
Apostles were taxed of ambition by Christ, because of the contention of some for
pre-eminence above the rest. Which was equally forbidden to all, and not
adjudged to be in the person of one. Therefore also says Ambrose on this
place, Unto all the Apostles is given one plat form of interdiction, that none
of them should brag of pre-eminence.

The seventh place is, John 21. 15. where Christ says to Peter Feed my sheep,
that is, (says he) govern my Church. whereunto I shall answer only in
Cardinal Cusanus words (lib. 2. de concord. Cath. cap. 13.) saying, If it was
spoken to Peter, feed my sheep, yet it is manifest (says he) that this
feeding was but by the word and his holy example, and that according to S.
Augustine in his Commentary on these words, the same was commanded likewise to
all the others, in saying, go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to
every creature, so that nothing is spoken to Peter (says he) which imports
any other power, and therefore we conclude rightly (says the Cardinal) that
all the Apostles were equal in power with Peter. Bellar. also (l. 4. de pont.
cap. 23.. addit) acknowledges that what was give^ to peter by these words
(feed my sheep) was given to all by these other words, as my Father sent me so
send I you.

His last place which he brings, is, Math 12. 25. Every kingdom divided
against it self is brought to desolation, and if Satan cast out satan etc.
whence he most ridiculouslie reasons thus, Satan has a kingdom whereof he
is chief, if then there be not only a visible head of the Church triumphant
in heaven* but also a visible head even in hell, why not also a visible head on
earth? (says he) risum teneatis amici. A goodly conformity indeed! But as
he would have the Church to have a visible vicar head on earth, as well as a
chief one in heaven* so he should let Satan also have a visible vicar head on
earth, as well as he is the chief head in hell, and indeed we acknowledge the
Pope to be that vicar of his power* but not the vicar of Christ, Horned like
the Lamb, but speaking like the Dragon. Revel. 13. 11.

As for Testimonies of Fathers which he cites as of Theophy lact, who calls
Peter the prince of the disciples, this imports no more supremacy of
jurisdiction over the rest, nor where it is said of Virgil, That he is the
Prince of poets, that therefore he had jurisdiction over all poets in his age.
Therefore, Cyril Hier* his words (which he also cites) shows the true
meaning thereof, calling Peter Prince, that is, The most excellent of the
Apostles, which none does deny. And whereas Eusebius calls him, The first
Bishope of Christians, this imports only primacie in order, but no
supremacy of power. As for Chrysostom his 55. Homile on Matthew, where he
alleges that he is there called, The head of the church, there is no such
title there, which (as I shall show heere-after) Pope Gregory calls proud
and profane. Lastly, he cites one Euthymius a late Monck, as a Father, who
lived 1118. years after Christ, who calls Peter, Master of the whole World,
not by dominion over it, (as all knows) but in respect of that Apostolical
commission, Math. 28. 19. Go teach all nations, etc. And the last is, Pope
Leo's testimony, in his own behalf, calling Peter, Head and chief of the
Apostles in the sense forenamed, and yet all these prove only what Peter was
personally, but nowise that the Pope is the same successivelie.

But before I leave this so pleaded for papal supremacy, I will batter this
loftiest tow^e of mystical Babylon, with a battery furnished only by a Pope
himself. Gregory the great, thus Bellarmin (lib. 2. de pont. cap. 31.) proves
the Popes supremacy by these two titles given to him to wit, that he is called
The Head of the Church and Universal Bishop. Of the first whereof, says
Gregory (lib. 4. indict. epist. 36) It is Sa^anicall pride by any such title
of Head, so to subject all Christ's members to one man which cohereth to one
Head only and alone, Christ Jesus. And of the second, he says, Any one so to
mount above others, to such an hight of singularity, as that he would be under
none, but he alone would be above all, (as Pope Boniface thereafter claimed
Extrav. lib. 1. Tit. 8. cap. 1. (to be acknowledged by all, under pain of
damnation,) It is a most proud and profane usurpation.

And lest that Gregory should seem to oppose these titles in the person of
John Bishop of Constantinople, who first obtained the same from the Emperor
Manritius as a wrong done to him, or his sea, to whom these titles were due.
Therefore 1. he clears himself of this, saying to the Emperor, Epist 32. In
this matter (most religious Lord) do I defend any cause of mine? or do I
challenge heerin any wrong done to me? No. And yet the more to clear this, he
says epist. 36. None of my Predecessors would ever consent to use such a
profane title, no* not Peter himself the first founder of this sea, who, although
he was chief of the Apostles, and according to his Apostle-ship had the care of
all the Church committed to him, yet notwithstanding (says he) was not called
the universal Apostle. And in the same Epistle to Eulogius B. of Alexandria,
he shows that himself would no wise accept of any such style when it was
offered to him. And therefore he says to Eulogius, Let not your Holiness in
your letters style any man whosoever universal Bishope, yea morover (says
he) epist. 38. I confidentlie affirm, that whosoever calls himself
universal Bishope, or desires so to be called, he is the forerunner of
Antichrist. Yea, more yet, (epist. 39. and lib. 6. epist. 30) whosoever
assenteth, or acknowledges any such style, he loses the faith (says he)
and makes shipwreck thereof, (a sadd doom against all papists) all which made
Cardinal Cusanus to say thus. (lib. 2. de concord. Cath. cap. 13.) whil we
defend this, that the Pope is not universal Bishope, but only the first above
others (to wit in place or primacie) in so doing we defend the truth (says he)
Thus does a great Pope and famous Cardinal plead against papal supremacy,
as much as any Protestant can do.

12. THat a woman may be head or supreme governesse of the Church in all
causes, as the late Queen Elizabeth was.
Which is contrary (says he) to Tim. 2. 11. where it is said, Let the
woman learn in silence with all subjection, but I suffer not a woman to teach,
nor to usurp authority over the man, and again, 1. Cor. 14. 34. Let women
hold their peace in the Churches. whereunto I answer, that none of these Texts
proves any other thing, but only the subjection of a married wife, to her
husband, and that no woman whosoever should usurp the public and pastourall
office of preaching, and thus do Aquinas, Lombard, Cajetan and other Romanists
expound, and their late Est^us especially.

And as for that Religious and late Queen of happy memory, She was Supreme
Governesse of the Church within her Dominions, in causes Ecclesiastical, no
otherwi^e than as we read David was in every matter pertaining to God, as we
see 1. Chron. 26. 32. and as Hezekiah was, 2. Chron. 29. 15. and 31* and Josiah
2. Chron. 35. 2. 3. and 6. and as Nehemiah was, 13. 7. 8. and 28. acting in
matters ecclesiastical civilie, but not usurping any power or practice (as
Vzziah did 2. Chron. 26.) which belonged to the Priests office. or of a
Pastourall charge in doctrine, discipline or administration of sacraments, but
as Princes should, to cause, and see that God be worshipped aright, and
discipline be exercised as it ought within their Dominions, that so, as their
power is from God: so it may be employed chiefly for God, as nursing Fathers
and mothers to his Church, and as no scripture debarreth Princes and Magistrates
from meddling with such causes in the manner forenamed, but admits them to be
Governors therein, so likewise does antiquity, as we may see in the person of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, as Eusebius in his third book of his
life, c. 13. reports, and of his carriage in the first Council of Nice, and
decision of matters of faith, wh^^ meddling the Emperors also ^ad in such
causes, Socrates likewise declares in the p^oeme of his fifth book of
ecclesiastical history. Augustine also contra Cresconium, lib. 3. cap. 51. and
de Civit. Dei lib. 5. c. 24. and Athanasius in his second Apology, p. 797.
Graecolat. appealing to the Emperor Constantine against the unjust proceedings
of the Council of Tire, in his behalf. As Flavianus in the like case did to
the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian.

But I cannot marvel enough that this pamphleter should so touch upon a woman's
government of a particulare national Church, in a civil way within her
Dominion, whil as a crafty and vile Strumpet, named Pope John the eight did
govern the whole Roman Church which they call Catholic as Christ's vicar and
head thereof, two years, a month and four days, till going in procession and
surprysed by pains of childbirth, being upon the public street delivered,
She thereafter died, for which cause in detestation of the fact, (as Platina
the Popes Secretary and all ancient Romanist histriographers speak) No Pope
ever since went that way in public procession, as Martinus, Polonus, Sigebert,
Fasciculus temporum, Marianus Scotus, and many others ancient Records do
testify, whom I can produce.

And as for any testimonies of Fathers which he brings, as Damascen's where
he says, I consent not that the Church of God be governed by Kings, and in
Theodorets history, that one Eulogius said concerning the Emperor Valens
commanding by his officer what did belong to a Bishop, What? was he made
Bishope (says he) that day when he was crowned Emperor? and Ignatius who
commands all men, even the Emperor himself to be obedient to the Bishope,
all these (I say) makes nothing against that which I have said before, but
only against civil Princes their usurpation of what belongs properly and
only to the Ecclesiastical office and persons vested therewith, in doctrine and
discipline.

And if we will look to Antiquity, we shall find that in this point, popish
doctrine debarring princes or the civil Magistrate from any meddling in
Ecclesiastical effaires, (as Bellar. teaches lib. 1. de clericis, c. 28. and
29.) joyneth hands with the ancient heretics the Donatists, who did contend in
likemanner, that the cognition, trial and meddling with Ecclesiastical
effaires, belongs nowise to the Magistrate. And therefore this was the speech
of Donatus, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia? or What has the Emperor ado
with the Church? as Optatus Milevitanus declares in his third book against
Parmenian, and Augustine likewise, lib. 1. contra epist. Parmeniani, c. 7. and
epist. 166. Whereas the harmony of confessions of faith, and ours in
particulare 1581. art. 24. says, Moreover to Kings, Princes, Rulers and
Magistrates, we affirm that chiefly and most principally the conservation and
purging of Religion appertains, so that not only they are appointed for
civil policy, but also for maintenance of the true religion, and for
supressing of idolatry and superstition, as in David, Iosaphat, Ezekias,
Josias and others highly commended for their zeal in that case may be espied,
and in our later confession 1647. cap. 23. That for the better effecting
whereof, they have power to call Synods, to be present at them* and to provyde
that whatsoever is transacted in them, be according to the mind of God.

13. THat Antichrist shall not be a particulare man, and that the Pope is
Antichrist.
Which he says is contrary to 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. where he is called, That man
of sin, etc. and therefore a particulare man only. Whereunto I answer in
the Jesuit Ribera's words on Revel. 17. 10. That it is not unusual in
Scripture, that by one man, many the like and of the same incorporation are
signified, (says he) which he proves out of Math. 22. 11. where, by One man
that wanted the wedding garment many such are signified, and out of Dan. 7.
where, by the King of the Medes and Persians, not any individual and one only
person is signified, but the whole succession of these Kings one after another.
likewise by the consent of all Romanists, that speech 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. where it
is said, (Only he who now lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way)
is to be understood, not of an individual Roman Emperor only, but of the
whole succession of the old Roman Emperors then resident at Rome, in their
full integrity. Yea, the papists even now, when they say, that the Pope is
Christ's vicar, they mean not this or that Pope only, but the whole succession
of such one after another.

The second place is Revel. 13. 18. Where the number 666. is called the number
of a man, whence he concludes That Antichrist shall be one only individual
man. To which I answer, that from the number of a man, 666. to argue to the
singularity of a person, is a bad consequence, but by this number the Jesuit
Ribera teaches us better, that Ireneus who lived near to the Apostles times,
according to the co^putation by the greek letters, found it out, to be Lateinos
or Roman, as their Church is called at this day, Ecclesia latina seu Romana,
and the Pope Papa Romanus, etc.

The third place is, 1. John 2. 22. That Antichrist denies the Father and the
Son, which the Pope does not. Whereunto I answer 1. That the word
(Antichrist) is sometimes taken generally, for all these who openly and
avowedly oppose Christ and his truth, and of such the Apostle John speaks
verse 18. That even in his time there were many Antichrists. And sometimes it is
taken more strictly, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. for that great Antichrist to come, and
whereby is signified the succession of such, who under the profession of the
Christian name. shall notwithstanding oppose Christ's truth, by all
deceavablnesse of unrighteousnes, and in deepest hypocrisy working in a
mystery, and therefore is said to be herned like the lamb, but to speak like
the dragon. And in this sense we say, that the Pope is Antichrist. 2. He who
denies the son, is said to deny the Father, as we see, 1. John 2. 23. Now
the Son is denied either directly and in express words, or indirectlie, by
consequence or in deeds (as Augustine speaks, lib. contra Donatistas) and that
this way the Pope denies the son in the verity of his humane Nature by
their transsubstantiation, and in all his three offices, as sole King of his
Church, sole Priest and sole Prophet, by many learned divines has been
clearlie proven, the Pope also claiming all these three* a* Monarch of his
Church on earth, high Priest, and infallible Prophet thereof.

The fourth place which he brings is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. where it is said, That
Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that are called gods. To which I
answer, that this place rather clearly proyeth him to be Antichrist, it being
evident that Princes and Kings are called so, Psalm. 82. 6. and it is notour,
both by doctrine and practice, that the Pope exalts himself above all such,
as we may see (Extravag. lib. 1. tit. 8. cap. Vnam S^nctam.) to the very
making them kiss his feet, deposing them, and treading on their necks, as
Alexander the third did to the Emperor Frederick, and as I have shown at
large in my late Treatise Of Antichrist, painted and poynted out in his true
colors.

The fifth place which he bringes, is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. which says, That our
Lord Jesus shall kill him with the spirit of his mouth at his coming, which
agrees no more to the Pope he) then That Christ is come the second time. To
which place I answer, 1. That this deceatfull Seducer deals most falsely and
fraudfullie in citing these words, as if they were the words of our Bible,
whereas the words of our Translation according to the original are these, Whom
our Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming, and in the Rhemes translation, it is thus, whom our
Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
manifestation of his advent. So that the Apostle makes two degrees of his
destruction, The first whereof he calls a consumption by the spirit of his
mouth, and a consumption we know is a lingering disease, whereby one wastes
away piece and piece. And this is by the spirit of Gods mouth, whereby is
signified Gods Word, as we see Gal. 3. 5. 1. Tim. 4. and 1. 1 John 4. 1. And
this consuming of Antichrist by this mean, by the preaching of the everlasting
gospel Revel 14. 6. we see (praised be God) in a good measure performed. The
second degree he calls the destroying of him altogether by the brightness, or
(as the Rhemists speak) by the manifestatio^ of his coming. which we hope in
God also is drawing very near.

The last place which he brings, is John 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers name
and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own name, him ye will
receive. To which I answer, 1. That our Savior speaks not of Antichrist
strictly taken, and by way of eminency, as he is described by Paull, 2 Thessalonians. 24. who was to come and appear after the dissolving of the ancient
Roman Empire, but of false Prophets that were shortly after Christ's ascension
to arise, to deceive the incredulous Jews, (as histories report) because they
did not believe, but rejected the true Messiah. And this their own Ferus
declares to be the meaning of the place, and diverse other Romanists.

2. We see that the jewish Nation only were to receive these of who^ our
Savior speaks. But Antichrist (of who^ the Apostle speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2.) was
to be an universal deceiver of multituds, of peoples, of nations and tongues,
which (Revel. 17. 15.) are called the waters whereon the Whore sits, and
whereunto the papal title of Universal Bishop does therefore properly agree.

14. THat none but God ca^ forgive sins.
Which he says is contrary to John 20. 23. where it is said, Whose sins
ye forgive are forgiven them, and Math. 9. 8. where it is said, When the
multitude saw it, they marvelled and glorified God which had given such power
to men. To which I answer, that this place of John, proves only a
Ministerial power given by Christ to his Apostles and their successors, which
we deny not, and which his own words also on Math. 9. 8. does only grant unto
them, saying, Which tho they (to wit the multitude) knew to appertain to God
only by nature, yet they perceived that it might be done by man's Ministry on
earth.

Wherefore we say 1. with Ambrose (lib. 3. desp. Sancto c. 19. Men (says he)
does only afford their Ministry to the remission of sins, but they
exercise not any right of authority. Istirogant, Divinitas donat (says he)
that is, They seek it, but God gives it, 2. Lombard also their Master of
sentences teaches, how God only forgiveth sins properly, and men
Ministeriallie, saying, lib. 4. sent. did. 18. God only remitteth and
retains sins, and yet he has given power to the Church to do so, but He
remitteth and retains otherwise than the Church. For he remitteth sins only
by himself (says he) because he purges the soul from the inward spot
thereof, and delivers it from the debt of eternal death. But he has not
given this power to Priests, notwithstanding, he has given them power of
binding and loosing, that is, (says he) of declaring that men ar bound or
loosed, as the Priest declares the Leper to be clean, whom first the Lord had
cured and made clean. And therefore this is their Commission to preach
repentance and remission of sins in Christ's Name. Luke 24. and Act. 13. 38.
And this Ministerial power is that only which the Fathers who^ he cites does
prove as out of Ambrose I have already shown.

15. THat we ought not to confess our sins to any man, but to God alone.
FIrst for confession of sins, I will show what we hold, and and 2. what
we oppose. 1. then we hold that ordinarlie it suffices to confess only to
God, according to that Psalm. 32. 5. I said I will confess my transgressions to
the Lord, but if any persons for any secret or hid sin, or his sins
otherwise, be weyghted in conscience, and cannot find of themselves comfort or
counsel, concerning such, these a^ the words of Calvin (lib. 3. instit. cap.
4. number. 12. Let every faithful man remember that this is his duty, if
privilie he be so distressed and afflicted in conscienc, through the sense of his
sins that without the help of others he cannot be comforted see that he neglect
not the remedy that the Lord offers to him, to wit, that for his relief, he
use private confossion to his Pastor, and for giving him comfo^t, he privatlie
implore his help, whose office is both privatlie and publictlie by the doctrine
of the gospel to comfort Gods people.

We oppose not then private confession altogether to man, being voluntary,
free and occasional, but that politic picklock of popish sacramental
auricular confession, whereby every one is forced to confess to a Priest all
their sins which they can remember with all the agravating circumstances,
else to expect no forgivenes of them from God, which (as their own Ferus on
Math. 11. 28. says) (by the confession of the learned) is nihil nisi
carnifi^ina conscientiae, that is, nothing else but a torturing of the
conscience (says he) when men are forced to auricular confession, and may not
make it, but to their own Priest, though he be unlearned, naughty and
inconstant. And truly (says their own Cassander, consult. art. 11.) I
believe there should be no controversy in this, if this wholesome medicine of
confession had not been insected and defiled by many unskillfull and
importunat soule-physitians, whereby they have laid snares upon their
consciences, and as it were by certain tortures, tormented them whom otherwise
they should have eased and relieved.

Next, to come to answer to his scripture Arguments, which he brings for
his popish auricular confession, the first is Math. 3. where it is said That
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan went out to John
the Baptist, and ^er baptized of him confessing their sins. To whom I shall
answer only in the Jesuit Maldonats words on this place, saying, What
Catholic was ever so unlearned that he would prove the sacrament of confession
by this place? seeing as Cardinal Cajetan shows on act. 19. 18. This their
confession was but general and public, any other being by all probability
impossible, that he could hear in particular and in private, such a huge
multitude, as out of all the forenamed places came to him to be baptized of
him. We see then by Maldonats verdict, that this Pamphleter is an unlearned
dolt.

The second place is, act. 19. 18. where it is said, That these who believed
came to Paull and confessed and show their deeds. To which place also I answer
in Cajetans words, which are these, As they did flock together (says he) to
the baptism of John, confessing their deeds, without doubt generally, or
their public sins, so here. For none of these confessions were Sacramental,
but a profession only of repentance for their former life (says he)

The third place which he adduceth is, Numb. 5. 6. Then shall they confess
their sins which they have done. To which I answer 1. That hereby
sacramental confession cannot be proven, because they hold it to be a
sacrament of the gospel, and which was not instituted (as Bellarmin grants,
lib. 3. de pont. c. 20) till after Christ's resurrection. 2. Bonaventure (lib.
4. d. 17. art, 1) cites Augustine, saying, That the offering of sacrafices was
the legal confession of sins, whence he infers, That it appears that
there was no other confession under the law, but the oblation of sacrifices. 3.
Their own Lyra on Levit. 16. 21. shows, That the Priest did not hear in
particular the confession of the people, but in general, for the other had
been impossible (says he)

But I wonder how he omitteth that which usuallie they object, and is
Bellarmins maine argument for auricular confession, to wit, Jam. 5. 16. which
says, Confess your sins one to another. To which I can not answer better
than in Cardinal Cajetans words, and by adducing his reasons, saying, There is
here no speech of sacramental confession, for sacramental confession is not
one to another, but to the Priest only (says hee] wherefore this confession
is that, whereby we mutuallie confess our selves to be sinners, that one may
pray for another, or for reconciliation, where wrong is done (says he.)

As for Fathers which he cites, they are either false and counterfit, as
Clements Epistles which Bellar. in his book of Ecclesiastical writters,
declares and proves to be spurious, or else they are falsely alleged, as
Ireneus and Tertullian, who as their Beatus Rhenanus testifies speaks only
of public confession, and not of private, saying, (in Tertul. de poenit) Let
none-marvell that Tertullian speaks nothing de clancularia illa admissorum
confessione, that is, of that secret confession of sins. Neither is there any
such thing in Origin, or any alleged works of Ambrose that makes for popish
sacramental and auricular forced confession, nor any such work of his, as, in
muliere peccatrice, in all the Catalogue of his works set down by Bellarmin de
scrip eccles. and though there were such a work and such words, As confess
freely to the Priest the hidden secrets of thy soul, this were but only as
one stood in need of comfort and counsel, upon distres of conscience (as has
been said) but I wonder most of his citation of Chrisostom and Augustine, both
of which are against any such forced confession. Chrisost. (conc. 4. de Lazaro)
saying, Do I say confess to thy fellow servant who may upbraid thee? No.
Confess unto God who can cure thee, and Augustine lib. 10. confess. c. 3. says
thus, What have I to do with men, that they should hear my Confessions, as if
they could heal all my diseases.?

16. THat Pardons and Indulgences were not in the Apostles times.
Which he says is contrary to 2. Cor. 2. 10. where the Apostle says, To
whom ye forgive any thing, I for give also. To which I answer, 1. That this
shows only the Apostles consent to the releasing of the incestuous Penitent
from the Church censure of Excommunication, formerly pronunced 1. Cor. 5. 3.
and this (says Estius) is the exposition of all the latin Fathers, and so
makes nothing for papal indulgences or pardons. Which their own Prierias lib.
cont. Cath. de indulg. and Cajetan opusc. lib. 5. cap. 1. grants to have no
ground in scripture, tho this Pamphleter would wrest scripture for them. Yea
moreover (says Cajetan) none of the ancient fathers greek or latin have
brought any such to our knowledge. which makes that Bellarmin brings not one
father for them. 2. Their Alfonsus a Castro. lib. 8. cont here is. Tit.
indulgentia, as also B. Fisher cont. Luth. art. 18. grants that their use is
only of late.

The second place which he brings, is, 2. Cor. 2. 6. Sufficient to such a man
is this punishment, whence he concludes, that it lies in the hand of the
spiritual Magistrate to measure the time of such censure or punishment that is
imposed. To which I answer; That these his words confirms what we have said
before, showing what ancient indulgences were in foro Ecclesiae, and which we
practice in the exercise of our discipline toward pe^itents, as we see cause,
but this makes nothing for papal indulgences, which they extend not only to
the living, but also to the dead in purgatory, and wherein, what is their
unity, or rather huge division of tongues and pen's, we have shown in the
answer to the tenth Assertion.

17. THat the actions and passions of the saints serve for nothing to the
Church.
Which he says is contrary to Coloss. 1. 24. where the Apostle says, I
now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is wanting of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church. To
which I answer, The true meaning of these words in their own Aquinas words, on
this place is this, saying, These words according to the superfice might have
an ill sense, as if Christ's passion were not sufficient for our redemption, but
for filling up that which wants, the sufferings of the saints were to be added,
but this is heretical (says he) for the blood of Christ is sufficient for
the redemption of many worlds, himself being the propitiation for our sins,
but it is to be understood (says he) that Christ and his Church make up but
one mystical person, whose head is Christ, and all the godly are his body
and members thereof, this then was wanting, that as Christ had suffered in his
natural body, so he was to suffer in Paul's person as a member of his
mystical body, Christ's sufferings in his body, being for the redemption of
his Church, but the sufferings of the saints for the Church, being for this,
that by their example the Church may be confirmed, (says he) where we see
that the sufferings of the saints serve to the church for co^formity and
confirmation, but not (as this Pamphleter would have them) to be a treasure for
papal indulgences to bring in a treasure of money to the popes coffers.

The second place which he brings is, Philip. 2. 30. wherein Paul exhorts the
Philippians to receive Epaphroditus with all gladness, because for the work of
Christ he was near to death, to supply their work of service toward him,
which as Aquinas says, They were not able in their own persons to perform to
him. which words of Paul no more proves the Pamphleters point whereat he
aims, of the benefit of popish indulgences, then that Rome is in Vtopia, but
shows both his usual impertinencie, impudence and ignorance.

18. THat no man can do works of supererogation.
Which he says is contrary to Math. 19. 21. where our Savior says to the
young richman, If thou will be perfect, go sell all that which thou have and
give to the poor etc. and follow me, whence it plainly appears (says he)
that a man by the assistance of Gods grace may do somthings counseled, which
are of more perfection than are things commanded. To whom I answer 1. in their
own Ferus words on this place, saying, In these words is employed that which is
necessary and commanded to all, to wit, Poverty of spirit, which is nothing
else, but with the heart to cleave to no creature, neither does the kingdom
of heaven belong to any but to such as do so (says he) 2. This command to
this young at this time to sell all. was a personal command, given for this
end to discover this young man's covetousnes and hypocrisy, in saying he had
kept the whole law from his youth* like that personal command given to
Abraham of sacrificing Isaac, to discover his great faith and obedience to all
after ages. And we know that such personal commands for trial or discovery
does not tie all. 3. The perfection of Angels is to do Gods Commandments, as
we see Psalm. 103. 20. and in that petition of the Lords prayer, Thy will be
done on earth, as it is in heaven. Yea Christ's own perfection was in this, the
doing of his Fathers will, and shall wretched sinful man be able to go beyond
the perfection of these?

The second place which he brings is 1. Cor. 7. 25. Now concerning virgins, I
have no Commandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment (we read counsel,
says he) and to do that which is counseled is not necessary, because one
nevertheless may be saved (says he) To which place I answer 1. Not only the
origin^ll has the word, judgeme^t (...), and not counsel, but also Cardinal
Cajetan acknowledges the same on that place ingenouslie. 2. By command, the
Apostle means a general command, oblieging all persons and at all times, as
the precepts of the Moral Law do, and concerning such special commands of
living single and keeping virginity, he shows that he has no such
Commandment of the Lord, but in regard of the present condition of Christians
liable to daily persecution, he declares his judgment only, that to live
single, and in the estate of virginity, it is better then to live in a married
estate, for their own good, but not that thereby they could supererogat at
Gods hands, and therefore leaving it in the mean time free to every one to do,
as God has distributed to every one his gifts, as he speaks 1. Cor. 7. 17.

3* Gerson (de consult. evang. and statu perfect.) and with him their Paludanus
(in lib. 3. sent. d. 34. q. 3.) do teach, That some may attain to as great
hight of perfection living in marriage, and possessing riches (as we see in
Abraham and Job) as they who live single, or in the estate of poverty. As also
Jansenius in his concord. on the Evangelists cap. 100. alleging the
authority of Aquinas teaches, That the perfection of a Christian life
consists essentiallie in keeping of Gods Commandments. Aquin. 2, 2. q. 184.
art. 3. and as we see Philip. 4. 8. beyond which in performance can no flesh go.

Lastly, We find in scripture Gods counsel to man and his command to be all
one, as these places testify, psalm. 73. 24. Prove. 1. 25. 30. Jer. 49. 20. Act.
20. 27. and Revel. 3. 18. How soever with man it may be said, as it is
proverbiall, Counsel is no command.

The third place which he bringes, is Math. 19* 12. There be Eunuchs who have
made themselves so, for the kingdom of heaven, he that is able to receive it,
let him receive or keep it, now of precepts it is not said, keep them who
may, or is able, but keep the^ absolutely (says he)

For answer 1. Let him hear the Jesuit Maldonats exposition upon this place,
saying, The words receive it, in this place signifies the same as to
understand, for Christ thereby would say no other thing than elsewhere he uses
to speak of any grave matter, saying, he that has ears to hear, let him
hear (says he.)

2. These Eunnchs that made themselves such, that is, lives as Eunuchs chastely
and in a single life, the text says that they did it for themselves, to
attain to the kingdom of heaven, (which every one is bound to do) and not to
supererogat for others.

As for Origens words which he alleges on the 1. Romans 15. saying, These
things which we do over and above our duty. I find nowise in that place, and
though they were, yet we must distinguish between duties to which we are
bound, by a general precept common to all (as has been said) and duties to
which we are not so bound, but left to the performance thereof, according as
every one finds himself gifted or not, which answer serves also to that
place alleged out of Chrysostom, that we may do more than we are
commanded. Next for this he cites Gregory Nissen. 1. Moral. cap. 5. whereas
Gregory Nissen. never wrote such a book, but he seems to mistake Gregory
Nissen. for Gregory the great, who lib. 21. Moral. cap. 15. quyte overthrowes
works of supererogation.

19. THat by the fall of Adam we have lost our freewill, and it is not in our
power to choice good, but only evil.
Which he says is contrary to 1. Cor. 7. 37. and Prove. 23. 26. where the Lord
requires us* To give to him our heart, which if we have not freedom of will,
why does the Holy Ghost require this of us? (says he) To which I answer,
that all such precepts are the Rules of our duty, but not proofs of our
ability by nature, which when we see we are not able to perform of our
selves, it is to drive us by prayer to him who only can enable us, and (as is
said Philip. 2. 13.) Who works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, and as we see the proof thereof, Joel. 2. 12 compared, with Lam. 5.
21. as also Ezekiel. 18. 31. Where, though the Lord says, Make you a new heart,
yet cap. 36. 26. he says, I will give you a new heart etc. For as Augustine
speaks (tom. 7. de gra. and l. arb. c. 16.) To the Pelagians of old who
objected such places, That God commands us to do what we are not able, (to wit
of our selves) that we may know what we should seek of him, who can make us
able, and workesin us both the will and deed. So Bernard de gra. and lib. arb.
And as for Scholasticks, how much (says their Cassander. consult. art. 18)
They have ascribed to Divine grace, in place of the rest, Bonaventure does
witness, saying, This is the profession of all pious minds to ascribe nothing
to themselves, but all to the grace of God.

Next, as to that 1. Cor. 7. 37. where it is said, That he that stands
steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will
and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virginity, does well.
This Text (I say) makes nothing for man's natural freewill, a-like to good as
to that which is morallie evil, nor was there ever any learned Romanist (to my
knowledge) that alleged this place to prove freewill. For Cardinal Cajetan,
Aquinas, Catharinus and others upon this place, shows that the Apostle here
speaks only of a fathers power over his child, and that as he wills or
pleases he may dispose of his virgin, either to marry her, or keep her
unmarried, as he should find her inclination, or the fitnes or unfitnes of
times. As we have the like speech Act. 5. 4. of Peter to Ananias though in
another matter.

The second place which he brings, is John. 1. 11. 12. which says, That
Christ came to his own and they received him not, but as many as received him,
he gave them power to become the sons of God. which plainly implies a
liberty of will, (says he) To whom I answer. 1. That this Text implies no
liberty of will by nature in them who received Christ, to receive him. but that
he that gave them power to become the sons of God, gave them grace also to
receive him, whil as others did not receive him, and this is according to the
Apostles speech, 1. Cor. 4. 7. Who made thee to differ from another? and what
have thou which thou have not received? and according to 2. Cor. 3. 5. That we are not able to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God, whereon says their own Estius (and with him Lyra) The greek
Commentators as Chrysostom, Theophylact, and O Ecumenius, explicating the
Apostles meaning, speaks after thi^ manner (says he) That there is not
something on our part, and something on Gods part in the first work of our
conversion, but plainly, that there is nothing on our part, no not the least
thing, but all to be ascribed to God.

The third place which he bringes is Deuteronomy. 30. 19. where Moses having set
before the people life and death, etc. he bids them choose life. To which
place my former answer to Prove. 23. 26. suffices, Therefore also says their
Hugo de S. victore, (Miscell. 2. lib. 2. Tit. 137.) That for doing good there is
a three fold grace, a preventing, a cooperating, and a following grace. The
first gives us the will to choice, the second, the ability to do, and the
third, the perseverance to continue. Estius likewise on 2. Cor. 3. 5. To this
purpose cites the words of the council of Orange, whereby they decreed, That
he was deceived with an heretical spirit, who will say, that a man by the
power of nature can but think as becomes him any good that belongs to
eternal life, let be to choice the same.

The fourth place is Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
gathered thy children, as an Hen does her brood under her wings, but ye would
not. Which Text shows indeed the perverseness of man's will by nature, and the
opposition thereof to the will of God, but no freedom thereof by nature, to will
that which is morallie good and tends to salvation.

As for the testimonies of fathers. He brings first Hilarie, saying, That he
would not that there should be a necessity for men to be the sons of God,
but a power. To which I answer 1. That Hilarie wrote 12. books of the
Trinity, but he tells not which of them. 2. Hilarie speaks of a manichean
necessity or coaction, which we also deny to be in man's will at all, or in
his first conversion, and by power, he means not the power of freewill by
nature, but that power or efficacy of grace which our Savior gives, John 1.
11. Therefore also of this power, and against the forenamed coaction, Prosper
speaks thus, (de vocatione gentium) We both believe and feel by experience
(says he) that grace is so powerful, that yet we conceive it not to be any
ways violent.

The second testimony which he brings is, Augustins, saying, To consent or
not to consent to Gods calling, lies in a ma^s own will. To which I answer 1.
That he cites, l. 1. ad simpl. q. 4. whereas in that whole book there ar but two
questions. 2. I answer to the words of August. out of Augustine himself in his
107. epistle to Vitalis. That not only, not to consent to Gods calling lies in
man's will which is perverse by nature, but also to consent to Gods calling
lies also in a man's own wll, for grace takes not away the liberty of the will
which is by Gods creation, but the pravity thereof which is from man's
corruption. So that (as he said before l. de gra. and l. arb.) It is sure that
we will freely when we will, but it is he that makes us will that which is
good, of whom it is said, It is God who works in us both the will and the
deed.

In this sense also does Cyrill speak whom he brings, saying. W^e cannot any
ways deny freedom of will in man. And Augustine also speaking against
manichean coaction, and saying, How should our Savior reward every one
according to their works if there were not freewill? conform whereunto says
the haromnie also of the co^fessions of the reformed Churches, and ours in
particular, 1647. cap. 9. God has endued the will of man with that natural
liberty, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature
determined to do good or evil. So that we acknowledge the will to be free, as
freedom is opposed to coaction, but not free, as able of it self to choice the
good that tends to salvation, or that it is equally propense to good as to
evil, as the Pelagians of old, and now papists maintain. Therefore (said
Bernard de gra. and lib. arb.) Let no man think that therefore it is called
freewill which we have, because it has an equal power and inclination to
good as to evil, seeing it could fall by it self, but not rise but by the holy
Ghost.

20. THat it is impossible to keep Gods Comandements, tho assisted with his
grace and the holy Ghost.
Which he says is contrary to Philip. 4. 13. where the the Apostle says,
That he can do all things through Christ. that strengthens him. Whereunto I
answer, That the word (all things) is not of further extent, than these things
whereof he speaks in particular in the preceding verse, where he says, In
all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, to abound and to
suffer need. Thus does Sedulius and their own canonized Aquinas expound this
text, as also their late Estius, saying, The meaning is, all things before
rehearsed, and what else I am to suffer I am able to do through Christ who
enableth me, so that he speaks no^ of his perfect fulfilling of the Law in
general, the contrary whereof he confesses, Romans 7. 23.

The second place which he brings is, Luke 1. 5. 6. where it is said of
Zachary and Elizabeth, That they walked in all the commandemen^s of the Lord
blameless. To which I answer 1. That this was the old Pelagian objection
which they called their impenetrable Buckler, as Jerome witnesses, lib. 1.
cont. Pelag. with whom the papists heerin agree. And to whom I answer in his
words to the Pelagian. That where it is said, that they are called righteous,
this is (says he) as many others are called so, in the holy scripture, as
Io^, Iehosaphat and Josias, not that they wanted all fault, but are commended
so, because for the most part they were virtuous, for Zacharias himself was
punished with dumbnes (says he) and Io^ by his own speech was rebuked, and
Iehosaphat and Josias are reported to have done things which greatly
displeases God. Next, where it is said that Zachary and Elizabeth walked in
all the Commandments of God without blame, that is, without any gross
wickedness (says he) but that they walked without sin, I deny (says he)
that any man can do so, for that is co^petent only to God. Their own
Carthusian also (and with him their late Stella) shows, That this is spoken
according to that measure which is agreeable to humane condition, but that
there walking was not without sin, for there is none so righteous in this
mortal life (says he.)

The third place is, Luke 11. 27. where Christ says, Yea rather blessed are
they who hear the word and keep it. To which I answer, and to all such
places that speak of keeping Gods word or commandments, that such a keeping
thereof is here meaned (as there Carthusian says) Which is agreeable to
humane condition in this life. For as Jerome says lib. 3. cont. Pelag. If
thou can show me but one man who has fulfilled the Commandments, Thou may
show me a man that needs not Gods mercy (says he.)

The fourth place is, Luke 11. 2. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
To which I answer, as their own Carthusian also expounds, That this is,
readily, reverendlie and sincerlie, Q^antum nostra fragilitas permittit, that
is, as far as our frailty permits (says he) so that the word (as) has
relation not to that degree of perfect obedience which Angels perform in
heaven, but to the manner of doing the same, as has been said by Carthusia^,
and as our frailty permits, which sufferes us not to be free of sin, and
of not doing Gods Will perfectly, and therefore in the same prayer we are
also taught to crave daily forgivnes, which we needed not, if we could obey
Gods will perfectly as the Angels do.

The last place is, 1. John 5. 3. For this is the love of God that we keep his
Commandments, which is coincident with the third place, and therefore already
answered.

As for any testimonies of Fathers, he brings the words only one of Basil,
saying, That it is an impious thing to say that the Commandments of God, are
impossible. To which I answer, Though he tells not where Basil speaks so,
that it is impious indeed to say that Gods commandments are impossible to be
kept in any measure, for we see the contrary in Zachary and Elizabeth, but
to say that in this life they may be keped perfectly without sin or any
breach of them, that is likewise impious, and plain Pelagianisme or heresy,
therefore in this sense says Ambrose on gal. 3. (which Aquinas cites on the
same place) The Commandments ar such that it is impossible to keep them (sayeh
he) but I admire how he cites Hilarie in psalm. 118. whose words are these on
the 39. verse in his contrar, saying, The Prophet being in the body speaks,
and knows that no living man can be without sin, except one whom he
remembers, who had no sin, and in whose mouth was found no guile, to wit,
Christ. As also I have shown how opposite Jerome is to him, l. 3. cont. Pelag.
whom notwithstanding he cites as for him. As Origin and Cyrill, who no wise
patronizeth him.

21. THat faith only justifies, and that good works are not absolutely
necessary to salvation.
Which he says is contrary to 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and I have not charity, I am nothing, therefore
faith only does not justify (says he) To which I answer, 1. That there is
no word in this Text of Justification, but of the necessity of charity to be
joined with faith in a christian profession, which no protestant ever yet
denied. 2. The Apostle speaks not of a justifying faith, but (as the words
imports) of a faith of working Miracles, which their own Estius
acknowledges, saying, (on 1. Cor. 12. 9.) The greek Fathers do rightly
understand that faith here, of which is spoken, cap. 13. 2. which they call
the faith of signs and miracles, which faith (says he) is of it self a grace
only given for the benefit of others. And so not a justifying faith for a man
himself, as we may see, Math. 7. 22.

The second place is Iam. 2. 24. where it is said, Ye see therefore how that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith only. To which I answer, That beside
O Ecumenius, Theodoret and Beda on this place, their own Aquinas shows the
true meaning thereof, Who objecting to this place, Romans 3. 20. where it is
said, by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in his sight, he
reconcileth them thus, I answer (says he) that to justify may be taken two
ways, either for the execution, or for the manifestation of our justification.
and this way indeed a man is justified by works, that is, he is declared and
manifested to be just, or it is taken for the infused habit of righteousness,
and this way no man is justified by works (says he) Likewise says Doctor
Paes a Portugal Friar. The meaning of these words, That Abraham was justified
by works, may be this, as Theodoret expounds, that he was declared just,
which exposition I approve most (says he.)

The third place is, Iam. 2. 14. where the Apostle says, What does it profit
though a man say, he has faith, and not works, can that faith save him? I
answer, 1. That the Apostle says not, Though a man have faith, but, Though
he say he has faith, showing thereby that an alleadgance only of faith
avails not to salvation, 2. A^ their Estius with us shows, it is said there,
that a dead and fruitless faith only according to the Apostles words verse
17. and 18.) avails not to salvation. nor can be called a justifying faith.

The fourth place is, Gal. 5. 6. Neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, but faith which works by love. which place is coincident
with the former, and does nowise militat against our doctrine of
Justification, as the words of our confession, anno 1581. and 1647. c. 11.
testifies, saying. That faith receiving and relying only on Christ and his
righteousness is the only instrument of our Justification, ^et it is not alone
in the person justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces,
and is no dead faith, but works by love. And that this is also the doctrine
of all other reformed Churches, their own Cassander witnesses, consult. art.
4. As also Bellarmin (lib. 1. de Iustif. cap. 14.) saying, John Calvin in his
Antidote of the Council cap. 11. Sess. 6. says, That it is faith only that
justifies, but yet not faith which is alone, as the heat of the sun is that
only which heateth the earth, yet heat is not alone in the sun, but their
is light also joined with it. the same also (says he) does Melancton.
Brentius, and Chemnitius teach with others.

And as for Fathers whom he cites, or whose words he sets down, such as
Ambrose, saying, That faith alone suffices not, and Augustine that faith only
saves not without observing Gods Commandments, they militat nowise against
out doctrine as we see confessed.

But I admire at the impudence or ignorance of this Pamphleter, who in the next
place ascribes to us, that we hold That good works are not necessary to
salvation. whereas in the contrary, These are the words of our Confession of
faith. cap. 16. concerning their necessity, That they are the fruits and
evidences of a true and livelie faith; and by them Believers manifest their
thankfulness, strengthens their assurance, edifieth their brethren, adorneth
the profession of the gospel, stops the mouth of the adversaries: and
glorisieth God, whose workma^ship they are, created in Christ thereunto, that
having their fruit in holiness, they may have the end, life eternal. being as
Bernard speaks* via Regni, non causa regnandi.

22. THat good works are not meritorious.
Which he says is contrary to Math. 16. 27. where it is said, That Christ
at his second coming shall reward every one according to his works. To which I
will answer only in the words of Pope Gregory (in psalm. 7. poenit. and
verba, fac auditam) who says thus, If the felicity of the saints be mercy
and not acquired by merits, where is that which is written, who shall render to
every one according to his works? If it be rendered then according to works, how
shall it be esteemed mercy? but it it one thing (says he) according to ones
works, and another thing to render for the works themselves. For in that it ^^
said, according to his works, the quality of the work is understood, that
whose works are seen to be good, his reward shall be also glorious, as whose
works are evil his reward shall be contrary; but as to that eternal life,
which we have of God and with God, no labor can be equalled (says he) no
works can be compared. Therefore also says their late Ferus on Romans 2. 6. All
that this word (according) does import in relation to good works, is, that the
doing of them is a requisite condition, without any sort of meriting (says
he.)

The second place is Math. 5. 11. Rejoice and be glad for great is your reward
in heaven. As also Math. 10. 42. That a cup of cold water given to one of
Christ's, shall not want it reward. Whereunto I answer 1. That we deny not but
that good works have their reward abiding them, for so says our Confession of
faith 1647. cap. 16. art. 6. That the Lord looking on believers in his Son, it
pleased hi^ to accept and reward that which is sincere, although accompanied with
many weaknesses and imperfections. But we distinguish and say that there is a
reward in mercy whereof Hosea speaks 10. 12. saying, Sow in righteousness and
reap in mercy. As also the Apostle 2. Tim. 1. 16. 17. And there is a reward
of merit called wages Romans 6. 23. Where the Apostle says, The wages of sin
is death, but (by way of opposition) he says, Life eternal is the free gift
of God. upon which place therefore says Cardinal Cajetan according to
Augustins like words, de gra. and lib. arb. cap. 9. The gift of God is Eternal
life, that we may understand (says he) that it is not for our merits, but of
the free gift of God that in end we attain to eternal life. So also speaks
Lombard, That we may understand that God brings us to eternal life (says
he) for his own mercy sake and not for our merits. So also speaks their
Ferus on John 3. and Math. 20 and Gabriel Biel on the the Canon of the Mass,
lect. 47. and others, yea, Bellarmin himself, lib. 5. de Iustif. cap. 19.
confesses That this has been the common and constant judgment of Divines in
the Roman Church, as Thomas, Bonaventure, Scotus, Durand* and others, that God
rewards good works of his mere liberality above any condignitie. Flat
co^trar to that blasphemous speech of the Rhemists on Heb. 6. 10. saying, That
our good works are so fully worthy of eternal life which God of his justice
owes to the workers ^f the same, that he should be unjust if He rendered not
heaven for them.

Lastly, Where he says that the holy Fathers unanimouslie affirm the same,
but sets down none of their words, Let their own Cassander witness the
contrary, (consult. art. 6.) saying, This doctrine is not to be passed by,
which with a full consent all the ancient Fathers deliver, That our whole
confidence of remission of sins, and hope of pardon and Eternal life, is to
be placed in the only mercy of God and merit of Christ, which made Bellarmin
also conclude (lib. 5. de Iustif. cap. 7.) saying, for the uncertantie of our
own unrighteousnes, and the danger of vain glory, it is safest to place our
whole confidence in the only mercy and bounty of God.

23 THat Faith once had, cannot be lost.
Which he says is contrary to Luke 8. 13. Where the seed on the rock, are
th^se who when they hear, receive the word with joy, and for a while believe,
but in the time of temptation fall away. To which I answer, That by the
believing of such, no true saving faith is meaned. But a temporary assent
only to that which is spoken, as their own Carthusian and late Stella shows,
because their hearts (say they) are hard and rebellious, and destitute of the
moisture of grace.

The second place is, 1. Tim. 18. where it it said, That some having put away a
good conscience, concerning faith, have made shipwrak. Whereunto I answer, That
by faith is not understood true saving faith, but the profession of the gospel
only, which oftimes in scripture receives this title, as 1, Tim. 4. 1. and
Act. 13. 8. where it is said, That Elimas the Socerer sought to turn away the
deputy from the faith. which by way of exposition, Heb. 10. 23. is called the
Profession of the faith. And thus also does Lombard, Aquinas and Estius
expound, who declares it to be also the exposition of Auselmus.

The third place is, 2. Tim. 2. 16. Concerning the overthrow of the faith some,
which receives the same answer with the former. And which the very words of
the preceding verse clears, calling this overthrow, Their erring from the
truth. As the forenamed, Lombard, Aquinas and Estius also shows.

As for Fathers, he says that they affirm the same frequently, but cites
only Augustine in two books. but tells not what chapter, whereas there are
24. in the one, and 16. in the other.

24. THat God by his will and inevitable decree has ordained from all
eternity, who shall be damned, and who saved.
Which he says is contrary to 1. Tim. 2. 3. 4. Where it is said, That our
Savior will have all men to be saved To which I answer 1. That Augustine in
his Enchiridion, cap. 103. expounds this place thus, That God will have all
to be saved that are saved, and that none can be saved but such as he will. And
next, that by all men he means, all sorts of men. And thus also does
Aquinas and Lombard expound the words (all men) Aquinas also and Cajetan,
shows, that by our Saviors Will, is not meant that which is called Voluntas
beneplaciti, or his secret Will, whereby from all Eternity, he has elected
some to salvation, and reprobated others, but Voluntas signi, or his revealed
Will. whereby he offers to all the means of salvation. And their late Estius
tells us, that by (all men) a part only by the whole is understood, as
Philip. 2. 21. where it is said, All men seek their own, not the things of
Christ.

The second place 2. Pet. 3. 9. That God is not willing that any should perish,
is coincident with the former.

And as for the words of Ambrose. That he will not referr to God the
prevarication of Adam, nor the treasone of Judas, though he knew the same
before it was committed. They no wise make against us, who in our Consession of
Faith, cap. 5. art. 4. affirm, That the sinfulnes of men or Angels proceeds
only from themselves, and not from God, Who being most Holy and Righteous,
neither is, nor can be Author or Approver of sin. And as for other Fathers
whom he cites only, he does this so looslie as none can know at what words
he aims, for example he he cites Augustine lib. 1. de civit. Dei, but no
chapter, whereas there are 36. in that book, as also he cites Ambrose lib. 2.
de Cain and Abel. but tells not in what chapter the words are which he
alleges, whereas there are ten in that book. And as for others, none of them
ar against us, yea, they are clearlie for us, as also Cardinal Cajetan and
Aquinas on Romans 9, 20. As likewise their late Estius on Romans 9. 13. 20. and 21.
goes as far in this point of Election and reprobation with us, as any
Protestant writter whosoever, and cites Lombard, Aquinas Hugo* de S. victore,
Lyra, Cajetan, Prierias and others as of the same mind with him, and us.

25. THat every one ought infalliblie assure himself of his salvation, and
believe that he is of the number of the predestinat.
Which he says is contrary to 1. Cor. 9. 27. where the Apostle says, I keep
my body under in subjection, lest by any means when I have preached to others,
I my self should be a Castaway. To whom I answer 1. To the point of our
doctrine, that we say no further herin than their bishop Ambrosius Catharinus,
as Bellarmin testifies (lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 11.) That a godly man may have
assurance of his Justification and salvation without doubting, by the
certainty of divine faith, but yet as our Confession of Faith speaks, cap.
14. That saving faith is different in degrees, weak or strong, and may be
often and many ways assailed and also weakened (to wit by doubting) but in end
it gets the victory, and grows up in many to the full assurance through Christ,
yea, says their own Cassander consult. art. 4. That there is none of the
Schoolmen who does not teach and diligently urge (says he) that confidence
and assurance of the grace and mercy of God and glory to come, should be
opposed to doubting and distrust. Therefore though the godliest may have their
own doubtings, yet they should strive against the same, and use all the means
ordained by God to gather assurance, and make their election sure by well
doing, and not to cherish doubting as a duty, the doctrine whereof is as
contrary to the nature of faith, as light is to darkness, as we may see Romans
4. 20.

Next, to answer to the place forecited 1. Cor. 9. 27. 1. The word rendered
(Castaway) or as the Rhemists translate, Reprobat, is not in opposition to
(Elect) but is as much as (reproved) as the word (...) signifies. 2. This
place proves not that the Apostle doubted of his salvation, whereof by papists
own confession he was sure, as Romans 8. 38. 2. Tim. 1. 12. 4. 8. and gal. 5.
20. shows. But in his person he shows the sutablenes of the practice of
mortification with his doctrine thereof, and the like necessity of conformity
in all other Pastors, as they would eschew the danger here mentioned. And
this to be the true meaning of the place both Aquinas and Lombard does show.

The second and third places are Romans 11. 20. Of not being high minded but
fear, and Philip. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation in fear and trembling.
To which I answer, That there is a twofold fear, the one which is called,
Timor incertitudinis, or a distrustful fear, condemned, Isai. 35. 4. Luke ^.
74. 12. 32. and Revel. 21. 8. And another, which is called Timor solicitudinis,
or a fear of holy carefullnes, suspecting their own infirmity and
corruption, and causing godly watchfulnes, which is therefore called, Godly
fear, Heb. 12. 28. and they are pronounced blessed who have it, psalm. 128. 1.
and this is that fear which is commanded in both these forcited places, as
Cardinal Cajetan shows on Philip. 2. 12. As also Estius, saying, With fear
and trembling to work out our eternal salvation, is to work it out, magna cum
solicitudine, that is, with great carefulnes.

As for the testimonies of fathers, he cites Ambrose in psalm. 118, Ser. 5.
where nothing makes against us, nor in Basil, or Jerome, whose book he only
names, but no chapter, whereas there are 11. long chapters therein, nor yet in
Chrysostom, and as for Augustins words on psalm. 40. (which should be 41) where
he says, Whether his own justice remains or not, he knows not, for the
Apostle terrifieth me (says he) saying, he that stands, let him take heed
lest he fall. To which I answer, with Bernard, who cites this same place, ser
2. de Septuagesima. That this is the fear of an holy solicitude, which every
one should have to keep him humble (says he) as Augustine likewise shows in
the words that follows the former, that he speaks not against assurance of
salvation, which the godly may have, but against self confidence and
presumption.

The second Testimony that he brings is Bernards words in the same sermon,
saying, Who can say, I am one of the Elect? but he forgets to bring the
following words, which are these, Yet the confidence of hope comfort us,
that we be not altogether tormented, with the anxietie of doubting (says he)
for this cause are given to us signs and evident marks of our salvation, that
it may be put out of doubt (says he) that he is of the number of the Elect,
in whom these signs remain. Even as against such anxious doubting that
excellent speech of Cyprian is remarkable. Ser. 4. de mortalitate, page 317.
That if we do believe an ho^est man's promise, much more should we the Lord
who has promised life and immortality.

26. THat every man has not an Angel guardian or keeper.
Which he says is contrary to Math. 18. 10. where it is said, That Children
have their Angels that behold the face of God. And psalm. 91. 11. He shall give
his Angels charge over thee etc. To which I answer, That these places speak
not of one only Angel guardian appointed for every one, but of Angels in the
plural, which we deny not to to be sent forth (as the Apostle shows Heb. 1.
14.) As Ministering spirits for the good of the Elect, sometimes many, as Genesis
28. 32. to attend Jacob. and 2. King. 6. 17. to protect Elisha, and sometimes
fewer, or one as Act. 12. 7. As it pleases God to direct and dispose. So that
I know not any great controversy between Romanists and us heerin. Which
Bellar. therefore never touches in all his book of Controversies.

27 THat the holy Angels pray not for us, nor knows our thoughts and desires
on earth.
AS for the Angels their knowledge of our thoughts, he brings no place of
scripture, neither indeed can he, this being the Lords only prerogative, as
we see 1. King. 3. 36. and Romans 8. 27. And as Theophilact. shows on Luke 5.
22. And their own Jansenius acknowledges, concord. cap. 32. Neither is this
the Controversy, what Angels do in heaven in praying for the Church in
general, but what we should do on earth, in relation to them in particular, as
whether we should pray to them, and give to them that which Bellarmin calls,
That most excellent sort of worship which is prayer (pref. de sanctis) but
because he wresteth some Texts of scripture to prove that the Angels pray for
us in particular, therefore we shall free these from the wrong sense which he
would put upon them.

First then he brings Zach. 1. 9. (which should be verse 12.) where the Angel
says to God How long will thou not have mercy on Jerusale^? To which I
answer 1. That this Angel was Christ as Remigius Altisioderensis expounds.
so called frequentlie in scripture, as Genesis 48. 16. Exodus 32. 34. Hos. 12. 4.
and Mal. 3. 1. Who is the only Mediator for his Church 1. Tim. 2. 5. And 2.
Though this were a created Angel, yet he prays for mercy only to the Church
in general.

The next place of Canonical scripture which he brings is Revel. 8. 4. And
the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the saints ascended from the hand
of the Angel before God. To which I answer in likemanner, That Andreas
Caesarensis and many others (says the Jesuit Ribera) expounds this Angel
to be Christ, as Ambrose and Beda likewise expound, Lyra also and Carthusian,
who affirms moreover, That this is the exposition of all Catholic

As for the testimonies of Fathers, he brings one of Hilaries saying, That
God needs not the intercession of Angels, but our infirmity needs.

The first part whereof makes against him. And in the last, howsoever he
says that our infirmity needs, yet this does not positivelie prove that
they do interced, especially for particular persons, and in particular cases.
As for other fathers whom he only cites, to wit, Ambrose and Victor Vticensis
they speak nothing which is contrary to our doctrine, or for him.

28 THat we may not pray to them.
Which he says is contrary to Genesis 48. 16. The Angel who redeemed me from
all evil bless the Lad's To which I answer, That by the Angel (says Cyrill
of Alexandria lib. 3. Thesaur. cap. 1.) He understands the word of the
Father, for He was not ignorant, that he was called the Angel of the great
Counsel, (says he) Likewise says Athanasius (cont. Arrian, ora. 4.) As
also Procopius. It is clear that the patriarch Jacob coupled no other in his
prayers with God, but his word, which he therefore calls the Angel, because
(says he) he only reveals his Fathers will.

The next place of canonical scripture which he bringes is, Hosea 12. 4. Where
Jacob is said to have had power with the angel and made supplication to him.
To which I answer, That by this Angel the text shows clearlie that God is
understood. 1. seeing it is said of Jacob verse 3. That by his strength he had
power with God. 2. He tells us v. 5. that this Angel was The Lord of Hosts.
3. The change also of Jacobs name to Israel, Genesis 32. 28. and the reason
thereof shows this, For as a Prince thou have prevailed with God (says he who
wrestled with him.) And 4. the name of the place proves this, being called
Peniell, for I have seen God face to face, (says Jacob)

As for testimonies of fathers, he brings only Augustine on Job. 19. 21.
where he faith That Job speaking thus. have pity on me my friends, he addressed
himself to the Angels. To which I answer 1. That he wrongs Augustins words,
which are these only, That Job seems to desire the Angels or-else the saints
to pray for him, which exposition Pineda a Jesuit condemns, and expounds
it of Iob^ own friends. 2. The scripture it self in the ve^ie next verse
makes against any such exposition, which says, why persecute ye me (to
wit, by reproaches) which the good Angels abhor to do to the godly. 3. Pope
Gregory also in his Moralls on that place, expounds it thus, saying, Behold
he calls the^ friends, who by reproachs hitherto had afflicted him. Thus also
does Lyra expound this place, Ferus like wise, and Mercerus professor in the
Universitie of Paris.

29. THat the Angels cannot help us.
FOr answer, This calumny is most impudentlie and maliciously imputed to us,
for on the contrary, we grant that both they can and do help the godly, seeing
(as is said Heb. 1. 14.) They are Ministering spirits sent forth for the good of
the Elect as many examples in scripture does prove.

30 THat no saint deceassed has afterward appeared on the earth.
FOr answer, This likewise we nowise affirm nor are we contrary to Math.
27. 52. That after Christ's death, the graves were opened, and many bodies of
saints that sleeped arose, and came out of their graves after his resurrection,
and went into the holy city and appeared to many, nor to Math. 17. 3. That
Moses and Elias appeared at Christ's transfiguration to to the three disciples.
But this Pamphleter heerin shows his ignorance, saying, That they talked with
them* whereas Thy talked only with Christ. And as for Samuels apparition to
Saull. 1. Sam. 28. Tertullian lib. de anima prope finem. Justinius Martyr q. 52.
Augnstin quaestionu^ vet. Test. q. 27. Procopius and Eucherius in 1. Sam 28.
Aquinas, sum. p. 1. q. 89. art. 8. and the Popes own Decretall, causa 29. cap.
14. All these declare that it was not Samuel, but the devil that appeared
like him to Saull. But the intention of this Pamphleter in all the places
adduced, is for establishing that lucrative error of Purgatory, and of the
apparition of souls being there, and desiring by soule-masses to be freed
therfrom. To which I will answer only in Chrisostoms words. Hom. 29. on Math.
These voices that say, I am the soul of such a one, proceeds (says he) from
the deceat of the Devil, for it is not the soul that departed that says that,
but Satan, who that he may deceive the the hearers, faineth himself to be that
sonle (says he) As likewise thus ^peaketh their own Lyra on Dan. 11. People
being thus deceived by mi^acles fained by Priests and their adhe^ents for their
gain (says he) as ^he people of old were deceived by the Priests that
worshipped the dragon and God permitting this (says their Gabriel Biel in
canone Missae lect. 49.) and men's infidelity so deserving the same. Against
which sort of juggling tricks and apparitions their own famous Valla mightily
exclaimeth, in his book of Constantins donation about the end thereof.

31 THat the Saints deceassed know not what passes here on earth.
Which is contrary (says he) to Luke 16. 29. where Abraham knew that they had
Moses books on earth. when he said to Dives concerning his brethren, they have
Moses and the Prophets. which himself had never seen while he was alive. To
which I answer, 1. That this is a parable as Theophylact says expreslie on
Luke 16. and Justin Martyr, q. 60. As also Chrysostom Hom. 1. de Lazaro, and
their own Arboreus shows that others affirm the same, as Erasmus does (and
parabolicall speeches are not argumentative by consent of all.)

The second place is, John 5. 45. where our Savior says There is one that
accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust To which I answer, That by Moses is
understood not his person, who should be their accuser, and therefore knew
their faults, but as this Pamphleters own words are, Moses books. And so this
place proves not his point.

The third place is, Revel. 12. 10. taken from Satan's accusing the brethren
before God* ergo (says he) he must know whereof, and who without shame can
deny that to saints, which must needs be granted to devils? To which I
answer, That this is an absurd infere^ce, for glorified saints remain only
in heaven. And therefore (as is said Job 14. 21. and Isai. 36. 16.) know not
men's effaires on earth, whereas the Devil compasses the earth to and fro
walking in it (Job. 1. 7.) being the Temper, and therefore may know men's
effaires and actions.

The fourth place is, 2. King. 6. 12. where Elisha told the King of Israel the
words that the King of Syria spoke in his bedchamber. To which I answer, That
from one extraordinary act of Gods revelation to his Prophet, and of one thing
only on earth, to argue to an ordinary revelation to his glorified saints of
all things in heaven, is as absurd a consequence as was the former.

As for Fathers, he cites only three, Euscbius, Maximus and Jerome, but
none of their words, and so lo^slie also, as 14. chapters being in that book of
Ieromes he tells not in which of them.

32. THat the Saints pray not for us.
TO which point I answer first in general, That the controversy is not (as I
spoke of Angels) what the saints in heaven out of their charity do for the
Church and their fellow brethren in general, but what our duty is, and if it be
lawful for us to pray to the^ in particular. Next I answer to the wrested
places of scripture which he brings to prove that they pray for particular
men ordinarlie and in particular cases, known unto them (as he said before)
The first whereof is Revel. 5. 8. where, The twenty four Elders in heaven are
said to fall down before the Lamb, having every* o^e harps and golden vials
full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints. to which I answer, That
Haymo, Beda, Aquinas, and Richard de S. victore, all expound these Twenty four
elders to represent the church militant, said to be in heaven (as that woman
Revel. 12. is said to be) because of their heavenly disposition and
affections, and because that this was represented in a heavenly vision to
John, and are said to have Harps and golden vials, the speech being borrowed
from the Leviticall Ministry, as the Jesuit Ribera shows, to express the
spiritual worship of Christians praises and prayer under the gospel, as we
see foreprophecied, Mal. 1. 11.

The second place of Canonical scripture which he brings, is Ier. 15. 1. Tho
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this
people. To which I answer 1. That the speech is hypotheticall or by
supposition, and therefore nowise concluding, as our Saviors like speech
shows John 21. 23. 2. This cannot prove that Moses and Samuel did pray for
the people Being then till Christ's Resurrection in Limbus Patrum, as Bellarmin
says, (lib. 1. de sanctis, cap. 20) and so not enjoying Gods sight or
presence, and therefore they neither prayed for men, nor were prayed unto by
men. And 3. This their prayer is meant for the people of God only in general,
and not for any one in particular.

The third place is, Revel. 2. 26. He that overcomes and keeps my words to
the end, to him I will give power over the nations, and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron. Therefore (says he) seeing Christ imparteth his power to
them upon the nations, they may pray for them over whom they are s^t. To which
their own Jesuit Ribera answers thus, Our Savior alogether speaks here
of power (says he) that the saints shall exercise in the day of j^dgement,
upon all nations that have not obeyed Christ, judgeing them with Christ, and
giving them over to the punishment of eternal death, signified by ruling them
with an iron rod, as we see cap. 19. 15. Thus we see that they are so far
from praying for them being alive, that they are to adjudge them to eternal
punishment after death.

His last place is from the parable of the rich-glutton Luke 16. Praying to
Abraham for his brethren, and it were absurd (says he) that the damned in hell
should have greater charity than the saints in heaven. To which I answer 1.
That this is a parable (as has been proven) and therefore not argumentative.
2. The damned in hell have no charity or Christian virtue at all, and
therefore this Rich glutton did it not out of charity to his brethren, but to
eschew the augmenting of his own torment, by their continuance in these
sins, wherein he had given them ill example or inducement, when he was alive
with them. 3. To argue from the practice of a damned Wretch in hell, which had
so bad a success, as not to be heard, to alike practice which Christians
should use on earth, is a bad inference, and a worse directorie.

As for fathers, he cites only Augustine, Hilarie and Damascen, but not
their words, of whom Augustine makes nothing for him in that place, neither
Hilarie, for what he speaks is only of Angels, grounded also upon an
Apocryphal book only, Tobit. And as for Damascen (as I show before) as he is
not of so great antiquity, so also he is noted by Sixtus Senensis in his
Bibliotheck (lib. 6. Annot. 187.) to be heretical specially concerning the
procession of the Holy ghost.

33 THat we should not beseech God to grant our prayers for the saints merits,
nor do we receive any benefit thereby.
Which he says is contrary to Exodus 32. 13. where it is said. Remember
Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy servants. To which I answer, That this was to
remember his own free promise which he made to them, that he should be their
God, and the God of their seed after them, as the very following words shows,
saying, To whom thou swearest by thy self, and said, I will multiply your
seed, as the stars of heaven, as their own Lyra upon that place shows, and
the subsequent place which he cites proves, 2. Chron. 6. 16. so that this was
not to remember their merits, (which Jacob we see utterlie disclaimeth Genesis
32. 10.) but his own free promise and mercies.

The second place is 2. Chron. 6. 16. Now therefore O Lord God of Israel,
keep with thy servant that which thou have promised him. Where we see again
clearly, no mention of merit on David's part (which he every where also
disclaimeth) but only of the free promises of mercy made to David on Gods
part, as we said before.

The third place is, Exodus 20. 5. I will show mercy to thousands of them that
love me and keep my Commandments, which place makes clearlie against merit,
where the Lord speaks only of mercy, which he will show on the godly and
their offspring, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Tim. 1. 16. The Lord give mercy to
the house of Onesiphorus for he often refreshed me. And where mercy is only, it
excludes merit.

34 THat we ought not expressly pray to them, to pray or interceed to God for
us.
Which he says is contrary to Luke 16. 24. Where the Rich-glutton in hell
prays to Abraham to have mercy on him. To which I have already answered,
That it is parabolicall and therefore proves not.

The second place is, Job 5. 1. Call now, if there be any that will answer
thee, and to which of the saints will thou turn? To which I answe^e, That
Cardinal Cajetan sets this down as the meaning of the words. That heerby
Eliphaz would show Job that his innocence which he so much maintained, would
get none of the saints that would maintain so bad a cause, and to plead such
innocence as he did, or who would approve his speeches. The intention of
Eliphaz being only to convince Job that none were ever so sharply punished as
he was, except he had been wicked or an hypocrit, (which was Eliphaz error) and
therefore he bids him show any of the saints or godly before him that ever
were so punished. 2. Their own Lyra also expounds this place thus, That
Eliphaz tells Job, That seeing God answers him not in his sad affliction, to
whom other can he have his recourse? For thou shall not have the saints (says
he) to be thy helpers, so that this place rather makes against prayer to
saints, nor for it. As for the Fathers whom he cites only (as his use is) but
sets not down their words, they make nothing for him and he cites the
works of some, as that of Athanasius, which is nowise extant.

And because this man would bear his reader and proselits in hand (as most of
them do deceatfullie) That they pray only to saints to pray to God, or
interceed for them, but that they seek not pardon or grace and such like from
the saints themselves, as Bellar. also professes, lib. 1. de Sanct. cap. 17. I
will show how deceatfullie they deal with simple souls, and that their
practice is quyte contrary, and that they seek these things from them
whereof God only is the giver, as Mercy, pardon of sins, grace, and other
good gifts. And shall instance this only in these places of their own old
printed books, against which they cannot except, and which I have beside me to
show to any who desires. The first is that idolatrous invocation of the virgin
Marie in the Roman Missall, the words whereof are these, O felix puer pera,
nostra pians sce^era, jure matris impera redemptori. tua se^per ubera nostra
sanent vulnera. That is, O blessed Mother who expiateth-our sins, by the
authority of a mother, command our Redeemer. and let thy pape milk heal our
wounds. Which is so gross, that Bellarmin is ashamed thereof and most
shamleslie denies it, saying, (lib. 1. de sanct. beat. cap. 16.) Who ever of
us spoke so* why do they not prove it by some instance? To the same purpose it
is said and worse, in their psalter of the virgin Marie printed at Rome* 1588.
psalm. 35. Coge illum peccatoribus nobis misereri, that is, compel him to have
mercy upon us sinners. In which book also, which is a rapsodie of horrid
blasphemies, all the psalms of David are turned from the Lord to our Lady,
and psalm. 50. it is said. Have mercy on me our Lady, who is the Mother of
mercies, and according to the bowels of thy mercies clange me from my sins.
And again psalm. 71. it is said, O God give justice to the King, and give
mercy to the queen his mother, whence it is that their Gabriel Biel on the
Canon of the Mass, lect. 80. says thus, As Ahasuerus promised to Esther even
to the half of his kingdom, even so, seeing our heavenly Father has Justice and
mercy, as the best things of his kingdom, reserving justice to himself, he
has given mercy to his mother the virgin Marie (says he) whence (says
their Bernardin de busto in Mariali part. 3. ser. 3.) It is lawful to appeal
from the Sons justice to the mothers mercy. Hence it is also, as Sir Edvin
Sandys observed in his European travails, and speculum Europae, p. 4. That the
honor which they do to her is double for the most part (says he) to that
which they do to our Savior, and where one professes himself a devoto or
peculiar servant of our Lord, whole towns, as Siena by name, are the devoti of
our Lady, and where one voweth to Christ, ten vow to her, and not so much to
herself, as to some peculiar image of hers, which for some select virtue or
grace, together with greater power of working Miracles they chiefly worship,
as the glorious La^ie of Loreto, the devote Lady of Rome, the miraculous Lady
of Proven Zano* and the annunciata of Florence. And as their vows are such are
their pilgramages and rich offerings. Yea their devils in exorcisme are also
taught to endure the conjuring of the^ by the name of God or the Trinity
without trouble or motion (says he) but at the naming of our Lady to ^oss
and torment, as feeling then a new force of a more unresistable power. I could
instance the prayer to many other saints in their Roman Missall for grace,
pardon and glory, whereof God is the only giver, as to S. Maurus fol. 51. S.
Martha fol. 56. and S. Francis etc. And yet (says Bellarmin lib. 1. de sanctis
cap. 20.. alii) to the knowing of prayers, that at one time are made in diverse
places, is required ubiquitie, which we believe does neither agree to the
spirits of men nor Angels.

35 THat the bones and Relics of saints are not to be kept, no virtue
proceeding from them after they be once dead.
Which he says is contrary to 2. King. 13. 21. where it is written, That the
bones of Elize^s being ^o^ched by one that was dead, they did revive him. To
which I answer 1. That it is not said there, that the bones of Elisha did
revive that dead man, but that when he was let down into Elisha's sepulcher,
and touched the bones of Elisha ^e revived, this virtue proceeding not from the
bones of the Prophet, but from God, who for confirming these that were then
present, that he was a true Prophet, wrought this miracle, but we read not
that thereupon they raised his bones, and inshryned them as Relics, to be
carried about in procession or adored, as the Popish practice is.

The second place is, Act. 5. 14. 15. where it is said, That the sick were
brought forth to the streets in their beds, that at least the shadow of Peter
passing by might over shadow them. To which I answer, as to the former, but
in their own Gabriel Biels words on the cano^ of the mass, lect, 47. saying,
S. peter by his shadow healed the sick, as we read in the acts, but (says
he) who will say that the virtue of that healing was in his shadow? which is
no existent thing, but a privation of light, whereunto no activitie can be
competent, therefore it was God himself (says he) to manifest the truth of
that faith which Peter preached. And so let any judge, if this proves that the
bones or Relics of saints are therefore to be kept above the earth, and
that virtue proceeds from them after they be dead, and if argueing here for
this from a shadow, be not mere shaddowish it self, having no soliditie.

The third place is Act. 19. 11. That God wrought sundry miracles by the hands
of Paull. To which I answer, Who denies this? or who can say that this proves
that the bones of his hands, as holy relics should therefore been kept
above the earth, set on altars, and adored, or that they wrought miracles after
he was dead? But seeing in all this he dryveth at the adoration of Relics, we
would gladly know, amongst such a multitude and variety of forged Relics,
how to discern the true from the false. Seeing as their own Cassander speaks
(consult. art. 21. printed at Paris, 1616.) That through the avarice of Priests
to deceive simple people false Relics ar obtruded for true, and fained
miracles are taught unto them, by which their superstition is fostred, and
sometimes by the deceat and delusion of the Devil, abusing men's superstitious
credulity by dreams and visions new Relics (says he) have been revealed,
and by the same working of satan, miracles seemed to be wrought. Examples of
which sort their own Erasmus on Math. 23. 5. mentions, saying. You may now
every where see held out for gain, Mary's milk, which they honor as much
almost as Christ's own body (says he) also so many pieces of the Cross, that
if they were all gathered together a great ship would scarce carry them. Here
also S. Francis hood is set forth to behold, there the Wastcoat of the virgin
Marie in one place, Anna's comb in another, Joseph's stocking in a third place
and Tho^as of Canterberries shoe, in another place Christ's foreskin, which they
worship more religiously than Christ's own person. Neither do they s^owe these
things (says he) as things that may be borne with, and to please the common
people, but they place all religion in them. And of which foreskin of Christ's,
one is shown at Rome, with his sandals and this inscription, Circumcisa caro
Christi, sandalia clara, ac umbelici viget hic praecisio chara. Another is to
be seen at Antuerp, a third in Bezanson in Burgundy, a fourth in the town of
Aken, and a fifth in the abbay of Poytiers in France.

The like also may be said of the nails which nailed Christ to the Cross,
which from three ar multiplied to near threescore. As also the spear that
pierced Christ's side, to the image whereof they ascrive the opening of heaven^
gate, praying thus to it as if it heard them. Ave ferrum triumphale, intrans
pectus in vitale, Coeli pande ostia. Than which what can be greater blasphemy
and idolatry?

As for Fathers whom he only cites but sets not down their words, never one
of the^ proves any adoration of Relics, yea Jerome epist. 53. ad Ripariu^,
says, We are so far from worshipping the Relics of Martyrs, that we will
not worship the Sunn or moon, Angels nor archangels. And as for Ambrose his
alleged words, which he tells not where they are to be found, yet I answer to
them, that they prove nothing, for he says only, that He honors the
wounds and ashes of the Martyrs, which is only the memory of their constant
sufferings.

36 THat the Creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more holy than they are
already of their own nature.
Which he says is contrary to 1. Tim. 4. 4. where it is said, That every
creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving. To which I
answer 1. That this proves nothing against us, for their own Estius, as also
Lombard, on this place shows, that the Apostle speaks only of the
sanctified use to believers of meat and drink, being received with prayer and
thanksgiving. 2 This place makes rather against popery, to wit, their
prohibition of certain sorts of meats, at certain times, for conscience
sake, which is contratie altogether unto Christian liberty. As for Math. 23.
17. and 19. Himself confesses That the Altar is said to sanctify the gift,
and the Temple the gold, as things separate from a common, to a holy use, a^
said to be holy by destinatio^, but not by in^esion. But the hallowing of the
creature of which this man means, is the popish hallowing of their bells,
(which they also baptize) as also of their beads, holy water, and agnus Dei
etc. by plain socerie conjuring the dead and senseless creatures, and speaking
to the^, as if they both heard and understood, and ascribing to the^ divine and
miraculous operation, one example or two whereof, instead of many, I shall
instance of their conjuring their holy water, as is set down in their own
Missall, saying, I conjure thee, thou creature of water, in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that thou become a chosen water, to take away
all the power of the Devil, and to drive him away, with all his wicked angels.
The like they speak to the salt which they mix with the water. And which
doubtless drives away the Devil from the priests breast that conjureth the
same, as far as a hungry dog would flee from a fatt morsel, the sprinkling
also of which holy water, might have been a good mean to have driven away
the devil from pope Sylvester the second, when he came to him, and rent his
body in pieces. as Platina, and all other Roman Historians record. And what
equal virtue to Christ's blood, and miraculous operation they ascrive in
likemanner to their hallowed Agnus Dei, which they carry about with them, may
be seen by these verses which Pope Urban sent with one of them, to the
Emperor of Grecia. saying* Peccatum frangit ut Christi sanguis, and angit,
etc. and thereafter, Portatus mundae de fluctibus e^ipit undae. which if the
Spanish Armado found true in 88. themselves best could tell.

37 THat Children may be saved by their parents faith, without the sacrament of
baptism.
Which he says is contrary to John 3. 9. Except a man be borne again of
the water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. To which I
answer 1. As their own Ferus expounds, by this water, Baptismall water is
not to be understood, but metaphoricallie the purging virtue of the spirit of
Regeneration (says he) Therefore also says Lombard (lib. 4. d. 4.) God has
not tied his power to sacraments, so that the want does not damnifie, but the
contempt for, that some have gotten invisible sanctification, without the
visible sacrament (says he) and so also speaks Bellar. (lib. 4 de Christo,
cap. 16.. ad locum) and other Romanists with him. Wherefore their own
Cassander concludes, (consult. art 9.) saying. That it is agreeable to the
judgment of the primitive Church, and to the holy scriptures (as Bonaventure
on the 4. of the sentences, and Lo^bard did. 4. c. 2. shows) that Infants
dying without baptism may be saved, for if they cannot get baptism, being
prevented by death, as the faith of the Church and of these who offer them unto
baptism, is reputed as their own (says he) so the will and desire of the
Church, and specially of the parents to have them baptized, is accepted for
baptism, by that merciful Father who accepts the will for the deed, and tyeth
none (says he) to what is impossible, nor his own grace simply to the
external sacrament. As Bellarmin also affirms, (lib. 4. de Christo cap. ult.
ad locum) and who also confesses (lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 4.. 5.) That sindrie
famous divines of the Roman Church, as Cajetan, and Biel, and others thought it
disagreable altogether from the mercy of God that infants should perish
without their own fault.

The second place is Tit. 3. 5. where it is said, That according to the mercy
of God we ar saved, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost. To which I answer, That this place speaks only of the work of
Regeneration or renovation, as absolutely necessary to salvation, which
sometimes is compared to washing by water, as Ezekiel. 36. 25. and sometimes, to
purging by fire, as Math. 3. 11. And which without baptismall washing the
thief on the Cross found available to salvation, (as this text speaks)
according to the free mercy of God.

The third place is, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned* To which place Bernard
worthily answers, epist. 77. saying, Mark, when Christ said, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, warily and well, be says not, but
he that is not baptized shall be damned, but only he that believes not shall
be damned. Therefore says their Carthusian on John 3. 5. It is to be
understood, that Baptism is necessary if o^casion serve to receive the
sacrament of Baptism, otherwise the baptism of the spirit suffices, else the
believing Thief on the Cross had been excluded out of Paradise.

The fourth place is, Genesis 17. 4. The uncircumcised child shall be cut off from
his people, but Circumsion was no more necessary to the Isralits (says he)
than baptism is to Christians. To whom I answer, That it is the contempt of
that Sacrament that is meant, and not the want thereof, if occasion served not
to receive the same, as Lombard and Carthusian forecited shows, for many
children amongst the Isra^lits dyed in the womb, some in the birth, and others
after, before the eight day, as well as the children of Christians do, and it
were a cruel doctrine to say that all such were damned, as also during forty
years in the wilderness there was no circumcision used, and yet we must not
yield, that therefore all infants who died then without it, were damned and cut
off from their people.

As for Fathers he cites only Augustine, Pope Leo, Ireneus, and Cypria^, but
sets not down their words. But he may remember (as Maldonat witnesses on
John 6. 53.) that Augustine and Pope Innocent 1. were as much for the necessity
of infants receiving the Eucharist, which opinion (says he) generally
continued in the Church 600. years.

38 THat the sacrament of confirmation is not necessary, nor to be used.
Which he says is contrary to Act. 8. 14. where it is said, That Peter and
John having laid hands on them that were baptized, they received the Holy
Ghost. To which I answer 1. We deny that confirmation is a sacrament at all,
seeing that the Council of Trent sess. 7. can. 1. affirms That all the
Sacraments of the new Testament were instituted by Christ, and that the
Romanists themselves, as Alensis, Bonaventure and Marsilius affirm, that
confirmation was not instituted by Christ, as Bellarmin testifies, lib. de
sacramentis in genere, c. 23. 2. Suarez and Bellar. likewise grants that the
imposition of hands Act. 8. was not sacramental. (Suarez disp. 33. sect. 3.
and Bellarmin lib. 2. de confirm. cap. 9.) 3. Neither will Romanists themselves
say that every one that is confirmed by popish confirmation receives the
Holy Ghost (especially the miraculous gifts thereof, which are here meaned)
nor that their confirmation produces any such effect, as the laying on of the
Apostles hands did on them that were baptized. Beside that there is neither the
matter (as anointing with Chrisme, nor form as signing with the Cross, which
in popish confirmation is used.

Neither does that place Heb. 6. 1. prove any further than that of Act. 8. 14.
which speaks of Baptism and the laying on of hands. And as for Cyprians
testimony it speaks only of two sacraments, but mentions not that popish
confirmation was one of these two, and giving that it were, yet Bellarmin lib.
2. de effectu sacram. cap. 24. and Cassander consult. art. 13. confesses that
both in scripture, and other Authors, the name of sacrament is given to many
things, which by consent of all are not sacraments properly and indeed.

39 THat the bread in the Lords supper is but a figure or remembrance of the
body of Christ received by faith, and not his true body.
Which he says is contrary to Luke 22. 15. where he says, with desire I
have desired to eat this passover with you. To which I answer 1. in general,
that we never did hold that the bread in the supper of the Lord is but a bare
figure or remembrance of Christ's body, and therefore says the confession of
our faith anno 1581. art. 21. We utterlie damn the vanity of these that
affirm sacraments to be nothing but bare and naked signs, and in our late
Confession anno 1647. fitted for the whole three kingdoms, positivelie we say,
Wherein as reallie but spirituallie, the Body and blood of Christ are present
to the faith of Believers, as the Elements themselves are to the outward
senses, (and so speaks Calvin in 1. Cor. 11. 24.) but that in this sacrament
(wherein the soul is spirituallis fed) the bread is transubstantiated into
Christ's body, and received by the bodily mouth, this we deny as most erronius
and heretical. 2. As to that place of Luke which he brings to prove the
same. 1. the man's ignorance and impertinencie is to be admired, wherein Christ
only expresses his great desire to eat the typical passover with his
disciples, whereof himself was the substance, 1. Cor. 5. 7. And which lamb being
called the passover (it being but a sign and memorial of the Lords passing
over the houses of the Isralits, as we see, Exodus 12. 13. and 13. 9. makes
against papists, who will not admit in the Eucharist such a sacramental
speech.

The second place which he brings is, Luke 22. 16. where Christ says, That
he will not drink any more of the fruit of the vine, till it be fulfilled in the
kingdom of God. Which words (says he) cannot be understood figurativelie,
more nor the former of eating the passover. To whom we answer 1. That never
any of us said any such thing, that the words of eating the Passover were to
be understood figurativelie, nor yet that these words are to be understood
figurativelie but properly, which Christ speaks here of drinking the fruit of
the vine, which pope Innocent the 3. declares to be spoken of the sacramental
cup, (de mysteriis Missae lib. 4. cap. 27.) As also their own Iensenius cap.
131. p. 162. and Alfonsus a Castro, lib 6. Tit. de Euchar.. sexta haeresis,
beside fathers (as Origin tract. 301. in Math. Chrisost. Hom. 6^. in Math.
Cyprian epist. 68. ad Cecil. and Beda in Luc. 22.) Next, these words are so
far from proving Transsubstantiation, as that they quyte overthrow the same,
seeing that which out Savior drank at his last supper, he calls it the fruit
of the vine, that is, Wine in substance, and not blood, as what is eaten after
consecration is likewise called by the Apostle bread and not flesh 1. Cor. 11.
26. Therefore says Chrysostom (hom. 83. in Math.) speaking against some who
used water in this sacrament in place of wine, When our Savior celebrated this
mystery (says he) he gave unto his disciples wine, calling it the fruit of
the vine which produces not water. For as Theodoret says (dial. 2.) The
mystical signs departs not after consecration from their own nature, but
remains in their former substance, form and figure, and may be seen and
touched as they were before.

The third place is, John 6. 51. where Christ says, I am the living bread
which came down from heaven, and being granted to be living, what else is it
but his body (says he.) To whom I answer 1* as Bellarmin witnesses (lib. 1.
de. Euch. cap. 5.) all these Romanists, to wit, Gabriel Biel, Cardinal
Cusanus, Thomas Aquinas, Cardinal Cajetan, Ruardus Tapperus, Joannes
Hesselius, affirms, and Cornelius Jansenius especially (concord. cap. 59.)
unanswerablie proves, p. 387. and 389. That this chapter medleth nowise with
any sacramental eating of Christ's body, or drinking his blood. 2. This Text
makes rather against Transubstantion, for tho Christ says I am the living
bread, yet it follows not that therefore his flesh was transsubstantiated into
bread, and consequently no more does it follow, that when Christ said of the
bread, This is my body, that therefore bread was transsubstantiated into His
body.

The fourth and maine place is, Math. 26. 26. Take, eat, This is my body. To
which I answer 1. with the forenamed Theodoret dial. 1. That our Savior
heerby honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood, not
changing their nature (says he) but adding grace to nature. And so likewise
speaks Pope Gelasius against Eutyches. (de duabus Christi naturis) 2.
Augustine cont. Adimant. cap. 12. Tertullian cont. Marcion. lib. 4. c. 40. and
Eusebius de demonstratione evangelii. lib. 8. in fine, and many more fathers
expounds these words, This is my body, that is, a sign and symbol thereof.
3. The Popes own canon law, and Gratians gloss thereon (did. 2. de consecra.
c. hoc est) expounds these words thus. The heavenly sacrament which truly
represents Christ's flesh is called the body of Christ, but improperlie,
wherefore it is called so after the own manner, not that it is so truly, but
in a signifying Mystery, so that the meaning is (says the gloss on the
former words) it is called the body of Christ, that is a sign of Christ's body.

As for the testimonies of Fathers, he cites Ambrose, where he says, It is
bread before the words of consecration but after, of bread it is made the flesh
of Christ. To which I answer 1. That he perverteth Ambrose words, which are
these. It was not Christ's body before consecration, but I say to thee, that
after consecration it is Christ's body. 2. In the same place be explaines
himself, showing that the substance of bread remains not withstanding, and
the change is only sacrame^tal, so that it is the flesh of Christ only in a
sacramental way, Therefore (says he) Christ's blessing is of that force, ut
sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur, that is, that the Elements they
remain in substance what they were before, and yet they are changed into
another thing. And illastrateth this change by this simile. Thou thy selswas
(says he)- but thou was an old creature, but after that thou art consecrat,
thou began to be a new creature. Now I hope, no man will say that by
regeneration, or our consecrating to Gods service, we are changed in substance,
but in quality, from a sinful di^position to a more holy. And in his fourth
book of the sacraments. cap. 5. he therefore calls the consecrated bread The
figure of Christ's body, whereby the same is represented to us. So that this
conversion abolisheth not the things that were, as we see in Theodoret, but
makes them to be in a sacred use what before they were not.

His second testimony is out of an obscure and late Monck, whom he calls S.
Remigius, saying, That Christ's flesh and the consecrated bread are one body,
but tells not where he speaks so, neither does it prove any conversion of
the substance of the bread into Christ's flesh, but that these two are one by a
sacramental union. As for other fathers whom he only cites, but sets not
down their words, none of them proves any popish transsubstanciation, yea,
Justin Martyr whom he cites, apol. 2. his words overthrowes the same, saying
only, That the sacramental bread is not common bread, whereby our flesh and
blood is nourished, which is not done by Christ's body, it being only the
food of the soul.

40 THat we ought to receive under both ki^ds, and that one alone is not
^ufficient.
Which he says is contrary to John 6. 51. where Christ says, If any man
shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, here (says he) life ever
lasting is promised to him that eats of the bread only. To whom I answer 1.
as I show before in my answer to the same place, a number of famous Roma^ists
declares, that there is no speech of sacramental eating in that chapter, and
in particular Cardinal Cusanus (epist. ad Bohemos p. 858.) when he has
affirmed the same, and that the spiritual feeding only on Christ by faith is
there set down, he concludes thus, Et ^aec est necessaria omnium Doctorum
sententia (says he) 2. If this were spoken of sacramental eating, then al
who receive not the sacrament, as children before ripe age who die, should be
damned, because our Savior says verse 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man and drink his blood. ye have no life in you. 3. We see here
drinking of his blood as necess^rie requi^ed as the eating of his flesh, which
is against their depriving of people of the sacramental cup.

The second place is, Luke 24. 30. Christ at Emaus (says he) communicated his
disciples under one kind. To which I answer, That the Evangelist speaks
there only of ordinary refection, as he did Mat. 14. 19. which is here
called The breaking of bread, Therefore says their own Carthusian, He took
bread and blessed it but did not convert it into his body (says he) but
only as his custom was to bless meat. whence also says their own
Iansenius (concord. c. 146. p. 249) There ar some who from this place would take
an argument (says he) to prove that it is lawful under one kind to give or
receive the sacrament of the Eucharist, which opinion is neuher certa^ne nor
has it liklie-hood* of irueth (says he) And as for the n^v^l^ie of this half
communion, which Pope Gelasius calls sacrilege (part. 3. decret de consecra.
d. 2.) there Alfonsus a Castro shows the same; sit. Euch.. ultima haeres. p.
120. Cassander also tells us, Consult. art. 22. That it was not in the Roman
Church till Aquinas time (anno 1265.) and is not in the greek church (says
he) until this day. Wherefore we conclude in Bellarmin's words (lib. 4. de
Euch. cap. 7.. quia vero) That it cannot be doubted, but that it is best to be
done which Christ did, and we know that Christ said to his disciples,
representing (says Cassander) the persons of all faithful Communicants
(drink ye all of this) as the Apostle also speaks accordingly 1. Cor. 11.
28. And therefore as for their fiction of concomitance, whereby they would elude
these words. I will ove^ throw the same only by their bishop Iansenius words
(concord. cap. 59 p. 389.) saying, It does not easily appear how the outward
taking of the bread alone can be called drinking, for it is rightly called
eating, because there is something taken there by way of meat, but how can that
be called drinking (says he) where there is nothing taken by way of drink?

41 THat there is not in the church a true and propitiatory Sacrifice of the
Mass.
Which he says is contrary to Malach. 1. 11. where the Lord says, That in
every place incense shall be offered to his Name and a pure offering To which I
answer, 1. That Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 20. and Tertullian lib. 4. adv. Marcion.
As also Theodoret on this place, expoaes this pure offering to be the
spiritual sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving. 2. Hugo Cardinalis* as also
their own lyra, shows that the Lord would heerby give the jewish priests to
know that spiritual sacrifices were to succeed thereto which were carnal and
in particular devote prayer is this pure offering (says Lyra.)

The second place is, Psalm. 110. 4. where Christ is called A Priest after the
order of Melchisedek, whose sacrifice was made in bread and wine (says he) as
the Mass is now. To whom I answer, 1. That Melchisedecks sacrifice was not in
bread and wine, for that was the refreshment only which he brought forth to
Abraham and his followers, as Clemens Alexandrinus witnesses, and therefore
their own vulgar has the word protulit. he brought forth. and not the word,
obtulit* he offered up* 2. Cardinal Cajetan (and with him Andradius) says,
there is nothing in that story (Genesis 14. 18.) of any sacrifice or oblation
that Melchisedek-offered up to God (says he) but that be caused bring forth
bread and wine (as Iosep^us reports) for the refreshment of the victors. And
thereafter, when he comes to these words (And he blessed him) behold here
(says he) is his Priestlie action, according to Numb. 6. 23. which therefore
the Apostle mentions Heb. 7. 1. and proves him thereby to be greater nor
Abraham, and consequently his Priesthood to be greater nor Levi's who was then
in Abarhams loins, because at that time Levi was both tythed and blessed by
him.

The third place is, Luke 22. 19. This is my body which was given for you. To
which I answer, That of these words I have already spoken, by which here they
would make Christ to have been a Mass Priest, and to have sacrificed himself
the night before he was sacrificed on the Cross. And so, (contrary to Heb.
10. 14. That by one only offering he has not perfected for ever them who are
sanctified,) but contrar to Heb. 7. 27.) That He offered himself up twice,
whereas it was necessary (says Paull Heb. 9. 25.) That he should not offer
himself up ofter than once, for then (as he says) he must have suffered ofter
than once. which the Apostle counts a most gross absurdity.

As for the testimonies of Fathers which he brings, who calls that which
Christ instituted at his last supper, An unbloodie and mystical venerable
sacrifice. I answer in the words of Lombard their Master of sentences, (lib.
4. did. 12. q. si sit) who shows in what sense the fathers so calls it,
saying, That which is offered and consecrated, is called a sacrifice and
oblation because it is the remembrance and representation of that true
sacrifice and holy real oblation which was made on the Altar of the Cross,
which only was bloody. In likmanner says Aquinas (part. 3. q. 83. art. 1.)
It is called a sacrifice, both because the celebration of this sacrament is an
image and representatio^ of the sacrifice of Christ, as also because by this
sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit of the Lords passion and sacrifice
on the Cross. So also speaks Gabriel Biel on the canon of the Mass, lect. 85.
calling the Eucharist a sacrifice because it is a representation and memorial
(says he) of that true and holy sacrifice offered on the Cross. And
subjoyneth this reason, for as Augustine (says he) writteth to Simplician.
the Images of things uses to be called by their names whereof they are images.
as we say this is Cicero, when it is but Cicero's picture (says he) So in
likmanner speaks Lyra on Heb. 10. and many more Romanists. So that it is
false that Bellarmin says lib. 1. de Missa cap. 2. That neither the scripture
nor the fathers calls that a sacrifice, which is only a representation and
remembrance of a sacrifice. And because this is their Idol of the Mass, which
they adore, therefore I will labor to overthrow this Dagon by some few
arguments furnished by themselves, as 1. A sacrifice and Priesthood are
relatives (says Bellarmin, lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 2.) so that to a sacrifice
properly so called, a Priesthood also properly called must be correspondent
(says he) whence it will follow, that if the Mass be a sacrifice properly so
called, the Priest must be a Priest also properly so called, and if this be,
he must be either after the order of Aaron, which has ceased, or after the
order of Melchisedeck, and this he cannot be, because Christ living, and being
a Priest for ever after that order, he has no successor therein, as we are
taught, Heb. 7. 23. 24. Next (says Bellar. in the same chapter. neque)
Melchisedecks sacrifice was bread and wine, and so says this Pamphleter,
whence it will follow that in the Mass in likmanner that which is offered up
by the Priest (giving that he were after the order of Melchisedeck) must be
bread and wine only, and consequently not the flesh and blood of Christ by
transsubstantiation 3. If they will say that it is notwithstanding Christ's own
body and blood that is offered up. then out of Bellar. in the same place. 6. I
reason thus, in a sacrifice properly so called there must be some sensible
thing that is offered (says he) but this cannot be Christ's body, because by
none of the senses, as sight, taste, or touch, can it be discerned to be there,
and as for the accidents of the bread, as shape, color and taste. I hope they
will not say that this is the sensible thing which they offer up as a
sacrifice. 4. (Says Bellar. in the same place. 8.) To a true sacrifice is
required, that the thing which is offered be in the substance thereof
destroyed, that is, that it be so changed (says he) that it cease to be what
it was before. Which to affirm of Christ's body offered up in the Mass, were
most horrid blasphemy.

42 THat sacramental unction is not to be used to the sick.
Which he says is contrary to Iam. 5. 14. where the anointing of the sick
with oil is commanded. To which I answer in Cardinal Cajetans words on this
place, saying, Neither by these words themselves, nor by the effects, does
these words speak of sacramental extreme unction, but rather of that unction
(says he) which the Lord Jesus did institute in the gospel to be exercised
on the sick, for the Text says not, if any be sick unto death, b^t
absolutely, if any be sick (says he) and further the effect is the raising
up of the sick, whereas extreme unction is not given but at the point of death
(says he) besides this James bids call many elders, and many anointers to
one sick person, which is altogether disagreable to the manner of extreme
unction (says he)

The second place is Mark 6. 13. And they anointed many with oil who were
sick, and healed them. whereunto the same Cardinal answers thus, This unction
(says he) was not sacramental, for it is evident that they used oil here,
for healing, not for ministering any sacrament (says he) as also it is clear
that thereupon followed health, otherwise the virtue of healing oil (which was
miraculous) had not been known, and this effect is not found by extreme
unction (says he) And of this same judgment with Cajetan were Ruardus,
Iansenius, and Dominicus a Soto with others, as witnesses Bellarmin, de
extrema unctione lib. 1. cap. 2. who also confirms their opinion by diverse
arguments.

The third place is Mark, 16. 18. They shall lay hands on the sick and they
shall recover. To which I answer, 1. That there is no mention here of any
unction. And 2. The effect of the laying on of the Apostles hands was
recoverie, which is not the effect (as Cajetan speaks) of extreme unction.

As for the fathers whom he only cites, but sets not down their words,
none of them makes for his purpose, and some of them are both looslie cited
and judged by Erasmus counterfit, as Augustine in speculo: for therein are
insert some verses of Boethius, who was long after Augustine.

43 THat no inward grace is given by impositio^ of hands, in holy orders, and
that ordinary vocation and mission of Pastors is not necessary in the Church,
FOr answer 1. The last of these Assertions, That ordinary vocations and
mission of Ministers is not necessary in the Church, is so impudent and gros^e
a calumny, as I cannot enough wonder how he could vent or invent such a lie.
Seeing both in our Confession of faith 1581. art. 22. and in our later 1647. the
contrary thereof may be seen. And as for the first which he says is
contrary to 2. Tim. 4. 6. where it is said, Wherefore I put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of GOD which is in thee by putting on
of my hands. and 1. Tim. 4. 14. where it is ^^d, Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, and laying on of the hands of the
presbytrie. I answer, 1. There is here a gift spoken of (as Cardinal Cajetan
acknowledges) but not an inward grace, or if grace, an edifying grace for
others, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 2. This gift is expounded by Aquinas to be The talent
or gift of knowledge wherewith he was endued to gain souls, or the Episcopal
order or degree whereunto for that end he was called and advanced, as Cajetan
and ^ombard also expounds. Their late Estius also expounds this gift to be
That ability that was given him of God to execute his charge of teaching,
exhorting and convincing etc. not that he received the gift of all and sindrie
of these upon a sudden, when he was ordained (says he) for he ought not to
have been ordained a Bishop, except he had been endued with these gifts
before (says he) or that by this imposition of hands (says Aquinas)
Ministri dant gratiam, The Ministers or presbyters co^ferres grace on him that
is ordained, but that this signified only the grace that was conferred upon
him before by Christ. And whereby (says the ordinar gloss) was confirmed to
him that authority which he did receive, to wit, of the public exercise of
the holy Ministry.

As for his citation of some Fathers, the same is either so looslie, as
Augustine l. 4. quest. super number. but tells not what question, whereas there ar
65. questions on that book, orelse he cites them who makes nowise for him, as
Cyprian who speaks nothing in that Epistle of ordination. He cites also
Optatus, but no book, whereas he write seven. also Tertullian de praescrip. but
no chapter, whereas there are 53. in that book.

44 THat Priests and other religious persons who have vowed chastity to God,
may frelie marry notwithstanding of their vow.
Which he says is contrary to Deuteronomy. 23. 22. where it is called A sin to
vow and thereafter to break it. To which I answer, That this place speaks
only of vows free, lawful, and possible to be performed which popish forced
and mo^asticall vows of perpetual single life and the like annexed to holy
orders, are not, and are so far from being a degree of higher perfection, as
they are rather superstitions and sinful snares (as their Cassander calls
them) in which no christian ought to entangle himself. The unclean fruits
whereof may be seen in the lives of the Popes themselves, and from them
downward to the lowest skirts of their clergy, as is notour to the world, and
as I have particularly shown by their own famous historians in the 16.
chapter of my late Treatise, called Antichrist pointed and painted out in his
true colors. Which made their own Ferus on Math. 19. 12. to say, You may see
heerby how unwarily and uncircumspectlie they do, who close within Monastries
their children being but young, whilas they know not what sort of persons they
will be, whereby how great evils do arise (says he) Who is he that sees not?

And of the rest of the popish clergy* thus also speaks their own Cassander
(consult. art. 23.) The matter now is come to that pass, that ye shall not
find scarce the hundredth man who abstaineth from the company of women (says
he) And again, this is to be remarked, as these who would enter in holy
orders at restrained from that which by Gods institution is permitted, and is a
remedy against lust, to wit, marriage, which is called The Bed undefyled, and
honorable in all. Heb. 13. 4. So on the contrary, whoredom, which is
forbidden by God, and whereof it is said in the same place, That God will judge
all such, (The same is permitted, as we see in the Popes decretals (did, 81.
cap. Maximianus) where it is said, That it is co^monlie held, that one ought not
to be deposed for simple fornication. And remarke the reason, because (says
the gloss) very few ar found without that fault. And therefore 1. we affirm
that no such inforcement of such vows should be 2. That being made, if t^^y
^end to the prejudice of a man's soul, by exposing him to the unavoidable
danger of sin, as fornication, adultery and the like, therefore they do not
bind, but are better broken than kept.

The second place which he brings is 1. Tim. 5. 11. But the younger widows
refuse, for when they have began to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry
etc. To which I answer. That this place is a direction only not to admit to
the office of diaconesses (as Phebe is styled Ro^. 16. 1.) which at that time
required unmarried women any that were young under the age of 60. years at
least, because howsoever they will profess a single life, or continency (but
their is no word of vows) yet they will not be able to perform the same, and
so will make but a rash and an unlawful profession, from which sort he
therefore disswadeth younger women, verse 14. and wills that they rather
marry and bare children, not to profess continency, and yet thereafter (as
verse 15.) to turn after satan by whoredom and lust. This place then is rather
against the making of such vows or profession of perpetual continency in
religious persons that are young, the evils whereof in the Popish Church (as
their Ferus speaks) who is he that knows not? to the great provocation of
Gods wrath, stain of Christian religion, and secret murder of thousands of
poor infants, as their own famous histories record.

The third place is 1. Tim. 5. 15. For some are already turned aside after
satan. To marry then after the vow of chastity once made, is here termed by
the Apostle a turning aside after satan (says he.) To which I answer 1. That
Primasius expounds this, That they are turned after satan, either by denying
the faith of God, or by committing fornication (says he) 2 Their own late
Estius says also thus, But wherein they are turned after satan the Apostle
tells not, some expound it because they married after their vow, others
because they committed Fornication, which is the more probable (says he) for
hereby a greater occasion of speaking evil against the profession was
furnished to enemies as v. 14. As also (says he) it may be referred to their
deserting of the religion. As the experience therefore of some younger widows,
that had turned aside after satan by incontinencie, was a sufficient reason to
the Apostle for refusing such, so like wise should the woeful experience of so
many whorish Priests, Friars, Nuns and others, teach, that no young person
should be forced in their admission to holy orders, to vow and make
profession of perpetual continency. which moved Cardinal Cajetan to say on 1.
Tim. 5. 12. As Paull had learned by experience the forenamed inconvenients, by
admitting young widows under 60. years to a profession of continency, so would
God (says he) that we would learn by such experience, whither the solemn
vows of persons o^ both sexes in their youth, that have entered into holy and
religious orders, has done good i^ the Church or not.

But it seems strange to me that against the marriage of religious persons
he should allege scripture, seeing in the Popes canon law (causa 28. q. 2.)
and by Bellarmin himself (lib. de clericis cap. 18.] it is acknowledged That
the marriage of Priests is not forbidden by Law or gospel nor any Apostolical
authority, but by a later Church constitution, for repealing whereof Pope Pius
the second (as Platina reports) used to say, that there was greater reason and
cause to repeal it, than there was for making the same. The fruit of which
decree their own Cassander sets down (consult. art. 23) saying, We see by
this decree that chastity is so far from being established, that a window is
seen to be opened to all lust and villainy. Therefore also did Gerson
Chancellor of the universitie of Paris deplore (de vita spirituali animae
lect. 4. coroll. 14) That the places of the holy Ministry were possessed by
Adulterers, whoremasters, Sodomits and such like Monsters, and that the number
of this kind was so great, that there was no proceeding against them. yea,
Whoredom was of so little account amongst them, and authorized, that it is
said in the gloss on the canon Law (did. 81. cap. Maximianus) That for simple
fornication a Priest is not to be deposed, Seeing as has been said, Few were
to be found who were free of that vice. So likewise to the very same purpose,
(causa 2. quest. 7. cap. Lator) it is again said, That single fornication is
not worthy of deposition. So that as Bernard speaks sermon. 66* in cantica.
Take from the Church honorable marriage, and the Bed undefiled, you shall fill
the same with whoredoms, incests, filthy issues, effeminat and Sodomiticall
Monsters, and in a word with all sort of uncleanness.

And what opposition was made against this decree of forced single life made by
Pope Gregory 7. alias Hildebrand, a^no, 1074. by the whole Clergy almost.
Their own Sigebert declares in his Chronicle, saying, Pope Gregory having
convocated a synod, removed from their office all married Priests, and inhibit
all Laics to hear their Mass by a new example, whereupon did arise so great
a scandal, that in the time of no heresy, the church was rent with a more
grievous scisme, many thereby joining also with incontinencie, perjurie and
manifold Adulteries. Which made that noble poet in his time Chaucer, Esquire. of
woodstock* anno 1341. to say in his plowmans tale. They live not in lechery,
but haunt Wenches, Widows and wives, and punishes the poor for poultrie,
Themselves using it all their lives.

45 THat fasting and abstinence from certain meats is not grounded on holy
scripture, nor causes any spiritual good.
FOr answer, 1. That fasting is not grounded on scripture, nor causes any
spiritual good, we disowne, for our Confession of faith, 1647. cap. 21. art.
5. testifies the the contrary, where solemn fasts in their several times
and seasons, used in an holy religious manner, are declared to be a part of
Gods religious worship, according to the scriptures there alleged. So that we
admit both private and public fasting for humiliation, as the same is joined
with prayer, and fitteth us the better for devotion, as also tends to
spirit^all good many ways, as we see Act. 13. 3. Math. 17. 21. etc. But as for
enjoining abstinence from certain sorts of meat at set times, and for
conscience sake, joined with opinion of merit or satisfaction. This we oppose
as a doctrine of devils, so called 1. Tim. 4. 3. contrary to Christian
liberty, and to Gods word, 1. Tim. 4. 4.

As for the example of the Rechabits which he brings, Ierm. 35. 5. of
forbearing the drinking of wine for ever, It was a singular case, and a
particular humane injunction only of their father, binding no others in that
time or ever thereafter, as the like was that of the Nazarits, Luke 1. 15. to
wit, temporary only, and relating to some only, as also meerlie ceremonial.

46 THat Jesus Christ descended not into hell nor delivered ^hence the souls
of the Patriarch's out of the same.
Which he says is contrary to Ephesians. 4. 8. where it is said, That when
Christ ascended on high he led captivity captive, which Captives (says he)
were the souls of the fathers which Christ delivered out of Limbus. To whom I
answer 1. we deny that ever he shall find in scripture any such place as he
calls Limbus, or that the word Hell, as it relates to the soul, signifies
any place appointed for the godly, but for the wicked only and damned for
ever. 2. By Captivity led captive, Christ's enemies and ours are only meant,
and not his friends or the fathers, which is clear, first by the alike speech,
Judge. 5. 12. where Deborah after the victory over Isreal's enemies, says to
Barack, Arise Barack and lead thy Captivity captive. That is, thy vanquished
enemies. 2. The fathers also so expound these words, therefore says Tertullian
lib. 5. contra Marcion. He led Captivity captive, that is death and that
slaverie under which man was. Haymo also and Theophy lact on Ephesians. 4. 9.
says, That this captivity was the Devil, death, the curse of the Law and
sin And so also speaks Augustine (on psalm. 67.) 3. So also do their own
Doctors expound these words, as Lyra on psalm. 67. Lombard likewise and
Arboreus on Ephesians. 4. 9.

The second place is Act. 2. 27. Thou will not leave my soul in hell. To which I
answer, 1. Their Arias Montanus in his interlineall Bible approven by the
Universitie of Lovan, and printed at Antuerp 1572. translates that place of the
16. psalout of which this of the Act. is taken, thus, Non derelinques animam
meam in sepul^hro. And Isidorus clarius on this place speaks thus, according
to the Hebrew phrase the soul is put for the body, which he was not to leave
in the grave. And Bellarmin, lib. 4. de Christo. cap. 12. grantes that the
hebrew word nephesh or anima, is a general word which sometimes signifies the
body, as is clear (says he) by many parts of scripture. Whereof he instances
one, Genesis 37. 21. where Ruben says to his brehren concerning Joseph, Non
interficiamus anima^ ejus where the word anima is not taken for the soul
properly so called nor by a Trope for the man himself, but properly for his
flesh or body (says he) and as Nephesh sometimes signifies the body, so in
the same sense is the greek word (...) used by the septuagint Levit. 21. 1. and
11. 2. The hebrew word Sheol, also, is taken two ways in scripture, to wit,
either for the receptacle of the corporal part of man after death, and so it
signifies the grave. which is not only called in the greek (...) but (...),
as 1. Cor. 15. 55. (...) O grave where is thy victory? orelse it is taken for
the receptacle of the spiritual part or soul of man after death, and thus
being taken, it is translated, Hell, and then only and ever it signifies the
place of the damned, out of which there is no deliverie, as Augustine shows at
length in his 99. Epistle to Evodius, and for probation that the word Sheol is
taken for both these forenamed receptacles. Their own Lyra's words on psalm.
114. are these, In the hebrew (says he) for INFERNUS is put SHEOL which does
not only signify Hell, but also the grave. as we also see Genesis 42. 38. Job,
^7. 13. and psalm. 141. 7. A third exposition Romanists give of the word Sheol
or Infernus, signifying there by the estate of the dead in general under the
power of death, whereof Peter speaks Act. 2. 24. and thus does their
Jansenius expound in Prove. 15. 11. and Genebrard in psalm. 88. 48. Thus the
words being cleared by Romanists themselves, 1. then whither the meaning be
this, Thou will not leave my body in the grave, according to Arias Montanus
translation of psalm. 16. 10. relating so to Christ's resurrection, which is the
Apostles purpose to prove, or 2. whither the meaning be, Thou will not leave
me under the power of death, as Jansenius expounds, or 3. whither (...) or
soul be taken for the spiritual part of man, and (...), or hell for the place
of the damned, yet howsoever (I say) the words be taken in any of the three
former senses, they shall never prove any popish Limbus, or any desce^se of
Christ's soul thither, because the word (...), or Infernus (when it is taken for
the grave, or that which is in place thereof, as Genesis 43. 38. and Jonah. 2. 2.)
It ever signifies the place of the damned, as both scripture shows, and
Augustine forecited, and I hope that papists themselves will never say, that the
souls of the Patriarchs went down thither.

Moreover, concerning the descense of Christ's soul to hell. Romanists
themselves disagree thus. 1. Scotus in 1. sent. did. 11. q. 1. disclaimeth any
warrant in the gospel for it. 2. Bellarmin (lib. 4. de Christo. c. affirms
that Christ's soul descended locally to the place of the damned. 3. Aquinas
denies this (as Bellar. shows in the same place) and says that he only
descended locallie to that part of hell, which is called Limbus. 4. Durand.
mantaineth that Christ's soul descended to no part of hell locallie, but
virtualie only and by effect, seeing the scripture (says he) distinguishes
nowise the hell of the damned from any other place, otherwise (says Durand. in
3. sent. did. 22. q. 3.) his soul had been in two places together, seeing he
said to the thief on the Cross, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
And which virtuall descending of Christ into hell, Protestants likewise
acknowledge, Chamier speaking thus (lib. 5. de Christo, cap. 3.) Moreover
(says he) when we say. He descended into hell, we signify thereby the
efficacy of Christ's death, whereby he overcame hell. The fruit of which
victory not only appertains to them who were to come after, but also to them
who had long gone before (says he.)

The third place is 1. Pet. 3. 18. Being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit, by which also he went and preached to the spirits in
prison. Which he says were the Fathers in Limbus. To which I answer, That this
place proves no descending of Christ's soul to Limbus, for delivering of the
fathers therefra. Which shall be made clear by considdering 1. By what spirit
Christ went and preached in the days of Noab. 2. who were these spirits in
prison to whom he went. and 3. The time when he went. First then the spirit by
which Christ went and preached, was not his humane soul, but his divine spirit,
for so says Augustine epist. 99. ad Evodium, as also Beda on this place. O
Ecumenius likewise and Athanasius, which exposition Estius says agrees well
with 2. Cor. 13. 4. Aquinas likewise part. 3. q. 52. art. 2. says that it was
by the spirit of his divinity that he went and preached (says he) by the
mouth of just Noah. Lyra in likemanner says, That it was by the holy Ghost in
Noah and in other good men. So also speaks Hugo Cardinalis and the Jesuit
Salmeron on this place. Next, Scripture it self testifies in the same place,
That it was by that spirit by which he was quickened and raised from the dead,
and that this spirit was his divine spirit, is witnessed Romans 8. 11. by which
also our mortal bodies shall be quickened, and which dwells in the Elect.
And this is not Christ's soul, but his holy spirit, as v. 9. Next, the spirits
to whom he went are descrived 1. That they were disobedient, and who abused the
long suffering patience of God that waited for their repentance in the days of
Noah. which the patriarchs did not, who ar praised so much for the contrary, to
wit, their faith and obedience Heb. 11. 2. They are said to be such spirits, who
were in prison even then, when Peter wrote this epistle, as their own Andradius
notes (def. council. Trid. lib. 2. p. 17. 2) and the Text it self declares, and
therefore were not fred therfra at Christ's Resurrection which was long before.
3. The time when Christ by his spirit preached to these spirits in prison, was,
as the text shows, In the days of Noah, and not after his death, which days
were thousands of years before the same. Therefore says Beda they were the
wicked and carnal livers in the age that Noah lived in to whom Christ
preached. And so says Carthusian, and this he did (says Aquinas) by the
mouth of just Noah, and by the holy Ghost (says Lyra) in Noah and other good
me^. By all which it is clear that it was not after Christ's death, that in his
soul he descended to any popish Limbus, to deliver the godly Patriarch's
therfra. Seeing the Patriarch that was then alive in the days of Noah, was only
Noah himself.

The fourth place is Heb. 11. 40. God having provided a better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect, whence it follows (says
he) that these holy souls were detained till then in a place distinct from
heaven, and hell of the damned. To whom I answer, That no such thing follows
from these words, but that the glorifying both in soul and body of these holy
pat^iarch's shall not be till the general resurrection, when both they and we
shall be perfectly in both glorified together, which is the exposition of
Aquinas, Cajetan and Lombard on this place, Calling the glorifying of their
souls after death the first robe or stole which they received, and the second
which they are to receive to be the glorifying also of their body at the last
day. This like wise is the exposion of their late Estius, which he shows to
be also Augustins, epist. 99. and Evodium and 49. Treatise on John, as also
Chrisostoms, and Erasmus in his paraphrase. And concludes thus saying, The
Apostle therefore speaks of the perfyting which is to be at the general
resurrection.

The fifth place is, Math. 12. 40. That as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the Whales belly: so should the son of man be three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth. which he expounds, Hell. To which I
answer, This is only spoken of Christ's body in the grave, and not the being
of his soul in hell witness Chrysostom hom. 44. in Math. 12. whose words
are, He says not in the earth, but in the heart of the earth, to wit, in the
grave (says he) Thus also does Gregory Nyssen expound, epist. ad Eustachium.
So says Auselmus on Math. 12. He was in the heart of the earth, to wit, in
the grave (says he) Thus also does Ignatius expound epist. ad Trallianos
Euth^mius in Math. 12. Jerome also and Tertullian with diverse others, and thus
also says their own Lyra, The son of man shall be in the heart of the earth
three days and three nights, that is in the grave, and so speaks their
parisian Doctor Arboreus, and others. And which answer serves likewise for
that of the Ephesians. 4. 9. which others object.

The sixth place is Math. 27. 52. And the graves were opened and many bodies of
the saints which sleeped arose, and came out of their graves after his
resurrection. To which I answer, That here is a resurrection of the bodies of
the saints: coming out of their graves, but no coming of their souls out of
any part of hell o^ a popish Limbus.

The seventh place is Zach. 9. 11. By the blood of thy Covenant I have let out
thy prisoners forth of the pit wherein there is no water. That is, the Fathers
out of Limbus (says he) To which I answer shortly, omitting Augustins
exposition lib. 18. de civitate dei. cap. 35. Of the deep of man's misery by
sin, out of which by Christ's blood we are freed, Bellar. himself answers
clearlie for us, l. 1. de purg. cap. 3. and shows That no such thing as
Limbus patrum can be meant heerby, because their is water of comfort and
refreshment in Limbus (says he) whereas in this pit whereof Zachary speaks
there is no water at all.

As for his last place, 1. Sam. 28. 14. concerning Samuels apparition to Saull*
we have answered it already, that it was not Samuel, but the Devil in his
shape. And which place is most impertinently brought to prove Christ's descense
into hell, by the apparition of any such spirit coming out of hell of the
damned.

As for Fathers, whom he only cites* Jerome explaineth himself on Ephesians. 4.
9. what he says on v. 8. Next, Augustine on psalm. 171. has nothing of Limbus
patruu^ or Christ's descense there, and as for Gregory there is no such place
as he mentions, lib. 3. Moral. cap. 20. For that book has only 17. chapters
in it.

47 THat there is no purgatory fire, or other prison wherein sinn^s may be
satisfied for, after this life.
Which says he is contrar to 1. Cor. 3. 13. 15. The fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is, if any man's work be burnt, he shall suffer loss.
yet he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. To which I answer, or rather
their own Estius on this place, saying, Sindrie expounds this place (says
he) of Purgatory, wherein after this life, and before the day of the last
judgment the souls of the just are purged from their lighter sins, but it
appears that this cannot be said (says he) both because the words shows
that the day of particular judgment is not to be understood, but of the
general judgment, whereas the purging of the souls pertains to the
particular judgment, as also because the fire of purgatory does not try
every man's work (says he) but punishes only the evil works of good men.
Bellarmin also lib. 1. de purg. cap. 5. says, That the word (fire) in the 13.
and 14. verses is to taken only allegoricallie, and that the fire of
purgatory is not thereby to be meant, for of this fire the Apostle says it
shall burn the work, not the worker (says he) and therefore a purging or
afflicting fire of persons is not meant thereby, only he would have the word
(fire) in the 15. verse to be taken in another sense than in the other two
verses, and thereby to be meant the fire of purgatory, but Estius answers
unto him thus, and refuteth him, saying, That not without just cause it seems
to be absurd, that the Apostle in one Text of so few words would speak of fire
in so diverse significations, neither can any easily be persuaded (says he)
that in the third place a purgatory fire of souls can be signified, when as
in the first and second place, another and diverse fire from that is
understood. And then he subjoines after the naming of some Romanist Divines
that has expounded these words otherwise tha^ he does, saying, Let none
marvel that I have not followed these authors in all things, because that
neither themselves amongst themselves do always agree* Such is his testimony
of their braged of unity.

The second place is John 11. 22. But I know that even now (says Martha to
Christ) Whatsoever thou will ask of God, he will give it thee. Ergo there is a
fi^e of purgatory, is as good a consequence, as to say, ergo the staff is in
the corner.

The third place is Act. 2. 24. Whom God has raised up loosing the sorrows of
hell, that is, loosing men one of their pains there (says he) To which I
answer 1. That he shamefullie perverteth the Text, for it is in the original,
Thanatu, and in our translation, and their own interlinear, (the sorrows of
death, and not hell) So that although he pretended in the Preface, and promised to
refute our doctrine by the express text of our own Bible, yet here he
grosslie passes therefra, and for establishing of his purgatory, he purges
out the word (death) and puts in (hell) in place thereof which is a bold
corrupting. 2. The text speaks only of Christ's own being loosed from the
sorrows of death, and not of his loosing any other persons from the same, and
far less from hell, or any other place of purgatory, which thing was done
by his resurrection. Therefore says Cardinal Cajeta^ on this place, The
sorrows were the sorrows of death (says he) by which is was impossible that
he could be holden, to wit, Christ.

The fourth place is 1. Cor 15. 29. Otherwise what shall they do who are
baptized for the dead? That is, afflict themselves and do penance for them that
are in purgatory (says he) To which I answer 1. That this can not be said
of voluntary afflicting themselves, as by prayers alms and fasting undertaken
for the help of the dead (says their own Estius on this place) which if
Paull had meant he had not said, who are baptized, as if it were by others,
but who baptize themselves for the dead (says he) The exposition then which
he says is worthiest to be preferred before al others, and which Epiphanius
(haeres. 28.) received from them who were before him as approven, is this
(says Estius) to wit, That these ar said to be baptized for the dead, who
having no hope of longer life here, but as dead men, did crave and get
baptism, reallie heerby declaring that they were baptized for the dead, that
is, for this end that baptism (which witnesses their faith in the trinity)
might be profitable to them at that time when they departed this life, and
were to enter into the condition of the dead. As if the Apostle had said, if
there were no resurrection of the body at all, what fruit can they reap who
are baptized? being about to die, or counted for dead, and who for this cause
profess that they were baptized, in respect of that future estate that is
after this life, and this meaning is most clear, pure and simple (says
Estius) and most ^itt to prove what the Apostle intends, and which others
also does approve (says he) Which exposition likewise the Jesuit also
A-lapide approves as most simple and plain, declaring also that it is
Chrisostoms. And so it proves no purgatory at all.

The fi^th place is Luke 19. 6. Make you friends of the mammon of
unrighteousnes, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. To which I answer, That this place proves nowise after death any
fire of pu^gatorie, but rather the contrary, that when the godly and
charitable persons fail, that is* die, they are received presentli^ into the
eternal habitations of heavenly glory. Therefore says Bellarmin (lib. 1. de
sanctis cap. 3. on 2. Cor. 5. 1.) The Apostles reasoning here is excellent
(says he) to wit, if this mortal life perish we have instantly another far
better in the heavens, for God is no read^er to punish says he (lib. 1. de
sanctis. cap. 6.) than to reward. whence it follows, that if the wicked after
death presently go to hell, that the godly in likemanner after death
presently go to heaven, and consequently to no fire of purgatory.

The sixth place is Luke, 23. 42. Lord remember me when thou comes into thy
kingdom. which shows (says he) that souls may be helped after death. Which
indeed we grant, by Christ's receiving the^ into his heavenly kingdom, as is
here by the Thief petitioned, but no word is here of Christ's helping out of a
hel^^sh purgatory. Thus we see by how weak arguments he would prove his
Purgatory, which B Fisher (cont. Luth art* 18.) grants was known but of
late only, and after many ages believed. And therefore little or no mention is
of it in the ancient fathers (says he) and yet, which Bellarmin says is a
doctrine of faith of such consequence. That he that believes not purgatory
to ^e shall never come there, but shall be tormented in hels fire for ever.
(says he lib. 1. de purg. cap. 15.) and so he condemns all the eastern or
greek churches to hell, (beside the Protestants) which notwithstanding the B.
of Bitonto in his oration before the Council of Trent acknowledges to be the
only mother Church of the Roman.

As for fathers who^ he cites, Ambrose in that place speaks only of the
fire of Gods judgment. Jerome also speaks nothing of a popish purgatory, and
as for Gregory he says That the fire whereof the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 3.
13. may be meant of the fire of affliction. And as for any other fire, he
builds it on Math. 12. 32. which both by Mark 3. 29. and by the fathers that
comment on that place, as also by Romanists themselves, as Carthusian and
Arboreus, makes nowise for purgatory. And as for Origin he speaks only of
the fire of affliction. yea, their B. Fisher cont. Luth. art. 18. says, That
there is little or no mention of it in the ancient fathers at all.

48 THat it is not lawful to make or have images.
Which is contrary (says he) to Exodus 25. 18. And thou shall make two
Cherubims of beaten gold etc. As also to the 1. King. 6. 35. And he car^ed
thereon Cherubims, and palm trees etc. Whence he infers that these graven
Angels, were images of the highest order of Angels (one excepted) which S.
Jerome witnesses that the Jews worshipped. To whom I answer, where Moses is
commanded to make two Cherubims of gold, and place them in the holiest, and
where Solomon on the doors of the Oracle caused carve Cherubims in likemanner.
Both had a particular warrant from God to do so, which Papists have not for
making their Images of the blessed Trinity, and of saints, setting them up in
public places of divine worship to be adored. And therefore worthy and
remarkable is that speech of Tertullian answering the ancient Idolaters, who
objected in likemanner for their defense Moses his making and setting up of a
brazen serpent to who^ Tertullia^ (l. 1. de idololatria) replyeth saying, One
and the same God both by his general Law forebad any image to be made (^aieth
he) as also by his extraordinary and special command, willed an image of a
serpent to be made, if then thou be obedient to the same God (says he) thou
have this-law of his, Make thee no graven image, but if thou respect the image
of the serpent that was afterward made by Moses, then do thou a^ Moses did
(says he) and make no image against the Law, unless God command thee as he
did Moses. Whose word is a Law.

Next, where he says, that S. Jerome witnesses that the Jews worshipped these
images of the Cherubims. I answer 1. That they were not seen by them, seeing
they were placed in the holy of holies, into which the High Priest only
entered once in the year only. 2. Their own Estius on Heb. 9. 5. testifies
the contrary saying, Neither were the Cherubims placed in the Sanctuary to be
worshipped (says he) but both for the signification of things to come, as also
for augmenting the majesty of the place.

His next place is, Hebr. 9. 1. 5. Where the images of the Cherubims ar called
divine ordinances. To which I answer, That this confirms what has been
said, to wit, that those were made by Gods special command, and what God
commanded under the law to be done, as typical and significative of more
spiritual things under the gospel, (as the Apostle shows v. 8. 9. 10.) was
a sufficient warrant, the like where of papists have not for their unwarrantable
making of the images of the Trinity and others abused to idolatry.

49 THat it is not lawful to reverence images or to give any honor to dead
and insensible things.
Which he says is contrary to Exodus 3. 5. Where Moses is commanded to put
off his shoes before he drew near to the burning bush, because the place
whereon he stood was holy ground. To which I answer, 1. That it seems
strange to me, that for adoration of images, he should bring any scripture,
seeing their bishop Melchior Canus ingenouslie acknowledges (lib. 3. de Trad.
cap. 3. fund. 3.)* That the worship of images is not contained in scripture,
neither clearlie, nor obscurelie. 2. As their Cassander testifies (consult.
21.) the adoration of images was condemned in the Council of Frankfoord, as
contrary to scripture. 3. This reverence that was done by Moses by putting off
his shoes was not to the sens^es ground, called holy, because of Gods holy
presence at that time there, but to the Lord himself, who was manifesting
himself there both by voice and vision, as Hugo de S. victore shows, and as
their bishop also Lipomanus in his catena upon Exodus and Cajetan whom he cites
does there also teach.

The second place which he brings, is psalm. 99. 5. Adore ye his footstool,
for it is holy. By which literallie is understood the Ark, which was worshipped
by the Jews (says he) in regard of the images that were set on it. To which I
answer, 1. That he perverteth the Text, for the words are (as the original,
and their own interlinear has) Adore ye at his footstool, for he is holy,
so that it is God, and not his footstool that was to be adored, 2. In the
same psalm v. 9. It is said, worship ye at his holy hill, for the Lord our
God is holy, which justifies the former exposition, and not, worship ye his
holy hill. 3. his reason is both naughty and false. First, naughty, because
the Jews (says he) worshipped the Ark, because of the images, that were set on
it* whence it would follow that not only images themselves were to be
worshipped, but also the places wherein, or whereon they are set. 2. False,
because, as their Estius on Heb. 9. 5. testifies That these images of the
Cherubims were placed in the sanctuary or Ark, not to be worshipped (says he)
but for the signification of things to come, and were not to be seen by the
people. And 4. suppose it were, Adore ye his footstool, yet Augustine on that
place, ^elleth us, that thereby is meaned Christ's humanity, which being ^nited
to his Deity in a personal union, is therefore to be adored, and this
exposition does Lyra follow, as also Lombard, Carthusian, Durand. in his
rationale divin. lib. 4. p. 60. and the Doctors of Duay in their notes on this
place likewise.

The third place is, Philip. 2. 10. At the Name of Jesus every knee shall ^owe.
whence he inferres, that seeing words are representing signs, or images to the
ear, as other images are to the eye, therefore also they are to be worshipped,
as well as the former. To which I answer, that beside O Ecumenius, Theophylect,
Sedulius and Haymo, also their own Aquinas, all of them testify, that the
name is put for himself who is named, and so likewise says their late Estius
And that by bowing the knee is signified by a metonomie, subjection (says he)
therefore the meaning is, that all who are in any place, knowing that man who
is called Jesus to be the son of God, and God himself truly, they shall
submitt themselves to him (says he) as God and Lord over all.

The fourth place is Numb. 21. 8. Where the Lord says to Moses, Make thee a
fiery serpent, and set it on a pole, and it shall some to pass that every one
that is bitt or stinged, when he looks on it shall live. Whence he
gathers, that an image may not only be made and set up to be looked upon,
but also reverenced or adored. To whom I answer 1. with Tertullian before
cited, that for making and setting up that serpent to be looked upon for a
miraculous cure, Moses had an express divine precept, with a promise, which
papists have not for making their Idolatrous images of the Trinity, and such
like, but a precept in the contrary 2. For reverence or adoration, there is no
such thing in the Text, but on the contrary we see the unlawfulnes thereof, by
that practice of godly Hezekiah in breaking the same when it became to be
adored. 2. King. 18. because, as their own Biel shows on the canon of the
Mass lect. 47. This was gross idolatry, and that this godly king by breaking
the same removed the occasion thereof, (says he) 3. In his answer to the
objection of this place 2. King. 18. he grants that this worshipping of that
serpent was the abuse thereof, and so contradicts himself.

And as for fathers whom he cites, I cannot admire enough his impudency,
beside his wresting of scripture, seeing their own Cassander (co^sult. art. 21.)
faith, How much the ancient fathers of the primitive Church did abhore all
veneration of images, Origin as one, declares against Celsus lib. 7. (says
he) Whence also it was, that in the second Council of Nice, under Constantine
and Irene when some decrees were made concerning the adoration of images, and
that a copy thereof was brought to the Emperor Charles, he indicted a Council
at Frank foord (anno 794.) at which the Popes legates were present, wherein by
the unanimous consent of all the western Bishops, the decree of that Nicen
Council was condemned, as being contrary (remarke) both to scripture, and to
the doctrine of the ancient Fathers as also to the custom of the Roman Church
(says he) neither did that subterfuge* then prevail, which used to be
alleged by some, that they give not the honor to the images themselves, but
to them whom they represent, for this excuse (says he) was also given by
pagans for their adoration of their Images, as we may see in Arnobius, as also
in Augustine on psalm. 113. 4. Or as we reckon, psalm. 115. And yet he cites
Augustine and Gregory, who in his epistle to Serenus, lib. 9. epist. 9.
co^demnes all worship of images, as Ambrose does likewise in his oration on
the death of Theodosius, calling such worship an heathnish error, Neither is
any such thing in Basil or Chrysostom whom he cites, that makes for the
worship of images, and as for Damascen alleging it to be an Apostolical
tradition only. This makes against him, who cited for image worship,
testimonies of scripture, beside, that Damascen is but late, and ^ainted with
gross errors, as the denying of the procession of the holy Ghost, (lib. 1.
orthod. fidei) And to what hight of gross idolatry their worship of images is
come, shall be evidenced, both by their doctrine, as likewise their practice,
and both these only out of themselves. And 1. for their doctrine, all the
schoolmen [sayth their Bishop Peresius de trad. p. 3.) D^teach that the images
themselves are to be worshipped with that same worship as these whom they
represent, and therefore that the Images of God and of Christ are to be
worshipped with that highest sort, which they call Latria, as Bellarmin also
witnesses, lib. 2. de imag. cap. 20.. 2. likewise says he cap. 21 That the
images of Christ and of the saints are to be worshipped, not only by accident
or improperlie, but also for themselves and properly, so that themselves
terminateth the worship, as they are considered in themselves, and not only as
they supply the place of them whom they represent, for if the image (says he)
were to be worshipped but improperlie, to wit, because before it, or in it, or
by it, that which it represents is adored, then certainly (says he) it
might be denied that images were to be worshipped at all. So that for defense of
this their doctrine, they are forced to use most subtle distinctions, which
scarce themselves understand, let be the unlearned people says Bellarmin.
lib. 2. de imag. cap. 22.. quarto.

Next, for their practice, It is more manifest than it can be by many words
expressed (says their Cassander (consult. art. 21.) that the worship of Images
is come to that hight as ever that adoration was, which was by Pagans given to
their Id^ls. And they so dote upon them (says their Gabriel Biel in canone
Missae, lect. 49^) That they believe a certain Deity, grace or holiness to
be in them, whereby they are able to work miracles, restore health and deliver
from dangers, out of the confidence of the forenamed, being mo^ed to worship
them, that they may obtain some of the former things from them, whence it is
also (says he) that they vow and obliege themselves to undergo pilgramages,
some to this and some to that Church, according as they respect the images,
believing that this Image in such a place is of greater virtue than that in
another, and to be more famous for miracles and of greater power. And if at any
time miracles be wrought, upon men (says he) who have recourse unto them,
this is not by the virtue of the image, but sometimes by the operation of the
devil to deceive such idolatrous worshippers, God so permitting, and their
infidelity so deserving (says he.)

And which idolatrous adoration of images (says that learned knight and great
traveller, sir Edmund Sandys in his speculum Europae, p* 228. and 230.) is the
greatest scandal of al others, for which both Jews and Turks calls us
idolatrous Christians, and therefore the Jews say, when they come to the
Christians sermons, that as long as they see the Preacher direct his speeeh and
prayer to the little wooden Crucifix which stands on the pulpit by him, and
to call it his Lord and Savior, to kneell to it, to embrace and kiss it and
to weep upon it (as the fashion of Italy is) this is preaching sufficient for
them (say they) and persuades the^ more with the very sight thereof to hate
Christian religion, than any reasone that the world can allege to love it.

50. THat no man has seen God in any form, and therefore that his image and
picture cannot be made.
Which is contrary (says he) to Genesis 3. 8. Where God appeared to Adam
walking in the garden in a corporal form, and to Genesis 28. 12. where he
appeared to Jacob standing above the ladder which he saw. To which I answer,
That he shamelessly belieth Scripture: for there is no such thing that Adam saw
God in any corporal form, but only heard his voice, as it is said likewise,
that at the giving of the Law, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16. The people heard a voice only,
but saw no shape lest they should corrupt themselves, and make them any graven
image. Likewise it is said, Genesis 28. 13. That the Lord stood above the ladder,
and that Lacob only heard a voice, but not that he saw any shape. Therefore
says the Prophet Isai. 40. 18. To whom will ye liken God, or what liknes will
ye compare to him? whereupon says Perusin an augustine Friar and professor
of divinity, by these words is refuted and rejected the rashness of men, yea
their madness and ignorance (says he) who dare be bold to represent God by any
image, therefore also their own Vasques lib. 2. de ador. cap. 3. disp. 4. As
also Catharinus bishop of Minori, in his opuscula de imag* declares that the
representing of God by any image is expresslie against the second commandment.
As also Bellarmin himself witnesses (lib. 2. de sanct. cap. 3.) that
Abulensis, Durand. and Peresius do teach plainly That the image of God is
nowise lawful to be made. And specially to represent him by a three headed
Monster, as they do the image of the Trinity* as I have to show in their own
Missall.

The third place which he bringes is, Exodus 33. 11. where it is said, That Ged
appeared to Moses face to faee, whereunto their own bishop Lipomanus answers
out of Augustine l. 4. de symbolo ad Catechumenos, cap. 3. Moses did see God
(says he) not with his bodily eyes but with the eyes of his mind, and
because that perpetual light which God is, had in lightened him more than
others, therefore it is said that he spoke to him face to fate, as if it had
been said, that he manifested himself more clearly to him nor to all others,
for in that it is said, cap. 10. no man can see my face and live, is shown,
that none can see God with his bodily eyes (says he) Therefore also says
Cajetan, he says not that God was seen face to face, but that he spoke to
him face to face, for God manifests himself only by speech, nor is he
perceived but by hearing only (says he.)

The fourth and fifth testimonies which he brings are coincident with Isai.
6. 1. 5. and 1. King. 22. 19. wherein it is said, That God was sitting on a
Throne, and Dan. 7. 9. whose garments were white as snow, and the hair of his
head like pure wool. Whence he gathers, that as he was seen, therefore he
may be ^o pictured, To which I answer, That it follows not, for before that
time he appeared to Moses in the bush in the form of fire, and yet their own
Richeom (tract. 3. c. 9.) says To picture him so, were to favor the paga^s,
who worshipped the fire, and so may we say that to picture God as an old man (as
the papists do) is to favor heretics called the Anthropomorphits, who made
him to have the shape and members of a man. Therefore Augustine (de fide and
symbolo cap. 7.) gives this reasone why it is not lawful to any Christian to
make any such image, Lest we fall into the same sacrile^ge (says he) whereby
the Apostle makes them execrable who turn the glory of the incorruptible God
into the similitude of a corruptible man Romans 1. 23.

51 THat blessing or signing with the sign of the Cross is not founded on
holy scripture.
Which he says is contrary to Revel. 7. 3. Where it is said, Hurt not the
earth nor the sea, nor the trees, till I have sealed the servants of GOD in the
foreheads To which I answer, 1. That there is no word here of signing, and
far less with the sign of the Cross, but (as the original has) of
sealing, and what this sealing is, is expressed 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of
the Lord stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his,
and let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. So that
it is sanctification and departing from iniquititie, which manifests their
election, and that such ar the Lords. 2. If this were the signing with the
sign of the Cross, then none that did sign themselves so, would perish, for
none of these that were sealed here did perish.

The other two places Mark 10. 16. Luke 24. 50. which speaks only of Christ
and his disciples their blessing of Children, makes no mention of any signing
them with the sign of the Cross, but only of blessing them. And so are
alleged unto no purpose.

As for Fathers, he sets down none of their words, Therefore we pass by
the^, yet with this answer, that none of them proves his point.

52 THat the public service of the Church ought to be said a language that all the people may unstand.
Which he says is contrary to Luke 1. 8. where it is said, That Zacharte
was burning incense in the temple, and the whole people were praying without
where (says he) he being within and the people without, then how did they
understand him? To which I answer 1. There is no word of his speaking words, to
be understood, but of burning incense (for he was stricke^ dumb.) 2. He being
within, and the people without, it was not marvel that they did not
understand, in what language he had spoken. whereas the question is. Whither
that divine service which is performed in the sight and audience of the people,
and which should be to edification (according to 1. Cor. 14.) should be in a
language unknown to the people, which is against the Apostles direction, for
says Cajeta^ on that place, out of this doctrine of Paul it is gathered
[sayeth he) That it is better for edifying of the Church, that public prayers
which are said in the peoples hearing, be said in the vulgar tongue known to
the people and Clergy, nor in latin, or an unknowe^ language. And that this
was the practice of the primtive Church. Aquinas on 1. cor. 14. grants, as
also says their own Lyra. In the primitive church thanksgivings, and all other
common service was performed (says he) in the vulgar tongue.

The second place is Levit. 16. 17. where it is said, That there shall be no man
in the tabernicle of the Congregation, when he goes in to make an attoniment
in the holy place, till he (to wit the High Priest) come out again. Which
makes no more to prove that public divine service before the people should be
done in an unknown tongue to them, then it proves Rome to be in Vtopia. For
1. This place speaks only of the Highpriests entry into the most holy
place with blood to make attoniment, once only a year, which was an action
between God and him, and no mention of speech in whatsoever language. 2. Which
was to be performed in that place, when there should be no man in the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, and therefore private, without any assistance, or presence
of any who might either hear or see him. 3. This was a jewish and typical
service abrogat, from whence to draw this consequence. Ergo the public service
of the Church under the gospel ought to be said now in a language that people
understands not, is as coherent as fire and y^e, or follows as well in Logic,
as to say, that the Author of this Touchstone is an Animal. Ergo, Bos
cornutus.

You may see likewise how impudent and ignorant this man is, to allege (as he
does in his preface, and whole Tenor of this Touchstone) To convince us, that
our doctrine is against the express words of our own Bible, whereas let any
indifferent man judge (beside a number of the like impertinencies) if these two
alleged places of Luke 1. 8. and Levit. 16. 17. be contradicted any wise by
this our assertion. That the public service of the Church ought to be said in
a language which all the people may understand.

FINIS.
AN Advertisment to the READER.
IN Respect of that crafty and cruel practice, even to the dead, let be to
deceive the living, which our Adversaries have used of late in purging both out
of fathers and others, their own modern writters, what they find to be against
themselves, or for witnessing the Truth, as their Index expurgatorius shows,
Lest that the Reader of this my answer to that popish PAMPHLET should light on
such purged books as I cite, and not finding the words at all, orelse far
changed (as I can instance) should think that I had cited them at randon,
Therefore having the uncorrupted copyes beside me, I have set down with their
Names, the place where, and the time when they were printed. That if the Reader
find not the words cited by me, or find them altered in a later impression, he
may know, that they have passed through that popish fiery purgatory of books,
ordained at Trent, and which indeed is no new trick of the Devil and his
supposts, but has been used by Heretics of old, as Vincentius Lyrinensis
testifies, who lived in the year 430. And examplifieth the same in Origens
works, that so by his authority heretics might persuade men of their errors,
which Origin never knew. AND therefore he shows us that for old and far
spread heresies (such as these of popery are) they are not to be confuted so
much by the authority of fathers, and ancient writters, in respect by
vitiating their books, they have stolen out of them what was for truth, and
what they found to be against themselves, or to use his own words, Eo quod
prolixo temporum tractu longae his furandae veritatis patuerit occasio, and
therefore for confuting such, he says we must use, aut sola scripturarum
authoritate, orelse with the same, the authority of the most ancient and
general Councels, such as we see that of the first of Nice, for peoples
reading of Scripture, the lawfululnes of churchme^s marriage, for which that
famous Paphnutius so much stood, and the paritie of patriarchall jurisdiction
against papal supremacy, which in the three succeeding Councels was also
decreed against, beside the co^demning of prayer to Angels, decreed against in
the Council of Laodicea, can. 35. and the having of images in Churches, (let
be their adoration) condemned in the Council of Eliberis, Can. 36. and the
like.

THE NAMES of the Authors whom I cite are,
A
Augustine, printed at Paris, 1541. Ambrose, at Paris, 1529. Aquinas, at Paris,
1529. Alfonsus a Castr^o at Paris, 1534. Arboreus, at Paris, 1551.
B
Basil Basileae 1540. Bernard, at Paris, 1527. Bellarmin, Coloniae, 1615.
C
Chrysostom, at Paris, 1554. Cyprian, Lugduni, 1537. Carthusian, at paris,
1536. Cajetan, at Paris, 1532. Cusanus Basileae, 1565. Catharinus, Venetiis,
1551.
D
Decretalia, Lugduni, 1517. Dura^di rationale, Lugduni, 1515.
E
Estius, at Paris, 1616. Erasmus Antuerpiae, 1538,
F
Fulgentius, Nuru^bergae, 1520. Fasciculus Temporum, Coloniae, 1479. Ferus, at
Paris, 1559,
G
Gabr. Biel Lugduni, 1517. Gregorius, 1. at Paris, 1518. Gratian. Lugduni,
1517. Georgius Cassa^der at Paris 1616.
H
Hieronimus, at Paris, 1546. Hilarious, Basileae* 1570. Haymo, at Paris, 1538.
Hugo Cardinalis, at Paris, 1532.
I
Ireneus, Basileae, 1548. Ignatius at Paris, 1540. Ianse^ius Muguntiae, 1624.
L
Lyra, at Paris, 1501. Lombard, at paris, 1528. Lipomani Catena, at Paris,
1550.
M
M^lchi^r Canus. Coloniae, 1605, Missale Romanu^. at Paris, 1532. Mercerus, at
Paris, 1563. Maldonat. Moguntiae, 1624.
O
Origenes, at Paris, 1537.
P
Platina, Nurimbergae, 1481. Peresius, at Paris, 1605. Petrus de Aliaco,
Coloniae, 1500. Perusin, Perusiae, 1608.
R
Roffensis, Londini, 1533. Ribera, Antuerpiae, 1603.
S.
Sigebert, at Paris, 1513. Stella, Antuerpiae, 1608.
T
Theophylact, a^ Paris, 1515.
V
Vincentius Lyrinensis, at Paris, 1560.
Errata.
In the Epistle Dedicatory, page 2. linea ult. hands and almost, for hands
almost and. And To the Reader, p. 6. l. 11. Nicen, for Nissen. p. 13. ^2.
Ecuminicall, for O Ecumenicall. p. 24. l. 11. Doway, for Duay. p. 33. l. 20. nf
for in, p. 74. l. 2. Lyrin, for Jerome. p. 103. l. antepenult. Gelasuis, for
Gelasius. p. 220. l. 3. a whole line in the copy omitted, the words are these,
(because it feemes to be broken, to who^ it is objected, what Ambrose says,
that no falsehood should be thought to be in the sacrifice of truth) p. 128. l.
3. after the words (amongst us) is omitted (who^ they call Calvinists) l. 19.
de ecclesia, for de notis ecclesiae. p. 132. l. 20. donation for domination. p.
272. l. 14. young, for youngma^. p. 180. l. 6. virginity, for virgin. p. 191.
l. 19. one of for of one. p. 353. l. 17. circu^sion, for circumcision. p. 299.
l. 9. when it is taken, for when it is not taken.


