Mercies Memorial. Set out in A SERMON PREACHED In Paul's Church, November. 17.
1644. in memorial of the great deliverance which England had from Antichistian
bondage by Queen ELIZABETH'S attaining the Crown.

By William Gouge.

Judge. 5.7. The Inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel,
until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

Isai 49.23. Kings shall be thy nurcing fathers, and Queens thy nurcing mothers.

Historia vita memoriae, magistra vitae.

Cic. de Orat. Imprimatur

THO. GATAKER.
November. 25. 1644.


LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Joshua Kirton, in Foster-lane next to
Goldsmiths Hall. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Thomas Atkin, Lord Major of the Honorable City of
LONDON.
Right Honorable,
BY a Note under your own hand, I was appointed to preach at Paul's Church on
the seventeenth of November. The seventeenth of November is a day of so high
account with me, that I durst not make any excuse, though otherwise in way of
excuse, I might have pleaded my age, my weakness, and multitude of other
employments: but the seventeenth of November, being such a day as is set out to
be in the following Sermon, ought to be had in perpetual remembrance. It may
be that all have not that day in so high account as I have, and that if another
had performed that duty, he would have over-slipt it, without any mention made
thereof. Length of time makes memorable matters to be forgotten; and it is now
above fourscore and six years since that seventeenth of November. Therein
England first received such a blessing as never ought to slip out of the heart
of an English man. That seventeenth of November was the day when unparalled
Queen Elizabeth first came to the Crown. Thorough Gods blessing, I spent
eight and twenty years of my days under her reign; and I have often blessed
God that I was borne, and so long brought up in that blessed time. I have been
called in my younger years to perform public Scholasticall duties on a
seventeenth of November, and me thought, I never performed any more cheerfully.
The very subject matter put life and spirit into me. Since I was called to the
ministerial Function, I have many years on the seventeenth of November made
the best remembrance that I could of that days blessing. Being by you called
to the most public place of London, I could not, I durst not pass over the
mention of that blessing. I did the more willingly publish it to the view of
all sorts, that I may provoke others to be more mindful of that day. And to
your Honor in special, I dedicate these my poor labors, because you were
the first mover thereunto. And now, my good Lord, having this occasion in
public to speak to you, give me leave, I beseech you, to stir up your
honorable mind unto such faithful courses, as, to the joy and benefit of
many, you took, when you were Alderman of Farrington within. I have been now
thirty seven years (to the praise of Gods good Providence and mercy I speak
it) a Minister of Gods Word in a Precinct within that Ward: in which time,
there have been sundry several Aldermen. But (to your praise, but not to the
dispraise of any of the rest, I do here publicly attest it) I never observed
any more careful of the good of their charge, more inquisitive after the same,
more industrious in searching out disorders to redress them, more pitiful
over the poor, more sollicitous about such as were infected with the
sickness, and that which sets the crown upon all, more pious in preventing
all manner of profaneness on the Lords Days, and procuring people (so far
as in you lay) to observe the holy Ordinances thereof.

Right honorable, the Lord has now advanced you to a higher place, given you
a larger jurisdiction, and put more power into your hand. You have now ten
Talents in comparison of the five that you had before. Know that God now
expects of you an improvement of all those ten Talents; Answerably more care,
more industry, more diligence, more prudence, if more can be showed, is
requisite: Above all, let your conscionable care be yet more manifested about
the Lords Day; and herein I beseech you, Sir Thomas Middleton. Sir Thomas H^^es.
give me leave to set before you the prudent and pious course which two Lord
Majors of famous memory, in the years 1613 and 1614 took thereabouts, which
was this, They made choice of conscionable persons, who with an holy zeal were
set against all profaneness of that Day, and put on to redress all manner
abuses thereof: such they chose, and to such they gave power and authority to
apprehend and bring before them all delinquents in that kind, whom, for the
greater terror unto others, they severely punished. Conscience will more put
on pious persons to a thorough redressing of disorders, then hire or reward. It
is the due execution of Law that puts life thereinto, and makes it the more
effectual: and inward Principles will work men unto a due execution more then
outward motives. Go on in promoting Gods honor, and he will promote yours.
For he that said, will perform what he has said, Them that honor me, I will
honor. That you may do the one, and God the other, it is the hearty prayer of

Your Honors daily Orator, W. GOUGE.

Mercies Memorial.
EXODUS 13.^3. Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt.
THis Text has reference to a memorable History. History is an useful and
delightful kind of instruction. Among Histories none are comparable to the
Histories of sacred Scripture: and that in their antiquity, rarity, variety,
brevity, perspicuity, Eccellencies of Scripture Histories.
harmony, and verity. This last is the excellency of the other excellencies:
and it commends an History much more then all the rest; For antiquity, rarity,
variety, brevity, perspicuity, harmony, and other like excellencies without
verity, are but as so many pearls in a blind eye, which make it the more
deformed.

If comparison may be made betwixt Histories and Histories in sacred Scripture,
among Histories of the old Testament, they which relate the Israelites
departure out of Egypt through the red Sea and Wilderness into Canaan, are most
remarkable. For, Isreal's abode in and passage out of Egypt typical.
besides the forementioned excellencies, which they have in common with all
Scripture Histories, they are in an especial manner typical: and set out the
condition of the Church brought out of the bondage of sin under Satan, and
travailing through the dangers and troubles of this world unto the celestial
Canaan.

In this respect the deliverance of the Israelites out of the land of Egypt is
premised in the Preface before the Decalogue, or ten Commandments of the moral
Law, which appertains to all Nations, 2 Cor. 10.1. etc.
and that as a type of man's Deliverance from his spiritual servitude. Israells
passing thorough the red Sea, and under the Cloud, are also made like figures
to Baptism: and Manna and the water that came out of the Rock like to our
sacramental bread and wine. Yea of many other things done in the Wilderness,
it is said These things are our types, that is, they are types, (...).
patterns or examples to show Gods mind to us, how he will deal with us if we
be such and such. And the settling of Israel in Canaan, Heb. 4.7, 8, 9.
is expressly made a type of the rest of Gods people in Heaven.

Thus in regard of the mystical truth comprised under this historical type,
it concerns all sorts of people, and to every one whose natural condition is
altered, it may not unfitly be said, Remember this day in which ye came out
from Egypt.

Isreal's passage out of Egypt fitly applied to England.
Yea further in regard of an allegorical allusion, it may be applied to this
our Nation, which long lay in a miserable thraldom under Antichrist. For the
Kingdom of Antichrist is a mystical Egypt: and the tyranny and idolatry
thereof a spiritual bondage* a bondage far worse then the temporal bondage
under which the Israelites were held in Egypt: so as it may well be said to you
in particular who are sensible of your deliverance from that antichristian
servitude, Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt.

The 27. of Novem. a mememorable day.
This day is the first day of the fourscore and seventh year since the
beginning of that blessed deliverance. For this day is the seventeenth of
November: a day worthy not only to be distinguished in our Almanakes by
capital, red or golden letters, but also to be written in our hearts by the
finger of Gods Spirit. A day of which it well becomes us often to put one another
in mind, and to say, Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt.

On this day of the month, the seventeenth of November 1558, two great pillars
(besides many others) of the antichristian tyranny and idolatry were removed
from this Land. For Queen Mary and Cardinal Poole, who were strong
supporters, abbetters and maintainers of the Popes supremacy and popish
idolatry, were both on one day, the foresaid seventeenth of November, cut out
of the land of the living.

On the very same seventeenth of November blessed Queen Elizabeth (whose
memory, Qu. Elizabeth's crow nation day.
so long as this Gospel continues to shine among us will be blessed) I say
blessed Queen Elizabeth, who suffered much, and long lay in prison, while this
Land was an house of antichristian bondage, was on this day 1558 freed from
those troubles, and thousands more freed from much misery. On that day was that
blessed Queen set upon the throne of England: and a Scepter of peace and truth
put into her hand; which, by the good guidance of Gods Spirit, she so swayed
for five and forty years together current, A blessing by Qu. Elizabeth.
as she restored to English Subjects, not only the liberties and privileges of
Subjects, together with a well established peace and all manner of prosperity;
but all so true Religion and a free passage to the Gospel of peace (having
clean put out the cruel fire of the Marian persecution, and dispelled the
thick cloud of popish Superstition:) whereby it came to pass, thorough Gods
blessing, that the lives of many, who were appointed to death, were preserved,
and the souls of many millions saved.

Had I time to set out distinctly the many blessings which this Land enjoyed
all the time of that blessed Queens reign, the many victories which God gave
her against the implacable enemies of this Land, the good aid she afforded to
the neighboring Countries about us professing the same Religion, as Scotland,
Netherlands, Portugal, Henry 4.
yea and to that King of France which professed to establish the true reformed
Religion in his dominions, had I time to set out these and other like memorable
matters, ye might see yet further cause often to inculcate this memento,
Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt.

This in brief of the allegorical allusion of this Text to our times. I shall
speak somewhat more hereof in my last applicacation. In the mean while I come
to the literal intendment of my Text.

Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt remarkable.
The deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt was one of the most famous
deliverances that ever God gave to a people: and that both in regard of the
mighty wonders manifested therein, and also in regard of the great distresses,
from which they were delivered by those wonders. No wonders are more frequently
repeated and brought to the minds of Gods people in the old Testament then
these. The sweet Singer of Israel, that man after Gods own heart, having his
heart filled with an holy admiration of Gods wonderful works, thus
exemplifieth them, He wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field
of Zoan. Psalm. 78.43. Numb. 13.22.
( Zoan was a royal City in Egypt, called by the Greeks and Latins Tanis)
And Psalm. 135.9, He sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt.
And speaking of Gods Ministers he says, They showed his wonders in the land of
Ham, Psalm. 105.27. These are the wonders which Gods people are called upon to
remember, Psalm. 105.5. Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his
wonders and the judgments of his mouth. And they which slightly passed them
over or forgate them are thus blamed, Our fathers understood not thy wonders in
Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies. Psalm. 106.7.

Wonderful signs of Gods preserving his Church.
Some of those wonders were evidences of Gods gracious protection and mighty
preservation of his people. Others were instances of Gods fiery indignation
against and fearful vengeance on their enemies.

Of the former sort were, 1. The flaming Bush not consumed.
1. The Bush that flamed with fire, and was not consumed. Exodus 3.2. An Emblem
of the Churches preservation in the midst of fiery persecution and affliction.
2. A rod turned into a serpent.
2. Moses his rod turned into a serpent. Exodus 4.3, 4. Hereby God gave him to
understand, that though the Government which was conferred on him, should be as
a Scepter of equity unto his people, yet it should be also a biting and
stinging Serpent to the rebellious. 3. A leprous hand cleansed.
3. Moses his leprous hand made clean when it was plucked out of his bosom.
Exodus 4.7. A sign of Isreal's cleansing from the pollutions wherewith they were
defiled in Egypt: yea, also a sign of sanctifying Moses to his function, as
the touching of Isaiahs mouth with an hot coal taken from the Altar, was a
sign of sanctifying him to his function, Isai. 6.7. 4. Water turned into blood.
4. The turning of water into blood. Exodus 4.9. Not that water which was in the
river: for therewith the fish were destroyed: but water taken out of the river
and powered upon the dry land, which became blood upon the dry land: whereby was
prefigured that they should be delivered out of Egypt, but not without the
blood of their enemies. 5. Goshen free.
5. Isreal's exemption in Goshen from all the plagues that infected the land of
Egypt, Exodus 8.22. and 9.26. Hereby they had a present evidence that the Lord
in all kinds of judgment knew how to put difference betwixt his people and
enemies, and how to deliver the godly. 6. A path in the sea.
6. Isreal's going on dry ground through the midst of the sea. Exodus 14.16. This,
as it was a like figure to Baptism (as we showed before) so it was an
especial instance of Gods carrying them through all difficulties and dangers
into Canaan.


Of the latter sort of wonders, The ten plagues of Egypt.
which are instances of Gods vengeance on the Egyptians, are those which we
commonly call the ten plagues of Egypt. They are these which follow.

1. The streams, rivers, ponds and pooles of water thorowout all the land of
Egypt turned into blood: so as the fish in the river died, 1. Blood.
and the water stunke, and the Egyptians could not drink of it. Exodus 7.19,
20, 21. Pharaoh had commanded all his people to cast into the river every son
of the Israelites, when it was first borne. God therefore to meet with the
Egyptians in their own kind, makes that element which they used as an
instrument of their cruelty, to be an instrument of his just judgment on them:
and killed the Creatures which were of use to them, with that means whereby
they sought to destroy young children: yea, they themselves were thereby
stanched and choked.

2. Frogs in such abundance as they came into the Egyptians houses,
bed-chambers, beds, ovens and kneading troughs, 2. Frogs.
not sparing the Kings house and bedchamber. Exodus 8.3. etc. Psalm. 105.30.
yea, ( Psalm. 78.45.) it is said, The frogs destroyed them. The Egyptians
endeavored to empty the houses and bed-chambers of the Israelites, and to
deprive them of their sweet babes. God therefore fills theirs with croaking,
noisome frogs.

3. Lice.
3. All the dust of the land became Lice throughout all the land of Egypt, so as
there were Lice upon man and beast. Exodus 8.17, 18. and that in all their
quarters, Psalm. 105.31. The Egyptians were tyrannically imperious over the
Israelites. God therefore does justly beat down their pride with these
noisome, loathsome, contemptible creatures, as Herod's pride was beaten down
with worms, Acts 12.23. And because bondslaves used to be much annoyed with
this kind of Vermin, God would there with infest those proud Lords which made
his people bondslaves.

4. Flies.
4. Grievous swarms of Flies came into the house of Pharaoh, and into his
servants houses, and into all the land of Egypt. The Land was corrupted by
reason of the swarms of Flies. Exodus 8.21, 24. (...) Turbam sive misturam
collectam ex variis and multis speciebus besliolarum, seu insectorum
significat. Vatabl. Annot. in hunc locum.
The Psalmist says* ( Psalm. 78.45.) that the Lord sent diverse sorts of Flies
which devoured them. It is evident that there were more then one sort. The
original word translated swarms of Flies properly signifies a mixture of
things. It is applied to the mixture of sundry sorts of people together ( Exodus
12.38.) to the mixture of light and darkness together, and called the evening
( Levit. 23.33.) and to mixture of diverse creatures together: so is it here
used in this place. Our English Translatours therefore have thus expressed it
in the Margin, A mixture of noisome beasts. Such creatures they were as
devoured the Egyptians, Psalm. 78.45. so as dog-flies, horse-flies, wasps,
hornets, vipers, scorpions, and such other biting, stinging, poisoning
creatures may be comprised under the forementioned word. The cruel Egyptians
many ways vexed and gauled the Israelites; they therefore with such kind of
creatures were vexed and tormented.

5. Murraine.
5. A very grievous Murraine upon their cattle, so as all the cattle in Egypt
died. Exodus 9.3, 6. Before, the fish in the water were destroyed: here, the
cattle in the field: to show how far they had provoked the Lord; even to
deprive them of the use of all his creatures, both in the waters and also in
the dry land. It is probable that the Egyptians had wronged the Israelites in
and about their cattle: so as God repaies like for like.

6. Boyles.
6. Boyles breaking forth with blanes, upon man and beast. The Magicians could
not avoid this plague: for the Boil was upon the Magicians, and upon all the
Egyptians. Exodus 9.10, 11. As their hearts were inwardly swollen with pride,
malice and cruelty: so God made their flesh to swell with noisome and painful
Boyles. The Egyptians oppressed the Israelites with making and burning brick:
answerably by ashes of the furnace are Boyles caused to vex them.

7. Thunder, hail and fire mingled therewith, very grievous, 7. Hail.
which smote thorowout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both
man and beast, and every herb and tree of the field, Exodus 9.24, 25. such was
the hail as the fire melted it not: and such the fire as the hail quenched it
not. As this was a terrible judgment in it self; so the more terrible to the
Egyptians, because in Egypt which was near to the hot middle Zone, there used
not to be any hail, or rain at all. They were herein justly dealt withal,
for their terrible threatenings to, and cruel dealings with the Israelites.

8. Locusts. Exodus 10.5, 14. This was a grievous plague, 8. Locusts.
in regard of the kind and multitude of the creatures which annoyed them.
Locusts were of that kind which they call Insecta, divided betwixt the head and
the belly. They were winged, and able to fly over seas from Country to Country.
They devoured all kind of grass, herbs and fruits. They were so pernicious
that in the Countries where they abode, all the means that could be invented
were used to destroy them. In their multitude they were as hurtful as in their
kind; for they used so to flock together, as like a thick dark cloud they
overshadowed the face of the sky, and obscured the light of the Sun. The
Psalmist joyneth Caterpillars with them, Psalm. 78.46. And another Prophet
joyneth Locusts, Canker-wormes, Caterpillars, and Palmer-wormes, and calls them
Gods great Army, Joel 2.25. From this phrase which Pharaoh uses ( Exodus
10.17.) Take away this death only, some gather that the Locusts were venomous
creatures, and bit and stung men to death. The Egyptians were very cruel to
the Israelites.

9. Darkness, even Darkness which might be felt, 9. Darkness.
so as they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three
days. Exodus 10.21, 23. That phrase, which might be felt, shows that it was
an extreme Mist or Fog which utterly obscured all the celestial Lights, as
Sun, Moon and Stars: and put out all artificial lights, as fires,
torches, candles, and such like. Idolatry and superstition had obscured the
light of Gods truth to their minds, and this darkness obscured other lights to
their bodies. As the Egyptians had many ways terrified the Israelites, and
denied all comfort and succor to them; so with this darkness are they much
affrighted and deprived of all comfort and succor one from another.

10. Death of Firstborn.
10. The destruction of all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, even unto the firstborn of
the captive that was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of cattle: so as
there was not an house where there was not one dead. Exodus 12.29, 30. So great
was this plague as it forced them to let the Israelites with all that they had
to depart out of their land. This judgment of all the rest did most properly
meet with them in their kind: for they sought to destroy the strength of
Israel, even all their male-children, and here God takes away their strength,
the heirs and supporters of their families; yea, he extends it to their
beasts and gods. Exodus 12.12.

Pharaoh and his host drowned.
These were the ten plagues. There was an other judgment as fearful as any of
these, if not more fearful, the utter destruction of Pharaoh and all his host
in the red sea. It is said that he took six hundred chosen Chariots, and all
the Chariots of Egypt, and Captains over every one of them ( Exodus 14.7.) which
implies a very huge host. God saw it not enough to destroy their fishes in the
water, but also in just revenge of their seeking to drown the Israelites
children, drowned Pharaoh and all his host.

Thus we see what wonders the Lord wrought in executing vengeance on his
enemies.

I should here, according to my Method propounded, set forth the distresses
from which the Israelites were delivered by these wonders, but they will more
seasonably be observed in the Application of the last point of my Text, to
which I now come, Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt.

Sense of Text.
To remember, is the proper function of the memory, which God has set as a
treasury in the soul, to lay up for future use, such things as the
understanding conceives to be a truth, and the will yields unto as good.

There is a fourfold act of this faculty. A fourfold Act of memory.


1. To receive and lay up what is so conceived, as Joh. 15.20. where Christ
thus says to his Disciples, 1. To lay up.
Remember the word that I said unto you.

2. To hold fast that which is so laid up. 2. To hold fast.
Thus it is most properly opposed to forgetfulness. As Deuteronomy. 9.7. where it is
thus said, Remember and forget not.

3. To call again to mind what has been forgotten. 3. To rec^ll.
Thus the Israelites are said to remember their own evil ways ( Ezekiel. 20.31.)
And the Disciples to remember what Jesus had said to them. Joh. 2.22. Jesus in
the time of his Ministry had told them that he should rise the third day from
the dead, but they forgate it till the time of his Resurrection, then they
remembered it, that is, called it again to remembrance.

4. To think on and consider that which we have learned; 4. To think on.
as when we are enjoined to remember God, ( Deuteronomy. 8.18.) to remember his Law, (
Mal. 4.4.) to remember the Sabbath, ( Exodus 20.8.) Thus our English
Translatours do render the same Hebrew word think on, ( Neh. 5.19.) and
remember* (...)
( Neh. 13.31.)

In this latitude the word remember being enjoined as a duty is here to be
taken.

That which is here commanded to be remembered, The particular day here meant.
(...)
is first in general thus expressed, This day. There is a double relative used
in the original to express the set distinct time here intended, which we may
thus expound, This day, this very day. The particular day here meant was that
very day wherein they came out from Egypt. For in the Chapter going before it
is said, that in the night the Egyptians were urgent upon the people of Israel,
that they might send them out of the land in haste, ver. 30, 33. and thereupon
ver. 42. it is said, This is a night to be much observed unto the Lord, for
bringing them out of the land of Egypt. This is that night of the Lord to be
observed of the children of Israel in their generations. The day following that
night they came to Succoth, the place where Moses gave this charge, for the
children of Israel were in Ramases (which is in Egypt) when they first began to
take their journey from thence ( Exodus 12.37.) thence they came to Succoth,
which was the first station where they settled after they came out of Egypt, (
Numb. 33.5.) The night before mentioned is comprised under this day, and so
both make one natural day, the very first day of their deliverance. Yet is not
this charge to be restrained to that particular day only, but to the annual
revolution thereof, generation after generation. In which respect the charge is
thus extended, ( ver. 10.) Thou shall keep this Ordinance in his season, from
year to year.

That which is thus added, in which ye came out from Egypt, does both determine
the day that is here meant, and also show the reason, why this day was to be
remembered.

What Egypt was.
Egypt was an ancient, fertile and learned Nation. The Hebrew name had his
denomination from Misraim the second son of Ham, Genesis 10.6.
which shows the ancientnesse of it. No rain did ever fall upon it (as was
before showed, Deuteronomy. 11 10, 11.
) but the river Nilus overflowing their pasture and arable grounds at certain
seasons, left a slime thereon, which made them more fertile then any dung or
other manu^ing could do. Thus it came to be the most fertile of all lands.

The Magicians, which are mentioned to be therein, were learned Philosophers.
Such was the report of the learning in Egypt, as sundry Philosophers went
thither to get more learning.

Egypt a place of bondage. Egyptus Hebraice d^ci^ur (...) quod interpretatur
(...), id est, tribulans and (...). Hieron. l. 7.
How then may some say is their coming out from Egypt to be remembered as a
great deliverance?

The words immediately following my Text do show the reason: for thus it is
added, Out of the house of bondage. Egypt was to Israel a place of very great
affliction. The Hebrew name given to Egypt signifies oppression or anguish. In
regard of the Egyptians oppressing the children of Israel, and the anguish
which thence arose, the name fitly agrees thereto.

Comment. in Isai. 23. Resolution of the Text.
The sum of this Text in two words is this, MERCIES MEMORIAL, or a little
more largely and plainly thus, The duty of such as are delivered from distress.

Here more particularly we may distinguish the Act, wherein the duty is
expressed, Remember: and the Object whereabout it is exercised.

The Act is thus in general propounded, This day, and in particular thus
exemplified, in which ye came out from Egypt. The principal Doctrines.


Hence arise these three Instructions.

1. Memorable matters are to be remembered. Remember.

2. The very day wherein God does memorable matters is duly to be noted. This
day.

3. The distress from which we are delivered is to be considered, even after
the deliverance. In which ye came out, etc.

The first Instruction (Memorable matters are to be remembered) is to be taken
in the fourfold latitude before mentioned: as, 1. Doctr. Memorable matters to
be remembered.
1. They are to be laid up in memory. 2. Being once laid up, they are to be
held fast and not forgotten. 3. In case they be forgotten, means for calling
them to mind again are to be used. 4. For the better retaining of them they are
frequently and seriously to be thought on. In this extent Moses adds this
Memento in the fourth Commandment, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember that thou wast a
servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out
thence, through a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm. So David the like,
Psalm. 105.5. Remember his mavelous works that he has done: his wonders and
the judgments of his mouth. And to show that the duty does not only bind
semper, always, on all occasions to be performed; but also ad semper, never to
be omitted, (...) significat and onne and ullum. Grammatici ducunt ullum a
(...) per transmutationem literarii. Helps afforded by God for remembrance.
let slip or forgotten, it is thus negatively set down, Deuteronomy. 8.11, 14. Beware
that thou forget not the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth from the land
of Egypt out of the house of bondage. And Psalm. 103.2. Forget not all his
benefits, or, any of them; for the Hebrew word signifies any as well as all.

To help the Jews in the performance of this duty, many means were prescribed
by God, as,

1. The observation of the Passover, which the very (...) Passover.
title given to that Ordinance imports. Read for this purpose, Exodus 12.26,
27.

2. The sanctifying or redeeming the firstborn of man or beast, Exodus 13.14,
15.

3. The feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.42, 43.

4. The heaps of great stones erected both in the midst of Jordan, and also by
the side thereof in Gilgal, Jos. 4 9, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Names of places for memorial. (...)
Many titles also and names given to sundry places tended to that end; as the
(...) The well of the living, seeing me.
name which Hagar gave to the place where the Angel of the Lord promised that
her seed should be greatly increased, Genesis 16.14. And (...) The Lord will
provide.
that which Abraham gave to the place where God kept him from sacrificing his
son, Genesis 22.14. And (...) The face of God seen.
that which Jacob gave to the place where God blessed him, Genesis 32.30. And
(...) The Lord my banner.
that which Moses gave to the place where Israel prevailed against Amalek.
Exodus 17.15.

Many like instances might be given of the care of Gods people in making
memorials for remembrance of memorable matters.

This is a point duly to be observed in regard of God, our selves, and others.

Reasons. 1. Gods honor continued and propagated.
First, in regard of God. It is an especial means of continuing and
propagating the honor of God, arising from such memorable matters, longer and
further then otherwise it would be. For by such means, not only the present
spectators and beholders, who then take notice thereof, have their hearts
filled with admiration of the excellencies of God, and their mouths opened to
magnify him for the same; but also others, who live far off, or are borne in
future times, by such means come to have such notice of those wonderful
works, as to be affected in their hearts therewith, and moved to admire,
adore, magnify and glorify that mighty God who did them.

2. Sundry graces preserved.
Secondly, in regard of our selves. By such memorials our faith, hope, fear,
and other like Graces, may be the better preserved, quickened, and strengthened.
For remembrance of matters worthy to be remembered, is as the continual supply
of oil to a lamp, which keeps it always shining. Thus were the Lamps in the
Tabernacle kept from going out. Levit. 24.2, 3, 4.

3. Ground of faith to others.
Thirdly, in regard of others. A ground of faith and hope in Gods goodness,
power, prudence, and other excellencies is hereby afforded to succeeding ages.
For God is the Lord that changes not. Mal. 3.6. What once he was able to do,
he is ever able to do; yea, what he has once done, manifests his
willingness to do such a thing, at least if in his wisdom he sees it meet
to be done. Memorials then of Gods former mighty works give even to others in
after times ground to call on God, and to trust on him in their distresses, so
trusting to his power, as they submit to his will; like to him that said, If
thou will, thou can make me clean, Mark 1.40.

Uses. 1. Corruption of memory.
I. This duty of remembering remarkable matters, resting upon such equity as it
does, gives an evident demonstration of the depth of natural corruption, and
how far it has depraved a man's soul. I might aggravate man's corruption in
every faculty of the soul, and distinctly show of what excellent use they are,
as God placed them in the soul, and how strangely they are now perverted. But
I will instance it only in this faculty of memory, which we have now in hand.
You have heard of what singular use it is being rightly used, for laying up,
fast holding, recalling and thinking on time after time, that which is once
conceived as a truth, and yielded unto as good. But through corruption of
nature, it is made in good things like a riven dish, or a Colender full of
holes, which let out what is put into them as fast as it is let in; but it is
too too tenacious of evil. I may fitly resemble it to a Sieve, Boulter or
Strainer. Solid corn and chafe being put together into a Sieve, the corn
falls out, the light chafe remains. Meal put into a Boulter and boulted, the
fine flower goes out, the course bran continues: and sweet liquor soon sokes
out of a Strainer, but the foul dregs abide therein. Even so solid divine
truths soon slip out of a man's memory, but the chafe of uncertain fables and
gross errors remain too fast fixed therein; and the wholesome directions of
Gods Word quickly pass away, when the bran of a man's own foolish conceits
stick fast: yea, and the sweet consolations of the Gospel are soon forgotten,
when the dregs of filthy lust, revenge, and other evils are too long remembered.
I may in this case cry out and say, O the depth of man's corruption! What matter
of humiliation does this give unto us?

2. Carelessness in observing Gods works.
II. Just matter of Taxation also is here given us of the careless disposition
of such, who living in times and places when and where God does mavelous
works, lightly pass them over, without taking any due notice thereof for the
present, or remembering them for the future. This does the Psalmist thus tax,
Psalm. 106.7. Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt: they remembered
not the multitude of thy mercies. Such do hereby (as much as in them lies)
rob God of much of that glory which otherwise he might receive from his
wondrous works, and also deprive other men of singular helps, which they might
have had from those works, which God did before their days. Herein they show
themselves as bad as, if not worse then, that Judge which feared not God nor
regarded man* Luke 18.2. yea, they suffer that light, which might have been an
excellent direction to themselves in the ways of God, to go out, and so stand
in their own light and hinder their own good.

3. Exhortation to the duty.
III. Be you, I beseech you, exhorted to do what lies in you, for laying up,
fast holding, recalling and thinking on such worthy and wonderful things of
God, as may be useful unto you, not only for the present, but also for the
future, so long as you live: yea, and be useful also for your posterity,
generation after generation. For they are a light which shines continually,
and never goes out: so as all that have their eyes opened to see that light
and walk therein may receive much benefit thereby. I need not add other
motives to enforce this Exhortation, or to incite and quicken you up to the
duty enjoined, then those which arise from the forementioned equity thereof.

4. Directions for remembering.
IIII. I hold it meet to add a Direction for the better performing thereof.
This shall be set out in the six following rules.

1. Duly observe Gods works at ^^rst.
1. Take due and diligent notice of such matters as are worthy to be remembered,
even at the first while they are in working. Great works at their first doing
most affect men's hearts, and mollify the same. Thus will they be like new Wax
which is soft and sit to receive a deep impression. Now we know that the print
of a Seal being at first deeply set in, lasts the longer. To work such deep
impressions in men's hearts, holy men of God were wont to use patheticall
insinuations before remarkable matters, as Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2, etc. Give
ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; And hear, O earth, the words of my
mouth. My doctrine shall drop as the rain: my speech shall distill as the dew,
as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass,
etc. Christ himself before his excellent Parables premised this Preface,
Hearken, Behold, (Mark 4.3.) to work upon both the learned senses, and at the
end thereof he adds this Exhortation, If any man have ears, let him hear,
together with this Caveat, Take heed what you hear, Mark 4.23, 24. or as it is
expressed, Luke 8.18. Take heed how you hear. The Prophets were wont to call
upon senseless Creatures to hear what they said, and that with much emphasis
(as Jer. 22.29. O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord,) the more to
rouse up sensible and reasonable men seriously to consider what was spoken.
Pertinent to this purpose is this charge of the Apostle, Heb. 2.1. We ought to
give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time
we should let them slip, or let them run out as leaking vessels.

2. Much meditate thereon.
2. Often meditate on that which once you conceive to be an useful truth.
Frequent meditation adds much to a fast retention of that which is judged to
be useful. Meditation is that oil which keeps the lamp of memory from
wasting and going out. David who made the best use of the Law that ever any
did, meditated thereon day and night.

3. Declare them to others
3. Often declare to others what thou desire to retain in thine own memory.
They who use to instruct others in what they know themselves, do not easily
forget it. For thereby they make the deeper impressions thereof in their own
memory. This is the reason that Schoolmasters so well retain the Grammar
rules and sentences of Orators and Poets, because they often inculcate them upon
their Scholars. The Psalmist therefore advises men to talk of Gods wondrous
works. Psalm. 105.2.

4. Often mention them in praises and Prayers.
4. So often as thou offerest up unto God a sacrifice of praise, make mention of
the foresaid remarkable matters, yea, and in thy prayers plead them before
God, for strengthening thy faith in desiring the like. Men use to be most
sincere and serious in their holy devotions. And those things which are most
sincerely and seriously pondered will best be remembered.

5. Search records.
5. Make use of such Records and Chronicles as register Gods great works. Have
recourse to these again and again: Thus not only things known will be
retained, but also things forgotten will be again called to mind. Ahasuerus
by reading the Records of his own Kingdom was put in mind of Mordecai's
fidelity, and of the treason that was plotted against him, which proved a
means of preserving the Church at that time. Among other records we ought most
especially to make use of the sacred Scriptures: for these, as they contain
most memorable and infallible truths, so they do most directly set out what is
of God in the great works that they relate.

6. Pray to God.
6. To all other means add Prayer. This sanctifies all the rest. By this Gods
Spirit is obtained, whereby the defects of memory are repaired, and that
faculty it self so renewed, as to be made an happy Treasury in fast holding
the best things.

By these and other like helps the duty hinted in the first Instruction of
remembering remarkable matters may be the better observed.

Thus much for the Act here required, Remember. The Object here in general
expressed is, This day. Remember this day. And the Instruction thence raised is
this,

2. Doctr. The day of a wonder to be noted.
The very day wherein God does memorable matters is duly to be noted. This very
point is with somewhat more emphasis thus set down. Ezekiel. 24.2. Son of man,
write thee the name of the day, even of this same day. On this ground the Jews
observed sundry fasts all the time of their Captivity on set days, as the
fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth, the fast of the seventh, and
the fast of the tenth, Zech. 8.19. For on the ninth day of the fourth month was
Jerusalem broken up, and the Chaldeans entered thereinto. Jer. 52.6, 7. On the
tenth day of the fifth month, the House of the Lord, the Kings house, and all
the houses of Jerusalem were burnt with fire. Jer. 52.12, 13. On the seventh
month Gedaliah (the Protector of the remnant of the Jews, after their King
was carried away captive) was slain. Jer. 41.1. On the tenth day of the tenth
month Nebuchadnezzar first laid siege to Jerusalem. Ier. 52.4. This is that day
which was commanded to be written down, Ezekiel. 24.2. These are remarkable
days for judgment. Now if days of judgment were so precisely to be
remembered, how much more ought distinct days of blessing to be observed? The
former were evidences of Gods displeasure; and so means to keep down the
soul, and occasions of continuing to be humbled time after time. The latter
were evidences of Gods special favor, and so means of upholding our spirits,
and occasions of continuing to quicken them up to thankfulness from time to
time. Therefore when God had removed away the cloud of his displeasure from his
people, after their seventy years captivity, and caused the bright and
comfortable sunne-beames of his favor to shine upon them, he commanded that
those set days of Fast should be turned into days of cheerful Feast, Zech.
8.19. The original word signifies set and standing times, (...)
and so is proper to the point in hand. To this end were most of the Feasts
under the Law appointed on set days, to be memorials of deliverances, or other
blessings on those very days; as the Passover, Exodus 12.17. the Feast of
Purim, Esth. 9.21. and others: yea, the Sabbath being the seventh day of the
week, Genesis ^.3.
was a continual weekly memorial of that very day wherein God rested from all
his works, as the Christians Lords day is a weekly memorial of Christ's
Resurrection from the dead, Matthew. 28.1. To this purpose not unfitly may be
applied this phrase of the Psalmist ( Psalm. 118.24.) This is the day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Among other grounds this in special shows the equity of this duty, Reason.
Gods vvisdome better discerned.
that God ( who has put in his own power the times and seasons, Acts 1.7.)
does most seasonably order his dealings with children of men. He gives rain
in his due season. Deuteronomy. 11.14. He gives to all their meat in due season.
Psalm. 145.15. His Saints reap that crop which he gives in due season, Gal.
6.9. To every thing there is a season. Eccl. 3.1. Now Gods unsearchable wisdom
is much manifested in a due ordering of the things which he does, as in
wisdom he made all things ( Psalm. 104.24.) so most wisely does he dispose the
same. By a due observing of the very day and point of time, we may clearly
discern that wisdom of God; yea, the blessing it self will thereby appear
to be the greater in the kind thereof, and more useful unto us.

Uses. 1. Demonstration of the damage of not notin^ (...) day of Gods wonders.
I. This gives information of a maine reason of men's slacknesse and
backwardness in rendering due praises to God, for the many and great works
which he does. They observe not the time of effecting the same. We heard before
how the spirit of a man was affected at the first working of a wonderful
work. This puts life and spirit into a man, and makes him more fervent and
zealous in praising God for it. When the Israelites saw their enemies dead upon
the seashore, they feared the Lord and believed him, Exodus 14.30, 31. and as
it is recorded in the next Chapter, they sang praise to him. Psalm. 106.^^, 11,
12.
But if that first season be let slip, the heart is like to wax hard, and the
work it self to slip out of memory. We may find this by woeful experience too
truly to be verified in our selves.

2. Exhortation t^ take the first opportunity.
II. It will be our wisdom to take the first opportunity that we can to
quicken up our spirits to thankfulness unto God for his great works. Our
Proverb says, Strike the iron while it is hot. Thus may it be fashioned and
molded according to our mind. The first opportunity is the very day whereon
the work is wrought: so was this day that is here mentioned in my Text,
Remember this day. And that this quickening of the spirit may not only be for
once, the memorial thereof is some way or other to be celebrated, so often as
that day returns year after year. For this end the Diaries, (...) useful.
which many use to have, wherein they register special mercies and blessings
on the day wherein they were wrought, are commendable.

3. Justification of (...) (...) set dates for thanksgiving.
III. This does justify that prudent care which many States have of preserving
the Anniversary memory of extraordinary deliverances, on the very day year
after year, whereon they were obtained.

A memorial for our delive^^nce from the Gun-povvder-treason, 5 Nov. 1605.
The warrant which Gods Word gives of celebrating one special day in the
year, for the continuing of a memorial of a great blessing, without question,
moved the great Council of this Land by Statute to enact and set apart the
fifth of November, for a public thanksgiving to Almighty God, for the happy
deliverance of the King and Parliament, from the most traitorous and bloody
Massacre by Gunpowder.

There was not many years since a commendable custom begun by a merchant in
this City, Birth-dayes solemnized.
of celebrating the four birth days of our four Reformers and Preservers of
the true Protestant Religion here in England. The solemnization of those days
was performed in duties of Piety, as Prayer, Praises and Preaching Gods Words.
Celebration of set days, wherein men of note and name were borne; or advanced
to high place, have been very ancient. I pass by that which the Scripture
notes of celebrating Pharaohs birthday ( Genesis 40.20.) and Herod's birthday (
Matthew. 14.6.) That which the Prophet ( Hos. 7.5.) upbraideth to the Israelites
may be more pertinent to our purpose. It is this, In the day of our King, the
Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine: By mentioning the Kings day he
aggravates their sin, as if he had thus said, In that day wherein God
bestowed a King upon you, for which your hearts should have been enlarged, and
your mouths opened to bless God, you gave your selves to all manner of
excessive riot. Whether this were the Kings birthday or Coronation-day it
makes no great matter to the point in hand. It is sufficient that there was a
set day solemnized for a special blessing.

This may suffice to have spoken of that point.

The exemplification of the day intended in my Text, the day wherein they came
out from Egypt, leads me to the third Instruction, which is this,

3. Doct. (...) to be considered after deliverances. Exodus 12.8.
The distress from which we are delivered is to be considered, even after the
deliverance. For they were come out of Egypt before this charge was given. My
Text expressly affirms as much, in this phrase, wherein ye came out from
Egypt. This was the end why they were enjoined to eat bitter herbs at the
Passover, to put them in mind of their bitter bondage in Egypt after they were
delivered from it. That confession which the Israelites were enjoined to m^ke,
when they should come into their l^nd of rest, tended to this purpose, it was
this, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.5. so that which the Apostle thus
presses upon the converted Gentiles, Remember that ye were in time passed
Gentiles, etc. Ephesians. 2.11, 12.

Reasons. 1. Gods respect to us, thereby called to mind.
1. Remembrance of former miseries, specially when we are delivered out of the
same, brings to our mind the presence of God then with us, the eye of his
divine Providence on us in that our misery, together with that respect which he
had to our cries and prayers, according to that which he himself says, Exodus
3.7. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry, etc.

2. Gods power discerned.
2. The greater the distress was, the greater will the power of God appear to
be in delivering us, by calling to mind that distress: as is acknowledged, (
Deuteronomy. 6.21.) by them who said, We were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt, but the Lord
brought us out with a mighty hand.

3. Gods pity amplified.
3. This does much amplify the pity and compassion of God toward us. Ezekiel
does for this end lay forth the misery wherein the Jews at first were, by an
elegant Parable taken from a child, Ezekiel 16.2. etc. In the day that thou wast
borne, thy navell was not cut; neither wast thou washed in water, to supple
thee: thou wast not salted at all, nor swaedled at all. None eye pitied thee,
to do any of these unto thee, etc. Then the Lord to amplify his compassion
thus proceeds, When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee, Live, etc.

4. Our hearts more knit to God.
4. It uniteth our heart the closer and faster unto God, and stirs us up to love
him the more, as the Psalmist who said, I will love thee, O Lord my strength,
etc. The sorrows of hell compassed me about, the snares of death prevented me.
In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my
voice, etc. Psalm. 18.1, 8. Nothing unites the heart of one to another more then
the remembrance of kindness in distress.

5. Our spirits more enlarged to pr^ise.
5. This inlargeth a man's spirit to more and greater thankfulness. Where David
calls upon his soul again and again to bless the Lord, he rendereth this
reason thereof, Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy
diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, etc. Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.

6. We more bound to duty.
6. This binds a man more firmly to all duty and good obedience. Upon
consideration of this the Psalmist acknowledging that God had delivered his
soul from death, his eyes from tears, and his feet from falling, makes this
inference, I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Psalm. 116.8,
9.

7. Confidence for future wrought.
7. This is an especial ground of future confidence, as is evident in David's
answer to Saul, which was this, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of
the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, He will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine. 1 Samuel 17.37. To like purpose Saint Paul being delivered
out of the mouth of the Lion, that is, Lion-like Nero, thus adds, And the
Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, etc. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.

Uses. 1. Discommodities of forgetting former miseries.
I. Surely they who after deliverance forget the misery wherein they were,
manifest a very ungrateful and ungracious disposition against God, moving him
(as much as in them lies) to repent of the good he has done for them (as it
repented him that he set up Saul to be King, 1. Sam. 15.11.) They do also
take away much from the sweetness and the comfort of that deliverance which
they might have in their own souls. For remembrance of a bitter affliction
past does much sweeten a quiet and peaceable estate. Yea further they deprive
themselves of an especial ground of confidence, which they might have, if
again they fall into any trouble, as has bin prooved before.

2. Exhortation to think on times past.
II. Let us therefore be more wise: and among other things that we often
meditate on, call to mind such distresses as formerly we have bin in, and from
which thorough Gods providence we have bin delivered: whether they be such as
the whole Christian Church have groaned under, or particular Churches, either
of our own or other nations: yea and such also as we our selves have bin in,
or our children, families, friends, or others near and dear unto us. For
private deliverances, particular Dyaries before mentioned are needful, and often
reading them will be very useful. For public deliverances, it will be time
well spent to read such Ecclesiastical Histories as set forth the cruel
persecutions of the primitive Christians under heathenish Emperors from the
Apostles time till Constantine the great. Read histories of Martyrs
And the more inhumane persecutions, under which the professors of the true
faith endured much, from the beginning of Antichrists reign till these our
days (I would in these our days they were ended.) The latter Beast of Rome
was far more cruel then the former. Among other fierce and fiery
persecutions, let them especially be remembered which have bin executed in this
our Land, against those who maintained the same faith which we now do, and for
the same resisted unto blood. Their sufferings and our freedom from the same
are never to be forgotten. We have an excellent help for informing our selves
in all the sufferings of the Church from the death of Christ till the reign of
the forementioned blessed Queen. The help that I mean is that large volume,
The book of martyrs a good help.
which we call the book of Martyrs, entitled Acts and Monuments of matters
most special and memorable happening in the Church, with an universal History
of the same. All the days of Queen Elizabeth was this Monument of Martyrs in
high account. All Churches by authority were enjoined to have it, so as all
that would might read it. There was scarce a Family of note that had it not.
It was usuali to spend the long Winter evenings in reading it. By the constancy
of Martyr therein set out, people were much encouraged to stand to that faith
which was sealed by their blood.

Israelites miseries under Egyptians, and Protestants under Papists paraleld.
For further amplification of this Use, I suppose it now meet to come to that
which was before put off to this place, namely to show distinctly the
distresses wherein the children of Israel were under the Egyptian bondage, and
therewith to parallel the distresses wherein this English Nation was under the
forementioned antichristian bondage, before the reign of the foresaid blessed
Queen Elizabeth: that so the seventeenth of November, the day of our
deliv^rance may be accounted as memorable a day to us, Exodus 12.18. and 23.15.
Abib was the first month. Est. 9, 1, 21. Adar the twelfth month.
as the fourteenth day of Abib, the day of Isreal's deliverance, was to the
Israelites, and as the fourteenth and fifteenth day of Adar was to the Jews in
Esthers time, that we may see what just cause we have in relation to the
seventeenth of November to say, Remember this day in which ye came out from
Egypt.

That which I have in this case to observe shall be reduced to six heads.

Particular grievances. 1 Base esteem.
1. That base esteem which the Egyptians had of the Israelites, accounting them
no better then Servants and Slaves, dealing with them answerably. For they put
them to servile tasks, which was to make bricks for their great works, as
treasure Cities, Pithon and Ramases: and they placed over them taske-masters.
Exodus 1.11. They fed them also with the basest meat, as fish, Cucumbers,
Melons, Leeks, Onions and Garlic. Numb. 11.5.

A far baser esteem have Papists of Protestants, accounting them Heretics,
Schismatics, despisers of Saints, Sacrilegious, men of no learning nor parts;
Yea to their common people they set them forth to be, ougly and monstrous
shapes of men, such as would eat and devour up their own Mothers, to make the
common sort of people the more to detest them.

2. Envy.
2. That envy and malice which the Egyptians did bare against the Israelites.
For they had a jealous and suspicious conceit that the Israelites might be more
in number and mightier in power then they, and that they might join with their
enemies. This made them envy at Gods blessing in causing the Israelites to
multiply, Exodus 1.9, 10.

Is not the envy and malice of Papists against Protestants far greater? do
they not fret and fume, rage and rave at the increase of Protestants? and is
not Gods blessing on our Ministry an eyesore unto them, because so many
children, professors of the true Protestant faith are begotten thereby? The
many means plotted and contrived by them to hinder or diminish this increase,
gives sufficient evidence of that their envy against us.

3. Bad usage.
3. That hard usage wherewith the Egyptians handled the Israelites. For they did
not only put them to servile works, but also afflicted them with their
burdens. They exacted of them more then well they could accomplish, and yet
afforded them not means to perform the same. Exodus 5.7, 8.

More harshly dealt Papists, imposing such variety of unwarrantable duties and
burdensome Ordinances on people, as with the peace of their conscience they
could not observe, and yet afforded them not the light of Gods word to direct
them, nor other means to help them: but by rigor would enforce the same upon
them.

4. Cruelty.
4. That savage cruelty which they exercised upon them, not only by keeping them
down with hard labor, but also by seeking utterly to destroy them: Exodus
1.22.
and that by casting their young babes so soon as they were born into the water
to drown them.

Far greater cruelty have Papists executed on Protestants. That instance of
taking a babe that was newborn, and casting it into the fire, because it was
(as they said) an Heretics brat, is a strong evidence of their more then
savage inhumanity. They have spared neither young nor old, male nor female,
great nor mean: but sought to destroy all of all ages, sexes, degrees and
conditions whatsoever, not forbearing the most exquisite tortures that ever
were heard of.

5. Revenge.
5. That unsatiable revenge which the Egyptians showed against the Israelites.
For notwithstanding by many mighty wonders and judgments they were forced to
let the Israelites go out of their coasts, Exodus 14.3.
yet they soon repented thereof: for when they were gone out of their Land,
Pharaoh gathered an huge host together to fetch them back again.

Thus Papists, though they were forced to let us Protestants have the freedom
of our Religion; yet what plots have they contrived? what treasons have they
attempted to deprive us of our liberty in Christ?

6. Idolatry.
6. That Idolatry whereunto Israel was brought in Egypt. This was the greatest
misery of all. Whether the Israelites were forced thereunto by the rigor of
the Egyptians, or whether they yielded thereunto through undue fear, or through
custom of the place, or through a natural pronenesse to idolatry, is not fully
expressed. But sure it is that in Egypt they committed whoredoms in their
youth. There were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of
their Virginity, Ezekiel. 23.3. And though the Lord said unto them, Cast ye away
every one the abominations of his eyes, and defile not your selves with the
idols of Egypt; yet did they not cast away the abominations of their eyes,
neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Ezekiel. 20.7, 8.

Papists in this spiritual bondage went beyond all the idolatrous Jews that
ever were; Hesiod. (...).
yea, and Gentiles too. One of the heathen Poets writing of the generation of
gods, has reckoned up above thirty thousand of their gods. But Papists far
exceed, both in the number and kind of their idols. For they make all the
Angels as gods, yet there are thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten
thousand of them mentioned, Dan. 7.10. And the Apostle declares them to be an
innumerable company. Heb. 12.22. Dion. Hist. lib. 53. Bonifacius summus
Pontisex (...) in ten plum omnium Sanctorum convertit* Steph.
They add to these all canonized Saints. And whereas the Heathen-Romanes had a
(...), wherein they placed all manner of gods, Popish-Romanes in imitation of
them have their (...) for Saints. As for the idolatry of Papists, in one thing
they go beyond all Heathens. For they make a creature not only to be a
representation of the Deity, but to be indeed a very God, as their Host in the
Mass. They say that it is the flesh of him that is very God: and that in
eating it they eat their Creator. Upon this conceit they adore and perform
divine worship unto it.

From this spiritual bondage was this Land delivered as on this day. Thus if
this and all the forementioned distresses and slaveries, from which we were
delivered on the seventeenth of November, 1558. be duly weighed, we may see
just cause to conclude as we began, and say, Remember this day, in which ye
came out from Egypt.

The benefits and blessings, which this land received upon the forementioned
deliverance from the foresaid Antichristian bondage, under the reign of Queen
Elizabeth of ever blessed memory, makes that deliverance much more memorable.
Wherefore the heads of those benefits being succinctly and distinctly in the
Epitaph engraven upon her tomb at Westminster, I have here set down word for
word that Epitaph*

Sacred unto Memory. Religion to its primitive sincerity restored: Peace
thoroughly settled: Coin to the true value refined: Rebellion at home
extinguished: France, near ruined by intestine mischiefs, relieved: Netherland
supported: Spaines Armado vanquished: Ireland with Spaniards expulsion and
traitors correction quieted: Both Universities revenewes by a Law of Provision
exceedingly augmented. Finally, all England enriched, and forty five years
most prudently governed, Elizabeth, a Queen, a Conqueresse, Triumpher, The
most devoted to Piety, and most happy, after seventy years of her life,
quietly departed.

FINIS.

