THE GREAT CHARTER OF THE FOREST, DECLARING THE LIBERTIES OF IT.

Made at WESTMINISTER, the Tenth of February, in the Ninth Year of HENRY the
Third, Anno. Dom. 1224. and Confirmed in the Eight and Twentieth of EDWARD the
First, Anno Dom. 1299.

WITH Some short Observations taken out of the Lord Chief Justice COKE's Fourth
Institutes of the Courts of the FORESTS.

Written for the Benefit of the Public.

LONDON, Printed by the Assignees of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires, for
John Kidgell at the Atlas in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1680.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
FInding how well Magna Charta has been received amongst us, as it has been
lately printed with some of my Lord Coke's Notes upon it, and considering
likewise that Charta de Foresta, which was made and confirmed at the same times
with the other, does in effect treat of the same Matter, and therefore both are
called The GREAT CHARTERS of the LIBERTIES of England, I could not but imagine,
that upon taking the same course, and presenting you with some of that Great
Man's Comments, and Explanations of the Text, as I could gather them out of his
fourth Institutes of the Courts of the Forests, and alibi; I could not, I say,
but imagine, that this GREAT CHARTER of the FOREST would meet with an Equal
kind Entertainment from you.

This, together with the Importunity of the Stationer, made me set about the
Work; and I will here speak but a very few things by way of Preface, because I
would not long keep you from your fuller satisfaction; and those shall be
excerpted from my Lord Coke too. There were many of the Great Charters, and of
This CHARTA DE FORESTA, put under the Great Seal, and sent to Archbishops,
Bishops, and other men of the Clergy, to be safely kept, whereof one of them
remain at this day at Lambeth, with the Archbishop of Canterbury.

This was a great reach of Policy, to have them well preserved; and besides,

The same was entered of Record in a Parliament Roll.

And afterward King Edward the first, by Act of Parliament 25 E. 1. c. 1.
did ordain, that both these Charters should be sent, under the great Seal, as
well to the Justices of the Forest, as to others, and to all Sheriffs, and to
all other the Kings Officers, and to all Cities through the Realm; and that the
same Charters should be sent to all the Cathedral Churches, and that they
should be read and published in every County four times in the year, in full
County, viz. the next County day 28 E. 1. c. 1.
after the Feast of St. Michael, the next County day after Christmas, and the
next County day after Easter, and the next County day after the Feast of St.
John.

This Charta de Foresta and Magna Charta, my Lord Coke calls, Two glorious
Lights; and truly so, for they were adjudged in Parliament to be taken as the
Common 25 E. 1. 1.
Law; and the Law is the Light and Guide of Judges; Lex est exercitus Judicum
tutissimus Ductor, lex est Optimus Judicis Zenagogus, and lex est tutissima
Cassis.

And albeit Judgments in the Kings Courts are of high regard in Law, and
Judicia are accounted as Juris dicta, yet it is provided by the same Act of
Parliament, that if any Judgment be given contrary to any of the points of
either of the Charters, by the Justices, or by any other of the Kings
Ministers, etc. it shall be undone, and holden for naught, because the Judgment
is given against the Law.

And in such high Estimation have these two Charters been, that they have been
confirmed, established, and commanded to be put in Execution by two and thirty
several Acts of Parliament.

Magna Charta DE FORESTA. THE GREAT CHARTER OF FORESTS, etc.
EDward by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyan,
to all to whom these Presents shall come, sends, Greeting.
We have seen the Charter of the Lord HENRY our Father, sometime King of
England, concerning the Forest, in these words:

HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy
and Guyan, and Earl of Anjou,
to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs,
Provosts, Officers, and to all Bailiffs, and other our Faithful Subjects, who
shall see this present CHARTER, greeting.
Know ye, That We, unto the Honor of Almighty God, and for the Salvation of
the Souls of our Progenitors and Successors Kings of England, to the
advancement of Holy Church, and amendment of our Realm, of our mere and free
will have given and granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons, and to all Freemen of this our Realm, these Liberties following, to be
kept in our Kingdom of England for ever.

CHAP. I. What Woods shall be disafforrested.
IMprimis, We will, that all Forests, which King Henry our Grandfather
afforested, shall be viewed by good and lawful men; and if he has afforested
any other (a) Wood, more than his own Demesne, by which the Owner of the Wood
has damage, it shall be forthwith disafforested; and if he has afforested
his own Wood, then it shall remain Forest: saving the (b) Common of Herbage,
and of other things in the same Forest, to them who before were accustomed to
have the same. 3. Bulstrode. 213.

Ockam cap. quid Regis Foresta, says, Foresta est tuta ferarum Mansio, non
quarum libet, sed silvestrium, non quibuslibet in locis, sed certis and ad hoc
idoneis, unde Foresta E. mutata in O. quasi Feresta, hoc est, ferarum statio.
Co. Litt. Sect. 378. Fol. 233. a.

Forests and Chases are not enclosed, but a Park must be; the Forest and Chase
do differ in Offices and Laws: every Forest is a Chase, but every Chase is not
a Forest. A Subject may have a Forest by special grant of the King, as the Duke
of Lancaster, and Abbot of Whitby had. id. ibid.

A Forest consists of Eight things, viz. Of Soil, Covert, Laws, Courts,
Judges, Officers, Game, and certain Bounds. Co. Inst. 4. Part. Fol. 289.

Foresta est nomen collectivum, and by the grant thereof, the Soil, Game, and a
free Chase does pass. id. ibid.

King John the 15 of June in the 18 year of his Reign, at Kummigs-mead, alias
Kyme-mead, between Stanes and Windsor, granted the like Charter, as Charta de
Foresta is. id. ibid.

(a) This is an Act of Restitution, for if the King might have made a Forest in
other Men's Woods, then could not the Owner have felled down his own Woods
without View and License, and sic ad damnum illius, etc. id. Fol. 300.

(b) Note, all manner of Commons are saved.

CHAP. II. Who bound to the Summons of the Forest.
MEn that dwell out of the Forest, from henceforth shall not come before the
Justicers of our Forest by common Summons, except they be impleaded there, or
be Sureties for some others that were Attached for the Forest.

This Statute of Charta de Foresta has been above Thirty times, and lastly in
4 Hen. 5. confirmed, and enacted, and commanded to be put in execution. Co.
Inst. 4. Part. Fol. 303.

And it is very observable, that if any Act of Parliament has been made
against any of the Articles of the Statute of Carta de Foresta, by the Act of
Parliament of 42. E. 3. the same is made void, and by the Statute of
Confirmationes Cartarum in 25. E. 1. all Judgments given against any of the
points of Carta de Foresta, shall be holden for void.

CHAP. III. What Woods made Forest, shall be disafforested.
ALL Woods that have been made Forest by King Richard our Uncle, or by King
John our Father, until our first Coronation, shall be forthwith disafforested,
unless it be our Demesne Wood.

Whereas Henry 2. Fitz Empress claimed that he might make Forests not only
within his own Woods and Grounds, but in the Woods and Grounds of his Subjects,
and thereupon made diverse such Forests within his own and other men's Woods and
Grounds: Whereupon some Readers, and others that have followed them, are of
opinion that Henry 2. might de Jure do that which he did: This Act of Charta de
Foresta, which is but a declaratory Law restoring the Subject to his former
right, is directly against that conceit, as you may see before in the first
Chapter of it; and to the same effect is this third Chapter. Neither could
Henry 2. or any other King have made, or raised a free Chase, Park, or Warren
for himself in any of the grounds of the Subjects; for it is truly said in
Plowdens Commentaries, Lord Berkely's case, fol. 236. that the Common Law has
so admeasured Note.
the Kings Prerogatives, that they should not take away, nor prejudice the
Inheritance of any. But we agree, that all the Lands of the Subject are
originally derived from the Crown: And therefore when the Ancient Kings had the
most part in their own hands, or at least great Deserts, Waste and Woody
grounds, for want of habitation, they might make what Forests it pleased them
therein, which may be a Reason and cause of a lawful beginning; and therefore
a Forest may be by Prescription good in Law over other men's grounds. But the
King in his own grounds may make a Forest at this day, which is proved by these
two Chapters, for such Forests are thereby saved and Enacted to stand. Co. 4.
Part. Instit. fol. 300, 301. Desertum, id quod ab hominibus deseritur, and
feris relinquitur.

CHAP. IV. No Purpresture, Waste, or Assart to be made in Forests.
ALL Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, and other
our Freeholders, who have their Woods in Forests, shall have their Woods as
they had them at the first () Coronation of Henry our Grandfather, so that they
shall be quit for ever of all (a) Purprestures, (b) Wastes, and (c) Asserts,
made in those Woods, after that time until the beginning of the second year of
our Coronation: And those who from henceforth do make Purpresture without our
License, or Waste, or Assert in the same, shall answer unto us for the same
Wastes, Purprestures, and Asserts.

(a) Purpresture comes of the French word purprise, or pourpris, which
signifies an Enclosure or building, and in legal understanding signifies an
encroachment on the King, either upon part of the Kings demesne Lands of his
Crown, which are accounted in Law as re's publicae, and semper favorabile fuit
in Omni Republica Principis patrimonium; or in the High ways, or in Common
Rivers, or in the Common streets of a City, or generally when any Common Nusans
is done to the King and his people, endeavoring to make that private, which
ought to be public, which Glanvil, lib. 9. cap. 11. very aptly describes in
these words; Dicitur autem purprestura, vel porprestura poprie quando aliquid
super Dominum Regem injuste occupatur, ut in Dominicis Regis, vel in viis
publicis obstruct', vel in aquis publicis transversis a recto cursu, vel quando
aliquis in Civitate super regiam plateam aliquid aedificando occupaverit, and
generaliter quoties aliquid fit ad nocumentum Regii tenementi, vel Regiae viae,
vel Civitatis. Co. 2. Instit. fol. 272.

It was an Article of the Air before the Statute de Bigamis, in 4. Ed. 1. to
enquire de purpresturis factis super Dominum Regem, sive in Terra, sive in
Mari, sive in aqua dulci, sive infra libertatem, sive extra. Cap. itineris. id.
ibid.

It appears also by Glanvil, that there be likewise Purprestures done to
Subjects. id. ibid.

(b) Waste, Vastum dicitur a vastando, of wasting and depopulating; and for
that waste is often alleged to be Timber, which we call in Latin Maremium, or
Maresnium, or Maresmium; it is good to fetch both of them, says my Lord Coke,
from the Original. First, Timber is a Saxon word: Secondly, Maremium is derived
of the French word Marreim, or Marrein, which properly signifies Timber. Co.
1. Instit. fol. 52. b. 53.

(c) Assert, is so called of the effect (as some hold) and is derived (say
they) of ad and sero, assero, because of Wood grounds, Marshes or waste
grounds, they are converted to be sown with Corn, and therefore in the
Register, and F. N. B. it is written assertare, with an E. and so it is in this
Chapter here in the Latin. Bracton Lib. 4. fol. 226.
hereof says, Illud quod fuit aliquando boscus, and locus vastae solitudinis
and communia and jam inde efficitur Assartum, vel redactum est in Culturam. And
herewith agrees Fleta, lib. 4. c. 22. lib. 2. cap. 25. illud olim fuit
Foresta, et boscus, etc. et jam efficitur Assartum, and reductum est in
Culturam, et idem dici poterit de Mariscis et aliis vastitatibus in culturam
redactis. Others fetch it otherwise, but we hold, that it is derived of the
French word essarter, to grub up, or clear a ground of wood, etc. and this
appears by Domesday. Hereford-shire. Merchela in eodem manerio sunt 58.
acrae, terrae provect. de silva, written over the same essars: de essart silvae
exeunt 17. s. and 4. d. E. being turned into A. Co. Instit. 4. part. fol. 306,
307.

() Where it it is said (tempore Coronationis Regis Henrici Avi, that is of H.
2.) it is to be known that he was Crowned twice, viz. the 20. of December in
the first year; he caused his Son Henry to be Crowned King the 15. of June, in
the 16. year of his reign; Henry his Son died the 11. of June in the 28. year
of his reign; after whose death King Henry Fitz-Empresse was Crowned again. Id.
fol. 293.

CHAP. V. When Rangers are to make their Range in the Forest.
OUr Rangers shall go through the Forests to make range, as it has been
accustomed at the time of the First Coronation of King Henry our Grandfather,
and not otherwise.

The Ranger is a sworn Officer of the Forest, of which sort there seem to be
twelve, as you shall see in the 7. Chapter, but he is not within the Forest,
having no charge of Vert, but only of Venison that comes out of the Forest
into his charge, or part of the Purlieu, to safe conduct them back again. And
it is to be noted, that in such Forests as have no Purlieus, there is no
Ranger, but Foresters serve the turn.

This Ranger is made and appointed by the King, his Letters patents under the
great Seal; and for his better encouragement in his duty, he has a yearly fee
of twenty pounds, or thirty pound paid out of the Exchequer, and certain fee
Dear both red and fallow; his Office consists chiefly in these three points:

1. Ad perambulandum quotidie per terras de afforest at as, ad videndum
audiendum and inquirendum, tam de Malefactis, quam de Malefactoribus in Balliva
sua.

2. Ad Refugandum feras Forestae tam Veneris quam Chaseae de terris
deafforestatis, in terras afforest at as: and

3. Ad praesentandum omnes trangressiones Forestae in terris deafforestatis
factas, ad proximas Curias illius forestae tent as.

As for the Oath of the Ranger, it is continually in these words. You shall
truly execute the Office of a Ranger in the Purlieu of P. upon the border of
the Kings Forest of P. You shall rechase with your Hound and drive the Wild
Beasts of the Forest, as often as they shall range out of the same Forest into
the purlieus; You shall truly present all unlawful hunting and hunters of Wild
Beasts of Venary and Chase as well within the purlieus (which proves that the
purlieus are no part of the Forest, but distiuct things) as the Forest; and
those and all other offenses you shall present at the Kings next Court of
Attachments, or Swanimote, which shall first happen: So help You God. Co.
Instit. 4 Part. fol. 304.

Purlieu is all that ground near any Forest, which being made Forest by Henry
the second, Richard the first, or King John, were by Perambulation granted by
Henry the third, severed again from the same. Manwood, Part. 2. of his Forest
Laws, cap. 20.

Purlieu, says my Lord Coke, contains such grounds which Henry the Second,
Richard the first, or King John added to their Ancient Forests over other men's
grounds, and which were disafforested by force of this Statute, in the first
and third Chapters, and the Perambulations and Grants thereupon. And is derived
from a French Adjective, and a French Noun, viz. Pur, which signifies clear,
entire, and exempt, and lieu, that is, a place entire, clear, or exempt from
the Forest. And both of these derived from the Latin Adjective and Noun: viz.
Purus locus, and in this sense the Civilians called that purum locum qui
sepulchrorum Religioni non est obstrictus. And the perambulation whereby the
Purlieu is deafforested, is called in French Pourallee. i. e. perambulatio: so
as the purlieu and pourallee are two distinct things, and 33 E. 1. Stat. 5.
purlieu is the right name of the place deafforested. Co. Instit. 4. Part. fol.
303.

By this it appears that Chases that never were any Forests cannot have any
Purlieu, and consequently the case in 16 Dyer. 326, b. 327. is mistaken, for
the Chase of Whaddon never was any Forest. Whereby it may be observed, how
necessary the true derivation of words is, according to Littleton's Example.
id. ibid.

By this deafforestation the owners of the grounds within the Purlieu may at
their will and pleasure fell, cut down, eradicate, and stubb up all the Timber,
Woods and underwood, convert their Pastures, Meadows, and other grounds to
arable, enclose them in with any kind of enclosure, build and erect new
Edifices upon the same or any part thereof, and to dispose and use the same
after the disafforestation, as if they never had been afforested. id. ibid.

CHAP. VI. Lawing of Dogs in Forests.
THe Enquiry or view of (a) Lawing of Dogs within our Forest, shall be made
from henceforth, when the Range is made, that is to say, from three year to
three year, and then it shall be done by the view and testimony of lawful men,
and not otherwise. And he whose Dog is not lawed, and so found, shall pay for
his amercement three shillings. And from henceforth no Ox shall be taken for
lawing of Dogs. And (b) such lawing shall be done by the Assise commonly used,
that is to say, that three claws of the forefoot shall be cut off by the skin.
But from henceforth such lawing of Dogs shall not be, but in places where it
has been accustomed from the time of the first Coronation of the aforesaid
King Henry our Grandfather.

(a) Expaaltare Canes. i. e. Expeditare Canes. Expeditating or Lawing of Dogs.
Expeditatio is derived of ex and pede, because the Dog is lamed in the foot.
Co. Instit. 4. Part. fol. 308.

(b) Canis in this Chapter is taken for Mastivus by these words, talis
Expeditatio fact' per Assisam communiter usitatam, which has reference to the
Assise of the Forest, tempore Henri. 2. Art. 6. which speaks only de
expeditatione Mastivorum and Assis. and consuetud. Forestae, 6 Ed. 1. cap. 9.
speaks only de Mastivo. id. ibid.

Ortelles, this word is taken from the French word Orteils des pieds. i. e.
digiti pedum, the Toes, or here Claws. ibid.

Pellota, of the French word Pelote, and they from Pila; in this act it is
taken for the Ball of the foot, sine Pelota, without the ball of the foot. And
therefore by the express words of this Chapter the ball of the foot of the
Mastive is not to be cut off, but the three claws of the forefoot to the skin.
This extends only to Mastiffs, and to no other Dogs; for Vbi non est Lex ibi
non est Transgressio; and necessary it is, that such as dwell in Forests where
there are Coverts, that they should keep other Dogs unexpeditated, and the
Mastiff unexpeditated for the defense of their house, or for giving of warning
of Thieves and Robbers, etc. ibid.

The words of this Chapter are, De expeditatione Canum existentium in Foresta;
and therefore in Purlieus or places deafforested, a man may keep a Mastiff
without being expeditated. Ibid.

If Greyhounds be found running ad Nocumentum, the Forester ought to retain
them, and present them in the presence of the Verderers, and send them to the
King, or to the chief Justice of the Forest. Ibid.

The Court of Regard, or Survey of Dogs, as you see by this chapter, is holden
every every third year, for Expeditation or lawing of Dogs by that Court. Id.
fol. 289.

CHAP. VII. Where only Gathering shall be in Forests.
(a) NO Forester or (b) Bedle from henceforth shall make () Scotal, or gather
Garb or Oats, or any Corn, Lamb, or Pig; nor shall make any Gathering, but by
the Sight, and upon the Oath of the Twelve Rangers, when they shall make their
Range. So many Foresters shall be assigned to the Keeping of the Forests, as
reasonably shall seem sufficient for the Keeping of the same.

Stat. 25 Ed. 3. 7.
In this Statute of 25 Ed. 3. c. 7. the words are: Moreover, It is Accorded and
Established, That no Forester, nor Keeper of Forest or Chase, nor any other
Minister, shall make or gather Sustenance, nor other Gathering of Victuals, nor
other thing, by color of their Office, against any Man's Will, within their
Bailywick, nor without; but that which is due of Old Right.

(a) Forestarius is taken for a Wood-ward, not only of the King within his
Forest, but ex vi termini of any Subject of his Woods wheresoever they lie; as
appears by a Writ in Bracton, lib. 4. fol. 316. a. and b. and 231. a. Vid.
Co. Instit. 4. part, fol. 293. But in Legal Understanding, he is taken for a
sworn Officer Ministerial of the King's Forest; and his Duty appears by his
Oath, which consists of Five Parts.

1. That he shall be Loyal and True to the Master of the Forest.

2. That he shall truly walk and keep the Office of the Forestership, and true
Watch make both Early and Late, both of Vert and Venison.

3. Truly attack, and true Presentment make of all manner of Trespasses done
within this Forest, to his Knowledge; and especially, within the keeping of his
Baylwick.

4. The King's Council, his Fellows, and his own, he shall truly keep. And,

5. No Concealment make for no Favor, Meed, or Dread; but well and truly to
behave himself therein. Co. ibid.

Officers of the Forest shall not be sworn on Enquests out of the Forest.
Ordinat. Forestae, 34 E. 1. cap. 5. ibid.

(b) Bedellus, is an Officer of the Forest, that does warn all the Courts of
the Forest, and does Execute the Process of the Forest, and make all
Proclamations as well within the Courts, as without; and is derived from the
Saxon Word Bydder, to Call or Warn, or of the French Word in Normandy, Bedeau,
a Bailiff, or Apparitor. Co. Instit. 4 part, fol. 313.

How many sorts of Officers, and what Number do belong to a Forest; you may be
satisfied in, by my Lord Coke's Recital of them, as they are found in the Eire
of Pickering.

The Foresters, by this Chapter, for keeping of the Forests, are to be so many,
as shall reasonably seem sufficient for the same.

The Verderers are most commonly Four in every of the King's Forests.

They are Judicial Officers of the Forest, and chosen in Full-County, by force
of the King's Writ.

The Office of a Verderer is to observe and keep the Assizes or Laws of the
Forest; and to View, Receive, and Inroll the Attachments and Presentiments of
all manner of Trespasses of the Forest of Vert and Venison; and to do equal
Right and Justice, as well to Poor as to Rich. All this, and much more you may
read in the Oath, which he takes before the Sheriff. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol.
292, 293.

The Form of it you may see in Manwood's First Part of his Forests Laws, page
51. You shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King, in the Office of a
Verderour of the Forest of P. You shall to the utmost of your Power and
Knowledge, do for the Profit of the King, so far as it does appertain unto you
to do. You shall preserve and maintain the Ancient Rights and Franchises of his
Crown. You shall not conceal from his Majesty any Rights or Privileges, nor
any Offense either in Vert or Venison, or any other thing. You shall not
withdraw, nor abridge any Defaults; but shall endeavor your self to manifest,
and to Redress the same: And if you cannot do that of your self, you shall give
Knowledge thereof unto the King, or unto his Justice of the Forest. You shall
deal Indifferently with all the King's Liege People. You shall Execute the Laws
of the Forest, and do equal Right and Justice, as well unto the Poor, as unto
the Rich, in that appertains unto your Office. You shall not oppress any
Person by color thereof, for any Reward, Favor, or Malice. All these Things
you shall, to the uttermost of your Power, observe and keep.

The Regardatores, or Rangers, are by this Chapter to be Twelve at the least;
but by the said Eire of Pickering, it appears there may be more, for there
are there set down Thirteen by name. Vid. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 311.

The Agistors, or Gist-takers, are Four in Number within every Forest: Their
Office you shall see more of in the Nineth Chapter. And,

There are several others, which you may see in Manwood, par. 2. cap. 1. nu. 4,
and 5. together with their Offices, too long here to be inserted.

Scotales, Scotale, derived of two English words, Scot and Ale; as much as to
say, a Tribute or Contribution of Drinking for the Ministers of the Forest;
when they came to the House of any, whereunto others are Contributory within
the Perambulation of the Forest, which then was called Potura, a Drinking. And
after, they claimed the same for all Victuals for Themselves, their Servants,
Horses, and Dogs, which was called Putura: And this does notably appear by a
Record in 5 E. 3. in these words:

Putura in Chacea de Bowland. i. Consuetudo clamata per Forestarios, and
aliquando per Ballivos hundredorum, recipere Victualin, tam pro seipsis,
hominibus, equis and canibus de tenentibus and inhabitantibus infra
Perambulationem Forestae seu hundredi quando eo pervenerint, nihil inde
solvend. And whereas it is enacted by the Statute 25 E. 3. c. 7.
abovementioned, That no Forester, or Keeper of Forest or Chase, etc. shall
make or gather Sustenance, etc. against any Man's Will, etc. but that which is
due of Old Right; that is, those Fees which time out of mind, they ought to
have within that Forest, and as shall appear to be due by the Oaths of Twelve
Regarders, or Rangers. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 307.

CHAP. VIII. When Swanimotes are to be kept, and who to Repair to them.
NO Swanimote from henceforth shall be kept within this our Realm, but thrice
in the Year; viz. in the Beginning of Fifteen Days before Michaelmass, when
that our Gest-takers, or Walkers of our Woods come together, to take Agistment
in our Demesne Woods; and about the Feast of Saint Martin, in the Winter, when
that out Gest-takers shall receive our Pawnage. And to these two Swanimotes,
shall come together our Foresters, Verderors, Gest-takers, and none other by
Distress. And the Third Swanimote shall be kept in the Beginning of Fifteen
Days before the Feast of Saint John Baptist, when that our Gest-takers do meet
to Hunt our Deer. And at this Swanimote shall meet our Foresters, Verderors,
and none other by Distress. Moreover, every Forty Days through the Year, our
Foresters and Verderers shall meet, to see the Attachments of the Forest, as
well for () Greenhue, as for Hunting, by the Presentment of the same Foresters,
and before them Attached. And the said Swanimotes shall not be kept, but within
the Counties wherein they have used to be kept.

Within every Forest there are these Courts.
1 C. First, The Court of the Attachments, or the Wood-mote Court: This is to
be kept before the Verderers every Forty Days throughout the Year; and
thereupon is called The Forty-day Court. At this Court, the Foresters bring in
the Attachments de Viridi and Venatione, and the Presentment thereof; and the
Verderers do receive the same, and inroll them: But this Court can only
Enquire, and not Convict. But it is to be observed, that no Man ought to be
attached by his Body, for Vert or Venison, unless he be taken with the Manner
within the Forest; otherwise the Attachment must be by his Goods.

2 C. Secondly, The Court of Regard, or Survey of Dogs to be Holden every Third
Year for Expeditation, as before has been said.

3 C. Thirdly, The Court of Swanimote, which is to be Holden before the
Verderors, as Judges, by the Steward of the Swanimote, thrice in the Year; and
the Foresters ought to present their Attachments at the next Swanimote-Court;
and the Freeholders within the Forest, are to appear at the Swanimote, to make
Enquests and Juries. And this Court may enquire de Super onerationae
Forestariorum, and aliorum Ministrorum Forestae, and de eorum oppressionibus
populo nostro illatis. And this Court may not only Enquire, but Convict also;
but not give Judgment.

Vid. 1 E. 3. ca. 8. 50 E. 3. Assiz. 442. Co. Instit. 4 par. f. 289.

Swanimote is derived of Swein, that is, Saxonice Minister; and Mote, or
Gemote, which is Curia, i. e. Curia Ministrorum Forestae; so called, because it
is but a Preparative for the Justice-Seat, a. Ordinat. Forestae, 34 Ed. 1. cap.
4. id. ibid.

For the Jurisdiction of this Court, there is a Notable Case in 45 E. 3. in a
Writ of Trespass of False Imprisonment, brought against J. de W. the Defendant
said he, is Forester in fee of the Forest, and that a certain Swanimote it was
presented by the Foresters, Verderers, Regarders, and Agistors, that the
Plaintiff had chased and taken Deer within the Forest: Whereupon the Defendant
being Forester in Fee, came to the Plaintiff, and prayed him to find Pledges to
answer the same before the Justice in Air, in this Country, (that is, at the
Justice-Seat): and that to do the Plaintiff refused; by force whereof he
retained him, until he had performed the Statute in that Case provided; and
justified the Imprisonment. The Plaintiff replied, De son tort Demesne sans
tiel cause; and the Issue was received by the Court. And it was said, That
before the Justice in Eire he should have no Averment against the Presentment
of the Foresters. Id. f. 290.

Hence are Six Conclusions observable.

1. First, That the Law of the Forest is allowed and bounded by the Common-Laws
of this Realm.

2. Secondly, That though the Verderers be Judges of the Swanimote, and the
Steward but a Mininster; yet the Presentment in that Court, is as well by them
as Verderors, as by Foresters, or Keepers, Regarders, and Agistors, by the Law
of the Forest.

3. Thirdly, That a Forester or Keeper may Arrest any Man, that Kills or
Chaseth any Deer within the Forest, when he is taken with the Manner within the
Forest; or if the Offender be Indicted.

If a Man be so Imprisoned, and after offer sufficient Pledges, and they are
not taken; seeing Justice-Seats for Forests are very seldom Holden, this is his
Remedy*

In the Term-time, he may have Ex merito Justitiae, a Habeas Corpus out of the
King's- Bench; or, if he have Privilege, out of the Court of Common Pleas, or
of the Exchecquer, or out of the Chancery, without any Privilege in Term, or
out of Term in time of Vocation; and upon the Return of the Writ, may be Bailed
to appear at the next Eire to be Holden for the Forest, etc. and also, may be
Bailed by a Writ de Homine Replegiando, directed Custodi Forestae, if he be
Arrested by the Officers of the Forest, for Hunting, etc. whereof he stands
Indicted, or Presented, taken with the Manner, he finding Twelve Pledges: But
if he be adjudged by the Justices in Eire, and Imprisoned, he cannot be Bailed
by that Writ.

If he be unjustly proceeded against, he has there Remedy by Law.

Note a Difference, between the Writ de Homine Replegiando directed to the
Sheriff; for he cannot by Stat. West. 1. cap. 15. Replevy any Man imprisoned
for the Forest, being taken with the Manner, or Indicted: But this Statute
reaches not to that of de Homine Replegiando, directed Custodi Forestae.

4. Fourthly, That the Offender may be Retained by him, until he has found
Pledges to appear before the Justice in Eire; because (as has been said) the
Swanimote-Court has no Power of Judicature: But if sufficient Sureties be
offered, he ought not to be Imprisoned.

5. Fifthly, The Justice in Eire at his Sessions, may, by the Law of the
Forest, proceed upon the Presentiments or Verdicts in the Swanimote-Court,
though they are taken in another Court. And,

6. Lastly, Note, The Issue joined upon the Plea of the Forester, viz. De
injuria sua propria absque tali causa, and allowed by the Court, and the
Consequent thereupon.

Note also, That if at the Swanimote, the Presentment of the Foresters be found
true by the Jury concerning Vert or Venison, the Offender stands thereof
Convict in Law, and cannot Traverse the same: But an Indictment or Presentment
before the Chief Justice of the Forest, at a Court of 21 E. 3. 48.
the Justice-Seat by a Jury, and not found in the Swanimote, may be Traversed,
8 E. 3. Itinere Pickering, 147. a. because it is not Presented but by one Jury.
Co. Instit. 4 par. 290, 291.

4 C. There is also the Court of the Justice-Seat, holden before the Chief
Justice of the Forest, aptly called Justice in Eire; for so he is, and has
Authority and Jurisdiction to Hear and Determine concerning Vert and Venison,
etc. by force of Letters Patents under the Great Seal; whereof there are Two:
One for the Forest on this side of Trent, the Other beyond. Id. 291.

The Court of the Justice-Seat can be kept but every Third Year; and other
Justices in Eire kept their Courts every Seventh Year. And it must be Summoned
Forty days at least, before the Sitting thereof: And one Writ of Summons is to
be directed to the Sheriff of the County. Id. Ibid.

There is another Writ of Summons directed Custodi Forestae, etc. And this
consists of Two Parts.

1. To summon all the Officers of the Forest, to bring with them all Records,
etc.

2. All Persons who claim any Liberties or Franchises within the Forest, etc.
to show how they claim the same. Id. Ibid.

More of this shall be said in the Sixteenth Chapter.

() Greenhue is Vert; and signifies in the Laws of the Forest, Every thing
that does Grow, and bear Green Leaf, within the Forest, that may cover and hide
a Deer. Manwood 2 par. Forest-Laws, fol. 6. a. and fol. 33. b.

Vert is divided into General and Special; Vert General is, as above Defined;
special, is every Tree and Bush within the Forest, to Feed the Deer withal; as
Pear Trees, Crab-Trees, Hauthorns, Black Bush, and the like. And the reason of
this Name is, because the Offense of destroying such Vert, is more highly
punished than any other, according to the Quantity thereof. See more C. 16.

Mensis Vetitus, Fence-Month, or Defence-Month; so called; because it is the
Fawning-Month, when the Does have Fawnes; for the Preservation whereof, they
ought to be Fenced, and Defended from Hurt and Disquiet. It contains a
Kalendar-Month of One and Thirty Days, and begins the Fifteenth Day before
Mid-Summer; in the beginning whereof, a Swanimote is to be holden, and ends
Fifteen Days after: as you may see by this Chapter. The Third Swanimote to be
kept in the beginning of Fifteen Days ante Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae,
quando Agistatores nostri convenient pro * Faonatione seu Feonatione bestiarum
Nostrarum. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol 313.

In the Printed Book it is Venatione, which ought to be amended, and made
Faonatione, or Feonatione; which signifies the Fawning.

This word Faonatio, or Feonatio, is derived of the French word Faonier, i. e.
to Fawn, or for Does to bring forth. Id. ibid.

CHAP. IX. Who to take Agistment and Pawnage in Forests.
EVery Freeman may Agist his own Wood within Our Forest, at his Pleasure, and
shall take his () Pawnage. Also, We do grant, That every Freeman may drive his
Swine freely, without Impediment, through our Demesne Woods, to Agist them in
their own Woods, or where else they will. And if the Swine of any Freeman lie
one Night within our Forest, there shall be no Occasion taken thereof, whereby
he may lose any thing of his own.

Agistator, so called, because he takes Beasts to Agistment; that is, to
Depasture within the Forest, or to Feed upon the Pawnage; and comes of the
French Word (Geyser,) i. e. to Lie; because the Beasts that Feed there, are
there Levant and Couchant, Lying and Rising. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 293.

Agistment is properly the Common of Herbage, of any kind of Ground, or Land,
or Woods, or the Money due for the same. Mr. Manwood, par. prior. of his
Forest-Laws.

This Officer is Constituted by the King's Letters Patents: And of these, in
such Forests where there is any Pawnage, there be Four in Number. Co. ibid.

There Office consists in these Four Points: 1. In Agistando. 2. Recipiendo.
3. Imbreviando. 4. Et Certificando. ibid.

() Pawnage, (Pannagium, alias Pasnagium) or Pennagium, as it is Latined in
Pupilla Oculi, may be thought to come of the French Panez, or Panets; which is
a Root much what like to a Parsnip, but less and ranker in Taste; which Hogs do
there Feed upon, though it be Eaten by Men also. It signifies in our
Common Law, the Money taken by the Agistors, for the Feed of Hogs with the Mast
of the King's Forest. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 155.

Mr. Manwood, par. prior. of his Forest-Laws, says, Pawnage is most properly
the Mast of the Woods, or Lands, or Hedge-Rowes, or the Money due to the Owners
of the same for it.

Mr. Skene de Verbor. Signif. calls it Pannagium; and defines it to be the
Duty given to the King, for the Pasturage of Swine in the Forest.

Quietum esse de Pannagio, i. e. to be quit to pay any thing for Pawnage. Vid.
F. N. B. p. 230.

CHAP. X. The Punishment for Killing the King's Deer.
NO Man from henceforth shall lose either Life, or Member, for Killing of Our
Deer: But if any Man be () Taken, and Convict for Taking of Our Venison, he
shall make a Grievous Fine, if he have any thing whereof. And if he have
nothing to lose, he shall be Imprisoned a Year, and a Day: And after the Year
and the Day is expired, if he can find sufficient Sureties, he shall be
Delivered; and if not, he shall Abjure the Realm of England.

Stat. 1. Ed. 3. 8. Sess. 1. Stat. 1. H. 7. 7. Register, fol. 80.
In this, and in other Chapters of this Statute, Venatio signifies Venison, as
in the Eighth and Sixteenth. It is called Venison of the Mean, whereby the
Beasts are taken, Quoniam ex Venatione Capiuntur; and being Hunted, are most
Wholesome. They are called, Beasts of Venary, (not Venery, as some term it)
because they are gotten by Hunting.

Ordinatio Forestae, cap. 15. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 316.

There be many Beasts of the Forest, by the Laws of the Forests of England.

The Hare in Summer, the Hind in Winter; and all that proceed as of them: The
Buck in Summer, the Do in Winter, and the Proceed of them: The Hare, Male and
Female, and their Proceed: The Wild-Boar, Male and Female, and their Proceed:
And the Wolf, Male and Female, and their Proceed: The Martin, Male and Female.
The Roe is no Beast of the Forest, but it is a Beast of Chase; and so it was
resolved by the Justices, and the King's Council, That Capreoli non sunt
Bestiae de Foresta: And this was the Reason of it, eo quod fugant alias feras.
Hill. 13. E. 3. coram Rege in Thesaur. Co. Litt. Sect. 378. fol. 233. a.

The Proceeds of the Heart and Hind: The Male, the First Year a Calf, the
Second a Brocket, the Third a Spayad, the Fourth a Staggard, the Fifth a Stagg,
the Sixth a Heart; and so after. The Female, the First Year a Calf, the Second a
Brocket's Sister, and the Third Year a Hind. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 316.

The Proceeds of the Buck and Do: The First Year a Fawn; the Second Year a
Pricket, the Third Year a Sorel, the Fourth a Sore, the Fifth a Buck of the
First Head, the Sixth a Great Buck. ibid.

The Proceeds of the Hare: The First Year a Leveret, the Second Year a Hare,
the Third a Great Hare.

Of a Wild-Boar: A Pigg, a Hogg, a Hogg-Stea^, a Boar, and after a Sanglier.

The Seasons by the Law of the Forest, for the Beasts of the Forest are these:

Of the Heart, and the Buck, begins at the Feast of St. John Baptist, and
ends at Holy Rood-Day.

Of the Hind and Do, begins at Holy-Rood, and continues till Candlemass.

Of the Fox, at Christmas, and continues till the Twenty Fifth of March.

Of the Hare, at Michaelmass, and lasts till Mid-Summer.

Of the Boar, from Christmas till Candlemass. id. ibid.

() Taken: Taken with the Mayneer, a Manu, is in four kinds; viz. Dog-draw;
that is, Drawing after a Deer, which he has hurt. Stable-stand; viz. At his
Standing with any Knife, Gun, or Bow, or close with Greyhounds in his Leash,
ready to Shoot or Course. Back-bear; (Bracton, lib. 3. fol. 32.) that is,
Carrying away the Deer, which he Killed. Bloody-hand; i. e. When he has Shot,
or Coursed, and is imbrued with Blood. id. fol. 294.

If the King, or other Lord do Pardon a Trespass in a Forest, and the Offender
at a Justice-Seat, by his Learned Council, plead the same; in the Proceeding
thereupon, we do observe Two things: 1. That by the Law of the Forest, before
any Allowance thereof, the Justices charge the Ministers of the Forest, to
enquire, whether the Delinquent has done any Trespass in Vert or Venison,
after the Date of the Pardon. 2. When the Pardon is allowed, then the Entry is,
Quod invenit manucaptores quod a modo non forisfac'. i. non Delinqueret aut
peccaret. But if an Offender be Convicted for Trespass in the Forest, in
Hunting, etc. and adjudged to be Fined or Imprisoned; which Fine, though it be
paid, yet shall he find Sureties for his good Abearing, etc. in these words:
Quod a modo se been geret, and in Foresta praedicta non forisfac', i. non
Delinqueret seu peccaret. Vnde forisfactura pro delicto. idem, fol. 313.

CHAP. XI. A Nobleman may Kill a Deer in a Forest.
WHatsoever Archbishop, Bishop, Earl, or Baron, coming to Us at Our
Commandment, passing by our Forest; it shall be Lawful for him to Take and Kill
one or two of our Deer, by View of our Forester, if he be present; or else he
shall cause one to blow a Horn for him, that he seem not to Steal Our Deer. And
they shall do so likewise in their Return from Us, as it is aforesaid.

We find not any Chapter or Article of this Charta de Foresta, does extend to
Chases or Parks, but only this Eleventh Chapter. Quicunque Archiepiscopus,
Episcopus, Comes, vel Baro ad mandatum nostrum transierit per Forestam nostram,
etc. which does not only extend to the Forests of the King, but to His Chases
and Parks also: For so was the Law before the Making of this Act, which is but
in Affirmance of the Common Law of the Forest, before this Act. Co. Instit. 4.
par. fol. 308.

First, In respect of the Persons: For, every Lord of Parliament, be he
Spiritual or Temporal, had this Privilege besides those that be named in this
Chapter; as, such Abbots and Priors, as were Lords of Parliaments; and so of
Dukes, Marquesses, and Viscounts, who were Erected and Created, afterward
being Lords of Parliament, have the same Privilege also. id. ibid.

Secondly, By reason of the kind of Commandment; Ad mandatum nostrum, says the
Statute; which words have reference to the Writ of Parliament, directed to
every Lord of Parliament, Ideo vobis mandamus, etc. and is a Legal Commandment
by Writ directed severally to each and every Lord of Parliament, to appear at
the King's Court of Parliament, etc. to treat De arduis and urgentibus negotiis
Regni, Statum and Defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus.
And to Recreate themselves, Veniendo, and after Redeundo, they may, passing by
any of the King's Forests, Chases, or Parks, Hunt and Kill one or two of the
King's Deer. The Lords of Parliament may do it at other times ex Gratia, but by
Law, Eundo and Redeundo, to and from the Parliament.

Thirdly, Here is employed, that the Lord of Parliament may, in the Absence of
the Forester or Keeper, after the Blowing of the Horn, Kill one or two of the
King's Deer; Propriis suis Canibus, aut Arcu suo proprio.

Fourthly, Here is a secret Conclusion of Law, That albeit Spiritual Persons
are Prohibited by the Canon Law, to Hunt; yet by the Common Law of the Land,
they may for their Recreation, to make them fitter for the Performance of their
Duty and Office, use the Recreation of Hunting, as here it directly appears.
And in Assisa Forestae, 6 E. 1. it appears, That the Abbot of Peterborow had
a Right of Hunting in the Forest of Rockingham. And this appears in other
Statutes, viz. 13 R. 2. 19 H. 7. 1 Jac. c. 27. And at this Day, and Time out of
mind, the King has had after the Decease of every Archbishop and Bishop
(inter alia) Matam suam Canum, etc. his Kennel of Hounds, or a Composition See
25 H. 8. cap. 19, etc.
for the same; which, and other things, are in the Exchecquer called Multa.

Fifthly, The last Conclusion is, That all Canons against the Laws or Customs
of the Realm, are void, and of none effect.

CHAP. XII. How every Freeman may use his Land in the Forest.
EVery Freeman from henceforth, without Danger, shall make in his own Wood, or
in his Land, or in his Water, which he has within Our Forest; Mills, Springs,
Pools, Marsh-Pits, Dikes, or Earable Ground, without enclosing that Earable
Ground; so that it be not to the Annoyance of any of his Neighbors.

The Jurisdiction of the Forest being Local, the Law of the Forest has
provided, That the Forest should be enclosed by Meets and Bounds, which indeed
are the Enclosure of the Forests: For, as Parks are Enclosed with Wall, Pale,
or Hedges; so Forests and Chases are Enclosed by Meets and Bounds: And as a
Park cannot be a Park, without such an Enclosure indeed; so it can be neither
Forest nor Chase, without an Enclosure in Law; that is, by Meets and Bounds.
Metae sunt Clausurae Forestarum and Chacearum. And where, by the Statute 6 E.
1. c. 18. it is provided, Quod omnes metae Forestae sint integrae Domino Regi;
that is, so to be understood, Quoad Jurisdictionem and Imperium, and non quoad
Dominium: For if Rivers or Highways be Bounds, (as most commonly they be) yet
the King has no more Interest in the Soil, Way, River, or Fishing, than of
Right he ought; but only for his Jurisdiction of his Forest, which extends
over the whole Way, River, etc. And where Mills, and other Houses, Trees, etc.
of other Men, and such like, be Meets and Bounds of the Forests; yet thereby
the King has no Interest in such Mills, Houses, or Trees, etc. See more of
this in Co. Instit. 4. par. fol. 315. 316.

Here is nothing in this Chapter so Difficult, as to need Explaining.

CHAP. XIII. How every Freeman may use his Land in the Forest.
EVery Freeman shall have within his own Woods, (a) Ayries of Hawks,
Sparrow-Hawkes, Falcons, Eagles, and Herons; and shall have also the Honey that
is found within his Woods.

(a) Aerie is in our Language, the proper word in Hawks; 8 E. 3. Itin. Pick.
Sir John de Melsa's Case.
for That we generally call a Nest in other Birds; and so used here.

The Statute speaks De Aeriis Accipitrum, Espervorum, Falconum, Aquilarum,
and Hieronum; which is but in Affirmance of the Common Law; for it extends to
Aeries of other Hawks than be specially named; as to Aeries Merleonorum in
boscis suis de Levesham. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 310.

CHAP. XIV. Who to take Chiminage or Toll in a Forest; for what Cause, and how
much.
NO Forester from henceforth, who is not Forester in Fee, paying to Us Ferm for
his Bailywick, shall take any Chiminage, or Toll within his Bailywick: But a
Forester in Fee, paying Us Ferm for his Bailywick, shall take Chiminage; that
is to say, for Carriage by Cart, the Half-Year Two Pence, and for another
Half-Year Two Pence: for an Horse that bears Loads, every Half-Year an
Halfpenny; and by another Half-Year, an Halfpenny. And but of those only that
come as Merchants through his Bailywick by License, to buy Bushes, Timber,
Bark, Cole; and to sell it again at their Pleasure. But for none other Carriage
by Cart, Chiminage shall be taken. Nor Chiminage shall not be taken, but in
such Places only where it has been used to be. Those who bear upon their Backs
Brushment, Bark, or Coal to sell, though it be their Living, shall pay no
Chiminage to our Foresters, except they take it within our Demesne-Woods.

Chiminage (as is here expressed) signifies a Toll for Wayfarage through the
Forest. Crompt. Jurisdic. fol. 189. Manwood, par. 1 of his Forest-Laws, fol. 86.

Quietum esse de Carego, cum aliquae Cartae, seu Carectae cartatae Transeuntes
per Forestam, and similiter summagia seu somagia equorum Consuet. sunt solvere
secundum magis vel minus Ministris ibidem pro Chemino, ibidem habend.
Summagium, or Sommagium, comes of the French word Sommier, or Summier; which
signifies a Horse carrying any Load. Chimagium, is derived from the French
word Chemin, a Way; and, as the Lord Coke says, is a Toll for Waysaring-Men
through a Forest. Co. Instit. 4 par. fol. 306.

CHAP. XV. Pardon for Outlaws, of Trespass within the Forest.
ALL that be Out-lawed for the Forest only, since the time of King Henry our
Grandfather, until our first Coronation, shall come to our Peace without Let,
and shall find to us Sureties, That from henceforth they shall not Trespass
unto us, within our Forest.

Here you see, though the Outlaws are Pardoned; yet they are obliged Invenire
Manucaptores quod a modo non forisfac', i. non Delinquerent aut peccarent.

CHAP. XVI. How Pleas of the Forest shall be Holden.
NO Constable, Castellani, or Bailiff, shall hold Plea of Forest, neither for
() Greenhue, nor Venison, but every Forester in Fee shall make Attachments for
Pleas of Forest, as well for Greenhue, as Venison; and shall present them to
the Verderors of the Provinces. And when they be Enrolled and Enclosed under
the Seals of the Verderors; they shall be presented to our (*) Chief Justicers
of our Forest; when they shall come into those Parts, to hold the Pleas of the
Forest, and before them they shall be determined. And these Liberties of the
Forest, we have granted to all Men; saving to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, and to other Persons, as well Spiritual, as
Temporal, Templars, Hospitallers, their Liberties and free Customs, as well
within the Forest, as without, and in Warrens, and other places, which they
have had. All these Liberties and Customs, We, etc. as it is in the End of
MAGNA CHARTA, and We do confirm and ratify these gifts, etc. as you may see
there too is specified, etc.

Greenhue, Vert, is whatsoever bears green Leaf, but especially of green and
thick Coverts: And Vert is of diverse Kinds, some that bears Fruit, that may
serve as well for Food of Men as of Beasts, as Pear Trees, Chesnut-Trees,
Apple Trees, Service-Trees, Nut-Trees, Crab-Trees, etc. and for the shelter and
defense of the Game: some called Haut-Bois, serving for Food and Browse of, and
for the Game, and for the defense of them, as Oaks, Beeches, etc. some
Haut-Bois, for browse, and shelter, and defense only, as Ashes, Poplers etc. Of
Sub-Bois, some for Browse and Food of the Game, and for shelter, and defense,
as Maples, etc. some for Browse and defense, as Birch, Sallow, Willow, etc.
some for shelter and defense only, as, Alder, Elder, etc. Of Bushes and other
Vegetables, Some for Food and Shelter, as the Haw-Thorn. Black-Thorn, etc. Some
for hiding and shelter as Brakes, Gorss, Heath, etc. To Sum up all, Plantarum
tria sunt genera: Arbores, Arborescentes, and Herbae, Arbores, as Haut-Bois,
and Sub-Bois. Arborescentes, as Bushes, Brakes, etc. Herbae, as Herbs and
Weeds, which, albeit they be Green, yet our legal Viridis, Greenhue, extends
not to them. Co. Instit. 4. par. fol. 317.

(*) The Court of the Justice-Seat has Jurisdiction to inquire, hear, and
determine two things: 1. All Trespasses within the Forest, according to the
Laws of the Forests. 2. All the Claims of Franchises Privileges, and Liberties
within the Forest; as, to have Parks, Warrens, Vivaries, to be quit of Assarts
and Purprestures, to cut down 21. H. 7. 30.
his own Woods, without View of the Forester, etc. like-wise Claims of Leets,
Hundreds, Felons Goods, Waifs, Strayes, Fugitives, and to kill Hares and other
Beasts of Chase within the Forest; or to have a Wood Infra Metas Forestae, and
extra Regardum Forestae, that is, to be out of Jurisdiction of the Forest, and
other Franchises, Privileges, Liberties, Immunities, Freedoms, etc. within the
Forest; whereof excellent Matter is to be Read in the Eire of Pickering, in 8.
E. 3. Rot. 3. 1. Co. 4. Inst. fol. 291.

This Chief Justice may by the Stat. 32. H. 8. c. 35. make his Deputy, (yet all
the Writs of Summons, Ancient and Late are Coram (the Justice Itinerant) Aut
ejus Deputato. Before any Justice-Seat be holden, the Regarders of the Forest,
must make their Regard by Force of the King's Writ, and the Regard is
Obambulare, to go through, and view the whole Forest, and every Bailywick of
the same, Ad videndum, inquirendum, imbreviandum and certificandum all the
Trespasses in the Forest.

His Office extends through the whole Forest, and every Part thereof, to
inquire of all offenses concerning Vert and Venison, and of all-Concealments of
any Offenses or Defaults of the Foresters, and all other Officers of the King's
Forest. He is a Ministerial Officer, and is Constituted either by
Letters Patent of the King, or by the Chief Justice at the Justice-Seat, or to
be chosen by Writ to the Sheriff, id. ibid.

Before a Justice-Seat, there ought to be preparations for the same; to the
end, that good Service may be done there, Et quod Itinera non sint umbratilia.
ibid and sequent.

Note, Before Scroop, and other Justices in Eire, according Kilway. 150. 6. V.
21. H. 7. 22, and 30.
to the Course of the Common Law, a Man Claimed to be quit of Pawnage of the
King's Forest; And also he Claimed in the same Forest, Pawnage of his Tenant
Pour Agistes; And for that this belonged to the Justices of the Forest; they
would not meddle with it. And the Reason of that, is, the Words of the Chapter,
Praesententur Capitalibus Justiciariis nostris de Foresta, cum in parts illas
venerint, and coram eis terminentur. So as the Termination and Ending thereof,
belongs to the Chief Justices of the Forest, by the express Words of this
Chapter; and where it says, Coram Capitalibus Justiciariis nostris, etc. It is
to be known, That there is but one Chief Justice of the Forests on this side
Trent, and he is named Justiciarius itinerans Forestarum, etc. citra Trentam.
And there is another Capitalis Justiciarius, and he is Justiciarius Itinerans
omnium Forestarum, etc. Vltra Trentam; who commonly is a Man of greater
Dignity, than Knowledge in the Laws of the Forest. And therefore, when
Justice-Seats are to be Holden, there be Associated to him such as the King
shall appoint, who together with him shall determine Omnia placita, etc.
Forestae, with a Patent of Si non omnes, and a Writ de Admittendo, etc. And the
Chief Justice of the Forest, and these Associates, are Capitales Justiciarii
Forestae, and named Capitales in respect of the Verderors and others, that to
some purposes have inferior Judicial Places.

FINIS.

