A TRVE AND BRIEF RELATION OF THE BLOODY BATTLE OF NIEVPORT in FLANDERS,
fought betwixt Prince MAVRICE, of happy memory, and ALBERT Archduke of AUSTRIA,
Upon the second of July 1600. Stilo Novo.
THe Enemies forces in the year of our Lord 1600. being weak, and in a
mutiny, the States of the United Provinces seeing their affairs in disorder,
took this advantage, and resolution to make an offensive War in Flanders, as
the fittest place to annoy the Enemy most, and to secure their own state, if
they could recover the wast Towns, which was the scope of their design.

To this end, their Army was embarked in 2080. smack ships, with purpose to
have landed at Ostend, but coming into Zeeland, and finding the wind contrary,
resolved to disimbarke their Army upon the Coast of Flanders, by a Fort called
Phillippine, lying upon the river of the Scheld, where we ran our Vessels at
a high Water (which for the most part were flat bottomed) a ground, so that the
ebb falling, we lay on dry land, and with much ease and readiness we landed
both our Horse and Foot.

Our Army then being landed, it consisted of some twelve thousand foot, and
3000. Horse, which were divided into three Tercias commanded by three several
Chiefes. The first by Count Ernest of Nassaw, The second by Count Solmes, And
the third by Sir Francis Vere, every one interchangeably taking their turns
every day: namely, the Avantguard the Battle, and the Reere.

The Avantguard.
The Avantgard was ordered thus, Count Jews of Nassaw, brother unto Count
Ernest, led the Avantgard of the Horse, as being Lieutenant General,
consisting of ten Cornets of horse, namely, his own troop, the troop of
Prince Maurice, which were Curassiers, commanded by Monsieur Walraven of Gent,
Count Henry Frederick of Nassaw his Excies brothers troop, led by Captain
Bernard, all which made one division. The second division was commanded by
Monsieur Marcelis Bacx with his own Cornet, and his Brother Paul Bacxes, and
Captain Sales brought up the Reere, with these marched three troops of
Carabines, namely Conteliers, Peter Pany, and Battenburchs.

To the Avantgard of Horse were joined these foot Companies, to wit, Prince
Maurice his guard, commanded then by Captain Aa: Count Hohenloes guard led by
his Lieutenant Strydhorst, and after these marched the Regiment of General
Francis Vere, consisting of 13 English Companies, his own, Captain Yaxleis
Sariant Major, Capt. Denisses: Capt. Daniel Veres: Capt. Honniewoods: Capt.
Hammonds: Capt. Ogles: Capt. Tyrrils: Capt. Fairefaxes. Sr Galistine Brockses:
Capt. Fosters: Capt. Garnets: and Capt. Holcrofts.

After these marched the Regiment of Sr Horace Vere: first his own Company,
then Captain Suttons. Sr Thomas Knolses. Capt. Purtons, Monsir Cicils. Monsir
Morgans, Mons. Metkercks. Capt Scots. Capt. Vavousours. Capt. de Caines
Hartwirscons. and Capt. Denbies. making of both these Regiments 24 Colors, in
all accounted to be some 1600 English.

Unto the Avantguard were likewise joined the Frizons commanded by their
Lieutenant Coronell Iaco Hottinga: as his own company, The Baron of
Sideniscoes: The company of Jasper van Eussum: Capt. Michell Haghes: Capt.
Grovestines: Capt. Oshermes: Capt. Hans de Frize: Capt. Zagemans: Capt. Qutrin
de Blauws: Capt. Edzard Grovesteines: Capt. John Kiefs: Capt. Egbert Hovens:
Capt. Holsteynes: Capt. Assuerus: Capt. Garrat Schages junior Capt. D. Arusmas:
and Capt. Riperdaes: making in all 17 Companies, so that the Avantgard
consisted of forty foot Companies, over which Sir Francis Vere commanded in
chief.

The Battle.
The Battaille was commanded by Count George Edward of Solmes: as first, his
own troop of Horse, his brothers Count Fredericks of Solmes, the troop of
Iostling Wierick Cloutes: and Capt. John Bacxes, which made the first division
of Horse. In the second division were these troops following, as Godrad de
Bales: Sir Francis Veres: commanded then by Capt. Pembrooke, and Sir Edward
Cicils: making together seven Cornets.

Unto these horse troops were joined these foot companies, the Wallon, or new
Geux Regiment of Prince Frederick Henry de Nassaw; (now his Highness)
commanded by Sir Daniel Hertain Lord of Marquet his Lieutenant Coronell, with
which regiment Prince Henry's own company Marched. Capt. de Bouts: Capt.
Anthony Saucies: Capt. Francis Marleis Capt. Francis Mareschals: Capt. Philips
de la Lous: Capt. Nimmeries: Capt. Jonas Durands: and Capt. Gabriel de
Nouvelles: making together 9. companies, to these also were joined the four
Swissers companies, to wit, Capt. Hans Kriecks de Ballichom: Capt. Hans Sas van
Vnderwalt: Capt. Hans Meyer of Zurich: and Capt. William de Puits.

The Battaille likewise consisted of two divisions of French: The first was
commanded by Monsieur de Dommerville, Lieutenant Coronell to Monsieur de la
Noue, in which were his own Company, Monsieur de Rogueses, and Capt. du Saltz.

In the second division were the companies of Capt. Simendrie: Mareschats:
Hamlets: Capt. Bruise de Corimers, led by his Lieutenant, who was shot before
Albertus Fort The Companies of Monsieur du Fort, de Formenteirs, de Verneville:
and Du Pont Auberts: making together twelve Companies: In the midst whereof
Prince Maurice was himself to give order every where, accompanied with his
brother Prince Frederick Henry de Nassaw: and diverse other Lords: namely, John
Adolph Duke of Holsteyn, John Ernests Prince of Anhalt, three Counts of Solmes,
namely, Count Frederick, Count Albert Otho, and Count Henry William Solmes,
Count de Colligny Lord of Chastillon, nephew to that famous Admiral of France,
the Lord Gray, Sr Robert Drury, the Lord Justinius de Nassaw, with many other
brave Volunteirs and English gentlemen of quality, French, and Germans, who
attended the Princes person the whole Battaille then consisted of 7 troops of
Horse, and 25 companies of foore.

The Reere.
The Reere was commanded by Mons. Oliver Temple, Lord of Corbeke, Sariant
Maiour General, and consisted of three Cornets of Horse, namely, Capt. Wernard
de Bois: Capt. Hameltons: and Monsieur Conteliers troop, over which Monsieur
Bois commanded.

There was in the Reere also three battalions of Foot, to wit, the Regiment of
Count Ernest of Nassaw, (who commanded this Tercia) his own Company, Capt.
Husemans, Capt. Nassaws: Capt. Imbizes: Capt. Cotwitz: Capt. Balthasars: Capt.
Essums, Capt. Pithans, The old company of Count Ernest: Capt. Crimwitz: Capt.
Breeds: Lucas Neusars: and Capt. George Weckerlies: this made the first
division, and consisted of 13 Colors.

In the second division were the Lord of Cistelles his company Coronell, The
company of George Edward Count Solmes, Capt. Irelons: Capt. Freboughs: Capt.
Ammouvillers: Capt. Longfeild, Capt. Russies: and Capt. Flores de Winegarden.

In the third division, there was the Regiment of Coronel Huchtenbrooke his
company Coronel, Monsieur Temples company, Capt. Marlin: Capt Dederick de
longs: Capt. Ruysenbourghs: capt. John Loones: and capt. Calverts: making in
all 3 troops of Horse, and 26 foot companies, and thus the Army was ordered
into the Avantgard, the Battaille, and the Reere, the day wherein the Battle
was fought.



The Archdukes Army consisted of 19 Cornets of Horse, with his own troop,
Commanded by Don Roderigo de Lasso, and were al Lanciers, but only one troup of
Harquebussiers, as namely, the Admirant of Arragon his troop, Don Iuan de
Braccamontos, Don Iuan de Silvas: Don Phillepoos de Arrelanos: Don Ferdinando
de Guavaras: Don Guillielmos de Verdugos, Il Conte Giacomo Belgiosos, il
Cavelloro Vicontes: and Carolos de Sangros, all Lanciers: Il Conte de Salines,
Capitano Ryferhey^s: Capitano de Forests Curassiers, Michel de Tells: Ian van
Cepates: Nicolas de Blyer: and Captain Franasco de Royes to which were joined
600 horse more, that had mutined at Die, making in all some 25 hundred
Horsemen.

The Enemies Battaillons of Foot consisted of three Spanish Regiments, under
the command of Don Ieronimo de Monroy: Don Jasper de Sapenas, and Don Jews de
Villars Regiments. There were also two Italian Regiments, under the Conduct of
Don Alphonso de Avillos. The two regiments of the Count of Bucquoy, as that of
Burlottes: and Bestocks the Count de Bucquoy commanding the reere, diverse other
companies drawn out of the regiments of Count Frederick vander Berke: The
Marqnesse of Varrabons, the Earl of Barlamonts The Lord of Archicourt,
Balansons, and others.

Their army consisted of some 15 thousand foot, and 25 hundred horse, besides
their Mutiniers, all old and experienced soldiers, and were also divided into
three Brigadoes, as the Avantgard, the Battle, and the Reere, as the two
figures following here unto annexed shall Demonstrate.

Now before the Armies met, it was consulted wherein the Army should be first
employed, either in taking the Forts, which the Ennemie held in the low, and
broken grounds about Ostend, or in the seige of Nieuport: the latter being
resolved upon the States (who had all this while marched, and abode with the
Army) departed to Ostend, to take the Fort Albertus, and to open the passage
between that Town and Nieuport: Prince Maurice with the rest of the Army,
leaving the Fort of Ouldenbourgh, and the others, which the Ennemie had
forsaken well guarded, as behouefull (because without forcing them, the Ennemy
could not come unto us, but with fetching a great compass) marched by
Hemskerck, toward a Fort called the Damme, lying upon the River that goes to
Nieuport, but finding the Country weak, and Moorish, and not able to carry
the weight of our Carriages, and Artillery, returned by a small village not
far from Hemskerck, and lodged there, thence crossed through the Meddowes
toward the sea side, filling many ditches, and laying bridges to pass over
the waters, whereof that Country is full, and so with much ado we got to
the Downs by the sea side, and encamped about a Canon shot from the Fort
Albertus, which was before rendered up to Count Solmes. Early in the morning
we marched along the sea side toward Nieuport. And at the ebb waded over the
river on that side, which makes the Haven of that Town, and so encamped
there, and spent two or three days in quartering, and entrenching our selves
in places of advantage, for our own safetye, and the beseiging of the Town,
laying a stone bridge over the narrowest of the Haven for our Carriages, and
troops to pass too and fro at all times, and as occasion required. The
Archduke having understood that his Excie was satt down before Nieuport
gathered a head, and marched with all expedition with his Army toward the
Downs, passing the very same way, which his Excie did, that he might the
sooner relieve Nieuport. In the mean time his Excie was advertized from those
of Ostend, and Ouldenhourg, that the Ennemy with good troops of horse and
foot, were come and lodged near the Fort, whereupon consulting, the opinions
were diverse, most of them agreeing, that it was only a Bravado made by Ribus,
who as we heard before had gotten up in the land some 4000 men together near
unto Sluice, to divert us from our enterprise, and that then upon our Rmovall
toward him, he would make his retreat to the Sluice again. But Sr Francis
Vere was of the opinion, that it was the gross of their Army, and how it was
very needful without any delay, to march thetherwards with our Army also,
least the Fort, and the rest fell into the Ennemies hands, who might then come
and lodge at our backs, and cut of our passage to Ostend to the extreme
annoyance of our Army: That in using diligence to prevent the Ennemie from
taking these Forts, we might at once block up, and beseige those which the
Ennemy held in the low and drowned lands, being an Enterprise equal with that
of Nieuport. While these things were thus a disputing that night came Messenger
upon Messenger to the Prince to give him to understand, first that the Ennemy
had Cannon and that those of the Fort were summoned in the Archdukes name and
afterward it was yielded to him upon conditions. Thrice that night upon general
and false alarums, Sr Francis Vere was called up from his rest, which confirmed
him in his former opinion, that the Ennemie was coming toward us, and that
the Fort being yielded into the Ennemies hands, it was needful, that the whole
Army with all speed should return over the water, to stop the Ennemy, from
gayning the passage, our selves had made through the drown land, and to
possess the same, which was the shortest, and the readiest way the Ennemie
had to the Downs and sea side. These reasons (of Sr Francis Veres) his Excie
liked not, but resolving to foreslow the Ennemie, as much as possibly might
be, that he might gain the more time: and therefore the second of July at
the break of the day he sent from the Army before Nieuport, his Nephew and
Cosen Count Ernest of Nassaw, with two Regiments of foot, the one Schots, the
other Zealanders with four troops of horse, making some 2000 footmen, and
500 horse, with some Ordnance and materials, to entrench upon the passage,
unto whom the States sent out also, according to his Excies order, some
companies out of the garnison of Ostend, and those which came out of the Forts
of Ouldenborg, Plassendale and Bredene, to hinder the Ennemie from passing the
Bridges, which lay over certain waters upon the way, as you go toward the
Fort Albertus, the Prince saying he would follow, and second them with the
rest of the Army in due times.

But before they came thither, the Ennemy had seized upon those Bridges, and
having passed over them with the choice of his Army, it was impossible for so
small a number to hold up and stopp the Ennemies passage toward the Downs:
the before said Regiments being engaged in fight with the Ennemie, and finding
themselves too weak, to resist any longer so puissant an Army, after they had
bravely defended themselves, and carried themselves like good Soldiers, were
at last put to flight, the most lost falling then upon the Scotch; as well upon
their chiefes, and Captains, as Gentlemen, and private Soldiers, who fought
it out stoutly: so that there were slain about 800. dead upon the place,
amongst the which, there were eleven Captains many Lieutenants and Officers.
The Archduke having got this Victory, wrote to Brugges that he had over
thrown the Avantgard of Prince Maurice, and that he was so far engaged with
the rest of his Army, that they could not escape out of his hands: in so much,
that this day they began to triumph at Brugges, and the adjacent Towns in
ringing their bells, as though they had gained already the Victory.

Now the news of this defeat put the Lords the States into a great
perplexity, considering what a danger the country was in, if any misfortune
should happen to our Army which lay before Nieuport, and encamped on both
sides of the Haven, the Soldiers being separated one from an other, which
drove them into a great fear. And therefore being in such an extremity, when
all human means failed them, they took their refuge to the Lord of Hosts by
prays and assembled themselves, and all their train with diverse Officers and
people of the Town of Ostend into their chambers where their Minister
Vtenbogaert made prayers unto God for the preservation of the person of his
Extie, the Lords, Chiefes and Commandours, which were with him, yea the whole
Army, that God would be pleased to give them a happy success.

The Archduke being encouraged with this advantage, and defeat, which he got
so quickly over our men, marched in all have toward Nieuport, imagining to
find his Extie and all his Army so amazed by this overthrow, that he might
easily put our men to route. But God had his eye of providence upon the State
of these Countries, and the defense of his Church in them, giving his Excie
such wisdom, that he commanded away all the shipping, and boats from
Nieuport toward Oftend, and with all gave order that all his troops should be
ready to pass the Have^ of Nieuport at a low water, to get on the other
side, with a courageous resolution, to make head against the Ennemy, and to
give him battle, according to which his Excie went from troop to troop to
animate and encourage his Soldiers. That seeing they had the sea on the on
side, and the Ennemies Army on the other side betwixt them, and saw that there
was now noe means in the world to escape, but to fight it out and beat
through their Army: considering that his Exties reputation depended thereon,
yea all their honors, their lives and the good of the country lay now all the
stake, and that now they would carry themselves bravely and courageously, with
assurance that God would give them a blessed issue. The like also did all the
chiefs, Commanders and Captains to there Soldiers. Prince Henry (now his
highness) did likewise encourage also his Wallons, or new Geux, being of his
Regiment to do the like.

The rest of the Army was commanded to march to the water side by the break
of day to pass over the Haven with the first ebb, being then Sr Francis Veres
his turn to have the Avantgard, which made him careful not to be wanting in
his duty, so as in due time his troops were at the place appointed, and
because the water was not yet passable, he went to his Excie to know his
further pleasure, whom he found by the bridge with most of the chiefes and
Officers of the Army, where not long after, news was brought him, that the
Ennemies Army was passing the Downs, and marching toward us, whereupon Sr
Francis Vere advised his Excie that all possible speed must be used to pass
the Furrs before the Ennemy was possessed of the other side of the Haven. His
Excie willed him in all things to do as he saw cause, and calling to him Count
Lodewijck of Nassaw (who then commanded the Horse as General) badd him go
along with Sr Francis Vere, and follow his directions, so Sr Francis Vere left
the Prince, and went to his troops, and as soon as the tide served he passed
his men, which stood there in three Battailions. The Soldiers would have
stripped themselves to have kept their clothes dry, as Sr Francis Vere willed
them when he crossed the haven first, but afterward thought it not expedient,
the Ennemie being so near at hand, and therefore he willed them to keep their
clothes on, and not to care for wetting them: seeing they should need none
that day or else have better and dryer clothes to sleep in that night.

Count Lodwijck passed first with his five Cornets of Horse, whereof two of
them were Harquebussiers, and advanced toward the Ennemie, and entertained
shirmish with two of the Ennemies troops, and then followed all the rest,
which were scare got over on the other side of the shore, but they saw the
Ennemie stand in full Battaille, between them and Ostend: insomuch that if the
Ennemie had but advanced, he might have prevented his Excie from passing his
foot over the haven. Now the Ennemy not knowing how many of our men were
passed over the haven, because of the great dust, which arose and blinded their
sight, made a halte a long time by the sea shore, which gave his Excie time
and leisure to pass over the English and Frize Regiments, with his Excie guard,
and Count Hohenloes, all commanded by Sr Francis Vere. Then followed the French
Regiments, the Walloues, and Swissers, which made the Battle (as is said)
commanded by Count George Everard of Solmes, and after them almost all the rest
of the horse. The Regiment of Count Ernest, Gistelles and Huchtenbrookes made
the Reere. The Regiments of Gistelles, and Vtenbrooke, which were under the
Conduct of Count George Everard of Solmes, were left before the Town of
Nieuport, to block it up, with charge to stand upon their gards, and upon his
Excies first order, to beready to pass over the bridge, which was made with
boats, and plankes over the haven of Nieuport: how the Army was disposed into
the Vantgard, Battle and Reere, as you have heard already. When the troops
of the Vauntgard were passed Sr Francis Vere left the footmen standing ranged
in their order, betwixt the Downs, or Sandhills and the sea, and with the
horse he advanced toward the Ennemie, whom we discovered a far of coming
toward us alonge the sea side, not to engage a skirmish, or fight, but to
choose a fit place to attend them in, which was now the only advantage we
could by industry get of the Ennemie: for by situation of the Country, that
skill and dexterity we presumed to exceed our Ennemies in (which was the apt
agile mo- of our Battaillions) was utterly taken from us: for the space
betwixt the sea, and the Sandhills, or Downs, was commanded by the Sandhills,
which consisted of many heads, reared and commanding one an other, containing
so much breadth in most places, that our troops could not occupy the whole,
and every where so confusedly packed together, so broken, and steep, that our
troops could neither discover what was done a stones cast before them, nor
advance forward in any order to second one another if need required. And on
the other side of the Downs toward the firm land, if the whole breadth were
not possessed, the Ennemy might pass to the Haven of Nieuport, where our
bridge, and most of our shipping yet lay on the dry ground, and so to spoil
and burn them in our View. To prevent then all these inconvementes, Sr Francis
Vere went to find out a place, where the hills, and Downs stood in a manner
divided, with a hollow bottom narrow and the hills higher to the sea side, and
North, then toward the Island, and South part, which ran clean thwart from
the sea sands to the Island, the Downs being there also of no great breadth: so
that we might conveniently occupy the^ with out front, and command the sea
shore, and the way that lay betwixt the low Island, and the foot of the
Downs on that place which was on the higher side of the bottom, Sr Francis
Vere resolved to attend the Ennemy there, and therefore causing his troops to
advance, drew from the whole Avantgard about a 1000 men, to wit 300 English,
the Princes guard; and such other companies as vsuaily march with it 250 and of
the Frizons 500, which were musketeers, two troops consisting of shot; and
pikes, the English and 50 of his Excies guard they laced on the topp of the
hill that lay more advanced then the rest, which being steepie, and sandy was
not easily to be encountered, and in the topp so hollow, that the men lay
covered from the hills on the other side, and might shoot from it, as from a
Bulwark.

Just behind this hill some 100 paces from it, was another far more higher,
on the top, whereof Sr Francis Vere placed 200 men of the troop of the guard,
in which also (with a little labor of the Soldiers,) they lay in a good
covert, these two hills joined together with a ridge somewhat lower then the
foremost hill, which endwaies lay East, and West, and broadwaies looked
toward the South, and Inlands, and commanded all the ground passable, on the
outside, steep, loose, and sandy and ill to be encountered, within the hollow
he placed 500 Musketeers, giving charge to the Officers to bestow their shot
only to the Southwards, when time should serve, which was directly on the
right side, and flank as we then stood turned toward the Ennemie. Betwixt
these two hills on the left hand or flank, which looked toward the sea, Sr
Francis Vere placed 700 men in covert places for that purpose to be near the
sea sand, that with ease, and good order in an instant, they might break out
into two or four troops all which were English.

The Ennemie ranged their forces to the Northwards, directly on our left
flank, and so they adventured to pass by us to the other troops, with intent
to leave them in his eye more Easterly upon the sands, then on the Inermost of
the two hills, which Sr Francis Vere perceiving, ranged in a Front (with a
space betwixt them) the other two troops of the English. And a pretty distance
behind them, more to the sea-wards ordered the Frizons in four Battaillions,
two in front with a space to receive betwixt them one of the other Battallions,
that stood behind them. And the files and intervals behind the troops, as
close one to another as conveniently might be, to leave the more space for the
ranging of the other Battaillions with a compitent distance between each
division: so that one troop might not shadow an other, but that all of them
might be in the Ennemies eye in an instant: insomuch that the Avantgard took
up about one third part of the Downs, leaving the rest to be manned by the
other troops, as occasion should require, and on the left hand and the
outtermost toward the sea more advanced, were the horsemen placed. This work
was scare done, when as his Excie Prince Maurice with the rest of the chiefs,
and Commandours of the Army came to the head of Sr Francis Veres troops,
where his Excie in the hearing of many putt it in deliberation, whether he
should advance toward the Ennemie with his Army, or attend their coming.
Those that spoke (as most men in those cases will not seem fearful)
councelled him to march forwards: for they thought it would daunte the Ennemie
much, and make the Victory more easy, whereas in attending him, he would
gather courage out of an opinion of our fear by taking the oppertunity of our
stay, to fortify upon our passage to Ostend, and so cut of our victuals and
retreat. Hereupon, Sr Francis Vere alleged, that their Army having been
gathered up in have, and brought into a Country, where they intended noe such
war, could neither have provisio^s of victuals with it, nor any Magazines in
those parts to furnish them therewith, nor any store in that naked Country in
the latter end of a year could be expected: so that there was noe fear, that
they should setle themselves there, to starve us, who had store of victuals in
our shipping, and the sea open to supply us with all sailing winds, with the
vain courage they should get by our supposed fear, after a long march, and
coming upon us down those sandy steepe-hils in the extremity of heat would
be wearied, and spent before they could come unto us, and then finding us fresh
and lusty, ready to receive them in the strength of our advantage, in all
reason it would turn to their greater confusion and terror. They persisted
(in their opinion) and as it were with one voice oppossed it: so as in the end
(Sr Francis Vere) was moved to say, that all the world could not make him to
change his opinion: His Excie was pleased to like of it, resolving not to pass
any further toward the Ennemy, and for the ordering of things reposed so much
trust in Sr Francis Vere, that he believed they should be well done, without
viewing the places, or examining the reason of his doings. But his Excie
returned to give order, and dispose of the rest of the Army, which as the
water ebbed, his Excie enlarged to the Seawards, next the which the Horsemen
were placed, and six pieces of Ordinance advanced, planted in the head of the
Avantgard, having the advantage both of the wind, and the Sun on our side,
and gave order to Mons Warmont, and Mons. Duvenvord, that they from our men of
war, should give fire with their Ordnance upon the Ennemies Battallions, that
stood upon the strand. In this order we stayed, and the Ennemie (though still
in our sight) moved not forwards for the space of two hours, and then (rather
turning from us the^ advancing) they crossed the Downs, and rested there two
hours at the foot of the Island, which confirmed their opinions, that he would
lodge there. But we found reasons to the contrary out of their proceedings to
keep us from wavering: for it was probable, that the Ennemie was harryed out,
and tired with that nights march and days travel. And seeing we were passed
the Haven of Nieuport (to have hindered, or prevented us, was the greatest cause
of his have) whilst also he saw us stirring, and ordering our troops he might
hope, that we that were fresh, now passed and engaged in fight, would advance
the rather, to have the help of our troops which were with Couut Ernest, if
perchance he were retired to Ostend, toward which the nearer we were to fight
to that place, it might be of more advantage unto us, or else if we had heard
of their defeat, then we might be drawn on to revenge. But when he saw that
we stood and held our place, not moving out of the hope, that they were not
provided to make any long stay, for the reasons before mentioned, and might
resolve to refresh themselves a little and then to advance toward us: seeing
that side was for that purpose more advantageous, then the bare sea sands and
withal we considered, that they made a halt to rest their footmen (which were
all old exercised Soldiers, and to that day vnfoiled in the field) they
would attend rather the growing of the tide, which was then at the lowest ebb,
that the scopes of the sand might be less spacions and seruisable for
Horsemen. Now about half floude, they crossed the Downs again to the
seasands, and marched forwards, sending some light horsemen far before the
troops to discover, one of which (as we supposed) suffered himself to be
taken, who brougt news to his Excie, and told him alone that Count Ernest was
defeated, and that he would presently give him battle, augmenting the number,
braverie, and resolutio^s of their me^. The loss of our men being understood
before, we were careful to have few present at the heareing of this prisoners
report, whose mouth being stopped by the Princes order, not with standing they
hearing it bewrayed it, both in word and countenance to the soldiers

The Ennemie advancing nearer, and nearer their Horsemen came in the head of
their trouppes in a compitent distance, to have been drawn to a fight, Sr
Francis Vere would willingly have advanced the Horsemen of our Vantgard near
unto them, and with some choice and well mounted men, have beaten in their
Carabines and shit mishers to their gross, with purpose if they had been over
charged again to have retired in have, with a set Avantgard of Horse, betwixt
the sea and the Vauntgard of foot, and having drawn them from their foot
under the mercy of our Ordinance would have engaged the rest of our horse, to
have charged, and followed them resolutely. This advise liked not to the young
noblemen who was not well pleased with the power, which his Excie had given to
Sr Francis Vere over this charge, and therefore was not by him putt in
execution, who choose rather as the Ennemie advanced leisurely: to retreat
likewise toward our foot. This council of his taking noe better effect, and
the Horsemen now coming within the reach of our Cannon, Sr Francis Vere made
the motion to have them discharged, which was liked, and so well spent, that
we made the^ scatter their troops, in somedisorder, and fly for safety, which
had doubtless given us the victory, without any more ado, if our Horsemen had
been ready and willing to have taken the advantage of this occasion: Their
footmen out of our reach kept on their way along the sands, and the sooner to
requite us, advanced their Ordinance a good distance before them, and shot
roundly at us, and did some hurt. The water now growing very high, we and they
were both forced to strengthen our Front, and the Ennemie of purpose, as
aforesaid was driven to fight upon Sr Francis Veres advantage, which he took
with his foot, in drawing them into the Downs, where all our Horse stood with
our Reere, hereupon our Avauntgard altering order, our Battle, and Reere
passed into the Downs, and in the same distance backwards, as they had before
raunged themselves upon the sand on the left hand, so as the front of our three
bodies of foot, filled the breadth of the Downs, not in any large front, but
in the reere one of another, as the narrowness of the passage enforced the^
where Sr Francis Vere found a fit place, on the topp of a hill, from whence
the green way which lay on the green side of the Downs might be commanded
by our Ordnance, upon the which hill (by his Excies order) two demy-Canons were
presently mounted.

The Ennemy drawing very near, then Sr Francis Vere told the Prince it was
now time for him to go to his charge, and asked his Excie, if he would
command him any further service, he said noe, but to do as he saw cause,
willing us the chiefes that stood about him, to advise him in what part of the
Army he should be personnally, whereunto we all answered, that for many
reasons, he was to keep in the Reere, all which his Excie yielded to. And so
Sr Francis Vere taking his leave of the Prince, he went into the head of the
Avantgard, and after he had viewed the readiness, and order of the several
troops, the Ennemy now appearing at hand, that he might the better discouuer
their proceedings, and for the readiest execution of his commands upon all
occasions Sr Francis Vere after he had encouraged his men in abiding the first
brunte, took his place in the topp of the foremost hill before mentioned,
where he resolved to attend the issue of that days service, as well for the
advantage of the ground he had chosen there to stand upon his defense, as alsoo
because it was an even ground, where he might stir from place to place (as is
usually and necessarily) for the executing, and performing the duty of a
Captain, where the Country lying open and plain, he should not only have
the sight of the Ennemie (upon whose motions in such cases the Council of
execution depend) but also the view of his troops, and they of him, which
might have caused many unreasonable, and confused Commands, if it had been
otherwise.

The Ennemies forlorn hope of Harquebusiers, having gotten up, to the topp of
the hills, and places of most advantage on the other side of the bottom before
mentioned, began to shoot from thence at us, whilst our Avantgard approached,
who now growing near at hand, five hundred Spaynards Pikes, and short mingled
without Ensigns, or precise order gave on upon the place where Sr Francis Vere
stood and very stoutly for the space of a great half hour, laboring to
enter, and force it, but he succored it with more store of shot from the
topps of the hills. The gross of their Avantgard standing in some covert from
the shot, which flew from Sr Francis Veres troops on the other side of the
bottom. In the mean time, the Vauntgard of the Ennemies horse advanced alonge
the greeneway so often mentioned, betwixt the hills and the Downs toward our
horse, that stood more backwards upon the flanks of our Battle, whereupon our
two pieces of Ordinance were discharged from the topp of the hill to good
effect, and well spent, and when they came near and thwart our right flank,
the 500 Frizons Musketeers, who (as is said) before were only desired to
bestow their shot that way, did their parts, and so gauled the Ennemie upon
the first proffer of a charge.

For the Prince seeing the Ennemies horse advance, commanded presently Count
Lodwick to charge them, namely, with his Excies own troop, Prince Henry's and
Count Lodwijcks, who being seconded by these Horse Captains Marcelis Bacx,
Paul Bacx, and Monsieur La Sael their troops, (as you may see in the figure)
brake the Ennemies horse, and putt them to a disorderly retreat. After this
the Battle began on all sides, and the Ordnance from both sides played
furiously one upon an other. The fight from the first beginning to the end of
the Battaille continewed, not only in the Downs, but also upon the shirt of
the Downs, and in the bottom on the other side of them with diverse charges.
And therefore his Excie divided his men into small troops and divisions, that
he might bring the more men to fight at a time, and to charge the Ennemie when
occasion offered it self.

The fight growing hotter and hotter Sr Francis Vere giving two Regiments of
Spaynards their belly fulls, namely Don Jews de Villars, and Don Ieronimos de
Monroy, beating their Musketeers to a retreat. The Ennemie seeing that advanced
both his Battle and his Reere, to bring them likewise to fight. His Excie
perceiving our men thus engaged in the fight, caused also our Battle to
advance, and gave order to Count George Everard of Solmes, to lead it on, who
with three French divisions of Musketeers charged two Regiments of Spaynards
and Italians. The French Officers that led them on were these Captain Du Puy,
Captain Du Br^il, Monsieur La Noue his Lieutenant, Captain Pommaride,
Monsieur Dommerville his Lieutenant, Capt. Vander Burch, Monsieur Du Forts
Lieutenant. The most of these came to handie blows in the Downs, being the
first charge which the French made.

After this first charge of the Battle, these Horse Captains, also namely
Contelier, Peter Panny, and Battenburch charged the Ennemies Foot, the Prince
sending Count Lodwijck with six troops of Curassiers to second them, being
accompained with Count Frederijck of Solmes. His Excie gave order again that
Count George Edward of Solmes should give a second charge with the French, who
had the Avantgard of our Battle, who were divided into two troops, that on
the right hand, was led on by Monsieur Dommerville Lieutenant Coronell, and
that on the left hand by Captain Sau. This was the second charge the French
made, who fought with a Battaillion of the Ennemies Pikes, consisting of two
Regiments, the one was a Spanish Regiment commanded by Don Alphonzo d' Avalos,
the other an Italian couducted by Jasper Sapena Maestro del Campo.

Count George Everard of Solmes retyring with these French, was once more
commanded by the Prince to lead on Prince Henry of Nassaw his brothers the
Wallons Regiment, called the new Geux, commanded then by his Lieutenant
Coronell Monsieur Markett, the Swisser Regiment also commanded by Hans Krick
went on with them, and fought stoutly doing good service. These two Regiments
encountered, and fought against Barlotte, and the Count de Bucquoy, who
commanded the Ennemies Reere guard, which consisted of three Walloon
Regiments, and some Irish Companies. His Excie likewise commanded Monsieur de
Gistelles, being of our Arreregard to go on with his Regiment, as also the
Regiments of Coronell Huchtenbrooke and that of Count Ernest, commanded by
Monsieur Haysman his Lieutenant Coronell with these five Regiments, Count
George Everard Solmes charged the Ennemie as above said. This fight lasted
about three hours long, the Victory being doubtful on both sides, sometimes
the on side winning, and otherwhiles the other side loosing ground. The Princes
Horse in charging the Ennemie putt them often to the worst of it, and our horse
had continual the advantage upon them, driving some of them to a retreat as
fart as Nieuport: The Ennemies foot fought with more advantage upon the Downs
then ours, and made the Princes men to quit on down after an other: so that
our Ordinance was in hazard of loosing.

To return again to our Avantgard, Sr Francis Vere gave order that a hundred
men should be sent from the foremost troops, which he had laid (as is
aforesaid) in the Downs, to have given on upon the lest flank of the Ennemie,
if they had attempted to pass by us on the Sand, and as covertly as they could
to approach and fall on, upon the right flank of those that were in fight with
him, when they were come up, and at hand near the Ennemie, he sent secretly by
the hills (where there was a hollow descent) some sixty men more to charge them
in their front, which amazed the Ennemie much, and made them run away, our men
following them charged and killed them, till they had passed the bottom, and
came to their gross, from which they disbandied 500 Spaynards more (the like
number as before) who followed our men, and seized upon some heights that were
in the bottom some what near unto us. Their Pikes standing under the shadow
of the hills, they played with their shot from the topp of them upon our
disbanded and skirmishing men. Sr Francis Vere to drive them from thence, being
loath they should gain ground upon him, sent more men out of the same
by-waies, from whence he had drawn the first before mentioned, giving then
only this order, to make good that place. This was a bloody morsel, which
we strove for: For whilst our men, and theirs were not covered with the
hanging of the hills, as they advanced, or we chased, so they lay open to the
shot, not only of those that were possessed of those little Hills, but of the
higher also who powered in a great tempest of short amongst the^: so as these
Soldiers which Sr Francis Vere had sent, hasted for their safety to get the
heath side of the hills. The Ennemie also for the like reason abode their
coming with the like resolution, and so in a moment as the hills were round
and mountable, our men can to handie blows upon the whole demi Circle of them,
with much slaughter on both sides: but in the end the Ennemie was forced to
retire. In the mean while, the Ennemies Battle of foot were come up to the
gross of their Avantgard, which as it had taken the right hand of the Downs,
so the battle with some distances betwixt them (though in an even front)
having been well gauld and beaten with our shot, from the topp of the hills,
stood all in good covert as the place would afford, from whom they sent fresh
men to beat ours from those grounds of advantage in the become. As our men
began to give back Sr Francis Vere sent new supplies to make good that place in
the bottom: sometimes getting otherwiles loosing of ground. The fight was
still mainteyned with fresh supplies on both sides, so that Sr Francis Vere
perceived (though with the loss of men) yet with this advantage of ground he
did not only beat upon the gross of the Ennemie, but also gave fire upon
their loose fighting men, which made the loss far greater on the Ennemies
side, his maine dessigne being so, as to engage their whole force upon his
handful of men, made him employ his men sparingly, and by piece meal of
purpose, to spend and wast the Ennemie (that they should not be able to abide
the sight of our other troops) when they advanced (as is said) the Horsemen of
the Ennemies Battle, and ours encountered together, but somewhat more advanced
toward the Ennemie. Our men having comfort with the first success our Frizon
Musketeers before mentioned, could not so well favor our men, but our
Horsemen being putt to a retreat, the Ennemie persuing them, yet were so
saluted by our men that they were driven back. The Ennemies Reerward now coming
up, with the two other boddies (for so Sr Francis Vere termed them, because
their coullours remained together) most of their men being drawn from them and
engaged in fight, they attending their Ensigns, advanced boldly on the left
hand of their Battle, and spreading the breadth of the Downs, they stood as
it were to Sr Francis Vere his troops, rather on the corner of his right
flank, then a Front, and so fronted directly upon his Excies Battle and
Arreregard, some Muskett shot behind Sr Francis Veres troops, toward which
it seemed they intended to advance first, we gave fire to them, as much as we
could from the hills: but when they began to open upon the Frizon Musketeers,
who (as is said before) were only to bestow their shot on our right side, and
till that time had done noe service, but against their horse, the Frizons
gauled the Ennemie exceedingly, which made the^ stopp suddenly as amazed or a
shamed to give back, seeing none to chaze them in a bottom of so small a
covert. Hereupon they sent out some shirmushers along the Southermost parts
of the Downs: Against which also some loose men were sent from our other
bodies: but our Musketeers, which gave fire upon them standing, and shot
without fear from their rests gauled them most of all. The Horsemen of the
Reeregards on both sides showed themselves, and some bickering was betwixt
them, but the Ennemies Horse retired out of the footemens reach. This was a
strange, and an unusual fight: For whereas commonly in a Battle the success
of the foot depended most on that of the Horse: Here it was clean contrary,
for so long as the foot held the place good, the Horse could not be beaten out
of the field (though as it fell out) they might be chazed to them.

All this while the fight without intermission continued hoter and hoter,
betwixt the other two troops of the Ennemie, and Sr Francis Vere his men, each
sending fresh supplies, as occasion required to maintain the fight, so that
now the whole troops of the English came to handie blows in the aforesaid
bottom, saving some few that were placed on the hills, and on the Ennemies
side few were idle. Now was the time which Sr Francis Vere saw, to give the
Ennemie a deadly blow his gross being disbandied, as well in occupying places
of the heath, as taking advantages to annoy us, by those that were sent to
dispute the places in question, for their only strength consisted in their
loose men, which a few Horse charging on a sudden in the bottom, would then
have putt them to flight, and being followed pellmell with our foot, they
could never have bin relieved, nor gathered themselves together again. On the
other side, Sr Francis Vere knew well (without further succor) their numbers
would weary, and eat out his men in the end. And therefore at once he sent to
the Frizon Footmen, that were of the Avantgard to advance, and withal to his
Excie to give him to understand how things stood, desiring to send him part of
the Horse of the Battle to second him. And seeing the Ennemie pressed and
gained ground upon his men, he sent again messenger upon messenger (for men
and none coming he imputes it to the slacknesse and neglect of the
messengers.) In the Interim to give his me^ the more encouragement, he went
himself into the bottom amongst them, where ryding up and Down, he did in
their eyes, and with much ado entertained fight with the^ though the Ennemie
encroached and got ground upon him. At his first coming into the bottom he
was shot through his leg, and a quarter of an hour after, he got an other
shot through the thigh of the same leg, which he never complained of, nor so
much as thought upon a Chirurgian, for he knew if he left that place his men
would instantly quail, he therefore choose rather (not being used to have his
troops foiled) to try the uttermost cast, and not to show them the way to
fly, hoping still for the coming of the Frizons, and the Horse which he had
sent for, but have was so small, that his men being overlayd with numbers they
forsook the place, not withstanding he did his best endeavor to have stayed
them, hasting along the Sands to our Cannon, and the Ennemie following them
hard, he was forced seeing them all go to retreat he with the last came of
easily and unwillingly (God knows) and as he went his Horse fell dead under
and upon him, having neither Officers, Gentlemen, or servants about him to give
him any help, Sr Robert Drurie by chance came, and a Gentleman a servant of
his called Higham (and Sr John Ogle) drew him from under his Horse, and set
him up behind his Master, which help came very seasonable for him, the
Ennemie being so near at hand, when he fell, and so by this means he was
saved out of their clutches, from thence he rode to our Ordnance, where finding
his brother Sr Horace Vere, and most of the Officers that came thither with
some 300 Foot, he made them stand from before the mouth of the Ordnance,
(which were laden with Musket Bullets) and willed the Cannoniers to discharge
upon the Ennemie, which swarmed now upon the Sand, the Canon being discharged
made a great slaughter and lane among the Ennemies Horse and Foot.

At the same instant his Excie sent two Cornets of Horse to him, namely, his
own commanded by Captain Ball, and General Vere his own troop commanded
by his Captain Pembroke, who coming thither, he willed them to give them a
charge, and withal gave order to his brother Sr Horace Vere to advance with
his foot, and send the Ennemy packing. This small number of Horse and foot
gathered together on a sudden, gave a great charge: for the Ennemie in hope
of victory followed us closse, and being upon the Sands, where horse might
come to serve, they were soon routed, and cut in pieces, the rest saved
themselves by flight, as they could in the Downs. Our men both Horse and Foot
followed them closse at the heels. Their Battles where their Ensigns
remained, began then to stir, and rouse up themselves, rather for their
defense, then to revenge their fellows for they advanced not a whitt. Our men
from the topp of the hills (who had kept their places from the beginning) had
by this means a fair mark to shoot at powered whole volleis of shot upon
them. Our English Officers and Soldiers on all hands, took new courage and
came up to fight, and their battailions being very small, and thin, by reason
of the men that had bin sent from the^ to maintayn the fight, especially their
shot (which in these uneven places were of most service) were well pelted with
our shot. Our men then pressing hard upon the^ made the^ give back: His Excie
the^ (seeing the Victory inclyning on our side) caused the Battle to advance,
and his Horsemen to make a charge upon the Ennemies. Upon which sight the
Ennemie (without attending any more blows was routed, and chased out of the
field. In the last charge Sr Francis Vere followed not: for seeing the success
upon the Sands, and knowing that his directions in the prosecution of the
Victory would be executed, he easily gessed that the works of that day were
at an end, and therefore began to take care, and provide for himself, who all
this while having bin undressed, the blood leakeing from him at four holes,
together with a dangerous disease that had held him long made him extreme
weak and faint.

Our men followed the execution hard, even into the Moorish grounds, as far
as the Damme, slew many of the Ennemy, and took a great many prisonners, among
the rest in the first charge Captain Ball, took Jasper Sapena before
mentioned prisonner, and one of General Veres Company took Don Jews de
Villari Maestro del Campo prisoner. The battle lasted above three hours in
suspense, with the effusion of much blood on both sides, sometimes the one
side, otherwhiles on the other gayning, or loosing of ground. The Archduke
himself escaped very narrowly, loosing in this battle as well slain, as
prisonners the most part of the Chiefes, and Captains of his Army, and the
Principal, Lords, Nobles, and Servants of his Court, as these prisoners. Don
Francisco de Mendoza, Admirant of Arragon, Count Sol^^^, Don Jews de Villars
Coronell. Don Jews d'Avilla. Don Petro De Mendoza. Count Charles Rezin his
Highness page, Doctor Andrew his Highness Ph^an. Don Jasper Maragon. 35.
Horse and Foot Companies, Lieute Lieutenants, Sariants, Dons, and Willeroes,
and others of note, to the number of 309. likewise his Excie got eight pieces
of Ordinance and the two we had lost in the morning, most of their Ammunition,
and Baggage, the furniture belonging to his highness Chamber, and Cabinett,
his seal of arms, a hundred and six colors besides some Cornets. There
were slain of the Archdukes side dead upon the place where the Battle was
fought some five thousand, besides those that were slain upon the execution
and dyed afterward upon their hurts, the greatest blow falling upon the
Spaynards, and Italians, who ventred most, and were fleshed with the morning
Victory. His Excie with those that were lost in the morning had slain
between two and three thousand, whereof the greatest loss fell upon the
English, having some 800 of them slain and hurt. Seven English Captains were
slain in the field, Captain Yaxely, Hunniewood, Tyrrill, Duxborrow, Pirton,
and Woodward, Sr Francis Vere himself and all the rest of the Captains (but
two) hurt, and the most part of the inferior Officers either slain or hurt.
There were also three of our horse Captains slain, three French Captains a
Walloon Captain, and a Dutch Captain, besides diverse Lieutenants, Ensigns,
and Sariants.

Night coming on, his Excie marched with his Victorious Army to the Church of
Westend, where he quartered that night, the Admirant of Arragon, and some
others of their Commanders being at supper with the Prince (because the Ennemie
had bragged heretofore) that our men were good Spade-men, but durst not fight a
set battle in the field, asked the Admirant, and some of the Spanish Dons,
and Commandadours, what they thought now of our Fresh Water Soldiers and
whether they had not proved themselves in this days actio^ as good swordmen,
as spade-me^, whereat the Admirant and the Dons smiled, but the Admirant among
other Grave and wise speeches which came from him, complained much that their
own Horse had played the Iades, and had not done their best endeavor, which
if they had done, their foot which charged bravely, might have become master
of our Ordnance, Commending Prince Maurice much (of blessed memory) that he
had managed and husbanded the lives of his men so sparingly, against so great
an Army of old beaten Soldiers, wheaeas they brought their men to fight by
Phalenges and gross bodies, which was the cause that our men brook and
routing them it breed such a confusion which caused their overthrow, and thus
much briefly of the Battle of Nieuport, fought Anno 1600.


