PRAYERS OF Intercession FOR THEIR Use who Mourn in Secret, FOR THE Public
Calamities OF THIS NATION.

WITH An Anniversary Prayer for the 30th of January.

Very Necessary and Useful in Private Families, as well as in Congregations. By
Jo. Huit, D. D.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.

Prayers of Intercession for their Use who Mourn in Secret for the Public
Calamities of this Nation.
A Preparatory Prayer.
O Lord, I find in that Book of thine which cannot deceive me; that the oftener
thy Servant Abraham prayed to thee, the more he got ground upon thee, and came
at last to that holy Confidence, as not only to pray to thee for himself; but
to be importunate, and press thee in the behalf of others.

Lord, I confess my Case is different; for Abraham was the Father of the
Faithful; but I am not worthy to be reckoned among his Children: He had the
Honor to be called thy Friend; but my Sins have been such, that (unless thy
Mercy interveen) may make thee look upon me as thine Enemy. He prayed unto thee
for a People, of whose Sins he was no Partaker; But my Address is to thee, for
them, in whose Iniquities I am involved, and have some way or other deeply
contributed to the hastening and bringing down those terrible Judgments of
thine, which now lie so heavy upon us: So that alas! I am unworthy to appear
before thee, for my self; and how shall I dare to supplicate thee for others.

O that there were a Moses, to stand in the Gap to turn away thy wrathful
Indignation from us! O that there were a David! a Daniel! or a Jeremiah! to
pour out their Souls before thee: yet hear me, O my God; for though these holy
Saints of thine have now no being upon Earth; yet their Prayers remain upon
Record, for every Soul that mourns in secret to make use of.

O Holy and Blessed Spirit! kindle but the same fervency in my Heart (while I
repeat their Words) as was in them, and I know I shall be heard.

King David's Prayers for the Church and People.
The First Prayer.
O God! wherefore art thou absent from us so long? or, why is thy Wrath so hot
against the Sheep of thy Pasture?

O think upon thine Inheritance, whom thou have purchased, and redeemed of old!

Lift up thy Feet, that thou may utterly destroy every Enemy that has done
evil in thy Sanctuary.

For behold! they break down all the carved Work thereof with Axes and Hammers.

Yea, they have said in their Hearts, let us make havoc of them altogether:
and thus have they designed to ruin all the Houses of God in the Land.

But, O God! how long shall the Adversary do this Dishonor? How long shall the
Enemy blaspheme thy Name? for ever.

Arise, O God! maintain thine own Cause, remember how the foolish Man
blasphemeth thee daily.

But O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle Dove into their hands; for the
Presumption of them that hate thee, increases more and more.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.
The Second Prayer.
O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy People that prays?

How long will thou feed us with the Bread of Tears, and give us Plenteousness
of Tears to drink?

O turn us again; thou God of Hosts! show us the Light of thy Countenance, and
we shall be whole.

Remember that thou did once plant a Vine among us, and when it had taken
root, it filled the Land.

Our Hills were covered with the Shadow of it, and the Boughs were like the
goodly Cedar Trees.

But now thou have broken down her hedge, so that all they that go by, pluck
off her Grapes.

The wild Bore of the Wood does root it up; and the Beasts of the Field devour
it.

Yet turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, show us the Light of thy Countenance,
and we shall be whole.

For we will not go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon thy
Name.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make have to help us.
The Third Prayer.
HOld not thy tongue, O God, keep not still silence, refrain not thy self, O
God.

For lo thine Enemies make a murmuring; and they that hate thee, have lifted up
their Head.

They have imagined craftily against thy People, and have taken counsel against
thy sacred Ones.

Behold! they have cast their Heads together with one consent, and are
confederate against thee.

They have said, come and let us root them out, that they may be no more a
People, and that their Name may be no more in remembrance.

They come daily round about us like Water; and compass us together on every
side.

But, O my God! make them like unto a Wheel; and as the stubble before the Wind.

Who say, let us take unto our selves the Houses of God in possession.

O make their faces ashamed! O Lord, that they may seek thy Name.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.
The Fourth Prayer.
O God thou have cast us out, and scattered us abroad; thou have been
displeased at us: O turn thee unto us again.

Thou have moved the Land, and divided it, O heal the Sores thereof; for it
shakes.

Thou have shown thy People heavy things, and given us a drink of deadly Wine.

Thou have made us turn our backs upon our Enemies, so that they which hate us,
spoil our goods.

Thou make us to be rebuked of our Neighbors, to be laughed to scorn, and to
be had in derision of them that are round about us.

But though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee, nor behave our
selves frowardly in thy Covenant.

Our Heart is not turned back; nor our steps gone out of thy way.

No not when thou have smitten us into the Place of Dragons; and covered us
with the shadow of death.

Up Lord! why sleep thou? awake, and be not absent from us for ever.

But, O! wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our misery and trouble.

For our Soul is brought low, even unto the dust; and our belly cleaves to the
grave.

Arise, help us and deliver us for thy mercy sake.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make have to help us.
King David's Tears.
O My God why have thou forsaken thine anointed and art displeased with him?

For lo! thou have broken the Covenant of thy Servant, and cast his Crown to
the ground.

Thou have overthrown all his hedges, and broken down his strong holds.

So that all they that go by spoil him; and he is become a Rebuke to his
Neighbors.

For thou have set up the right hand of his Enemies, and made all his
Adversaries to rejoice.

Thou have put out his Glory, and cast his Throne down to the Ground.

The Days of his Youth have thou seasoned with bitterness, and covered him with
dishonor.

But Lord, how long will thou hide thy self for ever? And shall thy Wrath still
burn like Fire.

Remember, O Lord, the rebuke that thy Servant has; and how he does bear in
his Bosom the rebukes of many People?

And let his Adversaries be clothed with shame: But upon his Head let his
Crown flourish.

O help him against his Enemies! for Vain is the help of Man.

O God make speed to save him.
O Lord make have to help him.
Jeremiah's Lamentations Prophetical of these times.
HOW has the Lord covered us with a Cloud in his Anger? And cast down from
Heaven unto the Earth, the beauty of our Israel; and remembered not his
Footstool in the Day of his Wrath?

For lo! he has bent his Bow as an Enemy; he has swallowed us up, and has
not pitied; he has made desolate the Kingdom, and the Princes thereof.

He has cast off his Altars, and abhorred his Sanctuary; and has given into
the Hands of the Enemies, the Walls of his Pillars.

He has caused our solemn Feasts, and Sabbaths to be forgotten; and has
despised in his Indignation the King and the Priest.

For the Lord has now accomplished his fury, he has poured out his fierce
anger; he has kindled such a fire in Sion, as has devoured the Palaces
thereof.

For the Sins of the Prophets, and the Iniquity of the Priests who have shed
the Blood of the Just in the midst of her.

For the Breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, has been taken in
their Pits; of whom we said, under his shadow we shall live in Peace.

But we have transgressed, and have rebelled, and thou have not pardoned.

And therefore our Eyes have as yet failed us in our vain help: for in our
watching we have watched for a Nation, that could not save us.

Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou have done this?

O Lord, thou have seen his wrong; judge thou his Cause.

Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their imaginations against him.

Thou have heard their Reproach, O Lord! and all their imaginations against him.

The Lips of those that are risen up against him, and their devices against him
all the Day.

O God make speed to save him.
O Lord make haste to help him.
The Second Prayer.
REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us? consider and behold our reproach.

For our Inheritance is turned unto Strangers; our Houses to Aliens; our Necks
are under Persecution; we labor and have no rest.

Our Fathers have sinned, and are not; we have born our Iniquities.

The Servants rule over us; and there is none to deliver us out of their hands.

Our Elders have ceased from the gate; and our young Men from their Music.

The Joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning.

For the Crown is fallen from our Head; and woe unto us that we have sinned.

For this our Heart is faint, for these Things our eyes are dim.

But wherefore do thou forget us for ever? and forsakest us so long time.

O turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our Days as of
old.

And do not utterly reject us; be not for ever wrath against us.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.
Daniel's Prayer and Confession, in the behalf of himself and his People.
O Lord, the great and dreadful God! we have sinned and done wickedly; and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy Judgments.

Neither have we hearkened to thy Servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name
to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and all the People of this Land.

O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us Confusion of face as at
this day; unto all that are near and far off through all the Countries, whether
thou have driven them, because of the trespass that they have trespassed
against thee.

For we have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God, and therefore the Curse
is poured out upon us.

Even such a Curse, as that under the whole Heaven has not been done to us.

But now, O Lord our God, according to all thy Righteousness; I beseech thee,
let thine anger, and thy fury be turned away from us.

Hear the Prayer of thy Servant, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
Sanctuary, which is now desolate.

O my God, incline thine ear, and hear, open thine eyes, and behold our
Desolation.

For I do not present these Supplications before thee for mine own
Righteousness, but for thy great Mercies.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord do, delay not, for thine own sake, O my
God, and for thy Peoples sake that are called by thy Name.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.
Prayers for the KING.
The First Prayer.
LOrd, remember our distressed King and all his troubles. Let thy hand hold him
fast, and thine arm strengthen him.

Let not the Enemy be able to do him violence, or the Son of Wickedness hurt
him.

Let thy Truth and Mercy be ever with him, and in thy Name let his Throne be
exalted.

O be thou his Father, his God, and his strong Salvation.

And let him be as thy first born, and glorious among the Kings of the Earth.

O God make speed to save him.
O Lord make haste to help him.
The Second Prayer.
O Most Powerful Lord God, the only Disposer of all the Kings and Kingdoms on
the Earth, who for the Punishment of the crying Sins of this Nation, have
extinguished our Glory, and cast the Throne down to the ground: Give us not
over utterly to Ruin and Confusion, but bring back yet in thy good time the
Heir of these Kingdoms, like the Sun with healing in his Wings, to repair the
Breaches already made, and prevent the Desolations that threaten us.

And however thou have been pleased to cast a Cloud upon him in the morning of
his Days, yet leave him not in this Storm; forsake him not, thou that art the
God of his Salvation, but look upon his Wrongs and have compassion on his
Innocence and Suffering.

O let it never be in the Power of Man to bar him from the Throne, to which by
his Birth thou have designed him; but guide him with those Councils, and
prosper him with that Success, as may settle him in his Throne in Peace.

Or if the Guilt and Wickedness of his Opposers shall still continue to hinder
this, do it after thine own way, O God with thy mighty Hand and stretched out
Arm, that they may both know and feel that Thou art the Protector of Kings, and
the Refuge of them who have no other Trust but in Thee, grant this, O God, for
the Glory of thy Name, and the Comfort of thy desolate Church and People, Amen.

The Third Prayer.
O Most Merciful God, the only Sanctuary of sad and distressed Souls, look
down, I beseech thee upon thy Servant, who here with bended Knees and a wounded
Spirit prostrate my self before thee; for woe unto us, we have lived to see the
Crown fallen from our Heads, and the Glory departed from our Israel; even the
anointed of the Lord driven to fly before wicked Men, and they who have divided
his Inheritance, triumphing over him.

But thou, O Lord, how long shall bloody Designs and Rebellious Imaginations
prosper? Shall not the Judge of the whole Earth do right? Or have thou forgot
to be gracious? and shut up thy tender Mercy in Displeasure?

O no, thou art the same God, who in the midst of Judgment remembers Mercy;
Thine Arm is not shortened, that thou can not save; nor thine Ears heavy that
thou can not hear. Arise thou, O God, arise; let the World see that thou art
the Father of the Fatherless, and Helper of them to right that suffer wrong.
Show it, O Lord, especially at this time in multiplying all thy Comforts on our
distressed King. And as thou have strangely and wonderfully delivered him from
those, who so eagerly hunted after his Life, so let it appear to the World,
that thou have not done this to make him the more miserable, or to continue him
in the condition of an Exile; but rather, that thou have reserved him for
faithfuller Hands and fairer Opportunities, and more prosperous Successes: And
though this were not the time, nor this the means, by which thou had designed
to restore the Kingdom to him; yet that thou have not yet forsaken him, but
that he is still in thy Care, still under the Shadow of thy Wings, who alone
art able to do more for him than we can pray for; and gloriously to bring him
back again by ways we cannot think of. In the mean time, O Lord, whilst thou
think fit to keep him under the sharpness of this Discipline, teach him to
kiss the Hand that chastens him, and humbly to submit his Earthly Crown to thy
divine Will and Pleasure; as knowing that thou can, either restore him that
(when it seems good to thee) or give a Crown infinitely more glorious, which no
Man can take from him.

Lord, he is more precious to thee, than he can be possibly to us; dispose of
him therefore, in the Multitude of thy Mercies; and let thy holy Spirit take so
full Possession of him and Guidance, that among all the Difficulties of his
most perplexed Affairs, he may constantly continue his Duty toward thee, and
live and dye thy faithful Servant in Jesus Christ, Amen.

A LITANY of Intercession.
Preparatory Ejaculations to precede the LITANY.
O That thou would hear me, O God! that thou would so prepare my Heart,
that thou may hear me!

That thou would hear me yet once more, though I am but Dust and Ashes!

That thou would hear me for all those, whom by the bonds of Duty, of
Charity or Affection, I am bound to pray for.

O Lord, hear my Prayers.
And let my Cry come unto thee
The LITANY.
THat it may please thee, O God, to bless the whole Catholick-Church of thy Son
Christ; and as it has been planted in his Death, and watered with his Blood;
so it may be still nourished by his Sacraments, and governed by his Word; that
the Uncharitableness of Men may not make the Rents and Divisions of it wider,
and that howsoever we may differ in the Superstructions, the Foundation of
Christian Faith may never be cast down.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee, to look
compassionately on this persecuted Part of thy Church, now driven from thy
public Altars, into Corners and secret Closets; that thy Protection may be
over us, wherever we shall be scattered, and a Remnant preserved amongst us,
by whom thy Name may be glorified, and thy Sacraments administered, and the
Souls of thy Servants kept up upright, in the midst of a corrupting and of a
corrupted Generation.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to be gracious to
Him, who was once designed by thee to be the Nursing Father of this thy Church;
but for the Sins both of Priests and People, is now cast out, as an
unprofitable Branch; and that in thy due time, thou would deal with him
according to the Innocence of his Person, and Justice of his Cause.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to comfort him in
the sadness of his Spirit, and guide him in the Perplexities of his Mind, and
support him in streights and necessities of his Fortunes: To raise him Friends
abroad, to convert or confound the Hearts of his Enemies at home; To do some
mighty Thing for him, which I in particular know not how to pray for; and by
the secret Windings and powerful workings of thy Providence, to make the Stone,
which these foolish Builders have refused, the head stone of the corner.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to preserve him with
an unspotted Soul, and an unshaken Faith, and that no Splendour of any Earthly
Crown may so dazzle him, as to make him forget either himself or thee; or to do
any unworthy thing to lose that Heavenly Crown, which thou have prepared for
him, and nothing but his Sins is able to keep from him.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to show mercy to the
Queen, his Mother, the Dukes his Brethren in exile with him, and the rest of
that scattered and oppressed Family; to guide them with thy Counsels, to defend
them by thy Power, to provide for them in thy mercy; and to make them in their
several ways Instruments of thy Glory, and our Happiness.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to deal graciously
with that Remnant of the loyal Nobility, and all others of that ruined Side;
who have chosen rather to suffer in thy Cause, than to participate with the
Sins of a more successful Party.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to spread the wings
of thy Protection over all those, whom thou have made near or dear unto me, to
preserve them safe in Body and Soul, from the Snares of their Enemies, and the
Iniquities of the times, that no Sin may lay waste their Consciences, nor Evil
come near their Dwellings.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to recompense all
those whom thou have raised to be Instruments of any good to me; such as have
taken care of my Soul, and instructed me in the way to Heaven; such as have
counseled me when I have gone astray; supplied me in my wants, comforted me in
my heaviness, and have had that high Charity for me, as to reprove me when I
have sinned.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to let the Day
spring from on high shine upon all those that sit in Darkness, and in the
shadow of Death; who either do not know thy Name; or knowing it are carried by
strong Delusions into the ways of Error and false Persuasion.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to confirm those,
who as yet stand fast on the Foundations of thy holy Truth; that neither the
Persecution of the Church, in which they were baptized; nor the Tentations of
the Times, nor the Snares of cunning Men, who watch all advantages, may make
them fall from their first Faith, and miserably wander after their own
Imaginations.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to comfort and raise
up those weak and dejected Spirits, which are ready to sink under the burden of
a troubled or affrighted Conscience; that as thou have showed them their Sins,
and the Punishments due for them; so thou would show them their Savior, and
by directing them, to lay hold upon his Cross; keep them from a final and
everlasting Shipwreck.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to hear the Groans
and Cries of all that are afflicted, either outwardly or inwardly; in Body or
Soul; especially such who being oppressed for Conscience sake, have no Place to
fly unto, nor no Man cares for their Souls.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to listen
compassionately to the deep sighing of the Prisoners, and by thy mighty Power,
to deliver such, who for obeying thee and a good Conscience, are or shall be
designed to Death or Ruin.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to soften the Hearts
of all unrighteous Judges, who now have the Power over us; and to make them
know with trembling, that there is a Judge higher than they.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to forgive all who
more particularly are Enemies to me or mine; all that have any way traduced or
slandered me; even to turn their hearts, and to extend thy Charity to them in
all those degrees of mercy, which I desire may be shown to my own Soul.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. That it may please thee to hear all those
Servants of thine, who either have the Charity to pray for me, or desire my
Prayers for them; but above all, that it may please thee to hear the Prayers of
thy Son Jesus Christ, who now sits gloriously on thy right hand, to intercede
both for me and them.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake. O Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my Cry come
unto thee.

O Lord, Pardon my Prayer, and let not my Sins, and my Unworthiness interpose
between thy Mercy-seat and me, Amen, Amen.

A Prayer for the Church.
ALmighty and Everlasting God; who only workest great marvels, show the Riches
of thy Goodness to thy desolate and persecuted Church, that now sits mourning
in her own Dust and Ruins; torn by Schism, and stripped and spoiled by
Sacrilege. And thou, who after long Captivity did bring back thy People to
rebuild their Temple, look upon us with the same Eyes of mercy.

Restore us once again the public Worship of thy Name, the reverent
Administrations of thy Sacraments; raise up the former Government both in
Church and State, that we may no longer be without King, without Priest,
without God in the World; but may once more enter into thy Courts with Praise,
and serve thee with that Reverence, that Unity and Order, as may be acceptable
in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for the Queen Mother, and the Royal Progeny.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all Goodness, we humbly beseech thee to be
gracious to the Queen Mother, to comfort her in her sad Afflictions, and to
direct her Ways and Counsels, as may conduce to the settling of her Posterity
here in Peace; enlarge thy Blessings on all the Branches of the Royal Family:
Those that are driven to fly for Refuge into Foreign Parts, take them all into
thy Care; cover them under thy Wings, and in thy due time make them so many
Instruments of thy Glory, and our Happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

A Prayer for the Afflicted.
O Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, the only Sanctuary and Refuge for those
that are in Misery and Trouble; hear, I beseech thee, the Groans and Cries of
all that are afflicted outwardly or inwardly; in Body or Mind; especially such,
who suffer in a righteous Cause; whose Loyalty has been more dear unto them
than their Fortunes; and a good Conscience more than their Lives.

Consider them, O God, in their several Extremities, whether at home or abroad,
comfort them in their Distresses, supply them in their Wants: Let the sorrowful
sighing of all that are oppressed come before thee, and by the greatness of thy
Power, preserve thou those that are appointed to dye.

Convert and soften the hard Hearts of their implacable Enemies, and assuage
their thirst of Blood, which still cries more and more; or if thou otherwise
have decreed to bring any more of us through the red Sea, into the Land of
Promise, prepare us for this Passage, and guide us by thy Blessed Spirit, through
the Shadows of Death, continue our Christian Courage and Constancy to the
utmost; strengthen our Faith, confirm our Hope, and let our Charity overflow
even to the forgiving of them, by whose unjust Sentence we perish; that so
dying in thy Peace, we may enter into the Joys prepared for us, through the
Mediation of our Savior, who has gone the same way before us, even Jesus
Christ the Righteous, Amen.

Psalm 10. Verse 1. Why stand thou so far off, O Lord; and hidest thy Face
in the needful Time of Trouble?

Psalm 8. Verse 1, 2, 3. Lord, how are they increased that trouble us, many are
they that rise up against us, many there be that say of our Souls, there is no
Help for them in their God.

But thou, O Lord, art our Defender, thou art our Worship, and the Lifter up of
our Head.

Jeremiah 10. Verse 24. Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy Judgment, not in thy
Fury, lest we should be consumed and brought to nothing.

Psalm 130. Verse 3. If thou will be extreme to mark what is done amiss; O
Lord! who may abide it?

A Prayer.
O Thou most blessed Judge Eternal! We the unworthiest and sinfullest of all
the Children of Men, that have so long abused and profaned thy Mercies,
provoked thy Judgments, unsheathed thy glittering Sword, forced all the Arrows
and Darts out of thy Quiver, and with our multiplied, abominable crying Sins,
brought down a Desolation on a most pleasant Land; that former delight of
thine, the Glory of all Lands: We, that after thy Wrath was poured out upon us,
have yet further increased our Sins, as thou have increased the Weight and
Number of thy Judgments on us, and walked most unprofitably and obdurately
under all thy Discipline and Visitations, suffered all thy precious Methods of
reducing us, thy Admonitions and thy Stripes to be utterly lost and frustate
amongst us: And now the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree, and above all, the
Sword of Violence died with the Blood of thine Anointed among us, and with
that, all the bloody Presages, that we cannot without Horror, but apprehend a
final utter Vastation threatened to a long flourishing Church and Monarchy; are
yet so far still from bringing forth meet Fruits of Repentance, that we have
not as yet attained to any degree of Sight, or Sense, or Acknowledgment of our
Estate; much less to a hearty Humiliation or Contrition before thee, for those
Sins that have fetched down this Vengeance upon us: We do now at length, in the
Bitterness of our Souls, most heartily desire to cast down our selves prostrate
before thee, to put our Hands upon our Mouths, and our Mouths in the Dust, and
acknowledge all Honor and Glory to be due to thee, whatsoever becomes of us,
though it be in the Shame, and Confusion, and Condemnation both of our Bodies and
Souls.

This is our only Portion, O Lord; this is the mildest that we have reason to
expect to receive from thy Judgments, in Retribution to our Sins; and
whatsoever is less than this, whatsoever the Bitterness of our Cup in this
Life, though thou should cast us into the Place of Dragons, and give us to
drink of the Wine of Astonishment, the most stupifying deadly Potion: If thou
should number us all to the Sword, or pour out thy Fire and Brimstone upon
us; yet if by this chastning of us here, thou please to rescue us from that
sadder Doom of being condemned with the World; this is a most inestimable Mercy
of thine, beyond all that we have hitherto so unworthily enjoyed. O Lord, we
desire and profess to acquit thy Justice in thy Proceedings, to admire thy
Patience and Long-suffering, to adore the infinite Bounty of thy Goodness
toward us, that we have not been as Admah and Zeboim, as Sodom and Gomorrah!
that we have had this Day the Liberty to approach unto thee: O Lord, if it may
at length be thy good Pleasure to come home to every of our Souls, to strike
our Hearts, to break up this fallow Ground of ours; that all thy precious Seed
be no longer so cast away among Thorns, and by the Power of thy mighty
controuling Spirit, that thou will once subdue all the Resistances of our
Spirits, against this most just, most holy, most reasonable Motion of
Humiliation within us; O Lord, this is the one earnest desire of our Souls,
that has cast us this Day low before thy Footstool, with Cries and Tears, and
earnest Groans; that thou will have mercy upon us, that thou will thus
powerfully reveal thy self unto us, who have thus long smitten and
importunately called unto us; that being at last returned unto thee, in
Confession of our Sins and Confusion of Face, we may be capable of thy Return
to us, of the further Impressions of thy Grace; and never more contradict,
quench, or grieve that Holy Spirit of thine, which has so long wrestled and
contended with us; That so at length, it may be seasonable with thee to give us
the Comfort of thy Help again; and the Confidence to approach thy Presence, to
praise that Majesty, that has not cast out our Prayers, nor turned his Mercy
from us: To whom we desire to ascribe all Honor, and Glory, and Power, and
Praise, now and for ever, Amen.

A Confession of Sins.
O Lord, great and wonderful God, keeping Covenant and Mercy to them that love
thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments: We have sinned with our
Forefathers; We, our Kings, our Priests, and our Nobles, and all the People of
the Land, and have rebelled even by departing from thy Precepts and thy
Judgments.

By our impious and godless Thoughts of thee, our Confidence in the Arm of
Flesh, by placing our Affections too much upon earthly things, by neglecting to
love and delight in thee, by presuming of thy Mercies; and yet continuing in
our Sins, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness
belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By our want of Reverence to thy Service, not considering the Awfulness of thy
Presence, and the Honor due to thee in thy House, by our formal and
hypocritical Worship, by open Profanation and Sacrilege; by shows and
pretenses of Piety, to cover our worldly and wicked Designs; we have provoked
and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By vain and rash Oaths, Blasphemies and Perjuries; especially, our careless
Breaches of Oaths, made to our Sovereign, forgetting that such are the Oaths of
God; and that thou thy self in a more especial manner, art a strict Avenger of
them by our Execrations of our Selves and Brethren, and our Enemies; we have
provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But
unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By our undervaluing thy public Service, and neglecting to bear a Part in it,
by mispending of that time, either there or elsewhere, in wanton or worldly
Thoughts and Employments, and not keeping the Spiritual Sabbath unto thee, in
serving thee truly all the Days of our Life, [By not duly observing the Times
of Festivity or Fasting, appointed by just Authority, according to the Example
of thy People in all Ages] we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord,
Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By not duly acknowledging thine Ordinance and Authority, or the Persons of our
Superiors, by speaking evil of Dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy
People, by groundless Jealousies and Suspicions, and misjudging and censuring
their Actions, and at last proceeding to that highest and most horrible Pitch
of Violation of that Image of thine imprinted on them, by being as a People
that strive with their Priest, by not obeying those that have Rule over us, and
not submitting our selves to them, who by Appointment watch over our Souls, by
neglecting the Care of those committed to our Charge, not correcting those
Sins, which cried loud for exemplary Punishment; we have provoked and rebelled
against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of
Face, as at this Day.

By rash Anger and Malice, Hatred and Revenge, and the bloody Effects thereof;
by uncharitable Contentions and Divisions, Factions and Animosities, by
Cruelties, Unmercifulness, and communicating in the Sins of Blood; we have
provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But
unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By the manifold Sins of Uncleanness, by seeking or not avoiding the occasions
thereof, by Idleness, Intemperance and Drunkenness, by immodest Words and
Gestures, by our shameless boasting or not blushing at those Sins, we have
provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But
unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By Theft, Rapines, and Oppression; by vexatious Suits so much practiced and
countenanced; by Exactions, by unjust Gains in bargaining, by defrauding the
Labourer of his Hire, by want of due Care in expending what we have, and a good
Conscience in acquiring more, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O
Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this
Day.

By Lying, Detraction, and contumely by censuring and rash Judgments, by false
Witness, and perverting the course of Justice, we have provoked and rebelled
against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of
Face, as at this Day.

By Desire of Change and Uncontentedness in our Estates, by giving our selves
over to lustful, covetous and inordinate Affections, by desire of Peace, not so
much for thine own Honor, or the public Good, as the Satisfaction of our own
private Lusts, by neglecting Acts of Charity, and doing as we would be done
unto, and not doing our Duty in that State of Life, unto the which it has
pleased thee to call us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord,
Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian Duties of Humiliation and
godly Sorrow for Sins, of due Indignation and Revenge upon our selves for them,
of confessing and forsaking of Restitution and Satisfaction to others, and by
not bringing forth Fruits worthy of Repentance; we have provoked and rebelled
against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of
Face, as at this Day.

By Impatience under thy correcting Hand, by not endeavoring our Amendment by
it, in reflecting upon our Sins, as the Causes of it, by despising thy
Chastisements, in not rejoicing in Tribulations, and not glorifying thee that
have counted us worthy to suffer for Righteousness sake; we have provoked and
rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By fretting our selves because of the ungodly, and being envious at the evil
doers, by not loving our Enemies, not blessing them that curse us, not doing
good to them that hate us, not praying for those that despitefully use us, and
persecute us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness
belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By presuming to do evil that good may come thereon, by placing Piety in
Opinions, by straining at Gnats and swallowing of Camels, by scrupling at
Things indifferent, and making no Conscience of known Sins, we have provoked
and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By running into open Profaneness, under Color of avoiding Superstition; by
guiding our Conscience by Humors, Fancies, and not by the certain Rules of thy
Law; by having itching Ears, and heaping to our selves Teachers, and by having
Men's Persons in Admiration because of advantage; we have provoked and rebelled
against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of
Face, as at this Day.

By our unreformed continuing in our former Sins, since thy heaviest Judgments
came out against us, our not melting, not turning to thee in Humiliation and
Contrition, and Change of Life, or not preparing to meet our God, when he is
come out in Fury against us, we have provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at
this Day. By those open or secret, but still unmortified crying Sins of a
wretched People, which have so enraged a long suffering God, as to deliver up
our Glory, the Joy of our Hearts, and the Breath of our Nostrils, into the
Power and Malice of bloody Men, to be assaulted with a Rage that reaches up to
Heaven, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness
belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By our fatal Stupidity, under this Vengeance of thine, our Want of Zeal, of
Courage, of a due Detestation of so vile an Enterprise, our not confessing of
thee, when we have been most signally called unto it; we have provoked and
rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By bowing our Shoulders to bear, and crouching down with Issachar under our
Burdens, because the Land is pleasant, and Rest seemed good unto us, by not
putting out our selves, and restoring our Sovereign; but neglecting that Prize,
that thou wast pleased lately to put into our Hands, and forsaking our own
Mercy; we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness
belongs to thee, But unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By our too much Formality and Coldness in our Devotion, by being wearied at
the Return of our Days of Humiliation, and secretly repining at the length and
frequency of our Prayers, by honoring thee with our Lips, while our Hearts
have been far from thee; especially, we of this Family have provoked and
rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

By preferring Sacrifice before Obedience, and by holding fast our Iniquities,
and yet thinking to be heard for our much speaking; we have provoked and
rebelled against thee: O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, But unto us
Confusion of Face, as at this Day.

Who can tell, how often he offends? O cleanse thou us from our secret Sins!

Try us, O Lord God, and search the ground of our Hearts; prove and examine our
Thoughts, and look well if there be any other way of Wickedness in us, and lead
us in the way everlasting.

A Prayer.
O Almighty and most Merciful Father, who art the Lord, the Lord God, merciful
and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy
for Thousands, and forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sins. Look down upon
us with thy compassionate Eyes, who are here before thee in the Bitterness of
our Souls, and do now with troubled Spirits, with broken and contrite Hearts,
most humbly beg Pardon for these Multitude of our Offenses. Look, we humbly
beseech thee upon the Blood of thy Son, which speaks better Things than that
of Abel; for his sake, spare us Lord, spare thy People, that those Sins rise
not up against us; for his Passions sake, expose us not for a Prey to their
cruel Hands, who would both devour and deride us: Spare us Lord, spare thy
People, for the Glory of thy Name; O deliver us, and be merciful to all these
our Sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest only.
ALmighty God, our Heavenly Father, who of his great Mercy has promised
Forgiveness of Sins to all them, that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith,
turn unto him: Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your Sins,
confirm and strengthen you in all Goodness, and bring you to everlasting
Salvation, both of Body and Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Lord's Prayer.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, open thou our lips.


Answer. And our Mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Priest. O God make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord make have to help us.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


Answer. As it was in the beginning, etc.


A Prayer.
LOok down, O Lord, in the Bowels of thy Pity, and lend a tender ear to the
Voice of our Lamentation, our Adversaries are the chief, our Enemies prosper,
for thou have afflicted us, for the Multitude of our Transgressions, the Crown
is fallen from the Head, woe unto us, we have sinned!

O Lord, behold our Afflictions: For the Enemy has magnified himself. The
Adversary has spread out his Hand upon all our pleasant things, they have
entered into and profaned thy Sanctuary, they have seen us low and have mocked
at our Sabbaths; our solemn Feasts are become their Scorn, and our Devotion
their Derision: O Lord, behold our Afflictions; for the Enemy has magnified
himself.

Thou art become our Enemy, thou have destroyed our strong Holds, thou have
increased among us Mourning and Lamentation, because thou have despised in the
Indignation of thine Anger, the King and the Priest.

See, O Lord, and consider; for we are become very vile. The Yoke of our
Transgressions is bound by thy hand, they are wreathed and come upon our Necks;
thou have made our Strength to fail, thou have delivered us into their Hands,
from whom we are not able to rise up: Thou have trodden under Foot our mighty
Men, in the midst of us: Thou have called an Assembly to crush our young Men:
Thou have trodden us as in a Wine Press: Our Enemies hear of our Trouble, and
they are glad that thou have done it.

Behold, O Lord, for we are in Distress! Our Bowels are troubled, our Heart is
turned within us; for we have grivously rebelled; abroad the Sword devoureth,
at home there is Death; our Enemies have opened their Mouths against us, they
hiss and gnash their Teeth; they say we have swallowed them up; certainly, this
is the Day that we looked for, we have found it, we have seen it. Thus are we
in Derision all the Day long, we are become their Song, and their Music: O
Lord, behold our Afflictions; for the Enemy has magnified himself.

They have cried unto us, depart ye, ye are unclean; depart, depart, touch not;
yea, these Men have said, they shall no more sojourn here: O Lord, behold our
Afflictions; for the Enemy has magnified himself.

The Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is fallen into their
Pits, and slaughtered by their Hands; of whom yet we said under his Shadow we
shall live among the midst of these sad Distractions: O Lord, behold our
Afflictions; for the Enemy has magnified himself.

Thus do we call to mind our Afflictions, and our Miseries; the Wormwood and
the Gall, our Souls have them in Remembrance, and they are humbled in us; and
therefore have we hope, it is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed;
because his Compassions fails not: They are new every Morning; great is his
Faithfulness; for the Lord will not cast us off for ever, but though he cause
Grief, yet will he have Compassion, according to the Multitude of his Mercies;
for he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men: Glory be to
the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be World without end, Amen.



PSALM III.
A PSALM of David, when he fled from Absalom his Son: Or the Security of God's
Protection.

LORD, how are they increased that trouble me? Many are they that rise up
against me.

2. Many there be which say of my Soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.

3. But thou, O Lord, art a Shield for me; my Glory, and the lifter up of my
Head.

4. I cried unto the Lord with my Voice, and he heard me forth out of his holy
Hill. Selah.

5. I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.

6. I will not be afraid of Ten Thousands of People, that have set themselves
against me round about.

7. Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God: For thou have smitten all mine Enemies
upon the Cheek Bone: Thou have broken the Teeth of the ungodly.

8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord: Thy Blessing is upon thy People. Selah.

PSALM VII.
David prays against the Malice of his Enemies, professing his Innocence, 10.
by Faith he sees his Defense, and the Destruction of his Enemies.

O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust; save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me.

2. Lest he tear my Soul like a Lion, renting it in pieces, while there is none
to deliver.

3. O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be Iniquity in my Hands.

4. If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at Peace with me: (yea, I have
delivered him that without cause is mine Enemy)

5. Let the Enemy persecute my Soul, and take it, yea let him tread down my
Life upon the Earth, and lay mine Honor in the Dust. Selah.

6. Arise, O Lord, in thine Anger, lift up thy self because of the Rage of mine
Enemies; and awake for me to the Judgment that thou have commanded.

7. So shall the Congregation of the People compass thee about: For their Sakes
therefore return thou on high.

8. The Lord shall judge the People: Judge me, O Lord, according to my
Righteousness, and according to mine Integrity that is in me.

9. Oh let the Wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just:
For the Righteous God tries the Hearts and Reins.

10. My Defense is of God, which saves the upright in Heart.

11. God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every Day.

12. If he turn he will whet his Sword: He has bent his Bow and made it ready.

13. He has also prepared for him the Instruments of Death; he ordains his
Arrows against the Persecutors.

14. Behold, he travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived Mischief, and
brought forth Falsehood.

15. He made a Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he made.

16. His Mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own Pate.

17. I will praise the Lord according to his Righteousness, and will sing
Praise to the Name of the Lord most high.

PSALM XXVII.
1. David sustaineth his Faith by the Power of God. 4. By his Love to the
Service of God. 9. By Prayer.

THE Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?

2. When the Wicked, even mine Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my
Flesh, they stumbled and fell.

3. Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear; though
War should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

4. One Thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: That I may
dwell in the House of the Lord, all the Days of my Life, to behold the Beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

5. For in the time of Trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion; in the secret
of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock.

6. And now shall mine Head be lifted up above mine Enemies round about me:
Therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle Sacrifices of Joy, I will sing, yea, I
will sing Praises unto the Lord.

7. Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my Voice: Have mercy also upon me, and answer
me.

8. When thou said, Seek ye my Face, my Heart said unto thee, Thy Face Lord,
will I seek.

9. Hide not thy Face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou have
been my Help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.

11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine
enemies.

12. Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are
risen up against me, and such as breath out Cruelty.

13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living.

14. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord.

PSALM XLVI.
1. The Confidence the Church has in God. 8. An exhortation to behold it.

GOD is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2. Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be moved: and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

3. Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah.

4. There is a river, the streams thereof shall make glad the City of God: the
holy Place of the Tabernacle of the most high.

5. God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved; God shall help her, and
that right early.

6. The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved: he uttered his Voice, the Earth
melted.

7. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolation he has made in the
Earth.

9. He makes Wars to cease unto the end of the Earth: he breaks the Bow, and
cutteth the Spear in sunder, he burns the Chariot in the Fire.

10. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen, I
will be exalted in the Earth.

11. The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

PSALM LXXXIII.
1. A Complaint to God of the Enemies Conspiracies. 9. A Prayer against them
that oppress the Church.

KEEP not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be still, O God.

2. For lo, thine Enemies make a Tumult: and they that hate thee, have lift up
their Head.

3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy People, and consulted against
thy hidden ones.

4. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation: that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

5. For they have consulted together with one consent; they are confederate
against thee.

6. The Tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmaelites of Moab, and the Hagarens.

7. Gebal and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the Inhabitants of Tire.

8. Assure also is joined with them: they have helped the Children of Lot. Selah.

9. Do unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
Brook of Kison:

10. Which Perished at Endor: they became as dung for the Earth.

11. Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their Princes as
Zebah, and as Zalmunna.

12. Who said, let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession.

13. O my God, make them like a wheel: as the stubble before the Wind.

14. As the fire burns a Wood: and as the flame sets the mountains on fire;

15. So persecute them with thy tempest; and make them afraid with thy storm.

16. Fill their faces with shame: that they may seek thy Name, O Lord.

17. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to
shame and perish.

18. That Men may know, that thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH art the most high
over all the Earth.

PSALM LXXXVI.
1. David strengthens his Prayer by the conscience of his Religion. 5. By the
goodness and power of God. 11. He desires the continuance of former Grace. 14.
Complaining of the proud, he craveth some token of God's Goodness.

BOW down thine ear, O Lord hear me: For I am poor and needy.

2. Preserve my Soul, for I am holy: O thou my God save thy Servant that
trusts in thee.

3. Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

4. Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
Soul.

5. For, thou Lord, art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee?

6. Give ear, O Lord, unto my Prayer; and attend to the voice of my
Supplications.

7. In the Day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will answer me.

8. Among the Gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any
works like unto thy works.

9. All Nations, whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, O
Lord: and shall glorify thy Name.

10. For thou art great and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.

11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy Truth: unite my heart to fear
thy Name.

12. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify
thy Name for evermore.

13. For great is thy Mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my Soul from the
lowest Hell.

14. O God, the Proud are risen against me, and the Assemblies of violent Men
have sought after my Soul; and have not set thee before them.

15. But thou, O Lord art a God full of compassion, and gracious,
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy Strength unto thy
Servant, and save the Son of thine Handmaid.

17. Show me a Token for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed: Because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

The First Lesson proper for this Occasion, the Second of Samuel XV Chapter.
1. Absalom by fair Speeches and Courtesies, steals the Hearts of Israel. 7.
Under Pretense of a Vow, he obtains leave to go to Hebron, 10. He makes
there a great Conspiracy, 13. David, upon the News flies from Jerusalem, 19.
Ittai would not leave him, 24. Zadok and Abiathar are sent back with the Ark,
30. David and his Company go up Mount Olivet weeping, 31. He curses Ahitophels
Counsel, 32. Hushai is sent back with Instructions.

AND it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him Chariots and Horses,
and Fifty Men to run before him.

2. And Absalom rose up early and stood beside the way of the Gate: And it was
so, that when any Man that had a Controversy came to the King for Judgment,
then Absalom called unto him, and said, of what City art thou? And he said, Thy
Servant is of one of the Tribes of Israel.

3. And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right, but there
is no Man deputed of the King to hear thee.

4. Absalom said moreover, oh that I were made Judge in the Land, that every
Man which has any Suit or Cause might come unto me, and I would do him Justice.

5. And it was so, that when any Man came nigh to him, to do him obeisance, he
put forth his Hand, and took him and kissed him.

6. And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the King for
Judgment: So Absalom stole the Hearts of the Men of Israel.

7. And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said to the King, I
pray thee, let me go pay my Vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron.

8. For thy Servant vowed a Vow while I abode in Geshur in Syria, saying, if
the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord.

9. And the King said unto him, Go in Peace. So he arose and went to Hebron.

10. But Absalom sent Spies throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying, as
soon as ye hear the Sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigns
in Hebron.

11. And with Absalom went two hundred Men out of Jerusalem, that were called,
and they went in their Simplicity, and they knew not any thing.

12. And Absalom sent for Ahitophel the Gilonite, David's Counselor, from his
City, even from Giloh, while he offered Sacrifices: And the Conspiracy was
strong; for the People increased continually with Absalom.

13. And there came a Messenger to David, saying, the Hearts of the Men of
Israel are after Absalom.

14. And David said unto all his Servants that were with him at Jerusalem,
arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom: Make speed
to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the
City with the edge of the Sword.

15. And the Kings Servants said unto the King, Behold thy Servants are ready
to do whatsoever my Lord the King shall appoint.

16. And the King went forth, and all his Household after him, and the King left
Ten Women, which were Concubines, to keep the House.

17. And the King went forth, and all the People after him, and tarried in a
Place that was far off.

18. And all his Servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and
all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, Six Hundred Men which came after him
from Gath, passed on before the King.

19. Then said the King to Ittai the Gittite, wherefore go thou also with
us? Return to thy Place, and abide with the King: For thou art a Stranger, and
also an Exile.

20. Whereas thou came but yesterday, should I this Day make thee go up and
down with us; seeing I go whether I may, return thou, and take back thy
Brethren, Mercy and Truth be with thee.

21. And Ittai answered the King, and said, as the Lord lives, and as my Lord
the King lives, surely in what Place my Lord the King shall be, whether in
Death or Life, even there also will thy Servant be.

22. And David said to Ittai go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed
over, and all his Men, and all the little ones that were with him.

23. And all the Country wept with a loud Voice, and all the People passed
over: The King also himself passed over the Brook Kidion, and all the People
passed over, toward the way of the Wilderness.

24. And lo, Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing the Ark of
the Covenant of God, and they set down the Ark of God; and Abiathar went up
until all the People had done passing out of the City.

25. And the King said unto Zadok, carry back the Ark of God into the City: If
I shall find favor in the Eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show
me both it, and his Habitation.

26. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold, here am I, let him
do to me as seems good unto him.

27. The King said also unto Zadok the Priest, Art not thou a Seer? Return into
the City in Peace, and your Two Sons with you, Ahimaaz thy Son and Jonathan the
Son of Abiathar.

28. See, I will tarry in the Plain of the Wilderness, until there come Word
from you to certify me.

29. Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the Ark of God again to Jerusalem;
and they tarried there.

30. And David went up by the Ascent of Mount Olivet, and wept as he went up,
and had his Head covered, and he went barefoot: And all the People that was
with him, covered every Man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.

31. And one told David, saying, Ahitophel is among the Conspirators with
Absalom. And David said, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the Counsel of Ahitophel
into Foolishness.

32. And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the mount,
where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him, with his
Coat rent, and Earth upon his Head.

33. Unto whom David said, if thou passest on with me, then thou shall be a
Burden unto me.

34. But if thou return to the City, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy
Servant, O King; as I have been thy Fathers Servant hitherto, so will I now
also be thy Servant: Then may thou for me defeat the Counsel of Ahitophel.

35. And have thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the Priests?
Therefore it shall be that what thing soever thou shall hear out of the Kings
House, thou shall tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the Priests.

36. Behold, they have there with them their Two Sons, Ahimaaz Zadok 's Son,
and Jonathan Abiathar 's Son: And by them ye shall send unto me every thing
that ye can hear:

37. So Hushai David 's Friend came into the City, and Absalom came into
Jerusalem.

The First Lesson. Part of the II. of Chronicles CHAP. XIII.
Abijah succeeding, makes War against Jeroboam. 4. He declares the Right of
his Cause. 13. Trusting in God, he overcomes Jeroboam.

NOW in the Eighteenth Year of King Jeroboam, began Abijah to reign over Judah.

2. He reigned Three Years in Jerusalem (his Mothers Name was Michaiah the
Daughter of Uriel, of Gibea:) and there was War between Abijah and Jeroboam.

3. And Abijah set the Battle in array with an Army of valiant Men of War, even
four hundred thousand chosen Men: Jeroboam also set the Battle in array against
him, and with eight hundred thousand chosen Men, being mighty Men of Valor.

4. And Abijah stood up upon Zemaraim, which is in Mount Ephraim, and said,
hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel:

5. Ought ye not to know, that the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his Sons by a Covenant of Salt?

6. Yet Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, the Servant of Solomon the Son of David is
risen up, and has rebelled against his Lord.

7. And there are gathered unto him vain Men, the Children of Belial, and have
strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was
young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.

8. And now ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in the Hand of the
Sons of David, and ye be a great Multitude, and there are with you golden
Calves, which Jeroboam made you for Gods.

9. Have ye not cast out the Priests of the Lord, the Sons of Aaron, and the
Levites, and have made you Priests after the manner of the Nations of other
Lands? So that whosoever comes to consecrate himself with a young Bullock, and
seven Rams, the same may be a Priest of them that are no Gods.

10. But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him, and the
Priests which minister unto the Lord, are the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites
wait upon their Business.

11. And they burn unto the Lord every Morning, and every Evening, burnt
Sacrifices, and sweet Incense: the Shewbread also set they in order upon the
pure Table; and the Candlestick of gold with the Lamps thereof, to burn every
Evening; for we keep the charge of the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken him.

12. And behold, God himself is with us for our Captain, and his Priests with
sounding Trumpets to cry alarm against you: O Children of Israel, fight ye not
against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper.

13. But Jeroboam caused an Ambushment to come about behind them, so they were
before Judah, and the Ambushment was behind them.

14. And when Judah looked back, behold the Battle was before and behind; and
they cried unto the Lord, and the Priests sounded with the Trumpets.

15. Then the Men of Judah gave a shout; and as the Men of Judah shouted, it
came to pass that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel, before Abijah and Judah.

16. And the Children of Israel fled before Judah; and God delivered them into
their Hands.

17. And Abijah and his People slew them with a great slaughter; so there fell
down slain of Israel Five Hundred Thousand chosen Men.

18. Thus the Children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the
Children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of their
Fathers.

19. And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took Cities from him, Bethel with
the Towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the Towns thereof, and Ephraim with the
Towns thereof.

20. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the Days of Abijah; and the
Lord struck him and he died.

Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


People. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without
end. Amen.


Priest. We will cry unto the Lord with our voice, yea even unto God will we
cry with our voice, and he shall hearken unto us, for the Lord is gracious and
long suffering, and of great mercy, to them that call upon him.


People. The Lord is nigh to all that be of a contrite heart, and will save
such as be of an humble Spirit.


Priest. And now Lord what is our hope, truly our hope is even in thee.


People. For our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did
deliver them, they called upon thee, and were helped, they put their trust in
thee, and were not confounded.


Priest. The Lord be a Defense for the Oppressed, even a Refuge in due time of
trouble, and they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for thou
Lord never failest them that seek thee.


People. The merciful Goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon
them that fear him, and his Righteousness upon Childrens Children, even upon
such as keep his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them.


Priest. Thou therefore that art a Savior to all that trust in thee, thou that
upholdeth all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that
healest the broken in heart, and give Medicine to heal their Sickness, thou
that art the Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, thou that art comfort
to the Sad, and strength to the Weak, hear thy Servant, we beseech thee, look
down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy Salvation.

Glory be to, etc.
The Lord be with you;
And with thy holy Spirit.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord of Heaven and Earth, God of the Spirits of all Flesh; we a most sinful,
and therefore now a most miserable People, do in the bitterness of our
afflicted Souls humbly fall down at the Footstool of thy Grace, most sadly
bewailing our many and most heinous Sins; we have multiplied our Iniquities
into a violation of thy whole Law; having neither performed to thee our God,
nor to Man the Duties thou requirest of us; so that by our wicked Works, we
have denied that most holy Faith, whereof our Mouths have for so long a time
made Profession, and now in thy just Judgment, thou have set our Sins in order
before our Eyes; yet return, O God, in great Mercy unto the many thousands of
thy People, do thou accept and increase in our Hearts a Detestation of all
Wickedness. O let not thy Scourge end in a Desolation, or thine Anger go on
unto the height of an everlasting Ruin; but hear us, merciful Father, hasten
the Aversion of these thy sharp Judgments from us; scatter thou the People that
delight in War: And let the blessing of Peace be upon the Heads of all those
that strive and pray for this Blessing, and that for his sake, by whom thou
give every blessing, even Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Priest. Hear our Voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our Complaint come
before thee, let it enter even into thy Ears.


People. Our Hearts are in heaviness, O let us make our Prayers unto thee in an
acceptable time.


Priest. O Lord, our Iniquities are against us, our Rebellions are many, with
which we have transgressed against thee, but we confess our Wickedness, and are
sorry for our Sins.


People. Our Confusion is daily before us, Fearfulness and Trembling are come
upon us, and an horrible dread has overwhelmed us, and it is thy great Mercy
only, that we are not consumed, for we have sinned, O Lord, we have
transgressed and done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled and departed from thy
Precepts, and from thy Commandments.


Priest. Innumerable Troubles are come about us, and our Sins have taken hold
upon us, that we are not able to look up; yea, they are more in number than the
hairs of our Head, and our Hearts have failed us, O Lord, Righteousness belongs
unto thee, but unto us Confusion of Face; because of all the Offenses we have
committed against thee.


People. Yet Compassion and Forgiveness is with thee, though we have rebelled
against thee, O Lord, according to thy Goodness, we beseech thee, let thine
Anger and thy Wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy Face to shine upon
thy Servants: Incline thine Ears and hear, open thine Eyes and behold our
Afflictions, for we do not present our Supplications before thee in our own
Righteousness; but for thy manifold and great Mercies.


Priest. We have sinned, we have sinned against thee, O Heavenly Father, and
are no more worthy to be called thy Sons.


People. Yet, O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive, consider, do it, and defer not for
thine own sake, O our God.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


People. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be World without
end. Amen.


Priest. Hear our Prayer, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and
hearken unto the Words of our Mouth, for Strangers are risen up against us, and
Tyrants, which have not God before their Eyes, seek after our Souls.


People. Cast us not away in the times of our Weakness, forsake us not when our
Strength fails us.


Priest. O remember not our Offenses, but according to thy Mercy think thou
upon us, for thy Goodness sake.


People. O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us, for we are desolate and
in Misery.


Priest. The Sorrows of our Hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our
Troubles!


People. Turn us, O God, our Savior, and let thine Anger cease from us; send
down from on high, and deliver us; take us out of those many Waters.


Priest. Why art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy Wrath so hot against
the Sheep of thy Pasture?


People. Wherefore hidest thou thy Face, and forgettest our Misery and Trouble?
For our Soul is brought low unto the Dust, and our Belly cleaves unto the
Ground.


Priest. Look upon our Adversity and Misery, and forgive us all our Sins.

Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us, for thy Mercies sake, so shall it
be known that it is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, have done it.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


People. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be World without
end, Amen.


The Second Lesson proper for this Occasion is, XXIV. Chapter of St. Matthew.
1. Christ foretells the Destruction of the Temple: What and how great
Calamities shall be before it. 29. The Signs of his coming to Judgment. 36. And
because that Day and Hour is unknown. 42. We ought to watch like good Servants,
expecting every moment our Masters coming.

AND Jesus went out, and departed from the Temple, and his Disciples came to
him for to show him the Buildings of the Temple.

2. And Jesus said unto them, see ye not all these Things? verily I say unto
you, there shall not be left here one Stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down.

3. And as he sat upon the Mount of Olives, the Disciples came unto him
privately, saying, tell us when shall these Things be? and what shall be the
Sign of thy coming, and of the end of the World.

4. And Jesus answered and said unto them, take heed that no Man deceive you.

5. For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.

6. And ye shall hear of Wars, and rumors of Wars: See that ye be not
troubled: For all these things must come to pass, but the End is not yet.

7. For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and
there shall be Famines, and Pestilence, and Earthquakes in diverse Places.

8. All these are the beginning of Sorrows.

9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: And ye
shall be hated of all Nations for my Names sake.

10. And then shall many be offended, and betray one another, and shall hate
one another.

11. And many false Prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.

12. And because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold.

13. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the World, for a
Witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come.

15. When ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy Place, (whosoever reads, let him understand)

16. Then let them which be in Judea, flee into the Mountains.

17. Let him, which is on the House top, not come down, to take any thing out
of his House.

18. Neither let him, which is in the Field, return back to take his Cloths.

19. And woe unto them that are with Child, and to them that give suck in those
Days.

20. But pray ye that your Flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath
Day.

21. For then shall be great Tribulation, such as was not since the beginning
of the World to this time, no, nor ever shall be.

22. And except those Days should be shortened, there should no Flesh be saved:
But for elects sake those Days shall be shortened.

23. Then if any Man shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or there; believe
it not.

24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great Signs and Wonders, insomuch, that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very elect.

25. Behold, I have told you before.

26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the Desert, go not
forth: Behold, he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not.

27. For as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the
West: So shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

28. For wheresoever the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.

29. Immediately after the Tribulation of those Days, shall the Sun be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven,
and the Powers of the Heaven shall be shaken.

30. And then shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven: And then shall
all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in
the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory.

31. And he shall send his Angels with a great Sound of a Trumpet, and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to
the other.

32. Now learn a Parable of the Fig Tree: When his Branch is yet tender, and
puts forth Leaves, ye know that Summer is nigh.

33. So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near,
even at the Doors.

34. Verily, I say unto you, this Generation shall not pass, till all these
Things be fulfilled.

35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away.

36. But of that Day and Hour knows no Man, no, not the Angels of Heaven, but
my Father only.

37. But as the Days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.

38. For as in the Days that were before the Flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the Day that Noe entered into
the Ark.

39. And knew not when the Flood came, and took them all away; so shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be.

40. Then shall two be in the Field, the one shall be taken, and the other left.

41. Two Women shall be grinding at the Mill, the one shall be taken, and the
other left.

42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what Hour your Lord does come.

43. But know this, that if the good Man of the House had known in what watch
the Thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his
House to be broken up.

44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an Hour as you think not, the Son
of Man comes.

45. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler
over his Household, to give them Meat in due Season.

46. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so
doing.

47. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him Ruler over all his Goods.

48. But and if that evil Servant shall say in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his
coming.

49. And shall begin to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with
the drunken:

50. The Lord of that Servant shall come in a Day when he looks not for him,
and in an Hour that he is not aware of;

51. And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his Portion with the
Hypocrites: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

Priest. Give thy Judgments O God; and thy Righteousness to the King.


People. The Lord hear him in the Day of Trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob
defend him.


Priest. Send him Help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion.


People. Let the King rejoice in thy Strength, O Lord, and let him be exceeding
glad of thy Salvation.


Priest. Grant him his Hearts desire, and deny him not the Request of his lips.


People. O Lord, gird him with Strength unto the Battle, throw down his Enemies
under him.


Priest. Make them to turn their Backs upon him, and disperse those that hate
him.


People. Deliver him from the strivings of his People.


Priest. Deliver him from his cruel Enemies and set him above his Adversaries,
thou shall rid him from the wicked Man, and why? because the King puts his
strength in the Lord, and in the Mercy of the most High he shall not miscarry.


People. Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we remember
the Name of the Lord our God.


Priest. Save Lord and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee.


People. Be thou exalted in thy own strength, so will we sing and praise thy
power.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


People. As it was in the beginning is now and ever shall be world without end.
Amen.


O Lord God, that do build up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcasts of
Israel, wherefore art thou absent so long, and why is thy wrath so hot against
the sheep of thy Pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation, whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old,
think upon the tribe of thine Inheritance, and mount Sion where thou have dwelt.

Lift up thy Feet and disperse all those our Enemies which have done ill in thy
Sanctuary.

For they have broken down the carved Work thereof with Axes and Hammers: They
have defiled the dwelling places of thy Name, yea, they said in their hearts,
let us make havoc of them altogether.

O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor, how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand, why pluckest
not thou thy right hand out of thy bosom to scatter the enemy?

Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause, remember how the foolish Man
blasphemeth thee daily.

Forget not the voice of thine Enemies, the presumption of those that hate thee
increases ever more and more.

Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.


People. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without
end. Amen.


A Prayer.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee to be merciful
unto us, and be near to help us, in all those extremities which our Sins
threaten to bring upon us, our Enemies are strengthened against us, because our
rebellions are multiplied against thee, and we deserve to suffer what our
Enemies threaten, and sudden destruction and with desolation, but there is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared; and there is mercy with thee, that
they may not be feared; show us therefore thy mercy, O Lord, and let us so fear
thee, that we may never be brought to feel or fear them, and that for our
Jesus, and thy Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for the Church.
ALmighty God, and gracious Father, we confess against our selves that we are
most worthy of all the Judgments that thou have threatened against us, these
Kingdoms, this Church, which is now under the Cross, and near to utter ruin,
and extirpation, unless thy mercy stepped in between thy fierce W^ath and our
heinous Sins, and howsoever the voice of our crying Sins, has ascended into
thine Ears, and stirred up Destroyers to root us out, that we be no more a
People, and that thy Name be no more called upon, nor hallowed by us, yet we
most humbly beseech thee to hear the Prayers and Supplications, with strong
Cryings and Tears which once our blessed Savior offered for us upon the Cross,
and in the Garden, and daily represents unto thee; and for his all-sufficient
Merits, which speak better things than the Blood of Abel, hear not the cry of
our Sins, but hear the cry of his Blood, and therein wash away all our Sins,
let our great Miseries and Dangers suffice for that which is past, and let that
Orator in thy own bosom that is, thine own fatherly goodness persuade and
prevail for us, and purchase our Deliverance and Safety; hear us for our selves
and others, look upon us with the Eyes of Pity and Compassion, consider our
Enemies how many and how mighty they be, and they bear a tyrannous hate against
us. Our Goods, our Lands, our Lives will not suffice their boundless Ambition:
Our Religion our Souls, and if it were possible, our God, is that they strike
at; curse thou their Angers, for it is fierce, and their Wrath, for it is
cruel. Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: as for us, deliver us
out of their Hands, and unite us together in the bond of Peace, that being
freed from our many and tyrannous Enemies, we may ever bless thy sacred and
holy Name, and evermore serve thee without fear in Holiness and Righteousness
all the Days of our Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

WE beseech thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
Servants, and stretch forth the right Hand of thy Majesty to be our Defense
against all our Enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds are
justly punished, by the comfort of thy Grace may mercifully be relieved,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our Infirmities and
Miseries, and in all our Dangers and Necessities, stretch forth thy right Hand
to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, which art more ready to hear, than we to pray, and are wont to
give more than either we desire or deserve: pour down upon us the abundance of
thy mercy, forgiving us those things, whereof we are afraid, and giving unto us
that, that our Prayers dare not presume to ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

FINIS.
A proper Prayer for the Thirtieth of January, the Anniversary of England's
Captivity, and Tyrants Liberty.
O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom guidest and orderest all things most
suitable to thy Justice, and performest thy Pleasure, always in such manner to
us, that thou can also appeal to us, whether thy ways be not equal: we, thy
poor afflicted People, fall down before thee, acknowledging the justice of thy
proceedings with us, and that the amazing Judgment, which as this Day befell us,
in thy permitting cruel Men, Sons of Belial to execute their fury of their
Rebellions upon Our late Gracious Sovereign, and to imbrew their Hands in the
Blood and Murder of the Lords Anointed, that was drawn down by the great and
long Provocations of this Nation sins against thee: For all which and our own
parts, in which, we sinful wretches here met together, desire to humble our
selves before thee, and to tremble at thy presence in this Days sore Vengeance,
the effect as well as the defect of our Impieties, the work of our own Hands
upon our selves, thy heavy Judgment, but our own most horrible Sin; for which
alone (did not multitude of other Sins cry out against us) thou might justly
descend down upon us all, as thou did in Sodom, and leave us no other
memorial than to be the frightful Monuments of thine Indignation and Fury to
all Posterity. Gracious is the Lord, and merciful, therefore it is that we are
not consumed! O let thy long-suffering and patience lead us to Repentance: And
now, O Lord, looking on this particular signal Judgment, and thy last Trump
warning us to fly from the Wrath to come; We come forth to meet our God,
mourning in our Prayers before thee, and begging the aversion of thy further
displeasure, and the removal of these Plagues of long continuance from us; for
the all-sufficient merits of the Death and Sufferings of our blessed Savior. O
forgive our great and manifold Transgressions, and for his bloody Passion sake,
deliver this Nation from Blood-guiltiness, that of this Day especially; O God
of our Salvation. Let not our crying Sins intercept our Prayers, or thy
Blessings; but hear the Voice of our Tears; and hearing forgive and heal us:
retire not quite from us into thine own Place, Laugh not at our Calamities,
neither Mock in this Day of our Visitation: Vindicate thy own Cause, and thine
own Providence, that it may appear unto Men, that thou bear up the Pillars
of the Earth; and that by thee Kings do Reign. And though thou have suffered
our Enemies to proceed to that high pitch of Violence against our late King,
even to kill and take possession of his Throne and Revenews: Yet frustrate now
at length their bold Hopes and Desires; let not their mischievous imaginations
Prosper, least they be too Proud; let them not be able to establish themselves
in that prosperity and greatness they have Fancied; let them not say of his
Family, God has forsaken them, let us persecute them: Show some Token on his
seed for Good, that their Enemies may see it, and be ashamed; because thou,
Lord, have Helped and Comforted them. Bow the Hearts of the Subjects of this
Land, as thou did those of Israel to David, that they acknowledge and receive
joyfully the Heir of these three Kingdoms; and fasten thou him as a Nail in a
sure Place; behold his Injuries, and have compassion on his Innocence; and let
the desire of his Enemies perish like that of the Hypocrite; but bring him,
maugre all their Oppositions, to a peaceable possession of that Throne to which
by Birth-light thou have designed him, and establish him in the Just Rights of
his Family. O Lord, we wait on thee this Day for this Blessing; make no longer
tarrying, but according to the time thou have Plagued us send us deliverance.
Snatch the prey out of the Lions Teeth, and pull us out of the Burnings like a
Firebrand: We beseech thee, that this Day, we may spread before thee the Words
of Rabshekah, the Proud railing, and Scornful reproach of our (Enemies) Behold
this Day their Exaltation, and our Mourning: O Lord, our Eyes are toward thee!
For whom nothing is hard; let it not seem a small thing to thee, that we
suffer, but concenter our Prayers with the many Thousands that call on thee;
that Salvation may come to our King, and through him thy blessing of Peace unto
thy People. Think upon those that are peaceable, and faithful in the Land, and
deal thou with us according to thy Word, wherein thou have caused us to put our
trust: Let the World see that there is a God that judges the Earth, and will
send deliverance to his People in their needful time of trouble. But whatsoever
is, let us not behave our selves frowardly, but with all Christian Humility,
run the race thou set before us, and patiently bear the Indignation of the
Lord, because we have sinned against him. And we meekly beseech thee, that if
the Divine Decree of thy Justice withstand our Petitions, our Prayers may
return unto our own Bosoms; and that thou will make thy Judgments temporal and
not spiritual upon us; but assist us with strength proportionable to our
temptations; that we be not delivered to evil: but that in well-doing we may
commit our selves unto thee our God, as unto a faithful Creator; and that both
our King and we may say with a Christian submission and cheerfulness: It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good; to whom we desire to ascribe Honor,
Praise, Dominion and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents.
A Preparatory Prayer. folio 3 King David's prayer for the Church and People. 4
King David's second Prayer. 5 King David's third prayer. ibid. King David's fourth
prayer. 6 King David's Tears. 7 Jeremiahs Lamentations, prophetical of these
times. ibid. Jeremiahs second prayer. 8 Daniels prayer and confession in the
behalf of himself and his people. 9 The first prayer for the King. 10 The
second prayer for the King. ibid. The third prayer for the King. 11 Preparatory
ejaculations precede the Litany. 12 A Litany of intercession. ibid. A prayer
for the Church. 16 A prayer for the Queen Mother and the Royal Progeny. ibid. A
prayer for the Afflicted. 17 Certain Verses of several psalms. ibid. A prayer.
18 A Confession of sins. 20 A prayer. 25 An Absolution to be pronounced by the
priest only. ibid The Lords prayer. 26 More prayers. ibid. Psalms proper upon
this occasion to be read viz. III, folio. 53. VII, fol. 56. XXVII. fol. 57.
XLVI. fol. 58 LXXXIII, fol. 75. LXXXVI, fol. 60. 28 The first Lesson proper
upon this occasion, is, out of the 2 Book of Samuel XV. Chapter. folio. 34
Another Lesson upon this occasion, is, in the 2 of Chronicles, XIII. Chapter,
fol. 37 More Lessons fitting this occasion, viz. 2 Samuel 16, 17, 18, and 20.
Chapters. Numbers 16. Chap. Isai. 22. Amos. 4. Joel 2 and Ezekiel. 9. Chapters.
Then shall priest and people repeat those sayings. 39 Another prayer. 40 Then
shall the priest and people repeat those sayings. 41 The second Lesson proper
for this occasion, is, the 24 Chapter of St. Matthew. 44 Then shall the priest
and people repeat those sayings. 47 Another prayer. 49 A prayer for the Church.
ibid. More prayers. 50 A proper prayer for the 30th of January, being the
Anniversary of Englands Captivity, and Tyrants Liberty. 53

