THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF OLIVER CROMWELL

The late Usurper, and pretended Protector of England, etc.

Truly Collected and Published for a warning to all Tyrants and Usurpers.

By J. H. Gent.

a knight on horseback

LONDON, Printed for F. Coals at the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 1663.

THE HISTORY Of the LIFE and DEATH OF OLIVER CROMWELL The late Usurper.
CHAP. I. Showing the birth and Parentage, and place of Nativity of the said
Oliver Cromwell.
THE unparalleld actions of this man, has made people more curious then
otherwise, they would be, to know his Rise and Birth, which otherwise might
better to the advantag of his memory been yet obscured and concealed; for it
will neither add praise nor commendation either to his country or Relations,
both which have publicly protested their shame and their abhortance of him.
So that without prejudice to his Family, who have cleared themselves of any
participation of his Facts, and did and do detest both him and them; you may
understand; he was the Son of Henry Cromwell, alias Williams the Younger
Son of Sir Henry Cromwell of Hinohingbrook, in the County of Huntingdon
Knight, who so magnificently treated, King James in that place at his coming
into England; who so Loyally and Affectionately loved King Charles the Martyr;
and who lastly so hated and abominated this same Oliver his Nephew, God-sonne
and Namesake.

He was Born at Huntingdon, in the year 1599. where his Father being a Cadet or
younger Brother, as we have said, having no large Estate, had intermarried with
a Brewers Widow, by whom he had some addition of Fortune, and from her sprung
that story of Olivers being a Brewer in Huntingdon: he was from his infancy a
lusty active Child, and of a sturdy rough temper, which to remedy in his young
years, his Father prudently took this Course.

CHAP. II. How Oliver was Educated and brought up in the University of
Cambridge, and afterward in Lincolns Inn, in the study of the Law.
ABout the Age therefore of Thirteen or Fourteen years, his Father sent him to
the University of Cambridge, to have him tempered and managed by the severe
Tuition and Discipline of the University; but his Tutor quickly perceived the
boisterous and untractable spirit of his Pupil, who was more for action then
speculation, and loved Cudgells, Foot-ball-playing, or any Game and Exercise
better then his Book, so that there was no hopes of making him a Shollar, or a
learned Man, and much ado there was to keep him so in compass, that he became
not an open and public dishonor to his Friends; (here he was made an actor
in the play of the Five Senses, where he ominously stumbled at a Crown, which
he had also dreamed he should once Wear) whereupon he was presently removed,
his Tutor weary and afraid of disgrace by him, to Lincolns-Inne; where he might
with less imputation and observance, if his bent were so given, royster it
out, and yet without much trouble attain some knowledge in the Laws to
qualify him for a Country Gentleman, and that little Competency his Father
could leave him. But no such Rudiments would sink into him, he was for Rougher
Arguments and Pleas, Club-law, and indeed what occasion had he to know and be
versed in the Law, whose designs and wicked practices afterward were directly
opposite to all Laws both Divine and Humane, so that he continued not long
there, but was called home, his Father dying soon after and leaving him to his
swinge.

CHAP. III. Of his Manner of Life and Conversation in the Country.
OLiver being come down in the Country, and growing sturdy and of Man's
stature, frequented all manner of wild Company; who but he at any Match or Game
whatsoever, where he would drink and roar with the rudest of his Companions,
and when his Money which he had sparingly from his Mother, who yet kept the
purse, failed him; he would make the Victuallers trust him, to such a ruin of
his Credit and Reputation, he being as famous for his Raunting and his Scores,
as after for his Prayers and Victories, that the Ale-wives of Huntingdon if
they see him coming would set up a cry, here comes young Cromwell, shut up the
Doors, and so keep him out. But he had better success in the War, for then
there was no shutting of him out, no Garrison or Castle or strength whatsoever
was sufficient to debar him. But that may be imputable to the luck of his
former Atchievments, Fortune being tied at his Girdle, and keeping a constant
Tenor with him, for at this Age he would make nothing of beating of Tinkers
and such Masty Fellows at Quarter staff, or any such weapon they would choose;
so that he was dreaded by all the Ale-drinkers as well as Ale-wives of the
Country.

CHAP. IV. How Oliver was reclaymed from these loud Courses, and how he joined
himself to the preciser sort, and became an Hypocritical Convert.
BY these debaucht Courses of Life, and regardlesse thoughts how the world
went, as long as Drink and Company could be had, no matter how nor where; he
had so endangered his small Estate and Patrimony, and was so far in debt that
nothing robory, he was forced to retire himself, and get out of the way, and
live privately for private arrests and judgments which were brought against
him. In this solitary Condition he had time to bethink himself of his
Condition, and having nothing else to do, having played a part at Cambridge, to
personate another at home, seeming very pensive and melancholy, and much
reserved in his talk and discourse, which from vain and frivolous and wild
speeches was now altered into serious and modest and grave language, and sober
expression, which accomodated and set forth with a more stayed and solemn
aspect and gesture, made him appear to be another kind of person, having run
from the one extreme to the other; from Stark naught to too Good, and twill be
a question whether, by the first he were more destructive to himself, or by the
latter more pernicious to his Country.

This humor sowred him at last into a precise Puritanisme, with whom his
zealous design was to ingratiate himself, who increasing every day, and being
grown to a headstrong Faction, he doubted not but if time should serve, which
his daring spirit (if he had not a familiar,) told him was a coming, to be
principal person among them, and howsoever to make up his decaies on his
Fortunes, by the kind-hearted supplies and loanes of the brotherhood, who were
very proud of such a proselyte.

In a short time after, he had learned to pray, and attained a very ready
faculty therein, which he made no nicety to manifest upon all occasions, both
in their public and private meeting; so that he was looked upon by those of
his Godly party as their chiefest Ornament, and by the rest of the world as a
strange wonder. This Artificial devotion did not only then advantage him, but
served him thereafter through the whole course of his Life, and was the main
ingredient of all his policies and successes. A Friar was an Ass to him for
saying of Prayers, he was able to give him two for one with his Beads and by
Rote, and out-stript him Extempore.

CHAP. V. How Oliver, being noted for his pretended Sanctity, was chosen a
Burgess of Cambridge for the Long-Parliament. and the War breaking out, was
made a Captain of Horse.
BY this sanctimonious vizor and manifested zeal for Reformation, which was
then in every Man's mouth, he was looked upon as the fittest Instrument to
promote it in the Parliament, which the King had called in 1640. to redress
the grievances of the State and Church and to supply his necessities; and
therefore the Puritan faction and his Relations by marriage, as Mr. Goodwin and
also Hambden of Buckingham labored in the Election of Burgesses for the town
of Cambridg to have him chosen. The Town was generally infected with the same
Disease, and therefore it was no hard matter to effect it. Sitting in
Parliament as a Member, he quickly saw which way the stream went, and
therefore resolved to run one of the first with it, and therefore helped out the
Noise and Cry for Privilege, proving a great stickler against the Prerogative;
and to that end endeavoring to widen the breach way made by the Malapertnesse
of Tumults against the Kings Person and Court, insomuch that he became
conspicuous and noted for his aversion to the Government. The Flame of those
inward burnings now breaking out, and because of his influence on his Country,
and his bold confident spirit, he was courted with a Commission (which he
accepted) under the Earl of Essex the Parliaments General, and was made a
Captain of a Troop of Horse,

CHAP. VI. Of the Exploits Cromwell did in the beginning of the War.
HAving raised his Troop, he marched not presently with the gross and main
body of the Army, but was ordered to continue about his own country, that so
his own enterprises might be the better observed, and he taken notice of; so
that he was a rising man from the very first beginning of our civil confusions.
The first service that he appeared in, was the seizure of Sir Henry Conisby,
the Sheriff of Hartfordshire: when in a gallant contempt of the Parliament, he
was proclaiming the Commission of Array at St. Albaus, and sending him and
other Gentlemen his asistance to London; which sudden and meritorious exploit
of his was well resented, and highly commended by the Parliament. His next
piece of diligence was the like seizure of Sir John Pettus and Forty Gentlemen
more, of the County of Suffolk, who were forming a party for the King, and
securing them; by which means he broke the neck of any future design in that
or the next County of Norfolk, for the Royal Interest; so that he had brought
all the Eastern part of England to the Parliaments subjection by a bloodlesse
and easy Conquest: but his other Victories, which were principally ascribed to
him, though they were joined with him, were very sanguinous and fatally cruel.

As his last home employment, he was ordered to purge and to inspect the
University, wherein he proceeded with so much rigor against that place of his
own Nurture, etc. it was conceived he would at last as mercilessly use his
Mother, then bleeding England which work being over, and unhappily effected,
Cromwell was the only man; his prudence, Fortune and Valor every where
applauded and extolled, and he reputed for one of the most eminent and able
Commanders in the Parliaments Army.

'Twas time therefore now to show him abroad, having Armed, Disciplined and
paid his Men so carefully, that there was no doubt of their prevailing upon any
equal Enemy, and under the Conduct of so Vigilant and Wary a Leader, whose only
aim it was to keep up his Reputation to greater undertakings. Therefore in
order to a Conjunction and assistance of the Scots, who were entered England, he
was made Lieutenant General to the Earl of Manchester, who had raised his Army
out of the associated Counties, as Cambridge, Huntingdon, Bedford, Suffold,
etc. Those Armies being joined, and mastering the Field (the Marquess of
New Castle who opposed them, retreating into York) they resolved to besiege
that City: to Relief whereof Prince Rupert came, and forcing them to draw off
from their League, gave them the battle on Marston Moor, July the Second, 1644.
In the beginning of the Fight Prince Rupert had utterly discomfited the right
wing of the Army, where Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Scots Horse stood and
disordered the main body of the Foot, so that the day was given for lost, the
Scots running and throwing down their Arms; when Cromwell with his Curafficres
and the rest of my Lord Manchesters Horse, who were placed in the right wing,
fell with such force and fury upon the Lord Gorings Brigades on the Right, that
they presently broke them in pieces, and following their success before the
Prince returned, obtained a complete Victory, killing no less then 5000 Men,
gaining their Camp, Bag and Baggage, and as the price of all, the City of York:
Hence he acquired that terrible name of Ironsides, his Troops being reported
unvulnerable and unconquerable; by this Dehe feat, lifted up himself to those
great Titles and Places he went through afterward.

CHAP. VII. A continuance of his successes against his Sovereign and his
Forces, his Treacherous and Disloyal dealing with his Majesty.
THe next Field we find him in, was that of the second Newberry, October the
27 1644. where with the same Felicity and Valor, he had the better on that
part of the Field, where he Fought, and contributed mainly to that piece of a
Victory the Parliament Forces had there; when to cloud and damp this rising
Martiallist, he was Articled against by his Superior Officers for some
miscarriages and practices in the Army, to the hindrance of the service, which
was indeed his ambitious insinuation into the affection of the Soldiery: but
this was never prosecuted, his Friends the Grandees of the Independent party,
interposing and justifying him for a godly, expert and Valiant Commander.

This Independent Faction was now grown too crafty, and had supplanted their
Brother of Presbytery, by new modelling the Army, turning out most of Essexes
Officers, and dismissing all Members of Parliament from their several Commands
therein; among which number Cromwell should have been included, but his
partisans wrought so, that he was continued for Forty days, and those expired
longer and longer even till the War ended. By this said model Sir Thomas
Fairfax was made Lord General, and Cromwell after some time Lieutenant General,
being the only man looked upon able to carry on the independent Interest. The
first action he engaged in in this quality, was his routing of the Queens
Regiment and some other Troops (come from Worcester to fetch the King from
Oxford, then designed to be besieged in the beginning of the year 1645.) at
Islip bridge: then his immediate summoning and taking Blechingdon House, April
24th. whereafter as he was designing a stratagem upon Faringdon House, he was
set upon by as vigilant a Commander as himself, the Lord Goring, and received a
smart brush, and the only one throughout the War; which now hastening to an end
at the Fatal Nasby, he was called from out the Isle of Ely (whither he had been
lately sent to secure it, it being thought the King would have turned his now
successeful Arms thitherward) to assist the General, who by his Letters to the
Parliament had desired it. That Unfortunate day the 14th. of June, 1646. owes
it is dismalness to the Fortune of this Rebel whose Troops alone could glory in
that Atchievment; for the left wing of that Army, where Ireton his Son in Law
Commanded, was absolutely routed and the main body solely distressed; so that
Cromwell alone assured that Victory.

So ended the first War with the Praises and Triumphs of this Man of War,
Adored and Worshipped by the Rascal Rabble of Independency, who stuck not to
Blaspheme God and his Scriptures attributing all those Hosanna's and Psalms,
and Songs of Deliverance and Victory to this their Champion; in effect making a
mere Idol of Him, which Phanatick Religious Veneration, he mist not to improve,
though for the present he covered his ambition with modesty and humility,
ascribing all things in a Canting way of expression, to the goodness and
omnipotence of God, which he frequently and impiously abused, intituling it to
all his wicked and Villainous designs and actions.

The War thus ended, and the KING having escaped their Swords, and so the main
rub yet lay in the way to his projected sovereignty; he resolved by Treachery
to ruin him; to that purpose, that he might render the King indisposed to the
Terms and Propositions of the Parliament, which were hard and unreasonable
enough besides; he pretended to the King that the Army should take his part and
declare for him: as on the other side in the Parliament House, and privately in
the Army (telling them that the Kings design of peace and Agreement was only
to get them Disbanded, and then Hang them for their Rebellion) he exasperated
them against the King, adding that God had hardened his heart against any
composure, and had rejected him: and when all this would not do, but that the
people every day more and more were undeceived, and he conceived a fear they
might rescue the King from Hampton Court, and bring him to London which the
King and all good men desired; he contrived another wicked Device to the Kings
Final Overthrow, by scaring him with the Adjucators (such were two selected out
of each Company and Troop) conspiracy to assassinate him, and so making him
fl^e to the Isle of Wight, a distant and sure prison, from whence he never came
but to his Death. The King a while before was not ignorant of these Treacherous
arts of Cromwell, seeing nothing performed as to substance of what ever he
promised, and therefore did roundly Tax him with his Faithlessenesse; who at
the upshot told the King that He did misconstrue his words, or else he
remembered no such matter, and that if it were so, yet it were no time to
perform them, till the Discipline of the Army was recovered, and chose
Adjutators in a capacity to be questioned, who were now most outragiously and
uncontroulably violent against his person and Government, with many more such
Flams and Delays, and Traitorous Fallacies.

The King being in prison at Carisbroke Castle in the said Isle, by the juggling
of Cromwell with Hammond the Governor (Brother to one of the Kings most
affected Chaplains) an ungrateful Fellow, who owed himself to the Kings bounty;
several fresh attempts were made for his restitution: that which particularly
concerned this Oliver, was the Welsh insurrection at Pembroke, which Town in
July, after a brave defense was rendered to him. and the Scots invasion under
Duke Hamilton, whose Army, to which were joined some Three Thousand English
under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, he totally defeated at Preston in Lancashire, on
the 17th. of August, (and not long after the General Fairfax took in
Colchester, which had stood out Three months (in expectation of relief from
this Army) upon the same account) and pursued his Victory as far as Scotland,
marching to Edinburgh, and there making sure of a party, dealing with Bribes
and other forceable persuasions, and making them disarm themselves to give him
no disturbance or interruption in the accomplishing his most execrable
Regicide, for which he was now ready; the expected advantages and opportunities
being now in his Hand.

CHAP. VIII. Cromwell turns out the Parliament, Murders the King, sets up a
Commonwealth, who invading Scotland and Ireland, make him their General.
CRomwell posting to London, and he and his Son Ireton put the Council of
Officers to demand Justice upon the King as the Capital Offender, and Author
of all the Troubles and Bloodshed: which he so eagerly prosecuted, that though
the Parliament had nearly concluded with the King in the Isle of Wight, after a
full Treaty, he by Col. Pride, one that would venture upon any thing he was
commanded by him, Secludes twice the Major part of the Members, and then packs
up a Juncto of Army Blades, of some Fifty, who constitute a High Court of
Justice, by which the Martyr King was Traitorously and Barbarously Condemned
and Beheaded, January the 30. By the same Juncto and Rump of a Parliament, the
King ship and Government by a single Person was Voted useless and dangerous,
to which Cromwell freely assented, as purposing to time his Ambition, now the
great Obstacle was removed.

But though the King and his Interest were defunct in England, yet they were
not in Ireland or Scotland; whereupon, Cromwell is made General for the Irish
Expedition, and though he was the only diswader of the Soldiery from that
service, during the quarrel betwixt the Independants and the Presbyterians, and
while he had accomplished his mischievous Ends upon the King; yet now he is
severely bent to transport such as the Lot should appoint: which the Levelling
party, the Adjutators, Whelps of his own Litter, refusing and mutining, them
likewise under pretense of a Treaty, and giving and receiving satisfaction
(their usual expressions) he betraies and surprises at Burford (not daring to
venture a Fight with them for fear of a Total defection of his own party) and
had the Ringleaders shot to Death.

Having surmounted this difficulty, he wafts his Army over into Ireland, and
presently storms Tredagh, and understanding it was the Flower of the Kings
Army, set there to give him a repulse, having twice bin beaten off, he led his
men himself the third time and entered, and put all to the Sword, (having amused
the defendants who maintained the breach; but having then lost their Colonel,
were in some confusion through offer of Quarter,) and by that device got
admittance) with alike baseness, treachery and cruelty.

After that followed the rendition of most of that Kingdom, the Lord
Lieutenant thereof, the Marquess of Ormond being in no Condition to resist
him: whereupon the Scotch War then newly beginning, Cromwell was sent for over,
and the Presbyterian Ministers, set on no doubt by some of his Agents, having
inveigled Fairfax with the unlawfulness of his engaging against their Good
brethren; he laid down his Commission, which was readily conferred on, and
taken up by Cromwell.

CHAP. IX. Of Cromwells March into Scotland, his Victories at Dunbar and
Worcester, and the reduction of that Kingdom.
GLadly did Oliver undertake this War, for now he was sure to make the Army his
own, by placing and displacing of Officers; long it was, and many delays were
used by the Scots, before they would be brought to Fight, intending to starve
the English Army, which was near done to their Hands, and Oliver sneaking away
Home, when the precipitate blew cap greedy of Spoil and Victory, would needs
fall upon them at Dunbar, Sept. 3d. 1650. and were there by the prowess and
desperate Valor of their Enemies totally overcome. Cromwell therefore now
Marches back again to Edinburgh, and buys that impregnable Castle of the
Traitor Dundasse, and advances against King Charles the Second, who lay
Encamped by Sterling; but he not stirring out of his fortified Camp, and there
being no other or further passage into Scotland, but over the Frith an Arm of
the Sea: Cromwell wafts over most part of his Army, and defeats a Scotch party,
while the King gives Cromwell the Go-by, being two days march before him, and
after a tedious march came to Worcester, August the 22d. whither not long after
came Cromwell in great doubt and perplexity by the way, (having left General
Monk to carry on the War in Scotland, who shortly after reduced the whole
Kingdom) and beset the Town, being recruited and made up with his old Army, to
above Forty Thousand Men; what shall I say of that Unfortunate day? the King
was Worsted, and most miraculously escaped, and so Cromwell might have leave to
play.

But no such matter, the time was come he had long expected, to act his own
Game and appear in it for himself, for by the year 1653. Scotland and Ireland
being wholly subdued, and in the hands of his most trusty Privado's and
Confidents, his New Son-in-Law Fleetwood (for Ireton was dead of the Plague at
Limbrick) being Deputy of Ireland, and General Monck Governor of Scotland; he
proposes to the Parliament, the desires of the Army for their Dissolution, to
make way for succession of a new Representative, which they endeavoring to
delay, and to impose upon him with the necessities of their sitting a little
while longer; his Ambition could brook no longer retardments, but sent Major
General Harrison on the 20th. of April, 1653. to out their Rump-ships which he
accordingly did, to the general rejoicing of the people, who considered nor
cared who should come next, so they were rsid of these.

CHAP. X. How Cromwell ordered the Government afterward, and how he made
himself Lord Protector of England.
AFter the RUMP was thus dissolved, Oliver by the advice (forsooth) of his
General Council of Officers, erected a Council of State, of such as were true
to his Interest and the Army, and were well Fledged with the spoils of the
Kingdom, but perceiving that was but a slender Authority, to derive the
Government to himself, which was the first and last thing intended; he called a
picked Conventicle of the like batch as himself and his Followers, all of the
Godly party, whom he styled a Parliament; the name whereof was enough to
Authorize and Dignifie the Resignation of the Authority they had from, to, him;
and their odious actions moreover would make a single person (himself) more
acceptable; For these wild Fellows were upon Abolishing the Ministry, and
opening the Floodgate to Heresy and Atheism; when Cromwell dissolved them,
and with them discarded his old Friend and their darling, Major General
Harrison, who was tampering with the Army to unhorse Oliver; but he smelt him
out and Cashiered him, as he did his Trusty Friend Lambert soon after, as
finding they were both greater in the Army then his Safety and Interest would
suffer: so impossible it is for brethren in iniquity long to continue in Love
and Friendship. Oliver would endure no Competitor, but resolved to be Single
and Supreme:

CHAP. XI. How Oliver was sworn Protector, and how be managed the Government,
briefly.
THat little or foolish Parliament being divided among themselves, one part
thereof resigned their power unto Oliver, who straight with caused the
Commissioner of the Seal Mr. Lisle, to Administer him an Oath on the 16th. of
December, 1653. before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, in
Westminster Hall, to observe a Module of Government in Forty Two Articles;
which instrument of his, as was said, was found in my Lady Lamberts placket,
and thereupon he was proclaimed Lord Protector; in February he was feasted
sumptuously in the City, and Knighted the Lord Mayor, as he did many other
afterward, upon whom he had better have pissed: he made also one Lord, but he
never owned it. Now though he was proclaimed Protector, yet he knew the people
took him for no such thing, therefore he called a parliament according to Form,
thinking to have been declared so by them, but they would not own him or his
Authority. Seeing therefore he could neither get Reputation nor Money at home,
he resolved to have it from the King of Spains West Indies, but at Hispaniola
his Forces under General Venables were strangely defeated, and forced to plant
themselves in Jamaica, and fight for Bread instead of Gold. He likewise started
several plots, (the Fox was the finder) against Cavaliers, such as Colonel
Gerrard, and afterward Colonel Penruddock (maintaining intelligence at the
price of 1500. per annum, with one Manning a Clerk to the Kings Secretary, who
then resided at Colen, who discovered most of the Kings Council, till he was
discovered himself and executed) on purpose to terrify people, and those
especially from rising against him.

Now when Oliver saw he could not attain his will by whole Parliaments, he
resolved on his old expedient, to garble a Parliament, Call it, and then Cull
it, which he did, and secluded those Members that would not before they entered,
recognize and own his Highness; by which means two parts of three were
excluded, and he by the remainder complemented with the style of King, but for
fear of Lambert and Harrison, and indeed the whole Kingdom, especially the
Army, he durst not accept of it, but was content to take the Title of Protector
from their Hands, and was accordingly on the 16th. of June, 1657. Solemnly
installed by the Speaker, Sir Thomas Widdrington again in Westminster Hall, and
the Parliament adjourned, who had likewise passed an Act for erecting of a
thing called another House, consisting of such Lords as Pride, Hewson and
Barkstead; but upon the meeting of a full House, after the Adjournment, all
this new structure was questioned even to Oliver himself, who thereupon in a
passion, and transported beyond his vizarded sanctity, with an Oath by the
Living God, dissolved them.

In the year 1658. he assisted the French against the Spaniard, and helped them
to take Dunkirk, which for his pains he had delivered to him, and no doubt it
was the best service he ever did to his Country. But during this unenvied
triumph, having drencht his polluted hands in more innocent and Loyal Blood;
namely, that of Dr. Hewet, and Sir Henry Slingsby, God put a Hook into the
mouth of this Leviathan, and having snatched away his beloved Daughter Claypoole
just before; on the 3d. of September 1658. his great successful day, he was
hurried in a Tempest out of the world, which he had so long troubled, and on
the 16th. of November following, was most magnificently buried, to the only
sorrow of those who furnished the Mourning, and Pageantry thereof, leaving his
Wife Elizabeth alias Jone, with two Sons, Richard, who succeeded, till he
tamely and Cowardly resigned and is now fled for his Fathers Debts, and Henry,
and a Daughter ycleped Francis Rich. A Person as it was well charactered of
him, fit to be a Prince of Tartars or Cannibals.

Before the King returned into England, Colonel Henry Cromwell, Son of Sir
Oliver Cromwell, obtained license of the King to change that hateful name into
Williams, which was the name of this Family, before they married with a
Daughter and Heir of of Cromwell, which was upon Condition they should take her
Name as well as Estate.

FINIS.

