ANSWER To a Book called the Fanatic History: Published with the Approbation
of diverse Orthodox Divines (so called) and Dedicated to the King by RICHARD
BLOME. (Against the QUAKERS^)

WHICH Being Examined and Tried, is found to be a Packet of Old Lies, many of
which was seven years since presented to the Little Parliament: and since to
other Parliaments and Protectors: which by us was Answered and Confuted in the
Year 1653. many other Lies and false Reports is gathered up since by them:
which herein is Answered and Disproved.

And herein also is a short Relation of the twelve changes of Governments which
have bin in this Nation in those eight years, under all of which we have
suffered and been persecuted for that Truth, which we yet stand Witnesses for,
against all its Opposers.

Richard Hubberthorne. James Nayler.

Oh England! In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, and in the midst
of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger.

In thee have they vexed the fatherless and the W^dow, In thee have they taken
gi^^^ t^ shed blood, Ezekiel. 22.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1660.

In Answer to the Epistle directed to KING CHARLES.
FRIEND,
THou seems to dedicate thy book of false accusations to King Charles, and
would put it upon him (as matter of his duty) to be patron thereof, but it is a
wisdom in all men, but especially in Rulers, to know what they Father, or take
upon them to defend; in this day when the old lier and murderer is at work in
the earth, seeking, and creeping into every several government to stir them up
that are in present power, by false accusations to persecute Gods innocent
people, yea, what power has risen in this age of men, which have not been by
flattering titles tempted hereunto, and also overcome, by a sort of teachers
and people, which are not children of peace, nor have wrought peace in these
nations, Pro. 4.16.
or the rulers thereof, but blood falls, and overturnings, and if King Charles
look to be established in peace, and truth, and Righteousness; which is the
anointing of God, then he must not patronize lies, Prove. 20.12. Not countenance
wickedness and envy, Pro. 20.8. and 26.

Pro. 39.14


which is the substance of thy book which thou would have defended, and
against a harmless people, whom thou would have him suddenly to restrain,
and that under pretense of defending Christ's faith; But friend: Eccles. 5.8
to restrain people from following the light of Christ in their consciences,
and his truth in their inward parts, is not to defend his faith, which faith is
a mystery and held in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9
And they that follow the Lamb are led by his spirit and truth in their inward
parts, John 16.13.
and this the eternal God of Heaven and Earth requires, and seeks such to
worship him, and this to restrain is not the Kings safety, nor the work of his
sword, John 4.24. Psalm. 82.
nor are you the friends of his establishment in Gods peace, who would put him
upon it, to please your bloody spirits. But to restrain open ^rofainness, and
to be a terror to evil doers, Romans 13.3
and to preserve people from the fist of wickedness, and to d^liver the poor
and helpless from him that is too strong for him, and to bring judgment into
the gates, and make it free for all sorts of people, Amos 5.15.
without respect of persons, or opinions, that the ^vil doer may be punished,
and the well doer encouraged, in every corner of the nations, that when God
come to enquire for innocent blood or oppression, it may not be found, nor
violence in the land, This is that which God looks for at the hands of Kings
and Rulers, that they bear not the sword in vain, and this you cry not for,
Isa. 5.7.
by which his authority maybe owned of God, and subjected for conscience sake,
but you would have that in the conscience strifled and restrained, Isa. 32.7.
and then what is all obedi^nce worth toward God, or men, or Rulers, but to
follow any thing that is set up, and be true in heart to naught, and many such
spirits will be found in this nation, if ever King Charl^s stand in need to
prove them, further then by flattery, and self e^as, as those have f^und that
was before him, And whether it will be his wisdom to fall upon the tender Lambs
of Christ, and seek to restr^in them from following their leader, and so
procure his wrath, for pleasing these spirits; let the wise in heart judge, who
have duly observed Gods appearance toward such a work, all along in this age.

And whereas thy complaint is, that if his Majesty put not forth his Royal
hand and power to restrain us, we are so seducing, that (in a little time) we
will defuse our poison over the better part of his kingd^m, for naught but a
Royal Authority can stifle it.

I say then, what is become of your spiritual weapons, have not your teachers
told people, of the str^ngth of truth, and the power of godlin^ss, have you
lost both (may wisd^m say) and run you now to the arm of flesh to get errors
stifled (as you call them) or else your hope is lost, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.

Ephesians. 6.12* etc.


and your faith fails you, did ever any of Christ's ministers leave their
spiritual weapons, to run to the arm of flesh, or a carnal weapon to stop
seducers, I say no, this they never did, but with spiritual weapons, they
wrestled and overcame spiritual wickedness, and with that cut down heresies,
blasphemi^s, and false worships, and cl^ared the Churches of Christ of them,
and drove them down before them in the world, for none could resist the spirit
by which they spoke of all the false priests* Acts 6.10
and false worshipers, but being put to worse, they cried (as you say) to
rulers and people, Act^ 21.28

Acts 17.5.6.


help us or all will be over run for they that turn the world upside down are
come hither, (mind your cry) and then the rude multitude run as heaps upon
them, and made tumults often, and fell upon them with staves, and fists,
assaulted the houses, that entertained them as yours do; and so haled them
before rulers, who take their part herein, and put them in prisons, and often
whipped them, unless it were some that were so noble as not to heed the cry of
their multitudes, Acts 25.15, 16.
but would hear their cause and give leave to speak before they would sentence
them that was accused, and this was the nobility of heathen Kings and rulers,
and do not you seek to make Englands Rulers worse, least heathens rise up in
the day of judgment against them who are called christians and condemn them.

And in this your cry for help, against so contemptible a people you (like
silly women) do but discover your weakness and worthlesness, and if God open
the eye of King Charles, he will see it, what have you pr^^ched and wrestled
your selves out of all hope and says, that either sudden help from him, or
all is lost and overrun? Surely it may be said you have been bad watchmen, and
idle shepherds, who have lost all if sudden help come not from another hand,
now if some had come against you with carnal weapons, then had you had some
excuse in crying to the earthly*powers, but in that nothing but spirit comes,
against spirit, and yet has lost the day, this does clearly manif^st the power
of God you have not in you, but have lost the kingdom of the most high, and so
are become unreasonable men, who would have two weapons against one, 2 These.
3.2.
and another to do your work, and yet are unwilling to forego your wages; yea;
this advantage you have had diverse years, but have not prevailed therewith. And
whereas then say, thy book is of great consequ^nce, an^ ^o then presum^s to
make King Charles the patron of it, and th^n ask^s pardon for thy presumption,
when thou have done.

I say so thou have n^ed, the substance of thy bo^k, being made up of false
acc^^ations, gathered up out of books formerly written against us, which have
been disproved by answers several times over, and to these thou have added some
few accusations as false as the old, and spied out the failings of some few, who
have mourned before God, that ever they should give occasion to the enemy of
God so to blaspheme, And many things which was done and spoken by others who
are not of us, nor ever was, and of this is thy book made up, as any may see
who reads it, and our several Answers to the charges therein, many of them of
several years standing, against these false accusations, which have most of
them been printed over and over, and presented to the former powers that have
risen, and as often Answered; so there needed no more to be said then has been,
were it not for the sakes of some who may yet be strangers to your way of
dealing toward us, under every power that has been, now discretion will say,
that to make another man the father of such a work to which he is a stranger,
(but especially a King) is presumption indeed, rashness and folly, and needs a
pardon.

And whereas you now say, that none but a Royal Authority can stifle; Its
true, you have tried Parliaments, and Protectors, (as you called them) and
Parliaments again, and to make them then work for you, your Priests used these
arguments to them, (to wit) that in the late wars they had exposed lives,
liberties, estates and relations, with all personal advantages, in maintaining
the just proceedings of Parliament, and from them you then claimed our
stiflings, as the price of your p^ayers, purses, hazards, losses, banishment,
and blood, as may be read in thy Westmoreland petition against us, which thou
have printed, in Page. 197. and 198. And was not this power, that, which you
then called the common enemy in the same petition, Page 200. Which you now cry
too, and would put him upon that work against us now, as defender of your
faith, etc. Ah! faithless generation you have been, to God and man, may you not
shame with this work, to print it and send it to King Charles, and call him to
defend it, and patronize it, how has envy bereaved you of your reasonable
senses, shall he who defends this, defend either faith or truth, but this is
that you may cover your selves with your shame and envy, that both King, and
people, and Parliaments may see what a generation you are, that will run under
any power to get your bloody ends, but indeed true to none, for if it was true,
that you was so faithful to that Parliament, with your prayers, purses, and
blood, as there you plead, then is your faith but new which now you would have
defended, but if not true, then how great deceivers, and how little to be
trusted, or defended in your crueldesignes.

The King that faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be established for
ever. But if a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked, Prove.
29.12.14.

And to thee who has set forth this book of mischief, I say with the
Soripture, Lay not wait (O wicked man) against the dwelling of the Righteous,
spoil not his resting place, f^r a just man falls seven times, and rises up
again, Mica 7.8.
but the wicked falls into mischief, Prove. 24.15, 16.

J. N.

THe day is come that the Scripture is fullfilled which the Lord spoke by his
Prophet Isaiah ^4.25. That he will make the Diviners mad, and that they shall
every one be ashamed of his Vision, Zack. 13.4. Micah 6.7. the which does now
evidently appear, and their Folly is made manifest unto all that will see and
behold it, according to 2 Timothy 3.9. And is not this manifest Madness and Folly
in them called Orthodox and Divines, to present unto the King their Packet of
lies, which have been seven years told over, and so long since disproved and
confuted, as may be seen in a Book called Saul's Errand, etc. Printed in the
year (1654.) and in several other Books since? It already has been and i^ now
manifest unto all men of sober understandings, that these men falsely called
Orthodox and Divines, have had no defense, either to vindicate themselves, or
disprove the people called Quakers, but this refuge of lies, which they first
presented to the Parliament sitting in (52.) likewise to all other Parliaments
which have been since that time, and to the two Protectors, and now to this
present King i^ directed, and you presumptuously charge him to be the Patron to
it, requiring him to defend those lies which you falsely call the Faith. But
this we know, according as it is written, Prove. 29.12, 19. that If a Ruler
hearken to lies, all his Servants are wicked, but a wise King scatters the
wicked and brings the Wheel over them.

These pretended Divines are such as have bowed and crowched under every
appearance of a power, and by Flatteries seem to cleave unto them, that they
might uphold, maintain and satisfy their God, which is their Bellies; these
were of them which said that Oliver Cromwell was the light of their Eyes, and
the breath of their Nostrils, so that now with shame they might rather confess
that they are blind and dead (from the light and life of God) than to multiply
lies in their accustomed manner as formerly. These also were of them that said
Oliver Cromwell was Moses, who had led them into a fight of the good Land, and
that Richard his Son, was Joshua, which should lead them into the Possession;
but we with many more do see that their Ho^e is false, and their Faith also
proved vai^, and that they are not yet in the Land of Promise, for there no
liars comes. And those former Rulers hearkening to their lies was decei^^d by
them, which was the cause of Gods Judgments, and an utter destruction coming
upon them, which while they put into the Priests Mouths, they cried peace unto
them, calling them Moses, Aaron, and Joshua, but when they ceased and could not
put into their Mouths then cried out that Moses and Josh^a was Tyrants, and
Oppressors, and so will they do unto the King now, who are seeking to cleave
unto him by Flattery and Deceit, which if he deny to be the Patron and
Defender of their lies, will cry as much against him, so that he or they are
blessed, whose Ears are not open unto their Clamors, but whose Hearts are
joined to the Truth, and who is led by the Spirit of God as their Instructor,
for such shall discern Hypocrites and False-hearted men under every pretense of
Flattery or Dissimulation, for the Folly of these begins to be manifest unto
all men, 2 Timothy 3.9.

Now as in Answer unto the History concerning John Tolderrey, asserted by a
company of Priests, as Brooks, Cocking, Goodwin, Jenking, J^comb, Alderrey,
Tombs, and Pool, whom themselves say that they have but perused a part, as page
99. and yet pretend to witness the whole, whose witness is disproved and
denied by the same John Tolderrey, both by his own Book given forth from him,
and by his Life and Conversation, being now a living witness, not against, but
for the Way, Doctrine, Principle and Practice, which the Quakers do live in,
against those lies published abroad concerning him.

And as for thy Charge thou have against J. N. through the everlasting mercy of
my God, I have yet a being amongst the living, and breath to answer for my
self, though against the intents of many bloody cruel Spirits, who pursued my
Soul unto death (as much as in them lay) in that day of my calamity, when my
Adversary was above; And wherein I was made a sign to a back sliding
Generation, who then would not see nor hear what now is coming upon them, but
rejoiced against this piece of Dust, and had little pity toward him that was
fallen into their hands, wherein God was just in giving me up for my
Disobedience, for a little moment, as a Father to correct, yet should not they
have sought to aggravate things against me as thou do, for it was a day of
deep distress, and lay sore upon my Soul, and the pitiful God s^w it, who
though he was a little displeased, ye his thoughts was not to cast off for
ever, as it is at this day, glory be to his name from my delivered Soul
eternally.

And in that day there was many Spirits flocked about me, and some whom while
my Candle shone upon my Head, I ever judged, and kept out from me, who then got
up and acted, and spoke several things not in the light and truth of God, by
which they who sought occasion against me then was strengthened to afflict this
Body; and he that watches for evil in thee and some others, makes use on still
against Gods truth and innocent people, whose Mouths the God of my mercy stop,
and so finish the trouble of my heart as to that thing, for my Soul has long
dwelt among Lions, even among them that are set on Fire, whose Teeth are spears
and ar^ows, and their Tongues a sharp sword, speaking mischievous things to
shed blood.

But oh man, or men, what ever you be whose work it is to gather together the
failings of Gods people in the time of temptation, or nigh^ of their trial, and
aggravate them, and add thereto the wickedness and mi^chi^vous lies of your
own hearts, as thou have done in thy Book, and then come out with those against
Gods everlasting holy truth it to reproach, I say you are set on work by an
evil Spirit, and you do but show your selves to be enemies to God and his
Children: And it is our sorrow that any of us should give such Spirit^ occasion
to Blaspheme, and it has been trouble of Soul to all the people of God, that
have ever loved righteousness, when they thus have occasioned the Joy of the
wicked, or to feed that man that watches for iniquity, and feeds on mischief;
yet know this, you that art of that brood, God will not cast off his people,
though he be sometimes provoked to correct them, even before their Adversaries
(which is a sign to them) yet is his anger but for a moment, and his favor
shall return as streams of life, Then shall the food be taken out of the mouth
of the Viper, and the prey from between the Teeth of the Devourers, and God
shall feed them with their own vomit, and the poison that has long lain under
their Tongues, shall be bitter in their own Bowels, thus will God certainly
plead with Zions Enemies, as he bends her Sons for himself, and God will make
up her breaches; And this has my Soul seen, Jacobs Captivity restored, and
the Diggers of the Pit are fallen therein, neither has he smitten him as he
smote them that smote him, Or is he slain according to the slaughter of them
that are slain by him, but this is all his fruit to purge away his sin.

So he that had long watched for my faltering then got advantage against me,
yet had I then power to bear his utmost envy, through Christ Jesus whom I then
confessed before men, who then was my support in all and under all, and who is
over all, blessed for ever of all who have proved him in the depth.

But that which was and is the sorrow of my heart, is the advantage the Enemy
then took against the name of Christ, his Truth, and his despised People, in
that time of Temptation, which is that which thou art now persuing with hatred
and lies, as that I had a Woman in bed with me the night before I suffered at
Bristol, when there was six or seven Persons in the Room that night, and a man
(to wit) Robert Rich in bed with me; But this and several other false things
thou have written in thy Bo^k, of which I am clear before the Lord, so they
touch me not at all, nor shall I here mention them against thee in particular,
but to God alone I look, in his time to be cleared from all offenses, in his
sight, who only knows my heart in this thing, in whose presence I can say, that
nothing is more odious and burdensome to my soul, than that any of that glory
or wo^ship which belongs to God, or to Christ, should be given to flesh and
blood, in my self or others; and how it was with me at that day, many talk of
but few knows, so the Judgment of such I bear, desiring that none in Judging
me, might have condemned themselves in Gods sight, whose Counsels are a great
deep, and the end of his works past finding out, till he himself reveal them,
but in the end he will be Justified of all, and in all he does, that all flesh
may be silent before him.

And however my self or many others may be left to themselves to be tried in
the night, yea should any utterly fall, or whatever may be act^d by any man or
woman that is not Justifiable in Gods sight, yet in vain do thou, or you,
gather up sin, or watch for iniquity, to cast upon the light which condemns it
in every enlightened Conscience, and there will clear himself to be no Author
nor Actor therein, and I know by the Spirit of Jesus, which I have received,
and which works in me, that this is not his work, nor his seed, nor in him
that loves thy Enemies, thou art not, but the old accuser of the Brethren it is
that works, strongly in thee, and in the light which thou reproaches, art
thou seen to be the man that makes lies, and carries tales to shed blood, Ezekiel.
22 9.12.

Again concerning the false charge in Chapter the 5. page 108. concerning the
Quakers in North Wales.

That some Quakers had such swellings in their Bodies, shreekings and howlings,
that not only frighted the beholders, but caused Dogs to bark, Swine to cry,
and the Cattle to run about.

Answer, this Charge is altogether false, and not a word of Truth in it, as we
who live in North Wales, and have been constant at them meetings do testify,
John ap John, Roger ap John; and as for William Spencer, that is false also,
that any humming or hissing was heard by him, or that any Quaker did lay his
H^ad on his Shoulders, or Blow toward his Mouth, as the F^ther of Lies has
said in the Phanatick History* Page 109.

Again also in the ^ame Page is another Slander cast upon the Quaker^ saying,
that in October the 9th 1654. in Durham, a Minister prayed amongst them, his
Legs trembling, and that they roared in a strange and hideous manner; which is
false; for there was no such thing, as many can witness, who was present at the
meeting.

And in Page 110. several Lies is repeated, without any proof, as that one
Bu^nt the Bible: and another appeared in Essex in such a sh^pe, a^ c^used them
to break up their meetings; Another concerning James Purnell in Colchester,
that when he would have eaten could not; which is all false, and there is no
proof for any of those things, but the false Accusations of our Opposers, as
for instance R. B. his Quaeres is brought, (for a proof to the first,) as
Quaery the 10th. Do not some of you say the Bible ought to be burnt, etc.? Our
Answer is, No, for it ought to be read, believed and fulfilled; and yet the
impudency of those that put forth the Phanatique History is not ^shamed to say
that we b^rn the Bible, or dissuade men from reading it, but all People who are
not given up to b^lieve Lies may know to the contrary, and may know that there
is no People in the Nation that does more honor the Scriptures, by living the
life of them, and fulfilling that which they speak, than we do, and that shall
be our chief Witness against all our Oppose^s and Accusers, whereby they shall
be ashamed.

Again, whereas several is accused ^s for going naked;

Nakedness is a sit sign for you who are covered with Lie^ and Unright^ousness,
and as the Prophet Isai^h was called of the Lord to be a^ a sign to the
Egyptians and Ethiopians, first in Sackcloath, and then naked and bare foot,
and to walk so for three years as a sign and wonder amongst them, Isaiah 20.2,
3. which things would have been a Subject for those pretended Orthodox Divines
to have published Books from, and so to have accused him to be mad, or a
Phanatick, or bewitched, as they do accuse some now, which do it in obedience
to the Lord, and as signs unto them; And those that do thus accuse from the
ground of enmity, they must be as much uncovered from that Veil of Darkness
that is over their, Hearts, before ever they see God, as ever any Quaker wa^
naked or uncovered outwardly; and when that comes to pass, the Scorner will
leave his scorning, and the wicked man his way, and turn to the Lord, and will
leave reproaching of the Quakers.

Again, others are accused for coming into the Church, so called, and for
working of Needle Work;

Answer, whether is it better to do the thing which is useful and lawful,
than for a man to preach for hire in that place, which is a thing which God
has always declared against since that sinful practice came up, for it is
that which in all Ages has grieved his holy Spirit, and has been testified
against by his Prophets, his Son, and his Apostles, as you may read, Isaiah
56.10, 11. Jer. 5.30, 31. Mica. 3.11. Ezekiel. 34.1, 2, 3. John 10.12. Titus 1.10,
11.

And God is yet bearing his Testimony against all such, both by words and
actions, for they that preach for filthy lucre do not serve the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Bellyes, as the Lord is now plainly making manifest unto
many thousands, and will also manifest it more and more, Titus 1.10, 11.

Many other Lies and false Accusations is gathered up in this Phanatick
History, Page 114, and 115. and no proof for any of them, but that lying Book
called Hell broke loose, put forth by Tho. Underhill, whom God did manifest his
indignation against, for while he was gathering up those Lies now published in
the Phanatick History, before he could perfect his work, God cut him off in his
wickedness, and so that Scripture was fulfilled upon him, The wicked shall not
live out half his days, and all those that do succeed him in the same work
shall receive the same reward, for God is just, and will reward every man
according to his work. Which Lies and Accusations in that Book related is
answer^d by Francis Howgill in his Book called, The pits mouth stopped, etc.

Another false Slander is charged upon the Quakers, that in September 1659.
there was a discovery of diverse Witches in and near Shirebourn in Dorset
shire, there being near two hundred of them at one meeting, most of them
Quakers and Anabaptists, and that five of them was committed to Dorset shire
Gaol, and have confessed, etc. and says likewise that they did torment,
bewitch and destroy Mr. Leyford Minister of Shirebourn, tormenting him with a
sharp painful Disease that he dyed, and that Mr. Bamfield his Successor they
forced by their Witchcraft to desert the Town.

Answer here thou have proved the Ministers to be under the power of
Witchcraft, and not in the power of God, and so no Ministers of Christ; for
they could not be bewitched but had power over that unclean Spirit, A^ they
would have, if they were in the power of God.

But there was no discovery of any Witches amongst the Quakers, neither was
there ever any of the Quakers that ever did confess or wa^ proved to be
Witches, for the Quakers is in that life and spirit, which the Devil and
Witches have no power over, and therefore it is that the Devil, Witches, False
Prophets, Hirelings, and Deceivers is so enraged against us, and so these being
but all forged lies, which may be manifestly known to all people which desire
to know the Truth, does prove nothing against us, but does fulfill the
Scripture, which says, that all manner of evil shall be spoken against us
falsely for his names sake, who suffered the like contradiction of Sinners, as
we do now, for they said, that he had a devil and did deceive the people; and
unto us the bearing of his reproaches is as great Riches, although it be so be
called Devils, Witches and Deceivers for his sake: for we have his witness in
our selves that we are of God, and that of God in all men's consciences shall
bear witness unto us.

And as for thy saying, That some Quakers killed their mother, following the
light within them. It is Answered, That there was such a thing done in
Yorkshire, but that they ever bore the name of Q^akers, is utterly false, as
thousands can witness but was of your own Generation: Neither does following
the light of Christ within, teach to do any such thing, as thou blasphemously
wou^dst reproach it, whose coming is to save life, and not to destroy it: And
though he come to make an end of sin, both original and actual, yet it is
through his own blood, and not with the blood of others: So thy charge herein
is blasphemous and false in this thing, and in diverse other particulars which
thou mentionest against the Truth and its followers. As concerning the
Physician in Lincoln which thou tellest of, and the Maid in London which thou
tellest of, and diverse other particulars, which are falsehoods, grounded upon
the enmity of him, who was a Liar from the beginning, and are not worth the
mentioning after thee, neither can any moderate spirit who have any taste of
Truth in their own hearts, be easily drawn to believe such things, which have
so little face of truth with them, but is apparent fruit of enmity: And as
thou tells of some Quakers dancing, some cursing and swearing, some killing and
murdering, and immoderate familiarity with women, and many such things,
against which our God has set us living witnesses both in life and doctrine,
as all that knows us can testify, so, much need not to be said in our defense
as to those accusations, being that our lives preaches the contrary where we
come in all parts of the Nation, as it is well known, none dwells with us in
the light of Jesus, who act any of these thing, and live in them and repent
not, but with you and your hearers these things are found (who are our Enemies,
accusers, and persecuters) lived in, and justified, by Teachers and people is
diverse of these things unto this day, against which we are witnesses.

An^ as for thy saying a Quaker at Dover when he came to die, said he expected
Salvation by his own works, and not by Christ; and thy bringof John Davis a
Priest for a witness hereto] To which we say, that John Davis having been
asked hereof, seems to deny it: however this we testify to be our Faith in
Christ Jesus, that by him only and through obedience to his works we are
justified, and not in our own.

And whereas thou accusest some of us for saying to a Priest, Now is our day,
and we will have you down.] To this we say, the day is come in which you are
seen, and the fall of Antichrist, but for any such words or intention in us of
violence toward you, our hearts are clear before God, and he that shall either
threaten or act so toward you, we deny.

And whereas thou accusest E. B. for saying, Give the Priests blood to drink,
for they are worthy. Its well known to many, that through the Priests, yea, by
their own hands, have several of our bloods been shed, yet did never we attempt
to shed any of yours or theirs, nor ever shall do, for it is the whore, and her
worship that has in her the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and all that are
slain upon the Earth for the Testimony of Jesus, of whom the Spirit of God has
said, Give her blood to drink, for she is worthy. And we have this testimony in
our Conscience toward the most blood-thirsty of you, That we had rather see
your repentance, than that Scripture fulfilled upon you; though these words E.
B. might use in obedience to the same Spirit, to those who continue in that
spiritual Babylon.]

And for any Quaker, way-laying the Minister of Cowwould (as thou calls him)
justling him by the way, and drawing his sword half way.

We say, This is as false as the rest, and the Minister himself thou
mentionest, denies it, and said, If it was spoken concerning him, he would give
his hand against it, before Humph: Killingbeck, and Rob. Thornden, who went to
him properly about that business to enquire it out: And thus thy false
accusations returns upon thy own head, to thy shame.

As that open falsehood concerning William Naylor, brother to James, coming into
Savoy Church (as thou calls it) and there bellowing and affrighting the people
that they ran away, etc.

When as James Naylor had never a brother, that ever came in London, nor within
above fifty miles of it. Oh shameless Man! it is time for thee to conceal thy
name, when thou undertakes such a work as is all along in this thy book, wherein
is a loathsomeness to any sober Spirit to follow thee in thy lies, or read them
after thee, so we leave many of them unmentioned in particular, as knowing they
need no further answer, but the savor they carry in themselves toward every
sober mind that reads them.

As for Mary Todd coming into the B^ll and Mouth pulling up her coats, and
walking up and down the room, and using base expressions, whilst some of the
Quakers were speaking.

To this we say, she neither was nor is any Quaker, but a Ranter, who came
thither to oppose the Quakers, as many unclean spirits have done, nor was this
action done in our Meeting, our Meeting not being that day in that place. So
this is like the rest.

Again, thou mentionest things which thou call our Opinions, and thy charge
in general is, That let our tenants be never so diametrically opposite to the
written verity, yet we will father it upon the Spirit of truth, and will make
him the Inspirer of these falsities: and that we make Christ the light within
us, to hold out palpable darkness.

To which we say, As thy charge is general and signifies little, so it is
false, for by the Spirit of Truth and Christ the light within us, do we
witness the verity fulfilled, and not contradicted, and by the same are we
made opposite to the Spirit of darkness, and all its false worships.

And though we may say that the Spirit of Christ is the same that it was, and
so not unequal to it self, in whom, or at what time soever it appears,
according to the Measure of his appearance, yet is he ever the Spirit of Truth,
and not against verity, whether written or spoken, but is the same that leads
into a^l Truth, as of himself he bears testimony; and we must say, that his
speaking in his living Temples, is of greater Authority with us and all the
living, whom he has quicked with his appearance, than the reading of the
letter was, or is, to them who are without him, being dead in their sins, and
reprobate in their understandings, through the darkness of their hearts,
reading the Scriptures without the Spirit that gave them forth; and this may
answer thy accusation of George Whitehead, and the question that was asked him.

And for thy seeking to make us as the Papists; First, in that the Pope to them
is an Infallible Judge; Secondly, Written traditions equal to the written word.

We answer, What is that to us, who deny both the Pope, his infallibility and
his traditions, they are none of them binding unto us, look you to that, who
have the remainder of that Idolatry yet upon you in several things, which might
be instanced: But, blind man, what a Comparison is this of thine? Is it become
an offense to say the Spirit of Christ is infallible, and to confess him come,
who leads into all truth? Are we Papists in thy account for this? You have too
long made people follow you, while you have been without that Spirit, and
little else have you to teach people but traditions, who have not the
Infallible Spirit to lead you in your worships and doctrine. And so thy
accusation I return upon thy own head.

And we can say no less of the Spirit of Truth and his word at this day, than
the holy Men of God have ever done in whom he has appeared: to wit, that he is
the same, and his power the same, and his word the same, which lives for ever,
and by which we now are armed and strengthened to withstand as great
wickedness, and enlightened to see as great deceit in Teachers and people at
this day (we have cause to believe) as ever appeared in the World, from which
we could not be delivered by our own wisdom, reading or hearing of the letter,
till God sent the Spirit of Truth in the name of Jesus into us, to enlighten
our understanding in the Scriptures, and against all spiritual wickedness, and
deceitful worships, to quicken us with his power: so to us he is the power,
and to him is the glory and the confession, who lives for ever, and his days
waxes not old, nor his voice feeble, nor his arm short, because many
generations pass away before him, and this is he that was before the letter,
who can work without the letter, or with it, and this is he whom men that know
not have often opposed at his coming, and have been broken for it, though they
professed the letter; and this may answer thy accusation of George Fox, or any
other who have spoken any thing in the honor of his Appearance, the power of
his world, or the danger of them that oppose it, in this his day, as well as
formerly, though we boast not of the fulness of our measure herein, that is
but thy accusation,

And for thy accusation, that we deny the Personal body of Christ, His coming
in the Clouds to Judgment, The visible Church, And thy saying we are against
Scriptures, and against Ordinances, against Sabbaths, taking no notice of the
morality of the fourth Commandment, That we say the Doctrine of Original
Corruption is a Soul-destroying, God-blaspheming Doctrine, That we are against
Justification, and Religiou^ Education, etc.

These are but thy false accusations, not our Judgment, nor our words, but
thou have gathered the false accusations of the Priest^ of New Castle, and
other slanderous Spirits, and this is the ground, proof and foundation of thy
Charge, which has been several times answered, over-turned in the first rising
of them, as may be seen in the Answers to The perfect Pharisee, and Saul's
Errand, and in a Book called The Pits mouth stopped, by Fran. Howgill, and
several other Books to be seen, in which your Folly is made manifest, and what
we own, which is according to Scripture, and what we deny, which is your
traditions and false worships, never set up by God, nor practiced by his
people, to which Books we refer the Reader for full satisfaction herein, And
also in a book called Love to the Last, by J. N. wherein these things are
plainly spoken of, And thou stumbles at the light, as all the children of
darkness must do, And thou says we are strangely confused, and know not well
how to distinguish, etc.

We say the confusion is in thy self, and thy dark mind, and not in us, we
stumble not who walk in light, but all that walk in darkness and hates the
light must needs stumble as thou do, but to us is the light known, Joh. 11.9,
10.
and him that dwells in it, to whom no mortal eye can approach, blessed for
ever, and this is our all, 1 Timothy 6.16.
and the Nations of them that are saved must walk in it, R^v. 21.24.
and the power that we have in it we know, and the want we have had without it
we know, so we speak glorious things of the light, and preach it before all its
enemies without amazement, for therein is the arm of God revealed, mighty to
save, though many cannot receive our report, but hates it, because their deeds
are evil, as thou do, Isa. 53.1. Joh. 3.80.
who calls it a natural Conscience, and then says, we find Christ called the
light, and of him said, that he lights every one that comes into the world;
Is not here the Confusion and Jumble thou tells on, in thy own dark old Bottle,
who cannot retain his Testimony, but calls the light of Christ natural, who thy
self art the natural man, that receives not the things of the spirit of God,
now the testimony that the Scriptures gives of him, who is the light of the
world, whom we make our all, as thou say;

And for that of perfection.
Thou charges us for saying that those that have received Christ and God, are
come to perfection, and that all such as are in Christ are without sin.

To which we say, yea he that comes to God and Christ, comes to perfection, and
to him that is able to save from sin to the uttermost, and he that abides in
Christ sins not, as says the Scritures, Heb. 7.25. 1 John 3.6. and this
perfection is in Christ, and not of our selves, and so is this freedom also and
to him it is given, and confessed, and not to flesh and blood, nor any carnal
appearance, But what seed art thou of to whom perfection and sanctification is
so offensiv^, Mat. 5.48. Heb. 6.1.
which Christ and his Ministers commanded and preached.

And as to discerning.
Thou accuses us for saying, That the Saints by the Spirit that is in them can
judge men's hearts, and that such judging is Christ's judging of them; and that
Christ shall judge no where but in the Saints, and for this accusation thou
quotes Naylors Answer to Pendarvis.

Wherein thou wrongs Naylor, for he does not say, that Christ shall judge no
where but in the Saints, nor that People may judge men's hearts by every Spirit
that is in them: but this we say, that the Spirit of Christ has given to some
discerning of Spirits, and the Spiritual man judges all things, as says the
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.15. 1 Cor. 12.10. and this Privilege the Saints had by the
Spirit of Christ in them, and the same we witness, every one according to our
measure as we have received the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 11, 12.

And thou chargest one Nicholas Kate, to have said, 1. That Marriage was made by
man, 2. that Christians were worse than Beasts, 3. that any woman was as free
to him as his Wife, 4. that his Wife was no Wife of his, she was a Limb of the
Devil, 5. that he was holy, and all things that he touched were holy, 6. that
when the fullness of time was come he should work Miracles.

To which we say, the man we know not, neither the truth of thy Accusations,
for they may be as false of him in these things as thou art found in many other
things concerning others; yet to the first of these we say, that though true
Marriage be of God, and that which has his blessing, yet there be too many
Marriages at this day made without God, in the lust; To the 2d. we say, that
there be many who are called Christians, that by nature are worse than Beasts,
and b^ practice also, though none deserve the name of Christians truly but such
as are in Christ Jesus, and being sanctified by his Spirit, such are holy, as
says the Scripture: ^or the rest we leave it, as that which is none of ours.

Thou further accuses us for saying, that the Redeemer of man is not that
Person, the Son of man that dyed at Jerusalem, but the light which is in every
particular man, etc.

To which we say, thy Accusation is false, for we own no other Redeemer but
that Person the Son of God, that dyed at Jerusalem, who is the light within us,
and the light of the world, as he said of himself, John 8.12. though this be a
mystery to thee, and tha^ which has been hid from Ages, even Christ in us the
hope of glory, Col. 1.

Again, thou accusest us for saying, The Scripture is not the way to find out
the knowledge of Christ, but a turning the mind within, etc.

To which we say, Christ is the way, the light, and the life, and no man comes
to the knowledge of him, but by the Father, Mat. 11.27. nor to the knowledge of
the Father but by him, though men without both may read the Letter, as the Jews
did, whom thou tells on, and their searching of the Scripture who for all that,
never came to the knowledge of Christ, nor would they come to him that they
might have life. So ignorant is flesh and blood of his way, and knowledge, from
the Letter; and therefore we do say, that without first turning to the light
and Spirit of Christ, there is no coming to him, nor his knowledge, Luke 10.22.

And for the Blasphemies thou chargest against us; as first, that we say we are
equal with God, as holy, just, and good as God himself; and this thou says was
affirmed by George Fox and James Naylor before Witnesses.

To which J. N. says, thy Charge is utterly false concerning me, who in the
presence of God can say, that I never spoke these words secr^t nor open, nor
did it ever enter into my heart so to think of my self. It is true George Fox
was accused at Lancaster of saying, that he was equal with God; and to his
Answer we refer you for satisfaction, as it is in Saul's errand, Page. 10, 11.
Which answer is in these words, Answ. That was not so spoken, Heb. 2.11.
but that he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are of one, and the
Saints are all one in the Father and the Son of his Flesh, and of his Bone;
this the Scripture does witness, Ephesians. 5.30.
and ye are the Sons of God, and the Father and the Son are one, and they that
are joined to the Lord are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. they that are joined to an
Harlot a^e one flesh: But as for saying he was as holy, just and good as God
himself, this was never charged upon him.

And many other such false charges are laid upon us, which we are not guilty
of, and which there is no proof for, from our words or writings, as that we
should say, that we are more perfect than Christ, and that Christ is a sinner,
and that we should call the Apostles carnal men, with other things of that
nature, which we neither thought, spoke, nor writ, and so these things being
disowned and disproved by us, is returned back again to be condemned with the
accuser of the brethren from whence they did arise.

Again, as concerning the dispute at Cambridge (which thou mentions in the
Fanatic History) put forth by T. S. that is answered, and his false
accusations disproved, by George Whitehead, in a book called, The Key of
Knowledge not found in the University of Cambridge; which is to be sold at the
Black spread-Eagle in Martyns; And also the false Relation of the disputation
at Sandwich is answered, and the truth of it clearly declared.

Again, concerning thy relation in the 11. Chapter of the Phanatique History,
of the Petition of diverse Ministers in Westmerland, etc. the substance of
clamors therein expressed, and the charges against G^o. Fox, and Ja. Nailor is
fully answered to satisfaction of those that desire to understand the Truth, in
a book called Saul's Errand, which is to be sold at the B^ack spread Eagle at
the West end of Paul's.

And as for thy Narrative of public proceedings against the Quakers in diverse
Counties and Cities, and how they were imprisoned without the breach of any
Law, and for speaking the word of the Lord as they were moved; and because they
could not swear, and because they were signs against pride; these things does
all testify for us, how innocently we have suffered, and how unchristianlike
they have been, that have so persecuted us for doing the will of God, in love
to their souls who have thus hated us. And our being so hated, persecuted and
imprisoned by the Powers that have ruled in this Nation, do plainly show unto
those of understanding, that they have wanted the Spirit of Christ, Love,
Meekness, Mercyfulness; and have showed Cruelty without Mercy, therefore the
same measure which they have given unto others, is justly come upon themselves;
and he that would provoke the Magistrates now to persecution, as others that
have gone before them, they would bring them into the same Cause of
Condemnation, for which the Lord God might justly cut them off, as he has done
others which would not be warned in their day until their time was no more.

A short Relation of the twelve Changes of Government that has been in England
within these 8. years, under all of which we have suffered Persecution.
SInce by the Lord we were called, chosen, and separated to be his People, and
had unto us committed the word of Reconciliation, and since his eternal Power
broke forth and was manifest amongst us, has he done great things in the
Earth; for he has prepared his way, and made it plain before the face of all
people, by the appearance and testimony of his eternal light in their hearts:
which has not only the^e shined, but is broken forth into a life of
Righteousness in many whom the Lord has accounted worthy to be his Servants in
his work, to raise up a seed unto Jacob, and to gather the dispersed of Israel
and Juda, (both Jews and Gentiles) into the Covenant of Light and Life with the
Father, from whence the^ are erred by transgression: and for the accomplishing
of this Work and Service has the Lord furnished us with Spiritual Weapons, to
war even against Spiritual wickedness in high places, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And
against the Rulers of the Darkness of ^his world; Ephesians. 6.12. which has
appeared under many Forms and Governments since the breakings forth of truth in
this Nation. Yea many Heads or Governments has been raised up and cast down
again by one Hand and Power: and have all from the Lord (through his Servants)
had a word of Wisdom and Council ministered unto them, what they should do that
they might be established: which if they did not, the Lord would break them to
pieces: which word of the Lord was fulfilled upon them all. And every diverse
Head had a Horn in it, to push at the Lambs of Christ withal, and at every
appearance of his Spirit and Power in his People, but for his Elect sake was
their days shortened, and his breakings and destruction came upon them
according to his word spoken to them by his Servants at diverse times.

And it is to be observed as the Lords doing and ordering by his mighty Power,
that with in these eight years, since we have been persecuted and cruelly used
for the name and Testimony of Jesus, and the Answer of a pure Conscience, there
has been twelve Changes of Government in this Nation which have all of them
more or less been guilty of our Sufferings, either in acting against us, or
in suffering others to act cruelly, and not endeavoring to restrain them, when
they had power in their hands to do it, and the sufferings laid before them,
who suffered for Righteousness sake; so that they could not plead Ignorance,
but was left without excuse, which now in the day of their misery and
tribulation some of them do consider it when their time is no more.

1. As first in the time of the Long-Parliament, in the year (1652.) although
many pretended, some prayed, and some fought for Liberty of Conscience in
matters of Religion, and yet at that time were we imprisoned, beat, and
persecuted for obeying and worshipping our God in Spirit and Truth, according
to his teaching; and at that time the Priests Rage begun to burn like fire: and
they run one unto another, and kindled the wrath in one another against the
Truth, even to petition against the spreading of it (and those that walked in
it) as a dangerous thing; and they generally with one consent called the Truth,
Heresy, Delusion and Blasphemy: and those that ministered it abroad they
called Ringleaders of Sects, as in the Apostles days there was the like
example.

But these was warned in their day, not to persecute the Innocent, nor to
uphold those that preached for filthy lucre, who served not the Lord Jesus
Christ but their own Bellies; But they hearkened not to the Council of the Lord,
but shut their ears against his Instructions: therefore was their day taken
from them, and their Power given to another, that they also might be tried.

2. In the year (1653.) a Council of State was called, by (O.C.) but they did
nothing to take off the weight of oppression in the Nation, neither in
Spiritual nor Civil things, for Pride and the deceiptfulnesse of Riches entered
into their hearts, that they did not regard nor set themselves wholly to do
that which the Lord did require of them, although they were warned of God in
their time, yet the Yoke of the oppressor was not taken away, but under it the
Nation groaned, and they wrought no deliverance in the earth.

3. Then the Little Parliament sat in the same year, and there was a plant of
Righteousness (tending toward some equity and freedom) springing up in them,
but the strength of deceit and subtilty in others, did Quench it before it
brought forth any thing to perfection, and in that time the Priests fierce
persecuting Zeal, was so inflamed, that many Petitions from several parts of
the Nation was presented (against the Quakers) to the Parliament, and their
continual clamor, Petitions and Addresses (and they being regarded and harkned
unto) was one cause of the continuance of the Nations bondage and oppression,
and God never prospered such as received them into their Councils: or gave heed
to their reports, but a Curse and Destruction always followed them in their
undertakings, whose ear was open unto such things. And in the time of this
Power and Government, was persecution continued about Religion, though much was
pretended to the contrary; they also were warned, and wisely counseled in
their day, and so was left without excuse.

4. Again in the same year was (O.C.) made Protector who had his day, and power
in his hand to have done good, and to have done that which he and others
pretended, but he joining with the covetous Priests and their Interests, to
make his arm strong, thereby betrayed the Lord and his People, into the hands
of sinners. And instead of removing Persecution, he caused new Acts to be made
to Persecute by, and so brought a Curse upon himself, and Family, and
Tribulation upon those that trusted in him: And the Lord did often visit him
with reproofs and instructions, until he hardened his heart against all
reproof, and then was he given up of the Lord, and of his People, to his
appointed end, as an Example to all Hypoc^ites and Treacherous ones.

5. Again his second Parliament was called, and sat in the year 1654. in their
days was not the Land eased, nor freed from its bondage, and when they had let
in the Priests Spirit, and was insensed against the Truth, and intending to
make Laws to Persecute, then were they broken, and their power taken from them,
who in their day was warned, but did not the thing which the Lord required of
them.

6. Oliver's 3d. Parliament, which consisted of two Houses, sat in the year
1657. they more than any of the rest, did draw back into that which they had
declared against, and they let in the P^iests Persecuting Spirit, and made Laws
for Persecution, and many were Imprisoned in the time of their Government,
because for Conscience sake they could not pay Tithes to the Hireling Priests,
and because they could not Swear, contrary to Christ's command, Mat. 5. And they
had many warnings and admonitions from the Lord, which they rejected, and so
the Lord rejected them, as from doing his work.

7. Then Richard Cromwell in the year 1658. was made Protector, whom the
Priests flockt to, as their Rock of defense, that he as their Joshua might lead
them into their promised Land, which was but a Benefice of Tithes or
Augmentations, their prayed for Inheritance; and they told him that the Gospel
was bound up in him, and so did cleave unto him by Flatteries, as they did unto
all the rest before him for their own ends, but the suffering seed of God,
which could not Flatter him was not set free: who freely declared unto him the
word of the Lord, and instructions from the Almighty before his day was over.

8. And again his Parliament sat in the year (1659.) they continued and did
not free the Sufferers, and imprisoned ones, who suffered only for the worship
of their God, and for the exercise of a good Conscience; but they went on
swiftly in the way of their destruction, to impose Worships upon People, and to
decree unrighteous Decrees: and upon that Rock of Religion, they were broken as
others had been before them, though they were exhorted to righteousness, and
told of the evil that did come upon them.

9. The 9th. Government was again the Long-Parliament, who came in with great
Pretenses, and Resolutions, and Protestations to make this Nation a
Free-Commonwealth, not only in name but in nature; And they begun well, and to
call the Prisoners up to London who suffered for Conscience sake, and freed
some of them: and many of them intended to take away that great Oppression of
Tithes, whereby much deceit, and many Deceivers are held up in the Nation: and
then the Priests rage was kindled against them, and they cursed them in their
Pulpits, and preached up war against them, and themselves get Horses, Pistols
and Swords to fight for their Tithes and Maintenance: and when they were
routed, then they again petitioned the Parliament, some begging pardon, and
some pleading not guilty: and the Parliament was so blind, that upon their
Dissimulation they let in the Priests again; and begun to gratify the Priests,
and establish Tithes; and then the wrath of God broke forth against them, and
their Destruction was prophesied of, and told them that it should shortly come
upon them, as it came to pass: because they would not receive the Lords
Counsel in their day.

10. Then the Army and Committee of Safety (so called) had the Power and
Government in their hands, which they did not improve as they might have done
for the liberty of the Subjects: neither did they receive that counsel from the
Lord which would have opened their understandings how to have ruled for him,
but with corrupt reasonings among themselves perverted one another, and
confounded their own work, reasoning out the good and honest intentions of some
that was amongst them, until they all became as a heap of Confusion, and their
work broken to pieces. A just reward of their own devices, and following the
counsels of their own hearts; neglecting the Advice of that Spirit of
righteousness which should have led and also established them in the work of
the Lord in the Nation: so as unworthy and disobedient were they cast out.

11. Then again the Long-Parliament had another day of Trial given them into
their hands, but a mad Zeal and Fury attended them, against the honest and
upright-hearted people; and the Fury of the Oppressor was highly exalted
amongst them, bu^ning like Fire, in which they could not contain themselves,
nor possess their own Spirits in quietness; in which Fury was Folly: the
effects of which did betray and destroy both themselves and others. They being
diverted from their first intentions, and desire after righteousness: a just
recompense of reward for their Disobedience came upon them, according to many
true Testimonies from the Lords Servants unto them; which if in time their Ears
had been open to the Lords instructions, and their Hearts inclined to
righteousness, that swift and sudden destruction had not so soon come upon
them: but they being blinded with Fury in their anger, would neither hear nor
see, that which was the effect of their own work, nor the Lords hand of Justice
near come upon them; as now they may consider it.

12. The Secluded Members then came in as a rod of Gods anger, and of Justice,
or a prey upon them; and it was manifest to the seeing Eye that God had tu^ned
his hand against all those which had abused his Power, and neglected his work,
who had sought and set up themselves, instead of the Lord and his
righteousness: and now when the Lords hand is justly stretched for to wound
those that by him would not be healed, who shall forbid it, until the Cause be
removed, and they purged through judgment and suffering?

And now unto you the present Power, King and Parliament: be not high minded,
but fear; be not lifted up, as though by your Arm, Power, and Policy you had
got a Victory; For it is Righteousness yet which the Lord does require, and if
by his immediate Power, (without your Sword) he have cut off all those that you
might be grafted in Consider therefore Gods end in so doing, for it is by that
immediate Power of God (which has broken them) that you must stand, (if you do
stand) for God is the same; and will be to you, as he has been to others, as
you answer or not answer his requirings: For it is not Persons that God
accepts, but he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him:
therefore as you look to be established by the Lord, do Righteousness, Equity
and Justice to every man, without respect of persons: and those that according
to the Equal and Royal Law of God walk, doing unto others, as they would that
others should do unto them: Take heed of imposing any thing relating to the
matter of Worship upon the Consciences, least you kindle Gods wrath against
you, (as others have done) which will not easily be quenched; for upon this
Rock have many been broken, and others wounded so, that they could not again be
healed.

And two things we would mind you of especially,

First, That you are not come in by your own Sword or Power, but by a
remarkable hand of God in such a way as neither your selves, nor many other
could have expected.

2ly. Consider what a flood of unrighteousness, licentiousness, and fleshly
liberty has of a sudden overspread the Nation upon your coming in; which
although it received some little seasonable curb by a Proclamation from King
Charles (till which scarce a man fearing God, and that could not join with them
in their riotings and drunken healths, could pass the Streets in most places of
the Nation) yet the Body of that Iniquity still stands in many places, as in
May games, Fidlings, Danceings, Stage Plays, and diverse other ungodly vain
Sports, by which Gods righteous Soul is still grieved, the Spirits of all
people that truly fears God sadned, the weight of that wickedness which
already lay upon the Nations mightily increased; quite contrary to what such a
work as your coming in after such a manner required; All which speaks
dreadful things against these Nations in the sight of many, who are most
acquainted with Gods fear, and have that Eye in them which foresee Evil to
come, in whose Hearts and Mouths it is now to warn you, in love to your own
Souls, (who are in Power to scatter such Wickedness) and the Nation^ peace and
well-being, That the Wrath that is already threatened might be prevented from
coming in your day; And we desire, That you may take more notice of the Lords
warnings to you, than others have done that have gone before you, that Gods
hand and power be not turned against you, as it was against them.

Richard Hubberthorn.

THE END.

