A SERMON Preached at the Triennial Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in
GOD, RICHARD, L. Bishop of Bath and Wells: HELD AT BRIDGEWATER, on the 19th Day
of August, 1695.

By MATTHEW HOLE, B. D. Vicar of Stokegursey in Somersetshire.

LONDON, Printed for Mat. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet near the
Inner-Temple-Gate. 1696.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
My Lord,
THis Sermon, which was Preached at Your Lordships Command, and Printed at the
Request of Your Clergy, naturally flies to the Altar for Protection; and if it
may be allowed to take Sanctuary there, it will not fear the Censure or
Assaults of any Adversaries. The subject matter of it being concerning
Spiritual Gifts, it is in a manner entitled to the Care and Patronage of
Spiritual Persons; and especially of Your Lordship, who is deservedly placed in
the highest Rank and Order of them. If any Evil Spirits shall arise, and oppose
these Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as Jannes and Jambres of old withstood Moses,
and Simon Magus and others resisted the Apostles, we need not doubt but the
Author of them will help us to defend the Argument, and the Finger of God will
elude the Magical Enchantments both of Atheism and Enthusiasme.

If this Discourse may any ways help forward the right use of these Spiritual
Gifts; if it may serve to correct the Abuse of them in some, or to
discountenance the vain Pretenses to them in others, it may perhaps prove one
of the Best Gifts that could be Presented to the Church by one of the meanest
Well-wishers to it.

My Lord,

I have Obeyed Your Lordships Command, which the Obligations of Duty and
Gratitude must ever make me willing and ready to do.

That all Your Clergy may Reverence and Obey Your Lordship as their Spiritual
Father, and that Your Lordship may long continue to be a Blessing and Support
to Your Clergy, is the Hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and Devoted Servant, MATTHEW HOLE.

A SERMON Preached at the Triennial Visitation, etc.
1 COR. xii. Last Verse. But covet earnestly the best gifts: And yet I show
unto you a more excellent way.


THE great Subject of this Chapter is concerning Spiritual Gifts, which the
Apostle in his entrance upon it, declares to be so useful and necessary a piece
of Knowledge, Ver. 1.
that he would by no means have us ignorant of it. And to the end that the
Christian Church might be rightly instructed in so Divine and Excellent a
Subject, he here treats at large concerning the Author, the number, the use,
and the distribution of these Spiritual Gifts.

For the Author, he declares it to be no other than the Holy Spirit of God, the
Third Person in the ever Blessed and Adorable Trinity, whose peculiar Office in
the Economy of Man's Salvation, is to edify and instruct the Church of Christ,
for which we are so entirely beholding to this Holy Spirit, Ver. 3.
that no Man can say, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. And
they are called therefore Spiritual Gifts, not because they are seated in the
Spiritual part or Soul of Man, but because they proceed from the Spirit of God.

From the Author, he goes on to the number and variety of these Spiritual
Gifts, reckoning up in the 4th and following Verses, The Word of Wisdom, the
Word of Knowledge, the Gift of Prophecy, the Gift of Healing, the gift of
Tongues, and the Interpretation of Tongues, and the like: All which diversity
of Gifts he tells us, flow from the same Spirit, and their different operations
from the same Lord, who works all in all; that is, who works all these
Gifts in all that have them.

And least we should mistake the design of the Holy Ghost in bestowing these
Gifts, he proceeds to direct us in the right end and use of them, telling us,
That the manifestation of the Spirit was given to every one to profit withal;
Ver. 7.
that is, not barely to procure some private profit to themselves, but for the
public good and benefit of others: They were not given for vanity and
ostentation, to set forth our selves by our Eloquence, or any Elaborate Arts of
Speech, much less to raise Schisms and Factions, but to advance the Peace,
Unity and Edification of the Church.

Then lastly, for the distribution of these Gifts, he tells us, that they are
not all given to one, nor are the same given to all, but they are scattered
with an admirable variety and in different measures on the sons of Men, that
like the various Members of the Natural Body, they might be all helpful and
serviceable to one another; Ver. 28, 29, 30.
Are all apostles, says he? are all prophets? are all teachers? do all speak
with tongues? do all interpret? Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
No, He has given some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some
pastors, and some teachers; and all this for the perfecting of the saints for
the work of the ministry, and the edifying of the body of Christ.

And having thus discoursed at large of the nature, end and use of these
Spiritual Gifts, he closes the Chapter with this excellent advice of our Text,
Covet earnestly the best gifts: And for an introduction to the following
Chapter, adds, And yet I show unto you a more excellent way.

The words will require a little Explication, before I can sum up the sense, or
speak clearly to them.

First, Then by gifts here, there can be no doubt but the Apostle chiefly
intended those supernatural and extraordinary gifts of Tongues, Miracles,
Prophecy, and the like, which were rife and common in those days; and were
indeed necessary in the Infancy of the Church, for the confirmation of the
Gospel, and to gain Proselites to the belief of it: But those extraordinary and
miraculous Gifts having long since ceased, together with the reason of them,
may not now be the object of our Ambition; and therefore the Apostles advice
here may be, and usually is, extended likewise to the natural and acquired
gifts of the Spirit, which are necessary still to propagate the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as it now stands confirmed and derived down to us: Of this kind are
those intellectual habits and endowments of the Mind, by the improvement
whereof, some attain to a greater skill in the Tongues, others excel in the
knowledge of Arts and Sciences, by which means Men come to have different
Talents, and are diversely qualified for public service: All which gifts,
together with the improvement of them, proceed still from the same Spirit, and
are given for the same use, even the good and benefit of Mankind; and these
will be continued to the end of the World, only with this difference, that
whereas the former were conferred on the Apostles, and others, by Inspiration
and sudden Infusion, and so they needed only to be directed to the right use of
them; these latter are now conveyed to us by the ordinary Methods of Study and
Diligence, and so we are to be taught, both how to get, and how to use them as
we ought. These are the gifts. But,

Secondly, What does the Apostle mean by the best gifts? For that term denotes
not only a diversity, but a preference of some above others. In Answer to
which, by the best gifts here, we are to understand not absolutely the best in
every kind, but those that were most useful, and tended most to the edification
of the Church; for the Apostle having before asserted, Ver. 7.
That the manifestation of the Spirit was given to every one to profit withal:
Whatever most promoted that end was reckoned in the number of the best gifts;
so that whether the Apostle referred here to the gift of Tongues, which was
very necessary at that time, when the Gospel was to be Preached to People of
diverse Nations and Languages, or whether he had an eye to the gift of Miracles,
which gave the greatest credit to their Doctrine, and begat the highest assent
and veneration to it; or whatever else were the particular Gifts referred to,
it is plain the Apostle meant by them, such as best edified the Church; and
consequently by Analogy, we are still to reckon those the best gifts whereby we
may best profit and edify our Hearers. But,

Thirdly, What is the Apostles meaning in bidding us to covet these Gifts and
that earnestly too? To covet in Scripture is sometimes taken in a very bad
sense, and there is one whole Precept in the Decalogue directly levelled
against it. Indeed to covet any of our Neighbors Goods, or to use any indirect
arts to compass them, is a vile and detestable piece of Covetousness, but to
desire the gifts of God for the good of Mankind, and to seek to enrich our Mind
with the highest and best abilities to promote his Glory, is a noble and
laudable Ambition; and this is what the Apostle here recommends to us. But,

Fourthly, What is that more excellent way which he here directs to? And yet I
show unto you a more excellent way. The words in the Original are, (...). I
show unto you a way to attain to a greater excellency than any the best gifts
can advance you to. And what is that? Why it is the Graces of the Spirit, as
appears by what follows, where the Apostle immediately falls upon the excellent
Grace of Charity, which as it comprizes the Love of God and our Neighbor, is
the complex or summary of all Christian Graces; and to set forth its
excellence, he presers it far above all other Gifts or Endowments whatever; as
we shall show hereafter.

From the words thus explained, we may easily gather these two Propositions.

I. That the Ministers and Pastors of the Church ought earnestly to covet and
labor for the best gifts; that is, those especially that tend most to the
Benefit and Edification of the Church. II. That the Graces of the Spirit are
more excellent than the Gifts of it, and therefore ought to be more earnestly
coveted and labored for.
These two useful and seasonable Truths shall be the subject of our ensuing
Discourse; and I begin with the first of them, viz.

I. That the Ministers and Pastors of the Church ought earnestly to covet and
labor for the best gifts; that is, such especially as conduce most to the
Benefit and Edification of their Hearers. St. Paul gave this direction with
reference to those extraordinary Gifts that were rife in his time, that they
should covet and seek after the best of them. And the Reason being still the
same, we are concerned likewise, even in those ordinary Gifts that are
continued to us, to desire those most that are likelyest to do most good. In
treating therefore of this Proposition, I must inquire,

First, What are now the best or most beneficial Gifts for the use of the
Church? And,

Secondly, How we are to covet and seek after them.

For the First, Before I can show you what are now the most useful and
beneficial Gifts for the good of the Church, I must put you in mind of four or
five Gifts or Talents in Prayer and Preaching, which are none of the best,
though they have been too much affected in our days. And the

1. I shall mention of these, is, The Gift of Extemporary Effusions in Prayer,
which some have miscalled, The gift of Prayer. This is not much to be affected,
nor to be reckoned in the number of the best gifts; for this instead of
edifying has greatly disturbed the Peace of the Church, and destroyed the
Reverence and Harmony of Public Worship. Solomon, who has been justly reputed
the Wisest of Men, has willed us, Not to be rash with our mouth, nor hasty to
utter any thing before God, ^cl. 5.2.
but to consider that God is in heaven, and we are upon earth, therefore our
words unto him should be few. Meaning that we should never approach the Divine
Majesty, but with the profoundest Awe and Reverence; and that is best signified
by few and well weighed Expressions in our Addresses to him: And therefore a
greater than Solomon, even our Blessed Savior himself, the Head and Founder of
his Church, prescribed a Form of Prayer to be used by his Disciples and
followers; and the Christian Church according to his order, has used the same
ever since, and likewise composed her Public Liturgies according to that
excellent Platform: And thanks be to God, our Church has at this day one of
the most pious and best composed Liturgies that is extant in the Christian
World; so that now we need only bring ardent desires and good affections in the
use of it, and we need not doubt a gracious answer and acceptance. There was
indeed in the days of the Apostles an extraordinary gift of Praying by
Inspiration, called sometimes, Praying by the Spirit, which was necessary in
the beginning of Christianity; when as the Apostle tells us, They knew not how
or what to pray for as they ought; but when the Holy Spirit of God had dictated
the holy Scriptures, wherein we are directed both as to the matter and manner
of our Prayers; when the sacred Canon was completed, and Public Prayers
composed according to the directions of it, then this among other extraordinary
Gifts ceased, together with the reason of it; for the Spirit of God which does
nothing in vain, is not wont to give extraordinary assistances when ordinary
means will serve the turn.

So that all the gift of Prayer now remaining in the Church, consists not in
pouring out many and new words, but in the pious Motions, and good Affections
of the Heart: The Spirit helps our infirmities still; but how? Romans 8.26.
Not by furnishing us with new Phrases and variety of Expressions, which God is
no way delighted with, but with sighs and groans, says the Apostle, that
cannot be uttered; that is, by exciting the inward desires and breathings of
the Soul after him: Hence we read that the poor Publicans short Letany, Luke 18
10, 11, 14.
Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, prevailed more for his Justification than the
tedious Harangues of the Pharisee; which Sect, though in outward pretense and
appearance the strictest in those times, our Savior blames for their Babbling
and vain Repetitions in Prayer, as if they thought to be heard for their much
speaking: And it is well known, what crude and indigested, not to say
blasphemous, Speeches have dropped from the Mouths of such bold pretenders to
inspired Prayers. The truth is, this Extemporary way of Praying was a thing
unknown in the Primitive and purer Ages of the Church, and has plainly
appeared to be a late Invention, brought into these Kingdoms by the subtlety of
Popish Emissaries, merely to distract and divide the People; and we know how
they triumph in the Schisms and Confusions that have been raised by it: which
is enough to put us out of conceit with this Gift, and the pretenders to it.

2. The Affectation of Tone, or the vehemence of Voice or Gesture in Prayer or
Preaching serve not the true ends of Edification, and therefore may be reckoned
rather among the Artifices of Seducers, than in the number of the best gifts;
for Religion is a grave and serious thing, and makes its way into the Heart,
rather by powerful Arguments than by a powerful Noise. Kin. 19.1, 12.
We read in Scripture, that God was not in the Earthquake, nor in the Tempest,
but in the small and still voice: And the efficacy of Gods Word is better
conveyed by calm and sound Reasonings, than by the loudest blusters of Action
or Utterance: Such Bodily exercise profits little, and is better suited to
the Levity of the Stage, than to the Gravity of the Pulpit. Affected Tones and
Gestures may indeed raise the Fancy, and over-heat the Imagination, but seldom
or never leave any true or lasting warmth upon the Heart or the Affections;
they may serve to astonish and startle weak People for the present, but the
impression quickly wears off, and passes away with the motion or sound that
raised it. And therefore it is observed of those that use or follow those Arts,
that though they may seem affected for a while, yet they never prove either the
wiser, or the better Men. Length and Lowdness were the main ingredients of the
Pharisees Prayers; for which we find our Savior often condemning their
Hypocrisy, but never commending their Devotion. All that have had any game to
play upon the People, have betook themselves to such Wiles, and by this Craft
have got their Wealth, and made Merchandise of them.

But as it has been the Honor of the Regular Clergy, not to affect such Mean
Arts, so 'twill be the Wisdom of the Laity to beware of being deluded by those
that use them.

3. The gift of diverse Tongues, or the ostentation of several Languages in
Popular Sermons, is of little or no use, and therefore not to be affected by
us: For the Vulgar are little edified by Latin; and it is Proverbial among them
to say, of what they understand not, That it is Greek to them: So that the use
of these Tongues in our Discourses to them can be of no advantage; they may
serve to amuse and confound them, but cannot any ways inform or help their
understandings: It Is true indeed the study and knowledge of the Tongues are
necessary to qualify and accomplish a Divine, seeing the Holy Scriptures, and
many great and useful parts of Learning are written in those Languages: But of
what use the embellishing or interlarding our Discourses with them to the
Common People should be, is not easy to understand. 1 Cor. 14.
The Apostle blames Praying and Prophesying in a Tongue not known to the
People: And so far as we intermix these things, we speak unto them in an
unknown Tongue.

To this may be added the using of Hard Words, and Terms of Art, that are above
the reach of Vulgar Understandings, speaking as the Apostle expresses it, 2
Pet. 2.18. 1 Timothy 1.20.
great swelling words of vanity, and affecting Science falsely so called.

As also the Clouding our Discourses with Mystical Phrases and Uncouth
Expressions; such as the Incomings and Outlettings, the Beamings and Streamings
of the Spirit, with such like unintelligible Jargon; whereby some Men instead
of making difficult things plain, have made plain things difficult, which is a
very fruitless and unprofitable Talent.

4. The Ostentation of Wit, or Curiosity of Language in our Public Discourses
tend little or nothing to Edification, and therefore may not be reckoned among
the best gifts. Witty Sayings and fine Sentences may indeed tickle the Ears,
but never sink into the Heart; they may please a while, and afford matter of
Talk, but they seldom or never profit the Hearers. St. Paul that great
converter of Souls, declares that his Preaching consisted not in the wisdom of
words, but in the demonstration of the spirit. 1 Cor. 2.4.
He studied not fineness of Expression, but soundness of Doctrine: And we read
that the simplicity of the Gospel prevailed more, than a vain ostentation of
Wit could ever do, and the foolishness of preaching triumphed over all the
wisdom of the wise. 1 Cor. 1.21.
Our Business (my Brethren!) is not to gratify itching Ears, but to save Men's
Souls; and that is better done by grave, solid and practical Discourses, than
by the most florid and polite Preachments, which may delight for the present,
but bring no lasting Benefit or Instruction with them: For as the plainest Food
nourishes more than the most delicious Kickshaws, so plain Truths without Art
or Varnish, oft-times leave deeper Impressions on the Mind, than all the Charms
of Humane Eloquence.

Lastly, The Art of straining the words of Scripture, and forcing them from
their plain and genuine Sense, is none of the best gifts: This is done
sometimes by Critics, who to advance a new Notion will stretch and pervert the
Holy Scripture, and by the help of Invention, and the ambiguity of Words and
Particles, offer violence to a Text, and even take it by force. lat. 5.
Our Blessed Savior rebuked the Pharisees for their false Glosses, by which
they made void the Law of God: And these Men justly incur the same Censure, who
by their wild and strained Interpretations make the Gospel of Christ of none
effect.

There are others, who to serve the Interest of a Party, will rack and torture
the Scriptures, to make them speak what they please: Hence some have used the
Bible as the most successful Engine to overturn Church and State, and have made
the Gospel of Peace, the Trumpet of War and Sedition. This is a most pernicious
Talent, and has done unspeakable mischief. St. Peter tells us of some, who
wrest the Scripture to their own Damnation: Pet. 3.
And we have heard of others, who have wrested them to the ruin and subversion
of Kingdoms, and have so far racked some Passages of Sacred Writ, as even to
force them to speak Blood and Confusion.

But our Apostle does not here will us to covet, but to abhor such vile and
detestable Arts.

And thus having mentioned some of those Gifts, which though too much in vogue,
are yet none of the hest, I proceed now to those more useful Talents and
Abilities, that tend most to the Edification of the Church, and therefore ought
to be coveted by us as the best gifts.

To which end, we must note, that the two great parts of Edification, are
Knowledge and Practice.

The former gives Men the right understanding of Holy Mysteries: And the latter
teaches them to square their Lives and Actions according to them. And
consequently the best gifts are those that enable us,

First, To settle and inform Men's Judgments aright in the knowledge of the
Truth. And,

Secondly, To excite their Affections to the Love and Practice of it.

First, I say, We are to covet those as the best gifts that enable us to inform
and settle Men's Judgments aright, in the knowledge of the Truth. Here we must
begin; for if we go about to move and stir the Affections, before the Mind be
well informed, we shall beget a Heat without Light, or a Zeal without
Knowledge, which will be of very evil and dangerous Consequence. Our Apostle
tells us, That it is good to be zealously affected; Gal. 4.18.
but then he limits it, always to a good thing: And therefore the Mind must be
well instructed in the goodness of the thing, before we excite to the love or
pursuit of it, otherwise Zeal may spend it self, as it too often does, upon
very bad matters: And this is the root and foundation of all Fanaticism: For
some Teachers seek to work upon and warm the Passions of Men, before their
Judgments are well informed, and thereby make their Hearers zealous for or
against things, without giving them the right understanding of either; and this
has begot those intemperate heats in Religion, which have frequently broke but
to the disturbance of Church and State.

The Affections which are too apt to inflame, are very unfit to guide, and
therefore they must not outrun, but follow the understanding, and be guided by
the dictates of a well informed Judgment; for else how easily may the undue
fervours of the Mind lead to the heats of Enthusiasme, or the weaknesses of
Superstition? And how frequently have they that have been too hasty and eager
in raising the Affections, made sad work with the Passions of Men?

By this means, 2 Timothy 3.7.
some have been ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth,
being unstable in their Principles, Ephesians. 4.14.
and like children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine; by the
cunning craftiness of those that lay in wait to deceive.

To edify then, or profit our Hearers, we must begin with their Judgments, and
endeavor to settle them aright in the great Points of Religion: For as in the
Creation of the World, the first thing created was Light, and that dispelled
the Darkness of the rude and unformed Chaos; even so in the new Creation, the
first thing must be to let in a clear and convincing light upon the Soul, and
that will scatter all the mists of Error and Ignorance.

To this end Catechizing will be of very great use, to instruct Children
betimes in the Principles of Religion, to instill into them the knowledge of
God, and to season their tender Years with an Early Piety: Prove. 22.6.
By thus training up children betimes in the way that they should go, Solomon
has told us, that when they are old, they will not depart from it.

As they grow up, we must explain to them the Nature and Obligation of their
Baptismal Vow, giving them to understand what they have promised, and how they
may be enabled to perform it. When they come to greater Maturity, we are to let
them know upon what grounds the Articles of the Christian Faith stand, that
they may not be shaken from the belief of them: And this will be best done by a
plain and easy Exposition of the Apostles Creed.

After this, we are to show them the excellency and extent of the Divine Law by
a fuller Explication of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, describing the
Nature of every particular Virtue and Vice, required and forbidden in them:
Psalm. 119* 18.
So shall we open their Eyes to see the wondrous things of Gods Law; we shall
lead them as it were by the hand into the paths of Righteousness, and guide
their feet into the ways of Truth and Peace. And having thus fixed and settled
their Judgments in the knowledge of Divine Truths, we are then to apply our
selves to the

Second part of Edification; and to covet those Gifts that may best serve to
move their Affections, and to stir them up to the love and practice of their
Duty. And here we may safely use all the Arts of Divine Rhetoric, and betake
our selves to the most prevailing Topics and Methods of Persuasion: Here we
may describe the loveliness and rewards of Virtue, setting forth in the most
lively colors the Beauty of Holiness, that Men may be enamored and fall in
love with it: Here we may represent the uglyness and deformity of Vice,
painting it in the blackest and most odious shape, to beget the greater
abhorrence and detestation of it. When we would reveal the Wrath of God from
Heaven against Sinners, Exo. ^
we may appear as on Mount Sinai, in Thunder and Lightning, to make (if
possible) the sturdiest Sinners to quake and tremble. When we would display the
Riches of Divine Grace in the Work of Man's Redemption, we may like our Savior
on the Mount of Olives, breathe out nothing but Joy and Blessedness, Mat. ^
and with open voice proclaim the glad tidings of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we are to persuade Men to flee from the wrath
to come. Cor. 5.1.
And knowing the tender Love of God to Mankind, we are to court them to accept
of Mercy and Pardon, and as Ambassadors in Christ's stead, ^er. 20.
beseech them to be reconcil^d. This will make our Doctrine drop as the Rain,
and our Speech distill as the Dew; gently sliding through the Ears into the
Hearts of our Hearers, and by a sweet facility insinuating it self into their
Will and Affections: ^om. 10.5.
And then how beautiful will be the feet of them that thus preach the Gospel of
Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?

And thus having showed what are the best gifts, and most worthy of our
ambition; I proceed,

Secondly, To show how we are to covet them; which our Text tells us, must be
earnestly: Covet earnestly the best gifts. Now to covet any thing in good
earnest, is not barely to approve of it, nor yet much less to sit down with
faint and languishing wishes after it, but to apply our selves to the most
proper means of attaining it, and to exert the utmost of our Powers and
Faculties in endeavors after it: And therefore when the Apostle advises us to
covet earnestly the best gifis, he thereby puts us upon using the best means of
becoming Masters of them. And because it may be asked what they are? I shall
briefly mind you of these four.

1. Diligent Study. 2. Frequent Exercise. 3. Hearty Prayer. And 4. A good Life.
Of each of which a word or two distinctly. And,

1. We must covet these Gifts by our diligent Study and earnest search after
them; for this is now the ordinary way and means of acquiring them. Indeed in
the days of the Apostles, the Spirit was poured out, and came upon them not by
Study, but by sudden Infusion. The mighty wind in which the Holy Spirit
descended, was a Symbol of Inspiration, and betokened the breathing into them
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost: The Fire that sat upon their Heads, represented
that fervency of Spirit, which enabled them with courage to go through all the
difficulties of their Office: The Cloven-Tongues bespake the diversity of
Languages with which they were endowed; by which means Illiterate Persons
excelled the greatest Rabbis, and Fishermen spoke more Languages than the most
studied Linguists. But now we are to seek that by Industry, which they had by
Inspiration; and the Church being arrived at the Stature of a Man in Christ
Jesus, God Almighty has laid aside those extraordinary helps and supports of
Infancy: So that Diligence now keeps the Key of Knowledge, and it is Study alone
that opens to us the Treasures of Wisdom; 2 Timothy 2.15.
Study, says the Apostle, to show thy self a workman, that needs not to be
ashamed. To be an Able Divine is a work of Study; and a serious intention of
Mind is necessary to the expert and faithful discharge of our Office: We may
not now pretend to, or look for Inspiration, nor hope by Dreams and Visions to
know the Will of God: No, Ignorance and Folly are the effects of Sloth, whilst
Learning and Knowledge are only the Rewards of Industry; Romans 1^ 8.
The word is nigh thee, says the Apostle, even in thy mouth, and in thy hand,
oh! let it be in thy Heart too, and make it the daily object of thy Study and
Meditation: 2 Pet. 19.
We have a sure word of prophecy, says St. Peter, whereunto we do well to
take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place. Solomon that great
Master of Wisdom, exhorts us to seek for Knowledge, and to search diligently
for Understanding; yea, he wills us to search for it as for silver, and to dig
for it as for hid treasure; Prove. 4.
for though there be some truths that seem to float at top, and to lie open to
a careless eye, yet there are others that lie deep, and require a profounder
search; here we are to employ our most composed thoughts, giving our selves to
Reading and Meditation, as the first and great means of attaining them.

2. Our study for these Gifts must be accompanied with the frequent use and
exercise of them: This will whet our Parts, and set an edge on our Faculties,
and thereby enable us rightly to divide the Word of Truth. St. Paul exhorts
Timothy, Tim. ^ 6.
to stir up the gift of God that was in him; signifying that it is Exercise that
puts Life and Vigor into our Parts; that blows up those Sparks within us, and
quickens them in o a bright and useful Flame. Thus to employ is to improve our
Talent, which will daily increase by Exercise, and like the Widows Cruise of
Oil, multiply by being used. A lazy neglect of Men's Gifts makes them do the
work of the Lord negligently; and for want of a due exercise of their own
Parts, they do but too much exercise the Patience of them that hear them. He
that buried his Talent in the Earth, and he that wrapped it in a Napkin, were
both deprived of them, and doomed as wicked and unprofitable servants to outer
darkness; whereas he that used his Talent to his Masters Honor, was commended
for a good and faithful Servant, and entered into his Masters Joy; which makes
it evident, that Exercise is a good means of improving our Gifts, and procuring
to us the Reward of them.

3. To the Exercise of our Gifts we must add hearty and fervent Prayer for a
Blessing upon them; for though Paul may plant, ^or. 3.
and Apollo may water, yet it is God alone that gives the increase. (...). 1.5.
If any lack wisdom, says St. James, let him ask it of God. Thither our
recourse must be, if ever we hope to obtain it; and indeed whither else should
we go? (...) 6.68.
He only has the words of eternal life. To seek for Wisdom only in Books and
Writings, is but to seek the living among the dead; it is the Blessing of God
that enlivens our endeavors, and makes us rich both in Grace and Knowledge;
and he that leaves out this in his search after them, will never arrive to more
than what will betray his own Ignorance: ^es 1.
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
father of lights: And therefore we must look upward, and make our requests
known unto him, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; and
for our encouragement, the same Apostle tells us, that he gives to all men
liberally, Jam. 1.5.
and upbraideth not: And our Blessed Savior has assured us, that Earthly
Parents are not more willing to give good Gifts to their Children, Mat. 7.11.
than our Heavenly Father is to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it. Our
desires then of these Gifts must be carried on with uncessant Petitions to God
for them, and if we would attain to any measure of them, we must seek them upon
our Knees^: for it is the Blessing of God that gives the Talent, and the
Improvement too; and the Fruits of the Spirit owe all their increase to the Dew
of his Heavenly Benediction.

Lastly, To our Prayers we must join the exercises of Virtue and a Holy Life;
for Wisdom enters not into a polluted Soul, nor can so refined a perfection
inhabit an impure or corrupt Heart: The carnal mind is enmity against God: 1
Cor. 2.14.
It receives not the things of the spirit of God, neither can it know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. And therefore our Hearts must be purged
from the corruptions of Sin and Error, to make way for the entrance of Divine
Truths; and our Souls must be consecrated to holy uses, before they can be fit
to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost: A good Life will best dispose us to a good
Understanding, and sincere desires of pleasing God will make us useful and
profitable unto Men. So that if we mean to arrive at any proficiency or growth
in Knowledge, we must live up to that whereunto we have already attained; for
he that does the will of my father, says our Savior, John ^ 17.
he shall know the doctrine, whether it be of God. Divinity (as one has well
observed on those words) is a Science that we are not so much to Study, as to
Live our selves into: It passes into the Head through the Heart, and our
Knowledge will daily increase by the Love and Practice of what we know; for God
Almighty delights to communicate his Mind to such as are willing to do it:
Psalm. 25.9, 14.
The secret of the Lord, says the Psalmist, is with them that fear him, and he
will teach them his covenant: And elsewhere, The meek he will guide in
judgment, and the humble he will teach his way. He is ever ready to reward the
least degree of Obedience to his Will, with farther discoveries of it. And
therefore the same ingenious Author has observed, That in old time the Men of
extraordinary Revelations were Men of extraordinary Piety too; and such had
most of the secret Will of God imparted to them that best performed his
revealed Will: They were the Enochs, the Abraham's, and the Elijahs; and such of
whom the Scripture more remarkably testifies, that they walked with God. And
surely he that walks with another is likely to know more of his Mind than a
stranger, or one that keeps at a distance from him. In short, Virtue is the
most fruitful Principle of Knowledge, and he that does what he knows of the
Will of God shall be sure to know more of it; for to him that has shall be
given, says our Savior, and he shall have abundantly.

And thus I have done with the first part of our Text, having showed you what
are the best gifts, and how we are to covet and seek after them.

But I must crave a little more of your Patience, whilst I show unto you a more
excellent way. And this will bring me to the second part of our Text contained
in this Proposition.

II. That the Graces of the Spirit excel the highest and the best Gifts of it.
And here I could almost wish for the Tongue of an Angel, to describe to you
this more excellent way, and to persuade you to walk in it. But St. Paul who
was raped up into the third Heaven, has prevented our wish, and extolled the
single Grace of Charity, as high as words can reach, above all other Gifts and
Endowments whatever; for in the next words to our Text, he thus delivers
himself: Could I speak with the tongue of Men and of Angels, and had all the
Charms of Divine and Humane Eloquence; could I dart the brightest Beams of
Light into Men's Understanding, and by the most powerful Rhetoric command and
insinuate into their Affections, yet without Charity, 1 Cor. 13.1.
I am no better than a sounding Brass or a tinkling Cymbal: Had I the Gift of
Prophecy, and understood the deepest Mysteries; had I the knowledge of all that
is past since the beginning of Time, and could foretell things to come to the
end of the World, yea, had I faith strong enough to remove Mountains, and to
make the Poles of the World to change their place, yet in all these
accomplishments, without Charity, I am nothing less than nothing and vanity.
What could the Tongue of Men or of Angels speak higher in the praise of this
Virtue, and to extol the Graces above the Gifts of the Spirit? But there are
three things that will plainly demonstrate the pre-eminence.

First, The subjects on whom they are bestowed. Secondly, The end or use unto
which they serve. And, Thirdly, The term of their duration or continuance.
First, The subjects on whom they are bestowed will give Grace vastly the
pre-eminence; for Gifts like the Rain, and other Common Blessings, are showred
down promiscuously on the Good and Bad, and the Light of the Spirit, like that
of the Sun, shines indifferently both on the Just and Unjust. Judas had the
Gifts of Prophecy and Miracles, as well as the other Apostles; and our Savior
has told us, that many will say unto him at the last day, Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? And in thy name done many
wonderful works? Who yet shall be bid to depart from him as workers of
Iniquity. So that the highest and best Gifts neither find, nor give any
intrinsic worth to the persons that have them, but leave them many times as
bad or worse than they found them; for many who in Christ's Name had cast out
Devils, will be sentenced by Christ himself to take up their abode for ever
with them. But Grace on the other hand stamps an excellence on those that
receive it; for it makes them like unto God, and renders them most acceptable
to him, and therefore is conferred on none but the particular Favorites and
Darlings of Heaven: It Is only the excellent ones of the Earth, Psalm. 16.3.
as the Psalmist styles them, that walk in this more excellent way, when many
gifted Brethren will be found in the broad way that leads to destruction.
Grace is that Seal of the Spirit, of which the Apostle speaks, whereby the
Children of God are marked and sealed unto the day of redemption. Ephesians. 4.^0.
It Is by this Seal, as the same Apostle tells us, ^ Tim. 2.9.
That the Lord knows who are his; and by this Sacred Stamp or Signature, we
too may know whether we belong to him; for the Graces of the Spirit are the
particular marks and tokens of the Divine Favor, which are not communicated to
any, but the Elect People of God. ^at. 7.6.
The Holy Ghost is not wont to cast these Pearls before Swine, nor is this
Childrens Bread given unto Dogs: No, this is reserved as the peculiar Lot and
Portion of the Saints, and therefore must far surpass those Common Gifts, that
are shared promiscuously by wicked Men.

Secondly, The end or use to which they serve, will farther give Grace the
pre-eminence above the best gifts: Cor. 8.
For knowledge, says the Apostle, puffs up, and tempts many a Man to Pride
and Vanity, whereas it is Charity that edifieth, it is Grace that corrects the
swelling quality of Gifts, that lays the foundation in Humility, and thereby
builds us up in our most Holy Faith: The greatest Gifts and Abilities, if not
accompanied with Grace to direct the use of them, are so far from edifying,
that they have in all Ages done the Church the greatest Mischief. How many
pestilent Errors and Schisms are owing to the greater parts and abilities of
Heretics? What ground has Atheism and Debauchery got in the World by the
Influence and Discourses of the finest Wits? And as the sharpest Razour cuts
deepest, so have the quickest Parts made the deepest Wounds in Religion, and
Men's Souls: so pernicious are the effects of their ill management both to the
Public and themselves. But Grace is so far from being liable to these, or the
like Abuses, that it prevents the Evil, and corrects the abuses of our Gifts:
It Is this puts all their usefulness into them, and makes them instead of doing
harm, become instruments of much good unto the Church; and consequently it is
the sanctifying of Gifts, that like the enamelling of Pearls, gives them their
main luster and value. But,

Thirdly. There is another great and surpassing excellency in the Graces above
the Gifts of the Spirit, and that is the Duration or Continuance of them; for
Grace has Eternity stamped on it; it is coeval with the Spirit of God that
gives it, and as Immortal as the Spirit or Soul of Man that receives it: This
is more than can be said of the best gifts; for of these the Apostle declares
in the next Chapter, 1 Cor. 8, 9, 1^
that they must shortly have an end and be done away: Whether there be
prophesies, says he, they shall fail, whether there be tongues, they shall
cease, whether there be knowledge, that shall vanish away: But Charity he tells
us shall never fail, and of the Graces of the Spirit, he affirms that they
shall abide for ever.

This is an excellency that far transcends all other Perfections whatever; it is
the disgrace of all Worldly Excellencies, that they are short-lived and
vanishing; Riches perish in the using, the pleasures of Sin are but for a
season, Honor is but a puff of Wind, a bubble that passes away with the
breath that raised it; yea, the most specious and durable accomplishments on
this side Religion must all fail, and leave us at the Grave: But Grace goes
farther with us, and accompanies us into the other World, where it not only
leads to, but makes up the chiefest part of our Felicity. St. John tells us,
that good Men at their Death rest from their Labors; that is, among other
things, from the Laborious Exercise of their Gifts: but their good Works, and
the gracious Habits of their Mind follow, and go along with them, and that not
only to crown them with a Reward, but to perpetuate the very Action; for Grace
differs from Glory not in Kind, but merely in Degree; and those gracious
Habits, that are begun and planted in us here, will there grow up into a
greater Maturity and Perfection.

Yea, Heaven is nothing else but the Blessed Mansion of Holiness, where that
Grace, that is here Militant, and daily struggling with the relics of corrupt
Nature, will there be Triumphant, with a Palm of Victory in her Hand, and a
Crown of Gold upon her Head, and the Spirits of Just Men in whom it reigns,
shall be made perfect, and become more than Conquerours through Christ that
loved them.

And now having by the Blessing of God finished what I at first proposed, give
me leave to press the Exhortation of the Text, with respect both to the Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit. And,

First, Let me exhort you to covet earnestly the best gifts; that is, to labor
for the most useful and edifying Abilities, whereby you may best serve the
Church, and profit your Hearers. And here if I could ever hope to prevail,
methinks it might be reasonably expected from such an Assembly as this,
consisting of Persons, whose great business it is to instruct others in the
Knowledge and Practice of Divine Things: Know then, my Brethren, that this is
the main end of our Ministry, and the design of all our Spiritual Gifts, and
therefore hither should all our aims and endeavors tend^: Remember that you
are the Mouth of the People unto God, to make known their Requests unto him;
and you are the Mouth of God unto the People to make known his will unto them:
The faithful discharge of both these may indeed require no small Labor, but
'twill be abundantly recompensed with a great Reward.

In your Prayers then affect not Novelty or Variety of Expressions, which are
no way pleasing unto God: But let all your Addresses unto him be in fit Words,
and in all the decent Postures of Humility and Adoration. Read the Public
Prayers of the Church with Reverence and devout Affections, that the Hearers
Zeal may be enkindled, by the pious ardours of your Devotion.

In your Preaching show Vncorruptness, Gravity, Tit. 2* 7, 8.
Sincerity, and sound Speech, that cannot be condemned, that he who is of the
contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you: So shall you
put a muzzle upon the prophanest Mouths, and cut off all occasion from them
that seek occasion against you. Stir up your People to Love and to good Works;
for these things are good and profitable unto Men; and when they are thus
forced to approve your Labors, you will be the better able to convince
gainsayers, and to strike detractors dumb. Do not entertain Vulgar Hearers with
nice and curious speculations, which rather perplex than inform their Minds,
but let all your Discourses to them be evermore plain and practical, leaving
matters of Dispute to the Schools, or more Learned Auditories. Avoid all things
that may engender Strife, or lead to Faction, and follow those things that make
for Peace, and things whereby ye may edify one another. Do not use your Gifts
to Pride and Vainglory, for this is to make the Breathings of the Holy Ghost,
subservient to the vain Breath of the Multitude, which cannot but grieve the
Holy Spirit of God, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace. Beware of abusing
your Parts to the Maintenance of Schism and Divisions, but rather use your
utmost Prudence to heal those Breaches which open too wide a gap for Atheism,
Confusion, and every evil work. Suit all your Discourses both to the
Necessities, and likewise to the Capacities of your Hearers, having Milk for
Babes, and stronger Meat for riper Christians: In a word, Feed your Flocks with
sound Doctrine, and go before them by a Pious Example, that they may safely
both hear your Voice, and follow you.

But I may not conclude without minding you of the more excellent way, and
calling upon you to walk and keep in it; that is, to covet more earnestly the
Graces than the Gifts of the Spirit: We have seen how far the one excells the
other; that it is Grace alone that sanctifies our Gifts, and gives them all
their worth and excellence: This therefore justly calls for our most earnest
Prayers and Endeavors; It Is good, says the Apostle, Heb. 13* 9.
to have the heart established with grace, yea much better than to have the
Head stuffed with Knowledge; for this may but aggravate our Condemnation,
whilst the other will secure and increase our Felicity. Grace is indeed the
greatest thing that God can give, or that we can receive; for it is a Ray of the
Divinity, the very Character or Image of God stamped upon the Soul, and what
higher thing can the most elevated Ambition raise our Wishes to? Wherefore let
our desires and endeavors after it bear some proportion to its transcendent
worth and excellency; Psalm. 81* 40.
let us open our Mouths wide, that we may be filled with the Spirit, and let
the cry of our Devotions, Zech. 4^
like the acclamations at the Building of the Temple, be evermore, Grace,
Grace. But let us especially, to whom the World has given the style of
Spiritual Persons, pray for a double portion of the Spirit, that God would
furnish us with his Gifts, to promote his Glory and the good of Mankind, and
sanctify them with his Grace, that we may use them to those ends, that as we
excel others in the Holiness of our Profession, so we may in the Holiness of
our Lives too, adding to our knowledge virtue, to virtue temperance, to
temperance patience, 2 Pet* 5, 6, ^
to patience brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness charity; for if
these things be in us and abound, they will truly enoble our Minds, adorn our
Profession, and dignifie us far above all Earthly Preferments. In a word my
Brethren! see that ye come behind in no Gift, being enriched in all knowledge,
and in all utterance, that ye may speak as the Oracles of God, and that all
your Speeches may administer Grace to the Hearers: So shall ye shine as Lights
in this World, and as Stars of the first Magnitude in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Which that we may all do, I shall conclude with the excellent Collect
appointed for this day.

Almighty and most Merciful God, of whose only Gift it comes, that thy
faithful People do unto thee any true and laudable Service, grant us thy Grace,
that we may so faithfully serve thee in this Life, that we fail not finally to
attain thy Heavenly Promises, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

