THE SECOND PART OF THE History of Whiggisme, OR THE Whiggish-PLOTS PRINCIPLES
and PRACTICES (Mining and Countermining THE TORY-PLOTS, PRINCIPLES and
PRACTICES) In REIGN of King CHARLES I.
TORY. ONce more, well met Mr. Tantivee, and honest Whigg: 1626. 2 Car. 1.



Tantivee. Whigg. We come on purpose to hear the Continuation of your History
of Whiggisme;


Tory. I neither am able (nor do I pretend) to tell you any thing but what is
to be found in Chronicles, Histories, and at large already in Print.


Tant. Ay, but I have not Money to buy them, nor Leisure to read large Volumes,
give us only an Abridgment out of those vaster Collections, in relation only
to the Whiggisme of them.


Tory. With all my heart; where left I off?


Tant. At Mr. Moor's Release and Discharge by his Gracious Majesty Charles 1.
and the Imprisonment and Release of the Earl of Arundel.


Tory. Oh! It Is Right.


Whigg. But was not that part of the Kings Answer about the Imprisonment of the
Earl of Arundel (namely -- My Lords, Whiggisme before in p. 24.
By this I do not mean to show the Power of a King, by diminishing your
Privileges;) ill resented by the House of Lords?


Tory. It plainly Intimated that the King thought He had such a Power, or some
(about him) made him believe he had such a Power of a King to Diminish their
Privileges, but he did not mean to show it.


Tant. No, the more Gracious King He.


Tory. However, the House of Lords were so Allarum'd at the Expression, that
lest they should happen to have a King that was less Gracious or of a worse
Meaning, they would not meddle with any Business 'till they had secured as well
as claimed their Privileges, by another Tenure than what was merely Arbitrary,
Ad libitum Regis, and therefore Adjourned in Disgust, resolving unanimously to
take nothing into Consideration, 'till they had Contrived how their Privileges
might be Secured to Posterity; which being perceived, the Earl of Arundel (as
you have heard) was Releas't to them, for which he was thankful.


Tant. Ay, that was right Tory-like, and most Loyally done; some Whiggs would
not so Religiously have Kissed the Rod that whips them.


Whigg. It Is somewhat against the Grain of Humanity, to fawn, Spaniel-like,
upon the Hand that beats them.


Tant. Some men are so Loyal as to make a Leg at every Box of the Ear; Who may
say to a King what do thou?


Whigg. Misapplied and Misconstru'd Scriptures make up a Tantivee, and makes a
man be a Tantivee.


Tant. Why? Is not the King's Will a Law?


Whigg. In France they say, and in Turkey, not in England; for so the Barons of
England told the two Cardinals (whom the Pope sent to Reconcile the Differences
betwixt King and People, Chron. Baker. p. 109.
about Magna Charta, Liberties and Prerogative) That, there were many Worthy
and Learned men in the Kingdom, whose Council they would use and not Strangers,
who knew not the cause of their Commotion, (in the Reign of K. Edward 2.)


Tory. No, I must confess, that Foreigners (unacquainted with the Fundamental
Constitution of our Government and Laws) are no Competent Judges of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of Contests betwixt King and People.


Whigg. Ay, the English were always tender of their Liberties.


Tant. But if English Kings did Invade their Liberties, they used no Remedy (I
hope) but Prayers and Tears.


Whigg. And Bows and Arrows, and long Swords, until the Kings were Contented to
Rule them according to their Oath, and the Law of the Land.


Tant. Ay, Perhaps when they happened to have some easy, weak, timorous and
condescending King.


Whigg. No, In such a juncture, they were always the calmer, but grew rough,
raging, high and boisterous, the more vehement, strong and tempestuous their
Kings were; as for Instance, in Edw. 1. another Saul, for he was higher and
taller than ordinary men by the Head and Shoulders, and as Tyrannical too as
King Saul was: He at one time (at the Instigation of William Marchian, then
Lord Treasurer) fetched all the Riches out of the Churches and Religious
Houses, and put it into his own Exchequer; Loans, Benevolences, the Writ of
Trailbaston, great Fines were used by him; in the Seventeenth Year of his Reign
he Fined all his Judges (pretending) for Corruption, the least of them one
thousand Marks, an immense Sum in those days; but some of them two thousand,
some three thousand, some four thousand, some six thousand, and the Chief
Justice (Sir Ralph de Hengham) seven thousand Marks; the Chief Baron (Sir Adam
Stratton) four and thirty thousand Marks; but from Thomas Wayland all his Goods
and whole Estate Confiscate, and himself Banished; and just so he used the
Jews, which were then (in England) very rich and very numerous: It Is said of K.
Hen. 8. that he never Spared Man in his Anger, nor Woman in his Lust; but King
Edw. 1. was as resolved as he, as Courageous and Stout (leaving the Marks of
his personal Valor, the Trophies of his Victories in the Holy Land before he
was King) but he could Disguise his furious Resentments, and Adjourn Revenge
seven and seven Years, 'till he could safely Execute it.


Tant. Safely! why who should or durst say to that most Courageous and
Victorious King, (that thrice Conquered Scotland, France and Wales,) What do
thou?


Whigg. His own People and Subjects forced him to reason, and to Rule them
according to Law, his Oath, and Magna Charta; the Parliament Men came to his
Parliament Attended with Armed men, very numerous at Stamford, 28 Edw. 1.
Walsingham, H^st. Angl. p. 48. Y^^ligm. n^^str p. 88. H^n. de Knighton. de
event. Angl. 3. l. cap. 13. col. 2528.
to make him fulfill and Execute the Charter of the Forest; says Walsingham
and Knighton two Famous Historians of those times, Rex Angliae sub his diebus
Parliamentum tenuit Stamford, ad quod convenerunt Comites and Barons cum equis
and armis, co prout dicebatur proposito, ut Executionem Chartae de Foresta
hactenus dilatam extorquerent (mind that) ad plenum.


Tant. Ay, but how did the Stout King Edward Treat these Armed Petitioners?


Whigg. They ask't nothing but what the Laws and his own Oath ought to have
Compelled him unto, and the King yielded to their Requests; Rex autem eorum
Instantiam and Importunitatem attendens, eorum voluntati in omnibus
condescendit; (Knighton says) De qua re Rex Integre and plene eorum voluntatem
Implevit ad vota; in which matter the King fully and wholly granted their
Desires to their Wishes.


Tant. It was very civilly done of him.


Whigg. It was wisely and honestly done, and as his Coronation Oath, Equity,
Reason, Conscience and the Laws, (from none of which English Kings pretend to
be exempt) did adjure him, and Constrain him; and they are devilish
Counselors, and the Kings worst Enemies and Traitors that persuade him to act
contrary to Law: Power is high enough without being wanton, and lasts longest
when it is not Stretched to the height, or Over-stretcht, it is a wonder that a
thing so uneasy should please.


Tory. Ambition and Covetousness know no bounds, and I have read King Edward
got the Pope to set him free from the obligation of his Coronation Oath and
Magna Charta.


Tant. But did the Pope absolve him and let him loose and free from his Oath
and the Laws?


Tory. Yes, he did; for the Pope was a Native of Bordeaux, Born in King
Edward's Domnions, Baker Chron. p. 99.
but yet he would not acquit him of his Oath and Obligation to his Subjects and
his own Conscience, 'till the King sent his Holiship all manner of Vessels
belonging to a Chamber, made of pure Gold, and then the Pope untied the King
from the Covenant made with his Subjects concerning their Charters, Confirmed
unto them by his last three Acts of Parliament.


Tant. Has the Pope power to do these things?


Whigg. Yes, Fools think so, and Knaves would persuade others to think so; the
King and the Pope got by it, but the poor English Subjects paid for all.


Tant. But did not the King pay part of the Reckoning?


Whigg. No doubt on it, King Edward 1. made a shift with much Bickering to rub
through, and come to his Grave in Peace, dying on his fair Death; but his Son
Edw. 2. that followed his Fathers steps when he could or durst, had not the
Wit, or else not the Luck to manage the Feat so well; (poor Rehoboam!) for he
was Deposed by the Parliament, or rather was persuaded to Depose himself,
Chron. Baker 112.
lest his Son also should be Excluded from the Crown: (for so they threatened,
and to make a King of another Race) Thus he lost his Kingdom, no Blow struck,
no Battle Fought, done forcibly and yet without force, violently and yet with
Consent.


Tant. Then surely he had first lost the Hearts of his People.


Whigg. You may be assured of it, for (at first) his Subjects refused to suffer
him to be Crowned, unless he would remove Gaveston from the Court and Kingdom,
Bak. Chron. p. 105.
which dampt King Edward's Spirit, especially many of his great Friends being
then at Court witnesses of his Disgrace, as Charles of Valois the Queens Uncle,
and Brother to her Father ( Philip the Fair) the French King, the Dukes of
Britain and Brabant, the Count of Luxemburg, who was afterward Emperor, the
Duke of Savoy, the Dutchesses of Brabant and Artois, with many other Princes
and great Ladies, so that the King solemnly Swore he would do what they desired
in the next Parliament, so they would be quiet now; and thereupon the
Coronation went on.


Tant. Could not so many Foreign Princes and so powerful, Encourage the King
to repel (with force) his Subjects Insolence.


Whigg. Insolence? Oh Brave Tantivee! What would have become of thee if thou
had lived in these days to have an answer in Parliament for your
Tantivee-principles, so Discrepant from, and Inconsistent with our
English-frame, Constitution and Fundamental Laws?


Tant. Why? were Parliaments so Malapert in those days?


Whigg. Malapert? Hey day! what again in your Tantivee-strain, you have got the
Language of some late Addressers, that take upon them to Judge the highest
Court and Council of the Kingdom, the Parliament.


Tant. In your Opinion (you mean) the Highest Council.


Whigg. Dare you say to the contrary, whatever you think?


Tant. I durst, if I were sure never to live to see another Parliament.


Whigg. Ay, thou art a good one, but the Parliament (as soon as they met) drew
Articles of their Grievances, Anno 1. Edw. 2. Chron. Bak. 106.
which, though seeming Harsh to the King, yet for avoiding further
Inconvenience, he yielded unto them.


Tant. Inconvenience? What Inconvenience? they were Subjects and Christians in
those days, and had no weapons but prayers and tears, which can bring no great
Inconvenience, if a man resolve to be hard-hearted.


Whig. No, thou (I believe) art Prayer-proof; but King Edward 2. remembered
well, Anno 25. Edw. 1.
that in his stout Fathers time, the Parliament met at London, October. 10. Non
tamen nudi, not naked and unarmed, but ( immo cum quingentis equis armatis and
multitudine magna peditum Electorum,) with five hundred Horse, and a vast
number of choice Foot: Hen. de Knighton. de event. Angl. l. 3. c. 9. to 14.
Induxerunt etiam cives Londoniarum, ut pro recuperandis libertatibus secum
starent; The Citizens of London were brought to stand up with them, for the
recovery of their Charters and Liberties: Comitibus itaque and Baronibus
pariter conglobatis and confederatis, necnon majoritate populi eis inclinante;
several Lords and Barons confederating and leaguing solemnly together, with the
majority of the common people, Inclining to their side.


Tant. What? against the King?


Whig. No, for the Ling, against evil Counselors that seduced the King against
his Oath, his Conscience, Religion and Law: And the Historian Hen. Knighton
gives the reason of this general Confederacy -- quia communem profectum and
utilitatem amplectebatur, H. Knighton, ibid.
communes diligebant eos fortiter; because the Conlederates or Covenanters
stood for the common benefit and commonweal, and the Laws, therefore the
People loved them mightily; and voluntarily accompanied their Parliament Men to
London with horse and Arms at their own charge: Nay, it is a wonder that any man
that had an English heart in his Belly could be a fawning Spaniel-like
Tantivee; some French Bastard sure.


Tant. But, what said the King to his armed Parliamentarians?


Whig. Said? he did (instead of saying any thing) his duty, and confirmed their
Charters and Liberties, so often confirmed and so often wickedly and illegally
broken and encroach't upon: but King Edward 1. was loath to confirm their
Charters, except with this clause -- salvo Jure Coronae nostrae; saving the
Rights of our Crown: But, the People would not, by any means, admit that saving
-- and Exception; so that the King confirmed them as formerly; as K. Charles 1.
after a long Tugg in the House of Lords consented to the Petition of Right,
without the saving; or leaving entire that Sovereign power wherewith, etc.

Whereupon, 4 Car. 1.
-- (says Mr. Noy) To add a saving is not safe: And says Mr. Alford -- Let
us look into the Records, and see what they are; what is Sovereign power? Bodin
says, That is free from any condition, by this we shall acknowledge a Regal as
well as a Legal Power; let us give that to the King that the Law gives him and
no more:


Tory. There spoke a Whigg.


Whigg. True: (so Mr. Pym added) I know how to add Sovereign to his Person but
not to his Power: Also, We cannot leave to him a sovereign power: Also, We
never were possessed of it:


Tory. Our King (God bless him) does not pretend to absolute and arbitrary
Power.


Whig. Sovereign power cannot be invested in any thing that is not Omnipotent.
And the great Oracle of the Law added, that the saving, or leaving entire the
sovereign Power, etc. will overthrow all our Petition of Right; It trenches to
all the Parts of it; It flies at Loans, and at the Oath, and at Imprisonment
and Billeting of Soldiers, This turns all about again. I know that Prerogative
is part of the Law, but Sovereign Power is no Parliamentary word: In my
opinion, it weakens Magna Charta and all our Statutes, for they are absolute
without any saving of Sovereign Power; take we heed what we yield unto: Magna
Charta is such a fellow that he will have no Sovereign: I wonder this Sovereign
was not in Magna Charta or the confirmations of it; If we grant this, by
Implication we give a Sovereign power above all these Laws, (mind that; for all
Power and Liberties and Prerogatives are bounded and limited by the Laws, and
though they be great as the Sea, yet have their bounds, the Law saying,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be
stayed; no Prerogative is infinite in England, nor any power omnipotent,
(except that of God alone) the Law limits and bounds us all from the greatest
to the least.) And therefore Sir Eward Cook goes on, telling the House; That
Power in Law is taken for a power with force; The Sheriff shall take the power
of the County; what it means here, God only knows: It is repugnant to our
Petition ( that is, the King shall not Billet Soldiers, raise Money by Privy
Seals, Loans, Imprison without cause in Law shown, etc. saving by his Sovereign
Power:) our Petition is a Petition of Right, grounded on Acts of Parliament:
Our Predecessors would never endure a Salvo Jure suo, no more than the Kings of
Old could endure for the Church, Salvo Honor Dei and Ecclesiae; we must not
admit of it, and to qualify it, is impossible: Let us hold our Privileges
according to the Law; that Power that is above this, it is not sit for the King
and People to have it disputed further.


Tant. The Oath of Allegiance binds us all to maintain the Kings Prerogative.


Whigg. No doubt on it; and let it be for ever Sacred, let no Profane Hand or
Tongue touch it; no, nor so much as think upon it Irreverently, both it and the
Peoples Liberties (as aforesaid) are vast and great; but they are not Infinite,
they have their known Bounds and ancient Landmarks, and Cursed is that evil
Councellor that makes such a Stir to Encroach or Remove them, extend them or
Stretch them, such deserve to Stretch for it; For it is certain that there is no
Sovereign Power or Prerogative wherewith any King of England has been
entrusted either by God or Man, but what is for Edification, not for
Destruction; for the Weal of his People, and for their Protection, Safety and
Happiness.


Tant. Our Gracious Sovereign (in his late Declarations) pretends to no other
Prerogative but what is legal.


Whigg. All the better for him and us, his Royal Father (of Gracious Memory)
seemed to Disgust his Lords (as aforesaid) when he told them, that he meant not
to show the Power of a King by diminishing their Privileges.


Tory. He wanted not bad Instillers sometimes, as he Confessed afterward.


Whigg. The Summer shall want Flies, e're the Crown want Sycophants swarming
about it, yet like Musketoes too, they usually Burn their Wings in the Flame;
to this sort some ascribed those words in the Kings Speech, 4 Car. 1.
I owe the account of my Actions to God alone, etc. But as for Tunnage and
Poundage it is a thing I cannot want.


Tant. No: why should he?


Whigg. The matter of taking it was not so much the question, as the manner of
taking it, namely, taking it before and without the gift thereof to the King,
by them that had the only power to dispose thereof.


Tant. Then there was hard Measure to some, as well as hard Imprisonment, if
the Parliament had the only power to give Tunnage and Poundage; for the Kings
Commission to the Customers begins thus: C. R.

WHereas the Lords of the Council, taking into Consideration our Revenue, and
finding that Tunnage and Poundage is a principal Revenue of our Crown, and has
been continued for these many Years, have therefore Ordered all those Duties of
Subsidy, Custom and Import, as they were in the Twenty first of King James,
and as they shall be appointed by Us under our Seal, to be Levied; Know ye,
that we, by the Advice of our Lords, Declare our Will, that all those Duties be
Levied and Collected as they were in the time of our Father, and in such manner
as we shall appoint; and if any Person refuse to Pay, then our Will is, that
the Lord Treasurer shall Commit to Prison such, so Refusing, 'till they Conform
themselves; And we give full Power to all our Officers from time to time to
give Assistance to the Farmers of the same, as fully, as when they were
Collected by Authority of Parliament.





Whigg. This occasioned Debates that ended in the Dissolution of that
Parliament, after which the King called no more of eleven long Years, and
Straits and Necessities were urgent and remediless without a Parliament, and
woeful work in Conclusion.


Tant. Why did the Parliament meddle with the Customers?


Whigg. Because they collected Customs in Tunnage and Poundage without
Authority of Parliament.


Tant. King James had them before they were given to him in Parliament.


Whigg. King James had them by Authority of Parliament, from the day before his
first Parliament begun; but the Statute gave him Power so to do, but not from
the first day of his coming to the Crown; 1602. 1603.
for he came to the Crown March 24. 1602. His first Parliament began at
Westminster March 19. 1603. and took many things into Consideration, and
Enacted them, before they took into consideration Tunnage and Poundage, but 1
Jac. cap. 33. the Commons, by the Advice and consent of the Lords, gave the
King the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, at a very low rate; namely, but three
Shillings a Tun for Wine, and so proportionably for quantities greater or
lesser than a Tun; but this expired with the Kings Life: his only Son and
Successor took it ( without Authority of Parliament) as his Father took it by
Authority of Parliament, to the great Disgust of his Parliament, who did at
length grant him Tunnage and Poundage, upon certain Trusts and Confidences,
from the 9th of August, 1641. for about three months, 16 Car. 1.22.


Tant. What no longer?


Whigg. Not at one loose; then by 16 Car. 1.25. they trusted the King with the
Customs, from November 30. 1641. to February 1. namely, for two Months longer:
Then (the other Hitch) for five Months, namely from February 1. 1641. until
July 2. 1642. Then they continued it for some little time by 16 Car. 1. c. 29.
and cap. 31. and cap. 36.


Tant. But did the Free, Free-Parliament in 12 Car. 2.4. give it to our
gracious King for no longer time?


Whigg. Yes, yes, for his Life, but upon trust too, so says the Act; namely,

The Commons Assembled in Parliament, reposing Trust and Confidence in your
Majesty, in and for the Guarding and defending of the Seas, against all
Persons, intending or that shall intend the Disturbance of your said Commons,
in the Intercourse of Trade, and the Invading of this Realm, etc.


Tant. Then it was granted for these Uses and Considerations, belike, and
should be made Use of for no other end, you would say.


Whigg. Yea, I do say so, as the said Statute says.


Tant. But how will you mend your selves, if I get some of it for secret
Service?


Whigg. Thou art capable of any secret Service but Pimping.


Tant. Pimping? that becomes not my Coat.


Whigg. True, but I could tell you a time when Pimping, and Conniving at
Whoredom and Adultery, has been as ready a road to a Bishopric, as ever
Sybthorp, Manwaring, or Mountague took.


Tant. In what time; I pray?


Whigg. In what time? Catch-pole! in no good time.


Tant. Well, say (though) in what time? good Whigg!


Whigg. When Popish Councils prevailed most, and Popish Interest.


Tant. Oh! a great while ago.


Whigg. Yes, yes, Man-Catcher! how fain thou would find me tripping?


Tant. But did King Charles 1. take Tunnage and Poundage, and Imprison the
refusers without Authority of Parliament, for the first 15 years of his Reign?


Tory. Yes indeed, Mr. Richard Chambers was Imprisoned for refusing to pay
Customs, and had also 7060 Pounds of his goods taken from him, and was fined
2000 l in the Star Chamber.


Tant. See what it is to be obstinate and Rebellious.


Whigg. What language these Tantivees have? Obstinate and Rebellious! when it
was Voted and Declared by the honorable House of Commons, Anno 1627. and 1628.

That whosoever shall Counsel or Advise the taking or Levying of the Subsidy of
Tunnage and Poundage, not granted by Parliament, or shall be any Actor or
Instrument therein, shall be reputed an Innovator in the Government, and a
capital Enemy to the Kingdom and Commonwealth.

And if any Merchant or Person whatsoever shall voluntarily yield or pay the
said Subsidy of Tunnage or Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, they
shall likewise be reputed Betrayers of the Liberties of England, and Enemies to
the same;

As may appear by the said Order upon Record.



Now, (good Tantivee!) what shall a Subject do in this Case? he must
necessarily be ground-crusht between two Millstones; if he Pays not, the
Kings party take all from him; and if he Pays, the Parliament punishes him for
Betraying the Liberties of England, and as a common and capital Enemy.


Tant. There is but Right and Wrong in the World, which of them were in the
Right?


Whigg. Neither of them would acknowledge themselves in the Wrong, I Will
warrant, 'till the longest Sword decided the Quarrel.


Tant. But might not Mr. Chambers have been Pardoned, if he would have Recanted
these words, -- They -- meaning the Merchants -- are in no parts of the World
so screwed and wrung as in England, and that in Turkey they have more
Encouragement.


Whigg. Recant? yes, they brought him a Recantation to Subscribe, and then he
should be Released of his Fine, -- 2000 l But the draught of Submission he
Subscribed -- thus --

All the abovesaid Contents and Submission, I Richard Chambers do utterly abhor
and detest, as most unjust and false, and never 'till Death will acknowledge
any part thereof.

Richard Chambers.


Also he underwrit these Texts of Scripture, instead of Submission, namely,
Isa. 29.21.
That make a man an Offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate; and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

Mic. 2.1, 2.
Woe to them that devise Iniquity, because it is in the Power of their hand, and
they covet Fields and take them by Violence, and Houses, and take them away; so
they Oppress a man and his house, a man and his heritage.

Ezekiel. 45.9. and 40.8.
Thus says the Lord God, let it suffice you, Oh Princes of Israel: Remove
Violence and Spoil, and execute Judgment and Justice, take away your Exactions
from my People, says the Lord God.

Eccles. 5.8.
If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent perverting of Judgment
and Justice in a Province; marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher than
the highest regards, and there be higher than they.

Per me Richard Chambers.





Tant. But did He that is higher than the highest regard and show his
Displeasure in this Affair?


Whigg. It is neither safe nor easy to unriddle the meaning of Gods Providence,
by the Events: But as to matter of Fact, History tells us, that Richard
Chambers, notwithstanding his vast Losses (for which he never had considerable
Reparation when time served, so thankless an Office it is to be a State Martyr,
as to the gratitude of men, but) by Gods goodness to him, he lived to be
Sheriff of London, and a worshipful Alderman thereof; but his Judges in the
Star Chamber (many of them) did not come to the Grave in Peace; but went out of
the World as naked as they came into it, stripped of all before they were
bereaved of Life; yet the Lord Treasurer Weston dyed of his fair death, flying
beyond Sea, and withal he dyed a professed (as before he was vilely suspected,
and taken upon suspicion for a Masquerade) Papist.


Tant. You Whiggs thought him a Covert-papist, or a Protestant in Masquerade,
when he was so preferred at Court from Chancellor of the Exchequer, to be the
great Lord Treasurer.


Whigg. He was a Creature of Buckingham's making, and Bishop Laud's Confirming.


Tant. Do Bishops confirm Lord Treasurers?


Whigg. Sometimes, as well as turn Lord Treasurers themselves, as they used to
be.


Tant. The worst of the Disciples carried the Bag.


Whigg. That Rule holds not always true.


Tant. But if the said Treasurer did Dye a professed Papist, that looks not well
on our side.


Tory. Nor can it surely be denied; 1626. 2 Car. 1.
and the Commons were so sensible of it, that they agreed upon this ensuing
Petition to his Majesty concerning Recusants, (long before Weston grew so high)
in these words: To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
YOUR Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects, 2 Car. 1.
the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, do with great Comfort
remember the many Testimonies which your Majesty has given of your Sincerity
and Zeal for the true Religion Established in this Kingdom, and in particular,
your gracious Answer to both Houses of Parliament at Oxford, upon their
Petition concerning the Causes and Remedies of the Increase of Popery, that
your Majesty thought fit and would give Order to Remove from all Places of
Authority and Government, all such Persons as are either Popish Recusants, or
according to direction of former Acts of State justly to be suspected, which
was then Presented as a great and principal Cause of that Mischief; but not
having received so full redress herein as may conduce to the Peace of this
Church, and safety of this Regal State, they hold it their Duty once more to
resort to your Sacred Majesty, humbly to Inform you, that upon Examination they
find the Persons underwritten to be either Recusants, Papists, or justly
suspected according to the former Acts of State, who now do, or since the
Siting of the Parliament did remain in places of Government, and Authority and
Trust in your several Counties of this your Realm of England, and Dominion of
Wales.

The Right Honorable Francis Earl of Rutland, Lieutenant of the County of
Lincoln, Rutland, Northampton, Nottingham, and a Commissioner of the Peace, and
of Oyer and Terminer in the County of York, and Justice of Oyer from Trent
Northwards; and also against his Deputy Justice in Oyer from Trent northwards;
the right Honorable Viscount Dunbar, Deputy Lieutenant in the East riding of
Yorkshire, his Wife and Mother, and the greatest part of his Family being
Popish Recusants; also against William Lord Eure, a convict Popish Recusant,
and in Commission for the Sewers; Henry Lord Abergavenny, John Lord Tenham,
Henry Lord Morley, John Lord Mordant, John Lord St. John of Basing, Captain of
Lidley Castle in Com. Southampton; Em. Lord Scroop, Lord President of his
Majesty's Council in the North, Lord Lieutenant of the County and City of York,
and of Kingston upon Hull; Anthony Viscount Mountague in Commission of the
Sewers; Sir William Wray Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, Colonel to a Regiment, his
Wife a Recusant; Sir Edward Musgrave, Sir Thomas Lampley, Justices of Peace and
quorum; Sir Thomas Savage Deputy Lieutenant and Justice of the Peace, his Wife
and Children Recusants; Sir Richard Egerton a Non-communicant; Thomas Savage
Esquire, a Deputy Lieutenant a Recusant, and his Wife Indicted and Presented;
William Whitmore, Sir Hugh Beeston, Sir William Massy, Sir William Courtn^y
Knight, Vice-warden of the Stannery, and Deputy Lieutenant, a Popish Recusant;
Sir Thomas Ridley, Sir Ralph Conyers, James Lawson Esquire, Sir John Shelley
Knight and Baronet, a Popish Recusant; William Scot Esquire, a Recusant, John
Finch Esquire, not convicted, but comes not to Church; Sir William Mullineux,
Deputy Lieutenant and Justice of the Peace, his Wife a Recusant; Sir Richard
Houghton Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, Sir William Norris Captain of the General
Forces, and Justice of Peace, a Recusant; Sir Gilbert Ireland Justice of Peace,
a Recusant; James Anderton Esquire, Justice of Peace, and one of his Majesty's
Receivers; Edward Rigby Esquire, Clerk of the Crown, Justice of Peace, himself
a good Communicant, but his Wife and Daughter Popish Recusants; Edward E --,
Robert Warren Clerk, a Justice of the Peace, justly suspected for five Reasons
there mentioned, Sir Henry Compton Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, Justice of the
Peace, and Commissioner for the Sewers; Sir John Shelly Knight and Baronet,
himself and his Lady Recusants; Sir John Gage a Popish Recusant, with a vast
number more of Justices of Peace, and Commissioners of Sewers, either Papists
or justly suspected.

Wherefore they humbly beseech your Majesty not to suffer your loving Subjects
to continue any longer discouraged by the apparent sense of that Increase both
in number and power, which by the Favor and Countenance of such like ill
affected Governors accreweth to the Popish Party; but that according to your
own Wisdom, Goodness and Piety, (whereof they rest assured) you will be
graciously pleased to Command that Answer of your Majesty's to be effectually
observed, and the Parties above named, and all such others to be put out of
such Commissions and Places of Authority wherein they now are in your Majesty's
Realm of England, Contrary to the Acts and Laws of State in that behalf.





Tant. Those last words were Pungent.


Tory. Not prevalent surely, for the Parliament was soon after Dissolved, and
the House of Commons having Intimation of their intended Dissolution made what
have they could to perfect a Remonstrance or Declaration against the Duke of
Buckingham, and concerning Tunnage and Poundage, taken by the King since his
Fathers death without consent in Parliament, and which were never payable (they
say in their Remonstrance) to any of his Majesty's Ancestors, but only by a
special Act of Parliament, and ought not to be levied without such an Act.


Tant. And did the King go on Collecting and taking Tunnage and Poundage
notwithstanding?


Tory. Yes, he said he could not want it; and sent them a former Message, that
if He had not a timely supply, He would betake himself to New Councils.


Tant. New Councils, what were they?


Tory. The Commons in their said Remonstrance often with thoughtful Hearts
remember the words -- New-Councils, repeating, and Repeating them as if they
were somewhat against the old Parliamentary Councils and course of this
Kingdom; and they Ordered every Member of the House to have a Copy of the said
Remonstrance, for they had not time to Present it to his Gracious Majesty, but
were Dissolved, though the Lords also prepared a Petition to stay the Kings
purpose in Dissolving the Parliament, sending Viscount Mandevil, Earl of
Manchester, Lord President of his Majesty's Council, the Earls of Pembrook,
Carlisle, and Holland, to entreat his Majesty to give Audience to the whole
House of Peers.

But the King returned Answer, that his Resolution was to hear no motion for
that purpose, but He would Dissolve the Parliament, and he was then as good as
his Word, for he immediately Dissolved them by Commission under the great Seal,
Dated at Westminster June 15.2. R. R. Car. 1. 1626. To that purpose:

And withal Publishes a Declaration in Print, concerning the Grounds and
Causes which moved his Majesty to Dissolve this, as also the former Parliament,
Dated June 13. 2 Car. 1. two days before the Date of the Commission.


Tant. It was the readyer against the time of using it; Coleman was as
provident.


Tory. Right, And also a Proclamation was published against the said
Remonstrance of the Commons, commanding all Persons of what Quality soever, who
have or shall have hereafter any Copyes or Notes of the said Remonstrance,
forthwith to Burn the same, that the Memory thereof might be utterly abolished,
upon Pain of his Majesty's Indignation and high Displeasure.


Tant. Then the Tide did run very high.


Tory. The King also Published another Proclamation against Preaching or
Disputing the Arminian Controversies Pro or Con; but the effects of that
Proclamation, how equally soever intended, became the stopping of the Puritan's
Mouths, and an uncontrolled Liberty to the Tongues and Pens of the thriving
Divinity-men, the rising side, Mountagues Party.

And though the Parliament was Dissolved, so that the Duke of Buckingham for
that nearly-reflecting Article, the last, against him, which the King in
Honor, and by the Bonds of natural Affection and Piety to the Memory of his
Deceased Father, thought himself obliged to Call him to a public account for
so Daring an Insolence, in applying a Plaster to the Kings breast against his
Will, and without the Advice, and contrary to the Opinion of the Sworn
Physicians of King James, who attributed the Cause of his trouble unto the said
Pla^^^^^, and a Drink that Buckingham gave him, as was Alleged in the
Thirteenth Article of the Dukes Impeachment; and the said Drink twice given to
the King by Buckingham's own Hands, and a third time refused by the King, who
felt great Impairment of his Life and Health, complaining of the Drink that the
Duke gave him; His Physicians telling him, to Please him and Comfort him, that
His second Impairment was from cold taken, or some other ordinary Cause; No,
no, said his Majesty, It is that which I had from Buckingham, as more at large
much aggravated and insisted upon by Mr. Wandesford, who managed the Thirteenth
Article of the Impeachment against Buckingham.


Tant. But what said the Duke in his own Justification and Defense in the
Star Chamber?


Tory. He denied it, and examined diverse Witnesses about the matter.


Tant. And what then?


Tory. Nothing more, the Cause never came to Judicial Hearing in that Court.


Tant. Then let us hear no more of it; I am sick of it my self: I never heard
so much before; Go on.


Tory. After the Parliament was Dissolved and things well hushed, the Privy
Council Ordered all Customs to be paid, and the Refusers Punished by Fines,
Imprisonment, this was deemed one New-council, and Loans another.


Tant. Loans, prithee Tory, what were they?


Tory. The King sent to the Rich a Letter (beginning, Trusty and Well-beloved,
etc.) under the Privy Seal, requiring him or them to send him within twelve
days so much Money (as for Example, in the West Riding in Yorkshire, to Sir
Thomas Wentworth 20 l Sir Francis Fuljam 20 l Sir Edward Osburn 30 l Godfrey
Copley Esquire 15 l) promising in the Name of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, to repay the Money so lent.


Tant. Ay, when? lets hear that.


Tory. Within eighteen Months.


Tant. And was the Money Repayed?


Tory. Pish! that is a silly question; then of the City of London, the King bid
them lend him a hundred thousand pound.


Tant. Well said, a few such Sums from Towns or Cities would do the business;
but did they lend the Money?


Tory. No, the City desired to be excused.


Tant. And what then?


Tory. Then the Privy-Councel required them, all excuses set apart, to return a
Direct and speedy Answer to his Gracious Majesty, or in default thereof, that
his Majesty may frame his Councils as appertains to a King in such extreme
and Important occasions.


Tant. And were they not afraid and apprehensive of the Innuendo?


Tory. The Commands rested not here, for they also commanded the City to
Equippe twenty of their best Ships in the River, with all manner of Tackle,
Sea-stores and Ammunition, men and Victuals for three Months.


Tant. And did they do it?


Tory. They grumbled at it, saying it was without President; as did also the
Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of Peace at Dorset, having received the Kings
Commands for setting forth Ships from Pool, Weymouth, and Lime; but the Council
checked them for daring to dispute Orders, instead of obeying them; and whereas
they mention presidents, they might know that the presidents of former times
were Obedience, not Direction.


Whigg. It would puzzle a good Historian to find presidents of Obedience in
England to Arbitrary-sway, and Orders of Privy Council for Impositions without
Law to back them.


Tory. How? Did not stout King Edward 1. Command Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk,
25 Edw. 1.
and Lord Marshal of England, and several other Lords to go to the Wars in
Gascoygne in France, which they refusing, except the King himself went also in
Person; But the King threatened then to take away their Lands and their Lives;
saying to the Lord Marshal, and Swearing -- By God, Sir Earl, you shall either
Go or Hang.


Whigg. Ay, but the Earl answered the King at the same moment, -- I Swear by
the same Oath, I will neither Go nor Hang, and so without leave went out of the
Room and departed; and shortly after, he and Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford,
and other Lords and Noblemen Assembled, and other their Friends to the number
of thirty Bannerets, one thousand five hundred men at Arms, well appointed and
stood upon their Guard; but the King Dissembled his Resentments at that time,
being about to go to Flanders, where he spent much Money, and for recruit
Summons a Parliament (to meet) at York, promising from thenceforth never to
charge his Subjects otherwise than by their Consents in Parliament, and also to
Pardon all such as had denied to attend him in this Journey.


Tant. And did they trust the Kings word?


Tory. Yes: but he broke it and all his other Oaths and Confirmations of the
Peoples Charters made in Parliament, two Years after; 27 Edw. 1.
having obtained and bought a Pardon for so doing, (as aforesaid) of his
Holiness; nay, he begun to play his Arbitrary Pranks long before that, for (in
8 Edw. 1.) he sent out his Writ of Quo Warranto (a fine Engine to get Money) to
examine by what Title men held their Lands, Bak. Chron. p. 100.
which upon flaws found in their Charters, and pryed into by the Lawyers
brought him in much Money; 'till John Earl of Warren stopped the Current and
stem'd the Tide, for calling upon him to show his Title, He drew out an old
rusty Sword, and said, He held his Land by that, and by that would hold it to
Death, and having many Backers, it made the King desist from his Project.


Tant. An old rusty Sword, do say? that was more than the old Christian
Weapons, Prayers and Tears.


Tory. And stopped the Kings Tyranny and lawless Usurpations, more than a
thousand Petitions, Prayers and Tears.


Tant. Still I say Subjects, Christian Subjects should use no Weapons but
Prayers and Tears.


Whigg. What, not against Robbers, Thieves and Murderers?


Tant. Not against Magistrates that Rob by Law.


Whigg. Thou talk like an Ass every day more than other; Rob by Law? a
Contradiction in terminis; if there be Law for it, it is not Robery, Theft nor
Murder; and if it be against Law or without Law, all violent taking of men's
Goods (one Subject from another) is Theft and Robbery, except the Law enjoin
it, and may lawfully be Resisted, without all doubt, in like manner and with
such Weapons as the Onset or Assault is made.


Tant. What in an Officer, a Commission-Officer?


Whigg. No man can be Authorized to do an ill thing, or an illegal thing by any
man's Commission, much less by the Kings Commission, or the Broad-Seal, for the
King can do no wrong; if it be wrong, it stands for nothing; it is not the
Kings act, nor the Kings Commission, but Surreptitious, and punishable.


Tant. And who shall Judge of its Legality, or the legality of the Resistance?


Whigg. The Judges, and the Law, and the Juries.


Tant. Nay, then we are well enough yet.


Whigg. If you be well, keep you so, whilst you are well, but remember
Belknap, Tresilian, etc. many Judges have been Hanged (right, right and good
Reason) for corrupt and false Judgment, there are they that shall judge the
Judges.


Tant. Ay, but when? at the day of Judgment?


Whigg. Yes, yes, no more on it; but this Doctrine of resisting with other
Weapons than Prayers and Tears, Force with Force, Violence with Violence, in
our own just Defense, Augustine. cont. Manich. l. 22. cap. 74. Lud. Viv.
Institut. Fem. Christ. lib. 1.
seems so strange to the new Tantivee-men, that herein join with the old Error
of the Anabaptists, (condemned in the 37 Article of the Church of England) as
also the Family of Love, who Condemned all Wars, as did the Manichees; nay, the
learned Ludovicus Vives says, Arma Christianum Virum tractare nescio an fas
sit; I know not whether or no it be lawful for a Christian to Fight at all, or
go to the Wars, and wear Weapons; Lactantius also was against all Killing,
right and wrong, by Law, or without Law, by or without the Magistrate.


Tant. The Article you mention, says, it is lawful to wear Weapons, and serve
in the Wars at the Command of the Magistrate.


Whigg. Right, I say no other, the other resisting without the Magistrate, is
only in a Christians own Defense, the dictates of the Law of God, the Law of
Nature, the Law of Wisdom, reason and Prudence; the Law that Worms and all
Creatures have of Self-preservation; he is accessory to his own Death, and felo
de se, that resists not a Murderer or a Robber.


Tant. Ay, but suppose the Magistrate take your Goods violently against Law.


Whigg. That also is impossible, for as he is a Magistrate he acts by Law, and
cannot possibly Act as a Magistrate but by having the Law on his side; if he
has not the Law to Vouch him, he Acts not like a Magistrate, but as a Robber;
but this must be certain, clear and evident, otherwise Resistance is a Sin.


Tant. This is right Whiggish Principles, and Whiggish Doctrines, and Whiggish
Practices.


Whigg. This is the old English Practice, and the dictates of right Reason and
the Law.


Tant. Where did you learn these Doctrines?


Whigg. I cannot well tell where first I had them, for they are connate and
coeval with the reason of every Wise man, and Good man, but I think I first had
them in Print, out of a Sermon Preached by one of the Kings Chaplains in
Ordinary, William Haywood D. D. Preached before his Majesty at Newport in the
Isle of Wight, during the time of the Treaty there (for Peace) betwixt the King
( Charles 1.) and the Parliament; upon a suitable Text ( Romans 12.18.) If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men: Where,
excellently and suitably he Discourses of the first words of the Text; I Will
repeat only his own words in Print, in descant upon the words -- If it be
possible, namely, (He says,) A form of Speech this is which implies often
Difficulties in the business; and sometimes Impossibility; difficult where the
Parties to be reconciled are froward, and self-willed Enemies to Peace in
David's language. Impossibility where no Agreement will be had, without loss of
a good Conscience: Where Gods Honor, or the administration of Justice, or the
discharge of our calling lies at stake, so that we cannot have Peace with men,
unless we be irreligious, unjust or unfaithful. In the former case where Peace
is only difficult; that should stir up our dilgence the rather; endeavor with
so much the more Patience and unwearied Industry to overcome the frowardness of
those we have to deal with; and where so precious a Jewel as Peace is to be
compassed, with expense of our labor or our substance, there spare for no cost
or pains. But where it is impossible to a Servant of God, where nothing will do
it but the sale of a good Conscience, there rouse up our courage, and prefer
not outward Peace before inward; men's contentment, or our own temporal
commodity or safety, before Gods Honor, our Souls quiet and the public good.
But it will here be demanded, How we may know when Peace is possible, when not:
Six cases are mentioned by some Divines, ye may referr them to the three heads
aforenamed, of Religion, Justice, and Faithfulness in our calling. Of Religion
first. God himself (in case his public Worship be endangered) enjoins us
flatly to break the Peace. If thy Brother the son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or
thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own
Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and Serve other Gods which thou
shall not know, etc. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him,
neither shall thine eye pity him: Thou shall not spare, nor conceal him, but
thou shall surely kill him, thy hand shall be first upon him, and afterward the
hand of all the People, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Thus ye are to understand it in case of
Temptation to manifest Idolatry, (and Popery is clearly proved to be Idolatry)
Blasphemy, Heresy or Apostasy from the true Faith and Worship of God: we can
have no Peace, nay, we can have no Mercy; we are not allowed to spare and
conceal the party so tempting us, but deliver him up to just Punishment, be he
never so near, or dear to us. Secondly, where our selves are Persecuted for
Religion, or Virtue, or Obedience to Gods Law in any kind, and there is no way
of satisfying our Persecutors, or delivering our selves from trouble, but by
denying our Faith, yielding up our Virtue, or violating our Obedience to Gods
Commandments. In these two cases, the one offensive, the other defensive; for
preservation of our Religion, and our Duty to God, no Peace possible.

Two other cases follow, which belong to Justice. One where we are passive, or
those who are one with us: and we are violently assaulted contrary to Law and
Equity. We may then break the Peace for our own Preservation, in defending our
selves, so we do it Cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, go not beyond what is
needful to our honest defense, or theirs who depend on us, as our Wives,
Children or Family. The like holds when we are violently handled, because we
will not join with others in breaking Peace, and trampling down Justice. Cast
in thy lot among us: We will find all precious substance, and fill our Houses
with spoil, Prove. 1.13. Thus where in defense of Justice to our selves, and our
own private, being Innocent, and against wrongful Authority, our Lot is to be
passive. Another case may fall out, wherein it becomes us to be active, though
our selves, in our particular Interest suffer not: and that is, where we see
our innocent neighbors wrongfully abused, and distressed to extremity by
lawless hands; we may there rise up in rescue of oppressed Innocence, and do as
much in our neighbors case, as we would wish done in our own. Thus Lot
resisted the Sodomites in behalf of the Angels whom they Invaded with violence:
And Moses succored the Israelite striving with the Egyptian, Exodus 2.12. And
thus every good man, armed with wealth and power, may, and ought to stand up in
defense of the poor Widow and fatherless, against their tyrannous oppressors.
Nor are they breakers of the Peace in so doing; but these cruel grinders of the
Poor whom they resist.



Now Tantivee, what think you of your Doctrine, that Christians may use no
other Weapons but Prayers and Tears? and what your Design may be in Preaching
up, and every Sunday inculcating such Crambee Doctrine at this Juncture, I do
not know, it looks like a Set-business: What think you of Dalilah's Policy? the
crafty Whore was Bribed to Betray Sampson, but the Philistines durst not set
upon him 'till he was Bound, for they had woeful Experience of his Whiggish
Valor; therefore they hire the Hireling to Bind him first, that they might
securely Spoil him; a very crafty Piece of Politics.


Tant. Ay, and if all you Whiggs were Bound Hand and Foot, 'till we did to you
what we list, it were no great matter.


Whigg. It would be the safest way, for Torles and Tantivees have no good Luck
at Fighting, though none so prone to Challenge and Quarrel as they; (right
Hectors) witness a late double Duel of Chieftanes, Whiggs and Tories.


Tant. I never heard of it.


Whigg. No matter, you shall not then from me; for I purposely conceal your
Tory-Champion, out of profound respect to him, because he was most Piteously
baffled.


Tant. What, out of his Life?


Whigg. No, no; To save that ignobly, he only parted with his Honor; that he
might die daily and endure a thousand Deaths, in conscious memory and doleful
regret for the cowardly baseness and loss of Honor, which none but the Son of
W -- no man of Honor will part with it; basely to purchase a Sneaking reprieve
for a baffled Life.


Tant. I do not apprehend you.


Whigg. No matter; It is not to the History, but pat to our present purpose,
whilst you Tantivee's would persuade us to bind our own Hands 'till our
Throats be cut, by Hectors and Tories, against Law, and that It is Divinity so
to do; I told you before, that this was the Old Doctrine in Ireland, just
before the Tory Cutthroats basely Butchered the Protestants, Man, Woman and
Child that they could come at, or durst come at; and they came at all, and
spared not Man, Woman nor Child, who happened to be Armed with no other Weapons
but Prayers and Tears; old Earl Warren's rusty Sword was the only Shelter and
Safeguard under God, there is nothing else frights a Jesuit from a Massacre,
but fear of losing his own life; but for Prayers and Tears, the Crocodiles
relent not, though you Weep your Hearts out; no, let them once begin their
Violence, (which God forbid) but if they do, he deserves to have his Throat
cut, and his Wife and Children first miserably Butchered before his face, that
so unmans himself as not to defend the helpless Babes with no other Weapons but
Prayers and Tears. Prayers and Tears! is that the word? Why, box it about then
in every Tantivee pulpit, and number the Converts, and tell me how many
Englishmen (Protestants or Papists) are proselyted to the new
Tantivee-doctrine; yet if all the Papists in Christendom, and all the fierce
Episcopal or Presbyterian Bigots, whose Religion is Persecution, and Blood and
Wounds, an inhospitable and inhumane Crew, that will think it Religion to kill
men if they will not go to Heaven, Plunder and Fine them, if they will not
march along (their way too) and yet in their public Confessions and Articles
of Faith, acknowledge themselves fallible, and whether they be right or wrong
they cannot well tell, to be sure: Pretty hearts, all other People must have no
other Christian-weapons but Prayers and Tears, whilst they with Sword in Hand,
hold a Bible in one hand, and dart and flash with the other, as if they (alone)
were the Popes Commission-Officers, or Antitichrists Curaziers, armed Cap-a-pe,
whilst the trembling and better part of Christendom kneel Weeping before them,
Crying to them for -- Mercy for Gods sake, -- Quarter for Heavens sake; whilst
with deaf Ears, hardened Hearts, and bloody Hands, they are Killing men for
Gods sake; If I could not be reconciled, yet I could cohabit peaceably,
lovingly and neighbourly with any Religion, except this Persecuting Religion,
(under what form soever it lurks:) It is not of God, but from Abaddon, (that
is) the Destroyer, who was a Murderer from the beginning; an Inquisition, a
High Commission, an Ecclesiastical Jailer, Horning, Cursing, Damning,
Imprisoning, Stooling or Fooling upon the Stool of Repentance, etc. differ but
as the old Viper and her Brood, though they eat up one another, they are all
Vipers, all the same Image of the Beast, and all of a Breed; or as a Serpent
and a Dragon, a little time, and good store of Blood and growth makes the
Serpent right Dragon: God bless us all from their Stings, from their Bloody
Jaws and all devouring Maws.


Tant. Nay, the Fanatics say the Episcopal are more Condescending and Merciful
than the Presbyterian.


Tory. You know the Proverb, Cursed Cowes have short Horns; but you may know the
Nature of the Beast, the Cursed nature, by her Dossing at men on all trivial
occasions, though her Horns are almost worn to the Stumps: of all Persecuting
Religious there is never a Barrel better Herring; for they all do as much
Mischief as they can; I grant some of them have not the force, the opportunity,
the longed-for Power of being bloodily cruel, but they show their good will,
you see; though they are forced (poor Hearts) to Thrash in their Cloaks; the
Cloaks and Pretenses of Mercy and Christian Compassion: this makes such a
jumble with their Practices, that they Thrash now 'till they Sweat again, and
are almost tired and out of breath; they cannot well tell what to do for the
best, which makes them so various from themselves; sometimes all Love and
Kindness, Charity and Indulgence; and then again, at it again, with Curses and
Gaols, Hell and Damnation; -- Into what difficulties does sin plunge poor
Souls? whereas, how easy is Christ's Yoke? what Guards and Bulwarks are
necessary to secure Tyranny and Cruelty, Oppression and Violence? and all too
little; however, no fence (can be had) for their Fears, nor any cure for their
wounded Spirits and Consciences: whereas on the contrary, How easy is it, and
pleasant to be Sober, Temperate, Virtuous, Loving, and to live according as the
Law, counsel us, not taking new Councels, New ways, and by-ways, out of the
right Road of the Kings Highway.


Tory. Humanity teaches men no such monstrous cruelty.


Whigg. It Is true, for their superstition (Invented to be a Crutch for Pride
and Avarice) under the Vizard of Divinity first destroys Humanity out of the
Bigots; and then, and not till then, they cease to be men, and lose all humane
Bowels and Compassion, being Transubstantiated to perfect Devils, and
Abaddon's, or Destroyers; so devilish are all persecuting Religions: whereas
Christ's Kingdom (the Gospel) is not of this World, nor are its Weapons carnal
but Spiritual; if Christ's Kingdom were of this World, then might, and would,
and should his Servants fight for it; but now is his Kingdom not from hence.


Tant. A little more of this would make me perfect Whigg, I think; yet I had
rather hear more of the History; How did the Loans thrive? when were they
repaid? or, was the Exchequer shut up at pay-day? or what became of the Ships,
and the Ship Money?


Tory. The Ships, and Men, and Fleet, and Money went the way that a great deal
of English-money has gone since that time, namely, to France with the Duke of
Buckingham; who made a base broken Voyage of it, and returned to get Recruits,
which the King provided for him as well as he could; and away then the Duke
went (for a second Venture) toward the Isle of Rhee again; but he got no
further onward his way thither than Portsmouth, for there he was Stabbed by
Lieutenant Felton.


Whigg. Upon what Provocation?


Tory. I Will tell you anon; as for the Loans, 1626.
the King Promised that this way should not be made a President for the time to
come, to charge them or their Posterity, to the Prejudice of their Just and
Ancient Liberties, enjoyed under his most Noble Progenitors, and Promising
them, In the Word of a Prince, to repay such Sums.


Tant. That is to be understood when he has the Money to repay.


Whigg. Yes, but that time never yet came.


Tant. I am not for this kind of Lending, whether I will or no, and without
being able to sue for, or recover (neither by fair means nor foul) neither
Principal nor Interest, I Will Swear.


Whigg. Nay, Do not Swear, I Will believe the Parson without Searing; for Men of
thy Coat and Tantivee-principle seldom put out Money to Interest or Use, except
to the Alehouse or Tavern, to wipe out the Chalk, and clear old Scores, and
then run fresh upon Tick again; what needs thou to care for the Liberties and
Charters of an Englishman? thou have no Inheritance to lose, nor will thy
Heirs fall out or quarrel about the Land thou leavest them; thou will take a
Course for that, and make thine own Hands and Guts thy Executors.


Tory. To the Imposition of Loans was added the Burden of Billeting of
Soldiers (returned from that unsuccesseful and dishonorable Voyage from
Cadiz) and Moneys to discharge their quarters were for the present to be levied
upon the Country, to be repaid out of Sums Collected upon the General Loan.


Tant. Yes, when they could catch it.


Tory. The Companies were scattered here and there all the Kingdom over, but
that did not much affright men out of their Purses, though many Felonies,
Robberies, Rapes and Murders were Committed by the Soldiers and Mariners; but
they were governed by Martial-law; and some were Executed, but they Mastered
the People, disturbed the Peace of Families, committed frequent Rapes,
Burglaries and Robberies, Murders and Barbarous Cruelties, which made a
general Outcry and Lamentation wherever they came: but the Lord Chief Justice
(Sir Randolph Crew) lost his Place for not favoring the Loan; and in his room
succeeded a right Cavalier, (Sir Nicholas Hide) who yet for his Abilities and
Skill in Law, might without blushing climb up to the Bench; but he could not
without great disgust and general Prejudice succeed a man so universally
beloved as was Sir Randolph Crew.

To advance this Loan, one Sibthorp had contrived a Tantivee-Sermon, 3 Car. 1.
Preached by him at Northampton, at Lent Assiizes, upon Romans 13.7. called
Apostolical Obedience, and by all means the Divinity must be in Print, or else
you will say, how could it have reached the Ears of Bishop Laud, or made room for
Preferment.

And Archbishop Abbot must License it under his own Hand, or take what follows.


Tant. Why sure he would not lose his Archbishopric for want of Subscribing
his Name.


Tory. He refused to do it, though the Court pressed him earnestly to do it, and
his Archbishopric was Sequestered soon after.


Whigg. Some said it was Bishop Lauds Policy, to pick a Quarrel with him, if he
refused to obey the Kings Commands, 1627.
or expose him to the Indignation of a Parliament, if he dared to License such
Tantivee-Stuff, and illegal and wicked Positions; some called them Traitorous
Positions; he affirmed that the Prince who is the Head, and makes his Court and
Council, it is his Duty to direct and make Laws. Eccles. 8.3, 4. He does
whatsoever pleases him; where the word of the the King is, there is power, and
who may say unto him, What do thou? And -- If Princes Command any thing which
Subjects may not Perform, because it is against the Laws of God, or of Nature,
or Impossible, yet Subjects are bound to undergo the Punishment without either
resisting, or railing, or reviling, and so to yield a Passive Obedience where
they cannot exhibit an active one: I know no other Case but one of these three
wherein a Subject may excuse himself with Passive Obedience, but in all other
he is bound to Active Obedience, says Sybthorp.


Tory. He had forgot the Laws of this Land, which all Kings are bound and Sworn
to obey; for the municipal Laws are not immediately any of those three, and
Doctor Manwaring he fisht for Preferment with two Sermons to Drill in the Loan,
though against Law, as the King confessed in after Statutes; as also the
Ship-writs Condemned by the King: (16 Car. 1.14.) But those Court-Sermons did
Mischief awhile, though in Conclusion the Court-Parasites smarted for their
saucy rashness and falsehood; Manwaring asserting, that the King is not bound to
observe the Laws of the Realm concerning the Subjects Rights and Liberties.


Whigg. This is just like the Popes Pardon, and Absolving King Edward of and
from the Obligation of his Coronation Oath, Vows and Promises.


Tory. Manwaring also asserted, that those who refused to pay the Loan,
Offended against the Law of God.


Tant. Did he find that in the Bible?


Tory. And that the Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of
Aids and Subsidies.


Whigg. It Is a wonder to me that the Parliament let him escape after this: what
sets a Kingdom in a flame but these Incendiaries, that do not, or will not know
the Constitution of this Kingdom and Commonwealth? An equal Bridle to curb
Tyranny and Arbitrary Sway on the one hand, and Anarchy and Confusion on the
other.


Tory. Ay, our Laws are good enough, none better.


Whigg. Then what Traitors and Villains are they, that dare debauch the
fundamental Constitutions and Laws?


Tory. It was the way to Preferment.


Whigg. The way to the Gallows, was it not? better a hundred thousand such
Sycophants were Hanged, than a good King and his Laws Betrayed, and the Kingdom
Involved in blood through their sly Tantivee-leasings and Insinuations.


Tory. Bishop Laud was the Man, and all in all with the King, all Preferments
in Church and State he annuated, or He and Buckingham; though they so
mischeivously to the King and State, countenanc't the Loan, so contrary to the
grants of the great Charter, and the Subjects Liberties and Properties, which
the King was bound by Oath and Duty to Preserve and Observe, and was ready to
do it of his own Benignity and Goodness, but those Court-Parasites ruined all
at length, and themselves too.

Popery and Arbitrary Sway are Twins, always coupled; the Queen had great
Influence upon the Favorites, either to make or mar them, and they knew it
as well; and the Jesuits had too much Influence over her, what by fair means,
what by foul; but the King was angry, when he heard they made her (for Penance)
walk barefoot to Tyburn.


Whigg. The Jesuits! Ay, they are pretty Creatures for Princes to be Slaves
unto, and to become their Vassals and Instruments; they have got the two Reyns
(into their own hands) that guide the silly World, namely, Hope and Fear, whom
the hopes of Heaven cannot allure to their purposes, the fear of Hell and
Purgatory does affright.


Tant. Brave doings! In Athens Themistocles was Governor and Ruled the City,
his Wife ruled him, and her Son ruled her, where then were lodged the Reyns of
Government?


Tory. What Is that to us here in England? good Impertinent!


Whigg. Do not interrupt us, you (Parson) with your Nonsensical Prate out of
old Notes, which you read devoutly out of Sybthorp, Manwaring and Mountague; do
not mistake your self, you think the People of Athens had a brave time on it,
luscious doings; if you had lived there, you would have known where, and to
whom you would make your special Addresses and close Applications.


Tory. Archbishop Abbot was quite out of play, for refusing to License that
doughty Sermon; to which he made many rational exceptions; as namely, in Page
2. to these words -- And whereas the Prince pleads not the power of
Prerogative: and in page 8. The Kings Duty is first to direct and make Laws:
and -- page 10. If nothing may excuse from active Obedience, but what is
against the Law of God, or of Nature, or Impossible: How does this agree with
Page 5. That all Subjects are bound to all their Princes, according to the Laws
and Customs of the Kingdom wherein they live? (he might have honestly added)
and no otherwise: and Page 12. yea, all antiquity to be absolutely for absolute
Obedience to Princes in all Civil and Temporal things.


Tant. Hey day, this is like Pope Boniface to Philip (the fair) of France,
Sciat te in Temporalibus and Spiritualibus nobis subjacere.


Whigg. They do not say in Spiritual things they would have their Prince
absolute over all but themselves, but is that Position agreeable to the great
Charter, and many more Acts of Parliament in Edw. 1. and Edw. 3. That the
Subjects shall not be grieved to sustain any Charge or Aid, but by the Common
Assent, and that in Parliament; and the Petition of Right at large Confirms the
same, by the Repetition of many more Statutes to that purpose.


Tory. Enough, Enough of this.


Tant. What Opinion had Archbishop Abbot of Dr. Laud?


Tory. He soon found him, and said, his Life in Oxford was to pick quarrels in
the Lectures of the Public Readers, and to give notice of them to the Bishop
of Durham, that he might fill the Ears of King James with Discontents, against
the honest men that took Pains in their Places, and settled the truth (which he
called Puritanisme) in their Auditors. Rushw. Col. part 1. 440.
It was an Observation what a sweet man this was like to be, that the first
observable Act that he did, was the Marrying the Earl of D. to the Lady R; when
it was notorious to the World that she had another Husband; King James did for
many years take this so ill, that he would never hear of any great Preferment
of him: The Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor Williams got him at length advanced to
the Bishopric of St. David's, which he had not long enjoyed, before he began to
undermine his Benefactor.


Tant. That Ingratitude is inexcusable.


Tory. He continued his Rancour against him to his utmost to the very last.


Whigg. Ay, Archbishop Abbot (that had woeful cause to know him) gave this
Character of Land, that such was his aspiring nature, That he would underwork
any man in the World, so that he might gain by it.


Tory. The little man had a high towering Spirit; which made the Kings Jester,
Archee, who would needs say Grace before the King, when little Bishop Laud was
present, in these words -- Great Praise be given to God, and little Laud to the
Devil.


Whigg. The worst Crime that was laid to his Charge, was the Countenancing
Arbitrary and illegal Taxes recommended by Sybthorp and Manwaring, and abetting
these Sycophants; which some call Crimen lesae majestatis Legis and Regis;
There cannot be a greater Treason than an endeavor to rob the King of his
Goodness, Truth, Conscience, Trust, and fidelity to his People, nor a readier
Road to Ruin: The Kings Prerogative is the guard of the Subjects Liberties and
Peace, he has no Prerogative but what the Law gives him, much less any
Prerogative against Law, Equity, Reason, Conscience and Justice, though
Sycophants for vile ends would so have stretched it: They wore the old Text
thredbare -- (Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's) in those
Tantivee-dayes.


Tant. Why so?


Whigg. If you will not be Angry, (Parson) I Will tell you a Story, a true one,
of my own certain knowledge and remembrance, that will for ever Spoil
(hereafter) all your Tantivee-Sermons on that Text.


Tant. Nay, if it be such a spoyl-Sermon-story, keep it to your self, for I
have four Sermons upon that Text, ready writ, and they will last me ( with
Repetitions you know, and eeking out) two whole Months.


Tory. Prithee, (Whigg) let us hear your story, (however) let the Parson storm
as he pleases, or be disappointed.


Whigg. Before one of the wisest Kings that ever England had, King James, did
one D. Harsnet Preach a Tantivee-Sermon on that Text -- Give unto Caesar -- but
his Sermon (poor man!) instead of getting thanks for the same, had the Hap
(that afterward befell Manwarings Sermon, it happened) to be Burnt by the
common Hangman.


Tant. Hard Hap! what was the matter?


Whigg. Only for asserting, (as thou have done twenty times,) That all men's
Goods and Moneys are Caesar's; for which the Parliament (though the Sermon was
Preached in the Kings Chapel at Whitehall) called my Gentleman coram nobis,
taking great offense thereat.


Tant. What was that Doctor Harsnet?


Whigg. He was afterward made Bishop of Chichester, and then Bishop of
Norwich, just as Mr. Mountague leapt, and perhaps upon the same rise and
advantage of the ground, (Tantiviisme,) and for the same Covetous reason too,
because the Norwich Bishopric is the richer; and then leapt to Yorks
Archbishopric.


Tory. But King James disowned the Doctor in that affair, and did not own him
therein.


Whigg. Yes, yes, I told you he was a wise King, and used to say, that he was a
Tyrant that did not rule according to Laws, and calmed the business, moderating
thus -- and saying, Rushw. part 1. 442.
that the Bishop only failed in this, When he said, the Goods were Caesar's, he
did not add, they were his according to the Laws and Customs of the Country
wherein they did live.


Tory. I do not deny but the Bishops had great Sway and influence over affairs
both in Church and State, if the Lord Faukland's Speech in Parliament to that
purpose, was well Calculated for those times.


Tant. I have heard much Discourse of the Speech of that Lord, so famed for his
Learning and Loyalty, as well as Nobility, but I could never get a sight of it.


Whigg. It was called the true Picture of those times, pourtraying that modern
Episcopacy to the life, Anno 1640. and here it is.


Tant. Read it.


Whigg. The whole would be tedious, I Will read part of it, thus he begins --
MAster Speaker, he is a great stranger in Israel who knows not that this
Kingdom has long labored under many and great Oppressions, both in Religion
and Liberty: and his acquaintance here is not great, or his ingenuity less, who
does not both know and acknowledge that a great, if not a principal cause of
both these have been some Bishops and their adherents.

Master Speaker, a little search will serve to find them to have been the
Destruction of Unity, under pretense of Uniformity, to have brought in
Superstition and Scandal, under the titles of Reverence and Decency; to have
defiled our Church, by adorning our Churches; to have slackned the strictness
of that Union which was formerly between us and those of our Religion beyond
the Sea; an action as unpolitick as ungodly.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have Tith'd Mint and Anise, and have
left undone the weightier works of the Law; to have been less eager upon those
who damn our Church, than upon those who upon weak Conscience, and perhaps as
weak reasons (the dislike of some commanded Garment, or some uncommanded
posture) only abstained from it. Nay, it has been more dangerous for men to
go to some neighbors Parish, when they had no Sermon in their own, than to be
obstinate and perpetual Recusants; while Masses have been said in security, a
Conventicle has been a crime, and which is yet more, the conforming to
Ceremonies has been more exacted than the conforming to Christianity; and
whilst men for Scruples have been undone, for attempts upon Sodomy they have
only been admonished.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have been like the Hen in Aesop, which
laying every day an Egg upon such a proportion of Barley, her Mistress
increasing her proportion in hope she would increase her eggs, she grew so sat
upon that addition, that she never laid more: so though at first their
Preaching was the occasion of their preferment, they after made their
Preferment the occasion of their not Preaching.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have resembled another Fable, the Dog in
the manger; to have neither Preached themselves, nor employed those that
should, nor suffered those that would: to have brought in Catechizing only to
thrust out Preaching, cried down Lectures by the name of Factions, either
because their Industry in that Duty appeared a reproof to their neglect of it,
(not unlike to that we read of him, who in Nero's time and Tacitus his story
was accused, because by his Virtue he did appear Exprobrare vitia Principis) or
with intention to have brought in darkness, that they might the easier sow
their tares, while it was night; and by that Introduction of Ignorance,
introduce the better that Religion which accounts it the Mother of devotion.

Master Speaker, in this they have abused his Majesty, as well as his people,
for when they had with great wisdom (since usually the Children of darkness are
wiser in their generation than the Children of light; I may guess not without
some eye upon the most politic action of the most politic Church) silenced on
both parts those Opinions which have often tormented the Church, and have, and
will always trouble the Schools, they made use of this declaration to tie up one
side, and let the other loose, whereas they ought either in discretion to have
been equally restrained, or in justice to have been equally tolerated. And it
is observable, that that party to which they gave this License, was that whose
Doctrine, though it were not contrary to Law, was contrary to Custom, and for a
long while in this Kingdom was no oftener Preached than recanted.

The truth is, Master Speaker, that as some ill Ministers in our State first
took away our Money from us, and after endeavored to make our Money not worth
the taking, by turning it into Brass by a kind of Antiphilosophers-stone; so
these men used us in the point of Preaching, first depressing it to their
power, and next laboring to make it such, as the harm had not been much if it
had been depressed; the most frequent Subjects even in the most sacred
Auditories, being the Jus divinum of Bishops and Tithes, the Sacredness of the
Clergy, the Sacrilege of Impropriations, the demolishing of Puritanism and
propriety, the building of the Prerogative at Paul's, the introduction of such
Doctrines, as admitting them true, the truth would not recompense the scandal;
or of such as were so far false, that as Sir Thomas Moore says of the Casuists,
their business was not to keep men from sinning, but to inform them Quam prope
ad peccatum sine peccato liceat accedere: so it seemed their work was to try
how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much
as they could of the Gospel, without bringing themselves into danger of being
destroyed by the Law.

Master Speaker, to go yet further, some of them have so industriously labored
to deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to meet it half way: Some
have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery: I
mean not only the outside and dress of it, but equally absolute; a blind
dependence of the People upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon themselves;
and have opposed the Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond
the water. Nay, common Fame is more than ordinary false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the Opinions of Rome to the Preferments of England;
and be so absolutely, directly and cordially Papists, that it is all that
fifteen hundred pounds a year can do to keep them from confessing it.

Master Speaker, I come now to speak of our Liberties; and considering the
great Interest these men have had in our common Master, and considering how
great a good to us, they might have made that Interest in him, if they would
have used it to have informed him of our general Sufferings; and considering
how little of their freedom of Speech at Whitehall might have saved us a great
deal of the use we have now of it in the Parliament House, their not doing this
alone were occasion enough for us to accuse them as the betrayers, though not
as the destroyers of our Rights and Liberties: Though, I confess, if they had
been only silent in this particular, I had been silent too; But, alas, they
whose Ancestors in the darkest times excommunicated the breakers of Magna
Charta, did now by themselves, and their adherents, both write, preach, plot,
and act against it, by encouraging Doctor Beal, by preferring Doctor Mannering,
appearing forward for Monopolies and Shipmoney: and if any were slow and
backward to comply, blasting both them and their Preferment with utmost
expression of their hatred, the title of Puritans.

Master Speaker, we shall find some of them to have labored to exclude both
all persons and all causes of the Clergy, from the ordinary Jurisdiction of the
temporal Magistrate, and by hindering prohibitions (first by apparent power
against the Judges, and after by secret agreements with them) to have taken
away the only legal bound to their arbitrary power, and made as it were a
conquest upon the common Law of the Land, which is our common Inheritance; and
after made use of that power to turn their Brethren out of their Free-holds,
for not doing that which no Law of man required them to do; and which (in their
Opinions) the Law of God required of them not to do. We shall find them in
general to have encouraged all the Clergy to suits, and to have brought all
suits to the Council Table; that having all power in Ecclesiastical matters,
they labored for equal power in Temporal, and to dispose as well of every
Office, as of every Benefice, which lost the Clergy much Revenue, and much
reverence (whereof the last is never given when it is so asked,) by encouraging
them indiscreetly to exact more of both than was due; so that indeed the gain
of their greatness extended but to a few of that order, though the envy
extended upon all.

We shall find of them to have both kindled and blown the common fire of both
Nations, to have both sent and maintained that Book, of which the Author no
doubt has long since wished with Nero, Vtinam nescissem litera! and of which
more than one Kingdom has cause to wish, that when he writ that, he had rather
burned a Library, though of the value of Ptolomie's. We shall find them to have
been the first and principal cause of the breach, I will not say of, but since
the Pacification at Berwick. We shall find them to have been the almost sole
abettors of my Lord of Strafford, whilst he was practicing upon another Kingdom
that manner of Government, which he intended to settle in this, where he
committed so many, so mighty, and so manifest Enormities and Oppressions, as
the like have not been Committed by any Governor in any Government, since
Verres left Sicily. And after they had called him over from being Deputy of
Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of England: All things here being Governed by
a Juntillo, (who dare say thus much at this time of day?) and that Juntillo
Governed by him, ( And he Governed by I know who) to have assisted him in
giving of such Councels, and the pursuing of such Courses, as it is a hard and
measuring Cast, whether they were more Unwise, more Unjust, or more
Unfortunate; and which had Infallibly been our Destruction, if by the Grace of
God their share had not been as small in the subtilty of Serpents, as in the
Innocence of Doves. Master Speaker, I have represented no small quantity, and
no mean degree of Guilt.




Tant. Enough, enough of this, I see Whiggish Doctrines, Principles and
Practices, grow upon us.


Whigg. Do not mistake your self, (Tory!) it is your Tory-Plots and Principles
have swelled of late years to a monstrous Tumor and Deformity, almost to the
Consumption of our right and natural Constitution; and because we make warm
Applications sometimes to draw down the Swelling, and let out the Corruption,
how you Tantivees Kick and Frisk?


Tant. Kings (of old) used not to be Bearded nor Braved by their Subjects.


Whigg. No, there was no Cause for it, but read the History of the Lives of
King John, Henry 3. Edw. 1. Edw. 2. what Bickering there was to keep those
Kings from encroaching on the Subjects Liberties and Properties, the subject of
the great Quarrel, Contest and Battles fought betwixt King and People, in all
(and only in) the unhappy Reigns of unhappy Kings, that suffered themselves to
be Seduc't out of their Faith and Truth, and to outstretch their Prerogatives
beyond its Maker and Creator (the Law) and outstretch their Consciences and
their Oaths, till they broke all to pieces.


Tant. Poor feeble Kings (perhaps) they were; Worms soonest grow in soft Wood.


Whigg. Were any Kings Fiercer or Stouter than the three first of them? who
more Valiant than Edward 1. or more Victorious against Foreigners? and if he
were weak and feeble, it was only when the Head (like Children that have the
Rickets) swelled monstrously and unconscionably, to the starving and
Consumption of the whole Body, and inferior Members, which cannot fare ill,
but the Head must ache for it, and feel the smart at long run.

Honestly therefore (if he could have continued so) did he answer the
encroaching Prelates, (to whom K. Edw. 1.
he had Promised to give whatever they would ask, and they ask't him to Repeal
the Statute of Mortmain) The King answered, that this was a Statute made by the
whole Body of the Realm, and therefore was not in his Power, (who was but one
Member of that Body,) to undo that which all the Members together had done.


Tant. By this Answer he should seem to infer that He and his People are made
all of a piece, of the same Clay.


Whigg. Why, what? do thou think Kings are not Mortals?


Tant. They are Divine.


Whigg. So Tantivees also call themselves, but (as Alexander the great answered
his Flatterers that called him a god) those that emptyed their Close-stools
scent no such matter, or extraordinary Hogo beyond other Mortals.


Tant. Does not the Text say, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no
Harm?


Whigg. What of that?


Tant. Then do not you touch Gods Ministers, and Gods Prophets.


Whigg. Where are they? you must first show them to me before I can touch them.


Tant. All the Kings Ministers, (Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans,
Parsons, Vicars and Curates) are all Ministers and Prophets of God.


Whigg. And also all Officials, Commissaries, Publick-notaries, Delegates,
Surrogates, Vicars general, Apparitors, Proctors, Jaylors and Hangmen,
Registers and Summers, are also all the Kings Ministers; I do not desire to
touch them, nor am very ambititious that they should touch me; from them all,
good Lord deliver us, and all good Men.


Tant. They meddle not with good men, cannot live by good men, the Hangmen must
starve if all were good men, they live by Sinners, they eat eat up Gods People
as they eat Bread; that is, the Sins of Gods People is Meat, and Drink, and
Cloth to them.


Whigg. Foh! no more of them.


Tant. Thou talk like a bold Rebel, and would act like a Rebel (I fear)
with other Weapons than Prayers and Tears.


Whigg. I do not know how such Fools and Knaves as thou art may hap to provoke
the old man within me; it is at your peril, and you come at your own adventure,
but I will rather dye than be a Rebel.


Tant. When the Kings Subjects (in Edw. 2. Reign) took up Arms to remove evil
Counselors from the King, and the King fled before them, and at length in
hopes to preserve his Minion, and the Instrument of his wickedness (Gaveston)
lodged him in an impregnable Hold, Scarborough-Castle, which the Kings Subjects
took, and Beheaded poor Pierce Gaveston; you Whiggs do not call this Rebellion.


Whigg. Why? what Historian does call it so? I am sure that great Loyalist and
Cavalier, Sir Richard Baker, that (throughout) writes, leaning on one side,
Bak-Chron. 107.
as if he was byas't the wrong way, does not call it Rebellion; nor is the word
Rebellion once mentioned in the late Act of Oblivion, after the happy Return of
his Gracious Majesty: But instead of calling it Rebellion (which old Hodge
would have Echoed and Mouthed twice in each line) Sir Richard Baker's note is,
-- That while the King was altogether ruled by Gaveston, and Gaveston himself
was altogether irregular, the Commonwealth could have but little of Justice,
but was sure to Suffer, as long as Gaveston was Suffered; and this may be
sufficient to Justify (mark that) the Lords, that it be not Interpreted to be
Rebellion, which was indeed but Providence.

After that, the two Spencers were the new Minions that trod in the very steps
of Gaveston, and Seduc't the easy King, Pimps to his Lust, for these only
were his Favorites; whereupon the People rise, as one man, with the Earls of
Hereford and Lancaster; who confederating by a solemn League and Covenant to
live and dye together in maintaining the Right of the Kingdom, Bak. Chron. 129.
Anno 132^.
and to procure the Banishment of the two Spencers, the great Seducers of the
King, and the Oppressors of the State; and under this pretense they take Arms,
and coming armed to St. Albans, they send to the King (then) at London,
requiring him as he loved the quiet of the Realm, to rid his Court of those two
Traitors, the Spencers; Condemned in many Articles of High Treason by the
Commonwealth (mark that) of the Land; and withal to grant his Letters Patents
of Pardon and Indemnity, both to them and such as took part with them.


Tory. By that desire of Indemnity they tacitly acknowledge Guilt.


Whigg. Yes, against the Letter of the Law, in strict construction, and a Judge
and Jury of your Principles, (Tory,) it is not safe trusting you, when
necessity had forced them to Courses that otherwise were Illegal; which yet the
Historian calls Providence, not Rebellion.


Tant. But did the King Pardon them?


Whigg. Pardon them? No, I trow, that had been too wise an Action, for such a
weak Prince as was that ill-advis'd King.


Tant. But prithee what Answer did the King give to the bold Covenanters?


Whigg. He Swore he should never Violate the Oath made at his Coronation, by
granting Letters of Pardon to such notorious Offenders, who Contemned his
Person, Disturbed the Kingdom, and Violated the Royal Majesty.


Tant. Well said, and how did this Answer work upon the armed Confederates?


Whigg. It exasperated them, and presently they Marched to London, (the
Citizens being their sure Friends) and lodged in the Suburbs, 'till they had
leive of the King to march into the City, where they again more peremptorily
urge their demands.


Tant. And what did the King then? why did he not Hang them all at Tyburn?


Whigg. He could not find Hangmen that would undertake so great a work, besides
to Hang them all would be a tedious long work, and long a doing.


Tant. What? did all People hate him, and forsake him?


Whigg. No, they all loved him so universally, and wished him so well, that they
also desired he might be quit of his two Diseases (the two Spencers) that made
the Head ache, and the whole Body sick and ill at ease; and so at last he yields
to their Banishment. But this Kings Goodness and Truth, went and came (like
Ague-fits) by Paroxismes and intermissions; no trust in his Word and Promises,
for he Consents to their Banishment, only to hush the present Commotion; Hugh
Spencer the Father was then beyond Sea, and kept himself there, but young
Spencer lurk't here and there, hiding himself in England, expecting the turn of
a better Season, which soon came about; Anno 1322.
for Fortunes-wheel (to the Comfort of the Afflicted, and terror of the
Prosperous) never stands still, but is always in Motion and upon the Turn, as
in this Kings Reign was frequently demonstrated; for the next year ( Anno
1322.) the King defeated the Lords, 1326.
and Beheaded his Uncle the Earl of Lancaster; and four years after the
Parliament Deposed King Edward, (or rather) forced him to Depose himself and
Invest his Son; which if he refused, they threatened to Choose a King of another
Race, and he was Killed soon after by his Keepers, Gourney and Matrevers,
Tarleton Bishop of Hereford writing to them to that effect in doubtful sense,
viz. Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est; but they guessed at his
meaning, for that Bishop, Adam Tarleton, had a little before at Oxford Preached
before the Queen and Roger Mortimer, (her bosom friend) on this Text, Caput
meum doleo, My Head aketh; whence he inferred, that the Kingdom being now
deadly sick of its Head, it was fit to remove that Head and put a sounder in
his place; this was the Loyalty of your Bishop, when Interest, etc.


Tant. How did the Queen approve that Doctrine?


Whigg. She did not dislike it, to be sure, but her Minion (Roger) like't it
well enough, as appeared afterward.


Tant. It was an Impudent Whores-trick of her; first to make the King a
Cuckold, preferring the Love of Mortimer; and then to Unking him by
Deprivation; and then to Vnman him, by Murdering him.


Whigg. She did not own the Murderers that did the Deed.


Tant. But she did not punish the wicked Bishop that Preached up the
King-killing Doctrine; and who did give the Murderers also Commission to do it.


Whigg. No, he was her chief Favourite-Bishop, and fit for her turn; but such
was the general Hatred to King Edward 2. that he dyed Unlamented, (though
(perhaps) not unpittyed) he had so disobliged his People by espousing two or
three unfortunate Minions, and their dependants, before and above his peoples
welfare, that ought to have been his chiefest Care.


Tant. I protest, though, it is hard measure, first, to be made a Cuckold, and
then by the same Engineers to be Deprived, and then Killed; this is worse than
what befell the Earl of Essex, (General of the Parliaments-Forces in -- 41.)
First, the Duke of Some -- made him a Cuckold, then He and she disparage her
Husbands virility, then (for that reason) gets her Divorc't from him, (as not
man sufficient:) And Lastly, to make the Church Father all the escapes, he
Legitimates them, by making her an honest woman, and Marrying her.


Tory. Not Man sufficient? say thou Parson! why, what one man is sufficient
for a Whore? if the Church admit that for a sufficient Plea for Divorce, they will
have as many Customers for that, as they have for Licenses for Marriage.


Tant. The better trading for us; we are men that know our Interest and
Advantage, as well as carnal men.


Tory. Ay, Ay, who doubts it? but say, (Mr. Whigg,) did the Earl of Essex put
up this affront?


Whigg. No, I told you he was the man that first headed the Parliaments forces,
that afterward took more than sufficient Vengeance on the Church, and all that
sided or bandyed with her: Manet alia mente repostum: Evil Actions carry their
furies along with them, Vengeance attends them. For the said Kings
unfaithfulness to his People, in breaking his Coronation Oath and Kingly trust,
he lost his Peoples Hearts, and cousequently his own Life; and Roger Mortimer
was Killed in the Queens Embraces, and both Court and Church suffered in the
other Instance.


Tant. Did the City of London join with the Queen and the Confederates?


Whigg. Yes, and the Londoners to show their good will to the Queen, and the
Confederate Lords, with great despite Beheaded Walter Stapleton Bishop of
Exeter, and Lord Treasurer, (in rancour and hatred to the King) with many
others that they thought loved that unhappy King; his Kingdom as well as
himself suffering beyond all Patience, for his Folly and Perfidiousness in
breaking his Word, Oath and Royal Trust, and by Gods heavy Judgments and
Displeasure, there being in the eighth Year (of this silly Prince's Reign) such
a Dearth or scarcity of Provisions, that Horses and Dogs were eaten, and
Thieves in Prison plucked in Pieces those that (were newly brought in and) had
got some flesh of their backs, and eat them them half alive.


Tant. Sure that King was an ill-natured man.


Whigg. No, quite contrary, he was fair of Body, and of great Strength, given
much to Drunkenness, but not much to Women; Kind and Loving, but unfortunate in
pitching his Affections upon bad Men and evil Counselors, which was his Ruin
and theirs too.


Tory. Some Men are not capable of good advice; Quos Deus intendit perdere
dementat prius:
Whom Heaven does Hate, to their own ways It leaves them;
Then Strips them of their Wits, and then Bereaves them.



Whigg. Some thought he deserved a better fate than he found, to be Deposed by
his Parliament, and Murdered by the means of those that made him a Cuckold, or
Bishop Tarleton the Court-Pimp to the Queen and Mortimer; others said, Honi
soit qui mal y pense, Let evil befall to evil men.


Tory. Well, we have enough of him; to return to Archbishop Abbot, who told
little Doctor Land (then Bishop of Bath) in a Conference with him about
Sybthorp's Sermon, (and this Passage therein, viz. All Antiquity to be
absolutely for absolute Obedience to Princes, in all civil or temporal things,)
that such Cases (as Naboth's Vineyard) may fall within this.

Whereupon the little-great-man was as a Man in a Rage, and fell a Huffing,
saying, that it was an odious Comparison; for it must suppose that there must
be an Ahab and a Jezabel, and I cannot tell what Sons of Belial for false
Witnesses, and a Judge for the nonce, etc. But the Archb -- told him, that
Reviling and Railing does not answer his Argument: All Antiquity takes in
Scripture, and if there has been an Ahab, or a Jezabel, that which has been, is
possible to be again many years hence; and if (says Doctor Abbot) I had
allowed that Proposition for good, I had been justly beaten with my own Rod:
For, if the King the next day had commanded me to send him all the Money and
Goods I had, I must by my own Rule have obeyed him; and if he had commanded the
like to all the Clergymen and Gentlemen, Yeomen and Commons in England, by
Sybthorp's Proportion, and my Lord of Canterbury's allowing the same, they must
have sent in all, and left their Wives and Children in a miserable Case.


Tory. What care the Courtiers for your Wives and Children?


Whigg. True, but the wonder is, that any Englishman that has an Estate (though
he got it by Pimping) should desire any Tantivee-wayes or Arbitrary-sway, lest
he lose it as suddenly.


Tant. Or that any of us Clergymen should be Tantivees, (you would say) is a
wonder too.


Whigg. You say right, but greedy Dogs (that can never have enough) so they
have but at present to please their rav'ning Appetite, they gulp and swallow
all, but never consider how it will Digest or do them good.


Tory. Nay, It is impossible to do them good, for it never digests or breeds
good blood, but bad humors in abundance, that overflowes them, if it do not
stick in their Throats at the first going down, as many times it does, and
choaks them before they taste the Sweetness of their Morsels, the Reward of
their (Spaniel-like) fawning and Sycophantry.


Whigg. I am glad to hear this from you, Mr. Tory.


Tant. So am not I, if Toryes leave Tantivees to shift for themselves, what
will become of us, losing our main Props?


Whigg. Then make use of your Main-sail, and Skud over the Water, where you all
strive to be, and whither you seem to drive might and main; for Popery and
Arbitrary Government are Inseparable, at least, Arbitrary Plants cannot thrive
in England except they be watered and besprinkled with Popish Exorcismes and
Holy Water: Some Bishops of the Church of England have said that there is but a
very little little difference betwixt Popery and us; our Holy Days, our
Service (in English, theirs in Latin) but word for word in most parts thereof,
our Priests Vestments, Church-musick, Candles, Altars, Bowing, Cringing, the
very same.


Tant. Right, but we have not Auricular Confession, nor hold we
Transubstantiation.


Whigg. You mean you cannot persuade the People to come to
Auricular-Confession; but for the real presence many Preach it up, but by a
distinction Metaphysical, (a distinction without a difference) they only deny
the corporal presence.


Tant. So, then you will say we differ therein from the Papists only in nice words
and terms of distinction.


Whigg. If it be more than words wherein you differ in this point, then that
thing you bow to at the Altar is really nothing, for if it be a real thing, it
is a corporeal thing, if it take up its residence in one place of the Church
more than the other, and on the Altar and the East, more than on the Pulpit and
the West; Nay, some Preachers that Bow very reverently to the Altar at
Service-time, turn their Back-sides to it all the while they are Preaching very
undecently; if there be something there to be reverenc't more than on the
North, West, or South Side, where no Altars are.


Tant. You are a Perilous Whigg.


Whigg. And you are either a fool for bowing to nothing constantly, or a Papist
in heart for bowing to some real thing that takes up its Lodging on the Altar,
in the East, which as yet you dare not name.


Tant. Then you would make us believe that between the two Religions there went
but a pair of Shears.


Whigg. Far be it from me to say so, but between some of the Priests and
Bishops of the two Religions, there has scarce gone so much; (as the Lord
Faulkland said,) It is all that a good Living or 1500 l per annum can do, to
keep some of them from declaring themselves openly and professedly to be
Papists; these Fellows never speak of the worst, the darkest, the blackest,
the bloodyest Superstition in the World, under the known name of Popery,
Papists, etc. but (mildly and gently) they only call it the Church of Rome, the
Catholics, etc. and if sometimes they call them Romanists and Roman
Catholics, they think (if it were overheard) all hopes of further Preferment
is almost defunct; as if Roman was a needless Epithet, and as if none were
Catholics in the World but only that barbarous and bloody Sect, because (like
the Devil in the Possessed) their Name is Legion, for that they are many and
numerous; (more is the pity) yet, (blessed be God) if you go to tell Noses in
Europe, or all the World over, Protestants are the major part, as well as the
better part; though you throw to the Papists side all our Tantivees into the
bargain; Come, come, Rome loses ground every day, let the Pope, the Jesuits and
the Devil do what they can in Combination, I told you, they have got but one
Main-pillar, and that is crazy and rotten almost, as great a blunder as they
keep.


Tant. Why do you think we shall not carry all before us?


Whigg. Yes, you will (some of you at least) be advanced as high as Haman, if
the learned Mr. Seldom Prophesied true; for when Doctor Worral Chaplain to the
Bishop of London Licensed Sybthorp's said Sermon, he scratch't his Name out,
and suffered not so much as any Sign of the Letters of his Name to remain on
the Paper, by advice of Mr. Seldom, to whose better Judgment, and for further
advice he sent Sybthorp's Pamphlet (called a Sermon) after he had Licensed it:
but Mr. Seldom said to him, What have you done? you have allowed a strange Book
yonder, which if it be true, there is no Meum or Tuum, no man in England has
any thing of his own; if ever the Tide turn (as it did with a Vengeance to the
Toryes and Tantivees) you will be Hanged for Publishing such a Book.

But what the Chaplain (upon second thoughts) would not do, his Master (the
Bishop of London) did, Licensing the same with his own hand, the good man being
not willing that any thing should stick with him that came recommended from the
Court.


Tant. From the Court or Queen, what skills it? I commend him, the same Bishop
also Licensed a Book, called The Seven Sacraments, with all its Errors, made by
Doctor Cosens, Bishop Laud's Confident, and yet neither he nor any of them did
ever declare themselves to be Papists openly.


Whigg. No, no, I know it, they were the wiser; neither did Mountague, whom
they all upheld and advanced, and yet he made the Church of England a
Schismatic; if the Church of Rome be a true Church, and always kept the
Faith, as Mountague asserts, and the said Bishops did abett him, and Preferred
him, and so did the D. of Buckingham, magnifying him as a well Deserving man;
and when the King ( Charles 1.) was Married to his Queen, (a Daughter of
France,) Letters were sent to the High Commission-Court and other Courts, to
suspend and take off all Execution of the Laws against Papists; then by
Proclamation (upon the Parliaments Remonstrance) a quite contrary Command was
published under the broad Seal of England; and after the Parliament was
Dissolved, then all the Popish-Priests, fourteen or fifteen at a time, are set
at Liberty again: such great variation of the Compass was found in the same
Climat and Longitude; sometimes the Laws being put in Execution at a force-put,
and then again slackning the Reins and following natural inclination.


Tant. What Opinion had Archbishop Abbot of those times and those Transactions?
Ru^w. 455.



Whigg. When the allowance of Sybthorp's Pamphlet was put upon him, he said, He
had some reason out of the grounds of that Sermon, that the Duke had a Purpose
to turn upside down the Laws, and the whole Fundamental Courses and Liberties
of the Subject, and to leave us not under the Statutes and Customs which our
Progenitors enjoyed, but to the pleasure of Princes.


Tant. That is brave, it is al-a-mode d' France; but when the Duke was Stabbed,
did the same Arbitrary Courses go on?


Whigg. Yes, Loans and Monopolies, Privy Seals and such Projects were
continued, and some say the Earl of Strafford begun to assess Soldiers upon
the People that would not pay his Arbitrary demands in Ireland, chiefly to make
way the better for the like Project other-where; yet he was a wise man, and a
right Englishman (once) 'till he became infected afterward with Ambition and
Court, the fate and occasion of the Ruin of Bishop Laud as well as of him, and
of one more of more worth than both of them: Besides --

(Said the Archbishop Abbot) Now it came in my heart, that I was present at the
Kings Coronation, where many things on the Princes part were, solemnly
Promised, which being observed would keep all in order, and the King should
have a loving and gracious People, and the Commons a kind and gracious King:
But I am loath to plunge my self over head and ears in these difficulties, (the
Loans, etc.) that I can neither live with quietness of Conscience, nor depart
out of the World with good Fame and Estimation: And perhaps my Sovereign if he
looked well into this Paradox, would of all the World hate me, because one of
my Profession, Age and Calling would deceive him, and with base Flattery swerve
from the Truth.


Tant. Then you think that the Kings Minions ( Buckingham, Laud and Strafford)
were the Kings greatest Enemies, and that of all the World he had most Cause to
hate them.


Whigg. No doubt on it, if their Councels came out of their own Heads, or was
not rather Instilled and put into their Heads, by -- I know who --


Tory. Oh! I apprehend you.


Whigg. But whether it be the Devil or man that possesses men with evil, the
Sinners that received the Temptation, (the Baits of Ambition and Avarice) as
they are Instruments of wonderful Mischief and Blood, ought to pay dear for
their Sycophantry.


Tant. Pay dear, (do you say?) Strafford and Laud lost their Heads on
Tower Hill, and Buckingham was Stabbed at Portsmouth by Felton, (you said;) But
you did not tell me what moved him to this bloody Fact.


Whigg. Felton neither fled for it, nor denied the Deed, but said he Killed him
for the Cause of God and his Country; and when it was replied, that the
Surgeons said there might be hopes of his Life, Felton answered and said, It is
impossible, I had the force of forty men assisted by him that guarded my Hand:
that he did not kill him for any private Interest whatsoever, that the late
Remonstrance of Parliament published the Duke so odious, that he appeared to
him deserving Death, which no Justice durst Execute.


Tant. But (we say) seldom comes a better.


Whigg. Nay, there was not much to choose, for the same Councils were still
carried on, so that the Duke was not looked upon as the Original, but rather an
Instrument to execute Perplexed Counsels; and when he was Killed there wanted
not others that would venture in his room, though all History tells us, those
little by-ways and illegal ways prove as fatal now a-dayes as of old, (in the
days of Gaveston and the two Spencers, Suffolk, etc.) There was a Paper found
tack't in the Crown of Mr. Felton's Hat, which was to show that his Conscience
was satisfied in the Fact, and that he was therewith well pleased, lest he had
been presently hewed in Pieces without Opportunity to tell the World so much;
but by the Pious endeavors of some men, he was brought to some Remorse, and to
acknowledge the Fact damnable without Gods great Mercy; but denied that the
Puritans or any other set him on, or knew of his Purpose: but Bishop Laud told
him, if he would not Confess who set him on, that he must go to the Rack; he
replied, he knew not whom he might Accuse, perhaps Bishop Laud or any other in
that Torture; and the Judges agreed -- that by Law he could not be Racked nor
Tortured; but Felton proffered his Hand to be cut off, which the King desired
might be done, but the Judges said it could not be by Law, but after he was
dead, he was Hanged in Chains.


Tant. But who got the Duke's Place?


Whigg. Places (you should say) for many were enrich't by this single Wrack;
yet after the Duke's Death the King seemed to take none into favor so much as
Doctor Land, (then Bishop of London) and Sequestrator of the Profits of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury; for Dr. Abbot was (civilly) dead, and four years
after he really dies, to the desired Advancement of Dr. Laud to that
Archbishopric, having long waited for the happy hour before it came.


Tant. But was Tunnage and Poundage continued without Authority of Parliament?


Whigg. Yes, and Mr. Chambers his Goods to the value of 5000 l was seized for a
pretended Duty of 200 l Custom; the like Seizure on the Goods of Mr. Vassal,
Mr. Rolls, and many others; and the Attorney General exhibited an Information
against Mr. Samuel Vassal, seting forth that King James did by his Letters
Pattents, command the taking the said Customs, and that his Majesty, ( Charles
1.) by the advice of the Privy Council, did declare his will and pleasure, for
the said Subsidies, Customs, etc. until it might receive a settling by
Parliament.


Tant. What did Mr. Vassal Plead to this?


Whigg. He Pleaded Magna Charta and the Statute De Tallageo non Concedendo,
etc. to which Plea the Attorney General Demurred in Law, and the Barous of the
Exchequer did absolutely deny to hear Mr. Vassals Council to argue for him.


Tant. That was brave upon our side. ^^^



Whigg. And yet the King in his Speech to both Houses in the Banqueting House
confess't he did not challenge Tunnage and Poundage as of right.


Tant. If not of right, how then?


Whigg. De been esse, and of necessity, because he could not want it, nor stay
till the Par(...)ent was minded to give it him.


Tant. That is a mighty pretty reason, in justification; when 12 years together
he called no Parliament.


Whigg. And soon after the King sent a Message to the House of Commons speedily
to take Tunnage and Poundage into consideration.


Tant. And how did the Commons like that Message?


Whigg. They were disgusted that the Bill should be Imposed upon them, which
ought naturally to arise from themselves, impowering a Committee to examine the
violation of Liberty and Property since the last Session of Parliament, and
then resolved in the next place to proceed in matters of Religion, and
particularly against the Sect of Arminians.

And (says Mr. Pym) two Diseases there be (Mr. Speaker) the one Old, the other
New, the old, Popery, the new, Arminianism.

Concerning Popery three things to be enquired:

1. The Cessation of the Execution of the Laws against Papists.

2. How the Papists have been employed and countenanced in great places of
trust.

3. The Law violated (mark that, Parson!) in bringing of Superstitious
Ceremonies amongst us, as at Durham by Mr. Cozens, Angels, Crucifixes, Saints,
Altars, Candles on Candlemas-day burnt in the Church after the Popish manner.


Tant. That was only because -- since the Papists would not meet us, we would
try how far we can go toward Rome and yet be Church of England men.


Whigg. Ay, you Tantivees are subtle fellows in Ecclesiastical Policy, nay, and
(likewise) in State Policy, your hand is in in every dish, there is nothing
comes amiss to you, you are so equally accomplished for Heaven and Earth; you
are clearly of Opinion to have your Church Triumphant here, as well as
hereafter, you have the luck of it, in comparison of Christ and his Apostles.


Tant. We are Prudent as Serpents, and are commanded so to be.


Whigg. And also like Serpents to lick the Dust and other men's Spittle, in
Prospect of Advancement: And the manners of the Bishops was so notorious to
that young Prince of famous Memory (King Edw. 6.) that in his Diary with his
own handwriting, Rushw. Col 649.
was found this Observation concerning the Bishops of his time, namely, That
some for Sloth, some for Age, some for Ignorance, some for Luxury, and some
for Popery, were unfit for Discipline and Government.


Tant. Come -- no more of them; what became of the Tunnage and Poundage?


Tory. The Committee (in debate) inclined, that the Merchants have (first)
their Goods restored which were taken from them against Law, and against Right,
and the Proceedings against the Refusers nulled in the Exchequer and
Star Chamber, before they would enter upon the Bill for Tunnage.

For (quoth Mr. Noy) we cannot safely give unless we be in Possession, for it
will not be a Gift but a Confirmation, neither will I give 'till a removal of
these Interruptions.


Whigg. Ay, Noy and Sir Thomas Wentworth were right Englishmen, but ambitious,
and the King was advised to take them off by Preferment, and he did so, Noy
being made Attorney General, and the first Projector of Ship Money, but he dyed
soon after; but his Project did (but a little while) outlive him, and then it
was Damned by the same King that promoted it (in 16 Car. 1.14.) and All the
Writs (called Ship-writs) and the Proceedings of the Judges thereupon, as
utterly against the Law of the Land, the Right of Property, the Liberty of the
Subjects, former Resolutions in Parliament, and the Petition of Right, made but
in the third year of that King.


Tant. How should we know the Law, if the Judges err?


Whigg. There is none so blind as they that will not see, do not we see how
great places make men warp, and stand awry? like high Steeples that are too
lofty to be upright.


Tant. All are not so warpt.


Whigg. No, God forbid they should, Judge Hatton and Judge Crook escaped the
general Contagion and Infection.


Tant. But what became of this same Tunnage and Poundage?


Whigg. The King Dissolved the Parliament when they would not give it him, (but
as they list,) and after that in the Interval of Parliament took it, and
Imprisoned (by Warrants from the Council) were Denzil Hollis Esquire, Sir Miles
Hobert, Sir John Eliot, Sir Peter Hayman, John Seldom Esquire, William Coriton,
Walter Long, William Stroud, and Benjamin Valentine, Parliament men.


Tant. And how long lasted that Interval of Parliaments?


Whigg. Above twelve years (namely) from March Anno Domini 1628. until April
13. 1640. which lasted but twenty days, his Majesty Dissolving them also, (for
they went on in the old Story) looking back since the last Parliament, at the
Grievances which were as numerous as intolerable; but the King found it
necessary to call another Parliament, which met November 3. 1640. and did the
strange things you have heard.


Tant. Sure the People were mad, stark mad in -- 40. and 41.


Whigg. Oppression makes Wise men mad.


Tant. Did not Addresses come from all parts to thank the King for Dissolving
the Parliaments so fast?


Whigg. No such matter, Anno 3 C^^^.
for the people were so enraged when the Parliament was Dissolved 1628.
(attributing it to the D. of Buckingham) that they would ordinarily utter these
words: Let Charles and George do what they can,
The Duke shall dye like Doctor Lamb.



Tant. How dyed Doctor Lamb?


Whigg. The Boys, ordinary People and the Rabble beat him and bruised him, and
left him for dead, falling on him as he walked through the Old-Jury, calling
him the Duke's Conjurer.


Tant. But when the Duke was Stabbed, 4 Car. 1.
who did they blame for the Dissolution of the Parliament?


Whigg. Who? who but the powerful men at Court? especially Bishop Laud, some
few days after two Libels being found in the Dean of Paul's Yard to this
effect; Laud, look to thy self, be assured thy Life is sought, as thou art the
Fountain of Wickedness, repent of thy monstrous Sins before thou be taken out
of the World, and assure thy self, neither God nor the World can endure such a
vile Councellor or Whisperer to live.

The other was as bad against the Lord Treasurer Weston.


Tant. What, he that you say dyed a professed Papist?


Whigg. The same.


Tant. But Bishop Laud dyed of the Church of England.


Whigg. Yes, yes; It is better to be the Arch or Chief of the Clergy of
England, and chief Favorite Also, than to be the Second at Rome; and he very
fairly refused a Cardinal's cap which was proffered him: and I believe he was
no more a Papist (in heart) than I am; what he did in compliance with Popery,
and Popish Ceremonies, was only in complacence to -- you know who. --


Tory. The more blameworthy, to act against his little Conscience; as appeared
by the then Favorites, for Strafford, Noy, Laud, etc. until Preferment
dazel'd them, and height made them Vertiginous and Turn-sick, were as steady
Protestants and Englishmen as any.


Whigg. Ay, Ay; the Devil knew what he did when he proffered our Savior the
Kingdoms of the World, showing the glory of them, tempting him: as if, they had
need be assisted by Divinity who are Temptation-proof.


Tant. Right; for only Divines are temptation-proof.


Whigg. True; none are Temptation-proof but those that are true Divines, in
Reality, not Divines (that are such) in Name only; or such that lay heavy
burdens on others, but will not touch them themselves with one of their
fingers; or, such as preach Prayers and Tears only to other Christians,
whilst they themselves tear and rend with the Civil Sword, curses instead of
prayers, and instead of tears, rant it with blood and wounds.


Tory. You think the Laws are the only as well as the best Boundaries to keep
King and People within their just limits and duty.


Whigg. Right: The Rules of Justice or the Laws are the Hercules Pillars, or
the ne plus ultra, to King and People; to the Kings Prerogative, and the
Peoples Liberties; as they are the Hercules Pillars, so they are the Pillar to
every Hercules, to every Prince; which if he pass, he goes into the vast Ocean,
the Lord knows whither; for no body knows what will be the End and Issue of
such dismal wandering. Therefore the old Rule of Law is -- Solum Rex hoc non
potest facere, quod non potest just agere; The King can do nothing but what he
can Legally do: Therefore Antiochus King of Asia sent his Letters and Missives
to all his Provinces, That if they received any Dispatches in his Name, not
agreeable to Law and Justice; Ignoto se literas esse scriptas ideoque iis non
parerent; he disclaimed the same, as not being his Act and deed, though
attested under the Broad-Seal.


Tory. But suppose ( at a Bone-fire on a Thanksgiving Night) such a Whigg as
you pass by, and will not drink the Kings Health, or the Dukes Health, and I
break your head, Whigg.


Whigg. Then, you are a Ryotor, and the Magistrates ought to punish you
accordingly, and in my own defense I may lawfully Knock your Pate again, Tory,
to get out of your clutches.


Tory. That might occasion Knocking-work.


Whigg. Have a care then that you keep the Kings-Peace, and do not dye as a
Fool dies; for he that makes the assault, (the Aggressor) must be responsible
for all the mischief that ensues from his own wickedness, and villanously-bold
attempt in stopping the Kings Subjects, and setting upon them with violence, in
the Kings Highway walking peaceably by them.


Tory. There is none but a Rebel will refuse the King or Dukes Health.


Whigg. There is none but a drunken Coxcomb will say so: besides, it is
expressly against His Majesty's Proclamation published Against forcing of
Healths down men's Throats, whether they will or no.


Tory. We, for the King, will Drink and Whore, It shows our Loyalty the more.


Whigg. Ay, such Loyalty has done wonders; wonderful Mischief; and the Kings
Friends were his greatest Enemies and Traitors, and most guilty Laesae
Majestatis.


Tory. How prove you that?


Whigg. Infallibly, by the Premises, for if the King can do no wrong, and can
only do that that Legally and justly he may do, then,

1. Tunnage and Poundage without Authority of Parliament;

2. Money for Knights Fees or, lest you should be made a Knight;

3. Loans and Privy Seals, Benevolences and Monopolies;

4. Billeting of Soldiers;

5. Ship Money, and Ship-writs;

6. Imprisonment and seizures for refusing to pay those illegal Taxes; were
none of (them) the Kings Act and deed, though in his Name, and under his Seal.


Tant. That Is strange; why, (man!) the return of the Cause of their Commitment
(upon their Habeas Corpus) was this, Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, that
the Prisoners were Committed by the special Command of the King himself, and so
the Council Ordered.


Whig. That Is Braze: Good Counselors will take upon themselves harsh things,
and leave the King the Honor and Thanks of our Acts of Grace and Goodness; but
this invests all the order of true Politics; Mercy and Goodness, only
naturally and immediately flow from the Throne; Justice from the Ministers:
Therefore the Sword is carried before him, but the Scepter in his Hand.


Tory. Ay, but it was advised, that the Calling of a Parliament: (being
pleasing to the People and obliging) should be given out to be at the motion of
Buckingham; Ay, Ay, But when it was Dissolved, the King did it in his own
Person; as well as by his Prerogative: But has the King such a Prerogative to
Adjourn, Hold, and Dissolve Parliaments at pleasure?


Whig. King Charles often told the Parliament so, saying, as before, in page
23. Remember that Parliaments are altogether in my Power, for their Calling,
Sitting and Dissolution; therefore as I find the fruits of them good or Evil,
they are to continue or not to be.


Tory. By his Prerogative, the Law of Parliaments is wholly at the Kings Will,
and in his breast; For grievances intoiierable (as aforesaid) many and great,
in false Imprisonment, false Seizures, false Subsidies, all illegal were yearly
and daily inflicted in the Kings Name, and by his Authority upon the Bodies and
Estates of the King's Subjects, no man was sure of holding either liberty or
property longer than the good pleasure; these grievances were contrary to Law,
Equity, Justice, Equity, Reason, and the Stipulation Oath and Acts: these
grievances ought not to have been; or, if by evil Councillors, and evil
Ministers, and wicked men they happened, the King ought to have remedied and
redrest them, instead of abetting and defending the Oppressors of his Subjects,
and the violators of those Laws, that he was sworn to uphold and obey; and
ought to have looked upon these Usurpations of his Subjects Rights, and the
Usurpers as the greatest Enemies of his Throne, which ( Solomon says) is only
established by Justice; not by Pilling and Polling, Robbing or Defrauding the
harmless People. And the King should have looked upon the Parliament (that
desired to redress the Grievances and to cure these griefs and distempers of
the State) as his best Friends, and should have blessed God that he had a
Prerogative to Call them and keep them together for so blessed a work; and not
to threaten to Dissolve them; if they will not give him more Money, and if they
will not forbear to punish those grand Delinquents that had so shamefully
abused the King, by abusing his Subjects, his Justice, his Oath, his Royal
Word, and Promises, his Conscience and his Laws.


Tory. Bracton says, Bracton Comm. p. 487.
that although the Common Law does allow many Prerogatives to the King, yet it
does not allow any that he shall wrong or Hurt any by his Prerogative.


Tant. By that Rule a King has no Prerogative (it seems) to Dissolve a
Parliament for meddling with Redress of Grievances, or the punishment of the
Evil Instruments and Ministers that caused or counseled them.


Whig. I will not be so bold to define the Kings Prerogative, (let it be for
ever Sacred) otherwise than as we describe Divinity; (Negatively) rather
telling what it is not, than what it is.

First, The King has no Prerogative to hurt himself, or his People, Plowd.
Comm. p. 246.
nor yet to break his Laws, or dispense with a Statute, nor to violate his
Conscience, his Word, nor his Oath. For Rex merito debet retribuere legi quia
lex tribuit ei, facit enim lex, Bracton lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 107.
quod ipse sit Rex, says Bracton: The King may well give the Law its free
course, due unto it, because the Law gives him his due: For the Law makes him
(what he is) a King. Rex enim, a been Regendo: The King is so called from
Ruling well, but he is called a Tyrant that Oppresses.

Secondly, The Kings Oath is not only to Rule according to Law, but to make
new, and abrogate old Laws, which cannot be without a Parliament; therefore
Parliament; therefore Parliaments are a Fundamental and Vital part, and
constitution of the Government.

Thirdly, If a King can choose whether he will Call a Parliament at all, except
once in three years, and then send them Home and Dissolve them, as he list and
when he list, without Redress of Grievances; then the fundamental Constitution
and Law of the Government must be Lame and Imperfect: For, at this rate, the
Prince and his Ministers may do what they list, and impune make their Wills a
Law: But it is impossible that a Government (so wisely Constituted as ours is)
should be so lame, imperfect and deficient, as not to make Provision for its
own Being and Subsistence in the Fundamentals: This therefore is provided for
in the very Essence of the Government (which we may call the Common Law) which
is of more value than any Statute; and of which Magna Charta and other Statutes
are but Declaratory.

Fourthly, Though the King is Trusted with the formal part of Summoning and
pronouncing the Dissolution of Parliaments, yet the Law which obliges both him
and us, has determined and ascertained how and when he shall do it.


Tant. Ay, (marry) Whigg! now you come close, let us hear that.


Whig. I Will prove it clearly and evidently by Common Law and Statute Law,
Reason and Equity; and these four do guide or should guide all the Benches in
Westminster Hall.


Tory. If you can do this, it will prove very Beneficial to all; for I observed
that, in the late Civil Wars, the cause of the great Bloodshed was the
difference betwixt the Kings Prerogative and the Peoples Liberties; which could
not be decided, (it seems) but by the Sword.


Whig. It is better far to decide the difference with a Pen; but indeed the
Kings Prerogative and the Peoples Liberties never clash, but there is a sweet
Harmony betwixt them, one with another, one supporting and upholding another,
not destroying and ruining one another; as some Juncto Councils would make them.


Tory. We (Tories) Fought for the Prerogative Royal.


Whig. Then you Fought for you did not know what.


Tory. Yes, the Loans, Privy-Seals, Tunnage and Poundage, Ship Money, etc. and
Seizures and Imprisonment (thereupon) were all against Law, Law, and against
the Peoples Liberties and Properties, but the King did act by his Royal
Prerogative, and so took the Goods and Imprisoned the Gentlemen that refused;
by Prerogative.


Whig. The King has no Prerogative wrongfully to Imprison or take men's Goods:
to Imprison men, is a work for the Kings Ministers of Justice, but below the
Grandeur of Royal Majesty to do it, or, to give order for it, other than that
as all the Execution of the Kings Laws is to be done in his Name, though he
personally know nothing of the matter: And if the King ore tenus, or in
writing, command John a Nokes to Imprison John a Styles, without mentioning any
cause in Law, (or breach of some Law that requires Imprisonment; an Action of
false Imprisonment lies against John a Nokes, and he shall not be suffered (in
his excuse and justification) to plead -- speciale mandatum Regis, that the
King Commanded it; but must set forth some other special matter; for if that
might be admitted, the King, who cannot with a word take away my Pence, my
Horse, nor my Ass; yet he might destroy with a Breath (that which is much
Dearer to me) my Liberty.


Tory. You speak Reason, and Law too; but may not the King Invade his Subjects
Liberties and Properties, in Cases of Necessity, by his Royal Prerogative?


Whig. Pish; The Favorites ( Buckingham and Laud, etc.) as you have heard
before destroyed the Kings Fleet, consumed the Kings Men and Money, Ships and
Ammunition, by Senseless and Unhappy Expeditions, and sometimes by Lending them
to France, in a time when we had more need to Borrow, and by such Whimzees (but
the Parliament gave it a worse name, calling them, Treasons) they reduced the
King and Kingdom into great Straits, weakness and necessities (which was the
design of the Popish Plot, the Favorites were only the Instruments, and
perhaps saw not what they did) But they did so many Irrational, Senseless and
Destructive Acts, that almost all lay at Stake (as you have heard) and was just
upon the go: What must be done? That was the Question, in these Necessities and
Straits? To call a Parliament, was the proper, natural, true, certain, and only
English Remedy.


Tory. Ay, so it was; I must needs say.


Whig. Well, and so the King found (too late) but the Minions had done such
unanswerable things, that in all their Consultations they did (as all Private
Counselors do) stear their course with an Eye and main respect to their own
particular Safeties and welfare, and not to the general good, welfare and
Salvation of the Ship of the Commonwealth, that they guided, at the Helm; and
they were so Conscious of their own wickedness; that the Earl of Strafford
(very prudently foreseeing his own destruction when the Parliament was called)
humbly craves excuse from attending it, choosing rather to stay with his Army in
the North.


Tory. He had nothing else to trust to but an Army and Force; for by Force and
an Army he Ruled in Ireland, and nothing but the same methods could possibly
preserve him, nor (indeed) any Tyranny and Oppression.


Whig. True, Violence only can justify Violence; not could his sins be safe but
by attempting greater; yet, he had something else to Trust to besides an Army.


Tant. What, I pray? let me hear that.


Whig. The Royal Word, and the Promise of a King, who, to persuade him to come
to the Parliament, (besides the Peremptory Command that would take no denial or
excuse, but come he must) the King engaging and promising, that as he was King
of England, he was able to secure him from any danger, and that the Parliament
should not touch one Hair of his Head.


Tant. But they did reach every Hair of his Head, and the Head also, the King
also Passing the Bill: But what said the Earl when he first heard that the King
had past the Bill against him; as in a Complemental Letter he gave him leave.


Whig. He held up his Hands, (as Coleman did at the Gallows when he saw he must
go to it, not using the very words that Coleman did, There is no Truth in men,
but) to the same Tune, lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and laying his Hand on his
Heart, said, -- Put not you Trust in Princes, nor in the Sons of men, for in
them there is no Salvation.


Tant. Ay, Coleman indeed was left in the Lurch, some thought by his last words.

And thus, the Devil Huggs the Witch;
But, at the Gallows, leaves the Wretch,
To the Embrace of Squire Ketch;
Laughing when her Neck does Stretch,
That he her Soul to Hell may Fetch.

Tory. But what said King Charles in his own excuse? For giving up Strafford
contrary to Promise?


Whig. He was Sorry for it, but it could not be helped, it was so lately done;
but the King (nevertheless) sent a Letter by the Prince to the Lords, Dated May
11.41.
written with his own Hands, Entreating them that they would Confer with the
House of Commons to spate the Life of the Earl, and that it would be a high
Contentment to him.


Tant. And what did the Lords thereupon?


Whig. Just nothing at all, as to sparing his Life; but so confirmed the King,
May 1. 1640, 16 Car. 1.
that he said also Fiat Justitia: But the King in a Speech (a little before) he
Signed the Bill of Attainder against the Earl, told both the Houses of
Parliament; that in Conscience he could not Condemn the Earl of High Treason,
that he Answered for, as to the most of the main particulars of the Charge
against him.


Tory. Ay, ay, the Earl did not, durst not have attempted such things as he
did, if some body had not been privy to it besides himself.


Whig. The King also told the two Houses, (at the same time,) that neither
Fear, nor any other respect should make him go against his Conscience.


Tant. But it seems his Royal Resolution was Changeable.


Whig. Yes, and yet he was naturally constant to his Opinions, and Tenacious of
them, some thought even to Offense sometimes: But the Crimes against the Earl's
Arbitrary Government, Arbitrary Sway, Arbitrary Councels, Arbitrary Force,
Arbitrary Taxes, and Ruling by an Army, and making his Will his Law was so
Apparent, that the fault mustly upon some body, and upon whom more fit, than
upon such an evil Instrument, and evil Councellor, as Strafford was, whom the
very King himself could not deny to be guilty (as he publicly acknowledged to
both Houses in his Speech aforesaid) of such Misdemeanors, that he thought the
Earl not fit to serve him or the Commonwealth, in any place of Trust, no not so
much as a Constable; and concluded his said Letter, with these words: If no
less than his Life can satisfy my people, I must say -- Fiat Justitia; which
words he repeated, when the Lords in Answer to his Majesty's said Letter,
denied to spare his Life, as unsafe for the King and Royal Family.


Tory. I am clear too of Opinion, that either the King was privy to his
Misdemeanors before that time (as the King intimated as aforesaid) or else he
and all other Kings may think the better of Parliaments as long as they live,
for representing men in their true colors, and letting them see that the
Persons and chief Favorites, Admirals and Generals of their Armies, and when
they trust (as King Charles did Strafford) with the management of their chief
Affairs, are really and truly such wretches, that they are not fit for the
meanest Trust, no, not so much as worthy to be Petty Constable.


Whig. That Dilemma is unanswerable.


Tant. But, Prithee, (Whigg!) what Opinion had men, in those days, of the
Court, as to Arbitrary Government, Popery, or Affection to Popery?


Whig. Men strangely differed in Opinion (in those days as now) which bred that
great difference amongst men, as (it seems) was not to be decided without
Blood, great unnatural, and uncivil Bloodshed.


Tory. We, (that were Cavaliers,) believed the King, when he took the Sacrament
upon it, and passed so many Acts of Parliaments against Popery and Papists, and
promised to proceed Vigorously against Papists; and that he also did abhor the
Thoughts of Arbitrary Government: Really we believed so many Oaths,
Sacraments, Vows, and Royal Words and Promises, public and private
Declarations and Proclamations.


Whig. Ay, ay, so you did; we Whiggs, too have a great deal of Faith, if we let
upon a belief, we will not to our own Eyes give Credit; we are for Implicit
Faith sometimes, as well as you.


Tory. Well, but Answer to the purpose was not the King counted a Gracious good
King?


Whig. Yes, all Kings are called so, especially whilst they Live and to their
Heads; for a King can do no wrong: And all men acknowledged that King Charles
I. of his own Natural Temper was inclined to Goodness, and Mercy, and Justice,
and Righteousness; and the keeping of Faith with men, and observing his Word,
fulfilling his Promises, and keeping steadfast to Religion; and therefore, they
think that he knew nothing of the matter, when Popish-Books, or Books in Favor
of Popery, (as Mountagues Book aforesaid) and the Authors of such Books; and
the Books for Arbitrary Government, and the Authors of them ( Sybthorp and
Manwaring) were the men and the Books, the Tenants, Doctrines and Opinions that
were preferred, advanced, extolled, cried up and Countenanced at Court above all
other men and Books, were really Orthodox, and according to Law; nay, some
think the King knew not that Mountague and Manwaring were not only Pardoned but
made Bishops; since the Parliament had judged them unmeet for their demerits
(which no man in England durst publicly own or vindicate to this day) and vile
wretchedness and false Doctrines, to be incapable of the meanest Benefices; yet
these must be the chief Shepherds, the Flocks were like to be well governed;
and Bishop Land that abetted and Countenanced the said Authors and Books,
Licensed their false Doctrines, and impure as well as Illegal Principles, and
got their Books Licensed, was made Archbishop, and who but he? with the King
and Court? The King knew nothing of all this, nor that Papists (great Papists)
were put into Commission all the Kingdom over; nor, that Arbitrary Government
in Loanes, Knighthood-Money, Tunnage and Poundage, Ship Money, Assessing and
Billeting of Soldiers, etc. The King knew nothing of all this; these were
Deeds, Deeds, not Words; Deeds that made the Kingdom groan, Deeds that
Affrighted the Parliament and the Kings best Subjects with too much cause of
Jealousies and Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government, when it was really
practiced in so many particulars, and the Counselors and Favorites that
abetted the same, the only men in Favor; and nothing was said against them in
Parliament, but it proved the ruin of the men, though Parliament Men, that
might Parler le meant, speak their minds freely, and lawfully, and also proved
to be the Dissolution of those Parliaments; 'till the Kings Necessities and
Straits were so great, and the Dissolutions so frequent, and on the strange
occasions aforesaid, that the Parliament would do nothing, 'till the King not
only had Promised (but had granted it by Statute) that they should not be
Dissolved but by their own Consent.


Tory. It is the greatest wonder in the world to me that any King should
Dissolve a Parliament but by their own Consent, or 'till all Grievances be
Redressed; for the King is Pater Patriae the Father of the Country, and what an
odd Humor is it, if a Father that has a Child or Children, troubled with
griefs or Grievances, and had a Prerogative that could but would not remedy
them; nay, nor suffer them that would remedy his Children; is this Father like?
or like something else? The King is the chief Shepherd of his People, his
Flock; but what an odd humor is it, if a Shepherd, when he sees Dogs and
Wolves tear and rend his Sheep, shall neither (according to the duty of his
place) deliver his Sheep out of their Jaws; nor yet suffer others to do it;
but, contrarily, side with the Dogs, and defend the Worried Sheep? much more,
if he see the Currs on, worse, if he shall go Snips in the Booty and Prey.


Whigg. I am glad to hear this of you, (Mr. Tory!) you have been used to
Language that has less of Sense, Reason or Law in it.


Tant. But all this while (Mr. Whigg) you do not tell us any thing in Answer to
this excuse the Favorites made, namely, Necessity, the Kings necessities
required that which (indeed) ought not to be done by Law.


Whig. Necessity? Pish! this excuse aggravates their Offense; for thus they
dispute in a Carcle, and justify their wickedness by greater, by links and
chains of evil consequences; First, the Kings Affairs by their Evil Council and
Managements is brought into Straits and Necessities, the effect of them, then
these evil effects are made the Cause of the continuance of worse effects,
World without end: But, thank God for a Parliament; Commentar. of Guilme
Jeremie, Anno 131 4.
The Pretense of this same Whimzey, (Necessity) has ruined the Liberties and
Properties of the Frenchmen in Normandy to this day: For they were ruled
(once) by as good Laws as we are; but being oppressed with some Grievances,
contrary to their Charters, Customs and Franchises, they made their Complaint
to Lewis the Tenth, who by his New Charters in the year 1314. acknowledged
their Rights and Customs aforesaid, and confirmed them; Confessing also that
they had been unjustly grieved and wronged; but by the said New Charter did
provide that from thence forward they should be free from all Subsidies and and
Exactions (to be imposed upon them) without their own Consents; but, with this
saving, or small exception, Si necessitis grand ne le requiret; namely, except
great necessity required the contrary: Which little business (Mr. Necessity)
has done their business, and broke the neck of all their Laws, Charters and
Franchises, and of Subjects they are become Slaves and Vassals; little
differing from Turky-Gally-Slaves; for no man can say any thing is his own; if
necessitye le Grand, (that is) the King require the same; nay, they dare not
now say, That their Souls are their own; so great is the Encroachment of
Tyranny, Covetousness and Oppression; if you give it an Inch, it will take an
Ell, and thefore you Toryes are a base generation, for you hate your Friends
most of all, and (Spaniard-like) at the same time, basely Fawn, Wagg your
Tails, and Cringe ( base Currs!) to the Hand that beats you most; nay, you will
Fight to Blood, in pursuit of your Sycophantry, (poor Slaves!) And your
Tantives will Preach your People all out of Church, rather than not Preach up
the said false Doctrine of Sybthorp, Mountague and Manwaring: Oh most unworthy
Treacherous and Easy-bought Hirelings! That, for to be made a Shepherd, or
chief Bishops of Souls, would betray them, and Sell them all, and your own to
boot into the bargain, in defyance of the Laws of God and the Realm, which the
King is Sworn and bound to obey, perform, observe and keep: The Throne cannot
have (it has been found by woeful experience) worse Friends nor greater Traitors
than such Sycophants and Wretches as you are.


Tant. We are as much obliged to you, Mr. Whigg, for your good Opinion of us.


Whig. It Is, according to your Merits; Is it not enough that this Kingdom and
Commonwealth should be once in one Age undone by the same kind of men, the same
Sell Truths, the same Illegal Principles, and Tantivee-Practices, and
Parasitical Flatteries, and Slye Insinuations under the Vizard of Divinity,
Loyalty, and the Church, the Church; and yet not one in a hundred of them can
tell what, or who is the Church; but usually, by the Church (they mean)
themselves, the Clergy; that is, the promoted and Dignifyed Clergymen; and how
the Vilest and worst of Clergymen came to be promoted (by their Vileness and
Villainies) you have heard; for no other Clergymen could be found so to Debauch
their Consciences, the Laws of England, and the Protestant Religion; and these
are the men (Forsooth!) whose Spitle we must all lick up, and be punished, if
we speak never so little against them, Ten thousand times more than when by
Curses and Oaths we Blaspheme the Holy Name of God: Oh brave World! and brave
Holy Religion! and bravely managed!


Tant. You are warm upon us.


Whig. Is this a time to be Meally-mouth'd? To sit weeping and wailing and
wringing of hand, with Prayers and Tears only, when --


Tant. When, what? Speak out --


Whig. I will not, Catch-pole! you do but ly at lurch, to undo a man for
speaking Truth, if you can but by hook or Crook drill him in, and bring him
within the reach or swing of some Old Stretched Law, to color, as well as
vindicate safely the private Spleens and Revenge; every body sees you, and yet
you think you walk invisible; and now too, having got (Tory) here to be a
Fellow-witness with you; Oh how you will Strain a word and your own
Consciences? To bring a man (that Thwarts your Evil purpose) to be Mauled by
Law, especially, when you get (which is not difficult) a Jury, and -- for your
Turns.


Tory. You speak feelingly.


Whigg. Jeet on; and mark the end on it; there is an overruling Providence and
God of Justice, the very Heathens apprehend it; and the Wheel of Fortune
comforted the Captive Prince, that drew the Conqueror's Chariot, the Wheels
whereof turning round, and the upmost side (forthwith) undermost, and the
undermost again uppermost, comforted and cheered his Captivity with the certain
incertainty inconstancy and vicissitude of things: And therefore, ( good
Rampant Tory!) let not him that puts on his Armor boast himself; yet, you
think, you have got the World in a string; and since the days of Blessed Mary,
Popery ( Coleman says) had never so fair and likely a Prospect.


Tant. I am not for Popery.


Whigg. No, not for the Name; I believe, thy Religion is 1500 l per Annum, call
it by what Name any body pleases.


Tory. But did not you say, (Whigg) that you would prove by Common Law,
Statute Law, Reason and Equity, that the Law determines how and when
Parliaments shall sit, or be Dissolved; How long they shall sit, and when they
shall be called; all which (I understand) lay no where but in the Hallow of the
Kings-Breast, His Will and Pleasure.


Whig. No Acts of Justice, as a King, lies (so incertainly only) as at the will
and pleasure of the King, so as not to be determined by Law, though some Acts
of Mercy and Pardon are purely Arbitrary to adorn the Throne: For if that did,
all our other Laws are nothing worth, but at the good pleasure of the King and
His Ministers Arbitrarily: For, for all their Transgressions, none can call
Evil Ministers to Account but a Parliament, at least, none more properly: And
if they can stave off a Parliament at pleasure, and Dissolve it at pleasure, we
hold all our other Liberties, Charters and Properties at pleasure; which they
have often oppressed and invaded, as aforesaid; and when a Parliament called
them to a Reckoning and Account for their Roguery, and worse, than march them
off: Here the Remedy (by this Rule) is left to the mercy and good will and
pleasure of the Disease, when Evil Ministers Disease the Commonwealth, and
this Disease may not be inquired into by the only Physicians, the Parliament:
For (Alas!) the Judges know who gives them (and continues to them) their Places
and Soft Seats.


Tory. You see, as aforesaid, in King Charles I. his Speeches, his
Declarations, etc. Still he inculcates, and bids them remember that the
Calling, Adjourning, Prorogueing, Holding and Dissolving Parliaments are in his
Power.


Whig. I believe, you mistake, for the Houses usually (if not always) do
Adjourn themselves, but they are Prorogued, and Called, and Dissolved by the
King; so all Criminals, (or so suspected) are Indicted by the King; that is, in
the Kings Name; but the Law directs it both how and wherefore.


Tory. So you would say, the Law directs the formal part also of Calling and
Dissolving of Parliaments to be by the King, in His Name, but the wherefore, or
cause of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments is limited and determined by the
Law, and the time of Intervals which the King cannot pass, or dispute with.


Whig. Yes surely, or else the great foundation of our Laws (Parliaments) the
banks that limit and bound the out-ragious swellings and overflowings of
Arbitrary and unlimited dominion, would be strangely deficient and lame in not
providing (first and especially) for its own Preservation against Arbitrary
Will and Pleasure.


Tant. Nay, I suppose you are a Learned and Stout Champion for the Laws; and
for the Laws of Parliament, and much Skilled in them.


Whig. I pretend to no Skill therein, nor to the Honor of it; all I have to
say, or have said on this Subject, is only as an Historian of Whiggism, a bare
summary Collection of what others have done and said as to these particulars in
the Reign of King Charles I. to rub up your memory with my brief Notes, not to
tell you any thing you have not heard before, but with little Cost and Charge
give you the Marrow of greater and more Elaborate works at an easier rate, and
minute Expense both of Money and Time.


Tant. Well said, I like that very well, for I have not much (of either) to
spare; but first (say) what the Common Law enjoynes as to the Holding or
Dissolving Parliaments? Coke lib. 7. Rep. p. 12, 13.



Whig. Few know what the Common Law is: Coke says, it is founded in the
Immutable Law and Light of Nature, agreeable to the Law of God, requiring
Order, Government, Subjection and Protection; containing Ancient usages,
warranted by Holy Scripture, and because it is generally given to all, King and
People, Poor and Rich, Lords and Commons, it is therefore called Common.

Now (consider) that never any King of England had any Prerogative, but what
the Common Law or Statute Law gives them, nor any Liberty or Privilege but by
Law: The Prerogative is a Royal Privilege (Privilegio (quasi) privatae Leges)
Privileges are Private Laws, which always yields to the Common Law,
Commonweal, and Common-Benefit: The King has no Privilege or Prerogative
contrary to the Publick-weal, Order, Government and Protection of the People:
Apply this, to the question in hand concerning Holding or Dissolving of
Parliaments. Lib. 9. Preface.
And therefore in the Mirror of Justice, a Book so commended by the Lord Coke,
Mirror of Justice, chapter 1. Sect. 3.
that he says it contains the whole Frame of the Ancient Common-Laws of this
Realm from the time of King Arthur, till near the Conquest, Citesout of it, one
Law Concerning Parliaments, made Reg. R. Alfred, Anno Dom. 880. in these words:
Le Roy Alfred ordcigna pur usage perpetuel que a deur foits per lan on plus
sovene pur mistier in temps de Peace le Assembler a Londres, put Parliementer
surle guidement del People de dieu coment gents soy garderent de Pegers,
viverent in quiet, receiverent droit per certain usages and Saints Judgments.

King Alfred Ordains for an usage Perpetual, that Twice a Year, or oftener if
need be, in time of Peace, they shall Assemble themselves at London, to Treat
in Parliament of the Government (mark that) of the People of God, how they
should keep themselves from Offenses, should live in quiet, and should receive
right by certain Laws and Holy Judgments.




Tory. Right, for Standing Privy Councels, or long Standing Parliaments, may be
Pentioners to Foraign States, may give Council for their own ends, but a
frequent Parliament is incapable of being Bribed, and most improbable to give
any Advice against the Commonweal, Common-benefit of King and People.


Tant. In Troth, I am at a loss to find out a Reason why any should Address and
be Thankful for Dissolving a Parliament.


Whig. And yet your Hand was one of the first to an Address of like nature
(Hark you) you know when and where. Lord Coke 's Comment upon it.



Tant. No more of that, I am of another mind now: But what says the Lord Coke,
the Laws Oracle and Apollo, concerning the said Statute of King Alfred?


Whig. He says, that the threefold end of this Great and Honorable Assembly
of Estates is there declared.

First, That the Subjects might be kept from offending, that is, that Offenses
might be prevented, both by good and provident Laws, and by the due Execution
thereof.

Secondly, That men might live safely and in quiet.

Thirdly, That all men might receive Justice by certain Laws and Holy
Judgments, that is, to the end that Justice might be the better Administered,
that Questions and Defects of Law might by the High-Court of Parliament be
planed, reduced to certainty and adjudged, etc. In short, Si vetustatem spectes
est anquessima, si dignitatem est Honoratissima, si Jurisdictionem est
capacissima: If you regard Antiquity, the Parliament is the most Ancient Court;
if Dignity, the most Honorable; if Jurisdiction, the most Sovereign; and is a
part of the frame of the Common Law, which is called usually Leges Anglicae.


Tant. I thought the Parliament had beginning only since Magna Charta in the
Reign of Hen. 3. which is not so very Ancient.


Whig. Some of your Tantivees have said so and writ so; but it is your
ignorance, or worse: King Hen. 1. Surnamed Beauclark writ to Pope Pascal,
saying, Notum habeat Sanctitas vestra, Chart. Hem. 3.
quod me vivente (auxiliante Deo) Dignitates and usus Regninostri Angliae non
imminentur, and siego (quod absit) in tanto me dejectione ponerem optimates mei
and totus Angliae populus id nullo modo pateretur: Your Holiness may please to
understand, that as long as I live, (by the help of God) the Dignities and
Customs of our Realm of England shall never be impared, or diminished; to
which, if I should (which God forbid) be so high-base as poorly to condescend,
my Lords and Commons of England would by no means permit the same. Judge then
how dangerous it is to change the Ancient Customs and usages of the Common Law,
much less the greatest and most useful of all the rest, frequent and
uninterrupted Sessions of Parliament, without which the Liberties and
Franchises have been and may be taken away remedilesly.

By the Canon Law, Vid. Decret. Greg. 9. fol. 260. Col. 1.
Children born before Marriage Solemnized, were Legitimate, if Matrimony
afterward followed; which is contrary to our Common Law: This was William the
Conqueror's Case, who is said to be the Son of a -- Arlot, so notorious that
all Whores are since called Harlots, Will. Maim. lib. 3. c. 19.
for her sake, yet William of Malmesbury says, that Robert Duke of Normandy
(his reputed Father) did after William was Born Marry his Mother Arlot, which
did Legitimate William by the Canon Law, but it reaches not England: For in the
like Case, when the Bishops would have ruled it according to the Papal Decree,
Omnes Comites and Barons una voce respondement, quod nolunt leges Anglicae
mutare; 9 Hon. 3, 9.
All the rest of the Lords, Earls and Barons with one voice cried out -- We
will not change the Laws of England (accounted) the wisest Laws in the World;
but they must be the weakest and most deficient, if it be Arbitrary whether
Parliaments (a Fundamental Constitution) may or may not have a Being; or only
be born to die, namely, only to be called together that they may be Dissolved:
Therefore even the late Act for holding Parliaments once in three years or
oftener, if need be, made by that Parliament, (that from the numerous Pentioners
therein is commonly (but Improperly) called for distinction the Pentioners
Parliament) amongst the many precious Statutes they made, take care and provide
that Parliaments shall not only be called, but sit and be held; or else of what
use is this Sovereign Remedy, if it be not made use of? It would be a
Mock-Remedy and Mock-Parliament, if it only be called together to be Dissolved:
This would defeat the very Letter of the Law, as well as the true intent,
meaning and benefit thereof.

For if a Gracious and good King (as King Charles I. is reported to be) had
such Horrible Oppressions and Violence committed in his Reign, as Loanes,
Ship Money, Illegal Seizures of men's Estates, Liberties, Free Quarter, Coat and
Conduct-money, and False Imprisonment, during his Reign, contrary to Law, (as
he acknowledged by after Statutes that condemned them:) See the Articles of
Impeachment against Strafftord.
If Papists were preferred to Offices of great Trust Military and Civil; and if
his Favorite the Earl of Strafford raised an Army of Papists, 8000. and ruled
by them, committed such Heinous Enormities and Misdeeds that he was not fit to
be a Puny Constable; and committed such Tyrannies and Cruelties that no Record
can parallel: And if no remedy was found to these mischiefs but a Parliament,
and that not suffered to be for 12 long years together: Oh Fruitless Remedy of
a Parliament! Oh dull and Improvident Ancestors! That were wise above all the
World to make good Laws for securing our Liberties and Properties, (of which
they were Tenacious to the death) And yet, that the Law, that secures these,
should not be able to secure it self, but to grant a Prerogative to make all
null and void at pleasure! If such mischiefs happened during the Reign of a
Gracious King, what may not happen, in a Reign less Gracious? Penelope's Webb
(which she weaved all day and undid (all again) at night) might be a Fable, but
this the moral of it; that our Laws (which our wise Ancestors had been long
contriving to save us from Arbitrary sway) should all be unravelled again, and
leave us by a Prerogative (of which the Law is the Author) to mere good will
and pleasure.


Tory. I must needs say, that the Law (which should be Wise, Holy and Good)
would be the Strangest Law in the World, if it should give a Prerogative to
destroy it self, and so become felo de se, its own Executioner; having so
carefully fenced against Arbitrary sway in all Ages, and so Industriously and
zealously too have our Ancestors stood up for the same to the last drop of
their Bloods; as choosing rather to leave us no Lands, Charters, Privileges,
and Fields, rather than Akeldama's (as one calls them) Fields of Blood, and
such as we must (like them) be forced to Fight for their Defense and our own,
against Arbitrary Projects.


Whig. There needs no Fighting for them, if we make the good Old Laws the
Arbitrator of the Good Old Cause: For the Law alone gives the King his due, and
his Subjects their due; but, because men naturally incline to do what they list
without control, wonder not, if even the best of Kings, (surrounded with so
many Parasites and pimping Sycophants) have been tempted to rule and do (as he
list,) without Check-mate of Bishops and Knights, and Lords in Parliament.


Tant. Why? Has Parliaments then been as Old a Constitution as Kings of England?


Whig. Yes, for ought can be known to the contrary: The said Famous Old Book
Mirror of Justice.
(the said Mirror of Justice) shows; that Parliaments were before a single
King Ruled England; namely, during the Heptarchy, when there were seven Kings
(rather than fail) to rule England.


Tant. I shall never have enough of Kings, I do so love them.


Whig. Ay, but seven Kings were accounted more than enough; and after the
Heptarchy, when the King of the West Saxons, (namely Cornwall, Devonshire,
Egbert Anno 926.
Dor setshire, Summer setshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and Barkshire) had
swallowed up all the rest, Parliaments still were, or Senates (as, long before
this, during the Reign of the Senate and Caesar's of Rome here in England.) So
also (after Egbert) when the Bishop of Winchester ( Ethelwolph his Eldest Son)
with much ado, was persuaded to leave his Bishopric and a Religious Life, for
a Kingdom, Pope Gregory 4th.
after he had purchased a Pardon from the Pope, for breaking his Religious Vow.
And, yet he had much ado to keep his Crown upon his head for breaking but one
poor Law; for, if he had not (by death) timely death, cheated his Lords, they
had certainly Deposed him, for placing his Queen in a Chair of State; which was
(then) contrary to Law, made ever since Queen Ethelburg by chance Poisoned her
Husband King Birthrick, by a Venomous Potion which (she said at least) she had
prepared for another; but, being a Handsome Whore, she fled into France, 'till
by frequent Adulteries, she died. Miserably, and like a Rotten Whore, and for
her sake, the West Saxons ordained ( whence, Note, they were Lawmakers in
these days) a Law, that no Kings Wife should hereafter have the Title or
Majesty of a Queen, which Law (as aforesaid) King Ethelwolph being so bold as
to dispense with, and break, the Lords would certainly have Deposed him, but
that his Grave prevented them.


Tant. Then (belike) it was not safe for Kings to break Laws in those days.


Whig. Judge you, and long after, Stout King Edward I. told the Bishops
plainly, Baker's Chron.
that he could not (being but one Member of the Body, though the Head) undo
what the whole Body had done and Enacted, as is before remembered.


Tant. You are full of your Old Stories to maintain your Whiggism.


Whig. I invent none; I write nothing but what I have Authentic Histories and
Records to Vouch, and Attest the Truth: And thus Parliaments continued in the
short Reign of Ethelbald, Successor to his Fathers Crown and Bed; for, to his
Eternal shame, he Married (Judith) his Fathers Widow: So also in the Reigns of
Ethelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred, the four Sons of Ethelwolph, who Successively
Reigned one after another; which Alfred, was as Learned as Valiant, Ann. Them.
895
and first Founded the University of Oxford, (one of the Oldest Universities in
the World.)


Tant. I thought Universities had been as Old as Christianity: What could
Christianity and the Ministry continue in the World nine hundred years, in its
greatest splendour, without an University and an Academian?


Whig. Yea, so it seems, without either Oxford-Scholar, Bloxford-Schollar, or
Cantabrigian: Alas, alas! Universities were (at first) the Pope's Invention; so
also were Schoolmen, School Divinity and Canon-Laws, with which he has so
defaced Christianity, with his Painting, Glazings, Glossings, Comments,
Arguments, Syllogismes, Fallacies, Fripperies, and Metaphysical-Fopperies, that
Scholars are forced to Fool away a great deal of time, in Cracking these
Insipid Shells and Outward Rindes, (that their Teeth are broke, and worn out)
before they come to Taste true, and Solid Learning or Christianity; nay, Fox
Acts and Monuments.
the Majority never come at the Kernel and Marrow of true Divinity and useful
Learning during their whole Life; not much unlike that Popish Doctor, that had
been nine years Doctor of Divinity before he saw a Bible.


Tant. Doctor Subtilis, I Will warrant.


Tory. Prithee, Parson! do not thus Interrupt Mr. Whigg, with your Impertinent
Parenthesis: Go on Whigg!


Whig. To serve you, Tory, I will; and will let you know, Mirror of Justice.
that there were Parliaments to which Knights and Burgesses were Summoned,
after the Heptarchy, in the Reigns aforesaid, and the Reigns of Alfred's Sons,
King Edward as Stout a man as his Father, not so Book-Learn'd, but more
Successful; through the help of his Sister, Madam Elfled, the Wife of Ethelred
Earl of Mereia, to whom, when she had brought him one Daughter with Grievous
Pains in her Travel, she turned Soldier and Virago, helping her Brother most
Manfully against the Welsh and Danes, and brought them all under her, refusing
the Nuptial Bed of her Husband, saying, It was a floolish pleasure, that
brought with it so Excessive Pains.


Tant. Few of our women (now a days) are of her mind, they will venture again and
again.


Tory. This Parson is always Interrupting us with his Idle Notes, Commentaries,
and Observations: Proceed, (good Mr. Whigg) there is some profit and
understanding to be learned by you: Parson! hold your Tongue, if it be possible
for a Prating Circingle to leave his Impertinence in Company.


Whig. This Old Fundamental frame continued in the Reigns of Athelstone, Edgar,
Ethelred, Canutus, Harold, William the Conqueror, etc. So that Parliaments are
part of the Frame of the Common Law, which no Kings can defeat, frustrate or
make void; nor did ever any attempt the same, but it proved Fatal to him; nay,
proved to be his ruin: Witness all the Unhappy Reigns, and Violent Deaths of
English Kings that have broke loose, and made Rapes and violent attempts upon
the known, Chaste, and Sacred Laws of England; the Common Law to King and
People, framed in the Law and Light of Nature, Right Reason, and Holy-Writ.

Secondly, According to the said Law made in the Reign of King Alfred,
Parliaments are to Sit frequently (Right and good Reason:) I do not say, as
often as you take Physic, ( Spring and Fall at least;) but however so often as
the Noxious Humors abound (above the Boundaries, Banks and Limits of the Law)
and offend our Liberties, Charters, Rights and Properties.

Thirdly, By the said Law the place of Meeting then was London.


Tant. Perhaps Westminster and the Banqueting House were not then built.


Tory. Thou happens to be in the right on it, (Parson!) for once.


Whig. Parliaments then being so Ancient, (no Court so Ancient) the Lord Coke
having traced them from the Britains, Saxons, Danes, Normans, to our days, I
wonder what Tantivees dares (as Sybthorp and Bishop Manwaring, etc.) attempt
thus to divide, separate and make null and void, two of the three Estates of
this Realm, the Lords and Commons; to leave us but one Estate, (a King) in use,
and de facto; whilst the the other two, the great and main Body have no
Subsistence, but de Jure; stand useless and for nothing, years together, and
always when there is most need of them too. If ever any Head lived well without
the Body, give me but one Instance.


Tant. This makes me think of the Fable, when the Head and Hand joined together
to pull the Gutts out; for (quoth the Head) I plod for all; and we (quoth
Toryhands and Feet) have Fought and Wrought for the Head as it annuated and
directed, and yet the (Whiggish) Gutts devour all the good Victuals; wherefore
it was agreed, with joynt-forces to tear the Gutts a pieces; little
considering, that both Hand and Head Live and are Nourished and grow Fat and
Fresh and well-liking by the assistance, of the Trading Part, the
Whiggish-Gutts, to whom we grutch that they have a Being and Subsistence,
though by them we Live and grow Fat, and if we offer to tear them apieces, and
their Ancient Privileges, Charters and Franchises; who knows but it may prove
our own Ruin?


Tory. Here Is a wise Tale of a Tub; more fit for a Tub-Preacher than a Tantivee.


Whig. Nay, for that there shall be no quarrel; for Tantivee at an Idle-Pulpit
Metaphor, or Far-fetched Similitude, shall match the best Tub-Preacher of them
all; whilst Tantivee is Paid for some as Idle Stories, as poor Tub is Fined
and Punished for.


Tory. Some men had better Steal a Horse, than others to look over the Hedge:
You have told us what the Common Law says for Parliaments, frequent
Parliaments; Parliaments that Sit, and must be held, not Mock-Parliaments,
(made like Penelope's-Web only to be Vnravell'd and Dissolved.) But what says
the Statute Law to this point.


Whig. I have not done yet with my Common Law.


Tory. Proceed then, but be brief.


Whig. The Ancient Treatise (called Modus Tenendi Parliamentum) which Lord Coke
says was rehearsed and declared before William the Conqueror, Coke Instit. 4.
R. p. 11.
and by him approved, and accordingly he held a Parliament for England, (as
appears 21 Edw. 3. fol. 60.) wherein we Read, that Petitions being truly
preferred, have been Answered by the Law and Custom of Parliament, before the
end of Parliament.


Tant. But suppose the King will end it before the Petitions and Grievances be
redrest, by his Prerogative.


Whig. Parson! Thou makes Suppositions most dishonorable to Loyal Majesty, and
that which is scarce to be supposed, that ever any Head should not permit any
Remedy to be applied to the Gouty or distempered Hands, Gutts and Feet: For if
the Hands be Lame, how will the Politick-Head help it self? Or if the Gutts be
empty, or Gutifounder'd, how will Head feed its self: And if the Feet be Lame,
and the Heart faint, the Head will make Wise-Fighting, (I believe,) when it
comes too: Therefore, I cannot imagine a Head to be so Senseless, (except the
Brains be out) that should have such an Unnatural, Cruel, Stupid and foolish
project in the Nodle of it, as neither to help the oppressed Gutts and Hands or
Feet; nor yet permit the Charity and good will of others that are both willing
and able to Ease, Remedy and Redress the Griefs and Grievances of the Body; and
all this, without a Fee.


Tant. If you apply this to Parliament Redressing Grievances without a Fee, you
do not mean, a Pentioners Parliament, I hope.


Tory. No, no, such Physicians (are paid as many others) they got Fees to
hasten us the sooner to our Graves.


Whig. But the True-English-Parliament can never be a Long-Parliament, nor can
the Intervals of Parliament be long; nor yet, the Sessions of Parliament can be
short: For, Modus Tenendi, says, That the Parliament ought not to be ended
while any Petition depends Undiscussed, (and so say the Statutes too, as I Will
show anon irrefragably) Or at least, to which a determinate Answer is not made,
Rot. Par. 17 Ed. 3. No. 60.25 Ed. 3. No. 60.50 Ed. 3. No. 212. 2 Rich. 2.134. 2
Rich. 2. No. 38. 1 Hen. 4.132. 2 Hen. 4. No. 325. and 113.

And that one of the Principal ends of calling Parliaments, is for Redressing
of Grievances that daily happen; ( of which the King cannot possibly be
informed so truly as by Parliaments) that Parler le ments speak their minds
freely, without Glozing and Flattery; for Kings seldom hear Truth but in
Parliament; that it is one of the greatest wonders in the World, that Kings (of
all others) should not most of all desire frequent Parliamens, wherein (of all
other places) he sits in most Majesty and King-like, as Gloriously, as
Powerfully; but, those Kings (that have been Enemies to Parliaments, and to
frequent Parliaments) have been at poor as ever they could creep, for go they
could not, in State, and King-like; but were glad to make Poor and Beggarly and
Illegal Shifts and all to preserve a company of Sneaking Sycophants that care
not how Bare and Beggarly the King's Exchequer be, so they may but live impune,
to pull him more bare and bald, when there is scarce a Hair left; knowing that
they must be Fleeced too, if a Parliament Sir; and also must disgorge the ill
gotten Goods they have Gourmandiz'd so Greedily and Illegally swallowed up, and
they are afraid, they shall be choked when they are forced (by the Wise
Physicians) to Spue it up.


Tory. But if frequent Parliaments ( to fit so long till all Petitions be
Answered and Grievances be Redressed) be secured by Common Law and Statute Law:
How came King Charles I. in open Parliament, (more than in one Parliament) in a
kind of Threatening way to tell the Parliaments, and bid them remember, that the
Calling, Adjourning, Prorogueing, Holding and Dissolving, was wholly in his
Power.


Whig. So it is in his Power, that is, he alone can do it, as many other Kingly
Acts; Indicting men for Felony, Treason, etc. It cannot be done but in the
Kings Name, you cannot Arrest a man for Debt that is owing to you, but in the
Kings Name: But still they are things in Course, and directed by the Law.

Besides, when King Charles I. had such Principles whispered into his head, he
was but young; he lived to be wiser before his latter end, King James 's
Speeches in Parliaments Anno 1603. and 1609.
and to know the Truth of what his Wise Father had told him and his Parliaments
very often: That as the Head is ordained for the Body, and not the Body for the
Head; so must a Righteous King know himself to be ordained for his People, and
not his People for him: Wherefore, I will never be ashamed to confess it my
Principal to be the great Servant of the Commonwealth, etc.


Tory. Ay, but we Toryes are not of King James 's mind, but quite contrary.


Whig. Right, therefore you are most rightly called Tories, mere
Irish-Bogg-Trotters, and Slaves that would be, more like than Englishmen;
because you are Slaves to your Lusts of Avarice and Ambition; to gratify
which, you will gratify any other man's Ambition, to advance your own; and as
they say, lick up other men's Spitle (poor Currs) in hopes that others will lick
up yours.


Tory. Ay, thouart a Hopeful Whigg; such a Tom-Tell-Truth I do not like.


Whig. I know thou do not; thou likest Flatteries and Leasings better by
half, Old Tory-Boy.


Tory. Well, but tell me true, what Authority have you to assert (as you have
already) that the principal ends of calling Parliaments is for Redressing
Grievances that daily happen.


Whig. For this, Consult 36 Edw. 3. c. 10.18 Edw. 3. c. 24.50 Edw. 3. No. 17.13
Hen. 4. No. 9.


Tant. I cannot think that this same King Alfred that was so Wise a man, so
great a Scholar, a Prosperous King, and a Valiant, should so humble himself to
the Laws.


Whig. Therefore you think like (as you are) a Tantivee and a Cockscomb: For
Andrew Horn tells us (in his Mirror of Justice) that King Alfred made bold to
Hang Judge Darling, Horn 's Mirr. of Justice.
Seynor, Cadwine, Cole, and forty Judges more.


Tant. For what? Judges Hang other men, but do not use themselves to be Hanged.


Whig. No, they do not make a common practice of it, though they have often had
it, and more often deserved it; but when they meet with some Just Kings, they
also meet with their deserts, (some of them) a Halter.


Tant. Forty Judges, (do you say) did they hang together?


Whig. Yea, only for Judging contrary to Law?


Tant. Nay, if Judges will Hang men for acting contrary to Law, I am of
Opinion, that they that by their Office, their Place, their Wisdom, their
Experience, and their Oath, should act according to Law, I would Halter them my
self, (though it is unseemly for my Coat,) if such Wretches act contrary to Law.


Whig. When we have an occasion for a Tantivee Hangman, we will send for you
(Parson) for want of a better.


Tant. I am your tres humble when occasion serves.


Whig. In Edward 3d. time, poor Thorp, Lord Chief Justice, went to Pot, in
plain English, he was Hanged.


Tant. I am your tres humble when occasion serves.


Whig. In Edward 3d. time, poor Thorp, Lord Chief Justice, went to Pot, in
plain English, he was Hanged.


Tant. For what? For receiving a Bribe of the Ambassador?


Whig. No, he was not so great a Rogue: He was only Hanged for receiving the
Bribe of 100 l in obstruction of Justice.


Tant. Poor Fellow! he had hard Fortune: I can tell you in History, of a man,
that received fifty times as much, in Obstruction of Justice, and yet the
Gallows did not claim its due.


Whig. Ay, ay, some men are born with their A -- upwards; but there is a time
for all things; and a day of Judgment a coming.


Tant. Ay, but when? can tell?


Whig. Yes, even when it pleases God.


Tant. And the King, you should have said.


Whig. That Is needless, for what pleases God, must please all the Kings in the
World: The Wisdom and the Politics of the wisest men is Foolishness with God:
What Head had more Brains in it than Strafford? That out of Self-Interest and
Preservation disliked coming to Parliament, whom (he knew in his Conscience) he
had Offended; and both he and the Archbishop Laud, fenced off the Parliaments
sitting so long till -- at length they themselves had Judgment without Mercy,
for Involving the Kingdoms by their Arbitrary Projects; and Countenancing and
Advancing Popish-Books, Popish-Authors, Papists and Popishly Inclined, etc.


Tant. But was it true, that Strafford ruled Ireland with an Army, and most of
that Army Papists?


Whig. Yes, Popery and Arbitrary Government are like Fire and Heat; the latter
is the necessary consequence of the former: Lord of Strafford Anno 1639.
had 10000. Soldiers of his standing Guards; of which 8000. were professed
Papists, and the other 2000. were Well-affected to the Tory Cause, they were
True-Blew; and whilst he Decreed and Ordered men's Estates and Lives away at the
Council Board, thereby (as it was Articled and Alleged against him) breaking
the Kings Oath: Which made the poor Earl at last Style himself, the Accursed
thing, or the Achau that had troubled Israel, with the Babilonish Garments of
Popery, and the Accursed Wedges of Gold, by Arbitrary Taxes, Decrees, Loanes,
Monopolies, False Imprisonments; nay, Sentencing to Death some, (as the Lord
Mount-Norris) and Executing others, taking from him his Inheritance of his
Manor, and Tymore in the County of Armagh; so also Thomas Lord Dillon was
outed (by the good will and pleasure of this great Lord) of and from his Lands
in Mago and Rosecommen, so also Dame Mary Hibbots in Favor of Thomas Hibbots,
who shortly after conveyed the same to Sir Robert Meredith, to the use of the
said Earl of Strafford.


Tant. I commend him; he had wit enough to get somewhat, and gather to himself;
which some Tyrants do not.


Whig. I know not, what he got over the Devils back was spent under his belly;
as we say, male parta male dilabuntur, for he Died poor and in Debt: The Curse
of God follows the Oppressor and his House; so true is that of the Prophet --
Habak. 2.5, 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Woe to him that Increases that which is not his, and to him that ladeth
himself with thick-clay; shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee,
etc. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his House, that he may set
his Nest on high, etc. Thou have consulted shame to thy House, etc. For the
stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall bear
witness: Woe unto him that builds a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by
Iniquity.


Tory, Ay, Poor Gentleman, the Earl of Strafford was made a woeful example of an
evil Councellor and an Oppressor: The sense of his Guilt made him submit to his
death the more Patiently.


Whig. Yea, he desired to die, seemed weary of his Life, a wounded Conscience
who can bear? Prosperity may a while muzle the Mouth of Conscience; but a
prospect of Death and Affliction unmuzles the Mastisse.


Tory. The Earl Confessed His Speech in the Tower.
-- he had received nothing but Justice; and that the death of the bad, (he
ingenuously confessed with Cicero) was the safety of the good that be alive;
and bid -- no man trust either in the Favor of his Prince, the Friendship and
Consanguinity of his Peers, much less in his own Wisdom, of which (he
confessed) he had been too Confident, saying, as once Cardinal Woolsey did, Had
I strived to obey my God as Faithfully, as I sought to Honor my King
Fraudulently, I had stood and not fallen. And for his Peers, thanking them for
that Free and Legal Trial they gave him, and though they detested the Fault,
yet they pitied the Delinquent: Saying, my Lords, I am now the Hopeless
President (of an Ambitious, Covetous, Evil Councellor, before spoken of) may I
be to you all a Happy Example: For Ambition devoureth Gold, and Drinks Blood,
and climbeth so high by other men's Heads, that at length in the fall it
breaks its own neck.


Whig. Yet men will tread the very same Steps, of the same evil way, till they
come to the same evil end.


Tory. It is impossible it should be otherwise, whilst they are Slaves to their
Lusts, Ambition and Avarice; and therefore said that Unfortunately Fortunate
Earl, His Speech in the Tower.
O! how small a proportion of Earth will contain my Body, when my High Mind
could not be Confined within the Spacious compass of two Kingdoms? But my Hour
draws on.


Whig. He had not thus Died before his time for being over wicked, but that he
(in his Career of Prosperity) feared no Colors, nor would hear any good
Council, breathing nothing but Daggers to the Naked-Truth.


Tory. Ay, Pride will not be controlled nor told of its Faults; it is deaf to
all good warning, and open-ear'd as well as open-hearted to Sycophants, that
will ruin all.


Whig. Let them alone, let the Blind lead the Blind; till they fall (as others)
into the same Ditch: For they will never take warning, never be good, till they
can be no longer bad.


Tory. Indeed Archb -- Laud, that came to the same End with Strafford, went on
in the same Road: And when they could not persuade the Parliament to give
Supply 'till-Grievances were addressed, he (in his Wise Synod) when the
Parliament was Dissolved, ordains the Clergy to pay six Subsidies, on pain of
Excommunication, and a worse turn, Deprivation; men wondered at their Impudence
as well as Folly; they were grown very high.


Whig. A Synod called together upon pretense of Reconciling and Settling
Controversies and Matters in Religion, to take upon them the boldness thus out
of Parliament, to grant Subsidies, and to meddle with men's Freeholds: I dare
say, Sir Harbotle Grimston 's Speech in Parliament.
the like was never heard of before; and they, that durst do this, will do
worse, if the current of their raging Tyranny be not stopped in time; said Mr.
Harbotle Grimstone in the Parliament Anno 1640.

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have countenanced and cherished Popery and
Arminianism to that growth and height it is now come to, in this Kingdom?

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have given Encouragement to those that have
boldly Preached those damnable Heresies in our Pulpits?

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have given Authority and License to them that
have published those Heresies in Print.

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that of late have been advanced to any Dignity or
Preferment in the Church, but such as have been notoriously Suspicious in their
Disciplines, Corrupt in their Doctrines, and for the most part Vicious in their
Lives?


Tory. Ay, ay, The Skum will be uppermost, if possible.


Whig. God forbid though, that only the Clergy, or (much worse) only the
Dignified Clergy, should be accounted the Church of England.


Tant. Why not? For the Church of England confesses that she may Err; and if
the Clergy, nay, the Dignified Clergy (in Convocation too) have not Erred
wretchedly, they have had hard Censures and hard Measure.


Whig. They cared not for Censures, some of them, if they can keep 4000 l per
Annum, and may Censure, Sentence, Excommunicate, Curse, and consequently Goal
them that stop their carreer.

But Sir Harbotle Grimstone went on, in his said Speech, saying, Who are they
(Mr. Speaker) that have overthrown our two great Charters, Magna Charta, and
Charta de Foresta?

What Imposition has been laid down, or what Monopoly has heen damned in any
Court of Justice since the last Parliament?

Has not Ship Money, Coat and Conduct-Money, and Money for other Military
Charges been Collected and Levied, with as great Violence as ever they were, in
violation of our Liberties, confirmed unto us in our Petition of Right,
notwithstanding all our Supplications and Complaints the last Parliament?

And who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have caused all those dangerous
Convulsions, and all the desperate unnatural Bloody Distempers, that are now in
our Body Politic?


Tant. I could have told the Master of the Rolls their Names, and who they
were, at least, Old Hodge, the Fiddler tells us their Names in -- 41.41. viz.
The Puritans, the Roundheads, the Whiggs.


Whig. Then Mr. Grimstone was mistaken, for he proceeded, saying, Mr. Speaker,
I will tell you a passage I heard from a Judge in the Kings Bench. There was a
poor man Committed by the Lords, for refusing to submit unto a Project, and
haing attended a long time at the Kings Bench Bar, upon his Habeas Corpus, and
at the last pressing earnestly to be Bailed, The Judge said to the rest of his
Brethren --


Tant. Well said, Let us hear the Judges Opinion.


Whig. Come Brothers (said he) let us Bail him, for they begin to say in the
Town, That the Judges have overthrown the Law, and the Bishops the Gospel.


Tory. I do not like that Innuendo, and upon the Bench too, and in -- 41 -- 41.
too: Trusly Roger lays the blame of the Commotions (when all things were out
of Order and Law, and you hear, by whom) on the Whiggs, the Whiggs put all in
Combustion.


Whig. Nero (Chronicles say) set Rome on fire and laid the blame upon the
Christians.


Tant. What then? How do you apply it, let us hear the application.


Whig. I make no Applications, except like your self, far from the matter in
hand, Catch-Pole! You would ensnare me, would you? God bless me from a
Tantivee-Swearer, when his Interest lies at Stake; we know it experimentally,
men of your Coat can Swear Thorow-stitch.


Tant. We know our Interest, which is Spiritual, and in a Spiritual way, we can
do pretty well, or, by the way of Oaths, which are Spiritual and Religious
things.


Whig. Ay, I herein will take your word (as I do that of Stretching Travelers)
I had rather Trust you, than make Trial; God bless me from you, you are
Home-Thrusters, when a Cause is at Pinch; or, (like a Ship in a Storm) lies at
Try.


Tant. Some Fear us, that do not Love us.


Whig. Ay, all of you are terrible men, and men of Reverence (Sir) and some of
you, worthy to be beloved a little: So Sir Harbotle acknowledged, (in the said
Speech) viz. Mr. Speaker, I would not be misunderstood in what I have said; for
there are some of both Functions and Professions that I highly Honor and
Reverence in my heart, for their Wisdoms and Integrities.


Tory. Ay, or else it is a pity but they should be advanced, if there be not
some worcester thy persons, and some Integrities among them.


Whig. Yet, the good Patriot goes on, speaking feelingly, viz. But (Mr.
Speaker) I may say it, for I am sure we have all felt it, that there are some
of both Functions and Professions that have been the Authors and Causers --


Tant. -- Of what? Of Law and Gospel?


Whig. No, of all the Miseries, Ruins and Calamities that are now upon us Mr.
Speaker, This is the Age (Mr. Speaker) that has produced and brought forth,
Achitophels, Hammans, Woolseyes, Empsons and Dedleyes, Tricilians and
Belknapes, Vipers and Monsters of all sorts.


Tant. We use to lay the cause of all our Civil Wars at the doors of the
Puritans, Roundheads or Whiggs.


Whig. Ay, you know no more than just what Oliver 's Fiddler and Not. Thompson
discover to you: Are you not ashamed to berul'd, and taught Ethics and
Politics, from the Pillory, the Mass, and the Stews; poor Tories and
Tantivees, I blush she you.


Tant. But why do you so often make Astrismes and Remarks of Popular Fury
against the Grand Favorites?


Whig. Our own Memories can sufficiently enform us of the Tragical Events that
attend the Peoples Odium, Indignation and Wrath. Dr. Lamb (for no other fault
but (taken on Suspicion) for an Intimado and Friend to the Duke of Buckingham)
was pulled in pieces by the Mobile and Rabble; and Verses presently dropped about
the Streets Threatening the like Fate to the Duke: This Dystich for one, Let
Charles and George do what they can,
The Duke shall Dic like Doctor Lamb.
And he that Stabbed the Duke, was rather bewailed and Canonized, then Execrated
by the Populace; what Devils Incarnate did the people prove to the two De Wits
in Holland, not long ago? The examples of Popular Hatred and Revenge ( I call
it not always Justice, because Irregular at best) are infinite in our own and
Foraign Countries: What need I tell of the Sicilian Vespers? Mastnello's ten
days Revenge occasioned by the Gabell's or Excise, and yet, it was established
by Law, as Hearth-money (amongst us) and Excise (amongst us) and in Holland and
other Countries?


Tant. I perceive by the Story that, of all men living, Favorites, Grand
Minions (whom all men Envy) have had the worst luck.


Whig. To go no further back than King Edward 2. how miserably were Gaviston
and the two Spencers, Tom and Dismembered, limb from limb?


Tory. Ay, so was Lord William Scroop, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord Treasurer,
and Sir John Bushy, Bagot, and the two Green's, ( Thomas and Henry) in Richard
2. time?


Whig. And so ended the Duke of Somerset and Suffolk in Henry 6. time.


Tant. These were three Easy Kings?


Whig. But what was Henry 8. then? And what Fate had Woolsey?


Tory. Or the Duke of Somerset and his Brother the Admiral, both of them Uncles
to the King? in Edward 6. Reign?


Whig. Or Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Strafford, Archbishop Laud in Charles I.
time? Or Earl of Clarendon in his present Majesty's Reign, (which God long
preserve.)


Tant. The Earl of Clarendon came off; or, rather he marched off; (if you
please) and well he could.


Whig. Well then, God send me The Character of a Happy man.
A Moderate Fortune, and a quiet Conscience,
A Soul not Stuffed with Flattery or Nonsense;
Nor, with much Business, too uneasy made,
Nor of a Curtain-Lecture much afraid,
But, at a Thunderbolt, stands undismayed;
With Brow Unwrinkled, Feet without the Gout;
Let Hero's plod and heave each other out:
And strive to be marked out the Peoples hate,
Bustling who first shall feel the wonted Fate;
And Justle for the Bench, and Noisy-bar:
We Shrubs are lower but far Happier.
I Will conclude with an old Story: Rawleigh' s History of the World, lib. 3.
Cambyses King of Persia was a man naturally inclined to Goodness, but Spoiled
by Sycophants, and drilled on to absolute Tyranny by Whores and Sycophants,
that led him by the Nose; and then for Lust, he was not only Insatiable, but
wildly Extravagant; scarce any Wench of his own Kingdom would serve his Wanton
Squeamish Old Appetite, and yet he had (of his own Subjects) Whores in
abundance, that were as willing as heart could wish, and would have been glad
of the Preferment to be a Royal Whore (for besides the pleasent sin, there was
Money and a Title of Honor too perhaps in the Case:) But nothing would serve
Cambyses, but to make his own Sister his Miss; and not only so, but he could
have been tempt'd and could find in his heart to make her his Wife, (if he
durst for the Laws) whereupon to satisfy the Laws and his Lust together, he
made a Privy-Council-business of it, and Consulted them and the Lawyers,
whether he might no. Marry his Sister lawfully? They Answered, That they knew
no Law which admitted such Marriages, but that there was a Prerogative, That
the Persian Kings might do what they listed.


Tant. The Prerogative (then) is a very Hapy Commodity (these) and a help (it
seems) to get such a Commodity as is not allowed to the poor, nor to the
wicked, neither by the Law of God nor man: But tell us more concerning our
Kings Prerogative in reference to Parliaments?


Whig. Not now however, for I understand your drift, (Mr. Catch-Pole!) but I am
not very ambitious of being a State-Martyr; I find cold comfort in it (in a
Thankless, unthinking and degenerate Age) besides, (Mr. Tantivee!) you can
Swear with a Witness, and either strain my words, or you will stretch your
Conscience, and it is a Cheverill-Conscience already, we know it by woeful
experience.


Tant. But (now that) Mr. Tory is absent, there cannot (you know) be two
stretching Witnesses, Anno. 1645.
speak bold Truths, and tell us why the Parliament did lay to the charge of
King Charles I. the granting Passes under his own Hand to several of his
Servants and Knights to go over into Ireland, Signed C. R. and serve and assist
the Irish Rebels that cut the Protestants Throats, and also sent to the Duke of
Ormond to make Peace with them, and to promise them Toleration, and a Deputy of
their own choosing, who they would, and agreed that they should come over for
England, and what to do, tell us some of these Mysteries; and How, and Why the
Pope sent them a Plenary Indulgence for the merit of Butchering the Protestants.


Whig. A Vaunt! thou Tempter! how dare thou (Pitiful Tantivee!) grow thus
Insolent and Troublesome here? May I not be Master of mine own, nor quiet in my
own House for these Beggarly and Cowardly Tories and Tantivees? Boy! bring me
hither my Old Fox again; I Will once more wear it by my side, rather than thus be
pestered and disturbed with Slaves, that cannot look in a Glass, but they must
see in their Foreheads those Scarrs, which are the Witnesses as well as
Trophyes of Whiggish Valor and his Unconquered Sword? Tory has had a soft
place in his Head ever since.


Tant. Dear Whigg! Pry'thee, a few more of your Perilous Truths.


Whig. Not now, I profess, you grow Trouble some: Have you no more wit? Do you
know who you speak to, Catchpole! Begone, I say, Ha?


FINIS.
London, Printed for E. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, Anno Dom. 1682.


