THE PRIVILEGE OF THE Saints on Earth, BEYOND Those in HEAVEN, In respect of
Gifts and Graces exercised, Duties and Services performed, sufferings and
Trials undergone by them, which the Glorified are not capable of.

BEING The Sum of a Discourse upon a part of Hezekiah, Song of Thanksgiving
after his Recovery from his Sickness.

To which is added, A short Discourse of the Nature and (...) of the
Gospel-day, reaching from the Destruction of the Old, to the (...) of the New
Jerusalem out of (...).

By WILLIAM HOOK, Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Wilkins, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Exchange-Alley, next door to the Exchange-Coffee-House, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1673.

Courteous Reader,
Thou art desired to correct with thy Pen these following Errata's.

PAge 9. Line 15. for imparted, read imported. P. 11. in the Margin, r. Ephesians. 3.
last. P. 13. l. 6. f. hence, r. here. P. 16. l. 10. for Spiritual, r. special.
P. 22. in the Margin, r. Job 7. 2. P. 23. l. 10. for the, r. this. P. 35. l.
13. blot out yet. P. 51. l. 28. r. bridled. P. 53. in the Margin, r. Luke 8.
48. Luke 7. 50. P. 65. l. 9. for the, r. your. P. 91. l. 23, 24. for
Argumentations, r. Augmentations. P. 92. l. 8. for for, r. so. P. 92. l. last,
for were not the, r. were it not for the. P. 95. l. 20. f. from plain to Plain,
r. from Place to Place. P. 101. l. 22, for lon, r. long.

In the second Sermon in the Epistle, for go, r. therefore.

TO THE READER.
THe greatest and highest Honor of the reasonable Creature is to serve him,
who is the best Good, and last End. Herein do we communicate with Angels, whose
glory it is that they are Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1 14.
always beholding the face of God our Father for this very purpose. How
diligent then should we be to lay hold on, and to improve all opportunities of
service, seeing our time is so short, our work so great, and our salvation
nearer than when we first believed? The Son of God has given us a glorious
pattern herein, John 9. 4.
I must work the work of him that has sent me, etc. Christ Jesus our Master
improved all opportunities, went up and down doing good, filling all places
where he came with the favor of his Doctrine and Miracles, because he knew his
time was short, and the recompense of reward at hand. The serious thoughts
hereof would exceedingly spur us to a holy diligence, Heb. 12. 2.
especially considering that Heaven is a place not of work but reward, where
the Saints will be divested of serving and honoring God in many of these ways,
wherein now (through grace) they are enabled to bring much glory to his Name.
Many Graces, Duties, Gifts have here their place, while we are Viatores, but
shall have no room when we come to be Comprehensores.

And this is the design of the worthy Author in this little Tract: viz. to set
before thee the great opportunities thou have of service to God, while thou art
on this side Heaven, beyond what are to be enjoyed there. Were this thoroughly
weighed, how would Holiness be promoted, Saints thrive, Families flourish,
Churches revive? we should not so passionately desire death merely to be rid of
all sufferings, but should prize life, if with it Christ Jesus might be
magnified. It is glorious work that God calls his Saints to 'ere they get to
Heaven. Is not suffering for Christ, glorious work? is not the exercise of
Faith, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Hope, and Patience, glorious work? To do good, and to communicate both to the
bodily and spiritual necessities of Saints and others, is not this glorious
work? In a word, to propagate pure Religion, and undefiled, to the generations
to come, is not this glorious work? Why, herein are the Saints on Earth
privileged beyond those in Heaven, where there is no room for the exercise of
these Graces, and Duties.

Oh! who would not pray that he might live to do God service? spin not out
precious time unprofitably. Pray that thou may be counted worthy of this
calling (which is indeed a high calling) and fulfill all the good pleasure of
his Goodness, and the work of Faith, Hope, and Patience, with power, that the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according
to the grace of our God, 2 These. 1. 11, 12.
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Isaiah 38 18, 19. For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate
thee: They that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth.

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: The Father to
the Children shall make known thy Truth.


THe words are a part of Hezekiah's thanksgiving for his recovery from his
sickness (beginning at the ninth verse.) This good King was not simply afraid
of Death, as appears, ver. 3d. But

First, He had then no Son to succeed Manasseh was not then born) and he was
sollicitous for a Successor, and the fulfilling of God's Promise to David,
which we have four times expressed, ( viz. 2 Samuel 7. 12, 13, 16. 1 King. 8. 25.
Psalm. 89. 28, 29. and 132. 12. In all which places we find this Promise to
David, that there should not fail a Man of his Seed, to sit upon the Throne of
Israel, so that his Children took heed to their ways, to walk before the Lord
in truth, as David their Father had done. Here was a Promise with a Condition.
And hence it is, I suppose, that Hezekiah in his Prayer ( verse. 3d) makes
mention of his fulfilling that Condition, viz. That David's Children must take
heed to their way, (if they desired to sit upon his Throne) that they walk
before him, as David had done. For, says Hezekiah, Remember now, O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. As much as to say, Lord! I hope
thou will not cut me off, and leave the Kingdom without an Heir of the Seed of
David, seeing thou did promise him that thou would not; provided that his
Children took heed to their way, that they walked before him as David did. And,
through thy Grace, I have so walked in my measure, and therefore, I hope, thou will not take me away, who have performed the Condition. So that Hezekiah
(though a very good Man) was afraid of Death; yet not simply, but lest the
Kingdom should want an Heir of the Seed of David.

And this that I have said confirms the Opinion of those that say, that
Hezekiah was loath to dye, because then he had no Heir; though that was not all
the reason.

For, Secondly, He was also loath to Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.
If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments: If they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; Then will I visit their transgressions
with the Rod, and their iniquity with Stripes. And he testifies it sometimes in
their death, as he did in the death of the Prophet that came out of Judah, 1
King. 13* 21, 22.
and Prophesied against the Altar it Bethel, who was slain by a Lion for his
disobeying the Word of the Lord.

And Hezekiah was afraid, that God had some controversy with him, and he was
loath to dye in God's displeasure. Peradventure, he was somewhat lifted up with
his miraculous deliverance from the Host of Senacherib, mentioned in the former
Chapter: For God did wonderful things, as you know, to effect that deliverance,
and this sickness was immediately after the destruction of Senacherib's Army;
for that happened in the 39th year of Hezekiahs life, who lived fifteen years
after his recovery from his sickness, which two numbers make the whole number
of Hezekiah's years, which were 54, 2 King. 18. 2. 2 King. 18. 2.
So that this sickness of his fell out presently upon that great deliverance.
And the good Man was not so thankful (perhaps) as he should be, but somewhat
elevated. For this was his weakness after his recovery. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.
His heart was lifted up, and he rendered not again according to the benefit
done to him, for which God was angry with him. What the sin was, I will not
positively determine, only I thus conjecture; but that he apprehended God's
displeasure for his sin, is evident from the words immediately before my Text,
says he, Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. Therefore, it seems, his
sins lay before the face of God, till his recovery, and upon this account he
was loath to dye.

Thirdly, He was loath to dye, as Jehoshaphat's though he left a son behind him;
and of Jehojadah's, though he left a well-educated Nephew behind him. Add
hereunto, that he found the Church in a very deplored condition, when he came
to the Crown. And as for his present Reformation, it had not lasted so long as
his Father's Deformation and Idolatry; and his Reformation had scarce taken
root as yet; therefore he was willing to live longer, and not, as yet, to dye.

Fourthly, That which made him the more unwilling, was the nature of his
Disease, which (by the Remedy, and way of Cure, a lump of Figgs laid for a
Plaster upon the Boil, Ver. 21.) I say, which by the Cure, seems to have been
the Pestilence: And he was not willing to go to Heaven that way; though good
Men may dye of that Disease, and many times have done. But yet a Child of God
would, for several Reasons, willingly decline that way of dying, if it might
stand with the good will and pleasure of God.

Thus you see the Reasons why Hezekiah was loath to dye.

Now then being recovered, and having a lease of his life for 15 years granted
him, he writes down his thanksgiving, as much affected with God's mercy
toward him, verse. 9, etc.

In the Text read unto you, there is,



Secondly, An Assertion of the opportunities Hezekiah has here a special
respect to the Truth and faithfulness of God in his Promise made to David and
his Seed, in the foremtioned Texts of Scripture.

And therefore it is very likely, that Hezekiah made known this Truth and
Faithfulness of God to his son Manasseh, who was twelve years old when Hezekiah
dyed. Though Manasseh (it seems) did little mind it, or made any good use of
it. That Point of Doctrine, which I shall insist upon, is this, That

Doctrine.

There are opportunities of service to be performed to God in this life, which
are not to be enjoyed after death.

Or thus,

The people of God may do that for him in this World, which they cannot do in
Heaven.

David therefore makes an Argument of it in his Prayer, Psalm. 6. 5.
and sad Complaint in his Sickness: For, says he, in death there is no
remembrance of thee; (not but that the Saints in Heaven do remember God, (for
they see him there) but they cannot keep up his memorial any longer among the
living; he goes on) In the Grave who shall give thee thanks? The like we have
in the 30th Psalm, entitled, A Song at the Dedication of the house of David,
viz. after his return (as it is conceived) from his victory over Absalom, who
had dreadfully defiled David's house with Incest, in abusing his Fathers
Concubines; which house therefore David endeavors to purge and cleanse in a
solemn holy manner at his return, 2 Samuel 20. 3.
and to dedicate it anew to God. And in that Psalm he shows, how he cried to
the Lord in the day of his trouble, when Absalom rose up against him, and when
he was afraid of his life, and was loath to dye by the hand of his son; says
he, Psalm. 30. 3.
What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy Truth? And dark deserted Heman makes use of
the same argument, Psalm. 88. 10, 11. Psa. 88. 10, 11.
Will thou show wonders to the dead? and shall the dead arise and praise thee?
Selah. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the Grave? or thy faithfulness
in destruction? Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness
in the land of forgetfulness? says he, Thy people may make known thy wonders
in this life, but not in the Grave.

But then, Quest.
do not the Saints, when they are dead praise the Lord?

Yes; Answ.
But the Psalmist speaks not of that, but of praising God, and declaring his
loving kindness, faithfulness, and righteousness in the land of the living. And
all their service that way is at an end, except by Miracle any be raised from
the dead, as Lazarus and Tabitha were. So Psalm. 115. 17. The dead praise not
the Lord, neither any that go down into silence. And hence says David, I shall
not dye, but live, and declare the works of the Lord, Psalm. 118. 17. Psalm.
118. 17.
As much as to say, there is no declaring of them after death!

But what are those services that may be done here, Quest.
which cannot be done in Heaven, that so we may see the Point in Instances?

They are many; Answ.
and let me begin with these in my Text.

The living, the living, he shall praise He shall praise thee before the
Children of Men in the Land of the living. Now, this is a glorious service,
containing as much as is imparted in the first Petition of the Rule of Prayer,
i. e. Hallowed be thy Name; which, though it be a service done in Heaven, yet
in the presence of glorified Saints only, without any propagation of praise to
the Name of God, for that is the privilege of the Saints while they live in
this world, where they make the Name of God known to them, that knew it not
before. This is the first and highest Petition of all in our prayers, and
therefore of greatest concernment.

Secondly, There is another service in words, The Father to the Children shall
make known thy Truth. And is not this also a most blessed service? for it
contains what is imported in the second Petition in the Rule of Prayer, ( viz.)
Thy Kingdom come. For this is one excellent way of advancing and enlarging the
Kingdom of God in this world, ( viz.) when Parents shall make known the Truth
and Faithfulness of God to their Children. To which purpose consider, Psalm. 78.
2, 7. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and 6. 6, 7. And this is the great service of the Saints upon
Earth, both Ministers and People. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
The things (says Paul to Timothy, 2 Epist. Chapter 2. Ver. 2.) That thou have
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. And this is a service, which cannot be done
in Heaven. For the dead Saints cannot contribute ought to the enlarging of the
Kingdom of Grace in this World; and as for the Kingdom of Glory, there are but
two ways of enlarging that, which are by the departure of the Saints on Earth
to Heaven, and by the Resurrection; in neither of which does God use the
service of the glorified Saints at all.

The care therefore of the choicest Saints has been, not only for the time of
their lives, but for the Generations to come, Deuteronomy. 31. 19.
that they might know what God had done. Josh. 2 last Chap.
The time would fail to tell of Moses, and Joshua, and David, and Paul, 2 Chr.
2. last. Chapter
whose Epistles close with this Doxology and hearty desire of glory to be given
to Christ in the Churches for ever. Ephesians. 5. last.
The truth is, the whole Scripture is a Book of the Acts and Monuments of the
Lord's wonderful works in gathering, and building, protecting, saving, and
doing good to his Church, and that for this end, that the Generations to come
might put their hope and trust in God. And this was the unanimous design of the
Penmen of holy Scripture. This shall be written for the generations to come;
Psalm. 102. 18.
and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

Thirdly, Here in this world the Saints blameless and harmless, Phil. 2. 15.
as the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. And this is a great service also; For

First, Hereby some may come to be converted, 1 Pet. 3. 1. and so the Kingdom
of God is enlarged by this way also. And

Secondly, Many hereby will be convinced, and left without excuse in that great
day. For this is one way whereby the Sains shall judge the world; they shall
judge it exemp^arily, Mat. 12. 42. with 1 Cor. 6. 2.
and (in concurrence with Christ) sententiarilly: Now (I say) this is a
service, which cannot be done in Heaven; where, First, There is no evil person:
Nor Secondly, Any need of examples for the glorified Saints to walk by, who are
all perfect, and under the immediate and sole Government of the Spirit of God.
There is but one example in Heaven, and that is the exemplary cause of the
glorification of our bodies, Phil. 3. 21
viz. The glorified body of Christ. For in this life the Saints conform to the
grace of Christ actively, and at the Resurrection, they conform to his
glorified body passively, as to their pattern.

Relations. Melch. Adam in vit. ejus.
I remember how dying Mr. Rollock was much offended with a Kinsman, for
desiring his Prayers when he should come to Heaven. God will have but one
Intercessor there.

Hence they may do good to the bodies, Matthew. 25. 35, 36.
give drink to the thirsty, lodge the harbourless, clothe the naked, visit the
sick and imprisoned; whereas in Heaven there are no necessities or wants.

Here the Saint, may suffer for Christ and Blessed are the dead which dye in
the Lord, Rev. 14. 3.
from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. And this is such a service, as the very Angels are
in no wise capable of.

So that you see, there are many services which the Saints may do here for
Christ, which they cannot do in Heaven.

Indeed, if they could return to this life again, they might do such works as
these. For when Lazarus was raised from the dead, he entertained Christ again.
John 12. 2
And when Tabitha was raised from the dead, it is very probable that she fell
to her good Works and Alms-deeds again, to her making of Coats and Garments
again for the poor, as she had been wont ( Act. 9. 39.) Acts 9. 39.
But these are rare examples of the returning of the dead Saints to this world
again. Job 7. 9, 10.
For as the Cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the
grave, shall come up no more. He shall return no more to his house, neither
shall his place know him any more.



1 Cor. 13. 12.
Here they walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
and not by sight, as they shall do in Heaven. And Faith is a gift of Grace,
whereby God is much glorified; for it empties and humbles the Heart, and
carries it forth to Christ, and glorifies God in all his Attributes. Whereas
in Heaven the Saints have all in hand, and therefore they live by sight, and
not by Faith. There is but one thing there to come to them (to the completing
of their happiness) and that is, the resurrection of the dead, in the Faith
whereof they live, but yet this Faith is of another nature, than that which
justifies and saves in this life.

Secondly, It follows hence, That Romans 8. 24
For Hope (that is, the thing hoped for) that is seen, is not Hope: for what a
man sees, why does he yet hope for? There is no hope in Heaven (the Fathers to
the Children cannot hope for thy Truth, as Hezekiah here says) except it be of
the Resurrection, Psalm. 16. 9.
whereof the Saints have a most joyful expectation. They are glad, and rejoice,
in that their flesh does rest in hope. Not that their flesh does hope, but that
rests, and their Souls hope for its rising again.

Accordingly it follows, That here These. 1. 3.) called there the patience of
hope; For if, Romans 8. 25
we hope for that which we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. There
is nothing in Heaven to put our patience to it.

Cor. 13. last. 1 Cor. 13. last.
Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three; but the greatest of these
is Charity. Ver. 8.
Because Charity (i. e. Love) never fails; (ver. 8.) that is Heavens grace in
a Spiritual manner. But yet, notwithstanding, even Love it self has a larger
Object here in this world, than in Heaven. For there is a Love here, which
cannot be exercised there. And that is,

To love our enemies, which is the Command of the Gospel, Mat. 5. 44.
and a great Duty, and was one of the last Acts of Christ upon the Cross, Luke
23. 34. And the very last Act of Stephen the Protomartyr, who was never like to
act it more, Act. 7. last.. Lord, says he, lay not this sin to their charge.

Tit. 3. 2, 3.
and show it in your desires and endeavors for their conversion.

there is no room for this Love.

And as these gifts of Grace forementioned 1 Cor. 13. 8.
For whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail; or, whether there be
Tongues, they shall cease; or whether there be knowledge (that is imperfect,
mediate, and the communication of it to others) it shall vanish away. And yet
Prophesying is much to God's glory. 1 Co. 14. 3.
For, He that Prophesies, speaks unto men to Edification, Exhortation,
Consolation. Ver. 5.
And Tongues do also edify. So likewise for knowledge.

So that put all this together, and there is much to be done here, whereby God
may be glorified, and men edified and benefited, which cannot be done in heaven.

And thus you see the Point made good in several Instances, That there are
opportunities of service to be performed to the Lord in this life, which are
not to be enjoyed after death.

Quest.

But if it be thus; why have some of the Saints mentioned in Scripture desired
to dye?

Answer.

Some of the Saints have done ill in so doing, but others upon good ground.

First, Some of them have not done well in desiring death, for they have
passionately desired it, and to their own loss, if God should have answered
their desires herein. For instance. 1. Moses, he was the meekest Man upon the
Earth, yet he seems to be in a passion, when he said, If thou deal thus with
me, kill me, Numb. 11. 15.
I pray thee, out of hand. Why? was there no remedy, but God must kill him, and
presently too, if the burden of the people lay a little longer upon him? This
was a passionate expression and desire of death. And had he died there
presently, he had incurred a double loss (to say no more in it) 1. He had been
cut short of the opportunity of doing that eminent service in conducting the
people through the Wilderness. For he lived 38 years longer, and did much for
God and his people during that time. 2. If he had died then out of hand, he had
not dyed, and been buried so honorably, Deuteronomy. 34.
as he was afterward upon Mount Nebo, even by God's hand.

2. And though Job was a patient Man, yet he passionately desired death. Oh!
Job 6. 8, 9.
says he, that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing
that I long for: Even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let
loose his hand, and cut me off. Whereas God meant Job better than so, ( viz.)
to turn his Captivity, and to give him twice as much as he had lost, and the
full number of his former Children, and so, to double their number also;
showing him, that his first number was not last. Moreover, he shall yet live
140 years longer to serve and honor God in this world. Again,

3. Elijah was a Man subject to like passions as we are, and being persecuted
by Jezebel, he requested for himself that he might dye, 1 King. 89. 4.
and he said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am not better
than my Fathers. Whereas God intended better for him, ( viz.) that he should
live yet longer, and finish his Testimony against Ahab, Jezebel, and Ahaziah,
and then be carried triumphantly to Heaven in a fiery Chariot. So

4. Jonah would needs dye in a fret, Oh Lord, Jonah 4. 3.
says he, Take I beseech thee, my life from me, for it is better for me to
dye, than to live. No, Jonah was not in case to dye at present, God would not
take him at his word, but he must live yet longer and repent.



1. Just and devout Simeon, when he had taken up Christ in his arms, he blessed
God, Luke 2, 29.
and said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; and the ground of
this request lies in the words following -- according to thy Word. His Prayer,
it seems, was grounded upon a word from God. For as God had told him, Ver. 26.
that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ; so he had
promised him, that then he should dye, and so his Prayer was grounded upon a
Promise.

2. And as for Paul, He desired to depart, and to be with Christ, which (says
he) is far better, i. e. for me. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you. And having this confidence, Phil. 1. 23, 24.
I know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your furtherance and
joy of Faith. So that 1. When he desired to dye, he looked upon the benefit
thereof abstractedly, and absolutely, but not comparatively. 2. When he looked
upon it on comparison with the benefits of life, he was not so positive in the
desire of death, but having done great service, and, that too, a long time for
Jesus Christ (for then he was Paul the aged, Philem. ver. 9.) and being then in
prison at Rome, he hung for a time in Aequilibrio, midway between two, till at
last the Scale turns to a desire to live, further to serve Jesus Christ, and
his Church and people. For though Paul was then in prison, yet he did very much
good there, which had been lost, had he then gone to Heaven. Phil. 1. 12.
For his bonds furthered the Gospel. ver. 13.
And they strengthened the Brethren, and wrought upon several in Caesar's Palace.
And there be converted Onesimus; and there he wrote his Epistles to the
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and the second Epistle to
Timothy and that to Philemon. In all which are many excellent Points of diverse
kinds, which greatly conduce to the Churches edification: And better a thousand
times that Paul had been kept 20 years out of Heaven, than that the Church
should have wanted these Epistles.

But is it not lawful then in any case, Quest.
to desire to dye?

Yes; Answ.
with subjection to God's will, in case especially there are appearances that a
Man's work is at an end. For a Child of God may live so long, that his
faculties may be impaired, his strength decayed, his spirits spent, and he may
be full of pain too, and so shut up, that he can do little good. And as Job
says, Job 2. 2.
A servant that has wrought hard all the day, and is weary, earnestly desires
the shadow. And so it is with a Child of God in this case. The weary body
naturally desires the bed. And sometimes God makes a clear discovery to some
of his servants, that their work is at an end. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
Thus it was with Paul, I am ready to be offered up, and the time of my
departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the Faith. And it is with gracious Souls; as with the Fruit of the
Tree, which when it is ripe, drops naturally from it. There is a Spiritual
instinct, inclining the Soul of a Believer Heavenward, when the Fruit is ripe:
So that they come to their graves, as a ripe Shock of Corn comes in its
season. And a desire to dye in such a case is still the better, when it
proceeds from a longing to be freed from sin, and a desire to be with Christ,
Phil. 1. 23.

Application.
If there are opportunities of service to be performed to God in this life,
which are not to be enjoyed after death; and, that the Saints may do that for
God in the world, which they cannot do in Heaven; we are then 1. Informed,
That Heaven is the place of the Saints Rev. 14. 13.
they cease from their labors, and their works do follow them. They do not
follow the Saints, as if the Saints were there to follow their work, but they
follow them to be rewarded and crowned. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
For their course is now finished, their race is run, and henceforth is laid up
for them a Crown of Righteousness. Heaven therefore is not their working-place,
but their resting place; they rest from their labors; there is much to be
received there, but nothing to be done there, but to live in the high praises
of God and the Lamb to Eternity.

Job 14. 14.
If a Man dye, shall he live again? No, says Hezekiah (ver. 11.) I said in the
cutting off of my days, I shall go to the Gates of the Grave; I shall nor see
the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the living, I shall behold Man no more
with the inhabitants of the world. That is, I shall no more appear before the
Lord in his Sanctuary, to perform any more service there to him.

As if he should say, I shall see the Lord in Heaven, but I shall see him and
serve no more in the Land of the living, which I desire to do. For when Isaiah
brought him the welcome tidings of his recovery, one of first things that he
says to him is, what is the sign that I shall go up to the House of the Lord?
Ver. last.
For a King to go to the House of the Lord, and to lead the way to the Worship
of God, was a very glorious service. He looked upon it as a very great mercy,
to see and serve the Lord in the Land of the living; but he thought he should
see him so no more, nor behold Man any more with the inhabitants of the world;
and therefore he should return no more.

Men have but one Soul, and but one opportunity to act for the eternal
salvation of it; Job 7. 8, 9, 10.
when they are dead, the Eye that has seen them, shall see them no more, and
he that goes down to the Grave, shall come up no more.

And therefore it was not Samuel risen from the dead, 1 Samuel 28. Chap.
but the Devil that appeared and spoke to Saul in the house of the Witch at
Endor. For the appearance ascended out of the Earth in the house of the Woman,
which was in the Tribe of Issachar, 1 Samuel 25. 1.
whereas Samuel was buried at his house at Ramah, which was in the Tribe of
Benjamin. Besides, he was buried in his Grave-clothes, whereas he is described
rising in his Mantle. And he was (as all the Saints are after death) at rest;
where^s he that is there called Samuel says to Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 15.
Wherefore have thou disquieted me to bring me up? And it is not in the power
of all the Devils in Hell to disquiet the Saints after death. Other Reasons I
might urge, but these may suffice.

The dead return not again; as David said of his Child, 2 Samuel 12. 23.
when dead, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. Opportunity is a
part of time, and has nothing to do in Eternity. Neither is there any regress
or returning, but by miracle from the Land of forgetfulness.

2. Instructed in matter of Reproof,


So teach us (says Moses) to number our days, Psalm. 90. 12
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. And surely this is one special way of
numbering our days; to know how long we have lived in serving our Generation,
and what time we have spent that way: and he never applied his Heart to Wisdom,
who has not learned so to number his days.

There are but two lives, that can be lived in this world, viz. a Natural, and
a Spiritual; and all live the first, but few the second: whereas it is our
wisdom to live spiritually; and so to live, is to live, First, for the
Generations that succeed us, so as Hezekiah here desired to live. Secondly, To
live for Eternity. To live only a natural life; is for Brutes, and not for Men.

And therefore you that are entered into years, and have done but little, are
justly reprehended, as having lived more like Fools than wise Men.

Secondly, What shall we say to

Thirdly, But (which is worse) some Jehoram, 2 Chr. 21. last.
without being desired. 2 Chr. 28. last.
And such another was Hezekiah's Father, even that King Ahaz, who when he died,
was buried like Jehoram, and not brought into the Sepulchers of the Kings of
Israel. And such another was that persecutor Jehoiakim, for whom they lamented
not, saying, Jer. 22. 18, ^^.
Ah Lord, or ah his glory. Oh! these are to be exploded out of the Land of the
living; Job. 27. last
For Men shall clap their hands at them, and hiss them out of the world; he
never did good work while, he lived, and he shall have never a good word when
he dies. So much for Reprehension.

This Point instructs us in matter of Humiliation. What has been said, should
humble even the very best of God's people, in that they have done no more
service for Jesus Christ in their Generation. You have (possibly) done
something for him, but you might have done more: You might have praised him
more, declared the Truth more to your Children; you might have projected and
designed more for the glory of God, and the good of Posterity; you might have
devised liberal things, and lived more exemplarily, been more zealous of good
works, more edifying in your conversation; you might have adventured more for
Christ; and whereas you have gained two Talents for him, you might have gained
five. Truly (for my part) I might have done more, and it humbles me that I
have done so little. I remember it is said of Doctor Usher in the Narrative of
his Life and Death, that when he was a dying, he was humbled for his omissions.
And indeed they are great sins, and the judgment of Christ, at his appearing,
will pass much upon good works on the one side, Mat. 25. 35 -- end.
and omissions of them on the other. And therefore we had need to sit in
judgment upon our selves for our omissions before we dye. For it is not enough
to do good sometimes, but we should be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 18. ^. 1
and prepared unto every good work, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 21.
giving a portion to seven, and also to eight, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
going about as Christ did, doing good. And he that is thus exercised, Eccl.
11. 1.
is fit to live, and fit to dye. Act. 10. 38.


But let us be humbled this day for our neglects. For have not our hearts
sometimes checked us, upon reviews of the loss of our opportunities to do such
or such a good work? Says a gracious and tender heart, when he is come from
such a person, or such a place, or such a company, or occasion; Alas! what have
I omitted? I might have put in such a word for Jesus Christ, I might have
reproved such a sin, or given such or such counsel, or stopped such a vain
discourse, or given such an example, or moved for such a good work, etc.

Alas! who knows the errors of his life this way? and therefore this
consideration calls for deep Humiliation, and self-judging at this time.

3. Exhorted.
We are here Exhorted, and the Point affords Exhortation several ways.

your Bodies and Souls abide here together.

Whatsoever therefore thy hand finds to do, Eccles. 9. 10.
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the Grave whither thou go.

And suppose you have done well hitherto, like a good and faithful servant, be
not yet weary of well doing, but up and be doing still, Gal. 6. 9.
and in due time you shall reap, if you faint not. What a deal of good had
Hezekiah done, before he fell into this sickness? He destroyed the Monuments of
Idolatry, 2 King. 16. 3, 4, 5.
set up a notable Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 29, 30, and 31 Chapters.
brought back the Tribes of Israel to the Lord God of their Fathers. And yet
you see here, he is willing to live longer to do more. So Peter had done much
good in his time; Acts 2d.
you know he converted about three thousand Souls at the beginning of his
Ministry, Acts 3d, v. -- 44.
he had a most happy hansel, Acts 2d. And yet he takes another opportunity, and
sped well. And after this, he passes through all quarters, and came at last to
Lydda, Acts 9th.
and Saron, and Joppa, Acts 10th.
and you know what good he did in the house of Cornelius, etc. At length he
becomes old, 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15.
and then he writes to the Saints; For, says he, I think it meet, as long as I
am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance, knowing
that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ
has showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor that you may be able after my
decease, to have these things always in remembrance.

First, says he, I am aware of death approaching.

Secondly, I will therefore do all the good I am able, both with my Tongue and
Pen.

Thirdly, I will endeavor that the good I do may live when I am dead; that you
may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.

Even thus we should endeavor to live in this world after our departure.
Survive your Funerals, and outlive your deaths. For it is not enough that we
shall then live in Heaven, but we should endeavor to be doing of that good
while we live, that may make us live on Earth; even when we are dead. And in
this way the memory of the Just shall be blessed, Prove. 10. 7.
and the Righteous had in everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112. 6.
It is the Saints happiness to have Glory, and Honor, and Immortality in
Heaven; but it is much to the glory and honor of God for the Saints to be
immortalized on Earth, and to live in their good Examples, good Counsels, good
Names, and good Works, when their Souls are shining in Heaven. Particularly,

1. Dilate and diffuse the praises of God, and make his Name glorious to the
utmost of your power. And let this be often sounding in your ears. The living,
Psalm. 149. 6.
the living he shall praise thee. Speak much, and live much to his praise. Let
the high praises of God be in your mouths. (...) Hebr.
Ainsworth, and the Dutch Interpreters render it, Let the exaltations of God be
in your throat, and it suits with the Original, (...). Sept.
as also with the Translation of the 70.

The Exaltations, i. e. the lifting up of God in his Name, Attributes, Precept,
Promises, Threatenings, Providence, etc. let them be in your throats, i. e.
exalt your voices in exalting these praises, cry with the throat, Isa. 58. 1.
and lift up your voices like Trumpets. And this argues, that God's praises
comes from your hearts, when they are thus sounded, as it were from your
throats. And this work exalts you, and that as high as the Heavens, for it is
the very service of Heaven, only it is a greater service, seeing the
Proclamation of God's praises upon Earth, tends to the propagation of them, so
as it is not in Heaven.

And truly, he that is good at this, is good indeed. He is no Hypocritie; for
he is a self-denying man, and one that loves God far above himself, one that
lives in God, and delights in him, and gives him the highest place in his
heart. Do what you can therefore this way, and it will redound to a singular
evidence of your sincerity.

2. Endeavor also the Propagation of Christ's Kingdom; pray for it, and
according to your capacity promove it.

You may remember what is written, Psalm. 72. 15. Psalm. 72. 15
where it is said of Solomon in the Type, and of Christ in the Truth, He shall
live, and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba, Prayer also shall be made
for him, and daily shall he be praised. Why? must we pray for Jesus Christ?
yes, by all means. Of all that we pray for, we must be sure to pray for Jesus
Christ, but not considered personally, but Mystically. You know how the people,
and the children prayed for Christ, when they cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son
of David; Mat. 21. 9.
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest. The
words are taken out of the 11th Psalm. ver. 25, 26. They cried, saying, Hosanna,
that is, Save, I beseech thee. It is as much as, God save the King, send now
prosperity. It is meant especially of Christ as King, Christ and his Kingdom.
And we never say, Thy Kingdom come, but thus we pray for Christ, who prays
for us every day, or else we should be in a very sad case.

And truly, if the Kingdom of Christ be within us, we shall be very sollicitous
and active for the Kingdom of Christ without us, which Kingdom of his this day
is in a very low condition, as to the professed power and purity of the Gospel.
And yet if we can do little or nothing else, yet we may pray for the Kingdom of
Christ. Let us therefore lay the state thereof to heart this day. How often do
the Saints under the Old Testament, pray for the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
under the New? Psalm. 67. 1, 2.
say they, God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine
upon us; That thy way may be known upon Earth, thy saving health among all
Nations, etc.

Mark ye, That singular blessing, which God commanded Aaron and his Sons to
pronounce upon the people of Israel, Numb. 6. 24. 25.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; The Lord make his face to shine upon thee,
and be gracious unto thee. The godly in David's time turned it into prayer for
the enlarging of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus under the Gospel, accounting it
a great blessing to themselves, to have it enlarged by the accession of the
Gentiles; though (yet) it was to be accomplished in the rejection of the Jews;
but it is (as if we should say) Let God do what he pleases with a Nation, so
that his Gospel may be propagated, and his Kingdom enlarged in the World. If
God's way may be known upon Earth, and his saving health among all other
Nations, We should account that the Lord is merciful to us, and blesses us,
and causes his face to shine upon us; We should love the Kingdom of Christ
above all the Kingdoms in the World, Isa. 2, 2.
and That it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the
Lords house shall be established upon the top of the Mountains, and exalted
above the Hills, and that all Nations shall flow unto it. You know what great
heaviness and continual sorrow of heart Paul had for his Brethren the Jews,
Romans 9. 2, 3.
and kinsmen according to the flesh; and yet he magnified his Office, in that
he was the Apostle of the Gentiles. Romans 11. 13.
That is, he accounted it to be a glorious Office to be a Preacher to the
Gentiles. So that, Le^ the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus come, whatsoever become of
any Kingdom, or of all the Kingdoms under Heaven.

Thirdly, Live exemplarily, that your Phil, 3. 17.
Thus Paul lived, Brethren, says he, be followers together of me, and mark
them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample. And he denied himself, to
make himself an example to others. You know, says he, how ye ought to follow
us (viz. in orderly walking in your particular Callings) for we behaved not our
selves disorderly among you, 2 These. 3. 7, 8, 9.
neither did we eat any man's bread for naught; but wrought with labor and
travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you. Not
because we have not power ( that is, night to be maintained at your charge) but
to make our selves an ensample unto you, 1 Cor. 9, 4. -- 16. with 11. 1.
to follow us. And thus also he did unto the Corinthians. For thus did Christ
deny himself to give us an example, Joh. 13. 14, 15. If I then your Lord and
Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's feet. For I
have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. Consider
also, 2 Cor. 8. 9.
2 Cor. 8. 9. For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be rich. And when Paul took his leave of the Elders of Ephesus, who were never
like to see his face more, he leaves his example with them; I have, ( says he)
coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; Yea, you your selves know, that
these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me;
Acts 20. 33, 34, 35.
I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to support the
weak. -- The like did Samuel. Thus also David left his example behind him, 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3.
for God set him up for a pattern to all succeeding Kings in Israel, whose Life
and Reign God therefore measures by their care to follow him, as you may read
frequently in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles. For of such and such Kings
it is said, They walked in the ways of David; and of others, that they did not
so walk. Examples are very prevalent in utramque partem, either one way or
the other, either for good or evil.

And therefore so walk according to God, that others may follow you, seeing
your example will live whilst you live, yea, and when you are dead too. For it
will be said, such a one lived thus, and walked thus, and thus he behaved
himself in his family, and thus in his fellowship with the Saints, and thus in
his dealings with his neighbors, and with all men; and thus he carried it
under his trials and oppositions in an evil day, and this and that was the Rule
he walked by. For he was a wise Man, or she was a wise Woman, and very
conscientious, and tenderhearted, and sincere, and active, and stirring, and
zealous for Jesus Christ, and fearful to give the least offense, and ready to
every good work, and pitiful to the poor Saints, his Heart, and Purse, and
House were open for Jesus Christ. And he was a just and peaceable Man, and one
that could govern his Spirit, and Tongue, and that could keep down his
passions, and one that was a mortified person, dead to the world, and the
things thereof, etc. Now, what a blessed example is this? 2 Cor. 8. 23.
and what a glorious report? what an edifying pattern, and for the glory of God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ? Yea, this example will preach your funeral Sermon,
(you need no other to do it) and it will keep you alive when you are dead, and
immortalize you upon Earth, make you of blessed memory indeed, and to be had
with the righteous in everlasting remembrance; when the names of others shall
be written in the Earth, which will soon be obliterated, and quite blotted out;
and when it shall be said of them as of Hezekiah's Father, by way of reproach,
This is that King Ahaz. And such a good example many have left behind them, and
we are ever and anon speaking of such as these are, whose names are as a
precious Ointment, and which were embalmed when they dyed, with the Graces,
Virtues, and good Works of their Lives, that still they send forth a sweet
savor to surviving posterity. And thus was that good Woman's name embalmed, who
poured out a very precious Ointment on the Head of Christ against his burial.
Verily, says Christ, Mat. 26. 13
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also
this, that this Woman has done, be told for a memorial of her. So that this
good Woman is still alive in her memory, and she (...) thus lived these 1600
years and more, and shall never dye so long as the world stands. Acts. 36.
And such another was Tabitha. And the like I may say of many more, whose names
are recorded in holy Writ, who obtained a good report, Heb. 11. 2, 4.
and though they are now dead, yet still they both speak, and are spoken of.

Brethren, will ye think upon these things; And will ye now study and endeavor
to live exemplarily, and to live lives for posterity, and so to live converting
lives, and convincing, and edifying lives; yea, and to live the lives of such,
as must be the world's Judges? And will it not be greatly to the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to your Eternal Consolation, to hear of your lives and
examples in that great day of Christ's appearance, when your examples shall
have their resurrection as well as your bodies, when Christ shall produce your
paterns before all the world, and convince and judge the ungodly world by them?
As if he should say to those on his left hand, who lived in your days, and saw
your examples; Lo, do you see these Men and Women on my right hand, who lived
thus and thus in your sight, and gave you a blesse^ example, which either you
censured, or were unwilling to follow; they lived and conversed in direct
opposition to you; they lived so and so, when you did thus and thus: Therefore
they shall be your Judges.

Methinks I cannot speak enough of this Subject, which is of very great moment,
viz. the transmission and recommendation of paterns to posterity, as one
grieved, that I can see no more of it, but rather such a common and ordinary
kind of walking, as has little or nothing of singularity in it.

Alas! How few, that profess the fear of God this day, are writing of Copies
for posterity to walk by? And where is singularity of life to be seen? Yea, how
many are there among the Professors of the Gospel, by whose failings we may
learn more than by their Virtues? and this I speak to my grief; ^^t. 5. 16.
Oh, let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Jesus Christ there speaks of the light
of good works and good examples, which are visible to standers-by, and such as
do occasion them to glorify our Heavenly Father.

And know thus much also, That Men live much by example, either on the one side
or other. And where good examples are given, God expects that others should
follow them, and that not only the examples of the living, but of the Such are
often reco^^^^ded, Heb. 12. 1.
dead also, For what says the Apostle? Remember them which have the rule over
you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, Jam. 5. 10.
considering the end of their conversation. Heb. 13. 7.
The Apostle there speaks of such as had been their Guides, but were now
dead; (...).
for the words in the Original are not, remember them: that have the rule over
you, but, remember your Rulers, i. e. Ministers of the Gospel, who are now with
the Lord. And he exhorts the Hebrews not to forget their Faith, and holy lives,
who had no other end in their conversations and good examples, but God's Glory,
and the Salvation of them that beheld them.

But I must pass from this Particular, though somewhat loath to leave it, and
should much rejoice, if what I have said of it, may take place in all your
hearts and lives.

Live exemplarily, that your paterns may outlive you, and edify others when
you are dead. And this is a work which cannot be done in Heaven. And take heed
of scandals and visible infirmities, which edify beholders to ruin. For there
is a sinful mischievous edification, 1 Cor. 8. 10.
of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8. 10. For if any Man see thee, which
have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple: Shall not the Conscience of
him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to Idols?
The word rendered, (...).
Emboldened, is Edified in the Original. You may so live in your Examples, that
you may edify and teach beholders to sin in following them, as Jeroboam the
son of Nebat did, who made Israel to sin. And many that profess to the Gospel,
do so live and walk, the Consideration whereof is very sad and miserable. O
beware of giving such examples, for they will diminish your glory in Heaven, if
you shall be so happy, at least, as to arrive there. But so much for this 3d
Particular.

(another service peculiar to the Saints on Earth, who cannot speak a word for
Christ in Heaven.) And many such seasons are providentially administered to us,
viz. sometimes of reproving sin, both in such as fear God, and such as fear him
not. In the Scriptures you find the Saints reproving one another; Exodus 32. 21.
Moses reproves Aaron, and Nathan David, and Hanani Asa, 2 Samuel 12.
and his son Jehu Jehoshaphat, and Paul Peter, 1 Chronicles. 16. -- 19. 2
and one private Brother another. Gal. 2. 11.
And how often also do the Saints in Scripture reprove the wicked and ungodly?
Lev. 19. 17.
I need not give you Instances for that. Mat. 18. 15
It is not enough that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11.
but we must also reprove them. We must appear for Christ, his Truth, his
Rules, and Glory; or where is our love to him? Sometimes you shall hear
cursing, and swearing in your presence, sometimes reproaching, slandering,
flithiness, foolish talking, and sinful jesting; sometimes you shall see
Covetousness, Pride, Passion, Anger, and uncomely Language, and sometimes
inordinate affections, and sometimes gross omissions of duty either to God or
Man. Here now are opportunities of doing a service for Christ, and of appearing
and witnessing for him, so as you cannot do hereafter in glory. In such cases
therefore consider your duty, and what the Lord requires of you, who will take
it very ill, if you have never a Tongue for him. And do not say, I am loath, or
I am afraid to speak, and it will be ill taken, or I shall do no good by
testifying, or I shall be accounted a busie-body; but attend your duty, and
leave the event to God; only beg Wisdom, which is profitable to direct: And
however a Reproof take, or speed, yet you have done a better service for
Christ, than any Saint in Heaven can do. I know, indeed, that such testimonies
for Christ are soldom well taken, but that arises from the pride of Man, and
however, that must not hinder your duty, for I am sure, that the withholding
such testimonies, when you are called to give them, is very ill taken by
Christ; and if he take them well, let proud spirits take them as ill as they
please.

The like I may say as to the opposing of Error and Heresies, according to your
capacities, and of informing and instructing the ignorant, when a season is
offered, and of warning the unruly, etc. And you know not, but you may do much
good in such cases, and your work may live when you are dead; however your
rewerd is with the Lord, for whom you have performed this service.

There are other good and gracious 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Here we may, yea must be trading one with another, Jam 5.. 16.
viz. Prayers for Prayers, Ministers with people, and people with their
Ministers, and one Saint with another: Not but that we must pray for others
also.

Oh! what a trade did Paul drive this way? I have sometimes thought, what a
Catalogue of Churches and Saints he had to commend to God in his daily prayers.
How many Churches did he usually pray for? says he to the Church at Rome, Romans
1. 9.
God is my witness, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my
prayers. The like for the Church at Ephesus, Ephesians. 1. 16.
says he, I cease not to give give thanks for you, making mention of you in my
prayers. Col. 1. 3.
So for the Church at Philippi, Phil. 1. 3, 4.
says he, I remember you always in every prayer of mine for you all, making
request with joy. And thus too, he says, he prayed for the Church at Colossus.
1 These. 1. 2, 3.
The very same for the Church at Thessalonica, We give thanks to God always for
you all, making mention of you in our prayers, remembering without ceasing, your
work of Faith, labor of Love, and patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ --
And doubtless, had he written Epistles to all other Churches, we should have
heard of his prayers for them. Neither did he pray only for Churches, but also
for several Saints in particular; For he says, 2 Timothy 1. 3.
that he prayed for Timothy night and day; that is, Morning and Evening, the
whole put for the part. And as for Philemon, Philem. v. 4
he says, That he made mention of him always in his prayers. What a Catalogue
then had Paul of Churches and Saints to recommend to God in his daily prayers?
For it is very likely, that he prayed for many more, than we find in his
Epistles.

And as he prayed for the Churches, so he desires to be remembered in their
prayers. For, as I said, he drove a holy trade this way. He begs the prayers of
the Church at Rome, Romans 15. 30, 31.
in the very Language of a Beggar for an Alms. Now I beseech you, Brethren, for
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me, in your prayers to God for me, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
that I may be delivered. -- So of the Church at Ephesus and of the
Philippians, Phil. 1. 1^
and of the Colossians, Col. 4. 3.
and of the Thessalonians, and of the Hebrews; 1 These. 5. 25.
(for the greatest Apostle had need of the prayers of the meanest Christian)
only he begs no prayers of the Church at Corinth, Heb. 13. 18.
in his first Epistle to them, as looking upon them under many and great
offenses, for which he there reproves them: Nor of the Churches of Galatia,
whom he looked upon as greatly backsliden from the Faith: And he would not
trade with broken men. But here you see, I have given you a notable example for
your imitation in this Point. Pray therefore for one another, and trade
together as you shall see occasion. Yea, you must pray sometimes for such as
never desired it. So likewise, if you do hear of the afflicted condition of
such and such of the Saints, suppose in great poverty, or in prison upon the
account of Christ, and a good Conscience, or in some great distress otherwise,
or under sickness, and in danger of death, look upon your selves as obliged to
put up one Prayer for them. Heb. 13. 3.
You know what the Apostle says, Remember them that are in bonds, as bound
with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the
body. Remember them; How? To sympathize with them, to pray for them, and (to
your power) to help and relieve them.

And think it not enough, that you pray for Saints, but perform the like
service for sinners also; for your prayers may contribute much to their
conversion, as Christ's prayer, Luke 23. 34. did to the conversion of many that
were his enemies, Acts 2. and Stephens prayer (probably) was heard in the
conversion of Paul.

And be sure to pray for Children, and Childrens Children, that they may live
in the sight of God, and bear up his Name in their generations.

Neither rest in particular persons, but pray also for the Churches of Christ
this day, in whom he is so much concerned, as exercising his special Government
in and over them. Pray therefore for their peace and purity, and progress in
holiness, Acts 9. 31.
and that they may be edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 122.
6.
and comfort of the Holy Ghost, be multiplied. And this is to pray for the
peace of Jerusalem. And when you hear of a Church bereft of its Pastor, pray to
the chief Shepherd, to supply the empty room with a meet successor: Numb. 27.
16, 17.
As Moses said in another case, Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all
flesh, set a man over the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which
may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them
in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no Shepherd.

Oh sirs! There is a great service to be done for Christ by prayers, during the
opportunity of our intercession, which dies together with us. What great
things have been, and still are done by prayers? By these was the Church
delivered out of Babylon, Jer. 29. 12, 13.
and Peter out of Prison. By these was Zion built. Act. 12. 5 --
By these is the Gospel upheld, the enemies thereof brilded, and liberty
obtained, Psalm. 102. 16, 17.
etc. And when God will do great and wonderful things, Psalm. 50. 5.
he will gather his praying Saints together, and pour out a mighty Spirit of
prayer upon them.

Sixthly, Comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak. Speak a word in due
season to the weary. 1 These. 5. 14.
For sometimes you shall meet with such as want it, and who walk in darkness
and see no light, and are ready to complain like Heman, Psalm. 88. at large. In
such cases, Strengthen the weak hands, Isa. 35. 3, 4.
and confirm the feeble knees, and say to them that are of a fearful heart, be
strong, fear not. And this (it seems) was Jobs practice. Job 4. 3, 4.
He strengthened the weak, and his words upheld him that was falling. Prove. 12.
4 25.
And if they were in affliction, the moving of his lips assuaged their grief.
For, heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, Isa. 50 4.
but a good word makes it glad. And this savoureth sweetly of the Spirit of
Christ, Mat. 12. 12
who would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. The words
are diminutive, for the meaning is, he would strengthen the bruised Reed, and
blow up the smoking Flax. For he carries his Lambs in his bosom, that is, he
tenders them, and lays them near his heart.

As when the Church was in affliction, and sick of love, Song 2. 5, 7
he stays her with flagons and comforts her with Apples; his left hand is
under her head, and his right hand embraces her. Not his right hand under her
head, and his left hand embraces her; Heb. 4. 15. with 5. 2.
for that is not next the heart of Christ. He is our High Priest, who is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and has compassion on us in just
proportion. He speaks to the heart of the trembling Haemorrhoiss, when she fell
down at his feet, Luke. 740.
and says unto her, Daughter be of good comfort, thy Faith has made thee
whole, Luke 7. 40
go in peace. And he takes part with that brokenhearted sinner that sat behind
him at his feet, weeping, and washing, and wiping, and kissing them, and
rebukes censorious Simon; and says to her, Thy sins are forgiven, thy Faith
has saved thee, go in peace. Oh the sweet Spirit of Christ! Phil. 2. 5.
Let the same mind then be in you which was in him. 2 Cor. 1. ^.
And comfort them that are in trouble, with the comforts wherewith you your
selves have been comforted of God; Romans 12. 10.
And be kindly affectioned one toward another in brotherly love. And when the
case requires it, show your self a son of Consolation.

Job's example; Job 31. 16, -- 21.
says he, I have not withheld the poor from their desire, nor caused the eyes
of the Widow to fail, nor eaten my morsel alone, but the Fatherless has eaten
of it also. Neither have I seen any to perish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering, but his loins have blessed me, and he was warmed with the
fleece of my sheep. The stranger did not lodge in the street, but I opened my
door to the Traveller, etc. and the eyes of our Lord Jesus are much upon such
good works as these; Mat. 25. 35
for he beheld how the people cast their money into the Treasury. Heaven
affords no such objects of your Love and Compassion.

There are indeed many Beggars at Heavens Gates, but never a Beggar within
Heavens doors. And there are many Widows and Fatherless Children here, but
never a Widow nor Orphan there.

Brethren, Luke 6. 36.
Be ye then merciful, (...) your Father in Heaven is merciful. Mat. 5. 7.
And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Deuteronomy. 22. 7.
And it is that which will lengthen out your lives. Mercy, even to the bruit,
creatures, shall prolong your days, much more then to Men, especially to the
household of Faith. Gal. 6. 10.
Lazarus shall rise, Joh. 12. 2.
and have a new lease of his life to entertain Christ again. And so shall
Tabitha to make Coats and Garments for Widows again. Act. 9.
Life is well bestowed upon merciful ones. And life is the time of acting this
Grace, for bowels are shut up in Heaven, and no pity shall be showed to the
nearest perishing relations in the day of Christ. Again, Here you may entertain
Jesus Christ in his Members, and Ministers. Here you may be fellow-helpers to
the Truth and Gospel. 3 John v. 8.
And what says John of that? We ought therefore to receive such, that we might
be fellow-helpers to the Truth.

And, Heb. 13. 2*
says the Apostle, Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some
have entertained Angels unawares. We cannot entertain Angels in Heaven, (for
they have their places there as well as we, and there we are rather entertained
by them, Zech. 3. 7.) but here it has been done, as by Abraham and Lot. And
though we cannot expect to entertain them as they did, yet, (if we could) what
is that to the entertainment of Christ himself? Mat. 24. 40
And if we entertain his Members at our houses, or do any Office of Love for
them, we do it unto Jesus Christ.

If need be, because we are not to cast our selves upon suffering, uncalled. We
must take up, but not make a Cross. But when the providence of God, and his
Word calls us to witness for Christ to the loss of ought that is nearest and
dearest to us, let us remember, that this is one of the services, which
termineth with our lives, and cannot be performed in glory. It has indeed been
our portion hitherto to escape those sufferings, which many of our brethren
have undergone. But have we been sufferers in affection? Have we been prepared
for the Cross? Or, have we not been among the fearful? And have we sympathized
with our Brethren in their sufferings? and have we accounted them happy that
have endured, yea, and their sufferings honorable for the sake, and in the
quarrel of such a Lord and Master? Consider what I say: For it is a very
honorable thing to suffer for Christ, his Gospel, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
and Kingdom. For the Spirit of God, and of glory rests upon all such. And
what are all the sufferings of this present time, Romans 8. 18.
in comparison with the glory which shall be revealed in us? But though we have
escaped what others have undergone, yet we know not what may be our portion, as
to suffering before we dye. Perhaps there is the more behind. Rev. 6. 11.
God has appointed the number of them that shall suffer for Christ. And who
knows what God has appointed for him this way? But what ever it be, Heaven
will put an end to it, where are no sufferings but Crowns, even incorruptible
Crowns of glory. You know what is said of them that came out of great
tribulation, Rev. 7. 9.
they were clothed with white Robes, and had palms in their hands.

Ninthly, Exercise those fruits of the of Knowledge, which is mediate in this
life.

All these are the gifts of the Spirit on this side Heaven, in the exercise
whereof God is much glorified, and others edified, which is that which should
be the scope and aim of us all.

The Fathers to the Children shall make known thy truth. And we may run it
through Fatherhood at large. But

Psalm. 72. 17
His Name (that is, Christ's) shall endure for ever, his Name shall be
continued as long as the Sun. Some render it, His Name shall be continued as a
son continues his Father's name, for the Original Jinnon, or Janin comes of
Nin, (...) son. As if one should say, Filiabitur nomen ejus, or sobolescet
nomen ejus, as Tremellius renders it; That is, Christ shall not only himself
live for ever in his person, but his Name also shall endure for ever, and be
derived to his Children, Isa. 53. 10.
who therefore shall prolong his days, (as Children mete out their Fathers
mortality) in bearing his name, being called Christians, Acts 11. 26
and the sons of God, Heb. 2. 13.
and the Children of Christ. And this shall be (says the Psalmist) before the
Sun, that is, as long as the Sun endures.

Now God will use means to bring this to pass, and what are those means? one
special one is this, The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth. For
how should the Name of Christ be childed from generation to generation, (as
some render it) if care be not taken by Parents to Child Christ's Name
downwards to their Offspring; that his Name may be put upon their Children, by
being not only Christians by Baptism, but by Regeneration. And this is one of
the great works and ends of our lives; for Hezekiah, here mentions, First,
Praising of God, and Secondly, Making known the Truth to our Children; which
was a great Statute in Israel, and obliges us no less then them: says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 78. 2, 3, 4.
I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old, which we
have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us: We will not hide them from
their Children, showing to the generations to come, the praises of the Lord,
and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has done. Here

1. Are such as are worthy of the name of Fathers, viz. who transmit to
posterity the Truths of God contained in the Scripture, so as these here did,
as appears in the sequel of the Psalm. And

2. Here is the only infallible sort of Tradition, viz. that which delivers
to posterity, what God first delivered to the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men
of God, and is now contained in the Scriptures.

3. From these words we are taught, that the godly in every age ought to have
the same care to transmit the Word of Truth to their posterity, as their
Ancestors had to transfer it unto them; and so to pay the debt which they owe
to their godly Ancestors, unto their succeeding Children: for our Children are
here called their Children, verse. 4th. And if you descended not from such
Parents immediately, yet (peradventure) mediately you did. However, this here
is your duty, out of love to God, to Truth, and your Posterity. Mark therefore
what follows in the same Psalm. Ver. 5, 6.
For God established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which
he commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children,
that the generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them unto their Children. You see this
transmitting of the Truth and true Religion to Posterity, is God's love and
Testimony, because it testifies and witnesses for God, and against us, if we
break it. And this Law and Testimony we have several times in Moses. So that
the Law and Testimony is, Exodus 12. 26, 27 -- 13. 14.
to transmit the Truth to Posterity. For God did not deliver the Truth, Deuteronomy.
4. 9. -- 6. 9.
and true Religion to a person or people for the use of themselves alone, Josh.
4. 6, 7.
but for the benefit of their Children also: And he never loved the Truth
truly, who is careless, whether it dye with himself, or outlive him.

Let such Parents and Masters look to it, who have been negligent in
instructing their Children and Families. The handing of Religion from Parents
to Children, and from the Living to the next succeeding Age, is a standing part
of our Generation-work. It is said of David, Act. 13. 36
That after he had served his generation, he fell asleep. And truly, such as
fall asleep before, go to bed before they have done their work, and that is the
way to make them start, as many do, when they are newly setting themselves to
sleep.

Oh sirs! care and pains for the godly being of posterity, is a great and
necessary business. I many times think of the care and endeavor of the nine
Tribes and half, Josh. 22. 22 -- 30.
lest their Children should lose their interest in the God of Israel. To which
end they built the Altar Ed, as they tell the two Tribes and half in their
Apology. Say they, The Lord, God of Gods, The Lord, God of Gods he knows, and
Israel he shall know that we have not done it in rebellion, to turn from
following the Lord, etc. But we have done it rather for fear of this thing,
lest in time to come your Children might speak unto our Children, saying, What
have you to (...) with the Lord God of Israel? For the Lord has made Jordan a
border between us and you; ye Children of Reuben, and Children of Gad, ye have
not part in the Lord: So shall your Children make our Children cease from
fearing the Lord: Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an Altar,
not for burnt-offering, nor for Sacrifice, but that it may be a witness between
us and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the service of the
Lord before him with our Burnt-offerings and our Sacrifices, and with our
Peace Offerings, that your Children might not say to our Children in time to
come, ye have no part in the Lord, etc. Here you see the care and endeavor of
the two Tribes and half for the preservation of the true Religion, and way of
God's Worship among their posterity, which is the Point that I am now pressing.
I beseech you lay it to heart; for I fear that many are guilty in this matter,
and that posterity is like to be little beholding to them. Admit of a few
Expostulations, and consider,

What will your Children and Servants

Lord, our Parents and Masters did not make known the Truth to us; they did not
Catechize and Instruct us; they did not deliver to us the form of sound words,
nor any brief sum of the Articles of Faith, and true Religion; but we lived and
dyed in ignorance, for they had no care of our Souls; and if others dealt thus
with their Children and Servants. Religion it self might have perished, as we
have done. Now would not this be most miserable? And are you willing to be thus
indicted by your Children and Servants in that great day.

Hezekiah here say, The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth? And
is it not expressed as a duty, and a great one too? And does not Hezekiah look
upon this as one of the great works to be attended in this World, without which
it is not worth while to live? Hezekiah indeed had no son at this time, but he
resolves here, that if God shall give him one, he will make known the Truth
and Faithfulness of God to him; for he looks upon it as his duty, when he
says, The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth. And what is the
reason, that many are so ignorant this day, but because they wanted
Family-instruction from Parents and Masters? For it is not enough, that such do
live under the preaching of the Gospel, if they want instruction in the
Families wherein they have lived; the want whereof makes the Ministers Plow to
go so heavily. Oh let not the Children and Servants rise up in judgment against
you, and charge their ignorance and damnation upon the neglect of your duty
toward them.

Thirdly, Consider with whom God

1. He puts his Ministers in trust with it. 1 These. 2. 4
For, says the Apostle, We are allowed of God to be put in trust with the
Gospel. And it is a great trust, and we must be faithful in the discharge of
it; and you must not be offended if we deal plainly with you.

2. He betrusteth all his people with his Gospel and pure Religion, expecting
their discharge of this trust by their utmost endeavors to transmit it to
posterity, as you heard but even now from that Text, Psalm 78. 3, -- 7. For he
does not, as I said, put the trust into your hands for your selves only, that
you should make use of it during your lives, and then dye, and let others that
shall come after you shift for themselves; for this were to be cruel, like the
Ostriches in the Wilderness, who leave their Eggs in the Earth, and warm them
in the dust, forgetting that the Foot may crush them, and the wild Beast break
them; but he expects and requires your faithfulness, and utmost care and
labor to recommend the same Religion to your Children and Servants that live
with you. And what says Solomon? My Father taught me, and said thus and thus
to me, Prove. 4. 4. And my Mother also taught me, and she said so and so to me,
Prove. 31. -- But how have you taught those that are under your care? and what
have you said to them? And where is the Altar Ed, that you have built for them,
as a witness and memorial of the true Religion and Worship of God, which you
have commended to them? No marvel that Religion decays in many Families, when
their Governors have wrapped up their Religion in a Napkin, and professed only
for themselves, and not for them that should come after them. You that are
guilty in this part, will have a sad reckoning to make, when you shall be
called to give an account of your discharge of that trust, which is commended
to you, and have never an Ed to witness your care of conveying the Truth to the
generation to come. Know therefore, that it is your duty, according to this
trust committed to you, to turn and wind your Religion for God's Glory and the
advantage of posterity; which, if you neglect, take beed you be not numbered
among the wicked, and slothful servants, and have your portion with them.

Consider the common care of Parents Psalm. 17. 14
Lands, Psalm. 49. 12
and Goods to such as are to succeed them. They leave their substance to their
Babes, says the Psalmist. And the inward thought is, that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, and they call
their Lands after their own names. That is, they are thoughtful for the
upholding of their Families, and the continuing of their names from one
generation to another. But as for the Gospel, which they profess, and the
Religion which they own, they have little or no care at all. They leave their
Earthly substance to their Children, but that which is the most substantial
thing of all, they leave it not to them; and they leave their names to their
Children, but the Name of God and Christ they leave not, nor have they any
care, that Christ's Name be named upon them, by endeavoring to make them
Christians indeed, according to their duty, Psalm. 45. ult.
as the Psalmist says, I will make thy Name to be remembered in all
generations. Psalm. 72. 17
They care not that his Name should be childed from generation to generation.
Truly it were just with God, that their names should be blotted out from under
Heaven, who love their own names better than Christ's.

Genesis 17. 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed; He expects and requires, that
Parents do not only give up themselves, but their Seed also unto God. As Hannah
said in her prayer, 1 Samuel 1. 11.
If thou will give unto thine Handmaid a Man-child, I will give him unto the
Lord all the days of his life: She spoke indeed of more then an ordinary
devoting him to the Lord, viz. in the way of Nazariteship: But yet she bound
however, to have given him back to the Lord, in and by an ordinary way of
dedication, common to her self with all Parents, who are bound to this duty by
the Law of Nature, and by many commands in the Word of God, which I have
already mentioned. Train up therefore a Child (or Catechize him) in the way he
should go. Prove. 22 6.
So did David deal with Solomon, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
as you have heard, Psalm. 44. 1. -- 78. 3. --
and so Lois with Eunice, and Eunice with Timothy, and so the godly Fathers in
their generations. It was as you have heard, a Testimony and a Law in Israel.
And when you brought your Children to Baptism, you did solemly engage unto this
duty. For the Covenant which gave your Children right to that Ordinance, and
which sealed it to them, strongly obliged you to give them up to God in the use
of all such means as he has appointed.

And therefore you are a Covenant-breaker in the neglect of this duty, which is
the ruin both of many Children and Families, 1 Samuel 2. 23. with 3. 13.
as of Elie's in particular, and yet Eli did reprove his sons, but did not do
his utmost. And this is the reason why many Children of godly Parents prove
lewd and vicious, and their Families at last, lose all power of godliness, if
they grow not loose and profane. For it is with Children, as with the Flowers
in your Gardens, which without care and culture will soon degenerate. Remember
therefore your Covenant, and attend the terms thereof, which concern you in
relation to your posterity. And say, I am not only naturally, but also
federally bound to use all means to train up my Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, and to serve the purpose of God as to their Eternal
Salvation.

For do you think it enough, that you breed them up to live in this world? And
is it enough that you provide Meat, and Drink, and Apparel, Portions, and
Trades, and ways of livelihood for them? Or, that you give them civil
Education, and teach them how to carry themselves as men? will you love their
bodies, and neglect their souls? Do you know the price of your own souls, and
not of theirs too? Or, are not theirs as precious as yours? Or, is it all one
to you where you spend your Eternity, and whether you go to Heaven or Hell? In
the meanwhile, where is your Religion? where your love of God, and Godliness?
Where your Conscience as to your Covenant? Or, what care have you, that
Godliness may flourish in the next generation, who take not the course that it
may thrive in your own Family? Take heed lest you prove to be an Hypocrite at
last. Oh, remember the care of good Manoah, Judge. 13. 12.
when the Angel told him, he should have a son; But, says he, How shall we
order the Child? and what shall we do do unto him?

And seeing you are a Covenanter with God, and have given up your Children to
him, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21.
who has accepted of them, and sealed the Covenant to them; you should now
consider, that they are his Children, his Sons and Daughters, as well as yours,
as he expressly calls them. And he puts them out to you to Board and Breeding,
and you must give an acount to him, how you have bred them up for him.

And what? will ye rob God of his Children, and bestow them upon the world, or
sacrifice them to devoured, and cause them to pass through the fire, as God
challenges those Parents in the aforesaid place of Ezekiel. I mean to be
devoured of that roaring Lion, and (not to pass through the fire, but) to dwell
with devouring fire, and with everlasting burnings. Does not Nature teach Men
to propagate their kind? And does not Grace teach them to propagate the Truth,
and true Religion? without the first, Mankind would perish; without the second,
Religion would soon be extinguished: or, have you more care to uphold the
World, than to propagate the Gospel of Christ's Kingdom? if so, you are no
better than a Man or Woman of this generation.

I perceive, there are many Bills presented for prayers in behalf of ungodly
Children. It is well, if their Parents have not been wanting in their duty
toward them. If they have not, let them not despond as to the success of their
endeavors. I have lived to see the blessed fruits of pious Education, and that
though Children so Educated have gone astray for a while, yet they have been
graciously reduced at the last, and made their Parents joyful. And I think, it
is not usual, that a Father should be a true fearer of the Lord, and one that
conscionably discharges his duty toward his Children, and yet all of them
should prove ungodly, and none of them be converted sooner or later, but perish
in the uncircumcision of their hearts. Perhaps Parents may not always live to
see it, but it is well enough if their Children come to Heaven after them.

I have insisted the more upon this Point, it being the great duty of my Text,
and of such concernment as to generation-service.

The Exhortation reaches Ecclesiastic 1 Cor. 4. 15.
such as are the Ministers of the Gospel. Gal. 4. 19.
For such Fathers also to their Children shall make known the Truth. And that
is the reason why we make known those Truths to you, viz. that we may discharge
our duties to our Children, that you may discharge the like to yours. And every
week, and every Sabbath, and every Sermon we preach can testify, that we are
careful to make known the Truth unto you. Act. 20. 27*
For we have kept back nothing that was profitable for you, nor have shunned to
declare unto you all the Counsel of God. 3 John v. ^
For as John says to Gaius, We have no greater joy, than to hear that our
Children walk in truth, even in the Truth that we make known unto them. And let
all that fear the Lord, bless his Name, that in such a day as this is, there
are yet such Spiritual Fathers, who know the Truth, and labor to make it known
to their Spiritual Children. For the time may come, that you may want them,
when the Truth which is now made known to you by us, may be impugned by them
that shall come after us.



Naaman's servants called him Father, 2 Kings 5. 1. with v. 13.
because he was a great Commander and Prince in his Country, to which also he
had been a Father, having wrought great deliverances for the same. However,
such a Father was the good King in my Text, and he owns himself as such an one
in the very entrance of his Reign, when he was but 25 years old: For says he
to the Priests and Levites (exhorting them to their duty) My sons, 2 Chronicles. 29.
11.
be not now negligent, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before him, to
serve him, and that you should minister unto him, and burn Incense. They were
(themselves) Fathers, for Hezekiah calls them God's Ministers, and so they were
Fathers to Hezekiah; but as he was their King, he was their Father, and they
his sons. They his Spiritual Fathers, he their Political, and so, he was not
only Pater patriae, but also Pater patrum, not only the Father of his Country,
but the Father of his Fathers, i. e. the Political Father of those who were his
Fathers Ecclesiastically. But here is no opportunity of speaking to such
Fathers as these, whose duty it is also to make known the Truth unto their
Children, as Hezekiah did, as appears at large in his Reformation, 2 Chronicles.
29th, 30th, and 31th Chapters.

There are Fathers in age, gravity, and seniority, viz. such as are well
stricken in years. Such are they, 1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 1.
but entreat him as a Father, the younger Men as brethren, the elder Women as
Mothers, the younger as sisters. The Elder here is not a Church Officer, as
some (perhaps) may think. For though it is Presbyteros in the Original, yet the
same word is applied to Elder Women also, in ver. 2. (...), the Elder Women, or
(as if I should say) The Presbyteresse^. So that the Apostle here speaks only
of the several degrees of Age in each Text, Elder and Younger, calling the
Elder Men Fathers, and the Elder Women Mothers, and the younger Men and Women,
Brethren and Sisters. And that this is the true meaning of the Apostle, appears
also, Titus, 2. 2, 3. where the Elder here, is called Aged there.

Now there is a duty also incumbent upon these, as touching the transmission of
the Truth to the generation to come. Make it known therefore by your Examples,
Counsels, Encouragements upon all occasions; for you have heard much, and seen
much, and known much, and treasured up experiences, and therefore certainly,
you should have much to say to such as are of the younger sort, and your years,
gravity, wisdom, experiences will the better recommend the Truth unto them; for
there is an honor due to you also, See Lev. 19* 32.
by virtue of the fifth Commandment.

Let me commend to you that Text of Scripture, Psalm. 71. 17* 38.
Oh God, thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous works; Now also when I am old, and gray headed, Oh God, forsake me
not, until I have showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to
every one that is to come. The Psalmist was now an old Man, one of much
experience, being taught of God from his youth; and as God taught him, so he
taught others: For says he, Hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works;
Hitherto, that is, to old Age, for now he was aged, and gray headed. And had he
not done well? and was it not time now to dye? Yes, he had done very well, but
yet he is willing to live a little longer, to do more, and therefore (says he)
Forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy
power to every one that is to come. As if he should say, I am willing yet to
live a little longer to do more generation-work, there is a care and zeal for
posterity upon my heart, there are young people ready to come after me, and
peradventure they will listen to the Counsel of an old experienced servant of
God; and upon this account I am willing to spend a few days more upon Earth, to
serve God and Posterity, without which it were not worth while to live.

Think upon this Text of Scripture, you that are old and gray headed, and
improve the little remainder of your lives to serve the succeeding generation.
For you do not love Religion, if you do not love that it should live when you
are dead; neither are they worthy of experiences, who dig and hide them in the
Earth. When God had showed his singular care and power in the preservation of
his Church against her Enemies that attempted the ruin thereof, says he,
Ps3l. 48. 12, 13.
Walk about Zion, go round about her, tell the Towers thereof, mark ye well her
Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye may tell it to the generations
following. So when God arises to build up Zion, and appears in glory upon the
prayers of his poor people, This must be written for the generations to come,
Psalm. 102. 16, 17.
that the people which shall be created may praise the Lord.

Lastly, There are such, who though they are not called Fathers, Rev. 4. 4.
yet are called Elders, viz. the Members of the Gospel-Churches. And they are
so called, not in respect of age, but of state in these Gospel Times, wherein
the Church is past her nonage, and is now in an Elderly state, requiring more
Knowledge, Wisdom, Strength, Seriousness, Gravity, and Solidity in the things
of God. How should such, as these walk before others, so as to answer the
Character of Elders? Let such take heed then of carrying it below their state.
It is not for Elders to behave themselves like Children. I have thought many
times of that description of the Gospel-Churches in the Revelations, and how
little it is answered this day by many that relate to such Societies. Take heed
then of scandals, answer your State, live up to your Privileges, shine in
Holiness, that you may adorn the Doctrine of God and our Savior, and commit
and commend your State, Examples, and holy Lives unto the Generation to come,
that they may attain to the knowledge of the Truth, by your walking in it; and
say, These Truths and Ways of holy Walking were made known to me by the
Gracious, Grave, and serious Lives of such as did relate unto the Churches of
Christ.

The Exhortation hitherto has been to do all the good we are able, during our
abode here below, seeing death will put end to all our opportunities. And I
have propounded to you several Particulars wherein to be exercised this way.

Now before I proceed to any further Use of Exhortation, Let me mind you of
that which may conduce to the attendance of this Duty, and that is, an heart
enlarged unto public service. For that which greatly hinders the prosecution
of this work, is the narrowness and straightness of the Spirits of Men, whose
concernments are commonly bounded within themselves. Therefore you must
endeavor to abound in love.

First, To the glory of God. For this was at work in Hezekiah's heart, when he
said, The living, the living, he shall praise thee. This was uppermost, this
was the first thing that was in his Eye, in his desire of prolongation of life.
For indeed, it is the chief good of Man, whom God made for himself, and who
therefore is to have this end continually in his aim, Romans 11. 36.
and to be often thinking, What shall I do to glorify God? For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen. And all
is lost that ends not in him that is Omega, to whom you may well afford this
honor, when you consider that he is Alpha. He that is the first, must be the
last. Take heed then of a narrow selfish Spirit, which never looks so far as to
this end; and that makes many so unactive for God, and his Glory. You must
therefore believe more, and love more, and then you will act to this end more,
etc.

Secondly, Your love to the glory of Paul, Ephesians. 3. 21.
To God be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end, Amen. His love to God's glory ran through all Ages even to
Eternity. And so should your love do, or else you do not sincerely love it;
neither indeed can you love that his Glory be upheld during your own time, and
not love the continuance of it to the Worlds end.

And such was the love of the Saints in the Scriptures, Psalm. 79. last.
to the praise and glory of God; say they, We will show forth thy praise to all
generations. And therefore,

1. They desired the continuance thereof to the Worlds end.

2. They would also endeavor it. With my mouth, Psalm 89. 1.
says the Psalmist, will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations: Ps.
102. 18.
And this has been their care still, That the people which shall be created
may praise the Lord. Thus you must love God's Glory both Intensively, and
Extensively.



And this was much upon Hezekiah's heart, when he said, The Father to the
Children shall make known thy Truth. For he does not say, I will make known thy
Truth to my Children, though he purposed so to do, but the Father, that is,
every Father that fears God, not only in my time, but in the generations to
come. Thus must your love be extended to the Kingdom of God, and, Thy Kingdom
come, must be always in your desires and endeavors. Come; how long? even to
the end of the world, and never cease coming, till Christ himself come. Now if
this be upon your heart, and if you love that Christ should reign in the world,
you will do your utmost to promote it, in your capacity, in attending to the
several Particulars propounded.

As you love God's Glory and Kingdom, Word of the Kingdom; Mat. 13. 19
That is, The Word whereby God's Kingdom is erected, enlarged, governed,
perfected. It is that in which, and by which our Lord Jesus does reign in the
world, viz. as to his Spiritual Kingdom therein, of which I now speak
especially. And you see in my Text, Hezekiah's love to the Truth, and to the
making of it known from Generation to Generation; whereas the Gospel is the
Truth, (...), the Truth with an excellency, Ephesians. 1. 13.
called therefore, Col. 1. 5.
The Word of Truth, Jam. 1. 18.
and The Word of the Truth of the Gospel: The Truth made known not by the Light
of Nature, but by Revelation; a mysterious Truth, and therefore a great Truth,
that we use to say, As true as the Gospel. Now if you love this Truth, (as you
have cause enough so to do) you will do any thing that may tend to the
publication and propagation of it, by your prayers, pains, purses, Counsels,
etc.

Fourthly, As you must love God's Glory, Kingdom, and Gospel, so you must love
Souls. The Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth. Therefore the
Father must love the Souls of posterity, and have a zeal for the salvation of
them that shall succeed. And this will quicken your endeavors to the service
of your Age, when you shall look upon the Souls of successors as of equal
value with your own, Exodus 30. 13, 15.
seeing the ransom given for all Souls is the same.

And it is a blessed thing to be a lover of souls: it makes a man like unto
Jesus Christ, whose love to Souls shines in his own blood, Tit. 3. 4.
wherein the kindness and love God our Savior toward Man appears. His
kindness and Philanthropy, i. e. love toward Man. For God and our Savior are
great lovers of Men; so should we be. And Christ's delights were with the sons
of Men from eternity. Prove. 8. 31.
We should not therefore terminate our love in Men's bodies; we should love the
Jewel far above the Cabinet, and be frequently looking upon Men's Souls.

1. In comparison with our own, and

2. In the Blood of the Son of God; and

3. In relation to Eternity; especially the Souls of such as are near to us.
And the enlargement of our affections this way will amplify our endeavors. In
Heaven we shall love Souls that are saved, but here we must love Souls that
they may be saved; A work which determines in Glory.

Now all this requires a public Spirit, and an heart carried far beyond our
selves. For a narrow Spirit acts within a narrow compass, and is limited to
private concernments* And that is the reason why there is so little
Generation-service performed. All Men seek their own, Psalm. 2. 21.
and not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Whereas our care should extend far
beyond our own salvation; and love to God's Glory, future Ages, Christ's
Kingdom, Gospel, and precious Souls, should all have a large room in our hearts
and affections.

Thus you have had a great deal of work set before you, which will dye together
with you. And to quicken you to it,

Consider, Consid. 1.
That you know not how soon you may leave this world: Genesis 27. 2.
As Isaac said to Esau, I am old, and know not the day of my death, and yet he
lived 43 years after that. Few men in Scripture knew the day of their death, so
as Hezekiah here did, to whose life 15 years were added, and he resolves to
spend them for God's Glory, and the good of Posterity. So do you as for the
remainder of your days, which may not be a quarter so many as his.

Only have a care to perform better than he did. Caution. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.
For when he was recovered, he rendered not again according to the benefit done
unto him. Why? what was the matter? His heart was lifted up. Hezekiah says
here, The living, the living he shall praise thee, as I do this day; Yea, but
how many days did this continue: For by and by he is praising himself. Ye see
the deceitfulness of the Heart of Man. This by the way.

Only consider the uncertainty of the opportunity, and how soon it may be at an
end, and that the dead cannot praise God, nor they that go down into silence.
Psalm. 11* 5. 17.
Now your Tongues may speak for God, and so may your Lives, and Examples too;
but shortly there will be nothing but silence.

Oh! be not silent before death, for then you will be silent for ever.
Peradventure you have spoken too little already, in order (I mean) to the work
of your day. Speak therefore and act to God's honor, and the benefit of
others, whilst you live, or for ever hold your peace.

I have laid several particulars before you, concerning the service of this
life; and have you not been wanting in many of them? And is not your day also
far spent? and are not the shadows of the evening stretched out? make it up for
the future, as far as your remaining days will give you leave. And to this end*

Consider the account you are to give says the Apostle? Romans 14. 12
Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. And this is the very
next thing after death* It is appointed unto Men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27.
and after this the judgment. Once to dye, not twice; for there is an Emphasis
in that little word, Ver. 28.
once, as appears by the next verse, So Christ was once offered, etc. And
after this the judgment. 1. Dye. 2. But once. 3. Men, that is, all Men. 4. Then
to judgment; and there is a statutum est upon all this four. And the judgment
will pass upon your managing your present opportunities. Mat. 25, 19
For when the Lord comes, he comes to reckon; so when you go to the Lord, you
go to reckon, viz. how you have praised him here among the living, how you have
endeavored to further his Kingdom, according to your capacity, how you have
lived exemplarily, embraced and improved all opportunities to appear and speak
for Christ; how, and for whom you have prayed, how you have comforted the
feeble minded, and supported the weak, supplied the outward wants of the Saints
according to your ability, how you have stood for Christ in a suffering time,
how you have improved those Gifs of Grace which are proper to this Life, how
you have endeavored to transmit pure Religion and undefiled to your Posterity,
by recommending it especially to your Children.

I tell you these are the great things, and all of them are the Work of the
Living, and not of the Dead. How far you have attended them hitherto, you best
know; If you have been wanting, you had need to make up in repentance, what
has been lacking in duty; and a great part of your repentance must be
exercised in fruits worthy amendment of life. For so soon as ever your Soul is
quit of its earthly Tabernacle, you must presently appear before God's
Judgment Seat.

Consider the greatness of the reward Mat. 25. 2^
For they must enter into it, seeing it cannot enter into them. Neither the
Sufferings, nor the Duties and doings of this present time are worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. But our Eyes are too
seldom upon the recompense of reward, nor do we consider what God has prepared
for them that love him: Whereas, did we seek for Glory, Honor, Immortality, we
should continue patiently in well-doing. But few that fear God have Faith
enough to take in the exceeding eternal weight of Glory that is prepared for
them. If glorified Saints were to return to live again upon Earth, they would
double and treble their duties beyond what they did in former times. For, what
do they think when they are entering into the joy of their Lord? what? All this
Glory, all this Joy, an Heart full, and a Heaven full, and to Eternity also,
and that for so few imperfect services? And must I now spend Eternity in the
enjoyment of God, and do none of those services any more for him, which were
proper and peculiar to my temporal life? And must I be on the receiving hand as
to all this Glory for ever and for ever? Certainly, if it were possible, This
would make the Saints repent in Heaven, that they had done no more for Jesus
Christ on Earth. But if such thoughts were incident to glorified Saints, they
come too late, when once they are in Heaven: Now is your time to be working for
that inestimable reward. When therefore you come to God, you must have a full
persuasion, not only of his Being, Heb. 11. 6.
but Bounty, that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, as the
Apostle speaks. But remember that it must be diligently. And be you never so
diligent, he will abundantly reward it. And if Saints could but look into
Heaven, and see how it is there, before they come thither, they would soon
double their diligence, and work their fingers to the stumps for Christ. But
many want Faith to believe so great a reward, or to apply it to themselves, as
that which God will certainly bestow upon them after their work is ended.

Consider yet further, That the good unutterable, 2. Cor. 12. 4.
yet there are abundance of Argumentations in Heaven, and the ywho at their
first entrance, wore but single Crowns, Jer. 17. 10.
after a while wear double ones. For it is said, God will give to every Man
according to his ways, and according to he fruits of his doings. So that, if
their former doings on Earth do fructify after they are dead, God will reward
them according to the Fruit thereof. For not only their works, Rev. 14. 13
but the fruit of them also does follow them. And so do the evil works of
wicked men follow them, as Jeroboam's did for above three hundred years
together after his death; for that at last he felt a sevenfold Hell for what he
did at first. Upon this account it is conceived, that Dives desired Abraham to
send Lazarus to go and preach to his five brethren, that they might avoid that
place of torment; why? is there charity in Hell? no, it was not out of love to
his brethren, but to himself, because he had corrupted them with his wicked
life, and left a bad example behind him, which they followed, therefore he
desired, that they might (if not be saved, for that I think a damned Soul
cannot desire, yet that) they might not for his cause and example be brought
into that place of torment, because this would be the increase of his torment
too. In like manner on the other hand, the glory of the Saints receives
increase as their labors and pains are fruitful, as Divines say of Paul's
glory. One Heaven is too much for the best Saint that ever lived, were not the
reward of Grace, and yet your Heaven shall multiply according to the fruit of
your good doings which you left behind you.

And this will be instead of doing good in Heaven, when the Saints leave that
behind them, which keeps fructifying after they have left this world.

Why? Quest.
what is that which they may thus leave behind them?

Their good Works and Words, Answ.
and Examples, and holy Lives, their Instructions, Exhortations, Counsels,
Encouragements, their remarkable Actions and Sufferings for Christ. By all
which they act and speak even after death. Heb. 11. 4.
And there is no other way that I know whereby to do good when you are in
Heaven. And in this way shall the glorified Saints know in Heaven, whether the
good works which they left behind them do fructify, for they shall find and
feel it in their enlarged Crowns, further Augmentations, and additional
Glories. And then they shall break out into new Songs of praise to God and the
Lamb, for helping them to sow their Seed on Earth, which still fructifieth
after they are gone to Heaven. And in this way a Father may convert his Child,
or Children after his death, as (as I doubt not, but) many have done. And then
he hears of it in Heaven, two ways.

1. By his additional Glory.

2. By the joyful Acclamations of the Angels for the conversion of a sinner.
Luk, 15. 10


Wherefore let us endeavor so to live here a little while, that our good Works
may live when we are dead, and act when we are at rest, and speak when we are
gone down into silence, and bring forth fruit unto holiness, when we are in
endless happiness; and bring Souls to Heaven after us to tell us that our good
Works, and Words, and Examples, Instructions, Exhortations, Counsels,
sufferings, Graces, are yet all alive and well, and like to yield a further
Crop and Harvest of Joy and Honor to them that sowed them before their death.
Oh, it is a blessed thing, and the Wisdom of Saints to leave a stock of good
Works behind them, whereby to have a Trade going here on Earth, which will
afford them fresh Incomes of Glory, whilst they are already shining as the Sun
in the the Kingdom of their Father.

And thus much for the first Use of Exhortation, to do all the good we are
able, during our dwelling here on Earth.

2d Branch of Exhortation.
Let the second Exhortation be to call Hezekiah began now to consider the price
of time, Ver. 10.
who but lately was at the Gates of the Grave, and deprived (as he thought) of
the residue of his years, that is, which he might have lived according to the
ordinary course of Nature. Says he, Mine age is departed, and removed from me
as a Shepherds Tent, That is, which the Shepherd removes from Plain to Plain,
according to his occasions, as the matter shall require.

Now I am living here, (...) a peniculamento, quod Textor in extrema tela
relinquit.
by and by my Body must lodge in the Tent of the cold Grave, and my Soul return
to God that gave it. I have cut off like a Weaver my life, he (that is, God)
will cut me off from the Thrum, Ver. 12. I have cut off my life by my Sins, and
God has cut it off by his righteous hand upon me. Says he, I reckoned till
morning, Ver. 13. I shall be dead by the morning. And now Hezekiah begins to
prize time, and cries, The living, the living he shall praise thee. Thus when
once the swift Shuttle of your life is come to a Thrum, then you will see the
value of Opportunity, and cry, The living, the living, etc. and reckon till the
morning, and say, There is but one day more between my life and Eternity. And
it may not be long ere that Morning or Evening comes. For little did Hezekiah
a few days before think that he had been so near unto death, being now but
thirty nine years old, and God having wrought so wonderfully for him in his
late preservation from Senacharib: Ver. 17.
For says he, Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. God lately destroyed
the Host of the King of Assyria, and gave me peace, and I said, I shall now now
dye in my Nest, and multiply my days as the Sand, but I little thought of such
a sickness to ensue my peace.

It seems he was surprised; and so may you be, if you look not well to it, for
God now gives fair warning of it. They that will not prize Opportunity, shall
have an opportunity to prize it: If they prize it not living, they shall prize
it dying. Wherefore manage your seasons for the best ends while you have them,
and fill up your days with duty, and be not so eager upon the World, and the
things thereof. Opportunity is a golden Mattock to dig for Heavenly Treasure;
do not wear it out, as many do, in digging for Pibbls, and at your latter end
become a fool.

Beware therefore of idleness on the one side, and cumbring your self with
Worldly Occasions on the other; but consider, wherefore has God given you life
and time, but to be serviceable in your day, and to work for him in whom you
live. He did not give you time to play the Truant, and design and labor to be
rich, and to grow great in the World, and to arrive at such a Revenue, and
proportion of worldly Estate; but he sent you into the World to do his work,
and to improve your Time and Talent for him.

And therefore, when the World, or the Flesh is putting such Employments upon
you, which will devour much time, and divert you from the one thing necessary,
tell them; That you must give an account of your time, and you must not rob
your Lord and Master of his hours, which he sent you to improve in his service,
etc.

And certainly it is an undervaluing also of Heaven, to think to go thither,
and to do little or nothing for God upon Earth, though yet the recompense of
reward is purely gracious, or of mere Grace, let our Labors for the Lord be
never so many; for what are all our Studies, Works, Sweat, and blood, and
Spirits, and Cost; and Care, and Time expended upon Christ, in comparison with
an exceeding Eternal weight of Glory? Prize therefore and improve your times.

Here are several of you that are young, 1. Particularly.
or in your middle age, or about Hezekiah's years. Call your selves to an
account, and enquire of your own hearts what you have done: Peradventure but
little for God, and what will turn to a comfortable account. What then, if God
should now lay you (as he did Hezekiah) upon your sick Bed, and threaten to cut
off the Thrum of your lives? Would you not with him turn your faces to the
wall, and weep sore? And yet I tell you, Hezekiah had done a great deal of Work
for God, during the time of his Reign unto this sickness. He lost no time, but
fell hard to the Work of Reformation in the first month of the first year of
his Reign. 2 Chapter 29. 3.
And he did a great deal during his fourteen years before his sickness, Isa.
38. 3.
and he did it also in Truth, and with a perfect heart.

But still, what have you done, if you were now as near the gates of the grave,
as here he was? And to these Gates you must come at last, and pass through them
also to the highest Tribunal, to answer to this Question, What have thou done?
How have thou improved time, occupied with thy Talent, filled up thy Relations,
maintained good Works for necessary uses, been active for the highest end?

Peradventure you will plead your small capacity, Observe.
and that you are but of mean degree, an obscure person, and ezercised in Low
Employments, and of weak parts, etc.

Yea, Sol.
but still what says Hezekiah? The living, the living he shall praise thee.
And are not you living? Are you not alive? For any Man or Woman living may
praise the Lord, or else Hezekiah says not well; But it is true what he says,
for any Man living may do his his generation-work. Is your capacity than such,
that you cannot praise the Lord? Psalm. 148. 11, 12.
what says the Psalmist? Praise ye the Lord; who? Kings of the Earth. Yea,
they are in a capacity indeed. Such as Hezekiah may do much that way, they are
great Men, and have great opportunities. But what follows? Kings of the
Earth, and all people: Princes and all Judges of the Earth. Both young Men and
Maidens, and old Men and Children. Let them praise the Name of the Lord. Men
and Maids, old and young, all may; and all must attend the service, none
excepted.

And therefore plead not your mean capacity, Matthew. 25.
but serve your age according to your Talent. For he that had but one Talent,
does not say, Lord, I had but one, and what can a Man do with one? My
fellow servants had, one five Talents, the other two, and they might well
employ and improve them. No, he says not thus; He was convinced that one
Talent might be improved to advantage as well as five, and that every one is
bound to be Trading for God with what he has given him; for, says the Text,
Ver. 15.
He gave to every Man according to his several ability. So that all of them had
an ability, though several ^ One had a five-fold ability, another a twofold,
another a single. And he that had but a single capacity, was called to an
account for his unprofitableness, and cast into outer darkness. The meanest
therefore among you has some ability, and woe be to him, if he does not
improve it. A young Man, a Servant, a poor Man, a mean Man, may do many things
in tendency to God's Glory, and the good of others, whilst he is living, and
the living, the living, he shall praise thee.

You that are stricken in years, 2ly.
you have much to account for. For you have lived lon, and perhaps are now
grown old, but have you been old Traders? Yes, as to a worldly account: Yea,
but there is another, and a better Trade, and what have you done therein? God
will call you to a reckoning for your worldly Trade, and especially for your
Spiritual. You have gained thus much in the world, he will say, but what
redounds to my share of all that you have done? This is the great Question.
Think ye; Oh how many opportunities have you outlived, which will never have
their Resurrection: If therefore you should say as John Baptist's hearers, what
shall we do then? I answer,

1 Cor. 11. 31.
For if you judge your selves, you shall not be judged.

Nicodemus was an old Man when he came to Christ by night; John 3d.
For, says he, Can a Man be born when he is old? As much as to say, As I am.
But when he is converted, he thrives apace, and comes to Christ at noon, and
owns him in the place of public Judicature, and is a mean to dissolve the
Session. John 7. 50.
And afterward he owns Christ crucified, and is at much cost to embalm him, --
19. 39.
when his Disciples deserted him. The Old Man got the start of them all, and of
many others that set out before him. Mat. 19. 30
So it is sometimes, The first are last, and the last first.

Now therefore bestir your selves, and redeem lost time by improving what
remains to the utmost, and see what you can do with a little remnant of life,
and whether you cannot grow as fast as Old Nicodemus did. Project improvments
of life, which is a kind of Saveall, now that your light is near extinguishing.

Make up in affection what may be

Judah, is still imputed to the Reformers that set them on work, as you may see
in the Reign of Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. And though the persons
employed might act from Principles of Hypocrisy, Jer. 3. 10.
as some (at least) did in Josiah's Reformation; Yet the works were done in
sincerity, as to the Reformers: They were done in Hypocricy as to the
Instruments, in sincerity as to the principal Agent.

Your time therefore is but short, and you cannot do much with your own hands,
see what you cad do by others, as by your Wife, Husband, Children, Relations,
Friends, Neighbors, and it shall be imputed unto them, if they do it
sincerely, but to you howsoever, if you did set them on work in the uprightness
of your heart.

is fit to glorify God, and edify others at your last farewell to friends.
This is that which we should all pray for, and it is that which God is pleased
to grant to some, and it is a great mercy where it is vouchsafed, for it is not
so eminently granted unto all that fear the Lord. Had Hezekiah now dyed, his
Distemper was so violent, that he could not have dyed so comfortably, Ver. 13,
14
I reckoned till morning, that as a Lion, so he will break all my bones: From
day even to night, will thou make an end of me. Like a Crane, or a swallow, so
did I chatter; I did mourn as a Dove: Mine eyes fail with looking upward: Oh
Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. But they that have done but little for
the Lord, and are not now like to do much, had need to pray more, especially,
that thus they may finish their course.

And if God grant you this mercy, you may perhaps do as much good dying, as
ever you did living. The few words of the penitent Thief have done good to
thousands, though he was a Man that never did good, but much evil, till he was
converted upon the Cross. And thus much for the Exhortation to value
Opportunities, Luke 23. 40, 41, 42.
and to make the best improvement of time while it lasts.

3d Use of Exhortation.
Jobs weakness, though indeed he was then in great distress and misery. Job 3.
21.
He longed for death, and dug for it more than for hid Treasures. We must
not be too forward to dig our own Graves: We may prepare them, as Joseph of
Arimathea did, and also we must prepare for them; but let us not dig them
impatiently, or importunately.

Life is a great mercy, yea, and length of days. It is annexed to the
obedience of the fifth Commandment. Ps. 91. last.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Why? will not a
Child of God be satisfied without length of days? Yes, he is satisfied to dye
when God pleases. If God will take him away sooner or later, he he is
satisfied. It is said of Abraham, Isaac, David, and Job, that they dyed full of
days. And it was true, both passively, in that they were old Men; and
actively, in that they were well satisfied to live so long. And therefore Job
left off digging for death, long before he dyed. Peradventure you have your
exercises both outward and inward, and withal you have good hopes of a blessed
state in a better world; and now you long for death, and would fain be gone.
Take heed, it is time enough to go to a glorious Eternity, and when you are
there, you will never say, you came not thither soon enough. Here is, more
service for you to do: Do not love your Reward beyond your Work. A lazy servant
will be often listening to the Clock, or looking upon the Sun, and longing for
the Evening, not minding so much his Work as his Wages.

It is said of Jehojada also, 2 Chr. 24. 15.
that he was full of days, when he dyed, being one hundred and thirty years
old. He was full of days passively, and full actively, he was satisfied with
this great length of days, and very well contented and thankful to live so
long. He was deep in years (I suppose about, if not above, an hundred years
old) when his Nephew Joash came to the Crown. 2 Chr. 24. 3, 4. --
For he lived to see Joash married, and after that the Temple repaired. And he
died not long before Joash, who reigned but forty years. But few men lived so
long in those days, and yet he did a great deal of good service unto the last.
And when he died, they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because
he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house. And the
most of it was done in his old Age.

4th Use of Exhortation.
Hezekiah here had died of his sickness, the people of God would soon have
missed him, as when (at last) he died, they did, for you know what came after.
Consider what a deal of good cease with the li^e of a good Man: It is true,
his Works live, but his working is dead. Ministers shall preach no more;
Church Officers rule no more, dispense no more; Benefactors lay out themselves
no more; public Spirits act no more. True; their Examples, Sayings, Writings,
Memory, Fruits of their former Works may survive: But their persons, personal
actings, delightful presence, sweet fellowship, wholesome Counsels, and ready
helpfulness are dead and gone. Whereas these are great mercies, and many will
say so when they are gone, who made but little of them while they had them. You
know how the Elders of Ephesus, and the Brethren at Miletus wept at Paul's
parting, sorrowing most of all, that they should see his face no more; and yet
after that he lived many years, and wrote an Excellent Epistle to the Church at
Ephesus. Oh, how would they have wept, had he then dyed at Miletus! But few
precious ones are prized enough till dead, and perhaps not then neither. 1 Samuel
25. 1.
The Israelites did not sufficiently value Samuel when he grew old, but when
they had tasted what Saul was, and that Samuel also was taken away by death,
then they all lamented him. Yea, and Saul himself also wanted him, who little
regarded him whilst living. 1 Samuel 28. 11.
Bring me up Samuel, says he to the Witch at Endor. He that before would not
go to Samuel, will now go to the Devil for him. Bring me up Samuel; Yes, Rake
him by all means out of his Grave: And, oh, that Saul could but once more speak
with Samuel!

How few are they who have a just valuation of these living mercies, or that
duly lay to heart the loss of them? Isa. 57. 1.
For it is our duty also to bewail the death of such, Acts 8. 2.
as when the Church lost Stephen, devout Men carried him to his burial; and
made great lamentation over him. Oh know the price of living Saints, especially
the most useful ones.

You that are Children, and have godly Parents, who have made known the Truth
to you, take heed you think not they have lived too long; but know that it is
your mercy, if they dye full of years, and come to their Graves in a full age,
like as a shock of Corn comes in its season. Improve their lives, and lament
their deaths. Sarah was an hundred twenty and seven years old when she dyed,
and yet Isaac lamented the loss of her for the space of three years, and
nothing could comfort him, but his marriage with a dear Rebekah. Genesis 24.
I beseech you love and honor your godly Parents, beg their continuance with
you, and your profiting by them, and be very obedient to the first Commandment
with a Promise. Joash had that benefit by his old Uncle Jehojada, who was
instead of a Father to him, that it went well with him and his Kingdom whiles
he lived, but miserably with both afterward. Many Children have lost
themselves together with their Parents.

Consider what I say. And then you that have such Ministers of Jesus Christ, as
labor in the Word and Doctrine, and watch for your Souls, prize them, pray for
them, and improve them, for you know not the consequences of their removal.

5th Use of Exhortation.
Lastly, Seeing there is more service know what he says in his prayer to his
Father, Joh* 17. 4.
I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished, the work which thou gave me
to do. Yea, but we are to understand it of his Work upon Earth, for his Work in
Heaven is not as yet finished, nor will before the end of the world.

Alas! we can do little for Christ in Earth, and less in Heaven. Yet Jesus
Christ, whether in Earth or Heaven, is still at work for us. It is not with him
as with us. Heaven takes the work out of our hands, but it puts it into his.
For thither is he gone to take and keep possession, and to prepare places for
us. There he executes his Mediatory-Office, continually appears and makes
intercession for us, sheds abroad his Spirit, gives Commission to the Angels,
and Gifts unto Men, calls and gathers in his Elect ones, enableth us to
work on Earth, governs the World, upholds his Church, and subdues their
Enemies. All the Work of Heaven lies upon Christ's hands; and it is well it
does, o^ what would become of us on Earth!

And as this should raise our Esteem an^ Love of Christ, so should it quicken
us the more to work for him on Earth, seeing he is still at work for us in
Heaven. He wrought above thirty years for us here on Earth, but in Heaven above
sixteen hundred, and thus he will continue his work to the end of the world.

To him therefore be glory, and honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

A short Discourse OF THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE Gospel-Day, Reaching from
the Destruction of the OLD, to the erection of the NEW JERUSALEM:

Zach. 14. 6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Light shall
not be clear, nor dark.

But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor night;
but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light.

By W. H.

London, Printed for John Wilkins, and are to be sold at his shop in
Exchange-Alley, next door to the Exchange-Coffee-House, over against the
Royal Exchange, 1673.

COURTEOUS READER.
THou have added a brief Treatise of the nature of the Gospel-Day in its Rise,
Progress, and Perfection. The Morning of which Day (beginning in the Apostles
times) had much darkness mingled with a little light. You know what stiff and
earnest contentions there were for the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies; yea, the
very Articles of Faith called in question, the Spirit of Antichrist working
even then in the Evangelical Churches, which in after Ages grew to a greater
height in the exaltation of the Man of Sin. But still the Light and Purity of
the Gospel prevailed, though sometimes the darkness was such, as to threaten an
utter extirpation: God raising up some faithful Witnesses in all Ages to hold
forth, and vindicate the Light against all that opposition made against it. The
Truth had its Champions even then, when the whole World wondered after the
Beast. And from them to us it is continued by an uninterrupted succession,
being still of a growing and increasing Nature like the path of the Just
shining more unto the perfect day. What cause have we to bless God that we see
the Truth and Gospel going on conquering and to conquer all Error and
Opposition? Well, the night is far spent, and the day is at hand, and go, let
us cast off the Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light, and so much
the more as we see the Day breaking, when Shadows shall flee away, and Light
shall overspread the face of the whole Earth. Peace, Truth, Holiness, and
Comfort shall then abound. In the mean time it is no wonder if Light and
Darkness conflict together. Light of Peace with Trouble, of Truth with Error;
and go, let us not be secure, God may soon bring a Cloud over our Peace and
Liberty. And let us also who are of the day be sober, bearing with and
forbearing one another, forasmuch as yet we know but in part, and see through a
Glass darkly; but when the Evening of this Gospel-Day comes, the Lord shall be
one, and his Name one; Zech. 14. 7, 9.) one heart and one way, Jer. 32. 39. In
the Faith and Hope hereof, Let all the Children of Zion rejoice, and endeavor
to be a People prepared for the Lord.

Reader, I shall detain thee no longer from this useful and seasonable
Discourse. The blessing of God go with it, and make it fruitful, so prays

Jan. 18th 1673-4. Thy Servant in the Gospel. H. J.

ZECH. 14. 6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall
not be clear nor dark.

But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor night;
but it shall come to pass that at evening time it shall be light.


THis Chapter begins with the revenge of God upon Judah and Jerusalem for their
crucifying the Lord of glory ( Chapter 13. 7.) of which vengeance Christ himself
foretold, Mat. 24.
and he calls them days of vengeance, Luke 21. 22.
where he amply fieth what the Prophet here speaks briefly.

Yet God threatens to be avenged on the Nations that dealt thus with Jerusalem
and the Jews. They should have no thanks for this their service, as minding
only the fulfilling of their own wills, and not Gods; ( Ver. 3.) But though
Jerusalem should be overthrown, and the Temple burnt, and the Temple-Worship
abolished; yet the Lord would have a care of his Church, and make way for the
conversion of the Gentiles, and expose the Truth and Way of his Worship to the
open view of the Jews and Gentiles from East to West.

For the Truth and Way of God's Worship, and of Salvation was pent up before
Christ's coming, in the narrow confines of Judea, and obscured also, and
darkened with shadows and Ceremonies, Psa. 25. 2.
as Jerusalem (the Seat of God's Worship) was with Hills. But now all should be
laid open before all the world, from East to West. And this here is signified
by an Allegory of the cleaving of Mount Olivet (one famous Hill being put for
the rest) in the midst toward the East, Ver. 4.
and toward the West, whereby the City of God (which is the Church) should no
longer be obscured, but patent, all Shadows and Ceremonies, and Partition-walls
being removed. This, I suppose is the purport of Verse. 4.

After this follows a very great Commotion, Verse. 5.
compared to that great Earthquake in King Uzziah's days, which made Men to
flee for their lives. But it is to be understood Spiritually ( viz.) of
Christ's voice in the Gospel, Heb. 12. 26.
shaking, not the Earth only, but also Heaven; whereby a great change is made
even in the Church, by the shaking and removing of the Ceremonial-way of
Worship, and the Partition Wall, and causing both Jew and Gentile (as many as
would be saved) to flee to the Gospel, and Gospel-way of Worship, and Christ
therein, from the wrath that is to come: This, I conceive is the meaning of
Ver. 5.

Only, whereas it is said, And the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints
with thee; This may be meant, Firstly, Of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
to set up his Gospel-Kingdom, whither his Elect should be gathered unto him
their Head: But lastly, and chiefly of Christ's second coming, whereof Paul
makes mention, speaking of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
Saints. 1 These. 3. last.
For this Chapter leads us so far, that nothing remains but this last and
great coming of Christ, unto which the Prophet cannot forbear to look, and he
looks at it with much Faith and Joy.

1. In that he applies the Lord God to himself. The Lord my God shall come.

2. In that he turns his speech unto him. And all the Saints with thee.

Briefly as for the Chapter, it begins with the destruction of the Old
Jerusalem, and ends with the erection of the New.

And whereas there is a Day spoken of, so and so described as in my Text, It is
the day or the time, that lies between these two Jerusalems, Old and New. It
is not a Natural or Artificial day, for such a day cannot suite with the scope
of this Prophecy; Nor was there ever any such day, wherein it was lighter in
the Evening than in all the day before. And therefore by Day here, we must
necessarily understand a large tract of time, for so Day is many times taken in
the Scripture, particularly the time of the Gospel is called the Day of
Salvation. And it is called that Day, sixteen times in this and the two
preceding Chapters, 2. Cor. 6. 2.
which treat of the last times, wherein such work is to be done, as will take
up many hundred years, as you may see if you consult the Chapters at leisure.

And you see here when this day began, ( viz.) when the Gospel was first
published, viz. about the time of the destruction of the Old Jerusalem, or
somewhat before it, and continues to the setting up of the New.

Let me then put all the description of this day together into one Point, and
it is this.

Doctrine.

The Gospel Times, unto the conversion of the Jews, are one day intermixed with
Light and Darkness, known to God, in the evening whereof it shall be light.

First, The Day here is plainly meant of Jerusalem. For you find this Day
again, Verse. 8. and again, Verse. 9. and so, till you are led to the conversion
of the Jews, and the New Jerusalem, Ver. 10, 11. to the end.

Secondly, This day is one day. 1. A

A Day. And that for these Reasons.

1. In that it has light in it all along. For Christ and the Gospel run
through it. And these carry light with them where ever they come. It is true,
there is a mixture of darkness in it, yet it is not called night; but, because
it has light in it, therefore is called Day; for the better part carries the
denomination.

2. It is a Day in comparison with the dark times under the Law, especially the
times immediately preceding the coming of Christ, when besides the shadows of
Ceremonies, there was great darkness of ignorance.

3. It is such a Day, as is distinguished with remarkable periods, ( viz.) of
Seals, Trumpets, Vials, even as the Natural day is with hours, and distinct
divisions. This we see at large in John's Revelation.

4. It is a Day, in that it has in it a blessed opportunity of working, Luke
19. 42. Joh. 9. 4. and 12. 35.

5. A Day, in that it has a Morning, and an Evening. The Morning began with
the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, when the dayspring from on high did
visit us, and the people that sat in darkness saw great light. And the Evening
lies in my Text, immediately before the Jews conversion. Thus it is a Day.

It is One day, i. e. one and the same from Morning to Evening. And it is so
upon two accounts.

First, In that every part of the day

Secondly, One and the same, and Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, Heb.
12. 26, 27.
but also Heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of
those things that are made that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.
The Legal Administration was shaken and removed at the coming of this day, but
the Evangelical shall remain to the very end of it. And hence it is, that the
Church still appears in all the Periods of this day, under the same form to the
very last, viz. of four living Creatures and twenty four Elders. Rev. 4. 4. 11.
16. 14. 3. 19. 4.
And thus it is unus idemque dies, One and the same day from first to last.
This is the Second Branch of the point, it is One day.

Thirdly, It is such a Day as is intermixed with Light and Darkness, so that it
is neither Day nor Night, verse. 7. But why then is it called a Day in the same
Verse? The meaning therefore is, that it is neither perfect Day, nor perfect
Night; but yet such, as may well be called a Day for the reasons aforesaid,
only with intermixtures of Light and Darkness.

But what is the Light, Qu.
and what the Darkness?

The Light is the light of Truth: Answ. 1.
for these two go together; Psalm. 43. 3.
Send out thy Light and thy Truth. And the Darkness is the darkness of
Ignorance, Error, Heresy, Idolatry, and Superstition. And such a mixture there
has been in this Day, and will be to the very Evening of it.

The clearest part of this Day was in the Morning thereof, when the Apostles
lived; yet even then there was a mixture of this Darkness. The Churches in
Galatia were infected with the leaven of false Teachers, mingling Law and
Gospel in the point of Justification. And some in the Church at Corinth denied
the Resurrection of the Dead; and others held that it was already past, 2 Timothy
2. 17.
(as Hymeneus and Philetus) and their word did eat like a Gangrene. And some
such there were that turned the Grace of God into Lasciviousnes, etc. Both
Peter and Jude give us a sad character of them. And in John's time, 1 John 2.
18, 19
there were many Antichrists and Apostates from the Faith, and many false
Prophets were then gone out into the World, who denied that Christ was come in
the Flesh. And Pride and Ambition began then to appear in Diotrephes. 1 John 4.
1, 2.
And false Apostles we meet with several times; 3 John 10.
and with Balaamites and Nicolaitans in the Church at Pergamus, Rev. 2.
and the woman Jezebel, a false Prophetess, and a Seducer in the Church at
Thyatira.

You see the Morning of this Day, red and lowering, presaging foul weather
throughout the remainder of it. In the times succeeding the Apostles, arose the
Simonians, Menandrians, Carpocratians, Cerinthians, Ebionites, Marcionites,
Apollinarians, etc. which did somewhat darken the Primitive Day, wherein yet
there was a comfortable mixture of Light held forth by Ireneus, Lactantius,
Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Cyprian, and others. Afterward arose the Arrians,
(who denied the Godhead of Christ) greatly obscuring the Day, but were opposed
by Athanasius, Hilary, and several others, and condemned by the Nicene Council.
Not long after, the Heresy of Macedonius (who denied the Personality of the
Holy Ghost) was condemned by a Council at Constantinople; And so was the Heresy
of Nestorius, (who held that Christ had two Persons, as well as two Natures)
opposed and condemned by a Council at Ephesus, not long after the same time.
Opposite to this Heresy was that of the Eutychians, who held Christ to have but
one Nature; confounding his Natures, as the Nestorians had divided his Person.
For thus we find most of the Primitive Heresies to be about the Natures and
Person of Christ, the great Light of the World, which the Prince of Darkness
endeavored to extinguish, that so he might turn this Day into Night. But still
you will find that there was Light in opposition to his Darkness. And when
afterward the Devil stirred up Pelagius to assert the Freedom of Man's Will,
God raises up Augustine to oppose him.

Only what shall we say about the close of the Sixth Century, when the
bottomless Pit was opened, out of which there arose a smoke, Rev. 9. 2.
as the smoke of a great Furnace, insomuch that the Sun and Air were darkened
by reason of the Smoke. Where now was the Light? and where was the One Day in
my Text? Yea, and as the Centuries increased, so did the Darkness, by a
continual succession and series of Errors and Heresies, for many Hundreds of
years together. And you know what dark Lights the Schoolmen were in their
Generations, who did rather obscure than illustrate Theology.

These things are true; And a man had need of a great deal of knowledge in
Church History, and the Centuriators, to give particular satisfaction in this
point, and it would also require a large Discourse.

I shall therefore give you some general grounds of Proof, that still the Light
did run through the darkest Times.

First, Christ promised that the gates of Hell should never prevail against his
Church, Mat. 16. 18 28. last.
and that he would be with it to the end of the World.

Secondly, It is held by several Learned and Orthodox, That the Seven Churches
of Asia had their Antitypes, one after another, throughout the day of the
Gospel in my Text. And then, surely there was always Light in the Candlesticks.

Thirdly, When Christ began to show John things to come, the First thing that
he showed him, was God sitting upon his Throne, with the Church round about
Him, and so described, as you know, Revel. 4. For in showing John things to
come, at so great and vast a Prospect, God must needs show him great and
dreadful things, as. He did under the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials. And therefore
at the very entrance of this Discovery, God secureth to John the safe condition
of the Church in all times, and let^ him see that his Eye was still upon that,
as standing round about his Throne encompassed with ten thousand times ten
thousand of Angels, that so what sights soever John should afterward see, he
might be assured, that the Church was safe enough. For God is before, and his
Angels behind the Church. And hence it is that ever and anon the Church puts up
her head in such and such periodical times, and days of danger and darkness in
the Revelations.

Fourthly, When God intended great Rev. 7. 1, 2^.
and the number of the sealed was 144000.

And when the four first Trumpets sounded, though there followed always a sore
judgment, Rev. 7.
yet still a third part escaped under every one of them; And with this agrees
that of Zechary, Zech. 13. 8.
Two parts shall be cut off and die, but the third part shall be left therein.

And when again the fifth Trumpet sounded, and the mouth of the bottomless Pit
was opened, Rev 9. 4.
out of which a dreadful smoke ascended, and Locusts out of the smoke, they had
not power to hurt the grass of the Earth, nor any green thing, nor any tree,
but only those men, which had not the Seal of God in their foreheads, Rev. 9. 4

Fifthly, If we come to the Sixth Trumpet, which began to sound about the Year
1300. when the Ottoman Power arose, which yet continues to this day; it was a
very dark and dismal time, yet not void of Light. For the Waldenses and their
Followers were up long before that time, and Wickliffe arose somewhat about the
same, and (as I take it) Bernard. Afterward John Huss and Hierome of Prague.
But seeing the time was so doleful, and that it might well be admired, what was
become of the Church, and where the Light was to be seen; our Lord Jesus Christ
comes down from Heaven, in the form of a mighty Angel, clothed with a Cloud,
and a Rainbow upon his Head, and his Face shining as it were the Sun. For this
was in the dark times of the Sixth Trumpet, when although Christ was much
clouded to the World, and little of him seen, yet the Sun did shine through the
Cloud, even in those times; for he was mindful of his Covenant, Rev. 10. 1, 2.
signified by the Rainbow. And moreover Christ had in his Hand a little Book
open; so that there was some Light shining in those very dark times.

Sixthly, When Antichrist was at his greatest height, a little before the Light
so brake forth, that some Reformation began, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lamb of
God, appears standing on Mount Zion, Rev. 14. 1.
and with him an Hundred and forty four Thousand, having his Fathers name
written on their Foreheads: showing us, That Christ had his Church in the times
of the greatest Apostasy, and that there was not wanting Light in Darkness.
The sealed Number ( Rev. 7) ran through (about) a thousand years, and at last
lifted up their heads upon Mount Zion.

Seventhly, Suppose the rise of Antichrist fourth and fifth Centuries, you know
the rise of the two Witnesses contemporates therewith; after which they
continue their prophesying, during One thousand, two huudred and sixty Days, a
day put for a year. And so too, upon this account, the darkest Days did not
want the Light of the blessed and everlasting Gospel; yea, so much Light, as to
uphold the denomination of a Day.

But since the Second spring of the Gospel, arising from the Light introduced
by Luther, Melanchton, and the German Theologues, it is visible to the eyes of
Adversaries, how the Darkness has declined, and the Light shined more and more
to this very day. And thus it will be light and dark, light as to Truth, and
dark as to Ignorance, Error, Heresy, Idolatry, and Superstition more or less
unto the very Evening of the Day.

Secondly, In this day there is a mixture of Light and Darkness in another
respect, viz. Trouble mingled with Tranquillity, and Persecution with Liberty.
You know the sad times under the Seals, by the rage of the Roman power against
Christianity. Yet some liberty was now and then enjoyed, and silence in Heaven
for half an Hour. You have heard also of the Arrian Persecution under
Constantius, Julian and Valens, yet all liberty was not destroyed. For though
Persecution and Liberty in their height are inconsistent, as light and
darkness, the one in its height expels the other, yet there was an interchange
by the succession of one to the other sometims, if not an intermixture of both
as to a moderate degree. For though Persecution and Liberty have not stood
together in one and the same time and place in their height, yet as for the
light of the Gospel, and Truth thereof, that has sometimes shined in showers
of Persecution, like as we have now and then seen the Sun to shine, and the
Rain to fall at one and the same time.

And thus you see how the Day of the Gospel has all along hitherto been
intermixed and interchanged with light and darkness. The light of Truth and the
darkness of Error, the light of Liberty, and the darkness of Persecution. And
thus much for the third Particular of the Point in hand.

Fourthly, This one day thus intermixed, viz.) that there is such a day, and
thus intermixed as aforesaid. But it is known to God, so as it is not known to
us.

First, It is known to him as the Efficient Psalm. 74. 16
The day is his, the night also is his, he has prepared the light of the Sun.
And again, I form the Light, and create Darkness; Iia. 45. 7.
I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these things. Thus it is with
this Gospel-day; The Lord is the Former of it, who has determined the times
before appointed.

Secondly, This day is known to God, as being wholly in his power to order all
things in it after the Counsel of his own will. He knew the end from the
beginning, and what lies in the Womb of this day, from the Morning to the
Evening of it. He knew what light, and what darkness there would be in every
period of the day, whereas we know not what a day may bring forth; and little
did we think a year ago what Light of Liberty we should now enjoy, nor do we
know what darkness of trouble and confusion may arise again ere long. We look
sometimes, for good, and lo, evil comes, and we wait for Light, and there
comes darkness. For it is not for us to know the times and seasons, Job. 30. 26
which the Father has put in his own power. Acts. 1. 7.
We cannot make a Divine Almanac, and define what day (in this great day) it
shall be calm, and what day tempestuous, what day it shall shine, and what day
rain. We know not the Ordinances of Heaven, nor can we set their Dominion in
the Earth; we cannot lift up our voices to the Clouds, that abundance of Waters
may cover us; neither do do we know the way where the Light dwells, and as
for Darkness we know not the place thereof. Known unto God are all things.

Thirdly, This day is known to God, knowing, Ejus modiest quem curabit and
conservabit Deus.
which includes also the affections. And therefore this day is so known of the
Lord, Jun. Trem.
that it is regarded and cared for by him. His Eyes are upon it, that nothing
falls out in it, but by his special Providence. And though darkness has
sometimes increased, and far prevailed in this day, yet the Light was never
extinguished, nor ever shall: He has still preserved a Lamp, as he did in the
Kingdom of David, at the lowest ebb thereof. About one hundred and fifty years
ago, when darkness lay upon the face of the Earth, presently God commanded
light to shine out of darkness, which has continued and increased unto this
very day.

Fourthly, This day is known unto mistakes have there been, about the time of
Antichrist's ruin, and the calling of the Jews?

We know in the general, that this Day shall have an Evening, and that in the
Evening it shall be light: But when this Evening shall be, we know not; we
cannot take the Light and the Darkness at the bound thereof. But God does
perfectly know the Epoch of the reign of the Beast, and his Number, 666. And
thus this day is known to the Lord, and to the Lord only.

Fifthly, In the evening of this day it shall be light.

First then, What is this Evening? It is the darkest part of this Day,
throughout which there was still more or less Darkness intermixed with Light,
as you have heard, but now at the Evening-time there shall be more darkness
than in any of the preceding parts of the Day: How else were it an Evening?

But how can it be, Obj.
that the Evening should be so dark, and yet that at Evening-time it should be
light?

1. In some respects it shall be the darkest part of the Day, Sol. 1.
for it will be a time of very sore Troubles, Wars, and rumors of Wars, and
great Commotions. For I cannot tell where to fix this Evening, but under the
Sixth Vial, which shall be poured out upon the great River Euphrates, Rev. 16. 12
That the waters thereof may be dried up, and the way of the Kings of the East
prepared: In which words is held forth (as our best Interpreters hold) the
conversion of the Jews. Revel. 16. 13, 14.
At what time The three unclean Spirits, like Frogs, shall go out of the mouth
of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet, which are the spirits of Devils, working Miracles, and going
forth to the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the
battle of the great Day of God Almighty. And that must needs be a very sad
Evening, especially in respect of trouble, great oppositions and commotions.
For there shall be as terrible Signs and Presages fore-running the erection of
the New-Jerusalem, Luke 21. 9, 10, 11.
as there were before the Destruction of the Old. Hinc illae Tenebrae. But how
then shall it be light at this Evening time.

Secondly, In some respect therefore, it shall be the most lightsom part of the
Day hitherto. And indeed it will be the light of the Evening, that will very
much occasion the Darkness of it: I mean the Light of the Truth, that shall
then shine forth, shall darken the Kingdom of the Beast, and cause his
Followers to gnaw their very Tongues for pain. Rev. 16. 10
For that is under the Fifth Vial; and if the Kingdom be full of Darkness, it
must needs be that Christ's Kingdom will then be full of Light. For the
Witnesses will be ^isen long before the effusion of the Fifth and Sixth Vials,
and Antichrist be greatly consumed with the breath of Christ's mouth, viz. in
the Preaching of the Gospel. And therefore in this respect, it must needs be a
lightsome Evening, and a time of greater Light than ever shined since the days
of the Apostles.

Thus you see what a time the Evening shall be.

But shall this Evening then determine this Day, Quest.
so that the Conversion of the Jews shall become another Day?

No; Answ.
But as this Day is one and the same, and constant to it self, as we have
heard, so shall the Day of the Jews Conversion, and the time following be one
and the same day with this. But how? Not in respect of Light and Darkness
intermixed, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
so as in the Day before the Evening, but in respect of one and the same
Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. 11.
and way of Holy Administration still continued: Heb. 12. 28
For the Ordinances now used shall be continued to the coming of Christ.

For it is observable;

First, That this dark Time is not called, The Evening; but the Evening-time,
Quo tempore advesperascere, and Nox esse solet: At what time it begins to be
Evening; or, to look like an Evening, and the Sun seems to be setting. And
therefore

Se^^ndly, Though it is called an Evening-time, yet there is no Night said to
follow it. Sol occubuit, Nox nulla secuta est. It is such an Evening, wherein
the Sun sets, and no Night succeeds. It is true, One would little expect
light in the Evening, especially more light than in the Day before. But such an
Evening-time is this, after which shines the greatest Light that ever was seen
since the days of Jesus Christ.

You see then what this Evening is.

Secondly; What is that Light, that shall shine so gloriously at the
Evening-time, especially at the end of it?

Answ. It is the same in kind and quality with that which shined before this
Evening-time, only it differs in degrees. For now the Light shall excel, and
that shall be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet; Isai. 60. 1, 2, 4.
Arise, and shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, etc. Now (as I may say) the light of the Moon shall be as the light
of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, Isai. 60. 19, 20.
as the light of seven Days: Yea, The Sun shall be no more thy light by day,
neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall
be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy glory. The Sun shall no more
go down, neither the Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light.

But wherein shall this Light consist? Quest.


First; Answ.
There shall be a great effusion of the Spirit of God in those times, whereof a
Pledge was given in the Morning of this Gospel-day. It shall come to pass in
the last days, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh. And the like we
find in the words following my Text; And it shall be in that Day, that living
Waters shall go out from Jerusalem, Zech. 14. 8.
etc. And hereby is meant the Spirit of God with his Gifts and Graces, Joh. 4.
14. 3. 38, 39.
compared to living Waters. Ezekiel. 47. 1-6.
And these I take to be the same with Ezekiel's waters, which rose at last to a
very great depth.

Secondly, Hence it follows, That Know the Lord, for they shall all know him
from the least to the greatest. And that shall be the time especially, Isai.
11. 5
when The Earth shall be full of the knowledge of God, as the Waters cover the
Sea.

Thirdly, This Light of Knowledge Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holiness to the
Lord; Even Carters, Cooks, and Kitchin-Maids shall then shine in purity of
life, and there shall be no more the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of
Hosts. Zech. 14. 20, 21.


Fourthly, That Day shall shine with the Light of Peace, Tranquillity, and Joy,
for these go together, Esth. 8. 16. Swords shall then be turned into
Plough-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword
against Nation, Mic. 4. 3.
neither shall they learn War any more.

Fifthly, In that Day there shall be the Light of Comfort; for this will follow
necessarily from all the former; and the Consolation will be both External and
Internal, viz. When the Spirit of God, the Comforter, shall be poured out so
plentifully, and when the Spirit shall have his Day, as the Father and the Son
had theirs. And when Knowledge, Holiness, and Peace shall abound on the Earth;
when Turk and Pope, and all that oppose the Kingdom of Christ shall be
destroyed, and Satan bound and confined to the bottomless Pit, during the
Thousand years. I say, This must needs be a very comfortable time. Great then
shall be the peace of Zions Children, when God shall make her an eternal
Excellency, and a joy of many Generations, when violence shall no more be heard
in her Land, wasting and destruction within her Borders; but men shall call her
Walls, Salvation; and her Gates, Praise; and when they shall come and sing in
the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, who
shall turn the former Mourning of his People into Joy, and comfort them, and
cause them to rejoice from their sorrow, For they shall come to Zion with
Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their Heads, they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

And thus you see the Light that shall be at the Evening-time, and the Doctrine
cleared in the several parts of it; the Uses whereof now follow.

Uses.
First. 1.
What has been here said answers that Challenge of the Papists; Where was
your Church before the Days of Luther? We answer, Where the Light was. For
though great Darkness was introduced by Antichrist for many years before the
breaking out of the Light in the days of Luther, yet there has been always a
mixture of Light in the obscurest times, and there the true Church has been.
There have been Witnesses to the Truth ever since the rise of the Man of Sin,
and their testimony witnesses to the true Churh, distinct from Antichrist, in
that it witnesses to the Light where the true Church has always dwelt, which
Church still professed against the Additions and Impositions of the Man of Sin,
hating and abominating his Idolatrous Corruptions and Superstitious Inventions,
and held to the Faith and Truth of the Gospel. And as this Church, like the
Light, did still bear witness to it self: So did the continual opposition made
against the Light and Truth professed, bear witness to the same. And therefore
we remit the Papists to their own oppositions and persecutions, for an Answer
to their Challenge. Yea, and this true Church has been visible at all times to
them that are of the Light. (For what can men in darkness see?) The Day, you
hear, has been one all along, and therefore the Sun did never set in it, and
the Light has still been, Index sui and tenebrarum, A discoverer both of it
self and of darkness. All things that are reproved (or discovered) are made
manifest by the Light: For whatsoever does make manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13.
is Light. And therefore the true Church has always seen both her self and
the false Church; but the false (wanting Light) could never see the true.

Use 2.
The Doctrine may serve to show us the parallel between the Day of the Gospel,
Use 2.
and the Day of them that do profess it, which is also intermixed with Light
and Darkness, so that it is neither Day nor Night. For,

First, There is Knowledge mingled with Ignorance, and Truth with Error, even
in the best of God's Children, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10-12.
who know but in part, and prophecy in part, till that which is perfect, in
another world, is come. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now we know in part, but then shall we know, even as we are known. Thus
it is, and thus it will be, till our Sun is set, and then it will be perfect
light.

2. There is also Trouble mingled with Tranquillity, 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10.
Adversity with Prosperity, Isai. 50. 10.
Light of inward Peace and Comfort with inward Doubts and Darkness, whiles we
live here below.

Use 3.
We are showed, Use 3.
That the darkest time of the Gospel-Day is yet to come. For that time is to be
expected in the Evening, which is the darkest part of all the Day. Only this
Darkness will not be (as I conceive) in respect of the withdrawing of the Light
of Truth, but of the Light of Peace and Tranquillity: For at the Evening of
this Day, Men shall look unto the Earth, and behold Trouble, and Darkness, and
Dimness of Anguish. And this will immediately precede the Conversion of the
Jews, through the opposition of Turk and Pope.

For this will be the time when the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world
shall be gathered together to the battle of the great Day of God Almighty. Joel
3. 10.
At what time Men shall beat their Plough-shares into Swords, and their Pruni^^
hooks into Spears.

But though that will be the darkest part of the Day, yet we must expect gloomy
times till then, though with intermixed beams of Light, wherein God will still
be setting this over against that, to the end that Men should find nothing
after him. And thus God will Chequer out the Gospel-day, till that be fulfilled
which is spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 60. 1.
Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. And seeing the day shortneth, and the shadows of the Evening begin to be
stretched out, let us expect no more Days of Tranquillity and Peace, but Wars,
and rumors of Wars, Nation lifting up Sword against Nation, and learning of
War, the confused noise of Battle, and Garments rolled in blood; For the Man
upon the red Horse is gone forth, to whom power is given to take Peace from the
Earth; and nearer the Evening still the darker. That which concerns us, is to
be in a Posture of Humiliation and Preparedness, for the reception of these
dark Dispensations. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints.

Use 4.
Let what has been said be for Exhortation. Use 4.


To pray for the Conversion of God's ancient people, the Seed of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, for whose sakes they are beloved. Till when, the Day shall
not be clear nor dark, but then the Sun shall no more go down, nor the Moon
withdraw it self, Isa. 60. 19, 20.
but the Lord shall be an everlasting Light, and the days of mourning be
ended. Isa. 62. 6, 7.
Therefore hold not your peace day nor night, ye that are the Lord's
Remembrancers, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and
till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.

Secondly, Though you want the Light of Peace, be thankful and improve the
Light of Truth. For it is a mercy that we have this part of the Light, though
we want the other; and of the two, it it is far the better, seeing we should
part with Peace for Truth, but not with Truth for Peace.

The Text says, It shall come to pass in that day, that the Light shall not be
clear nor dark; or (as after the Original) not be precious nor thickness, which
shows us, that the Light of Truth is precious, and though that of Peace is so
likewise, yet not of equal value; for Christ came not to send Peace on the
Earth, but the Sword, by the publication of the Truth; which was of so great
esteem with Him, that He bore witness to it to the Death, even when He
witnessed a good Confession before Pontius Pilate concerning the truth of his
Kingly Power and Government, which the Apostle adjureth us to attend, as of
great moment, though Pilate slighted it, saying, What is Truth? For he did not
propound that question for satisfaction, in that he stayed not for an answer,
but showed thereby, that he looked upon truth, and particularly that truth,
concerning the Kingly Power and Government of Christ, as a pitiful Cause
whereon to hazard the Life of Christ.

Oh! The Truth there confessed by Christ, is a precious Truth, a very great
Truth, and the Foundation of many Truths, which Christ sealed with his Blood,
which therefore we are adjured in the sight of God, who quickens all things,
and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession,
to keep without spot, unrebukeable until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let us then love the Truth, and this Truth, and improve it.

Thirdly, Seeing the Gospel-day is not equally lightsome in all the periods of
it; how thankful should we be, that we were born in a Time and Place of Light?
For great was the Darkness, and little the Light, about Six or Seven-score
years past, when England lay under the Darkness of Antichristian Ignorance;
since when, it has been turned from the Valley of the shadow of Death, into a
Valley of Vision. This heighteneth the account of the Land we live in, for the
enjoyment of so great a mercy, as no other Nation this day has enjoyed the
like, especially as to the clearness of the Light that has shined in it. And
though it will not be accompanied with outward peace, yet it will not want
inward, if we keep close to the Light, and live up to it in this our Day.

Fourthly, This Day being thus intermixed with Light and Darkness; Let us not
wonder, nor be offended, that there are such varieties of Persuasions,
differing one from another, and therefore all of them cannot be of the Light,
whatever is pretended by them that do profess unto them; but the Light has
influence upon some of them, and Darkness upon some other. So that God's
Heritage is unto him as a speckled Bird, which the Birds fly round about
against her: But however let us not fly one against another, lest we fly
against our selves, whiles we have our several feathers and colors in this one
Bird; but let us bear with one another as to particular Light and Darkness, so
long as we are all enlightened with the saving Knowledge of the Truth.

We ought not indeed to be Scepticks in Religion, but every one to be persuaded
in his own mind, yet in some things peradventure thou art in the Light, and I
am in the Dark; in others, the Day perhaps shines unto me, and not to thee.
Let us yield to the Dispensation of the Day, and keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the Bond of Peace; and if in any thing we are differently minded, God shall
reveal even this unto us: Nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained,
Phil. 3. 15, 16.
let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. For thus there are
some in the Visible Church, who are be-misted, when others are enlightened, and
yet all agree in Fundamentals, who ought to live in Unity, and the Stronger to
exercise Charity toward the Weaker; that God, who has begun to enlighten them
in other things, will acquaint them in due time with those Truths, whereof at
present they are ignorant: For it is God alone who reveals the Light unto us.
And He that forms the Light, and creates Darkness, may in some things make
it Day to one man, and night to another. We are all (who truly fear the Lord)
Children of the Light, and of the Day, and not of the Night, nor of Darkness,
as to our states, yet as to particular apprehensions in Truths of an inferior
nature, it may be Day to one and Night to another. And thus it will be till the
Evening comes, but then there shall be one heart, Zech. 14. 9.
and one way, one Lord, and his Name one.

Use 5.
Lastly, Use 5.
What has been held forth, administreth a word of Comfort, That this
Gospel-Day is known to the Lord, from the Morning to the Evening of it. He
knows the Light and also the Darkness, and who are in the one, and who in the
other, and how far. And therefore He knows what is done by the Children of
the Night to introduce Darkness, and to obscure the Day of the Gospel. For the
Day is his, and the Night is his, He forms Light and Darkness, and therefore
he orders the Rulers of the Darkness of this world, that no more either of
Ignorance, Error, Heresy, Superstition, and Idolatry on the one side; or of
Tribulation, Persecution, and hostile Opposition to the Truth and Peace on the
other, shall prevail further than He has determined. And whatsoever He has
appointed to be the portion of this Day, as to the darkening of it, yet it is
our Comfort, that the Day is known to the Lord, and that He will have a care of
it. For he sees the Darkness as well as the Light of the Day, the darkness and
the light are both alike to Him. He has seen the Day from the Morning of it to
this moment, and has ordered and disposed of the darkeness of Ignorance,
Error, Heresy, and Idolatry, and likewise of Affliction and Persecution in it,
in times of Pagan, Arrian, or Antichristian opposition. And his care of this
Day is no less toward the Evening of it, nor his love to to it, and ability
to see to it, any less than in the Morning, or Noon of it. He that said, I have
seen I have seen the Affliction of my People which are in Egypt, and have heard
their cry, by reason of their Taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; knows all
the Sorrows and Sufferings of his People in this Hour of the Gospel-day. It was
a very dark Night with Israel in Egypt, when God spoke these words to Moses;
for then was fulfilled in the Truth, what was signified to Abraham in the Type,
when an horror of great Darkness fell upon him. And yet, Genesis 15. 12
I have seen, I have seen, and I know, says the Lord, in the midst of that
horrid Darkness.

And therefore however the Day prove, and Clouds and darkness arise, as perhaps
they may do, marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher than the highest
regards. Men and Devils may be high, but God is higher, yea, higher than the
highest, which is a degree above the Superlative. God has a care of his Church
and Gospel, and of such as Preach it, and profess it, only it is our duty to be
humbled for the sins of Churches, Ministers, Professors, which may otherwise
the more darken and imbitter the Day that we are now entering into, which
calls us to Prayer, Humiliation, Mourning, and Reformation, wherein if God
assist us, it shall be well in the end; and though weeping may endure for a
time, yet joy comes in the evening. For it shall come to pass, that at
Evening-time it shall be Light.

FINIS.

