THE VANITY OF Self-boasters. OR, The Prodigious madness of tyrannizing Saul's,
mis-leading Doegs (or any others whatsoever) which peremptorily go on, and
atheistically glory in their shame and mischief.

IN A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of John Hamnet, Gent. late of the Parish
of Maldon in Surrey. BY E. H. Minister of the same, and late Fellow of Merton
College in Oxford.

Sen. Hyppol. Act. 1. Quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimium potest.

LONDON: Printed by R. Bishop for S. GELLIBRAND at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

Amicissimo juveni Ioanni Hamnet Generoso, ornatissimi viri Ioannis Hamnet
nuperrimae de Maldon apud Regnos Suthreios Genesis filio unico and haeredi, S.
ROgasti ut a me concio haec (rogo and ego ut a te pater tuus) exscriberetur,
optatum jam habes, utinam and ego pariter felix, hoc enim mihi unicum in votis,
juxta and precibus, at ipsissimum patris prodeas exemplar, ut sis non rei
familiaris tantum, sed and virtutum haeres, ut emorituri parentis, jam jamque
ultimum emittentis spiritum, coelestibus plane oraculis and fidem habeas and
morem geras; sic te tibi reddas, sic tecum vivas, sic proprio sinu, domique
senatum, aerarium, and exercitum habeas, sic Deo proximior fias, sic amico.

E. H.
Mald. pridie Calend. Iul. An. salutis, 1643.
THE VANITY OF Self-boasters: OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of John
Hamnet Gent. late of the Parish of Maldon in SURREY.
PSALM. 52.1. Why boastest thou thy self, O mighty man in mischief? the
goodness of the Lord endures for ever.


IT was much folly in the Stoics, to hold that all sins were equal, none of
a greater stain or poison then another; but it is stupidity in the Papists, to
make the gap so wide as to affirm, some to be venial only, and the other
mortal; If the Papists were in the right, then every soul which sins
should not dye, Ezekiel. 11.20.
if the Stoics, then should it not have been easier for Sodom and Gomorrah,
then for that City: Mat. 10.15.
Every sin does lineam transilire (as Cicere expresses it) is a transgression
of the Law, and that is death; then none is venial; thus the Papists err: and
if every sin is a transgression of the Law, then Long progredicum semel
transieris, auget transeundi culpam (as the same Orator:) and reason tells us,
the growth and continuance of sin make an inequality, and thus the Stoics
err.

Nay, every virtue being a quality, has its latitude, whose medium is not
[(...)] a strict Arithmeticall mean, but [(...)] a Geometrical mean, which
proportionably varies its distance according to the diversity of circumstances:
Arist, Ethie. 2.
What differences then and disproportions are there between vices, which are
therefore vices because they have no mean? Yes (doubtless) an ill suggestion
quickly stifled is not so bad as that which is nourisht into a thought, nor
this thought as bad as such a one, which grows up into the mouth, and breaks
out in words; nor this neither so sinful, as that which sets the head a
plotting, and the hand a working mischief; nor this plotted, active mischief
so black and sinful, as a wicked habit wallowed and delighted in; nor has
this wicked habit so much death and wormwood in it, as when it is swollen to such
a bulk, come to such a non ultra as to be boasted of; for lower then this can
thou not sink, unless thou sinkst into hell and take Jobs wifes advice,
cursest God and dyest. Again, not to love and pray for our enemies is a very
sin, a breach of our Saviors injunction, Mat. 5.44.
but a greater sin is it to withhold our love and prayers from Gods best
Children, and holiest servants; but worser is it to hate them; but yet far
worser, to be an instrument of their ruin; but worst of all, (and horror to
imagine) to triumph that thou wast thus mischievously employed, to boast that
thou did hatch the plot that ruind them, dischargedst the Cannon that tore
them, made the pill that poisoned them, wast a Doeg (a knight of the Post)
which did accuse and butcher them. Lastly, of all sins, pride and boasting
have the blackest brand, and of all boastings a boasting in mischief; and of
all boastings in mischief, a boasting (O thou mighty man, or) that thou art
mighty in mischief Well then may David in wonder and amazement, or I in his
person, ask Saul the persecutor, or Doeg his informer, and executioner, his
bloody misleading instrument, or any other incarnate Devil peremptorily
triumphing in the blood or fall of Gods people, Why do thou boast thy self O
mighty man in mischief? the goodness of the Lord endures for ever. This
paraphrase for the explanation of the words. Take another, whereby we may know
the occasion of them.

David was now an innocent persecuted Dove (as you have the History, (1 Samuel
21, 22.) who willingly would have returned with an Olive branch in his mouth,
for he sought peace, but they would have war Psalm. 120.7.
Wherefore finding the floods still up, the waves encompassing him on every
side, which made him afraid Psalm. 18.4.
And having no quiet place, no whereto rest his foot on, he returns like Noah's
Dove to the Arc, betaked himself to Abimeleth the Priest of the Lord for
advice and succor; who believing him fast both to God and the King (though the
king was not pleased to think so) did not stick, in case of necessity, to break
a ceremony, gives him the hallowed bread and Goliahs sword: But see the
mischief, the Devil (as usually it falls out) had sent a Doeg (who even in
Gods Temple was his Chapel) to gather pretense of slander and death against
them, who presently carries and aggravates the business to Saul; Saul being
before heated, was now on fire, turned his former rage into madness, (so
quickly does a bloody tyrannical nature kindle at the least hint) he forth
with sends for Abimelech, and making his will his Law, becomes himself: both
the accuser and the Judge, and makes Doeg his informer his speedy executioner,
who forth with falls on Abimelech, and for the relief he afforded the Lords
servant and his own faithful subject, ruins both him, his family and City.
Had not David then, think you, just cause to be thunderstruck at the confident
and peremptory proceeding of the tyrant Saul, or his bandog Doeg, and in
amazement to cry out, Why do thou boast thy self O mighty man in mischief?
the goodness of the Lord endures for ever. This the occasion of the words.

I will not raise a quarrel by telling you how Expositors wrangled and are
divided about my text, how they turn and alter both the sense and words,
because though they ring as it were changes on them, and set the words several
ways, yet (like skillful Musicians) they keep the Music still sweet, and the
tune good. Notwithstanding I should much wonder how the Papists so constant to
their old Translation, which they call St. Hieromes, should here leave it and
follow the Septuagint, did I not know they gladly take any occasion to baulk
the Original. The words are, as you already guess, a Question by way of
admiration, Why do thou boast thy self O mighty man in mischief? and the
ground or reason of that question [for the goodness of the Lord endures for
ever.] The Question naturally and of it self falls into these 3. Questions: 1.
Why do thou boast thy self? 2. Why do thou boast thy self in mischief?
3. and lastly, Why do thou boast thy self in mischief O thou mighty man?
or that thou art mighty in mischief? all which the ground and reason of the
general Question does make good; and severally answer: so that the burden of
the 136. Psalm might very well be the burden and keeping of my discourse;
Thus: 1. Why do thou boast thy self in any thing? for the mercy of the Lord
endures for ever: whatsoever thou have, 'twas his mercy that gave it thee, and
it is the enduring of his mercy that continues it. 2. More especially I wonder,
Why thou do boast thy self in mischief, glory in thy shame, to see thee
thus daring I am at a loss, scarce my self, for know again, the mercy of the
Lord endures for ever: it is the enduring, the continuance of his mercy that
thou art not blasted in the midst and heat of thy pride and mischief. 3. I
most especially wonder, why thou do boast in mischief O thou mighty man, or
that thou art mighty in mischief; to see thee so desperate I leave to be man,
have almost as little of reason in me as thou have of God; for once more know,
that the mercy of the Lord endures for ever: notwithstanding the blood and
Cross of the Saints be thy thirst and pride, yet know, as for Israel, as for
them, the Lord of Hoasts, the Lord is their memorial, the great and constant
love of God will in the fittest time relieve his sheep and repay their wrongs.
Hos. 12.5.

But I must suit my discourse to the sad occasion of our meeting, nor will the
short warning for my meditations, or the scantling of time allowed me for their
delivery, suffer me to be thus exact. For the general Question broken into
these particulars does justly challenge more then an hour for the handling of
each of them severally. At this time therefore only of the 2. former
Questions. And (truth is) I have been therefore the larger in paraphrasing and
opening the words, that you might be the better contented to give me leave to
defer the last Question to some other opportunity. Now for the first
Question, besides the ground and Reason in the Text, which (to speak truly)
does more properly make good the two other Questions; we have 3. other grounds
and reasons, according to which this 1. Question will also multiply. The 1.
ground and reason is the lowness, weakness and nothingnesse (as I may so
speak) of the party boasting, whether Saul, Doeg, or any other; and then the 1.
Question will be, Why do thou poor, frail, nothing man why do thou boast
thd self? The 2. ground and reason is the uncertainty, emptiness, and vanity
of that which necessarily must be the subject of self-boasting; and then our 2.
Question will be, Of what do thou boast thy self? The 3. and last ground
and reason, is the fondness and foolery of the end of self-boasting, viz. the
froathy applause of the giddy multitude; and thus our 3. and last Question will
be, To which end do thou boast thy self? Of these in their order, and first
of the first, Why do thou poor, frail, nothing man, why do thou boast thy
self?

Caetera animalia mihi nature a potius quam ratione artem aliquam exercere
videntur, ut formicae and apes; homo vero sicut corpus armis nudum sic and
animum artium destitutum habet, Ga'en de usu partium l. 1.
(as the Physician.) Other creatures seem naturally to exercise a kind of art,
as the Be and Emmet, but man, as he has a body void of natural weapons, so
also a mind void of natural arts; and although Galen immediately adds [Quod
pro corporis nuditate manus, and pro artium imperitia rationem accipit] that
his hands supply the want of weapons, and reason recompenceth the want of arts,
yet his reason (though naturally [sanissima] never so sound and acute (say
Socinus what thou will) if not first [sanata] bent and rectified by the Holy
Ghost, is no better then a sword in a mad man's hand, wherewith whilst he lives
he does himself more harm then any other creature is capable of. Hark what
low thoughts my kingly Prophet had of man, Surely every man at his best estate
is altogether vanity, Psa. 39.5.
He says not that man is vain only, but vanity it self: and [Abstracta sunt
significantiora] Abstracts are weightier and come more home. 2. He excepts none
from being vanity it self, Every man is vanity: Neminem excipit, ne quem
decipiat, says a Father Austin.
He excepts none, because he would deceive none. 3. Not every man only, but
man in every estate and degree, is vanity it self; yes at his best estate he
is so. 4. He is vanity it self in every both part and faculty of soul or
body, for he is vanity (says he) altogether. 5. and lastly, all this (it
seems) is a very certain truth, otherwise he would not have affirmed it with
this serious asseveration (surely) surely man is vanity it self, every man is
vanity it self, every man at his best estate is vanity it self; Yes, every
man at his best estate is altogether vanity it self. I know not what might be
more said to cool and damp the swellings and excrescencies of proud man.

Our sad and miserable condition in this world caused (as some have well
conceived) that fond opinion [of men's soules] to get within the wisest of
Philosophers; which, say they, had from the beginning their creation and being
in heaven, and for certain faults there committed, were sent hither to be
imprisoned in flesh, to be wrackt with its passions, and to undergo the
multitudes of miseries, which unavoidable seize us. Nay, the thought and
knowledge of the poor and wretched estate of man brought also this error into
Divinity; for I have read of a sect of Heretics, called Origenists, who were
of the same opinion with the Philosophers, who we may well think were so
called from Origin the Father, because I find Austin bringing him in speaking
almost the same words Animas fuisse olim in coelo angelos, qui in coelo
peccantes, dejiciuntur in haec corpora quasi in se pulchra; and tot in coelo
ruinae, quot in terra nativitates, Ep. Tom. 2. p. 124.
This consideration also made the Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 63.
Naturalist conclude it an argument of natures bounty afford us such diversity
of poisons, whereby we may free our selves from the world and its crosses. And
though Religion allows not of this atheistical exchange of misery, of leaping
out of the Fryingpan, as we speak, into the fire, even Hellfire; yet the
miserable condition of man has made some of the Fathers to bestow
large-commendations on death; that known speech of Ambrose is most remarkable,
Mors remedium potius poenae, quam vindicta culpae; Death was brought on us
rather for the ending of our punishment then for the punishment of sin: For a
punishment, says he, was it said unto man Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat thy bread; but for his comfort was it
added, till thou return to the earth: And even in this respect also is it
truly affirmed by our best Divines, that though death considered according to
its own nature, be a punishment; yet as it is considered with relation to the
faithful, it is not, because to them the nature of it is changed, and from a
curseit is turned into a blessings for the sting of it Sin is taken away, in
which its hurt and punishment consisted; and whereas Arminius would therefore
prove death properly a punishment even to the faithful, because though the
right of holding them captive be taken a way from death by Christ, yet from the
actual dominion of death we are not freed till the resutrection, I could tell
him (might I stay so long) that death has not this actual dominion over the
faithful (he speaks of) seeing by Christ we have gotten the victory over it;
so that we may not crouch to it as captives to their Governor, but rather as
Conquerours over a captive may we triumph ( O death where is thy sting? 1 Cor.
15.55.
thy punishment, thy dominion?) thought thou art an enemy, the last enemy to be
destroyed, and art though by the Arminians to help forward our afflictions,
yet abundantly have thou helped forward our good, the good not only of our
souls, which hereby fly to heaven, are made infinitely and eternally happy,
but of our bodies also, which hereby have a thrice happy deliverance. First,
they are delivered from the sense of misery, from the pains of sickness, the
troubles of old age, the crosses of the world, and the misusages of
persecutors. Secondly, they are delivered from the society of wicked men; they
are took from sojourning in Mesech, and from dwelling in the Tents of Kedar,
which in this world is so loathsome, so burdensome unto them, Thirdly, and
lastly, they cease from their labors, not only from their sufferings, under
which they unavoidably labor, but from their labors of sin, they rest from
their works of wickedness: sin by death loses not only its dominion, but
its habitation, it shall not only not reign, but no longer dwell in their
mortal bodies, and the reason is, because their bodies shall be no longer
mortal.

'Twas well asked, why is earth and ashes proud? Ecclus 10.9.
so true is that common etymology, [homo quasi ex humo] man is so called, because
his foundation is in the dust, Psalm. 108.9.
our first parents had no other materials, nor ever since have we: nay the
bowels whence we sprang are nothing else [ Wonderfully and fearfully ( says
the Psalmist Psalm. 133* 15.
) have thou made me in the nethermost parts of the earth] i. in my mothers
womb, and so (truth is) the Chaldee Paraphrast reads it: hence the Hebrews
call women plainly earth; so truly, so verily earth are we, not only made of
earthy materials, but cast also in an earthy molde.

So earthy and mouldring, that that which we call life, is it self but a
wasting and dying, a continual flux and decaying, no part of it being our
own, nay no part of it being but [punctum continuationis] the [(...)] the
present moment, which too is so near nothing, that (as the Philosopher)
desinit esse antequam est; it begins almost not to be, before it is. What is
past of this we call life, is lost, what is to come is not gained, this present
instant only remaining, which was so fleet to that 'twas gone as soon as I
could tell you 'twas come, is vanished, whilst 'twas spoke of. Be not mistaken,
death consists not in the last gasp, last groan, or fit; these do not name or
cause death, but finish it: just as it is not the falling of the last sand in
this glass, which makes or names this hour, but the falling of all the sand;
and the hour might be then said to make toward an end, when the glass was
first turned. It Is not, you know, the last blaze of a Candle, spends him,
because he is spending all the time he burns, and may truly be said even then
to begin to go out, when he was first lighted. No otherwise is it with us,
death consists not in the last breath or sickness, no, it is now upon you,
even upon the best and healthiest constitution, every breath you fetch, every
step you move, and every journey you take, it is toward the grave, thither were
you tending, when you first set out, even the first minute of your birth; all
of you beginning then to die, when you first began to be.

But men resolving to be proud, A Cavil answered.
and therefore willing to forget they are but dust and ashes; may reply, It Is a
very truth, that in these times and places of War and sickness, our earthy
frail condition plainly appears; but at other times, and in other places, we
know it is otherwise. Have there not bin, and are there not even now amongst us
many aged people? Answ. It Is confessed, but yet there is scarce any of these aged
ones, which you call now living, which on serious thoughts and recollection
dare say they truly live, that only being true life which has joy and
contentment individual with it, which the cares and thorns of the world, the
weaknesses and infirmities of old age denying them, denies them also truly to
live. So true is that of my Psalmist, Psalm. 90.70.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be eigthy years, then is their strength labor and pain. If joy
and content did not only speak us truly and properly alive, then they in hell
may be said to be alive, but on them the second death has seized. Aged men (by
reason of the troubles and cares the world has brought on them) are like those
on the seas, bent for a short voyage, but vexed and hindered by contrary winds
and tempests: for as such cannot be said [ multum navigare, but multum
jactari,] not to fail far, but to be much tossed: so old people may not so
properly be said to live long, as to be troubled long. But grant that some old
men have been so healthy and happy, that they never yet tasted the bitter of
cross or sickness, and grant that with Wine, good Company, Cards, and a
careless self, loving heart they can merrily pass over the fears and
miseries of Church and State: grant that in such frantic jollity they attain
to 80.100. years, yet that life is but [vapor aliquanto diuturnior] (says the
Father) a better lasting vapor; Austin in Psalm. 6.
nay, [ sitoto illo tempore viveres, ex quo Adam e paradiso emissus est vsque
in hodiernum diem, videres vitam tuam (says he) non fuisse diuturnam, quae sic
avolasset] if thou had been borne when sin slung Adam out of Paradise, and
lived to this present moment, thou must necessarily confess, thy life may not
properly be called long, which is so swift-winged. Seeing then our life is so
short, miserable, and uncertain, may we not stand amazed at the general pride
that overspreades and oppresses the whole Kingdom, and ask almost every man
we meet, Why do thou poor miserable nothingman, why do thou boast thy
self? And thus much suffice for the proof and illustration of the first
branch of our first question; let us in the next place apply what has been
said.

Psalm. 39.5.
, then certainly in these bleeding sick and worst times, we are fallen on,
it is not only before God, but in it self nothing. All of us now (as David
complains Psalm. 119.109.
) carry our souls in our hands; or, as our Divines Ainsworth in locum.
with the Chaldee Paraphrast expound him, being every day, nay every hour
through the destroying angels of War, and the sickness raging amongst us, in
jeopardy of our lives, it should make us again with David, (as Lorinus Lorin.
in lib. Sapient, 6.4. v. 7.
and others expound him) to carry our souls in our hands i. with meditation of
the certainty of death, and the uncertainty of its coming [animam velutmanibus
gestare, ut Domino ad nutum offeramus] so to carry our souls in our hands,
that we be ready, willingly and preparedly to yield them up unto the Lord, let
him call for them never so suddenly. And, here bethinking my self both of the
misery and carelessness of our times, I am lost in the comparison. If ever
England were inhabited by people of Laish, if ever we were lost in a
Leathargie, buried in security, dulled and deaded in a senseless course of
sinning, then now especially. What alatums and warnings have we had, and even
now are bellowing in our ears? and yet, Behold joy and gladness, slaying of
Oxen, and killing of sheep, eating of flesh, and drinking wine Psalm. 22.
] At such a carelessness the Prophet stands amazed, even when judgment was
threatened, and for it the Lord assures the Jews that they should be utterly
destroyed, [this iniquity should not be purged away until you die, verse 14.]
Oh my Brethren, how justly may we be lost then with the apprehension of the
deadnes, and senseless stupidity of our times? and what a fearful and utter
destruction may we expect at Gods hands, whose judgments are not only
threatened, but in execution? Oh! they fall thick and heavy on us, and yet are
we still the same constant and careless trudgers on in the old sins of our
nature, cu^^ome and crimes: nay, we hate to be reformed, accounting those our
enemies and misusers, who would recall and better us. War, Civil war (the
most bloody and lasting of any) and the sickness rage amongst us: the sad
breach between the King and his great Council, not made only, but
proclaimed, the gappe grows daily wider, the Drum speaks louder, and the
sword drinks blood thirstier then ever, massacres, burnings, batteries,
besieges, (things not heard of for many, (many years in our Island) are our
familiar misery, and discourse: yet (alas, alas!) as if we could neither see,
nor hear, we continue the same careless indifferent Christians.

We often hear and read of the cruel suffering of our Brethren, both with us
and beyond the Seas, especially in bleeding and dying Ireland, such sufferings
that 'twould make the heart ache to think of them, the ear tingle to hear
them, and the tongue faulter to relate them? and yet (still took with the
sins and courses of the world, with the vanities, idolatries, and
superstitions of pastimes) you never set about the making up of your accounts
between God and your souls, of the making even with heaven; the Lord knows
how soon (sooner it is to be feared then the Devil will let us believe) we may
be made to drink the dregs of that cup, which our poor Brethren have begun
unto us.

It Is much to be wondered at, that you, which have so many arguments for praying
against sudden death, should make such no-preparation against it,. But do you
know what in that short ejaculation you pray for? In it you do not so much
pray against thieves, bloody persecuters, the Pestilence, Impostumes,
Apoplexies, Palsies, Fire, Water, Thunder, Earthquakes, the hazzards and
dangers of Civil War only, the usual messengers of untimely deaths: but
that you may by a blessed use of the means (such as praying, hearing,
meditation, conference, sanctified afflictions, etc.) so confirm your faith,
and perfect your repentance, that you may at all times be armed and provided
against death: which means if you neglect, you live contrary to your own
pretended desire, and consequently your prayer is vain, and hypocritical, an
abomination to the Lord. But if your prayer be hearty, and your endeavors
answerable, that thereby you are prepared to meet the Lord, whenever he shall
call for you, death then can never be sudden, let it come when it will, and how
it will, or by whom it will. So much truth has that of Solomon's in it, Wisd
4.7.
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be at rest,) though
he be took away sooner, then after the ordinary course of nature he might
expect, in his youth (,happily) full strength, or best complexion, yet being
took so doing, standing on his watch, and guard, by faith and repentance
having made Christ his, and by a continual circumspection living in a constant
expectation of death, he dies in full assurance of rest and happiness: whereas
wicked Psalm. 55. vit.
bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days i, either as a
judgment on their hard hearts, which cannot repent, they shall be cut off in
the midst of their strength and sins, (as most interpret the words) or wicked
men, though they die feeble, and aged, yet are they said [dies dimidiare] not
to live out half their days: because they are so deeply in love with the
world, and greedy of life, that they would willingly live as long again, as
already they had: or lastly, are so careless of their walking, so little
knowing how the precious time passes away, that they are at their journeyes
end, ere they think they have gone half way: thus being took away before
they expected death, they are took away also ere they could half provide for
it.

Whereas if we consider how frail and brittle even naturally, how subject to
variety of casualties, the frequent instruments of sudden death, we are; how
many continually fall on every side of us; what store of blood-thirsty Papists,
and desperate Libertines rage, and swarm in our land, each whereof [suae vitae
incuriosus, tuae dominus] grown careless of his own life, becomes master of
thine; and upon these considerations always keep Sen. Ep. 66.
in our view and mind, approaching death, we should never be unprepared for
it. Non subito moriuntur, qui semper se morituros cogitaverunt.] i.e. those
which with Saint Paul, dye daily 1 Cor. 15.31.
(for so also may he be understood) cannot die suddenly. If therefore thou art
resolved to pray, From sudden death good Lord deliver us, pray also with David
Psalm. 92.12
Teach us so to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
i.e. bring them to wisdom, make them wise: Now a wise man's heart (says the
Preacher Eccles. ^.5.
) discerns both time and judgment; the last time death, and the last
judgment at Christ's second coming: not that he punctually knows the time
when he shall die, or when Christ shall in flaming fire be revealed from
heaven; no, these times and seasons belong unto God alone; but that he so well
discernes the one and the other, that neither of them shall take him
unprovided, to this purpose (as it becomes a wise son) [ he gathers in
summer Prove. 10.5.
] In the long days of peace, and the glorious sunshine of the Gospel, he
lays up against Winter, i.e. either against times of blindness and
persecution, when the means shall be denied him, or else against death, when
his strength, like that of Plants, returns to the earth, there to be kept
until the Resurrections spring. You therefore which desire to be freed from
sudden death, and by your prayer will witness this your desire, witness it
also, I beseech you, by your careful endeavor to prepare for its coming:
pray that you may apply your hearts unto wisdom, and manifest your selves to
be wise sons by gathering in Summer. O gather therefore (gather apace) whilst
it may be (yet) said to be Summer: For ought I know, our Sun may be
declining, and our Summer drawing toward an end, darkness and spiritual
blindness may be coming faster on us, then the years Winter. We have (truth
is) at this time a great shine, great store of excellent and faithful
Preachers, but this may be but Vltimus lucernaefulgor, the last blaze of a
dying candle, greatest at last. The times are dangerous, full of tears and
dismal expectations (what bloody and desperate designs are continually hatched
and discovered!) strange talk and projects abroad, (God knows whether the
Jesuits many years plot may now have issue) the scales may turn; (sure I am
our sins and hardened hearts deserve it) nay, do we not see them swagge, and
much ado to keep even? and did not the prayers and humiliations of some few
good souls amongst us, which sigh and cry both for their own, and the
abominations of the land, add weight unto the right scale, we were utterly
lost. O how suddenly may the freedom and liberty of enjoying God in his
Ordinances, for want of valuing and rightly using them, be took from us! Let
therefore you, and me, and him, let every one of us resolve with his Savior, [
John 9.40.
To work the works of him that sent us, whilst it is day, because the night
comes, when no man can work;] the works of him that sent me, not of my
Father, Vt obligationem faciendi ipso missionis nomine declaret Maldon. in
locum.
, that he might show the necessity of performing these works, from his
purposely being sent for their performance. So ought we whilst it is called to
day, the time of our life, the time of our liberty, or the time allowed us for
coming in, let us ply the businesses breeding faith, and perfecting
repentance, not only because they are the works of our Father, works tending
to his glory, but also because they are the works of him that sent us: to this
end has he sent us into the World that we might repent and believe. It
concerns us therefore carefully to use all the means to attain to this
perfection ere we are took out of the world, ere the night of death come on us,
when no man can work.

And for ought I know to the contrary, this night wherein no man can work, may
as well include our last sickness, the time of dying, as that after it. Death
is a harder task, and there is more to do in it then most men think of. How
much business we may then have, and how little time allowed for its dispatch,
God only knows. A careless man going on in the sins and courses of the
world, who thinks it not worth the while in times of health and content, to
trouble himself with the melancholy of repentance, will find it employment
more then enough on his deathbed for his weak heart and giddy head to set his
house in order, (the chief thing in these troubles cared for by worldly
Achitophels) with patience to undergo his present pains, or to make the
little and spiritlesse flesh, God shall leave him, willing to depart: What no
time then (my brethren) and quiet will he have to make even with God, having
run on 30, 40, 50. or more years in horrible arrerages? what little leisure
then will he have to resist the Devil, quiet his conscience, or answer his
clamorous sins? I shall in a word show you what a toil, and trouble, almost
invincible, 'twill be for that man to dye well that has lived ill, acquainting
you with these 2. things; 1. How hard it is for such a one to be willing to
dye. 2. How hard it is for him dying to resist the Devil.
First, see how hard it will be for him to be willing to dye.

Whatsoever is destructive to being or life, nature abhorres, the continuance
and preservation of this, being its only appetite. Such a one then, as yet
being in the state of nature, cannot but mightily dread death. Nay, there has
been in the dearest of Gods children this unwillingnesse to dye; in Jeremiah,
^r. 37.20.
Therefore hear me now I pray thee, and let my supplications be acceptable
unto the King, my Lord, that thou cause me not to return to the house of
Jonathan the Scribe, lest I dye there. Our Savior foretelling Peter that bold
professor, [ Though all should be offended, yet not I Mat. 26.37.
] of his death, foretold him also how unwillingly he would undergo it, Thou
shall be carried whither thou would not John 21.18.
And thus unwilling have the Saints been to dye, not only when wealth and
pleasures would have made them in love with life, but even in such times as
these, when sin and misery did abound in the world; yet even then loath have
they been to be took out of it: just as Lot, who though his righteous soul was
vexed day by day whilst he lived in Sodom 2 Pet. 2.8.
, although he knew that a fearful destruction was falling on it suddenly, yet
how strangely did he linger when God would take him out of it? insomuch that
the two Angels were constrained, laying their hands on him, to force him out.
So weak was the purest and best flesh that was ever made, even our Saviors,
though united to the Godhead, that it begged, If it be possible let this cup
pass from me, Ipsa vox non exauditi magna est expositio Sacramenti, Leo in
Mat. 26.39.
The mystery that Christ should be God, and not be heard, is to tell us, that
nature, flesh and blood would not willingly purchase any good thing at so dear
a rate as the price of its life, and being: Man then, yes the best man, nay God
himself, as he was a man, being not able without some struggle and reluctancie
to undergo the last and sad departure of the soul from the body (these dear,
intimate and ancient friends:) with what heartbreaking then and tormenting
unwillingnesse does a man formerly careless and customary in Religion yield up
his soul?

Again, take notice how hard 'twill be for him to resist the Devil, who then
especially recollects what malice and poison is within him, and vents it with
most violence? Vltimum magno scelus animo patrandum (as Medea of her self Sen.
Med.
Sad and present experience will tell you that when the besiegers of a Town
hear that the siege is shortly to be raised by the relief of approaching
succors, whereby it must necessarily be for ever rescued out of their hands;
how fast and loud will the Ordnance then thunder? what underminings, what
stratagems, what force will be then used? then will they recollect whatsoever
is man in them; not a brain, heart, or hand which shall not be then employed,
that their former hopes may not fail, or their former labor be lost. And can
the Devil (think you) who has besieged a soul for 30, 40, 50, or 60.
years, and all this while has more then hopes of taking it, be forced to
remove siege ere he has tried his utmost strength, fury, and policy? And as
the Devil will on our deathbeds use his utmost endeavors; so shall we
(formerly careless) be utterly disenabled for resistance, Alas! we have not in
time of health got unto our selves the whole armor of a Christian, which is
very improbable, I will not say impossible, to begain'd in the last sickness;
for the armor, the chiefest whereof is the shield of Faith, comes by hearing
Romans 10.17.
God therefore seldom, very seldom bestows his graces on those who in their
health have not thrived by this Ordinance. And this is the reason why many
careless ones dye either without a Minister, or happily having an ignorant
loose one, which knows not how to awaken a soul out of its damnable lethargy;
or lastly, having a faithful one cannot by reason of their present pains or
fear of hell, reap any profit by him; and if any seemingly to us are by Gods
blessing on a faithful Minister brought to repent, their repentance is scarce
acceptable, or sound; 1. Not acceptable. May not God say to such, as he in the
Comedy, [Cum nemini obtrudipotest, itur ad me,] you make me your refuge, not
your choice; nay, you come not only last unto me, but you reserve that which
is worst for me: As in a barrel long drawn, [Non tantum minimum, sed and
pessimum relictum,] what is left is not only little, but grownes and dregs,
the worst of all; so offering your selves unto me on your deathbeds, you give
me only that little of your life that is left, and this little is the worst
part too, made up of pains, weaknesses, fears, and agonies; nor this neither
would you give me, knew you how otherwise to bestow it. What thank-worthy is it
to be willing to leave your sins, when you can keep them no longer? to
renounce the world and its vanities, when you must be took from them? to give
means to the poor, when you your selves cannot make use of them? to forgive
your enemies, when you are disinabled to return their injuries? or to persuade
your wife and children to rely on my providence, because you can no longer lay
up for them? 2. It Is usually unsound. Many at their last gasp with tears in
their eyes, groans in their hearts, and confession in their mouths miscarry
and go to hell, which we assuredly conclude to be in heaven, and have often with
joy related what good ends they have made, looking only at their last
pensiveness, and not at their former lives, by which only may we guess what
follows death, death being the Echo to life, so we usually dye as we live.
This sad truth my own reason and experience makes good. Some have I known in
extremity of sickness, being as they thought the last, have made large
confessions of their past errors, and have professed strong resolutions of
amendment for the future, in supposition of recovery. Oh! said they, if it
would please God to spare me, suffer me to recover my strengh ere I go hence,
add unto my years, mightily would I manifest, how the Lord has sanctified
his visitation unto me, by a reclaimed, strict, and exemplary life: yet being
restored again to their former strength and liberty, (Dogs and Sowes as they
are) have suddenly returned to their vomit and mire; this my experience tells
me: now my reason tells me, that had these wretches died in this their
repentance, which the devil made them believe, and they us was sound and true,
they must necessarily have gone to hell, because their after relapses, and
wallowings proved them to be counterfeits.

Thus are we necessitated to fear the miscarrying of all these careless ones,
though they are permitted to dye in their beds with a long and ordinary
sickness Oh then in what danger do they live? and how do they walk upon the
brinke of hell, which care not through repentance and humiliation to make their
peace with God in these dismal, bloody, dying times of ours, when probably
this benefit of dying by a long sickness in the bed, being denied them, they
may be suddenly cut off with a head full of Wine, hands full of oppression,
eyes full of uncleanness, and a heart full of malice; and think (Oh think)
what then!



1 Cor. 1.19.
by which foolishness, as he and such like count it, it pleases God to save
them that believe; he has appointed as a means to work faith in them whom he
intends to save.



Augustine is very good, Verum quidem dicis, quod Dous poenitentiae tuae
indulgentiam promisit, sed huic dilaetioni tuae diem crastinum non promisit;
Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 16.
; That merciful God which has promised pardon upon repentance, has not
promised to morrow to him that deferres it. Whenever therefore thou art
called, come, do not defer thy coming till the eleventh hour, because you
have heard of the Thief then called: it is very likely in these bleeding, dying
times, that thou shall not live to the sixth. Secondly, Bolton Comfort. Walk.
from the Creation to this present hour, we have read but of one so
miraculously snatched out of the fire: 'twas a miracle wherewith God honored
the passion of his Son, and we may then only look for the like miracle,
when Christ is again to suffer. Thirdly, and lastly, Down. Warf. part. 1. lib.
2. c. 32.
Princes now and then, though very seldom, as tokens of their clemency, pardon
some man at the block, yet if any shall in hope hereof wilfully offend, and
having offended, delay suing for a pardon, till he be led forth to execution,
certainly he richly deserves to suffer, not only for his offense, but for his
presumption: just so the Lord to manifest the riches of his mercy, pardoned the
thief, when death (death eternal) was seizing on him: now those which
hereupon shall take occasion by continuing in their old and sinful courses,
fearfully to displease his Majesty, or having fearfully offended, yet shall
defer by faith and repentance to sue for pardon, utterly unworthy are they of
grace and mercy, and as probably as deservedly shall perish in their sins,
and be delivered up to the black tormentor.

To conclude therefore this first application (the sutablenesse whereof both to
our times and sad occasion has lengthened it a great deal beyond my
intention) considering how hard, almost impossible, it is to repent in our last
sickness, and how probable it is that the last and usual leisure of a long
sickness, will by reason of our natural frailties, the raging of infectious
and violent diseases, together with the thousand casualties of a bloody Civil
war, be utterly denied us, Let us speedily set about working forth our
salvation with fear and trembling: Let Us forthwith endeavor to make our
calling and election sure: Now, now, in this breathing time of health and
liberty, let us make good our title to heaven, confirm our evidence, our Faith,
which is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
and have in readiness our witness, which is a good conscience. The Scripture
will not give you any encouragement or allowance for the least delay. It Is to
day if you wilt hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95.7, 8.
not to morrow, if you will hear it; a days procrastination does harden the
heart. It Is now is, not hereafter will be, the acceptable time: Behold now is
the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.
The glorious time of the Gospel, wherein peace and reconciliation through
Christ is tendered on condition of faith and repentance, is expressed by the
present time and this day, to tell us (as I conceive) that there is a certain
time allowed for every man to come in, which nick and opportunity, through a
desperate carelessness o'reslipping, he is irrecoverably lost. And therefore
ought we to make so thrifty a use of this day, nay of this present time, of
this present hour of my discourse, as though this glass were now turned up
upon you, and that the time allotted for your, and your coming in did expire
with the falling of the last sand. For therefore (faith a Father Austin.
is our last day conceald from us, that we may believe every day to be the
last. Oh that the Lord would make me a blessed instrument to move, melt, and
soften but one heart here present, with the apprehension of that horror and
trembling, which seizes a foul impenitent and unprovided sinner suddenly
death-strucken, and with the blow having his conscience awakened; or into what
everlasting burnings and torments he sinks being never awakened. But I have
already trespassed too much in the lengh of the use of the first branch. I
shall recompense your patience in the shortness of the other uses. I go
forwards therefore to the second branch.

Of what do thou boast thy self? i. e. what have thou which might be a just
subject for boasting? whatsoever thou dare own, or call thine, are either the
good things of thy body, fortune, or thy mind, (as they are commonly
distinguished) we will make our examination severally. First then, the good
things of thy body are either beauty or strength; but neither of these can
justify the least pride or vaunt: Not beauty, which is Flos floris, the flower
of a flower: Man at the best is but a Flower suddenly gone, Ps. 103.15.16.
As for man his days are as grass, as a Flower of the field so he
flourishes, for the wind passes over it, and so it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more; but beauty is that which soonest fades and
alters in man, nay it is only (...), sch Aen.
the flower of color, or the color of a flower, which soonest fades in a
flower. Add to this, that Scripture, experience, Chronicles, and most
Histories tell us, that those sins and miseries can scarce be equalled, which
this fond thing (we call beauty) has produced. And even this might take off
from boasting of it, because it is (as Pindarus terms it) (...), the wanton
Goddesses Ambassador. Nor can strength, health, or manhood justify thy boast;
for know, especially in the times of war and sickness know, that the
healthiest, ablest men fall thickest: Strong and able men are daily called to
the dangers and hazzards of the war, and the purest and best complexions
soonest yield to the infection and cruelty of raging diseases; and most
Physicians affirm, that Temperamentum ad pondus (as they call it) the exactest
constitution has most danger in it, because it cannot long consist in its
perfection and excellency: Et quia non potest in melius progredi, labitur in
deterius, (as Galen somewhere) because it cannot grow better, grows worse: And
that Aphorism of Hippocrates Hippoc. sect. 2. Aphor. 30. (...)
will hinder your boasting, pains and diseases are easiest in youth and age,
[(...),] of more force against the strongest complexion. A sudden tempestuous
sickness, a fever, the Stone, or wind in the Stomach (as a tempest deals
with sturdy Oaks) soonest plucks up and overturnes the strongest, when weak
creeping wretches come off easier.

And if thou have no just cause to boast of the good things of thy body, much
less cause have thou to boast of the things we call the good things of
Fortune, because they are less thine own, longer winged, and fly away sooner.
First, no cause have thou to boast of thy riches, for nec verae sunt, nec tuae
Bern. Ser. 49.
, they are neither truly wealth, nor thine own: so far are they from being
thine own, that we are forbidden to gather them for our selves. Lay not up
(says our Savior) for your selves treasures upon earth (not that we are
forbidden with honest and moderate carfulness to endeavor an increase of our
stock and talent: Mat. 6.19.
No, the hand of the diligent makes rich, says Solomon, Prove. 10.9.
their growing rich is made the reward and encouragement to moderate and honest
carfulness; but that we should not lay up treasures for ourselves; that we
should not therefore carke, spare, and pine, that we may purchase a propriety in
wealth, that we may have heaps of gold and store of lands that we may call our
own, that we may have what to set our hearts on with that fool in the Gospel
singing lullabie to our souls, Soul take thy rest, thou have much goods laid
up for many years, Luke 12.19.
thou have goods laid up, the goods are thine, and for thee only are they laid
up: Well might this fool by the Psalmist Psalm. 39 6.
be said to be disquieted in vain, because he stored up riches, and knows not
who shall enjoy them: So far is he from knowing who shall enjoy them, that he
knows not for whom he gathers them. Even in this sense also that charge of the
Apostle I Cor. 10.24.
requires obedience, Let no man seek his own, but every one another wealth,
Let him not seek wealth for himself to make it his own, but for others,
either for his children, friends, Commonwealth, especially for God, for the
upholding of his cause, or the relief of his servants. And oh that men would
consider what no propriety, what no right they themselves have to their wealth,
what no masters themselves are of their own purse, when Gods cause calls
for it, and bids them deliver!

Again, the deceitfulness of riches (as our Savior calls it Mar. 4.19.
which especially fails us in our greatest necessity, should keep us from
boasting of them; when age or sickness throws thee on thy deathbed, thy full
barnes and crammed bags will afford thee little comfort, thy corn will not
then be nourishing, nor thy gold restorative. In this needful time they deal
with us as Hagar did with Ishmael Genesis 23.16.
, being not able then to comfort us with the waters of refreshment, they depart
from us, they yield us up unto death; and after death thy comfort will be least
of all, thine I mean, which pridest thy self in thy wealth: for in that last
and great day they will but increase thy onus, add to the score, and make thy
accounts deeper and more intricate. This misery riches bring with them though
well got, but if ill got, got by oppression, the trade of Usury, or other
unlawful gains, what no cause have thou to boast of them? especially in thy
last sickness, when their deceivablenesse plainly appears: this heavy strait
will thou be brought to, if thou make restitution, as God and thy conscience
requires, thou must then leave thy children beggars; if not, thy soul sinks
into hell: Coelum undique, and undique pontus.

Secondly, no just cause have thou to boast of thy honors, which though in
themselves good, not only as they are Gods gifts: [ He it is that raises the
poor out of the dust, and lifts the beggar from the dunghill, to set them
amongst Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory 1 Samuel 2.8.
] but also as they are rewards to those that stick for his Honor [ He will
honor those that honor him 1 Samuel 2.30.
]. Yet to those that desire to pride themselves in them are just cause of dread
and shame, for these reasons: First, such will desire honor far above their
desert and place: Thus Alexander, who gloried much in his height and Victories,
willingly accepted of divine respect; when some of his base Courtiers persuaded
him he was a God, then presently became he violent against the few faithful
friends of his that gainesayed it, so violent, that the faithfullest of them
was murdered; and no wonder, for thinking himself a god, 'twas easy for him
afterward to conceive that he was not bounded by Law or duty. Secondly, such
will not ouely affect honor far above them, but whatsoever honor they
affect, they are eager in the pursuit of it, and it cannot casily be guest,
what variety of sins and dangers such will run through to satisfy their lust;
they care not how dishonest the means be, how base the instruments, nor how
foul the way, so they may get to their journeys end. God grant that we owe not
our present sufferings, nay our present sins, our hideous lyings, oaths,
perjuries, bloody stratagems, murders, and oppressions to such inordinate
desires. Thirdly and lastly, they which desire honor merely that they may
vaunt and glister, they will not desire that which neither God nor man has
thought fit for them, and with a strange eagerness, and hazard pursue this
desire, until they have either lost themselves or gained their unjust honor,
but into these straights are they also cast, viz. to be as base and sinful
in keeping their Honor, as they were in the obtaining of it (according to that
rule of the Historian Salust.
, [Iisdem artibus retinetur gloria, quibus parta fuit] glory is to be kept upon
the same terms it was got; if thou by sinful courses and base instruments
gottest up, the same finnefull courses and base instruments are necessary to
the keeping of thy height, otherwise they which set thee up will pull thee
down again, ex. gr. if by flattery and dissembling thou gottest so high, then
(O misery!) must thou still be base and flatter: if by bribing, then must thou
still be sending and giving, otherwise 'twill be with thee as with a Comet,
which (say Astronomers) continues its blaze and luster no longer then it has
matter to feed and maintain it; nor will thy glory, if thus come by, last
longer then thou have oil to foment it, base smooth language or gifts; but
when these fail, thy great friend will begin to frown, and then down thou
must, and wilt fall like a spent exhalation. Put these together then, and tell
me. Have those which are so unjust in their desires, and so violent in the
pursuit of them, so violent (I say) that they often run through any sin, and
venture on any danger, rather then they will be hindered, yes and are forced for
the most part to a necessary continuance in the sins, by which, and
liablenesse to those dangers, through which they waded to their height: have
these (I say) just cause of boasting of their honor thus got and enjoyed?
Alas! my brethren, did you feel and know the stings and burnings, the throws
and cuttings of their guilty consciences, if they have any, you would not be
long in giving in your answer. But one step further, that they (Atheists as
they are) have no consciences, for none but Atheists would be so violent and
sinful in the pursuit of honor, and that they can gloriam ^sdem artibus
retinere, quibus parta fuit, keep their height and glory with the same sins and
strength wherewith 'twas got; yet all this will but make them great and
glorious sinners, whose end is horror to imagine.

And then for the best honors which are to be gained the best and most
innocent way, though offered and forced on thee; labor thou may indeed to
deserve them, but never to make them matter of thy boast: Hence our Savior,
the people crying, Blessed is he which comes King of Israel Luke 19.38.40.
, would by no means be brought to rebuke them; but understanding their
intention was to make him King, he withstood them Ioh. 6.^5.
, whereupon Hilarious, [Insinnat quod statum regium, and mundi honores volebat
mereri, and contemnere] he thereby willed the desert, and contempt of worldly
honors: Magne fortuna est magna servitus, high place is but an honorable
servitude, and will stand in little stead at last: it cannot stave of deaths
arrest, though happily it may the Laws; Even of the greatest of mortal, says
the Psalmist Psalm. 146.4.
, his breath gooth forth, he returns to his earth, (the earth from whence he
came) and then all his thoughts (not good thoughts certainly, for such are
gloriously satisfied, but his bad thoughts, his thoughts of soaring, revenge,
rioting, etc.) shall perish: Then (as Lucretius wittily Lib. 3.
Eripitur persona, manet ves, the play will be done, his exiit come, and his
robes took off, he will appear an arrant man, not of better earth or mould
then the poorest beggar.

Thirdly and lastly, no just cause have thou to boast of thy great friends, thy
dependancy or mighty relations, and that for these reasons; First, because most
are false, they dive and wind themselves into thy bosom; and being got into
thy innermost closet, acquainted with thy natural bent and inclination; they
will accordingly so bend and crook their words and actions, and therewith as
with a false key, they will unlock and open thy heart, that they may deal with
thee as Latiaris in Tacitus did with Sabinus Annal. 1.4.
, sound and pump thee until they have got enough out of thee to undo thee.
They will Eccl. 13.11, 12.
smiling on thee get out thy secrets, lay up thy words, will not spare to do
thee hurt, or to put thee in prison: There are I am confident plenty of such
friends storing up against a black day. How usual a way of poisoning is it to
profess Physic? Who would not have took Ioab to have been Amasa's friend? see
his friendly greeting, Art thou in health my brother? Takes him by the beard to
kiss him, but nothing less; this only to make way for more surely murdering
of him; for hereby (says the Text) Amasa took no heed to Ioabs sword, so he
struck him therewith on the fifth ribbe and shed out his bowels to the ground,
and struck him not again 2 Samuel 20.9.10.


Secondly, suppose thy friends not such wretched Caitiffs, as to intend to
build themselves a fortune out of thy ruins, or rise the higher by treading on
thee (though the discovery of many bloody underminings tell us, there are store
of such amongst us) notwithstanding few are there which do truly intend the
good of their friends. Many will be friends to thy wealth, thy power, wisdom,
or hospitality, which will not be so to thee; such as the Philosopher says,
[qui eo usque oleum infundunt, donec lucerna opus est] which put oil into the
Lamp no longer, then they make use of its light: But when thy candle is put
out, as Job phrases it Job 18.6
, when thou art disenabled from affording them comfort and relief, then
presently will they fall off, and (as he complains of his friends Job 6.15.
) deal deceitfully with thee as a brook, in summer, in the heat of thy
afflictions, when thou have most need of them, fail thee, and like David's
kinsfolk stand afar of Psalm. 8.1^.


Thirdly, grant thy friend true, and for the time fast, yet how soon may
another creep into his bosom, and thrust thee out? I need not to go so far
back as to tell you that Haman (but now Ahasuerus his great Favorite, the only
man privy to his sports, and businesses) was on a sudden forced to be an
instrument of Mordecai's honor, whom ere-while he would not suffer to sit
covered before him, and immediately afterward hanged on that Gallows he
reared for him Est. 7.
How suddenly the scales have turned, and good carding altered, our own
Chronicles will tell you, yes, our own times (very late times) will tell you
how a long imprisoned person has been took out of the prison, judged, and
censured his but now mighty adversary: 'Twere loss of time to show you those
many, whom sympathy and conversation have been long a twisting, which in a
thrice have been as famous for they enmity, as ever they were for their
friendship. One instance shall serve, Sejanus had but now so much of the bosom
of Tiberius (as the Historian tells us Tacitus
, that he styles him [consors curarum,] partnet in his cares; and so much of
his dignity, that he styles him [Collega imperii] partner in his Empire: but
how suddenly and fatally did the Scene alter, next day, nay next hour
[Calcamus Caesaris hostem;] Macro a new pellet, but his old Adversary, thrust
him out of Tiberius his favor, brought men and Authority to the Senate to
spoil him of his life, and (which was worse to an ambitious man) of his
honors too: then those, which but this hour were his Idolaters, became with
the hearing of six lines read, proud to be his executioners, and made him the
sacrifice, which but this morning was their God.

Fourthly and lastly, suppose thy friend (thy greatest friend) true and fast,
as constant too, as the three paires the Heathens boast of: let him be as close
and sure to thee as Jonathan was to David; nay further, suppose him as close
and as fast to his God too, yet he is still but Gods instrument: if thou do
ill, he neither will, nor dares stick to thee; if thou do well, yet can he be
nor more nor longer thine, then God shall suffer him. Nay let me tell you, if
high friends, great dependence, or mighty relation be that which you pride your
selves in and boast of, God may (and 'cis probable he will) so crush and humble
thy great friend, that thou may gladly make use of Peter's [I know not the
man:] 'twas I believe somewhat in the cause why the Lord lesus so left Peter,
that he denied, forswore, and wept, because he relied too much upon the man
Christ Jesus. Read we not that 'twas usual amongst the ancient to attach and
accuse friends as accessories, and conclude every traitors friend a
conspiratour? and that humor is not yet quite worn out: For though judgment
does not so peremptorily (as in old times) seize the friends of the accused, or
guilty, yet suspicion sticks close to them; and if jealous, suspicious eyes are
about thee, it is as bad as moss about a tree; 'twill for the present hinder
thee from thriving, and at last by degrees wither thee. No sooner was our
Savior betrayed, but present enquiry was made after his friends and followers;
then presently thou also Peter wast with Jesus of Galilee Matt. 26.69.71.
and again, this fellow also was with Jesus of Nazareth: (b) And though the
Disciples fell not presently with their Master, yet his cause was their death,
and because they persecuted him, they persecuted them much more.

This have I said, not that I would have you leave your Savior, or fear to
profess friendship to his cause and servants, but then you might know that
friendship, and relation only, be they never so innocent, may cause your
overthrow. Hence the Athenians Phocion asking them why others (he only being
thought guilty) should be accused, answered only [quod amici fuerint] because
they were his friends. Thus Alexander (as Curtius tells us) sought the death of
all Parmeno's friends and allies; and to Sejanus his friends [amicitia objecta
est] they were accused of friendship: Nay (as Tertullian witnesses of him
Apoloz.
, [portati sunt in carcerem emorituri puberes, qui mortem nesciebant, and sub
cultro ridebant] 'twas sufficient fault for his children to be his, who (tender
wretches!) were put to death, ere they know what it meant, and sported with
that axe that was to end both their mirth and life: So suddenly may the wind
turn and times change, that you may with a heavy heart say of your great
friend, what Evodius does of Sejanus, [Aeque illum amasse quam offendisse
periculosum] his friendship is now as dangerous as before his anger was.

To put this together then, if some friends are basely treacherous many
selfe-ended, others inconstant, and all but men frail, and uncertain in their
persons and condition, subject to the miscarriages of state and change of
times; yes so subject, that thy former friendship, and relation with them may
utterly ruin thee, though thou and thy great friend be never so innocent. This
being so, doubtless thou have no just cause to boast of thy friends, though I
bate thee the sinfulness of it.

But were we not ear and eyewitnesses to the contrary, we could not think
that any one which has not left to be man can be so very a craven as to crow
on these dung-hills, boast of mere froth, of these low, wordly, gaudy
nothings: a Heathen could say Sen. prae. sat in ratural. quested.
[quagrave;m contempta res est homo, si non supra humana so exercuirit!] man is
a very inconsiderable thing if the things here below only take up his time and
thoughts: yet there are [bona animi] the good things of the mind, somethings
within man, such as knowledge, sweet and affable dispositions, moral virtues,
together with reason, and other gifts, and natural endowments, which a man may
better call his own, and therefore the Heathens have so strangely boasted of
them, which some, even Christians have thought may enable them [expuris
naturalibus] merely of themselves to lay hold and keep fast their Savior, to
work out their salvation with fear and trembling (as pround nature
misconstrues, that place of the Apostle;) and therefore some, even Christians
have boasted of these natural, and moral endowments. But for my part so
sensible am I (and the Lord continue me so) of these wretched fruits, which
(radix ista damnata) (as the Father calls her o) nature that da^able root brings
forth, Austin. ^. contia Iuian.
that I cannot but in respect of these good things of the mind also (as they
are called) continue my wonder and question, and ask the richest endowed, the
compleatess man, that nature or industry has made, Why boastest thou thy self
in these?

And first, what just subject of boasting can the wisdom and knowledge of the
experientest learned man afford him, which some have thought at the best to
be but opinion: that whatsoever we are capable of, is not only uncertain in
its possession, but in its knowledge also: nay, this Tenet of theirs, That
nothing can be truly known, is not sufficiently known unto themselves: as
Lucretius well;

Nil sciri quisquis putat, id quoque nescit
An sciripossit, quod semel scire fatetur Lib. 4.

But grant our knowledge may be sure and certain, yet what just matter of
boasting can that be, which is purchased with so much ado, and may be lost so
easily? How much money, travel, sickness, patience, and study (though vulgar
ignorance think otherwise) go to the making of a wise knowing learned man,
whom an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy, or discontent, in a moment besots, or
strikes lunatic? Thus Eccius, Luthers great adversary (as great for his
learning, as his malice, as Osiander In Epit: Cen. 16. e. Com. lib. 23.
and Cardinal Cressentius, the Popes Nuntio, at the Council of Trent, as
Sleiden relates) were struck with a sudden frenzy: and Calius Rhodiginus will
tell you that Aristotle the Fountain and Conduit of almost all learning and
wisdom, was by a violent surprisall of grief suddenly cut off Antiq. lect.
l. 29. c. 8.
The Stoi^es the the greatest Idolaters that ever wisdom and learning had,
have set too low a rate upon them that they stick not to affirm that
Heraclitus and Pherecides (men oraculously wise amongst them) would have
changed their wisdom for health, if thereby they might have been rid of
their pains and Sickness for health (a good so common to us and beasts, that
some have therefore preferred riches before it.

-- Et divitem optare podagram
Non dubitant -- Iuven, Satyr.
)
Thus many have there been (and thrse none of the weakest neither) that have
preferred a childs simplicity, and a fools ignorance before it, lest by a
forethought, and miserably wise anticipation, they might suffer afflictions
before they fall, and being fallen, add to the load by a punctual comparison
of past happiness and present misery. Truly in this respect spoke the Greek
Poet [Ev (...)] the sweetest life is in knowing nothing Sophoc. Ajax.
of which Solomon gives the reason; because in much wisdom is much sorrow
Ecclesu.


And if thou have so little cause to boast of knowledge and wisdom, then much
less cause have thou to boast of a towardly disposition, natural ingenuity,
pleasantness of wit, yes or of the full chain of moral virtues, which all
put together, are but [semina and radices prudentiae] but the roots and
groundwork of wisdom. Know therefore that in the second place, sweetness
and ingenuity of Nature, nor the greatest stock of morality, can justify thy
boast; (i mean still, though we abstract from boasting its sinfulness) Though
these happily are in themselves good, Gods gifts, and challenge thy
thankfulness, yet not so absolutely good, or thine own, as to justify a
boast For these are at the best but home-made garments, which may perchance
serve to keep out wet in the world, get name and repucation amongst men, yet
is it not a fit dress for the Spouse to meet her Bridegroom in: and if thou
art not better clad at the great marriage feast, thou will be found without thy
wedding garment. Agains, do not these endowments, if not seasoned by the Holy
Ghost, make us more yielding and liable to temptation? witness these common
phrases, which often, out of a fond irreligious charity, we bestow on swine,
Alas! he is a man of a very good nature, An enemy only to himself, You see
the worst of him,) the worst, quoth you! God forbid I should ever see any of
you so bad: for happily sober and himself, he never swore; cheated, lied,
quarreled. etc. and may on the Lords day pass with most for a very good
Christian: but on Monday there comes a Messenger from the Devil, one of the
drinking crew, has him abroad, where, after a Catowse or two, he loses both
his sense and goodness, and then his lascivious gesture, and profane
language, confess that his former acted civility was not grace, but some
towardly seeds of morality, which vainglory and imitation had fostered into a
custom. Yet this is not all, these naturally sweet dispositions and virtues
make a man not only more pliable to temptation, but (though I dare not say, as
some, that they are at the best a hinderance to Religion) yet certainly may I
say with a Divine of ours, if they are not rectified by the good Spirit, they
cannot but block up the way to the power of godliness; and upon this his
reason too: because many, when they have perceived that natural sweetness,
and civil uprightness have got them name and credit in the world, and that it
will consist with the profit and pleasure which some bosom sin affords them,
then presently stop they here, contenting themselves with a probable being in
the right way, when (to speak truth) it is but a plausible way to eternal
death.

And if the best of natural dispositions, nay, if the best of our moral
habits which are [(...)] properly called virtues, are no just matter for
boasting, then certainly neither is our reason, or sharpness of judgment,
which is only [(...)] a natural virtue, and improperly so called. Know
Socinus in the third place, that thy reason, though naturally never so deep or
sharp, cannot make good thy pride and strange boasting of it: which by nature,
and of it self is darkened, Ephe. 4.18.
Nay, darkness it self Ephesians. 5.8.
, and this is that darkness which could not comprehend the light, John 1.5
that vessel which is not able to comprehend the way of the Highest 2 Fsdr.
4.11.
Though I cannot well side with them, who make reason an absolute enemy to
Religion, Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 3. Sect. 8.
and that the way to be ripe in faith, is to be raw in wit and judgment.
Though there is on the other side, Sapientia Dei in aperto (as Saint Austin
expresses it) the wisdom of God legible in the creature, though the veriest
Heathen has a Law written in his heart sufficient for conviction, yet there is
[sapientia Dei in mysterio] the mystery of godliness, (as Saint Paul speaks)
1 Timothy 3.6.
which is far beyond the reach and ken of natural reason: which when I
fasten my thoughts on, I cannot but think and say, nay, [(...)] with the
ancient Father, Shall I cry out [ Justin. Mart de trinit. p. 388.
(...)] that these points of Christianity are above our understanding, above our
reason, and above the capacity of created nature, and therefore a little before
he affirms, that the interpretation of them ought not to be [(...)] according
to humane reason P. 375.
[(...) but according to the sense and will of the doctrine of the Spirit,
especially (says he) [(...)] with the sons of the Church. Once therefore
well spoke. Tilenus, Syntag. l. 1. cap. 3. these. 30.
though since miserably he fell (rationem extinguit fides ut ducem, and
dominam, adhibet ut pedissequam) faith refuses reason, as judge or guide, but
not as follower, or servant. Hence excellently Saint Austin, (Noli quarere
intelligere ut credas, sed creed ut intelligas) labor not to understand that
thou might believe, but believe that thou might understand. This natural
reason of ours, if it has any light, it is in it self no better in respect of
the mysteries of godliness, then that of an ignis fatuus, which miserably
misleads: or at the best, it is but as a star to guide us (like that of the
shepherds) to Christ: now as a star, the Sun and Moon withholding their
shine, yields no light or comfort: So if the Word of God, or the Spirit which
enlightens the Word withhold their light, we shall, notwithstanding the
strength of natural reason, be enwrapped in perpeturall night: and (truth is)
such 2 star has it proved to many in Polonia, and Racovia, even the star
mentioned by Saint John, and called Wormwood, which made rivers so bitter,
that men tasting of them dyed, dyed thereof. Rev. 8.1.


To go forward then, if natural reason (the richest jewel in natures
Cabinet) is so blind in matters of Religion, that it cannot make good a
Socinian boast, we may justly go further and conclude: that nature bestowing
her gifts with never so broad a hand, cannot afford her greatest darling,
matter sufficient for one selfe-boast. Let me therefore in the next place ask
thee, Why do thou boast thy self in any gifts, excellency, or strength of
Nature whatsoever? Is It not a contest vanity of the poor to boast of their
wealth, the broken hearted of their jollity, the Captives of their liberty, the
blind of their quick sight, or a bruised Cripple of his legs? If so, what
fond madness is it for us to boast of our natural abilities? For poor and
blind Captives are we, bruised and broken Cripples by nature, and this we must
know, and acknowledge too, ere we can reap any benefit by Christ's coming:
Witness that of the Prophet, Isai. 61.1. Luke 4.18.
which our Savior affirms to be spoken of himself; The Spirit of the Lord
was upon him, to preach the Gospel, but to whom? to the poor, (i.e.) those
which through the sight and acknowledgment of their own natural poverty were
poor and low in their own thoughts; he sent him to heal, but whom? the
brokenhearted, (i.e.) those whose hearts are almost broken with the discovery
of their wretched estate, both by actual transgression and natural pollution,
to preach deliverance to the captives only, those which seriously confess,
what slavery is bequeathed them from Adam to sin, and the Devil, recovery of
sight to the blind, (i.e.) those which are truly sensible of their natural
ignorance and advernesse unto saving truths, and to set at liberty those which
are bruised, which are sufficiently sensible of that all-over bruise they had
by their first Parents fall; he fell with us in his arms, we were equally
crippled with him; but alas, this was not all, we were not only maimed in the
fall, but struck dead; for as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive 1 Cor. 15 15.
; For ought I know to the contrary, the Apostle here excludes all these from
having life in Christ, which will not acknowledge that by nature they are dead;
and what reason think you, has a dead man to boast of his natural abilities?
Be we advised rather by Prosper Lib. de libera arbitrio ad Ruffin.
, (agnoscat se humana debilitas, and cum mortui vivificantur, cum caeci
illuminantur, impii justificantur, confiteantur and vitam, and lumen, and
justitiam Iesum Christum) let humane weakness acknowledge it self, and since
the dead are restored to life, the blind recover their sight, and sinners are
justified, let them acknowledge that Christ above is their life, their light,
and their righteousness; and (as the Father goes on) qui gloriatur, in Domino
glorietur, qui cum esset impius, caecus, and mortuus, a liberatore suo gratis
accepit and justitiam, and lumen, and vitam; he that does glory, let him glory
in the Lord 2 Cor. 10 17.
, not in himself, who a sinner, blind, and dead received gratis, (i.e.)
without desert present or foreseen; of his Savior light, life, and
righteousness. I must wonder therefore that some like Philotas in Curtius
Curt. l. 5.
(meruisse mortem consiteri pudet,) scorn to acknowledge that even by nature
they deserve to die and (as there the Historian of him,) mallent injuriam
accepisse quam vitam; had rather die, and that for ever, so thereby God may be
accused of injustice, then accept of salvation merely through Christ. These
with Bonaventure Lib. quarto distinct. 14. qu. 2. ar.
, boast that (qui facit quod inse est, cogitans bonitatem Dei and justitiam,
qui malum edit, and revertentibus misericors est,) he that does what he can,
(as his disciples have Englished him) bethinking himself of the goodness and
justice of God, which hates iniquity and is merciful to penitents, and hereby
begets fear in himself from the thoughts of the justice of God, and hope of
pardon from the thought of his mercy, who thus begins to think (says he) and
then (faciendo quod in se est) doing what he can, is of himself disposed for
justification. Thus our late pretending Defender of the Protestant Religion
(who desended our Religion, as the Colonel did Ports-mouth, that it might be
more assuredly yielded up, undertook its defense himself to hinder others from
more safely keeping of it,) thus may I say, this pretending Defender says, men
are to use their best endeavors, to believe the Scriptures in their true
sense, and to live according to it; this if they do (as I hope many do on all
sides) truly and sincerely, it is impossible but they should believe aright
Chilling. Relig. Protest. ansiv. to the Prefat. p. 18.
, (it had been modestly spoken had he said 'twas probable they should believe,
aright; so might he have meant, that this their honest care and endeavor is an
argument that God intends good unto their souls; but to say it is impossible
but they should believe aright, makes this use of their best endeavors, either
of it self to cause belief, or else to deserve it at Gods hands:) this
doubtless his proud meaning, otherwise he had not affirmed in the following
page, that God has no reason to be offended with those, which using their
best endeavors are mistaken; and more hideously to this purpose in the
following lines I say plainly and clearly, for he that speaks obscurely and
ambiguously, and now declares himself plainly, surely he has no reason to be
much offended if he be mistaken.
: which I wonder not so much at, when I consider from whom they come, from a
Sceptick in Divinity, and a changeling in Religion; a just judgment on him,
which so much relies on the strength of reason, and the use of his own best
endeavors; but this my wonder, (or grief rather) what great ones he has
(great (I mean) for their then esteem in the Christian world) ready pressed as
it were to be his seconds: What else mean such large approbations, making way
for his Socinianisme? Lament may we with David 2 Samuel 1.19.
, The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places, how are the mighty
fallen? (Non homo voluntate sua (says Austine) adhuc in vitio liberi arbitrii
claudicantis praevenit Deum, ut cognoscat and quarat eam gratiam, Lib. 7.
contra Pelag.
) man's will faultring, through the mis-use of his former freedom does not
prevent God, by use of his best endeavors by doing what he can, his using such
a measure of industry in finding of truth, his humane prudence, and ordinary
discretion, (as our Defender would make us believe in his forequoted passage)
does not, I say, prevent God in knowing or seeking his grace, which deservedly
he may challenge, (sed praecedit miscricordissima gratia sua Deus hominis
ignorantis, and nondum se quaereutis voluntatem liberi arbitrii, ut eam se
scire and quarere faciat,) but God with his most free grace makes the will of
man willingly to find and know him, which naturally and of himself is
ignorant and careless of him: And as it is the free mercy of God which begins
this great business of conversion in man, so it is also his free grace which
furthers and perfects it. In this respect may we say, what in another God
himself says 1 Samuel 3.12.
When he begins he will also make an end, for it is he alone which of his good
pleasure works in us both to will and to do Phil, 2.13.
Know therefore in the last place, that graces though never so many and
glorious, cannot afford just matter of self-boasting; let me therefore in the
last place ask thee, Why do thou boast thy self in thy spiritual graces?

What if in many assaults thou have got the better of the field, become more
then Conqueror, yet remember 'twas through Christ only, which loved you Ram.
8.37
, and if the Lord had not been on thy side, may thou now say, if the Lord had
not been on thy side, when not men only, but when the World and the Devil, nay
when thou did rise up against thy self, thou had been swallowed up quick.
Again how know thou whether or no the Lord owes thee a forsaking; and it is
more then probable he does and will pay it too, if thou too much pridest thy
self, and turnest his graces into wantonness: When Ioh so securely and so
proudly too, My root is spread out by the waters and the dew lays all night
upon my branch, my glory is fresh in me, and my how is renewed in my hand Job.
29.19
and so triumphantly to the end of the Chapter: see how sadly the next chapter
begins, Now they that are younger then me have me in decision, whose fathers I
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock: Thus David too, no
sooner had boasted that in his prosperity, he should never be moved, Lord by
thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong, but presontly it
follows, thou did hide thy face from me, and I was troubled Psa. 30.6.7.
, Now if God once withdraw himself, suffers thee to fall in a skirmish, let
David's tears and groans and sighs tell thee, how strong throws 'twill cost
ere thou recoverest thy self or thy right station. Once more, 'Twere better to
have no grace at all (as the Father thinks) then that thou should make it
matter of self-boasting, [ Audeo dicere (says he) superhis continentibus
expedit caders, ut in eo ipso in quose extollunt humilientur] I dare affirm it
greater safety for the chaste to fall, then to be proud of their chastity, that
they might be humbled in that wherein they prided themselves: and the reason is
good he gives, [quid enim prodest continentia si dominetur superbia?] what does
continency advantage a man whom pride swells Aust. Sermon. 57. in Mat.
? He who thinks out of grace freely bestowed to get glory to himself, labors
to the utmost to pull down what God was building, and to rebuild what God was
pulling down, (i.) he is proud of his humility, humility being that which God
seeks chiefly to erect, and pride that which he seeks chiefly to pull down. A
man in this case like Lots wife looks back on what the Lord was destroying, and
it is the Lords mere mercy, that for an example he leaves not such a one as he
left her at the half-wayes end, even in the midst of his journey to heaven;
that it befalls not him, as it did Eleazar who in fight first killed an Elephant,
and afterward unhappily by its fall was killed by the Elephant: so it is I say
Gods goodness, that whosoever having conquered pride, and afterward is proud
of his conquest (of his humility) is not at last overcome by this pride.

But me thinks the sad consequences of Peter's boasts should sufficiently fright
us from being guilty of the like; for as of him, so of others also is it
generally observed both by Divines and Soldiers that the greatest
Braggadochio's are the first which revolt and deny; nay rather then they will
hazard life or goods, the first that will forswear too: Wot you not that Peter
which ere whilst made that great vaunt, Though all men should be offended
because of thee, ye will I never be offended Malth. 26.33.
, immediately afterward, ourst and swore he knew him not Verse. 76.
? and pray observe that it is plain from the content that this his revolting
was not so much an argument of his weak faith, as a punishment of his
presumption: There are a sort of Thrasonicall Professors always boasting how
far they dare go in a good cause, which either ruffile it in a bad, or will
not venture a being wershod in a good, men much like these Galli Insubros (
Florus speaks of Lih. 2.
) which had [corpora plus quam humana] bore a good bulk and show, [quorum
primus impetus iis major quam virorum crat, sequens vero minor quam foeminarum]
who at the first onset were valiant almost beyond men, but in the heat of the
battle cowards below women: So these forward men (as they seem) at the first
like thorns make a great blaze and noise, yet suddenly go out:
notwithstanding some small penalty or disgrace they swelled and bufled, yet
now, now, when there is happily a necessity of endangering, if not leaving off
all that we may follow Christ, now there is laying down of lives for his sake:
now (as that Histerian speaks of these Galli) they have [quaddam simile oum
nevibus,] like soow they quickly dissolve and are lost, either they go beyond
Sea, thereby to quit themselves of trouble and expense, or else (like Metius
Fuffetius in Florus) they stand aloft and indifferent, resolving at last to
side with the uppermost, or else [in malum otium resoluti] (as Tacitus of
Tiberius Annal. l. 4.
) prizing their own ease and quiet before the welfare of the State, they do
with Tiberius betake themselves [in insulam Capreas] into some nook or
by-corner of the Country, caring not, so they may sleep in a whole skin,
what become of Liberty, or Religion: and of these we may safely say, what
Alexander of Darius his soldiers, [ Temeritas est quam adhuc pro virtute
habuistis, quae ubi primum impetum effudit, velut quaedam animalia amisso
aculco, torpet Qu. Curt. b. 4.
], this fierce entrance, which some vainglorious and hasty men have made, was
not (as fondly it was imagined) virtue and Religion, but pride and headiness;
when their first heat and pransing was past they suddenly flagged, like bees
having lost their stings become droanes: In vain therefore did such beat the
ears of men wise and religious with that bold boast of Jehu's, [Come see my
zeal for the Lord of hoasts] for who with half an eye sees not that therefore
they went from us, because they were never of us? And so far of the second
branch of the first question, its ground and reason; a word only of
application, and I shall forward to the last.

nete quaesiveris extra) that thou make not conclusions of thy self
according to thy flourishing in the world (thus far the Heathen could go)
but also from the consideration of that miserable, dead and ignorant condition
thou art in by nature, renounce thy self, (all carnal props and stays) and
seek the Lords favor with an humble soul, that if thou will glory thou may
glory in the Lord, that thou may have wherewithal truly to hug and glad thy
self.

Nothing will more humble us then the meditation of our own wretchedness by
nature, 'twill allay our pride in us, it is like the Peacocks looking on his
feet, it pulls down our plumes, to consider on what we are bottomed; our
foundation is not only in the earth, but in rotten putrified earth, we are not
only frail but corrupted flesh. Tell me, could the proud and stour heart of
Nebuchadnezzar be still soaring and swell, when from a King he was turned into
a beast? and can we be then proud and vainglorious boasters of our own
natural abilities, when we shall call to mind this miserable consequence of
Adams fall, that from being Kings of the whole earth, we are turned into
beasts, yes worsethen beasts, witness such hideous corruptions continually
breaking forth which the worst of beasts were never guilty of? Shall
Mephibosheth from the consideration of his lamenesse; and the fall of his
parents be so humbled, that he bowed himself unto David and said, What is thy
servant, that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am Sam. 9.8.
? And can we, when we shall consider that we are all of us more lame
spiritually, then ever Mephibosheth was corporally, and infinitely more
endammaged by the fall of our Parents, then he by his, continue still confident
of our natural strength? For, first, our lamenesse is much more then his; he
maimed in one part only, we bruised all over; he from the cradle only, we
from the womb; he procured his maimednesse from his Nurce, we from our first
Parents: For as Austine of Adam Tom. T.P. 276. A.
, [Omnes ille unus fuere] all of us were he, and he was all of us. Again,
infinitely more are we endammaged by their fall; he by the fall of his Parents
lost only an Inheritance to a little patch of earth, to a temporary kingdom,
to an uneasy uncertain crown: but we our right to the whole world, to an
heavenly Kingdom, and an eternal weight of glory. Once more, if Leah by
reason of her blear'd eyes, and the little favor she thereby found in the
sight of Jacob, was afflicted, (surely says she, the Lord has looked upon my
affliction Genesis 29.32.
,) how will it afflict our souls then, when we shall truly know that we are
not only as tender eyed as Leah, but as blind as Bartimens? For being alienated
from the life of God (as by nature we are) We have our understandings darkened
through the ignorance that is in us by reason of the blindness of our hearts
Ephesians. 4.18.
: and if the light that is in us be dark, how great is that darkness Matt.
6.23.
? Nay, herein lies the great cause of our misery and humiliation, that we are
not only naturally blind, but giddy and unruly, notwithstanding this our
blindness: by the reason of the disobedience of Adam, that curse is fallen on
us, which was threatened to the disobedient Israelites Deuteronomy. 28.28.
, we are smitten not only with blindness, but with madness too: and as a
man sober and blind understands his misery, and therefore by keeping within or
sitting still, is always out of dangers and whereas one mad and blind exposes
himself to variety of dangers and miseries: Even this our case, we are
absolutely by nature blind, nay blindness it self; ( Ye were sometimes
darkness (says S. Paul Ephesians. 58.
) in the state of nature before you were called by the Word and Spirit, ye
were not only blind, but in the abstract blindness it self) and yet so mad
are we that we strive by our natural endeavors, by our strength of reason,
and humane prudence and ordinary discretion, (I shall never make that passage
of our Defenders sufficiently odious) to find out the truth, in so much that
the Lord (we conclude) is unreasonable, if saving truths are not understood by
us, of if we are punished for not savingly understanding of them This
conclusion took from the Pelagians vid. Aust. Tom. 7. p. 458. D.
And this misery we bring on our selves, even the misery following madness
joined with blindness, a groping at noonday Deuteronomy. 28.28.29.
, even now when the light of the Gospel is gloriously and plentifully afforded
us, when the Sun is at its full shine and heigh: even now there is groping up
and down for the truth, from Protestantisme to Popery they go, and from Popery
to Protestantisme, and thence are posting back again, and meetly because they
are mad as well as blind, whereas were they truly sensible of their natural
blindness and darkness, in stead of venturing abroad thus blind, they would
with Bartimens, sit still, be quiet, and betake themselves wholly to Christ,
crying out him Mar. 10.47.51.
, Jesus thou Son of of David, have mercy on me; This Lord I will, that I
might receive my fight: Then shall it be with them, as 'twas with him, their
faith shall make them whole, they shall receive their sight Verse. 52.
, then only may they venture abroad, and be able to follow Jesus on the way.

Lastly, can we imagine that the curse of Elisha on Gehezi 2 King. 5 ult.
, not bow and sink him, The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee
and thy seed for ever, and he went out from his presence a leper as white as
snow? How can it then but humble us, to consider that as a just punishment of
our first sin, God has said the leprosy of Adam shall cleave unto us and
our seed for ever, and we are ever since borne leprous all over, no part of us
free from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot Is. 1.6.
? In primopeccato (says Tilenus) persons corrupit naturam, in originali natura
corrumpit personam Syntag. li. 1. cap. 56. These. 1.
, in the first sin man corrupted nature, but since in original sin, out
hereditary leprosy, nature corrupts the man; children even of the best and
holiest Christians are borne covered with this leprosy, ( quomodo preputium
manet in it is quos genuerint circumcisi, and palea in fructu qui de purgato
tritico nascitur Aust. Tom. 7. p. 276. c.
just as children begot by circumcised Parents bring notwithstanding their
fore-skinne with them, or as the fruit of the best winnowed wheat spring up
wrapped in chafe: In a word, to consider what lamenesse and blindness, what
bruises and leprosy, what crushings and depravednesse, as a just consequence
of our first fall is brought on us, should mightily humble us, because Gods
judgments are not laid on us so much to punish as to humble us for sin, to
bring us to the knowledge of that death and shame which is in sin by
afflicting us for it, [ Thus says the Lord, I will punish the world for their
evil, and the wicked for their iniquity, and I will cause the arrogance of the
pround to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible Is 13.11.
,] as if the Lord should say, to this end men shall suffer, not only that they
might be punished, but that they might be humbled, that their arrogance might
cease, and that their haughtiness might be laid low. God forbid, that the
Church of Laodicea's case should be ours, either that we should be ignorant of
our miserable condition by nature, should not know that we are wretched and
miserable, poor, and blind, and naked, and not knowing thus much, should think
our selves sufficienly rich and wanting nothing; and upon these false thoughts
swell and extol our selves, build castles in the air, promise our selves
safety, and salvation to be got by our own natural strength and abilities,
when truth is, these will prove castles in the air indeed, weak and nothing:
And so much of the second branch of the first Question, the third follows.

To what end do thou boast thy self? it being already manifested that there
is no just reason why thou poor frail nothing man should boast thy self,
and secondly, that thou have nothing whereof thou may justly boast. We shall
have the less labor to prove, thou can have no right end in thy boasting;
let me therefore in a few words ask thee, to what end do thou boast thy
self? But alas, I may not expect an answer to my question, for I am confident
that the veriest Captain, the highest crested of this proud Regiment would
blush to acknowledge the empty fond end their vaunting aims at, and I wish
that they would blush also to hear it, that the rest may discover and laugh at
them; for I purpose to speak truth for them, and try whether their guilty faces
will confess what their tongues dare not: (Hearken) the whole only maine end
of these selfe-boasting men is mearely and nothing else but the Euge, and the
Belle, the popular, Oh brave, oh admirable, oh honest! The clap and cry, the
throat and applause of the giddy multitude of wondering ignorants, (risum
teneatis amici?) It Is a just complaint of the French man's Mountaig. Essay l,
2.6.16.
that we usually empanell and select a jury of men out of a whole County to
determine of an house or an acre of Land, but the judgment, and determination
of our selves, we refer to the idle breath of common people, [An quicquam
stultius, quem quos singulos contemnes, eos aliquid putares esse universos?]
can their be a greater folly then to esteem of their full cry, whose
particular mouths thou would scorn?

Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum? What is glory if thou have
nothing else to make it good? nay if thou have a substance whereof that is the
shadow, yet still may it be asked, Gloria quantalibet quid erit? What is the
praise and esteem which men afford thy virtues, which is so blind and unequal,
that well may it be termed a shadow: For as the shadow is never justly
proportioned to the dimensions of thy body; so nor this to thy desert: the
worlds esteem like the shadow in the morning and beginning of thy Sun when
thou first appearest, and art cried up, is farrelarger then thy desert, but in
the midst and prime of the day, when thou art best and most deserving, then
usually this thy shadow comes far short of thee, thou shall not have half
the glory thou meritest: and as a shadow sometimes goes before the body, and
sometimes follows after, so many steal glory from the ignorant world ere
their desert calls for it, and some again whose lives have been excellently good
and exemplary have dyed in disgrace, yet their works and glory have followed
them Rev. 14.13.
, and their names smell sweet upon earth. Let then children, and Poets,
Players, and Painters, hunt after the clap and cry of the times; let light
tottering Christians follow the fashion even in religion too; let Popelings hug
and vaunt themselves in their outside boasting and merely ceremonious
devotions: but let us, us whose hope and aim it is to be those little ones,
(our Savior speaks of Malli. 18.6.
) little in our own conceits, and little in the worlds; let, I say, us
neglecting the vain empty glory the world affords, earnestly seek after the
massy and weighty glory, humility shall enjoy in heaven, a glory of that bulk
and substance, that where David says, [ thou O Lord art my glory Psalm. 3.3.
] the original signifies his weightinesse and gravity; which place I believe,
S. Paul had respect unto, when he called it an exceeding eternal weight of
glory 2. Cor. 4.17.
And here I thought to make the application of this third branch, the
continuance of this exhortation, hoping to have some of these tinkling Cymbals,
these outside men hereby to be persuaded off from their affectation of
vainglory, but I have considered that there is more good to be done upon
these fawning Curs by a knock then by a gentle put-off; I shall therefore
change my intended exhortation into a reproof.

Belle or an Euge, which they so greedily thirst after, that they had rather
have an O brave, bellowing in their ears by the ignorant rout, then a Well
done good and faithful servant, sounded to their consciences by their Savior:
and this our misery, that not some few of the lower form only, but those of
the highest, some otherwise fit for the stern, great ones ('it is to be feared)
live by this air. To see a little Spaniell or Tumbler with his sneaking and
fawning to beg a commending clap on the side, or spetting in the mouth is
somewhat tolerable; but to see a great old Mastiffe riggle for it, after the
same ridiculous gesture is extremely odious. In like manner to see a Player or
Fencer to expect or take courage from the clap or shout of giddy Spectatours,
it is as pardonable as usual; but to see this old Statesman, or the other great
Soldier, which ought to be serious and in earnest, Chamelion-like to live by
the common air, to wax cold or hot in their weighty employments according to
the cry of vulgar Ignorants, 'twould make a man lose both patience and modesty;
and tell this great Lord or the other great man, that the Compass he steares by,
is unworthy either his blood place, honor, or calling, and that this common
air he now lives by, is of all aires most uncertain and altering, and may
through sudden dislike become sufficiently thick and noisome to stifle or
poison him, and that happily not undeserving. For to speak truth, the vain
glorious ones of our times, are the lowest and unworthyest that ever I read or
heard of. History will tell you that Scevola burnt his own hand off; Zeleucus
suffered one of his own, and another of his Sons eyes to be boared out; Decius
flung himself into the midst of a bloody and raging Army, intending thereby to
become a sacrifice for his Country; and Brutus too whipped and beheaded his two
Sons in one day, and all these moved by the same ground and principle, even as
the Historian reports of that act of Brutus his ( favore civium Flor. lib. 2.
) to gain favor from the people: and what spirit and resolution this spark of
vainglory put into some Christians in the Primitive times, Doctor Done tells
you Pseudo-Mart.
, whereas he excellently discovers, and rightly blames their inordinate
affectation of Martyrdom. But alas, the vaine-glory-hunters of our times,
though that only byasses them, yet can it not thus strongly byasse them; though
(favor civium) be the thing they only aim at, and the wheel these puppets
only move by, yet base as they are, base below Christians in the infancy of
the Church, nay base below Heathens, yet will they not venture on any danger or
hazard any loss to gain or continue it Let these take home that of
Tertullians, [haec ethnicorum exempla non sine causa Dominus in seculum
admisit, sed ad nos and nunc exhortandos, and in illo die confundendos, si
reformidaverimus pati pro veritate in salutem, quae alii affectaverunt in
perditionem Lib. ad Martyr.
], these forenamed examples of the Heathens God did not in vain, but for us
admit of, both for our present encouragement, and for our shame and confusion,
if we shall through sca^e shrink from under-going these miseries for the truth
unto eternal salvation, which they for vainglory only affected unto their
condemnation. The necessary brunts, hazzards and troubles, these our present
distractions put good men upon, abundantly discover these empty quelque chooses.
Now, even now, our Savior says unto them, If you will follow me, show your
selves my Disciples, go and venture all that you have for me, and you shall
have treasures in heaven: like the young man in the Gospel upon the like
injunction and trial, they are not only sorrowful, begin to flag and to be
discontented, to repent that they have gone so far, stickled so much for
Christ, but with the young man too, they begin to depart, (shame to them) and
forsake him, and upon the same ground too, as the young man there did Man
2.19.21.22.
, because they have great possessions: when their store of Land, or great
Houses come in question, then farewell reputation and popularity, these shall
no longer keep them in trouble or danger, they will then tell you, as the
Spaniard says truly of such Fanse^. sermon. 37.
, [That obligation of Religion is not so precise a thing that we should for the
same adventure either our goods, persons, or peace of the State: That which a
Statesman is most interested in, is the profit and benefit of the people, and
by no means ought he to draw too much envy upon them for cause of religion:]
So true is that of S. Paul's, [Not many wise men after the flesh, not many noble
are called Cor. 1.26.
]: And that of our Saviors, [ Arich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven Matt. 19.23.
]. And so much be spoken of the first part of the question in general, and of
its three particular branches; in the last place fall we upon its second part,
I say in the last place, because my meditations on the first question have
enlarged themselves so much farther then at first was intended, that I shall
have no time to handle the last question, unless I touch on it in the
application of the second.

Why do thou boast thy self in mischief? To justify this carnest
expostulation of my Psalmist, I shall show you out of the sacred History what a
searfull and hideous mischief this boaster, whether Saul the Tyrant, or Doeg
the bloody misleading informer, was guilty of, and leave it to your after
meditations to make the conclusion, whether or no they have just cause to boast
of it, or the Psalmist to be amazed and lost at their boasting. David was so
much in the peoples eyes, [ Saul has slain his thousand and David his ten
thousands 1 Samuel 18.7.
,] that he therefore became less in Readiness, [and Saul eyed David from that day
forward verse. 9.
,] This emulation, or rather envy bred wrath, the wrath a murderous intention,
[ and Saul cast a javelin, for he said, I will smite David even to the wall
with it verse. 11.
,] So much danger did David find, there was in deserving and being thought
well of by the people; the Kings violence thus missing its aim, he turns his
rage into wiles, of an Ajax becomes an Ulysses, drops preferment to ensnare him
verse. 21.
; afterward upon Ionathans plain dealing pacification is made and the King
binds it with a solemn Oath, [ As the Lord lives he shall not be slain 1 Samuel
21.6
,] and immediately breaks that Oath and Pacification, and through the evil
Spirit that was upon him, sought again to smite him to the wall with his
Javelin verse. 10.
; anon after David being certified by Jonathan of his Fathers murderous
intentions 1 Samuel 20. a ver. 37. ad 41.
, was forced to fly for his life, and in his flight betook himself to
Ahimelech the Priest for relief and succor, and so well told he his tale,
that he got of him the Shewbread, and Goliah's Sword 1 Samuel 21 aver. 6. ad 9.
But see the ground and Author of this great mischief, Doeg was then in the
Temple, and heard all, (as it is the peculiar lot of Gods people to fall into
the hands of Doegs, treacherous and deceitful people) this sneaking Parasite
carries and aggravates the business to Saul, [I saw the Son of Iesse coming
to Nob to Ahimelech the Priest, and he enquired of the Lord for him Sam.
22.9.10.
], and what of that? 'twas after treason and conspiracy the King enquired, [
sed ea ratio est adulatorum, ut si principem calentem videant, velint eum
incenderc, and ex stulto prorsus insanu^ facere Pet. Martyr in loc.
,] but such is the condition of flatterers that they will blow a heated Tyrant
into a flame, and turn his folly into madness; Upon this false information
Ahimelech and the rest of the Priests with all of their Families were sent for
ver. 11.
; they come, Saul becomes both the accuser and the Judge, and presently falls
upon the trial, [ Hear now thou Son of Ahituh, and he answered, Here am I:
and Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me ver. 12.13.
?] But wherein laid the conspiracy? in relieving a man faithful to his God and
Prince? [ And who is so faith full amongst all thy Servants as David, which is
the Kings Son in Law? [Conjuratio est consensus aliquorum contra rempub: Pet.
Martyr, Ib.
]. The conspire, which mischievously plot against the Commonwealth: [ he goes
at thy bidding and is honorable in thy house]; did he then begin to enquire of
God for him verse. 14.15.
? i.e. is this the first time I enquired for him? or being thy Son-in-law, and
thy faithful Servant, I did not so much enquire of God for him, as for thee.
At last knowing he was to deal with a Tyrant, whom reason, law or right would
nothing move, he gives over pleading and falls to begging, [Let not the King
impute any thing to thy Servant, for thy Servant knew nothing of this more or
less ver. 15.
]: What if you had Ahimelech? would you not therefore have relieved him,
because the King unjustly persecured him? would that have been fair dealing
(think you?) If others had been of this mind, he had never overcome the
Tyrants cruelty. But now I see that our Priests (as they desire to be called) are
not the first that would rather renounce a just cause, then displease an unjust
man: Our cruel High Priest, violent and peremptory as he was, did with his
power so brow-beat and dare all the rest (as one of themselves lately and
publicly confessed) that they had but one voice amongst them all, the rest being
but his ecchoe's, his dictates out-nois'd those of their conscience: for woe
had been to them who had done otherwise, who had relieved any though never so
innocent and religious, whom his Grace had slung his Iavelin at, sent his
Citation for, or once called Puritan -- Rubet auditor, cui frigida men's est.]
But to go forwards, would this Priest his closing with Saul serve his turn?
no certainly, [For the King said, Thou shall surely die Ahimelech, thou and all
thy Fathers house ver. 16.
:] The sentence is past, between which and execution some respite ought to be,
but no such matter now, he immediately says unto the footmen that were about
him Turn and slay the Priests of the Lord ver. 17.
, fearing happily lest cooling and coming to himself he might on better
consideration not have been guilty of so much innocent blood: But wherefore
should they be slain? Because they knew when David fled and told it not unto
me: but where is the witness? Doeg you will say did affirm it: but is not this
against the known Law Deuteronomy. 17.6
, [At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of death,
die, but at the mouth of one witness he shall not die?] But see, the honest
Guard far honester then their master, would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the Priests of the Lord verse. 17.
, they well know he was but Gods Minister for their good, and mandatorius
siquid vult facere contra mandatum, id jubet esse irritum et. Martyr, Ib.
, and whatsoever a Commissioner injoynes beyond his Commission is void, and
ought not to be obeyed. But if one will not another will, the Devil will always
supply Tyrants with suitable instruments; Doeg seems to be glad of the office,
and resolute to do whatsoever the King should command him, never interposing
that honest condition of the Israelites to Joshua, [onely the Lord be with thee
Josh. 1.17.
] and forthwith he falls to work, fell on the Priests of the Lord, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons, that wore a linen Ephod 1 Samuel 12.18.
: he slew the Priests, the Priests of the Lord, he slew men unarmed, men
consecrated to God, he slew old men and women, he slew children and sucklings,
to whom Scythians and Parthians have shown mercy in the time of the cruellest
war; and to make up the sum, he slew so many innocents, he slew them, he
their informer was their executioner; first belied them with his tongue, and
then butchered them with his hand: choose which you will now, either Saul or his
instrument, and you cannot but confess there is cause more then enough of my
Psalmists question and exclamation, [Why do thou Saul, thou envious,
malicious, unjust, bloody Tyrant, or why do thou Doeg, thou sneaking base
informing Parasite, thou cruel murdering butcher, why do thou boast thy
self in this so unheard of a mischief?] But happily, and on good grounds,
David's wonder may be that any whatsoever should boast in any whatsoever
mischief, and therefore I shall endeavor to make good the question in general.

And now (me thinks) I am brought into a wilderness, the subject I am fallen
on, is so large and fearful; should I let fly my Meditations, with that
bitterness and liberty wherewith such mad and prodigious boasters ought to be
took up, I should lose both you and my self. But the sutablenesse of my first
questions business, both to our times and our present occasion, tempted me to
so much over-largenesse, that I could not but in equity promise brevity in the
following questons: that therefore I may be as good as my word, I shall not
keep you long in this wilderness. Mad and prodigious boasters have I called
them, and truly both these they are. First, they are mad, for who but a mad man
would boast that he had given himself his deaths wound? [(...)] sin is the
death of the soul Ezekiel. 33.12.13.
Who but a mad man would boast of that heavy burden, he is forced night and
day to sink under? [ a heavy burden are my iniquities (faith David) they are
too heavy for me Psalm. 38.4.
]. This heavy burden the Prophet calls a Talent of Lead Zach. 5.7.
; yes, heavier and more intolerable then Hell or the Devil himself, for 'twas
sin made Hell, and 'twas sin sunk the Devil into it; without it he cannot
add a dram weight to depresse or keep us from making toward heaven; nay,
though unwillingly, he furthers us in the way; but it is sin alone, and only
which keeps us down. Again, who but a mad man would boast in what arrerages he
runs with his Creditours, vauntingly publish, how all he has is morgaged,
and that Usury eats him up apace? it is truth indeed some may, and many do,
(base and unworthy as they are) pretend poverty, say, that they are ready to
starve, that thereby they might starve Christ's cause. But I cannot deem that
man truly himself, which really boasts how bravely he is undone. Now to obey
Gods law is a debt due from us to him, [ Cursed is he that continues not in
all the words of the Law to do them Deuteronomy. 27.26.
and all the people shall Amen:] that obedience is our debt we cannot deny, our
consciences seal to this bond, the counterpane of it is wrote even in every
natural man's heart Romans 2.15
; every sin then being a transgression of the Law is an arrerage, and upon
this arrerage the soul is morgaged, and without repentance lost and forfeited,
the sinner is utterly undone, he shall be delivered up unto the tormentor
until he has paid all his debt Mat. 18.34.
Once more, who but a mad man will boast that he is a loathsome creature? a
wicked man is a loathsome man (says Solomon Pro. 13.5.
) loathsome in Gods eyes, [ my soul loathes him, says the Lord, Zach. 11.8.
] loathsome in the eyes of good-men; and not only loathsome, but infectious
too: the Prophet therefore resolved not to be in a wicked man's company Psalm.
26.5.
: Lastly, it makes him loathsome and contemptible in the eyes of his nearest
friends, yea of those friends which ought according to the Laws of God and
nature not only to love, but to reverence him. Thus the Prophet of Icrusalem,
by reason of sin, [ Icrusalem has grievously sinned Lam. 1.18
therefore they that honored her despised her;] and though for want of faith,
and by reason of the weakness of spiritual judgment we cannot discover the
filth and ugliness of sin, yet doubtless at Christ's second coming, when
he shall be revealed from Heaven, this also shall be revealed, even what an
ugly noisome creature an impenitent sinner is; then (says the Prophet speaking
of Doomes-day and sinners) they shall be an abhorring to all flesh Is. 66. ult.


Again, as these boasters in mischief are mad, so are they also prodigiously
wicked; for who but a man prodigiously wicked would boast that God is fallen
out with him? such a boaster is he which boasts in sin, for it is sin that
separates between us and our God Isa. 59.2.
: secondly, every sin is a contempt against God (quo ejus pracepta
contemnimus) temnimus] says Bernard Sermon. 31. de mod. been viven. di.
: how prodigiously then does he contemn God, which boasts that he has
contemned him? Thirdly, sin is that which excludes us heaven, and flings us
into hell, that which deprives us of all that we call good, and brings on us
all that is miserable; it is the greatest of curses, and the worst of
judgments. Hence Saint Paul laboring to express how much Christ had suffered
for us; says [ he was made sin for us 2 Cor. 5.21.
:] How prodigiously wicked then is he which boasts of the greatest misery that
man is capable of? Lastly, sin being that alone which crucified the Lord of
life, which tore our Saviors head with thorns, pierced his side, and nailed
his feet, which made him sweat blood and water, which put the gall and vinegar
to his mouth, and wrung from him that bitter complaint, [My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me] Tell me then, sadly tell me, is not he prodigiously
wicked which boasts in that which after so cruel and shameful a manner
crucified our Savior?

Nor is this boaster in mischief mad only and prodigiously wicked, but which
must necessarily follow, and be supposed, is in a desperate and forlorn case:
and for these two reasons. First, because such a one sins with the fullest
swing and willingness, without any reluctance and scruple, nothing has he of
the Spirit in him, which might cause opposition, or pawces, ( The words of his
mouth are intquity and deceit, as my Psalmist of him, he has left off to be
wise and to do good, he devises mischief upon his bed, he sets
himself. i. e. gladly goes on; in a way that is not good, Ps. 36.3.
who being past feeling, has given himself over to work all uncleanness and
greediness Ephesians. 4.19.
Secondly, because these of all men are farthest from Christ and heaven, being
farthest from repentance, whose sins are so far from being a load and heavy
burden unto them, that they glory in their shame. It Is with these boasters as
with men dived to the bottom of the water, as long as they lie in the water,
they are nothing sensible of its weight, but once recovering out would be
overwhelmed with a small quantity of it: So these boasters being sunk to the
bottom, almost as low as hell, and lying there under never so many and hideous
sins, are never senfible of their load and burden, whereas to a man by Gods
grace recovering out of them, one and the least sin will be a talent of Lead.
And so much of this second Question; a short application, and I have done.

wretches swarm and spread amongst us. Go abroad and listen, and you shall
hear the Drunkard boast how many swine he made the last night: you shall hear
the Ruffler boast what a new handsome fullmouthed oath he has got: the Goat,
how many women he has abused: and the Fox, how many he has overreached and
cousened: -- Fiunt,
Fiunt ista palam cupiunt and in asta referri.


But alas! these, though miscreants, are but novices and bunglers in respect of
some closer workers, and deeper instruments of the devil, who first guild over
sin with the name of virtue, and boast of it under that name. Take some
instances. Such are those, which lest they should lose friends or credit, dare
not openly profess how good they are at lies, yet will they affirm, that hand
some lying is but policy, and boast how many they have over-reacht with thy
their policy; Perjury by no means will they justify, yet will they tell you
that it is the part of a wise Statesman, in case that the keeping of an oath
hinders a project, to invent some cleanly shift, whereby it may be eluded, and
boast how excellent they are at these shifts. Luke-warmnesse, a Laodicean
temper, may not be countenanced, yet this will they call moderation, and boast
themselves in this their moderation. Obstinacy in a wrong way, twere shame to
patronize, yet this will they call a brave spirit, and boast of their own stout
hearts: they will praise a Josiah for going on peremptorily in a way contrary
to Gods command, though he gets nothing thereby but his own death, and their
empty commendation 2 Chronicles. 35. v. 21.22 23.
Conspiracy, which is a plot against the Commonwealth, (as Peter Martyr has
defined it) this they call fighting for the Protestant Religion, and yet
impudently affirm what Augustine of Heretics [ Nihilaliud laborant, nisi non
invenire quod quaerunt August. Tom. 1. p. 516.1.
] that the end of their sweat, expense and hazard, is not to enjoy what they
seem to fight for, viz. the Protestant Religion in its truth, purity and
universality: and there are (I dare say) many thousands of Papists and
Libertines now in arms, which were they put to their oaths would confess
thus much. 'Twas madness, say they, and barbarous in Nero to set Rome on fire,
and afterward sing and rejoice at the flames, yet these very same men,
Jesuits happily and Iesuited persons, have of late set three Kingdoms on
fire, and whether they laugh at the flames I know not, sure I am they
continually add fuel to them: yet this cumbustion they call a pretended
reconciliation, and boast themselves in it. To delude and misuse a sweet and
fast friend, has somewhat of Judas in it, say they, yet so to entangle their
best and greatest friend, as Darius his base Courtiers entangled him, ( quod eo
rerum ventum est, ut tam periculosum non credere suis, quam falli Q. curt. l. 5.
That it is equally dangerous to him not to believe them, and to be deceived;
this they call their masterpiece of wisdom, and boast themselves in it;
these, these are they which are come to such a height of Atheism, which a re
so much beaten and hardened in their subtle hypocritical maxims, that they
will not move one step out of the way, which the Devil and Machiavill have
chalkt out to them; and so resolute and petemptory too in that way, that we may
say of them as Erasmus of Heretics ( facilius eos vinci quam persuaderi
^rasa^ ad Hier. lib contra Lucif.
It Is easier to overcome, then alter them. Thus have I made some discovery,
greater might have been, had I not promised brevity, of the mad, prodigious,
desperately for lorne boasters of our land, that you might admire, and lament
the miserable condition of our times. But oh! take heed that you be not so lost
in admiration, that you forget to lament, like a gazing child made forgetful
of his chiefest errand, for to this end was the discovery made, (God knows my
conscience) not to make them a laughing, but a mourning stock, that you might
be humbled in behalf both of them, and our land. For hereby shall you secure
your selves howoever they escape, or the Kingdom for their sakes Ezek^ 14. ad
6.
And so much of the second Question, I should now forward to the third and
last, but the time has much overrun me, let us therefore take up here from
this Text and forward, to that other before me, a Text like wise speaking the
frailty and nothingnesse of man. For if you desire farther ground for these
questions, Lo this spectacle of mortality may be it; a wise, able, strong
Gentleman suddenly cut off, which tells you, that our footing in this world being
so slippery, it is folly for such frail weak men as we are, to boast; which
tells you, that wealth, wit, and friends in the last, and needfullest times
failing, it is folly to boast of them; which tells you that now he is gone, the
common voice, neither hurts nor pleasures him, neither lessens nor adds to his
joy; it is folly therefore to hunt after it. Saint Paul wishes us so to run that
we may obtain, so to run, not as one that beats the air in vain, for the
applause of the giddy multitude, but for a prize, for an incorruptible Crown v.
25.
Again so run, our life here compared to a reace, not only for its shortness,
which is a few paces, but for its trouble somenesse also, it is a running, which
is no ordinary pain and toil: Truly therefore spoke the Patriarch not only
few but evil also are my days Genesis 47.5.
: this race some give over at their first setting out, children dying in their
Gradles: others after a pace or two past, in their youth: some in the midway,
in their best manhood are cut off: most, as this our friend, are out of breath
ere they reach the stayed paces of threescore years. Let us not therefore
boast [canere ante victoriarn] vaunt as though we had obtained the prize, ere
we come to our journies end: but let us so run, so zealously, and so humbly,
working forth our salvation with fear and trembling, that we may obtain. If
you are not yet satisfied, but desire more ground for my Questions, Lo here a
spectacle of humility before you.

And thus am I fallen upon my last message, a message I am confident God wished
me to deliver; namely, to recall and make known somethings excellent, and
exemplary from the life and death of my worthy friend, I say it again, my
worthy friend. I may not boast, my Text forbids it, but I joy in our past
relation Amabatur a me plurimum nec tamen vicius. Plin. l. 2. Ep. 13.
And here I would not be mistaken, conclude not so unworthily of me, that his
wealth, place, or friends, put me on this discourse, though to speak truly,
so runs the fashion of the world: if a man be poor, though never so good and
holy, yet shall he pass away in silence, as we find nothing said of Lazarus,
but that he dyed, whereas it is said there of the rich man, not only that he
dyed, but that he was buried too Luke 16.22.
, says a Commentator of ours, there was noise and pomp, much done and said at
his Funeral: So many [(...)] shall you have, many Hackney praisers in black,
which at the Funerals of great and rich men, though they departed as
gluttonous, as merciless as Dives, never leave prating till they have placed
them in heaven. But I know where I am, I know not only in whose presence, but
in whose stead I stand, of what therefore I am to speak, let me use Jobs words.
Lo mine eyes have seen all this, mine ears have heard and understood it,
what you know, the same do I know also Job 13.1.2.
And as in my following discourse I am resolved to be true, so am I necessarily
forced to be brief, and for these reasons. First, because of my present
weakness; Secondly, the scantling of time allowed me as for meditaton, so now
for delivery; Thirdly and lastly, to be otherwise, I should much injure my gone
friend, who was a professed enemy to multitude of words; and alas, why should we
with an overlarge discourse keep our griefs awake, and wounds a bleeding? Why
should we speak much of him whom we can no longer enjoy, unless it be the more
to trouble us that we cannot enjoy him? Briefly and truly then thus much.

I intend not here a genealogy, to acquaint you with his birth and descent,
this is the Heralds business, and it were a disparagement to so much worth to
be beholding to Ancestors for a commendation, for arms, and titles, -- Vix ea
nostra voco -- they may not well be called our own, nor think I it matter of
weight to acquaint you with his breeding, since his conversation confessed how
ingenuous it was: No, nor need I tell you, how dear a husband he was, how
tender a father, or how sweet a neighbor: behold this peale of groans, and
mist of sighs, tells me so much. And to deal truly, this I purposely omit
(though he was excellently glorious in all these Relations) lest I might
bethought like the Orators Pliny speaks of Panegy. ad Traian.
, to upbraid the living of their vices, whilst I commemorate the virtues of the
dead. These five more eminent excellencies I shall commend to your memories and
imitations.

The first is humility, which considering his breeding, parts, place, and
calling was admirable: I cannot call to mind that word, look, or action that
ever spoke him proud: nor was he one of our cunning boasters, who often in their
own dispraises notably vaunt it, challenge the lowest place, that they may be
forced to the highest, unawares often speak truth, cry [alas they are nobody,]
even then tempting some base Sycophant with the expense of a lie or two to make
them Somebody. Nor was he like him, of whom Tacitus speaks, [arte quada^
ostentator] an artificial boaster. For this I counted his great fault, even
(celata virtus) that through a natural reservednes he did not so shine forth
before men, as justly he might, and was required of him.

The second, his true heartedness; a fitter man to make a friend of I never
yet knew; oh, he was wise, and faithful, he did not quickly knit the knot,
not easily familiar, and intimate, but once having made it, he was sure and
fast: not only was his mouth open to his friend in advice, comfort, and just
encouragement, but his hands and purse too for relief and succor; no nor his
mouth and purse only, but his heart also, willing was he to enlarge his joys
by communicating them, and ease his grief by venting; and this, this openness
especially speaks a true friend, whence our Savior to his Disciples,
Henceforth I call you not Servants, for the servant knows not his Lords will,
but I have called you friends; and mark the reason; for all things that I have
heard of my Father I have made known unto you John 15.15.
: The other two offices of friendship may be dissembled; I may through a
self-end teach my tongue Parat-like to prate the language of love, when my
heart swells and repines at what it says. I may again, through a self-end
hazard my goods and credit, and my life too seemingly in the behalf of my
friend, when it is nothing so; as there are some, I am confident, at this
present which pretend the honor and safety of their deceived friend, and under
this pretense merchant-like venture both lives and fortunes, when in truth and
indeed their only aim is liberty for their profaneness and toleration, if not
admittance, for their heresy: as Hierome of Jovinians Disciples, (non tam te
loquentem sectantur, qua^ vitiis suis favent) so I of these, they do not so
much adhere to their friend, as favor their own vices. But I cannot dissemble
either my own friendship, or suspect another, when I freely open my bosom unto
him; and this did he often unto his friend, this to my self not only in his
sickness, as to his Minister, but in his health as to his friend: He left it
to weaker less knowing men, who skilled not to choose a friend, to make use of
Bias his wise advise, (ama tanquam osurus) to love so reservedly, that in
chance of a breach, you may not lie at the mercy of your supposed friend, lest
when he proves a knave, you prove your self a fool in being so grossly mistake^
in him.

The third, his temperance; and that in meat, drink, and recreations; the
covenant Job made with his eyes Job 31.1.
, he made with his appetite also, to keep himself unspotted of uncleanness,
gluttony and drunkenness; the fear Job had of his sorrows Job 9.28.
, he had of all his passions; even in sickness, even in his extremest fits I
could not discover the least token of fear or anger, except it was the fear of
God, and an holy indignation against himself for sin. This virtue was most
eminently exemplary in him, and God forbid, that the neglect of so excellent a
pattern should aggravate both your sins and judgment, yours especially, to whom
by reason of your near relations, this grace shined out most gloriously. For
my part it is my wish, and shall be my prayer, that his example may be of like
force with Amaziah's, of whose Son it is Registered 2 Kings 15.3.
, That he was right in the sight of the Lord, and did according to all that his
father Amaziah had done before him.

The fourth, his providence, care, and industry in the employment of that
stock, talent, and calling the Lord had given him. To prove this I have a
double argument, the voice of the Court, whereof he was a grave member: And
this it was, of which I have been an eare-witnesse, none more exact, more
careful, more faithful then he: secondly, the blessing of God upon his
honest endeavors, the Lord crowned it with a large portion, and his lot fell
in a fair ground. But envy may object; this rather an argument of
covetousness then providence; it is to be feared he made too much have to be
rich, and therefore could not be innocent, getting so much in so little time.
Into this snarling mouth I fling these answers. First, his time of thriving was
no little time, he was a long gatherer, and ever frugall; and secondly, he had
many occasional additions to his estate," and is well known to you all: This
to free him from making too much have to be rich. Again that he was not
covetous, these reasons prove: First, he dislik't, sure I am, ever since I knew
him, the unjust griping trade of usury: Secondly, he never made purchase, as I
have heard not himself only, but some neighbors affirm, wherein he gave not
of the most: Thirdly and lastly, he was liberal at his door, and hospitable in
his house: Whosoever shall be apt to condemn him out of this opinion, that
thrift and providence, and the Lords blessing on these, a joining house to
house, and land to land, cannot be without covetousness, this man is much out
of the way: The truth doutblesse is quite of the otherside, those which are
careless of their own estates are most covetous of their neighbors, witness
Cataline, of whom Salust [sui profusus, alieni appetens,] men often spend that
wit and time in taking from others, which should have been employed in keeping
or increasing their own, becoming thus at the same time thieves, and
loyterers: Some the desire of others goods, and skill in cheating, leaves them
careless of their own; others again wasting their own estates become covetous
of their neighbors.

The fifth, as the last and chiefest; his constancy in the observation of
religious days and duties; never since God sent me to you, do I remember,
that ever he absented himself from our holy meeting, unless sickness or some
undeniable and lawful occasion detained him; constantly did he observe set
times of prayer in his Family. And so punctual was he in the observation of
the Lords own day, that when the violent danger of a fit, and the earnestness
of his friends (his Minister urging reasons for it) could not be persuaded that
a Messenger should on that holy day travel for a Physician, no not after our
public devotions were ended. But his Religion will more brightly appear, when
as in the last and next place, you shall hear how religiously and thriftily he
husbanded the time of his sickness.

Which was almost nothing else but a continued prayer, a praying always, a
praying without ceasing. For his sickness seized him with such violence, and
deadly symptoms, that it told him at first what he was to look for, wherefore
he presently pronounced [(...)] unto himself, resolved for death, and thereupon
forthwith betook himself unto God in a long and serious prayer, and unless it
were in some necessary intermissions of rest, of receiving either spiritual or
temporal food and Physic, he continued in the same posture and action until
his last fit, which took him away praying: Nay, when he was quite tired with
the extremity of his fit, and sleep offered it self, he would often refuse it,
saying, he could not spare so much time from his devotions; and when I answered
him that by rest he would be the better fitted and quickened for prayer, he
replied, but (oh!) I shall have ill thoughts get within me even in my sleep to
my great hinderance: at last when I told him that such ill thoughts, that
seized on him thus unwillinly, and were suddenly sorrowed for, awaking would as
soon vanish and be pardoned; he was with much difficulty brought to admit of an
hours intermission for that rest, which he so much wanted: Yet even then too
did he manifest himself part of the Church (of Christ's Spouse) who though she
slept, yet her heart waked Cant. 5.2.
for seemingly to us asleep, yet many times the up-moving of his hands showed
his heart was awaked unto God. But when he was perfectly awaked, with such
earnestness even in his extremest fits did he fasten his eyes, and hands, and
heart too, (I dare say) toward heaven, that I believe 'twas with him as with
Stephen Acts 7.56.
By faith he saw the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right
hand of God, whom he then so earnestly plied to pray the Father for him. He
came at last to such a delight in prayer, that spending one whole almost even a
terrible night of many threatening fits in this heavenly Colloquy and
familiarity with God; and I asking him the morrow following, how he had sped
that night: Oh said he, I have had many brave fits, and told me withal that
God would not let him lose one fit, but ever after it he found his faith and
comfort increasing, The Lord by them does work me (said he) and by degrees I
creep unto him.

When we first sat about the great business of preparation for death, which
truth is, ought to be the business and task of our whole life, I could not
take the course usual with me on the like occasions: first, to administer the
Law, its exactness, terrors and curses on the disobedience, allowing some
certain time and days for the working of it, ere I administered the Gospel: but
by reason of the danger his fits threatened, I was forced to make a confection
of the Law and Gospel, to administer them mingled, and compounded, acquainting
him at the same time with terrors and comforts, threats and promises, hell and
heaven, lest he might have been suddenly cut off in a desperate sorrow, or a
false joy. And (God be praised) accordingly it wrought with him; now you
should have his eyes fastened on the ground in token of humiliation, anon
piercing the Heavens in token of confidence; now you should have his hands
wrung in token of grief, anon again, held up in token of hope; now a tear in
token of sorrow, and then a smile in token of joy; just like this Month of
April, rain and Sunshine, storms and calm. But toward his end, these enter
changes ceast, the calm begun to be full and glorious; he might have cried out
with the Church Cant. 3.11 12.
, Lo, the winter is past, the rain is over, the flowers appear on the earth,
the time of the singing of birds is come, the voice of the Turtle is heard. For
I asking him whether or no his comfort did increase, he answered me,
excellently, greatly; and how faith held out, he replied, strongly, even then
when I could scarce hear him: Whereupon demanding of him (loath I was the the
Devil should at last gull him) whether he could at the present resist unto
blood, be burnt, undergo the fiery trial for his Saviors cause and glory; he
answered me, gladly, gladly. Lastly, the Lord so much showed himself unto him,
gave him so full a view of his treasures, such a largetaste of those joys that
were laid up for him in heaven (as we are charitably given to believe) that he
underwent the extremity of his fits not with patience only, but with comfort,
and left the world, (his wealth, friends and pleasures) not out of a dull sense
of the pain and agony of his sickness or a prophetic sensiblenesse of the
miscries falling on this Kingdom, (which he would often lament) nor made he in
this respect a virtue of necessity, carelessly left it because he could no
longer enjoy it: this were like a condemned thief or traitor, who seem willing
to lay down their lives, because they can no longer keep them: not in this, or
that, or the other false respect did he welcome death, but therefore was with
joy and cheerfulness dissolved, because his faith assured him he should be
with Christ.

FINIS.

