DENSELL HOLLIS Esquire HIS SPEECH At the delivery of the PROTESTATION TO the Lords
of the upper House of Parliament, 4. May, 1641. Wherein is set forth the
reasons that moved the house of Commons to make the said PROTESTATION: Together
with A Short Narration of the several grievances of the KINGDOM.

London Printed, 1641.

The Speech of Master Hollis Esquire.
My Lords,
THe Knights, and Burgesses, of the house of Commons, having taken into
consideration the present estate and condition of this Kingdom, they find
^^surrounded with va^^ety of pernitions and dostructory designs, practices and
plots, against the wel-being of it, nay, the very being of it, and some of
those designs hatched within our own bowels, and Viper-like working our own
destruction.

They find Jesuits and Priests conspiring with ill Ministers of State to
destroy our religion, they find ill Ministers conjoined together to
subvertiour Laws and liberties, they find obstructions of justice, which is
the life and blood of every estate, and having free passage from the Sovereigne
power, where it is primarily seated as the life and blood in the heart, and
thence derived through the judicatories, on through so many veins into all the
parts of this great Collective Body, does give warmth and motion to every part
and member which is: nourished and enlivened by it, but being once precluded,
stopped, and reared up, as the particular must needs faint, and languish, so
must the whole frame of Government be dislolved.

And consequently, Sovereignty it self which (as the heart in the body, is
primum vivens, and altimum moriens, must die and perish in the general
dissolution, and all things as in the beginning in antiquum Chaos.

My Lords, They find the property of the subject invaded and violated, his
estate rent from him by illegal taxations, Monopolies, and projects almost
upon every thing that is for the use of man, not only upon superfluities, but
necessaries ^ and that to enrich the Vermin and Caterpillars of th^^ (...)
impoverish good subjects, to take the Mess from the Children, and give it to
Dogs.

My Lords; If the Commons find these things, they conceive they must needs be
ill Counsels that have brought us into this condition.

These Counsels have put all into a combustion, have discouraged the hearts of
all true English men, and brought two Armies into our bowels, which is the
Vulture upon Prometheus, cates through, and sucks and gnawes our very hearts
out. Hic Dolor, sed ub^ Medicina?

Heretofore Parliaments were the Catholicall, the balm of Gilead, which healed
our wounds, restored our spirits, and made up the breaches of the Land.

But of late years they have been like the fig tree in the Gospel, without
efficacy, without fruit, only destructive to their particular members, who
discharged their duties and consciences, no way benesiciall to the
Commonwealth. Nobis exitiale, nec Reipublicae profuturum, As he said in
Tacitus, being taken away still as Elias was with a whirle-winde, never coming
to any maturity, or to their natural end, whereas they should be like the
blessed old man, who dies, plenus dierum, in a full age after he had fought a
good sight, and overcome all his enemies, or as the shock of wheat, which
comes in due season to fill our Granaries with Corn, uphold our lives with
the staff of bread, for Parliaments are our panis quotidianus, our true bread,
all other ways are but Quelkachoes which yield no true nourishment, bread, nor
good blood.

The very Parliament which has sat so long, has but beat the air, and
strive against the stream, I may truly say the wind and tide has been still
against us. The same ill Counsel which first raised the storm, and almost
shipwrackt the Commonwealth, they still continue, they blow strong like the
East wind that brought the Locusts over our Counsels, cross our designs,
cast difficulties in our way, hinder our proceedings, and make all that we do
to be fruitless and ineffectuall: They make us not masters of our business,
and so not masters of money, which have been the great business of this
Parliament, that we might pay the Armies, according to our promises and
engagements.

For my Lords, our not effecting of the good things which we had undertaken,
for the good of the Church, and of the Commonwealth, has wounded our
reputation, and taken off from our credit.

Is it not time then my Lords, that we should unite and concentrate our selves,
in regard of this Antiperistasis, of hurtful and malicious intentions and
practices against us?

My Lords, it is most agreeable to nature, and I am sure most agreeable to
reason, in respect of the present conjuncture of our affairs, for one maine
engine by which our enemies work our mischief, is by infusing an opinion and
belief into the world, that we are not united among our selves. But like
Sampsons Foxes, we draw several ways, and tend to several ends.

To defeat the Counsels of these Achitophels, which would involve us, Our
Religion, our being, our Laws, our liberties, and that can be near and dear
unto an honest soul, in one universal and general desolation, to defeat I
say, the Counsels of evil Achitophels; the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the house of commons (knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their Conscience are persuaded that the
dangers are so eminent, as they will admit of no delay) have thought fit to
declare their united affections by entering into an association amongst
themselves, and by making a solemn protestation and vow unto their God, that
they will unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the Counsels and
Counselors which have brought upon us all these misceries, and the fears of
greater, to prevent the ends and bring the Authors of them to condign
punishment, and thereby discharge themselves better before God and man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you, together with the
ground and reasons which have induced the house of Commons to make it which are
prefixed before it by way of Preamble. Then the Protestation was read by M.
Maynard.

FINIS.

