A SERMON On Acts xxviij. 22. Showing, That the CHRISTIAN RELIGION Is not a
SECT, And yet that it is Every where Spoken against.

By MATTHEW HENRY, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by, Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, in Cheapside, MDCXCIX.

Christianity no Sect to be spoken against.
ACTS 28.22. -- For as concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is
spoken against.


WOULD you think that such a spiteful scornful Word as this should ever be said
of the Christian Religion? That pure Religion and undefiled, Jam. 1.27.
which came into the World supported by the strongest Evidences of Truth, and
recommended by the most endearing Allurements of Grace and Goodness: The
sayings whereof are so faithful, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and so well worthy of all acceptance: That Sacred Institution which scatters
the brightest Rays of Divine Light and Love that ever were darted from Heaven
to Earth: That Is it which is here so invidiously called a Sect, and is said to
be every where spoken against.

It will be worth while to observe,

1. Who they were that said this, they were the chief of the Jews that were at
Rome, ver. 17. The Jews were looked upon (at least they looked upon themselves)
as a very knowing People; The Jews at Rome; a place of Learning and Enquiry,
thought themselves more knowing than the other Jews; St. Paul in his Epistle to
the Romans, chap. 17.2. -- 20. takes notice of it: Thou art called a Jew, and
make thy boast of God, and know his Will, -- and art confident that thou
thy self art a Guide of the Blind, a Light of them which are in Darkness, etc.
And we have reason to suppose that the Chief of the Jews there who had the
greatest Advantages of Education and Correspondence, were the most intelligent:
It might also be justly expected that upon the first notices of the Gospel, the
Jews should have been of all People most ready to acquaint themselves with a
Religion which was so much the Honor and Perfection of their own: And yet it
seems, the Jews, the chief of the Jews at Rome knew no more of Christianity but
this, that it was a Sect every where spoken against. This we know, (said they)
and it was all they knew concerning it.

1 These. 2.15, 16.
The Jews were of all other the most bitter and inveterate Enemies to the
Christians; while the Roman Emperors tolerated them, (as they did till Nero's
time Tertullian confidently asserts Primum Neronem in hanc Sectam tum maxim
Romae orientem, Caesariano gladio terocisse. Apol. cap. 5
) the Jews with an unwearied Malice persecuted them from City to City, and were
the first Wheel in most of the Opposition that the Gospel met with, when it was
first Preached: Now one would think they would not have been so vigorous and
industrious to suppress Christianity if they had not very well acquainted
themselves with it, and known it to deserve such opposition; But it seems by
this, they knew little or nothing of the Religion they so much maligned, had
never searched into the Merits of its Cause, nor weighed the Proofs of its
Divine Authority, but against all Law and Reason condemned it ((...),
Inquisitione and agnitione neglecta Nomen detinetur Nomen expugnatur -- Vox
sola praedamnat Tert. Ap. c. 3.
as Justin Martyr complains) purely upon common Fame, and follow the cry to run
it down, because it was every where spoken against.

2. Upon what occasion they said this. They were now appointing a time to
discourse with St. Paul upon the grand Question in debate, whether Jesus of
Nazareth was the true Messiah or no. And they seemed willing to hear what that
great Man had to say in defense of the Religion he preached, We desire (say
they) to hear of thee what thou think, -- Now one would expect that so good
a Cause, managed by such a skilful Advocate, would not but carry the day, and
be Victorious, and that they would all have been brought over to the belief of
Christianity; But we find v. 24. that it proved otherwise; after all, there
were those that believed not, and the Text intimates the reason of their
Infidelity, they came to hear the word under a Prejudice; They had already
imbibed an ill opinion of the way, which right or wrong they resolved to hold
fast; And though some of them by the help of Divine Grace got over this stumbling
Block, Acts 17.11.
that like the Bereans were more Noble than the rest, and of freer thought: yet
many of them continued under the power of those Prejudices, and were sealed up
under Unbelief, v. 26.27. Thus is the Power of the Word in many, baffled by the
Power of Prejudice. They do not believe, because they are resolved they will
not: John 1.46.
They conclude that no good thing can come out of Nazareth, and will not be
persuaded to come and see: Prove. 18.13. John 7.51.
Thus do they prejudge the Cause, answering the matter before they hear it, and
it will prove folly and shame to them.

Now in the Account they here give of their Knowledge of the Christian
Religion, we may observe, 1. That they looked upon it to be a Sect, and we'll
prove that to be false. 2. -- A Sect every where spoken against, and we will
grant that to be true, that it is generally spoken against, though it is most
unreasonable and unjust it should be so.


First, The Christian Religion is here called (but miscalled) a Sect, (...),
Electio optio, An Opinion not forced upon us by the Evidences of Truth, but
chosen by us with some foreign Design.
(...), a Heresy. After the way which they call Heresy, (says St. Paul, Acts
24.14.) so worship I the God of my Fathers, -- The Sect of the Nazarenes, so
Tertullus calls it in his opening of the Indictment against Paul, Acts 24.5.
it is called this way, Acts 9.2. and that way, Acts 19.9. as if it were a
By-path out of the common Road. The Practice of serious Godliness is still
looked upon by many as a Sect that is a Party-business, and a piece of affected
singularity in Opinion and Practice tending to promote some carnal Design, by
creating and supporting invidious Distinctions among Men. This is the proper
notion of a Sect, and therefore the Masters and Maintainers of Sects are justly
in an ill Name, as Enemies to the great Corporation of Mankind; but there is
not the least color of Reason to put this invidious and scandalous Character
upon the Christian Religion. However, it may be mistaken and misrepresented, it
is very far from being really a Sect. There were Sects of Religion among the
Jews; we read of the Sect of the Sadducees, Acts 5.17. which was built upon
peculiar notions, such as overturned the foundation of Natural Religion, by
denying a future state of Rewards and Punishments: There was also the Sect of
the Pharisees, Acts 15.5. the straitest Sect of their Religion, Acts 26.5.
which was founded in the observance and imposition of singular Rites and
Customs, with an affected separation from, and contempt of all Mankind: These
were Sects: But there is nothing of the Spirit and Genius of these in the
Christian Religion, as it was instituted by its great Author.

1. True Christianity establishes that which is of common concernment to all
Mankind, and therefore is not a Sect. The Truths and Precepts of the
everlasting Gospel are perfective of and no way repugnant to the Light and Law
of Natural Religion. Is that a Sect which gives such mighty Encouragements and
Assistances to those that in every Nation fear God and work Righteousness? Acts
10.34. Is that a Sect which tends to nothing else but to reduce the revolted
Race of Mankind to their Ancient Allegiance to the great Creator, and to renew
that Image of God upon Man which was his Primitive Rectitude and Felicity? Is
that a Sect which proclaims God in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2
Cor. 5.19.
and recovering it from that degenerate and deplorable State into which it was
sunk? Is that a Sect which publishes Good Will toward Men, Luke 2.14. Joh.
1.29.3.16. 1 John 2.2.
and Christ the Lamb of God taking away the Sins of the World? Surely that
which concurs so much with the uncorrupted and unprejudiced Sentiments, and
conduces much more to the true and real Happiness of all Mankind cannot be
thought to take its rise from such narrow Opinions, and private Interests, as
Sects ow their Original to.

2. True Christianity has a direct tendency to the Uniting of the Children of
Men, and the gathering of them together in one, and therefore is far from being
a Sect, Secta dicitur a Secando.
which is supposed to lead to Division, and to sow Discord among Brethren. The
Preaching of the Gospel did indeed prove the occasion of Contention. Our
Savior foresaw and foretold it would be so, Luke 12.51, 52, 53. that his
Disciples and Followers would be Men of strife, in the same sense that the
Prophet was, Jer. 15.10. not Men striving, but Men striven with; but the Gospel
was by no means the Cause of this Contention, for it was intended to be the
Cure of all Contention. If there be any who under the Cloak and Color of the
Christian Name cause Divisions, and propagate Feuds and Quarrels among Men, let
them bear their own Burden; but it is certain that the Christian Religion as
far as it obtains its just Power and Influence upon the minds of Men will make
them Meek and Quiet, Humble and Peaceable, Loving and Useful, Condescending and
Forgiving, and every way Easy, and Acceptable and Profitable one to another. Is
that a Sect which was introduced with a Proclamation of Peace on Earth? That
which beats Swords into Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks? Or, was he
the Author of a Sect who is the Great Creator of Unity, and who Died to break
down partition Walls, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. John 11.52.
and to slay all Enmities, that he might gather together in one the Children of
God that were scattered abroad? Was he the Author of a Sect who came into the
World not to destroy Men's Lives, Luk, 9.56.
but to save them, and who taught his Followers not only to love one another,
but to love their Enemies, and to count every one their Neighbor, Luke 10.36,
37.
that they could be any way serviceable to?

3. True Christianity aims at no Worldly. Benefit or Advantage, and therefore
must by he means be called a Sect. Those that espouse a Sect are supposed to be
governed in it by their secular Interest, and to aim at Wealth, or Honor, or
the gratification of some base Lust: The Pharisees proved themselves, to be a
Sect by their Thirst after the praise of Men, and their greedy devouring of
Widows Houses: But the Professors of Christianity have not only been taught by
the Law of their Religion, to live above this World, and to look upon it with a
Holy Contempt, but have been exposed by their Profession to the Loss and Ruin
of all their secular Comforts and Enjoyments. Are those to be accounted
politic and designing Sectaries that have for Christ cheerfully suffered the
loss of all things? Phil. 2.8.
Is that a Sect which instead of prefering a Man to Honor, or raising him an
Estate, lays him open to Disgrace and Poverty, renders him obnoxious to Fines
and Forfeitures, Banishments and Imprisonments, Racks and Tortures, Flames and
Gibbets, which were the common Lot of the Primitive Christians? Caesar Vaninus
a sworn Enemy to the Christian Religion, and one who was industrious in
searching out Objections against it, owned he could find nothing in it that
savored of a Carnal and Worldly Design; No, it has always approved it self a
Heavenly Calling, Heb. 3.1.
and the strictest Professors of it (even their Enemies themselves being
Judges) have had their Conversation in the World in Simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and Godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom: Very unjustly therefore it is
called a Sect.

As to this therefore, suffer a Word of Caution and Exhortation.

1. Let us take heed lest our Profession of Religion degenerate into any thing
which may make it look like a Sect. Christianity as it was instituted by Christ
is not a Sect, let not Christians then be Sectaries. We make our Profession of
Religion a Sect when we monopolize the Church and its Ministry and Sacraments,
and spend that zeal in matters of doubtful Disputation which should be reserved
for the weightier matters of the Law. When we place our Religion in Meats and
Drinks, Romans 14.17, 18.
which should be placed in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
When we profess Religion with a Conceit of our selves, and a Contempt of
others, and with any Worldly secular Design; when we sacrifice the common
Interests of Christ's Kingdom to the particular Interests of a Party, and in a
word, when our Profession is tainted with the Leaven of the Pharisees, Luke
12.1.
which is both sowring and swelling, then it degenerates into a Sect. Let us
therefore adhere to the sure and large Foundations, and be acted by a Principle
of Love to, and so maintain Communion with all that in every place, 1 Cor. 1.2
and under every Denomination, call on the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours. Let us be Modest in our Opinions, Charitable and Candid in our
Censures, Self-denying in all our Converse, Acting always under the Influence
of that Wisdom that is from above, which is first Pure, Jam. 3.17.
then Peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality and Hypocrisy, that by this well-doing we may put to
silence the Ignorance of those who call Religion a Sect. 1 Pet. 2.15.


2. Let us not be deterred from serious Godliness, or any of the Instances of
it, by the invidious Name of a Sect, which is put upon it. If a strict and
sober and circumspect Conversation, a conscientious Government of our Tongue,
Praying and singing Psalms in our Families, a religious Observation of the
Lord's Day, a diligent Attendance upon the Means of Grace, joining in religious
Societies for Prayer and Christian Conference, and endeavoring in our places
the Suppression of Profaness and Immorality, if these and the like be called
and counted the Marks and Badges of a Sect, let us not be moved at it, but say
as David did, 2 Samuel 6.22. If this be to be vile, I will be yet more vile. If
the Practice of Piety be branded as a Sect, it is better for us to come under
the reproaches of Men for following it, than under the Curse of God for
neglecting it. It is a very small thing to be judged of Man's Day, but he that
judges us is the Lord: 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.
Let us therefore be more afraid of being Sectaries, than of being called so.

Secondly, The Christian Religion is here said to be every where spoken
against. That it was spoken against was evident enough, but that it was every
where spoken against, was more than they could be sure of: They did not know
all Places, nor had they correspondence with, or intelligence from every
Country; but we must not wonder if those that oppose the Truth as it is in
Jesus, make no conscience of transgressing the Laws of Truth in common
Conversation. But we will suppose that the Acquaintance and Converse of those
Jews at Rome lay mostly with those that were Enemies to Christianity, and spoke
against it, and they therefore concluded it every where spoken against because
they found it spoken against in all places that they came to, or had advice
from. Thus apt are we to embrace that as a general Sentiment and Observation
which we find received by those that we usually associate with, and so we run
our selves into mistakes, which larger and more impartial Enquiries would soon
rectify.

But we will take it for granted, however, that what they said was true, not
because they said it, but because the experience of all Ages does confirm it,
and concur with it: So that a little Acquaintance with Books and the World will
prove the Observation which we ground upon this Text; Doct.
That it is, and always has been, the Lot of Christ's Holy Religion, to be
every where spoken against. Or thus:
That true Christianity has all along met with a great deal of Opposition and
Contradiction in this World.


I purpose not to enter into a particular Disquisition of that which has been,
and is spoken against Religion, nor do I undertake at present to show how false
and unreasonable it is, That has been done many a time by the best Hands, and
so effectually that every impartial eye must needs look upon the cause of the
Adversaries of Religion to be a baffled Cause: But I shall only make some
improvement of this general Observation, which cannot be unseasonable in an Age
wherein the Gates of Hell seem to be making their utmost efforts against the
Church; and the Devil, as the Calumniator and False Accuser to be more wroth
than ever with the Woman the Church, Rev. 12.17,
and to push on the War with an unusual vigor against the remnant of her Seed,
which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

I shall therefore (1.) enquire what it is in Christianity that is spoken
against. And (2.) show you why so Holy and Excellent a Religion is spoken
against, and then draw some Inferences from this Observation.

For the first, Who and What it is that is spoken against.

1. Jesus Christ, the Author of our Religion, is every where spoken against.
When the First-begotten was brought into the World, old Simeon, among other
great things, pronounced this concerning him, that he was a sign which should
be spoken against, and by that means was set for the fall of many, Luke 2.34.
when he was here upon Earth he was spoken against. The Stone, Psalm. 118.22.
which was designed to be the Head of the Corner, was rejected, and set at
naught by the Builders. It was not the least of his Sufferings in the days of
his flesh, that he endured the contradiction of Sinners against himself, Heb.
12.3. They spoke against his Person as mean and contemptible, Isa. 53.2, 3.
and one that had no form, nor comeliness: They spoke against his Preaching as
false and deceiving, John 7.12. as factious and seditious, Luke 23.2. as
senseless and ridiculous, for the Pharisees derided him for it, Luke 16.14.
They spoke against his Miracles as done in Confederacy with Beelzebub the Prince
of the Devils, Mat. 12.24. They spoke against his Morals, charging him with
Blasphemy against God, Profanation of the Sabbath Day; and all the instances of
Debauchery which were usually met with in a Gluttonous Man, a Winebibber, and a
Friend of Publicans and Sinners, Mat. 11.19. They spoke against his Followers
as a company of ignorant despicable People, John 7.48.49. When he was in his
Sufferings, pass through all the steps and stages of them, and you will find
him every where spoken against, They reproched him in all his Offices, In his
Office of Teaching, when they challenged him to tell who smote him: In his
Office of Saving, when they challenged him to save himself as he had saved
others. In his Office of Ruling, when they challenged him to prove himself the
King of the Jews by coming down from the Cross. The common People spoke against
him, Mat, 27.39.
even they that passed by reviled him. The Pharisees and chief Priests, the
Grandees of the Church were as severe as any in their Reflections upon him,
Luke 23.11. (...).
Princes also did sit and spoke against him, Herod and his Men of War set him
at naught, made nothing of him that made all things.

Nay, even now he is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, Ephesians.
1.20.21.
far above all Principalities and Powers, i. e. both good and evil Angels, so
as to be no more hurt by the contradictions of the one, than he is benefitted
by the Adorations of the other, yet still he is spoken against. Besides the
Contempt cast upon him by the Jews and Mahometans, are there not with us, even
with us, those that daringly speak against him? Arians and Socinians are daily
speaking against him as a mere Man, thinking that a Robbery in him, Phil. 2.6.
which He thought none, to be equal with God; Quakers and Enthusiasts speak
against Him as a mere Name, setting up I know not what Christ within them,
while they explode that Jesus that was Crucified at Jerusalem. Atheists and
Deists speak against Him as a mere Cheat, accounting the Religion he
established a great Imposture, and His Gospel a Jest. Profane and Ignorant
People speak slightly of Him, as if our Beloved were no more than another
Beloved; and some speak scornfully of Him, Cant. 5.9.
as Julian the Apostate did, that called Him in disdain the Galilean, and the
Carpenter's Son. Such as these are the hard speeches, Jude 15.
which ungodly Sinners have spoken against Him, the Lord rebuke them, even the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke them.

2. God himself the great Object of our Religious Regards, is every where
spoken against. It is not only the Christian Revelation that is thus attacked
by virulent and blasphemous Tongues, but even Natural Religion also. The
Glorious and Blessed God the great Creator and Benefactor of the Universe, that
does Good to all, and whose tender Mercies are over all His Works, even He is
every where spoken against. Some deny His Being: Though His Existence be so
necessary, so evident, that if He be not, it is impossible any thing else should
be, yet there are Fools who say in their hearts, what they dare not speak out,
that there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. And he that says there is no God wishes
there were none, and if he could help it there should be none. Others Blaspheme
the Attributes of God, that charge the All-seeing Eye with Blindness, saying,
The Lord shall not see, Psalm. 94.7. that charge the Eternal Mind with
Forgetfulness, saying, God has forgotten, Psalm. 10.11. that charge the
Almighty Arm with Impotency, saying, Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness,
which is there called speaking against God, Psalm. 78.19, 20. Those speak
against God that promise themselves Impunity in Sin, saying, They shall not
surely die, Genesis 3.4. Ps. 10.13.
and God will not require it. And those that boldly allow their Impiety and
Irreligion, saying unto the Almighty Depart from us -- Job. 21.14, 15. Some
speak meanly of God, though He is infinitely Great and Glorious, others speak
hardly of Him, though he is infinitely Just and Good. The Name of God is spoken
against by the profane using of it; so it is construed Psalm. 139.20. They speak
against thee wickedly, thine Enemies take thy Name in vain. Can there be a
greater slight put upon the Eternal God than for Men to use his Sacred and
Blessed Name as a Byword, with which they give vent to their exorbitant
Passions, or fill up the vacancies of their other Idle-words? The Name of God
is thus abused not only by those that belch out bloody Oaths and Curses which
make the Ears of every good Man to tingle, but by those that mention the Name
of God slightly and irreverently, in their common Conversation; Jer. 12.2.
in whose mouths he is near when he is far from their reins. To use those forms
of speech which properly signify an Acknowledgment and Adoration of God's
Being, as O God, or O Lord, or an Appeal to his Omniscience, as God knows, or
an Invocation of his Favor, as God bless me, or God be merciful to me; I say,
to use these or the like expressions impertinently, and intending thereby to
express only our wonder, our surprise, or our passionate resentments, or any
thing than that which is their proper and awful signification, is an evidence
of a vain mind, that wants a due regard to that glorious and fearful Name,
Deuteronomy. 28.58.
The Lord our God. I see not that the Profanation of the Ordinance of Praying,
is any better than the Profanation of the Ordinance of Swearing. The serious
consideration of this, I hope, might prevent much of that Dishonor which is
done to God, and to his Holy Name, by some that run not with others to an
excess of Riot.

The Providence of God is likewise every where spoken against by Murmurers and
Complainers that quarrel with it, Jude 16.
and find fault with the disposals of it, Isa. 8.21.
and when they are hardly bestead curse their King and their God. Thus is the
mouth of the ungodly set against the Heavens, Psalm. 73.9.
and their Tongue walks through the Earth.

3. The Word of God the great Rule of our Religion is every where spoken
against, so it was when it was first preached, wherever the Apostles went
preaching the Doctrine of Christ they met with those that spoke against it,
contradicting and blaspheming, Acts 13.45. So it is, now it is written,
Atheists speak against the Scriptures as not of Authority, Papists speak
against it as dark and uncertain further than it is expounded, and supported by
the Authority of their Church, which Trident Council. Sess. 4th.
receives unwritten Traditions pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia, with the
same pious affection and reverence that they receive the Scripture, nay, and if
we may judge by their practice, with much more. Thus is the Word of God
blasphemed by them who call themselves the Temple of the Lord. But if we take
away Revelation (as the Deists do) all Religion will soon be lost, and if we
derogate from the Scriptures (as the Papists do) all Revelation is much
endangered.

Those also speak against the Scriptures, who profanely Jest with them, and
that they may the more securely Rebel against Scripture Laws, make themselves
and their idle Companions merry with the Scripture Language. The Word of the
Lord is unto them a reproach, as the Prophet complains, Jer. 6.10. And another
Prophet found it so, whose serious word of the necessity of Precept upon
Precept was turned into an idle Song, (as Grotius understands it) Isa. 28.13.
The word of the Lord was unto them Precept upon Precept -- Very likely it was
done by the Drunkards of Ephraim, spoken of v. 1. and it gave occasion to that
Caution, v. 22. Be ye not mockers lest your Bands be made strong. Profligate
and Debauched Minds relish no wit like that which ridicules the Sacred Text,
and exposes that to Contempt: Ps. 137.3.
As of old the insulting Babilonians must be humored with the Songs of Sion;
and no Cups can please Belshazzar in his drunken Frollick but the Sacred
Vessels of the Temple. Dan. 5.2, 3.
Thus industrious are the Powers of Darkness to Vilify the Scriptures, and to
make them contemptible; but he that sits in Heaven shall laugh at them, for in
spite of all the little efforts of their impotent Malice, He will magnify the
Law and make it honorable, according to the word which he has spoken, Isa.
42.21.

4. The People of God, the Professors of this Religion are every where spoken
against. Not only those of some particular Persuasion or Denomination, but
(without regard to that) such as have been zealous in fearing God, and working
Righteousness have been, in many places, very much spoken against. Our Blessed
Savior has told his Disciples what Treatment of this kind they must expect,
that they should be reviled and have all manner of evil said against them
falsely, Mat. 5.11, 12. that they and their Names should be cast out as evil,
Luke 6.22. And if they called our Master, Beelzebub, no nicknames fastened upon
his Followers can seem strange. Mat. 5.25. Mocking was an old way of
persecuting the Covenant-Seed, for thus, He that was after the Flesh, betimes
persecuted them that were after the Spirit. Compare Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4.29.
God's Heritage has always been as a speckled Bird, that all the Birds are
against, Jer. 12.9. Zach. 3.8.
And his Children for signs and for wonders in Israel, that every one has a
saying to. Isa. 8.18. Even Wisdoms Children have been called and counted Fools,
and their life Madness; The Quiet in the Land represented as Enemies to the
Public Peace; And those who are the greatest Blessings of the Age branded as
the Troublers of Israel. See this at large, represented by Caecilius in
Minucius Felix.
The Primitive Christians were painted out to the World under the blackest and
most odious Characters that could be, as Men of the most profligate Lives and
Consciences, and that even placed their Religion in the grossest Impieties and
Immoralities imaginable. Their Enemies found it necessary for the support of
the Kingdom of the Devil, the Father of Lies and Slanders, (fortiter
Calumniari) to Characterize them as the worst of Men, to whom they were
resolved to give the worst and most barbarous Treatment. It had not been
possible to have baited them, if they had not first dressed them up in the
skins of wild Beasts. And as then, so ever since, more or less in all Ages of
the Church, Reproach has been entailed upon the most serious and zealous
Professors of Religion and Godliness.

5. The Ministers of Christ, the Preachers of this Religion, are with a
distinguishing Enmity every where spoken against. Under the Old Testament God's
Messengers and his Prophets were generally mocked and misused, and it was
Jerusalem's measure-filling Sin. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. 'Twas one of the Devices they
devised against Jeremiah to smite him with the tongue, because they would not,
and they desired tha^ others might not give heed to any of his words, Jer.
18.18. Those to whom the Prophet Ezekiel was a very lovely Song, and with their
mouths showed much love to him, yet were still talking against him by the
Walls, and in the Doors of their Houses, and God lets him know it. Ezekiel. 33.30,
31, 32. And then it is not strange if the Ministers of the New Testament (in
which Truth shines with a stronger Light) be with no less Enmity spoken against
by those that love Darkness rather than Light. The Apostles, those prime
Ministers of State in Christ's Kingdom were so loaded with Reproach, that they
were made a spectacle to the World, (...) -- the Theater they played upon.
a spectacle of Pity to those that have either Grace or good Nature, but a
spectacle of scorn to those that had neither. They were trampled upon as the
Filth of the World; and whereas the Offscouring of any thing is bad enough,
they were looked upon as the offscouring of all things; even unto this day;
after they had in so many instances approved themselves well, and could not but
be made manifest in the Consciences of their worst Enemies, 1 Cor. 4.9, 13. And
it has all along been the Policy of the Churches Enemies by all marks possible
to bring the Ministry into contempt, and to represent the Churches Nazarites,
even those that were purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, and more ruddy than
Rubies, with a visage blacker than a Coal, so that they have not been known in
the streets. I allude to that complaint, Lam. 4.7, 8. Marvel not, if the
Standard-bearers be most struck at.

6. The Christian Religion it self has been and still is every where spoken
against. The Truths of it contradicted as false and groundless, the great
Doctrines of the Mediation of Christ, and the Resurrection of the Dead were
ridiculed by the Athenian Philosophers, Acts 19.18, 32. The Laws of it faulted
as grievous and unreasonable, as hard sayings, which could not be born, by
those who bid open defiance to the Obligation of them, and say, Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us, Ps. 2.3. The Ordinances
of it despised as mean, and having no form nor comeliness. Sabbaths mocked at,
as of old, -- cui septima quaeque fuit lux Ignava -- Juvenal. sat. 5. Dicimur
sceleratissimi de Sacramento infanticidij, and pabulo inde. and post convivium
incesto, etc. Tertull. Apol. cap. 7.
Lam. 1.7. and the sanctification of them represented as only a Cloak for
Idleness. Sacraments reproached, and the Sacred Memorial of Christ's Death and
Sufferings, by the Persecutors of the Primitive Christians represented to the
World as the bloody and inhumane Killing and Eating of a Child, and their Love
Feasts and Holy Kiss (which were then in use) as only introductions to the most
abominable uncleanness. Primitive Christianity was industriously put into an
ill-name: it was called emphatically The Atheism, because it overthrew
Idolatry, and undermined the false Gods, and worships that had so long
obtained. This was the Outcry at Ephesus, that if Paul's Doctrine took place,
the Temple of the great Goddess would be despised, Acts 19.26, 27. It was also
branded as a Novelty, and an up-start Doctrine, because it took people off from
that vain Conversation which they had received by Tradition from their Fathers.
1 Pet. 1.18. Acts 17.18, 19.

See Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, lib. 1. chapter 1.


It was called at Athens a New Doctrine, and industriously represented in all
places as a Mushrome Sect, that was but of yesterday. It was looked upon as
nearly allied to Judaism, because it was so much supported by the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, and nothing was more despicable among the Romans than the
Jews, and their Religion. The Professors of Christianity were looked upon as
unlearned and ignorant Men, Acts 4.12. the very Dregs and Refuse of the People.
Greg. Nazian. Invectiv. in Julian. Orat. 1. p. (mihi) 42.
Julian forbad the calling of them Christians, and would have them called
nothing but Galileans, thereby to expose them to the contempt of those who are
(as indeed most people are) governed more by a sound of Words than by the
reason of Things. Thus when the Devil was silenced in his Oracles (as it is
well known he was upon the setting up of Christianity in the World) his mouth
was opened in Lies and Slanders; and being forced to quit his pretentions to a
Deity, he appears barefaced, as a Devil, ((...)) a False Accuser.

The Reformed Religion in these latter ages, has been in like manner spoken
against: Though it maintains all that, [and only that] Doctrine, which Christ
and his Apostles preached, and was before Luther there, where Popery, as such,
never was before or since, that is, in the Holy Scriptures, yet the Professors
and Preachers of it have been called and counted Heretics, Lollards from
Lolium, Tares so my Ld. Cook from Mr. Fox. Rev. 13.17
and Schismatics, and by all possible Artifices exposed to the odium of the
People, that none might Buy or Sell, i. e. have the benefit and comfort of
civil Society and Commerce, that had not the Mark, or the Name of the Beast,
Rev. 13.17.
or the Number of his Name.

Nay, even among some that profess the Christian and Reformed Religion, yet the
Practice of serious Godliness is very much spoken against. The Power of
Religion is not only disliked and denied, but contradicted and condemned by
those that rest in the Form. They that call the Evil, Isa. 5.20.
Good, will call the Good, Evil; and it is not strange if they, who abandon
themselves to work all uncleanness with greediness, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4,
speak ill of such as run not with them to the same excess of Riot, where the
Wicked walk on every side, he that departs from evil makes himself a prey.
Psalm. 12.8. Isa. 59.15.
The old Enmity between the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent is
still working, and the old Game every day played over again. The Truth as it is
in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21. compared with Tit. 1.1.
and the Truth which is according to Godliness will be contradicted by those
that lie in wait to deceive. Bigots on all sides will have something to say
against Catholic Charity and Moderation: They that are fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord, and forward to every good Work, must expect to be evil spoken
of by such as affect a Lukewarmness, and Indifferency in Religion: Nor can
those who walk circumspectly, not as Fools but as Wise, escape the lash of
their Tongues who live at large, and walk loosly, and at all adventures, as the
Fools in Israel.

I come now in the Second Place to enquire what is the Reason that so Holy and
Excellent a Religion as Christianity is, meets with such hard usage, and is
thus spoken against, every where spoken against: When we hear such an Outcry
as this made against Christianity, it is natural to us to enquire, as Pilate
did when such a Clamor was raised against its Author, Why, what evil has it
done? Truly we may say concerning it as Pilate did concerning him, We find no
fault in it. Which of all its Opposers convinces it of Sin or Error? It
invades no Man's Right, breaks in upon no Man's Property, is no Disturbance of
the Peace, no Enemy to the Welfare of Families and Societies, is no Prejudice
at all to the Interests of States aad Princes, but to all these highly
Beneficial and Advantageous: Why then is it thus accused, condemned and spoken
against? We will endeavor to find out the true Reason of it, though it is
impossible to assign a justifiable Reason of that which is most unreasonable.

1. The Adversaries of Religion speak against it because they do not know it.
Sound Knowledge has not a greater Enemy in the World than Ignorance. Our Lord
Jesus was therefore despised and hated by the World, because the World knew him
not, John 1.10. If they had known the Dignity of his Person, the Excellency of
his Doctrine, and the gracious Design and Purpose of his coming into the World,
certainly they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. They
that did it, Acts 3.15, 17. Luke 23.34.
did it through Ignorance, and knew not what they did. Thus they who say to the
Almighty, Depart from us, could not say so if they did not at the same time
studiously decline the knowledge of his ways. Job 21.14.
No Man will speak against Religion and the Power of it, that has either
seriously weighed the Proofs and Evidences of it, or impartially tried the
Comfort and Benefit of it. John 4.10.
If they knew this Gift, this inestimable Gift of God, instead of speaking
against it, they would covet it earnestly as the best Gift. He that looks at a
distance upon Men Dancing, would think them to be mad: (It was Peter Martyr's
Comparison, in a Sermon which had so good an influence upon the Conversion of
the Marquess of Vico) But let him come nearer them, and observe the Regularity
and Harmony of all their Motions and Postures, and he will not only admire
their Order, but find in himself an inclination to join with them: So he that
contents himself with a distant and transient view of the Practice of Piety
will perhaps take up hard thoughts of it, but a better Acquaintance will
rectify the Mistake. When the Spouse in the Canticles had given a Description
of her Beloved to the Daughters of Jerusalem, the same who before had
scornfully asked, Cant. 5.9.6.1.
What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved? Now as seriously enquire,
Whither is thy Beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? The People of God
are called his Hidden Ones, and their Life is a Hidden Life, Psalm. 83.3. Col.
3.3. Prove. 15.24. Psa. 105.
their way above, and therefore it is that the World speaks evil of them,
because it knows them not. 1 John 3.1. They who speak evil of these Dignities,
speak evil of those things which they know not, Quid iniquiusquam ut oderin^
homines quod ignorant. Tunc enim meretur, quando cognoscitur an mereatur Tert.
Apol. cap. 1.
as the Apostle speaks Jude 8.10. How unjust then, and unreasonable is the
Enmity and Malice of the Adversaries of Religion, to condemn that which they
never enquired into, and to load that with the vilest Reproaches which for
ought they know, merits the highest Encomiums! And how excellent then are the
ways of God, which none speak ill of but those that are unacquainted with them!
while those that know them witness to the goodness of them, and Wisdom is
justified of all her Children, Mat. 11.19.

2. They speak against it because they do not like it, and we know Ill Will
never speaks well. Though they have little acquaintance with Religion, yet they
know this concerning it in general, that it is not agreeable with the way of
their hearts which they are resolved to walk in, Ante nos incipiunt odisse quam
nosse, ne cognitos aut imitari possint, aut damnare non possint Min. Fell. p.
(mihi) 30. Romans 8.7. 1 John 3.13.
nor with the course of this World, which is the Card and Compass they steer
by, and from which they take their measures; they know this, that it lays a
restraint upon their Appetites and Passions, and consists much in the
mortifying of their beloved Lusts and Corruptions, and therefore they have a
secret Antipathy to it: The Carnal Mind, which is enmity against God, is so
against all that bear the Image of God. Christ has bidden his Disciples to
expect the Hatred of the World, and not to marvel at it, Joh. 15.18, etc. They
who hate to be themselves reformed will never love those that are reformed: Out
of the abundance therefore of the Heart, and the Malignity that is there, it is
no marvel if the mouth speak; where the Root of Bitterness is, Job 15.25.
it will bear Gall and Wormwood. The Daring Sinner that stretches out his hand
against God finds his hand too short to reach him; but say they, Psa. 12.4.
with our Tongue will we prevail, our Lips are our own. The Beast that made War
with Heaven in the Apocalyptick Vision, though he had ten Horns, and those
crowned, yet is not described doing mischief with them, but opening his Mouth
in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle, and them
that dwell in Heaven, Rev. 13.5, 6. The Poison of the Serpents Seed is under
their Tongue, Romans 3.13.

3. They speak against Religion because it speaks against them. They who have
fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, hate the Light which
discovers them, Joh. 3.19. Nor do any curse the Rising Sun but those that are
scorched by it. Why were the Pharisees so exasperated against our Savior but
because he spoke his Parables against them, Mat. 21.45.
and laid them open in their own colors? Why did the World hate him who so
loved the World, John 7.7.
but because he testified of it that its Works are evil? Why had Joseph's
Brethren such a spleen against him, but because he was a Witness against them,
and brought to his Father their evil Report? Why did Ahab hate Micajah, Genesis
37.2. 1 Ki. 22.8.21.20.
and call Elijah his Enemy but because they were the faithful Reprovers of his
Wickedness, and never prophesied Good concerning him, but Evil? Why did the
Inhabitants of the Earth rejoice when the Witnesses were slain, but because
those two Prophets by their plain and powerful Preaching tormented them that
dwelt upon the Earth? Rev. 11.10. Mat. 24.14. Natural est and odisse quem
times, and quem metueris, infestare si possis. Min. Felix. Isa. 29.21. Isa.
58.1.
The everlasting Gospel is a Testimony, either to us to convince us, or against
us to condemn us, and then no wonder if those speak against it who hate to be
convinced by it, and dread to be condemned by it. The Prophet complains of
those that laid Snares for him that reproves in the gate; and why is it
faithful Ministers are so much hated, but because their Business is to show
people their Transgressions? If they would flatter Sinners that flatter
themselves in a sinful way, and cry Peace to them, to whom the God of Heaven
does not speak Peace, they might avoid a great deal of Reproach and Censure;
but they dare not do it. Gal. 1.8, 9.
They are not to make a new Law and Gospel, but to preach that which is made:
they have their Rule in that Caution given to the Prophet, Jer. 15.19. Let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. The Hearts and Lives of Men
must be brought to comply with the Word of God, for the Word of God can never
be made to comply with the Humors and Fancies of Men. Ministers as they would
not for the World make the way to Heaven any straiter or narrower than Christ
has made it, so they dare not make it any broader or easier, nor offer Life
and Salvation upon any other Terms than the Gospel has already settled. If
they aim at pleasing Men, they cannot approve themselves the Servants of
Christ, Gal. 1.10.
and therefore are they so much spoken against. And the same is the Reason why
the most strict and serious Christians are so much spoken against, because
their Piety and Devotion, their Justice and Sobriety, their Zeal and Charity,
is a standing Reproof to the wicked World, and condemns it, Heb. 11.7.
as the Faith and holy Fear of Noah condemned the Infidelity and Security of
the Old World. The Sodomites were vexed at Lot's Conversation as much as he was
at their filthy Conversation. Wherefore does the Blood-Thirsty hate and revile
the Upright, while the Just seek his Soul, Prove. 29.10.
but for the same Reason for which Cain hated Abel, because his own Works were
Evil and his Brothers Righteous. 1 John 3.12.


Now for the APPLICATION of this DOCTRINE.
Let us see what good Use we may make of this Observation concerning the
Wickedness of the Wicked in speaking so much against Religion and Godliness,
and what is our Duty in reference hereunto.

First, Let us admire the Patience and Forbearance of the God of Heaven, in
that he bears so much, and so long, with those that thus speak against Him and
his Holy Religion. The Affront hereby given Him is very great, and (we would
think) intolerable, even Hard Speeches that reflect upon an Infinite Majesty,
have in them a kind of Infinite Malignity. He hears and knows all that which is
said against Him, and against his Truth and VVays, and as a Jealous God resents
it. He has always Power in his Hands to punish the proudest of his Enemies,
nor would their immediate Ruin be any Loss to him, and yet Sentence against
these Evil Words and Works is not executed speedily: Be astonished O Heavens,
Eccl. 8.11.
at this, and wonder O Earth! that those wretches which rebel against the Beams
of such Light and Glory, which spurn at the Bowels of such Love and Grace, are
not immediately made the visible Monuments of Divine Wrath and Vengeance, and
like Sodom and Gomorrah, set forth for an Example! That the Blasphemers and
Scoffers of these last Days are not instantly struck Dumb, struck Dead. That He
who has so much said against him, yet does himself keep silence, Ps. 50.12.
and does not answer all these Reproaches and Contradictions (as he easily
could) in Thunder and Lightning. Though his Silence and Forbearance is turned
to his Reproach even by those that have the Benefit of it, who therefore think
him altogether such an one as themselves, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
and take occasion from his Patience to question his Faithfulness, and
challenge his Justice, saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? Yet he
bears, and his Patience is stretched out even to Long-suffering, because he is
not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9.
nor that any means should be left untried to prevent their perishing.
Therefore he bears with Sinners, because this is the Day of his Patience, and
of their Probation. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven in the Word of
God, Romans 1.18.
that we might be awed by Faith, more than in present Providence, which would
be an aw to Sense. But there is a Day coming, a dreadful Day, Psalm. 50.3.
when our God shall come, and shall no longer keep silence, a Day foretold in
the early Ages of the World, Jude 14.15.
by Enoch the seventh from Adam, when Judgment shall be executed upon ungodly
Sinners for all their hard Speeches, which Day he will not anticipate, for he
knows it is coming, Psalm. 37.13. It is agreeable to the regular course of
Justice, that all Judgments be adjourned till the Judgment-Day, and all
Executions deferred till Execution-Day: And therefore now he condescends to
reason with those that speak against him, for their Convicttion, as he does by
the Prophet Ezekiel. 18.25, etc. where he fairly debates the Case with those who
said, The way of the Lord is not equal, That every Mouth may be stopped with an
unanswerable Argument before it be stopped with an irreversible Sentence, and
those who have spoken against him may be sent speechless to Hell. He keeps
silence now, Mat. 22.12.
because when he does speak he will be justified. When our Lord Jesus was here
upon Earth, with what an invincible Patience did he endure the contradiction of
Sinners; when so many ill things were witnessed against him he was silent, Mat.
26.63. Joh. 19.9.
to admiration, answered not a word to all their unjust Calumnies and
Accusations, but at the same time he bound them over to the Judgment of the
great Day by that awful word, Mat. 26.64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man
sitting on the right hand of the Power, -- and still he bears in expectation of
that same Day. Heb. 10.13.
He does not take Vengeance presently because he has an Eternity before him
for the doing of it.

And by the way, we may infer from hence, That those who would be like their
Heavenly Father, must bear Reproach and Contradiction patiently. When any thing
is said against us, reflecting never so little Disparagement upon us, or our
Families, our Resentments of it are very sensible, and we are apt to take it
hainously; nay, and to say we do well to be angry, for it is not a thing to be
endured; not to be endured! O think how much God bears with the Contempt and
Reproach cast upon his great Name, and that will surely qualify our Resentments
of any indignity done to our little Names! Who are we that we must not be
spoken against? Or what are our Sayings that they must not be contradicted? 2 Samuel 16.10.4. 1 Pet. 2.23.
Such Affronts as these we should learn to bear as David did when Sbimei cursed
him, So let him Curse; and as the Son of David did when his Enemies reviled
him, Blessing them that Curse us, and Praying for them that thus Persecute us,
that we may be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven. God adjourns his
Vindication to the great Day, and then surely we may adjourn ours to that day
as St. Paul does his, 1 Cor. 4.5.

Secondly, Let us acknowledge the Power of Divine Grace, in keeping up the
Christian Religion in the World, notwithstanding the universal Contradiction,
and Opposition it has met with. One would think that a way thus spoken against
every where should have been long ere this lost and ruined, and the Christian
Name cut off, to be no more in remembrance; Ps. 83 3, 4.
which its Adversaries have so industriously endeavored; if it had been of
Men, it had certainly come to naught quickly, Acts 5.38.
though they had let it alone, but being of God, it was to admiration
Victorious over all opposition. A Sect, a Cheat could never have supported it
self against so much Contradiction; no Human Power or Policy could have kept it
up, nor any thing less than an Almighty Arm. See this excellently enlarged upon
by the learned Grotius de v. R. C. l. 2.
The continuance of the Christian Religion in the world to this day is a
standing Miracle for the Conviction of its Adversaries, and the Confirmation of
the Faith of those that adhere to it. When we consider what a mighty Force was
raised by the Powers of Darkness against Christianity when it was in its
Infancy, how many they were that spoke against it, learned Men, great Men,
Books were written, Laws were made against it; those that spoke for it, how few
were they? and how mean and despicable! the foolish things of the World, and
the Weak, and yet we see the Word of God mightily growing and prevailing. Acts
19.20.
Must we not needs say, this is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes? The several false Religions of the Heathen with their various
Superstitions and Idolatries, though they gave very little Opposition one to
another, but agreed together well enough, yet having no foundation in Truth
they all withered away, and dwindled to nothing, and after the mighty sway they
had born, and all means possible used to support 'em, at length their Day came
to fall, their Oracles silenced, their Altars deserted, and the Gods themselves
were famished, ( Zeph. 2.11.) and perished from the Earth, according to that
Prediction, Jer. 10.11. which is put into the mouths of the Captived Jews, to
retort upon their insulting Enemies, and for that purpose is originally in the
Caldee Dialect: We may ask triumphantly, not only where are the Gods of Humath
and of Arpad? Where are the Gods of Sepharvaim Hena, and Ivah, 2 Kin. 18.34.
those obscure and petty Deities? But where are the Gods of Babylon and Egypt,
Greece and Rome, the illustrious names of Saturn and Jupiter, Juno and Diana?
where are the Gods which our British and Saxon Aucestors worshipped bofore they
received the Light of the glorious Gospel? Are they not all forgotten as dead
Men out of mind, and their names written in the dust? But Christ's Holy
Religion, though for some Ages it was utterly destitute of all Secular Supports
and Advantages, and was assaulted on all hands by the most vigorous Attacks of
its daring and most implacable Enemies, yet it has strangely weathered its
point, and is in being, and, thanks be to God, in some places in a flourishing
state to this day: Its cause an opposed, Exodus 3.3, 4.
but never a baffled cause: Let us turn aside now, and see this great sight, a
Bush burning and yet not consumed, and say, The Lord is in it of a Truth: Come
and see the Captain of our Salvation riding forth in the Chariot of the
everlasting Gospel, Rev. 6.2.
with his Crown upon his Head, and his Bow in his Hand, conquering and to
conquer -- That which was every where spoken against Christianity, Acts 28.3.
was like the Viper which fastened upon St. Paul's Hand, it gave people
occasion to think very ill concerning it, and to look for its speedy fall, as
the barbarous people concerning him whom they concluded to be a Murderer, and
expected that he should have swollen, or fallen down Dead. But it has in all
Ages shaken those venomous Beasts into the Fire, and taken no harm, and so has
proved its own Divine Original. Let us herein acknowledge the Wisdom and Power
of our Lord Jesus, Mat. 16.18.
who has so firmly built his Church upon a Rock that the Gates of Hell, i. e.
all its Powers, and Policies, and Numbers could never prevail against it.
Mahomet, though he industriously adapted his Religion, to the Sensual Appetites
of Men, whose Reason only, and not their Lusts, could object against it, See
the learned Dr. Humfrey Prideaux's excellent History of the Life of Mahomet
lately published.
yet he obtained no strength, nor interest at all, till by a thousand Artifices
he had got the Power of the Sword, and with it forbad any upon pain of Death to
speak against him or his Doctrine; charging his first Followers, who were to
propagate his Religion, if they met with any that objected against it, not to
dispute with them, but to kill them immediately: By which means that grand
Imposture in a little time got some footing in the world; and by the same
Barbarous and Inhumane Methods, it has been supported now above a Thousand
Years. And in like manner that great Enemy of the Church, represented in St.
John's Vision, maintains his Interest by causing that as many as would not
worship the Image of the Beast should be killed, Rev. 13.15. Thus are Errors
and false Religions propagated; strip them of these supports, and they fall to
the ground of course; but on the contrary, the Christian Religion was planted
and preserved not only without, but against secular Force, recommended and
upheld by its own intrinsic Truth and Excellency, and that Divine Power which
accompanied it. The Preachers and Professers of it every where spoken against,
and yet every where getting ground, and strangely victorious, purely by the
word of their Testimony, Rev. 12.10, 11.
and by not loving their Lives unto the Death. Thus is come Salvation and
Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ.

Thirdly, Let us greatly lament the Folly and Wickedness of those who speak
against Christ and his Holy Religion, and if we can do any thin^, have
compassion upon them, and help to undeceive them, and rectify their Mistakes.
Surely this is one of the Abominations committed among us, for which we should
be found among those that sigh and cry. Ezekiel. 9.4. one of those Instances of
the Pride of Sinners for which our Souls should weep in secret, Jer. 13.17.
This is that Reproach of the solemn Assembly which is such a Burden to all
good Men. Zeph. 3.18. Our Ears should tingle, and our Hearts tremble to hear
the Reproach and Contempt cast upon Christ and his Religion, or to hear of it,
and looking upon our selves as nearly concerned in Sacred Things, we should be
sensibly touched with the Profanation of them.

To affect us herewith, let us consider,

1. The great Dishonor hereby done to our God in the World. They that reflect
upon his Truths and Ways, his Word and Ordinances, reflect upon him, He that
touches these touches the apple of his eye; If therefore we have any love to
God, or concern for his Honor, and have cordially espoused the Interests of
his Kingdom, what is an Affront to him, will surely be a Grief to us. It cannot
but be a very melancholy Thought to every sensible Soul, That the God that
made the World is made so light of in the World, That he who does so much Good
to the Children of Men, has so little Honor from them, nay, and has so much
Dishonor done him by them every day, Isa. 52.5.
and his Name continually blasphemed. That the Lord Jesus, who so loved the
World, is so much hated and despised by the World. The Reproaches of them who
thus reproach our Master, if we be his faithful Servants we should feel as
falling upon us. Psa. 69 10. Mat. 25.45.
And if he take what is said and done against his People, as said and done
against himself, much more reason have they to find themselves aggrieved in
that which is said and done against him. If we pray heartily that God's Name
may be hallowed, as we should do every day, we should grieve heartily that his
Name is dishonored, as we see it is every day. And our resentments of the
Reproach cast upon God and Religion, we should make a humble and pious
Remonstrance of before God in Prayer, as King Hezekiah spread Rabshakeh's
blasphemous Letter before the Lord, with that tender and affectionate Request,
Lord bow down thine ear and hear: Open, Lord, thine eyes and see, 2 Kin. 19.16.
How pathetically does Joshua plead, chap. 7.9. What will thou do unto thy great
Name? And with what a concern does the Psalmist in the name of the Church
insist upon this, Psalm. 74.10. O God, how long shall the Adversary reproach?
Shall the Enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever? And v. 18. Remember this that the
Enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish People have blasphemed thy
Name. And how earnestly does he beg, v. 22. Arise, O God, plead thine own
Cause. Thus should the Honor of God and Religion lie nearer our Hearts than
any other concern whatsoever.

2. Consider the miserable Condition of those that presumptuously speak against
God and Religion. Though they may do it with an Air of Assurance, as if they run
no hazard, yet he that rolleth this Stone, it will certainly return upon him
sooner or later. They that speak against Religion speak against their own
Heads, Psa. 64.8.
and their own Tongues will at last fall upon them. We have reason to bewail
their Madness, and to pity, and pray for them, for they know not what they do.
Miserable Souls! How will they be deceived at last, when they shall find that
God is not mocked! Gal. 6.7.
And that while they were studying to put contempt on Religion, they were but
preparing eternal Shame and Confusion for themselves! The Lord is a jealous
God, and will not hold them guiltless that thus profane his Name: Their Wit,
and Learning, and Figure in the World, may embolden them in their Sin, and bear
them up a while in an open Defiance of all that is Sacred, but nothing can
prevent their utter Ruin besides a serious and sincere Repentance, which is an
unsaying, with Shame and Self-lothing, of all that which they have proudly
spoken against God and Godliness. They that pervert the right ways of the Lord
will certainly fall therein, Hos. 14.9. 2 Pet. 3.16.
and they that wrest the Scriptures do it, to their own Destruction. Religion's
Motto is, Nemo me impune lacessit. It Is ill jesting with edg-tools. Jerusalem
will certainly be a burdensome Stone to all People, Zach. 12.3.
that burden themselves with it. They that spurn at the Rock of Salvation,
will not only be unable to remove it, but will find it a Stone of Stumbling, 1
Pet. 2.8. Isa. 28.13.
and a Rock of Offense. And we find those who ridiculed the Word of the Lord,
broken, and snared, and taken. Let all those therefore that mourn in Sion, weep
over those that will not weep for themselves; and look with pity and compassion
upon those that look upon them with scorn and contempt.

3. Consider the Mischief that is hereby done to the Souls of others. They who
thus err, their error remains not with themselves, but this poisonous and
malignant Breath infects others. Words spoken against Religion eat as does a
Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17.
and they who speak them, seldom perish alone in their iniquity, for many
follow their pernicious ways. 2 Pet. 2.2.
Unwary Souls are easily beguiled, and brought to conceive rooted Prejudices
against that which they hear every where spoken against, and few have
Consideration and Resolution enough to maintain a good opinion of that which
they that set up for Wits, make it their business to cry down. Act. 13.7.8, 9,
10.
Sergius Paulus was a prudent Man, and yet St. Paul saw him in danger of being
turned away from the Faith, by the subtle Suggestions of Elymas the Sorcerer,
which therefore the Apostle resented with a more than ordinary keenness. It is
sad to think how many Young People, who perhaps were well Educated and Hopeful,
when they go abroad into the World, by conversing with those who lie in wait to
deceive, have their minds insensibly vitiated and debauched, and perhaps they
are made seven times more the Children of Hell than those that first seduced
them. Under a pretense of free Thought, and fashionable Conversation, and a
generous Disdain of Preciseness and Singularity; Atheistical Principles are
imbibed, the Restraints of Conscience shaken off, Brutish Lusts not only
indulged but pleaded for, and serious Godliness and Devotion looked upon with
Contempt, and thus the Heart is impregnably fortified for Satan against Christ
and his Gospel, Wrath is treasured up against the Day of Wrath, and those who
might have been the Blessing prove the Plague of their Age, which is a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation to all that wish well for the souls
of Men, and to those especially that are desirous of the welfare of the rising
Generation.

Fourthly, Let us take heed that none of us do at at any time, directly or
indirectly, speak against the ways of Religion and Godliness, or say a
Confederacy, with those that do so. Isa. 8.11, 12.
Submit to Divine Instructions given with a strong hand not to walk in the way
of those People that speak ill of Religion. Take heed of embracing any Notions
which secretly tend to derogate from the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, or
to diminish the Honor of Religion in the Soul, or of accustoming your selves
to such Expressions as treat not Sacred Things with that awful Regard which is
due to them. Those were never reckoned Wise Men that would rather lose a Friend
than a Jest, much less are they to be accounted so that will rather lose the
Favor of their God. Those that in their common Converse make themselves merry
with serious things, how can it be expected they should at any time be serious
in them, or experience the influence and comfort of them? It is not likely that
those who make the Word of God the subject of their Jests, should ever make it
the Guide of their way, or find it the spring of their Joys. Let us not choose
to associate with those that have light thoughts of Religion, and are ready
upon all occasions to speak against it. It is not without good reason that
among the many words with which St. Peter exhorted his New Converts, this only
is recorded, Save your selves from this untoward Generation, Acts 2.40. Those
that listen to the Counsel of the Ungodly, Psalm. 1.1.
and Stand in the way of Sinners, as willing to walk with them, will come at
length (if Almighty Grace prevent not) to set in the seat of the Scornful. Let
us therefore abide by that which Job and Eliphaz, even in the heat of Dispute,
were agreed in, that the Counsel of the Wicked shall be far from us, which
Protestation we have, Job 21.16. and 22.18. It Is dangerous making Friendship
with those that have an enmity to serious Godliness, lest we learn their way,
and get a Snare to our Souls.

There are two common Pretenses, and seemingly plausible ones, under which
those that speak against Religion shelter themselves, but they are neither of
them justifiable.

1. They pretend, that it is only for Argument sake, that they object against
Religion, and pick quarrels with it, and (so little esteem they have of the
thing called Sincerity) they will not be thought to mean as they say. And are
the great Principles of Religion become such Moot-points, such Matters of
doubtful Disputation, that it is indifferent which side of the Question a Man
takes, and upon which he may argue, pro or con, at his pleasure? Cic. de Not.
Deor. lib. 2. ad Fin.
That grave and weighty saying of a Learned Heathen is enough to silence this
pretense, Mala enim and impia consuetudo est, contra Deos disputandi, sive ex
animo id fit, sive simulate. It Is an ill thing to talk against Religion,
whether a Man means as he says or no, or (in the Language of our Age) whether
he speak seriously, or only banter. Julian, the Apostate, when, before he threw
off his Disguise, he frequently argued against Christianity, pretended it was
only for Disputation sake. But out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth
speaks, and whence can such evil things come but from an evil Treasure there?

2. They pretend that it is not Religion that they ridicule and expose to
Contempt, but some particular Forms and Modes of religious Worship which they
do not like. And this is one ill effect of the unhappy Divisions among
Christians, that while one side has labored to make the other contemptible;
Religion in general has suffered on all sides. To reprove what we think amiss,
with Prudence and Meekness is well, but to reproach and make a Jest of that
which our Fellow Christians look upon as Sacred, and make a part of their
Religion, cannot be to any good purpose at all. To scoff at the Mistakes and
Weaknesses of our Brethren, is the way to provoke and harden them, but not to
convince and reform them. They who think to justify this way of ridiculing
those that differ from them, by the Instance of Elijah's jeering the Priests of
Baal, perhaps Know not what manner of Spirit they are of, Luke 9.55.
no more than those Disciples did who would have their intemperate Heats
countenanced by the Example of that great Prophet.

Fifthly, Let us that profess the Christian Religion, be very cautious that we
do not give occasion to any to speak against it. If there are those in all
places that are industrious to cast reproach upon Religion, then we have need
to walk circumspectly, and to look well to our goings, that those who watch for
our halting may have no occasion given them to Blaspheme. It is certain that
though in Religion there is nothing which may be justly spoken against, yet among
those that profess it there is too often found that which deserves to be taxed,
and which cannot pass without just and severe Reflections -- Pudet haec
opprobria nobis -- Are there not those within the Pale of the Church, To. 2.24.
2 Pet. 2 2.
through whom, the Name of God and his Doctrine are blasphemed, Jude 12. The
foulest Reproaches of the Primitive Christians took rise from the vile
practices of the Gnostics, and other Pseudochristians. Of which Vid. Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 7.
and by reason of whom the way of Truth is evil spoken of. Are there not those
who wear Christ's Livery, but are a Scandal to his Family, Spots in the
Love Feasts, and a standing Reproach to that worthy Name, by which they are
called? Now though it is certainly very unjust and unfair to impute the faults
of Professors to the Religion they profess, and to reproach Christianity,
because there are those that are called Christians who expose themselves to
Reproach; yet it is, without question, the Sin of those who give Men occasion
to do so. This was the Condemnation in David's Case, and entailed the Sword
upon his House, though the Sin was pardoned, that by it he had given great
occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. Let us
therefore double our diligence and care, to give no offense either to Jew or
Gentile, that Religion which has so often been wounded in the House of her
Friends, may never be wounded through our sides.

If we enquire (as we are commanded to do) what it is that gives occasion of
Reflection upon Religion, we shall find that the Imprudences of those that
profess it, give some occasion, but their Immoralities much more.

1. The Imprudences of Christians often turn to the Reproach of Christianity.
There may be such over-doing even in Well-doing, as may prove Undoing. When
more stress is laid than ought to be upon some instances of Religion, to the
justling out of others, and the Exercises of Devotion are either mis-timed, or
mis-placed, or mis-proportion'd, Religion is hereby misrepresented, or looked
upon to disadvantage. Rash and indiscreet Zeal may give occasion to those who
seek occasion to speak against all religious Zeal. Col. 4.5.
Therefore walk in Wisdom toward them that are without. Religion is a most
sweet and pleasant and amiable thing: Let not us by our Indiscretion make it a
Task to our selves, and a Terror to others. The more the Children of God are
Children of Wisdom, Luke 7.35.
the more they justify it, and its ways. Christian Prudence is very much the
beauty and strength of Christian Piety. Though it will secure the welfare of
our own Souls if we walk in our Integrity, yet it is necessary for the
preserving of the Credit of our Profession, that we walk in Wisdom, Prove. 14.8.
that Wisdom of the Prudent which is to understand his way, Ec. 10.10.
that Wisdom which is profitable to direct. And if any Man lack this Wisdom,
let him ask it of God, Jam. 1.5.
who gives liberally, and upbraids us not with our Folly. Pray with David,
Psalm. 27.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain Path because of
mine Enemies. (Hebr. because of mine Observers.) Our Enemies are our Observers,
and will be ready to reproach our Way, for the sake of the false steps we take
in it, and therefore we have need to ponder the Path of our Feet, and let
Discretion guide and govern our Zeal.

2. The Immoralites of those who profess Christianity turn much more to the
reproach of that Holy Religion; when those that are called Christians, are
griping and covetous, and greedy of the World, when they are false and
deceitful, and unjust in their Dealings, sour and morose, and unnatural to
their Relations, turbulent and unquiet in Societies, when they are froward and
passionate, proud and haughty, hard-hearted and oppressive, loose and
intemperate. When they are found guilty of Lying and Cheating, Drunkenness or
Uncleanness. When it appears that they keep up some secret Haunts of Sin, under
the cloak and covert of a specious Profession, when they that profess the
Christian Faith lick up the vomit of Heathen, and allow themselves in those
things that are contrary to the Light and Law even of Natural Religion. This is
that which opens the mouths of the Adversaries to speak reproachfully of that
Religion, the Profession of which is made to consist with such vile Practices,
which cannot possibly consist with the Power of it. This makes People ready to
say as that Mohammedan Prince did, when the Christians had broke their League
with him, O Jesus, are these thy Christians? Or as the complaint was upon
another occasion, Aut hoc non Evangelium, aut hi non Evangelici, Either this is
not Gospel, or these are not to be called Professors of the Gospel. If
Ministers give offense in any thing, not they only, but their Ministry will be
blamed. Nay, 2 Cor. 6.3
if Servants, Christians of the lowest rank and figure, if they be unfaithful,
and disobedient to the Government they are under, 1 Timothy 6.1.
the Name of God, and his Doctrine, is likely to be blasphemed. Let us
therefore who profess Relation to the Eternal God, and Dependence upon the
Blessed Jesus, and a Regard to the Holy Scriptures, as we tender the Reputation
of our Religion, Col. 1.10.
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. Let us Order our Conversation so in
every thing, as that we may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior. Tit. 2.10.
While we are called by so good a Name, let us not dare to do an ill thing. The
Disciples of Christ are as a City upon a Hill, Mat. 5.14.
and have many eyes upon them, and therefore have need to behave themselves
with a great deal of Caution, and to abstain from all appearance of evil. 2
These. 5.12.
Let us not do any thing that is unjust, or unbecoming us, nor allow our selves
in that which we know the Gospel we profess does by no means allow of, lest we
be to answer another day, for all the Reproach of Religion which we have
occasioned: How light soever we may make of this now, we shall find that it
will greatly inflame the Reckoning shortly, when God will affect the Honor of
his own Name, and will be glorified upon those by whom he was not glorified. In
consideration of this, let us see to it that we have our Conversation honest
among the Adversaries of our Religion, that they who speak against us as Evil-
doers, may, 1 Pet. 2.12.
by our Good Works which they shall behold, be brought to glorify God, and to
entertain good thoughts of Religion, v. 15.
or at least, that we may with well-doing put to silence the ignorance of
foolish Men. Our Religion, I am sure, is an Honor to us; let not us then be a
Dishonor to it.

Sixthly, If there be those every where that speak against Religion and
Godliness, let us then as we have opportunity be ready to speak for it. Every
Christian should be both a Witness and an Advocate for his Religion, and the
rather because it is so much opposed and contradicted. Next to our Care not to
be a Shame to the Gospel, should be our Resolution not to be ashamed of the
Gospel. You are Subpaena'd by the King of Kings to appear for him in the World:
Ye are my Witnesses says the Lord, Isa. 43.10. Do not betray this Cause then
by declining your Testimony, how much soever you may be brow-beaten and
confronted. Say with a holy boldness as Elihu, Job 36.2. Suffer me a little and
I will show you, that I have yet to speak on God's behalf. You hear what is
daringly said against God, how his holy Name is trampled upon and abused, his
Truths contradicted, his Word and Ordinances vilified, and have you never a
word to say for him? Is our Lord Jesus appearing for us in Heaven, pleading our
Cause there, pleading it with his own blood, and shall not we be ready to
appear for him on Earth, and plead his Cause though it were with the hazard of
our blood? As it is then a time to keep silence, when we our selves are spoken
against, I as a Deaf Man heard not, so it is then a time to speak, when God is
spoken against, and the Honor of our Religion lies at stake, and at such a
time we must take heed, Psalm. 38.33. Eccl. 3.7.
Jest by a cowardly silence we wrong so Jst a Cause, as if we were either
ashamed or afraid to own it. Wisdom's Children should take all occasions to
justify Wisdom, and vindicate it from the aspersions that are cast upon it.
Read the doom of him that is ashamed of Christ and of his Words in this
adulterous generation. Mark 8.38. Of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when
he comes in the Glory of his Father. Not confessing Christ when we are called
to it, is in effect denying him, and disowning Relation to him, and they who do
so, except they repent as Peter did, Luke 12.9. 2 Timothy 2.12.
will shortly be denied and disowned by him. If we should, with an angry
countenance at least, Prove. 25.23.
drive away a backbiting Tongue that reproacheth our Brother, much more a
Blasphemous Tongue that reproacheth our Maker. Should we hear a near Relation
or a dear Friend (in whose Reputation it is natural to us to reckon our selves
sharers) spoken against and slandered, we would readily appear in his
Vindication; and have we no resentments of the Contempt and Contumely cast upon
Religion? Can we sit by contentedly to hear God and Christ, and the Scripture
and serious Godliness reflected upon, and have we nothing to say in their
behalf? Common equity obliges us to be the Patrons of a just, but wronged
Cause. And that we may not think our selves discharged from this Duty by our
inability to defend the Truths and Ways of God, and so make our Ignorance and
unskilfulness in the word of Righteousness, an excuse for our Cowardice and
want of Zeal, we ought to take pains to furnish our selves with a clear and
distinct knowledge of the certainty of those things wherein we have heen
instructed. Luke 1.4.
We must labor to understand not only the Truths and Principles, but the
Grounds and Evidences of our Religion, that we may be able to give an Answer
((...), an Apology) to every Man that asks us a Reason of the Hope that is in
us. 1 Pet. 3.15.
How industrious are the profane Wits of the Age to find out something to say
against Religion, and should not that quicken us to provide our selves with the
Armor of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 6.7.
both on the right hand and on the left, aiming at the Riches of the full
assurance of Understanding? Col. 2.2.
And if we do (as there is occasion) with Humility and Sincerity, and from a
principle of Zeal for God, and his Honor, appear in Defense of Religion, and
its injured Cause, we may doubtless take encouragement from that promise, Mat.
10.19. It shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. God will
own those that own him, and will not fail to furnish his faithful Advocates
with needful Instructions, Psalm. 8.2.
and many a time ordains such strength out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings
as strangely stills the Enemy and the Avenger.

Lastly, Let none of us ever think the worse of the way of Religion and
Godliness for its being every where spoken against, nor be frightened hereby
from walking in that way. The Contempt cast upon the Practice of Piety is with
many, an invincible Objection against it; their good Impressions, good purposes
and good overtures are hereby crushed and brought to nothing: They have that
within 'em which tells 'em that the way of Sobriety and serious Godliness is a
very good way, and they sometimes hear that Word behind them, saying, This is
the walk ye in it, Isa. 30.21.
But they have those about 'em that tell them otherwise, and thus the
convictions of Conscience are overruled and baffled by the Censures and
Reproaches of Men, whose Praise they covet more than the Praise of God.

But to take off the force of this Objection, let us consider these four Things.

1. Consider who they are that speak against Religion and Godliness, not only
that they are Mortal Men, Isa. 51.7.8, 12.
whom the Moth shall eat up like a Garment, Men that shall die, and the Sons of
Men which shall be made as Grass, all whose thoughts will shortly perish with
them, and therefore why should we fear their Reproach, or be afraid of their
revilings? Nor only they that are fallible Men who may be mistaken, and whose
Judgment is by no means decisive, nor such as will bear us out: Shall we put
what Men say in the Scale against what God says? Let God be true and every Man
a Liar. We must not be judged hereafter, and therefore should not be ruled now
by the Sentiments and Opinions of Men: But those that speak against Religion
are also for the most part ill Men; Men of unsettled Heads, debauched
Consciences, and profligate Lives. It Is the Fool and none but he, that says in
his heart, there is no God. The Scoffers of the last days are Men that walk
after their own Lusts, whose carnal, fleshly Interest retains them on that
side. David was abused by the abjects, Psalm. 35.15. and the Christians at
Thessalonica by certain lewd Fellows of the baser sort, Acts 17.5. Such as
those are the Men that make a mock at Religion, and shall we be swayed and
influenced in the greatest Concerns of our immortal Souls by such Men as these?
Shall those have the Government of us that have so little Government of
themselves? Shall the Cavils and vain Scoffs of those, who know not what it is
to be serious, carry the day against the deliberate Sentiments of all Wise and
Good Men, who have with one consent subscribed to the Equity and Goodness of
Religion's Ways? If we choose such as these for our Leaders, surely the Blind
lead the Blind, and we know the consequence.

2. Consider how trifling and frivolous that is which is commonly said against
Religion and Godliness. The Devil made his first fatal assault upon Mankind by
Lies and Slanders, suggesting hard thoughts of God, and promising Impunity in
Sin; and by the same wretched methods he still supports and carries on his
Interest in the World. They that speak against Religion, make Lies their
Refuge, and under falsehood they hide themselves. All those bold and daring
things which are spoken against Religion, are either groundless and unproved
Calumnies, or very unjust and unfair Representations. 2 These. 3.2.
Hence the Enemies of Religion are said to be absurd and unreasonable Men. Men
that while they cry up the Oracles of Reason, rebel against all the Light and
Laws of it. Put all that together which is spoken against Godliness, and weigh
it in the Balances of right Reason, and you will write Tekel upon it, weighed
in the Balances and found wanting. And, as if an overruling Providence had
forced the Scoffers of these last days to confess their own Infatuation. Some
of those that have been most sharp in their Invectives against Religion, have
been no less free in their Satyrs against Reason it self, as if they were
resolved to answer the Character of Solomon's Fool, whose Wisdom fails him so
far, Eccl. 10.3.
that he says to every one that he is a Fool.

3. Consider how much is to be said for Religion notwithstanding it is every
where spoken against. Religion has Reason on its side, its Cause is a Good
Cause; and it is the right way whoever speaks against it. Arch Bp. Tillotson's
Sermon. on 2 Pet. 2, 3.
It is no disparagement (as that excellent Pen expresses it) to be laughed at,
but to deserve to be so; you have heard Religion reproached, but did you ever
find that it deserved to be so? Nay; on the contrary, have you not found that
it very well deserves your best Affections and Services? Enquire of those that
have made trial of it, consult the Experiences of others: Call now, if there be
any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? Job. 5.1.
Ask thy Father and he will show thee, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
thine Elders and they will tell thee, that the Fear of the Lord that is
Wisdom, and to depart from Evil, Job. 28.28
that is Understanding. They will tell thee, That Religion's Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, Prove. 3.17
and all her Paths are Peace, and that all the Wealth and Pleasure in this
World is not worth one Hours Communion with God in Jesus Christ. They will tell
thee, That there is no Truths so certain and weighty as Divine Truths, and that
no Statutes and Judgments are so righteous as the Divine Law, which is Holy,
Just, and Good. They will tell thee, That real Holiness and Sanctification is
the Perfection of the Human Nature, as well as the Participation of a Divine
Nature, That a firm Belief of the Principles of Religion is the greatest
improvement of our intellectual Powers, a strict Adherence to its Rules our
surest Guide in all our Ways, and a cheerful Dependence upon its Promises, the
Fountain of better Joys, and the Foundation of better Hopes than any we can be
furnished with in the things of Sense and Time. They will tell thee that a Life
of serious Godliness is incomparably the most Sublime and Honorable, the most
Sweet and Comfortable Life a Man can live in this World; and that nothing does
more answer the end of our Creation, better befriend Societies, nor conduce
more to our true interest in both Worlds than that Holy Religion which is every
where spoken against.

4. Consider that the cause of Religion and Godliness, however it be spoken
against and opposed, will infallibly be the prevailing Cause at last. We are
sensible of a mighty struggle in the World betwixt the seed of the Woman and
the seed of the Serpent; Michael and his Angels on the one side, and the Dragon
and his Angels on the other. Many there are that speak against Religion, and
are very vigorous in opposing it, and some, though but a few, that are speaking
for it, contending for the Faith, and striving against Sin, now it is desirable
to know which of these contesting Interests will be victorious; and we may be
assured that the cause of God and Religion will certainly carry the day.
Contradicted Truths will be effectually cleared and vindicated; Despised
Holiness will be honored; Mistakes rectified; Reproaches rolled away; and
every thing set in a true Light. Mal. 3.18.
Then you shall return and discern between Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong,
which now it is not always easy to do. The Day of the Lord is said to be in
the Valley of Decision, Joel 3.14. Because then and there will this great Cause
be decided, which has been so long depending, and a definitive Sentence given
from which there will ly no Appeal, and against which there will be no
Exception. Psalm. 50.3.
Our God will then come and will not Keep Silence; whoever now Speak against
Religion he will then speak for it, and will undoubtedly be justified when he
speaks, Psalm. 51.4.
and clear when he judges. Particular Parties and Interests, as such, will
wither and come to nothing, But Catholic Christianity, that is Denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and living Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in
this present World, in expectation of the Blessed Hope: This is Good, and the
Goodness of it being founded on the unchangeable Will of the Eternal Mind, it
is Eternally Good, and no doubt will be Eternally Glorious, whatever is said
against it. This, this is that Gold and Silver, and those Precious Stones,
which will stand the Test of the Fire that shall try every Man's Work, 1 Cor.
3.12, 13. and will be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at the Appearing
of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.7.


Assure your selves (Christians) there is a Day of Recompenses for the
Controversy of Sion coming, Isa. 34.8:
and it is at Hand; Jam. 5.9.
Behold the Judge stands before the Door. Then Vice and Wickedness which now
appear so daring, so threatening, will be effectually and irrecoverable crushed,
and such a fatal and incurable Blow given to the Serpents Head that he shall
never hiss, shall never spit his Venom any more: Then shall the Upright have
the Dominion, Psalm. 49.14. and all the faithful Soldiers of the Lord Jesus
shall be called to set their Feet upon the Necks of Principalities and Powers.
Jos. 10.24.
Then Atheists and Blasphemers, the Debauchees and profane Scoffers of the
Age, will have their Mouths stopped with an irresistible Conviction; will have
all their vile Calumnies visibly confuted; their Hearts filled with unspeakable
Horror, and their Faces with everlasting Shame: Their Refuge of Lies will then
be swept away, Isa. 28.17.
and Rocks and Mountains called upon in vain to shelter them: Rev. 6.16.
Then shall the Righteous who are now trampled upon and despised, shine as the
Sun in the Firmament of their Father. Ma. 13.43.
Wisdom and her Children shall be first justified, and then glorified before
all the World: And they that through Grace have gotten the Victory over the
Beast, Rev. 15.2.
and over his Image, shall solace themselves, and praise their Redeemer with
everlasting Songs of Triumph. The Dirt that is now unjustly thrown upon them,
will not only be wiped off, but will add to their Glory, Mat. 5.11, 12.
and every Reproach for the Testimony of Jesus will be a Pearl in their Crown.
The Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth will shortly render to every Man
according to his Work: Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
To them who by patient continuance in Well-doing seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality in the other World, and (in pursuit of that) patiently bear
Disgrace and Contempt in this, to them he will render Eternal Life, which will
make them as Happy as they can desire, far more Happy than they can now
conceive. But to them that are Contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but
contradict it, and rebel against the Light and Laws of it, being resolved to
obey Unrighteousness, to them he will render, with a just and Almighty Hand,
Indignation and Wrath, the effect of which will be such Tribulation and Anguish
to the Soul, as will make them feel eternally, what now they will not be
persuaded to believe, Heb. 10.31.
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God; for never
any hardened their Hearts against him and prosper'd. Brethren, These are the
true Sayings of God, on the certainty of which, Rev. 19.9.
we may venture our Immortal Souls.

They who speak and act so much against Religion, design to run it down, and
extirpate it, that the Name of it may be no more in remembrance, Psa. 83.4.
and perhaps you hear them sometimes boast of their success herein: If they can
but handsomely (as they think) ridicule the sacred Text, or Banter any of the
Divine Mysteries, or Hector over a good Man, they are ready to triumph, as if
they had run down Religion: Run down Religion? In the Name of my great Master,
I defy all the Powers of Hell and Earth to run it down: Magna est Veritas and
praevalebit.
They may sooner run down the flowing Tide, or the Sun when he goes forth in
his strength, than run down the least of the Dictates of Eternal Truth, Mat.
5.18.
not one iota or tittle of which shall fall to the Ground. Dagon will certainly
fall before the Ark of the Lord; and the Rod of Aaron will Swallow up the Rods
of the Magicians. Ex. 7.12.
Do they talk of running down Religion, and the Scriptures, and the Ordinances
of Christ? Isa. 37.22.
The Virgin the Daughter of Sion has despised them, and laughed them to scorn,
the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her Head at them; and has therefore put
them to shame because God has despised them, as it is said, Psalm. 2.4.
Psalm. 53.5. He that sets in the Heavens enjoying himself, and rides upon the
Heavens, Deuteronomy. 33.26.
for the Help of his People, derides their Attempts against the Kingdom of his
Son, as vain and fruitless. The Lord shall laugh at them, Psa. 37.13.
for he sees that his Day is coming. They have their Day now, it is their Hour
and the Power of Darkness: But God will have his Day shortly, and a Glorious
Day it will be, when our Lord Jesus shall appear in all the Power and Grandeur
of the Upper World, to the everlasting Terror and Confusion of all his
Adversaries, and the everlasting Joy and Honor of all his faithful Servants
and Soldiers; With the believing Hopes and Prospects of which Day, let all
those who heartily espouse and plead Religion's righteous Cause, Comfort
themselves and one another.

FINIS.

