THE PROPOSALS FOR PROMOTING THE WOOLLEN-MANUFACTORY, PROMOTED.

Further making it appear, that the Nation will thereby Increase in Wealth, at
least 5000 l. per day, for every day in the year on which it is lawful to
Labor.

And that the Strength and Safety of the King and Kingdom, together with a most
happy Reformation will be accomplished therein.

All which is most plainly demonstrated,

By several Well-wishers thereunto, Inhabitants and Citizens of London.

Licensed, April 29. 1679. TO. L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill, MDCLXXIX.

The Proposals for Promoting the Woollen-Manufactory, promoted.
NExt to being the Authors of profitable Inventions our selves, it is certainly
most commendable to Encourage them in others, and endeavor, That what is
happily found out, may be advantageously prosecuted. Men are grown to a
wretched pass indeed, when, as Cicero complained, they leave off, Non solum
laudanda facere, sed etiam laudare; Not only to do Praiseworthy Acts, but even
to Commend them; Let us at least speak well of good Expedients, give the
Laboring Promoters of Public Weal our good word, and afford Industry a
Tribute from our Tongues, though we are somewhat loath to allow her much from
our Hands; To improve such effectual Expedients as will most reclaim Vice, and
bring all Idle hands to Industry. To increase our richest Manufactories for
Exportation, and especially to restore and advance that of Woollen, the Grand
Staple Commodity of this Kingdom, which heretofore made the same to abound with
Wealth, Power, and Honor, beyond any of its Neighbor Nations. These are
things not to be Contemned or Neglected, but rather with the greater Diligence
and Zeal to be Promoted and Encouraged to the utmost; For, since this golden
Manufactory has Decreased amongst us, several Offers and Essays have been
made for Remedy, and many who are concerned therein have been very Impatient;
and not sufficiently considering the Cause of the Distemper, some have moved
the Parliament for the Exportation of Unwrought Wool, because little more than
half what grows in the Nation is Converted. Others have Opposed them, and
obtained an Act whereby to render the Exportation thereof Unwrought, a Capital
Offense, and hang all those that should do it; yet are not able to Manufacture
it themselves.

If Wool be Exported, the same will destroy our Markets abroad, and make People
Beggars at home, says the Clothier; But if it be kept at home, and not
Converted, it will do us no good, says Reason, with whom Experience and
Poverty both join their Voices; the outcries of the latter being heard, not
only in every Street, but almost at every Door.

The last Parliament has almost every Session made it a great part of their
Business to Hear and Encourage those who had any thing to offer for the
Recovery of this Trade; and yet, till the late Breviat of Proposals published
by one Mr. Richard Haines came out, it must be acknowledged, That neither the
Exporter of Wool, nor Opposer of the same, or any others, have offered any
certain Expedients for bringing all Idle hands to Industry, whereby the Wool
may be Converted as fast as it grows and arises, on such terms, that the Cloth
we have to spare may be Exported as fast as it is made.

Wherefore, we cannot think it unseasonable, to join our Suffrages with him,
and stir up all Active Public Spirits, to promote and encourage that which
will best accomplish this good Design: namely,

Workhouses to be Erected, and Stock raised in every County, in which, poor
People, Beggars, etc. shall be Employed in this Manufactory, with such Method
of Government as may prevent all such Miscarriages, as have formerly rendered
such Houses unsuccessful in our Nation; which he has, in such his Breviat,
declared to make good, and to Answer all Objections in that Case, in his
Proposals at large, which undoubtedly may be done with little Difficulty,
because it is done and practiced in other Nations, and may here as well as there.

The greatness of the Profits, namely, thirty or forty hundred thousand Pounds
per Annum, we confess at first started us, but on deliberate Consideration we
are satisfied with the Verity of it. And therefore judge it our parts to
recommend it as aforesaid, with the Reasons and Grounds which have fully
convinced us why such vast Wealth cannot but necessarily arise thereby to the
Nation as thus.

In England we may reasonably conclude there are of Beggars petty Felons,
Parish-Poor, and other idle People, which do little or nothing for their
Living, 200 Thousand; whereof many who do nothing may earn six Pence per day,
and those that earn six pence might earn twelve pence, when placed together in
view of each other, where Correction and Encouragement are duly administered.

It may also be reasonably concluded, that each Person, one with another, may
(with the help of some Clothiers) work as much Wool as will make fifteen pounds
worth of Cloth in one Year, which, if so, then there will be thirty hundred
thousand pounds worth to be Exported more than now is, as the Author of the
Proposals does insert. But suppose the quantity fall short, yet we may
reasonably conclude, that our Merchants in their course of Trade will near the
matter double the Value in the returns of what they Export, so that still the
Wealth of the Nation will be more, rather than less, increased, than what is
proposed. But if we take no other measures than this, viz. that each Person,
one with another, earns six pence per day, and that which is wrought by their
Labor shall be Exported, it is a certain truth, the Nation will gain by their
Labor 5000 l. for every day in the year that they work, as by Calculation does
appear; which, if doubled by the Merchants course of Trade, as aforesaid, it
will then amount to no less than 10000 l. per day, clear gain to the Nation.
And put case we allow 80 days in the year for Holy days, there remains 285
days to work in, which, by this modest Calculation, will bring in 2850000 l.
in one year clear gain by their Labor, besides the Value of the Wool, and
other things which add to the Value of all the Cloth they make. Nor is it to be
doubted, but the Work of each Person, one with another, may amount to 8 d. per
day, after some time of practice, so that for the future, by the Expedients
proposed, all people, as aforesaid, being brought up to such habit of Industry,
the Wealth of the Nation cannot but increase to the Value proposed. The Case is
plain, and an ordinary Capacity, whose Judgment is not swayed by corrupt
Affection, may be well satisfied.

That we have Wool enough, Fullers Earth enough, poor People enough, Vagrants,
petty Felons, Nurses of Debauchery etc. sufficiently enough to make Cloth
enough to revive the Glory, Wealth, Strength, and Safety of the whole Nation is
most certain, and may as certainly be effected with good Success; if instead of
Houses of Debauchery, such Houses of Industry were erected. It being that which
not only is practicable, but de facto has been and now is practiced on the
same Consideration, by the means whereof there is not a Beggar in the Country
where it is used, and by which that overgrown and innumerable Multitude of lewd
People may most profitably be restrained.

All which considered, we can see no Reason why any People should oppose these
Workhouses, unless it be those that do the greatest Mischief to the Persons,
Estates, and Souls of Mankind, namely, the before mentioned Idle lewd Nurses of
Debauchery, whom nothing can restrain so effectually as these houses, in which
they would be held in Durance with great Advantage. Therefore it concerns them
and their Abettors to obstruct the Building; and look how much a man is an
Enemy to the one so much he is the greater Friend to the other.

1. This we dare assert and maintatin against all Opposers that shall put Pen
to Paper against it, that if such a Gold or Silver Mine should be found in
England as might afford five thousand Pounds per day throughout the year, it
would not do the Nation near so much good, as these Expedients, if prosecuted.
2. That it is the greatest thing of such a kind, and easiest to be accomplished
that has been offered to the King and Parliament, to promote the Wealth,
Strength, and Safety of the Kingdom; since in it the Woollen Manufacture has
been encouraged. 3. That the said Expedients are feisible and practicable;
which being so, it must needs be some extraordinary and inordinate Affection
that must force any man to oppose it. 4. That it is in vain to endeavor to
suppress and destroy the Houses or Schools of Debauchery, whilst the major
part are Opposers and Enemies to the Houses of Industry, which may afford a
better Employment and honester life to the Inhabitants, who ought to be removed
from one to the other. And certainly if such public Labors and Endeavors as
will thus promote the greatest Happiness of a Nation be contemned and
discouraged, it will be enough to dishearten all noble and public Spirits, and
render them Objects for the Scorn and Derision of the basest of Men.
Wherefore, to prevent this destructive Evil, we shall with all hearty
Affection and Zeal to the public recommend the said Expedients to all good
People in the Nation, of what Estate or Quality soever, viz. 1. To the poorest
and most indigent, because thereby they and their Children, and their Childrens
Children shall never want an honest Employment, Food, Raiment, nor Habitation
if uncharitable People do not hinder. 2. To the pious and religious, because
thereby an happy Reformation in the Lives and Conversations of many Thousands
will be accomplished, if the Friends to Debauchery do not hinder. 3. To the
Breeders of Wool, because thereby they will have quick Markets for their Wool
as fast as it grows and arises, if the neglect of practical Expedients do not
hinder. 4. To the Clothiers, because thereby all the Wool of England, and what
Scotland and Ireland have to spare will be secured from being exported, and
they may have it wrought upon cheaper Terms than before, as fast as they need
it, having their Laborers partly maintained by a public Stock, etc. 5. To the
Drapers and Merchants, because they may have their Cloth, and afford it on
cheaper terms than those that have supplanted us. 6. To the Farmers, etc.
because they may save six pence in every twelve pence of what they now
Contribute to the Livelihood of the Poor, and may have better Markets for what
they have to spare, since so many thousands will near the matter Earn, and Pay
for all they Eat, and Drink, and Wear, which before had all for Begging, Lying,
and Dissembling. 7. To the City of London in particular, whose Trade and
Treasure will be near doubled, by reason of that double quantity of Cloth that
will be Exported, by means whereof, the Returns will be of double value in
Commodity or Treasure, etc. 8. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, whose
Revenue by the Increase of Customs will be proportionably increased, if want
of Encouragement do not hinder. 9. And to the whole Kingdom in general,
because, besides the Increase of Seamen and Navies of Ships, for its Defense
Strength, and Safety; Wealth and Treasure will Increase therein, at least
thirty or forty hundred thousand pounds every year more than it did; if those
that are regardless of the Nations Weal, do not hinder, with a base intention
to promote their own Private and Particular Lucre.


Wherefore, with submission to better Judgments, we will conclude with the
Words of St. Paul, upon the whole Matter; Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if
there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things.

FINIS.

