ENGLAND'S Great Happiness. OR, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN CONTENT and COMPLAINT.

WHEREIN Is demonstrated that a great part of our Complaints are causeless.

And we have more Wealth now, than ever we had at any time before the
Restoration of his sacred Majesty.

By a real and hearty Lover of his King and Country.

Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than these?
for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

Eccl. 7.10. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Edward Croft, and are to be sold at
the Printing-Press in Cornhill. 1677.

Licensed,

May 14. 1677.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS DIALOGUE.
TO export money our great advantage. p. 3. To consume Callico more profitable
for us, than other Foreign Linen. p. 4. The Norway Trade a profitable Trade.
p. 5. The French Trade a profitable Trade. ibid. Gilded Leather in a short time
like to be made as cheap here, as in Holland or elsewhere. p. 6. Variety of
Wares for all Markets, a great advantage. ibid. High living a great improvement
to Arts. ibid. An account of such as were great Traders formerly. p. 7.
Invitation of Foreign Arts a great advantage. p. 8. Multitudes of people an
advantage. p. 9. Examples of profit by Foreign Arts. ibid. A Hearty Wish. p.
10. Enclosure its advantage. p. 11. Horticulture a great advantage. ibid.
Whether lawful to enclose. p. 13. Reasons for the Act called Trade encouraged.
ibid. A way to enclose in spite of the Rabble. p. 15. Multitude of Traders a
great advantage. p. 16. Advantages of many Traders. p. 17. A Disswasive from
murmuring. p. 18. The word Impossible a great discourager of Arts. ibid. Signs
of Wealth. p. 19. A Comparison. p. 20. Our present complaints. ibid. A good
Resolution. p. 21. Some Scriptures against murmuring. p. 22
The Author to his Book.
MY little Book, when you do look
Into the World that is curious;
You must take care, you don't ill fare
From those men that are furious
Against all things that reason brings
To contradict their humors;
And scarce are pleased, unless they are eased
By spreading forth false rumors.
But if that they ought against thee say,
And make it truth appear;
Then I Will submit and think it fit,
That you the blame should bear.
But if they will be murmuring still,
Partic' larizing men, that idly spend,
Or fates do lend a hand to Ruin: then
'Twill be but meet Poor Robin see it,
And answer them with glee, because such fools
Are the fit tools T'employ such men as he
ENGLAND'S Great Happiness; OR A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Content and Complaint.
Content. HOw do you, Mr. Complaint? Complaint. Your Servant Sir, I Am glad to
see you well: What News?


Cont. Why, all the talk is of the Blazing Star, and Whale that is come to
Colchester.


Compl. God grant they forbode no ill News, I Am afraid on it. The French King
they say is at Callice.


Cont. Well, what then, I hope he knows the way back to Paris.


Compl. Nay he need not come hither, here are enough already to eat us up, I
profess there is no trade, I don't know what we shall do, there is not a penny
stirring, and men break like mad, if these times hold we shall be all undone.


Cont. You Complainants are a sort of the worst conditioned people in the
World, I will not say it is impossible for God to please you, but I Am sure his
Blessings of Peace and Plenty will not.


Compl. Plenty say you I yes, here is plenty enough of broken Merchants and
Citizens.


Cont. True, one of them of a sort is too much, but yet I dare say there is
more wealth in England at this time, than ever was at any before his Majesty's
Happy Restoration.


Compl. What then makes the Complaint?


Cont. Because such as you are hardly ever well when you are doing otherwise.


Compl. You talk strangely.


Cont. Well, I think it is so easy to make out, that while we are drinking a
glass of Wine, I may convince, or put you to a nonplus.


Compl. Say thou so? Well I Will try, but instead of Wine let us drink a dish
of Coffee; for I profess whatsoever you think, I find them hard times.


Cont. Well, a match, but I suppose you go thither because it is the Complaining
School, and you may be entertained with false jealousies an hour for a penny.
Come Boy give me a dish of Tee, for I Am for something that hears and wets, and
by its sweet taste give some reason to be contented.


Compl. For all this give me some Coffee.


Cont. Well, now let us hear your Complaints, and we will consider them one by one.


Compl. There are a great many at present, I Will only mention five, viz. 1.
Carrying the Money out of the Nation. 2. People's over-high living. 3. The too
many Foreigners. 4. The Enclosure of Commons. 5. The multitude of people that
run into trade, and sell so cheap that one cannot live by another.



Cont. Are these your great Complaints? I can hardly forbear laughing, for
these rightly considered are some of our main temporal advantages. A great
increase whereof would make us so rich as to be the envy of the whole world.


Compl. I should be glad if 'twere so, I pray let us hear what you can say for
the exportation of money. There s law against it, and a great many wise men
complain of the East India Company for that reason.


Cont. I must not gainsay Law; there was once a law to stint the making of
Malt; but some of our Gentlemen are now of other minds, witness the Act for
exportation of Beer, Ale, and Mum. The complaints against the East India
Company, if they were for the Nation's happiness, would they were encouraged,
and let it go as our Parliament shall in their wisdom think fit, but some wise
men think it best as it is, however it is our great advantage to export Money:
Our great advantage to export money.
For the aforesaid Company brings in a great many more goods than we consume,
the overplus whereof is exported: By which part I suppose none will dispute a
profit. Wherefore whatsoever they bring in more, must be all exported, (we
being already over-stockt) which undoubtedly will enrich us according to its
proportion. But this they cannot do without money. For I suppose them men that
very well understand their own interest (by which I am apt to judge all) and do
think that if they could sell that cloth in India for two and twenty Shillings,
which costs them here twenty, and sell enough, they would never carry out one
penny: for they pay no freight out, and two and twenty Shillings if it be
really two and twenty Shillings, will buy more goods than twenty Shillings will
do. But if the Indians will not buy our goods, they must have our money, or we
must knock off that Trade which the Dutch will heartily thank you for, and give
you a golden god to boot.


Comp. Ah but we consume abundance of their Commodities here.


Cont. It is more profitable for us to consume Callico, than other foreign
linen.
Best of all, for the more Callico we use, the less other linen, and that
saves abundance of wealth by being to us (at first hand especially) much
cheaper; and also pulling down the price of foreign linned, I have heard some
say almost half. But about this India trade you may see more at large by
ingenious Mr. Mun; and a letter called The East India trade a most profitable
trade to the Kingdom, printed 1677.


Comp. This is something, but what think you of the Norway trade that takes
away so many of our Crown pieces? Norway trade a profitable trade.



Cont. I think well of that too, for that kind of timber we cannot be without,
and I suppose our land can be better employed than in great groves of such
like. It also employs a great shipping, and makes us build Houses, Ships, and
Cases for Merchandise, at cheap rates, and if we might have a thousand
Saw-Mills, for ought I know they might do us as much kindness as Engine Looms,
and for all the talk of the short sighted Rabble, employ twice the people too.


Compl. You speak plain, but what think you of the French trade? which draws
away our money by wholesale. Mr. Fortrey whom I have heard you speak well of,
gives an account that they get sixteen hundred thousand pounds a year from us.


Cont. The French Trade a profitable Trade.
It Is a great sum, but perhaps were it put to vote in a wise Council, whether
for that reason the trade should be left-off, 'twould go in the negative. For
Paper, Wine, Linen, Castle-Sope, Brandy, Olives, Capers, Prunes, Kidskins,
Taffaties, and such like we cannot be without; and for the rest which you are
pleased to style Apes and Peacocks (although wise Solomon rankt them with Gold
and Ivory) they set us all a-gog, and have encrea'd among us many considerable
trades: witness, the vast multitudes of Broad and Narrow silk Weavers, Makers
of Points, and white and black Laces, Hats, Fanns, Looking-Glasses, and other
glasses as I Am told the best in the world, Paper, Fringes, and gilded Leather,
which in a short time is like to be made as cheap here, as in Holland or any
other place. Wine of several fruits, Sider, Saffron, Honey, Spirits, and such
like: and some cause improvements by farther Manufacture, others we export with
great profit, and have a great variety to satisfy all sorts of Markets,
Variety of Wares for all markers a great advantage.
causing their Neighbors that sell the like, as Salt, Wine, Linen, etc. to
sell us much cheaper with abundance other advantages. I must confess I had
rather they would use our goods than money, but if not, I would not lose the
getting of ten pound, because I cannot get a hundred; and I don't question but
when the French gets more foreign trade, they will give more liberty to the
bringing in foreign goods. And I think you will be ashamed to deny the Canary's a
little when Spain yields you so vast quantities. I Will suppose John a Nokes to be
a Butcher, Dick a Styles an Exchange man, your self a Lawyer, will you buy no
Meat or Ribbands, or your wife a fine Indian Gown or Fann, because they will
not truck with you for Indentures, which they have no need of? I suppose no,
but if you get money enough of others, you care not though you give it away in
specie for these things: I think it is the same case.


Compl. It Is well if it be as you say, but what think you of your next
proposal? Our High Living.


Cont. A general High Living a great improvement to arts.
He that spends more than he is able to pay for, is either fool or knave, or in
great necessity; but I suppose not this to be the Nations case; for if it were,
we must owe more to other Nations than they to us, though we gave them all we
have to boot, which if you think, most of the Merchants that have foreign
Factories in the East or West Indies, Africa, Streights, Spain, Portugal,
Baltic, East Countries, Hanse-Towns, Scotland, Ireland, with France and Holland
too, will condemn you. But our height puts us all upon an industry, makes every
one strive to excel his fellow, and by their ignorance of one another
quantities, make more than our markets will presently take off; which puts them
to a new industry to find a foreign Vent, and then they must make more for that
market; but still having some overplus they stretch their wits farther, and
are never satisfied till they ingross the trade of the Universe. And something
is returned in lieu of our exportations, which makes a further employment and
emprovement.

If it will not do this, why do you complain of France getting our money for their
trifles? if it will, why should we not increase it as high as ever it is
possible? If we make six considerable Laces and export but one, I suppose for
it we may bring in more money than the first cost of them all; which is far
better than to import one and let our people sit idle for want of employment.

The former great traders.
The Venetian, Spaniard, Portugeeze, Dutch, and English have drove the great
trade of the world, and fetched the gold and silver: but when they had done,
they eagerly carried it to France to buy their guegawes, and thereby made them
always considerable: and I had rather get a thousand pound by lace and fringes,
than nine hundred by the best broad-cloth that ever I yet saw.

That honest way that finds most employment and gets most money, is sure the
best for any Nation, and this fine manufacture joyn^d to our shipping will
perhaps make us the most potent the Sun shines on.

Take away all our supernecessary trades, and we shall have no more than
Tankard-Bearers, and Plow-men; and our City of London will in short time be
like an Irish Hut, or perhaps Carthage mentioned in Virgil Traveste.

If you have reason, here is enough to satisfy: but if not, should I bring ten
thousand undeniable arguments you would still complain.


Compl. I meet but with very few of your mind: but I pray let us hear your
thoughts of the next proposal? which is, That it is our happiness to have
abundance of Foreigners, for I Am sure the general cry is that they eat the
bread out of our mouths, they sell their goods when we cannot, they work cheaper
than we, live in holes, pay neither scot nor lot; and if we should have many
more of them, sure we should have nothing to do.


Cont. Invitation of Foreigners a great advantage.
You are never well full or fasting; you cry up the Dutch to be a brave people,
rich, and full of Cities, that they swarm with people as Bee-hives with Bees;
if a plague come, they are filled up presently and such like; yet they do all
this by inviting all the World to come and live among them. You complain of
Spain because their Inquisition is so high, they will let no body live among them,
and that is a main cause of their weakness and poverty. You find fault because
some of our people go to Ireland, and the Plantations, and say we want people
at home to fill our Cities and Countrie-towns, and yet you will allow none to come
and fill up their rooms. The advantages of Multitudes.
Will not a multitude of people strengthen us as well as the want of them
weaken Spain? sure it will. Would you not be glad if the Duke of Lorrain should
destroy as many Villages in France as are destroyed in Alsatia, and thereby
destroy 100000 people? I dare say the most part of you would. I pray then would
it not do as well if an hundred thousand French would run away leaving their
houses to drop, and fight against the French King, or at least work for money
to pay taxes to them that will? I think you will not gainsay it. In Sr. Walter
Raleigh's observations concerning the causes of the magnificency and opulency
of Cities, 'twas the best policy that old Rome had, and by it they were brought
to their height. Tamerlan the great was of the same mind, and Constantinople
owes its greatness to the same contrivance. Would not Foreigners living here
consume our corn, cattle, cloth, coals, and all kind of things we use? and
would not that cause our lands to be better tilled, and our trades increased?
would they not bring several new trades with them, or help to increase those we
have? witness the Flemmings in the time of Edward the third, Examples of profit
by Foreigners.
the Colonies of Colchester, Canterbury, and Norwich, the Silk-trade in
Spittle-Fields, the Tapistreymakers in Hatton Garden, Clarkenwel, and
elsewhere, Mr Todin the rare Pewterer in St. Martins Lane, the Husbandmen in
the Fenns, and diverse others, and does not every Tradesman among them employ
two or three English to attend them either in making tools, winding silk, or
such like, besides buying all their materials here? Do you think the first
rough materials of a piece of silk of six pound a yard costs twenty Shillings?
is not the other five pound better earnt and spent here, than to give the whole
six pound to France for it? No man in England loves it better than I, and I love
no Nation more than another, but for their virtues, or as they relate to the
welfare of England: but some of our great complainers will spend a groat when
they are not worth two pence, and work but two or three days in the week,
therefore others outdo them.

Strangers pay neither scot nor lot, it is true, but it is because they are
disturbed, and are hardly suffered (or at least encouraged) to take houses, but
otherwise they would quickly be like us, and the next generation would not be known
from English.

You seldom hear of any disturbance they make in the State, for they are not
all of one mind, and cannot agree if they would, they come for safety,
quietness, and livelyhoods, for which and other good reasons, if the Paliament
think fit, A hearty Wish.
I could wish there would twenty thousand come in next year.


Compl. At this rate all the World would be invited hither.


Cont. Amen, say I; for then our King would be universal Monarch, and I Would never
fear a prejudice either to Church or State if all were to be hanged that should
teach them causeless complaining principles.


Compl. Enough of this, but if you are for Enclosures the poor will complain of
you, and curse you to the pit of Hell: and a great many of the rich will give
you but little thanks.


Cont. All this signifies nothing; Enclosure and
one good reason prevails more with me than all their cries and curses, if they
were ten fold: and I Am sure that God is a God of reason. As for the Gentry I
respect them highly, but a great many are more ruled by a vulgar error, and
false maxims, than the dictates of their own reason. But if I thought it would
not be much for the advantage both of Gentry and Commonalty I would not say a
word more on it. But I pray consider that enclosed ground will sometimes yield
treble to what common will, Its advantage.
but if sowed with Clover, Sant-foin or such like, sometimes six, eight, or
tenfold, when Corn bears a good price, and it is for the Land's advantage it is
plowed too, and after the Crop is off sowed with Turnips or such like, and this
with the help of good tillage and dung, (which our good Husbandmen know now
pretty well how to procure) done every year, when the other must lie wast one
in three. Horticulture a great advantage.


A great deal will be turned into Orchards and Gardens, four or five acres of
which sometimes maintains a family better, and employs more laborers than
fifty acres of other shall do. Hops, Saffron, Liquorish, Onions, Potatoes,
Madder, Artichocks, Aniseeds and Coleseeds will thrive but ill in Common
Fields, and I suppose none will deny an Acre of these to yield more money than
so much Wheat: Whither goes it then? why, surely into the owners purse or
laborers pockets.

For the cry that the poor will be starved, it is not worth a rush, for few of
them make the benefit for lack of stock, and perhaps they spend as much time in
looking after their titts, runts, and tupps, as would gain them by an
indifferent Handy craft, twice the profit.

And how that parish that traded but for ten thousand pounds a year, and now
for twenty thousand, should be more likely to famish, and twice or thrice the
employment for the poor starve them, I confess is to me a paradox. Ever since
old Tusser's time, it has been observed that where there is most common, there is
least good building and most poor.

Enclosure must needs increase more great and small cattle, and an increase of
Hydes, Tallow, and Wool, with finer manufactures of them than formerly, can
never either depopulate or impoverish.


Compl. I must confess that most men yield it to be most profitable. But is it
lawful to take away that we have enjoyed time out of mind? and we must not do
evil that good may come on it.


Cont. Whether it be lawful to enclose.
I must confess this is your main argument, and I being neither Divine nor
Lawyer perhaps may not give to it so good an answer as ten thousand wiser men
can do. But it is well that I have proved it profitable: But I suppose this
Island before it was inhabited to be all Common; which was something altered by
the first Occupants, and increased according to the good husbandry, populacy,
and needs of the people, and why this prescription should not prevail as much
as yours, I know not. It does in America, and I believe all the World over. In
China I hear there is not an Acre of Common Land.

I must confess I know no Statute that gives full power to enclose all the
Common-Fields, in the Kingdom; but in my weak judgment there are several that
do much encourage it. Especially when it is for the advantage of the whole;
witness the two first Acts for enclosing the Fenns, and the 4 Ja^. 11. for part
of Herefordshire, caused by the good husbandry of some of the inhabitants. And
I think the 3 Edw. 6. and 3. will go a great way. And the inducement and ground
of the Act called Trade encouraged 15 Car. 2.7. runs thus verbatim.

The reasons for the Act called Trade encouraged.
Forasmuch as the encouraging of Tillage ought to be in an especial manner
regarded and endeavored, and the surest and effectuallest means of promoting
and advancing any trade, occupation or mystery, being by rendering it profitable
to the users thereof, and great quantities of Land within this Kingdom for the
presentlying in a manner waste, and yielding little, which might thereby be
improved to considerable profit and advantage (if sufficient encouragement were
given for the laying out of cost and labor on the same) and thereby much more
Corn produced, greater numbers of People, Horses, and Cattle employed, and
other Land also rendered more valuable.

How far the inducements and grounds of Acts of Parliament run, I know not, but
they show their designs; and how this can be done better than by Enclosure, my
ignorance will not reach to; but I have proved it most advantageous to the owner,
and I think wealth and a treble labor, will quickly increase People, Horses,
and other Cattle, the plenty whereof, of necessity must quickly make other Land
more valuable.

If leave were given, all the barren land in England I suppose would soon be
improved.

I believe you will be ashamed to urge the 25. of Hen. 8. and 13. because the
cheapness of our Corn, Cattle, Wool, Pigs, Geese, Hens, Chickens, and Eggs, are
in a great part the ground of your complaint.

I chiefly aim at that we call Common Field-Land, where men claim a propriety,
and can say. Thus many acres are mine; but for the other that lie always open
if the Lord of the Manor gets all in his own hand, or the Parishioners can
agree, I wish 'twere all so served, and I think there is few with good reason
can be against it.

As for the Kings Forests and Chaces, if they were imparkt, and kept to
himself, I believe timber would thrive never the worse, or the neighboring
corn, nor perhaps would there be a less breed of good Horses; But arguments are
endless. Boy give met'other dish of Tee.


Compl. I pray do nothing rashly, but drink first. Well suppose I grant that
you have law and reason enough on your side: what will you do against the
beggarly multitude, that will pull down your Fences, turn Cattle in, and spoil
your Corn, or what other improvements you shall make in your new Enclosure? if
you sue them you know the old Proverb, Sue a Beggar, etc. and they have nothing
to lose, their punishment will never make you satisfaction, and except you have
a large purse, and courage too you may chance be tired.


Cont. A way to enclose in spite of the Rabble.
It Is true, this is a great impediment to the good work, but a great many have
conquered it, and I believe had the former ages went the same way to work,
which an ingenious Justice, and another of my good friends (whom you well know)
have done, we should long ever this have had more Milk and Honey. For instead of
narrow Ditches and high banks, which might quickly be thrown down and filled
with ease, they have made their Ditches, seven, eight, or ten foot wide, six
foot deep, and carried away all that should make a hurtful bank, planted quick,
and with Damms, stop water to. fill up as high as they can or think necessary.
By this means the Rabble want materials to refill, unless they will bring it with
them, or dig one ditch to fill another. But as what relates to Ryots,
Trespasses, and other law tricks, the Contrymen I believe are wise enough.


Compl. This is a way indeed, surely this will do or nothing, but let them
enclose or do in the fields what they will, what can you say for the multitude
of Tradesmen? Multitude of traders a great advantage.



Cont. Say for them! I have said enough in what I said just now of Foreigners:
But however something more.

That man that gets most money over and above his expenses, surely will be
richest; so likewise will that trade: but suppose there were formerly twenty
Linnen-Drapers (or any other Traders) and they cleared each five hundred pounds
a year, it will amount to ten thousand pounds; but now there are forty Drapers
and by under-selling each other they clear each but four hundred pounds a year,
this will make sixteen thousand pounds. I suppose this Company do plainly
thrive: But should eighty get but three hundred pounds each, it would amount to
four and twenty thousand pounds besides the employment of four times the Ships
and Laborers, with the like increase of his Majesty's Customs, and this is the
case of most of our old trades, only besides the quantity of men, the
particulars have most of them so much increased their quantities, that with
less profit they every year spend more, and give their Children better portions.

Moreover there are a multitude of new Trades; and that variety of Arts should
undo a Nation, I believe was never known in this world or in Vtopia.

When you keep Bees, you are loath to suffer Drones among them. Good Bees are
the seventeen Provinces, and you cry them up to the skies, and say that two or
three years peace will make amends for all the Calamities they have endured
this War: But the like Industry in England, added to a prodigious Plenty, will
quite spoil us.

The advantages of many Traders.
Do not some of our Tradesmen spend one or two hundred pounds a year, whose
parents never saw forty Shillings together of their own in their lives? Does it
not make the Capons and Custards go off at a good rate? Does it not mightily
increase his Majesty's revenue, by Customs, Excise, and Chimney-Money? Does it
not make a tax light, by having many Shoulders to bear the burden? And were it
not for this, his Majesty must like Spain and Denmark, when he has occasion
hire ships, from perhaps his ill-humour'd Neighbors. But God be thanked things
are in a better case, and if I should live forty years longer, I hope to see
London as big again, and all the Towns in England strive to imitate it.


Compl. Well, I Will trouble you no more at present, and confess that what you say
seems to have a great deal of truth in it; but I don't know, people do complain.


Cont. A disswasive from murmuring.
And ever will; but I prithee leave off this humor of murmuring, either
disprove what I have said, or for shame blush to complain. Remember that you
are a rational creature, don't make your own and others lives uncomfortable by
refusing to enjoy those Blessings Providence has heaped upon you: St. Paul
with far less lived a happier life. What Comfort can his Majesty have, when
for all his good Government, Care, and Protection, you reward him with a mess
of Complaints? Don't Judaize and complain more when you are fed with Manna and
Quails, than when you fed on Leeks and Garlic. Murmur not like Corah and his
Crew when your King is a Moses. You know that of 600000. that came from Egypt,
there went but two into the Land of Canaan. Most of the rest perished for this
crime. When Moses begged any great Matter of God, he commemorated his former
loving kindnesses, and O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was of great concern
in a Jews petition. It Is the^ remembrance of the French King's Victories makes
him go on with courage: The word impossible a great discourager of Arts.
And would we but consider the great things we have done, it would perhaps make
us believe nothing to be impossible either in Arms or Arts. Let Us bless God for
all his mercies, and particularly for our good King, whose greatest Care has
been to keep us in peace, and procure us plenty, which I think will prove
better arguments to gain any needful thing, than the irksom and causeless
complaints of a thousand generations. The sum of all is this; Signs of Wealth.
If we have great Magazines for War, and multitudes of brave Ships; If we have
a Mint employed with more Gold and Silver than in a considerable time they can
well coin; If it be an affront to cause one to drink in any worse mettle than
Silver, if great part of our utensils be of the same; if our Trade be stretched
as far as any trade is known; if we have six times the Traders and most of
their Shops and Warehouses better furnished than in the last Age; if we have
abundance of more good debts abroad than credit from thence; if many of our
poor Cotagers children be turned Merchants and substantial Traders; if our good
Lands be made much better, and our bad have a six-fold improvement; if our
houses be built like Palaces, over what they were in the last Age, and abound
with plenty of costly furniture; and rich Jewels be very common; and our
Servants excel in finery the Great ones of some Neighbour-Nations; if we have
most part of the trade of the World, and our Cities are perhaps the greatest
Magazines thereof; if after a destructive plague and consuming fire, we appear
much more glorious; if we have an universal Peace, and our King in such renown
that he is courted by all his Neighbors, and these only the marks of poverty,
then I have been under a great mistake: But if it does otherwise appear, as
certainly it does to all rational men. Then I may still go on with my maxim
and say,

We have more Wealth now, than ever we had at any time before the Restoration
of his Sacred Majesty.

The Jews were never well settled till the time of Saul, A Comparison.
and then Wealth flowed in like water spilt upon the ground: you might see it
coming, and it being a stranger they stood gazing and cried ahah! witness,
David's lamentation over Saul, He clothed them in Scarlet, and put ornaments of
Gold upon their apparel. 2 Samuel 1.24.
But in David's own time it grew to a pretty handsome brook; but in Solomon's
time to a profound River. But then the custom of their Wealth took away the
sense of it, Our now complaints.
they cried that times were hard, there was nothing to be got, they were the
old ones that got estates, he that would get one then, must have tug'd hard
for it; and that such like talk they had, is witness Solovion's reproof, Say not
thou, the former times were better than these, for thou do not enquire misely
concerning this.

Just thus it has been with England, Queen Elizabeth's time was like Saul^s,
when by taking a few Spanish Ships, and almost beginning a Navigation, made us
cry ahah! In the time of King James and Charles, for want of Silver the Gold
made a pretty handsome glistering, but now Gold does much abound, and Silver is
hardany thing esteemed of. It flows in so often like a deep river, there is
hardly any notice taken of it.


Compl. I must confess I cannot answer you, but surely that which every body
says, must needs be true.


Cont. Well if you are so wilful as not to be convinced, I Am sorry, but however
this advantage to my self I Will reap, A good resolution.
I Will give God thanks for his great Blessings, and enjoy them while you sit
murmuring and repining for what you don't want, and like Midas starve in a
monstrous plenty.

However consider what follows.

Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, 1 Cor. 10.10.
and were destroyed of the destroyer.

Woe unto them, Jude 11.
for they have perished in the gainsaying of Core.

These are spots in your Feasts of Charity. 12.


And are murmurers and complainers, 16.
walking after their own lusts.

Your murmurings are not against us, Exodus 16.18.
but against the Lord.

Do all things without murmurings. Phil. 2.14.


And the people spoke against God, Numb. 21.5.
and against Moses, wherefore have you brought us up out of Egypt, to die in
the Wilderness? For there is no Bread, neither is there any water, and our soul
loatheth this light bread.

And the Lord sent Fiery Serpents among the people, 6.
and they bit the people, and much people of Israel dyed.

Many when a thing was lent them reckoned it to be found, Ecclus. 29.4.
and put them to trouble that helped them.

Till he has received he will kiss a man's hand, 5.
and for his Neighbors money he will speak submisly: but when he should repay,
he will prolong the time and return words of grief, and COMPLAIN OF THE TIMES.

He that is filthy, Rev. 22.11.
let him be filthy still.

Come Boy take money.

However dear Friend, farewell.


FINIS.

