Parables, REFLECTING Upon the TIMES.



Printed at PARIS, MDCXLIII.

To the choicest of my Noble Friends, Sir -- D. Knight.
SIR,
AMongst many other Barbarismes which like an impetuous Torrent have lately
rushed in upon us, The interception and opening of Letters is none of the
least, For it has quite bereft all ingenious Spirits of that correspondencie
and sweet communication of fancy, which has been always esteemed the best
fuel of affection, and the very marrow of friendship. And truly, in my
judgment, this custom may be termed not only a Barbarism, but the basest
kind of Burglary that can be, it is worse then picking of a lock, or breaking
into a room by violence for he who does so, robs us peradventur of some
outward pelf or baggage offortune; but he who breaks open ones private letter
or seal, may be said to plunder his very brains, and rob him of his most
precious meditations. We are reduced here to that servile condition, or rather
to such a height of slavery, that we have nothing left which may entitle us
free rational creatures; the thought it self cannot say it is free, much less
the tongue or pen. Which makes me impart unto You the traverses of these
turbulent times, under the following fables. I know you are an exquisite
Astronomer. I know the deep inspection you have in all parts of Philosophy, I
know you are a good Herald, and I have found in your study sundry books of
architecture, and Comments upon Vitruvius. The unfolding of these Apologues
will put you to it in all these, and will require your second, if not your
third Thoughts, and when you have concocted them well, I believe, (else I am
much deceived in your Genius) they will afford you some entertainment, and do
the arrand upon which they are sent, which is, to communicate unto you the most
material passages of this longed for Parliament, and of these sad confusions,
which have so unhinged, distorted, transvers'd, tumbled and dislocated all
things, that England may be termed now, in comparison of what it was, no other
then an Anagram of a Kingdom. One thing I promise you, in the perusal of these
Parables, that you shall find no gingles in them, or any thing sordid or
scurrilous, the common dialect and disease of these times. So I leave you to
the guard and guidance of

GOD and Virtue, who do still advance
Their Votaries, maugre the frowns of Chance.
Your constant servant, (...)

The great CONJUNCTION, OR, Parliament of STARS.
Upon a time, the Stars complained to Apollo, that he displayed his beams too
much upon some malignant Planets; That the Moon had too great a share of his
influence, and that he was carried away too much by her motion: They complained
also, that the constellation of Libra (which holds the balance of Justice) had
but a dim light, and that the Astrean Court was grown altogether destructive,
with diverse other grievances. Apollo hereupon, commanded Mercury to summon a
general Synod, where some out of every Asterisme throughout the whole
Firmament were to meet; Apollo told them, I am placed here by the finger of the
Almighty, to be Monarch of the Sky, to be the Measurer of Time, and I go upon
his errand round about the world every four and tweny hours: I am also the
Fountain of Heat and Light, which, though I use to dispense and diffuse in
equal proportions throughout the whole Universe; yet there is difference
'twixt objects: a Castle has more of my light then a Cottage, and the Cedar
has more of me then the Shrub: But touching the Moon, (the second great
Luminary) I would have you know, that she is dearest unto me, therefore let
none repine that I cherish her with my beams, and confer more light on her
then any other. Touching the malignant Planets, or any other Star, of what
magnitude soever, that moves not in a regular motion, or has run any
excentrique exorbitant course, or that would have made me to move out of the
Zodiak, I put them over unto you, that upon due examination and proof, they may
be unspher'd or extinguished. But I would have this done with moderation; I
would have you to keep as near as you can between the Tropiques and temperate
Zones: I would have things reduced to their true Principles, reformed, not
ruined; I would have the spirit of malice and lying, the spirit of partiality
and injustice, the spirit of tyranny and rigor, the base spirit of fear and
jealousy to be far from this glorious Syderean Synod; I would have all
private interests reflecting upon revenge or profit, to be utterly banished
hence: Moreover, I would not have you to make grievances, where no grievances
are, or dangers, where no dangers are; I would have no creation of dangers; I
would have you to husband time as parsimoniously as you can, lest by keeping
too long together, and amusing the world with such tedious hopes of redress of
grievances, you prove your self the greatest grievance at last, and so from
Stars, become Comets: Lastly, I would have you be cautious how you tamper
with my Sovereign power, and chop Logic with me in that point; you know
what became of Him, who once presumed to meddle with my Chariot. Hereupon the
whole Host of Heaven being constellated thus into one great Body, fell into a
serious deliberation of things; and Apollo himself continued his presence, and
sat amongst them in his full luster, but in the mean time, whilst they were
in the midst of their consultations, many odd Aspects, Oppositions, and
Conjunctions happened between them: for some of the Sporades, but specially
those mongrel small vulgar stars, which make up the Galaxia (the milkie way in
Heaven) gather in a tumultuous disorderly manner about the body of Apollo, and
commit many strange insolences, which caused Apollo (taking young The Prince
Phosphorous the Morning Star with him) to retire himself, and in a just
indignation to withdraw his Light from the Synod: so all began to be involved
in a strange kind of confusion and obscurity; they groaped in the dark, not
knowing which way to move, or what course to take, all things went Cancer-like
retrograde, because the Sun detained his beams and irradiations from them.

MORAL.
Such as the Sun is in the Frmament, a Monarch is in his Kingdom: for, as
the Wisest of men says; In the light of the Kings Countenance there is life;
and I believe that to be the Moral of this Astrean Fable.

(...) OR, The Great Council of BIRDS.
UPon a time the Birds met in Council, for redress of some extravagancies
that had flowne unto the volatill Empire; Nor was it the first time that Birds
met thus; for the Phrygian Fabler tells us of diverse meetings of theirs: And
after him we read that Apollonius Thyaneus, undertook the interpretation of
their language, and to be their Drogoman.

They thus assembled in one great Covie by the call of the Eagle their
unquestioned hereditary King, and by virtue of his Royal Authority, complaints
were brought, that diverse Cormorants and Harpies, with other Birds of prey, had
got in amongst them, who did much annoy and invade the public liberty: sundry
other Birds were questioned, which caused some to take a timely flight Finch,
etc
into another air.

As they were thus consulting for advancement of the common Mechanic Mariners.
good, many Rooks, Horne-Owles and Sea-Gulls flocked together, and fluttered
about the place they were assembled in, where they kept a hideous noise, and
committed many outrages, and nothing could satisfy them, but the Griffons
head, which was therefore chopped off, and offered up as a sacrifice to make them
E. Straff.
leave their chattering, and to appease their fury for the time.

They fell foul afterward upon the Pies, who were used to be Bishops.
much reverenced, and to sit upon the highest perch in that great Assembly:
they called them Idolatrous and inauspitious Birds, they hated their mixed
color, repined at their long train, they tore their white feathers, and were
ready to peck out their very eyes: they did what they could to put them in
Owls feathers (as the poor Sheep was in the Woolfs skin) to make them the
more hated, and to be star'd and hooted at wheresoever they passed. The Pies
being thus scared, presented a Petition to the royal Eagle, and to this his
great Counsel, that they might be secured to repair safely thither to sit and
consult, according to the ancient Laws of the Volatill Empire continued so
many ages without controllment or question: in which Petition they inserted a
Protest or Caveat, that no public act should pass in the interim. This
Supplication, both for matter and form, was excepted against, and cried up to
be high Treason, specially that indefinite Protest they had made, that no Act
whatsoever should be of any validity without them, which was alleged to
derogate from the High Law-making power of that great Counsel, and rended to
retard and disturb the great Affairs which were then in agitation: so the poor
Pies, as if by that Petition they had like the Blackbird voyded Lime to catch
themselves, for Turdus cacat sibi malum, were suddenly hurried away into a
Cage, and after ten long Months canvassing of the point, they were unpearch'd,
and rendered for ever incapable to be members of that Court, they were struck
dumb and voice-lesse, and suddenly blown up away thence, though without any
force of powder, as once was plotted against them. But this was done when a
thin number of the adverse Birds had kept still together, and stuck close
against them, and after that the Bill concerning them had been once ejected,
which they humbly conceived by the ancient order of that Court could not be
readmitted in the same Session. They petitioned from the place they were
cooped in, that for heavens sake, for the honor of that noble Counsel, for
Truth and Justice sake, they being as freeborn Denisons of the ayrie Region,
as any other Volatills whatsoever, their charge might be perfected, that so
they might be brought to a legal trial and not forced to languish in such
captivity. They pleaded to have done nothing but what they had precedents for:
And touching the Caveat they had inserted, it was a thing usual in every
inferior Court of Judicature, and had they forborne to have done it, they had
(...) their own nest, and done wrong to their successors. It was affirmed they
had been members of that Body politic, long before those lower pearch'd
Birds, who now would cast them out; and that they had been their best friends
to introduce them to have any thing to do in that general Counsel: they
prayed they might not be so cruelly used, as the Solan goose, and Redshanke had
used them, Scot.
who were not content to braile and clip their wings only, but to sear them
so, that they should never grow again; to handle them so unmercifully, was not
the way to make their adversaries Birds of Paradise: In fine, they advised them
to remember what the sick Kite's mother answered him, when he desired her to
pray to the gods for him, How can thou, said she, expect any good from the
gods, whose Temples thou have so violated? At last, upon the importunity and
pitifulness of their Petitions, the accusation of Treason, which kept such a
noise at first, being declined against them, they were released in the morning,
but cooped up again before night: and after the revolution of four full
Moons, they were restored again to a conditional liberty, under which they
remain till this day.

There wants not some, who affirm, that in that great Counsel of Birds, there
were some Decoyes (and it is well known where Decoyes Holland.
were first bred) who called in, not only these mongrill obstreperous Birds
from abroad to commit such outrages as were spoken of before, but drew after
them also many of the greatest Birds, who sat in that Assembly, to follow them
whither they listed: Others, who were of a more generous extraction, disdained
to be such Buzzards, as to be carried away hood-wincked in that manner, to be
Birds of their feather. Thus a visible faction was hatched in this great
Counsel, as if the said Decoyes had disgorged and let fall some grains of
Hemlock seeds amongst them to distemper their brains. Or, as if some
Spinturnix, that fatal incendiary Bird, or some ill-boding Scritch-Owle, which
as stories tell us appeared once at Rome, in a famous, though unfortunate great
Council (when there was a schism in the Popedom) had appeared likewise here.
There wanted not also amongst them some Amphibious Birds, as the Barnacle,
which is neither Fish nor Foul; and the cunning Batt, who sometimes professes
himself a Bird, sometimes a Mouse. I will not say there were any Paphlagonian
Birds amongst them, who are known to have double hearts: But it is certain,
that in this confusion there were some malevolent Birds, and many of them so
young, that they were scarce fledged, who like the Waspe in the Fable,
conspired to fire the Eagles nest, (and a Waspe may sometimes do mischief to
an Eagle, as a Mouse to an Elephant.) Moreover, some of these light brained
Birds flew so high, that they seemed to arrogate to themselves, and exercise
royal power, but foolishly; for we know what became of the Crow upon the Ram's
back, when she thought to imitate the Eagle: And it was observed that they were
most eager to attempt those high insolences against Jove's Bird, who had been
stark naked, and as bare as Cootes, unless he had feathered them; so that the
little Ant was more grateful to Esops Bird, then those Birds were to the
Eagle, their liege Lord. But the high-borne Bird with the two golden wings, the
noble Faulcons, the Martlets, M. Heart.
the Ravens, the Swan, the Chough, and all the ancient Birds of the E. South.
E. Westminster.
mountains remained faithful and firm to the Eagle, and scorned E. Worce.
to be carried away by such Decoyes; As also the generous Ostriches, E. Dover.
Wales.
who unless they had had an extraordinary stomach, could Digbies.
not have digested such iron pills as were offered them. Amongst other great
Birds which banded against the Eagle, the flying Dragons, E. Pemb.
green and white, were busy, specially the white; And for the E. Warw.
Green, considering he was an ancient bird of the Mountains, and that his
Progenitors had been so renowned for their rare loyalty to the Crown, every one
wondered that he should be drawn so far by the foresayed Decoyes, as to be the
first of his race that should clap his wings against his Sovereign Liege Lord.

The foresaid destractions continued still, and increased more and more in that
general convolation of Birds; therefore the Turtle would stay there no longer,
there was so much gall amongst them: the Pelican flew away, he saw Piety so
vilified; the Dove was weary of their company, she found no simplicity and
plain dealing amongst them: And the Kings-Fisher, the Halcyon, (the Emblem of
Peace) quite forsook them, he found so much Arondelle.
jarring, dissentions, and bandings on all sides; the Swallow also, who had so
ancient and honorable a rank amongst them, got into another air, he foresaw
the weather was like to be so foul: Her Majesty
And lastly, Philomela, the Queen of Volatills, who was partner of the Eagle's
nest, abandoned them quite, and put a Sea 'twixt her and them; nay, the Eagle
himself withdrew his royal presence from them; so the Decoyes aforesaid
carried all before them, and comported themselves by their Orders in that
hight, as if like the Lapwing, every one had a Crown on his head; they so
enchanted in a manner, all the common sort of Oppidan, rural, and Sea-birds,
and infused such a credulity into them, that they believed them to have an
inerring spirit, and what came from them, was as true as the Pentateuch:
Moreover, it was shrewdly suspected, that there was a pernicious plot amongst
them to let in the Stork, who is never seen to stay long in any Monarchy.

MORAL.
Moderation is that Golden Rule whereby all great Counsels should square their
deliberations, and nothing can tend more to their Honor or dishonor, in point
of Wisdom: Moreover, in a Successive hereditary Monarchy, when subjects assume
Regal Power, and bar the Holy Church of her Rights, and that Reverence which
is due to her chief Professors, It is the most compendious way to bring all
things to confusion, and consequently to an inevitable ruin; or some fatal
Change.

And this I hold to be the chiefest Moral of this Apologue of Birds.

(...), The gathering together, or Parliament of FLOWERS.
UPon a time, The Flowers assembled, and met in one general Counsel, by the
authority and summons of the Sovereign Rose, their undoubted natural King, who
had taken the Lilly for his royal spouse. The dew of Heaven fell plentifully
upon this happy conjunction, which made them to Bourgeon, to propagate and
prosper exceedingly, in so much, that the sweet fragrant odor which they did
cast, diffused it self over all the earth. To this meeting came the Violet, the
Gilliflower, Rosemary, the Tulyp, Lavender and Thyme, the Cinquefoyle (though
of M. Ham.
a foreign growth) had an honorable rank amongst them, and as some observed
got too much credit with the royal Rose. The Flowers of the field were
admitted also to this great Counsel; the Couslip, the Honysuckle and Daisie
had their Delegates there present, to consult of a Reformation of certain
abuses which had taken rooting in the Common wealth of Flowers, and being all
under the Rose, they had privilege to speak all things with freedom;
Complaints were made that much Cockle and Darnell, with other noxious Herbs and
Tares were crept in amongst them, that the Poppie did pullulat too much, with
diverse other grievances. The success of this Senate, this great Bed or Posie of
living Flowers, was like to prove very prosperous, but that the herb Briony,
Wormwood, Wolfebane, Rue, and Melampod (the emblems of Sedition, Malice, Fear,
Ambition and Jealousy) thrust in amongst them, and much distempered their
proceedings: These brought in with them the Burr, which exceedingly retarded
and entangled all businesses; and it was thought, that the Thistle was cot.
too meddling amongst them, which made matters grow to that acrimony and
confusion, as if the herb Morsus diaboli had got in amongst them. Amongst many
other good-morrowes, they propounded to the Rose, that he should part with his
prickles, and transmit his strength that way to be disposed of by them; the
Rose liked not this bold request of theirs, though couched in very smooth
language, but answered, I have hitherto condescended to every thing you have
propounded, much more then any of my Predecessors ever did; but touching these
prickles, which God and nature has given me, and are inherent in me and my
stock from the beginning, though they be but excressencies, yet you know they
fortify and arm me, Armat Spina Rosam, And by them I protect you and your
rights from violence, and what protection I pray can there be without strength?
therefore I will by no means part with them to enfeeble my regal Power, but
will retain them still, and bequeath them to my Posterity, which I would be
loath to betray in this point; nor do I much value what that silly insected
Animal, the King of Bees tells me sometimes, when humming up and down my
leaves, he would buzze this fond belief into me, how it added much to his
Majesty, that nature gives him no sting, as all other Bees have because he
should rely altogether upon the love and loyalty of his subjects. No; I will
take warning by the Eagle, the King of Volatills, and by the Lion, King of
Quadrupedals, who (as the Prince of Moralists reports) when by fair Plut.
insinuations the one had parted with his tallons, the other with his teeth and
ongles, wherein their might, and consequently their Majesty consisted, grew
afterward contemptible to all creatures, and quite lost that natural
alleaigeance and awe which was due unto the one from all birds, and to the
other, from all beasts of field and forest.

MORAL.
Every natural borne Monarch, has an inherent inalienable strength in
himself, which is the common Militia of his Kingdom; for, though the peoples
love (which oftentimes is got by an Apple, and lost by a Pear) be a good
Cittadell, yet there must be a concurrence of some visible settled force
besides, which no earthly power may dispose of without his royal commands: and
for him to transmit this strength to any other, is the only way to render him
inglorious and despicable, both at home and abroad* And thus you have the
spirit of these Flowers, and Moral of the Fabl.

The Assembly of Architects
THere was an ancient goodly Palace, composed of diverse pieces, and partition'd
into sundry Chambers, Halls and Courts which were supported by mixed Pillars,
partly Corinthian, partly Ionique, but principally by the Dorique, the King of
Columns, having the firmest Pedestall: Some took exceptions, and alleged,
that some of the said Courts were too high, and some of the Chambers in this
Structure were too wide. The Lord of this Palace called together the best
Masons and Architects, to advise with him (not without him) for mending of
those faults, the better contrivance of the rooms, and to reduce the Building
to a just proportion. They solemnly met, and falling to consultation hereof,
they found that the Chamber which was spangled with Stars, and where his
private Council of State did use to sit, were too wide; they thought that the
Court erected on the North side, and that learned Court where Ecclesiastical
matters were scanned, was too high; These, with that peculiar Court which was
erected for the support of Honor, they went about in lieu of rectifying, to
ruinate and raze to the very ground; and some of these Masons (for indeed they
were rather Masons then true Architects) were so precise and over critical,
that they seemed to find fault with the position of the Chapel that belonged
to this Palace, because, forsooth it stood East and West, which situation, only
in regard it was ancient, they held to be a superstitious posture; They seemed
to repine at the decency, riches and ornaments of it* with diverse other
frivolous exceptions. The Lord of the Palace said little to that, but touching
the errors and disproportions in the foresaid Courts and Chambers, he was very
willing they should be amended, and reduced to a true dimension and symmetrie;
and that all other rooms should be searched, and swept clean: but he would
be loath to see those ancient pieces quite demolished, for that would hazard the
fall of the maine Fabrique, his princely hereditary patrimony (descended upon
him from so many wise Oeconomists and royal Progenitors) in regard of the
juncture and contignation those parts had with the whole frame. To mend a thing
by demolishing it, is as curing a sick body by knocking him in the head: he
told them it was easier far to pull down, then build up; one may batter to
pieces in one hour, that which cannot be built in age: That everlasting
Villain, who burnt the Ephesian Temple, destroyed, as it were in a trice, what
was a rearing up ten long Olympiads: He wished them further to be very cautious
how they meddled with the Angulars and Basis of that royal Structure; for so
they might prove as wise as those Architects, who took out some of the
foundation stones, to repair the roof. Lastly, he told them, that if they
intended to pull down any part of his now standing Palace, they should be well
advised before hand of the fashion whereof those new pieces should be, which
they purposed to rear up in the room of the old.

MORAL.
Innovations are of dangerous consequence in all things, specially in a settled
well tempered State; therefore there should be great heed taken, before any
ancient Court of Judicature, erected as a Pillar to support Justice by the
wisdom of our Progenitors, be quite put down; for it may shake the whole
Frame of Government, and introduce a change; and changes in Government are
commonly fatal, for seldom comes a better. And this I hold to be the aim of
this Apologue.

The Insurrection of the Winds.
IT fortuned, that the Winds banded against Eolus: And Boreas (the North Wind)
began to bluster first, and would blow where he listed, he grew so boisterous,
that as he is called Scopa viarum, the highway Beesome, he seemed to sweep all
before him Southward, insomuch, that uniting all his strength into one body,
he made toward Eolus in a hostile armed manner, and so obtained of him what
he desired. After his example (and an odd example it was) the West-wind, his
fellow subject rose up, alleging, that though he blew from the left-side of
Heaven, yet he deserved to be as much favored as Boreas. In regard he drove a
far richer trade, and blew upon a more fertile Country, which brought in much
more benefit to the rest of Eolus his Dominions; therefore he would have his
liberties also assured him, which he pretended were as ancient as the others:
And he puffed with such an impetuous violence, that his blasts brought with them
(God wot) diverse showers of blood, and whole Cataracts of calamities* And as it
is observed in the course of Natural things, that one mischief seldom
marches alone, but ushers in another, and has always its concomitants, so
these North and Western gusts, as one wave uses to drive on another, made all
the winds in the compass, both colaterall and cardinal, to rise up and rebel
against Eolus, even under that very Clime, and in those Horizons, where he kept
his principal residence and royal Court. And this popular wind (for 'twas no
other, take it all jointly in one puff) did rage with that vehemency, that it
turned every where into fearful flames of fire, (issuing out of a kind of
Ignis fatuus, which by its repercussions, and furious arietations, did a world
of mischief, as if it had been that incendiary Prester wind, or rather an
Haraucana, that Indian gust, which always brings the Devil along with it (as
those Savages believe) had blown here, For, surely God was not in this wind.
Yet some were so simple, to think that this wind proceeded from divine
inspirations; nay, they came to that height of profaneness, as to father it
upon the Holy Ghost, though nothing could be more different to his sweet
motions, nothing so directly opposite to his soft gentle breeses and
eventilations; for no holy consecrated thing could stand before this
Diabolical wind, down went all Crosses it met withal; it battered down
Church and Chapel windows (and I fear the walls and steeples will next to
wrack) It was so violent, that it overturned all stone Tables that stood
Eastward; it blew away all the decent Vests and Ornaments of the Church; the
Bishops Mitre* (an order contemporary with Christianity it self) did quake
like an Aspen leaf before it; nay, it shrewdly shook the very Imperial
Scepter, and Crown which stood on Eolus his head, so that he was like to
become Ludibrium Ventorum. But the highest Deity of heaven, He who walks upon
the wings of the wind, and makes weight for them, and gathers them in his
fist when he pleases, hating such an odious rebellion, rebuked these
tumultuous winds, he caused a contagious air, to rush in and mingle with them,
and infect them with new diseases; besides whispers of jealousies, doubts and
diffidence blew and buzzed more and more amongst them, so that they could not
trust one another, insomuch, that it made them to fall into confusion amongst
themselves, which is the common fate of all rebellions. So Eolus recovered his
Monarchy, and as they say, there is no wind but blows some body good; so this
turned much to the advantage of Eolus, for he grew ever after more firm and
better established in his regal power, because he put a competent guard in
those Climes whence all these boistrous winds burst forth, and so secured
himself ever after, that they could not blow where they listed.

Rebellion suppressed, makes the Prince the stronger: And so you have the
Principal Moral all of this Parable in brief.

Postscript.
SIr, I long to receive your opinion of these rambling pieces of fancy, you
may, peradventure, have more, when the times are open: surely the wind will not
hold still in this unluckie hole, for it is too violent to last: It begins
(thanks be to God) to sift already, and amongst those multitudes, who expect
the change, I am one that lies at the Cape of good Hope, though a long time
under hatches. Howsoever, though all the winds in the Compass blow upon me, I
am armed and resolved to bear the brunt, and to welcome the Will of God. If
you desire a further intimation of things, I refer you to a Discourse, called
The True Informer, who will give you no vulgar satisfaction, So I am

Yours as at first inalterable.
FINIS.

