Diverse Historical DISCOURSES Of the late Popular INSURRECTIONS In Great
BRITAIN, And IRELAND, Tending all, to the asserting of Truth, in Vindication of
their MAJESTY'S; By James Howell Esquire;

Some of which Discourses were strangled in the Press by the Power which Then
SWAYED, But now are newly retreev'd, collected, and Published by Richard
Royston.

The first TOME.

LONDON, Printed by I. Grismond. 1661.

Belua multorum capit^m Plebs vana vocatur, Plus satis Hoc Angli ^uper docuere
Popelli. (...)* I: H:
The People is a Beast which Heads has many, England of late has showed This
more then any.



TO HIS MAJESTY
SIR,
THese Historical Discourses (set forth in such variety of dresses) having
given so much satisfaction to the world for the asserting of Truth, in
Vindication of Your Royal Father of ever blessed Memory, and some of them
relating also to Your Majesty, I humbly conceived might be proper for Your
Majesty's perusal and Patronage.

Concerning the Author thereof his name needed not to have bin prefixed, He
being so universally well known and distinguishd from other Writers both at
home and abroad by his style, which made one of the Highest Wits of these Times
say of Him,

Author hic ex Genio notus, ut Ungue Leo. God Almighty bless Your Majesty with
a continuance of Happiness, and daily increase of Glory, so prays

Your Majesty's most loyal, and humble Subject, ROYSTON.

A Catalog of the several Pieces that are here contained.
I. A Dialog twixt Patricius and Peregrin presently after Kintonfield Battle,
which was the first Book that came forth for Vindication of His Majesty. II.
The second part of that Discourse. III. A seasonable Advice sent to Philip late
Earl of Pembrock, to mind him of the several solemn Oaths whereby he was bound
to adhere to the King. IV. A Manifesto sent in His Majesty's name to the
Reformed Churches, and Princes beyond the Seas touching His Religion. V.
Apologs, and Emblemes, in whose Moralls the Times are represented. VI. Of the
land of Ire, or a Discourse of that horrid Insurrection in Ireland, discovering
the true Causes thereof. VII. The Sway of the Sword, or a Disurs of the Common
Militia or Soldiery of the Land, proving, That the Command thereof in chief,
belongs to the Ruling Prince. VIII. An Italian Prospective, through which
England may discern the desperate condition she stands in. IX. A Nocturnall
Progress, or perambulation of most Countries in Christendom. X. A Vindication
of His Majesty touching a Letter He writ to Rome from Madrid, in Answer to a
Letter which Pope Gregory the 15th. had sent Him upon passing the Dispensation
for concluding the Match. XI. Of the Trety of the I Will of Wight, and the Death
of His Majesty. XII. Advise from the prime Statesmen of Florence, how England
should come to Her self again, which can be by no other means under Heaven, but
by calling in the King, and that, in a free confident way without Articles, but
what He shall be pleased to offer Himself.
THE TRUE Informer, WHO DISCOVERS To the World the first grounds Of this ugly
REBELLION And Popular TUMULTS In England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Deducing the Causes thereof in an Historical Discourse from their Original.

-- Neutrum modo, Mas modo Vulgus. Written in the Prison of the Fleet Anno 1642.

CASUAL DISCOURSES, AND Interlocutions BETWIXT Patricius and Peregrin,
Touching the Distractions of the Times, With the Causes of them.
Patricius. SUrely I should know full well that face and phisnomy: O Heavens!
it is Peregrin. Gentle Sir, you are well met, and welcome to England, I am
heartily glad of your safe arrival, hoping now to apprehend some happy
opportunity whereby I may requite part of those worthy favors I received from
you in diverse places the other side side of the Sea.


Peregrin. Sir, I am as joyful to see you, as any friend I have upon earth;
but touching favors, they deserve not such an acknowledgment, I must confess
my self to be far in the arrear, therefore you teach me what I should speak to
you in that point: But amongst other offices of Friendship you have bin pleased
to do me from time to time, I give you many thanks for the faithful
correspondence you have held withme, since the time of our separation, by
intercours of Letters, the best sort of fuel to warm affection, and to keep
life in that noble virtue Friendship, which they say abroad, is in danger to
perish under this cold Insulary clime for want of practice.


Patricius. Truly, Sir, you should have had an account of matters hence more
amply and frequently, but that of late it has bin usual, and allowed by
authority, to intercept and break open any Letters; but private men need not
complain so much, since the dispatches of Ambassadors, whose P^ckets should be
held as sacred as their Persons, h^ve bin commonly opened, besides some
outrages offered their houses and servants; nay, since their Maj^sties Letters
under the Cabinet Signet have bin broke up, and other counterfeit ones printed
and published in their names.


Peregrin. Indeed I must confess the report hereof has kept a great noise
abroad, and England has suffered much in point of national repute in this
particular; for even among Barbarians, it is held a kind of sacrilege to open
Letters; nay, it is held a baser kind of burglary, then to break into a House,
Chamber, or Closet: for that is a plundering of outward things only, but he
who breaks open ones Letters which are the Idea's of the mind, may be said to
rip up his breast, to plunder and rifle his very brain, and rob him of his most
precious and secretest thoughts.


Patricius. Well, let us leave this distasteful subject, when these fatal
commotions cease, this custom, I hope, will be abhorred in England: But now,
that you are newly arrived, and so happily met, I pray be pleased t^ make me
partaker of some foreign news, and how the squares go betwixt France and
Spain, those two great wheels, that draw after their motion (some more, some
less) all the rest of the Western world: and when you have done, I will give
you account of the state of things in England.


Peregrin. I thought you had so abounded with domestic news, that you had had
no list or leisure to hear any foreign; but to obey your commands, you know
that I have been any time these six years a Land-loper up and down the world,
and truly I could not set foot on any Chr^stian shore that was in a perfect
condition of peace, but it was engag^d either in a direct, (...) or collateral
war, or standing upon it is guard in continual apprensions and alarmes of fear:
For, since that last flaming Usher of Gods vengeance, that direful Comet of the
year 1618. appeared in the heavens, some malevolent and ang^y ill-aspected star
has had the predominance ever since, and by it is malign influxes, made
strange unusual impressions upon the humors of subjects, by inci^ing them to
such insurrections, revolts, and tumults; which caused a Jewish Rabbi to say
lately, that it seems the grand Turk thrives extraordinarily in his devotions,
it being one of his prime prayers to Mahomet, that he should prevail with God
Almighty to continue disentions still among Christian Princes. And truly, as
the case stands, one may say, that the Europaean world is all in pieces; you
know well with what fearful fits of a high burning fever poor Germany has
been long shaken, which has wrought a Lethargy in some of her members, by
wasting of the vital spirits which should diffuse themselves equally through
that great body; and how she st^ll ^ostereth a cold Northern Guest (the Swed)
within her bosom, and is in (...) fear of a worse from the Levant: In the
Netherlands one shall hear the half-starv'd soldier murmur in every corner,
and railing against his King, and ready to mutiny for want of pay. In France
you shall see the poor Asinin Peasan half weary of his life, his face being so
(...) grownd, ever and anon with new tallies. You know there are some Soverain
Princes, who have a long time wandered up and down in exile, being outed of
their own anti^nt Patrimoniall Territories, and little hopes yet, God wot, of
restoring them. The world knows how Savoy is become of late a kind of Province
to France; Nay, Spain, who has been so dexterous to put her neighbors ogether
by the ears, and to foment war a far off, to keep her own home secure, is now
her self in the midst of two fearful fires, kindled on both sides of her by
quiterevolted subjects, viz. the Portugues and Cat alan, which so puzzles her,
that she cannot tell what Saint to pray unto. The Venetian also, with the
pope, and all the Princes of Italy, are arming apace; the Hollander only,
Salamander like, thrives in these flames: and as I have heard of some that by a
long habitu^l custom could feed on poison, and turn it to nourishment, so Hans
alone can turn War to a Trade and grow fat by it.

Now, Sir, being weary of eating my bread in such a distracted world abroad,
and hoping to take some sweet repose in England, I find that she is in as bad
a case, if not worse, then any other. So much news I give you in a lump, I will
be more particular with you some other time, if you please to spare me now.


Patricius. I hear, not without much resentment, these pithy expressions you
have been pleased to make of the torn estate of Europe abroad; and since you
mention that blazing Star, I remember what a Noble Knight told me some years
ago, That the Astronomers, who lay sentinel to watch the motion and aspect of
that Comet, observed that the tail of it having pointed at diverse Climats, at
last it seemed to look directly on these North-west I lands, in which posture
it spent it self, and so extinguished; as if thereby it meant to tell the
world, that these Islands should be the Stage whereupon the last act of the
Tragedy should be played. And how many Scenes have passed already, both here
and in Ireland, we know, God wot, by too too woeful and fresh experience.


Peregrin. There is a saying When your neighbors house is on fire, by it is
light you may see in what danger your own stands: And was England so blind and
blockish, as not to take warning by so many fearful combustions abroad? When I
took my leave last of her, I left her in such a complete condition of happiness,
both in Court, Country, City and Sea, that she was the envy of all Europ, in
so much, that that Golden Verse might be fi^ly applied to her then Golden times,

Mollia securae perage^ant otia Gentes.

The Court was never so glorious, being hanselld every year almost with a new
Roya^ offspring; the Gentry no where more gallan^ and sportfull; the Citizen
never more gorgeous and rich, and so abounding with treasure, bullion and
buildings, that no age can parallel; Commerce, inward and outward was never at
that height; the customs increasing every year to admiration; the narrow Seas
were never guarded with braver Ships, nor the navy Royal for number of
vessels and magazines of all sorts of materials was ever so well replenished;
the Universities had never such springing days: and lastly, the Church did so
flourish, that amongst the rest of the reformed Churches of Christendom, I
have heard her called the Church triumphant.

Besides, Ireland was arrived almost to the same degree of prosperity, for all
the arrerages of the Crown were paid, and not a penny sent hence for many
years to maintain the standing army there, or for any other public charge, as
formerly; Trafique came to that mighty height of increase, that in few years
the Crown customs and imposts came to be five times higher. In fine, Ireland
was brought not only to subsist of her self, but enabled to contribut toward
the filling of the English Exchequer, and to make some retribution of those
vast expenses the Crown of England has been at any time these 400 years to
reduce her to civility; her boggs were almost all dried up, and made good land*
her mudde-walls turned apace to Brick in diverse places, so that in one Summer
that I fortuned to be there, above 50. new Brickhouses were built in one Town.
But it has been the fate of that Island, to be (...) near a condition of a
settled, happiness, and yet to have some odd accident still intervene to cross
it.

In conclusion, there wanted nothing to make England and her united Crowns so
exactly blessed, that she might have assumed the title of one of the Fortunat
Islands. Good Lord, how comes it to pass, that she is now fallen into such
horrid distempers, and like a distracted body, laying han^s upon her self,
would thrust the sword of civil war into her own bowels? I beseech you, Sir,
impart unto me the true cause of this change; for I know none so capable to do
it as your self.


Patriciu^. Infandum, Peregrine, jubes renovare dolorem:

First, Sir, in the general you know, that it is with the Regions upon Earth,
as it is with those of the Air, sometimes we have a clear azur'd sky with
soft gentle ventilations, and a sweet serenitie the whole Hemesphere over; at
other times we know the face of the heavens is over-cast with frowns, with Frog
vapors, and thick clouds of various shapes, which look like Monsters, hovering
up and down, break at last into thunder and fulgurations, and so disquiet and
raise a kind of war in the Aereall Commonwealth. Just so in the Regions that
are dispersed up and down this earthly Glo^e, peepled with men (which are but a
composition of the Elements) you have sometimes a gentle calm of peace and
quietude, with a general tranquillity all the Country over; at other times
you have ugly misshapen clouds of jealousies, fears, and discontentments rise
up, which break out at last into acts of disobedience, rebellion, and fury. And
as those Aereall Meteors and Monsters above, are ingendered of those watery
fogs and mists which are drawn up out of fennie and rotten low grounds here
upon earth; so in the Region of the mind, the ill vapors which ascend to the
brain from rotten and impostumated hearts, from desperate and mal^-contented
humorists are the causes of all civil commotions and distempers in State. But
they have much to answer for in the world to come (though they escape it in
this) who for any private interest or respect whatsoever, either of Promotion,
Vainglory, Revenge, Malice, or Envy, will embroyl and plunge their own native
Country in any public engagement or civil war, by putting a partition wall
betwixt their soverain Prince and their fellow subjects. Truly, in my opinion,
these may be called the worst kind of Betrayers of their Countries. But I am
too far transported from satisfying your request in relating the true causes of
these calamities, I will now fall to work, and bring you to the very source of
them.

There is a pack of perverse people (composed for the most part of the scummie
and basest sort) multiplied in England, who by a kind of natural inclination,
are opposite so point blank to Monarchy in State, and Hierarchy in Church, that
I doubt if they were in Heven (whither it is to be feared they run a great
hazard ever to enter, it being a rule, that he who is rotten-hearted to his
King, can never be right-hearted to his Crea^or) I say if these men were in
Heven, they would go near to repine at the Monarchical power of God Almighty
himself, as also at the degrees of Angels, and the postures of holiness in the
Church triumphant. They call every Crotchet of the brain, tenderness of
conscience forsooth: which being well examined, is nothing else but a mere
spirit of contradiction, of malice and disobedience to all higher powers which
possesses them. There are no constitutions either Ecclesiastical or Civil can
please them, but they would cast both into such and such a mould, which their
cracked brains would fain devise, yet are never able to bring to any perfection;
They are ever laboring to bring Religion to the dock, and to be new trimmed,
but they would take down her fore-Castle, and scarce allow her the Kings Arms
to adorn her: They are great listners after any Court-news, and prick up their
ears when any thing is spoken of King, Queen, or Privy Counselor, and are
always ready, though upon loose trust, to take up any report whereby they may
whisper in conventicles and corners, and so traduce the Government. These great
Z^lots use to look upon themselves most commonly through multiplying glasses,
which make them appear to be such huge Santons, that it renders them not only
uncharitable in their opinions of others, but Luciferian-like proud in their
own conceit, insomuch that they seem to scorn all the world besides, believing
that they are ^he only Elect whose souls work according ^o the motion of the
Spirit: that they are ^he true Children of promise, whose faces alone look
toward Heven; They are more pleased with some new reach or fancy, (that may
puzzle the pericranium) than a Frenchman is in some new faction in clothing:
They are nearest to the nature of the Jew of any people upon earth, and will
converse with him sooner than with some sort of Christians; And as in their
pharisaicall Dispositions they symbolize with the Jew, so in some of their
positions they jump pat with the Jesuit: for though they are both in the
extremes, and as contrary one to the other, as the points of a diameter, yet
their opinions and practices are concentrique, viz. to depresse regal power;
Both of them would bind their Kings in Chains, and the Nobles in links of Iron;
They both deny all passive obedience, and as the one would have the mortar of
the Temple tempred with blood, so the other would beat Religion into the brain
with the poleaxe. Their greatest masterpiece of policy is to forge counter^eit
news, and to divulge and disperse it as far as they can to amuse the world, for
the advancement of their designs, and strengthing their party: But the Jesuit
does it more cunningly and modestly, for he fetches his news from far, so that
before the falsehood of it can be contrould, his work is commonly done, and the
news forgotten; But these later politicians use to raise lies hard by home, so
that the grosseness and palpablenesse of them is presently discovered. Besides,
to avoid the extremes of the other, these later seem to fall into flat
prophanness, for they may be called a kind of enemies to the very Name, Cross,
and Church of Christ. Touching the first, They repine at any reverence to be
done unto the name of Jesus, though spontaneous, not coercive. For the second,
which was held from the beginning to be the badg and Banner of a Christian,
they cry up the Cross to be the mark of the b^ast; And for the last, viz. the
Church, they would have it to be neither beautiful, holy, nor amiable, which
are the three main properties that God requires in his house. To conclude, when
any comes to be seasoned with this sower leaven, he seems to degenerat
presently from the nature and garb of a Gentleman, and falls to be of a sordid
and low disposition, narrow hearted and close handed; to be timorous, cunning
and jealous, and far from the common freedom, and sweetness of moral society,
and from all generous and loyal thoughts toward his King and Country.

These, these have bin the chiefest machinators, and engeneers Englands unhappy
divisions, who Viper-like have torn the entrails of their own mother their
dear Country: But there were other extern concurrent causes, and to find them
out, I must look Northward, for there the cloud began to condense first;

You know Sir, the Scot's nation were ever used to have their King personally
resident amongst them, and though King James by reason of his age, bounty, and
long breeding there, with other advantages, drew such extraordinary respect
from them, that they continued in good conformity: yet since his death, they
have been overheard to mutter at the remoteness and absence of their King,
and that they should become now a kind of province by reason of such a distance:
some of their Nobles and Gentry found not at the English Court, nor at his
Majesty's Coronation in Edinburgh that Countenance, Familiarity, Benefit and
Honors which happily they expected, and it is well known who he was, that having
been denied to be lorded (David Lesley) took a pet, and went discontented to
his country, hoping that some title added to the wealth he had got abroad,
should have purchased him more respect. These discontented parties tamperd with
the mercenary preachers up and down Scotland, to obtrude to the p^ple what
doctrines they put into their mouths, so that the pulpits every where rung of
nothing but of invectives against certain obliquities and Solaecismes (and I
cannot tell what) in government, and many glances they had upon the English
Church: yet all this while there was not matter enough for an insurrection, nor
to dispose the peoples hearts to a mutiny* until by the policy (as some
affi^med) of the said discontented party the English Lyturgie was sent thither:
this by the in^itement of those fiery pulpiteers, was cried up to be the
greatest I doll that possibly could be brought into their Kerke, insomuch that
when it was first offered to be read, the woman and ba^er sort of mechaniks
threw stools and stones at the Bishops heads, and were ready to tear them in
pieces* And here began the storm. (...) Majesty having notice hereof, sent a
most gracious proclamation, signifying, that whereas he had recommended that
Book to be practiced amongst them, wherein he himself served God Almighty twice
a day, he did it out of a pious endeavor to breed an uniformity of public
Divine service in all his dominions, specially in that his native Kingdom. But
since it had produced such dangerous effects, he was contented to revoke it
absolutely; for it was never his purpose to press the practice of the said book
upon the consciences of any, he did only commend, not absolutely command, the
use of it; Therefore he exhorted and required that every one unto whom it had
given any scandal, should return to his pristine obedience, and serve God as
formerly, offering herewith a gracious pardon, and to pass an Act of Amnestia
for an abolition of all faults passed.


Peregrin. And would not this suffice? In natural motions we find that the
cause being taken away, the effect cease, and will not this hold in civil
Actions?


Patricius. No, this would not serve the turn, but (...) was a further reach in
it, and for an inch to take an ell: you know the Scots since (...) single Lion
came to quarter with our three, are much elevated in their spirits, more
respected, employed and trusted abroad, they are heightened in their resolutions
and aims, and will questionless be daily more and more. You have heard of a
Mine that reached from our exchequer to Edinburgh. And I believe you have not
forgot Boccolinies balance, that was showed us in Italy, wherein Lorenzo de
Medici weighed all the states of Christendom, and throwing in England amongst
the rest, you know how much he made her to weigh less by this addition. The
former Proclamation I say, and Pardon would not suffice, but they took
opportunity to fish in those troubled waters, and vent their spleen further, by
an utter extirpation of Episcopacy, and by trampling the mitre under their
feet, hoping to have some of the birds plumes, being pluck^, to feather their
own nests; And they brought their work about; Good Lord, what a deal of dirt
was presently thrown into the Bishops faces by every Rural petty Clerk! what
infamous ballads were sung, what a thick clowd of Epidemical hatred hung
suddenly over them, so far, that a dog with black and white spots was called a
Bishop amongst them up and down the streets.

The chiefest contrivers of this up-roare, ^inding their design to go on so
well, and perceiving the whole Country so eagerly bent against Bishops, (and
what artifices and suggestions were used to render them so odious is
incredible) but finding withal his Majesty unwilling to alter the government
his father (of so fresh and famous memory) had left him, and to which he had
bin sworn at his Coronation, they put themselves in arms, and raised forces to
beat down the mitre with the sword, if the scepter would not do it. To the
frontiers they came with a great Army, (not half so great as was bruted)
pretending they came as Petitioners (though they brought their Petition upon
the pikes* point,) Some of the great ones* about the King grew cold in the
action: And what a pacification was then shuffled up, and how a Parliament was
called thereupon in Scotland, with other passages, is a fitter subject for a
story then a discourse.


Peregrin. I could have wished two things, that either His Majesty had given
them battle then, having the flower of his Nobility and Gentry with him, who I
understood came with all cheerfulness and pomptitude to attend him, or else
that after the said pacification, His Majesty had shaken off all jealousies,
and with a royal freedom and a commanding confidence gone amongst them to
hancell their new Parliament House at Edinburgh; for it is probable, it had
averted those showers and cataracts of ^miseries which have fallen upon us
since; but I pray Sir, proceed.


Patricius. As they say, there is no wind but blows somebody good, so it was
thought, this Northern clowd did England some advantage, for a Parliament was
summond hereupon: a Parliament do I call it? it was rather an Embryo of a
Parliament, an Ephemeran of 20* days. In this sitting His Majesty declared unto
both Houses the indignities he had received by His Scotch Subjects, and
therefore proposed a supply to be made of twelve subsidies to suppress that
Rebellion; and in lieu thereof he was willing to forbear and utterly to abolish
the Ship Money, which he had reason to think legal at first, being advised
thereunto by Noy his Attorney General, who had such a mighty repute in the
Law; yet he would not rest there, but he advised further with his learned
Council, who concurred in opinion with Noy; Nor would he rest there also, but he
had the approbation of all the Judges singly, and afterward of nine of the
twelve jointly upon a demur. This was enough to induce his conscience to hold
it legal all this while; It was clearly proved that the moneys levied this
way, were employed to no other but the intended service, the garding of the
narrow Seas; and not only for that, but to preserve his right of Dominion in
them, being the fairest flower of his Crown, which was not only discoursed of
abroad, but began to be questioned by the French Cardinal: And touching
danger, how could England be but in apparent dangers? consideri^g how all her
next neighbors were in actual hostility, which made huge fleets of men of
war, both French, Dunkerkers, Hamburgers and Hollanders to sail and flaunt ever
and anon in her Channells, and hard before her royal Chambers: nor came there
one penny of that public contribution to his private coffers, but he added much
of his own demeans for the maintenance of a royal fleet every summer: yet he
was ready to pass any Bill for the utter abolishing of the said Ship Money,
and for redressing of a^y other grievances, provided they would enable him to
suppress this Scots Rebellion: some say the House was inclinable to comply with
his Majesty's demands, but (as the ill spirit would have it) that Parliament was
suddenly brok up, and I would they who gave that Counsel had bin then in Arabia,
or beyond the Line, in their way to Madagascar, who nevertheless have got to
be in high request with this present Parliament.

Among others, old Sir Harry Vane was one, who, when the House seemed willing
to give six subsidies, and the King inclinable to take them; The said Vane
being the Secretary of State stood up, and said, His Majesty expected no less
then twelve, which words did so incense and discompose the House, that they
drew after them that unhappy dissolution.

His Majesty being reduced to these straits, and resenting still the insolence
of the Scot, proposed the business to His Privy Council, who suddenly made up a
considerable and most noble sum for his present supply, whereunto diverse of
his domestic servants and Officers did contribut. Amongst others who were
active herein, the Earl of Strafford bestir'd himself notably, and having got a
Parliament to be called in Ireland he went over, and with incredible celeritie
raised 8000. men, who procured money of that Parliament to maintain them, and
got over those angry Seas again in the compass of less then six weeks. You
may infer hence to what an exact uncontrollable obedience he had reduced that
Kingdom, as to bring about so great a work with such a suddennes and facility.

An army was also raised* here, which marched to the North, and there fed upon
the Kings pay a whole Summer. The Scot was not idle all this while; but having
punctual intelligence of every thing that passed at Court, as far as what
was debated in the Cabinet Council, and spoken in the bedchamber, (and herein
amongst many others, the Scot had infinite advantage of us) He armed also, and
preferring to make England the stage of the war, rather then his own
country, and to invade rather then to be invaded, He got over the Tweed, and
found the passage open, and as it were made for him all the way till he came
to the Tine, and though there was a considerable army of horse and foot at
Newcastle, yet they never offered so much as to face him all the while, At
Newburgh indeed there was a small skirmish, but the English foot would not
fight, so Newcastle gates flew open to the Scot without any resistance at all,
where it is thought he had more friends then foes, and who were their friends
besides for this invasion, I hope Time, and the Tribunal of Justice will one
day discover.

His Majesty being then at York, summoned all his Nobles to appear, to advise
with them in this exigence: Commissioners were appointed on both sides, who met
at Rippon, and how the hearts and courage of some of the English Barons did
boil within them, to be brought to so disadvantageous a Treaty with the Scot,
you may well imagine. So the Treaty began, which the Scot would not conform
himself to do, unless he were first unrebell*d and made Rectus in Curia, and
the Proclamation, wherein he was declared Traitor, revoked, alleging it would
be dishonorable for His Majesty to treat with rebels. This treaty was adjourned
to London, where this present Parliament was summoned (which was one of the
chiefest errands of the Sco^, as some think.) And thus far by these sad and
short degrees, have I faithfully led you along to know the true Originals of our
calamities.


Peregrin. Truly Sir, I must tell you, that to my knowledge these unhappy
traverses with Scotland, have made the English suffer abroad very much in point
of National honor; Therefore I wonder much that all this while there is none
set a work to make a solid Apology for England in some communicable language,
(either in French or Latin) to rectify the world in the truth of the thing,
and to vindicat her, how she was bought and sold in this expedition,
considering what a party the Scot had here, and how his coming in, was rather
an Invitation, then an Invasion, and I believe if it had bin in many parts of
the world besides, some of the Commanders had gone to the pot.


Patricius. It is the practice of some States I know, to make sacrifice of some
eminent Minister, for public mistakes: but to follow the thread of my
Discourse. The Parliament being sat, His Majesty told them, that he was
resolved to cast himself wholly upon the affection and fidelity of his people,
whereof they were the Representative body: Therefore he wished them to go
roundly on to close up the ruptures that were made by this infortunat war, and
that the two armies, one domestic, the other foreign, which were gnawing the
very bowels of the Kingdom, might be dismissed. Touching grievances of any kind
(and what State was there ever so pure, but some corruption might creep into
it?) He was very ready to redress them: concerning the Ship Money, he was
willing to pass a B^ll for the utter abolition of it, and to establish the
property of the subject; therefore he wished them not to spend too much time
about that. And for Monopolies, he desired to have a list of them, and he would
damn them all in one Proclamation: Touching ill Counselors, either in
Westminster Hall, or White Hall, either in Church or State, he was resolved to
protect none, Therefore he wished that all jealousies and misunderstandings
might vanish: This, with sundry other strains of Princely grace he delivered
unto them, but withal he told them, that they should be very cautious how they
shook the fram of an ancient Government too far, in regard it was like a Watch,
which being put asunder, can never be made up again, if the least pin be left
out.

So there were great hopes of a calm, after that cold Northern storm had so
blustered, and that we should be suddenly rid of the Scot, but that was least
intended, until some designs were brought about. The Earl of Strafford, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Judges, and diverse Monopolists are clapped up, and
you know who took a timely flight (Lord Finch) to the other side of the Sea.
And in lieu of these, the Bishop of Lincoln is enlarged, Bastwick, Burton, and
Prynn are brought into London with a kind of Hosanna. His Majesty gave way to
all this, and to comply further with them, he took as it were into his bosom, I
mean, he admitted to his Privy Council those Parliament Lords, who were held
the greatest Zelots amongst them, that they might be witnesses of his secret'st
actions, and to one of them (the Lord Say) he gave one of the considerablest
Offices of the Kingdom, by the resignation of another most deserving Lord, upon
whom they could never fasten the least misdemeanour; yet this great new Officer
would come neither to the same Oratory, Chapel, or Church, to join in prayer
with his Royal Master, nor communicate with him in any public exercise of
devotion: and may not this be called a true Recusancie? To another he gave one
of the prime and most reposefull Offices about his own Person at Court (The
Earl of Essex) and thereby he might be said to have given a Staff to beat
himself. Moreover, partly to give his Subjects an Evidence how firmly he was
rooted in his Religion, and how much he desired the strenthning of it abroad,
The treaty of marriage went on 'twixt his eldest daughter, and the young Prince
of Orange. Hereunto may be added as a special argument of compliance and
grace, the passing of the Bill for a Trienniall Parliament, and lastly (which
is the greatest Evidence that possibly can be imagined, of that real trust and
confidence he reposed in them) he passed that prodigious Act of Continuance.


Peregrin. Touching the Trienniall Parliament, there may come some whole some
fruit out of it, will keep all Officers in awe, and excite the Nobility, and
young Gentry of the Kingdom to study, and understand the Government of the
land, and be able to sit and serve their country in this great Senate: But for
this Act of Continuance I understand it not; Parliaments are good Physic, but
ill meat; They say abroad that England is turned hereby from a Monarchy to a
Democracy, to a perpetual kind of Quingentumvirat; and whereas in former times
there was a Heptarchy of seven* Kings in her, they say now she has seventy
times seven. But in lieu of these unparalleled Acts of grace and trust to the
Parl. what did the Parliament for the King all this while?


Patricius. They promised, specially upon the passing of the last Act, That
they would make him the most glorious, the best beloved, and richest King that
ever reigned in England: and this they did with deep protestings and
asseverations. But there intervened an ill-favored accident which did much
hurt, viz. A Discourse (for truly I think it was no more) but a discourse)
which some green heads held to bring up the Northern army, to check the
Puritan party, and the rabble of the city: This kept a mighty noise, and you
know who fled upon it, and much use was made of it to make that cloud of
jealousy which was but of the breadth of a hand before, to appear as big as a
mountain. Yet his Majesty continued still in passing Acts of grace, and
complying with them in every thing* He put over unto them the Earl of
Strafford, who after a long costly trial (wherein he carried himself with as
much acuteness, dexterity and eloquence, as humane brain could be capable of
for his defense) he was condemned to the Scaffold, and so made a sacrifice to
the Scot, who stayed chiefly for his head, which besides those vast sums of
money, was given him to boot.


Peregrin. Touching the Earl of Strafford, it is true, he was full of ability,
elocution and confidence, and understood the laws of England as well as any,
yet there were two things, I heard, wherein his wisdom was questioned; first
that having a charge ready against his chiefest accusers, yet he suffered them
to have the priority of suit, which if he had got he had thereby made them
parties, and so incapable to be produced against him: Secondly, that during the
time of his trial, he applied not himself with that compliance to his Jury as
well as to his Judges, for he was observed to comply only with the Lords, and
not with the House of Commons.


Patricius. Howsoever, as some say, his death was ^esolved upon, ( si non per
viam justitiae, saltem per viam expedientiae) which appears in regard the
proceedings against him are by a clause in the Act not to be produced for a
leading case or example to future ages and inferior Courts: I blush to tell
you how much the rabble of the City thirsted after his blood, how they were
suffered to strut up and down the streets before the royal Court, and the
Parliament it self, with impunity; They cried out, that if the Common Law
failed, club law should knock him down, and their insolency came to that
height, that the names of those Lords that would not doom him to death, should
be given them to fix upon posts up and down; And this was the first tumult
that happened this Parliament, whereof so many followed after their example,
being not only connived at, but backed by authority, for there were
prohibitions sent from the Parliament, to hinder all process against some of
them.

These Myrmidons, as they termed themselves, were ready at a watchword, so that
one might say there was a kind of discipline in disorder.


Peregrin. Were there any troubled for delivering their votes in the Houses? I
thought that freedom of opinion and speech, were one of the prime privileges
of that great National Senate.


Patricius. Yes, Those that were the Minions of the House before, became now
the subjects of popular malice and detraction, (as the Lord Digby now Earl of
Bristol for one) because against the dictamen of their consciences they would
not vote the Earl of Strafford to death, and renounce their own judgments, and
captivate it to the sense of others, yet they stood firm to their first
grounds, that he was a delinquent in a high nature, and incapable ever to bear
office in any of His Majesty's dominions.


Peregrin. I perceive Sir by your speeches, that one of the chiefest causes of
these combustions may be imputed to the City of London, which may be called
the Metropolis of all these evils, and I little wonder at it, for it has been
always incident to all great Towns, when they grow rich and populous, to fall
into acts of insolence, and to spurn at government; where so many pots, (so
many brains I mean) are a boiling, there must needs be a great deal of froth,
but let her look to her self, for Majesty has long arms, and may reach her at
last. But the truth is, that London bears no proportion with the size of this
Island, for either the one should be larger, or the other lesser: London may be
well compared to the liver of a crammed Italian goose, whose fatning emacerates
the rest of the whole body, and makes it grow lean and languish, and she may be
well termed a goose now more then ever, for her feathers are plucked apace; but
now that you have done with the Earl of Strafford, what is become of all the
rest who were committed?


Patricius. They are still in durance, and have continued so these two years
and upward, yet are not proceeded against, nor brought to their answer to this
very day, though all the Courts of Justice have bin open ever since. Many
hundreds more of the best sort of Subjects have bin suddenly clapped up, and no
cause at all mentioned in many of their commitments, and new Prisons made of
purpose for them, where they may be said to be buried alive, and so forgotten
as if there were no such men in the world (whereof the Author was one:) And how
this can stand with Magna Charta, with the Petition of Right (to vindicat
which, there was so much pains taken the last Parliament) let any man of a sane
judgment determine. Yet one of the Judges, who has an Impeachment o^ High
Treason still lying Dormant against him, though he be not Rectus in Curia
himself, is suffered to sit as Judge upon the highest tribunal of England,
whereas another for a pretended misdemeanour only is barred from sitting there.
Others who were at first cried up and branded to be the most infamous
Projectors and Monopolizers of the land, (as Hamilton, Holland, etc.) are not
only at liberty, but crept into favor, and made use of.


Peregrin* Has the house of Commons power to commit any but their own Members
without conference with the Lords? Or has any Order or Ordinance of one of the
Houses singly, or of both conjunctly, power to enjoin a virtual, binding,
general obedience without the Royal consent?


Patricius. The power of Parliament, when King, Peers, and Commons, which is
the whole Kingdom digested as it were into one volum, is indefinit, but what
either of both Houses can do of themselves singly or jointly without the King
who is the life of the Law, especially when a visible faction reigns amongst
them, I will not determine.

-- tantas componere lites non opis est nostrae --

But for my own opinion, I think it is as impossible for them to make a Law
without the King, as it was for Paracelsus to make a human creture without
coition of both sexes. The results of Parliament without the Royal consent,
are as matches without fire; And it is an incontroulable principle, that the
old Law must be our guide, till new be made, nor is any Act of the Subject
justifiable, but what is warranted by the old. But to proceed in the true
discovery of these Domestic scissures, my Lord of Stafford being gone, we
hoped fair weather would follow. (He who was the cause of the tempest (as they
pretended) being thrown overboard) but unluckie mists of jealousy grew
thicker and thicker; Yet the Scots were dismissed, having had Fiddlers fare, meat,
drink, and money, for eleven long months together. So His Majesty went to
Scotland, where the Parliament there, did but ask and have any thing, though it
be the unquestionable Prerogative of Majesty to grant or deny Petitions, and to
satisfy his conscience before any Council whatsoever.

But during his sojourn there, this formidable hideous Rebellion brok out in
Ireland, which though it may be said to be but an old play newly revived* yet
the Scene was never so Tragical and bloody as now: for the Barbarismes that
have bin committed there have bin so sanguinary, and monstrously savage, that I
think posterity will hold them hyperbolicall ^when History relates them. The
Irish themselves affirm there concurred diverse causes to kindle this fire: One,
was the taking off of Straffor^s head, (who awd them more then any Deputy ever
did) and that one of his Accusations should be to have used the Papists there too
favorably: Secondly, the rigorous proceedings and intended courses against the
Roman Catholics here in England. Lastly, the stopping of that Regiment of
Irish, who was promised by His Majesty's Royal Word and Letter to the King of
Spain, who relying upon that employment, rather then to beg, steal, or starve,
turned Rebels: And that, which has agravated the Rebellion all this while, and
heightened much the spirit of the Irish, was the introduction of the Scot, whom
they hate in perfection above all people else; And intended lastly the design
spoken of in our Parliament, to make an absolute Conquest, and National
Eradication of them, which has made them to make virtue of necessity, and to
be valiant against their wills.


Peregrin. Indeed I heard that Act of staying the Irish Regiment, considering
how the Marquesses de Velada, and Malvezzi, and Don Alonso de Cardenas, who
were all three Ambassadors here for the King of Spain at that time, having by
reliance upon the sacred Word and Letter of a King, imprested money, and
provided shipping for their transport, and bin at above 10000. Crowns charges,
I say this Act was very much censured abroad, to the dishonor of His Majesty
and our reproach.


Patricius. I am very sorry to hear it. Well Sir. His Majesty by His presence
having settled Scotland, was at his return to London received with much joy and
exultation, but though he was brought in with a Hosanna at one end of the Town,
he found a Crucifige at the other: For at Westminster there was a Remonstrance
framed, a work of many weeks, and voted in the dead of night, when most of the
moderat and well-thoughted Members were retired to their rest, wherein with as
much aggravation and artifice as could be, the least moat in Government was
exposed to public view, from the first day of His Majesty's Inaugurat^on to
that very hour: Which Remonstrance as it did no good to the Public but fill
peoples heads with doubts, their hearts with gall, and retard the procedure of
all business besides, so you may well think it could expect but cold
entertainment with His Majesty, who hoped his great Council, according to their
often deep protestations, had done something for his welcome home, that might
have made him the best beloved King that ever (...) amongst his people.


Peregrin. (...), there is no Government upon (...) up of m^n, but is subject to
corruption; there is no Court of judicature so clean, but some cobwebs may
gather in it, unless an Act of Parliament could be made to free and exempt men
from all infirmities and error; It cannot be denied, but Scotland might have
something to complain of (though I think least of any) and so leapt first into
the pooll to be cured, and what she fished besides in those troubled waters
it is too well known: England also no doubt might have some grievances, which
his Majesty freely offered not only to redress for the present, but to free
her of all fears for the future, from falling into relapses of that kind; but
to redress grievances by Arms, by plunging the whole country into an
intestine war, this makes the remedy worse then the malady, it is as if one
would go about to cure a sick body by breaking his head, or let him blood by
giving him a dash on the nose, it is as mad a trick as his was who set the
whole House a fire to roast his eggs. But truly Sir, in my opinion, his Majesty
at his return from Scotland, might have justly expected some acts of compliance
and gratitude from his Parliament, considering what unparalled acts of grace
he had passed before.


Patricius. His Majesty did not rest there, but complied further with them by
condescending to an act for putting down the star chamber Court the high
Commission, the Court of honor, nay, he was contented his own Privy Council
should be regulated, and his forests bounded not according to ancient
Prerogative but late custom; nay further, he passed a Bill for the unvoting,
and utter exclusion of the Spiritual Lords from the Parliament for ever,
whereby it cannot be denied, but by the casheering of 25 votes at a clap, and
by excluding the Recusant Lords besides (who subsist most by his grace) he did
not a little enervat his own prerogative. Add hereunto that having placed two
worthy Gentlemen Biron and Lunsford Lieutenants of the Tower, he removed them
both one after the other, and was content to put in one of their Election: And
lastly, he trusted them with his greatest strength of all, with his Navy
Royal, and called home Pennington who had the guard of the narrow Seas so many
years.


Peregrin. Truly Sir, I never remember to have heard or read of such notable
acts of grace and confidence from any King: but would not all this suffice?


Patricius. No, But they demanded all the Land Soldiery and military strength
of the Kingdom to be disposed of by them, and to be put into what posture, and
in what Equipage, and under what Commanders they pleased; And this was the
first thing his Majesty ever denied them, yet he would have granted them this
also for a limited time, but that would not serve the turn; Hereupon his
Majesty grew a little sensible how they inch'd every day more and more upon his
Royal Prerogatives; And intending to go to his Town of Hull to see his Magazin
(which he had bought with his own money) with his ordinary train, he was in a
hostile manner kept out, Canons mounted, Pistols cockt, and leveld at him. But
whether that unlucky Knight ( Hotham) did this out of his fidelity to the Parl.
or out of an apprehension of fear that some about the King, being moved with
the barbarousnesse of the action would have pistold him, I will not determine.


Peregrin. I have read of diverse affronts of this kind that were offered to the
French Kings, Rochell shut her gates more than once against Henry the Great,
and for the King now regnant, they did not only shut him out of many of his
Towns, but upon the gates of some of them they writ in legible Characters, Roy
san Foy, ville sans peur, a faithless King, a fearlesse Town. Yet in the
greatest heat of those wars, there was never any Town refused to let in her
King, provided he came attended only with his own train; and besides other
people abroad, I heard the Scot's nation did abhor that Act at Hull. But I pray
Sir go on.


Patricius. His Majesty being thus shut out of one Town, he might justly
suspect that an attempt might be made to shut him in, in some other; Therefore
he made a motion to the Yorke-shire Gentlemen, to have a guard for the
preservation of his Person, which was done accordingly. But I am come to
forward, I must go back and tell you how the King was driven from Westminster.
When His Majesty was returned from Scotland he retired to Hampton Court, whence
upon the Lord Majors and the Cities humble sollici^ation, he came back to
White-hal to keep his Christmas. But when the Bill against Bishops was in
agitation, which business ^asted near upon ten weeks, a crew of bold ^turdie
mechanics, and mariners, came from the City and ruffled before White Hall and
Westminster Hall, and would have violated the Abbey of Westminster, so that for
many ^ights a Court of guard was forced to be kept ^n the body of that Church,
(the chiefest Sanctuary of the Kingdom.) Moreover, His Majesty having impeached
some of the Members of both Houses, of High Treason, and being denied to have
them delivered up, he went himself to the Lower House to demand them, assuring
the House they should have as fair and legal a trial as ever men had. But as
it pleased God, they were not there, but retired to London for refuge; The
Londoners grew stark wild thereupon, and notice being sent to all the
adjacent Counties, this act of the Kings (though it wanted no precedents of
former times) was aggravated in the highest degree that possibly could be.
Hence you may easily infer, what small security his Majesty had at
White Hall, and what indignities he might have exposed himself unto, by that
which had passed already from the Rabble, who had vilified and cried tush at
his proclamations, and disgorg'd other rebellious speeches with impunity:
therefore he retird to Hampton Court (as we read, our Savior withdrew himself
once from the multitude) thence to Windsor Castle, whence accompanying her
Majesty, with his eldest daughter to the sea side for Holland, and having
commanded the Prince to attend him against his return at Greenwich, the Prince
had been surpised, and brought to London, had not the King come a little
before. Thence he removed to York, where he kept his Court all the Summer.

But to return to London, the very next day after their Majesty's departure,
the Country about, especially Buckinghamshire being incited by the C^tie and
Parliament, came in great swarms, and joining with the London mechanics, they
ruffled up and down the streets, and kept such a racket, making the fearfull'st
riot that ever I believe was heard of in Parliament time: so those Members
which formerly were fled into the City, were brought to the House in a kind of
triumph, being guarded by land and water in warlike manner by these Champions:
After this, sundry troops of horse came from all the shires near adjoining to
^he Parliament, and Buckingham men were ^he first, who while they expressed
their ^ve to ( Hamden) their Knight, forgot their ^worn oath to their King, and
in stead of feathers they carried a printed Protestation in their hats, as the
Londoners had done a little before upon the Pikes point.


Peregrin. This kept a foul noise beyond Sea I re^ember, so that upon the
Rialto in Venice, ^t was sung up and down, that a Midsummer Moon (though it was
then midst of Winter) did reign amongst the English, and you must ^hink that it
has made the Venetian to ^hrink in his shoulders, and to look but
illfavouredly upon us, since we will have none of his currants. But Sir, I heard
much of that Protestation, I pray what was the substance of it?


Patricius. It was penned, and enjoined by the Par^iament for every one to
take, and it consisted of many parts; the first was, to maintain the true
Potestant Religion against all Popish innovations, which word Popish (as some
think) was scrued in of purpose for a loop hole to let in any other innovation:
the second was to maintain the Prerogative an^ Honor of the King; then the
power and privilege of Parliament; and lastly, the Propriety and Liberty of
the subject; for thre^ parts of this Protestation, the people up an^ down
seemed to have utterly forgotten them, and continue so still, as if their
consciences had bin tied only to the third, viz the privilege of Parliament,
and never was there a poor people so besotted, never wa^ reason and common sense
so baffled in an^ part of the world.

And now will I go to attend His Majesty at York, where, as I told you before,
being loath to part with his Sword, (though he had half parted with his Scepter
before) by denying the Parliament an indefinite time to dispose of the Militia,
(alleging that as the Word, so the thing was new.) He sends forth his
Commissions of Array, according to the old Law of England, which declares i^ to
be the undoubted Right, and Royal Signorie of the King, to arm or disarm any
subject: The Parliament sends out clean countermands for executing the said
Militia, so by this clashing 'twixt the Commission of Array and the Militia,
the first flash of this odious unnatural war may be said to break out. The
pulse of the Parliament beats yet higher, they send an Admiral to the Sea (the
Earl of Warwick) not only without, but expressly against the Kings special
command. They had taken unto them a Military guard from the City for their
protection, without His Majesty's consent, who by the advice of the Lord Keeper
and others, had offered them a very strong guard of Constables and other
Officers to attend them, which the Law usually allows; yet the raising of that
guard in Yorkshire for the safeguard of His Majesty's person, was interpreted to
be leavying of war against the Parliament, and so made a sufficient ground for
them to raise an Army, to appoint a General (the Earl of Essex) with whom they
made public Declarations to live and die. And they assumed power to confer a
new Appellation of honor upon him, (Excellency) as if any could confer Honor
but the King! And this Army was to be maintained out of the mixed con^ribution
of all sorts of people; so a great mass of money and plate was brought into
the Guild hall, the Semstresse brought in her silver Thimble, the Chambermaid
her Bodkin, the Cook his Spoons, and the Vintner his Bowls, and every one
something, to the advancement of so good a work, as to wage war directly against
the Sacred person of their Soverain, and put the whole Country into a
combustion.


Peregrin. Surely it is impossible that a rational Christian people should grow
so simple and sottish, as to be so far transported, without some colorable
cause, therefore I pray tell me what that might be?


Patricius. The cause is made specious enough, and varnished over wonderful
cunningly; The people are made to believe they are in danger, and a prevention
of that danger is promised, and by these plausible ways the understanding is
wrought upon, and an affection to the cause is ushered in, by aggravation of
this danger, as one would draw a thread through a needles eye: This huge Bugbear
Danger, was like a monster of many heads, the two chiefest were these* That
there was a plot to let in the Pope; And to (...) the civil Government into a
French frame; It is incredible to think how the Pulpits up and down London did
ring of this by brainsick Lecturers, of whom some were come from New England,
others were picked out of purpose, and sent for from their own flock in the
Country, to possess, or rather to poison the hearts of the Londoners, to
puzzle their intellectualls, and to intoxicat their brains by their powerful
gifts; It was punishable to preach of Peace, or of Caesar's Right, but the
common subject of the pulpit was either blasphemy against God, disobedience
against the King, or incitements to sedition; Good Lord, what windy frothy
stuff came from these fanatic brains; These Phrenetici Nebulones (for King
James gives them no better Character in his ((...),) who may be said to be mad
out of too much ignorance, not knowledge; who nevertheless are come to that
height of profaneness and pride, that they presume to father all their
doctrines, all their nonsense, raptures and ravings upon the holy Spirit. Nor
did the Pulpit only help to kindle this fire, but the Press also did
contribute much stubble; What base scurrilous Pamphlets were cried up and down
the streets, and dispersed in the (...)? What palpable and horrid lies were
daily printed? How they multiplied in every corner in such plenty, that one
might say t^er was a superfaetation of lies, which continue unto this day? One
while the King of Denmark was coming over from the Sound: Another while the
King of France had a huge Army about Calais designed for England: Another while
there was an Army of Irish Rebels coming over with the privity of the King:
Another while a plot was cried up and down to burn London: Another while there
were subterranean invisible troops (at Ragland Castle) mustered under ground in
Wales, and thousands of Papists armed in Lancashire, and diverse reports of this
nature were daily blown up, and though the Authors of them were worthless and
mean futilous persons, yet the reports themselves had that credit as to be
entertained and canvas'd in the High Court of Parliament. But these false
rumors produced one politic effect (and it was the end indeed for which they
were dispersed) they did intimidat and fill the peoples hearts with fears, and
dispose of them to up roars and so to part with money.


Peregrin. I know there be sundry sorts of Fears; there are Conscientious Fears,
and there are ^annick Fears, there are Pusillanimous Fears, and there are Politic
Fears. The first sort of Fear proceeds from guilt of Conscience, which turns
often to Phre^cy. The second sort of Fear may be called a kind of Chymera, it is
some sudden surprizall or Consternation arising from an unknown cause.
Pusillanimous Fear makes a mountain of a molehill, and proceeds from poverty of
spirit, and want of courage, and is a passion of abject and degenerous minds,
and may be called Cowardice, and this Fear is always accompanied with
jealousy. Politic fear, is a created forged Fear wrought in another, to bring
some design about; And as we find the Astronomers (the comparison is too good)
do imagine such and such shapes and circles in the Heavens, as the Zodiak,
Equinoctial, Colures, Zones and Topiques with others, though there be no such
things really in nature, to make their conclusions good. So the Politician does
often devise and invent false imaginary Fears, to make his proceedings more
plausible amongst the silly vulgar, and thereby to compass his ends: And as the
Sun uses to appear far bigger to us in the morning then at noon, when he is
exalted to his Meridian, and the reason the Philosophers use to give, is the
interposition of the vapors which are commonly in the lower Region, through
which we look upon him (as we find a piece of silver look bigger in a bucket of
water then elsewhere) so the Politician uses to cast strange mists of Fear, and
fogs of jealousy before the simple peoples eyes, to make the danger seem
bigger: But truly Sir, this is one of the basest kinds of policy, nor can I
believe there be any such Politicians amongst the Cabalists of your Parliament,
who pretend to be so busy about Gods work, a Glorious Reformation, for you
know there is a good Text for it, that God needs not the wicked man* he
abominats to be beholding to liers to bring about his purposes: But I pray Sir
deal freely with me, do you imamagin there was a design to bring in the Mass^
again?


Patricius. The Mass? You may say there was a plot to bring in Mahomet as soon,
to bring in the Alchoran, or Talmud as soon; For I dare pawn my soul, the King
is as Cordial a Protestant as any that breathes under his three Crowns, which
besides his public deep Protestations, and his constant quotidian exemplary
open practice, many other convincing private reasons induce me to believe, and
it is in vain to think the Pope can take footing here to any purpose without
the Kings leave. You know as well as I Sir, that of all the Reformed Churches
in Christendom, the Lutheran retains most of the Roman, both in his positions
and practice, and comes much nearer to him then we do, yet I have observed,
that from the first day of his Reformation, to this, He is as averse, and as
far off from Rome, as the rigidest Calvinist that is; And shall I think,
because there are some humble and hansom postures, and decent vestures revived in
our Church (for they were never abolished;) because the Communion table stands
in the East end where it ever stood since Christianity came in all our
Cathedralls, which should be a rule to all inferior Churches, though the
Seperatist cries it up most falsely to be an Innovation: because the Queen has
a few simple Capuchins (fewer then was allowed by the Matrimonial
Capitulations) whither to retire sometimes: Because Schismatics were proceeded
against with more care, and the Government of the Church born up ^ately with
more countenance, shall I be^ieve out of all this that the Pope must pre^ently
come in? shall I believe the weakness ^f our Religion to be such, as to be so
easily taken and overturned? Yet I believe there was a pernicious plot to
introduce a new Religion, but what I pray? not Popery, but Presbitry, and with
it to bring in the doctrine of Buchanan and Knox for civil government, and so
to cast our Church and State into a Scots mould.


Peregrin. Indeed I heard the English much derided abroad for resigning their
intellectualls in point of Religion to the Scots, whom from Infidels they made
Christians, and Reformed Christians first, and now for the English to run to
them for a Religion, and that the Uniformity and reformation should proceed from
them, having disdained us formerly, what a disparagement is it think you to
the Anglican Church? This with other odd traverses, as the eclipsing the glory
of the King, and bringing him back to a kind of minority, the tampering with
his conscience, I will not say the straining it so far, the depriving him of
all kind of property, the depressing of his Regal power, wherein the honor
of a nation consists, and which the English were used to uphold more then any
other, for no King has more awful attributs from his subjects, as Sacred
Sovereigne, gracious and most Excellent Majesty, nor any King so often prayed
for, for in your morning Liturgy he is five times prayed for, whereas other
Princes are mentioned but once or twice at most in their's: I say that this,
with interception of letters, some incivilities offered Ambassadors, and the
bold lavish speeches that were spoken of the greatest Queens in Christendom,
and his Majesty's late withdrawing his Royal protection from some of his
Merchant-Subjects in other countries, has made the English lose much ground in
point of esteem abroad, and to be the discourse, I will not say the scorn of
other people. They stick not to say, that there is now a worse malady fallen
upon their minds, then fell upon their bodies about an age since by the
Sweating sickness, which was peculiar only unto them and found them out under
all Climes. Others say, there is a pure (...) amongst them, that they are
turned to Wolves (as you know it is a common thing in L^pland) and that the old
Adage is verified in them, Homo homini lupus; Nay our next neighbors give out,
that the saying was never truer then now, Rex Anglorum, Rex Diabolorum. Nor is
it a small disrepute to the English, that the word Cavalier, which is an
attribute that no Prince in Christendom will disdain, and is the common
Appellation of the Nobility and Gentry in most parts of the world, is now
used, not only in Libels and frivolous Pamphlets, but in public
Parliamentarie Declarations, for a term of reproach. But truly Sir, what you
have related touching the Pulpit and the Press, transformes me into wonder,
and I should want faith to believe it, did you not speak it upon your
knowledge; but the English when they fall to work upon a new humor, use to
overdoe all people.


Patricius. You have not yet the tithe of what I could give you, you would
little think that Coachmen, and Feltmakers, and Weavers were permitted to
preach up and down without controulment, and to vent their froth and venom
against Church and State, to cry down our Hierarchy and Liturgy, by most base
and reviling speeches.


Peregrin. Touching your Lyturgie, I have heard it censured abroad by the
regidest Calvinists of Generva and Dort, yet I never heard any other Character
given of it, but that it is a most Pious, Pathetick, and perfect piece of
devotion, both for the matter and form of it, which I have been a little
curious to observe. It begins with some choice passages of holy Scripture, and
a previous Declaration or Monitory to excite us to the work in hand; The first
address we make to God is by an humble and joint Confession which is
appliable to any conscience, and comprehends in it all kind of sins. Then
follows a pronuntiation of Gods promises and pronesse to pardon and absolve
us; We go on to the Lords Prayer, which having bin dictated by our Savior
himself we often use, and is as Amber thrown in amongst our Frankincense, to
make the Sacrifice more precious and pleasing unto God; Then we proceed to some
choice Psalms, and other portions of holy scripture taken out of the old and
new testament; Then we fall to the Symbol of faith, whereof we make a solemn
joint confession in such a posture as shows a readiness and resolution in us
to defend it: and so to the Letany, wherein the poor penitent peccant soul may
be said to breath out herself into the bosom of her Savior by tender
ejaculations, by panting groans, and eviscerated ingeminations, and there is no
sin, no temptation whatsoever that humane frailty is subject unto, but you
shall find a deliverance from it there, it is so full of Christian charity,
that there is no condition of people, but are remembered and prayed for there.
Then we proceed by holy alternatif interlocutions (whereby we hear our
selves speak as well as the Minister) to some effectual short prayers; because
in long prayers the mind is subject to wander, as some Zelots now a days use
to bring their Hearers into a Wilderness by their Prayers, and into a
Labyrinth by their Sermons. Then go we on to the Decalogue, and if it be in a
Cathedral, there is time enough for the Hearer to examine himself, while the
Music plays, where and when he broke any of Gods holy Commandments, and ask
particular forgiveness accordingly in the intervall; Then after other choice
portions of Scripture, and passages relating to our Redemption, and endearing,
unto us the merits of it, with a more particular Confession of our Faith, we
are dismissed with a Benediction: So that this Liturgy may be called an
Instrument of many strings, whereon the sighing soul sends up varions notes
unto heaven: It is a posie made up of diverse flowers, to make it the more
fragrant in the nostrills of God. Now touching your Bishops, I never knew yet
any Protestant Church but could be content to have them, had they means to
maintain the Dignity, which the Churches of France with others have not, in
regerd the Reformation beg an first among the people, not at Court, as here it
did in Engl. For unless there be some Supervisers of Gods house, endowed with
eminent authority to check the fond fancies, and quench the false fatuous fires
of every private spirit, and unless it be such an authority that may draw unto
it a holy kind of awe and obedience what can be expected but confusion and
Atheism? You know what became of the Israelites when the wonted reverence to
the Ark, and the Ephod, and the Priest, began to languish amongst them: For the
brain of man is like a garden, which unless it be fenced about with a wall or
hedge, is subject you know to be annoyed by all kind of beasts which will be
ready to run into it; so the brain unless it be restrained and bounded in
holy things by rules of Canonical authority, a thousand wild opinions, and
extravagant fancies will hourly rush into it: nor was there ever any field so
subject to produce Cockle and Darnell, as the human brain is rank and ready to
bring forth tares of Schism and Heresy of a thousand sorts, unless after the
first culture the sickle of Authority be applied to grub up all such noisome
weeds.


Patricius. Yet this most ancient dignity of Bishops is traduced and vilified
by every shallow-pated petty Clerk, and not so much out of a true zeal, as out
of envy that they are not the like. And touching our Liturgy, whereof you have
bin pleased to give so exact a Character, people are come to that height of
impiety, that in some places it has bin drowned, in other places burnt, in some
places torn in pieces to serve for the basest uses, nay it has bin preached
publicly in Pulpits, That it is a piece forged in the devils shop, and yet the
impious foul mouthed Babbler never was so much as questioned for it. Nor did
the Church only echo with these blasphemies; but the Press was as pregnant to
produce every day some Monster either against Ecclesiastical, or Secular
Government. I am ashamed to tell you how some bold Pamphleters in a discourse of
a sheet or two, would presume to question, to dispute of, and determine the
extent of Monarchik jurisdiction, what sturdy doubts, what saucy Quaeries they
put, what odd frivolous distinctions they f^am'd, That the King though he was
Gods Anointed, yet he was man's appointed: That he had the commanding, not the
disposing power: That he was set to rule over, not to overruled the people;
That he was King by human choice, not by divine Charter; That he was not King
by the Grace of God, so much as by the suffrage of the people; That he was a
Creatur^ and production of the Parliament: That he had no implicit trust, nor
peculiar property in any thing; That populus est potior Rege; That Grex lege,
lex est Rege potentior; That the King was singulis major, universis minor,
(whereas a successive Monarch -- Uno minor est Jove. -- Sometimes they would
bring instances from the States of Holland, sometimes from the Republic of
Venice, and apply them so impertinently to absolute and independent Royalty;
But I find that the discourse and inferences of these grand Statists were
bottomed upon four false foundations, viz. That the King of whom they speak
must be either a Minor, and Idiot, an insufferable Tyrant, or that the Kingdom
they mean, is Elective; None of all which is appliable, either to our most
gracious and excellently qualified King, or to his renowned Kingdom, which has
bin always reputed an ancient successive Monarchy, governed by one Suprem
undeposeable and independent head, having the Dignity, the Royal State, and
power of an Imperial Crown, and being responsible to none ^ut to God Almighty
and his own (...) ^or his actions, and unto whom a Body ^olitick compacted of
Prelates, (...), and all degrees of people is naturally subject; but this is a
theme of that transcenden^y, that it requires a serious and solid Tractat,
rather then such a slender Discourse as this is to handle.

But I pray excuse me Sir, that I have stepped aside thus from the road of my
main narration; I told you before, how the clashing 'twixt the Commission of
Array, and the Militia, put all things in disarray throughout the whole
Kingdom; The Parliament as they had taken the first Military guard, so they
began to arm first, and was it not high time then for His Majesty to do some
thing think you? yet he essayed by all ways imaginable to prevent a war, and to
conquer by a passive fortitude, by cunctation, and longanimity. How many
overtures for an accommodation did he make? How many Proclamations of pardon?
How many elaborat Declarations breathing nothing but clemency, sweetness and
truth did drop from his own imperious invincible pen, which will remain upon
Record to all ages, as so many Monuments to his eternal glory? Yet some ill
spirit stepped still in, between his Grace, and the abused Subject, for by the
peremptory Order of Parliament (O monstrous thing) the said Proclamations of
Grace, and other His Majesty's Declarations were prohibited to be read; fearing
that the strength and truth of them would have had a virtue to unblind, or
rather unbewitcht ( for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft) the poor
besotted people: What deep Protestations and holy Vows did he reiterate that
the main of his designs, was to preserve the true Protestant Religion, the known
Laws of the Land, and the just privileges of Parliament? How often did he
dehort and woo the City of London (his imperial Chamber) from such violent
courses, so that she may be justly upbraided with the same words, as the Prince
of peace upbraided Jerusalem withal: London, London, How often would I have
gathered thee, as a ^en does her chickens under her wings, yet thou would not?

How often did he descend to acknowledge the manner of demanding the one and
five Members in his public Remonstrances? and if there was an error in the
proceedings, how often did he desire his Great Council to direct him in a course
how to go on in the Empeachment? which they never did, but would reserve the
privilege to themselves to be judge and party.


Peregrin. Can your Parliament protect high Treason? I am sure the character of
an Ambassador cannot, which the late French Ambassador (who for his time
played his Cards more cunning than ever Count Gondomar did) knew well; and
therefore, as I heard some French men say, he got Letters of Revocation before
his designed time: but it seems strange to me, that the King who is the
Protector of the Law, and Fountain of Justice, cannot have the benefit of the
Law himself, which the meanest of his vassals can claim by right of
inheritance: It Is strange, I say, that the Law should be a dead letter to him
who is the Life of the Law, but that for omission of some punctillio in the
form of the Process, the charge of high Treason should be so slightly waved,
specially Treason of so universal a concernment, that it may be called a
complication of many Treasons; for if in every petty State it be High Treason
to treat only with any Foreign Power without the privity of the Prince, it must
needs be Treason of a higher nature actually to bring them in; And hereof I
could allege you many pregnant instances, ancient and modern, but that I do
not desire to interrupt you in your relation.


Patricius. The Parliament, as I told you before, armed apace, it was not
fitting then His Majesty should sit idle; therefore he summons those Nobles and
others, who had an immediate relation unto him by Office or Service, to attend
him at York, according to their particular obligation and oath: But it seems
the Parliament assumed power to dispense with those oaths, and excuse their
attendance, which dispensation prevailed with some ( tender) consciences; yet
the Great Seal posted to Court, and after it most of the Nobles of the Land,
with the flower of the Gentry, and many of the prime Members of the Commons
House; so that were it not for the local privilege, the Parliament for number
of Members, might be said to be ever since about the King: These Nobles and
Gentlemen resenting His Majesty's case, and what practices there were on foot to
alter the Government both of Church and State, not only advised His Majesty to
a royal war for defense of his Crown and Dignity, but contributed very
cheerfully, and have stood constant to the work ever since.


Peregrin. They have good reason for it, for the security of the Nobility and
Gentry depends upon the strength of the Crown, otherwise popular Government
would rush in like a torrent upon them. But surely those Nobles, and those
Parliament Gentlemen and others, some of whom I understand, were reputed the
wisest and best weighed men for experience and parts thorowout the whole
Kingdom, and were cried up in other Parliaments to be the most zealous Patriots
for the propriety and freedom of the Subject, would never have stuck so firmly
to His Majesty, had they not known the bottom of his designs, that it was far
from his thoughts to bring in the Pope or French Government; for thereby they
should have betrayed their own posterity, and made their children slaves.


Patricius. To my knowledge, these Nobles and Gentlemen are still the very same
as they were in former Parliaments, wherein they were so cried up for the truest
lovers of their Country, and best Common-wealthsmen; yet now they are branded,
and voted to be Seducers, and Traitors, because according to their oaths and
consciences, they adhere to the King their Master and Liege-Lord, for
maintenance of that Religion they were baptized and bred in. Those most
Orthodox and painful Divines, which till this Parliament began were accounted
the precisest sort of Protestants, are now cried down for Papists, though they
continue still the very same men, both for opinions and preaching, and are no
more Papists than I am a Pythagorean. In fine, a true English Protestant is put
now in the same scale with a Papist, and made Synonyma's. And truly these
unhappy Schismatics could not devise how to cast a greater infamy upon the
English Protestant than they have done of late by these monstrous imputations;
they would fasten upon him such opinions which never entered into his thoughts,
they would know ones heart better than himself, and so would be greater
Kardiognosticks than God Almighty.

But to draw to a conclusion; The Parliaments Army multiplied apace in London,
the Kings but slowly in the North, so that when he displayed his Royal Standard
at Nottingham, his Forces were not any thing considerable, so that if the
Parliaments General (Essex) had then advanced toward him from Northampton, he
had put him to a very great strait; they increased something at Derby, and
Stafford, but when he was come to Shrewsbury, the Welch-men came running down
the mountains in such multitudes, that their example did much animate the
English; so that his army in less than a month that the Court continued in
Shrewsbury, came to near upon twenty thousand Horse and Foot; not long before,
the Nephew Princes came over, and the first encounter Prince Rupert had with
the Parliaments Forces was at Worcester, where he defeated the flower of their
Cavalry, and gave them a smart blow. At Shrewsbury His Majesty took a
resolution to march with His whole Army toward London, but after seven days
march he understood the Parliaments Forces were within six miles side-long of
him, and so many miles he went out of His road to find them out, and face them:
Upon Sunday morning he was himself betimes upon Edgehill, where the Enemies
Colors plainly appeared in vale before Keinton; it was past two in the
afternoon before all his Infantery could get to the bottom, who upon sight of
the Enemies Colors ran as merrily down the Hill, as if they had gone to a
Morris dance. So His Majesty himself being Generalissimo, gave command the
great Ordnance should fly for a defiance, so the battle began, which lasted
above three hours, and as some French and Dutch Commanders (who were engaged in
the Fight) told me, they never remembered to have seen a more furious battle
for the time in all the German wars. Prince Rupert pursued the Enemies Horse
like a whirlwind near upon three miles, and had there bin day enough, when he
came back to the Infanterie, in all probability a total defeat had bin given
them: So that the same accident may be said to fall out here, as happened in
that famous battle at Lewis, in Henry the thirds time, where the Prince of
Wales (afterward Edward the first) was so eager, and went so far (by excess
of courage) from the body of the Army in pursuance of the Londoners, that it
was the fatal cause of the loss of that mighty battle. His Majesty (to his
deserved and never-dying glory) comported himself like another Caesar all the
while, by riding about and encouraging the Soldiers, by exposing his person
often to the reach of a Musket-bullet, and lying in the field all that bleak
night in his Coach. Notwithstanding that many lying Pamphlets were purposely
printed here, to make the world believe that he had retired himself all the
time of the fight; what partial reports were made in the Guild Hall to the
Londoners, and by what persons, ( W. and Strode) I am ashamed to tell you: But
that His Majesty was victorious that day (a day which I never thought to have
seen in England) there be many convincing arguments to prove it; for besides the
great odds of men which fell on their side, and Cannons they lost, some of their
Ordnance were nayl'd by the Kings Troops the next morning after in the very
face of their Army. Moreover, the King advanced forward the next day to his
former road, and took Banbury presently after; but the Parliamenteers went
backwards, and so from that day to this, His Majesty continues Master of the
field. It Is true, that in some places, as at Farnham, Winchester, and Chichester,
they have prevailed since, but no considerable part of the Royal Army was there
to make opposition; and I blush to tell you, how unworthily the Law of Arms
was violated in all those places.


Peregrin. Good Lord, how can the souls of those men that were in the
Parliaments Army at Keinton Battle, dispense with the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, besides the Protestation you speak of, they had taken to preserve
the Person, Honor, and Prerogative of the King, when they thus actually bandy
against his Person, and appear in battle with all the engines of hostility
against him?


Patricius. I would be loath to exchange consciences with them, and prevaricate
so palpably with God Almighty; Touching the Cavaliers, they may be said to
comply with their duties both toward God and their King according to the Oaths
you mention; Moreover, there was a strong Act of Parliament (for their security)
which was never as much as questioned or controverted, much less suspended or
repealed: But always stood, and yet stands in as full validity and force, as it
was the first day it was Enacted, and as much binding to an universal
obedience, which Act runs thus:


13. Octobris Anno undecimo Henrici Septimi, Anno Dom. 1496
IT is Ordained, Enacted, and Established by the King Our Soverain Lord, by the
Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from
henceforth no manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend
upon the King and Soverain Lord of this Land for the time being in his person,
and do him true and faithful service of Allegiance in the same, or be he in
other places by his Commandment, in his wars within this Land or without: That
for the said Deed, and true duty of Allegiance, he or they be in no wise Convict
or attaint of High Treason, nor of other offenses for that cause, by Act of
Parliament or otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of them,
shall lose or forfeit Life, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or any other things: But to be for that Deed
and Service utterly discharged of any Vexation, Trouble or loss. And if any Act
or Acts, or other process of the Law hereafter, thereupon for the same happen
to be made contrary to this Ordinance, That then that Act or Acts, or other
process of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and utterly void. Provided
always that no person or persons shall take any benefit or advantage by this
Act, which shall hereafter decline their said Allegiance.

Peregrin. This is as plain and fair as can be for securing both the Person and
Conscience of the Cavalier, but was there ever any Act or Oath, or any thing
like an Oath that obliged Englishmen to be true unto, or fight for the
Parliament?


Patricius. Never any, but these men by a new kind of Metaphysics have found
out a way to abstract the Person of the King from his Office, to make his
Soveraigntie a kind of Platonic Idea hovering in the air, while they visibly
attempt to assail and destroy his Person and Progeny, by small and great shot,
and seek him out amongst his life-Gard with fire and sword; yet they give out,
they fight not only not against him, but for him, and that their army is more
loyal unto him than his own; who, they say, fight only for the name King,
though they have his person really amongst them, commanding and directing: Thus
they make Him a strange kind of Amphibium, they make in one instant a King and
no King of the same Individuum; a power which the Casuists affirm God Almighty
never assumed to himself, to do any thing that implies a contradiction.


Peregrin. Noble Sir, you make my heart to pant within me, by the Pathetick
relation you have been pleased to make me of these ^uthfull times; But one
thing seems to me to be no less then a miracle, how his Majesty has been
able to subsist all this while, considering the infinite advantages the averse
party has had of him; for they have all the tenable places and towns of
strength, both by land and sea; They have the Navy royal, they have all the
Ammunition and Arms of the Crown, they have all the Imposts and Customs,
Poundage and Tonnage (which they levy contrary to their former Protestation
before the Bill be passed) They have the Exchequer at their devotion, and all
the Revenue of the King, Queen, and Prince, and lastly, they have the city of
London, which may be eall'd a Magazin of money and men, where there is a ready
supply and superfluity of all things, that may seed, clothe, or make men gay
to put them in heart and resolution: Truly considering all these advantages,
with diverse others on their side, and the disadvantages on the Kings, it turns
me into a lump of astonishment, how his Majesty could bear up all this while,
and keep together so many Armies, and be still master of the Field.


Patricius. I confess Sir, it is a just subject for wonderment, and we must
ascribe it principally to God Almighty, who is the Protector of his Anointed,
for his hand has manifestly appeared in the conduct of his affairs; He has
been the Pilot, who has sat at the helm ever since this storm began, and
will we hope continue to steer his course till he waft him to safe harbor
again; Add hereunto, that his Majesty for his own part, has been
wonderfully stirring, and indefatigable both for his body and mind; And what
notable things HER Majesty has done, and what she has suffered, is fitter for
Chronicle, then such a simple Discourse.

Hereunto may be added besides, that his Majesty has three parts of four of
the Peers, and Prime Gentry of the Kingdom firm unto him, and they will
venture hard before they will come under a popular government and mechanical
corporations, or let in Knox or Calvin to undermine this Church, and bring in
their bawdy stool of Repentance.


Peregrin. Truly Sir, amongst other Countries, I extremely longed to see
England, and I am no sooner come, but I am surfeited of her already, I doubt
the old Prophecy touching this Island is come now to be verified, That the
Churchman was, the Lawyer is, and the Soldier shall be. I am afraid the
English have seen their best days; for I find a general kind of infatuation,
a total Eclipse of reason amongst most of them; and commonly a general
infatuation precedes the perdition of a people; like a fish, that putrifieth
first in the head; Therefore I will trusse up my baggage and over again, after
I have enjoyed you some days, and received your commands.


Patricius. Dear Sir, If you seriously resolve to cross the Seas again so
soon, I may chance bear you company, for as you have since the short time of
your sojourn here judiciously observed a national defection of reason in the
people of this Island, which makes her so active in drawing on her own ruin;
so by longer experience, and by infallible Symptoms I find a strange kind of
Vertigo to have seized upon her, which I fear will turn to the falling
sickness, or such a frenzy that will make her to dash out her own brains:
Nor are her miseries, I fear, come yet to the full; It is the method of the
Almighty, when he pleases to punish a people, to begin with rods, to go on
with scourges, and if they will not do, he has Scorpions for them: Therefore,
I will breath any where sooner then here, for what security or contentment can
one receive in that Country, where Religion and Justice, the two grand Dorique
Columns which support every State, are fallen down? which makes all conditions
of men, all professions and trades to go here daily to utter ruin. The
Churchman grows every day more despicable, as if he had no property in any
thing, nor is there any way left him to recover his Tithe, but by costly
troublesome suits. The Civilian, a brave learned profession, has already made
his last Will; And the Common Lawyers case is little better; The Courtier
cannot get his Pension; The Gentleman cannot recover his rents, but either they
are sequestered by a high hand of unexampled power, or else the poor tenant is
so heavily assess'd or plundered, that he is disabled to pay them in; All kind
of Comerce both domestic and foreign visibly decays, and falls more and more,
into the hands of strangers (to the no small dishonor of the wisdom of this
Nation) nor can the Tradesman recover his debts, Parliamentary Protections
continue still in such numbers, so that it is a greater privilege now to be a
footman to the meanest of the Lower House, then to be of the Kings Bed chamber:
Prenti^es run away from their masters, and against their fathers intent turn
soldiers, and for money, which is the soul of trade, I believe since the
beginning of this Parliament, above one half of the treasure of the Kingdom is
either conveyed to'ther side of the Sea, or buried under ground, whence it must
be new dug up again. Moreover, all things are here grown Arbitrary (yet
that word took off the Earl of Straffords head) Religion, Law, and Allegiance
is grown Arbitrary; nor dares the Judge upon the Tribunal (according to his
oath) do justice, but he is overawed by Ordinance; or else the least intimation
of the sense of the lower House is sufficient to enjoyne him the contrary, so
that now, more then ever, it may be said here, -- Terras Astraea reliquit. --
peace also has roved up and down this Island, and cannot get a place to lay
her head on; she hoped to have had entertainment in Yorkshire by the agreement
of the best Gentlemen in the Country; but an Ordinance of Parliament beat her
out of doors; Then she thought to rest in Cheshire, and by a solemn Covenant
she was promised to be preserved there, the principal Agents of that Covenant
having protested every one upon the word of a Gentleman, and as they did desire
to prosper, both themselves, their tenants and friends,, should strictly observe
it; but the like Ordinance of Parliament battered down that Agreement.

Then she thought to take footing in the West, and first in Dorcetshire, then
in Cornwall and Devonshire, and by the holy tie of the blessed Sacrament she
was promised to be preserved there; but another Ordinance of Parliament is
pursuing her, to dispense with the Commissioners of the said Agreement for
their Oaths. Lastly, His Majesty is mainly endeavoring to bring her in again
thorowout the whole Land; but the furious, phrentique Schismatics will have
none of her; for as one of them (besides a thousand instances more) preached in
one of the most populous Congregations about the City, It were better that
London streets ran with blood, and that dead carcasses were piled up as high as
the battlements of Paul's, than peace should be now brought in. And now that
Peace is shut out, Learning is upon point of despair, her Colleges are become
Courts of Guard, and Mars lies in Mercuries bed. Honor also, with her Court,
lies in the dust; the Cobbler may confront the Knight, the Boor the Baron, and
there is no judicial way of satisfaction; which makes Monarchy fear she has no
long time of abode here. Public Faith also, though she had but newly set up
for her self, is suddenly become Bankrupt, and how could she choose? for more
of the Kingdoms treasure has bin spent within these thirty months, than was
spent in four-score years before; but she hopes to piece up her self again, by
the ruins of the Church; but let her take heed of that, for those goods have
bin fatal to many thousand families in this Kingdom: yet, she thinks much,
that those public sums which were given to suppress one rebellion (in
Ireland) should be employed to maintain another rebellion (in England.) And
lastly, methinks, I see Religion in torn ragged weeds, and with slubber'd eyes
sitting upon Weeping-Crosse, and wringing her hands, to see her chiefest Temple
( Paul's Church) where God Almighty was used to be served constantly thrice a
day, and was the Rendezvous, and as it were the Mother Church, standing open to
receive all comers and strangers, to be now shut up, and made only a
thorow-fare for Porters; to see those scaffolds, the expense of so many
thousand pounds, to lie rotting; to see her chiefest lights like to be
extinguished; to see her famous learned Divines dragged to prison, and utterly
deprived of the benefit of the Common Law, their inheritance: Methinks, I say,
I see Religion packing up, and preparing to leave this Island quite, crying
out, that this is Country fitter for Atheists than Christians to live in; for
God Almighty is here made the greatest Malignant, in regard his House is
plundered more than any: There is no Court left to reform heresy, no Court to
punish any Church Officer, and to make him attend his Cure, not Court to punish
Fornication, Adultery, or Incest: Methinks I hear Her cry out against these her
Grand Reformers (or Refiners rather) that they have put division 'twixt all
degrees of persons. They have put division 'twixt husband and wife, 'twixt
mother and child: The son seeks his fathers blood in open field, one brother
seeks to cut the others throat; they have put division 'twixt master and
servant, 'twixt Land- Lord and Tenant; nay, they have a long time put a sea of
separation 'twixt King and Queen; and they labor more and more to put division
'twixt the Head and the Members, 'twixt His Majesty and his political Spouse,
his Kingdom: And lastly, they have plunged one of the flourishingst Kingdoms of
Europe in a war without end; for though a Peace may be plastered over for the
time, I fear it will be but like a fire covered with ashes, which will break
out again, as long as these fiery Schismatics have any strength in this
Island; so that all the premises considered, if Turk or Tartar, or all the
infernal spirits and Cacodaemons of hell had broken in amongst us, they could
not have done poor England more mischief. Sir, I pray you excuse this homely
imperfect relation, I have a thousand things more to impart unto you when we
may breathe freer air; for here we are come to that slavery, that one is in
danger to have his very thoughts plundered; Therefore if you please to accept of
my company, I will over with you by Gods help, so soon as it may stand with
your convenience, but you must not discover me to be an Englishman, abroad: for
so I may be jeered at and kicked in the streets; I will go under another name,
and am fixed in this resolution, never to breathe English air again, until
the King recovers his Crown, and the People the right use of their Pericraniums*


THE SECOND PART OF A DISCOURSE ' TWIXT PATRICIUS AND PEREGRIN, TOUCHING The
DISTEMPERS OF THE TIMES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

A DISCOURSE, or PARLEY, Continued betwixt Patricius and Peregrin, Upon their
landing in France, touching the civil Wars of England and Ireland.
Peregrin. GEntle Sir, you are happily arrived on this shore; we are now upon
firm ground, upon the fair Continent of France; we are not circumscribed, or
coopt up within the narrow bounds of a rhumatick Island; we have all Europe
before us. Truly I am not a little glad to have shaken hands with that tumbling
Element the Sea; And for England, I never intend to see her again in the mind I
am in, unless it be in a Map; nay, In statu quo nunc, while this Faction
reigns, had I left one eye behind me, I should hardly return thither to fetch
it; therefore if I be missing at any time, never look for me there. There is an
old Proverb, From a black German, a white Italian, a red Frenchman, I may add
one member more, and, from a Roundheaded Englishman, The Lord deliver us.

I have often Crossed these Seas, and I found my self always pitifully sick, I
did ever and anon tell what Wood the Ship was made of; but in this passage I
did not feel the least motion or distemper in my humors: for, indeed I had no
time to taink on sickness, I was so wholly tsken up, and transported with such
a pleasing conceit, to have left yonder miserable Island.


Peregrin. Miserable Island indeed; for I think there was never such a
tyranny exercised in any Christian Country under Heaven; a tyranny that
extends not only to the body, but to the brain also; not only to men's
fortunes and estates, but it reaches to their very souls and consciences, by
violented new coercive Oaths and Protestations, composed by Laymen,
inconsistent with the liberty of Christians. Never was there a Nation carried
away by such a strong spirit of delusion; never was there a poor people so
purblinded and Puppified, if I may say so, as I find them to be; so that I am
at a stand with my self, whether I shall pity them more, or laugh at them.
They not only kiss the stone that hurts them, but the hands of them that
hurl it; they are come to that passive stupidity, that they adore their very
persecutors, who from polling fall now a shaving them, and will flay them at
last if they continue this popular reign. I cannot compare England, as the
case stands with her, more properly, then to a poor beast, sick of the
staggers, who cannot be cured without an incision. The Astronomers, I remember,
affirm that the Moon (which predominates over all humid bodies) has a more
powerful influence over your British Seas then any other; so that according to
the observation of some Nevigators, they swell at a spring tide in some places,
above threescore cubits high: I am of opinion, that that inconstant humorous
Planet, has also an extraordinany dominion over the brains of the
Inhabitants; for when they attempt any Innovation (whereunto all Insulary
people are more subject then other Citizens of the world which are fixed upon
the Continent) they swell higher, their fancies work stronglier, and so commit
stranger extravagancies then any other: witness these monstrous barbarismes
and violencies, which have bin, and are daily offered to Religion and just^ce,
(the two grand supporters of all States) yea, to humane Reason it self since
the beginning of these tumults.

And now, noble Sir, give me leave to render you my humble thanks for that true
and solid information you pleased to give me in London of these commotions.

During my short sojourne there, I lighted on diverse odd Pamphlets upon the
Seamstresses stalls, whom I wondered to see selling Paper sheets in lieu of
Holland: on the one side I found the most impudent untruths (vouched by public
authority) the basest scurrilities, and poorest jingles of wit that ever I read
in my life; on the other side I met with many pieces that had good stuff in
them, but gave me not (being a stranger) a full satisfaction, they looked no
further then the beginning of this Parliament, and the particular emergences
thereof: but you have, by your methodicall relation, so perfectly instructed
and rectified my understanding, by bringing me to the very source of these
distempers, and led me all along the side of the current by so straight a line,
that I believe, whosoever will venture upon the most intricate task of penning
the story of these vertiginous times, will find himself not a little beholden
to that Relation, which indeed may be termed a short Chronicle rather then a
Relation. We are come now under another clime, and here we may mingle words,
and vent our conceptions more securely; it being, as matters stand in your
Country, more safe to speak under the Lilly then the Rose; we may here take
in and put out freer air; I mean, we may discourse with more liberty: for,
words are naught else but air articulated, and coagulated as it were into
letters and syllables.


Patricius. Sir, I deserve not these high expressions of your favorable
censure touching that poor piece; but this I will be bold to say, That
whosoever does read it impartially, will discover in the Author the Genius of
an honest Patriot, and a Gentleman. And now methinks I look on you unfortunate
Island, as if one look upon a Ship tossed up and down in distress of wind and
weather, by a furious tempest, which the more she tugs and wrastles with the
foamie waves of the angry Ocean, the more the fury of the storm increases,
and puts her in danger of shipwreck; and you must needs think, Sir, it would
move compassion in any heart, to behold a poor Ship in such a desperate case,
specially when all his kindred, friends and fortunes; yea his Religion, the
most precious Treasure of all, are aboard of her, and upon point of sinking.
Alas I can contribute nothing now to my poor country but my prayers and
tears, that it would please God to allay this tempest, and cast over board
those that are the true causers of it, and bring the people to the right use of
Reason again. It was well observed by you, Sir, That there is a National
kind of indisposition, and obliquity of mind that rages now amongst our
people, and I fear it will be long ere they return to their old English
temper. to that rare loyalty and love which they were used to show to their
Sovereign: for all the Principles of Monarchy are quite lost amongst us,
those ancient and sacret flowers of the English Diadem are trampled under foot;
nay, matters are come to that horrid confusion, that not only the Prerogative
of the crown, but the foundamentall Privilege of the freeborn subject is
utterly overthrown, by those whose Predecessors were used to be the main
supporters of it: so that our King is necessitated to put himself in Arms for
the preservation not only of his own Regal rights, but of Magna Charta it
self, which was never so invaded and violated in any age, by such causlesse
tyrannical imprisonments, by such unexampled destructive taxes, by stopping
the ordinary processes in Law, and awing all the Courts of Justice, by
unheard of forced oaths and Associations, and a thousand other acts, which
neither President, Book-case or Statute can warrant, whereof, if the King had
done but the twentieth part, he had been cried up to be the greatest Tyrant
that ever was.


Peregrin. Sir, I am an Alien, and so can speak with more freedom of your
Country. The short time that I did eat my bread there, I felt the pulse of
the people with as much judgment as I could; and I find, that this very word
Parliament is become a kind of Idol amongst them, they do, as it were, pin
their salvation upon it; it is held blasphemy to speak against it. The old
English Maxim was, The King can do no wrong; another Nominative case is now
stepped in, That the Parliament can do no wrong, nor the King receive any: And
whereas there was used to be but one Defender of the Faith, there are now started
up amongst you, I cannot tell how many hundreds of them. And as in the sacred
profession of Priesthood we hold, or at least wise should hold, That after the
Imposition of hands, the Minister is inspired with the Holy Ghost in an
extraordinary manner for the enabling of him to exercise that Divine Function,
so the English are grown to such a fond conceit of their Parliament Members,
that as soon as any is chosen by the confused cry of the Common people to sit
within the walls of that House, an inerring spirit, a spirit of infallibility
presently enters into him (so that he is thereby become like the Pope, a Canon
animatus) though some of them may happily be such flat and simple animals, that
they are as fit to be Counselors, as Caligula's Horse was to be Consul, as
the Historian tells us.


Patricius. Touching Parliament, there breaths not a Subject under Englands
Crown, who has a higher esteem of it then I, it makes that dainty mixture in
our Government of Monarchy, Optimacie and Democracy, betwixt whom, though there
be a kind of co ordination of power during the sitting of Parliament, yet the
two last, which are composed of Peers and People, have no power, but what is
derived from the first, which may be called the soul that animates them, and by
whose authority they meet, consult and depart: They come there to propose, not
to impose Laws; they come not to make Laws by the sword; they must not be
like Draco's Laws, written in blood. Their King calls them thither to be his
Counselors, not Controllers; and the Office of Counsel is to advise, not to
enforce; they come thither to entreat, not to treat with their Liege Lord; they
come to throw their Petitions at his feet, that so they may find a way up to
his hear^.

It Is true, I have read of high things that our Parliament have done, but 'twas
either during the nonage and minority of our Kings, when they were under
protectorship, or when they were absent in a foreign war, or in time of
confusion, when there were competitors of the bloud-royall for the Crown, and
when the number of both Houses was complete and individed; but I never read of
any Parliament that did arrogate to it self such a power Paramount, such a
Superlative superintendence, as to check the Prerogative of their Soverain, to
question his negative voice, to pass things, not only without, but expressly
against his advice and royal command: I never heard of Parliament, that would
have their King, being come to the Meridian of his age, to transmit his
intellectualls, and whole faculty of reason to them. I find some Parliaments
have bin so modest and moderat ( Now moderation is the Rudder that should steer
the course of all great Counsels) that they have declined the agitation and
cognizance of some state affairs, humbly transferring them to their Soverain
and his privy Counsel: a Parliament man then, held it to be the adaequat
object of his duty, to study the welfare, to redress the grievances, and
supply the defects of that particular place for which he served; The Members
then used to move in their own ( Inferior) sphere, and used not to be
transported by any Eccentric motions. And so they thought to have complied with
the Obligation, and discharged the consciences of honest Patriots, without
soaring above their reach, and roving at random to treat of universals, much
less to bring Religion to their bar, or pry into the Arcana Imperti, the
cognizance of the one belonging to the King, and his intern Counsel of State:
the other to Divines, who, according to the Etymology of the word, use to be
still conversant in the exercise of speculation of holy and heavenly things.


Peregrin. I am clearly of your opinion in these two particulars; for, secrecy
being the soul of policy, matters of State should be communicated but to few;
and touching Religion, I cannot see how it may quadrat with the calling, and be
homogeneous to the profession of Laymen, to determine matters of Divinity;
who, out of their incapacity and unaptnesse to the work, being not pares
negotio, and being carried away by a wild kind of Conscience without Science,
like a Ship without a Helm, fall upon dangerous quicksands; so that whilst
they labor to mend her, they mar her, whilst they think to settle her, they
confound her, whilst they plot to prevent the growth of Popery, they pave the
way to bring it in, by conniving at, and countenancing those monstrous Schisms
which I observed to have crept into your Church since the reign of this
Parliament: so that one may justly say, These your Reformers are but the
executioners of the old project of the Jesuits, the main part whereof was, and
is still, to hurl the ball of discord, and hatch new opinions still 'twixt the
Protestants, to make factions and scissures between them, and so render their
religion more despicable and ridiculous.

But methinks, matters are come to a strange pass with you in England, that the
Judges cannot be trusted with the Law, nor the Prelates with the Gospel;
whereas from all times, out of their long experience and years, these two
degrees of men were used to be reverenced for the chief Touch-men, and
unquestionable Expositors of both, which another power seems now to arrogate to
it self, as the inerring Oracle of both: but I pray God that these grand
Refiners of Religion, prove not Quack-salvers at last; that these upstart
Politicians prove not Impostors: for I have heard of some things they have
done, that if Machiavell himself were alive, he would be reputed a Saint in
comparison of them. The Roman ten, and Athenian thirty, were Babies to these;
nay, the Spanish Inquisition, and the Bloet-Rade (that Council of blood) which
the Duke of Alva erected in Flanders, when he swore, That he would drown the
Hollanders in their Butter-tubs, was nothing to this; when I consider the
prodigious power they have assumed to themselves, and do daily exercise over
the bodies, the estates and souls of men.

In your former Discourse you told me, that amongst multitudes of other
mischiefs, which this new Faction has wrought, they have put division 'twixt
all sorts and sexes, 'twixt all conditious, both of men and women; one thing
more I may say, they have done in this kind: for, they have labored to put
division between the Persons of the holy Trinity, by making the first Person to
be offended at that voluntary genuflection and reverence which has bin from
all times practiced in the Christian Church to the name of the second Person;
so that Jesus worship, as I have read in some of your profane Pamphlets, is
grown now to be a word of reproach amongst you.

But to the point; there is one thing I can never cease to wonder at: that
whereas at the beginning of this Parliament, there were as able and experienced,
as stout and well spoken Gentlemen, as any in the whole Kingdom, that sat in
the House, and made the far major part, I wonder I say, that they would suffer
this giddy-headed Faction to carry all before them in that violent manner, that
they did not crush this Cocatrice in the shell.


Patricius. First, Sir, you know there is nothing so agreeable to the nature of
man, as novelty; and in the conduct of humane affairs, it is always seen, that
when any new design or faction is a foot, the Projectors are commonly more
pragmaticall and sedulous upon the work; they lie centinell to watch all
advantages, the Sand of their brains is always running: This has caused this
upstart Faction, to stick still close together, and continue marvellously
constant to their ends; they have bin used to tire and out-fast, to weary and
out-watch the moderate and well-minded Gentlemen; sometimes till after
midnight, by clancular and nocturnall sittings; so that as His Majesty says in
one of his Declarations, most of their Votes may be said to be naught else, but
Verdicts of a starved Jury.

Another reason is, That they countenanced the flocking together of the
promiscuous rabble from London, notwithstanding the two several motions the
Lords made unto them, that they might be suppressed by Parliamentary Order:
This riotous crew awed the wonted freedom of speech in both Houses, cried up
the names, and confronted many of their Members: yet these new Politicians not
only connived at them, but called them their friends; and so they might well
enough, or rather their Champions; for they had ordered the matter so, that
they were sure to have them ready at their devotion, at the heaving of a
finger: and from this tumultuous mongrell crew, they derived their first
encouragements to do such high prodigious insolences they have committed
since. Add hereunto, that they complied exceedingly besides with the Common
Council of the City, they used to attend them early and late to knock heads
together; and if any new thing was to pass in the House, they would first wait
on them, to know their pleasure, and afterward it should be propounded and put
to Vote in the House: And how derogatory it is to the high Law-making-councell,
to make their chiefest Members wait from time to time on the Magistrates of the
City, who in former times were used to attend them upon all occasions in
Westminster, I am ashamed to think on; nor am I less ashamed to remember those
base Artifices and indirect courses that were practiced at the election of this
pretended Major; here they tacked about to a second choice; after the first was
legally made, and how the Common Council was packed up of the arrandest
Schismatics up and down the City. And to that mutinous wealth-swoln City, and
the said unbridled pack of Oppidans (seconded afterward by the Country
clownes) who offered such outrages to Gods House, the Kings house, and the
Parliament house, may be ascribed all miseries, and the miscarriage of things:
for they caused His Majesty to forsake his own standing palace, to absent
himself from his Parliament, and make that unpleasing p^ogresse up and down his
Kingdom ever since, which put all Counsels at a stand, and to be involved in a
confusion.


Peregrin. But let me tell you that your Britannick Sun, though he be now
ore-set with these unlucky clouds, engendered of the vapors of distempered
brains, and the rotten hearts of many of his own meniall servants, who have
proved like the Sons of Serviah unto him, ungrateful monsters, yet is he still
in his own Orb, and will, when this foul weather's passed, and the air cleared
a little by thunder, shine more gloriously and powerfully then before, it being
a maxim of State, That Rebellion suppressed, makes a Prince the stronger; Now
Rebellion durst never yet look a Prince long in the face, for the Majesty of
Gods anointed, uses to dart such fulgent piercing beams, that dazzle the eyes
of disloyalty, and strikes her stark blind at last. And truly, as you say, I am
also clearly of opinion, that these ungrateful Londoners, as they were the
comencers, so have they been the continuers and contrivers of this ugly
Rebellion ever since; They seem to have utterly forgotten who has given them
the sword, and by, and from whom they hold their Charter; Their Corporations
are now grown body politics, and so as many petty Republikes amongst them, so
that they begin to smell rank of a Hanstown. Poor simple Annimals, how they
suffer their pockets to be picked, their purses to be cut; how they part with
their vital spirits every week; how desperately they post on to poverty, and
their own ruin, suffering themselves in lieu of Scarlet-gownes, to be governed
by a rude company of Redcoats, who 'twixt plundering, assessements, and visits,
will quickly make an end of them. I fear there is some formidable judgment of
regal revenge hangs over that City; for the anger of a King is like the
roaring of a Lion; and I never read yet of any City that contested with her
Soverain, but she smarted soundly for it at last. The present case of London
bears a great deal of proportion with that of Monpellier here in France, in
Charles the seventh's time; for when that town had refused the publishing of
many of the Kings Edicts and Declarations, murdered some of his Ministers and
Servants, abused the Church, and committed other high acts of insolency; the
Duke of Berry was sent to reduce the Town to obedience; the Duke pressed them
with so hard a siege, that at last the best Citizens came forth in procession,
bare-headed, and barefooted, with white wands in their hands, and halters
about their necks to deliver the keys of all the gates to the Duke, but this
would not serve the turn, for two hundred of them were condemned to the galleys,
two hundred of them were hanged, and two hundred beheaded, the King saying, he
offered those as victimes for the lives of his servants whom they had murdered
with the false sword of Justice.

But, Sir, I much marvel how your Church Government, which from all times has
been cried up to be so exact, is so suddenly tumbled into this confusion? how
your Prelates are fallen under so dark a cloud, considering that diverse of
them were renowned through all the Reformed Churches in Christendom for their
rare learning and piety? At the Synod at Dort, you know some of them assisted,
and no exception at all taken at their degree and dignity, but took precedence
accordingly, how came it to pass, that they are now fallen under this Eclypse,
as so be so persecuted, to be pushed out of the House of Peers, and hurried
into prison? I pray you be pleased to tell me.


Patricius. Sir, I remember to have read in the Irish Story, That when the Earl
of Kildare in Henry the eighth's time, was brought before the Lord Deputy for
burning Cassiles Church, he answered, My Lord, I would never have burnt the
Church, unless I had thought the Biship had been in it; for 'twas not the
Church, but the Bishop I aimed at. One may say so of the Anglican Church at
this present, that these fiery Zelots, these vaporing Sciolists of the times
are so furiously enraged against this holy Primative order; some out of Envy,
some out of Malice, some out of Ignorance, that one may say, our Church had not
been thus set on fire, unless the Bishops had been in it. I grant there was
never yet any Profession made up of men, but there were some bad; we are not
Angels upon earth there was a Judas amongst the first dozen of Christians,
though Apostles, and they by our Saviors own election: Amongst our Prelates
peradventure (for I know of no accusation framed against them yet) some might
be faulty, and wanting moderation, being not contented to walk upon the
battlements of the Church, but they must put themselves upon stilts; but if a
golden chain has happily a copper link two or three, will you therefore
break and throw away the whole chain. If a few Sho^makers (I confess the
comparison is too homely, but I had it of a Scots man) sell Calfes skin for
Neats leather, must the Gentle-Craft be utterly extinguish*d, must we go bare
foot therefore? Let the persons suffer in the Name of God, and not the holy
Order of Episcopacy

But good Lord, how pitifully were those poor Prelates handled? what a
Tartarian kind of tyranny it was, to drag twice into prison twelve grave
reverend Bishops, causa adhuc inaudita, and afterward not to be able to frame
as much as an accusation of misdemeanor against them, much less of Treason,
whereof they were first impeached with such high clamors: But I conceive it was
of purpose, to set them out of the way, that the new Faction might pass things
better amongst the Peers. And it seems they brought their work about; for
whilst they were thus reclused and absent, they may be said to be thrust out
of doors, and ejected out of their own proper ancient inheritance, And the
Tower wherein they were cast might be called Limbo patrum all the while.


Peregrin. But would not all this, with those unparalleled Bills of Grace you
mentioned in your first Discourse, which had formerly passed, suffice to beget
a good understanding, and make them confide in their King?


Patricius. No, but the passing of these Bills of grace, were termed Acts of
Duty in his Majesty; they went so far in their demands that 'twas not
sufficient for him to give up his Tower, (...) Fleet-Royall, his Magazines, his
Ports, Castl^ and Servants, but he must deliver up his swor^ into their hands,
all the Soldiery and Military forces of the Land; nay, he must give up his
very Understanding unto them; he must resign his own Reason, and with an
implicit Faith or blind Obedience, he must believe all they did was to make him
glorious; and if at any time he admonished them, o^ prescribed ways for them
to proceed and expedit matters, or if he advised them in any thing, they took
it in a kind of indignation, and 'twas presently cried up to be Breach of
Privilege.


Peregrin. Breach of Privilege forsooth, There is no way in my conceit, to
make a King more inglorious, both at home and abroad, then to disarme him; and
to take from him the command and disposing of the Militia throughout his
Kingdom, is directly to disarm him, and wrest the Sword out of his hand: and
how then can he be termed A Defendor? how can he defend either himself, or
others? it is the only way to expose him to scorn and derision; truly, as I
conceive, that demand of the Militia was a thing not only unfit for them to
ask, but for him to grant. But, Sir, what should be the reason which moved them
to make that insolent proposal?


Patricius. They cried out that the Kingdom was upon point of being ruined;
that it was in the very jaws of destruction; that there were foreign and
inland plots against it: all which are proved long since to be nothing else
but mere Chymera's; yet people for the most part continue still so grossly
besotted, that they cannot perceive to this day, that these forged fears,
these Utopian plots, those public Idea's were framed of purpose, that they
might take all the martial power into their hands; that so they might without
controulment cast the government of Church and state into what mold they
pleased, and ingrosse the chiefest offices to themselves: And from these
imaginary invisible dangers proceeded these visible calamities, and grinding
palpable pressures which has accompanied this odious War ever since.


Peregrin. Herein methinks, your statists have shown themselves politic
enough, but not so prudent and honest; for Prudence and Policy, though they
often agree in the end, yet they differ in election of the means to compass
their ends: The one serves himself of truth, strength of Reason, integrity, and
gallantnesse in their proceedings; the other of fictions, fraudulence, lies,
and other sinister means; the work of the one is lasting and permanent, the
others work moulders away, and ends in infamy at last; for fraud and frost
always end foul. But how did they requite that most rare and high unexampled
trust his Majesty reposed in them, when he before passed that fatal Act of
continuance, a greater trust then ever English King put in Parliament? How did
they perform their solemn promise and deep Protestations, to make him the
most glorious (at home and abroad) the richest and best belovedst King that
ever reigned in that Island.


Patricius. Herein I must confess, they held very ill correspondence with him,
for the more he trusted them, the more diffident they grew of him; and truly,
Sir, herein white differs not so much from black, as their actions have been
disconsonant to their words: Touching the first promise, to make him glorious;
if to suffer a neighboring Nation (the Scot) to demand and obtain what they
pleased of him; if to break capitulations of peace with a great foreign Prince
(the French King) by the renvoy of the Capuchins, and diverse other Acts; if to
bring the dregs and riffraffe of the City to domineere before his Court-gate,
notwithstanding his Proclamations of repressing them; if to confront him and
seek his life by fire and sword in open field, by open desiance, and putting
him upon a defensive war; if to vote his Queen a Traytresse, to shoot at her,
to waylay her, to destroy her, if to hinder the reading of his Proclamations,
and the sleighting of his Declarations (enclosed in Letters signed and sealed
with his own hand) for fear they should bring the people to their wits again; if
to call them fetters of gold, divellish devises, fraught with doctrines of
division, real mistakes, absurd suppositions, though there never dropped from
Princes pen, more full, more rational and strong sinewy expressions; if to
suffer every shallow-brain'd Scolist to preach, every Pamphletter to print,
every rotten-hearted man or woman to prate what they please of him and his
Queen* if to slight his often acknowledgment, condissentions, retractions,
pronunciations of Peace, and proffers of Pardon; if to endeavor to bring him
to a kind of servile submission; if to bar him of the attendance of his
Domestiques, to abuse and imprison his messengers, to hang his servants for
obeying his Commission; if to prefer the safety and repute of five ordinary
men, before the honor of their King, and being actually impeached of Treason,
to bring them in a kind of triumph to his House; if for subjects to Article,
Treat and Capitulate with him; if to tamper with his Conscience, and make him
forget the solemn sacramental oath he took at his Coronation; if to divest him
of all regal rights, to take from him the election of his servants and
officers, and bring him back to a kind of minority; if this be to make a King
glorious, our King is made glorious enough.

Touching the second promise to make him the richest King that ever was; if to
denude him of his native rights, to declare that he has no property in any
thing but by way of trust, not so much property as an Elective King; if to take
away his customs of inheritance; if to take from him his Exchequer and Mint, if
to thrust him out of his own Towns, to suffer a lousy Citizen to lie in his
beds within his Royal Castle of Windsor, when he himself would have come
thither to lodge; if to enforce him to a defensive war, and cause him to engage
his Jewels and Plate, and so plunge him in a bottomless gulf of debt for his
necessary defense; if to anticipate his revenue royal, and reduce him to such
exigents that he has scarce the subsistence of an ordinary Gentleman; if this
be to make a rich King, then is our King made sufficiently rich.

Concerning their third promise, to make him the best belovedst King that ever
was; if to cast all the aspersions that possibly could be devised upon his
Government by public elaborat remonstrances; if to suffer and give Texts to
the strongest lung'd Pulpiteers to poison the hearts of his subjects, to
intoxicat their brains with fumes of forged jealousies, to possess them with
an opinion, that he is a Papist in his heart, and consequently has a design to
introduce Popery; if to slight his words, his promises, his Asseverations,
Oaths and Protestations, when he calls heaven and earth to witness, when he
desires no blessing otherwise to fall upon himself, his wife and children, with
other pathetick deep-fetcht expressions, that would have made the meanest of
those millions of Christians which are his vassals, to be believed; if to
protect Delinquents, and proclaimed Traitors against him; if to suscitate,
authorize, and encourage all sorts of subjects to heave up their hands against
him, and levy arms to emancepate themselves from that natural allegiance,
loyalty, and subjection, wherein, they and their forefathers were ever tied to
his Royal Progenitors; if to make them swear and damn themselves into a
rebellion; if this be to make a King beloved, then this Parliament has made
King Charles the best beloved King that ever was in England.


Peregrin. I cannot compare this Rebellion in England, more properly then to
that in this Kingdom, in King John's time, which in our French Chronicle bears
to this day the infamous name of Iaquerie de Beauvoisin; The Peasans then out
of a surfeit of plenty, had grown up to that height of insolency, that they
confronted the Noblesse and Gentry* they gathered in multitudes, and put
themselves in arms to suppress, or rather extinguish them; and this popular
tumult never ceased, till Charles le Sage debell'd it; and it made the Kings of
France more puissant ever since, for it much increased their Finances, in
regard that those extraordinary taxes which the people imposed upon themselves
for the support of the war, has continued ever since a firm revenue to the
Crown; which makes me think of a facecious speech of the late Henry the Great,
to them of Orleans: for whereas a new imposition was laid upon the Townsmen
during the league by Monsieur de la Chastre, who was a great stickler in those
wars; they petitioned Henry the fourth, that he would be pleased to take off
that tax, the King asked them, Who had laid that tax upon them? they said
Monsieur de la Chastre, during the time of the League, the King replied, Puis
que Monsieur de la Chatre vous a ligue qu'il vous destigue, since Monsieur de
la Chastre has leagued you, let Monsieur de la Chastre unleague you, and so
the said tax continues to this day.

I have observed in your Chronicles that it has bin the fate of your English
Kings to be baffled often by petty companions; as Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Cade,
Warbecke and Symnel. A Waspe may sometimes do a shrewd turn to the Eagle, as you
said before; your Island has bin fruitful for Rebellions, for I think there
happened near upon a hundred since the last Conquest, the City of London, as I
remember, in your Story has rebelled seven times at least, and forfeited her
Charter I know not how often, but she bled soundly for it at last, and
commonly, the better your Princes were, the worse your people have been; As the
case stands, I see no way for the King to establish a settled peace, but by
making a fifth Conquest of you; and for London, there must be a way found to
prick that tympany of pride wherewith she swells so much.


Patricius. It Is true, there has bin from time to time many odd Insurrections in
England, but our King gathered a greater strength out of them afterward, the
inconstant people are always accessory to their own miseries: Kings
Prerogatives are like the Ocean, which as the Civilians tell us, if he lose in
one pla^e, he gets ground in another. Cares and Crosses ride behind Kings,
Clouds hang over them. They may be eclypsed a while, but they will shine
afterward with a stronger luster. Our gracious Soverain has passed a kind of
Ordeal, a fiery trial; he while now has bin matriculated and served part of
an Apprentiship in the School of Affliction; I hope God will please shortly to
cancel the Indenture, and restore him to a sweeter liberty then ever. This
Discourse was stopped in the Press by the tyranny of the Times, and not
suffered to see open light till now.


A SOBER and SEASONABLE MEMORANDUM SENT TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP late
Earl of Pembrock, and Montgomery, etc.

To mind Him of the particular Sacred Ties (besides the Common Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy) wereby he was bound to adhere to the King his Liege
Lord and Master.

Presented unto Him in the hottest brunt of the late Civil Wars.

Iuramentum ligamen Conscientiae maximum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

To the Right Honorable, PHILIP Earl of Pembrock, and Montgomery, Knight of
the Bath; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; Gentleman of His
Majesty's Bedchamber, And one of His most Honorable privy Counsel, etc.
My Lord,
THis Letter requires no Apology, much less any pardon, but may expect rather
a good reception and thanks, when your Lordship has seriously perused the
contents, and ruminated well upon the matter it treats of by weighing it in
your second and third thoughts which usually carry with them a greater
advantage of wisdom: It concerns not your body, or temporal estate, but things
reflecting upon the noblest part of you, your soul, which being a beam of
Immortality, and a Type of the Almighty, is incomparably more precious, and
rendereth all other earthly things to be but bables and transitory trifles.
Now, the strongest tie, the solemnest engagement and stipulation that can be
betwixt the soul and her Creator, is an Oath. I do not understand common
tumultuary rash oaths, proceeding from an ill habit, or heat of passion upon
sudden contingencies, for such oaths bind one to naught else but to repentance:
No, I mean serious and legal oaths, taken with a calm prepared spirit, either
for the asserting of truth, and conviction of falsehood, or for fidelity in the
execution of some Office or binding to civil obedience and Loyalty, which is
one of the essential parts of a Christian; Such public oaths legally made
with the Royal assent of the Sovereign from whom they receive both legalitie
and life (else they are invalid and unwarrantable) as they are religious acts
in their own nature, so is the taking and observance of them part of Gods
honor, and there can be nothing more derogatory to the high Majesty and
holiness of his name, nothing more dangerous, destructive and damnable to
humane souls then the infringment and eluding of them, or omission in the
performance of them. Which makes the Turks, of whom Christians in this
particular may learn a tender piece of humanity, to be so cautious, that they
seldom or never administer an oath to Greek, Jew, or any other Nation, and the
reason is, that if the Party sworn does take that Oath upon hopes of some
advantage, or for evading of danger and punishment, and afterward rescinds it,
they think themselves to be involved in the Perjury, and so accessory to his
damnation: Our Civil Law has a Canon consonant to this, which is, Mortale
peccatum est ei praestare juramentum, quem scio verisimiliter violaturum; It Is
a mortal sin to administer an Oath to him who I probably know will break it;
To this may allude another wholesome saying, A false Oath is damnable, a true
Oath dangerous, none at all the safest. How much then have they to answer for,
who of late years have framed such formidable coercive general Oaths to serve
them for engines of State to lay battery to the Consciences and Souls of poor
men, and those without the assent of their Sovereign, and opposite point blank
to former Oaths they themselves had taken: these kind of Oaths the City of
London has swallowed lately in gross, and the Country in detaile, which makes
me confidently believe that if ever that saying of the holy Prophet, The Land
mournes for Oaths, was appliable to any part of the habitable earth, it may be
now applied to this reprobate Island.

But now I come to the maine of my purpose, and to those Oaths your Lordship
has taken before this distracted time, which the world knows, and your
conscience can testify, were diverse; They were all of them solemn, and some of
them Sacramental Oaths (and indeed, every Solemn Oath among the Ancients was
held a Sacrament:) They all employed, and imposed an indispensible fidelity,
Truth and loyalty from you to your Sovereign Prince, your Liege Lord and Master
the King: I will make some instances: Your Lordship took an Oath when Knight of
the Bath to love your Sovereign above all earthly Creatures, and for His Right
and dignity to live and die etc.

By the Oath of Supremacy you swear to bear faith and true allegiance to the
Kings Highness, and to your power to defend all ^urisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and Authorities belonging to his Highness etc.

Your Lordship took an Oath when Privy Counselor, to be a true and faithful
Servant unto Him, and if you knew or understood of any manner of thing to be
attempted, done, or spoken against His Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, or
Dignity, you swore to let, and withstand the same to the uttermost of your
power, and either cause it to be revealed to himself, or to others of His Privy
Counsel; The Oaths you took when Bedchamber man, and L. Chamberlain bind you
as strictly to His Person.

Your Lordship may also call to memory when you were installed Knight of the
Garter, (whereof you are now the oldest living except K* of Denmark) you
solemnly swore to defend the Honor and Quarrels, the Rights and Lordship of
your* Sovereign: Now the Record tells us that the chiefest ground of
instituting the said order by that heroic Prince Edward the Third was, that he
might have choice gallant men, who by Oath and Honor should adhere unto him in
all dangers, and difficulties, and that by way of reciprocation He should
protect and defend them, Which made Alfonso Duke of Calabria so much importune
Henry the Eight to install him one of the Knights of the Garter, that he might
engage King Harry to protect him against Charles the Eighth, who threatened then
the conquest of Naples.

How your Lordship has acquitted your self of the performance of these Oaths,
your conscience (that bosom record) can make the best affidavit; Some of them
oblige you ^o live and dye with King Charles, but what Oaths or any thing like
an Oath binds you to live and die with the House of Commons, as your Lordship
often gives out you will, I am yet to learn: Unless that House which has not
power as much as to administer an Oath (much less to make one) can absolve you
from your former Oaths, or happily by their omnipotence dispense with you for the
observance of them. Touching the Political capacity of the King, I fear that
will be a weak plea for your Lordship before the Tribunal of heaven, and they
who* whisper such Chimeras into your ears, abuse you in gross; but put case
there were such a thing as political capacity distinct from the personal,
which to a true rational man is one of the grossest Bulls that can be, yet
these forementioned Oaths relate most of them merely unto the Kings Person, the
individual Person of King Charles, as you are His Domestic Counselor, and
cubicular Servant.

My Lord, I take leave to tell your Lordship (and the Spectator sees sometimes
more then the Gamester) that the world extremely marvels at you more then
others, and it makes those who wish you best to be transformed to wonder, that
your Lordship should be the first of your Race who deserted the Crown, which one
of your Progenitors said, he would still follow though it were thrown upon an
hedge: Had your Princely Brother ( William Earl of Pembrock) bin living he would
have bin sooner torn by wild horses than have banded against it, or abandoned
the King his Master, and fallen to such gross Idolatry as to worship the Beast
with many heads. The world also stands astonished that you should confederate to
bring into the bowels of the Land, and make Elogiums in some of your Speeches
of that hungry people which have bin from all times so cross and fatal to the
English Nation, and particularly to your own honor: Many thousands do wonder
that your Lordship should be brought to persecute with so much animosity and
hatred that reverend Order in Gods Church (Episcopacy) which is contemporary
with Christianity it self, and whereunto you had once designed, and devoted one
of your dearest Sons so solemnly.

My Lord, if this Monster of Reformation (which is like an infernal Spirit
clad in white, and has a cloven head as well as feet) prevails, you shall
find the same destiny will attend poor England, as did Bohemia which was one of
the flourishingst Kingdoms upon that part of the earth, which happened thus:
The Common people there repind at the Hierarchy and riches of the Church,
thereupon a Parliament was packed where Bishops were abolished, what followed?
The Nobles and Gentry went down next, and afterward the Crown it self, and so
it became a popular confused Anarchicall State, and a Stage of blood a long
time, so that at last, when this Magot had done working in the brains of the
foolish peeple, they were glad to have recourse to Monarchy again after a world
of calamities; though it degenerated from a successive Kingdom to an Elective.
Methinks, my Lord, under favor that those notorious visible judgments which
have fallen upon these Refiners of reformed Religion should unbeguile your
Lordship, and open your eyes: For the hand of heaven never appeared so clearly
in any humane actions: Your Lordship may well remember what became of the
Hothams, and Sir Alexander Carry, who were the two fatal wretches that began
the War first, one in the North, the other in the South, Plymouth and Hull.
Your Lordship may be also pleased to remember what became of Brooks the Lord,
and Hampden, the first whereof was dispatched by a deaf and dumb man out of an
ancient Church (at Litchfield) which he was battering, and that suddenly also,
for he fell down stone dead in the twinkling of an eye; Now, one of the
greatest cavils he had against our Liturgy was a clause of a Prayer there
against sudden death; Besides, the fag end of his Grace in that journey was,
that if the design was not pleasing to God, he might perish in the action: For
the other ( Hampden) he besprinkled with his blood, and received his death upon
the same clod of earth in Buckingham-shire where he had first assembled the
poor Country people like so many Geese to drive them gaggling in a mutiny to
London with the Protestation in their Caps, which has bin since torn in
flitters, and is now grown obsolet and quite out of use. Touching Pym and
Stroud, those two worthy Champions of the Utopian cause, the first being
opened, his stomach and guts were found to be full of pellets of blood, the
other had little or no brain in his skull being dead, and less when he was
living: Touching those who carried the first scandalous Remonstrance (that work
of night and the verdict of a starved jury) to welcome the King from Scotland,
they have bin since (your Lordship knows well) the chief of the Eleven Members
impeached by the House. And now they are a kind of Runnagates beyond the Seas,
scorned by all mankind, and baffled every where, yea, even by the Boors of
Holland, and not daring to peep in any populous Town but by owle-light.

Moreover, I believe your Lordship has good cause to remember that the same
kind of riotous Rascals, which rabbled the K. out of Town, did drive away the
Speaker in like manner with many of their Memberships (amongst whom your
Lordship was fairly on his way,) to seek shelter of their Janissaries the
Redcoats: Your Lordship must needs find what deadly fewds fall daily 'twix^ the
Presbyterian and the Independent, the two fiery brands that have put this poor
Isle so long in combustion. But it is worthy your Lordships special notice how
your dear Brethren the Scots (whom your Lordship so highly magnified in some of
your public Speeches) who were at first brought in for Hirelings against the
King for them, offer themselves now to come in against them for the King: Your
Lordship cannot be ignorant of the sundry clashes that have bin 'twixt the City
and their Memberships, and 'twixt their Memberships and their men of War or
Military Officers, who have often waved and disobeyed their commands: How this
tatterdimallian Army has reduced this cowed City, the cheated Country, and
their once all-commanding Masters, to a perfect pass of slavery, to a true
Asinin condition; They crow over all the ancient Nobility and Gentry of the
Kindom, though there be not found amongst them all but two Knights; and it is
well known there be hundreds of private Gentlemen in the Kingdom, the poorest of
whom, is able to buy this whole Host with the General himself and all the
Commanders: But it is not the first time, that the Kings and Nobility of England
have bin baffled by petty companions: I have read of Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, and
Ket the Tanner, with diverse others that did so, but being suppressed it tended
to the advantage of the King at last; and what a world of examples are there in
our story, that those Noblemen who banded against the Crown, the revenge of
heaven ever found them out early or late at last.

These, with a black cloud of reciprocal judgments more, which have come home
to these Reformers very doors, show that the hand of divine justice is in it,
and the holy Prophet tells us, When Gods judgments are upon earth, then the
inhabitants shall learn justice.

Touching your Lordship in particular, you have not, under favor, escaped
without some already, and I wish more may not follow; your Lordship may
remember you lost one Son at Bridgenorth, your dear Daughter at Oxford, your
Son-in-Law at Newbury, your Daughter-in-Law at the Charter House of an infamous
disease, how sick your Eldest son has bin; how part of your house was burnt in
the Country, with others which I will not now mention.

I will conclude this point with an observation of the most monstrous number of
Witches that have swarmed since these Wars against the King, more (I dare say)
then have bin in this Island since the Devil tempted Eve; for in two Counties
only, viz. Suffolk and Essex, there have bin near upon three hundred arraigned,
and eightscore executed (as I have it from the Clerks of the Peace of those
Counties;) what a barbarous devilish office one had, under color of
examination, to torment poor silly women with watchings, pinchings and other
artifices to find them for Witches: How others called spirits by a new
invention of villainy were connived at for seizing upon young children, and
(...) them on shipboard, where having their (...) they were so transformed that
their (...) could not know them, and so were carried over for new schismatic
Plantations to New England and other Seminaries of Rebellion. My Lord, there is
no villainy that can enter into the imagination of man has bin left here
uncommitted; no crime from the highest Treason to the meanest Trespass, but
these Reformers are guilty of. What horrid acts of prophanes have bin
perpetrated up and down! the Monuments of the dead have bin rifled! Horses have
bin watered at the Church Font, and fed upon the holy Table! Widows, Orphans,
and Hospitals have bin commonly robbed, and Gods House has bin plundered more
then any! with what infandous blasphemies have Pulpits rung! one crying out,
that this Parliament was as necessary for our Reformation, as the coming of
Christ was for our Redemp^ion: Another belching out, that if God Almighty did
not prosper this Cause, 'twere fitting he should change places with the Devil:
Another, that the worst thing our Savoour did, was the making of the Dominical
prayer, and saving the Thief upon the Cross. O immortal God, is it possible
that England should produce such Monsters, or rather such infernal fiends shaped
with humane bodies! yet your Lordship sides with these men, though they be
enemies to the Cross, to the Church, and to the very name of Jesus Christ; I Will
instance only in two who were esteemed the Oracles of this holy Reformation,
Petrs, and Saltmarsh; The first is known by thousands to be an infamous,
juggling and scandalous villain, among other feats, he got the Mother and
Daughter with Child, as it was offered to be publicly proved; I could speak
much of the other, but being dead, let it suffice that he dyed mad and
desperate, yet these were accounted the two Apostles of the times.

My Lord, it is high time for you to recollect your self, to enter into the
private closet of your thoughts, and summon them all to counsel upon your
pillow; consider well the slavish condition your dear Country is in, weigh well
the sad case your liege Lord and Master is in, how he is bereaved of his Queen,
His Children, His Servants, His Liberty, His Chaplains, and of every thing in
which there is any comfort; observe well, how nevertheless, God Almighty works
in Him by inspiring Him with equality and calmnesse of mind, with patience,
prudence and constancy, How He makes His very Crosses to stoop unto Him, when
His Subjects will not: Consider the monstrousness of the Propositions that are
tendered him, wherein no less then Crown, Scepter, and Sword, which are things
in-alienable from Majesty, are in effect demanded, nay, they would have him
transmit, and resign his very intellectuals unto them, not only so, but they
would have him make a sacrifice of his soul, by forcing him to violate that
solemn sacramental Oath he took at his Coronation when he was no Minor, but
come to a full maturity of reason and judgment: make it your own case, My
Lord, and that is the best way to judge of His: Think upon the multiplicity of
solemn astringing Oaths your Lordship has taken, most whereof directly and
solely enjoyne faith and loyalty to his Person; oh my Lord! wrong not your
soul so much, in comparison of whom your body is but a rag of rottenness.

Consider that acts of loyalty to the Crown are the fairest columns to bear up
a Noblemans name to future ages, and register it in the temple of immortality.
Reconcile your self therefore speedily unto your liege Lord and Master, think
upon the infinite private obligations you have had both to Sire and Son: The
Father kissed you often, kiss you now the Sun lest he be too angry; And Kings,
you will find, my Lord, are like the Sun in the heavens, which may be clouded
for a time, yet he is still in his sphere, and will break out again and shine
as gloriously as ever; Let me tell your Lordship that the people begin to grow
extreme weary of their Physicians, they find the remedy to be far worse then
their former disease; nay they stick not to call some of them mere Quacksalvers
rather then Physicians; Some go further, and say they are no more a Parliament
then a Pye-powder Court at Bartholmew-Fair, there being all the essential parts
of a true Parliament wanting in this, as fairness of elections, freedom of
speech, fullness of Members, nor have they any head at all; besides, they have
broken all the fundamental rules, and Privileges of Parliament, and
dishonored that high Court more then any thing else: They have ravished Magna
Charta which they are sworn to maintain, taken away our birthright thereby, and
transgressed all the laws of heaven and earth: Lastly, they have most
perjuriously betrayed the trust the King reposed in them, and no less the
trust their Country reposed in them, so that if reason and law were now in
date, by the breach of their Privileges, and by betraying the said double
trust that is put in them, they have dissolved themselves ipso facto I cannot
tell how many thousand times, notwithstanding that monstrous grant of the
Kings, that fatal act of continuance: And truly, my Lord, I am not to this day
satisfied of the legality (though I am satisfied of the forciblenesse of that
Act) whether it was in his Majesty's power to pass it or no; for the law ever
presupposes these clauses in all concessions of Grace, in all Patents,
Charters, and Grants whatsoever the King passes, Salvo jure regio, salvo jure
coronae.

To conclude, as I presume to give your Lordship these humble cautions and
advice in particular, so I offer it to all other of your rank, office, order
and Relations, who have souls to save, and who by solemn indispensable Oaths
have engaged themseves to be true and loyal to the Person of King Charles.
Touching his political capacity, it is a fancy which has bin exploded in all
other Parliaments except in that mad infamous Parliament where it was first
hatched; That which bears upon Record the name of Insanum Parliamentum to all
posterity, but many Acts have passed since that, it should be high and horrible
Treason to separat or distinguish the Person of the King from His Power; I
believe, as I said before, this distinction will not serve their turn at the
dreadful Bar of divine justice in the other world: indeed that Rule of the
Pagans makes for them, Si Iusjurandum violandum est, Tyrannis causa violandum
est, If an Oath be any way violable, it is to get a Kingdom: We find by woeful
experience that according to this maxim they have made themselves all Kings by
violation of so many Oaths; They have monopoliz'd the whole power and wealth of
the Kingdom in their own hands; they cut, shuffle, deal, and turn up what trump
they please, being Judges and parties in every thing.

My Lord, he who presents these humble advertisments to your Lordship, is one
who is inclined to the Parliament of Engl. in as high a degree of affection as
possibly a freeborn Subject can be; One besides, who wishes your Lordships
good, with the preservation of your safety and honor more really then he whom
you entrust with your secretest affairs, or the White Jew of the Upper House,
who has infused such pernicious principles into you; moreover, one who has
some drops of blood running in his veins, which may claim kindred with your
Lordship: and lastly, he is one who would kiss your feet, in lieu of your
hands, if your Lordship would be so sensible of the most desperate case of your
poor Country, as to employ the interests, the opinion and power you have to
restore the King your Master by English ways, rather then a hungry foreign
people, who are like to bring nothing but destruction in the van, confusion in
the rear, and rapine in the middle, should have the honor of so glorious a work.

So humbly hoping your Lordship will not take with the left hand, what I offer
with the right, I rest,

From the Prison of the Fleet 3. Septembris 1644. Your Lordships truly devoted
Servant. I. H.

HIS Late MAJESTY'S Royal DECLARATION, OR MANIFESTO TO ALL FOREIGN PRINCES AND
STATES, Touching his constancy in the Protestant Religion.

Being traduced abroad by some Malicious and lying Agents, That He was wavering
therein, and upon the high road of returning to Rome.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

TO THE Unbiased REDER.
IT may be said that mischief in one particular has something of Virtue in it,
which is, That the Contrivers and Instruments thereof are still stirring and
watchful. They are commonly more pragmaticall and fuller of Devices then those
sober-minded men, who while they go on still in the plain road of Reason,
having the King, and known Laws to justify and protect them, hold themselfs
secure enough, and so think no hurt; Judas eyes were open to betray his Master,
while the rest of his fellow servants were quietly asleep.

The Members at Westminster were men of the first gang, for their Mischievous
brains were always at work how to compass their ends; And one of their prime
policies in order thereunto was to cast asspersions on their King, thereby to
alienat the affections and fidelity of his peeple from him ^notwithstanding
that besides their pub^ick Declarations they made new Oaths and protestations,
whereby they swore to make Him the best beloved King that ever was;) Nor did
this Diabolical malice terminat only within the bounds of his own Dominions,
but it extended to infect other Princes and States of the Reformed Churches
abroad to make Him suspected in his Religion, and that he was branling in his
belief, and upon the high way to Rome; To which purpose they sent missives and
clandestine Emissaries to diverse places beyond the Seas, whereof foreign Authors
make mention in their writings.

At that time when this was in the height of action, the passage from London to
Oxford, where the King kept then his Court, was so narrowly blockd up, that a
fly could scarce pass; some Ladies of honor being searched in an unseemly and
barbarous manner; whereupon the penner of the following Declaration, finding
his Royal master to be so grossly traduced, made his Duty to go beyond all
presumptions, by causing the said Declaration to be printed and published in
Latin, French and English, whereof great numbers were sent beyond the seas to
France, Holland, Germany, Suisserland, Denmark, Swethland, and to the English
plantations abroad, to vindicat his Majesty in this point, which produced very
happy and advantageous effects for Salmtisius, and other forrin writers of
great esteem speak of it in their printed works. The Declaration was as
follows.

CAROLUS,
Singulari Omnipotentis Dei providentia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc. Universis et singulis qui praesens hoc
scriptum ceu protestationem inspexerint, potissimum Reformatae Religionis
cultoribus cujuscunque sint gentis, gradus, aut conditionis, salutem, etc.

CUM ad aures nostras non ita pridem fama pervenerit, sinistros quosdam
rumores, literasque politica vel perniciosa potius quorundam industria sparsas
esse, and nonnullis protestantium ecclesiis in exteris partibus emissas, nobis
esse animum and consilium ab illa Orthodoxa Religione quam ab incunabulis
imbibimus, and ad hoc usque momentum per integrum vitae nostrae curriculum
amplexi sumus recedendi; and Papismum in haec Regna iterum introducendi, Quae
conjectura, ceu nefanda potius calumnia nullo prorsus nixa vel imaginabili
fundamento horrendos hosce tumultus, and rabiem plusquam belluinam in Anglia
suscitavit sub pretextu cujusdam (chimericae) Reformationis regimini,
legibusque hujus Dominii non solum incongruae, sed incompatibilis: VOLUMUS,
uttoti Christiano Orbi innotescat, ne minimam quidem animum nostrum incidisse
cogitatiunculam hoc aggrediendi, aut transversum unguem ab illa Religione
discedendi quam cum corona, septroque hujus regni solenni, and sacramentali
juramento tenemur profiteri, protegere and propugnare. Nectantum constantissima
nostra praxis, and quotidiana in exercitiis praefa^ae Religionis praesentia,
cum crebris in facie nostrorum agminum asseverationibus, publicisque procerum
hujus Regni testimoniis, and sedula in regiam nostram sobolem educando
circumspectione (omissis plurimis aliis argumentis) luculentissime hoc
demonstrat, sed etiam faelicissimum illud matrimonium quod inter nostram
primogenitam, and illustrissimum principem (...) sponte contraximus, idem
fortissime attestatur: Quo nuptiali faedere insuper constat, nobis non esse
propositum illam profiteri solummodo, sed expandere, and corroborare quantum in
nobis situm est.

Hanc sacrosanctam Anglicanae Christi Ecclesiae Religionem, tot Theologorum
convocationibus sancitam, tot comitiorum edictis confirmatam, tot Regiis
Diplomatibus stabilitam, una cum regimine Ecclesiastico, and Liturgia ei
annexa, quam liturgiam, regimenque celebriores protestantium Authors tam
Germani, quam Galli, tam Dani quam Helvetici, tam Batavi, quam Bohemi multis
elogiis nec sine quadam invidia in suis publicis scrip^is comproban^ and
applaudunt, ut in transactionibus Dordrechtanae Synodus, cui nonnulli nostrorum
praesulum, quorum Dignitati debi^a prestita fuit reverentia, interfuerunt,
apparet Istam, inquimus Religionem, quam Regius noster pater (beatissimae
memoriae) in illa celeberrima fidei suae Confessione omnibus Christianis
principibus (ut and haec praesens nostra protestatio exhibita) public asserit:
Istam, istam Religionem solenniter protestamur, Nos integram, sartam-tectam,
and inviolabilem conservaturos, and pro virili nostro (divino adjuvante Numine)
usque ad extremam vitae nostrae periodum protecturos, and omnibus nostris
Ecclesiasticis pro muneris nostri, and supradicti sacrosancti juramenti ratione
doceri, and praedicari curaturos. Quapropter injungimus and in mandatis damus
Omnibus ministris nostris in exteris partibus tam Legatis, quam Residentibus,
Agentibusque and nunciis, reliquisque nostris subditis ubicunque Orbis
Christiani terrarum aut curiositatis aut comercii gracia degentibus, hanc
solennem and sinceram nostram protestationem, quandocunque sese obtulerit loci
and temporis oportunitas, communicare, asserere, asseverare.

Dat. in Academia et Civitate nostra Oxoniensi pridie Idus Maii, 1644.
CHARLES by the special Providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc. To all who profess the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, of what Nation, degree, and condition soever they
be to whom this present Declaration shall come, Greeting.

Whereas We are given to understand, that many false rumors, and scandalous
letters are spread up and down amongst the Reforme^ Churches in foreign parts by
the Pollitick, or rather the pernicious industry of some ill-affected persons,
that we have an inclination to recede from that Orthodox Religion, which we
were born, baptized, and bred in, and which We have firmly professed and
practiced throughout the whole course of our life to this moment, and that We
intend to give way to the introduction, and public exercise of Popery again in
Our Dominions: Which conjecture or rather most detestable calumny, being
grounded upon no imaginable foundation, has raised these horrid tumults, and
more then barbarous wars throughout this flourishing Island, under pretext of a
kind of Reformation, which would not only prove incongruous, but incompatible
with the fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, We do desire that the
whole Christian world should take notice and rest assured, that We never
entertained in Our imagination the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to
depart a jot from that holy Religion, which when We received the Crown and
Scepter of this Kingdom, We took a most solemn Sacramental Oath to profess and
protect. Nor does Our most constant practice and quotidian visible presence in
the exercise of this sole Religion, with so many Asseverations in the head of
Our Armies, and the public attestation of Our Barons, with the circumspection
used in the education of our Royal Offspring, besides diverse other undeniable
Arguments, only demonstrate this; But also that happy Alliance of Marriage, We
contracted 'twixt Our eldest Daughter, and the Illustrious Prince of Orange,
most clearly confirms the reality of Our intentions herein; by which Nuptial
engagement it appears further, that Our endeavors are not only to make a bare
profession thereof in Our own Dominions, but to enlarge and corroborate it
abroad as much as lies in Our Power: This most holy Religion of the Anglican
Church, ordained by so many Convocations of learned Divines, confirmed by so
many Acts of National Parliaments, and strengthened by so many Royal
Proclamations, together with the Ecclesiastic discipline, and Liturgy thereunto
appertaining, which Liturgy and discipline, the most eminent of Protestant
Authors, as well Germans as French; as well Danes as Swedes and Swittzens; as
well Belgians as Bohemians, do with many Elogies (and not without a kind of
Envy) approve and applaud in their public Writings, particularly in the
transactions of the Synod of Dort, wherein besides other of Our Divines (who
afterward were Prelates) one of our Bishops assisted, to whose dignity all due
respects and precedence was given: This Religion We say, which Our Royal Father
of blessed memory does publicly assert in His famous Confession addres'd, as
we also do this our Protestation, to all Christian Princes; This, this most
holy Religion, with the Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, We solemnly protest, that
by the help of Almighty God, we will endeavor to Our utmost power, and last
period of our life, to keep entire and inviolable, and will be careful,
according to Our duty to Heaven, and the tenor of the aforesaid most sacred
Oath at Our Coronation, that all Our Ecclesiastics in their several degrees
and incumbences shall preach and practice the same. Wherefore We enjoin and
command all Our Ministers of State beyond the Seas, as well Ambassadors as
Residents, Agents, and Messengers, And We desire all the rest of Our loving
subjects that sojourn either for curiosity or commerce in any foreign parts, to
communicate, uphold and assert this Our solemn and sincere protestation when
opportunity of time and place shall be offered.

CHARLES, par la Providence de Dieu Roy de la grand' Bretagne, de France, et d'
Irlande, Defenseur de la Foy, etc. A tous ceux qui ceste present Declaration
verront, particulierement a Ceux de la Religion Reformee de quelque Nation,
degreou condition qu'ils soient, Salut.

AYant receu advis de bonne main que plusieurs faux rapports and lettres sont
esparses parmi les Eglises Reformees de la la mer, par la politic, ou
plustost la pernicieuse industry de persons mal affectionnes a nostre
government; que nous auons dessein a receder de celle Religion que Nous auons
profess and pratique tout le temps de nostre vie iusques a present; and de
vouloir introduire la papaute derechef en nos Dominions, Laquelle conjecture,
ou calumny plustost, appuyee sur null fundement imaginable, a suscite ces
horribles tumultes and allume le feu d' une tressanglante guerre en tous les
quatre coins de ceste fleurissante Monarchy, soubs pretexte d' une (
chymerique) Reformation, la quelle seroit incompatible avec le government and
les loix fondementales de ce Royaume.

Nous Desi^ons, quil soit notoire a tout le monde, que la moindre pensee de ce
fair n^ a pas entree en nostre imagination, de departir ancunement de cell'
Orthodoxe Religion, qu' auec la Couronne and le scepter de ce Royaume Nous
sommes tenus par un serment solennel and sacramentaire a proteger and defendre.
Ce qu' appert non seulement par nostre quotidienne presence es Exercies de la
dite Religion, avec, tan^ d' asseverations a la test de nos Armees, and la
publicque Attestation de nos Barons, avec le soin que nous tenons en la
nourrituredes princes and princesses nos ensans, Mais le tres-heureux marriage
que nous avons conclu enter la nostre plus aisnee, and le tres-illustrie prince
d' Orange en est encore un tres-evident tesmoignage, par la quell' alliance il
appert aussy, que nostre desir est de n' en fair pas vne nue profession
seulement dicelle, mais de la vouloir estendre and corroberer autant qu' il
nous est possible: Cest' Orthodoxe Religion de leglise Anglicane Ordonnee par
tant de conventione de Teologues, confirmee par tant de arrests d' Parliament,
and fortify par tant d' Edicts royaux auec la discipline and la Lyturgi^ a
elle appartenant, laquelle discipline and Lyturgie les plus celebres Autheurs
Protestants, tant Francois, qu' Allemands; tant Seudois que Suisses, tant
Belgiens que Bohemiens approuent entierement and non sans quelqu envy en leur
escrits particulierement en la Synod de Dort, ou un de nos Euesques assistoit,
and la Reverence and precedence deue a sa dignite Ecclesi^stique luy fut
exactement rendue: Ceste tres-sainte Religion que nostre feu pere de
^res-heureuse memoire aduoue en sa celebre Confession de la Foy addressee come
nous faisons ceste Declaration a tous Princes Chrestiens; Nous Protestons que
moyennant la grace de Dieu, nous tascherone de conseruer ceste Religion
inviolable, and en son entier selon la mesure de puissance que Dieu amiss enter
nos mains; Et nous requerons and commandons a tous nos ministres d' estat tant
Ambassadeurs, que Residens, Agens ou messagers, and a tous autres nos subjects
qui fontleurseiour es paysestrangers de communiquer, maintenir and adouuer
cestenostre solennelle Protestation toutes fois and quantes que l' ocasion se
presentera.

APOLOGS, OR FABLES MYTHOLOGIZ'D.

Out of whose Moralls the State and History of the late unhappy Distractions in
Great Britain and Ireland may be Extracted;

Some of which Apologs have proved PROPHETICAL.

-- Nil est nisi Fabula Mundus. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

To my Honored and known friend Sir I. C. Knight.
SIR,
AMongst many other Barbarismes which like an impetuous Torrent have lately
rushed in upon us, The interception and opening of Letters is none of the
least, For it has quite bereft all ingenious Spirits of that correspondency
and sweet communication of fancy, which has bin always esteemed the best fuel
of affection, and the very marrow of friendship. And truly, in my judgment,
this custom may be termed not only a Barbarism, but the ba^est kind of
Burglary that can be, it is a plundering of the very brain, as is spoken in
another place.

We are reduced here to that servile condition, or rather to such a height of
slavery, that we have nothing left which may entitle us free Rational
creatures; the thought it self cannot say it is free, much less the tongue or
pen. Which makes me impart unto You the traverses of these turbulent times,
under the following fables. I know you are an exquisite Astronomer. I know the
deep inspection you have in all parts of Philosophy, I know you are a good
Herald, and I have found in your Library sundry books of Architecture, and
Comments upon Vitruvius. The unfolding of these Apologues will put you to it in
all these, and will require* your second, if not your third thoughts, and when
you have concocted them well, I believe, (else I am much deceived in your
Genius) they will afford you some entertainment, and do the errand upon which
they are sent, which is, to communicate unto you the most material passages of
this longed-for Parliament, and of these sad confusions which have so unhinged,
distorted, transvers'd, tumbled and dislocated all things, that England may be
termed now, in comparison of what it was, no other then an Anagram of a
Kingdom. One thing I promise you, in the perusal of these Parables, that you
shall find no gingles in them, or any thing sordid or scurrilous, the common
dialect and disease of these times. So I leave you to the guard and guidance,

Of God and Virtue who do still advance
Their Favorits, maugre the frowns of Chance.
Your constant servant, I. H.

The great CONJUNCTION, OR, Parliament of STARS.
UPon a time, the Stars complained to Apollo, that he displayed his beams too
much upon some malignant Planets; That the Moon had too great a share of his
influence, and that he was carried away too much by her motion: They complained
also, that the constellation of Libra (which holds the balance of Justice) had
but a dim light, and that the Astrean Court was grown altogether destructive,
with diverse other grievances. Apollo hereupon, commanded Mercury to summon a
general Synod, where some out of every Asterisme throughout the whole
Firmament were to meet; Apollo told them, I am placed here by the finger of the
Almighty, to be Monarch of the sky, to be the Measurer of Time, and I go upon
his errand round about the worl^ every four and twenty hours: I am also the
Fountain of Heat and Light, which, though I use to dispense and diffuse in
equal proportions through the whole Universe; yet there is difference 'twixt
objects, a Castle has more of my light then a Cottage, and the Cedar has more
of me then the Shrub, according to the common axiom, Quicquid recipitur,
recipitur ad modum recip^entis. But touching the Moon, (the second great
Luminary) I would have you know, that she is dearest unto me, therefore let
none repine that I cherish her with my beams, and confer more light on her then
any other. Touching the malignant Planets, or any other Star, of what magnitude
soever, that moves not in a regular motion, or has run any excentrick
exorbitant course, or that would have made me to move out of the Zodiak, I put
them over unto you, that upon due legal examination and proof, they may be
unspher'd or extinguished. But I would have this done with moderation; I would
have you to keep as near as you can between the Tropiques and temperate Zones:
I would have things reduced to their true Principles, I would have things
reformed, not ruined; I would have the spirit of malice and lying, the spirit
of partiality and injustice, the spirit of tyranny and rigor, the base spirit
of fear and jealousy to be far from this glorious Syderean Synod; I would
have all private interests reflecting upon revenge or profit, to be utterly
banished hence: Moreover, I would not have you to make grievances, where no
grievances are, or dangers where no dangers are. I would have no creation of
dangers; I would have you to husband time as parsimoniously as you can, lest by
keeping too long together, and amusing the world with such tedious hopes of
redress of grievances, you prove your self the greatest grievance at last, and
so from Stars become Comets: Lastly, I would have you be cautious how you
tamper with my Sovereign power, and chop Logic with me in that point; you
know what became of Him who once presumed to meddle with my Chariot. Hereupon
the whole Host of Heaven being constellated thus into one great Body, fell into
a serious deliberation of things, and Apollo himself continued his presence,
and sat often amongst them in his full luster, but in the mean time, whilst
they were in the midst of their consultations, many odd Aspects, Oppositions
and Conjunctions happened between them: for some of the Sporades, but specially
those mongrel small vulgar stars, which make up the Galaxia (the milkie way in
Heaven) gather in a tumultuous disorderly manner about the body of Apollo, and
commit many strange insolences, which caused Apollo (taking young Phosphorus
the Morning Star with him) to retire himself, and in a just indignation to
withdraw his Light from the Synod: so all began to be involved in a strange
kind of confusion and obscurity; they groaped in the dark, not knowing which
way to move, or what course to take, all things went Cancer-like retrograde,
because the Sun detained his wonted light and irradiations from them.

MORAL.
Such as the Sun is in the Firmament, a Monarch is in his Kingdom: for, as the
Wisest of men says, In the light of the Kings Countenance there is life; and I
believe that to be the Moral of this Astrean Fable. (...). OR, The Great
Council of BIRDS.
UPon a time the Birds met in Council, for redress of some extravagancies that
had flown unto the volatill Empire; Nor was it the first time that Birds met
thus; for the Phrygian Fabler tells us of diverse meetings of theirs: And after
him we read that Apollonius Thyaneus, undertook the interpretation of their
language, and to be their Drogoman.

They thus assembled in one Great Covie by the call of the Eagle their
unquestioned hereditary King, and by virtue of his Royal Authority, complaints
were brought, that diverse Cormorants and Harpies, with other Birds of prey, had
got in amongst them, who did much annoy and invade the public liberty: sundry
other Birds were questioned, which caused some to take a timely Finch, etc.
flight into another air.

As they were thus consulting for advancement of the common good, many
Mechanics* Mariners.
Rooks, Horn-Owles and Sea-Gulls flocked together, and ^luttered about the
place they were assembled in, where they kept a hideous noise, and committed
many outrages, and nothing cold satisfy them, but the Griffons head, which was
therefore chopped off, and offered up as a sacrifice (...) Stra^.
to make them leave their chattering, and to appease their fury for the time.

They fell foul afterward upon the Pies, who were used to be much reverenced,
Bishops.
and to sit upon the highest perch in that great Assembly: they called them I
dolatrous and inauspitious Birds, they hated their mixed color, repined at
their long train, they tore their white feathers, and were ready to peck out
their very eyes: they did what they could to put them in Owls feathers (as the
poor Sheep was in the Woolfs skin) to make them the more hated, and to be
star'd and hooted at whersoever they passed. The Pies being thus scared,
presented a Petition to the royal Eagle, and to this his great Counsel, that
they might be secured to repair safely thither to sit and consult, according
to the ancient Laws of the Volatill Empire continued so many ages without
controllment or question: in which Petition they inserted a Protest or Caveat,
that no public act should pass in the interim. This Supplication, both for
matter and form, was excepted against, and cried up to be high Treason,
specially that indefinite Protest they had made, that no Act whatsoever should
be of any validity without them, which was alleged to derogate from the High
Law-making power of that Great Counsel, and tended to retard and disturb the
great Affairs which were then in agitation: so the poor Pies, as if by that
Petition they had like the Blackbird voided Lime to catch themselves,
(according to the Proverb, Turdus cacat sibi malum) were suddenly hurryed away
into a Cage, and after ten long Months canvassing of the point, they were
unpearch'd, and rendered for ever incapable to be Members of that Court, they
were struck dumb and voice-less, and suddenly as it were blown up away thence,
though without any force of powder, as once was plotted aginst them. But this
was done when a thin number of the adverse Birds had kept still together, and
stuck close against them, and also after that the Bill concerning them had bin
once ejected, which they humbly conceived by the ancient order of that Court
could not be readmitted in the same Session. They Petitioned from the place
they were cooped in, that for heavens sake, for the honor of that noble
Counsel, for Truth and Justice sake, they ^eing as freeborn Denisons of the
aerie Region, as any other Volatills whatsoever, their charge might be
perfected, that so they might be brought to a legal trial, and not forced to
languish in such captivity. They pleaded to have done nothing but what they had
precedents for: And touching the Caveat they had inserted, it was a thing
unusual in every inferior Court of Judicature, and had they forborne to have
done it, they had betrayed their own nest, and done wrong to their successors.
It was affirmed they had bin Members of that Body politic, long before those
lower pearch'd Birds, who now would cast them out; and that they had bin their
best friends to introduce them to have any thing do do in that general
Counsel: they prayed they might not be so cruelly used, as the Solan goose,
and Sco^.
Redshanke had used them, who were not content to brail and clip their wings
only, but to ^ear them so, that they should never grow again; to handle them so
unmercifully, was not the way to make their adversaries Birds of Paradise: in
fine, they advised them to remember what the sick Kite's Mother answered him,
when he desired her to pray to the Gods for him, How can thou, said she,
expect any good from the Gods, whose Temples thou have so violated? At last,
upon the importunity and pitifulness of their Petitions, the accusation of
Treason, which kept such a noise at first, being declined against them, they
were released in the morning, but cooped up again before night: and after the
revolution of four full Moons, they were restored again to a conditional
liberty, under which they remain till this day.

There wants not some, who affirm, that in that Great Counsel of Birds, there
were some Decoys (and it is well known where Decoys were first bred) who called
in, not only these mongrill obstreperous Birds from abroad to commit such
outrages as were spoken of before, but drew after them also many of the
greatest Birds, who sat in that Assembly, to follow them whither they listed:
Others, who were of a more generous extraction, disdained to be such Buzzards,
as to be carried away hood-wincked in that manner, to be Birds of their
feather. Thus a visible faction was hatched in this great Counsel, as if the
said Decoyes had disgorged and let fall some grains of Hemlock seeds amongst
them to distemper their brains. Or, as if some Spinturnix, that fatal
incendiary Bird, or some ill-boding Scritch-Owle, which as stories tell us
appeared once at Rome, in a famous, though unfortunate great Counsel (when
there was a schism in the Popedom) had appeared likewise here. There wanted not
also amongst them some Amphibious Birds, as the Barnacle, which is neither Fish
nor Foul; and the cunning Ba^t, who sometimes professes himself a Bird,
sometimes a Mouse. I will not say there were any Paphlagonian Birds amongst
them, who are known to have double hearts. But it is certain, that in this
confusion there were some malevolent Birds, and many of them so young, that they
were scarce fledged, who like the Waspe in the Fable, conspired to fire the
Eagles nest, (and a Wasp may sometimes do mischief to an Eagle as a Mouse to an
Elephant.) Moreover some of these light brained Birds flew so high, that they
seemed to arrogate to themselves, and exercise royal power, but foolishly; for
we know what became of the Crow upon the Ram's back, when she thought to
imitate the Eagle: And as it was observed that they were most eager to attempt
those high insolensies against Jove's Bird, who had bin stark naked, and as
bare as Cootes, unless he had feathered them; so that the little Ant was more
grateful to Esops Bird; then those Birds were to the Eagle their liege Lord and
Master. But the highborn Bird with the two golden wings, the noble Faulcons,
the Martlets, the Ravens, M. Heart. E. South. E. Westminster. E. Worce. E. Dover.
Wales. Digbies.
the Swan, the Chough, and all the ancient Birds of the Mountains remained
faithful and firm to the Eagle, and scorned to be carried away by such Decoyes;
As also the generous Ostriches, who unless they had had an extraordinary
stomach, could not have digested such iron pills as were offered them. Amongst
other great Birds which banded against the Eagle, the flying Dragons, Green and
White, E. Pemb. E Wa^w.
were busy, specially the White; And for the Green, considering he was an
ancient Bird of the Mountains, and that his Progenitors had bin so renowned for
their rare loyaly to the Crown, every one wondered that he should be drawn so
far by the forefaid Decoyes, as to be the first of his race that should clap his
wings against his Soverain Liege Lord.

The aforesaid destractions continued still, and increased more and more in
that general convolation of Birds; therefore the Turtle would stay there no
longer, there was so much gall amongst them: the Pelecan flew away, he saw Piety
so vilified; the Dove was weary of their company, she found no simplicity and
plain dealing amongst them: And the Kings* Fisher, the Halcyon (the Emblem of
Peace) quite forsook Arondelle.
them, he found so mnch jarring, dissentions, and bandings on all sides; the
Swallow also, who had so ancient and honorable a rank amongst them, got into
another air, he foresaw the weather was like to so be foul: And lastly,
Philomela, the Queen Her Majesty.
of Volatills, who was partner of the Eagle's nest, abandoned them quite, and
put a Sea 'twixt her and them; nay, the Eagle himself withdrew his royal
presence from them; so the Decoyes aforesaid carried all before them, and
comported themselves by their Orders in that hight, as if like the Lapwing,
every one had a Crown on his head; they so enchanted in a manner, all the
common sort of Oppidan, rural, and Sea-birds, and infused such a credulity
into them, that they believed them to have an inerring spirit, and what came
from them, was as true as the Pentateuch: Moreover, it was shrewdly suspected,
that there was a pernicious plot amongst them to let in the Stork, who is never
seen to stay long in any Monarchy.

MORAL.
Moderation is that Goden Rule whereby all Great Counsels should square their
deliberations, and nothing can tend more to their Honor or dishonor, in point
of Wisdom: Moreover, in a Successive hereditary Monarchy, when subjects assume
Regal Power, when they bar the Holy Church of her Rights, and of that
Reverence which is due to her chief Professors, it is the most compendious way
to bring all things to confusion, and consequently to an inevitable ruin, or
some fatal Change. And this I hold to be the chiefest Moral of this Apologue of
Birds.

(...), The gathering together, or Parliament of FLOWERS.
UPon a time, The Flowers assembled, and met in one general Counsel, by the
authority and summons of the Sovereign Rose, their undoubted natural King, who
had taken the Lilly for his royal spouse. The dew of heaven fell plentifully
upon this happy conjunction, which made them to Bourgeon, to propagate and
prosper exceedingly, in so much, that the sweet fragrant odor which they did
cast, diffused it self over all the earth. To this meeting came the Violet,
Gilliflower, the Rosemary, the Tulyp, Lavender and Thyme, the Cinquefoyle
(though of a foreign growth) had an M. Hamilt.
honorable rank amongst them, and as some observed, got too much credit with
the royal Rose. The Flowers of the field were admitted also to this great
Counsel: the Couslip, the Honysukle and Daisie had their Delegates there
present, to consult of a Reformation of certain abuses which had taken rooting
in the Common wealth of Flowers, and being all under the Rose, they had
privilege to speak all things with freedom; Complaints were made that much
Cockle and Darnell, with other noxious Herbs and tares were crept in amongst
them, that the Poppie did pullulat too much, with diverse other grievances: The
success of this Senate, this great Bed or Posie of living Flowers, was like to
prove very prosperous, but that the herb Briony, Wormwood, Wolfbane, Rue, and
Melampod (the emblems of Sedition, Malice, Fear, Ambition and Jealousy)
thrust in amongst them, and much distempered their proceedings: These brought
in with them the Bur, which exceedingly retarded and Scot.
entangled all businesses; and it was thought that the Thistle was too meddling
amongst them, which made matters grow to that acrimony and confusion, as if the
herb Morsus diaboli had got in amongst them. Amongst many other good-morrows,
they propounded to the Rose, that he should part with his prickles, and
transmit his strength that way to be disposed of by them; the Royal Rose liked
not this bold request of theirs, though couched in very smooth language, but
answered, I have hitherto condescended to every thing you have propounded, much
more then* any of my Predecessors ever did; but touching these prickles, which
God and nature has given me, and are inherent in me and my stock from the
beginning, though they be but excressencies, yet you know they fortify and arm
me, Armat Spina Rosam. And by them I protect you and your rights from violence,
and what protection I pray can there be without strength? therefore I will by
no means part with them to enfeeble my regal Power, but will retain them
still, and bequeath them to my Posterity, which I would be loath to betray in
this point; nor do I much value what that silly infected Animal, the King of
Bees tells me sometimes, when humming up and down my leaves, he would buzze
this fond belief into me, how it added much to his Majesty, that nature gives
him no sting, as all other Bees have, because he should rely altogether upon
the love and loyalty of his subjects. No; I will take warning by the Eagle, the
King of Volatills, and by the Lion, King of Quadrupedals, who (as the Prince of
Plut.
Moralists reports) when by fair insinuations the one had parted with his
tallons, the other with his teeth and ongles, wherein their might, and
consequently their Majesty consisted, grew afterward contemptible to all
creatures, and quite lost that natural allegiance and awe which was duc unto
the one from all birds, and to the other, from all beasts of field and forest.

MORAL.
Every natural borne Monarch, has an inherent inalienable strength in
himself, which is the common Militia of his Kingdom; for, though the peoples
love (which oftentimes is got by an Apple, and lost by a Pear) be a good
Cittadell, yet there must be a concurrence of some visible settled force
besides, which no earthly power may dispose of without his royal commands: and
for him to transmit this strength to any other, is the only way to render him
inglorious and despicable, both at home and abroad; And thus you have the
spirit of these Flowers, and Moral of the Fable. The Assembly of Architects.
THere was an ancient goodly Palace, composed of diverse pieces, and partition'd
into sundry Chambers, Halls and Courts, which were supported by mixed Pillars,
partly Corinthian, partly Ionique, but principally by the Dorique the King of
Columns, as having the firmest Pedestall: Some took exceptions, and alleged,
that some of the said Courts were too high, and some of the Chambers in this
Structure were too wide. The Lord of this Palace called together the best
Masons and Architects, to advise with him (not without him) for mending of
those faults, the better contrivance of the rooms, and to reduce the Building
to a just proportion. They solemnly met, and falling to consultation hereof,
they found that the Chamber which was spangled with Stars, and where his private
Counsel of State did use to sit, were too wide; they thought that the Court
erected on the North-side, and that learned Court where Ecclesiastical matters
were scanned, was too high; These, with that peculiar Court which was erected
for the support of Honor, they went about in lieu of rectifying, to ruinat and
raze to the very ground; and some of these Masons (for indeed they were rather
Masons then true Architects) were so precise and over critical, that they
seemed to find fault with the position of the Chapel that belonged to this
Palace, because, forsooth, it stood East and west, which situation, only in
regard it was ancient, they held to be a superstitious posture; They seemed to
repine at the decency, riches and ornament of it, with diverse other frivolous
exceptions. The Lord of the Palace said little to that, but touching the errors
and disproportions in the foresaid Courts and Chambers of public justice, he
was very willing they should be amended, and reduced to a true dimension and
symmetrie; and that all other rooms should be searched and swept clean: but
he would be loath to see those ancient pieces quite demolished, for that would
hazard the fall of the maine Fabrique, his princely hereditary patrimony
(descended upon him from so many wise Oeconomists and royal Progenitors) in
regard of the ^uncture and contignation those parts had with the whole frame.
To mend a thing by demolishing it, is as curing a sick body by knocking him in
the head: he told them it was easier far to pull down, then build up; one may
batter to pieces in one hour, that which cannot be built in an age: That
everlasting Villain, who burnt the Ephesian Temple, destroyed, as it were in a
trice, what was a rearing up ten long Olympiads: He wished them further to be
very cautious how they meddled with th the Angulars and Basis of that Royal
Structure; for so they might prove as wise as those Architects, who took out
some of the foundation stones, to repair the roof. Lastly, he told them, that if
they intended to pull down any part of his own standing Palace, they should be
well advised before hand of the fashion whereof that new Fabric should be, which
they purposed to rear up in the room of the old.

MORAL
Innovations are of dangerous consequence in all things, specially in a settled
well tempered ancient State; therefore there should be great heed taken, before
any ancient Court of Judicature, erected as a Pillar to support Justice by the
wisdom of our Progenitors, be quite put down; for it may shake the whole Fram
of Government, and introduce a change; and changes in Government are commonly
fatal, for seldom comes a better. And this I hold to be the aim of this
Apologue. The Insurrection of the Winds.
IT fortuned, that the Winds banded against Eolus: And Boreas (the Northwind)
began to bluster first, and would blow where he listed, he grew so boisterous,
that he is called Scopa viarum, the highway Beesom, he seemed to sweep all
before him Southward, insomuch, that uniting all his strength into one body, he
made toward Eolus in a hostile armed manner, and so obtained of him what he
desired. After his example (and an odd example it was) the West-wind, his
fellow subject rose The Scot. The Irish.
up, alleging, that though he blew from the left-side of Heaven, yet he
deserved to be as much favored as Boreas, in regard he drove a far richer
trade, and blew upon a more fertile Country, which brought in much more
benefit to the rest of Eolus his Dominions; therefore he would have his
liberties also assured him, which he alleged were altogether as ancient as the
others: This made him puff with such an impetuous violence, that his blasts
brought with them (God wot) diverse showers of blood, and whole Cataracts of
calamities: Now, as it is observed in the course of natural things, that one
mischief seldom marches alone, but ushers in another, and has always its
concomitants, so these North and Western gusts, as one wave uses to drive on
another, made all the winds in the compass, both collateral and cardinal to
rise up and rebel against Eolus, even under that very Clime, and in those
Horizons, where he kept his principal residence and royal Court. And this
popular wind (for 'twas no other, take it all England.
jointly in one puff) did rage with that vehemence, that it turned every where
into fearful flames of fire (issuing out of a kind of Ignis fatuus, which by
its repercussions, and furious arietations, did a world of mischief, as if it
had bin that incendiary Prester wind, or rather an Haraucana, that Indian gust,
which always brings the Devil along with it as those Savages believe) had
blown here, For, surely God was not in this wind. Yet some were so simple, to
think that this wind proceeded from divine inspirations; nay, they came to that
height of profaneness, as to father it upon the Holy Ghost, though nothing
could be more different to his sweet motions, nothing so directly opposite to
his soft gentle breeses and eventilatio^s; for no holy consecrated thing could
stand before this Diabolical wind, down went all Crosses it met withal; it
battered down Church and Chapel windows (and I fear the walls and steeples
will next to wrack.) It was so violent, that it overturned all stone Tables
that stood Eastward; it blew away all the decent Vests and Ornaments of the
Church; the Bishops Mitre (an Order contemporary with Christianity it self) did
quake like an Aspen leaf before it; nay, it shrewdly shook the very Imperial
Scepter, and Crown which stood on Eolus his head, so that he was like to become
Ludibrium Ventorum.

But the highest Deity of Heaven, He who walks upon the wings of the wind,
and makes weight for them, and gathers them in his fist when he pleases,
hating such an odious rebellion, rebuked these tumultuous winds, he caused a
contagious air, to rush in and mingle with them, and infect them with new
d^seases; besides whispers of jealousies, doubts and diffidence blew and buzzed
more and more amongst them, so that they could not trust one another; insomuch,
that it made them to fall into confusion amongst themselves, which is the
common fate of all Rebellions. So Eolus recovered his Monarchy, and as they
say, there is no wind but blows some body good; so this turned much to the
advantage of Eolus, for he grew ever after more firm and better established in
his regal power, because he put a competent guard in those Climes whence all
these boistrous winds burst forth, and so secured himself ever after, that they
could not blow where they listed.

Popular Insurrections being debell'd, turn to the advantage, and render the
Ruling Prince more secure afterward, or a broken bone being well set, grows
stronger oftentimes: And so you have the Principal Moral of this Parable in
brief.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIr, I long to receive your opinion of these rambling pieces of fancy, you
may, peradventure, have more, when the times are open: surely the wind will not
hold still in this unlucky hole, for it is too violent to last: It begins
(thanks be to God) to sift already, and amongst those multitudes, who expect
the change, I am one that lies at the Cape of good Hope, though a long time
under hatches (in the Fleet.) Howsoever, though all the winds in the compass
should bluster upon me; nay, though a Haraucana should rage, I am armed and
resolved to bear the brunt, to welcome the Will of God, and possess my soul
with patience. If you desire a further intimation of things, I refer you to a
Discourse of mine called The True Informer, who will give you no vulgar
satisfaction. So I am

Yours, as at first, inalterable. I. H.

OF The LAND of IRE: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THAT HORRID INSURRECTION AND MASSACRES
Which happened lately In IRELAND;

By Mercurius Hibernicus: Who discovers unto the World the True Causers and
Incendiaries thereof.

In Vindication Of His Majesty, who is most maliciously Traduced to be
Accessory thereunto;

Which is as damnable a Lie as possibly could be hatched in Hell; which is the
Staple of Lies.

A Lie stands upon one leg, -- Truth upon two. Mercurius Hibernicus, His
Advertisement to the well-tempered READER.
THere is a mongrell race of Mercuries lately sprung up, but I claim no
acquaintance with them, much less any Kindred. They have commonly but one weeks
time for their conception and birth; and then are they but like those Ephemeran
creatures, which Pliny speaks of, that are born in the morning, grow up till
noon, and perish the same night: I hope to be longer lived then so, because I
was longer a getting, there was more time and matter went to my Generation.

There is a Tale how the true Mercury indeed, descended from Heven once in a
disguise, to see how he was esteemed on earth; and entering one day into a
Painters-shop, he found there diverse Pictures of Apollo, Jupiter, Mars, with
others; and spying his own hanging in a corner hard-by, he asked what the price
of that Pourtrait might be? The Painter answered, that if he bought any of the
rest, he would give him that into the bargain for nothing: Mercury hereupon
shaking his white Caducean, flung out in indignation, and flew up to Heven.
Should Mercury chance to descend now from his sphere, I think he would be much
more offended to find himself personated by every petty impertinent Pamphleter;
yet I believe he would not think it ill that Aulicus assumes his shape, nor
that the Harp, who owes her first invention to him, should be made now his
crest.

To my honorable Friend Mr. E. P.
SIR,
IF You please to cast your eyes upon the following Discourse, I believe it will
afford you some satisfaction, and enlighten you more in the Irish affairs. The
allegiance I owe to Truth, was the Midwife that brought it forth, and I make
bold to make choice of you for my Gossip, because I am

From the prison of the Fleet 3. Nonas April is 1643. Your true servant, I. H.

Mercurius Hibernicus.
THere is not any thing since these ugly wars begun, whereof there has been
more advantage made to traduce and blemish His Majesty's actions, or to
alienate and imbitter the affections of his people toward Him, to incite them
to arms, and enharden them in the quarrel, than of the Irish affairs;
whether one cast his eyes upon the beginning and proceedure of that war
(which some by a most monstrous impudence would patronize upon their Majesty's)
or upon the late Cessation, and the transport of Auxiliaries since from thence.
There are some that in broken pieces have written of all three: but not in one
entire discourse, as this is, nor has any hitherto hit upon those reasons and
inferences that shall be displayed herein.

But he who adventures to judge of affairs of State, specially of traverses of
war, as of Pacifications, of Truces, Suspensions of Arms, Parlies, and such
like, must well observe the quality of the times, the success and circumstance
of matters past, the posture and pressure of things present (and upon the
Place) the inducement or enforcement of causes, the gaining of time, the
necessity of preventing greater mischiefs (whereunto true policy Prometheus
like has always an eye) with other advantages. The late Cessation of Arms in
Ireland was an affair of this nature; a true Act of State, and of as high a
consequence as could be: Which Cessation is now become the Common Subject of
every man's discourse, or rather the discourse of every common Subject all the
three Kingdoms over: And not only the subject of their discourse, but of
their censure also; nor of their censure only, but of their reproach and
obloquy. For the World is come now to that pass, that the Foot must judge the
Head, the very Cobbler must pry into the Cabinet Counsels of his King; nay the
Distaffe is ready ever and anon to arraign the Scepter; Spinstresses are become
Stateswomen, and every peasan turned politician; such a fond irregular humor
reigns generally of late years amongst the English Nation.

Now the Design of this small discourse, though the Subject require a far
greater volume, is, to vindicate His Majesty's most pious intentions in
condescending to this late suspension of Arms in His Kingdom of Ireland, and
to make it appear to any rational ingenious capacity, (not pre-occupied or
purblinded with passion) that there was more of honor and necessity, more of
prudence and piety in the said Cessation, than there was either in the
Pacification or Peace that was made with the Scot.

But to proceed herein the more methodically, I will lay down, first,

The real and true radical causes of the late two-yeers Irish Insurrection.

Secondly, the course His Majesty used to suppress it.

Lastly, those indispensable impulsive reasons and invincible necessity which
enforced His Majesty to condescend to a Cessation.

Touching the grounds of the said Insurrection, we may remember when His
Majesty out of a pious design (as His late Majesty also had) to settle an
Uniformitie of serving God in all his three Kingdoms, sent our Liturgy to his
Subjects of Scotland; some of that Nation made such an advantage hereof, that
though it was a thing only recommended, not commanded or pressed upon them, and
so called in suddenly again by a most gracious Proclamation, accompanied with a
general pardon: Yet they would not rest there, but they would take the
opportunity hereby to demolish Bishops, and the whole Hierarchy of the Church
(which was no grievance at all till then) To which end, they put themselves in
actual Arms, and obtained at last what they listed; which they had not dared
to have done, had they not been sure to have as good friends in England as they
had in Scotland (as Lesly himself confessed to Sir William Berkley at
Newcastle) for some of the chiefest Inconformists here, had not only
intelligence with them, but had been of their Cabinet-counsels in moulding the
Plot: though some would cast this war upon the French Cardinal, to vindicate
the invasion we made upon his Masters dominions in the Isle of Rets; as also
for some advantage the English use to do the Sp^niard in transporting his
Treasure to Dunkerk, with other offices. Others would cast it upon the Jesuit,
that he should project it first, to ^orce His Majesty to have recourse to his
Roman Catholic Subjects for aid, that so they might, by such Supererogatory
service ingratiate themselves the more into his favor.

The Irish hearing how well their next Neighbou^s had sped by way of Arms, it
filled them full of thoughts and apprehensions of fear and jealousy, that the
Scot would prove more powerful hereby, and consequently more able to do them
hurt, and to attemp^ ways to restrain them of that connivency, which they were
allowed in point of Religion: Now there is no Nation upon earth that the Irish
hate in that perfection, and with a greater Antipathy, than the Scot, or from
whom they conceive greater danger: For whereas they have an old prophecy
amongst them, which one shall hear up and down in every mouth, That the day
will come when the Irish shall weep upon English men's graves: They fear that
this prophecy will be verified and fulfilled in the Scot above any other
Nation.

Moreover, the Irish entered into consideration, that They also had sundry
grievances and grounds of complaint, both touching their estates and
consciences, which they pretended to be far greater than those of the Scots.
For they fell to think, that if the Scot was suffered to introduce a new
Religion, it was reason they should not be so pinched in the exercise of their
old, which they glory never to have altered. And for temporal matters (wherein
the Scot had no grievance at all to speak of) the new plantations which had bin
lately afoot, to be made in Conaught and other places; the concealed lands and
defective titles which were daily found out; the new customs which were
imposed, and the incapacity they had to any preferment or Office in Church and
State (with other things) they conceived these to be grievances of a far
greater nature, and that deserved redress much more than any the Scot had. To
this end, they sent over Commissioners to attend this Parliament in England,
with certain Propositions, but those Commissioners were dismissed hence with a
short and unsavory answer, which bred worse blood in the Nation than was
formerly gathered; and this, with that leading case of the Scot, may be said to
be the first incitements that made them rise.

In the course of humane actions, we daily find it to be a true rule, Exempla
movent, Examples move, and make strong impressions upon the fancy; precepts are
not so powerful as precedents. The said example of Scotland, wrought
wonderfully upon the imagination of the Irish, and filled them (as I touched
before) with thoughts of emulation, that They deserved altogether to have as
good usage as the Scot, their Country being far more beneficial, and
consequenly, more importing the English Nation. But these were but confused
imperfect notions, which began to receive more vigor and form after the death
of the Earl of Strafford, who kept them under so exact an obedience, though some
censure him to have screwed up the strings of the Harp too high; insomuch that
the taking off of the Earl of Straffords head, may be said to be the second
incitement to the heads of that insurrection to stir.

Add hereunto, that the Irish understanding with what acrimony the Roman
Catholics in England were proceeded against since the sitting of our
Parliament, and what further designs were afoot against them, and not only
against them, but for ranversing the Protestant Religion it self, as it is now
practiced (which some shallow-braind (...) do throw into the same scales with
P^pery.) They thought it was high time for them to forecast what should become
of Them, and how they should ^e (...) in point of conscience, when a new Deputy
of the Parliaments election ( approbation at least) should come over. Therefore
they fell to consult of some means of timely prevention: And this was another
mo^ive (and it was a sh^ewd one) which p^sht on the Irish to take up Arms.

Lastly, that Army of 8000. men, which the Earl of Strafford had raised to be
transported to England for suppressing the Scot, being by the advice of our
Parliament here, disbanded; the Country was annoyed by some (...) those
straggling Soldiers, as not one in twenty of the Irish, will from the sword to
the spade, or from the Pike to the plough again. Therefore the two Marquesses
that were Ambassadors here then for Spain, having propounded to have some
numbers of those disbanded forces, for the service of their Master; His Majesty
by the mature advice of his privy Counsel, to occur the mischiefs that might
arise to his Kingdom of Ireland by those loose casheer'd Soldiers, yielded to
the Ambassadors motion, who sent notice hereof to Spain accordingly, and so
provided shipping for their transport, and impressed money to advance the
business; but as they were in the heat of that (...)* His Majesty being then in
Scotland* (...) was a sudden stop made of those promised troops, who had
depended long upon the Spaniards service, as the Spaniard (...) do^e on theirs.
And this was the last, though no^ the least fatal cause of that horrid
insurrection: All which particulars well considered, it had bin no hard matter
to have bin a Prophet, and standing upon the top of Holy-Head, to have foreseen
those black clouds engendering in the Irish air, which bro^e out afterward
into such fearful tempests of blood.

Out of these premises, it is easy for any common understanding, not
transported with passion and private interest, to draw this conclusion. That
They who complied with the Scot in his insurrection; They who dismissed the
Irish Commissioners with such a short unpolitick answer, They who took off the
Earl of Straffords head, and delayed afterward the dispatching of the Earl of
Leicester, They who hindered those disbanded troops in Ireland to go for Spain,
may be justly said to have bin the true causes of the late insurrection of the
Irish; and consequently, it is easy to know upon the account of whose souls
must be laid the blood of those hundred and odd thousands poor Christians, who
perished in that war; so that had it bin possible to have brought over their
bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at the doors, and in the
presence of some men I believe they would have gushed out afresh into blood, for
discovery of the true murderers.

The grounds of this insurrection being thus discovered, let us examine what
means His Majesty used for the suppression of it. He made his addresses
presently to his great Counsel, the English Parliament then assembled, which
Queen Elizabeth and her progenitors did seldom use to do, but only to their
Privy Counsel in such cases, who had the discussing and transacting of all
foreign affairs; for in mannaging matters of State, specially those of war,
which must be carried with all the secrecy that may be, Trop grand nombre, est
encombre, as the Frenchman says, too great a number of Counselors may be an
incumber, and expose their results and resolutions to discovery and other
disadvantages, whereas in military proceedings the work should be afoot before
the Counsels be blazed abroad. Well, His Majesty transmitted this business to
the Parliament of England, who totally undertaking it, and wedding as it were
the quarlel (as I remember they did that of the Palatinate a little before by
solemn vote; the like was done by the Parliament of Scotland also, by a public
joint Declaration, which in regard there came nothing of it, tended little to
the honor of either Nation abroad) His Majesty gave his royal assent to any
Propositions or acts for raising of men, money and arms to perform the work.
But hereby no man is so simple as to think His Majesty should absolutely give
over his own personal care and protection of that his Kingdom, it being a Rule,
That a King can no more desert the protection of his own people, then they
their subjection to him. In all his Declarations there was nothing that he
endeared and inculcated more often, and with greater aggravation and
earnestness unto them, then the care of his poor Subjects their
fellow-Protestants in Ireland: Nay, he resented their condition so far, and
took the business so to heart, that he offered to pass over in person for
their relief: And who can deny but this was a magnanimous and Kinglike
resolution? Which the Scots by public act of Counsel, did highly approve of,
and declared it to be an argument of care and courage in his Majesty. And
questionless it had done infinite good in the opinion of them that have felt
the pulse of the Irish people, who are daily ore-heard to groan, how they have
bin any time these 400. years under the English Crown, and yet never saw but
two of their Kings all the while upon Irish ground, though there be but a salt
(...) of a few hours sail to pass over. And much more welcome should His Majesty,
now regnant, be amongst them, who by general tradition, They confess and hold
to come on the paternal side from (...) (by legal and lineal descent) who was
an Irish Prince, and after King of Scotland, whereas the title of all our former
Kings and Queens was stumbled at always by the vulgar. His Majesty finding
that this royal proffer of engaging his own person, was rejected with a kind
of scorn, coucht in smooth language, though the main business concerned
himself nearest, and indeed solely himself, that Kingdom being his own
hereditary Right. Understanding also, what base sinister use there was made of
this insurrection by some traiterous malevolent persons, who, to cast aspersions
upon His Majesty, and to poison the hearts of his people, besides public
infamous reports, counterfeited certain Commissions in His Majesty's name to
authorize the business, as if he were privy to it, though I dare pawn my soul
His (or Her) Majesty knew no more of it then the great Mogor did. Finding also
that the Commissioners employed hence for the managing and composing matters in
that Kingdom, though nominated by the Parliament, and by their recommendation
authorized by His Majesty, did not observe their instructions, and yet were
connived at. Understanding also, what an inhumane design there was between them
and the Scot, in lieu of suppressing an insurrection to eradicat and extinguish
a whole nation to make booty of their lands (which hopes the London Adventurers
did hug, and began to divide the Bears-skin before he was taken, as His
Majesty told them* an attempt the Spaniard nor any other Christian State ever
intended against the worst of Savages; The conceit whereof in^used such a
desperate courage, eagerness and valor into the Irish, that it made them turn
necessity into a kind of virtue.

Moreover, His Majesty taking notice that those royal Subsidies, with other
vast contributions whereunto he had given way, with the sums of particular
Adventurers (amongst whom some Aliens ( Hollanders) were taken in, besides the
Scot to share the Country) were misapplyed, being visibly employed, rather to
feed an English Rebellion, then to suppress an Irish: Nay, understanding that
those charitable collections which were made for the relief of those
distressed Protestants, who being stripped of all their livelihood in Ireland,
were forced to fly over to England, were converted to other uses, and the
Charity not dispensed according to the Givers intention. Hearing also that
those 5000. men which had been levied and assigned to go under the Lord
Wharton, the Lord of Kerry, Sir Faithful Fortescue and others were diverted
from going to the west of Ireland, and employed to make up the Earl of Essex
Army: And having notice besides that the Earl of Warwick had stayed certain
ships going thither with supplies, and that there was an attempt to send for
over to England some of those Scottish Forces which were in Ulster, without his
privity. Lastly, His Majesty finding himself unfitted, and indeed disabled to
reach those his distressed Subjects, his own royal army all his navall
strength, revenues and magazines being out of his hands; and having as hard a
game to play still with the Scot, and as pernicious a fire to quench in
England, as any of his Progenitors ever had: Receiving intelligence also daily
from his Protestant Nobility and Gentry thence, in what a desperate case the
whole Kingdom stood, together with the report of the Committee that attended
His Majesty from them expressly for that service, who amongst other deplorable
passages in their petition, represented, That all means by which comfort and
life should be conveyed unto that gasping Kingdom, seemed to be totally
obstructed, and that unless (...) relief were afforded, His loyal Subject^
there must yield their fortunes for a prey, (...) for a sacrifice, and their
Religion for a (...) to the merciless Rebels.

His Majesty (as it was high time for (...)) taking into his Princely thoughts
those woeful complainrs and cries of his poor Subjects, condescended at last
to appoint some persons of honor to hear what the Irish could say for
themselves, as they had often petitioned; and God forbid but the King of
Ireland should receive his Subjects petitions, as well as the King of Scotland.
But His Majesty being unsatisfied with what they propounded then, the Lord
Marquess of Ormond marched with considerable Forces against them, and though he
came off with honor, yet no relief at all coming thither for many months
after from the Parliament here, who had undertaken the business, and had
received all the sums and subsidies, with other unknown contributions to that
end, matters grew daily worse and worse. To sum up all, His Majesty receiving
express and positive advice from his Lord Justices and Counsel of State there,
that the whole Kingdom was upon point of utter perdition, which was cointimated
the same time to the Parliament here, by a special letter to the Speaker; I say
His Majesty finding that he had neither power of himself, it being transmitted
to others; and that those Trustees did misapply that power and trust he had
invested in them (for the time) to make good their undertaking for preservation
of that his fruitful Kingdom; being impelled by all these forcible reasons,
His Majesty sent a commission to the Lord Marquess of Ormond his Lieutenant
General (a most known sincere Protestant) to hearken to a treaty according to
their petition; and if any thing was amiss in that treaty in point of honor
(as it shall appear by comparing it with others, there was none) we know whom
to thank. For out of these premises also, does result this second conclusion,
That they who misapplied those moneys, and mis employed those men which were
levied with His Majesty's royal assent for the reduction of Ireland: They who
set afoot that most sanguinary design of extirpating, at least of enslaving a
whole ancient Nation, who were planted there by the hand of Providence from the
beginning: They who hindered His Majesty's transfretation thither to take
cognizance of his own affairs, and expose the countenance of his own royal
person for composing of things: They, They may be said to be the true causes of
that unavoydable necessity and as the heathen Poetsings, The Gods, themselves
cannot resist Necessity) which enforced His Majesty to capitulat with the
Irish, and assent to a Cessation.

It was the saying of one of the bravest Roman Emperors, and it was often used
by Henry the Great of France, Her Majesty's Father, That he had rather save the
life of one loyal Subject then kill a hundred Enemies: It may well be thought
that one of the prevalentst inducements that moved His Majesty (besides those
formerly mentioned) to condescend to this Irish Cessation, was a sense he had
of the effusion of his own poor Subjects blood, the hazard of the utter
extirpation of the Protestants there, and a total irrecoverable loss of that
Kingdom, as was advertised both in the petition of the Protestants themselves,
the relation of the Committee imployd thither to that purpose, and the express
letters of the Lords Justices and Counsel there.

To prove now, that this Cessation of arms in Ireland was more honorable and
fuller of Piety, Prudence and Necessity, then either the Pacification or Peace
with the Scot. I hope, these few ensuing arguments (above diverse others which
cannot be inserted here, in regard of the force intended brevity of this
Discourse) will serve the turn.

1. In primis, When the Pacification was made with Scotland His Majesty was
there personally present, attended on by the flower of His English Nobility,
Gentry and Servants, and the enemy was hard by ready to face Him. At the
concluding of the Irish Cessation, His Majesty was not there personally
present, but it was agitated and agreed on by his Commissioner, and it has
been held always less dishonorable for a King to capitulate in this kind with
his own Subjects by his Deputy, then in his own person, for the further off he
is, the less reflects upon him.

2. Upon the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was an Amnestia, a
general pardon, and an abolition of all by-passed offenses published, there
were honors and offices conferred upon the chiefest sticklers in the War. At
the Cessation in Ireland there was no such thing.

3. When the Pacification and Peace was made with the Scots, there was money
given unto Them, as it is too well known. But upon the settling of this
Cessation, the Irish received none but gave His Majesty a considerable sum as
an argument of their submission and gratitude, besides the maintenance of some
of his Garrisons in the interim; and so much partly in point of honor.

4. At the concluding of the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was a
vigorous, fresh, unfoiled English Army a foot, and in perfect equipage; there
wanted neither Ammunition, Arms, Money, Clothes, Victuals or any thing that
might put heart into the Soldier and elevat his spirits. But the Protestant
Army in Ireland had not any of all these in any competent proportion, but were
ready to perish, though there had been no other enemy then hunger and cold: And
this implies a far greater necessity for the said Cessation.

5. In Ireland there was imminent danger of an instant loss of the whole
Kingdom, and consequently, the utter subversion of the Protestant Religion
there, as was certified both to King and Parliament by sundry letters and
petitions which stand upon record: There was no such danger in the affairs of
Scotland, either in respect of Religion or Kingdom; therefore there was more
piety shown in preserving the one, and prudence in preserving the other in
Ireland, by plucking both (as it were) out of the very jaws of destruction by
the said Cessation.

We know that in the Medley of mundane casualties, of two evils, the least is
to be chosen, and a small inconvenience is to be born withal, to prevent a
greater.

If one make research into the French Story, he will find, that many kinds of
Pacifications and Suspensions of Arms were covenanted 'twixt that King and some
of his Subjects, trenching far more upon regal dignity then this in Ireland.
The Spaniard was forced to declare the Hollanders Freestates, before they could
be brought to treat of a truce: And now the Catalans scrue him up almost to as
high conditions. But what need I rove abroad so far? It is well known, nor is
it out of the memory of man (in Queen Elizabeth's reign) that in Ireland it self
there have bin Cessations, all circumstances well weighed, more prejudicial to
Majesty then this.

But that which I hear murmured at most as the effect of this Cessation, is the
transport of some of those Soldiers to England for recruting His Majesty's
Armies, notwithstanding that the greatest number of them be perfect and rigid
Protestants, and were those whom our Parliament it self employed against the
Irish. But put case they were all Papists, must His Majesty therefore be held a
Favourer of Popery? The late King of France might have bin said as well to have
bin a Favourer of Hugonotts, because in all his wars he employed Them most of
any in places of greatest trust against the House of Austria; whereas all the
World knows, that he perfectly hated them in the general, and one of the
reaches of policy he had, was to spend and waste them in the wars. Was it ever
known but a Sovereign Prince might use the bodies and strength of his own
naturall-born Subjects, and Liege men for his own defense? When His person has
been sought and aimed at in open field by small and great shot, and all other
Engines of hostility and violence: When he is in danger to be surprised or
besieged in that place where he keeps his Court: When all the flowers of his
Crown his royal prerogatives which are descended upon him from so many
successive progenitors) are like to be plucked off and trampled under foot:
When there is a visible plot to alter and overturn that Religion he was born,
baptized, and bred in: When he is in dan^er to be forced to infringe that
solemn Sacramental Oath he took at his Coronation to maintain the said
Religion, with the Rights and Rites of the holy Anglican Church, which some
brainsick Schismatics would transform to a Kirk and her Discipline, to some
chimerical form of government they know not what. Francis the first and other
Christian Princes, made use of the Turk upon less occasions; and if one may
make use of a Horse, or any other bruit animal, or any inanimat Engine or
Instrument for his own defense against man, much more may man be used against
man, much more may one rational Creature be used against another though for
destructive ends in a good cause, specially when they are commanded by a
Sovereign head, which is the main thing that goes to justify a war. Now
touching the Roman Catholics, whether English, Welsh, Irish, or Scottish,
which repair to his Majesty's Armies either for service or security. He looks
not upon them ^s Papists, but as his Subjects, not upon their Religion, but
their allegiance, and in that ^uality he entertains them: Nor can the Pa^ist be
denied the Character of a good Subject, all the while he conforms himself to
the Laws in general, and to those laws also that are particularly enacted
against him, and so keeps himself within the bounds of his civil obedience: As
long as he continues so, he may challenge protection from his Prince by way of
right, and if his Prince by some accident be not in case to protect him, he is
to give him leave to defend himself the best he can, for the law of nature
allows every one to defend himself, and there is no positive law of man can
annul the law of nature. Now if the Subject may thus claim protection from his
Prince, it follows, the Prince by way of reciprocation may require
assistance, service and supplies from the Subject upon all public occasions,
as to suppress at this time a new race of Recusants, which have done more hurt
then ever the old did, and are like to prove more dangerous to his Crown and
regal Authority then any foreign enemy.

But whosoever will truly observe the genius, and trace the actions of this
fatal Faction which now swayes with that boundless, exorbitant, arbitrary and
Antinomian power, will find, that it is one of their prime pieces of policy, to
traduce and falsify any thing that is not conducible to their own ends: Yet
what comes from them must be so magisterial, it must be so unquestionably and
incontroulably true and lawful, that it must be believed by an implicit faith,
as proceeding from an in-erring Oracle (as if these Zealots were above the
common condition of mankind, to whom error is as hereditary as any other
infirmity) though the thing it self encroach never so grossly both upon the
common liberty, the states and souls of men. But if any thing bear the stamp of
royal Authority, be it never so just and tending to peace and the public good,
yea, though it be indifferent to either side, it is presently countermanded,
cried down, and stifled; or it is calumniated and aspersed with obloquies,
false glosses and misprisions; and this is become now the common Theme wherewith
their Pulpits ring

Which makes me think, that these upstart politicians have not long to reign;
for, as the common Proverb says, Fraud and Frost end foul and are short-lived,
so that policy, those Counsels which are grounded upon scandals, reproaches and
lies, will quickly moulder and totter away, and bring their Authors at last to
deserved infamy and shame, and make them find a Tomb in their own ruins. Add
hereunto as further badges of their nature, that black irreconcilable malice
and desire of revenge which rages in them, the aversness they have to any
sweetness of Conformity and Union, the violent thirst they have of blood, which
makes me think on that dis^ique of Prudentius, who seemed to be a Prophet as
well as Poet (a true Vates) in displaying the humors of these fiery Dogmatists,
this all-confounding faction which now has the vogue, to the punishment, I
will not say yet, the perdition of this poor Island.

Sic m^res produnt animum, and mihi credit, junctus
Semper cum falso est dogmate Coedis amor.
Thus in English.

Manners betray the mind, and credit me,
There Is always thirst of blood with Heresy.
THE SWAY OF THE SWORD; OR A DISCOURSE OF THE MILITIA Train'd-Bands, OR COMMON
SOLDIERY OF THE LAND;

PROVING, That the Power and Command thereof in chief belongs to the Ruling
Prince, and to no other.

Sine Gladio nulla Defensio. The Author's Apology.
It Is confefs'd that the subject of this Discourse were more proper to One of the
long-Robe, which I am not, I am no Lawyer otherwise then what nature has made
me, so every man, as he is born the child of Reason, is a Lawyer, and a
Logitian also who was the first kind of Lawyer: This discoursive faculty of
Reason comes with us into the world accompanied with certain general notions
and principles to distinguish Right from Wrong, and Falsehood from Truth: But
touching this following Discourse, because it relates something to Law, the
Author would not have adventured to have exposed it to the world, if, besides
those common innate notions of Reason, and some private Notes of his own, he
had not informed and ascertained his judgment by conference with some professed
Lawyers, and those the Eminentest in the Land, touching the truth of what it
Treats of; therefore he dares humbly aver that it contains nothing but what is
consonant to the fundamental and fixed Constitutions, to the known clear Laws
of this Kingdom.

From the prison of the Flcet 3. Nonas Mail 1645. I. H.

Touching the POLEMICAL SVVORD, And command in chief of The MILITIA, etc.
GOVERNMENT is an Ordinance of God for Man's good; the kinds of Government are
ordinances of men for Gods Glory: Now, among all Wo^ldly affairs there is not
any thing so difficult, and fuller of incertitudes as the Art of Ruling man,
For those nimble spirits (as it is spoken elsewhere) who from Apprentices have
been made Freemen of the Trade, and at last thought themselves Masters, having
spent their Youth, their Manhood, and a long time of old age therein, yet when
they came to leave the World they professed themselves still to be but Novices
in the Trade. There is a known way to break, guide, and keep in awe all other
Animals, though never so savage and strong; but there is no such certain way
to govern multitudes of men, in regard of such turbulences of spirit and
diversity of opinions that proceed from the Rational Faculty, which other
cretures that are contented only with sense, are not subject unto; and this the
Philosopher holds to be one of the inconveniences that attend humane reason,
and why it is given man as a part of his punishment.

Now, why the Government over men is ^o difficult, there may be two main
reasons alleged, The first is the various events, and World of inexpected
contingencies that attend humane negotiations, specially matters of State,
which, as all other sublunary things, are subject to alterations, miscarriages,
and change, this makes the minds of men* and consequently the moulds of policy
so often to alter, scarce one amongst twenty is the same man as he was twenty
years ago in point of judgment, which turns and changes according to the
success and circumstances of things, The wisdom of one day is the
foolishness of another, Posterior Dies est prioris Magister, the Day following
becomes the former days Teacher.

The Second Reason is, the discrepant, and wavering fancies of men's brains,
specially of the common peeple, who (if not restrained) are subject to so many
crotchets and chymeras, with extravagant wanton desires, and gaping after
innovations. Insulary peeple are observed to be more transported with this
instability then those of the Continent, and the Inhabitants of this I Will more
then others, being a well-fed spriteful peeple; In so much, that it is grown a
Proverb abroad, that The Englishman does not know when he is well: Now the true
Politician does use to fit his Government to the fancy of the peeple, the ruler
must do as the rider, some peeple are to be rid with strong bitts and curbs,
and martingalls, as the Napollitan, and French our next neighbor, which is the
cause that a kind of slavery is entailed upon him, for the French Peasant is
born with chains; Other Nations may be rid with a gentle small bridle, as the
Venetian and the Hollander, who has not such boiling spirits as others; A
bridle does serve also the Spaniard, who is the gretest example of stability,
and exact obedience to authority, of any peeple; for though Spain be the
hottest Country in Christendom, yet it is not so subject to Fevers as others
are, I mean to fits of intestin commotions: And this was never so much tried as
of late years; for though the present King has such known frail^ies, though he
has bin so infortunat, as to have many Countries quite revolted, and rent away
from him; though the ragingst Plague that ever was in Spain under any King,
happened of late years, which sweep'd away such a world of peeple; though his
Taxes be higher then ever were any, though he has called in and engrossed all
the common coin of the Country, and delivered but the one half back again,
reserving the other half for Himself; though there is no legal Instrument, no
Bond, Bill, or Specialty can be writ but upon his sealed paper, with sundry
other exactions, yet his subjects are still as obedient, and awful unto him,
they are as conformable and quiet, as if he were the most virtuous, and
victorious Prince that ever was; and this they do principally for their own
advantage, for if there were another Governor set up, it would inevitably hurl
the whole Country into combustion and tumults; besides, they are taught, that
as in choice of Wives, so the Rule holds in Governments, Seldom comes a better.

Touching the Originals of Government and ruling power, questionless the first
among Mankind was that Natural power of the Father over his Children, and that
Despotical domestique surintendence of a Master of a house over his Family; But
the World multiplying to such a Mass of peeple, they found that a confused
equality, and a loose unbridled way of living like ^rute animals to be so
inconvenient, that they chose one person to protect and govern; not so much out
of love to the ^erson, as for their own convenience and advantage, that they
might live more regularly, and be secured from rapine, and op^ression; As also
that justice might be administted; and every one enjoy his own without fear,
and danger: such Govern^urs had a power invested accordingly in them, also as
to appoint subservient, able Mi^isters under them to help to bear the ^urden.

Concerning the kinds of Government, ^ll Politicians agree that Monarchall is
the best and noblest sort of sway, having the nearest analogy with that of
Heaven, viz. A supreme power in one single person; God Almighty is the God of
Unity, as well as of Entity, and all things that have an Entity do naturally
propend to Unity; Unity is as necessary for a well- being, as Entity is for a
Being, for nothing conduces more to order, tranquillity, and quietude, nor is
any strength so operative as the united; The fist is stronger then the hand,
though it be nothing but the hand, viz. The fingers united by contraction; The
Republic of Venice which is accounted the most Eagle-ey'd and lastingst State
in the World, for she has continued a pure Virgin, and shined within her watery
Orb nere upon thirteen Ages, is the fittest to give the World advice herein,
for if ever any have brought policy to be a Science which consists of
certitudes, this State is She, who is grown a^ dexterous in ruling men as in
rowing of (...) Gally. But whereas the vulgar opinion is that the common peeple
there have a shar^ in the Government, it is nothing so, for he Great Counsel
which is the maine hing whereon the Republic turns, is compose^ only of
Gentlemen who are capable b^ their birth to sit there, having passed twenty
five years of age; To which purpose they must bring a public Testimonial that
they are descended of a Patrician or noble Family. But to return to the main
matter, this sage Republic who may prescribe rules of Policy to all Mankind,
having tried at first to Govern by Consuls and Tribunes for some years, she
found it at last a great inconvenience, or deformity rather, to have two heads
upon one body; Therefore She did set up one Sovereign Prince; and in the
Records of Venice the resons are yet extant which induced her thereunto,
whereof one of the remarkablest was this; We have observed that in this vast
University of the World all Bodies according to their several Natures have
multiplicity of Motions, yet they receive virtue and vigor but from one, which
is the Sun; All causes derive their Originals from one supreme cause; we see
that in one Creture there are many differing Members, and Faculties which have
various functions, yet they are all guided by one soul, etc.

The Island of Great Britain has bin always a Royal Isle from her first
creation, and Infancy; She may be said to have worn a Crown in her Cradle; and
though She had so many revolutions, and changes of Masters, yet She continued
still Royal; nor is there any species of Government that suits better, either
with the quality of the Country, and Genius of the Inhabitants, or relates
more directly to all the ancient Laws, Constitutions, and Customs of the Land,
then Monarchal; which any one that is conversant in the Old Records can
justify; Britannia ab initio mundi semper Regia, and regimen illius simile
illi caelorum.

Concerning the many sorts of Trust^ which were put in the Supreme Governor of
this Land (for there must be an implicit and unavoidable necessary Trust
reposed in every Sovereign Magistrate) the power of the Sword was the chiefest;
and it was agreeable to Holy Scripture he should have it, where we know it is
said, The King bears not the Sword in vain; The Laws of England did ever
allow it to be the inalienable prerogative of the Sovereign Prince, nor was it
ever known (humbly under favor) that any other power whatsoever managing
conjunctly or singly, did ever pretend to the power of the public Sword, or
have the Militia invested in them, but this ever remained entire and
untransferrible in the person of the Ruler in chief, whose chiefest instrument
to govern by is the Sword, without which Crowns, Scepters, Globes and Maces
are but bables. It is that Instrument which causes true obedience, makes him a
Dread Sovereign, and to be feared at home and abroad; Now it is a Maxim in
policy, that there can be no true obedience without Fear; The Crown and Scepter
draw only a loose kind of voluntary love, and opinion from the people, but it is
the sword that draws Reverence and awe, which two are the chiefest ingredients
of Allegiance, it being a principle, that the best Government is made of Fear
and Love, viz. when by Fear Love is drawn as thread through the eye of a
Needle; The surest Obedience, and Loyalty is caused thus, for Fear being the
wakefullest of our passions works more powerfully in us and predominates over
all the rest; primus in orb Deus fecit Timor. To raise up a Sovereign
Magistrate without giving him the power of the sword, is to set one up to rule
a metall'd Horse without a Bridle; A chief Ruler without a Sword, may be said
to be like that Logg of Wood which Jupiter threw down among the Froggs to be
their King, as it is in the Fable. Moreover, One of the chiefest glories of a
Nation is to have their Supreme Governor to be esteemed, and redouted abroad as
well as at Home. And what Foreign Nation will do either of these to the King of
England if he be Armless, and without a Sword? who will give any respect o^
precedence to his Ambassadors, and Ministers of State? The Sword also is the
prime Instrument of public protection, therefore that King who has not the
power of the Sword, must have another Title given Him, the Protector of his
peeple.

Now, in a Successive hereditary Kingdom, as England is known, and acknowledged
to be by all Parties now in opposition, There are three things which are
inalienable from the Person of the King: They are,

1. The Crown. 2. The Scepter. 3. The Sword.
The one, He is to carry on His Head, the other in His Hand, and the third at
His Side; and they may be termed all three the ensigns or peculiar instruments
of a King: by the first, He Reigns, by the second He makes Laws, by the third
He Defends them: and the two first are but bables without the last, as was
formerly spoken.

1. Touching the Crown or royal Diadem of England, there is none, whether
Presbyterian, Independent, Protestant, or others now in action, but confess
that it descends by a right hereditary Line, (though through diverse Races, and
some of them Conquerours) upon the Head of Charles the first now Regnant: it is
His own by inherent birthright and nature, by Gods Law, and the Law of the
Land, and these Parliament Men at their first sitting did agnize subjection
unto Him accordingly, and recognize Him for their Sovereign Liege Lord: Nay,
the Roman Catholic denies not this, for though there were Bulls sent to
dispense with the English Subjects for their allegiance to Queen Elizabeth, yet
the Pope did this against Her as he took Her for a Heretic, not an Usurpresse,
though he knew well enough that She had bin declared Illegitimate by the Act of
an English Parliament.

This Imperial Crown of England is adorned and deckd with many fair Flowers,
which are called, royal Prerogatives; and they are of such a transcendent
nature, that they are unforfeitable, individual, and untransferrable to any
other: The King can only summon and dissolve Parliaments: The King can only
Pardon (for when He is Crowned, He is sworn to rule in Mercy as well as in
Justice:) The King can only Coin Money, and enhance or decry the value of it:
The power of electing Officers of State, of Justices of Peace and Assize is in
the King; He can only grant sovereign Commissions: The King can only wage War,
and make Outlandish Leagues: The King may make all the Courts of Justice
ambulatory with His Person, as they were used of old* it is true, the Court of
Common Pleas must be sedentary in some certain place for such a time; but that
expired, it is removeable at His pleasure: The King can only employ Ambassadors
and Treat with foreign States, etc. These, with other royal Prerogatives which
I shall touch hereafter, are those rare and wholesome flowers wherewith the Crown
of England is embellished, nor can they stick any where else but in the Crown,
and all confess the Crown is as much the King's, as any private man's Cap is
his own.

2. The second regal Instrument is the Scepter, which may be called an
inseparable companion, or a necessary appendix to the Crown; this invests the
King with the sole Authority of making Laws, for before His confirmation all
results and determinations of Parliament are but Bills or (...) they are but
abortive things, and mere Embryos; nay, they have no life at all in them till
the King puts breath and vigor into them: and the ancient custom was for the
King to touch them with His Scepter, then they are Laws, and have a virtue in
them to impose an obligation of universal obedience upon all sorts of people,
It being an undeniable maxim, That nothing can be generally binding without
the King's royal assent, nor does the Law of England take notice of any thing
without it: This being done they are ever after styled the Kings Laws, and the
Judges are said to deliver the King's judgments, which agrees with the holy
text, The King by judgment shall stablish the Land: nay, the Law presumes the
King to be always the sole Judge Paramount, and Lord chief Justice of England,
for he whom He pleases to depute for His chiefest Justice, is but styled Lord
chief Justice of the Rings ^ench, not Lord chief Justice of England, which
title is peculiar to the King Himself, and observable it is, that whereas He
grants Commissions and Patents to the Lord Chancellor (who is no other then
Keeper of His Conscience) and to all other Judges, He names the Chief Justice
of his own Bench by a short Writ only containing two or three lines: which run
thus, Regina Iohanni Popham militi salutem, Sciatis quod constitutmus vos
justiciarium nostrum Capitalem ad placita coram nobis terminandum durante
beneplacito nostro; Test etc. Now, though the King be liable to the Laws, and
is contented to be within their verge, because they are chiefly His own
productions, yet He is still their Protector, Moderator, and Sovereign, which
attributes are incommunicable to any other conjunctly or separately.

Thus the King with His Scepter, and by the mature advice of His two Houses of
Parl. which are His highest Council and Court, has the sole power of making
Laws; other Courts of judicature do but expound them and distribute them by
His appointment, they have but Iuris dati dictionem or declarationem, and
herein, I mean for the Exposition of the Laws the twelve Judges are to be
believed before the whole Kingdom besides. They are as the Areopagites in
Athens, the chief Presidents in France and Spain in an extraordinary Iunta, as
the Cape-Syndiques in the Rota's of Rome, and the Republique of Venice, whose
judgments in point of interpreting Laws are incontroulable, and preferred
before the opinion of the whole Senate whence they received their being; and
who has still power to repeal them, though not to expound them. In France they
have a Law maxim, Arrest done en Rebbe rouge est irrevocable, which is, a
Scarlet Sentence is irrevocable, meaning when all the Judges are met in their
Robes, and the Client against whom the Cause goes, may chafe and chomp upon the
bit, and say what he will for the space of twenty four hours against his
Judges, but if ever after he traduces them, he is punishable: It is no
otherwise here where every ignorant peevish Client, every puny Barister,
specially if he become a Member of the House will be ready to arraign and vie
knowledge with all the reverend Judges in the Land, whose judgment in points
of Law should be only tripodicall and sterling: so that he may be truly called
a just King, and to rule according to Law, who rules according to the opinion
of his Judges; therefore, under favor, I do not see how his Majesty for his
part could be called injust when he leavied the Shipmoney, considering he had
the Judges for it.

I now take the Sword in hand, which is the third Instrument of a King, (and
which this short discourse chiefly points at) it is as well as the two first
incommunicable and inalienable from his Person; nothing concerns his honor
more both at home and abroad; the Crown and the Scepter are but unweildy and
impotent naked indefensible things without it. There Is none so simple as to
think there is meant hereby an ordinary single sword, such as every one carries
by his side, or some imaginary thing or chymera of a sword; No, it is the
polemicall public sword of the whole Kingdom, it is an aggregative compound
sword, and it is molded of bell-metall; for it is made up of all the ammunition
and arms small and great, of all the military strengths both by Land and Sea,
of all the Forts, Castles and tenable places within and round about the whole
I Will: The Kings of Engl. have had this sword by virtue of their royal signory
from all times, the Laws have girded it to their sides, they have employed it
for repeling all foren force, for revenging all foreign wrongs or affronts, for
quelling all intestine tumults, and for protecting the weal of the whole body
politic at home: The peeple were never capable of this sword, the
fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom deny it them; it is all one to put
the sword in a mad man's hand, as in the peeples; or for them to have a
disposing power in whose hands it shall be. Such was the case once of the
French sword, in that notorious insurrection called to this day La Iaqueris de
Beauvoisin, when the Pesants and Mechanics had a design to wrest it out of the
Kings hand, and to depresse all the Peers and Gentry of the Kingdom; and the
business had gone so far that the peasans might have prevailed, had not the
Prelates stuck close to the Nobility; But afterward poor hare*brain'd things
they desire the King upon bended knees to take it again; Such popular puffs
have blown often in Poland, Naples and other places, where while they sought
and fought for liberty by retrenching the regal power, they fooled themselfs
into a slavery unawares, and found the rule right, that excess of freedom
turns to thraldom, and ushers in all confusions. If one should go back to the
nonage of the world, when Governers and Rulers began first, one will find the
peeple desired to live under Kings for their own advantage, that they might be
restrained from wild exorbitant liberty, and kept in unity; Now unity is as
requisite for the wel-being of all natural things, as entity is for their
being, and it is a received maxim in policy, that nothing preserves Unity more
exactly then Royal Government: besides, it is known to be the noblest sort of
sway; In so much that by the Law of Nations, if Subjects of equal degrees, and
under differing Princes should meet, the Subjects of a King should take
precedence of those under any Republique.

But to take up the Sword again. I say that the Sword of public Power and
Authority is fit only to hang at the Kings side, and so indeed should the Great
Seal hang only at his girdle, because it is the Key of the Kingdom: which makes
me think of what I read of Charlemain, how he had the imperial Seal embossed
always upon the pommell of his Sword, and his reason was, that he was ready to
maintain whatsoever he signed, and sealed.

The Civilians, who are not in all points so great friends to Monarchy as the
Common Law of England is, say, there are six Iura Regalia, six Regal Rights,
viz. 1. Potestas Iudicatoria, 2. Potestas vitae and necis, 3. Armamenta, 4.
Bona adespota, 5. Census, 6. Monetarum valor: to wit, Power of Judicature,
Power of Life and Death, all kind of arming, masterless goods, S^issements, and
the value of money.

Among these Regalia's, we find that Arming, which in effect is naught else but
the Kings Sword, is among the chiefest; and it is as proper and peculiar to his
person, as either Crown or Scepter. By these two he draws a loose voluntary
love and opinion only from his Subjects, but by the Sword he draws reverence
and awe, which are the chiefest ingredients of allegiance, it being a maxim,
That the best mixture of Government is made of fear and love. With this Sword
he conferrs honor, he dubbs Knights, he creates Magistrates, the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, the Lord Mayor of London with all other Corporations have their Swords
from him, and when he enters any place corporate, we know the first thing
that is presented him is the Sword: With this Sword he shields and preserves
all his people that every one may sit quietly under his own Vine, sleep
securely in his own House, and enjoy sweetly the fruits of his labors.

Nor does the point of this Sword reach only to every corner of his own
dominions, but it extends beyond the seas to guard his Subjects from oppression,
and denial of justice, as well as to vindicate the public wrongs, make good
the interests of his Crown, and to assist his confederates; This is the Sword
that Edward the third tied the Flower deluces unto (which stick still unto it,)
when having sent to France to demand that Crown by maternal right, the Counsel
there sent him word that the Crown of France was not tied to a distaff, to which
scoffing answer he replied, that then he would tie it to his sword, and he was
as good as his word. Nor is this public sword concredited or entrusted by the
peeple in a fiduciary conditional way to the King, but it is properly and
peculiarly belonging unto him, as an inseparable concomitant, perpetual Usher
and attendant to his Crown. The King, we know, uses to maintain all garrisons
upon his own charge, not the peeples; he fortifies upon his own charge, not the
peeples: And though I will not averr, that the King may impresse any of his
Subjects, unless it be upon an actual vasion by Sea, or a sudden irruption
into his Kingdom by Land, as the Scots have often done, yet at any time the
King may raise Volunteers, and those who have received his money, the Law makes
it felony, if they forsake his service.

Thus we see there is nothing that conduces more to the glory, and indeed the
very essence of a King then the Sword, which is the Arms and Military strength
of his Kingdom; wherefore under favor, there cannot be a greater point of
dishonor to a King then to be disarmed, then to have his Sword taken from him,
or disposed of and entrusted to any but those whom he shall appoint; for as a
minori ad majus the Argument often holds, if a private Gentleman chance to be
disarmed upon a quarrel, it is held the utmost of disgraces, much greater and
more public is the dishonor that falls upon a King, if after some traverses of
difference 'twixt him and his Subjects, they should offer to disarm him, or
demand his Sword of him: when the Eagle parted with his talons, and the Lion
with his teeth and ongles, the Apolog tells us how contemptible afterward the
one grew to be among Birds, the other among Birds, the other among Beasts. For
a King to part with the Sword politic is to render himself such a ridiculous
King, as that logg of wood was which Jupiter let down among the froggs for
their King at the importunity of their croaking; it is to make him a King of
clouts, or as the Spaniard has it, Rey de Havas, a Bean King, such as we use
to choose in sport at Twelfnight.

But my hopes are, that the two present Houses of Parliament (for now they may
be called so, because they begin to parley with their King,) will be more
tender of the honor of their Sovereign Liege Lord, which, together with all
his Rights and Dignities, by several solemn Oaths, and by their own binding
instruments of Protestation and Covenant, (not yet revoked) they are sworn to
maintain, and that they will demand nothing of him which may favor of Asperte
or force, but what may hold water hereafter: But now, touching the Militia or
Sword of the Kingdom, I think, under favor, the King cannot transfer it to any
other; for that were to desert the protection of his people, which is point
blank against his Coronation Oath and his Office: What foreign Prince or State
will send either Ambassador, Resident or Agent to him, when they understand his
Sword is taken from him? What reformed foreign Church will acknowledge Him
Defendor of the Faith, when they hear of this? Nay, they who wish England no
good will, will go near to paint him out, as not long since another King was,
with a fair velvet Scabbard, a specious golden hilt and chape, but the blade
within was of wood. I hope that they who sway now, will make better use of
their successes: Many of them know it is as difficult a thing to use a victory
well, as to get one; there is as much prudence required in the one, as prowess
in the other; they will be wiser sure then turn it to the dishonor of their
King: it being a certain rule, that the glory of a Nation all the world over
depends upon the glory of their King, and if he be any way obscured, the whole
Kingdom is under an eclipse.

I have observed, that among other characters of gallantry, which foreign
Writers appropriat to the English Nation, one is, that they use to be most
zealous to preserve the Honor of their King; I trust that they who are now up
will return to the steps of their Progenitors, both in this particular and
diverse other; that their successes may serve to sweeten and moderat things, and
suppress the popular Sword which still rages; And it had bin heartily wished
that a suspension of Arms had preceded this Treaty, which uses to be the
ordinary forerunner, and a necessary antecedent to all Treaties; for while
acts of hostility continue, some ill-favored news may intervene which may
imbitter and (...)* nor can it be expected that the proceedings will go on with
that candor and confidence, while the old rancor is still in action* it is
impossible a sore should heal till the inflammation be taken away; To cast water
into a wound instead of oil is not the way to cure it: or to cast oil upon a
fire instead of water is not the way to quench it; poor England has had a
consuming fire within her bowels many years, she is also mortally wounded in
all her members, that she is still in a high Fever, which has made her rave
and speak idle a long time; and it is like to turn to a Hectic, if not timely
prevented. I pray God she may have no occasion to make use of the same
complaint as Alexander the Great made when he was expiring his last, Perii
turba Medicorum: too many Physicians have undon me.

To conclude in a word, there is but one only way, under favor, to put a period
to all these fearful confusions; it is, to put the great Master-wheel in order,
and in its due place again, and then all the inferior wheels will move
regularly; let the King be restored, and every one will come to his own, all
interests will be satisfied, all things quickly rectified; till this be done,
it is as absurd to attempt the settling of peace, as if one should go about to set
a Watch by the gnomen of an horizontall Dial when the Sun is in a cloud.

I. H.

AN ITALIAN PROSPECTIVE, Through which GREAT BRITAIN (Without any MULTIPLYING
ART) May clearly See Her present DANGER, And foresee Her future DESTRUCTION, If
not timely prevented.



Perditio tua ex Te Anglia. Paraenesis Angliae.
O England (specially thou besotted City of London) if Thou be'st not quite
past cure, or grown careless and desperate of thy self, if the least spark of
Grace, or ray of Reason be yet remaining in Thee, be warned, be warned by this
stranger, who having felt thy pulse, and cast thy water very exactly, discovers
in Thee symptoms of inevitable Ruin if thou holdst on this course.

Diverse of thy own children oftentimes admonished Thee with tears in their
eyes, and terror in their hearts, to recollect thy self, and return to thy old
road of obedience to thy Soverain Prince, But They have bin little regarded,
Let a Foreiners advice then take place, and make some impressions in Thee to
prevent thy utter destruction.

From the prison of the Fleet 2. Aug. 1647. I. H.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Deplorable, and Desperate condition THAT ENGLAND stands in,
Sent from LONDON, Anno 1647. To the LORD FRANCISCO BARBERINI, Cardinal of the
most holy Apostolic See, and Protector of the English Nation, at his Palaces
in Rome.
MY last to your Eminence was but short, in regard I had been but a short time
in this Country, I have now made a longer sojourn here, and taken a leisurely
information of all matters; therefore I shall give your Eminence an account
proportionably: For by conversation with the most indifferent, and
intelligenc'd men, and by communication with the Ambassadors here resident, I
have taken some pains to pump out the truth of things, and penetrat the
Interest of all parties.

And truly, I find, that That angry star, which has lowr'd so long upon Europe
in general, has been as predominant, and cast as direful aspects upon this
poor Island, as it has done upon any other part: Truly, my Lord, in all
probability this peeple have passed the Meridian of their happiness, and begin
to decline extremely, as well in Repute abroad, as also in the common notions
of Religion, and indeed in the ordinary faculty of Reason: I think verily the
Ill Spirit never reigned so much in any corner of the earth by those inhumane
and horrid things that I have observed among them. Nor is it a petty Spirit,
but one of the greatest Cacod^mons that thus drives them on, and makes them so
active in the pursuance of their own perdition.

To deduce matters from their Original, Your Eminency may please to
understand, that this King at his access to the Crown had deep debts to pay,
both of His Fathers, and his own, he was left engaged in a fresh war with
Spain; and had another presently after which France, and both at one time, but
he came off well enough of those: Afterward never any Country flourished in
that envied happiness, and wanton kind of prosperity; This City of London was
grown to be the greatest Mart, and mistress of trade, of any in the world;
Insomuch, as I have been certainly informed, the King might have spent merely
upon His customs 4000 crowns a day: Moreover, she had a vast bank of money
being made the scale of conveying the King of Spains treasure to Flanders:
Insomuch that in a few years she had above ten millions of his moneys brought
hither, which she might have remitted in specie or in merchandise, and for
which this King had five in the hundred for coynage: Yet could he not get
beforehand with the world, having a sister with so many Nephews and neeces,
having a Queen with diverse children of His own, (at least 16 of the
Blood-Royall) to maintain, with diverse profuse Courtiers besides, which made
Him more parsimonious then ordinary. The Wars then growing more active 'twixt
Spain and France, as also 'twixt Holland and Spain both by Land and Sea, and
diverse great Fleets of Men of War as well French (who were grown powerful
that way) as Dunkerkers, Spaniards Hollanders, and Hamburgers, appearing daily
in His narrow Seas, and sailing close by His Chambers, the world wondered this
King had no greater strength at Sea, in case that any of the foresaid Nations
should do him an affront, as some of them had already done, by denying to dash
their Colors to his Ships: Insomuch that in Holland and other places he was
pasquill'd at, and pourtrayed lying in his cradle lullaby'd and rocked asleep
by the Spaniard: Hereupon being by advertisements from his Agents abroad, and
frequent advice of His Privy Council at home, made sensible of the danger,
and a kind of dishonor he was fallen into, and having intelligence that the
French Cardinal began to question his title to the Dominion of the narrow
Seas, considering He employed no visible power to preserve it, He began to
consult of means to set forth a royal Fleet: but in regard the Purse of the
Crown was lightly ballasted, and that he had no mind to summon the three
Estates, because of some indignities he had received in former Parliaments by
the Puritan party (a race of people averse to all Kingly Government, unless
they may pare it as they please) his then Attorney General ( Noy) a great
cryed-up-Lawyer, put it in his Head to impose an old Tax called Ship-mony upon
the Subject, which the said Lawyer did warrant upon his life to be Legal, for
he could produce diverse Records how many of his Progenitors had done the like:
The King not satisfied with his single opinion, referred it to his learned
Council, and they unanimously averred it to be agreeable to the Law of the
Land; yet this would not fully satisfy the King, but He would have the Opinion
of His twelve Judges, and they also affirmed by their single vouches the said
Tax to be warrantable; Hereupon it was imposed and leavied, but some refusing
to pay it, there was a suite commenced, during which all the Judges were to
re-deliver their opinions jointly, and the business being maturely debated and
canvased in open Court diverse months, and all arguments produced pro and con,
nine of the said twelve Judges concluded it legal. Thereupon the King continued
the imposition of the said Tax, and never was money employed so much for the
Honor and advantage of a Country, for he sent out every Summer a royal fleet
to scowre and secure the Seas; he caused a Galeon to be built, the greatest and
gallantest that ever spread sail: Nor did he purse up, and dispose of one penny
of this money to any other use, but added much of his own Revenues yearly
thereunto: So the world abroad cried up the King of England to be awake again;
Trade did wonderfully increase, both Domestic and foreign in all the three
Kingdoms; Ireland was reduced to an absolute Settlement, the Arrears of the
Crown paid, and a considerable Revenue came thence clearly to the Exchequer of
England every year, the salaries of all Officers, with the pay of the standing
Army ^here, and all other Charges being defrayed by Ireland her self, which was
never done before. Yet for all this height of pappinesse, and the glorious
fruits of the said Ship Money, (which was but a kind of petty insensible Tax,
and a thing of nothing to what has hapened since) there were some foolish
peeple in this Land which murmured at it, and cried nothing else but a
Parliament, a Parliament; and they have had a Parliament since with a vengeance.

But before this occasion, it was observed, that the seeds of disobedience, and
a spirit of insurrection was a long time engendring in the hearts of some of
this peacepampred People, which is conceived to proceed from their conversation
and commerce with three sorts of men, viz. the Scot, the Hollander and the
French Huguenot. Now an advantage happened that much conduced to necessitate
the convoking of a Parliament, which was an ill-favored traverse that fell out
in Scotland; For the King intending an Uniformity of Divine worship in all His
three Kingdoms, sent thither the Liturgy of this Church, but it found cold and
course entertainment there, for the whole Nation, men, women and children rise
up a against them: Here upon the King absolutely revoked it by Proclamation,
wherein He declared 'twas never His purpose to press the practice thereof upon
the Consciences of any; therefore commanded that all things should be in statu
quo prius, but this would not serve the turn, the Scot took advantge hereby to
destroy Hierarchy, and pull down the Bishops to get their demeans: To which
purpose they came with an Army in open Field against their own Native King, who
not disgesting this indignity, Mustred another English Army; which being upon
the confines of both Kingdoms, a kind of Pacification was plaistred over for
the present.

The King returning to London, and consulting His second thoughts, resented
that insolency of the Scots more then formerly: Hereupon He summons a
Parliament, and desires aid to Vindicat that Affront of the Scot. The Scot had
strong Intelligence with the Puritan Faction in the English Parliament, who
seemed to abet his quarrel, rather then to be sensible of any national
dishonor received from him; which caused that shortlived Parliament to
dissolve in discontent, and the King was forced to find other means to raise
and support an Army by private Loanes of His nobler sort of Subjects and
Servants: The Scot having punctual Advertisements of every thing that passed;
yea, in the Kings Cabinet Council was not idle all this while, but rallies what
was left of the former Army (which by the Articles of Pacification (a little
before) should have bin absolutely dismissed) and boldly invades England, which
he durst never have done, if he had not well known that this Puritan party
which was now grown very powerful here, and indeed had invited him to this
expedition, would stand to him. This foreign Army being by the pernicious close
machinations of some mongrel Englishmen aforementioned, entered into the Bowels
of the Country, the King was forced to call this present Parliament, with whom
he complied in every thing, so far as to sacrifice unto them both Judge,
Bishop, Councellor and Courtier; yea, He yielded to the tumbling down of many
tribunals of Justice, which were an advantage to his Prerogative; He assented
that the Prelates, who were the most Ancient and Prime Members of the upper
House, and had priority of all others, since the first constitution of
Parliament in the enrollment of all Acts, He assented I say that these, who
were the greatest prop of His Crown should be quite outed from among the Peers;
He granted them also a Trienniall Parliament, and after that, this Perpetual;
which words, to the apprehension of any rational man, carry with them a gross
absurdity in the very sense of the thing: And touching this last Grant, I had
it from a good hand, that the Queen was a friend to this Parliament, and your
Eminence knows how they have requited Her since, but the main open Councellor
to this fatal Act was a Scot.

Now the reason which they alleged for this everlasting Parliament was one of
the baldest that ever I heard of, it was, that they might have time enough to
pay the Scots Army, whereas in one morning they might have dispatched that, by
passing so many Subsidies for that use, and upon the credit of those, they
might have raised what money they would.

The Parliament finding the King so pliable, and His pulse to beat so gently,
like ill-natured men they fall from inches to else in seeking their advantages:
They grew so peremptory as to demand all the Military strength of the Kingdom,
the Tower of London, with the whole Royal Navy, which they found in an
excellent equipage, gramercy ship money; so that the benefit of ship money,
which they so clamoured at, turned most to their advantage of any thing
afterward.

The Scot being Fidler-like returned to his Country with meat, drink, and
money, the King went a while after to keep a Parliament there, wherein he filled
every blank, they did but ask and have, for He granted them what possibly they
could propound, both for their Kirk and State, many received Honor, and they
divided Bishops Lands amongst them: for all which unparalled Concessions of
Princely grace, they caused an Act already in force to be published, viz. that
it should be damnable Treason in the highest degree that could be, for any of
the Scots Nation conjunctly or singly to levy arms, or any Military Forces,
upon any pretext whatsoever, without His Majesty's royal Commission; and this
they caused to be don by way of gratitude, but how they performed it afterward
the world knows too well.

The King returning to London, in lieu of a welcome to his two Houses of
Parliament (to whom also before his departure he had passed more Acts of Grace
then all his Progenitors, take them all in a lump) they had patched up a kind
of Remonstrance, which was voted in dead of the night, wherein they exposed to
the world the least moat in former government, and aggravated to the very
height every grievance, notwithstanding that the King had redressed all before;
and this Remonstrance, which breathed nothing but a base kind of malice, they
presented as a nosegay to their Sovereign Prince, to congratulat his safe
return from a foreign Country; which Remonstrance they caused to be printed and
published before he could give any answer thereunto. The King finding such a
virulent spirit still reign in the House, and knowing who were chiefly
possessed with it ( viz. Those whom he had impeached before, but saw he could
get no justice against them) in such an extremity, he did an act like a
generous Prince, for taking the Palsgrave with him, he took the first Coach he
met withal at his Court-gate, and went to his House of Commons in person, to
demand five Members, which he would prove to be Traitors in the highest degree
(...) to be the Authors of all these distempers, protesting upon the word of a
King, that they should have as fair and legal a trial as ever men had; in the
interim he only desired that their persons might be secured. The walls of both
Houses, and the very stones in London street did seem to ring of this high
carriage of the Kings, and the sound went thence to the Country, whence the
silly Plebeians came presently in whole herds to this City, who strutting up
and down the streets, had nothing in their mouths, but that the Privilege of
Parliament, the privilege of Parliament was broken, though it be the known clear
Law of the Land, that the Parliament cannot supersede or shelter any Treason.

The King finding how violently the pulse of the grossly seduced people did
beat, and there having bin formerly diverse riotous crues of base Mechaniques and
Mariners, who had affronted both his own Court, and the two Houses besides,
which the Commons, to their eternal reproach, connived at, notwithstanding that
diverse motions were made by the Lords to suppress them, the King also having
private intelligence that there was a mischievous plot to surprise his person,
removed his Court to the Country.

The King departing, or rather being driven away thus from his two Houses, by
this mutinous City, he might well at his going away have ubraided her in the
same words as H. the 3. did upbraid Paris, who being by such another tumultuous
rabble driven out of her in the time of the Ligue, as he was losing sight of
her, he turned his face back, and said, Farewell ungrateful City, I will never
see thee again till I make my way into thee through thy Walls: Yet though the
King absented himself in person thus from the two Houses, he sent them frequent
messages, that they would draw into Acts what he had already assented unto, and
if any thing was left yet undon by him, he would do it; therefore he willed them
to leave off those groundless fears and jealousies wherewith they had amused
both City and Country; and he was ready to return at all times to his Palace in
Westminster, provided that his person might be secured from the former
barbarisms and outrages: But in lieu of a dutiful compliance with their Prince,
the thoughts of the two Houses ran upon nothing but war: The King then retiring
into the North, and thinking with a few of his servants only to go visit a Town
of his ( Hull) he was denied entrance by a fatal unlucky wretch ( Hotham) who
afterward was shamefully executed with his Eldest Son, by command of his new
Masters of the Parliament: The King being thus shut out of his own Town (which
opened the first door to a bloody war) put forth a Declaration, wherein he
warned all his people that they should look to their proprieties, for if He was
thus barred of his own, how could any private Subject be sure to be Master of
any thing he had, and herein he was as much Prophet as Prince; For the
Parlement-men afterward made themselfs Landlords of the whole Kingdom, it
has bin usual for them to thrust any out of his freehold, to take his bed from
under him, and his shirt from off his very back. The King being kept thus out
of one of his Towns, might suspect that he might be driven out of another,
therefore 'twas time for him to look to the preservation of his Person, and the
Country came in voluntarily unto him by thousands to that purpose, but he made
choice of a few only to be his guard, as the Parlementeers had done a good while
before for themselfs: But now they went otherwise to work, for they fell a
levying, listing and arming men by whole Regiments and Brigades till they had a
very considerable Army afoot, before the King had one Musqueteer or Trooper on
his side; yet these men are so notoriously impudent, as to make the King the
first Aggressor of the war, and to lay upon Him all the blood that was split to
this day, wherein the Devil himself cannot be more shameless. The
Parliamenteers having an army of foot and horse thus in perfect Equipage, 'twas
high time for the King to look to himself, therefore he was forced to display
his royal Standard, and draw his sword quite out: Thus a cruel and most
cruentous civil war began which lasted near upon four years without
intermission, wherein there happened more batta les, sieges and skirmishes,
then passed in the Nether-lands in fourscore years, and herein the Englishmen
may be said to get some credit abroad in the world, that they have the same
blood running in their veins (though not the same brains in their sculls)
which their Ancestors had, who were observed to be the activest people in the
field, impatient of delay, and most desirous of battle then any Nation.

But it was one of the greatest miracles that ever happened in this Land, how
the King was able to subsist so long against the Parlamenteers, considering the
multiplicity of infinite advantages they had of him by water and land: for they
had the Scot, the Sea and the City on their side; touching the first, he rushed
in as an Auxiliary with above 20000. Horse and Foot completely furnish*d both
with small and great ammunition and Arms, well clothed and moneyed: For the
second, they had all the Kings ships well appointed, which are held to be the
greatest security of the Island both for defense and offense, for every one of
them is accounted one of the moving Castles of the Kingdom: besides, they had
all the other standing stone-Castles, Forts, and tenable places to boot:
Concerning the last, ( viz. the City) therein they had all the wealth, bravery,
and prime ammunition of England, this being the only Magazin of men and money:
Now if the K. had had but one of these on his side, he had in all probability
crushed them to nothing: yet did he bear up strangely against them a long time,
and might have done longer, had he kept the campane, and not spent the spirits
of his men before Towns; had he not made a disadvantagious election of some
Commanders in chief, and lastly, had he not had close Traitors within doors, as
well as open Rebels without; for his very Cabinet Council, and Bedchamber were
not free of such vermin, and herein the Parlementeers spent unknown sums and
were very prodigal of the Kingdoms money.

The King, after many traverses of war, being reduced to a great strait by
cross successes and Counsels, rather then to fall into the hands of the
Parlementeers, withdrew himself in a Serving-mans disguise to the Scots army,
as his last randevous, and this plot was managed by the French Agent then
residing here; A man would think that that Nation would have deemed it an eternal
honor unto them to have their own King and Countryman throw himself thus
into their arms, and to repose such a singular trust in them upon such an
Extremity: but they corresponded not so well with him as he expected, for
though at first when the Parlamenteers solicited their dear Brethren for a
delivery of the Kings person unto them, their note was then, if any foreign
petty Prince had so put himself upon them, they could not with honor deliver
him, much less their own native King; yet they made a sacrifice of him at last
for 800000. Crowns; whereupon Bellieure the French Ambassador being convoyed by
a Troop of horse from the King toward London, to such a stand, in lieu of
larges to the soldiers, he drew out an half Crown piece, and asked them how
many pence that was, they answered 30. He replied, for so much did Judas betray
his Master, and so he departed.

And now, that in the course of this Historical Narration, I have touched upon
France, your Eminence may please to understand, that nothing almost could tend
more to the advantage of that K. then these commotions in England, considering
that he was embarked in an actual war with the House of Austria and that this
Island did do Spain some good offices; among other, by transport of his treasure
to Dunkerk in English bottomes, whereunto this King gave way, and sometimes in
his own Galeons, which saved the Spaniard near upon 20. in the hundred, then if
he had sent it by way of Genoa; so that some think, though France made semblance
to resent the sad condition of her Neighbor, and thereupon sent the Prince of
Harcour, and the foresaid Monsieur Bellieure to compose matters, yet she never
really intended it, as being against her present interest and engagements: yet
the world thinks it much that she should publicly receive an Agent from these
Parlamenteeres, and that the French Nobility who were used to be the gallantest
men in the world to vindicate the quarrels of distressed Ladies, are not more
sensible of the outrages that have bin offered a daughter of France, specially
of Henry the greats.

But to resume the thread of my Narration, the King (and with him, one may say,
England also) being thus bought and sold, the Parlamenteers instead of bringing
him to Westminster, which had put a Period to all distempers, tossed him up and
down to private houses, and kept the former Army still afoot: And truly I
think there was never Prince so abused, or poor peeple so baffled, and no
peeple but a purblind besotted peeple would have suffered themselves to be so
baffled: for notwithstanding that no Enemy appeer'd in any corner of the
Kingdom, yet above 20000. Tagaroones have bin kept together ever since to
grind the faces of the poor, and exhaust the very vital spirits of town and
Country, and keep them all in a perfect slavery: Had the Parlament-men, when
the Scots were gone, brought their King in a generous and frank way (as had
well becom'd Englishmen) to sit among them, and trusted to him (which of
necessity they must do at last) as they had gain*d more honor far in the world
abroad, so they had gained more upon his affections then I believe they will
ever do hereafter.

But to proceed, the King having bin a good while prisoner to the Parliament,
the Army snatched him away from them, and some of the chiefest Commanders having
pawned their souls unto him to restore him speedily, in lieu thereof they
tumbled him up and down to sundry places, till they juggled him at last to that
small I Will where now he is surrounded with a guard of strange faces; and if
happly he beginns to take delight in any of those faces, he is quickly taken
out of his sight. These harsh usages has made him become all gray and oregrown
with hair so that he looks rather like some Silvan Satyr then a Soverain
Prince: And truly my Lord the meanest slave in St. Marks galleys or the abjects
Captif in Algier bannier is not so miserable as he in diverse kinds, for they
have the comfort of their wifes, children and friends, they can convey and
receive Letters, send Messengers upon their errands, and have private discourse
with any; all which is denied to the King of great Britain, nay the young
Princes his children are not permitted as much as to ask him blessing in a
letter. In so much that if he were not a great King of his passions, and had a
heart cast in on extraordinary Mould, these pressures and those base aspersions
that have bin publicly cast upon him by the Parliament it self, had bin enough
to have sent him out of the world e're this, and indeed it is the main thing
they drive at, to torture his brain, and tear his very heart strings if they
could: so that whereas this foolish ignorant peeple speak such horrid things of
our Inquisition, truly my Lord it is a most gentle way of proceeding being
compared to this Kings persecutions.

As the King himself is thus in quality of a captif, so are all his Subjects
become perfect slaves, they have fooled themselfs into a worse slavery then Jew
or Greek under the Ottomans, for they know the bottom of their servitude by
paying so many Sultanesses for every head; but here, people are put to endless,
unknown, tyrannical Taxes, besides plundering and Accize, which two words, and
the practice of them (with storming of Towns) they have learnt of their pure
Brethren of Holland: and for plundrings, these Parliamenteer-Saints think they
may robb any that adheres not to them as lawfully as the Jews did the
Egyptians: It Is an unsommable mass of money these Reformers have squandred in
few years, whereof they have often promised and solemnly voted a public
account to satisfy the Kingdom: but as in a hundred things more, so in this
precious particular they have dispensed with their Votes: they have consumed
more treasure with pretense to purge one Kingdom, then might have served to
have purchased two; more (as I am credibly told) then all the Kings of England
spent of the public stock since the Saxon Conquest: Thus have they not only
beggered the whole Island, but they have hurld it into the most fearfull*st
Chaos of confusion that ever poor Country was in; they have torn in pieces the
reins of all Government, trampled upon all Laws of heaven and earth, and
violated the very Dictamens of nature, by making Mothers to betray their Sons,
and the Sons their Fathers, but specially that Great Charter, which is the
Pandect of all the Laws and Liberties of the freeborn Subject, which at their
admission to the House they are solemnly sworn to maintain, is torn in
flitters: besides those several Oaths they forged themselfs, as the
Protestation and Covenant, where they voluntarily swear to maintain the Kings
Honor and Rights, together with the established Laws of the Land, etc. Now I
am told, that all Acts of Parliament here are Laws, and they carry that Majesty
with them, that no power can suspend or repeal them, but the same power that
made them, which is the King sitting in full Parliament; these mongrell
Politicians have bin so notoriously impudent as to make an inferior Ordinance
of theirs to do it, which is point-blanck against the very fundamentals of this
Government, and their own Oaths, which makes me think that there was never such
a perjured pack of wretches upon earth, never such Monsters of mankind.

Yet this simple infatuated peeple have a Saint-like opinion of these Monsters,
this foolish City gards them daily with Horse and Foot, whereby she may be
said to kiss the very stones that are thrown at her, and the hand whence they
came, which a dog would not do: But she falls to recollect her self now that
she begins to be pinched in Trade, and that her Mint is starved, yet the
leading'st men in her Common Council care not much for it, in regard most of
them have left traffiquing abroad, finding it a more easy and gainefull way of
trading at home, by purchasing Crown or Church lands, plundered goods, and
debts upon the Public Faith, with Soldiers debenters; thus the Saints of this
Island turn godliness into gain.

Truly my Lord, I give the English for a lost Nation, if they continue long
thus, never was there a more palpable oblaesion of the brain, and a more visible
decay of Reason in any race of men: It is a sore judgment from heaven, that a
people should not be more sensible how they are become slaves to Rebels, and
those, most of them the scumm of the Nation, which is the basest of miseries:
how they suffer them to tyrannize by a mere arbitrary extrajudicial power over
their very souls and bodies* over their very lifs and livelihoods; how their
former freedom is turned to fetters, Molehills into Mountains of grievances,
Ship Money into Accize, Justice into Tyranny: For nothing has bin and is daily
so common amongst them as imprisonment without charge, and a charge without an
accuser, condemnation without appearance, and forfeitures without conviction.

To speak a little more of the King, if all the infernal fiends had ligu'd
against him, they could not have designed or disgorged more malice: They would
have laid to his charge his Fathers death, as arrand a lie as ever was forged
in hell: they would make him foreknow the insurrection in Ireland, whereas the
Spanish Ambassador here, and his Confessor who is a very reverend Irishman,
told me, that he knew no more of it then the grand Mogor did: they charge him
with all the blood of this civil war, whereas they and their instruments were
the first kindlers of it, and that first prohibited trade and shut him out of
his own Town: They have intercepted and printed his private Letters to his
Queen, and Hers to him, (Oh barbarous baseness!) but therein they did him a
pleasure, though the intent was malicious, their aim in all things being to
envenom the hearts of his people toward him; and this was to render him a
glorious and well-belov'd Prince, as likewise for making him rich, (all which
they had vowed to do upon passing the Act of Continuance,) But now they have
made him poorer then the meanest of all his vassals, they have made him to have
no propriety in house, goods, or Lands, or as one may say, in his wife and
children: 'Twas usual for the father to hunt in his Park while the son hunted
for his life in the field, for the wife (...) lie in his bedds, while the
husband laid wait to murder him abroad; they have seized upon and sold his
private Hangings an^ Plate, yea his very Cabinets, Jewels, Pictures, Statues,
and Books.

Nor are they the honorablest sort of peeple, and men nobly extracted (as in
Scotland) that do all this, (for then it were not so much to be wondered at) but
they are the meanest sort of Subjects, many of them illiterat Mechaniques,
whereof the lower House is full; specially the subordinat Committees, who
domineer more over Nobles and Gentry, then the Parliament Members themselfs
their Masters use to do.

Touching those few Peers that sit now voting in the upper House, they may be
said to be but mere Ciphers, they are grown so degenerat as to suffer the
Commons to give them the Law, to ride upon their backs, and do most things
without them: There be many thousand Petitions that have bin recommended by
these Lords to the lower House, which are scornfully thrown into corners and
never read; their Messengers have used to dance attendance diverse hours and
days before they were vouchsafed to be let in or heard, to the eternal
dishonor of those Peers, and yet poor spirited things they resent it not: The
Commons now command all, and though, as I am informed, they are summoned
thither by the Kings Original Writ but to consent to what the King and his
Great Counsel of Peers (which is the true Court of Parliament) shall resolve
upon; The Commons I say are now from Consenters become the chiefest
Counselors, yea Controulers of all; nay some of this lower House fly so high as
to term themselfs Conquerors, and though in all conferences with the Lords they
stand bare before them, yet by a new way of mixed Committees they carry
themselfs as Colleagues: These are the men that now have the vogue, and they
have made their Privileges so big swollen, that they seem to have quite
swallowed up both the Kings Prerogatives, and those of the Lords: These are the
Grandees, and Sages of the times, though most of them have but cracked brains
and crazy fortunes God wot; Nay some of them are such arrand Knaves and
coxcombs, that it is questionable whether they more want common honesty, or
common sense; nor know no more what belongs to true policy then the left leg of
a joynt-stool: They are grown so high a tiptoes, that they seem to scorn an Act
of Amnestia, or any grace from their King, whereas some of them deserve to be
hanged as often as they have hairs upon their heads; nor have they any more care
of the common good of England then they have of Lapland, so they may secure
their own persons, and continue their Power now, Authority is sweet, though it
be in Hell.

Thus, my Lord, is England now governed, so that it is an easy thing to take a
prospect of her ruin if she goes on this pace: The Scot is now the swaying
man, who is the third time struck into her bowels with a numerous Army: They
say he has vowed never to return till he has put the Crown on the Kings head,
the Scept^r in his hand, and the sword by his side; if he do so, it will be the
best thing that ever he did, though some think that he will never be able to do
England as much good as he has done her hurt; He has extremely outwitted the
English of late years: And they who were the causers of his first and last
coming in, I hold to be the most pernicious Enemies that ever this Nation had;
for it is probable that Germany (viz. Ponterland and Breme) will be sooner free
of the Swed, then England of the Scot, who will stick close unto him like a
bur, that he cannot shake him off; He is become already Master of the
Englishmans soul, by imposing a Religion upon him, and he may hereafter be
master of his body.

Your Eminence knows there is a periodicall fate hangs over all Kingdoms after
such a revolution of time, and rotation of fortunes wheel; the course of the
world has bin for one Nation, like so many nails, to thrust out another; But
for this Nation, I observe by conference with diverse of the saddest and best
weighdst men among them, that the same presages foretell their ruin as did the
Israelites of old, which was a murmuring against their Governors; It is a long
time that both Judges, Bishops and privy Counselors have bin muttered at,
whereof the first should be the oracles of the Law, the other of the Gospel,
the last of State-affaires, and that our judgments should acquiesce upon theirs;
Here as I am informed; 'twas common for evry ignorant client to arraign his
Judge; for evry puny Curat to censure the Bishop; for evry shallow-brain
homebred fellow to descant upon the results of the Council Table: and this
spirit of contradiction and contumacy has bin a long time fomenting in the
minds of this peeple, infused into them principally, by the Puritanicall
Faction. Touching the second of the three aforesaid (I mean Bishops) they are
grown so odious (principally for their large demeanes) among this peeple, as
the Templers were of old, and one may say it is a just judgment fallen upon
them, for they were most busy in demolishing Convents and Monasteries, as these
are in destroying Cathedralls and Ministers; But above all, it has bin
observed that this peeple has bin a long time rotten-hearted toward the
splendour of the Court, the glory of their King, and the old established
Government of the land: It Is true there were a few small leakes sprung in the
great vessel of the St^te, (and what vessel was ever so ^ite but was subject to
leakes?) but these wise-akers in stopping of one have made a hundred: Yet if
this Kings reign were paralleled to that of Queen Elizabeth's, who was the
greatest Minion of a peeple that ever was, one will find that she stretched the
Prerogative much further; In her time as I have read in the Latin Legend of her
life, some had their hands cut off for only writing against her matching with
the Duke of Aniou, others were hanged at Tyburn for traducing her government;
she pardoned thrice as many Roman Priests as this King did, she passed diverse
Monopolies, she kept an Agent at Rome, she sent her Sergeant at Arms to pluck
out a Member then sitting in the House of Commons by the ears, and clapped him
in prison; she called them saucy fellows to meddle with her Prerogative, or
with the government of her household, she managed all foreign affairs,
specially the wars with Ireland soly by her privy Counsel; yet there was no
murmuring at her reign, and the reason I conceave to be, that there was neither
Scot or Puritan had then any stroke in England.

Yet, for all their disobedience and grumblings against their Liege Lord the
King, this peeple are exactly obedient to their new Masters of the House of
Commons, though they sit there but as their Servants and entitle themselfs so;
and also though in lieu of the small scratches which England might happily have
received before (all which the King had cured) these new masters have made such
deep gashes in her, and given her such deadly wounds that I believe are
incurable.

My Lord, I find by my researches, that there are two great Idols in this
Kingdom, the greatest that ever were, they are the Parliament and the Pulpit;
it is held High treson to speak against the one, and the whole body of Religion
is nailed unto the other, for there is no devotion here at all but preaching,
which God wot is little better then prating. The abuse of these two has bin
the source of all the distempers which now reign: touching the latter, it has
served as a subvervient Engine to prop up the power and popularity of the first;
these malicious Pulpitmen breath out nothing thence but either sedition,
schism or blasphemy: poor shallow brained Sciolists, they would question many
things in the old Testament, and find Apocrypha in the New: And such is the
violence wherewith the minds of men and women are transported toward these
Preachmen, and no other part of devotion besides, that in all probability they
will in time take a surfeit of them: so that give this giddy peeple line enough
there will be no need of Catholic Arms to reduce them to the Apostolic
Church, they will in time pave the way to it themselves, and be glad to return
to Rome to find out a Religion again.

There was here before, as I am informed, a kind of a face of a Church, there
were some solemnities, venerations and decencies used that a man might discover
some piety in this peeple; there was a public Lyturgie that in pithy Pathetical
prayers reached all occasions; the Sacraments were administered with some
reverence, their Churches were kept neat and comely; but this nasty race of
miscreants have nothing at all of sweetness, of piety and devotion in them;
it is all turned to a fatuous kind of zeal after more learning, as if
Christianity had no sobriety, consistence or end of knowledge at all: These
silly things, to imitat the Apostles time, would have the same form of
discipline to govern whole Nations, as it did a chamberfull of men in the
infancy of the Church, they would make the same coat serve our Savious at 30.
years, which fitted him at three: It Is incredible how many ugly sorts of
heresies they daily hatch, but they are most of them old ones newly furbish'd;
they all relate to Aerius, a perfect hater of Bishops, because he could not be
one himself. The two Sectaries which sway most, are the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Presbyterian is a spawn of a Puritan, and the Independent a
spawn of the Presbyterian: there is but one hop 'twixt the first and a Jew, and
but half a hop 'twixt the other and an Infidel; they are both opposite to
Monarchy and Hierarchy; and the latter would have no Government at all, but a
parity and promiscuous confusion, a race of creatures fit only to inhabit Hell:
and one of the fruits of this blessed Parliament, and of these two Sectaries is,
that they have made more Jews and Athiests then I think there is in all Europe
besides; but truly, my Lord, I think the judgments of Heaven were never so
visible in any part of the Earth, as they are now here, for there is Rebel
against Rebel, House against House, City against Army, Parliament against
Scot, but these two Sectaries, I mean the Presbyterian and Independent who were
the firebrarnds that put this poor Island first in a flame, are now in most
deadly feud one against the other, though they both concur in this to destroy
government: And if the King had time enough to look only upon them, they would
quickly hang, draw, and destroy one another.

But indeed all Christian Princes should observe the motions and successes of
these two unlucky Incendiaries, for if they should ligue together again, (as
they have often played fast and loose one with another) and prevail here, this
Island would not terminat their designs, they would puzzle all the world besides.
Their Preachmen ordinarily cry out in the Pulpit, there is a great work to be
done upon earth, for the reforming all mankind, and They are appointed by
Heaven to be the chief Instruments of bringing it about* They have already bin
so busy abroad, that (with vast sommes of money) they brought the Swed upon
the Dane, and the very Savages upon the English Cavaliers in Virginia; and
could they confederat with Turk, or Tartar, or Hell it self against them, they
would do it: they are monstrously puffed up with pride, that they stick not to
call themselfs Conquerors, and one of the chief ringleaders of them, an
ignorant home bred kind of Brewer, was not ashamed to vant it publicly in the
Commons House, that if he had but 20000. men, he would undertake to march to
Constantinople, and pull the Ottoman Emperor out of the Seralio.

Touching the other grand Idol the Parliament, it is true that the primitive
constitution of Parliament in this Island was a wholesome piece of policy, because
it kept a good correspondence, and closed all ruptures 'twixt the King and his
peeple, but this thing they call Parliament now, may rather be termed a cantle
of one, or indeed a Conventicle of Schismatiques, rather than a great Counsel;
it is like a kind of headless Monster, or some estropiated carkas; for there is
neither King nor Prelat, nor scarce the seventh part of Peers and Commons, no
not the twelfth part fairly elected; nevertheless they draw the peeple,
specially this City, like so many stupid animalls, to adore them.

Yet though this institution of Parliament be a wholesome thing in it self, there
is in my judgment a great incongruity in one particular; and I believe it has
bin the cause of most distempers; it is, That the Burgesses are more in number
than the Knights of the Shires; for the Knights of the Shires are commonly
Gentlemen well born, and bred, and versed in the Laws of the Land, as well as
foreign Governments, (diverse of them) but the Burgesses of Towns are commonly
Tradesmen, and being bred in Corporations they are most of them inclining to
Puritanism, and consequently to popular Government; These Burgesses exceeding
the Knights in number, carry all before them by plurality of Voices, and so
puzzle all: And now that* I have mentioned Corporations, I must tell your
Lordship, that the greatest soloecism in the policy of this Kingdom, is the
number of them; especially this monstrous City, which is composed of nothing
else but of Corporations; and the greatest errors that this King, specially his
Father, committed, was to suffer this Town to spread her wings so wide* for she
bears no proportion with the bigness of the Island, but may fit a Kingdom thrice
as spacious; she engrosseth and dreins all the wealth and strength of the
Kingdom; so that I cannot compare England more properly than to one of our
Cremona geese, where the custom is to fatten only the heart, but in doing so
the whole body grows lank.

To draw to a conclusion, This Nation is in a most sad and desperate condition,
that they deserve to be pitied, and preserved from sinking, and having cast
the present state of things and all interests into an equal balance, I find, my
Lord, there be three ways to do it, one good, and two bad.

1. The first of the bad ones is the Sword* which is one of the scourges of
heaven, especially the Civil sword.

2. The second bad one is the Treaty, which they now offer the King in that
small Island where he has bin kept Captif so long, ((...) which quality the
world will account him still while he is detained there) and by tha^ Treaty to
bind him as fast as they can, an^ not trust him at all.

3. The good way is, in a free confiding brave way (Englishmen-like) to send
for their King to London, where City and Country should Petition him to summon a
new and free full Parliament, which he may do as justly as ever he did thing in
his life, these men having infringed as well all the essential Privileges of
Parliament, as every puntillio of it, for they have often risen up in a
confusion without adjournment, they had two Speakers at once, they have most
perjuriously and beyond all imagination betrayed the trust both King and
Country reposed in them, subverted the very sundamentals of all Law, and
plunged the whole Kingdom in this bottomless gulf of calamities: another
Parliament may happily do some good to this languishing Island, and cure her
convulsions, but for these men that arrogat to themselfs the name of Parliament
(by a local puntillio only because they never stirred from the place where they
have bin kept together by mere force) I find them by their actions to be so
pervers, so irrational and refractory, so far given over to a reprobat sense,
so fraught with rancor, with an irreconcilable malice and thirst of blood,
that England may well despair to be healed by such Phlebotomists, or
Quack-salvers; be sides they are so full of scruples, apprehensions, and
jealousies proceeding from blac^ guilty souls, and gawl'd consciences, that
they will do nothing but chop Logic with their King, and spin out time to
continue their power, and evade punishment, which they think is unavoidable if
there should be a free-Parlement.

Touching the King he comports himself with an admired tempered equanimity, he
invades and o're-masters them more and more in all his answers by strength of
reason, though he have no soul breathing to consult withal, but his own Genius:
he gains wonderfully upon the hearts and opinion of his peeple, and as the Sun
uses to appear bigger in winter, and at his declension in regard of the
interposition of certain meteors 'twixt the eye of the beholder and the object,
so this King being thus o're-clouded and declined, shines far more glorious in
the eyes of his people; and certainly these high moral virtues of constancy,
courage and wisdom come from above; and no wonder, for Kings as they are
elevated above all other peeple and stand upon higher ground, they sooner
receive the inspirations of heaven; nor does he only by strength of reason out
(...) them, but he wooes them by gentleness and mansuetude; as the Gentleman
of Paris who having an Ape in his house that had taken his only child out of
the cradle, and dragged him up to the ridge of the house, the parent with
ruthful he art charmed the Ape by fair words and other bland^ments to bring him
softly down, which he did; England may be said to be now just upon such a
precipice, ready to have her brains dashed out, and I hope these men will not
be worse natured then that brute animal, but will save her.

Thus have I given your Eminence a rough account of the state of this poor and
pitifully deluded peeple, which I will perfect when I shall come to your
presence, which I hope will be before this Autumnal Equinox; I thought to have
sojourned here longer, but that I am grown weary of the clime, for I fear
there is the other two scourges of heaven that menace this Island, I mean the
famine and pestilence, especially this City, for their prophanness, rebellion,
and sacrilege* It has bin a talk a great while whether Antichrist be come to
the world or no, I am sure Anti-Iesus, which is worse, is among this people,
for they hold all veneration, though voluntary proceeding from the inward
motions of a sweet devoted soul, and causing an outward genuflection, to be
superstitious, insomuch that one of the Synodical Saints here printed and
published a Book entitling it against Jesus Worship.

So in the profoundest posture of reverence I kiss your vest, as being,

London this 12, of August, 1647. My Lord, Your Eminences most humbly devoted,
I. H.

A NOCTURNAL PROGRES, OR A PERAMBULATION Of most COUNTRIES IN CHRISTENDOM,

Performed in one night by strength of the Imagination;

Which progress terminats in these North-West Isles,

And declares the woeful Confusions They are involved at present.



The progress of the Soul by an usual DREAM.
IT was in the dead of a long Winter night, when no eyes were open but
Watchmens and Sentinels, that I was fallen soundly asleep, the Cinq-out-Ports
were shut up closer then usually, for my senses were so trebly locked, that the
Moon, had she descended from her watery Orb, might have done much more to me
then she did to Endymion when he lay snoaring upon the brow of Latmus Hill;
nay, (be it spoken without profaneness) if a rib had bin taken out of me that
night, to have made a new mo^ of a woman, I should hardly have felt it.

Yet, though the Cousin German of death had so strongly seized thus upon the
exterior parts of this poor Tabernacle of flesh, my inward parts were never
more actif, and fuller of employments then they were that night.

Pictus imaginibus, formisque fugacib^ adstat
Morpheus, and variis fingit nova vultibus ora.
Methought my soul made a sally abroad into the world, and fetched a vast
compass; she seemed to soar up and slice the air to cross seas, to clammer up
huge Hills, and never rested till she had arrived at the Antipodes: Now some of
the most judicious Geometricians and Chorographers hold that the whole Mass of
the Earth being round like the rest of her fellow Elements, there be places, and
poizing parts of the Continent, there be Peninsulas, Promontories and Islands
upon the other face of the Earth that correspond and concenter with all those
Regions and Isles that are upon this superficies which we read, Countries that
symbolize with them in qualities, in temperature of air and clime, as well as
in nature of soil; The Inhabitants also of those places which are so
perpendicularly opposite, do sympathize one with another in disposition,
complexions and humors, though the Astronomers would have their East to be our
West, and so all things vice versa in point of position, which division of the
Heaven is only man's institution.

But to give an account of the strange progress my soul made that night; the
first Country she lighted on was a very low flat Country, and it was such an
odd amphibious Country, being so indented up and down with Rivers and arms of
the sea, that I made a question whether I should call it Water or Land; yet
though the Sea be invited and ushered in into some places, he is churlistly
penned out in some other, so that though he foam and swell, and appear as high
Walls hard-by, yet they keep him out, maugre all his roaring and swelling.

As I wandered up and down in this Watery Region, I might behold from a straight
long Dike whereon I stood, a strange kind of Forest, for the trees moved up and
down; they looked afar off as if they had bin blasted by thunder; for they had
no leafs at all; but making a nearer approach unto them, I found they were a
nomberlesse company of Ship-Masts, and before them appeared a great Town (
Amsterdam) incorporated up and down with Water; As I mused with my self upon
the sight of all this, I concluded, that the Inhabitants of that Country were
notable industrious people, who could give Law so to the angry Ocean, and
occupy those places where the great Leviathan should tumble and take his
pastime in; As my thought ran thus, I met with a man, whom I conjectured to be
'twixt a Merchant and a Mariner, his salutation was so homely; the air also was
so foggy, that methought it stuck like cobwebs in his Mustachos; and he was so
dull in point of motion, as if the blood in his veins had bin half frozen: I
began to mingle words with him, and to expostulat something about that Country
and people; and then I found a great deal of downright civilities in him: He
told me that they were the only men who did miracles of late years; Those
innumerable piles of stones you see before you in such comely neat frabriques,
is a place (said he) that from a Fish- Market in effect is come to be one of
the greatest Marts in this part of the world, which has made her swel thrice
bigger the^ she was 50. years ago; and as you behold this floating Forest of
Masts before her mole, so if you could see the foundations of her houses, you
should see another great Forest, being reared from underground upon fair piles
of timber, which if they chance to sink in this Marshy soil, we have an art to
scrue them up again. We have for 70. years and above without any intermission,
except a short-lived truce that once was made, wrastled with one of the
greatest Potentates upon Earth, and born up stoutly against him, gramercy our
two next neighbor Kings, and their Reason of State, with the advantage of our
situation. We have fought our selfs into a Free State, and now quite out of
that ancient allegiance we owed him; and though we pay twenty times more in
taxes of all sorts then we did to him, yet we are contented: We have turned war
into a Trade, and that which uses to beggar others, has benefited us:
Besides, we have bin and are still the rendevous of most discontented Subjects,
when by the motions of unquiet consciences in points of Religion, or by the
fury of the sword, they are forced to quit their own Countries, who bring their
arts of Manufacture, and movables, hither; Insomuch that our Lombards are full
of their goods, and our banks superabound with their gold and silver which they
bring hither in specie.

To secure our selfs, and cut the Enemy more work, and to engage our
Confederats in a war with him, we have kindled fires in every corner, and now
that they are together by the Ears, we have bin content lately, being long
wooed thereunto, to make a peace with that King to whom we once acknowledged
vassalage; which King out of a height of spirit, has spent 500. times more
upon us for our reduction, then all our Country is worth; But now he has bin
well contented to renounce and abjure all claims and rights of Soverainity
over us; In so much, that being now without an enemy, we hope in a short time
to be masters of all the comerce in this part of the world, and to eat our
Neighbors out of trade in their own Commodities: We fear nothing but that
exces of Wealth, and a surfeit of ease may make us careless and breed quarrels
among our selfs, and that our General, being married to a great Kings daughter
may --.

Here he suddenly broke the thread of his discourse, and got hastily away,
being haul'd by a ship that was sailing hard by*

Hereupon my soul took wing again, and cut her way through that foggy condensed
air, till she lighted on a fair spacious, clear Continent, a generous and
rich Soil mantled up and down with large woods, where, as I ranged to and
fro, I might see diverse fair Houses, Towns, Palaces and Castles, looking like
so many Carkases, for no humane soul appeared in them; methought I felt my he
art melting within me in a soft resentment of the case of so gallant a
Country, and as I stood at amaze, and in a kind of astonishment, a goodly
personage makes toward me, whom both for his comportment, and countenance, I
perceived to be of a finer mould then that companion I had met withal before:
by the trace of his looks I guessed he might be some Nobleman that had bin
ruined by some disaster: having acosted him with a fitting distance, he began in
a masculin strong winded language full of aspirations and tough collision of
Consonants, to tell me as follows: Sir, I find you are a stranger in this
Country, because you stand so aghast at the devastations of such a fair piece
of the Continent, then know Sir, because I believe you are curious to carry
away with you the causes thereof, that these ruthful objects which you behold,
are the effects of a long lingering war, and of the fury of the Sword, a
cruentous civil War that has raged here above thirty years: one of the
grounds of it was the unfortunate undertaking of a Prince, who lived not far
off in an affluence of all earthly felicity; he had the greatest Lady to his
wife, the bes^ purse of money, the fairest Stable of horse* and choicest
Library of books of any other of his neighbor Princes. But being by desperate
and aspiring counsels put upon a Kingdom, while he was catching at the shadow
of a Crown, he lost the substance of all his own ancient possessions: by the
many powerful alliances he had (which was the cause he was pitched upon) the
fewd continued long; for among others a Northern King took advantage to rush
in, who did a world of mischiefs, but in a few years that King and He found
their graves in their own ruins near upon the same time; but now, may heaven
have due thanks for it, there is a peace concluded, a peace which has bin 14.
long years a moulding, and will I hope, be shortly put in execution; yet it is
with this fatal disadvantage, that the said Northern people, besides a mass
of ready money we are to give them, are to have firm footing, and a warm nest
ever in this Country hereafter, so that I fear we shall hear from them too
often: upon these words this noble personage fetched a deep sigh, but in such a
generous manner that he seemed to break and check it before it came half forth.

Thence my soul taking her flight over diverse huge and horrid cacuminous
mountains (the Alps) at last I found my self in a great populous Town (
Naples) but her buildings were miserably battered up and down, she had a world
of Palaces, Castles, Convents and goodly Churches: as I stepped out of
curiosity into one of them, upon the West side there was a huge Grate, where a
creature all in white beckned at me, making my approach to the Grate, I found
her to be a Nun, a lovely creature she was, for I could not distinguish which
was whiter, her hue or her habit, which made me remember (though in a dream my
self) that saying, If Dreams and wishes had been true, there had not been found
a true maid to make a Nun of, ever since a Cloistered life began first among
women; I asked her the reason how so many ugly devastations should befall so
beautiful a City, she in a dolorous gentle tone, and ruthful accents, the
tears trickling down her cheeks like so many pearls, (such pearly tears that
would have dissolved a Diamond) sobb'd out unto me this speech: Gentle Sir, it is
far beyond any expressions of mine, and indeed beyond humane imagination to
conceive the late calamities which have befallen this fair though infortunat
City, a pernicious popular Rebellion broke out here upon a sudden into most
horrid barbarismes, a Fate that hangs over most rich popular places that swim
in luxe and plenty; but touching the grounds thereof, one may say that
rebellion entered into this City, as sin first entered into the world by an
apple: For our King now in his great extremities having almost half the world
banding against him; and putting but a small tax upon a basket of fruit to last
only for a time, this fruittax did put the peeples teeth so on edge, that it
made them gnash against the Government, and rush into Arms; but they are
sensible now of their own follies, for I think never any place suffered more in
so short a time: the civil combustions abroad in other Kingdoms may be said
to be but small squibs compared to those horrid flakes of fire which have raged
here, and much ado we had to keep our Vest all fire free from the fury of it:
in less then the revolution of a year it consumed above fourscore thousand
souls within the walls of this City; But it is not the first time of forty,
that this luxurious foolish peeple has smarted for their insurrections and
insolences, and that this mad horse has overthrown his Rider, and drawn a
worse upon his back; who instead of a saddle, put a pack-saddle and Panniers
upon him: but indeed the voluptuousness of this peeple was grown ripe for the
judgment of heaven.

She was then beginning to expostulat with me about the state of my Country,
and I had a mighty mind to satisfy her, for I could have corresponded with her
in the re^ation of as strange things, but the Lady A^adesse calling her away,
she departed in an ^nstant, obedience seemed to be there so precise and punctual.

I steered my course thence through a most delicious Country to another City
that lay in the very bosom of the Sea, ( Venice) she was at first nothing else
but a kind of posie made up of dainty green Hillocks, tied together by above
400. bridges, and so coagulated into a curious City; though she be espoused to
Neptune very solemnly once evry ^eer, yet she still reserves her maydenhead,
^ad bears the title of the Virgin City in that part of the world; But I found
her tugging mainly with a huge Giant that would ravish her; He has shrewdly set
on her skirts, and a great shame it is, that she is not now assisted by her
Neighbors, and that they should be together by the ears when they should do so
necessary a work, considering how that great Giant is their common Enemy; and
has lately vowed seven years wars against her; specially considering, that if
he comes once to ravish her, he will quickly ruin her said Neighbors, She (to
her high honor be it spoken) being their only rampart against the incursion of
the said Giant, and by consequence their greatest security.

From this Maiden City, me thought, I was in a trice carried over a long gulf,
and so through a Midland Sea, into another Kingdom, (Spain) where I felt the
Clime hotter by some Degrees; a rough-hew'n soil, for the most part, it was
full of craggy barren hills; but where there were valleys and water enough, the
country was extraordinarily fruitful, whereby nature (it seems) made her a
compensation for the sterility of the rest. Yet notwithstanding the hardship of
the soil, I found her full of Abbeys, Monasteries, Hermitages, Convents,
Churches, and other places of devotion; as I roved there a while, I encountered
a grave man in a long black cloak, by the fashion whereof, and by the brimms of
his hat, I perceived him to be a Jesuit; I closed with him, and questioned him
about that Country: He told me the King of that Country was the greatest
Potentat of that part of the world; and, to draw power to a greater unity, they
of our Order could be well contented, that he were universal Head over
Temporalls, because it is most probable to be effected by him, as we have
already one universal Head over Spiritualls: This is the Monark of the Mines,
I mean of Gold and Silver, who furnishes all the world, but most of all his own
enemies with money, which money foments all the wars in this part of the world:
Never did any earthly monark thrive so much in so short a tract of time, But of
late years he has been ill-favouredly shaken by the revolt and utter defection
of two sorts of Subjects, who are now in actual arms against him on both sides
of him at his own doors. There has bin also a long deadly feud 'twixt the next
tramontan Kingdom (France) and him, though the Q. that rules there be his own
sister, an unnatural odious thing: But it seems God Almighty has a quarrel of
late years with all earthly Potentats; for in so short a time there never
happened such strange shocks and revolutions: The great Emperor of Ethiopia
has bin outed, he and all his children by a petty companion: The King of
China, a greater Emperor than he, has lost almost all that huge Monarchy by
the incursion of the Tartar, who broke ore the wall upon him: The grand Turk
has bin strangled, with 30. of his Concubines; The Emperor of Muscovy has
bin content to beg his life of his own vassals, and to see before his face
diverse of his chief Officers hacked to pieces, and their heads cut off and
steeped in strong water, to make them burn more bright in the market place.
Besides the above mentioned, this King has also diverse enemies more, yet he
bears up against them all indifferently well, though with infinite expense of
treasure, and the Church, specially our Society, has stuck close unto him in
these his exigents: whence may be inferred, that let men repine as long as they
will at the possessions of the Church, they are the best anchors to a State in
a storm, and in time of need to preserve it from sinking; besides, acts of
charity would be quite lost among men, did not the wealth of the Church keep
life in them: Hereupon drawing a huge pair of Beads from under his cloak, he
began to ask me of my Religion; I told him I had a long journey to go, so that I
could not stay to wait on him longer; so we parted, and me thought I was very
glad to be rid of him so well.

My soul then made another flight over an Assembly of hideous high hills,
(Pyreneys) and lighted under another Clime, on a rich and copious Country
(France) resembling the form of a Lozenge, but me thought, I never saw so many
poor peeple in my life; I encountered a Pesan, and asked him what the reason
was, that there should be so much poverly in a Country where there was so much
plenty: Sir, they keep the Commonalty poor in pure policy here, for being a
peeple, as the world observes us to be, that are more humerous than others, and
that love variety and change, if we were suffered to be pampered with wealth,
we would ever and anon rise up in tumults, and so this Kingdom should never be
quiet, but subject to intestine broils, and so to the hazard of any invasion:
But there was of late a devilish Cardinal, whose humor being as sanguin as his
habit, and working upon the weakness of his Master, has made us not only poor,
but stark beggars, and we are like to continue so by an eternal war, wherein he
has plunged this poor Kingdom, which war must be maintained with our very
vital spirits: but as dejected and indigent as we are, yet upon the death of
that ambitious Cardinal, we had risen up against This, who has the Vogue now,
(with whom he has left his principles) had not the fearful example of our next
transmarin Western neighbors (the English) and the knowledge we have of a worse
kind of slavery, of those endless arbitrary taxes, and horrid confusions they
have fooled themselfs lately into, utterly deterred us, though we have twenty
times more reason to rise then ever they had: yet our great City ( Paris) has
showed her teeth, and gnash'd them illfavouredly of late, but we find she has
drawn water only for her own Mill, we fare little the better, yet we hope it
will conduce to peace, which has bin so long in agitation.

I cannot remember how I parted with that Peasan, but in an instant I was
landed upon a large Island, and methought, 'twas the temperat'st Region I had
bin in all the while ( England;) the heat of the Sun there is as harmless as his
light, the evening serene^ are as wholesome there as the morning dew; the
Dog-daies as innocuous as any of the two Equinoxes. As I ranged to and fro that
fair Island, I spyed a huge City ( London) whose length did far exceed her
latitude, but neither for length or latitude did she seem to bear any
political proportion with that Island: she looked, methought, like the Jesuits
hat whom I had met withal before, whose brimms were bigger then the crown, or
like a peticoat, whose fringe was longer then the body. As I did cast my eyes
upwards, methought I discerned a strange inscription in the air which hung
just over the midst of that City written in such huge visible characters, that
any one might have read it, which was this: Woe be to the bloody City.

Hereupon a reverend Bishop presented himself to my view, his gray hairs, and
grave aspect struck in me an extraordinary reverence of him: so performing
those complements which were fitting, I asked him of the condition of the
place, he in a submiss sad tone, with clouds of melancholy waving up and down
his looks, told me; Sir this Island was reputed few years since to have bin in
the completest condition of happiness of any part on earth, insomuch that she
was repined a^ for her prosperity and peace by all her neighbors who were
plunged in war round about her, but now she is fallen into as deep a gulf of
misery, and servitude, as she was in a height of felicity and freedom before:
Touching the grounds of this change, I cannot impute it to any other then to a
surfeit of happiness; now, there is no surfeit so dangerous as that of
happiness: There are such horrid divisions here, that if they were a foot in
hell, they were able to destroy the Kingdom of Satan: truly Sir, there are
crep'd in more opinions among us about matters or Religion, then the Pagans had
of old of the Summum bonum, which Varro says were 300. the understandings of
poor men were never so puzzled and distracted; a great while there were two
opposite powers ( King and Parliament) who swayed here in a kind of equality that
peeple knew not whom to obey, many thousands complied with both, as the men of
Calecut who adore God and the Devil, Tantum Squantum, as it is in the Indian
language) They adore the one for love, the other for fear: there is a monstrous
kind of wild liberty here that ever was upon earth; That which was complained
of as a stalking horse to draw on our miseries at first, is now only in
practice, which is mere arbitrary rule; for now both Law, Religion and
Allegiance are here arbitrary: Touching the last, it is quite lost, it is
permitted that any may prate, preach or print what they will in derogation of
their anointed King: which word King was once a Monosyllable of some weight in
this I Will, but it is as little regarded now as the word Pope (among some) which
was also a mighty Monosyllable once among us: the rule of the Law is, that the
King can do no wrong, there is a contrary rule now crept in, that the King can
receive no wrong; and truly Sir, it is a great judgment both upon Prince and
peeple; upon the one, that the love of so many of his vassals should be so
alienated from him; upon the other, that their hearts should be so poisoned, and
certainly it is the effect of an ill spirit; both the one and the other in all
probability tend to the ruin of this Kingdom.

But now Sir, (because I see you are so attentive, and seem to be much moved at
this Discourse) as I have discovered unto you the general cause of our
calamities, which was not only a satiety but a surfeit of happiness, so I will
descend now to a particular cause of them; it was a Northern Nation ( Scot)
that brought these cataracts of mischiefs upon us; and you know the old saying,

Out of the North
All ill comes forth.
Far be it from me to charge the whole Nation herewith; no, but only some
pernicious Instruments that had insinuated themselfs, and incorporated among
us, and swayed both in our Court and Counsels: They had a hand in every
Monopoly; they had out of our Exchequer, and Customs near upon 400000. Crowns
in yearly Pensions, viis and modis; yet they could not be content, but they
must puzzle the peace and policy of this Church and State: and though they are
a peeple of a differing Genius, differing Laws, Customs, and Manners unto us,
yet for matter of conscience they would bring our necks into their yoke, as if
they had a greater talent of reason, and clearer illuminations, as if they
understood Scripture better, and were better acquainted with God Almighty then
we, who brought them first from Paganism to Christianity, and also to be
reformed Christians: but it seems, matters have little thriven with them; nay
the visible hand of heaven has bin heavily upon them diverse ways since they
did lift their hands against their native King; For notwithstanding the vast
sums they had hence, yet is the generality of them as beggarly as ever they
were; besides, the Civil Sword has raged there as furiously as here, and did as
much execution among them. Moreover the Pestilence has bin more violent, and
sweeping in their chief Town ( Edinburgh) then ever it was since they were a
peeple. And now lately there is the notablest dishonor befaln them that possibly
could light upon a Nation, in that 7000. of ours should upon even ground
encounter, kill, slay, rout and utterly discomfit thrice as many of theirs,
though as well appointed and armed as men could be: And truly Sir, the
advantages that accrue to this Nation are not a few by that exploit; For of
late years that Nation was cried up abroad to be a more Martial peeple then we,
and to have baffled us in open field in diverse traverses: besides, I hope a
small matter will pay now their Arrerages here, and elsewhere; but principally,
I hope they will not be so busy hereafter in our Court and Counsel, as they
have bin formerly.

Another cause of our calamity is a strange race of peeple (the Puritans)
sprung up among our selfs, who were confederat with those of the North; they
would make Gods House clean, and by putting out the candle of all ancient
learning and knowledge, they would sweep it only by the light of an Ignis
fatuus: but it is visibly found that they have brought much more rubbage into
it, and whereas in reforming this house, they should rather find out the groat
that is lost, they go about to take away the mite that is left, and so put
Christ's Spouse to live on mere alms: True it is, there is a kind of zeal that
burns in them, (and I could wish there were so much piety) but this zeal burns
with too much violence and presumption, which is no good symptom of spiritual
health, it being a rule, that as the natural heat, so the spiritual should be
moderat, else it commonly turns to a frenzy, and that is the thing which causes
such a giddiness and distraction in their brains; This (proceeding from the
suggestions of an ill spirit) puffs them up with so much spiritual pride; for
the Devil is so cunning a Wrastler, that he oftentimes lifts men up to give
them the greater fall: they think they have an inerring spirit, and that their
Dial must needs go true, howsoever the Sun goes: they would make the Gospel, as
the Caddies make the Alchoran, to decide all civil temporal matters under the
large notion of slander, whereof they forsooth to be the Judges, and so in time
to hook in all things to their Classis: I believe if these men were dissected
when they are dead, they would be a great deal of Quicksilver found in their
brains.

Proh Superi, quantum mortalia pectora coecae
Noctis habent! --
But I could pity the giddiness of their brains, had they not so much gaul
in their breasts, were they not so thirsting after blood, so full of poison and
irreconcilable malice; in so much that it may be very well thought, these men
are a kin to that race which sprung out of the Serpents teeth: these are they
which have seduced our great Counsel, and led this foolish City by the nose to
begin and foment this ugly War, insomuch that if those numberless bodies which
have perished in these commotions, were cast into her streets, and before her
doors, many thousand Citizens noses would bleed of pure guilt.

Not to hold you long, these are the men who have baffled common sense, blasted
the beams of nature, and offered violence to reason it self; these are they who
have infatuated most of the peeple of this Island; so that whereas in times
past, some called her the I Will of Angels, she may be termed now the I Will of Gulls,
or more properly the I Will of Dogs, or rather indeed ^he I Will of Wolfs, there is
such a true Lycanthrepy com in among us: I am loath to call her the Island of
Devils, though she has bin branded so abroad.

To conclude Sir, the glory of this Isle is quite blasted; it is true they speak
of peace, but while the King speaks to them of it, they make themselves ready
for battle; I much fear, that Ixion-like we embrace a cloud for peace, out of
which there will issue out Centaures, and Monsters, as sprung out of that cloud.

Touching that ancient'st holy Order whereof you see me to be; I well hoped,
that in regard they pretended to reform things only, they would not have quite
extirpated, but regulated only this Order: it had bin enough to brayle our
wings, not to have ^ear'd them: to have lopped and pruned, not to have
destroyed root and branch of that ancient tree which was planted by the hands
of the Apostles themselfs: In fine Sir, we are a lost peeple, it is no other
Dedalus, but the high Deity of heaven can clue us out of this labyrinth of
confusions, can extricat us out of this maze of miseries: the Philosopher
says, it is impossible for man to quadrat a Circle; so it is not in the power of
man, but of God alone, to make a loyal Subject of a Round head: Among other
things that strangers report of this Island, they say that Winter here has too
many tears in his eyes: Helas Sir, it is impossible he should have too many now,
to bewail the lamentable base slavery, that a freeborn peeple is com to: and
though they are grown so tame as to kiss the rod that whips them, yet their
Taskmasters will not throw it into the fire.

Truly Sir, as my tongue is too feeble to express our miseries, so the plummet
of the best understanding is too short to fadom the depth of them.

With this, the grave Venerable Bishop giving me his benediction, fetched such a
sigh, that would have rended a rock asunder; and suddenly vanished (methought)
out out of my sight up toward Heaven. I presently after awoke about the
dawnings of the day, when one could hardly discern Dog from Wolf; and my soul,
my Arimula vagula blandula, being re-entred through the Horn gate of sleep into
her former mansion, half tired after so long a Peregrination; and having rubbed
my eyes, distended my limms, and returned to a full expergefaction, I began to
call my self to account touching those world of objects my fancy had
represented unto me that night; and when by way of reminiscence I fell to
examin^ and ruminate upon them; Lord, what a mass of Ideas ran in my head! but
when I called to mind the last Country my soul wandered in, methought I felt my
heart like a lump of lead within me, when I considered how pat every
circumstance might be applied to the present condition of England: I was
meditating with my self what kind of dream this might be; whereupon I thought
upon the common division that Philosophers make of dreams, that they are either

Divine, Diabolical, Natural, or Humane.
For the first, they are Visions more properly or Revelations, whereof there are
diverse examples in the holy Oracles of God, but the puddled cranies of my brain
are not rooms clean enough to entertain such: Touching the second kind, which
come by the impulses of the Devil, I have heard of diverse of them, as when one
did rise up out of his sleep, and fetched a poyniard to stab his bedfellow,
which he had done, had he not bin awake; Another went to the next chamber abed
to his mother, and would have ravished her; but I thank God this dream of mine
was not of that kind.

Touching the third species of dreams; which are natural dreams, they are
according to the humor which predominats; if Melancholy sway, we dream of black
darksom devious places; if Phlegm, of waters; if Choler, of frayes, fightings,
and troubles; if Sanguin predominat, we dream of green fields, gardens, and
other pleasant representations; and the Physician comes often to know the
quality of a disease by the nocturnal objects of the patients fancy.

Humane dreams the last sort relate to the actions of the day past, or of the
day following, and some representations are clear and even; others are
amphibious, mongrell, distorted and squalid objects, (according to the species
of trees over troubled waters:) and the object is clear or otherwise, accorning
to the tenuity or grossness of the vapors which ascend from the ventricle up
to the brain.

Touching my Dream, I think it was of this last kind; for I was discoursing of,
and condoling the sad distempers of our times the day before: I pray God some
part of it prove not prophetical; for, although the Frenchman says, Songs
sont Mensonges, dreams are delusions, and that they turn to contraries, yet
the Spaniard has a saying,

Et ciego sonnava que via
Yera lo que querria.
The blind man dreamt he did see light,
The thing he wished for happened right.
Insomuch that some Dreams oftentimes prove true; as S. Austin makes mention of
a rich Merchant in Milan, who being dead, one of his Creditors comes to his son
to demand such a sum of money which he had lent his father; the son was
confident 'twas paid, but not finding the Creditors Receipt, he was impleaded
and like to be cast in the Suit, had not his fathers Ghost appeared to him, and
directed him to the place where the Acquittance was, which he found the next
day accordingly. Galen speaks of one that dreamt he had a wooden leg, and the
next day he was taken with a dead Palsy in one whole side. Such a Dream was
that of William Rufus, when he thought he had felt a cold gust passing through
his bowels; and the next day he was slain in the guts, by the glance of an
arrow, in new Forest, a place where he and his Father had committed so many
Sacrileges. I have read in Artimedorus, of a woman that dreamt she had seen the
pictures of three faces in the Moon like her self, and she was brought to bed
of three daughters a little after, who all died within the compass of a month.
Another dreamt, that Xanthus water ran red, and the next day he fell a spitting
of blood.

To this I will add another foretelling Dream, whereof I have read, which was
thus: two young Gentlemen being traveling abroad in strange Countries, and
being come to a great town, the one lay far in the City, the other in an
Hostry without the wall in the Suburbs: he in the City did dream in the dead of
night, that his friend which he had left in the Suburbs rushed into his chamber
panting and blowing, being pursued by others; he dreamt so again, and the
third time he might see his friends Ghost appearing at his beds side with blood
trickling down his throat, and a Poyniard in his breast, telling him, Dear
friend, I am come now to take my last farewell of thee, and if thou rise
betimes, thou shall meet me in the way going to be buried; the next morning his
friend going with his Host toward the Inn in the Suburbs where he left his
friend, they met with a Cart laden with dung in the way, which being staid and
searched, the dead body was found naked in the dung.

I will conclude with a notable Dream that Osman the Great Turk had not many
years since, a few days before he was murdered by his Janissaries, 1623. He
dreamt, that being mounted upon a huge Camel, he could not make him go, though
he switch'd and spurred him never so much; at last the Camel overthrew him, and
being upon the ground, only the bridle was left in his hand, but the body of
the Camel was vanished: the Mufti not being illuminated enough to interpret
this Dream, a Santon who was a kind of Idiot, told him, the Camel represented
the Ottoman Empire, which he not being able to govern, he should be overthrown,
which two days after proved true.

By these, and a cloud of examples more, we may conclude, that Dreams are not
altogether impertinent, but something may be gathered out of them; though the
application and meaning of them be denied to man, unless by special
illumination.

Somnia venturi sunt praescia saepe diei. By Dreams we often may guess
At the next days success.
THus have you a rough account of a rambling Noctivagation up and down the
world: I may boldly say, that neither Sir John Mandevile, or Coryat himself
traveled more in so short a time: whence you see what nimble Postillions the
Animal Spirits are; and with what incredible celerity the imagination can
cross the Line, cut the Tropiques, and pass to the other Hemisphere of the
world; which shows that humane souls have something in them of the Almighty,
that their faculties have a kind of ubiquitary freedom, though the body be
never so under restraint, as the Authors is.

They err as much who think all Dreams false,
As They who think Them always true.
In the prison of the Fleet 3. Idus Decembris 1645. I. H.

A VINDICATION OF HIS MAJESTY,

Touching a Letter He writ to Rome from the Court of Spain, in Answer to a
Letter which Pope Gregory the 15th. had sent Him upon passing the Dispensation
for concluding the Match with the I^fanta.

Which Letter Mr. Pryn mention's in his Book called the Popish Royal Favorit,
whereby the World is apt to believe that His Majesty had Inclinations to Pope^y.

There goe's also herewith, A clearing of some Aspersions that the said Mr. Pryn
cast's upon the Author hereof in the same Pamphlet, viz. That he was a
Malignant, and no friend to Parlements.

WHEREBY, He takes occasion to speak something of the first Rise, And also of the
Duty as well as the Authority of Parlements.



To my worthily honored friend Sir W. S. Knight.
SIR,
I Have many thanks to give you for the Book you pleased to send me, called the
Popish Royal Favorite; and according to your advice (which I value in a high
degree) I did put pen to paper, and something you may see I have done (though in
a poor pamphleting way) to clear my self of those aspersions that seem to be
cast upon His Majesty; But truly Sir, I was never so unfit for such a task; all
my Papers, Manuscripts, and Notes having bin long since seized upon and kept
from me: Add hereunto, that besides this long pressure and languishment of
close restraint (the sense whereof I find has much stupefied my spirits) it
pleased God to visit me lately with a dangerous fit of sickness, a high burning
fever, with the new disease, whereof my Body as well as my Mind is yet somewhat
crazie: so that (take all afflictions together) I may truly say, I have passed
the Ordeal, the fiery Trial. But it has pleased God to reprieve me to see
better days I hope; for out of this fatal black Cloud, which now ore-sets this
poor Island, I hope there will break a glorious Sunshine of peace and firm
happiness: To effect which, had I a Jury, a Grand Jury of lives, I would
sacrifice them all, and triumph in the oblation.

So I most affectionately kiss your hands, and rest

Your faithful (though afflicted) Servant, From the Prison of the Fleet. I. H.

The Pre-eminence, and Duty OF PARLIAMENT.
Sectio Prima.
I Am a Freeborn Subject of the Realm of England; whereby I claim as my native
Inheritance, an undoubted right, propriety, and portion in the Laws of the
Land: And this distinguishes me from a slave. I claim likewise protection from
my Soverain Prince, who as He is my Liege Lord is obliged to protect me, and I
being one of His Liege peeple am obliged to obey Him by way of Reciprocation; I
claim also an interest and common right in the High National Court of
Parliament, and in the power, the privileges and jurisdiction thereof, which I
put in equal balance with the Laws, in regard it is the fountain whence they
spring; and this I hold also to be a principal part of my Birthright; which
Great Council I honor, respect, value, and love in as high a degree as can
be, as being the Bulwark of our liberties, the main boundary and bank which
keeps us from slavery, from the inundations of tyrannical Rule, and unbounded
Will-government. And I hold my self obliged in a tie of indispensable
obedience, to conform and submit my self to whatsoever shall be transacted,
concluded, and constituted by its authority in Church or State with the Royal
assent, whether it be by making, enlarging, altering, diminishing, disanulling,
repealing, or reviving of any Law, Statute, Act, or Ordinance whatsoever,
either touching matters Ecclesiastical, civil, common, capital, criminal,
martial, maritime, municipall, or any other; of all which the transcendent and
uncontrollable jurisdiction of that Court is capable to take cognizance.

Amongst the three things which the Athenian Captain thanked the gods for, one
was, That he was born a Grecian, and not a Barbarian; For such was the vanity
of the Greeks, and after them of the Romans in the flourish of their Monarchy,
to arrogat all civility to themselves, and to term all the world besides
Barbarians: so I may say to rejoice, that I was born a vassal to the Crown of
England; that I was born under so well-moulded and tempered a Government, which
endows the subject with such Liberties and infranchisements that bear up his
natural courage, and keep him still in heart; such Liberties that fence and
secure him eternally from the gripes and tallons of Tyranny: And all this may
be imputed to the Authority and wisdom of this High Court of Parliament,
wherein there is such a rare co-ordination of power (though the Sovereignty
remain still entire, and untransferrable in the person of the Prince) there is
such a wholesome mixture 'twixt Monarchy, Optimacy, and Democracy, 'twixt Prince,
Peers, and Commonalty, during the time of consultation, that of so many
distinct parts, by a rare cooperation and unanimity they make but one Body
Politic, (like that shea^e of arrows in the Emblem) one entire concentricall
piece, the King being still the Head, and the results of their deliberations
but as so many harmonious diapasons arising from different strings. And what
greater immunity and happiness can there be to a Peeple, than to be liable to
no Laws but what they make themselves? to be subject to no contribution,
assessement, or any pecuniary erogations whatsoever, but what they Vote, and
voluntarily yield unto themselves? For in this compacted Politic Body, there
be all degrees of peeple represented; both the Mechanic, Tradesman, Merchant,
and Yeoman have their inclusive Vote, as well as the Gentry, in the persons of
their Trustees, their Knights and Burgesses, in passing of all things.

Nor is this Sovereign Surintendent Council an Epitome of this Kingdom only,
but it may be said to have a representation of the whole Universe; as I heard a
fluent wellworded Knight deliver the last Parliameut, who compared the
beautiful composure of that High Court to the great work of God, the World it
self: The King is as the Sun, the Nobles the fixed Stars, the Itineant judges
and other Officers (that go upon Messages 'twixt both Houses) to the Planets;
the Clergy, to the Element of fire; the Commons, to the solid Body of Earth,
and the rest of the Elements. And to pursue this comparison a little farther;
as the heavenly Bodies, when three of them meet in Conjunction, do use to
produce some admirable effects in the Elementary World; So when these three
States convene and assemble in one solemn great Iunta, some notable and
extraordinary things are brought forth, tending to the welfare of the whole
Kingdom our Microcosme.

HE that is never so little versed in the Annals of this I Will, will find that it
has bin her fate to be four times conquered, I exclude the Scot for the
situation of his Country, and the Quality of the Clime has been such an
advantage and security to him, that neither the Roman Eagles would fly thither
for fear of freezing their wings, nor any other Nation attempt the work.

These so many Conquests must needs bring with them many tumblings and
tossings, many disturbances and changes in Government; yet I have observed,
that notwithstanding these tumblings, it retained still the form of a
Monarchy, and something there was always that had an Analogy with the great
Assembly of Parliament.

The first Conquest I find was made by Claudius Caesar, at which time (as some
well observe) the Roman Ensigns, and the Standard of Christ came in together:
It is well known what Laws the Roman had; He had his Comitia, which bore a
resemblance with our Convention in Parliament; the place of their meeting was
called Praetorum, and the Laws which they enacted, Plebiscita.

The Saxon Conquest succeeded next, which were the English, there being no name
in Welsh or Irish for an English man, but Saxon, to this day; They also
governed by Parliament, though it were under other names, as Michel Sinoth,
Michel Gemote, and Witenage Mote.

There are Records above a thousand years old of these Parlements in the Reigns
of King Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, and the rest of the seven Kings during the
Heptarchy: The British Kings also, who retained a great while some part of the
Isle unconquered, governed and made Laws by a kind of Parlementary way;
witness the famous Laws of Prince Howell, called Howell Dha, (the good Prince
Howell) whereof there are yet extant some British Records: Parlements were also
used after the Heptarchy by King Kenulphus, Alphred, and others; witness that
renowned Parliament held at Grately by King Athelstan.

The third Conquest was by the Danes, and they governed also by such general
Assemblies, (as they do to this day) witness that great and so much celebrated
Parliament held by that mighty Monarch Canutus, who was King of England,
Denmark, Norway, and other Regions 150 years before the compiling of Magna
Charta; and this the learned in the Laws do hold to be one of the specialst,
and most authentic pieces of antiquity we have extant. Edward the Confessor
made all his Laws thus, (and he was a great Legis-lator,) which the Norman
Conqueror (who liking none of his sons, made God Almighty his heir by
bequeathing unto him this Island for a legacy) did ratify and establish, and
digested them into one entire methodicall Systeme, which being violated by
Rufus, (who came to such a disastrous end as to be shot to death in lieu of a
Buck for his sacriledges) were restored by Henry the first, and so they
continued in force till King John; whose Reign is renowned for first confirming
Magna Charta, the foundation of our Liberties ever since: which may be compared
to diverse outlandish graffes set upon one English stock; or to a posie of
sundry fragrant flowers; for the choicest of the British, the Roman, Saxon,
Danish, and Norman Laws, being culled and picked out and gathered as it were
into one bundle, out of them the foresaid Grand Charter was extracted; And the
establishment of this great Charter was the work of a Parliament.

Nor are the Laws of this Island only, and the freedom of the Subject
conserved by Parliament, but all the best policed Countries of Europe have the
like. The Germans have their Diets, the Danes and Swedes their Rijcks Dachs;
the Spaniard calls his Parliament las Cortes; and the French have, (or should
have at least) their Assembly of three States, though it be grown now in a
manner obsolete, because the Authority thereof was (by accident) devolved to
the King. And very remarkable it is, how this happened; for when the English
had taken such large footing in most parts of France, having advanced as far as
Orleans and driven their then King Charles the seventh, to Bourges in Berry the
Assembly of the three States in these pressures, being not able to meet after
the usual manner in full Parliament because the Country was unpassable, the
Enemy having made such firm invasions up and down through the very bowels of
the Kingdom; That power which formerly was inhaerent in the Parlementary
Assembly, of making Laws, of assessing the Subject with Taxes, subsidiary
levies, and other impositions, was transmitted to the King during the war;
which continues many years, that entrusted power by length of time grew as it
were habitual in him, and could never after be reassumed and taken from him;
so that ever since, his Edicts countervaile Acts of Parliament. And that which
made the business more feasible for the King, was, that the burden fell most
upon the Communalty (the Clergy and Nobility not feeling the weight of it) who
were willing to see the Peasan pulled down a little, because not many years
before, in that notable Rebellion, called la jaquerie de Beauvoisin, which was
suppressed by Charles the wise, the Common people put themselves boldly in Arms
against the Nobility and Gentry, to lessen their power. Add hereunto as an
advantage to the work, that the next succeeding King Lewis the eleventh, was a
close cunning Prince, and could well tell how to play his game, and draw water
to his own mill; For amongst all the rest, he was said to be the first that put
the Kings of France, Horse de page, out of their minority, or from being Pages
any more, though thereby he brought the poor peasans to be worse than Lacquays,
and they may thank themselfs for it.

Nevertheless, as that King has an advantage hereby one way, to Monarchize
more absolutely, and never to want money, but to ballast his purse when he
will; so there is another mighty inconvenience arises to him and his whole
Kingdom another way; for this peeling of the Peasan has so dejected him, and
cowed his native courage so much by the sense of poverty ( which brings along
with it a narrowness of (...)) that he is little useful for the war: which
put's the French King to make other Nations mercenary to him, to fill up his
Infantery: Insomuch, that the Kingdom of France may be not unfitly compared to
a body that has all it is blood drawn up into the arms, breast and back, and
scarce any le^t from the girdle downwards, to cherish and bear up the lower
parts, and keep them from starving.

All this seriously considered, there cannot be a more proper and pregnant
example than this of our next Neighbors, to prove how infinitely necessary the
Parliament is to assert, to prop up and preserve the public liberty, and
national rights of a peeple, with the incolumity and welfare of a Country.

Nor does the Subject only reap benefit thus by Parliament, but the Prince, (if
it be well considered) has equal advantage thereby; It renders him a King of
free and able men, which is far more glorious than to be a King of Cowards,
Beggars, and Bankrupts; Men that by their freedom, and competency of wealth,
are kept still in heart to do him service against any foreign force. And it is
a true maxim in all States, that it is less danger and dishonor for the Prince
to be poor, than his people: Rich Subjects can make their King rich when they
please, if he gain their hearts, he will quickly get their purses. Parliament
increases love and good intelligence 'twixt him and his peeple, it acquaints
him with the reality of things, and with the true state and diseases of his
Kingdom, it brings him to the knowledge of his better sort of Subjects, and of
their abilities, which he may employ accordingly upon all occasions; It
provides for his Royal Issue, pays his debts, finds means to fill his Coffers:
and it is no ill observation, That Parlementmoneys (the great Aid) have
prospered best with the Kings of England; It exceedingly raises his repute
abroad, and enableth him to keep his foes in fear, his Subjects in awe, his
Neighbors and Confederates in security, the three main things which go to
aggrandize a Prince, and render him glorious. In sum, it is the Parliament
that supports, and bears up the honor of his Crown, and settles his Throne in
safety, which is the chief end of all their consultations: For whosoever is
entrusted to be a Member of this High Court, carries with him a double
capacity; he sits there as a Patriot, and as a Subject: as he is the one, the
Country is his object, his duty being to vindicat the public liberty, to make
wholesome Laws, to put his hand to the pump, and stop the leaks of the great
vessel of the State, to pry into, and punish corruption and oppression, to
improve and advance trade, to have the grievances of the place he serves for
redressed, and cast about how to find something that may tend to the advantage
of it.

But he must not forget that he sits there also as a Subject, and according to
that capacity, he must apply himself to do his Soveraignt business, to provide
not only for his public, but his personal wants; to bear up the luster and
glory of his Court; To consider what occasions of extraordinary expenses he may
have, by increase of Royal Issue, or maintenance of any of them abroad; To
enable him to vindicat any affront or indignity that might be offered to his
Person, Crown, or Dignity, by any foreign State or Kingdom, or intestin
Rebellion; To consult what may enlarge his honor, contentment, and pleasure.
And as the French Tacitus ( Comines) has ^t, the English Nation was used to be
more ^orward and zealous in this particular than any other; according that to
ancient eloquent speech of a great Lawyer, Domus Regis vigi^a defendit omnium,
otium illius labor omni^m, deliciae illius industria omnium, vacatio ^lius
occupatio omnium, salus illius periculum ^nium, honor illius objectum omnium.
Eve^ one should stand Centinell to defend the Kings house, his safety should be
the danger of (...), his pleasures the industry of all, his ease ^old be the
labor of all, his honor the ob^ct of all.

Out of these premises this conclusion ^ay be easily deduced, That, the
principal ^ntain whence the King derives his happiness and safety, is his
Parliament; It is that great Conduit-pipe which conveighes unto him his peoples
bounty and gratitude; The truest Looking-glass wherein he discernes their
loves; (now the Subjects love has been always accounted the prime Cittadell of
a Prince.) In his Parliament he appears as the Sun in the Meridian, in the
altitude of his glory, in his highest State Royal, as the Law tells us.

Therefore whosoever is averse or disaffected to his Sovereign Law-making Court*
cannot have his heart well planted within him, he can be neither good Subject,
no^ good Patriot, and therefore unworthy to breath English air, or have any
benefit, advantage, or protection from the Laws.

Sectio Secunda.
BY that which has bin spoken, which is the language of my heart, I hope no
indifferent judicious Reader will doubt of the cordial affection, of the high
respects and due reverence I bear to Parliament, as being the wholsomest
constitution, (and done by the highest and happiest reach of policy that ever
was established in this Island) to perpetuate the happiness thereof. Therefore I
must tell that Gentleman, who was Author of a Book entitled the Popish Royal
Favorite, (lately printed and exposed to the world) that he offers me very hard
measure; nay, he does me apparent wrong, to term me therein, No friend to
Parliament, and a Malignant* A character, which as I deserve it not, so I
disdain it.

For the first part of his charge, I would have him know, that I am as much a
friend and as real an affectionat humble servant and Votary to the Parliament
as possibly he can be, and will live and die with these affections about me:
And I could wish, that he were Secretary of my thoughts a while, or if I may
take the boldness to apply that comparison his late Majesty used in a famous
speech to one of his Parlements, I could wish there were a Crystal window in my
breast, through which the world might espy the inward motions and palpitations
of my heart, then would he be certified of the sincerity of this protestation.

For the second part of his Charge, to be a Malignant, I must confess to have
some Malignity that lurks within me much against my will; but it is no malignity
of mind, it is amongst the humors, not in my intellectuals; And I believe, there
is no natural man, let him have his humors never so well balanced, but has
some of this Malignity reigning within him; For as long as we are composed of
the four Elements, whence these humors are derived, and with whom they
symbolize in qualities; which Elements the Philosophers hold to be in a
restless contention amongst themselves (and the Stoic thought that the world
subsisted by this innated mutual strise) as long I say, as the four humors, in
imitation of their principles (the Elements) are in perpetual reluctance and
combat for praedominancy, there must be some malignity lodged within us, as
adusted choler, and the like; whereof I had late experience, in a dangerous fit
of sickness it pleased God to lay upon me, which the Physicians told me
proceeded from the malignant hypocondriacall effects of melancholy; having bin
so long in this Saturnine black condition of close imprisonment, and buried
alive between the walls of this fatal Fleet: These kinds of malignities, I
confess are very rife in me, and they are not only incident, but connaturall
to every man according to his complexion; And were it not for this incessant
struggling and enmity amongst the humors for mastery, which produces such
malignant effects in us, our souls would be loath ever to depart from our bodies,
or to abandon this mansion of clay.

Now what malignity my Accuser means, I know not; if he means malignity of
spirit, as some antipathy or ill impression upon the mind, arising from
disaffection, hatred, or rancor, with a desire of some destructive revenge, he
is mightily deceived in me; I malign or hate no Creature that ever God made
but the Devil, who is the Author of all malignity; and therefore is most
commonly called in French le Malin Esprit, the malignant spirit. Every night
before I go to bed, I have the grace, I thank God for it, to forgive all the
world, and not to harbor, or let roost in my bosom the least malignant
thought; yet none can deny, but the public aspersions which this my Accuser
casts upon me, were enough to make me a malignant toward him; yet it could
never have the power to do it: For I have prevailed with my self to forgive him
this his wrong censure of me, issuing rather from his notknowledge of me, than
from malice, for we never mingled speech, or saw one another in our lives to my
remembrance; which makes me wonder the more, that a Professor of the Law, as he
is, should pronounce such a positive sentence against me so slightly. But
methinks I over-hear him say, that my precedent discourse of Parliament is
invol'd in generals, and the Topique Axiom tells us, that Dolus versatur in
universalibus, there is double dealing in universals: His meaning is, that I am
no friend to this present Parliament (though he speaks in the plural number
Parlements) and consequently, he concludes me a Malignant; Therein I must tell
him also, that I am traduced, and I am confident it will be never proved
against me, from any actions, words, or letters (though diverse of mine have bin
intercepted) or any other misdemeanor, though some things are fathered upon me
which never dropped from my quill. Alas, how unworthy and incapable am I to
censure the proceedings of that great Senate, that high Synedrion, wherein the
wisdom of the whole State is epitomized? It were a presumption in me, of the
highest nature that could be: It is enough for me to pray for the prosperous
success of their consultations: And as I hold it my duty, so I have good
reason so to do, in regard I am to have my share in the happiness; And could
the utmost of my poor endeavors, by any ministerial humble office (and
sometimes the meanest Boat-swain may help to preserve the Ship from sinking) be
so happy, as to contribut any thing to advance that great work (which I am in
despair to do, while I am thus under hatches in this Fleet,) I would esteem it
the greatest honor that possibly could befall me, as I hold it now to be my
greatest disaster, to have fallen so heavily under an affliction of this
nature, and to be made a sacrifice to public fame, than which there is no
other proof, nor that yet urged against me, or any thing else produced after so
long, so long captivity which has brought me to suck a low ebb, and put me so
far behind in the course of my poor fortunes, and indeed more than half undone
me. For although my whole life (since I was left to my self to swim, as they
say, without Bladders) has bin nothing else but a continued succession of
crosses, and that there are but few red letters found (God wot) in the Almanac
of my Age, (for which I account not my self a whit the less happy) yet this
cross has carried with it a greater weight, it has bin of a larger extent,
longer continuance, and lighted heavier upon me than any other; and as I have
present patience to bear it, so I hope for subsequent grace to make use of it
accordingly, that my old Motto may be still confirmed, (...).

HE produces my attestation for some passages in Spain at his Majesty's being
there, and he quotes me right, which obliges me to him; and I hope all his
quotations wherein he is so extraordinarily copious and elaborate in all his
works, are so; yet I must tell him, that those interchangeable letters which
passed between His Majesty and the Pope, which were originally couched in
Latin, the language wherein all Nations treat with Rome, and the Empire with all
the Princes thereof, those letters I say are adulterated in many places, which
I impute not to him, but to the French Chronicler, from whom he took them in
trust. The truth of that business is this; The world knows there was a tedious
treaty of an Alliance 'twixt the Infanta Dona Maria (who now is Empress) and
His Majesty, which in regard of the slow affected pace of the Spaniard, lasted
above ten years, as that in Henry the sevenths time, 'twixt Prince Arthur, and
(afterward) Queen Katherine, was spun out above seven: To quicken, or rather
to consummate the work, his Majesty made that adventurous journey through the
whole Continent of France into Spain; which voyage, though there was a great
deal of gallantry in it (whereof all posterity will ring until it turn at
last to a Romance) yet it proved the bane of the business, which it is not the
errand of so poor a Pamphlet as this to unfold. His Majesty being there
arrived, the ignorant common people cried out, the Prince of Wales came thither
to make himself a Christian; The Pope writ to the Inquisitor General, and
others, to use all industry they could to reduce him to the Roman Religion;
And one of Olivares first complements to him, was, That he doubted not but that
his Highness came thither to change His Religion: whereunto he made a short
answer, That He came not thither for a Religion but for a Wife: There were
extraordinary processions made, and other artifices used by protraction of
things, to make him stay there of purpose till the Spring following, to work
upon him the better; And the Infanta her self desired him (which was esteemed
the greatest favor he received from her all the while) to visit the Nun of
Carton, hoping that the said Nun, who was so much cried up for miracles,
might have wrought one upon him; but her art failed her, nor was His Highness
so weak a subject to work upon according to His late Majesty's speech to Doctor
Mawe and Wren, who when they came to kiss his hands before they went to Spain
to attend the Prince their Master, He wish ed them to have a care of Buckinham;
as touching his Son Charles, he apprehended no fear at all of him; for he
knew him to be so well grounded a Protestant, that nothing could shake him in
his Religion.

The Arabian proverb is, That the Sun never soiles in his passage, though his
beams reverberate never so strongly, and dwell never so long upon the myry lake
of Maeotis, the black turf'd moors of Holland, the aguish woose of Kent and
Essex, or any other place, be it never so dirty; Though Spain be a hot
Country, yet one may pass and repasse through the very Center of it, and
never be Sunburned, if he carry with him a Bongrace, and such a one His Majesty
had.

Well, after his Majesty's arrival to Madrid, the treaty of Marriage went on
still, (though he told them at his first coming, that he came not thither like
an Ambassador to treat of a Marriage, but as a Prince, to fetch home a Wife;)
and in regard they were of different Religions, it could not be done without a
dispensation from the Pope, and the Pope would grant none, unless some
Capitulations were stipulated in favor of the Romish Catholics in England,
(the same in substance were agreed on with France.) Well, when the dispensation
came, which was negotiated solely by the King of Spains Ministers (because His
Majesty would have as little to do as might be with Rome) Pope Gregory the
fifteenth, who died a little after, sent His Majesty a Letter, which was
delivered by the Nuncio, whereof an answer was sent a while after: Which
Letters were imprinted and exposed to the view of the world, because His
Majesty would not have people whisper, that the business was carried in a
clandestine manner. And truly besides this, I do not know of any Letter, or
Message, or Complement, that ever passed twixt His Majesty and the Pope before
or after; some addresses peradventure might be made to the Cardinals, to whom
the drawing of those matrimonial dispatches was referred to quicken the work,
but this was only by way of civil negotiation.

Now touching that responsory Letter from His Majesty, it was no other than a
Complement in the severest interpretation; and such formalities pass 'twixt
the Crown of England, the great Turk, the Mogor and diverse Heathen Princes.
The Pope writ first, and no man can deny, but by all moral rules, and in
common humane civility His Majesty was bound to answer it, specially
considering how punctual they are in those Countries to correspond in this
kind, how exact they are repaying visits, with the performance of such
Ceremonies; And had this compliance bin omitted, it might have made very ill
impressions, as the posture of things stood then; for it had prejudiced the
great work in hand, I mean, the Match, which was then in the heat and height of
agitation, His Majesty's person was there engaged, besides, and so it was no
time to give the least offense: They that are never so little versed in
business abroad, do know that there must be addresses, compliances, and
formalities of this nature used in the carriage of matters of State, as this
great business was, whereon the eyes of all Christendom were so greedily fixed;
A business which was like to bring with it such an universal good, as the
restitution of the Palatinat, the quenching of those hideous fires in Germany,
and the establishing of a peace throughout all the Christian World.

I hope none will take offense, that in this particular which comes within the
compass of my knowledge (being upon the Stage when his Scene was acted) I do
this right to the King my Master, in displaying the Truth, and putting her
forth in her own colors, a rare thing in these days.

TOuching the Vocal Forest, an Allegorical Discourse, that goes abroad under
my name, a good while before the beginning of this Parliament, which this
Gentleman cites (and that very faithfully,) I understand there be some that
mutter at certain passages therein, by putting ill glosses upon the Text, and
taking with the left hand, what I offer with the right, (Nor is it a wonder for
trees which ly open, and stand exposed to all weathers to be nipt.) But I
desire this favor, which in common justice, I am sure in the Court of Chancery
cannot be denied me, it being the privilege of every Author, and a received
maxim through the World, Cujus est condere, ejus est interpretari; I say, I
crave this favor, to have leave to expound my own Text, and I doubt not then
but to rectify any one in his opinion of me, and that in lieu of the Plums
which I give him from those Trees, he will not throw the stones at me.

Moreover, I desire those that are over critical Censu^ers of that piece, to
know, that as in Divinity it is a rule, Scriptur a parabolica non est
argumentativa, so it is in all other kind of knowledge; Parables (whereof that
Discourse is composed) though pressed never so hard, prove nothing. The^ is
another Rule also, That Parables must be gently used, like a Nurses breast;
which if you press too hard, you shall have blood in stead of milk.

But as the Author of the Vocal Forest thinks he has done, neither his
Country, nor the Common wealth of Learning any prejudice thereby (That maiden
fancy having received so good entertainment and respect abroad, as to be
translated into diverse Languages, and to gain the public approbation of some
famous Universities) So he makes this humble protest unto all the World, that
though the design of that Discourse was partly Satyricall (which peradventure
induced the Author to shroud it of purpose under the shadows of trees, and
where should Satyrs be but amongst Trees?) yet it never entered into his
imagination to let fall from him the least thing that might give any offense to
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, whereof he had the honor to be
once a Member, and hopes he may be thought worthy again: And were he guilty of
such an offense, or piacle rather, he thinks he should never forgive himself,
though he were appointed his own Judge. If there occur any passages therein, that
may admit a hard construction, let the Reader observe, That the Author does not
positively assert, or pass a judgment on any thing in that Discourse, which
consists principally of concise, cursory narrations of the choicest*
Occurrences and Criticismes of State, according as the pulse of time did beat
then: And matters of State, as all other sublunary things, are subject to
alterations, contingencies and change, which makes the opinions and minds of
men vary accordingly.

I will conclude with this modest request to that Gentleman of the long Robe;
That having unpassionately perused what I have written in this small Discourse,
in penning whereof, my conscience guided my quill all along as well as my hand,
he would please to be so charitable and just, as to reverse that harsh sentence
upon me, To be no Friend to Parlements and a Malignant.

A GLANCE UPON THE I WILL of WIGHT, AND Upon the unparalleled Concessions of
GRACE HIS MAJESTY passed in that Trety, etc.

Concluding with the horrid Murder committed afterward upon His Sacred Person.

Cui dabit parts scelus expiant Jupiter? A GLANCE UPON THE I WILL of WIGHT, OR AN
INQUISITION AFTER TRUTH.
WHo vindicats Truth does a good office not only to his own Country, but to
all Mankind; It is the scope of this short discourse, viz. to make some
researches after Truth, and to rectify the world accordingly in point of
opinion, specially touching the first Author and Aggressor of the late ugly war
in England, which brought with it such an inundation of blood, and so did let
in so huge a torrent of mischiefs to rush upon us. There be many, and they not
only Presbyterians and Independents, but Cavaliers also, who think that the
King had taken the guilt of all this blood upon himself, in regard of that
Concession he passed in the preamble of the late Treaty at the Isle of Wight;
The aim of this Paper is to clear that point, but in so temperat a way, that I
hope 'twill give no cause of exception, much less of offense to any: the blood
that is sought after here, shall not be mingled with gaul, much less with any
venom at all.

We know there is no Principle either in Divinity, Law or Philosophy, but may be
wrested to a wrong sense; there is no truth so demonstrative and clear, but may
be subject to cavillations; no Tenet so plain, but perverse inferences may be
drawn out of it; such a fate befell that preambular Concession His Majesty
passed at the Transactions of the late Treaty, in that he acknowledged therein
that the two Houses of Parliament were necessitated to undertake a war in their
own just and lawful defense, etc. and that therefore all Oaths, Declarations, or
other public Instruments against the Houses of Parliament, or any for adhering
to them, etc. be declared null, suppressed, and forbidden.

It Is true, His Majesty passed this grant, but with this weighty consideration
as it had reference to two ends.

First, to smoothen and facilitate things thereby to open a passage, and pave
the way to a happy peace, which this poor Island did so thirst after, having bin
so long glutted with civil blood.

Secondly, that it might conduce to the further security, and the indemnifying
of the two Houses of Parliament, with all their instruments, assistants, and
adherents, and so rid them of all jealousies, and fear of future dangers which
still lodged within them. Now touching the expressions and words of this Grant,
they were not his own, nor did he give order for the dictating or penning
thereof; the King was not the Author of them, but an Assentor only unto them:
nor was He or his Party accused, or as much as mentioned in any of them, to
draw the least guilt upon themselves. Besides, He passed them as he does all
Laws and Acts of Parliament, which in case of absence another may do for him in
his politic capacity, therefore they cannot prejudice his person any way. I am
loath to say that he condescended to this Grant,

-- Cum strict a novacula supra, When the razor was as it were at his throat,
when there was an Army of about thirty thousand effectif Horse and Foot that
were in motion against him, when his Person had continued under a black long
lingering restraint, and dangerous menacing Petitions and Papers daily ob^ruded
against him. Moreover, His Majesty passed this Concession with these two
provisos and reservations,

First, that it should be of no virtue or validity at all, till the whole Treaty
were entirely consummated;

Secondly, that he might when he pleased enlarge and clear the truth with the
reservednesse of his meaning herein, by public Declaration: Now the Treaty
being confusedly huddled up, without discussing, or as much as receiving any
Proposition from himself as was capitulated, (and reciprocal proposalls are of
the essence of all Treaties) it could neither bind him, or turn any way to his
disadvantage: Therefore under favor, there was too much have used by the
Parliament, to draw that hipothetick or provisional Concession to the form of an
Act so suddenly after in the very heat of the Treaty, without His Majesty's
knowledge, or the least intimation of his pleasure.

Add hereunto, that this Grant was but a mere preambular Proposition, 'twas not
of the essence of the Treaty it self: And as the Philosophers and Schoolmen
tell us, there is no valid proof can be drawn out of Proemes, Introductions or
Corollaries in any science, but out of the positive assertions and body of the
Text, which is only argument-proof; so in the Constitutions and Laws of
England, as also in all accusations and charges, forerunning prefaces and
preambles (which commonly weak causes want most) are not pleadable: and though
they use to be first in place, like gentlemen-Ushers, yet are they last in
dignity, as also in framing, nor had they ever the force of Laws, but may be
termed their attendants to make way for them.

Besides, there is not a syllable in this preface which repeals or connives at
any former Law of the Land, therefore those Laws that so strictly inhibit
English Subjects to raise arms against their Liege Lord the King, and those
Laws e contrario which exempt from all dangers, penalties or molestation, any
Subject that adheres to the person of the King in any cause or buarrell
whatsoever, are still in force.

Furthermore, this introductory Concession of the Kings, wherein he is
contented to declare, That the two Houses were necessitated to take Arms for
their defense, may be said to have relation to the necessity, a part post, not
a part ante: self-defence is the universal Law of Nature, and it extends to
all other cretures, as well as to the Rational: As the fluent Roman Orator in
that sentence of his, which is accounted among the Critiques the excellentest
that ever dropped from Cicero; Est enim haec non scripta, sed nata Lex quam non
didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus,
expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti, sed imbuti sum^s, ut
si vita nostra in etc. For this (meaning self-defence) is not a written, but a
Law born with us; A Law which we have not learnt, received or read, but that
which we have sucked, drawn forth, and wrung out of the very breasts of Nature
her self; A Law to which we are not taught, but made unto, wherewith we are not
instructed, but endued withal, that if our life's be in jeopardy, etc. we may
repel force by force. Therefore when the House of Parliament had drawn upon them
a necessity of self defense (And I could have wished it had bin against any
other but their own Soverain Prince) His Majesty was contented to acknowledge
that necessity. As for example: A man of war meets with a Merchant man at Sea,
he makes toward him, and assaults him; The Merchant man having a good stout
vessel under him, and resolute, generous Seamen, bears up against him, gives
him a whole broadside, and shoots him 'twixt wind and water; so there happens a
furious fight betwixt them, which being ended, the Merchant cannot deny but
that the man of war, though the first Assailant, was necessitated to fight, and
that justly in his own defense, which necessity he drew upon himself, and so
was excusable, a posteriori, not a priori; As the Civilians speak of a
clandestine marriage, Fieri non debuit, sed factum valet; It ought not to have
been, but being done it is valid: whereunto relates another saying, Multa sunt
quae non nisi per acta approbantur. There are many things which are not
allowable til they are passed.

The Kings of France have had sundry civil wars, They have had many bloody
encounters and clashes with their Subjects, specially the last King Lewis the
thirteenth, which turned all at last to his advantage; Among other Treaties in
that of Loudun, he was by force of Article to publish an Edict, Don't lequel le
Roy approuvoit tout le pass comme ayant este fait pour son service, etc.
Wherein the King approved of all that was passed, as done for his service, etc.
and these concessions and extenuations are usual at the close of most civil
wars, but there was never any further advantage made of them, then to make the
adverse party more capable of grace and pardon, as also to enable them to bear
up against the brunt of Laws, and secure them more firmly from all afterclaps;
They were passed in order to an Act of Abolition, to a general pardon, and
consequently to a re-establishment of Peace; now, Peace and War (we know) are
like Water and Ice, they engender one another: But I do not remember to have
read either in the French History, or any other, that such Royal Concessions at
the period of any intestin war were ever wrung so hard, as to draw any
inference from them, to cast thereby the guilt of blood, or indeed the least
stain of dishonor upon the King; For Royal Indulgences and grants of this
nature are like nurses breasts, if you press them gently there will milk come
forth, if you wring them too hard you will draw forth blood in lieu of milk:
And I have observed that the conclusion of such Treaties in France, both
parties would hugg and mutually embrace one another in a gallant way of national
humanity; all rancor, all plundrings, sequestration, and imprisonment would
cease, nor would any be prosecuted, much less made away afterward in cold
blood.

Touching the Comencer of this monstrous war of ours, the world knows too well,
that the first man of blood was Blewcap, who showed Subjects the way, how to
present their King with Petitions upon the Pikes point, and what visible
judgments have fallen upon him since, by such confusions of discord and
pestilence at home, and irreparable dishonor abroad, let the world judge. The
Irish took his rise from him: and whereas it has bin often suggested, that His
Majesty had foreknowledge thereof, among a world of convincing arguments which
may clear him in this particular, the Lord Maguair upon the ladder, and another
upon the Scaffold, when they were ready to breath their last, and to appear
before the Tribunal of heaven, did absolutely acquit the King, and that
spontaneously of their own accord, being unsought unto, but only out of a love
to truth, and discharge of a good conscience: but touching those cruentous
Irish wars, in regard there was nothing whereof more advantage was made against
His late Majesty, to imbitter and poison the hearts of his Subjects against him
then that Rebellion, I will take leave to wind up the main causes of them upon
a small bottom as was spoken elsewhere.

1. They who kept intelligence and complied with the Scot, in his first and
second insurrection.

2. They who dismissed the first Irish Commissioners (who came of purpose to
attend our Parliament with some grievances) with such a short unpolitic harsh
answer.

3. They who took off Straffords head, (which had it stood on, that Rebellion
had never been) and afterward retarded the dispatch of the Earl of Leicester
from going over to be Lord-Lievtenant.

4. Lastly, they, who hindered part of that disbanded Army of 8000 men raised
there by the Earl of Strafford, which His Majesty, in regard they were
soldiers of fortune, and loose casheer'd men, to prevent the mischiefs that
might befall that Kingdom, by their insolences, had promised the two Spanish
Ambassadors, the Marquesses of Veloda and Malvezzi, then resident in this
Court; which soldiers rise up first of any, and put fire to the tumult to find
something to do.

They, I say, who did all this, may be justly said to have bin the true causes
of that horrid Insurrection in Ireland; and consequently it is easy to judge
upon the account of whose souls must be laid the blood of those hundred and odd
thousand poor Christians who perished in that war* and had it bin possible to
have brought over their bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at
the lower House door, and in the presence of some Members, which are now either
secluded, or gone to give an account in another world, I believe their noses
would have gushed out with blood for discovery of the true murderers.

Touching this last firebrand of war, which was thrown into England, who they
were that kindled it first, the consciences of those indifferent and unbiassed
men are sit to be judges, who have bin curious to observe with impartial
eyes, the carriage of things from the beginning.

I confess, 'twas a fatal unfortunat thing, that the King should put such a
distance 'twixt his Person and his Parliament, but a more fatal and barbarous
thing it was, that he should be driven away from it, that there should be a
desperate design to surprise His Person, that Ven with his Myrmidons, and
Bourges with his Bandogs, (for so* they called the riffraff of the City they
brought along with them) should rabble him away, with above four parts in five
of the Lords, and near upon two parts in three of the Commons: Yet it is fit it
should be remembered, what reiterated Messages His Majesty sent from time to
time afterward, That he was always ready to return, provided there might be a
course taken to secure his Person, with those Peers and other who were rioted
away from the Houses, It Is fit it should be remembered, that there was not the
least motion of war at all, till Hotham kept His Majesty out of His own Town
Kingston upon Hull, (for the Name whereof showed whose Town it was) where being
attended by a few of His meniall Servants, he came only to visit her, having
peaceably sent the Duke of York, and the Palsgrave thither the day before)
which act of Hotham's by shutting the gates against him was voted warrantable
by the House of Commons, and it may be called the first thunderbolt of War:
It Is fit it should be remembered, that a while after there was a complete Army
of 16000. effectif Horse and Foot enrolled in and about London to fetch him to
his Parliament by force, and remove ill Counselors from about him, (long
before he put up his Royal Standard) and the General then named was to live
and die with them: and very observable it is, how that Generals Father was
executed for a Traitor, for but attempting such a thing upon Queen Elizabeth, I
mean to remove ill Counselors from about her by force. It Is also to be
observed, that the same Army which was raised to bring him to his Parliament,
was continued to a clean contrary end two years afterward to keep him from his
Parliament. It Is fit it should be remembered, who interdicted Trade first, and
brought in Forraigners to help them, and whose Commissions of War were near
upon two months date before the Kings. It Is fit it should be remembered how His
Majesty in all His Declarations and public Instruments made always deep
Protestations, that 'twas not against his Parliament he raised Arms, but
against some seditious Members, against whom he had only desired the common
benefit of the Law, but could not obtain it; It Is fit to remember, that after
any good successes and advantages of his, he still Courted both Parliament and
City to an Accommodation; how upon the Treaty at Uxbridge, with much
importunity for the general advantage and comfort of his peeple, and to
prepare matters more fitly for a peace, he desired there might be freedom of
Trade from Town to Town, and a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility for the time,
that the inflammation being allayed, the wound might be cur^d the sooner; all
which was denied him. It Is fit to remember how a Noble Lord (The Earl of
Southampton) at that time told the Parliaments Commissioners in His Majesty's
Name, at the most unhappy rupture of the said Treaty, That when he was at the
highest he would be ready to treat with them, and fight them when he was at the
lowest: It Is fit the present Army should remember how often both in their
Proposalls, and public Declarations they have informed the world, and deeply
protested that their principal aim was to restore His Majesty to honor,
freedom and safety, whereunto they were formerly bound, both by their own
Protestation and Covenant, that the two Commanders in chief pawned unto him
their souls thereupon. Let them remember, that since he was first snatched
away to the custody of the Army by Cromwells plot, who said, that if they had
the Person of the King in their power, they had the Parliament in their
pockets. I say being kept by the Army, He never displeased them in the least
particular, but in all his Overtures for Peace, and in all his Propositions he
had regard still that the Army should be satisfied: let it be remembered, that
to settle a blessed Peace, to preserve his Subjects from rapine and ruin, and
to give contentment to his Parliament, He did in effect freely part with His
Sword, Scepter, and Crown, and every thing that was proprietary to him: Let it
be remembered with what an admired temper, with what prudence and constancy,
with what moderation and mansuetude he comported himself since his deep
afflictions, insomuch that those Commissioners and others who resorted unto
him, and had had their hearts so averse unto him before, returned his Converts,
crying him up to be one of the sanctifiedst persons upon earth: and will not
the blood of such a Prince cry loud for vengeance?

Blood is a crying sin, but that of Kings
Cries loudest for revenge, and ruin brings.
Let it be remembered, that though there be some Precedents of deposing Kings in
his Kingdom, and elsewhere, when there was a competition for the right Title to
the Crown by some other of the blood Royal, yet it is a thing not only
unsampled, but unheard of in any age, that a King of England whose Title was
without the least scruple, should be summoned and arraigned, tried, condemned,
and executed in His own Kingdom, by His own Subjects, and by the name of their
own King, to whom they had sworn Alleagiance.

The meanest Student that has but tasted the Laws of the Land can tell you,
that it is an unquestionable fundamental Maxim, The King can do no wrong,
because he acts by the mediation of his Agents and Ministers, he hears with
other men's ears, he sees with other men's eyes, he consults with other men's
brains, he executes with other men's hands, and judges with other men's
consciences; therefore his Officers Counselors or favorites are punishable,
not He: and I know not one yet whom he has spared, but sacrificed to Justice.
The Crown of England is of so coruscant and pure a metal* that it cannot
receive the least taint or blemish; and if there were any before in the person
of the Prince, it takes them all away and makes him to be Rectus in curia. This
as in many others may be exemplified in Henry the Seventh, and the late Queen
Elizabeth: when she first came to the Crown 'twas mentioned in Parliament, that
the attainder might be taken off him, under which he lay all the time he lived
an Exile in France; it was then by the whole house of Parliament resolved upon
the question, that it was unnecessary, because the Crown purged all. So
likewise when Queen Elizabeth was brought as it were from the Scaffold to the
Throne; though she was under a former attainder, yet 'twas thought superfluous
to take it off, for the Crown washes away all spots, and darteth such a
brightness, such resplendent beams of Majesty, that quite dispell all former
clouds: so that put case King James died a violent death, and his Son had been
accessory to it, (which is as base a lie as ever the devil belched out) yet his
access to the Crown had purged all. This business about the plaster which
was applied to King James, was sifted and winnow'd as narrowly as possibly a
thing could be in former Parlements, yet when it was exhibited as an Article
against the Duke of Buckingham, 'twas termed but a presumption or misdemeanure
of a high nature: And it is strange that these new accusers should make that a
parricide in the King, which was found but a presumption in the Duke, who in
case it had been so, must needs have been the chiefest Accessory.

And as the ancient Crown and Royal Diadem of England is made of such pure
allay, and cast in so dainty a mould, that it can receive no taint, or contract
the least speck of enormity and foulness in it self, so it does endow the
person of the Prince that wears it with such high Prerogatives; that it
exempts him from all sorts of public blemishes; from all Attainders,
Empeachments, Summons, Arraignments and Trials; nor is there or ever was any
Law or Precedent in this Land, to lay any Crime or capital charge against him,
though touching civil matters: touching property of meum and tuum, he may be
impleaded by the meanest vassal that has sworn fealty to him; as the Subjects
of France and Spain may against their Kings, though never so absolute Monarchs.

In the Constitutions of England, there are two incontroulable Maxims, whereof
the meanest mootman that has but saluted Littleton cannot be ignorant: the
first is, Rex in suis Dominiis neque habet parem, nec superiorem. The King in
his own Dominions has neither Peer, or Superior. The other is Satis habet Rex
ad poenam quod Deum expectet ultorem: it is punishment enough for a King that
God will take revenge of him: Therefore if it be the Fundamental Constitution
of the Land, that all just Trials must be by Teers, and that the Law
proclaims the King to have no peer in his own Dominions, I leave the world to
judge, what capacity or power those men had to arraign their late King, to be in
effect his Accusers and Judges; and that an exorbitant unsampled Tribunal
should be erected, with power and purpose to condemn All to clear none, and
that sentence of death should pass without conviction or Law upon Him that was
the heard and protector of all the Laws. Lastly, that They who by their own
confession represent but the Common people, should assume power to cut off Him
who immediately represented God,

Cui dabit parts scelus expiandi Jupiter? -- Well, we have seen such
portentous things, that former Ages never beheld, nor will future Ages ever be
witness of the like: Nay, posterity, after a Century or two of years will hold
what is now really acted to be but Romances.

And now with thoughts full of consternation and horror, And a heart trembling
with amazement and sorrow for the crying flagrant sins of this forlorn Nation,
specially for that fresh Infandous murder committed upon the sacred Person of
his Majesty, I conclude with this Hepastick, wherein all cretures ( though
irrational) that have sense, yea the very vegetalls seem to abhor so damnable
a fact.

So fell the Royal Oak by a wild crew
Of mongrel shrubs which underneath Him grew;
So fell the Lion by a pack of Currs;
So the Rose witherd 'twixt a knot of Burrs.
So fell the Eagle by a swarm of Gnatts,
So the Whale perished by a Shoale of Spratts.
In the prison of the Fleet 25. Febr. 1648. I. H.

ADVICE Sent from the prime Statesmen OF FLORENCE, HOW ENGLAND may come to
HERSELF again, Which is, To call in the KING, Not upon ARTICLES, But in a Free
confident way:

Which Advice came immediately upon the Readmission of the Secluded Members, And
Coppies thereof being delivered to the Chiefest of Them.

It produced happy Effects.

A Letter sent from the City of Florence, Written by a Great Counselor there,
touching the present Distempers of England; wherein He, with some of the Prime
Statesmen in Florence pass their Judgments which is the only way to compose
the said Distempers.
To my Honored, and most Endeared Patron.
IT is no small diminution to my former happiness that I have not received
your commands any time these two months, which makes me lodge within me certain
apprehensions of fear that some disaste^ might befall you in those new
Distractions, therefore I pray be pleased to pull this thorn out of my thoughts
as speedily as it may stand with your convenience.

We are not here so barren of Intelligence, but we have weekly advice of your
present Confusions, and truly the severest sort of speculative persons here who
use to observe the method of Providence, do not stick to say, that the hand of
Heaven does visibly stir therein, and that those Distractions in Army, State,
and City are apparent judgments from above, for if one revolve the Stories of
former Times, as I have done many (but you more) he will find that it has been
always an inevitable Fate which uses to hang over all popular Insurrections
to end in confusion and disorders among the chief actors themselfs at last; And
we have had diverse examples thereof here among us, which has caused us to be
so long in quietness and peace.

But truly Sir, give me leave to tell you that your Nation has lost much of
their Repute abroad all the World over in statu quo nunc; Some do laugh at you;
Others do scorn, and hate you; And some do pity and comiserat you.

They who laugh at you, think you are no better than Mand men* having strange
Magots in your brains bred out of the fat of so long wanton plenty, and peace.

They who scorn and hate you, do it for your Sacrilege, your horrendous
Sacrileges, the like whereof was never committed on Earth since Christianity
had first a hole to put her head in.

They who pity you are few, and We are of the number of Them, as well in the
common sense of Humanity, as for the advantages, and improvement of Wealth
which this State has received by your Trading at Ligorne, for that Town does
acknowledge her prosperity, and that she is arrived to this flourishing Estate
of Riches, of Buildings and bravery by the correspondence she has had this
latter Age with England in point of Commerce, which yet we find does insensibly
impair every day, and I believe you feel it more; Therefore out of the
wellwishes, and true affections we bear unto England, some of the most serious,
and soberest Persons of this place who are well seasoned in the World, and have
studied men under diverse Climes, and conversed also much with Heavenly Bodies,
had lately a private Junto, or meeting, whereunto I was admitted for one, and
two of us had been in England where we received sundry free Civilities; Our
main business was to discourse, and descant upon these sad confusions, and
calamitous condition wherein England with the adjoining Kingdoms are at
present involved, and what might extricate Her out of this Labyrinth of
Distractions, and reduce Her to a settled Government; Having long canvased the
business, and banded arguments pro and con with much earnestness, all our
opinious did concenter at last in this point, That there was no probable way
under Heaven to settle a fast, and firm Government among you, then for the Men
that are now upon the Stage of power to make a speedy application to their own
King, their own Liege Lord and Sovereign, whom God, and Nature has put over
them; Let^ them beat their brains, scrue up their wits, and put all the policy
they have upon the tenterhooks as far as possibly they can, yet they will
never be able to establish a durable standing Government otherwise, They do but
dance in a circle all this while, for the Government will turn at last to the
same point it was before* viz. to Monarchy, and this King will be restored to
His Royal Inheritances, maugre all the Cacodaemons of Hell: Our Astrologers
here, specially the famous Antonio Fiselli has had notes to look into the
horoscope of his Nativity, and what predictions he has made hitherto of him
have proved true to my knowledge, He now confidently averrs, with the
concurrence of the rest, that the aspect of all the stars, and conjunction of
the Planetts much favor him the next two years; Nam Medium coeli in Genitura
Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae juxta axiomata Astrologiae Genethliacae dirigitur
ad radios Sextiles Lun^ Anno Domini 1660. and significat acc^ssum ad Dominum,
For the Medium coeli in the Geniture of Charles the Second according to the
axioms of Genethliacall Astrology is directed to the Sextile rays of the
Moon, and signifies an access to Dominion. Add hereunto that a most lucky
conjunction follows the same year, in the very Center of the said Kings
horoscope betwixt Jupiter and Sol in the month of September.

When I was employed by this State in Paris not many years ago, I had occasion
to make my address to your young King, and when I observed His Physiognomy,
and the Lineaments of his face, I seemed to discern in it something
extraordinary above vulgar countenances, and that he carried a Majesty in His
very looks, and noting besides the goodly procerity, and constitution of His
body, he seemed to be cut out for a King.

Now, in point of extraction, and lineage, it cannot be denied but he is one of
the greatest born Princes that ever was in the world; for whereas His
Grandfather, and Father were allied only if you regard Foreign
Consanguinity, to the House of Denmark and the Guyses, this King bears in his
veins not only that blood, but also the bloods of all the great Princes of
Christendom, being nearly linked to the House of Bourbon and France, to the
House of Austria, and consequently to the Emperor, and Spain, as also to the
Duke of Savoy, and our Grand-Duke: Moreover he is nearly allied to all the
greatest Princes of Germany, as the Saxe, Brandenburg, Bavaria, the Palsgrave,
and to the Duke of Lorain who descends in the directest line from Charlemain;
Add hereunto that the young Prince of Orange is his Nephew, and which is
considerable he is a pure Englishman born, whereas your two former Kings were
Foreigners. The Queen His Mother is of as Glorious an Extraction, which makes
me admire the frontlesse impudence of some of your poor Pamphletors who call
Her ever and anon the Little Queen, notwithstanding that the World knows Her
to be the Daughter of Henry the Great, and Queen of Great Britain, which Title
and Character is indelible, and must die with Her.

Hereunto may be adjoined, that this young King is now mounted to the Meridian
of his Age, and maturity of judgment to govern, and doubtless he is like to
make a rare Governor, having this advantage of all other Soverain Princes in
the world to have been bredd up in the School of Affliction so long, to have
Traveled so many strange Countries and observed the humors of so many Nations.

But to come to the Cardinal point of our Communication, after diverse debates,
and alterations how England might be brought to a stable condition of
tranquillity and perfect peace, to her former luster, and glory, the final
result of all, ended in this, that there was no other imaginable means to do
it then for you to make a timely and fitting humble address unto your own
King, and without question it is in his power to grant you such an absolute
pardon, such an abolition of all things passed, such a gracious Amnestia, such
Royal concessions that may extend to the security of every person for the
future that was engaged in these your revolutions, both touching his life and
fortunes; Unless their guilt of Conscience be such that like Cain or Judas
they think their Sin is greater then can be forgiven them.

Now the mode of your application to Him may avail much, for if you chopp
Logique with him too far, and stand upon Puntillios, and too rigid terms, if
you show your selfs full of fears, jealousies, and distrusts, it will
entangle, and quite mar the business, for in a Sovereign Prince there must be
an Implicit, unavoidable necessary trust reposed by his peeple, which all the
Laws that man's brain can possibly invent cannot provide against; Therefore if
you proceed in a frank, and confident true English way you may work upon his
affections more powerfully, and overcome him sooner so, then by any outward
Arms, This way will make such tender impressions, upon that he will grant more
then you can possibly expect.

Some Foreign Historians as the French Comines and our Guicciardin do cry up the
English Nation for using to love their King in a more intense degree then other
peeple, and to regard his honor in a higher strain, to support which they have
bin always so ready, and cheerful both with their persons and purses; There is
now a fair opportunity offered to rake up the embers of these old affections,
and to recover the Reputation of true Englishmen; There is no peeple but may
sometimes stand in their own light, go astray, and err, for Error was one of
the first frailties that were entayled upon man (and his posterity) as soon as
he was thrust out of Paradis; It Is a human thing to err, but to persevere in an
error is diabolical; You shall do well and wisely to follow the example of the
Spanish Mule, who out of a kind of wantonness being gone out of the high beaten
road into a by path, which led her to a dirty narrow lane full of pitts and
holes, at last she came to the top of a huge hideous Rock where she could go no
farther, for before her there was inevitable destruction, and the lane was so
narrow that she could not turn her body back, thereupon in this extremity she
put one foot gently after an other, and Crablike went backward until she came
again to the common road; This must be your course, by a gentle retrogradation
to come into the Kings high road again, and there is no question but he will
meet you more than three parts of the way: If you do not, truly in our opinions
you will precipitat your selfs down a Rock of inevitable destruction; For
Heaven and Earth are conspired to restore him, and though all the Spirits of
the Air should join with you, you shall not be able to oppose it. I presume you
are not ignorant how ^he two great Monarks of Spain and France (which may be
said to be the main Poles whereon Europe does move) have comprehended him within
the private capitulations of peace, The Emperor has promised to wed his
quarrel, and there is no Prince or State in Christendom but would gladly reach
a friendly hand to restore him, being deprived of his birthright, and his Royal
indubitable Inheritance (as you your felfs confess) for observing the fifth
commandment, for obeying his Father and Mother; From which Birthright he may
be said to have been thrust out when he was in the state of Innocence, being
but in a manner a Child, and very young then.

Now touching your selfs I will not flatter you, but plainly tell you that you
have not one friend any where beyond the Seas, nay your great Confederate the
Swed (as I had good intelligence) could upbraid one of your Ambassadors that
are now there, that He had not washed his hands clean since they had been
embrued in His Princes blood.

The time that I sojourned in England I was curious to read your Annals, and to
make some inspections into your Laws, and Method of Government; as also into
the Genius of the peeple, and I find there is no species of Government that
suits better with the nature of the Inhabitants, the quality of the Clime, and
relates more directly to the civil Constitutions, Laws, and Customs of the Land
then Monarchal; The I Will of Great Britain has been always a Royal Island from
her very Creation, from her Infancy, she may be said to have worn a Crown in
her Cradle, and although she had four or five Revolutions and changes of
Masters, yet she still continued Royal, whereunto alludes a saying that I
observed in your old Records, Britannia ab initio mundi semper fuit Regia, and
Regimen Illiu^ simile illi caelorum: Great Britain has been from the beginning
of the World Royal, and Her Government like that of the Heavens.

Therefore, all these premises being weighed in the balance of true judgment
you shall do well, and wisely to recollect your selfs, and call in your
hopeful young King, whose Title your consciences do acknowledge to be
unquestionable, otherwise it is not only improbable but impossible for England
to be Her self again, and to be settled in any stable Government which may reach
to posterity; you may wind up your wits as high as you can, you may consult
with your first, second, and third thoughts, but will never be able to settle a
fixed Government, you will be still at a loss, your Debates will be like a
skeyn of ravell'd thread, you will be in a labyrinth of confusions, and the end
of one, will be still the beginning of another.

To conclude, the current and concurrent opinion of all Ministers of State here
both Foreign and Florentine is, that if you do not make a timely application to
your King, you will have all the Princes of Christendom about your ears, and
what a sad calamitous Country, what an Aceldama will England be then? Therefore
if there be a true Patriot, and public soul amongst you, if there be ever any
drops of true English blood running in your veins, or the least spark of
national fire and affections glowing in your bosoms toward your own dear
Country, prevent these imminent dangers, and invite your King by discreet and
moderate proposals; The gallant Samnit General could tell the Romans who had
over powered them, that if they gave them easy and gentle capitulations they
would perform them, but if they would tie them to too high and strict terms,
they would observe them no longer then they cold have opportunity to break them.

Touching the affairs of Italy, we are like to have a general blessed peace
this side the Alps, and Lombardy who has been so pitifully harassed a long
time, and has had her face so often scratched, is in a fair way to recover her
former beauty; Signor Giovanni Palavicino, and D. Lorenzo Minuccio convey their
most affectionate respects unto you, and so does

Your Entire, and Faithful Servant.
Florence this 12th. of March, 1659. There are diverse other large Pieces tending
to the same Subject, which shall be published in the second Tome.



FINIS.

