The HUMBLE PETITION AND REPRESENTATION OF THE Sufferings of several Peaceable,
and Innocent Subjects, Called by the Name of ANABAPTISTS, Inhabitants in the
County of Kent, and now Prisoners in the Goal of Maidstone, for the Testimony
of a good Conscience.

Together with their Free and Faithful Acknowledgement of the King's Authority
and Dignity in Civil things, over all manner of Persons, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, within His Majesty's Dominions.

With their Reasons, Meriting the King's Protection in their Civil and
Spiritual Rights, equal with other His Majesty's Obedient Subjects.

Humbly Offered to the King's Majesty, and the Consideration of our Fellow
Brethren and Subjects. Well worthy General Observation.

Act. 17. He has made of one Blood all Nations of men, etc.

Job 4.7. Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being Innocent? or where were
the Upright destroyed?

Job. 34.28. So that they have Caused the Voice of the Poor to come unto him,
and he has heard the Cry of the Afflicted.

Romans 14.3. Let not him that Eats, despise him that Eats not, and let not
him which eats not, condemn him that Eats; for God has received him.

London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, near
Temple Bar, 1660.

TO HIS MAJESTY, Charles the Second, KING of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland; and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it Please Your MAJESTY,
FOrasmuch as by Authority derived from your Self, several of us your Subjects,
inhabitants in the County of Kent, are now imprisoned; it therefore much
concerns Thee, O King, to hear what Account we give of our present distressed
Condition. Thou have already seen our Confession of Faith, wherein our
peaceable Resolutions were declared; we have not violated any part thereof that
should cause that Liberty promised from Breda, to be withdrawn; And now for
our Principles, that most particularly relate to Magistrates and Government, we
have with all clearness laid them here before Thee, Humbly beseeching they may
be Read patiently; and what we say, weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary;
and then judge how worthy we are of either Bonds or Imprisonment; and this we
the more earnestly desire, because not only our own lives is in danger, but
also an irresistible Destruction comes on our Wives and little Ones, by that
violence which is now exercised on us. Disdain not our plainness of Speaking,
seeing the Great God accepts of the like. And now, O King, that all Thy
Proceedings (both toward us, and all men) may be such as may be pleasing unto
the eternal God (in whose hands your and our breath is, who ere long will judge
both quick and dead, according to their works) is the Prayers of Thy Faithful
Subjects and Servants,

The Prisoners in the Goal of Maidstone, for the Testimony of a good
Conscience.

A free and faithful acknowledgement of the Kings Authority and Dignity in
Civil things, over all manner of Persons, Ecclesiastical and Civil, within His
Majesty's Dominions, etc.
GOD that has made of one Blood all Nations of men, Acts 17.26.
for to dwell on all the face of the Earth; and has determined the Times
before appointed, and the bounds of their Habitation; has made this Land the
Place of our Nativity and Abode, by which we have an Interest in Common with
others Thy Subjects in this Nation, so that none can Deprive us of that which
is our Propriety, and Native Birthrights, without violating the Laws of God
and Nature: Yet (may it please Thee, O King,) as if that Law of doing unto
others, as we would be done unto, had never been Written, neither any Bounds
set unto the Wills of men: We Thy Imprisoned Subjects, have (some of us) had
our Houses broken open in the dead of the Night, without producing any
Authority from Thee, or any inferior Minister under Thee; our Goods and Cattle
taken away from some others, and yet detained from us; Our Bodies, some taken
from our own Dwellings, and others from our peaceable Meetings, and made
Prisoners; and this done unto many of us some Days before Thy Proclamation was
Published; which proceedings does bring great Distress and Ruin to our selves
and Families; for such is our mean Condition in this World, that (almost) all
of us have our outward Subsistence, through the blessing of God on our daily
Labors; Also some amongst us, that were Employed in the Public Service at
Chatham, and at Sea, being yet unpaid; The Bread which our Families have Eat
this 10 or 12 Months, has been taken up upon Credit; and all of us being
detained from our Employments, the Cries of our Families (who suffer Hunger)
becomes great.

And now, O King, that the Oppressed may be Relieved, and Justice and Judgment
Executed amongst men, and the Creation of God kept from being a Chaos of
Confusion: The God of Order has Ordained Government, and sets up
Magistrates, to Execute such Power as is given from himself, for the Ends
aforesaid: And this we have always Asserted, in our Discourses and Writings,
as appears in our Declaration of Faith, Printed about Three Months before Thy
coming over, and Reprinted and Presented to Thy Self above Four Months since.

And as for Thy Self, O King, we do believe, and do freely acknowledge, That
the Authority and Dignity that Thou now have, in being Chief Governor over
this Kingdom and its Dominions, is given Thee of God, whose the Kingdoms of
the World are, and he gives them unto whomsoever he will, Dan. 5.21. And
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75.6,
7. So says the New Testament, The Powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans
13.1.

And seeing the Lord Jesus has commanded us his Servants, To give unto Caesar
the things that are Cesars, Mat. 22.21. Therefore shall we pay Custom and
Tribute unto Thee; and in all temporal Causes and Things, shall we yield
cheerful obedience, not only to thy self as Supreme, but also to all inferior
Magistrates sent by thee; and this we do not only for wrath, but also for
Conscience sake, knowing that God has given thee Power, to punish any that
shall do that unto another, which he would not have done unto himself, and in
so doing thou will be a Minister of God, to us for good, a revenge to execute
wrath upon him that does evil.

And whereas it is alleged against us as a Crime, that we cannot acknowledge
any Authority that God has given Thee, in spiritual Things or Causes; yet if
thou would condescend to the reading, and ferious considering our ensuing
Reasons, it is possible we may be justified by Thee, as in this matter we are
in the sight of God, whose Word not only in this, but in all other Causes, we
desire to make our Rule. O King, we therefore beseech Thee to consider, if Thou
have any power to be a Lord over our Faith, or by outward force to impose any
thing, in the Worship of God, on our Consciences, it is given unto Thee as Thou
art a Magistrate, or as Thou art a Christian; but that Thou have no such power
given unto Thee of God, as thou art a Magistrate appears;

1. Because if Magistrates as such, have such an Authority, then all
Magistrates in all Nations have the same Power; then if we lived in Turkey must
we receive the choran, and be a Worshipper of Mahomet? if in Spain, be a
Papist? in England sometimes a Papist, as in Henry the 8th days? a Protestant
in Edward the 6th? a Papist again in Queen Mary's? and a Protestant again in
Queen Elizabeth's? and so for ever as the Authority changes Religion, we must do
the same; but God forbid,

2. Because the Apostles themselves (that gave forth those commandments that
are written in Scripture, to be obedient to Magistrates) refused to be obedient
to their Rulers, when they were commanded to forbear, Acts 4.19. chap. 5.29.
that which they judged part of the Worship of God, and said, Whether it be
right in the sight of God, to harken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

3. All the Scriptures of the New Testament, that enjoins obedience unto
Magistrates, were written when the Romans had the Empire of the world, whose
Emperors were for the most part (if not all) Heathenish Idolators for the
first 300 years, until Constantines time; it therefore cannot be supposed, that
any of these Texts of Scripture that calls for obedience to Magistrates,
intends an obedience in matters of Faith or Worship, for then the Christians
that lived under those Emperors, must needs have denied Christ, and worshipped
the Roman gods, as some of the Emperors commanded.

And now O King, that no man as he is a Christian, has power to be a Lord over
another Faith, or by outward force to impose any thing in the Worship of God,
is as clear,

1. Because the Lord Jesus Himself, nor his Disciples, would never by any
outward force compel men to receive them or their Doctrine; for when the
Disciples of Christ (supposing they might use violence as under the Law) would
have commanded fire to come from Heaven (as Elias did) to consume them that
would not receive them; Christ turned and rebuked them, saying, Ye know not
what spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives,
but to save them.

2. If any men under Heaven have had any such power in the days of the Gospel,
the Apostles and Elders in the primitive times must needs have had it, but this
they disowned; the Apostle Paul in 2 Cor. 1.24. says thus, Not for that we
have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy, for by Faith you
stand; yea the Lord Jesus when he strove for Domination forbids it, saying, Ye
know that the Princes of the Gemiles exercise Dominion over them, Mat. 25.26.
and they that are great do exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be
so amongst you; Even so says Peter, speaking to the Elders, Feed the flock of
God which is amongst you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords
over Gods Heritage, but be examples to the flock; and in truth, the Apostles
and Disciples were not to use any external force to carry on their Masters
work, but only by showing the terrors of the Lord, were to persuade men; and
in case of resistance, to shake the dust from their feet, as a witness against
their opposers.

3. It is very plain, that the Lord Jesus himself in his parrable of the Tares
and Wheat, forbid and force to be exercised upon false Worshippers, as such,
Mat. 13.
for by the Tares which he forbids the pulling up, cannot be intended the
transgressors of the second table, such as Thieves, Murderers, etc. because all
confesses with one consent, that the Magistrates Authority reaches such, but
those that Christ Jesus would have remain amongst his Wheat, in the field of
the world, is the Children of the wicked One; through Idolatry and
Will Worship; this will further appear, if the 28, 29, 30. verse. be compared
with the 38, 39. of the same Chapter; and the reason the Lord Jesus gives, why
both Tares and Wheat must grow together, (O King that it were engraven with the
point of a Diamond, and often laid before Thee) is, least in gathering up the
Tares, the Wheat also be rooted up with them; How sad is it to remember how in
all ages since Christ, very strange mistakes have been on this account; Matthew.
26.65.
the Lord of Life himself was put to death, for supposed Blasphemy and
wickedness, John 19.12.
and accused for being an enemy to Caesar, and this done unto him by a people
that had the Law of God amongst them, and were famous in the world for their
Earthly Wisdom and Knowledge. Stephen was stoned, Acts 6.13, 14. chap. 12.2.
and James the Apostle killed with the Sword, supposed to be Tares, or the
Children of the Wicked One, when they were the Precious Wheat of God, the
Christians that suffered in the ten Persecutions, Were they not accused of
being pestilent fellows, movers of Sedition, Act. 24.5.12. chap. 17.6, 7.
turners of the world upside down, Enemies to Caesar, when the contrary was most
true; and they will be found to be the Faithful Martyrs of Jesus? So in latter
times many of those that have been put to death for Heresy and Blasphemy, are
by this Age acknowledged to be the Saints of God: O King, that our Words might
be acceptable to thee, consider that neither Thy self nor Counselors have the
spirit of infallability; if the Apostles that had an extraordinary spirit of
discerning, must not pluck up the Tares, left they root up the Wheat also: How
can any Prince on Earth undertake a work so dangerous? It is possible many of
those that are accounted false Worshippers, and Heretics in this day, may (at
the time when God shall Judge the World in Righteousness) be found the Servants
of the Most-High God; Remember we pray Thee, that those that lived in the days
of the Lord Jesus, accused their Fathers, for being guilty of the blood of the
Prophets, saying, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Math. 23.29, 30. yet
themselves killed the Lord of Life; The Romish Church also says, if they had
lived in the days of the Heathen Emperors, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the Christians, yet puts to death many as righteous
as they were; and now many of thy Subjects in this Nation, are ready to say, If
we had lived in the days of Queen Mary, we would not have been guilty with our
Fathers in the blood of those good men, that then suffered; yet such a spirit
of Persecution is now risen up, as (if not restrained) will terminate in the
blood of many good men, and so bring down the wrath of God upon this
Generation, and there will be no remedy.

4. To inflict temporal punishments upon any of us thy Subjects, for not
conforming to Thy Decrees, that restrains us from the Worship that we know to
be of God; Is it not a breach of that Royal Law, that commands Thee, That
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7.12. And we would in all humility
offer to Thy consideration, if Thy Soul were in our Souls stead, would thou
be satisfied with the same measure, as is now dealt unto us, when neither the
God of Heaven, nor our own Consciences does condemn us of any evil intended
against Thy Person or Authority? nor can the greatest of our Enemies make any
due proof of any Combination or Plotting with any upon the face of the Earth,
for the disturbance of the public Peace; And this we can with boldness say,
because we know our own Innocence.

But whereas it is Objected, That the Kings of Israel and Judah, under the Old
Testament, had power in spiritual Causes, and did punish Blasphemy and
Idolatry, which are crimes of the highest nature against God, we confess they
had such power, which was given to them in plain Precepts, written in the Law
of Moses; but the Gospel that we live under is another Dispensation, in which
the Lord Jesus is the only Lawgiver, who does not (as Moses) proceed against
the Transgressors of his Precepts, by external force and power, to the
destroying them in their Bodies and Estates in this life, 1 These. 1.9. 2 Pet.
3.9. Acts 17.31.
but in long-suffering waits on men, not willing they should perish, but rather
that they should repent and be saved; and when any continues in disobedience to
the Gospel, his punishment is eternal, in the world to come; the Apostle Paul
testifies of himself, That he was a Blasphemer, and Persecutor, 1 Timothy 1.20.
And if the mind of God had been, that he should have suffered death in that
condition, How should he have had repentance given him, and been such a
glorious Instrument in the Church, as afterward he was?

Furthermore, it is too well known, that the Jews are the greatest Blaspemers
against our Lord Jesus Christ, as is on the earth; yet it is not the Mind of
the Lord they should be destroyed from the Face of the Earth, for how then
should the Scripture be fulfilled, wherein God has promised to call them, and
make them the most glorious Nation in the World? Oh how can they be converted,
if they be not permitted where the Gospel is Preached? We speak not this in
favor of any blasphemy, for our Souls abhors it, but because we would have the
Lives of men as precious in Thy Eyes, O King, as they are in the Eyes of the
Righteous and most Holy God.

5. As it is no ways lawful from the Word of God, for Christian Magistrates to
destroy, and root out the contrary minded in Religious Matters (although
Idolaters.) So such proceedings may many times prove inconsistent with the very
being of Nations; for suppose any Nation were wholly Heathenish Idolators, and
the Word of God coming in amongst them, should convert the chief Magistrates,
and twentieth part of the Nation more; must he with that twentieth part destroy
all the other nineteen, if they will not be converted, but continue in their
Heathenish Idolatry? It cannot possibly be supposed to be warrantable.

From all this that we have said, thou O King, may see, that not without
Grounds, do we deny the taking the Oath of thy Supremacy, which calls for
obedience as well in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and Causes, as
Temporal; not but that we can freely acknowledge thee to be Supreme Governor
of all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, but still in temporal
Causes and things: We do also as freely Renounce all foreign Jurisdictions and
Powers whatsoever, that any on the Earth may pretend to have over any of thy
Dominions or Subjects. And whereas some have said, that no more is required in
the Oath, Considered together with the Proviso in the Statute of the 5
Elizabeth, and the Queens Admonition: Yet we Humbly conceive there is, Because
the Queen both in the Proviso and Admonition, Challenges such a Power, as was
Challenged by her Father, King Henry the 8. which was to Burn his Subjects at
the Stake for their Dissenting from him in Religious Matters (as by his
practice appeared) And the Queen her self exercised the same Authority, in
putting some to Death for their Conscience in Religion.

And whereas many of us that are now prisoners cannot take the Oath of
Allegiance, because we cannot swear at all, the Lord Christ having forbidden,
in that fifth of Mat. 33. compared with James 5.12. not only vain Oaths, but
also such swearing as was delivered of old time, and lawful under the Law, as
in our Consciences we are persuaded, and therefore before now under former
powers have denied to swear; Yet (God is our Witness, who is the Searcher of
all Hearts) we deny not this Oath, because we would not yield due Subjection
and Obedience to Thee and Thy Authority; for this we say, in the presence of
him that shall judge the quick and dead, we do without any deceit, promise to
live peaceably under Thy Government, and in case any thing should be by thee
commanded in Spiritual Matters wherein we cannot obey, we shall not then take
up any Carnal or Temporal Weapon against Thee or Thy Authority, but patiently
suffer such punishment as shall be inflicted on us for our Consciences.

And now may it please Thee, O King, that these Engagements which we Humbly
tender unto Thee, may be accepted of by Thee, and not destruction brought on us
and our Families for not taking of an Oath; when the engagements before
recited, taken before some Justice of the Peace in a solemn manner, with
calling God to witness to the truth of what we say, without doubt answers the
end of the Law, that enjoins the Oath of Allegiance, and may be as much
security from us to Thee, as if we took many Oaths. Why should the very rigor
of the Law be exercised on us? Yea, but that we fear we are too tedious unto
Thee, we could make it clear, that the late dealing of thy inferior Ministers
has been such toward us, as neither Law nor custom has prescribed. And
now having faithfully laid our condition and Principles (so far as they relate
to Magistrates or Government) before thee; We therefore beseech Thee, O King,
that Liberty may be given us to worship our God, and such bowels of
compassion be in Thee, as to give us such speedy relief as may be agreeable to
the Mind of God, which made Heaven and Earth, which executed judgment for the
oppressed, which gives food to the hungry, the Lord loses the Prisoners,
Psalm. 146.7.

Signed by us in the Name of the Baptists, now Prisoners in the Goal at
Maydstone, William Jeffery. John Reve. George Hammon. James Blackmore.
Dated the 25th day of the 11th month commonly called January.
FINIS.

