THE VANITY of MAN, At his best Estate, AND THE Vanity of Dives, His Desire
when at his Worst, VIZ. To have a PREACHER sent from the Dead to his Fathers
House.

Discoursed of In Two SERMONS, the First before the University of Oxon, the
other at Ayno in Northamptonshire, at the Anniversary for the Foundation of the
Free School there.

By T. H. B. D. Sometime Rector of Souldern in Oxfordshire.

July, 17. Imprimatur,

G. Jane

LONDON, Printed by J.B. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and 3 Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on London Bridge, 1676.

To the much Honored Mrs MARY FANE.
Madam,
THe two following Sermons, here humbly presented into your hands, may have
leave to beg if not pretend, a Title to your Patronage, The first having been
made in a good measure, long since, upon occasion of the death of that
excellent person Sir Roger Townshend Baronet, your Uncle; and now made
seasonable, by the late loss of your dear Husband, that worthy and nobly
descended Gentleman Mr Fane as also of your dear father Mr Cartwright, a great
loss both to his Family and Country; your Husband deceasing in the morning,
and your Father about the Noon of his age. The second Sermon, may plead for
your acceptance also, upon this account, that it was not long since preached at
Ayno, upon the Anniversary for the foundation of the Free School there by your
Grandmother and God-mother, Mrs Mary Cartwright, late Lady of that Manor:
Madam, should I be censured for this Address to you, your birth at Soulderne
when I was Minister there, my Obligations to your Husbands Family, as also to
your Father, Mother, and Grandfather Cartwright, with other of your Relations
shall be my Apology.

So with my hearty prayers to God for you, that you may go on in the good ways
of your educations, and that although you are left Husbandless, Fatherless, and
Motherless, yet that neither you, nor yours, may ever be left Friendless,
helpless, or comfortless, but that he would please to be a comforter, a Friend,
a Father, a Husband to you, and that you may be the blessed of the Lord, and
your offspring with you, I humbly take leave and remain.

Madam, Your very humble servant Thomas Hodges,
June, 27th. 1676.
A SERMON Concerning the Vanity of man, even at his best estate.
Psalm 39.5. Verily, every man, at his best estate, is altogether Vanity,
Selah.


It Is usual and useful, for Travelers to carry about them Maps or draughts of
the Countries through which they travel. We are all pilgrims and strangers here
(but travelers) as all our fathers were: For as they were, so are we in this
world. Let me therefore commend unto you this Psalm, to carry along with you in
your bosoms, to have often in your eyes; It is a little map of the lesser
world, man; and, of the greater world, what it is or can be to man. It Is a true
perfect map, drawn and colored by the pen of the Royal prophet David, as his
hand was held and guided by the Holy Ghost: It Is possible that it may (and my
prayer is that it might) prove of singular use and benefit to us in this world;
that we lose not our way, that we lose not our selves, in this foreign country.

T^ text, it is the marrow and quintessence, it is the great lesson of this
Psalm, it is the sum of the whole book of Ecclesiastes; 'T(...) and prophecy of
Solomon's experience; It Is the (...) Prophets text, upon which the son, the
King-Preaent Solomon made after wards that Sermon or Comment, that excellent
piece, the book of Ecclesiastes. Here Is magnum in parvo, much in a little, a
description of two Wordls in two or three Words; yea, here is the universe, All,
as it were in Nothing, all briefly comprehended in this one word Vanity.

It Is thought, it was Absoloms conspiracy that occasioned David's penning this
Psalm. David, before this, (when the house of Saul was laid in the dust)
thought, that surely his Mountain was so strong that it could never be moved,
but behold on a sudden, a viper in his own bosom, an Absalom, that seeks the
death of him, that gave him life: and after he had driven h^s father from his
Royal palace and City, consults to assemble together all Israel, to whatsoever
place or City wheresoever they could find him, even to bring ropes to that
City and to draw it into the river until there should not be one small stone
found there. 2. Sam. 17.12, 13.

And, now, the sweet singer of Israel changes his tune to this sad note in the
text, Verily every man, at his most fined (or settled) estate is altogether
Vanity, Selah.

And, although we should suppose or grant, as some do, that the prophet David
uttered these words out of his impatience, yet the words, for the matter of
them, hold forth the same truth with many other Scriptures, see Job. 14.1. and
16.22. and 34.20. Eccles. 9.12.1. Corinth. 7.29, 31. Psalm. 89.48. and ' Psa. 90
10. and especially the 11th verse of this Psalm; where the same prophet repeats
the same thing for substance, that he does here; saying again, Surely every man
is vanity, Selah.

And, if Kings and Princes and great gallants of the world, should reply to the
prophet some what like that of Festus to the Apostle Paul, Acts. 26.24.25.
David, thou art beside thy self, much affliction has made thee mad: the
Prophet might return, in the like manner as the Apostle there did, I am not mad
most noble Princes, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness: Surely
man is vanity: Adam is Enosh or Abel, Abel, Enosh, Benoni are fit names for
every son of Adam: Every man is vanity high and low together, Greek and
Barbarian, wise and unwise, bond and free.

Further, every man is altogether vanity. Every man, or all man, is all vanity.
Man was a model and compendium of the worlds creation, in its perfection and
beauty; so he is now too, of it in its corruption and vanity: Cum inanimis,
says one, subjacet mutationi, corruptioni: cum animatis, alterationi, morti:
cum sentientibus, laetitiae, moerori: cum Angelis, inconstantiae, etc. i. e.
Man, like the inanimate creatures, or those creatures which are without life,
is subject to change, and corruption; like animate or living creatures, he is
subject to alteration, and death: like sensitive creatures, he is subject to
joy, and sorrow; and like the Angels, (namely those that left their first
station,) he is subject to inconstancy, and folly.

Lastly, every man at his best estate, at his most fixed, most settled estate,
when living, when most lively, lusty, healthy, rich, honorable, when most
happy, parmanent, (for the Hebrew (...) is very diversely rendered by
translators) even, then, is he altogether vanity: omni ex part, or quoad
omnia, or modis omnibus, vanissimus est, as some interpret. Men's lives are
uncertain, their afflictions are unsatiable and disorderly, their enjoyments
transitory. their beauty, their greatness, and glory, all fading and perishing:
so vain a thing is man. Oh that he would consider it, Selah.

I shall take my rise from these words to show you, 1. The creatures vanity,
and, 2. The Lord of the creatures vanity: to show you your own faces, your own
hearts, your all, in a true glass; only have patience a while to behold; come
and see; and then, oh then, go not away and forget not presently what manner of
men and women ye were.


In the handling of this text I lay upon my self no other burden then these
necessary things.

1. To show you, what is, or may be imploed under this word Vanity. 2. To
prove, that every man is altogether Vanity. 3. To discover the Original and
foundation of this flood of vanity, which overflows the whole world, and from
which not so much as eight persons, nay no one person since the fall, was ever
saved: namely the cause of this vanity upon all flesh. 4. To propound and point
out to you the way and means of being delivered out of this vanity, wherein
mankind is involved and plunged.
I.
First, of the first, what is or may be employed in the word Vanity.

1. A thing is said to be vain or vanity, which has but a little being, or
which has not long a being: (...) the word for vanity, is used to signify a
vapor; and so that in Ecclesiastes is by some translated, (instead of Vanit as
Vanitatum, omnia vanitas,) vapor vaporum omnia vapor: and what is our life,
faith the Apoicle James, cha: 4.14. It is even a vapor, which appears for a
little time, soon vanishes away. Our being is but a borrowed, a dependent
being; and we are but of short continuance here in this world. The light of our
lives, at best, is like the light of the Moon, a borrowed light; or like the
light, or blaze of a fiery meteor fading and vanishing, which is soon our or
extinct. And this worthlesness and great uncertainty, or fleeing and vanishing
estate of man in this world, may seem to be particularly aimed at by the
Prophet in this Psalm, and this place.

2. A thing may be said to be vain, or vanity which is empty or void. And here
emptiness is not opposed barely to entity and fullness, but to solidity and
satisfaction: we say a versel is empty, although it be full of air; a bladder,
blown full of wind, may be said to be empty and vain; such a vanity is man
(since the fall by sin, and before he is raised again by grace, he is an empty
vessel, void of any solid satisfying good: he is an earthen Pitcher, and an
empty Pitcher: (indeed, once, he had a lamp in his pitcher:) he is a bladder,
blown full of wind, full of vain conceits and imaginations; and so the more
full, the more empty, and the more vanity. And as for man's life here, if is
full of trouble, void of true satisfaction and happiness in our most
flourishing, and in our best estate.

3. A thing may be said vain, which is unprofitable, and which is not able to
help: of little or no value, or weight; that is light upon the balance; lighter
then vanity is the usual Scripturephrase. And truly to every son of man in his
best estate may be said, as to Belshazzar, Mean, Mean, Tekel, -- Thou art
weighed, and found too light. Thou art but as the dust of the balance compared
with thy Lord and maker; and thon art to him an unprofitable servant when thou
have done thy best: yea thou art a broken-staff, a vain thing to be trusted
unto. Hear what this Prophet David says to this purpose, Psalm. 62.9. Surely
men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in
the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

II.
The second thing propounded to be showed is, that every man is vanity. And
here I shall endeavor the discovery of this vanity four ways.

1. I shall show that man is vanity simply and absolutely considered; without
comparison, without relations.

2. That man is vanity if he be compared with his maker; his age is nothing
unto God, his being is nothing; laid in the balance, he is altogether lighter
then vanity.

3ly. That man is vanity considered relatively; or, that there is vanity in all
relations betwixt man and man.

4ly. That man is vanity causally; that is, that he is the cause of the vanity
in the inferior creatures; the cause wherefore the creature is made subject
unto vanity: I intend to insist more largely upon the first of these, and to
touch more lightly upon the three latter.

1. If we consider man simply and absolutely; he is a mass of vanity, since
the fall: his Esse, his Operari, his Possidere, are all vanity: man, I say, in
what he is, what he does, what he has, is vanity, or tempered and mixed with
vanity; And of these in order.

1. There is abundance of vanity in what he is; both in the faculties of his
soul, and also in the perfections of his body.

1. I shall begin with the faculties of his soul, and therein,

1. With the understanding.

1. There is vanity of vanity, or emptiness; a great want of knowledge, in the
knowing part of man. In the understanding of man, little understanding of God;
in Greece, ye know, the eye of the world, and in Athens the eye of Greece,
there was an Altar to the unknown God; and if the eye of the soul be darkness,
how great must needs the darkness of the soul be. And there is not only
emptiness of the knowledge of God, and divine Mysteries, but likewise there is
much ignorance of Natures secrets: The worlds grandees for wisdom are but like
bats and moles, very blind to the discerning the mysteries of nature.

2. Again, there is in man's understanding, the vanity of Mutability and
inconstancy: the same understanding gives a different light at diverse times;
It Is like a glass that represents things diversely, or contrarily, at several
times, we judge of things variously in health, and in sickness; in prosperity,
and adversity; in life, and when we are ready to dye; before and after we have
enjoyed them.

3. There Is the vanity of vanity in the understanding, i. e. a knowledge of
vain things more then of those which can profit us: men drive a great trade of
vanity; their heads are usually like some pedlars stalls, full of toys and
trifles and vanities. Our understandings, before we are again enlightened from
above, are busied about smaller matters, are tithing mint and cummin: but the
great things of the law are accounted strange things, are strangers, are not
known there.

2. There is vanity in the will.

1. It wills folishly, it wills things not good, not convenient: instead of a
fish a stone, instead of bread a scorpion, poison instead of food and Physic.
If God will undo a man quickly, he lets him undo himself, lets him have his own
will.

2. Again, the will wills ineffectually. It wills many things contrary to the
divine will, and so wills in vain; wills and cannot obtain.

3. Further, it wills and wills not: it wills mutably; and that is its vanity
and infirmity: We are like men in a fever, or like little children; now we
will have one thing and anon another; we are not satisfied; we will we know not
what. Our vain wills are blown about with every blast of vanity: Yet lastly,
the will ofttimes wills wilfully, impetuously, violently: it is almost always in
motion, though a kind of palsy motion which proceeds from its infirmity and
vanity.

3. There Is vanity in the affections.

1. They are always busyed, and yet always idle; like children, playing in the
marketplace of the world, when they should be laboring in Gods vineyard: like
Martha, troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary. Our affections
had rather, like the Israelites, be scattered all up and down the Egypt of the
world, to gather straw and stubble, to make brick to build Cities for the great
Pharach, the devil, then to follow Moses or Jesus, toward the heavenly Canaan

Again 2. There is in our affections the vanity of mutability, they are
constant only in inconstancy.

4ly, There Is vanity in the memory: our memories, like the stream, carry down
with them light matters, but lets gold and silver, and the more precious things
sink to the bottom; it is a sieve of vanity, it lets go the good corn, and
returns the dross and chaff of vanity; it is a cracked cistern which lets out
pure Crystal water, and retains only mud and dirt.

5. Lastly, there is vanity in the Imagination: the fancy is the Arch limner of
vain shaddows, and disquiets it self in vain: this is the house and shop of
vanity, here dwells, and here works vanity night and day; here many chambers of
imagery worse and worse, are in every man's fancy before regeneration.

2. And then as there is vanity in the powers of the mind, so in the
perfections of the body: bodily health, strength, agility are not free from
vanity: they are vanishing, perishing things; soon gone, of short continuance:
God puts no trust in the legs of a man, neither in the strength nor swiftness
of any man; so let not us lean too much upon these pillars; these strong men
shall one day bow themselves, neither shall any man rescue himself or his
brother, from the arrest of death: it is worth our taking notice of, that which
is observed by learned Mr Mede in his Diatriba upon Prove. 21.16. that Hell is
set out to us, in the Old Testament, by this expression, the place of the
Giants.

And as for our health, (set aside innumerable casualties and the principle of
mortality within,) it has 300 cremies, viz. so many diseases, to encounter it;
and our liablenesse to be spoiled by these is part of our vanity. And thus much
for the vanity of man in what he is, the vanity of his nature.

2. As man is vain in his nature, (in the saculties of his soul, and
perfections of his body,) so likewise in his operations.

1. In his thoughts, those inward works of the soul: the soul is a mint, and an
Exchange of vain thoughts. Man's heart in thinking, runs like a swift Dromedary
up and down the world, and snuffeth up the wind, vanity, every where: oh what
a storehouse of foolish, deceitful, sinful, and so of vain thoughts, is every
one of our hearts! Oh, how long, how long shall vain thoughts be minded by us,
be lodged in us, be hid within us, and the precious thoughts of God, and Jesus
Christ, stand without and have not where to lay their heads!

2. There Is vanity in men's words, and communication: men's words are wind, and
sometimes, like breath from corrupt lungs, they are rotten, putrid, unsavory
words our mouths are an open Sepulcher, which sends forth a stinking favor, we
may say to every natural man, of his words, thou say, but they are but vain
words, vain because useless;, not (...), not for use because not for
edification: they are idle words, unprofitable words, (...), not working words.
Gods word is sincere milk, profitable for nourishment: man's words are like foam
and froth, vain and unprofitable, for the most part; and sometimes, we spit out
our venom in one another faces whilst we talk together.

3. The Actions of a man whilst in his natural condition are vanity. His
natural actions, his eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. are in vain, because not
done to the glory of God. His moral actions, his acts of civil justice, etc.
although they be good for the matter of them, yet they are done from a vain
principle of inordinate self-love, or in a vain manner, and to a wrong end, for
vainglory: and therefore called by the father, but -- splendida peccata,
glittering sins. And lastly, his religious actions, his fasting, praying,
worshipping, are mixed with much vanity: God may say to them, bring no more
vain oblations: to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrisices and
services? The very Gods of the nations are Idols, are vanity, and lies, in
Scripture account; and therefore their religion and worship must needs be salse
and vain. A natural man whether he eats or drinks, or whatsoever he does, I may
say to him, he sows the wind, and shall reap the whirl wind; he conceives
vanity and shall bring forth a lie, shall at last be disappointed of his
expectation: Surely man walks in a vain show or shadow, dum unum imaginatur
and cogitat, and aliud succedit; whilst he designs one thing, another
succeeds; so the next verse to the text is expounced.

And thus much concerning the vanity of man's nature, and the vanity of actions
or operations, his vanity in what he is and what he does.

3. Lastly, there is a vanity also in what a man has; the goods of this world
which he has in possession are also vanity. The Heathens used to call these
outward good things, bona fortuna, goods of fortune: they thought them subject
to change and vanity; as undable as a wheel, up and down; here now, and soon
passed away in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, all are vanity: great places, great palaces, delicious fare,
gorgeous attire, a long train of attendants, all these are vanity, and will be
found so in the using.

1. These are vain things, which cannot profit them that have them, as they
look to be benefited by them. R^ches are thorns, which are wounding, tearing
things: they tear off the fleece, instead of affording shelter, many times; and
not only the fleece, but skin and flesh; and our very hearts are rent and torn
away after them.

2. Honors, and great places, etc. they are vanity; these things are wind,
apt to make men that have them to swell above their measure: hence so many
quarrels for elbow-room in the world: the narrow way to heaven is not broad
enough for many great ones; they must be allowed a greater latitude: and the
great places many have, are not great enough for their spirits; and this is
vanity.

3. And as for pleasures, they are vain things which perish in the using; short
sweets, and often, bitter sweets: all pleasures are bu t vanity, and sinful
pleasures are, or one day will prove, vexation of spirit: Momentaneum est quod
delectat, aeternum quod cruciat, what a hell is it to think, that a moment has
swallowed up that pleasure which can never return, and if not prevented of in
time, will inevitably bring eternal damnation.

4. All these outward good things are vain, there is no satisfying good in
them; happiness is not to be found in these enjoyments. Can a man gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? no more can we gather happiness from
the creatures. These whilst enjoyed, are not the souls good things. He was a
fool that thought so: and this saying was his folly; and wherever the Gospel
shall be preached, this his vanity and folly shall be remembered, Luke. 12. the
soul cannot thrive on these husks; not on the wind, like Ephraim; or on the
air, like the Chamelion. The heart of the wicked which feeds on wind or air,
is little worth. It was well said by a Reverend Divine, that these things, Dr.
Wh.
they are but halfprovision, provision (namely) for the body only, and that but
for this state, for this life, after wards the body will have no use of them.

5. Again, these things they are for use rather then enjoyment, even whilst we
have them; and the time of our using them is but short, the time is but short,
faith the Scriptures: God that wheels about the heavens, and spins out time for
thee, (as is excellently expressed by a reverend Author,) ere long will out the
thread of thy time, the thread of thy life (which is, for the most part, spun
out in a thread of vanity) and at last will set fire on, and burn the wheel it
self, yea, time shall be no more. And therefore as our life in relation to its
comforts, is vanity, so in respect of its continuance also, it is a vapor, a
bubble, a shadow, a tale, a dream. Childhood and youth are vanity and old age
often proves vexation of spirit.

And thus we have showed you hitherto how vain a thing is man absolutely
considered, in what he is, (his nature, the faculties of his soul, and the
perfections of his body;) in what he does, in what he has, or can have of this
world, so vain a thing is man taken absolutely.

2. We are to consider him in the next place comparatively, with respect to his
maker; and so the whole mass and lump of mankind, they are lighter then
vanity, and less then nothing, Esai. 40 17.

3. Nor can the sons of men combine together, by their relations, to secure
themselves from vanity. Let them join hand in hand to build a Tower to reach to
the skys, to keep themselves from being overflown with the deluge of vanity;
alas! this their attempt and fancy would prove a vanity of vanities; there is a
vanity in being alone, and there is a vanity in company, since sin came there:
there is division now in our greatest union.

The relation betwixt friends has this vanity often attending it; men will love,
tanquam aliquando osuri: and the hatred wherewith they will hate afterward,
shall be greater then the love where with they loved us.

In relation 'twixt man and wife, there is vanity; and, oftentimes, vexation of
spirit. Yea, in the society and communion of Saints, whilst they are in the
body, there are disgusts and differences; in judgment first, and then in
affection: the society of the Saints, I acknowledge, is New Jerusalem, come
down from heaven; yet not always a city: Uanity within it self is the best of
all societies; yet vanity will attend Saints, wherever they go, till they are
uncloathed of these bodies; whilst they are in the body, vanity as a shadow
waits on them.

4. As man is vanity both considered absolutely, in himself, and comparatively
to his maker, and also relatively considered in his several stations, so is he
all vanity causally, that is, he is the cause or ground of that vanity, which
is seen in the inferior creatures; According to that Genesis 3 17, 18. Cursed is
the earth for thy sake, etc. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee,
etc. And the like is employed, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. But of this I shall say no
more in this place, because I have further occasion to say more of it in the
third General.

And thus having so far explained the main aim of the text, for further proof
and amplification of the vanity in man, and the creatures vanity unto man, take
but these 3 following De monstrations.

1. Take the Judgment of God himself, Esai. 40.17. Hear what he says there of
all nations, all nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him
less then nothing, and vanity, yea, the choicest pieces of the nations are no
better, v. 23. he brings the princes to nothing, he makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity: and chapter 41 v. 29. Behold they are all vanity, their works are
nothing, and so are their thoughts, Psalm. 94.11. v. The Lord knows the
thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

2. Take the Judgment of good men, great men, and Prophets, and wife men; of
David, and Solomon: we have the prophet David's estimate, the man after Gods own
heart in the text; and again, v. 11. of this Psalm; and a third time, Psalm.
62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie;
they are lighter then vanity. And as for Solomon, he is a witness beyond all
exception, one that had power, and wealth, and wit, and will, to extract the
best spirits and the quintessence of all the good things in this world; and did
actually make experiment of all; witness his Ecclesiastes: and lastly, he
weighed all in Gods balance, tried all by Gods standard, has Gods Probatum
est to his trial, and the Holy Ghosts Imprimatur to his book; the sum of all
which is briefly comprehended in this saying, vanity of vanities, says the
Preacher, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. King Solomon was the great
critick-Alchymist of the world, who spent many years to distill the world, but
could not extract a drop of happiness out of it, but seas of vanity,
boundless and bottomless, wherein he had been drowned, had not Jesus Christ
lent him his hand, had not he walked on this sea, and trod under foot all these
vanities, and come to Jesus his Savior.

3. Study your own experiences, read over the book of your lives that book of
four leaves, childhood, youth, manhood, old age, (...) you have lived so long)
and you will find it written (...) and without, vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. You may (...) and read (...) if God give you grace to open the book
and look thereon. But if ye should altogether refuse to read now, although it
might save your lives, yea, the life of your souls, yet know there are three
days, wherein this truth will stare you in the face, and will be like the
handwriting on the wall to Belshazzar; the former two days are dark days, days
of darkness and gloominesse, spoken of by Joel, chapter 2. and by Solomon Eccles.
12. the day of distress and misery, and the day of death; and you will read that
in the dark, probably, which in the sunshine of prosperity you could not, or
would not do; and this is your vanity: the third and last day is a day of
thunder and lightning, the great day of Judgment, and then, if you were blind
till then, (which yet you shall not be,) your eyes shall then be opened, and
you shall see the world, your self, your own Condition, all in their proper
colors of vanity and vexation of spirit. Let this suffice to have been spoken
of two of the main things propounded to be handled in the beginning.

III.
3. And now if any ask me; if it be so, why is it thus? The great husbandman
sowed good corn in his field, whence then has it tares? whence has it vanity?
I answer, man may be said to be vanity causally, in regard of himself and also
of the creature; that is, to be the Author of the vanity in the creatures, and
in himself; I mean, of the sinful vanity of man; and of that vanity and
deceitfulness which is in all the creatures, their frustrating man's
expectations of satisfaction and happiness in them and from them, which indeed
they never promised him. I may say (to allude to that other Scripture) why seek
ye the living among the dead? why seek ye happiness below? It is not here it
is risen: come to the paradise, and see the place where once it lay. It was sin
bred bitterness in our greatest sweets, and discontent in our greatest
contentments. We drew on vanity, on ours and the creatures heads, with cords of
iniquity. Man when he sinned, became vain in his imagination: and it suffices
the servant that he be^s his master, that that likewife be in its kind subject
unto vanity.

It is true, there is a vanity which is not sinful which was not caused by sin;
and that is the vanity of the greater and lesser world in comparison to him
that made them both; they are so to him, vanity and lighter then vanity.

IV.
As for the fourth and last general proposed, viz. How we may be freed out of
this vanity; I refer you to the close of the application, and so I proceed
directly to the Uses.

Uses.
Use. 1. I's every man, at his best and most flourishing estate, altogether
vanity? Then, according as it is written, Jerem. 9.23. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might. Let not
the rich man glory in his riches; but rather (as it is written, and that again
and again, 1 Cor. 1.31. 2 Cor. 10.27.) Let him that glories, glory in the
Lord. Let the poor and mean Christian, (in respect of parts, and place, and of
his portion in the things of this life,) let him glory, in that by being a
Christian, he is spiritually exalted: but the wise, and noble, and mighty and
rich Christian, glory in this, that, by this Scripture, he is made low this
day, and set upon the same level and plain ground with his poor brother. Let
him consider the vanity and uncertainty, of all worldly enjoyments, and outward
excellencies; it is a text or theme the prophet is commanded to preach upon,
and that with a loud voice: Esa. 40 67. The spirit said, cry; and I said, what
shall I cry? why, all flesh is grass, and the goodlinesse thereof as the flower
of the grass; the grass withers, and the flower fades, because the spirit
of the Lord blows upon it. And the Apostle James gives this reason, why rich
men should have low thoughts in their high condition, because, as the flower of
the grass, they and their riches shall pass away. James, 1.10. You wise men,
and noble men, and rich men; you seem gay and glorious flowers, the eyes of men
are delighted with such beautiful objects; but alas at your best estate, you
are altogether vanity: when you are flowring, you may be nearest to withering,
you may die in your prime and flower, like as herbs, when they begin to spring
and flourish, presently wither, and the flower thereof falls, and the grace
of the fashion of it perishes: so also shall the rich man fade away in his
ways, says the Scripture, ver. 11. of that 1. of Janes.

Could thou by power or policy, get into a throne, and exalt thy throne above
the thrones of all the Kings upon the face of the whole earth; could thou
proclaim thy self univerfal Lord and Monarch, and send yokes by thine
Ambassadors, to all the Princes and States of the world, should thou say in
thy heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of
God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most
high: yet the time will come, and it will not be long, when this text shall be
like Belshazzars handwriting upon the wall, behold thou art weighed, and art
found too light, thou art light upon the balance, altogether vanity, and this
kingdom is departed from thee.

The Kings and great ones, who have gone down into the grave before thee, may
take up this proverb against thee, may speak and say unto thee, art thou also
become weak as we? art thou also become vanity like unto us? thy pomp is
brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: Instead of thy golden
and glorious carpets, and coverings, behold now the worm is spread under thee,
and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the
morning? O therefore when thou art in prosperity, in thy best estate, say not,
I shall never be moved; Do not sing a requiem to thy Soul, with the rich fool,
saying, soul, take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years: lest it
be said to thee, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Say
not, with Nebuchadnezzar, when thou look upon thy goodly buildings, Is not
this great Babylon that I have built by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? lest whilst the word be yet in thy mouth, there fall a
voice from heaven, saying, To thee it is spoken, thy kingdom is departed from
thee, -- thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; and the day comes
when there shall not be left one stone upon another, which shall not be thrown
down. Say not with Eastern Babylon, Esa. 47.7, 8. I shall be a Lady for ever; I
am and none else besides me, I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know
the loss of children; lest these two things come to thee in a moment, in one
day, the loss of children, and widowhood: lest desolation come upon thee
suddenly which thou shall not know. Say not, with Western Babylon, that is
Rome, (so Austin calls her,) I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow; Lest it be said, Therefore shall thy plagues come in one day; death and
mourning and famine, etc. Revel. 18.7, 8. Trust not in uncertain riches, but in
the living God. Set before your eyes always the vanity of this world, and of
your condition here, be it never so flourishing. Let not your thoughts be as
their thoughts are, ( Psalm. 49.11.) of whom the Psalmist witnesses, their
inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling-places to all generations: they call their land after their own names;
They think their family and name shall continue for ever: Thus they think, but
they are but vain thoughts. The Jews have a saying, that Every King is the son
of a beggar, and every beggar is the son of a King: Such mutability and vanity
there is in humane affairs, and in worldly greatness. It Is Gods work to humble
high things, and to raise low things. He it is who sets up one, and pulls down
another, who powrs contempt upon Princes, and stains the pride of all their
glory, and again, at the same time, raises the poor from the dunghill, to set
him amongst the Princes of his people.

Oh then, ye great men, ye Grandees of the world, ye Noblemen, ye rich men,
whom God has, in these respects, exalted above your Brethren, be not
high-minded, but fear; Let not your hearts be lifted up, to Judge your selves
therefore the only happy men, and to despise others: take heed your height make
not your brethren below seem as dwarfs, as little or as nothing, in your eyes.
If the height you are in once make you dissie and giddie (as we say) you are
like to fall presently, and lay all your honor in the dust or dirt. Do not ye
Idolize your selves, and let not the world deify you; or do not ye deify your
selves, and let not the world Idolize you; for both these are vanity. To make
you Gods (to give you that honor which belongs to God) is to make you Idols;
and to make you Idols, is to make you vanities, and lies, and nothing, it is
indeed quite to mar you, to undo you. This text, well studied, would be a good
antidote against the swelling of the poison, or against the tympany of pride in
mighty men; and a good Cordial against the pining-consumption of envy in mean
men at the prosperity of others. The fashion, beauty, glory of the world
passes away: Every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, Selab.

And here I shall back this lesson with these following considerations, let
high and low, rich and poor, together consider.

1. That in Adam, our common-Father we were all molded out of the same red
earth, we grew all from one root, we issued all from one fountain: the higher
we derive our pedigree, the nearer we are all akin. We are all lines from one
center; and the nearer we go to the center, the nearer we are one to another:
God made of one blood all nations and familyes to dwell upon the earth, Acts.
17.26. All blood is of one color, and runs in the like channels and vessels,
and observes the same course and motion in all men. We had all one father Adam,
and one maker, God. We are the sons and daughters of Adam, who was the son of
God.

2. We all live upon our Fellow Creatures; We all spend out of Gods treasury,
are maintained at his cost and charges. Those who received and spend most of
Gods bounty, are like greater and larger poor men's boxes: God of whom the whole
family in heaven and earth is named, does of his mere goodness, feed, and
cloth, and harbor us all. We are, all of us, wholly beholden to him, and live
upon his alms or contribution altogether: and the more delicious is our fair,
the finer our apparel, the more stately our dwelling, the greater our train;
the more are we indebted to his liberality. The whole world is Gods Hospital or
Almes-house; where the greatest and gayest are indeed but his Eleemosynaryes,
his Almes-men.

3. All men are alike, for almost half their times, viz. whilst both are
asleep, only it is the sleep of the laboring man, ordinarily, is the sweetest;
here in sleep, as in death, poor and rich meet together, and here the servant
is free from his master.

4. That greatness is not always, not very often, accompanied with goodness: a
man may be advanced to worldly honor and more greatness, but not at all to be
bettered thereby, or therewith. The same piece of money without any real change
in the money, may by the supreme power, be advanced and made to pass at a
higher rate: even so is honor, the raising the rate or value of a man in the
account of the world, D. R.
without changing the man, in the least; for the better; on the other side,
poverty and outward meannesse, do not make men ordinarily the worse. Nay, those
who by the world are accounted as the scum, and dung, and filth of the world;
even they are Gods Jewels, they are they of whom the world is not worthy. It is
well said by Dr. R. that mighty men and mean, differ but like great and small
letters, in the same volume, great letters take up more room, make a braver
show: It may be we are arrayed in scarlet, and so better seen, and more gazed
on by vulgar eyes: but they put no more matter or worth, no more or better
sense into the words which they compound, (...) the volumes the are in. Great
men make a more glorious show in the volume of this world; but this great book
of the Universe is not substantially the better for them.

5. Whilst we live together here in this world, there is no respect of persons
with God: God accepts no man's person, or sacrifice, for his greatness: and, in
Christ Jesus, it is not his being a mighty man, or mean man; a rich man, or poor
man; not bound or free, which avayleth any thing; but the being a good man, a
good Christian, this is it which is accepted of him. All true Christians, rich
and poor, are fellow members of the same body; now, as in the body natural, one
member does not undervalue another, because it is not set in so high a place in
the body, or is not so well clothed as another: so let Christians of high
degree, not contemn them of low degree; and let not Christians of low degree,
envy or repine at them that are exalted: they that are on high see a larger
field of vanity, then you that stand on a lower ground.

6. We shall all dye alike; no difference in the natural deaths of men because
Princes, or poor men, mighty or mean. Though some seem to have heads of gold,
like Nebuchadnezzars Image; yet they all stand but upon feet of clay; we must
lie down in the dust together; and who can distinguish the Kings dust from the
beggars. We are all excellently well compared to a set of counters, which men
use in casting of account: the counters are in themselves all alike, and differ
only for a time, according to the place in which they are set; some stand for
pounds, some for shillings, and some for pence; but in the conclusion all are
alike jumbled into the box or bag together: so it is in the world, some stand
in a higher place and a greater value is set on them for a time then others;
but at last, at death, all shall be jumbled alike into the grave, Psalm. 49.

7. When we shall be awakened out of our sleep in the grave, and gathered
together before the judgment seat of Christ; this distinction, of noble, and
mean men shall cease. In the Resurrection, at the Coronation of the King of
Kings, the Heralds of this world shall have no place to rank men according to
the dignity of their houses and families. In that respect, the resurrection
will make us all Peers, and those that shall wait on him on that day, he will
make all and for ever Kings. Oh therefore, considering that after a while, all
these artificial differences of coats and outward distances of place, shall
cease; let us not, for this small pittance of time we have to live here, let us
not despise or envy one another, let not the honorable person behold his
inferior with a haughty, proud, disdainful eye and let not the mean man look
on the noble man, or great man with an evil and envious eye. Neither let the
great Scholars of the world, or the grandees for wisdom and knowledge, exalt
themselves too much, and glory in their learning and wisdom, as if these were
exempt and privileged from the touch of vanity. Let such know, that the wisdom
of the world is foolishness with God; and that King Solomon, wiser then the
wisest now upon the face of the earth, found a vanity in humain knowledge,
Eccles. 1.18.

Besides, let the greatest Scholar the world has, see and know, that his line
is too short to fathom the depths of nature; that there are many things there;
which, as to the comprehensive knowledge of them, he must let them alone
forever. Where is the wise man? where is the disputer of this world? where is
the profound Philosopher? Give me, if thou can, a Definition of thy own soul,
Nay but the definition of a straw under thy foot. Tell me if thou can, how
the Remora, a fish no bigger then a carp, stays the ship? How the Lodestone
draws Iron? Why the grass is green? Give us a satisfactory reason, if you can,
why some Creatures are covered naturally with hair-cloath, others with rugs of
the finest wool, and others walk up and down and fly abroad, as well as sleep,
in feather beds of diverse colors? Hen quantum est quod nescimus! and again,
Maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima eorum quae nescimus: good Motto's for
the greatest Scholars. Oh therefore let the great Scholar glory in this, that
he knows me, says the Lord, Jerem 9. or in this, that he knows Jesus Christ
and him crucified; and that he is able to comprehend, with all Saints, the
height, and depth, and length and breadth af the love of God, and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge.

Use. 2. Is every man at his best estate vanity? then, cease from man whose
breath is in his nostrills, whose condition, when most flourishing, is but
fading and vanishing, for wherein he is to be accounted of? Put not your trust
in Princes, or in any son of man, Psalm. 146.3.

Men cannot preserve themselves alive, or in honor, cannot make themselves
happy, or secure themselves from outward misery. Lean not too hard on these
staves, they will break under you: to trust to these is to trust to a broken
reed, it is to lean on a spear which will pierce you, they are staves of bands,
and not of beauty. The rod of God is a staff; but the staff of man is a rod often
times, and will soon be turned into a Serpent, and bite you. Trust not in the
favor of Princes, or great men: Consider the height and downfall of Haman,
Sejanus, Cardinal Woolsey, and other Favorites. Trust not in the favor of the
multitude or commonpeople, neither, versatilis turba.

Now the multitude will cry Hosanna, and anon Crucisige now they will prepare
Garlands, and be ready to sacrifice to you as a God; and anon they will stone
you as a Malefactor, or one of the worst of men.

Use. 3. Is there vanity in what thou art, and do, and have (considered
without Christ)? then do not Idolize thy self for any endowments, nor bless thy
self for any creature enjoyments: do not pride thy self for parts and gifts:
If thy heart be lifted up within thee for these, thou have but a vain mind,
thou art become a fool in glorying, if any man might have stood upon their
parts and abilities, surely Solomon much more.

Be not too much enamoured with the perfections of thy body or outward man; thy
strength, agility, health, beauty; all shall fade away, wither like the grass,
and perish like the flower of the grass, when the blasting East wind, or the
scorching Sunbeams comes upon it. The day will come when you shall say, they
are vanity; when you shall say you have no pleasure in them.

Do not place happiness in what thou have, in great possessions, in
Creature Comforts, and enjoyments, there is a vanity in delicious meats and
drinks, in fine apparel, in sumptuous buildings, in a large train of
attendants, in the multitude of friends and acquaintance; do not place
happiness in these things, for you will never be able to find it here. In vain
do you look for Canaan on this side Jordan, the Devil showed our Savior all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and it is observed, that he
did this in a moment, as it were in ictu oculi, in the twinkling of an eye, sic
transit gloria mundi. But we have need to go up often, and to stay long with
God in the mount, to see clearly all the kingdoms of the world and the vanity
of them. The world is a world of vanity; yea, there is a world of vanity in
every man. Behold I show you a mystery, the lesser world man is more
comprehensive of vanity then the greater.

Use. 4. Is the world a world of vanity unto man? are the good things of the
world (as they are called) good for nothing, as to the making us happy? then
let us not fall out, and make our selves miserable by divisions, strifes, and
contentions about them; it is for children and fools to wrangle and fall out for
toys, and vanities. Fall not out for that which is not. It was Justus Lipsius
his Epitaph of his own making, which he commanded to be written on his
Sepulcher.

Vis altiore voce me tecum loqui.
Humana cunota sumus, umbra, vanitas,
Et, verbout absolvam, nihil.
Use. 5. Let us all make that use of this doctrine, which the Prophet David
does in this, Psalm. v. 7. saying, And now, Lord, what wait we for? our hope is
in thee. Seeing Every man is so vain, and seeing every thing is so
unprofitable, why should we in vain seek to be happy by any thing short of
thee? No, no, we do not; that be for ever far from us so to do. Our hearts were
made by thee, and they are never fully at rest, till they come unto thee. Thy
favor and grace we prize above all earthly happiness. Be thou our God, let us
be thy Sons and daughters; and then we are sure, thou have begun already, and
wilt perfectly, in thy own time, redeem us from this bondage of corruption and
vanity, to which we are now subject. As we are children of the first Adam, so
we are indeed bondmen to vanity; but our hope is in the second Adam, to be by
him delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Our present life is
vanity, but the gift of God is eternal life, is immortallity. All this world is
a world of vanity; but we look for the world to come, wherein dwells
blessedness and true felicity. Vanity grows up out of the earth: we expect
our happiness to come from heaven. We account all things here below, but as
dung and dross and vanity in comparison of Christ and the grace and glory of
Christ, those better things, those things above, all temporal good things are
but as shadows; but our substance is with thee, substantia mea apud te est, so
some render the 7th verse. All worldly hopes are but like the spiders web; but
our hope in God and Christ our Savior, is an Anchor firm and steadfast, cast
surely within the veyl, so that we can never sink. Our all, is nothing,
compared to thee; Lord, thou art our all in all. Whom have our souls in heaven,
but thee? and whom have we on earth that we can desire in comparison of thee?
truly our lines are fallen in a pleasant place, we have a goodly inheritance:
The Lord is our portion, our exceeding great reward, we will not be satisfied
with any thing, with all things, besides thee; not with things present, nor
things to come; not with things in the height or depth, visible or invisible,
temporal or eternal; not with angels, principalities or powers, or earth or
heaven; we esteem all as shadows, and vanities; only this is our happiness, we
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. We will no longer forsake our own mercies,
that is, thee, the God of our mercies, to follow after lying vanities behold
here is an answer to the last thing propounded in the beginning, viz. This is
the way to be freed from vanity, and we will walk in it. Jesus Christ is our
Captain, whom if we follow through the troublesome sea of this world, as the
Israelites did Moses through the Red Sea; the waters shall stand as a wall on
the right hand and on the left, and the proud waters shall not overwhelm us,
shall not go over our souls. Jesus Christ is our Ark, into whom we will get by
faith, and by him be saved, whilst the whole world, that are out of Christ,
shall perish by this flood of vanity which comes upon all the earth. Thus will
we make sure of this one thing necessary, that our faith and hope, being in
God, shall not be in vain; that we shall not live and dye in vain, but that our
Lord Jesus Christ may be to us, both in life and death, gain and advantage;
that, when we shall part with our corporal lives (which, in times of sickness
and war, we carry daily in our hands, and are apt to lose; and which, in times
of the greatest peace and prosperity, we cannot long hold; for at the best,
they are fleeting, and fading, and vanity) we may be sure to lay fast hold on
eternal life; so that vanity may no more have dominion over us; Amen.

An Epitaph on Sir Roger Townshend, who dyed at Geneva in his travail toward
Rome, aged 19 years and a half, in the year 1648.
Lo here lies dust and ashes Oar,
More prec'ous then the golden shore;
One Jewel precious in this tomb,
Far more then all in the Sea of Rome.
Geneva now a Saint may vye
With Rome, and with all Italy:
Lo there the Painters are divines
In Colors, and their Saints are shrines;
But here does sleep are all Saint,
Here is no Sepulcher in paint.
Piemont to Townshend Pisgah was,
Nigh which to Canaan he does pass,
And when men thought he had been at Rome,
To Heaven the Traveller was come:
To England how should he return,
When all is on fire and Seas do burn:
Had he seen Rome, he knew't would farn
Then make a Saint him rather mar:
In peace had's English home 'gain seen,
He Had still a Ward and Pilgrim been.
Heaven is a home which rest give can,
And under Twenty make him Man.
T. H.
Another.
HEre aye Geneva Lake let weep
Cause death a Gourt of Guard did keep;
Echo ye Alps for aye alas!
'Cause Trav^llers have for death no pass:
Our tears let recompense the Lake,
And ever after full-sea make;
Let Us thus requite the hills, let us all
Henceforth them Townshends Pyramids call.
On Occasion of the Narrative sent over by M. Diodati in which house he dyed.
ARe ye prevented Poets? what too late
His life and death to blazo'n? Diodate
Has don't in Prose, he that the Sacred Text
First Commented upon, his life is next:
And 'twas a sacred story, short it was;
Upon the Bible cal't a Paraplorase,
A Paraphrase Incarnate of the last
And best edition much corrected was it,
Reformed eve'ry way, Translated so,
He now speaks seventy languages and more;
H' Interprets Babel, Pentecost and all,
And is translated to's Original.
In this small work divinity is more
Then in the great Tostatus half a score.
Yea, now one Tome of this short volume man
Contains more learning then the Vatican,
Set by Inspired Authors, the rest i^le call
Compared to this, one Ignoramus all:
Worms may devour the book cover, leaves may fade
Though green and florid, or with gold ore laid;
Worms cannot corrupt the text, and the Angel's blast
Shall blow 'way worms, and dust, and death at last.
T. H.
The Second Sermon.
Luke 16.30.31. And he said, nay father Abraham, but if one went unto them from
the dead they will repent.

And he said unto them, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.


THe Relation concerning Dives and Lazarus from the 19th verse to the end of
this Chapter, some will have to be an History, others a Parable; I concur with
the latter: for what tongue could Dives have in hell, whose body was in the
grave? And what finger could Lazarus have, whose soul only was now in Paradise
or heaven?

In parables what is set down as spoken, signifies only what was fit to be
said; if any words were to be made of such matters. Parables (says one) are
Vocal Hyerogliphicks, Dr. Ing.
lively images of useful truths fitted for instruction: Christ made fescues of
known earthly resemblances, to point out to us spiritual and heavenly Doctrines.

In this parable Dives in Hell makes two requests to Abraham in heaven.

First, for himself, that he would send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in
water, to cool his tongue: But he that would not give a crumb of bread, could
not obtain a drop of water.

Being denied for himself, his second request is for his brethren, viz. that
Abraham, would send Lazarus to his fathers house, to testify unto his
brethren, lest they also should come unto that place of torment: But he speeds
no better in this then in the former: Abraham lets him know, it is needless:
They have Moses and the prophets, i. e. the writings of Moses and the prophets;
let them hear them; believe and obey them: by them they may sooner and better
be persuaded to repent, then if Lazarus or any other like him should arise from
the dead to warn them, and to testify to them that they should repent.

Again, in Parables the end and scope of them is mainly to be attended unto;
now the scope and design of this parable is to teach rich men pity and
compassion to the poor, and to teach all men to read and meditate on the holy
Scriptures, to hear and to obey them, that so they may attain eternal life; for
the right way to escape hell torments, and to be made partakers of Heavens
happiness, is to follow the guidance and direction of the Holy Scriptures. If
it be asked, how came Abraham to know that the Jews had the writings of Moses
and the prophets? I answer, he might be informed of this, by Moses and the
prophets, when they came to heaven: or he might know it by revelation:
probably, God would not hide from Abraham, a matter of so great concernment to
his seed: however, certain it is, the Jews had the Holy Scriptures, which were
able to make them wise unto Salvation: and they had no need that any should
rise from the dead to teach them.

It Is true indeed, men are apt to fancy, by other ways and means to get good,
and to do good, and to please God, then what God has prescribed: men are apt
to say in their hearts, who shall ascend into heaven, to bring them the mind
of God in such and such things? or wherewithal shall I come before God to make
atonement for my sins? shall I give the first born of my body for the sin of my
soul? when Naaman the Syrian came to be cured of his leprosy, 2 King 5.11. he
verily thought, that the prophet would have come out to him, and would have
stroked his hand over the place, and have called upon the name of his God, and
when he saw he was disappointed of his expectation in these particulars he grew
very angry and would hardly be persuaded by his servants to go and wash seven
times in Jordan, as the prophet had sent unto him to do; saying, are not Abanah
and Pharpor, Rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? may I
not wash in them and be clean? the same Naaman, after he was cured of his
leprofy, had a fancy, that the earth of the land of Canaan, was better to build
an Altar to God withal, then of any other land; and therefore, he begged of
the prophet Elisha, that there might two Mules burden of earth be given him: (I
suppose, for the purpose aforesaid, because it immediately follows) for thy
servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offerings nor sacrifice unto any
other gods, but unto the Lord, 2 Kin. 5.17. The Jews, they imagined, that
Messiah should be a temporal Prince, and set up a temporal Kingdom, and
therefore, because our Savior Christ, came not in such outward pomp, state,
and glory, they rejected him: hence it is I suppose also, that the papists are
not contented with Christ's naked institutions but presume to add of their own
inventions, to make them more gaudy, and more efficatious: to Baptism with
water, they add Cream, Oil, spittle, exsufflation. The Lords supper they have
turned from a Sacrament for the living, to a sacrifice for the quick and dead:
they will not presume to go directly or immediately to God the King of Heaven,
or by the mediation only of his own son whom he has made Master of requests
there, but they must make use of the mediation of the Courtiers of Heaven,
Saints and Angels: they fancy it is not good manners to do otherwise: they think
Christ crucified, not sufficiently represented, in the preaching of the word,
and administration of the Sacraments except they have also before their eyes,
crucifixes, Images, or pictures of him hanging on the Cross. The Idolaters of
old offered their sons and daughters in sacrifice, to appease their offended
Gods. And Gods own people, imitated the Idolaters of the nations: which thing
yet, God tells them, it never came into his heart, to require at their hands;
those Idolaters, the worshippers of Baal, cut and lanced themselves to procure
more compassion and audience of their prayers: and amongst the papists, some
whip themselves, to make thereby satisfaction for their sins, Mat. 6.7. We
read of some that thought they should be heard for their much-speaking: and
such are our papists also who think to prevail, by such a number of Ave-Maries,
and Pater-nosters; as if God regarded and answered prayers, according to their
number, rather then according to the faith and devotion, of the souls that made
them. And here Dives had a persuasion, that though his brethren were not
converted by the ordinary means, Moses and the Prophets, yet they would
certainly repent, if an extraordinary messenger, one from the dead, should be
sent to them, to warn them, lest they came into the same place of torment where
he was. And truly at the first view, this request of Dives, to send Lazarus
from the other world, from the bosom of Abraham to his brethren the children
of Abraham according to the flesh, to warn them to repent, seems not
unreasonable.

For first, the apparition of a dead man's Ghost, we may easily imagine, would
affright a sinner in the midst of his sins, and make him smite on his thigh,
and say, what have I done? or what do I? Moses and the Prophets tell us of our
duties, of the punishment due to us, if we fail of it, but one that comes from
the other world, could testify, that all that Moses and the prophets have said,
is true; so that their words should not seem any more (as they do too too
often, to many) but as idle tales: such a one could tell, that there is another
life after this, that there is a future estate of happiness or misery; that
when a man dies, his soul does not dye with his body, does not sleep; does not
cease to be. It would be happy for Atheists, Epicures, Gluttons, Drunkards,
Blasphemers, and unclean persons; for oppressors, for covetous and unmerciful
Dives's if there was no life, no world after this; but that as they have lived
like beasts, or worse then beasts, so they may die like beasts also; But if
there had been neither Moses nor the prophets to testify the contrary, yet
needed not any to come from the dead to do it: heathen poets, and philosophers,
have had knowledge of a future estate; witness their Elisian fields, a kind
of paradise for the virtuous; and their Phlegethons, a river of fire, a kind
of hell for the wicked.

But 2dly, If a Ghost should appear to us, we should be apt to think, that we
should die shortly; and that the Ghost of a dead man, did come to call or
summon us, to the state and place of separate souls; such an apparition would
be like the Messenger to Hezekiah, set thy house in order for thou shall dye:
and probably would put us into Bellshazzars posture, when he saw the
handwriting upon the Wall, would make our countenance change, would make the
joints of our loins to be loosed, and our knees to smite one against another.
And one would think, that such a fear, terror and consternation, might
reasonably mind us, of what we had done, namely, to undo our selves: and what
we should do to escape the wrath to come, or the damnation of hell.

And 3dly, All this probably might prove more effectual, if that one that came
from the dead, should be Lazarus, a good man, whose soul, came from the bosom
of Abraham; Lazarus, one who likely might be known, to Dives his brethren, to
have been a poor miserable and contemptible person whilst he lived in this
world; when they should see him come from heaven, from one of the highest
places there, from Abraham's bosom, and probably, in a glorious manner, make
his appearance; this might teach them, and mind them, that it is possible, that
poor men may be happy in the other world; and besides, when he should tell
them, as he might be well able to do, how happy he was there, though he had
been never so poor here, and how miserable, Dives their brother was in hell,
not withstanding all his great riches in this world; this, one would think,
should be, an effectual means, to warn, to persuade, and to bring them to
repentance: I say when he should tell them, that poor Lazarus was comforted,
and rich Dives was tormented, how he was advanced to heaven, and their brother
Dives thrown down to hell; when he should tell them, the glorious visions and
fruitions of heaven, and that there was no comparison betwixt earth and heaven;
betwixt the fading riches of this world, and the durable riches of the other,
'twixt sensible pleasures, and heavenly joys; 'twixt the honor from men here,
and the glory that is to be had from God hereafter; 'twixt the company of men
though never so great, and rich here, and the society of God and his holy
Angels in heaven; And that Dives his palace was but a dungeon, or dunghill, to
the palace of the great king of heaven and earth; that riches either horded up,
or Epicurean-like, laid out upon our selves, our back and our belly, would not
avail in the day of wrath; and would only be able to aggravate our misery, and
to increase our torment there; further, when he should tell them, that money
though it answers all things here, yet in the other world it is of no use at
all; Saints and Angels above, slight it, as much as worldlings overvalue it
below: behold, in the other world Dives and all his riches, were weighed and
sound too light: that Dives his greatness, Riches and Honors and delicates
were momentary, and all vanished; and that in place and room thereof, how he is
tormented. How that he saw him in hell torments, instead of delicious fare, and
delightful music, behold weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: Instead
of purple and fine linen, behold fire and Brimstone, and the smoke of the
Bottomless pit, compassing him as a garment. And on the other side, for his
own part, he had no cause at all to repent him, of all his poverty, hardship,
and misery he went through or underwent in this life, for that now heaven makes
amends for all. That his light afflictions, which were but for a moment, are
now recompensed with a far more, exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And if
after all this and a great deal more which he might say, he should tell them,
that if they did continue in their sins and die in them, they should have their
portion in hell, with their brother Dives, yea, with the Devil and his angels
for ever; but if they would now forsake their fins, if they would break off
their sins by repentance, and their iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if
they would cease to do evil, and learn to do well; if they would be open
hearted and open-handed to their poor brethren; when they dyed, God would send
his Angels, to carry their souls into the bosom of Abraham, from whence he
came out, sent by their father Abraham, and at the request of their brother
Dives. If all this had been said and done, one would be ready to think, that
here had been enough and more then enough, to have persuaded the worst and most
hardhearted sinner to repentance; But so is it, that a great deal more
effectual means then all this, prove insufficient to turn sinners from the
errors of their ways.

1. The Jews had Moses and the prophets amongst them, who being dead, yet spoke
unto them in their writings. They received the law by the disposition of
Angels; yea God himself preached unto them in thunder and lightnings, and
flames of fire at Sinai; the Jews had more signs, wonders and miracles wrought
amongst them, or for them, then the whole world besides: they had three raised
from the dead under the Old Testament-dispensation; our Savior when he came he
raised three from the dead, one newly dead Jairus his daughter: one carried out
to be buried as the widow of Naim her son, and one that lay four days in the
grave, viz. Lazarus; and yet the Jews, the body of the nation, were ofttimes
hard-hearted and impenitent sinners; even when Christ came in the flesh, and
manifested forth his glory amongst them, in working more miracles, then Moses
and the prophets that went before him: yet they would not repent, that they
might believe, that Jesus was the Christ, the Messiah, and that believing they
might have life, through his name: yea, they sought to put Lazarus to death,
whom Christ raised from the dead; and at last put Christ himself to death who
brought him from the dead: so far were they from being wrought upon, to repent
once unto life by this miracle.

2. Yea, Christ himself afterward raised himself from the dead, and confirmed
his doctrine and his mission, that he was sent of God, that he came out of the
bosom of God the father, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that he came to
preach repentance and forgiveness of sins, and yet the gross of the Jewish
Nation would not be persuaded to repent and believe on him: behold one greater
then Moses, and all the prophets; and therefore one greater then Lazarus, and
he too from the dead, his soul from paradise, and his body was raised out of
the grave: and he was one who could tell them of the joys of heaven, and of the
torments of hell more, and better then Lazarus: he could tell them, that for to
procure pardon to sinners, he himself had suffered the pain of sense in the
garden, when he said, his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto the death, and when
he sweat great drops of blood, trickling down to the ground; and the pain of
loss when he hung on the Cross, and cried out, my God, my God why have thou
for saken me? he could tell them that for their sakes he had endured the pains
of hell, to the end, that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
in his name, unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem: yet how few in
comparison, amongst the Jews believed on him.

3. It Is observable, what we read of Herod, that he heard John Baptist gladly,
and did many things at his preaching though John wrought no miracles: and when
he heard of the same of Jesus Christ, and the mighty works done by him, and
imagined that it was John the Baptist or some old prophets risen from the dead,
but for all that, did not repent and amend his life, that ever was heard of.

4. There are to be found many, too too many amongst us, that call themselves
Christians, D. All.
and profess to believe in Christ crucified, dead and buried, descended into
hell, that he arose from the dead the third day, ascended into heaven, and from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and for all this are
impenitent and unbelieving.

5. Pass we to the Church of Rome, and see whether it be better there, they
tell us of the obambulation of spirits, of the apparitions of dead men, whose
souls have come out of the fire of purgatory, a temporary hell; and yet how few
amongst them are brought to true repentance and amendment of life.

6. How often do men come from the beds of dying men and women, from the last
words perhaps of good men and women, telling them, they are as full of joy as
they can hold, that they desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; or from
the beds and last words of wicked men, who would if it was possible, call time
again, or desire to live, though it was but the life of a toad, rather then
dye; and yet how few are thereby wrought upon to repentance unto life? to a
repentance never to be repented of?

7. Come we to our selves, and as a Reverend and learned Author observes; D.
Allest.
we, diverse of us, have been in our own apprehension at deaths door, and have
had the prospect of the other world before our eyes, as it were, and God has
said to us at such a time by his providence, return, return, thou shall not
dye, and then our good purposes and resolutions, of dying to our former sins,
die presently, and we mend into, and live unto our old fins again: And how then
should another man's coming from the dead make us repent, when we our selves
have come, as it were from the dead, and have not repented?

Are these things so? let us learn then to attend to Moses and the Prophets, i.
e. to the holy Scriptures; and that they are more likely and effectual means
to bring sinners to repentance, then if one came unto them from the dead; and
that now we are not to expect Messengers or preachers to be sent unto us from
the dead, nor any signs, wonders, or Miracles to be wrought, to bring or
persuade us to repent; or to warn us to fly from the wrath to come. Let none be
found amongst you that asks counsel of the dead, for all that do such things
are an abomination to the Lord, Deuter. 1811. To the law, and to the testimony;
if they speak not according to this Rule, it is because there is no light in
them: men must not seek or ask counsel for the living of the dead, Isa. 8
19.20. When King Saul in his distress, went to the witch of Endor to raise up
Samuel from the dead, to enquire of him; the devil appeared to him in Samuels
mantle, and sad was the issue of that enquiry: and should we desire and have an
apparition from the dead, how should we be assured that it was not a cheat put
upon us by the devil? and that it was not the devil appeared to us in the
likeness of our friend, or of the party we had a mind to consult withal:
Angels, even evil Angels can assume bodies for a time, and move them, or else
make to themselves aerial bodies, and move them though not inform them, as the
soul the body. We read, that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
light: if so, then surely into the likeness of a dead man, yea of a dead saint.

Again, we might probably be more affrighted then edified, by such an
apparition; and when the fright was over, we might question, whether there was
any such thing or no: whether it was not a dream of our own brain, or a cheat
or trick put upon us, by others, or whether there was not some mist cast before
our eyes, and some juggle or trick used to make us think we saw what we did not
see.

Further, the holy Scriptures teach us, that God has magnified his word above
all his name, above his creatures and the works of his creation; above his
providence, ordinary and extraordinary; in plain english, above miracles,
signs and wonders: Here in this parable we are taught rather to attend to the
holy Scriptures then to one that should come to us from the dead. In the first
Chapter of the 2d Epist. of Peter, 17, 18, 19. verses, the holy Apostle teaches
us, to attend unto the word of prophesy, as more sure, then a voice from
heaven, from the excellent glory, when our blessed Savior was transfigured,
upon the holy mount, and had conference with Moses from the dead, and with
Elijah from heaven, concerning his (...) or departure out of this world; and
truly this is the only instance, in all the Scriptures, of the matter of the
discourse of any one that arose from the dead, our blessed Savior himself
excepted: if God had ever intended that we should be taught by men from the
dead, surely we should have had some directions, or instructions from those
whom the prophets, our Savior, or the holy Apostles raised from the dead, but
behold Altum Silentium! not a word to this purpose.

And this deep silence in this matter, speaks aloud to us, not to make enquiry
of the dead, either what we are to do in this, or to expect in the other world.
I shall add one testimony more in this matter, and that is of St Paul, Galath.
1.8, 9. where he says, that if we or any Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed: where he prefers the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, preached by
him, and which was taken out of, and proved by Moses and the prophets, before
the testimony of an Angel from heaven. And if so, then surely; the Testimony of
Moses and the Prophets, is more to be attended unto, then that of one that
should rise from the dead: And here we may appeal to our own reason, and to the
reason of other men, and say, Whether it be more reasonable to believe God or
man judge ye? God, The living God, speaking to us in his holy word by Moses and
the prophets, or to a man, suppose it was Lazarus from the dead? Before God
gave his people his mind and will in writing, he taught them by dreams and
visions of the night, by the ministry of Angels, by signs and wonders, but now
he has revealed his whole counsel, necessary to our salvation and committed it
to writing; now that he has sealed up the Canon of the Old Testarnent by Ezra,
and of the New by St John's Revelation; and now that he has ratifyed the truth
of both, by his broad seal of miracles, let not the Church nor any particular
person look after one from the dead, or for signs, wonders and miracles. His
holy word teaches us, that now God commands every man, every where to
repent, because he has appointed a day to judge the world in righteousness by
Jesus Christ, whom he has ordained; whereof he has given sufficient proof, or
evidence to all men, in that he raised him from the dead, Acts. 17.30, 31. I
confess it has been the guise and fashion of the world to look after, and
long for Miracles. Show us a sign, and what sign show thou? said the Jews
to Christ: notwithstanding all the wonders and miracles that he had wrought
amongst them, yea, the devil himself, tempted our blessed Savior in the
wilderness to show a sign, to work a miracle, if thou be the Son of God
command that these stones be made bread. But our Lord and Savior would not
gratify the devils curiosity, nor work a wonder at his beck or desire; he
would not cast such a pearl before such a swine; besides, had our Savior
wrought that miracle in that place, and at that time, the devil might have
denied it; or if not, our Saviors enemies possibly might have been tempted by
the devil to blaspheme, as some times they did afterward, and to say, he had
done it by the power of the devil.

We are apt to think, that if one came from the dead, or that we saw signs and
wonders, then we should believe, then we should repent; but alas! alas! how
often has God showed signs, and wrought wonders for nations and persons, and
yet they have remained impenitent and disobedient.

Pharaoh, and the Egyptians had many signs and wonders wrought before their
eyes; and yet their foolish hearts were hardened; yea, such madness was in
their hearts, that they pursued Israel into the Red sea, and were drowned in
the sea. The Israelites for whose sake God wrought such wonders in Egypt and in
the Red Sea, and whom God led and fed by a Miracle in the Wilderness with
Angels food, bread from heaven, and with water out of the rock forty years,
yet they murmured, and tempted God, and many a time rebelled they against his
word; so that six hundred thousand of them, their carcases fell in the
wilderness, and they could not enter into the Land of Canaan, because of
unbelief: Well, come we to their children whom God Miraculously preserved;
brought into and settled in the good land of Canaan; and we shall find, that
they or their children, soon forget God their Savior; whereas God, the Lord of
hosts, did several times fight for Israel with his hosts; his Angels; his
stars, his clouds, against their enemies; yet ever and anon we find them even
fighting against God: when our Savior Christ came into the world, entered upon
his public Ministry and office of Mediator, he manifested forth his glory
many ways, in sundry miracles wrought by him, in the sight of the Jews, and
were they kindly and savingly wrought upon? were they warned? were they
persuaded? did they, the body of them, all repent? do we not rather find, that
when our Savior raised Lazarus from the dead, and by reason thereof, many
believed on him, that therefore their chief priests an Rulers, the pharisees,
sought to kill Christ, and Lazarus both? yea, when they had crucified the Lord
of glory, and he arose from the dead, the third day, the greatest Miracle, that
ever the sun saw, did they thereupon believe and repent? no, no, they seek to
hide this miracle, and they give money to the soldiers to say, his disciples
came by night and stole him away. Of old, Balaam was stopped by an Angel from
heaven, and God opened the mouth of his Ass, so that he spoke with man's voice,
and reproved the madness of the prophet, yet Balaam was not converted King
Jeroboams hand was withered, and restored, by a miracle, and yet he continued
his false worship at Dan and Bethel, and would not suffer the people to worship
at Jerusalem. King Ahab saw that great wonder, fire came from heaven to consume
the sacrifice, at the prayers of Elijah; and yet for ought we know, was never
savingly wrought upon: Yea, that which is a wonder to think of it, good men who
have seen wonders and miracles, have not been so good as they should be, but
after those things have for a time turned afide, like a broken bow. Good King
Hezekiah, that was cured of the plague, by direction of the Prophet, after he
had received the sentence of death in himself, yet his heart was lifted up, and
he did not render unto the Lord answerable to what he had received. Jonah the
prophet was miraculously preserved in the belly of the whale, three days and
three nights, and yet afterward was so peevish and passionate as to tell God
to his face, that he did well to be angry even unto death. Go we higher, Noah
was saved by Miracle in an Ark, without sayls, Rudders, Anchors or Pilot, when
the world was drowned, and yet was overtaken soon after, with drunkenness. Lut
was saved miraculously from fire, when Sodons and Gomorrah and the other Cities
were burned, and yet it was not long, before he became guilty of drunkenness
and incest. By these instances national and personal, we may conclude, that
signs wonders and miracles are not always, such certain, powerful, and
effectual means, to bring sinners to repentance, or to make bad men good, or
good men better, as men are apt to imagine.

But what shall we say then to that of our Savior, Matthew. 11.21.23. Woe to thee
Corazin, woe unto thee Fethsaida, for if the mighty works which were done in you
had been done in Tire and Zidon they would have repented long ago in sackcloth
and ashes?

Grotius will have all these things to be said by our Savior not Jonahs
preaching did among the Ninevites: again, although miracles might probably have
been efficatious to bring gentile sinners to repentance; yet the Jews were so
perverse, obstinate, and rebellious, they had Moses and the Prophets, and
therein sufficient motives to repentance, (namely Gods commands, his promises,
and threatenings, even heaven and hell set before them, and those things
ratifyed formerly by miracles) so that if they would not be wrought upon by all
this, it would be in vain to send unto them a messenger, or preacher from the
dead: miracles (says the Apostle) are for them that believe not, and not for
them that believe, when there is no prophesy, there miracles probably may
prevail, but those within the Church who have had Moses and the prophets, and
prophesy confirmed by miracles long ago, if they believe not, if they repent
not, they themselves are to be looked upon us prodigies and wonders; so far are
they from reasonably expecting of miracles, to turn and convert them: If Moses
and the prophets be not of credit with Dives his brethren, being Jews, to
persuade them to amend and repent, neither could one, and that one Lazarus, if
he went unto them from the dead.

The Uses or inferences from the premises may be either for direction or
information of our selves, or for confutation of others, that are in error,
and for exhortation.

1st. Use, Hence we may be informed, Use.
that if we must attend to Moses and the prophets, and that those believed and
obeyed, are means sufficient to bring us to repentance and salvation, that then
by those, as the wife men by a Star, we may be directed unto Christ: our
blessed Savior testified as much, John. 5.46.47. Hadye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me, for he wrote of we; but if ye believe not his writings,
how shall ye believe my words? Moses wrote of Christ, Genesis 3.15. Namely, that
the seed of the woman should break the scrpents head; and Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. the
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken: This was so well known, that
Philip finding Nathanael, says unto him, as we read, John. 1.45. We have
found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth; the son of Joseph: As for the prophets, they foretold him, as the
Branch of the Lord, Isa. 4.2. as the prince of peace; so Isaiah, chap. 9.6. as
the destre of all nations, Haggai Chap. 2.7. As Messiah the prince, so Daniel,
Chap. 9.25. as the sun of righteousness with healing in his wings, so Malachi
Chap. 4. ver. the 2d: the two Testaments are joint witnesses of one and the
same great truth; namely, that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Savior
that was to come into the world.

2. Use, hence we may learn to make the written word of God, 2 Use. Of Inform.
(as David did) a light unto our feet, and a lanthorn to our paths; and not to
leave Moses and the Prophets, pretending to follow the light within us, as some
do; the light within us, our own reason; that is a dim and imperfect light,
without revelation; by this light, we should never have discovered the
mysteries of the holy Trinity, the Mystery of the two natures in Christ, nor,
our salvation by Faith in him: by this we could not have discovered all sins,
nor have known all necessary truths; nor have been convinced of all duties:
yea, it might come to pass, that leaving the holy Scriptures, Moses and the
Prophets; and the writings of the holy Evangelists, and Apostles, to follow the
dictates of our own erroneous consciences, we might be led, as those are, they
say, that follow an ignis fatuus, out of our right way into boggs and
precipices; Thus, they that shall kill you, (says our Savior) shall think
they do God good service: And the holy Apostle Paul tells us; I verily thought,
that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth; which
things I also did in Jerusalem, Acts. 26.9, 10. It Is true, that we are to
follow the guidance of our consciences, but our consciences are to be
enlightened and guided by the directions of God in his word: Our consciences are
but Gods deputyes and Lieutenants, and whether it be fit to observe the servant
or Deputy rather then to obey the will of the supreme or sovereign Lord, judge
ye.

Again, hence we may learn to study, and follow the directions of the holy
Scriptures of the old and New Testarnent, rather then pretend to impulses,
providence, visions and Revelations for what we do: to the law to the
testimony; by this our opinions, and practices yea, our persons shall be
justified, and by this word they shall be condemned: heaven and earth shall
pass away (says our Savior) but not aniota or tittle of the law shall perish.

3. Use, Use of Informat.
Hence learn not to be seduced or not to be drawn away from the true Protestant
Religion founded upon the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, (i. e. the holy
Scriptures) unto the Romish Religion, upon pretense of Miracles, which they say
are wrought amongst them, for,

1. Our blessed Savior foretold, Math. 24.24. that men should arise doing such
great wonders in imitation of himself, that they should deceive, if it were
possible, the very elect. And St. Paul tells us in his 2d Epistle to the
Thessalonians the 2d Chap. verse the 9th. that the son of perdition should
arise, should appear with all power, signs and lying wonders: So that
Antichrist does pretend to nothing but what our Savior Christ and his Apostle
foretold.

2. The protended Miracles of the Church of Rome are wrought and brought to
confirm a Doctrine contrary to Moses and the prophets, that is, to the holy
Scriptures, and they being already ratified by many and great Miracles, true
Miracles, it is certain, that these pretended miracles brought to confirm a lie,
are delusions and impostures.

3. The Ancient fathers and some of the most learned men of the Church of Rome
of latter times, deny the continuance of the power of Miracles in the Church
after that the Christian Religion had been so generally received, believed and
embraced in the world: for this the Reverend Dr Stilling fleet in a late piece
against the Papists, quoted St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, Tostatus upon
Leviticus, chap. 9.9.14. Stella upon Luke, Chap. 11 v. 29. and Erasmus upon the
first Epistle to the Corinthians the 13, Chap. and 13 verse.

4. If the power of Miracles should be continued in the Church, most probably
it would be exerted for the conversion of infidels, and consequently the gift
of languages should be given to them, now a days who are sent to preach to the
Indians, or other heathens; but we have no sufficient or credible witness, or
testimony, that those preachers of late times, or for many years have had or
ever have been endued with the gift of languages.

Again, does Abraham in heaven direct, to Moses and the prophets as abovesaid;
Use of Confutat. Coufut. 1. Of the doctrine of the Papists.
then this may serve to confute the Doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome, their Doctrine in exalting the testimony of the present Church above the
Authority of the holy Scriptures, the judge and touchstone of the Church. Our
Savior said to the Jews; you have one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye
trust, John. 5.45. it is observable, that Abraham takes no notice of any
infallible judge or interpreter of Moses and the Prophets: In this the Papists,
out-wit the scribes and Pharisees, when they disputed with Christ, yea, they
outdo and go beyond the devil himself; that old subtle serpent, when he
tempted our Savior: for when our Savior quoted Scripture, neither the
pharisees, nor the devil, ever thought of replying: I, but who must interpret
the Scripture? who must be judge? it belongs not to thee to read them, much
less to interpret Scripture; this belongs to the Jewish Church; who is the
only supreme judge of Scriptures and of controversies.

Again, hence we may see, Confut. 2. Of the practice of the Papists.
that the Papists err in withholding the Scriptures from the Laity: what an
unreasonable and unrighteous thing is it, that Gods children must not be
permitted to read their fathers will, without the license of man first had and
obtained for their so doing? Abraham says, they have Moses and the Prophets
let them bear them.

3. Hence then we may be exhorted greatly to prize and value the Scriptures,
the Bible, as the book of books, Use, Of Exhortat. Exhort. 1.
as a cabinet of most rich and precious jewels, as a fountain of water of life,
as a fiery pillar to lead us through this wilderness to Canaan.

2. And let us bless and praise God for his word; Exhor. 2.
how highly did David esteem the holy Scriptures? how does he magnify them?
and yet he had but a third part of what we have now: and if Moses applauded the
Jews happiness, when he had finished his Pentateuch, if he accounted the law,
as the inheritance of the congregation of Israel; and as it is in the Psalm, he
has not dealt so with any Nation, neither has the heathen the knowledge of
his law; how should we prize, and praise and bless God for the law and Gospel,
the whole Canon of the Old and New Testament: and let us know this, that our
best way of praising. God for the Scriptures, will be to read, study, meditate
on them, but above all to conform our hearts, lips, lives, to the rules and
precepts contained in them; doubtless obedience to the law is the best way to
honor both the lawgiver, and the law.

To draw toward a conclusion; From the text and context, the parable of Dives
and Lazarus, we may learn many useful and profitable lessons such as these.

1. That rich men must give an account how they have laid out their riches:
rich men are stewards, and it is requisite in stewards, that they be found
faithful; they must not lay out their Lords money upon themselves, their own
backs, and bellyes; and let the poor, such as Lazarus, their fellow creatures,
and fellowservants, and their own brethren to starve at their gates, manus
pauperis the saurus Christi. And rich men must cast into Christ's treasury of
their abundance.

2. That rich men must be careful, not only not to hurt the poor, but to
relieve them: they must not be Dives's, to do good to themselves only, but like
the good Samaritan, do good unto them that are in necessity and in extremities.
Dives is blamed and condemned, not for taking away from the poor, by oppression
or injustice; but for not communicating to poor Lazarus in his necessity, in
his extremity.

3. That men may sin in the misuse of lawful things, of outward comforts and
enjoyments; purple, fine lynnen, delicate fare, Music, were all lawful to be
used, but Dives did not use them lawfully, In licitis perimus omnes: we must
not use our lawful enjoyments, unseasonably nor excessively, nor make every day
a Feast Day. We must not forget the afflictions of Joseph in the prison, nor
themiseries and necessities of Lazarus at our Gates.

4. That good men may have evil things in this life, and evil men good things:
Dives had his good things here, and Lazarus his evil things: I know this is a
bard saying, who can bear it? This is it that has troubled heathen
philosophers; Jewish Rabbis, and the Doctors of the Christian Church, yea,
that it was malis been and bonis male, has been a trouble to some of the best
men in the Scriptures, to Job, to Jeremy, to David, to Habakkuk; but let us not
judge of Gods works till he has finished them; wait but a while and thou shall
see a Dives in hell, and a Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and then God will be
cleared and justified, and all the world will become silent before God.

5. That some men are more kind to their dogs then to the poor; some there are
who take the childrens bread, and give it to the dogs, but grudge to give the
dogs portion to the children; to such I should commend the Example of Amideus
Duke of Savoy, sometimes chosen Pope, but too good a man for so bad an office,
who showed a hall full of poor people fed by him daily, when it was expected,
he should have showed his hounds, and said, these are the hounds, wherewith I
hunt, after the Kingdom of Heaven.

6. That Lazarus received more kindness from Dives his dogs, then from
himself: Humaniores (says one) fuerunt canes hominibus. The dogs were more
hospitable then the master or his servants: and yet (says one) Canis est
latrare, peregrinos mordere, abigere Hospites, it is the property of dogs to
bark at, to bite strangers, and to drive them away; not to sawn on guests that
are strangers.

7. That like master, like servants; no man gave unto him; the master would not
give him a bit from his table, and the servants would none of them give him a
crumb that fell from the table.

8. That even Dives in hell seems to have more Charity and kindness to his
brethren, especially to their souls, then many men on earth and in the bosom
of the Church; he would have used means to save his brethrens souls, and now
many, do what they can, in a manner, to damn their own and their brethrens
fouls also.

9. That there are rewards and punishments after this life; there is a future
Estate of happiness or misery, for rich and poor; there is an Abraham's bosom
for some, and hell torments for others; those that have done good and suffered
evil things here, shall be comforted, and those who have done evil things, and
enjoyed good things here, they shall be tormented.

10. That some of the Children of Abraham find no place in the bosom of
Abraham: Dives called Abraham father, and Abraham called Dives son, but yet Dives
had his place and portion in hell.

11. That rich men must expect mercy in the other world according as they have
showed mercy to the poor in this: he that gives to the poor lends unto the
Lord, and the Lord will repay him his own again with usury: Giving to the poor
is but sowing of feed, and in due time they that sow plentifully shall reap
plentifully, shall I say, thirty or sixty, yea, I dare say an hundredfold,
even in the world to come life everlasting.

12. That the way to escape hell, and attain heaven, is to hearken to, to obey
the holy Scriptures: these are they that show unto us the way of salvation, the
only way of peace and reconciliation with God, and remission of sins, namely,
repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. These, these are
they that are as a voice behind us, or within us, saying, this is the way walk
in it, when that which is holy, just and good, is proposed to us: But when we
are tempted unto evil, these are unto us as the Angel to St. John, saying, see
thou do it not; Let us not in the least question the divine authority of the
holy Scriptures, either of the Old or New testament; both are confirmed by the
exerting of supernatural power in miracles, and of supernatural wisdom and
knowledge in fulfilling of prophesies: and forasmuch as Abraham in heaven sends
us to Moses and the Prophets, and even Christ himself a greater then. Abraham
appeals to Scripture, proves by Scripture, (though he received the spirit
without measure,) and resolves as it were his own authority into the divine
authority of the Old Testament.

13. And again, that if one of the Testaments be true, neither of them can be
false; let us know and believe all that is written in the Law of Moses, and in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Christ; and all that is written in
the Gospel in the Acts, in the Epistles and the Revelation concerning Christ,
and Christians, our Savior, or our selves; and let us not only hear the
Scriptures but do them, so that we may be blessed in the deed. And when we hear
any new or strange doctrines, let us be noble, like the Bereans, and search the
Scriptures to see, whether things be so or no as these men teach. Let Us try
opinions; doctrines and actions; our own and others, by this touchstone: Let Us
weigh them in this balance of the sanctuary, and accordingly judge them. And
that I may speak a word in season, both as to the text and the occasion, and
that some good account may be given of this days concourse, let us all of us
labor to show forth our faith by our works, and as we hold, that our faith
justifies our persons before God; so let our good works justify our faith
before men. They are like the hand on the dial of a Clock; which shows how it
goes, although it does not cause it to move. Lets feed the Hungry, Clothe the
Naked, make our selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness: that when we
fail, we may be received into everlasting habitations. Let Us be confident that
our cruise of Oil, shall never fail so long as we pour it out in these empty
vessels; and that one penny laid out upon Gods poor, upon Christ's brethren,
will redound more to our account at the great day, then many thousands laid up
in our Coffers, or laid out upon our vain delights, and pleasures; and should
the Lady of this Manor arise from the dead, this day, I dare say, she could
testify, that the widows mite, so (as I take it) she called the donation and
benefaction we now commemorate, was of more avail and advantage to her then the
thousands she laid up in her treasury; therefore whilst we have opportunity,
let us do good unto all men, especially to them who are of the household of
Faith, to the brethren of Christ: and what soever good we find in our hearts
to do, let us do it with all our might, for there is no wisdom nor counsel in
the grave, whither we are going.

Let Us beg of God, that we may not have our good things in this life, and our
evil in the other, that we may not be like Dives, of the number of those
worldlings, who have their portion in this life, as the Psalmist speaks. Or as
those fools who lay up for themselves treasures on earth and are not rich
toward God.

And let us manifest that our treasures are in heaven, because there are our
hearts also: let us set our affections on things above, and not on things on the
earth, considering God has made the earth to set our feet upon, not to set our
hearts upon: let us not be like blind Moles, ever rooting, digging in the
Earth, living here, as in our proper Element: for when a few years, perhaps
weeks or days are gone and death comes, our eyes shall be opened, as the
Naturalists say, the eyes of the Moles are when they come to die; and then we
shall see clearly, that we have labored in vain; in vain have we risen early,
gone to bed late, eaten the bread of care. fullness, for Riches Miser-like
hoarded up, or Epicure-like laid out upon our selves, profit not in the day of
death.

To conclude all, let us not suffer any poor Lazarus to starve at our gates, for
want of crumbs; and let none of us, that are ministers, suffer any poor soul
for whom Christ died, to starve at the gates of the Temple for want of our
breaking to them the bread of life: we are all by our profession children of
Abraham: now then let us do the work of Abraham: let us walk in the steps of
Abraham; let us be rich in faith, full of self-denial, full of good works,
chariry, Hospitality; let us go out, and invite strangers on occasion, as he
did, and then he will not be ashamed to be called our father, nor unwilling to
take our soul into his bosom: yea, let us imitate Lazarus, let us make God our
help, our trust, so he did; and so his name (as the name Eleazar) imports. And
let us patiently bear all the evils that God lays on us himself, or suffers man
to lay on us in this world: and then when we die, God will send his Angels to
do the like office for us, which they did for Lazarus, even to carry our souls
into Abraham's bosom.

Errata.
PAge. 3. line 12. for (...) read (...). p. 8. l. 1. for (...) r. (...) p. 20.
l. 6. for sumus r. fumus. p. 25. l. 2. for which r. who p. 15. l. 8. for powrs
r. pours. p. 27. l. 3. for them r. him. p. 3^ l. 32. for any r. an. p. 37. l.
22. for an r. and.

FINIS.

