THE TRAVELS OF Don Francisco De QUEVEDO, Through Terra Australis Incognita.
Discovering The Laws, Customs, Manners and Fashions, Of The South Indians. A
NOVEL.

Originally in Spanish.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, at the Crown and Pearl, over against
Exeter-Change, in the Strand. 1684.

Quevedo's Travell's.



Printed for William Grantham Booke-seller in the Strand.

^Draperitier. sculp.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
You are not to Attribute what follows, to any vanity in the Translator; as if
like Pigmalion he had been in Love with his Work; he values Popular Applause,
as a Transient Air, that vanishes into an Insignificant Nothing.

Under this Allegory, the too much prevailing Fopperies, and Vices of various
sorts of People, are lively represented, and exposed to the World, to the end
that they may be persuaded from, or made ashamed of them.

Preambles and Allegories, have been used in Sacred Writ; yet not censured as
Romantic; and though this Peregrination is represented in the Nature of a
Romance; it is only with an intent by Delightful Vanity, To Please and Convince
at the same time, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci, profitable things
intermixed with delightful are Captivating.

Here is Brisk Ingenious Fancy; and Satirical enough against the usual Vices,
and Ragnant Roguries of both Sexes; (for I think that word may be used in a
Feminine, as well as a Masculine Sense;) if your fancy incline to read it, you
may; if not, you may let it alone.

Touching the Original; Know, 'twas my good hap to Arrive at Bilboa, just when
this Ingenious Piece of Antiquity in Manuscript, was taking Post from a
Chandles Shop, to the Land of Oblivian. By this means I had the Opportunity and
Success, to Redeem from the Teeth of time, and very Paw of Destruction, This so
Admirable and pleasing a Tract, Originally in Spanish; whose beauty appeared to
me in Tattered Robes, to be the very Emblem of Eternity, it having neither
beginning nor end; and therefore the more justly I call it a piece of Antiquity.

It was very much defaced; Time or Accident having Worn, or Torn out those
Characters, which serve for distinction of Ages; as also our Travelers Name;
Except in one place, where was Remaining thus much of the Mouse-eaten Author,
Don Q. And from hence I concluded, it must be either Quevedo, or Quixot; but
that it was rather the former: I offer this Reason.

Because, He of all the Spacious and Flourishing Kingdom of Castile, was only
Valiant to a Miracle: He that never flinch'd at a Voyage to those Dangerous
Caverns, in Plutos Subterranean Dominions; was only capable to undertake this
so hazardous a Journey; Through the Confines of Terra Australis Incognita.

But you may Answer, that was but a Dream, Why? may be so too; and what if this
should prove no more, for it seems as unlikely to be real as that; but I hope
if our Circumstances can prove our Indefatigable Don the Author, it will be
sufficient to gain your good Opinion, and Acceptance; and pray why may not we
allow him to walk in his sleep, as well upon the Surface of the Terrestial
Globe, as to the Center.

And further to Convince you, I assure you the Spanish was excellently Smooth
and Eloquent, in which our Elaborate Don was the Nonsuch.

But then Indeed the Character was Black, Knotty, Rough and Uneven; Like the
Notes in Gamut, well understood by him; but almost uninteligable to a Shallow
Capacity. And hence a seeming Objection may arise, in the Opinions of such as
knew the fairness of his Writing: but in my Conceit, is answered with this
Question.

Think you that his intimacy with the Internals, could not obtain for his
Attendant, one of Plutos Secretaries, to note, and transcribe what his
Curiosity Observed; yes doubtless; and it is the rather my Opinion, because it
seemed to be Written with a Cloven hoof.

If so, how far the Courtesy exceeded Common favors, Judge ye, when the Devil
to Accomodate him, should leave those Hot Subterranean Mansions, and expose
himself to the Sharp Air, under the South Pole, and run the hazard of getting a
Kentish Ague.

From these Arguments I Conclude in the Affirmative, and I would have you do so
too; and then as soon as you will Hoist out the Boat, and Ashore all hands, to
make new Discoveries.

While I (Somewhat too stiff to Complement, after so toylsom a Journey) will
make bold to Rest,

Thine in good Earnest, R. S.

AN INDEX.
THe Discovery of the Land of Belly-All-Main, a part of the South Indies,
Called, Terra Australis Incognita, Bordering upon Terra Dell Fuego. Page 1. Of
Eat-All-Main or Gluttonia. p. 3. Of Dressingburgh, the first Canton of
Eat-all-main. p. 5. Of Banquetois, the second Canton of Eat-all-main. p. 9. Of
Pewter-Plateria, the third Canton of Eat-all-main. p. 11. Of the Metropolitan
City of Eat-all-main, called, Flesh-Pasti-Nople. p. 12. The Wars of the
Eat-all-mains. p. 23. Of Idle-Burgh, and Imperial free Town. p. 25. The
Religion of the Eat-all-mains. p. 28. The Laws of the Eat-all-mains. p. 31. Of
the Election of the Great Duke. p. 34. Of Starvling Island or Hungerland. p.
43. Of Drink-all-main, the second Province of Belly-all-main. p. 44. Of the
Shires of the Province of Drink-all-main. p. 46. The Description of
Carousi-Kanikin, the chief City of Drink-all-main; as also the Fashions, and
Manners of the Drink-all-mains. p. 49. Of the Knights of the Golden Tun, and
the Laws of the Drink-all-mains. p. 59. Of the Arts, and Military Disciplines
of the Drink-all-mains. p. 63. Of the Funerals of one of the Chief
Quagmirist's. p. 65. Of Brandy-Burgh, or Liquor-Ardens; and of the Pilgrimage
of St. Brochio. p. 69. A Description of Bottles-Brook. p. 77.
The Second Part.
THe Description of Woman-Decoia: Or Shee-Landt, of the Situation and Parts
thereof. p. 81. How Quevedo was used by the Gossip-Ingoesses. p. 83. Their
Forms of Government, and Elections of Persons of State. p. 87. The Original of
the Shee-Landesses. p. 90. Of Giglot-Tangier. p. 92. Of Shrews-Burgh. p. 96.
The Third Part.
OF the Situation of Fooliana and Populousness thereof. Page 107. The Parts of
Fooliana, and the Peoples conditions in General. p. 109. Of Fooliana the
Fickle. p. 116. Of the Peoples Conditions and Attire. p. 119. Of Fooliana the
Fond. p. 126. Of Ass-Sex. p. 128. Of the Cities of Cockscom-baya and Ass-Sex,
and of Blocks-ford the Metropolitan. p. 131. Of the Marquisate of
Spendall-ezza. p. 140. Of Clawback-Court. p. 143. Of Fooliana the Fat. p. 147.
The Quality and Conditions of the People. p. 150. Of the Paradise of Fooliana
the Fat. p. 155. Of Fooliana the Devout. p. 162. The State Public of Fooliana
the Devout. p. 165.
The Fourth Part.
THe Description of Theevingenia, its Situation. p. 169. The Conditions of the
Robbers-Walders. p. 171. The Pirates and Sea-Borderers of Robbers Waldt. p.
177. Of Lyers-bury-Plain, and of the City of Pick-Pocket-Angul; with the Nature
of the Liegerdemanians. p. 179. Of the Province of Still-Moore: Or, Nunquam
Satis. p. 190.
A Prologue.
REports by hearsay, who will credit?
What though the Parish-Parson saidit?
But that the Truth may pass for Credo,
I, even I my self, Quevedo;
Resolved to visit Foreign Islands,
The Southern Climates, Low and Highlands,
Lands which indeed were other Peoples,
To view their Towns, their Churches, Steeples;
Their Cities, Forts, and Magazines,
The Courts of Foreign Kings and Queens;
Their Manners, Habits, Customs, Fashions,
And various kinds of Habitations.
Such things, so tickling to my Fancies,
As I have Read in Old Romances,
As Giants, and Enchanted Castles,
Whose Fanes and Sumptuous Turrets Dazles
The Eyes of such as passed by,
If they by Chance Look up so high)
These Curiosities invite me,
With hopes that Travel will delight me,
To lanch into the Curled Ocean,
And hoisting Sail the Ship had Motion,
Which ready lay, when we had stepped in,
To plow the Watery Plains of Neptune,
We having Sailed 3 Leagues, or Nine Miles,
Lost sight of Landmarks, Steeples, Windmills;
Now trusting only to the Compass,
Though Neptunes surly surges thump us,
We in good time got safely over;
But what our passage did discover,
To tell the Truth, was no great matter,
For all we saw, was Sky and Water.
Well, but suppose I Am come on Shore,
And then suppose but one thing more,
That what so ever is worth your Notice,
Is in this Little Book, and so it is.
The Discovery of the Land of Belly-All-Main, a part of the South Indies,
Called, Terra Australis Incognita, Bordering upon Terra Dell Fuego.
Of its Situation.
THE Land of Belly-All-Main, is a Region far extending both in Longitude and
Latitude, bounded on the North with the Ethiopian Ocean, on the East with the
Sheelands, on the South with Fooliana the Fat, and on the West with the
Filching-Fens. It lies in that undiscovered Continent, where that monstrous
Bird RVC snatcheth up now and then a whole Elephant at a stoop, and swaps him
up at a Bit; Touching the Soil, the Fertility is most worthily Admirable, and
the Air most delicately Temperate. In Latitude, It lies full sixty Degrees,
and in Longitude seventy four from Cabo-de-Bon-Speranza, and is Situate almost
directly opposite to the Southern Frontiers of Africa.

Such Cosmographers as Write hereof, divide it generally into two Provinces,
Eat-All-Main, Called by the Inhabitants Gluttonia, and Drink-All-Main, By the
Natives also, called Quaffonia. The former situate in the same Longitude and
Latitude with Old England, and the Later, with the two Germany's: Both have one
Prince and one Law, and a little Reformation would make them Concur also in
Habits and Manners.

Of Eat-All-Main or Gluttonia.
EAt-all-main is in Form Triangular, and resembles the Figure of Old-Egypt,
being full of Sky Towring-Hills, and yet so Fertile, that the very Birds that
flock thither from all places to Feed, If they stay but three Months at the
admirable variety and plenty this Soil afords: They are so Laden with the
luggage of their own Fat, that they cannot possibly get wing so high as to
overtop one of the meaner Mountains, but become sworn Inhabitants of this Fat
Country all their Lives after.

The Shores abound with plenty of Fish of diverse kinds, and they are naturally
so Ravenous and Greedy, that you no sooner cast your Angling-hook among them,
but like Cole-Miners about the Rope, when the Candles burn Blew, (which
foretells the coming of the Damp) you shall have hundreds about the Line, some
on the Hook, and some on the String, and such as miss that Opportunity will
hold fast by the Tayls, and Fins, of such as took time by the foretop. 'Twould
never Tire a man's Patience to Angle in this Country, where he is as sure of
Sport, as the Beggar, when (with a Red woollen Rag put down his Back) he does
Angle for Lice.

The Land has diverse good Havens, but no Ship is suffered to Harbor There,
but such as comes Fraighted with good Fare, and is Laden with Delicates; the
Soil bears no Tree that bears no Fruit, but all the Hedges are stored with
Apples, Pears, Plumbs, and Nuts of all sorts, and some Hops, but not such
quantities of the last as in Drink-All-Main, where their Plenty is Incredible:
I Conceit our Western English had that kind of Custom from the Drink-All-Mains.

This Territory of old, both Eat-All-Main, and Drink-All-Main, was under the
Government of the Thrivingers, held by the Succession of diverse Thrivonian
Princes, whose principal Seat was Eat-All-Main: But foreign Invasions ensuing,
and those Ancient Worthyes Chased from Sovereignty, whose Memory is almost worn
out; By whose Extirpation it fell into the Hands of the Eat-All-mains, as it
continues at this present Time.

Of Dressing burgh, the first Canton of Eat-All-main.
DRessing-burg is the first Canton of Eat-All-main, which is too hot a Climate
for any true Eat-All to Inhabit; the South-Cape lying under the same Latitude
with the most Southern part of Castile, and is about 42. Degrees distant from
the Equinoctial. The Inhabitants are of a swarthy Tawny, most of them having
their skins shrivled, and withered, and their Bodies plump't up like a Glove
upon a Gridiron; they affect Deliciousness rather than Excess.

Upon the point of this Canton, called the Swarthy-Cape, the Country is
wondrously Overclowded with Smoke, because of the nearness of Terra del Fuego,
the Land of Fire.

Upon the left hand thereof lies the City of Kitchen-Norton, the Buildings of
which are generally very lofty, and as generally smoaky and ill Scented.

In the midst of this City stands a goodly Temple, Dedicated to god All-Paunch,
a vast and spacious Building, wherein are a Thousand Altars Burning with
continual Incense (except from Shrovetide till Easter) unto the aforesaid
Deity. In the Midst of this Temple is a Tower Erected of Incredible Altitude,
called by the Inhabitants Chimney Turret, from the height whereof of the whole
Region round about have the usual Signal of War given them; for whenever that
Eternal fume cease to ascend in Caligunous Clouds, it is a certain warning
that the Foe Approaches.

And this Invasion is most commonly attempted by the Inhabitants of the
Starvling Isles, otherwise called Hungerlanders, for these are the most
formidable Enemies that the Eat-All-Mains have.

Near unto this City of Kitchen-Norton lies Cistern-Burgh, wherein is the
famous Mountain Cock-Alty, Exceeding high, but directly opposite in nature to
Mount Aetna; for whereas that Disgorgeth streams of Fire, to the Detriment of
the Neighbor Cities, and Villages; so this Stupendous Mountain Cock-Alty
sends forth continual Rivers of sweet and fresh water; to the great advantage
of the Neighbor Cities, especially the City of Kitchen-Norton. In
Cistern-Burgh are only some few houses of entertainment, where commonly do
Sojourn for a small season the Journying Citizens of Carp-O-Pan, Trout-On, and
Tench-More; with Merchandise from those Marine parts, to this tradeing City of
Kitchen-Norton.

Within the liberties of Kitchen-Norton, are certain Villages, first Hole-Cole,
a large Town, consisting of a strange form of Building, of Caves under ground.
Tongs-Worth, and Fire-Pan-Wick, two small Villages both in one Parish; and on
the left hand you have three others, Spitsted, Kettle-Dorp and Spoons-by, all
pretty Towns, and well Peopled; Kittle-Dorp has a fair River passes through
it, called Ture-Mois, which they say Boyleth every Twenty Four hours.

The Inhabitants of Spoons-By, as also another small Village nigh it, called
Ladle-Cup, are instructed in no other art, but laving, and are very expert in
cleansing of Ditches, Fish Ponds, Wells, or such places; and these only are
employed in such Services, not only in Kitchen-Norton, but also in all the
Rivers of the Circum-Jacent Cities of Eat-All-Main; as Gravy-Channel in the
City of Flesh-Pasti-Nople, and Sauce-Bourn, which waters the Plains of
Pewter-Plateria, but principally in those famous Hot-Wells, called the Baths of
Broathington in the Valleys of Poringerio; for which Employments they have the
great Dukes Pattent, so that no others dare entrench upon their privileges.

Of Banquetois, the Second Canton of Eat-All-Main.
PAssing from Dressing-Burgh, the first Canton you enter, is the very Garden of
Eat-All-Main; it is called Banquetois, and is as it were a continual Forest of
nothing but Dates, Almonds, Figs, Ollives, Pomgrantes, Cytrons, and Nutmegs.
The River Oyl-Brook has its Course through the heart of this goodly Territory.

The City of Marchpane is the chief Town of note it this Canton, being Built
after a stately manner, with Turrets, and Obelisks, all Guilt over; but indeed
it is but of a slender kind of Fortification, and lies very open to the
Enemies Cannon.

A little above this City are certain Mines called the Sugar-Hills, whence they
dig a certain Ore, in Color whitish, in Touch hard, and in Taste sweet.

This City has very few Inhabitants of any years, that have any Teeth left;
but all from Eighteen to the Grave, are the Natural Heirs of a Stinking Breath.

Next unto this, lies another little Corporation called Drugs-Burgh, and here
they have a Law, that none must be made free of the City, but Apothecaries,
Grocers, and Boxmakers. The very Heavens seems to Conspire with the places
fitness to increas their Trading; for at certain times of the year, you shall
have the whole Country covered quite over with Aromatical Trochices, Comfits,
and Confections, (congealed by the coolness of the Airs middle Region) that
fall from the Clouds in as great Abundance, (at those times when they do fall)
as ever fell shower of Hail.

Of Pewter-Plateria, the Third Canton of Eat-All-Main.
AS we passed the 55th Degree beyond the line, we entered into a spacious
Plain; by the Inhabitants called Pewter-Plateria, which we entered in our Map
under the name of Platters-Plain; it lies in the very heart of Eat-All-Main,
and the first City we met with in this Tract, was Victualla, through the midst
of which there Passes a River called Sauce-Bourn, whose Water is somewhat Tart
in taste. In the Marketplace of this Town I beheld a Monument, it was no rare
Piece of work, but of a very Ancient Model, the top Stone being cut in form of
a Sea Crab.

I shall here omit the fruitful Plains of Goblet the great, and Fatland
Forest, together with the goodly City of Sausagenia, a Town rarely Seated,
only it stands a little too near the Salt Water. I shall also pass by Butterkin
the Fenny, and Cheswick, the last Town of all Eat-All-Main, and Situate upon
the vory Borders of Quaffonia. These I slightly pass, because I would fain be
at the Metropolitan City of the whole Region; for that very place alone, in
Structure of houses, Manners of Inhabitants, and formality of Discipline, I
esteem above all the rest.

Of the Metropolitan City of Eat-All-Main, called Flesh-Pasti-Nople.
HEre-about are but few Villages, The Cities having eat up most of the
Buroughs; neither are their Cities so abundant in number as they are in
Riches, and populous Inhabitants; but of them all, the Prime and Mother-City is
that Famous Flesh-Pasti-nople.

Their Old Records do report, that in former Ages, there were two Rich and
Potent Cities, Flesh-ton and Py-nople, between whom there was long and vehement
Contention about the Sovereignty; Py-nople stood much upon its Antiquity, but
Flesh-ton Counterpoised the others Continuance with her own present Glory,
pleasant Situation and Powerfulness.

Well, a Parliament was called, and Finally, the whole House with one Consent
gave the Supremacy unto Flesh-ton. Py-nople thus disgraced, decayed to nothing,
so that it is at this day almost Impossible to know where it stood. Now
Flesh-ton grew more and more in Luster, and both to add a Magnificence to the
Name, as also to paste the Foil of Py-nople upon the Forehead of posterity. It
left the last Syllable of its Old Name, and Assumed the two Last of Py-nople,
joining them together with the Cement whereof their Ancient Walls were made,
and so was thenceforth called Flesh-Pasti-nople.

Touching the form, it is rather vast in Compass, than comely in Building. It
has a Rivelet of Spring Water Running almost through every Street; in which
you shall see a thousand several impaled Fishponds, wherein they keep Swans,
Geese, Ducks, Teals, and all kinds of Waterfowl. This Current is called
Gravie-Channel. The City is Double-walled about with the Bones that remained of
their Carnival Feastings. These Bones are Artificially and with Judgment
cemented together with Mortar made of the whites of Eggs. Their Houses within
are neither too Stately, nor too Lofty. They love no Assents by Stairs up to
their Doors, partly, because it is dangerous to come down, when their Brains are
thoroughly moistened; and partly because it is toilesome to climb up, when their
Bellies are bumbasted. Instead of Lead, Tyle and Slat, their Houses are all
Rooft with shoulder-bones of Beasts very cunningly knit together.

The City consists not of any but such as have one dependence or other upon
Rack and Manger, the Husbandmen, Carpenters, Millers, and Butchers, have each
their Habitations assigned in the Suburbs, who notwithstanding, if they can
bring their Bellies to a certain size, are presently Summoned to Gurmands Hall,
and made free of the Wide-throats; no Stranger can have his Freedom at first,
unless he be either a Cook, a Baker, or an Inkeeper.

The City is Governed by a certain number of Grave Senators, peculiarly styled
Alder-maws, who are not Elected for their Wisdom, their Wealth, or their
Horse-Tail Beards; but by the circumference of their Paunches, which at a
solemn set Feast once every Year, are Measured, and the more that each man's
Rotundity is found to be enlarged, unto the higher place he is presently
Advanced: But if either sickness, or age, do chance to make any of these
Alder-maws cast their Collops, they are immediately put off the Bench; and as
they have lost their Grease, so must they lose their Grace at a clap: Why this
is hard now: but it is true, as hard as it is I can tell you that.

The Geometrical form of the City is Oval, and has four Gates; at which there
do daily attend course by course four Alder-maws, Selected to the Office of
Supervisors of the Paunchery; and these are to examine all that come in, and go
out, and to mind that none go out Fasting. If they find any Person so
offending, he is condemned to eat two Suppers. They are also to mind that none
come in Empty-handed: for not to go out full-Bellied, and not to come in
full-Handed, is an heinous contempt of the Cities Right-healthful Government.

Every Month they are bound by Law to Celebrate a solemn Feast, where every
Alder-maw of the whole Society must be present, to consult about the Public
good: Their place of meeting is Gurmonds Hall, where being met, and having
turned their Wine into Water, and their Oysters into Shells: Every one takes
his Chair, and to Dinner they go: Now, they may not in any case have their
Boars, Sheep, Goats, Lambs, etc. served up in Parcels and Joints, but they must
have all whole. You shall see the waiters come sweating with a whole Hogg, or a
whole Calf, upon a great Pewter Engine; you would bless your self to behold it:
and he that rises before six hours be fully run, runs his head under a
rigorous fine.

And for the breaking up of the Feast, thus is their Order. They have a Door in
the Hall, large enough for the greatest Gutmonger that lives, and take him
fasting. At this Door they enter when they come to the Feast, which being
ended, he that cannot get his Belly through, is let forth another way; but he
that passes as easily as he came in, is stayed by an Officer appointed for that
purpose, called the Sergeant of the Maw, and brought back again, where he must
seetle himself to a renewed Rouse, untell his Belly be able to kiss both the
Cheeks of the Door at once, and then he is dismissed.

They have a common Hospital belonging to this City, wherein all such as have
got the Dropsy or the Gout, or any such disease, by his Valor in
Gurmondizing, are Maintained at the Public charge.

But all such as have lost their Teeth by Age, or by eating their Broth too
hot, are forthwith provided for very conveniently, and sent away into the
Spoon-meat Islands.

The Citizens are Generally of an unmeasurable Groseness, and seemed to me,
when I saw them walk, just like so many Tunns, moving each upon two pottle
Pots; nor is that man worthy of the least Salutation that is not all Cheeks to
the Belly, and all Belly to the Knees.

And such shapes do the Women of this City walk in also, the German froes do
pretty well in Imitation of these Souse-Barrels; the Young Women may not Marry,
till such time as before a Bench of Matrons, They make a public Demonstration,
that their Dugs, and their Chins, can meet without forceing of either.

They go for the most part all naked, only their Alder-Maws may wear Gowns,
which must be only the Skins of such Beasts as they are able to devour alone at
one sitting.

Their Schools have no Lecture Read in them, but only Apicius. His Institutions
of the Art of Muncherie, and there are all the young fry taught the Sciences of
Carving, Chewing, and Swallowing most profoundly. The Munchery Lecturer, when I
was there, was one Doctor Full-Gorge; a man most rare in his Profession, and
thoroughly arquainted with all the Fundamentals of the said Sciences.

Their Library is a large Room ranked full of Pots and Cans of all sorts, every
sort in their several Classes; so the Scholars have also each his full Pot,
and his laden Platter for his Book. The Fresh men have lesser measures; the
Sophisters larger, and so up to the Graduaits. The first perhaps has his Pint,
and his Pullet; the next, his Quart and his Goose; the third, his Pottle and
his Lamb, and so upwards. Nor may any leave his Task, or have leave to play,
till he have made an end of what was enjoined him.

If any one stay Seven years in these Schools, and benefit nothing, he is
forthwith Banished for ever into the Starveling Isles, or Hungerland, to deal
upon Spanish dinners, furnished with half Pilchards. Thither also they thrust
all Physicians, and Prescribers of diets. If any one of them be ill at ease, he
presently eats a raw Radish, drinks a little hot Water, Spews a while, and
within a quarter of an hour, Viah he lets fly upon Ajax, and rises from his
roast as sound as a Bell.

They love venison entirely well, but cannot tell how to catch it; only such
Deer as comes willingly amongst them, those they Entangle in Nets, and take
them. But the noble Swine, Oh they prise that Beast above all others! whether
because of their sympathy of natures, being both fatally Consecrated to the
Table, or by reason that the Swine will feed on the Coursest meat, and be
soonest fed, I am incapable to determine.

If any one keep his provant while it stinks, he is forthwith condemned of High
Treason, and spitted upon a Stake. Only two Reservations their Law agrees
unto; The first is, they may keep Venison till it be all Hoary, and Moldy; And
the second is, they may lay their Cheese where they think good, till it be
ready to creep away with Maggots: To these Worms they usually scrape a little
fine Sugar, and with the point of a Knife, or a Spoon, crash them up as if they
were so many Almond Comfits. I wonder our Low Dutch should be such Loggerheads
to follow them in this filthy fashion.

The Wars of the Eat-All-Mains.
THE Eat-All-Mains have unreconcilable Wars with two other Nations, the Hunger
landers of the Starveling Islands, and the Thrivengers of Thriveingois.

The first Inhabit certain Western Isles in the Atlantic Sea, not far Distant
from Eat-All-Main; but the Latter lie Somewhat farther off it, by reason of a
great part of the Territory of Fool-I-Ana, and some parcel also of Shee-Land,
that puts in between them.

Their Historical Monuments relate, that the Hungerlanders, being confederate
with the Thevingenians, have made many Terrible Invasions upon the
Eat-All-Mains Borders, and one time gave them a sore Foyl, the Inhabitants
being forced to hide themselves in Caves under ground, until their gods
pitying them, made their foes own Chops their fatal destruction; for they did
so Engorge themselves after this sudden change, that growing hereby all
diseased, there was not a man of them left in three years. If you would have
given a Spanish Royal for a man, no not a man to Cast at a Dog.

The Thriveingers also, the Ancient Inhabitants of this Land, have made many
attempts to Regain their lost Possessions, but have been continually beaten
back by the Eat-All-Mains good success.

They march unto Battle Armed only before, (needing no defense behind, because
they cannot Run away) in Ox Hides, Sheepskins, and Swines Pelts, that you
would imagine them to be a herd of Cattle that were driving to the watering
place.

Their weapons commonly are Spits, and-Fire Forks, and some of them have
Cross-bows made of the bones of large Oxen. But the very truth is, the
Drink-All-Mains give them their best Assistance, for had it not been for them,
the Eat-All-Mains had been down the wind long ere this; and there is the main of
the whole matter.

Of Idle-Burgh, an Imperial free Town.
IDle-Burgh is a famous and free State, and has a large territory under
command; it is Situate in the farthest confines of Platters-Plain toward
Fooliana. The Citizens live in far more happy Estate than ever Monk did, having
all things they can desire in Abundance.

The Town is so strongly situated, that it is Impregnable, being Built upon a
Rock ten German Miles in height, and withal, so steep, that it is utterly
Inaccessible; at the foot of this Cliff Runs the River Idle, whereof the City
takes her name. Runs did I say, hold, it seems rather to Creep, being more
like a Lake than a River.

There is but one way up to the Town, that is, the Townsmen leting down a
Basket fastened to the end of a Rope, do hale up the Passengers.

They live all upon certain Birds Naturally bred amongst them, the Inhabitants
call them Gulls, which serve the Cities use with three sorts of Meats, Flesh,
Eggs, and Fish: Flesh from their own Carcasses, Eggs from their Nests, and Fish
which they bring for the feeding their young ones in huge excess: And besides,
the Sticks of their Nests finds the Citizens with perpetual fireing; What would
you have more, and more you shall have? Their Feathers serve the Citizens for
stuffing their Beds; yes marry do they, and some to spare also for
Transportation.

The Ground within the Walls brings-forth whole Vintages of delicate Grapes,
and whole Harvests of the purest Wheat.

The People do live an uncurious Life, they Sup, they Sleep, they Rise, they
Breakfast, they Dine, they Sup, and so round in a Ring. Unless a little
whoreing now and then chance to add one dance more to the Round.

The Richer sort have many Servants to attend on them; one to open the Masters
eyes gently when he awaketh, Another to fan a cool Air whilst he eats, A
third to pop in his victuals when he gapeth, A fourth to fit his Girdle to his
paunch as it rises, and falls: The Master only Exercises Eating, Digesting,
and Laying out.

There are Diverse other Cities that hold of this Idleburgh in Capite, and under
protection of her, enjoy the same privileges with her, as Sleep-on, and
Snort-apace, where the Inhabitants are seldom or never awake; and it is strange
to see how fat they grow with this Drousie Lethergy.

The Religion of the Eat-All-Mains.
THey cannot endure Jupiter, for he, when he Thunders, Sowers all their Wines;
but they have a good Devotion to god Trine, because he eats up all things
before him, and shows himself therein a true Eat-All-Main. They have built a
goodly Temple unto him, in which I saw the Picture of Saturn eating up his
Children very Artificially pourtraid.

On Shrove-tuesday, They Offer Sacrifice to this Deity, whose power appears to
them once every year in form of a huge Monstrous, Ravenous Fowl: The
Inhabitants call him RVC, to whom they present whole Hecatombs of Raw Flesh
thus Ordered.

Shrove-tuesday, As I said before, is the day of Sacrifice. The place in
Pewter-Plateria, where is a large Plain, lying toward the South, incirculed
with Mountains; unto this Plain do all the Inhabitants flock, bringing with
them an Ocean of Victuals, as Elephants, Camels, Oxen of the largest size,
Boars, Sheep, Goats, with a whole Army of Fowl, all with their Feathers plucked
off: All these are put as it were into this large Cage; which done, they get
them up on the top of the Mountains sides, as if they took their Seats in a
Playhouse, and with bended knees do there expect the comeing of this Deity, Old
RVC of Rucks-Hall. At length Sir, you shall see him come afar off, with a noise
Able to Deaf the whole Nation three hundred miles about, with a great crooked
Bill, as bigg almost as half the Equinoctial Circle, with a pair of Tallons
like two broad spread Oaks, with two Eyes in his head like two Towns that were
on fire, and such an Inundation of Harpies, Ravens, Vultures and Hawks, about
him. O! strange stupendous sight for Men to behold! and with a Cry able to
procure an Earthquake, they Approach the Plain, and by and by their Wings
Eclips the Sun, and bring a Midnight over the whole Valley.

Three times they flag about the Plain, while the People pour out their very
Bladders in Tears, and all that is in their Bellies in hearty prayers to this
Rout of Religious Birds.

By this time General RVC, the Leader of this Starved Regiment, has spied his
Prey: For you must Note, he out of all this Folio Catologue of Carcasses, must
choose what pleases his Tooth first.

Well, suppose he take some five Elephants, or half a score of Oxen, he is to
be first served, and then every one to his shark, Tag, Rag, and Longtail. Here
you shall see one fly away with a Calf, there another with a Lamb; here one
with a Boar, and there another with a Swan; every one fitting his Luggage to
his strength: And thus with a Reverend applause of all the spectators, they
depart every one with his carriage, and leaves the rest behind them.

All which the people are bound in Conscience to make ready, and eat up ere
they depart, whereby their Bellies are so overcram'd, that they loath flesh
forty days after; During which space they live all upon Fish: This vacancy
sharpens their Appetites, to fall greedily to Flesh again at the time expired.
As sure as Death, the Pope had his Lent sent him out of this Country, upon
granting the Eat-All-Mains some odd Indulgences, or upon dispenceing with them
for Ember-Weeks.

Of the Laws of the Eat-All-Mains.
GVrmonds-Hall is a stately Structure Built in Orbicular form like a Theater,
as well large and high as Beautiful, set forth with fair Arched Windows, whose
Lights are of transparent Horn Curiously pannelled; the Roof supported by
Pillars, which are of the Thigh Bones of Elephants, very artificially cemented
together; and over the front of the Entrance, are these Verses fairly Engraven
in Letters of Gold.

Let no Thin Jaws presume to pass this Stone,
The place is Sacred to the Plump alone.
And within the Hall hangs a Table chained to a Pillar, containing these
Inviolable Laws.

I. That Eating but one Meal a day be henceforth held for A Capital
Transgression.

II. He that overthrows a full Dish, or Cup Rashly, shall be forthwith by This
Statute, enjoined Standing upright on his Feet, to have a dish of Broth set
between his heels, which he must eat all up with a Thimble.

III. That none Eat alone, nor violate the Laws of the Table by any private
Suppers, upon pain of Eating his next Meal with his heels upwards.

IV. That if the Mouth be full, it shall be sufficient to answer by holding up
the finger.

V. That breaking Wind, either by belching or otherwise, be held not only
Lawful, but Honorable.

VI. That if any one hold his breath while his Belly is Measuring, he shall be
forthwith made incapable of Advancement.

VII. That no Person shall leave on his Trencher or Plate, any piece of meat,
under pretense it is too fat, or will overlay his Stomak, under the penalty of
being punished for a puny; which is, that he make his next Meal at a Side
Board, out of picking the Bones that remained of the last, and this in the
sight of all the rest, as well for their Sport, as that it may be a warning to
them: for this is held of great Disrepute.

VIII. That a Register be kept of all Transgressors from time to time; and that
both Guilt and Punishment be Recorded; as to place where, and time when; whose
Offenses may remain as Badges of Disgrace to posterity, and of Fame, Credit,
and Worthy Commendations, to such as are Loyal and obedient Observers of the
Law.

Signed All-Paunch.

Of the Election of the Great DUKE.
THere is a stately Palace built upon a narrow ledg of Land lying just between
Eat-All-Main, and Drink-All-Main: It was built as their Ancient Chronicles
Report by a Giant called All-Paunch, who was of an incredible height of Body,
Pliny's Orestes: Or, Plutarches Orian, were but Dwarfs in comparison of this
almighty All-Paunch; suppose rather that you saw Antaeus, that was Sixty Cubits
high, or him whose Carcass was dug up at Drepano, whom the Symetrions judged
by his Thigh Bone, could be no less then two hundred Cubits high. This latter,
I suppose, might be the Brother of All-Paunch.

This All-Paunch was the first that by Conquest drove the Thrivonians out of
this Land, brought in a New People, and gave them new Laws, and his Soul they
Imagine to be entered into that huge Bird RVC, in which shape they do yearly
adore him, and have him in as great reverence as the Turks their Mahomet.

He Lies Buried in the midst of the Palace Court, where for a sacred Memorial
of him, is a Statue Erected, far higher than Lysippus his Brazen Colossus, and
upon the Bases thereof, Like the English Inscription on the London Monument,
was this Epigraph fairly engraven in Capital Characters, in the Belly-All-Mic
Tongue.

I All-Paunch, Duke of Belly-All-Main, Lie here Entombed, Dying a Lord, a
Victor, a Prince, a Deity. Let none pass by me Fasting, nor name me Hungry, nor
salute me Sober: Be mine Heir he that can, my Subject he that will, Mine Enemy
he that dare.

This Dukedom is Elective, their being four chief Linnages or Families that may
stand for the Election, which are the Treble-chins, the Bacon-chops, the
Wool-sacks, and the Tun-Bellies. The Nimble-chops have pretended a Title to
their Right in the Election, who after some Debates were cast, so that they may
not attain to it, unless first by Adoption into one of those four Royal
Families.

Now this is the Order of the Election, There is Yearly a Tilting ordained, not
with Spears, but of Barrels. Whereunto every one comes Armed with his Teeth all
new sharpened, and to it they go; where he that unhorses most meat, and lifts
most measures of Wire out of their Pewter Sadles, is Honored with a Crown of
clustred-Vines, and Saluted by the Title of Lord High-Steward of
Belly-All-Main, the Dukes next Inferior.

The Tournament ended, each one arises if he can, and laying his hand on the
sacred Tomb of dead-Duke All-Paunch, takes an Oath by the Deities of Bacchus,
and the Reverend All-Paunch, to perform his Duty in the Election without
partiallity.

Then they depart to the Theater, and take their places to Behold the
Ceremonies of the Election.

And first comes forth the new chosen Lord High-Steward, bringing in his hand
a Golden Girdle, enchaced with Pearls, Diamonds and Rubies: This they call the
Sacred Belt of State; then the last years Duke puts it on, and takes an exact
Measure of his own Sowse-tub; so do all the rest of the Nobility after him, one
after another; and he that can set it on the Tenters without stretching of his
belly, or holding his breath (if it sit so stiff that it must needs be let out
one hole more) he is the man that with loud Acclamations both of the Nobility,
and Mobile, is proclaimed high Duke of Belly-All-Main. But if none exceed the
Magnitude of the former Duke, he holds his Monarchy till the next year, or till
another guts over-vote him by Pole.

Then comes his Cup Bearer, and upon his knees presents him with a Silver
Tankard of some dozen quarts, and entreats his Grace to Drink a health to the
People.

Who taking it, and lifting up the lid, begins an Oration, and taking a fresh
Oath by St. All-Paunch, declares that he will be a Bulwark to their Liberties,
a Drudg to their Business; a Terror to their Enemies; a Father to their
desires; and an Increaser and Inlarger of their Measures; Denounceing himself a
professed Enemy to Hunger, and Thirst, to sower Ale, to Meagerness of Wine,
Beer, and Bodies, so long as he shall wear that Royal Belt; protesting that
none should Fast unpunished, or be Drunk unrewarded.

Then setting the Tankard to his mouth, stole off the Liquor every drop, save a
little remainder which he was by custom to set upon his Thumbs Nail, and lick
it off, and so he did; then continuing his Oration, said, From the bottom of my
Heart I do wish you continually drunken Heads, full Bellies, and fat Fortunes.
Which ended, the Audience bellow out their Aplause, with long live
Bowsing-gut-Wool-Sack, Caesar Emperor of Belly-All-Main. At least a dozen
times, every time inter ecco'd with a Volley of Acclamations.

Then the Lord High-Steward presents him with the Sword and Mace of the
Government, which are a great long Knife, and a pretty Golden Tunn, pronouncing
according to custom, these words, Use and Enjoy.

But then for the Coronation Dinner and Supper, O! Monstrous what piramids of
Platters and Chargers! What Mountains of Flesh and Pastery! What Castles of
Banquetry! And what Deluges of Wine, Beer, Ale, and Brandy did I behold there!
It is impossible to particularise; only this I declare, the Streets that Night
were strewed so thick with Drunken Carcasses, that it is my opinion there were
never more Memories left in the Field, of the greatest Massacre that ever this
Modern Age was witness of.

Of Starvling Island: Or, Hungerland
WE have almost lost the Remembrance of Starvling Island; take it therefore
now as a penance for your tedious abode in Eat-All-Main. It lies under three
and thirty Degrees of Longitude; and four and fifty of Latitude, being on the
North directly opposite to Cabo Bianco; and on the South unto Filching-Fens. It
is a Stony Barren, Grasless, Sandy Soil.

There are some Trees in it, but they have no Bark left; no Blossom nor Bud;
nay the Weed cannot find in its heart to make the smallest Residence in these
quarters.

The Lands Natural Barrenness affords no distinction either of Summer or
Winter; because the Inhabitants snap up their herbs as soon as ever they peep
out of the ground.

All that dwell in these parts are Exiles, and their hew is naturally between a
Pale and a Swarthy, their Skins are crumpled like half burnt Parchment, and
puckerd like the hide of an Elephant. The alviewing Sun in all his Race never
beheld such ghastly Animals; you would swear they were Anatomies covered over
with fresh Skins.

Here you shall have one laying a Plot how to entrap the Flies, there another
contriving a conspiracy against the Worms; yonder another sit shaving the
Earths new shorn Beard, to discover the Roots of the ungrown Grass.

They have a strange and fierce wild Beast Rangeth continually in the Nights
all about the deserts of this Island, which they call Empty-Maw; it will keep
such a terrible barking, that it makes the hollow Air Echo again; and
whosoever in this Island hears it not bark once in twelve hours, grows
immediately Deaf; but he that hears it thrice in thirty six hours, and gives
it nothing to devour, ere twelve hours more be run, dies immediately, provided
always he can live no longer.

Other Beasts I saw none in all this Island, except a sort of Wolves, and some
Monkyes that had eaten off great part of their Tails.

Indeed I durst not make any long abode in so lean a Land, I think it was no
great Wisdom: What think you?

Thus far of Eat-All-Main, and the adjacent Isles; now proceed we to
Drink-All-Main, and so good night.
Of Drink-All-Main, the Second Province of Belly-All-Main.
YOU cannot expect an exact Description of Drink-All-Main, for I durst not for
my Ears enter into any City of the whole Province, until it was dark night,
that all the Citizens were wrapped in Wine and warm Clouts; And then how was it
possible to discover any thing to purpose? For to tell you the truth, I feared
the Burgomasters bounty; it being their fashion, as soon as any one sets a foot
within the Citygate, to give him I know not how many Lifts of Wine for his
welcome, receiving him in such Pomp, and State; and all out of the common Purse
of the City: All which Folio Cups he must take off, or else he is held an
ungrateful, unmannerly fellow. Nay, which is worse, a direct Foe to the common
good of the City. Now I feared both this Honor, and this Danger.

This Province is somewhat larger than Eat-All-Main, being as broad, or rather
broader than both the Germanies.

No Nation under the Cope of Heaven, so fortunate, nor so abounding in the
delicate Juce of the Grape as this: The peculiar Wines of all our Europian
Kingdoms are here; the Germans Rhenish, the Frenchmans White and Red, the
Spaniards Maligo, and the Canaries purest Sack; pshau, they have all, all to
Excess.

The Temperature of their bodies are different from the Eat-All-Mains, who
delight in the qualities of heat and drought; whereas the Drink-All-Mains
affect heat and moisture; so that the bordering neighbors do jearingly call
the Eat-All-Mains Kitchen-Bellies, and the Drink-All-Mains Celerian-Bellies.

As they are more ingenious than the Eat-All-Mains, so are they more
Lascivious. In their youths they are generally quick-witted; but being grown to
a Graver Age, especially Old Age, they grow so forgetful, that you shall not
have one amongst Twenty that can remember his own name.

Of the Shires of the Province of Drink-All-Main.
THE whole Province is Divided into three Counties, the County of Wine-cester,
the County of Vsquebah, or Brandy-Bridg, and the County of Hopsack-octun, or
Bru-Malta, called by some Strong-Biera.

Wine-cester is parted from Eat-All-Main, on the West by the River Piss-On, a
salt Current that Ebbs and Flows; which River runs round about the Dukes
Palace. The Philosophers of this Country affirm, that it has not its Saltness
from the Sea, but from an airy humor that often falls upon it.

The first Town I came unto in this Region, was called Vine-Spring. It is in
form of a five angled Trencher, whose Borders extend as far as Vine-Prop hills;
so that some of it became part of the Suburbs of Cluster-Beg, a pretty fine City
walled about with Stones of the Color of Brick, but somewhat deeper of Dye.
This City stands in the bottom of Pressing-Dale, a Valley so called; through
which runs a delicate River called Juce, which passes along by three or four
pretty Cities, seated upon the the Banks thereof, to the founders eternal
commendations.

Their names are, first Tankards-Bridg, next Tunning-Tree, then Broaching-Ford,
and lastly Carousi-Kanikin.

Tunning-Tree is fortified with a wall of wood, and Broaching Ford has never
but one gate open at once; and that when it is shut, is made fast with nothing
but the end of a Faggot stick. There is not in all the World any one River
comparable to this, which runs through these Cities; for besides the pleasing
meanders that it makes in its wanton course; the water is so sweet and
delicate, that neither the best of Europes Wines, nor the Turks delicious
Zerbeth can possibly excel it.

It has but one peculiar Fish belonging to it called a Tap, and this Fish will
sometimes lie by the Shore, and spout a huge deal of the water aloft; and it is
somewhat more pleasing in taste than before, and this the Inhabitants watch for
in Boats; and when they get it, make great store of it.

This River, as I told you, passes through Tunning-Tree: but hold, I had
forgotten one Town, it goes from thence to Celleridg, ere it come to
Broaching-Ford, and so by Broaching-Ford passes directly unto Carousi-Kanikin,
the prime City of the whole Province.

The Description of Carousi-Kanikin the chief City of Drink-All-Main, as also
the Fashions, and Manners of the Drink-All-Mains.
CArousi-Kanikin is a name, I understand not farther then what light I have of
it from the German tongue.

The City is built upon a Hill, and carries the form of a Tankard from what
Quarter so ever you behold it.

It is of Ancient Renown, and one of the best seated Ports for Traffic in all
the whole Land.

It is strongly fortified with Barricado's, and Bulwarks built all of Barrels,
the Roofs also of the houses are tiled with the Boards of broken Casks.

In the entrance of the gate is placed a double Cannon of Pewter, charged to
the Muzzel. This their Law Commands to be duly observed; the Citizens call it
the Flaggon of Hospitality, and round about it are these words Engraven'd, Aut
Bibe Aut Abi, drink or be packing; and whosoever ariveth, must either drink it
all off, or be carried before the Magistrate to Render an account of his
Contumacy.

But by chance, I met with a Traveller who was bound to the City as will a I;
who being acquainted with their fashions, brought me secretly by night into the
Town, and showed me such things as I should never have discovered of my self.

The Fronts of their Buildings are so wholly hid with spreading Vines, that had
I not seen the Signs hang out on every side, I should have sworn I had been in
a Vineyard, and not in a City: it is indeed a very pleasant Prospect.

In the Marketplace are all the Measures hung up in chains, Sealed with the
Dukes Stamp.

The Inhabitants go all naked, but for a Wreath of Vines about their
Foreheads; but their skins are all painted after the manner of the Ancient
Picts, every one after what form he pleases: you shall see some so perfectly
painted like Flaggons, that if one of them set but his Arms a Kimbo, you would
swear it was a living Flaggon with two Handles: I saw one painted so directly
in the shape of a Whale, that when he Vomited, no Man in the World, but would
have taken him for a live Whale Spewing up the Ocean.

I had a great desire to see the manner of their Public Feasts, and not be
seen by the Citizens; and mine Host with much entreaty agreed to perform my
Requests, giving me withal certain Cautions of Danger; and likewise informed me
in some necessary Points of Behavior; So mine Host and I got us into the
Town Hall in the Evening un-espyed, by and by came the Feasters, and taking
their places just as the Eat-All-Mains did, only these had less Meat, and more
Drink.

At first they began a Sacrifice to Bacchus, their general god, whose Statue
stands at the upper end of the Table, holding in his right Hand supported by
his left, a mighty Goblet: into this standing Cup, the Master of the
Ceremonies, in the Name of the whole Company, pours a Hogs-head of Wine (for it
holds no less) which passes in Pipes, as through Veins into his Body, and from
thence he pisseth it, till it be all out; and this is the Hourglass,
proportioning the continuance of the Feast; for when he leaves pouring out,
they must all leave pouring in, and that upon pain of Sacrilege.

Then comes up a Service; I protest at first sight, I took it for a Dish of
Shooing-Hornes, but upon stricter Observation, found they were Red-Herrings:
There was also a Dish of Anchovis, with Capers, and Pickled-Cowcumbers; and
lastly, a Westphalia-Gamon.

Then begins the Full-pots to move about the Table, and the empty ones against
the Wall; so that one could not possibly tell, whether they were sooner filled
to be emptied, or emptied to be filled.

Now, when one of them will Drink to another, he first Challenges him with a
Solemn Ceremonious Song: Then they join hands fast together, and giving a sound
shake, the Challenger Advances his moistened Weapon, and blows it dry: he may
puff a little, but the Pot must be sure to be Discharged of its Liquor, ere it
be severed from his Gripe; and then the other answers him at his own Weapon.

Well, the Seasoning Banquet being Devoured, and the Cloth thrust up on a
heap: The Master of the Ceremonys Cries, Healths, Three times, with an Audable
Voice: And I supposing this had been a Summons to the breaking up of the
Company, began to be jogging, till my Host pulling me by the Sleeve, told me,
the Feast was hardly begun: Pray stay (quoth he) and see the Conclusion; don't
you see how fast god Bacchus's Hourglass Runs? So I sat down again.

Then steps me out one of the Company, and taking off his Wreath, down upon his
Knees he falls, (I thought he had been going to Prayers) and presently calls
for a Quart. A Health quoth he to Great Bowsing-gut Wool-sack Duke of
Belly-All-Main, and presently the Pot stops his Breath, he Drinks, he Puffs, he
Belches, he Talks, until within a while he had Gulped down as many Quarts as
his Name had Letters in it: and when he had done, falls a Spewing, till all
cried Twang again.

Well, they all follow in Order, from the Highest to the Lowest, each one with
the same Pot, Execution, and Ejection, proving himself thereby a Faithful
Citizen; this past, up starts another with this Catch.

A Health to thee, and every Swain,
That Wishes well to Drink-All-Main.
Seasoning his Song with many a Goodly Belch, and so down upon his
Marrow-bones, and up with the Pot hand smooth, the Devil a Bone finds he in the
Drink; and after him they must all Follow; woe be to him that Hangs an Ars.

This Shower over-blown, out steps a Third, Advancing a quart of Plump Claret
to the Health of all the Quagmirists, which is the General Name of the Nobility
of this Famous City of Carousi-Kanikin; briefly after him they go, and thus
every man in Order brings in his Foundation of a new Round.

Now every man having his Share, they must each one in Order (Pox on it that
Madded me) go play the Poet, out of the Inspiration of Bacchus only, every one
Sings his own Song; and instead of Harps, they have their Knives and the quart
Pots, and truly they made fine Music on it. One in his Song commends his
Mistress, another the Goodness of the Wine, a Third Relates all the Passages
between him and his Wife at home, another Rhimes all in Satyr against one that
was not at this Drinking, every one keeping Time with the Music.

While these Songs were Singing, it was strange to see their several Postures,
and Behaviors; you shall see one for pure Love weeping in his Fellows Bosom,
another sit kissing his Companion, one in an Ecstasy of Laughter, though
himself knows not at what, another down upon all four in Devotion to Bacchus,
another Arguing of Religion, and matters of State; and here in a Corner, you
shall have another sit Nodding, and Slavering: 'Twould do a Blind man's heart
good to see it. But all this while the Cup is not forgotten.

Well, the Hourglass being run all out, they Rise (if they can) and with
wheeling Complements, are taking Leave of each other.

One thing my thought was very Observable; they have certain Flamins, who are
Priests to Bacchus, who frequent these Revelling Feasts, they go Clothed only
in a Gown of Black, girt about their Wastes, with a Silken Cord; and seeing
these amongst the rest in motion, I could not choose but smile; for their all
black Bodies, and shining Rubric Faces, seemed just like so many Charcoles
lighted at one end, dancing the Hay amongst the Reeling Multitude.

Well, but quoth I to mine Host, how the Devil will they get all home now? Fear
nothing quoth he, don't you see those Ropes there in the Court, that are
fastened to them Iron Rings, Sir they have an Officer who is always kept Sober
for the purpose, he guids each person to his Ropes end, the other end being
fastened to the Door of each man's House, these Ropes are as good to them, as the
Clue of Thread in Rosamonds Bower, or Ariadnes that guided Theseus from the
Labyrinth of Minotaur: very likely quoth I, But what if an unhappy Wag should
come in the mean time, and tie the Ropes farther end to the wrong door? Why, do
you think, quoth he smiling, that any are awake in this City in the Night? Yet
I have known it done, and the men have gone to bed to other men's Wives, who
perhaps being as Drunk as they, never discovers the matter till next day at
noon, and then, that which they ignorantly committed, they make a double sport
of, and is but the Preface to repeated Impressions. For it is a Principle here,
that a Drunken man can never Offend, it being the Effects of Bacchus.

Well, They being gone, mine Host and I broke off discourse, and very privately
sneaked home to our Quarters.

Of the Knights of the Golden-Tun, and the Laws of the Drink-All-Mains.
IN the Town Hall, properly called Gulpers-Court, hangs the Golden-Tun, which
is the Ancient Emblem of the Knights of that Order.

He that can drink this Vessel Thrice off, and go his way without Indenting,
for his Good Service is presently Knighted by the Great Duke, and has a Chain
of Extraordinary Value bestowed upon him.

These Knights have a large Charter, and are allowed many goodly Privileges;
they bear absolute Command in all Taverns and Alehouses, as also at all
public Revels, and are allowed to Furnish so many Soldiers in Pewter
Jackets, out of any man's Celler in the Town.

These hardy men have great Conflicts at every public Meeting, their Weapons
are full charged Cups, and he that carries most of them away clear, is
Conqueror, and leads the rest about the Town (if they can go) in Triumph; and
by this Trial, they prove who is the Victor, if he can put his Finger into the
Flame of the Candle, without playing hit I, miss I, let him Spew whole
Fish Ponds is held a Sober man, and wears the Wreath of Conquest for that day.

Over the entrance of Gulpers-Court is Engraved this Couplet in the
Belly-All-mic Tongue.

The House of youthful Mirth, and Lusty Cheer,
Peace, Wine, Sport, Rest, have all their Mansions here.
Upon the two heads of the Golden Tun, in a fair Character is written some of
the Principal Laws of the Drink-All-Mains, which I carefully Coppied.

I. That all Promises, Bills, Bonds, Indentures, Bargains, or any other
Conveyances whatsoever, made, or caused to be made in the Afternoon, shall be
utterly void and of no Effect.

II. That if any one cast away any Liquor, or Bottom, which is called a Snuff,
he shall be forthwith enjoined to lie flat upon the ground, and snuff up the
same into his Nostrils.

III. That every one pledge his Challenger in the same Cup, and after the same
fashion, upon pain of drinking the quantity double out of a pispot.

IV. That the pots be either always full or empty, for the Waiter that presents
a pot half filled, and the Person that takes it, shall be both guilty of the
breach of good fellowship.

V. That he that being sober shall strike him that is drunk; shall be
thenceforth disabled for giving Testimony in any cause whatsoever, but the
drunken man striking the sober shall be acquitted.

VI. That he that goes from any public Meeting without staggering, shall be
accounted a Malefactor, in a high degree; and if it be made appear that he
counterfeiteth Reeling, thereby to avoid the disgrace, he shall be proceeded
against as a Traitor to the Laws of All-Paunch.

VII. That all that stay three days in this City of Carousi-kanikin, do offer
Sacrifice to Bacchus.

VIII. That he that mixeth Water with his Wine, shall be forthwith obliged to
Drink a brimmer of Hoggwash.

IX. That he that strikes with a Pot, be enjoined to have his hands Tied
behind him, and take up every Cup that comes to his turn in his Teeth, during
the continuance of the Banquet.

Subscribed Stil-Yard.

Of the Arts, and Millitary Disciplines of the Drink-All-Mains.
THe People of this Province are almost all blear-eyed, and troubled with the
Palsy.

They have some Poets among them whom they never Crown with Laurel (because
that Tree is a foe to the Vine) but with Ivy: these are the very Offscum of
the Rascally Rabble, the veryest Lack-Latins, and most Vnalphabetical
Raggabashes, that ever bred Louse, living only by other men's Trenchers.

These fill all the Taverns in Town with Epigrams, Elegies, and Epitaphs, which
would make ones Ears Blister to hear them: They have had but one good Poet this
Twenty Years, and his Tallent lies in Drollery; but for the most part Prose,
who is an excellent Observator of the Times, and Seasons, and can with much
Facility Convert all Occurrences to Comedy, and represent all Comedy in the
morose habit of Tragedy. These Poets have the same sway over the Ballad Makers,
as the Knights of the Tunn have over the barrells.

The Drink-All-Mains go often to War in Assistance of the Eat-All-Mains; but
they never go armed, no not so much as with a Shirt on their backs, their
Lances are saplings of Elmes, sharpened and hardened at the Spires in the Fire;
one would swear in beholding them at a distance, they were a moving Hop-garden;
but notwithstanding (for stand well they cannot) it is admirable to see both
their Valor in Fight, and Fortune in Conquest.

They have a Law that none must go sober to the Field; so that Wine makes them
as Bold as Lions, Audaces fortuna Juvat, fortune helps the forward.

Of the Funerals of one the Chief Quagmirist's.
ONe of the Quagmirist's whose House was of some height, being loose in the
hilts, and intending to go where neither Pope nor Emperor can send an
Ambassador, being thoroughly tap-shackled, mistook the Window for the door, and
steping rashly on, down he came with the wrong end forward, and in plain
English broke his Neck.

His Funerals was very richly set forth; I can tell, for I was there; every man
was painted over with black for that day, and wore a Cypress wreath instead of
his Vines. The Body was not laid in a Coffin, but put into a Cask half full of
Wine, and so Boarn to the Grave, and rouled in rather to a Cistern of Sack,
than a Grave of Earth; and was rather drowned, than buried; each one having
instead of Rosemary, a Kan of Wine his hand, which they threw into the Grave,
Kan an all; and taking their leaves in these Words, thrice repeated, Adieu
sweet Corpulent Countryman: and instead of putting finger in Eye, each thrusts
his finger into his Mouth, and disgorges, instead of tears some Quarts: Then
hand in hand to the Tavern they go to drink his Remembrance.

This Quagmirist it seems was well esteemed amongst them, for he had a Statue
erected in Bacchus Court, and under it these two Verses in the Belly-All-Mic
Tongue.

Though he mistook his Window for his Door,
His Valiant Death shall make his Honor more.
Now I had staid two days in this City, without being demanded what I was; but
then mine Host came and told me, if I staid one day longer, I must prepare my
self to Sacrifice to Bacchus: For quoth he, I must not conceal you any longer,
unless you would have me forsworn. No quoth I, pray tell me then the Custom and
I Will either perform it, and stay longer, or get me gone presently, and rid us
both from danger.

Well Sir, quoth he, saw you not the Statue of Bacchus yesterday in
Gulpers-Court? And the great Goblet he holds, wherein they poured the Wine
that issued from his Yard? Yes that I did, said I. Well then, quoth he, you
must set your Mouth to this Tap, and suck till you be able to stand no longer,
but fall flat to the ground, and so must you lie under the Spout till all be
run out upon you: How like you this? Faith not altogether so delightful qnoth
I; But pray tell me, was there ever any Strangers that offered this Sacrifice?
All, All, quoth he, not a man escapes it: To It he must in spite of his nose:
some will come willingly, but others are fain to be hailed to their Teat, like
a Bear to the Stake. Well Sir quoth I, but I Will be jogging, only I entreat you
to inform me what Country in this Tract is next in Dignity to this of yours,
and worthiest of a Travelers observation; and he told me Brandy-Burgh, by some
called, Liquor-Ardence, it is under the Government of Sir Limbeck-Stilletory, a
Knight of the Noble Family of King Cups; so leading me forth, showed me the way
as plain as Dunstable-Road; and then courteously gave me the Basio Les Manos;
and I thanked him heartily for his Valiendo, and parted.

Of Brandy-burgh, or Liquor-Ardens, and of the Pilgrimage of St. Brochio.
ALl alone I took my way toward the North, leaving the River Forth behind me,
until I came to Spews-bury, the filthiest Town that ever I saw since my Mother
bound my head; I staid not long there (I had not need) but passed on, till I
came to Coopers-Norton, a pretty well seated Village, but not a drop of Water
was to be got in it, for Love nor Money. The Reason is (as I heard afterward)
lest they should mix it with the Wine, and so prove bad Common-VVealths men.

I was as much troubled with Pots and Flaggons in my Journey, as a Traveller in
Spain or Italy is with Crosses; I could not go two Miles to an end, but I
should find a bouncing Tankard kennell'd under an Arch; and Drink I must, no
gainsaying the Laws.

At last I overtook a Traveller in a Tattered Cassock of Haircloath, Barefoot
and bare-Headed, and demanding whither he Traveled; Sir quoth he, on
Pilgrimage to St. Brochio of Bottles-brook: I questioned him at large of the
Towns Situation and Discipline, and also of the Virtues of this St. Brochio.
(Quoth he) Bottles-brook is seated in the Confines of Brandy-burgh, in the Town
is a Temple of Bacchus-Fiery-Face. They call it Chapel Ardent. The top of this
Temple is all set with Carbuncles and sparkling Diamonds, and Rubies very Rich
to behold: And from the Embowed Arch there drops (they say) a king of hot
Fuming Liquor, which is received into a Vessel placed for that purpose, whose
Virtue is such, that if one drink a large Draught of it with good Devotion, he
shall never after either be Drunk before Noon, or Thirst before Midnight; both
which helps may do me much good, for I am a man so employed in my Country, that
I can never lie in my Bed till Midnight for Thirst, nor never Rise in the
Morning; but before Noon, I am Drunk and fast asleep again: therefore have I
gone these three days without Drinking, because I would merit the more of this
Holy Saint, when I come there: nor dares any importune me to Drink, or any in
my company as long as I wear this Weed.

I was glad of so good a Privilege, and entreated his Company and Patronage.
Well, we went Chatting on, until I observing the Soil altered, asked where we
were now?

This Country (quoth he) ever since we came over the Lake-Metheglin, is called
the County of Vsquebah, being the first Shire of Brandy-burgh; it is not so
well Husbanded, yet is more fertile than our County of Wine-cester, both in
Fatness of Soil, and pureness of Air; the People of this Nation are generally
Slovenly, and of a Fierce and Terrible Aspect, yet they used us very kindly; we
lodged in a little City, (I have forgot the Name of it) very quietly, for we
found almost all the Town dead Drunk, at our coming; and left them so at our
parting.

And next day Traveling through many Craggy, Fenny, Woody passages, we arrived
at a Famous Port-Town called, Aqua Fort: (Now quoth I) being as weary as a Dog,
is not this Bottles-brook? No (quoth he) but cheer up, for we go not a Foot
more by Land, all the rest of our Journey is by Water.

Well, to Ship we went, and by this time imagine us Lanched into the Main
Ocean; but what an eminent Danger, think you we escaped there? Our Mariners
were all as drunk as Wheelbarrows, not a man could guide himself, one was
asleep at the Helm, another going about to Row, fell overboard; whom two more
seeking to hall up again, had not we two held them, had both fallen after; a
third quarrels and lays a fourth over the Pate for not helping his fellow, he
strikes again, and to it they go, fight Dog, fight Bear: All the rest divided
themselves into two parties; now flew the ponderous Oars about their Ears, and
hand Spikes and Pump-staves. The water was quiet, and every one used his Oar in
the Air; but indeed they were easily knocked down, whose hamstrings Bacchus had
already cut in two, only two stood Conquerors, who being too weary of the
Massacree fell upon us; but we scorning to be put down by a couple of walking
Tankards, got up a Brace of Cudgels, disarmed them, bound them fast to the
Mast, and played the Sailors our Selves; but our Vessel sympathizing with her
Ancient Masters, did so reel from side to side, that had not a brisk gale
sprung us forward, we had laid our Bones in the Bottom of those Seas.

As we passed on, I descried as-far off a high smoking Land, and enquiring of
my Fellow Traveller how it was called: That Smoke quoth he comes out of Mount
Dennis, wherein the Souls of such as lived too sober, are purified by Fire,
until some of their Living-Friends go on Pilgrimage to Chappel-Ardent for a
Bottle of St. Brochio's Liquor, and pouring it upon their Tombs they are freed.
I smiled at this, and thought now sure I have found the Original of Purgatory.

Well, by that time our Sailers were sober, our Ship became drunk; for we
sustained a most Terrible Tempest, which lasted all night in most violent
manner; but growing somewhat calmer with the days approach, we with comfort
had the prospect of our desired Port, which in little time (though with great
difficulty) we attained; I was cold and faint, and the motion of the Ship had
so jumbled my brains together, that my head seemed to turn round upon my
shoulders, as if it had been set on with a Swivel: I wished heartily for a Dram
of Dr. Stephens, and entering the first door I found open, got such refreshment
as the Country afforded, and whilst I was thus recruiting my Spirits, my
fellow Traveller seeing a sheet or Writing Paper lie on the Counter, exercised
his skill in Poetry, expressing the Terror of the late Storm; at which I was
very well pleased and therefore took a Copy, which take you as freely.

All Round the Horizon Black Clouds appear,
A Storm is near.
Darkness Eclipseth the scerener Sky,
The Winds grow high.
Making the surface of the Ocean show,
Like Mountains lofty, and like Valleys low.
The weighty Seas are rouled from the Deeps,
In Mighty heaps.
And from the Rocks Foundations do arise,
To kiss the Skies.
Wave after Wave in Hills each other crowds,
As though the Deeps resolved to storm the Clouds.
How did the surging Billows Beat and Roar?
Against the Shore.
Threatening to bring the Land under their Power,
And it devour.
The curled Waves against the Land were hurled,
As to a Choas they would shake the World.
The Earth did interpose the Prince of Light,
'Twas sable Night.
All Darkness was but when the Lightnings fly,
And Light the Sky.
Night, Thunder, Lightning, Rain and Blustering Wind,
To make a Storm, had all their Forces joined.
A Description of Bottles-Brook.
WE found this a pretty sweet Town in truth; it is paved with Bottles, and
roofed with Leathern Budgets; I do not remember I saw any Artificer in all the
Town, but Leathern Jack-makers, and Tailors for Bottle-Cases. So that now I saw
where the Eat-All-Mains had utterance for their Hides.

The Men of this Town and Country, use no pure Wine, but certain Distilled
Waters, mixed with the strongest Grape that they can get, which are so forcibly
hot, that the brittle Glass cannot hold them; and therefore they are driven to
fortify their Bottles with Leathern Dublets, Rivetted together with Pitch and
Rozin.

The Citizens are fiery of Face, and choleric of Conditions, and of a
staggering manner of Pace in their Going; but that which is most terrible of
all, they drink and they belch nothing but Flames: one of them is able to drink
as much Fire, as one of us can Water. A Man would verily imagine when he saw
them, that they were so many Fire-Drakes, Or, St. George's Dragons: I was in
danger before of drowning in Water, but now I feared nothing but stifling with
Fire.

There I left my Companion to his Orisons; I loved him well, but my self
better, and the next morning got me out of this Vulcans Shop, this Ciclops
Forge; and being upon my way, began to consult whith my self, if it were not
convenient to Travel toward Brewmaulta, to observe the manners, and fashions
of the Hopsackoctuns. But considering as my Pilgrim had told me, it was the
basest part of the Land, and (but that it is more Beast-like) differs in
nothing from the other parts of Drink-All-Main. And while I was thus plodding
on, with many Cogitations in my mind what to do, to my great surprise rushes
forth an Ambush of armed Shee-Landesses, besieged me, took me, bound me, and
carried me Prisoner (the more unfortunate man I) a long and toylsome Journey,
even to the chief City of the Land called Gossip-Pingoa.

THE Second Part.
The Description of Woman-Decoia: Or, Shee-Landt, of the Situation and Parts
thereof.
THE New Discovered Woman-Decoia: Or, Shee-Landt, lies in that part of the
Southern Continent, which our Geographers of Europ called Psytaccorum-Regio,
the Land of Parrots; the North side is bounded upon Lecheritania, the South
upon Thrivingois, the East upon two of the Foolianas, the Fickle, and the Fat:
The Soil thereof is very Fruitful, but badly Husbanded. It is divided into many
Provinces, both large and rich, yet all of several Conditions, Habits and
Languages. The Principal of them are these, Tatlington, Soldonia, Blubberick,
Giglot-Tangier high and low, Cockatrixia, Sluts-Burrow, Shrows-Burgh, and
Blackswans-Mark, otherwise called Modestiana; many of these Provinces did I
pass through, though against my will; but to speak Truth, Tatlington is the
best Country of them all, and has many fair Cities in it, as Pratlingnople,
Tales-borne and Lips-wagg; through the last of which runs a great River
called Slaver, which sometimes will overflow the Banks, and drown all the lower
part of the Country, as far as Chin-dale; but the Inhabitants have lately
devised strong rampires of Bones, and bent Leather, to keep it from breaking
out.

Of all the Cities of Tatlington, or of all Woman-Decoia, Gossip-ingoa is the
Principal, thither was I brought Prisoner: Therefore take first an Account of
their dealing with me, and then I Will proceed to Describe the conditions of these
New Nations.

How Quevedo was used by the Gossip-Ingoesses.
BEing brought to this City, and so to the Court, a Bell was caused to be
tolled, and presently all the Inhabitants came flocking together, whose
diligent eyes began to survey me narrowly, who stood bound fast enough for
attempting Resistance, or offering to make any escape.

At length in the midst of the Multitude, I could hear one baul out for
silence, this by her Garb and port, I supposed to be their Captainess, who by
many signs and much a do, had somewhat abated the claimer; so that with an
elevated voice, I could hear her adress her Speech to the rest after this
manner. Uncontrollable and Undaunted Gossip-Ingoesses, Be it known unto you,
that we took this Fellow, in the Confines of that damned Country of
Letcheritania, who are a People you well know that have offered us the greatest
of injuries: I therefore hold it fit in taking Revenge of them to begin with
this Prisoner, and if my advice may Gain your Approbation, let him be condemned
to run the Gantlet To morrow stark naked, through our Regiment of Auxilaries.

She having made an end of my severe Sentence, (with much ado for the noise to
be heard) I got leave to speak for my self, declaring my Nation to be Old
England; (had I said Spain, I had been ruined to all intents and purposes.) The
cause of my wandering to make some new Discoveries, of this unknown part of the
Earth, that I was no Letcheritanian, nor had no acquaintance with any of them:
Telling her Ladyship that it would derogate much from her Nature and Clemency,
and from the Honor of her Just Government, to condemn an innocent Pilgrim.

Well, these good words I can tell you wrought so pretty well, that the poor
Young Wenches began most of them to weep; but the Old Countesses were not so
soon Mollified; but to the Louse house I must go, till my Country, and cause of
Travel was more clearly made manifest before the Grand-Shee-Councel, into whose
presence I was brought with a Guard next Morning.

Where, if it had not been for my feigned Countries Name, the only Paradise for
Women, which pleaded on my side, I had received Sentance immediately.

Which the Speaker of the Grand Counsel called there the Pratris, signified to
me in these Words, Sir, It is the Pleasure of this Honorable Counsel, Both to
remit your Punnishment, and give you Liberty, because they have heard that your
Country is Famous for the Freedom of Females.

So I was there immediately quitted by Proclamation, but not without an Oath;
for I was brought to Janus Altar, and laying my hand on the same, swore
solemnly to observe all these Conditions following.

I. That I should never go about to Injure this Noble Sex, by Word nor Deed.

II. That I should never Interrupt a Woman in her Talk.

III. That I should commit the whole Rule of the House to my Wife.

IV. That I should never betray any Woman's Secrets.

V. That I should never deny my Wife any Woman's Ornaments.

VI. That I should continually (no matter whether right or wrong) declare the
praise of Women, for Beauty, Wit, and Eloquence, and defend it against all men.

Now therefore, you see my Tongue is tied by Oath, not to tell all the
Cunundrums that I saw amongst these mad Wenches; somewhat I may say, but no
harm; and I Will venture to stretch as far as I can without Violating my Oath.

Their Forms of Government, and Elections of Persons of State.
THeir State is popular, each one seeking Superiority; and avoiding Obedience,
they have no absolute Laws, but do every thing by the number of their Voices:
But the manner of giving up their Votes amazed me, being unacquainted
therewith; for they set up a cry altogether, none gives ear, but every one
yells as if she were stark staring mad.

They hold a continual Parliament about their more Weighty Affairs of State;
now this continuance is necessary, because of their Laws uncertainty; for the
Decrees of this Day may be all disanulled to morrow, but the same day they
cannot, lest their Lawgivers should seem unconstant.

Every ones voice is a like in worth, the whole City through, but not every
ones Dignity; for they have a certain number of chosen Women, which they call
Gravesses; and these have great Authority and Honor in each particular City;
but they are not born to this Dignity, but Elected.

They had once a Custom to Elect those Gravesses by Vote from amongst
themselves, but every one giving her Vote for her self only, it bred a strange
confusion; which made them Abolish that kind of Election, and make a Decree,
that only such should have a Right to Vote, as would profess themselves neither
Young, Fair, nor Eloquent; and this brought all things to as bad a pass as the
other extreme; for now there was not one that would Vote for any body at all;
so that the State was like to want Governesses.

At length they all agreed (and that was very strange) to pass over those
places of Electresses, unto Twelve of the most aged Matrons of Old Mumping-ton,
a ruinous Village hard by, giving them the glorious Titles of Electres
Gravessial, to set them the more agog to perform their charges.

Insted of Scepters and Swords, the Gravesses have Fans and Glasses born before
them, great square Crystal Glasses. And always as they pass along through
the Streets, they prink up their Atires, and Ornaments, and set their Bulls,
and curled Towrs, in even and decent Order.

The Original of the Shee-Landesses.
THere are few of these Shee-Landesses born in this Nation, and those are such
as are transported hither in their Mothers bellies; but the Principal
Inhabitants, are either such as will needs wear their Husbands Breeches, or
such as the Husbands Jealousy Banishes; these run Flocking from all parts
hither.

Now all such as are their Husbands Masters, and are thereupon banished for
their unjust claim to Sovereignty, these are assigned to inhabit the frontiers
of Shee-Landt, especially in the Countries of Shrows-burgh, and there they are
all put in Garrisons.

But as for those that are Voluntier Exiles, being generally of Meek Spirits,
they are seated in the heart of the Land, to become Votaresses to Peace and
Beauty.

Yet there is no fear that this weal Public should go to ruin for want of
Members; and I Will tell you why, because there are so many Volunteers comes to
this Camp, that the fear is rather want of room for new Inhabitants then
otherwise.

I am in great fear, lest my Country Women should have any understanding of
this State; for if once they scent it, or get the least smatch of this Land of
uncontrouled Liberty, we may e'ne go hang our selves; for the Devil a Female
will stay amongst us, nay (which will be dreadful) we shall not have one
big-Belly left, to lay the Foundation of a future Age by. Therefore let me
entreat you Sir, as you love the preservation of our Linneage, and the General
Multiplication of Mankind, be silent in this so important a matter, and keep
this Secret, as it highly concerns us undiscovered from our giddy Females,
unless we can find a better means of Generation.

Of Giglot-Tangier.
AT Gossip-Ingoa, I Obtained, besides my Freedom, the Cities Letters for my
pasport; and from thence took my way toward Giglot-Tangier, a Country lying
upon the South part of Woman-Decoia toward Letcheritania: the Land of it self
in these parts, is the Worlds Paradise. It is not many Leagues from Loves-Den,
which is the first Town in this Road; here I entered into an Air as delicately
scented, as if all the Perfumers in England had lately played their prizes here
for Sovereignty.

The whole Country round about is crowded with Apothecaries and Pomandrificoes.

The Women of this Wapentake, are generally Tall, and Excellent^y adorned with
Millinery and Rich Laces; only they practice the Art of Cheek-oyling too much,
thereby to help the defects of Nature, by the Effects of Art; they wear nothing
on their Faces, nor on their Breasts; for their Habit it is fair in show, light
in weight, and so easy to mount with the smallest puff of Air; some of them
have their Naked parts crusted over with gross painting, but this is most
commonly used by the Commoners of Merritrixton, who are now no entire Nation,
but scattered (as are the Jews in Europe) through all the Provinces of
Shee-Landt.

The Women of Shameless (for so they call the Shire-Town of Giglot-Tangier)
have their Houses (Except four Pillars that supports the Roof) built all with
Muscovy Glass as transparent as Air.

It is lost labor to seek any of them at home, unless you make your Inquest
immediately upon their dressing-time, or somewhat before, but lay your Plot to
seek them at a Play house, or in a Tavern; and it stands upon a good
Foundation, for there you may be sure to find them in droves either Laughing,
Singing or Danceing, or very diligently employed in some such Exercise all the
Afternoon.

There is one Street in this Town where are more Danceing Schools, then there
are Colleges, both in Oxford and Cambridg, and produces more Practitioners and
Proficients; and since the Inhabitants are so merrily conceited, Take the
account in four or five Brace of Gingles.

High-Clif-Rad-Way, for so the Street is Named,
For frisking Female Academies Famed.
The Language of the Feet is there Instructed,
And though some Brisk Ones daily are deducted.
From those well-Peopl'd Schools, whose constant Trade is,
To teach true Vaulting to the Youthful Ladies.
There still remains such Crowds of Beauteous Ones,
Would stock a Court as Large as Solomon's.
But leaving to their Studies my Brisk Lasses,
To Shrows-Burgh I, from Giglot-Tangier passes.
But leaving the Road on my Right hand, Noot a boon Sax Mayls an a waa Bit,
(according to the pronounciation of the Natives) wide of this Town of
Shameless, lies Sluts Burrow: Or, as the Neighbor Countries call it
Scotts-Brough: To this Town (though it was out of my way) I Traveled, because
I would pass by no curiosities; and here I was fitted.

The Air I think might be wholesome, but for the stinking Inhabitants.

Their Beasts hereabouts (as there are a great many) are generally small, women
only excepted.

They have great store of Fowl also, as foul Houses, foul Woollen, foul Linen,
foul Pots, foul Dishes, and foul Trenchers.

I saw but little Grass but what was in their Pottage: The word Hay is heathen
Greek to them, neither Man nor Beast knows what it means.

I made but small stay here, for I thought it not safe, unless a man could have
(for every Morsel which he eats) an Antidote, therefore by the same way I came,
I returned toward Shrows-Burg, and glad was I, that I was got into the fresh
Air again.

Of Shrews-Burg.
IN my return from the Confines Giglot-Tangier, being now upon the most Western
Angle of the same, I happened (just as my Staff fell) into the Country of
Shrews-Burg, the only Garrison of this Feminine Government, and the only
defense it has against Foreign Invasions.

Here I was finely gulled, for seeing Persons in the Habits of men, this is
good thought I, I am now gotten out of Woman-Decoia; but when all came to all,
I found my self palpably cousen'd with a borrowed shape; for in this Country
Women wear Breeches and long. Perriwigs, and Men go with their Chins naked in
Jesticoes and Petticoats, Spinning and Carding Wool, whilst their Wives
discharge the main Affairs of State: the Barbarians in Aristotle's time never
used their Women half so Imperiously as the men are used here; the poor Snakes
dare not so much as wipe their Mouths unless their Wives bid them, nor so much
as visit the places of ease, or speak a word with their best Friend, but they
must first come to their Wives with a Petition of Quaeso Magristra, Good
Mistress give me leave to go, etc. I Observed this Custom strictly required, and
the neglect more narrowly peeped into one certain day when I was there, than at
other times.

The reason was, because some of the better-spirited Husbands disdaining to be
chained in this unmanly Subjection by their Tyrannizing Wives, had laid a Plot
among themselves, to rise unanimously on an appointed Night in open Arms, and
on a sudden, against this Female Government, thereby resolving to shake off
this Infamous and Disgraceful Servitude. This Plot had took very good Effect,
had not Misfortune crossed their good Intentions, and Valiant Resolutions.

Which was by the Means of one Cowardly, low-Spirited, narrow-Soul'd,
Henhearted Fellow of their confideracy, who being threatened by his Wife to be
soundly cudgeled, for some other private Fault; to procure himself a pardon,
went and Revealed the whole Platform of the Conspiracy, just the Evening
before the Night appointed for the performance.

The Women sit at meat, and the Men attend; the Women sleep, and the Men watch;
the Women scold and fight, while the Men are fain to ward with their ears, head
and shoulders.

What an uncomly sight was it to see a Distaff and Spindle in a Man's hand, and
a Sword and Buckler in a Woman's? yet I concealed my dislike as well as I could,
desiring only to see without suffering.

If any Woman use her Husband somewhat gentlier than Ordinary, (as some of them
are tenderhearted) she is presently informed against, and cited to appear
before the High Court of Parliament of Shrews-Burg, and there Indicted of High
Treason against the State; her next Neighbors give Evidence against her with
such a noise and fury, that it is strange to see their Impatience.

If she be but convicted by the smallest circumstance that is, she is
immediately condemned to this Punishment; first, she must change attires with
her Husband, and then shave off all her hair; and so being led by a strong
Guard of armed Shrews-Burgisses, through the Marketplace to the High-Cross,
where she must stand one whole day upon the Pillory, as an Object to all the
fleering Scoffs, and Derisions of those Crowds of Spectatresses; nor shall the
man escape scot-free, for being so audatious to accept of the favors offered
by his Wife, without a modest refusal. And when the Woman comes home, she must
not put off those Garments, or reassume her others, until she brings a Cudgel
into the Court all died with the fresh blood of her Husbands broken pate.

He that out-liveth his Wife, must either marry his Maid, and be sworn to her
service, as he was to his former Wives, or else he must become Slave to the
next Neighbors Wife, wherein he has this favor allowed, to chose whether to
his right hand Neighbors, or to his left hand Neighbors; and this Law they
call An Act of Grace.

For no man in this City may be the Ruler of his own House.

In this Country, when the Wife goes forth either to Wars, Consultations, or
for pleasure, she leaves her Keys, and therewith her whole Authority and
Government to her Maid, or her Daughter; either of which, if the Husband but
once mutter against, or grumble to obey, nay, should he but pout, or go
unwillingly about the performance of his duty, his shoulders are sure to suffer
severely for it at his Wives return, unless he can either beg or bribe the
Silence of the Deputy-Governesses.

They never Lie with their Husbands, but when an Appetite (for you know what
makes them sharp set) for that they hold would procure too much Familiarity:
Notwithstanding, If the Husband arise not out of his Cabin in the entry, or
under the Stairs, before the Wife be warm in her Bed, and coming up stairs
barefoot, knock three times very gently at her Chamber door, and offer her his
Service in a Low voice, and wait her Answer, he is sure to be Dissiplin'd with
a Bastinado next Morning.

The Women of this Country observe a Fashion directly contrary to Ours, for
they clip their hair, and let their Nails grow long.

There are also certain amongst them that are Professors of the Noble Science
of Offense, and keep Free-Schools, wherein the rest are taught all the Wards
Offencive and Defencive, both of Heels, Nails and Teeth; as also the most Exact
and modish Methods of Clawing off the Skin of Men's Faces, Picking out of Eyes,
Biting of Arms, wringing of Ears, and tearing of Hair. These Lectures they are
instructed in both by Precept and Practice.

I met many of my own Country men (was it not very strange in a Country so
remote) whom I knew by sight as well as a Beggar knows his dish: These
Acquaintance (like true Friends) gave me Cautions from their own Experiences,
of what Inconveniences might attend me in staying here Long, or being
overcurious to inspect their Customs and Manners; also giving me such
directions, which with heed I Observed: And following their Advices, found the
way (at length, though with much difficulty,) through the dirty Fens of
Blubberick, over the Mushrum-Palian Mountains, and so arrived upon the Confines
of Fooliana.

But you may ask why I traveled not into that part where the Modestianians;
otherwise called the Women of Black-Swan-Mark had their Habitations.

Why truly, I hold my self Unfortunate in that one thing alone, That I could
not come to see their State as well as the rest; seeing that my mind presaged
unto me, that it excels all the forenamed.

There is such a People, my friend, I tell thee plainly, but the Region wherein
they Inhabit, I could never come to discover; only their name, I had from the
Ancient Chronicles of the others States, and that as I said, is Black-Swan-Mark.

Indeed there are some of them that live as Hermitisses, in the Craggy-Desarts
of some other parts of Shee-Land^; but their Habitations are generally unknown,
and almost Inaccessible; he that will take the pains to search those vast
deserts, may by Miracle meet with some of those holy Votaresses.

I happened, I think, unless it was a Dream, to see one or two of them, whose
variety of Virtues, Beauties and Behaviors, have left me in an ecstasy until
this very hour, which made me so eager in the pursuit of so pleasing a
Discovery, that I almost ransact every corner of that prodigious Continent: But
notwithstanding all my diligence, could set eye of no more. Therefore
whosoever has a mind to Embark in so desperate a Voyage; Let him begin to
Travel in his Youth, lest gray hairs overtake him ere he attains his intended
Discovery: As for my part I Will give it over.

THE Third Part.
Of the Situation of Fooliana and Populousness thereof.
FOliana is the most vast and Ill-husbanded Region that ever mine eyes beheld;
and yet of all, the most populous; go but upon the Exchange of any Town of
Traffic in this whole Nation, and you would swear that the whole World came to
trade thither.

Historyographers in their Account of the number of People that are imagined to
be in all Europe, say, that Italy is supposed to contain 9000000 more or less;
Spain a number somewhat less; England 6000000. The Low Countries near as many;
Germany 15000000. France as many; Sicilia 150000. They account also that the
Inhabitants of China amount to 70000000. That Country paralleled with the whole
Country of Fooliana, is rather an uninhabitable desert, than a Peopled Nation.

It Lies just under the Antartick pole, as the Land of Pigmies is under the
Artick; and hence I gather, that the Extremity of cold in both these opposed
Regions, is the cause both of the Pigmies smalness, and the Foolianders
blockishness. Nature graceing her self in Counterpoising the defect of the body
in one place, with as great defect of wit in another.

Fooliana on the South, butteth upon Belly-All-Main; On the East, upon
Woman-Decoia; and the farthest Corner of Theving-genia: And on the West, upon
the Mushrom-Palian Mountains.

The Parts of Fooliana and the Peoples Conditions in General.
FOoliana the Great, is divided into four lesser, as namely Fooliana the Fickle
just under the Pole, Fooliana the Fat toward the South, Fooliana the fond
Easternly, and Fooliana the Devout toward the West.

The Inhabitants of all these are generally tall, their hair of a pale Flaxen;
their heads like Sugar-loaves, their Lips big like Moors, and their Ears thick
and broad, but their Conditions keep not all one form; some things they have
general amongst them, and they are these.

What ever Stranger arrives amongst them, they presently entertain him with all
the pleasures that Town, House and Table can afford. If ye come to any of them
all with a Conge Spaniard-like; and either commend his good face, his new Coat,
his fine Hand, or his fair House; seasoning his Affections with admiring
applause: Your obsequiousness will purchase you any thing, his courtesy will
Imagine nothing to dear for you; for good words, and fair promises, is all the
Money that this Nation uses.

Yet they have Gold in abundance, which they barter away for painted Feathers,
Glass Beads, small Bells, and the Shells of Snails.

The Inhabitants are of a hard Constitution, going bare-breasted, and thin
attired in the depth of Winter, to have the more benefit of the Air; and wrap
themselves up in Rugg Gowns in the midst of Summer, to keep off the heat of the
Sun. They have some Phylosotterical professors among them, that will go almost
naked in the midst of Winter in contempt of the cold; and their reason is this:
That seeing all Creatures, except Man, can be content with hair and hide only,
Why should not man, that is Master of them all, break through all the
Battalions of Cold, being only armed in his Shirt of nature, his Skin? And I
promise you it is a very Sensible Argument.

You shall never take any of them solitary, for they continually talk and
contend in Argument with themselves; sometimes one word provoking him to tears,
and another immediately to laughter, the person being all this while single by
himself.

They have also certain Religious virtuosies, among them, who beg for scraps,
wandering through the verges of Fooliana; and where they find a Stone with any
Picture upon it, down they go upon all four with strange mimmical conges and
cringes. Tapers and noonday meet ordinarily at every Dinnertime among them,
they whip themselves cruelly. First, because no man but themselves will undergo
such severe Lashes. Secondly, Because Calves Blood is a pleasing Sacrifice in
the Nostrils of their god; their Crowns are shaved, lest the hair growing
between the Heaven and the brain, should be a Hindrance to the mind in her
Celestial Meditation.

The Women of this Nation are the Principal Governesses, which I was told grew
first upon this occasion. The Shrews-Burgisses had overcome the whole Region of
Fooliana; yet notwithstanding, by Reason of the Barrenness of the Soy I would
not possess it, but left the Natives in possession, upon condition they did
homage for it unto them; paying them an Ass laden with Gold yearly for
Tribute, which was paid a long time, until at length the Foolianders brake the
peace upon these Terms; though as for the Gold they did not value it; but were
contented to pay it, had it been twice as much, provided the Shrews-Burgisses
would come and fetch it themselves, when it was due.

But for them to force a loving Creature, and one of their Native Town-born
Country-Brood, with severe strokes and lashes, to bear this burden out of
their land against his own proper will and pleasure; This they look upon to be
very hard, and in their Judgment intolerable; whereupon they revolted, refusing
to perform those Articles and Ratifications on which their peace stood.

This Revolt incensed the Shrews-Burgisses, whereupon they repair to Arms, and
entering Fooliana, marching without resistance through the Country, even to the
Metropolitan City of Blocks-ford, otherwise called Dunce-Town; and entering the
same, Allarms were suddenly spread through the City, out comes all the
Blocks-fordians crowding themselves in heaps without Arms, or Order. The Foe
was Drawn up with Judgment, and Marshalled in good order, who valiantly giving
the onset, down falls a Citizen or two, which the rest beholding, fell
prostrate upon their knees with Submission, the Conquerors weapons were held,
so that there was a sudden Cessation of Arms.

By and by one of the most Eminent and gravest Foolianders made a Speech after
this Manner.

Right Valiant and Unconquerable Shrews-Burgisses,
HOW could You be so cruel, for one poor Ass, to destroy so many propper Men,
and pretty Scholars; for as much as one living Ass might have been more
serviceable to Your State, Than a Thousand, nay; than five and forty men being
as dead as so many door-Nails: Now therefore, take every one an Ass, and his
Burden of Gold, for we had rather live without them, then die for them: Asses
are not so scarce in this Country of ours, Therefore we entreat You, put up
Your shineing things, and spare the Lives of many Weaponless Men. I know, and
to your Honor be it spoken, that your Valor scorns to try the utmost against
Men without weapons. Therefore we submitting, beseech You to spare us, and free
us from our present fears.

Well, the Conqueresses are moved by this pathetical Oration, and granted their
pardons, upon condition that the Women of Fooliana, should henceforth in all
Domestic Employments have pre-eminence of Men: To which the Vanquished gave
their humble consents, and the Army drew off, marching back (with the Spoils in
a most incredible quantity) to their own Garrison of Shrews-Burgh, the most
formidable Garrison of all the Provinces of Woman-Decoia.

Of Fooliana the Fickle.
FOoliana the Fickle is the easternmost part of Fooliana the Great, and
Bordering upon Woman-Decoia or Shee-Landt; but you must not expect an exact
description thereof; yet how I found it, and how I left it, you shall know as
well as I; but if you chance to go thither your self, as many fine Worshipful
Gentlemen, and Men of large possessions have done within these few years, and
find not the State, as I have described it, blame not any defect in me, for
their Forms of Government are so daily altered; that it is easier to describe
the shape of Proteus, or the Color of a Camelion, than discover their form of
Discipline.

I durst venture a wager, that the Ancient French were the first Discoverers of
this Country; for there are some Monuments remaining, that that do signify as
much; as their names of Towns, their most Ancient Laws, and their chief Coyns.

Their Grounds never carry one certain form two years together; that which is
pasture this year, shall be arrable the next: That which was all high
Mountains this year, shall be carried away to fill up Dales the next: Nay,
they turn the very course of their Rivers.

They have many Magnificent Cities, but they change their Fashion almost every
other day.

The chief of these Cities, at my first coming, was called Fair-Felia; but ere
I went away, it was Ordered in Counsel, That it should thenceforth be called
Butter-Flieux; the whole frame of this City runs upon Wheels, and may be drawn
whether the Counsel pleases to Order; or every particular man's House where the
Owner sees good.

It is Recorded, that the whole City has altered its Situation a Hundred
times since the Foundation, and thirty times has quite lost its former shape;
when I came there, it was seated upon the River Water-less: But there was an
Order from the Counsel Board, that the next Winter it must be drawn up to the
top of Mount Want-Wood; and as I was told, the last place it was wheeled from,
was Barren-Down.

The Rivers are so Frozen with extreme Cold, that if any be weary of its old
place, it may pass the Waters to a new one almost every month.

These Cities often change their forms, for every House is separate from the
next: So that as soon as they find the least fault with the old Neighborhood,
away goes House, Household and all, seating themselves in another Street where
they find a vacancy be the removing of others.

The Cities Arms had lately been, in a field Argent, three Snails bearin their
Shells passant Gules: The Motto on a Scrowl Mea Mecum, I carry my own; But now
it is (as long as it continues so) A Field Vert, charged with a Butterfly with
Wings displayed Argent, Flowred Or, The Motto Vbi Libit, where I list.

Of the Peoples Conditions and Attire.
THe Inhabitants go all in painted Feathers, as some of the East and West
Indians do; for say they, seeing that these light things are sufficient to keep
the little Birds warm enough: Why should we desire more, being much better able
to bear out the Cold than these tender Creatures?

Now, when they would seem to have new Clothes, they change the places of their
Feathers; so that that which in the Morning they wore on their heads, comes
before night to wipe the dust from their Heels; and that which kept the knee
warm but now, by and by sits up half a yard higher.

They Marry Wives, and love them confoundedly for a while, till they take some
occasion of dislike in their Old Bedfellow: Or, chance to spy another fairer;
Then farwell Wife: And welcome with all my Heart Huband, says she to another;
for the Wife is commonly as willing to change, as the Husband; and often takes
the first occasion, especially if she dislike the Husbands Cockship.

They use a Stranger as kindly as if he were their own Brother; and the next
day will pass by him, and forget that ever they saw him.

They seldom or never proffer any thing, that they do not recall next breath;
nor do they ever promise, but they afterward forswear it; nor do they ever
perform any thing, which they do not afterward repent, and be sorry for; what
they sell you to day, if you dislike it, they will give you double the price
you paid for it to morrow.

They make their Laws new every Year once; for say they, It is not fit, seeing
Man's Life is Mutable, that the Rules of his Life should not be Mutable also;
besides second Cogitations being most Generally perfect, it is a Slavery to be
tied to a first Decree.

In this City, nigh the Asschange, stands Turncotes Tomb; upon which I read
this following Incription, in the Foolianick Tongue.

Stay, Sit, Walk, Read: Here Lies, Standing upright, Tomkin Turncote, who was
neither Forreigner nor Freeman; Slave nor Soldier, Physician nor Fencer, Cobbler
nor Courtier, Lawyer nor Usurer; But All. Who lived neither in City nor
Country, neither at Home nor Abroad, neither at Sea nor on Land; nor here nor
elsewhere: But every where. Who Dyed neither of Hungar nor Chirst, nor Poison
nor Pox, nor Hatchet nor Halter, neither by Casualty nor Disease, but of all
together. I P. Q. Being neither his Debtor nor Creditor, nor Heir nor Executor,
nor Kinsman nor Friend, nor Neighbor nor Stranger, but all. In his Memory have
erected this, neither Monument nor Comb, nor Sepulcher nor Grave; But all
these. Wishing neither Evil nor Good, neither to Thee nor Me, nor Him, But All
unto All.

This City stands at present within few Miles of the City of Giggum-Bobba: So
famous for the Invention of Pendants, Knots, Fanns and false Curls for the
Females: Here also was found out that most Incomparable Fashion of Sholder
Tassells, by which any Ingenious Man with careful Observation, may come to know
his Right hand from his left, and therein readily answer the Queriest without
study.

As I Traveled along the Valley Capricious, I chanced to enter a Town that had
some shape of an University: The Name they told me was Gallipotilliter; here I
met with some Shadows of Philosophers, but no substance: It is lost labor to
look for any Lectors, Rectors, Books, or Schools of the Seven Sciences here;
every particular man being his own Teacher, and his own Auditor: Yet here are
two Colleges; one of the Scepticks, who deny that any trust is to be given to
the Sense; and they are herein so absolute, that they will not believe any
thing positive. Steal away one of their Purses, or his Gown, and he presently
falls in doubt, whether ever he was possessor of such a thing or no. Strike one
of them as hard as you can, he doubts whether you struck or not, or whether he
felt any stroke or not. Speak to him, or touch him, though he hears, feels and
sees, yet he dares not assure himself, that any one thing of this is true.

The other College, consists wholly of Gewgawists, who give themselves wholly
to the Invention of Novelties; in Sports, Games, Buildings, Garments and
Governments. He that can devise a new Game, or a New fashion, according to his
Invention, has a place of Dignity Assigned him by the Duke.

He that first Invented to blow bladders of Soap and Water out of a Galli-pot
with a Tobacco-pipe, is of as great Renown among them, as the Inventers of
Printing, Gun-founding, and the most Ingenious of Waterworks are amongst us of
Europe. These Gewgawists are in great esteem at Court, and among the meaner
sort too; for many of them will not so much as have a Button sewed to their
Coats, without first consulting their Approbations.

These Gewgawists are not only Scholars, but Originals, for they have devised a
new Language, wherein they keep the Mysteries of their knowledge only to
themselves: It is called the Supermonical Tongue, Parracelsus was provast of
the College, whose Judgment went a great way in the Invention of this strange
Language. But indeed, I am not sure whether this Tongue continues still amongst
them, or has by this time given place to some Language of the Later Edition.

Of Fooliana the Fond.
THis Part of Fooliana is the largest, and most Ancient of all the rest. The
Inhabitants of it affirm themselves the Original of all other Nations, as
Blocksford the Mother of all other Cities.

It Lies in the midst of the rest, as the Navel of this goodly Body; on the
East it has Fooliana the Fickle; on the West the Devout; and on the North the
Fatt. The Southern part of it is called Cocks-Combaia, of which the farthest
Sourthern canton is just under the Pole, where there is an Iron Rock, just like
the Rock of Loadstone that is under the North Pole, and this is the reason why
the Compass (after you are past the Equinoctial) declines toward the South.

This part of the Province of Cocks-Combaia, is peopled with sloathful
Inhabitants, but the Northern part is possessed by more Industrious and Active
Spirits.

Had I not beheld the strange beviour of these Southern Cocks-Combaians, I
could never have believed that Nature had bestowed so Divine a Gift as Reason,
upon such brutish Animals; for all of them go like Beasts upon all four, nor
do they know any other way of Traveling.

There is no house in all this part of the Country, because, neither the
Inhabitants can build any themselves, nor will suffer others to Build any; for
they dare not adventure under a Roof, lest it should fall upon their heads.

They are every year many of them starved to death, with hunger and cold, for
they can neither dress their meat, nor make themselves Apparel, or Bedding;
nor can they speak one word of Sense, There Is not a man of them knows his own
Father, nor his own Son, nor Wife; nor how to Return the same way he came, nor
can distinguish a Bear from a Sheep, or a Lion from a Catt; nay, there are some
of them, that cannot tell whether they should put their meat in at their
Mouths, Nostrils, or Ears. In short, Imagine you saw a real Ass in Humane shape,
and such a one is a true South-Country Cocks-Combaian.

Of Ass-Sex.
ASS-Sex a Northern part of Fooliana the Fond, is somewhat better furnished
with wit, and worthyer of a Travelers Observation; the People account
themselves wondeful wise, and profess the searching into Natures most Abstruce
Effects, never leaving till they have drawn one reason or other, from the very
bottom of Investigation.

They have but one eye a piece; not Born so, but the Parents at the Child's
Birth plucks out the other as being useless in nature; for say they, when one
Eye is shut, the other has a stronger faculty to discern.

Part of this Nation go all naked, to avoid the Labor of caseing and
uncaseing: Some of them have Houses built without Walls, that the fresh Air
may have free Access; some of them build Nests like Daws in the highest Trees,
partly because they might dwell nigher Heaven, and partly to exercise
themselves in Climbing.

Every particular man has his peculiar Opinion, and profession; ambition and
desire of Glory, draws some of them into strange and incredible Actions; you
shall have some going up and down the Streets on their Heads and Hands, others
flying about with Wings made of Wax and Feathers.

Some like your Italian Mountebanks, draw the People together, to behold the
effects of some rare Vnguento, or some strange Engine.

Others out of the basest Metals, by a Secret Art, can extract the purest
Gold; it is worth the laughing at, to see the Toylsome folly of these
Extractors: These Students for the Philosopher Stone; for look ye, while they
hope all goes well, it being brought to the Magnitude of a Brick-Bat, they are
gulled, and gulled and Treble gulled, and yet cannot find in their hearts to
give* it over, till all their Gold be converted to Dross, and all their Land by
fire turned to Air.

One of them of late, as I was informed, would needs repair to the Oracle, to
know the event of this so ponderous a business; the Oracle gave him this
answer, Travaillex, which is, take pains; home comes my Student with such an
Extacy of Joy, as if he had hold of his god by the Finger; and when all came to
all, it was the Devil by the great Toe. Well, to work he falls, with
Circulations, Sublimations, Conjunctions and Ferminations, till all his Brazen
headless labor ended in putrefaction, till Revenues and Reputation were both
dead and rotten; whereas indeed, the Oracle gave him better Council than he
could comprehend, Take Pains. That is,

A Mathook, and a Spade, will get thee Gold,
Sooner than Chemistry a Thousand Fold.
Of the Cities of Cockscom-baya and Ass-Sex, and of Blocks-ford the
Metropolitan.
THe first City I Accosted in this Country, was Hollow-Pate, a Town of Good
antiquity and well contrived, but affords no rarity; therefore I leave it, and
pass on to Bauble-dock, a Corporation Worthily Famous, for the Wisdom of their
Aldermen: These men a little before my arrival, held a Court about
Determination of a very doubtful matter; which was thus.

The Sky was very Cloudy, and a terrible storm of Rain or hail was generally
feared. The Mayor immediately calls a Bench, who were to Consult how to dispel
the suspected Storm.

The First Man's advice, was to Ring all the Bells in the Town; another Advised
rather to make great Fires in every Street; thereby to dry up the Moisture of
those thick Clouds; at length, the Opinion of one of the gravest Aldermen was
demanded, who standing up, Confutes the Opinions of the two former Politicians,
adding his advice, which was, that the only quirk to avoid the impending
peremptory Storm, was to Issue forth Immediate Orders, commanding all the
Citizens to shroud themselves under the Roofs of their own Houses, and so let
it all fall to the ground, that so when those biggfac'd, bragging Clouds, found
no resistance, they would destroy themselves, and expend their fury before they
were aware; Was not this an ingenious Intrigue? Yes, believe me it was, and had
the Unanimous approbation of the whole Bench; Twittle Twattle, don't tell me,
Wisdom is not bound to Inhabit only Europe.

Blocks-ford The very eye of all Terrestial Cities is here seated, Civitas
Angelorum, are but Peas-Markets in comparison of this.

It stands partly on a plashy plain, and partly upon a little Mountain, both
lying Northward, a great distance from any Wood or River: The upper part of the
Town serves the lower with Snow-Water; the lower serving the upper with
Spring Water.

There are in the Circumference of the Walls, just Sixteen Gates, wherein (to
the Founders Fame) it exceeds all the Cities of the World by four; the
Geometrical form is neither Circuler nor Oval, but like the portraiture of a
man's Body; he that Surveys this Town, will Imagine that he beholds Prometheus,
as he lies bound upon Mount Adazer: Or, the Lineaments of some mighty Colossus.

The Market place is on the Hills top, for that being the Head of the City,
Administers life and Nourishment to the expanded Body.

On this Mountains top, the Magnificoes and Seniors of the City have their
habitations, to the end, that as they are the Head and Eye of of the City; so
the Body should lie as a fitter Object to their prospect.

Down from this head descends a narrow Street, which resembles the Neck;
which is Inhabited only with Sergeants, Beadles, and Deputy Constables: From
the lower end of this Street, do two other extend themselves on either side,
resembling the Arms and Hands. These are peopled, though but sorrily, with
Handy-crafts Men, but with few or no Crafts-Masters.

The Bulk of this Fabric Lies in a Broader Street, and here you have all your
Inns, Alehouses, and Taverns, down to the Loins; the lower parts being
Inhabited by Scavingers, Jackes-Firmers, Broom-Men, Fish-Wives, and Card-match
Wenches, which I shall Let alone.

The Magnificoes build their Houses of a stately Form, and very lofty, to be
thereby the nearer to Heaven; and more elevated from this unrefined Dunghill of
Terrestial Conversation. Their Houses are curiously depicted within, with the
Names of their Ancestors, Guests, and intimate Acquaintance; Done with
Charcoal, or the Flame of a Tallow Candle.

The Grand-Dunsonions, for so the Burgomasters Title themselves, whilst I was
there, held a Parliament about matters of State in general; and in particular
about Securing, Brautifying, and Advancing the Public good of this City of
Blocksford, where every one (as is allowed) gave his Opinion, touching the
Commodious Advantages thereof; one Advises them to cause a Convenient Haven to
be cut through the Mountains, (though it was above five hundred Miles from the
Sea) that Ships may Trade to the City; produceing examples of other Cities,
whose Glory stood wholly upon the Riches of a Navigable Trade.

A Second rises, and to confute all the others Arguments, Discourses what a
dangerous thing it is to repose Confidence in such an inconstant element;
producing diverse Examples of Cities that lay buried in the devouring Womb of
the Seas.

Another rather advises, that Conduits may be Erected in the Valleys, that will
elevate, and defuse the Water in smaller streams, without fear of Delluges;
which may be conveyed in pipes from below to the Mountains top, which is easy
to be done; says he, for if you observe the Water, how it bubbles upwards,
thereby denoting, that it is willing to ascend, if it had but Pipes for
Conveyence.

Well, none of these passes the Approbation of the Bench, but then suddenly up
starts a Fourth, and he is for raising a high Mountain above the City, for
these subsequent uses.

First, because the whole World might not take notice of the Actions of the
Blocks-fordians; and more especially of the Grand-Dunsonions. Secondly, That
thereby the City would be better fortified. Thirdly, That they might be better
defended from Cold, by the warm Situation of the City, under so high a Mount;
and that this Mountain the Inhabitants of the Valley should dig below, and so
lay it together above the head of the City, and then a Bridge should be built
from one Mountain to the other; by which the City might be Accommodated with
necessaries.

This Speech ended, up steps another, and smiling, demands if it were possible
that a Valley should produce a Mountain: But said he, should we allow a
posibility, yet to build a Bridge were indiscretion; for, should a Traveller
stumble, or lose foot-hold; there were no way in the World to escape present
death, or which is worse, the breaking of an Arm or a Leg: No, but if my small
Experience in State Affairs, may Receive Approbation of this Grave Assembly of
Dunsonions, I would rather advise to an enterprise which may be easily
effected, and would advance the Honor and Dignity of this Metropolitan City,
which is this:

That every man according to his Ability, shall erect a Spire upon the top of
his House; and upon the uppermost point thereof shall advance a Cock, Vulgarly
called a Weathercock; either of Brass, or Silver, with a Comb of Gold, or
Goldsmiths Work. This Cock to be moveable, and to follow the express commands
of the Wind.

And in every Spire I would have Chimes, or at least a Clock, to strike hourly;
which being once completed, O! What Pathetick Spirit can express the
reduplicated delight which will redound from hence, both to the Eye and Ear!

To see such a glittering fulgur of Lofty Spires, and to hear such a sweet
Clamor of Harmonious Bells.

He had not quite closed his Mouth, before the whole Court opens in
Acclamations, and Approbations, of this Project, so gravely and Statesman like
propounded, and presently the Bench arose, Commanding the performance,
according to this so Learned Advice; so that, he that in his Travels shall
hereafter Arrive at this City, will find it in far more Glorious Estate then it
was my hap to behold. That Is certain, for I saw some of the Scaffolds raised
before I came from thence.

Of the Marquisate of Spendall-ezza.
NEre unto Blocks-ford, lies the Marquisate of Spendall-ezza, a Country not
long since very Rich, and of Antique and Honorable Memory; but now it is quite
gone down the Wind: I observed nothing worthy of note, except a Large Forest
called Acteons Dogg-Kennel, and an Eight square City called Hey-Dice; with
another little Corporation, by the Inhabitants named Hawks-Pearch.

The Inhabitants of all these are the only Spenders under the Moon; they study
nothing in the World but the Mystery of scattering; some delighting in Rich
Habits, some in Dogs, some in Hawks, some upon a pair of Ivory Cubes, or A
pack of Speckled Past-boards; and thus their patrimonies take Wing, and when
all is gone but Garments, Ene have at all, and farewell them too.

The Dice, or the Brokers, are their Ordinary Chapmen; well, what is a man but
his pleasure: But now whether this Marquisate belongs to Fooliana the Fond: Or,
the Fat? that I cannot resolve: But however, I am sure it is within the
Territories of Fooliana the Great.

Some Lawyers and Usurers have formerly inhabited about this Country, but in
this Latter Age they are all transported, and most of them dwell now about the
City of Pick-Pocket-an-gul, in the Province of Thevingenia, of which I shall
discourse by and by.

In this Continent joining to Spendall-ezza, is the Ancient port of
Cold-harbour, which is joining to Prodigalls Promentory, which is a Sanctuary
to Banckrupt Debtors. To this place Resorts all that are cast in Law, or such
as are Insufficient to satisfy their deluded Creditors.

Those in this Country that have any Sons, Assign them their patrimonys before
Nature allows them any Beards: And if in case they dye before this time, all
the Estate is left to their Wives; out of which she pays their debts by
Sequestration. But if they bury their Wives, they lavish more on their
Funerals, than would serve for a portion with the Foulest of their Daughters.

Of Clawback-Court.
BEtween this Marquisate and Fooliana the Fat, lies another Nation called
Clawback-Court, which is peopled with the strangest Monsters that ever man
beheld; every man has two faces, and speaks with two Tongues.

This Nation is Born to servitude, and voluntarily make themselves Slaves to
the Magnificoes of Fooliana the Fat, which Borders upon this Country? And
though they are so sottish, that they cannot of themselves enterprise any thing
worthy of commendation; yet they can immitate, and Counterfeit any Action they
see done before them. The World has not the like for exact resemblances; they
neither wear Attire, speak word, or do deed, but they have seen the like before.

When I was there, they halted all upon one Leg, and went Spiting and Spawling
from Morning till Night: The Reason was, as I since understood, that
Seignor-Tickle-Ear their Governor, had of late hurt his Foot, and withal was
troubled with an Old Pocky Cough.

There are by Report, some Gallants among them, pertaining to the Court, speak
to, or look but upon one of them, and you shall have him presently kiss his
hand, cringe in the Ham, and with a Laborious Congee, like an Echo,
Reverberate the last word you speak; and with an Applauding smile twist within
you, with the most fawning Terms immaginable, Mustring up a whole
Heralds-Office of Titles, and top-heavie Preambles. Then putting his lips
together, stand hovering for your next Syllable, to understand how his last was
approved: which if Current, though scarcely Sense, is presently Recorded in his
Tables as more than Humane Conceit, nay, as an adored Oracle; then standing
with his Eyes fixed on the Element, adores you with as warm a Zeal, as a
Drink-All-Main does Bacchus upon all four.

These increditable Courtiers are the Principal Gentry in these parts, or at
least their outward appearance presents them so: As for the rest, they are, or
look like Barbers, Sales-Men and Milleners.

They acknowledge no God, but the man whom they make choice to serve; and him
they observe with more Sacrifices and Adoration than an Idol, but it is from
the the Teeth Outward.

The first City in this Region is called, Praise-all: A sight-affecting
Structure; but so slightly Built, that there is no hope it should stand long.
It is much enriched by the Traffic of the River Fiction, and is often
damnified by the Inundations of the same. Nere this Town stands a Village
called Tongue-Walk, where the Inhabitants are continually talking; this Village
is Situate at the Foot of a Mountain, from whence it arises as far as
Tickle-ear, a Famous Burrow-Town, where stands the Mannor-House of their
Senior; who derives his Title from hence.

The Inhabitants employ themselves in continual Laughters.

On the other side of this Mount, lies a pleasant valley called Soothing-Dale;
and at the further end thereof, is a Marsh called Scoffstowfen, which reaches
down as far as Shamesteed; a Town of infamous note, whither they use to banish
all their Witches, Conjurers, Ass-trologers and Almanack-Makers.

Of Fooliana the Fat.
THis Region appears to exceed all the Southern Countries round about for
Wealth and Pleasure; and were it as it seems, I question whether the whole
Northern World, could find a Country to parallel it: But indeed, the People
generally feign to have what really they have not; and do fairly amplify that
which they possess.

There is a double ledg of Mountains extend some ninety German Miles in length,
and between them is a spacious Plain of the same length; and this is Fooliana
the Fat, through which the River of Ease, a very goodly Current, has its
course, with many Semi-circling Meanders.

Do but imagine what delicate Prospects, are from so many stately Cities, as
are ranked on the Mountains sides, over the fertile Plains, so Richly watered;
and stored with fat pastures, which are Environed with comely ranks of
flourishing Willows.

The neatness of these Cities excells their number; yet are they but of a
slight kind of building; and though their outward forms promise all decorum;
yet within you shall find very little good Order.

At the Mouth of the passage, through these Mountains, stands the Castle of
Braggadril, proudly Built, but beggarly Stated; And nigh unto it is
Backbiting-Burg: By this Town is a Rock of incredible altitude called
Breakneccliff; it is as broad at the top, as at the bottom, and bears the
form rather of a Tower built by man's hand, than any work of Nature. This Rock
is as famous for a place of Execution here, as ever the Tarpeian Cliff was in
Rome.

On the other side of this Famous Cliff stands the City of Bawds-Den. This City
has been oftener on fire than ever was Old Rome; partly through the Negligence
of the Citizens, and partly through the aptness to take fire; for they use in
their Buildings Brimstone instead of Lime, and Brandy instead of Water, which
serves them instead of Tarris or Mortar, being mixed together.

Adjoining to this, is Situate another little City called Puncks-nest Built
all of Flint; and a little further toward the Frontires of Idle-Burg, lie
those large Mountains, commonly called Holiday-Hills; where the people keep
continual Revels, and sit in Judgment upon such as offend by observing working
days.

Two fair Cities are seated on these Hills, Games-bury and Merry-Com-twang; and
on the East side of them the River Ease falls into the River Idle, making three
or four Islands, called by the Inhabitants the Dancing-Isles, Inhabited only by
Organists, Pipers and Fiddlers.

The Quality and Conditions of the People.
EVery Individual man in this Country professes himself a Gentleman Born. And
most of them can show Pedigrees for a thousand years before the World was
created; you shall have their Galleries drawn with their Lineal and Colateral
Descents, though the Neighbors are able to prove, their Grandfathers were
either Carters, Costermongers, or Cobblers.

Their best sort of Gentry content themselves with the poorest fare that ever
attended a fasting-day; yet some of them perhaps will make a feast once a year;
which for excess of Provisions, and Multitudes of Guest, will put a period to
the Inviters Revenues; who all the year after will defraud his barking stomach,
to accomodate the back with the best he can rake together; yet will they never
acknowledge or confess their defect of Belly-Timber, but the contrary; where
ever you meet them about dinner time, you may observe them picking their
Teeths, as if newly come from the destruction of a Regiment of Dishes.

No man that knows them will lend them a Groat upon their Credits: Therefore
they are obliged to to hire their Apparel at the Burrow Town of Brokeria, or
take it up at Bumaree of the Merchants of Tallymore.

They give themselves tedious long Names, and delight to have their Country and
alliance mentioned in their Titles; which being joined together, it is directly
impossible to pronounce in a breath. The Gentleman-Cook at the Ordinary where I
dined, was named Signior Hernando Gonzalo Ribadenira de Toledo; They wear their
Swords generally as long as their Titles; for I happened to be there when the
Youth were Training, or indeed more properly Trayling; as appears by their
Trayling of Swords at their heels, as we our Pikes to accommodate the Funerals
of a Field-Officer: But hold there, stand clear a little, I am resolved to have
one touch at this long Sword with my verse-Pen:

Walking the Fields to view the Martial Train,
With Drums and Colors Marching on the Plain.
That which I saw which most Delight affords,
Was Pigmy-Gyants, with Gygantick Swords.
Have you a Barbers Pole, or Sign-Post viewed,
Such was each Weapon, as to Longitude:
But was not altogether quite so Large,
Hung like the Rudder of a Western Barge?
The Pommel like the Helm, each by his Hand,
Steers his small Burdened Bark with, at Command.
The Guard or Hilt I fancied did appear,
Like nothing more than a deep Cullender.
I saw one drawn; and then it looked, me thought,
Like a long Spit run through a Porridg-Pot.
Which on a March Good Service may afford,
Steal but a Lamb and Spit it on the Sword;
And a good shift for Rost-meat, take my Word.
Ostridge Feathers are as dear with them, as Russia Furs with us; some of them
will hang Bells at their heels, that the noise may attract peoples eyes upon
their graceful carriage as they pass the Streets.

One thing I marvelled at among the rest, (as well I might); most of them,
instead of Meat, live upon the fume of a certain Herb, which they receive
through a long Engine made of white Clay into their Mouths; from whence it
issues like the fume of a Brewers Chimney; I know not certainly whether they
had this from the West Indians, or the West Indians from them: Yet some affirm,
that the Indians of the Torred Zone Invented the same to make themselves black
within, disliking to have their inner parts of one Color, and their outward of
another. Some of them wast their patrimonies upon this kind of Diet, Smoking
so long till all the Fat be in the Fire, and all the Fire out of the Kitchen.

Some of them especially in Bawds-Den, and Punks-nest, keep certain females as
long as their Estates will last; (certain did I say) well I was mistaken; for
when they have sweetened you out of most of your Superfluous Guinies: Their
Lodgings are removed, and it is very uncertain where, or when, either you or
their Landladies shall see them again. These had formerly the Titles of
Harlots: But since their Language has been more Civilized, they give them the
Alamode Name of Courtezans, which the Modern Translation Renders Miss: Besides
a Wife, these Supernumeraries are allowed, to such as can maintain them both by
Law, and the Ancient Custom of the Country.

Of the Paradise of Fooliana the Fat.
THere is not in all Fooliana, so Rare and Stupendous a Monument, as The
Paradise of Fooliana the Fat; A work worthy of admiration: You shall afar off,
behold a shining Mountain all of pure Gold, or it seems so, and that is as good;
framed in old time by Chemical Art. On the top of this Mountain stands a
Palace of Cristal, built by the Goddess Fortune, where she Inhabits, giving
freely all Abundance to her Credulous Worshipers.

Hither do People Flock from all the Nations of the World; but especially from
Fooliana the Devout: There are very few in the World but have seen this Mount,
and Ascended it.

Men may talk of our Lady of Loretto: Or, St. James of Compostella: They are
but Deserts in Comparison of this. Here the Pilgrims lie prostrate in the
Valley as thick as hailstones in the Road after a frosty Storm, but none must
approach the ascent of the Hill, till they behold a white Banner displayed,
which is a sign the Goddess is pleased they should ascend; then unanimously
with Acclamations they bellow, Madona Scoperta; and then run that run can,
crowding one another in the narrowness of the passage; happy is he that can get
first; each praying that it would be the Goddesses pleasure to grant his
desires.

One prays to attain his Love; Another, that Fortune would send him a Wife
that is no Shrew: A Third, for Honors; A Fourth, for Riches; here you shall
have a parcel of Young Heirs praying for the Deaths of Parents and Uncles; and
there a Crowd of Beardless Students, praying devoutly for the Funerals of the
Reverend, and Right Reverend.

Their was an Old Fat Blade Clothed with a Coat paley of Argent and Sable,
and on his head a Crown of very Antic Fashion, almost like a Dutch-Womans
Stove-Pot with the Bottom out; this kind of Crown the Inhabitants call a Timer.
This Old Fellow prayed heartily for the Death of the present Pope.

Another King-like Person sued for the next Monarchy that fell; but he was sent
away as cold as a Snow-Ball. Here stood a Flock of hard-favoured Wenches, most
of their suit was for Beauty; some for Sweet-Hearts: There a parcel of Old
Women with as many Oaken Trees in their heads, as Teeth; and these expected to
be set back to the age of Eighteen: You must note, there were abundance more
than I could take notice of.

Well, But how came they off? For that take one Example of a person that sought
for Honor: Comes one of the Flammins to him, blindfolds him, takes him by the
hand, and leads him through a hundred Turnings, to a place which he is to
believe is the Temple of the Goddess, not to be beheld with mortal eyes, and
therefore he was Muffled: Down he must upon all four, and kiss the pavement,
and so continue without moving, till the Goddess call him by his Name: Then let
him demand what he list; (If he effect her commands without delay or distrust)
be his request never so difficult, it shall be fulfilled. Well, he propounds
his petition, which was the highest pitch of earthly honors: the Goddess
assents very graciously, commanding him to receive a Holy portion; whereby his
Spirits should be better adapted for the ensuing felicity; the Flammin presents
him the Cup, which he freely drinks off, praising in his thoughts its delicious
taste; being ignorant that it is a portion prepared of Poppy, Opium and
Lettice; and such other procurers of Sleep; well, within an hour he is as fast,
that it is as easy to remove a Mountain as to awake him.

Then the Attendants lay him in a Rich Bed, and in a Chamber like a Kings, Clad
with Ivory, and Arched with Golden Pillars; all the Tables spread with Carpets:
The Arras of Champania, and the Tapestry of Alexandria, are but Sackcloath in
comparison to them.

About the Door stands the Atendants in Gold Chains, and all other
Courtier-like Accouterments, expecting when this Endimmion Junior will awake,
which is commonly three days after; who lifting up his head, beholds the Room
with amazement: And seeing this fair company of shining attendance, is wholly
transformed with wonder.

Whilst they approach in Order with a Ceremonious reverence, saluting the
awakened King, with the Titles of Majesty, (I protest this is brave): says
one, What Apparel will it please Your Majesty to wear to day; either your suit
of Tissue Embrodered with Rubies, or your Gold Vest with Carbuncle Buttons, or
your Pearl-powdered Campaign? Yes, yes, Tissues, Rubies, Pearls, Diamonds,
Carbuncles; hay day, why the man's an Endimmion indeed; and will not change states
with the Man in the Moon, for all his Cellar of Claret.

Well, Rich Garments are brought, every one Assisting to array this Mighty
Monarch, setting a Diadem upon his head; adorned with Pearls of Incredible
Magnitude, and Luster: All this goes well still.

Well thinks he to himself, get Dinner ready, (as 'twas time, having not eat in
three days); so thought, so done; Dinner is prepared and served up in State;
such rare Services; such brave Attendants; with such Harmonious Music.
Nineteen Muses cannot furnish a man with words sufficient to describe it.

Thus is the whole day spent, the fine King supposing all his own still: Well,
Night comes up with supper; and up comes Supper with more Rarities, and Richer
Attendants then waited at Dinner; and for Conclusion of the Feast, the Royal
King has the other Draught given him of the Holy Potion, which presently locks up
his senses fast enough; and then my poor twelve-hours King is stripped of his
Tissues and Rubies, and reinvested with his own Garments; carried out at a
Postern Gate, and laid in the Highway for passengers to gaze on; who when he
awakes, falls into as great amazement as before, and calling to mind how
glorious a state he was enthroned in yesterday; and now finding himself utterly
deprived of all; curses his own misfortune; not attributing the least
deficiency or unwillingness to the Infallable Goddess.

Of Fooliana the Devout.
UPon the Western part of the two Foolianas, the Fat, and the Fond, lies
Fooliana the Devout; a Region fertile enough in it self, but through the
Inhabitants negligence, altogether uncultured.

The Inhabitants are of Opinion, that a man cannot do God better service, than
in the utter neglect of himself.

There are several pretty Hamlets in this Province; as Fragment, Surnamed the
Moldy, Wonderfield; and a little way from them, lies Creep-ham-high-Cross,
and Cringing-Beck.

The Borders of this Nation are but deserts; and some of the Villages have but
few Inhabitants, as Lent-Stow, Pilgrims-Inn, and Scourge-Nock, are left almost
desolate, only once a year they are visited by some few Venetians.

The number of Monastries in this Country, exceeds the Number of their Towns;
there is not one Freeholder Inhabiting in all these parts, for the Cloisters
have Monopolized all the Land every Straws breadth, to make the better Cheer for
their gods.

Four sorts of Building is observed in this Country, Temples, Monastries,
Hospitals, and Hovels.

They are all of one Religion, but they know not what it is; for they profess
Ignorance, and neglect enquiry, following Tradition.

In their pace, they make continual Crosses; one thigh Thwarting the other at
every step; so likewise, they carry their Arms one Cross another: They have
goodly Temples, and yet they will down on their Marrowbones in the open Fields
(if they spy but an Antick-face upon a Stone, or an Old Logg) rattling their
Beads at least two and fifty times over.

There are more gods belonging to this Country than men, some of them
augmenting the number of their Deities with Adoration of Horses, Hoggs and
Hounds; every day giving life to a new Deity. There has been two hundred made
in one Temple upon one day.

These Foolianders never touch any thing, be it Water, Oil, Salt, Wax, or Iron,
before the Devil is driven out of every corner of it.

In this Province, is the rarest Miracle that ever Nature saw, or man heard of.
In the Hamlet of Wonder-field, there is not a Stone but can hear, see, weep,
laugh, move, cure Diseases, sweat Blood, and do more than ever was done by the
Semones, the Demons, or all the Black-Guard whatsoever.

The State Public of Fooliana the Devout.
THeir principal Governer, is a Compound of Emperor and Priest, or half Prince,
and half Bishop; part per pale, wearing a Crown upon a Miter: Or, a Miter in a
Crown.

There is always born before him, a Key and a Sword, the emblems of of riches
and Power. His Key signifies, that all the Foolianders Cabinets are at his
Command; his Sword denotes, that he may at his own pleasure take from others,
and defend his own.

All that comes into his presence, must kiss his Toe. He is not born, but
chosen, to this Dignity; yet not before he be very Old, lest the People should
be weary of him, before he be weary of his Life.

He seldom Rides but upon Men's Shoulders, to show that men in respect of him,
are but as Beasts in respect of Men.

He never demands a penny Tribute of any Subject, but what they give willingly;
he receives thankfully, and spends freely.

He makes no Laws, nor keeps any; nor issues any Decree, but once within two
Years it is out of use.

He uses his Servants with much Familiarity; and when he pleases, lifts them
up above the greatest Men in his Court.

I might have learned much more in this Court worthy of Observation; but to
tell you the Truth, I was weary on it, and did not care to tarry any longer then
needs must.

THE Fourth Part.
The Description of Theevingenia.
Its Situation.
THeevingenia is bounded on the West with the Streights of Magellanus, and on
the East with Fooliana the Devout, and part of Belly-All-Main. It is a Soil so
utterly void of fertillity, that not a Shepherd nor Husbandman can be found in
all the borders; yet is it not strange that this barren Country should so
abound in all necessaries; nay, and Superfluities also? There is no rarity, or
excellent thing of valuable worth in the World, but they will have it by hook,
or by Crook; and when they have got it, you may as soon get a fart from a Dead
man, as recover it again from their Clutches.

The Easternmost part is enriched by the Spoils of the two Foolianas; the Fat,
and the Devout. The Western by the Spaniards Cacaplates. These are the most
Notable Pirates of the Globe.

The whole Country is divided into two Seigniories, Robbers-Waldt, and
Liegerdemain. The first of which butts upon Fooliana, and an Angle of
Belly-All-Main: The latter lies more West.

Contrary to the other Thievingenians. The wandering Robbers-Walders keep
themselves in their own Bounds; but all of them are for the most part Barbarous
and Inhospitable.

The Conditions Of the Robbers-Walders.
RObbers-Waldt is divided from the two Foolianas by the Fenns, usually called
the Filching-Fenns; wherein there are Many Islands made by the turnings of the
Water; The whole Region is so Woody and Mountainous, that it seems rather a
Desert than a place Inhabited; and appears a place fitter for Rebellion, then
Habitation.

Their Language is very crabbed, and though I did not care to understand it; I
observed in it a Mixture of Welsh; which seems to have been taught them by some
Ancient Travelers of our Western Britains.

This Seigniority is Indifferenly well peopled, but under no Government; each
man holds himself born only for himself, and lives obeying and respecting
himself only; what he gets from another is forthwith his own, as good and
Lawful prize.

In Bodily shape they are like us, only all the Inlanders have Claws upon their
Hands instead of Nails; and this is not only Natural to all the
Robbers-Walders, but to the Liegerdemainists also.

Upon the Mountains of this Soil breeds a kind of People called the Bandity;
who usually beggs of Passengers, with a Fezee upon their Shoulders: they are
the Keepers of Booty Forest, a frith so called; which is of that breadth, that
the high Dutch Hercinian adding to it Englands Sherwood: They are both but a
days Journey for an Irish Louse, (Let her march never so fast) if compared to
this.

I Will justify, and be as good as my word; that if Hercinia kept ten thousand
Thieves, (as it is supposed it did, Booty Forest maintains a hundred thousand
Hercinia! Why it is a Blanket for a Cat, a mere Cockpit; nay, it is no bigger
then a Tobacco-Box, in comparison of Booty-Forrest.

You shall not find any man of State but keeps a Fort or Garrison: And in these
Fortresses they keep all they purchase; and that's no small prize. They are no
Shittle-cocks; what they have they hold.

When they march out upon their Expeditions; The poor Commonalty are sure to
untruss their Portmantles under the Branches, and lay their Noddles close to
the Root of some Ancient Oak, (Sic fuit ab Initio) quoth the Gentleman to the
Chandlers Son; So did your Fathers, and so must you, be you never so
topgallant. Some of these Villiacoes lie in wait to make prize of poor
Passengers; and when they catch them, they uncase them to the Skin, not leaving
them so much as a tatter, to serve for a Curtain to the Worlds propagater.

The Liegerdemainists of late made a Decree, that no Younger Brothers shall
have any share in the Fathers Land; and this Law has added a great multitude
of Volunteers to the Robbers Walders.

The Devout Foolianders you know are great Lovers of Crossess. Well, but they
cannot love them so much as these hate them; therefore if any of them hap to be
taken in Robbers-Waldt, farewell Fooliander, up they go as round as a Juglers
Box; and the chief reason is, because these Devout Foolianders do use to mock
the Robbers-Walders, by making Gibbets at them with their Fingers.

There is continual Dissension and Civil Wars among themselves, about injurious
Booties forced from one another, or about dividing the Spoils. And take my
word Sir, the whole World fares the better for it; for should they lay their
heads together against our world, we might e'n put up our Pipes, and cast our
Caps at the Moon, for any Estates we should hold long.

It is a great Commendation, and sign of towardness in their Children, to be
expert at Filching in their Early Years, which they are taught to practice from
their Infancyes; you shall have the little Theevelings while they suck at their
Mothers Breast, to pick pinns out of their Heads, and Pence out of their
Purses: But if they be taken in being either too slow-handed, or to boisterous,
up goes their Bumms without Bail. And as they grow in Years, they must Augment
their practice, by stealing Ducks, Geese, and so advanceing to Cattle: If
Trading be dead, and nothing of worth to be had, then they must keep their
hands in practice, by stealing a Clod from their Neighbors Ground, or a stake
from his Hedge. This is usual among the Borderers of Liegerdemain; between
which, and Robbers-Waldt lies a large Heath called Lyers-bury-Plain, of which
we will Discourse when we have passed the Marine parts of Robbers-Waldt.

The Pirates and Sea Borderors of Robbers-Waldt.
THese Pirates disperse themselves all along the Shores of Magellanus's Streat,
on the Banks Theevingenia, and among the Isles of the Filching Fenns.

Europe affords not any Seaman that knows his Bays, Creeks, Tides, Shelfs,
Rocks and Channels better then these men do in general; besides, they naturally
Swim as the Fishes themselves.

Their chief Haven is Jeer-All, a Town of no great strength and compass, but of
as hardy Pirates as the World affords; it is Situate in that Angle of
Robbers-Waldt, that lies just upon the head of the Filching-Fenns, over
against a part of Belly-All-Main.

The Shores hereabout are reported to be edged with Rocks of Loadstones, which
draws the Ships upon the Coasts from an incredible distance.

A little within the River Filching there is another Town called Lysal, which
takes Tribute of all Vessels that pass that way.

The Inhabitants lay out great Hooks baited with Load-stones, wherewith they
Angle for Ships as do for Trouts; and where it once seizes, it keeps its
hold fast. These are also good Swimmers, being as expert and perfect in the Art
as the Dolphins, and like Crocodiles, or English Otters, live as much in the
Water as on the Land; of these do our European Navigators stand in great fear.

Of Lyers-Bury-Plain, and of the City of Pick-Pocket-Angul; with the Nature of
the Liegerdemanians.
NOw I return to Lyers-Bury-Plain, which lies upon the verges of Robbers-Waldt
and Liegerdemain; And serves for a free Common to them both; there is a River
Runs through the midst of it called Memento, which divides the whole plain into
two parts; and on this River are diverse of the Liegerdemanian Towns and
Garrisons seated.

Ever since Spain obtained the Conquest of these Indians, that border upon this
Continent, the Liegerdemanians have tolerated the Jesuits, (those busybodies
that will needs scald their Chops in the whole Worlds Porridg) to pay their
visits here; and also to Inhabit this Land; which the Irruptions of the
Robbers-Walders had otherwise Depopulated.

Here are many Astrology-Schools, whose professors are more in favor with the
Leigerdemanians, than any other Artists whatsoever, except Poets and Lawyers.

Here in a little Town called Prediction, I set up School my self, and read the
Lecture of spying wonders in the Heavens urinal, as Methodically as any
Star-gazer of them all: I had my Ptolomy, Tycho, Guido Bonatus, my Bencorat, my
Zabel, my Messahalach, my Abbohali, and my Hali Aben Razehel all at my beck;
and by their Prescriptions I wrote an infallible Prognostication of these
present Times.

These Liegerdemanians are far more Sociable, or at least more circumspect and
secret in their intriegues than the Robbers-Walders; for what these do in
public, the Legerdemanians act privately, living under a Law and a Prince
also, whose Title is Triberio-De-Golden-Gripo; he keeps his State in a Delicate
City called Free-purloyn, Situate in the very heart of Lyers-Bury-Plain.

They never budge abroad in the day time, but keep within-doors, and contrive,
what they bring to Action in the Night: They hate the Sun, and love the Moon
with like extremes of Affection.

The Trees of this Soil are Naturally qualified like the Inhabitants: No Bird
can light upon them, but is presently taken as with Lime-\twigs.

The Chief Town of traffic in these parts is Pick-Pocket-Angle, wherein are
two Streets, Tongue-Street, and Pawns-Brook, which in my judgment, exceeds all
the Streets of any one City in the World, for length and stateliness of
Buildings. Tongue-Street is the general Rendezvous of all the Lawyers; and
Pawns-Brook of the Brokers, Usurers, Tailors and Scriveners.

It Is most certain, that no Nation under the Moon is stored with Lawyers as
this is, who if they want means of Contention, play the Seedsmen themselves;
sowing the Seeds of Animosity and Discord among their peaceable Neighbors.

Our Westminster, adding all the Inns of Court and Chancery to it, makes but a
mere St. Katherins-Hall, in comparison of the Inner Temple of this Town.

Their Numbers do daily increase; yet notwithstanding, it is the Opinion of the
wisest Politicians of this Land; that they cannot continue long; for when they
have eat up the whole Country, as they have almost done already; they must
needs decline for want of Clyents, unless by the want of business to employ
themselves, they should fall out, and go to Law one with another; and by that
means disperse abroad what they have Ravenously clawed together, among the
Comonalty again; and indeed, by this means, they may leave to their
posterities, a prospect of more business, and better employment, in succeeding
Times.

These Lawyers Footmen are clothed in Party-colored Liveries, Like the Knave
of Clubs, to signify that their Masters are ready to take Fees on either side.

The Usurers afford them a considerable part of their employment; but
principally the violent Current of the River Fraud; which running among the
Quirkney Isles, eats away one piece of Land here, and casts it up there;
and afterward washes it away from thence, and lays it in a third place;
changing its course now and then, and taking away one man's whole Estate, gives
it to another: And this is that which makes work for the Lawyers.

Nature has wrought a very strange work upon the Inhabitants of this Town;
their Skins do naturally attract Gold and Silver, with as powerful a strength
as the Loadstone draws Steel, and holds it as fast: If a piece of Gold touch
but their hands, it sticks so close, that it is impossible with all your
strength or force to unloose it from thence; a thing never seen elsewhere, and
therefore the worthyer of Record.

Pawns-Brook is peopled with all sorts of Artificers; yet they open no Shops,
but every one attends the Passenger at his own Door, with a What lack you
Gentlemen? And then if he gets a Chapman, he leads him in, and shows him his
Wares in private; one shall show you a chain Crusted over with thin Plates of
Gold; and swear, that India, nor Arabia did never afford purer Metal.

Another Cheats you with a counterfeit Musk Cod. A third with Pearls so
dexterously adulterated, both for Weight, Fashion, Clearness, Smoothness and
Bigness; that you cannot decern them from true ones; and there will he show you
the Shells wherein they grew. Here also you shall have your Lapidaries, with
Gems of all sorts, able to delude the most decerning Eye in the World: The
Cyprian Diamond, the Sicilian Agate, the Indian Berrill, the Persian
Eagle-Stone, the Affrican Chalcedon, the Sythian Smaradg, the German Corneil,
the Ethiopian Chrysolite, and the Lybian Garbuncle; here they are all, and many
more ready prepared by Art-Forgery.

Here are also Apothecaries in great abundance; and these do nothing but
Sophisticate Receipts with their quid pro quo, which would fill a Volume to
make a discovery of their Deceits.

One thing I am both Amazed and Grieved at, they are never taken in their
Falcifications, be they never so Palpable; but they have this Prevention, they
can change their Shapes, Voices, Trades, and Habits instantly, and so
Cunningly, that he goes about to wash a Guiney-Negar white, that seeks for the
man to day, that bubbled him yesterday.

There is a Famous School in the Suburbs, where Art- Spagirick is read to the
Youth of this City; and here they have a Book which they esteem as Holy as the
Turks their Alcaron; it is called the History of Mercury, wherein is related,
how he in his Infancy, stole Neptunes Trydent, Mars, his Sword, Phoebus his Bow
and Arrows, Vulcans-Tongs, and Venus's Girdle; and how ingeniously he cheated
Jove of his Thunder, being as then so young, that he must of necessity learn
the Theory of this Art in his Mothers Belly: This Book contains also, all
instructions partaining to the said Science, whereby the Student is thoroughly
furnished with all Expert and Methodical Rules, how to Pick Locks, how to draw
Latches, how to Tread without noise, how to Angle in a Locked Chest, with a
twine Thread, how to Nim the Cole and never touch the Purse, and how to forswear
all without Blushing; and a thousand such Secrets.

One of these Practitioners was ingeniously overreached by a Merchant Trading
to this City, (no Foolianian I assure you) from whose Pockets some Forty Royals
had disimbarked themselves at the public Exchange of this City: Well, our
Merchant resolves to Fish for the Angler and to put his resolution in practice,
caused his Pockets to be lined with Fish-hooks, fastened with the points
downwards, and coming upon Change next day, would often clap his hands on his
Pockets; this Bait was a sign of care in him, and of purchase to the busy Eyes
of the watchful diver, who observing when he was more busy and less careful,
slides his hand gently into the Trap, which the Gentleman all this while
observed, but took no seeming notice, till he found him sunk pretty deep; when
giving a sudden half turn, my nimble Artist was as fast moared, as a Ship with
two Anchors at head, who rather then view the face of Justice, disgorges the
Royals very willingly, and ( Receiving two or three kicks on the Arss very
thankfully) sneaks off.

There are in this Town more then a good many Innkeepers; these are Knaves
Rampant. A Traveller dares not trust his Purse under his Pillow, nor in an Iron
Trunk; but must as the Jews did when Besieged, swallow their Gold all the
night, and rake for it in his Close-stool next Morning, or it would be gone
every scruple.

The Villages are only inhabited by Millers, Tailors and Hostlers; or according
to the Ancient Orthography Oatstealers, unless by chance you may meet with here
and there a few straggling Gypsies.

Of the Province of Still-More: Or, Nunquam. Satis.
NOt far from Pick-Pocket-Angul, lies the Province of Still-More, Anciently
called Nunquam Satis.

It is in the Hands of a Monstrous sort of Humane Creatures, such as you see
depicted in the Emblems of Mondevill, with Heads like Hoggs.

They go always on their hands and Knees, lest they should miss any thing as
they pass along the Streets, as is worth the taking up; their Voice is a kind
of a grunting.

None are allowed to dwell amongst them but Old Folks, their Youth if they be
Valiant, they send into Booty-Forrest, or else to the Schools of
Pick-Pocket-Angul.

They do eat earth as the Woolf does when he is to fight; and some of them eat
nothing at all, but live upon the sight of Gold and Silver, and never sleep but
with their eyes open.

They serve a God, whom they call Full-Chest, with all Superstious Reverence;
and they never go to their Rests till they have seen him, nor do they eat but
in his presence.

In the heart of this Province is a vast and bottomless Lake, called the Gulf
of Usury; into which diverse pleasant and famous Rivers, pay the last offerings
of their Silver Streams; though no Current can possibly be observed to take its
head from this Lake; It being supposed to have some subterranean passage, which
they imagine breaks out at the foot of Executor Hill, in the Marquizate of
Spendaleza.

On the Banks of this dead Sea, are seated several Considerable Cities, whereof
Extortington is the most formidable for a Garrison; it is under the Government
of the Lord Covetuous Rack-rent.

The Citizens are unwilling to attempt any thing that is hazardous; yet when
once they are Engaged, will studdy a thousand Intriegues and Stratagems to
preserve their interests.

This City was lately invaded, by the Valiant Mendico, Son to Tatterdemallion
Duke of Ragland. The Reason of which Invasion was (as I am informed) That
whereas the Inhabitants of this Province, were Obliged by certain Articles, to
defend and protect the Tattered Offspring of the Duke of Ragland: They have of
late, not only withdrawn their assisting Auxiliaries, but likewise committed
many Outrages upon his Subjects, having lately Murdered one of his Ancient and
Dear Allies, called Hospitality, and sorely bruised another, called Charity,
which Cruelty was committed by Sir Lavish Lackwit, Son-in-Law to the Lord
Covetous Rackrent, by driving a Coach full of Ladies (with Six Horses) over
them.

The aforesaid Mendico, with a mighty Army of Raglanders, having a Confedracy
with, and Assistants of, two other Valiant Commanders, drew up his forces
against this City, and besieged it: These Assistants were Senior Gulletto,
Marquess of Bowsington, with his Regiment of Journeymen-Shoomakers; and
Count-Coucumber, with two Regiments, consisting of about 20000
Journeymen-Taylors, all Clothed, not as Adam with Figg-leaves, but what is
more serviceable, Cabbage; there came also as Volunteers, a Troop of Old
Serving-men, and another of Younger-Brothers.

During this Siege, many Sallies, and Skirmishes happened, the Besiegers for
the most part being the greatest Losers, especially at that Resolute and Fatal
Sally of Captain Tallymando, who with a Party of Foot, Consisting of
Marshals-men, made great havoc amongst them; so that what with the hardships
of a long Siege, and being infeebled with daily Losses, they were compelled to
quit their Stations, and leave the Citizens to their Ancient Liberties, whilst
the Recruitless Raglanders with their Weather-beaten Troops, drew off to their
Winter Quarters: and it is thought Poverty will hence-forward keep them in Peace.

Touching the other Cities of this Province, there is Swine-burrow, a filthy
stinking Town; then there is Gatherington, Hoardsterdam, and Lock-ad-a-lid, all
handsome Built things; but truly I could not come to View them (...) because
every particular Citizen of all these places, has a private Key to the Gates,
to Lock at their going out, and their coming in; so that by this means they
prevent the Access of all Strangers: Therefore expect no farther Account of
them, nor of any others, till farther discoveries are made, by a second Travel.

FINIS.

