BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERATE CATHOLIQVES OF IRELAND MET AT THE
CITY OF KILKENNY THE TENTH DAY OF IANVARY Co. Anno Domini 1646.

IT is ordered that the Oath of Associatio^ with the addition thereunto made by
this Assembly in manner as the same hereafter follows shall be de nouo taken,
and sworn by the members of this Assembly and all others of the Confederate
Catholics.

Ex. per Philippum Kearnie Genesis Com. Hiberniae Cler.

Printed at Kilkenny in the year, 1646.

I A. B. Do promise, swear, and protest, before God and his Saints and his
Angels that I will during my life bear true faith and allegiance to my
Souueraine lord Charles by the Grace of God King of great Britain, France, and
Ireland and to his heirs and lawful successors, and that I will to my power
during my life defend, uphold and maintain all his and their just
prerogatives, Estates, and rights, the power, and privileges of the Parliament
of this realm, the fundamental laws of Ireland, the free exercise of the
Roman Catholic faith and Religion throughout this land, and the lives, just
liberties, possessions, Estates and rights of all those that have taken or
shall (...) this oath and perform the contents thereof. And that I will obey
and ratify all the orders, and decrees made, and to be made by the Supreme
Council of the Confederat Catholics of this Kingdom concerning the said
public Cause, and that J will not seek or receive directly or indirectly any
pardon or protection for any Act don, or to be don touching this General
cause, with out the consent of the Mayor part of the said Council, And that I
will not directly or indirectly do any Act or Acts that shall prejudice the
said Cause but will to the hazard of my life and estate assist, prosecute, and
maintain the same. Moreover I do further swear, that I will not accept of,
of submit unto any peace made, or to be made, with the said Confederat
Chatholiques with out the consent and approbation of the General Assembly of
the said Confederat Catholics, and for the preservation and streingthning of
the Association, and Union of this Kingdom that upon any Peace or Accommodation
to be made or concluded with the said Confederat Catholics as before said I
will to the uttermost of my power insist upon and maintain the ensueing
propositions, until a peace as aforesaid be made, and the matters to be agreed
upon in the Articles of Peace be established and secured by Parliament. So
help me God and his holy Gospel.

THE PROPOSITIONS MENTIONED IN THE Foresaid Oath.
FIrst that the Roman Catholics of both Clergy and layty in there several
Capacities, have the free and public exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion and Function throughout the Kingdom in as full luster and splendour,
as it was in the Reign of King Henry the seventh, or any other Catholic
King, his predece^^^^s Kings of England, and Lords of Ireland ^ther in Ireland
or in England.

2. Secondly (...) the secular Clergy of Ireland videz. Prima^^ Archbisshops,
Bishops, Ordinaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries and
other Dignitaries, and all other Pastors of the secular Clergy, and their
respective successors shall have and enjoy all and all manner of
Jurisdictions, privileges and immunities in as full and ample manner as the
Roman Catholic secular Clergy had or inioyed the same within this Realm at
any time during the Reign of the late King Henry the seventh, sometimes King
of England and Lord of Ireland, any law, declaration of law statute, power,
or Authority what soever to the Contrary not withstanding.

3. Thirdly that all laws and statutes made since the twentieth year of King
Henry the Light whereby any restrainte penalty or other restriction
whatsoever, is, or may be laid upon any of the Roman Catholics either of the
Clergy or of the Layty for such their free exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion within this Kingdom and of their several functions, Jurisdictions,
and privileges may be repealed, renewed and declared void in the next
Parliament, by one or more Acts of Parliament, to be past therein.

4. That the Primats Arch Bishops, Bishops Ordinaries, Deanes, Deanes and
Chapters, Archdeacons, Chancelors Treasurers Chanters Prouosts Wardens of
Collegiat Churches Prebendaries and other Dignitaries, Parsons Vicars and other
Pastors of the Roman Catholic secular Clergy, and their respective
successors shall have, hold, and enjoy all the Churches, and Church livings in
as large and ample manner, as the late protestant Clergy respectively enjoyed
the same on the first day of October in the year of our Lord God 1641.
together with all the profits, emoluments, perquisits, liberties, and other
rights to their respective Seas and Churches belonging as well in all places
now in the possession of the Confederat Catholics as also in all other
places that shall be recovered by the said Confederat Catholics, from the
adverse party within this Kingdom, saving to the Roman Catholic Layty their
respective rights, according the laws of the Land.

Ex. per Philippum Kearnie Genesis Com. Hiberniae Cler.

BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERAT CATHOLICS OF IRELAND
WHereas the Confederat Roman Catholics of Ireland, have been forced to take
Arms for the necessary defense and preservation of their Religion, plotted,
and by many foul practices endeauored to be quite suppressed by the Puritan
faction, as also for the defense safeguard and maintenance of his Majesty's
regal power, just prerogatives, and rights invaded upon by the maligna^t
Parliamentary party of England, Ireland, and Scotland, and for the
preservation of the Relligion, lives, liberties possessions estates, and rights
of the said Confederat Catholics, have to that effect heretofore taken an
Oath of Association in declaration, and firm binding of a real and unanimous
union among them for the effects aforesaid. Now for as much as this general
Assembly upon some late distractions happened, have thought fit to take and
accordingly have taken (with an addition thereunto made by this house) the said
Oath of Association de Nouo It is there fore this day ordered that all and
every person, and persons of the Confederat Catholics with in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and all other person or persons that shall hereafter adheare unto
their party, as a Confederat, shall for the better assurance of their
adhearing fidellity and constancy to the public cause take de Nouo the said
Oath with the addition thereunto made by this general Assembly, and any person
or persons of the Comfederat Catholics aforesaid, of what degree, condition,
or quality, what soever failing or refusing to take the same to be deemed and
reputed a traitor and hereby is declared a traitor to God, his King, and
country, and as a person marked with that odious taynte to be proceeded
against, and dealt with all, and to the end noe man might pretend ignorance of
the Oath a foresaid, or want of tender of the same unto him. It is further
ordered that all Superiors of the secular Clergy shall cause all those under
their power, and within their respective districts, Diocesses, and
Jurisdictions to take the Oath aforesaid, in mannner following, videlicet that
every Parish Priest administer the same in his and their respective Churches,
or other public place, to be appointed by such parish priest throughout the
kingdom, and every person of rank and quallity within every such parish to
sign and subscribe his name adding thereto the place of his habitation in a
Roll of parchment to that Oath, which Roll the said Parish Priest is hereafter
to return signed likewise and sealed by him self to the Ordinary of the
diocese wherein the said Parish lies, who is to keep the same in his
Treasury, and to transmit and certify a true Copy thereof with in three
months next ensueing unto the office of the Clearke of the General Assembly
under his Episcopale seal, there to be kept, and the like course the Regulars
for those under the ir rule are to observe, And each General or other
Commander in chief appointed or to be appointed to conduct or lead any Army
or Armies under the power of the Confederat Catholics, and all and every
Collonell, Captain, or other officer, and his and their respective under
officers is to take the said Oath, which Oath the Chaplain Mayor of such Army
or Armies is as well unto them as unto all others the officers and Commanders of
such Army or Armies, where of he is Chaplain, and unto all the soldiers in
such army respectively to administer, retourning in manner as before expressed
rolls of the names of those that shall take the said, Oath, adding their names
the place of their habitation respectively as a foresaid, And it is further
ordered that all and every Magistrate and officer as well with in Cities and
Towns Corporat, as likewise all manner of officers of what name condition or
degree either in the Marshall or Civil List with in the Quarters of the
Co^federat Catholics shall upon the taking of any such imployement swear and
take the Oath of Association aforesaid other wise not to be admitted in any
such public trust or employment And all and every Magistrate or other officer
of what nature, name or condition what soever already in authority, or
entrusted from the Confederat Catholics in any employment either Civil or
Martial that shall fail or-refuse to take the Oath aforesaid to be imediatly
upon such refusal displaced, and put from Command, power, office, or
employment, among the said Confederat Catholics, and to be treated with and
proceeded against as an enemy in manner as before declared. And forasmuch as
grievous and daily complaints are made against the Commanders and officers of
the Army for their contempts and disobedience to the orders of such as are
placed in authority, or in the government of the Kingdom, to prevent the like
in the future, by the tie and obligation of obedience, by the aforesaid Oath
imposed. It is further ordered that noe manner of Commander of what degree
soever in any the Army, or Armies of the Kingdom, shall receive or be paid
either for any past arreares or future means, to accrue from the public,
unto him or them respectively, until such Commander or Commanders Officers or
officer do produce his and their certificat respectively of taking the Oath
aforesaid. And it is further ordered and declared that no person or persons of
what degree or quality so ever shall be admitted to sue, impleade or shall have
any other Judgment, sentence, or decree in any Court or Courts Judicature or
Iudicatures what soever, either spiritual, or temporal, with in the Quarters
of the Confederat Catholics before such person or persons first take the said
Oath of Association, and that they not taking or refusing to take the said Oath
of Association, shall be a sufficient plea in Bar, and shall abate the suite or
suites of any such person or persons whatsoever, And the Superiors and other
persons aforesaid of secular and regular Clergy entrusted to administer the
said Oath of Association, and to return rolls as before declared, are enjoined
as they Tender the Public good of Ireland and of the Catholic cause, duly
and effectually to pursue and observe the contents of this order, and least
here in they or any of them should prove negligent, those to be entrusted in
authority and with the government of the Kingdom by this Assembly are upon
such failer, by issuing of Commissions to such whom they shall think fit to
trust, or by some other means to prescribe a Course, whereby the said Oath of
Association shall be generally taken by all the Co^federat Catholics of
Ireland in manner as before expressed and declared, Given at Kilkeny the 8. of
March, 1646.

Ex. per Philippum Kearnie Genesis Com. Hiberniae Cler.


