THE TRUE CATHOLICS TENURE, OR A good Christians certainty which he ought to
have of his Religion, and may have of his salvation.

By EDWARD HYDE D. D. Sometimes Fellow of Trinity College in CAMBRIDGE, and
late Rector Resident of Brightwell in Berks.

(...), Naz.

EPHESIANS. 5. 1. Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. 1662.

To the Right Honorable, EDWARD Earl of Clarendon, Viscount Cornbury, Baron of
Hindon, Lord High Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of the Universitie of
OXFORD.
My Lord,
YOu will pardon the boldness of this Dedication, from one who is unknown to
your Lordship, when you have considered the consanguinitie, or near relation of
the Author of the ensuing work to your most Noble person.

If we add to this (a forcible tie or obligation of love) his Autonomy, his
bearing the same name with your Lordship, both as man and Christian, likewise
his assimilation or likeness to your Honor in the high accomplishments of
Nature and Grace; he being for his steadie loyalty to his King, his fidelity
to the Church, and stupendous science in all kind of learning, (...) (that I
may say of him, what S. Chrysostom says of another) a prodigy amongst men,
admired by the most, and beloved of all good Christians; weighing all these
particulars in the balance of my private thoughts, I from them drew this
conclusive persuasion, that if my deceased dear Friend were now living, and to
put the ensuing Treatise (the child of his brain) out to nurse, he would have
ventured upon your Lordships patronage; who may style this learned work your
own, and it justly own you for its parent, as being the copy of your soul, and
picture of your life: what is delineated, and set down in it by way of doctrine
or precept, your Lordship has drawn out in the lines of your life by practice;
for it contains a lively pourtraiture of a good Christian, and loyal Subject.

A Separatist may deceive himself by dividing these two, and flatter his
deluded soul with a persuasion, that though he bears not in his heart a
respectfull love to his Sovereign, he may scale heaven upon the ladder of a
bare title, or with the outward badge of an empty name, in that he is called
Christian, and challenges Christ as his with his daring tongue: Let such
(...), or (...) self-deceivers, peruse without partiality or prejudice the
following Treatise, and they will learn a better lesson; it will inform them of
this truth, that loyalty and Christianity like that Eros and Anteros in the
Fable, are so twisted and linked together, that as one cannot live or be
without the other, so, he that is false to his King cannot be true to Christ
our Savior, who in his word enjoins us to be good Subjects in obeying our
Kings just commands, whom God has set over us, as he requires of us to act the
parts of good Christians, which is to imitate him in humility and charity, in
sobriety and meekness, in piety and Patience, in love and obedience, in
brotherly kindness to all, even to those that are under us.

That this holy frame of spirit may be wrought in the hearts of all his
Majesty's Subjects, as it is in your Lordships, it is, and ever shall be the
hearty prayer of

Your Lordships most humble Servant R. Boreman.

To the Christian Reader.
GReat is the impiety, yet greater (if possible) is the inconstancy of this
our age; God justly delivering us over to inconstancy, because we have
delivered our selves over to impiety. The whole book of God tells us but of
one Ahab that sold himself to work wickedness; but our own sad experience, if
not our guilty Consciences, must needs tell us of many thousands that are now
riding Post to that market. [They chose new gods, then was war in the gates,
Judge. 5. 8.] expresses the least part of our present sin and future
punishment, for we are daily choosing new gods to increase our sin, and there
are daily new wars raging amongst us, nay within us to increase our punishment;
wars not only in our gates to waste our estates, but also in our hearts to
waste our Consciences: we have been a long time forsaking our God, and now we
are laboring to forsake our selves; we would not when we might, follow the
dictates of Religion; and now, we cannot if we would, follow the dictates of
Reason, or the directions of common sense; we were at first perverse, and would
not know Gods mind, we are now become stupid, and do not know our own; of this
fancy to day, of another to morrow, and as it was in Jobs messengers, The last
is the worst; or as it is in the outrageous billows of the tempestuous waves,
the first do toss and shake, but the last do drown and sink us: and all is from
fancy in stead of certainty in matters of Religion; I say from fancy, for the
humor that is now most predominant settles not deep enough to be called
persuasion, stays not long enough to be called a resolution. Good Lord! is this
to be Reformed Christians? not to be firm, not to be real Christians! for they
alone are the Real Christians (all others are merely fantastical) who sanctify
the Lord God in their hearts, and are ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them, with meekness and
fear, 1 S. Pet. 3. 15. There is not one word in all this text but drives at the
certainty of Religion;

1. It must be fixed in the heart, not slaunting in the head;

2. It must sanctify the Lord God, who as Lord changes not, and as God loves
not those who are given to change, especially for the worse.

3 It must put us in a readiness to give an answer to every man that shall ask
a reason of the hope that is in us; which cannot be effected without great
judgment and deliberation in the choice of our Religion, and greater constancy
and resolution in the practice of it; for we must not only answer every man
that shall ask us, but also answer by giving a reason of our hope, that is, we
must answer by convincing him that asks us, if he gainsay our hope, or at least
by confirming our selves against all his gainsayings: for in vain do we talk of
an hope of salvation that is in us, from the belief and practice of our
Religion, if our Religion be so unsettled as to be shaken by the storm of a
persecution, or so uncertain as to be blown away by the breath of an argument;
the hope of salvation which we have (or may have) from the true Religion, is a
hope so fixed as to make us withstand persecutours, much more to withstand
sophisters: for though it fills us with meekness in regard of our own
infirmities, and with fear in regard of our own impieties, yet it fills us with
courage in regard of Gods goodness, who has promised salvation to those that
sanctify him in their hearts by good resolutions, and in their mouths by good
professions, and in their lives by a good conversation, and it fills them with
constancy in regard of Gods truth and faithfulness, who cannot but perform his
promise.

This is the Tenure of a true Catholic, he holds both his Religion and
Salvation upon certainty, not upon conjecture; his Religion he holds upon the
certainty of Gods most holy word, for nothing else can furnish his mouth with a
satisfactory answer to silence, much less with a sufficient reason to convince
his adversary; and his Salvation he holds upon the certainty of Gods most
faithful promise, for nothing else can furnish his heart with comfort, or
establish it with courage to satisfy and content himself: and agreeable to
this (as far as concerns the certainty of Religion, upon which alone is founded
the certainty of salvation) is Vincentius Lirinensis his description of a true
Catholic; Ille verus and germanus Catholicus, est qui divinae Religioni and
Catholicae sidei nihil praeponit; non hominis cujusquam Autoritatem, non
Amorem, non Ingenium, non Philosophiam, non Eloquentiam, sed haec cuncta
despiciens, and in fide stans and permanens, amplectitur quicquid universaliter
Antiquitas Ecclesiam Catholicam tenuisse cognoverit. He is a true and genuine
Catholic, who prefers nothing above divine Religion, and the Catholic faith;
not the Authority of any man, not Love, not Wit, not Philosophy, not Eloquence,
but despising all these, and standing fast in the faith, does embrace whatever
he knows was universally and anciently held by the Catholic Church. From this
description it is easy to gather, who are the true Catholics (viz.) those
Christians,

First, Who in their Religion prefer causes above persons, who pretend not to
infallible Doctors, but make sure of an infallible doctrine: who look after
Gods, not man's Authority as the foundation of their faith; (for else they
cannot stand so fast in it, as to despise the Authority, Love, Wit, Philosophy,
Eloquence of man in comparison of the Oracles of God)

Secondly, Who in their communion, prefer persons above themselves, that is,
Gods Trustees above their own humors, regard not any novelty or singularity,
but make much of antiquity and universality; or in a word, those who are
immovable in the Catholic Truth, that they may persist in the true Christian
Religion; and who are obedient to the Catholic Church, that they may persist
in the true Christian communion.

Accordingly, my business in this Treatise shall be to show,

First, The certainty of Religion in its substance; that notwithstanding all
our present impieties on all hands, men may know when they have the true
Christian Religion;

Secondly; The certainty of Religion in its exercise, that notwithstanding all
our present inconstancies, men may know when they have the true Christian
Communion; and when this Certainty of Religion both in its substance and
exercise is compassed and achieved, which is the work, then the certainty of
salvation will be an undeniable consequent, which is the reward of good
Christians.

But till I come to my preaching, I think it needful to give my self to
praying, for though we may get the knowledge of Religion by preaching, yet we
cannot get the certainty, much less, the comfort of that knowledge but by
praying: so ill a course have those Divines taken of late to make this people
gain the certainty of their Religion, who have turned all praying into
preaching; for he that prays what the congregation knows not, does rather
preach, then pray as ^o his congregation, for they can only hear ^s judges,
they cannot join as Communicants in his prayer; well, he may teach them to pray
after him, but he cannot cause them to pray with him; for though they may wish,
yet they cannot pray but in the assurance of faith; and they cannot have the
assurance of faith upon uncertainty, and there is nothing but uncertainty in
ignorance, the ignorance of intention, disposition, and an erring direction of
him that prays, and the ignorance not only of the substance and nature, but
also of the scope and drifts of his prayer; If any faith can be exercised here,
it must needs be wholly implicit, such a faith as we justly blame in the
Papists, and therefore most unjustly force upon Protestants; a faith that has
no particular evidence of what it is to do, and therefore can have no
particular assurance of what it does.

But whilst I have fallen upon others prayers, I have almost forgot mine own.

God of his infinite mercy look upon us, once more show us the light of his
countenance, that we seeing our new building is upon the sand, (which is never
the surer for being cemented with blood) may return again unto the Rock our
Savior Christ, the only foundation of our souls (that is the only way to
make atonement for our impieties) and finding the want of the Master builders,
or most artificial workmen, may return also to his Church, which also is built
on that foundation (for that is the best if not the only way to get a remedy
for our uncertainties) that so coming to the infallible certainty of our
Religion both in its substance, and in its exercise, we may also come to the
most comfortable certainty of our salvation, and from the certainty pass to the
enjoyment, from the assurance pass to the inheritance thereof; through the
Author and Finisher both of our Religion, and of our salvation, our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

This being the main scope of this small treatise, ought to be the fervent
prayer of its Author, who knows this lesson is not to be learned by
recommending his book to you, but by recommending your souls to God; for it is
not all the preaching in the world (though the whole world should turn
preachers not only with swords in their hands, but also with Authority in
their mouths, and with grace in their hearts) I say it is not all the
preaching in the world can bring you to this saving knowledge of Christ and of
your self, but only praying: and since you will not abide your Church to pray,
you may be the better contented to let his reviled Ministers continue and
increase their prayers for you, because you have the greater need, though the
lesser ability and power to pray truly and heartily for your self; as either
praying without Christ's intercession, or praying against his word; but sure
praying without Christ's Communion, because praying without, if not against his
Church. It Is hard to be a wilful Separarist from your Church, and not to be
thus peccant in your prayers: but you are all for preaching Christ, whilst I
am rather for praying him, that is, for such sound and set prayers, as by their
matter assure me of his intercession, and by their form assure me of his
communion; and I am sure that with Mary, I have chosen the better part, though
with Martha you do make the greater noise; for Christ learned by preaching (if
at all so to be learned) only sills the head, and ofttimes unsettles the
brain; but Christ learned by praying fills the heart, and never fails to
establish it; he that is come to this establishment is the only true
Christian, for he is sure that he does God good service, and leaves it to
others only to think that they do so; he that has but a putaram for the
ground of his doings, can have but a nonputaram for the Apology of his
misdoings: If a man do but only think that he is in the right, he can only
say for himself, I did not think I was in the wrong, and that in ordinary
matters is the apology of them that want wit, but in matters of Religion it is
the apology of them that want common honesty; for what is imprudence in regard
of the world, is impiety in regard of God; there it is unwise to be under an
uncertainly or mistake, but here it is unconscionable; there it is insipiency,
but here it is irreligion. For what shall we say? Are those taxed by our
Blessed Savior for want of discretion, or rather for want of Conscience, who
by killing Gods servants think they do God service? (S. John 16. 12.) Since
therefore it may be so dangerous only to think we do God service, let us in
the first place make sure of it, especially then when we more particularly
profess to serve him: for if indeed and in truth we do him true and laudable
service, we shall have the comfort of his servants here, the joy of his
salvation; and the reward of his servants hereafter, the enjoyment of his
kingdom; this is that which he desires to preach to you, but much more to pray
for you, who is

Your Brother and Servant in our Common Savior, EDW. HYDE.

The Contents of the several Chapters in the Ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. I. The assurance of our Religion in the order of Nature, is before the
assurance of our salvation; and that the Apostles endeavor was to beget in all
Christians the assurance of Religion against Heathenisme, Judaisme, mixture of
Judaisme, and depravation of Christianity; What we want of Religion we want of
salvation; The neglect of Religion ends in Irreligion. CHAP. II. The Certainty
of Religion may be without the Assurance of it, by reason of our Profaneness,
Hypocrisy and Perverseness, though scarce by reason of our Ignorance; And that
perverseness is the way to the worst kind of Irreligion, or Atheism. CHAP.
III. Of the Substance and the Exercise of Religion, and the difference between
them in regard of the Authority, Certainty and Immutability. CHAP. IV. That
though the Substance and the Exercise of Religion be different in themselves,
yet they ought not to be accounted so now in our Profession, and much less made
so in our Practice; for that whosoever is not sure of the Exercise of his
Religion, will not much regard the certainty that is in the Substance of it.
CHAP. V. The Assurance we have of the Substance of Religion, in that it is
spiritual and resembles God the Author of it, in his incommunicable properties
of Simplicity and Infinity; as also in his Immutability and Eternity, which are
the two consectaries of Infinity; and also in his Omnipotency, Allsufficiencie
and Omnisciencie, which are the three consectaries of Eternity. CHAP. VI. The
Assurance that we have of the Substance of Religion, in that it resembles God
in his communicable properties, as Truth, Goodness, Purity and Liberty. CHAP.
VII. The Assurance we have of Religion, for that it resembles God in his
Attributes of Justice, Grace and Mercy. CHAP. VIII. The Assurance we have of
Religion in that it makes us reverence and fear God, ascribing the honor due
unto his name: and of the ten proper names of God collected by S. Hierome.
CHAP. I. The certainty of our Religion not to be gotten by Speculation, but by
Practice.
That the Apostles endeavored to beget in all Christians a certainty of the
Christian Religion against Heathenisme, Judaisme, mixture of Judaisme, and
depravation of Christianity. What we want of Religion, we want of Salvation.
The neglect of Religion, ends in Irreligion.

THe certainty of salvation in the judgment of those who most earnestly
contend for it (even with more earnestness then discretion) may be desired, but
cannot be attained without the certainty of Election; and the chief proof of
our Election, is from our perseverance in Religion: Thus the Apostle proves
that God had not cast off his people whom he did foreknow, from this Answer of
his to Eliah, I have reserved to my self seven thousand men which have not
bowed the knee to the image of Baal, that is to say, who have not been guilty
of Apostacy in this general defection of the Jews, of which thou complainest,
but do still persist and persevere in the true Religion: If God would have his
prophets know he had Elected the Israelites, because they had not fallen from
his worship, shall we think we can be otherwise assured of our Election then by
making sure of our Religion? Therefore whosoever has bowed the knee unto Baal,
cannot rightly conclude that God has Elected him, but rather that God will
cast him away, because he has first cast God away: And will ye know what is
this Baal, let Beza tell ye, Baal Patronum significat, vel eum in cujus aliquis
est potestate, Baal signifies a Lord and Master that has power over any man;
so then a Religion that pleases my Master on earth, but not my Father in
Heaven, is a bowing unto Baal. He that will be Gods servant must acknowledge no
other Master but only God, both for the Rule and the Practice of his Godliness
and this man alone will be sure not to fall away from Gods service: wherefore
the best assurance we can have that God will not forsake us, is, that we do not
forsake him; for none can be assured of his goodness, but they that continue in
it, his own Spirit thus attesting, But toward thee goodness, if thou continue
in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off, Romans 11. 22. For
Religion is as the way, salvation is as the journeys end, and a man must first
make sure of his way, before he can make sure of his journeys end; I am the
way, the truth, and the life, says our blessed Savior, (S. Joh. 14. 6.) And
he gives this reason of that saying, No man comes to the Father but by me: As
Christ is the way to his Father, so the true Religion is the way to Christ; we
must all first come to Christ before we can come to God, and we cannot come to
Christ, but by the true Christian Religion, for though Religion in general is a
knitting of the soul to God, yet the Christian Religion (which we must look to
be saved by) is a knitting of the soul unto God in and through our Savior
Christ.

For since the great distance made betwixt God and man by sin, we cannot
possibly be reunited unto him but by a Mediator; therefore the Apostle sets
this down as the ground of our Religion, There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. To allow of more
Mediators then of this one, whether Mediators of Intercession or of
Redemption (if the distinction were it self allowable) we dare not, because the
word allows but of one; we need not, because that one is all-sufficient in
himself without more company, and because he is all-sufficient in himself he
cannot, he will not admit of any other companion. And sure we are that no other
Mediator but he that has united God to man, is able to unite man to God; and
therefore no other Mediator but only he, can be intrinsecally necessary to
Religion, whose work it is to unite man to God; and if no other be
intrinsecally necessary we must look upon all others as merely additional, that
is to say, as mediators of man's not of Gods making; for so says the Apostle,
There is one God and one Mediator between God and man: It is the property of
Religion to unite created spirits to this one God, and so the good Angels may
be said to be religious who are united to God, though they were never separated
from him; but it is the property of our Christian Religion so to unite our
spirits to this one God, as to believe and confess this one Mediator between
God and man, the only author of our union, because our sins had indeed made
an actual separation betwixt us and our God.

This Mediator took our nature upon him, that he might take our sin upon him;
and he took our sin upon him that he might discharge us who were believing
sinners from the guilt of sin by imputative righteousness in our justification,
and deliver us who were repenting sinners (for we cannot be true believers,
unless we be true penitents) from the dominion of sin by inherent righteousness
in our sanctification: so that the only way for us to make sure of our
salvation is to make sure of our Religion; and the only way to make sure of
our Religion is to make sure of Christ; and the only way to make sure of
Christ is to make sure of a Christian conversation: For as Antioch was in after
ages called (...). the city of God, because therein men were first called
Christians; and was accounted one of the Patriarchal Sees, (...) (as says
Theophylact) not because it had been the seat of S. Peter, but because it had
been the seat of Christ, wherein he first was as it were enthronized and
established in his kingdom (For the Disciples were called Christians first in
Antioch, Act. 11. 26.) so is it with thy soul nothing but the profession and
exercise of Christianity, can make it the City of God, the Spouse of Christ, or
the Temple of the Holy Ghost. Do as Cornelius did (Act. 10. 2.) Be devout and
charitable, give much alms to the people, and pray to God always, be continually
exercising thy Charity, and thy Piety (two such virtues, as this age may be
afraid to name, because it is not ashamed to banish) And thy memorial shall be
with God, thy comfort with thy self, and thy communication with an Angel: But
because in many things we offend all, and they in most who do least acknowledge
their offenses in any thing, therefore Divines commonly reduce all Christian
conversation to these two heads of Faith and Repentance; a lively Faith in our
Saviors righteousness, and a hearty Repentance because of our own
unrighteousness.

Faith and Repentance are called Foundations, Heb. 6. 1. Surely because they
bring us to him, who is the only foundation both of our Religion and our
souls, our blessed Savior, into whose life we are engaffed by Faith, and into
whose death we are inserted by Repentance; for we must be planted together in
the likeness of his death, no less then in the likeness of his Resurrection,
Romans 6. 5. Coalitio cum Christo and in vitandacirc;, and in morte nunquam
possit divelli, says Beza. Our Union with Christ is no less in regard of his
death then of his life; wherefore he that is truly in Christ is in him, to his
death by repentance, as well as to his life by Faith; for there is no being
ingraffed into Christ, without being planted into his death, as well as into
his life: Thus Faith and Repentance are foundations, and yet the Apostles words
remain undoubtedly true, other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid;
which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Other foundation then Christ can no man
lay, no nor angel neither, nay if either seek to lay any other, Let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8. Other foundation can no man lay, therefore must every man
lay himself, his soul upon this foundation; which that he may do, he must have
repentance from dead works, and faith toward God; he must first repent, that
is, he must see and confess all his own works to be dead works, and himself
also to be a dead man, dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. his own
conscience being the witness, and Gods law the judge; and yet this is but one
part of true repentance, the other is still behind, he must also renounce his
works, and he must forsake himself, because both are dead, that is the second
part of repentance.

And when this foundation of repentance is well laid, then next comes faith,
which follows repentance in man's going to God, though it be before it in his
knowing him. Fides sequitur poenitentiam quantum ad tendentiam, licet antecedat
quantum ad cognitionem, says Bonaventure. Faith follows repentance in the
motion, though she go before it in the instruction or direction of the soul.
For when once we see our works all dead, and our selves under the power and
dominion of death, what can we do but fall into despair, and consequently into
perdition, unless we fix the eye of our soul upon the eternal Son of God, made
man for our redemption, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12. 2. and as looking unto him, so also resting in him, and relying
on him; for if we do not so, we show that we have a false opinion concerning
our Savior Christ, as if he had not come into the world to save sinners, as is
averred, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and what is false in the understanding must needs be
sinful in the affection, which is the demonstration by which Aquinas proves
desperation to be a most grievous sin, Quia est falsa opinio de Deo, and quod
est falsum in intellectu, est malum in appetitu. Because it is a false opinion
of God, and what is error in the understanding is sin in the will.

Thus is Christ the only foundation of our Religion; and faith and repentance
(and in them other virtues) are called foundations because they join the soul
to him, which cannot be properly said of any man whatsoever, nor of all the
congregations of men in the world, not of S. Peter himself, and much less of
his successors, and if it be said, cannot be justified by any good Logic, or
good Divinity, much less by that distinction of Fundamentum primarium and
secundarium, of a primary and a secondary foundation, which distinguishes a
numerical identity from it self, with too much subtilty and too little truth,
calling that a secondary foundation which is indeed a piece of the building;
and therefore they that teach, Post Christum fundamentum est Petrus, and nisi
per Petrum non pervenitur ad Christum, (Bellarm. in praefat. in libros de summo
Pontifice) do mistake a pillar for the foundation: to be a pillar in Gods house
is a more glorious title then is given to any angel, and carries with it a
burden too heavy for any man, who has not the extraordinary assistance of the
Spirit of God; and therefore the Holy Ghost thinks it enough to call S. Peter a
pillar, leaves it for Christ alone to be the foundation; James, Cephas, (that
is Peter) and John who seemed to be pillars, Gal. 2. 9. Cephas was a pillar,
and James and John were no less pillars then Cephas or Peter, and consequently
their successors no less pillars then his successors, but neither of them was
a foundation properly so called; vide Field, page 478, 479. that is too high an
attribute for any man, since he cannot work upon the soul by his own power, and
virtue to unite that immediately unto Christ; for he is the only foundation
that sustains the whole building; and faith and repentance are called
foundations by S. Paul, only as settling and establishing us in Christ, which
is not possible for any man or angel to do, who can work only instrumentally
toward these, by instructing the understanding, and exciting the will, but
cannot do the work of them, and therefore cannot so much as reductively, or
instrumentally be called foundations. And this is agreeable with Bonaventure's
distinction, (in lib. 4. sent. did. 22. qu. 1.) Fundamentum dicitur
dupliciter; uno modo, locus in quo aedificium stabilitur; alio modo, dicitur
fundamentum illud, secundum quod res locatur in suo sustentaculo. A thing may
be called a foundation in two respects, either that it self sustains the
building, and so Christ is the only foundation, or that it causes us to be
sustained by the foundation, and that is done three ways, either by removing
the impediments that keep us from it, or by placing and settling us on it, or
by confirming and strengthening us in it.

In the first consideration, Repentance is a foundation, because it removes
away our sins that keep us from Christ; in the second consideration Faith is a
foundation, because it places and fixes our souls on Christ, that is to say,
A faith working by love, whence the Apostle says, That we are rooted and
grounded in Christ through love (as well as through faith) Ephesians. 3. 17. for a
faith that is without love is a faith of devils, which will nor invite Christ
to come to us, much less to dwell with us, and least of all to dwell in us: The
Solifidian as he will have his faith to dwell without love, so he must be
contented himself to dwell without Christ. And lastly, in the third
consideration, the Word and sacraments may be called foundations because they
are the means to confirm and strengthen us in Christ:

All these may in several respects be called Foundations; for all these have an
immediate influence upon the soul of man by reason of the grace which
accompanies them, which influence no man possibly can have, and therefore no
man justly can claim: But all these which are called Foundations have (as I
said) an immediate influence upon our souls, to make us rise with Christ (our
Foundation) and seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, Col. 3. 1, 2. for as all the material building tends
downwards, because the foundation is below, so all the spiritual building
tends upwards (says the same Seraphical Doctor) because the Foundation
thereof is above, even on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3.
Wherefore we have need of a strong repentance, to raise us up from earth that
we may detest, and forsake our own unrighteousness, and we have need of a
strong faith to raise us up to heaven, that we may lay hold on our Saviors
righteousness, not only in our confidences, but also in our consciences; not
only in our applications, but also in our affections; not only by our
persuasion, but also by our imitation:

A thing that is easily said, but not so easily done; for he that will make
sure of a true faith must make sure of believing (at least in the preparation
of his mind) all the truths that God has revealed, as well as all the mercies
that God has promised, or Christ has purchased: And he that will make sure of
a true repentance must make sure of bewailing (at least in the preparation of
his mind and the desire of his soul) all those sins which he has committed;
and of so bewailing the sins he has committed, as not wilfully to commit the
sins he has bewailed: he that has made sure of this faith, and of this
repentance, has taken the right way to make sure of his religion, to serve God
not our of custom, but out of conscience; not of hypocrisy, but out of
integrity; not only in the communion of men, but also in the communion of
saints; and this man alone can come to make sure of his salvation. We take now
a contrary course, every man makes sure of his salvation, but no man makes sure
of his Religion; is not Christ Jesus the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever? as it is said, Heb. 13. 8. how is it then that we are not the same
Christians yesterday, and to day, and for ever? and yet we talk of nothing more
then of going to Christ, whiles we do nothing less then draw near him. Had we
looked after Christ in Christ's own Church, we should certainly have found him;
and had we once found him, we should not so willingly have left him: Had we
seen Christ in the exercise of our Christian Religion, we would certainly have
communicated with him; and had we once communicated with him, we would not for
the advantages or disadvantages of this world, have so easily forsaken his
communion.

It is to be feared, that either we professed our Christianity as hypocrites,
and so were not sure of our Religion; or that we are fallen from our profession
as apostates, and cannot make sure of our salvation. I speak this out of the
love of truth, and their souls who are my brethren, and therefore hope it will
offend none that either love the truth or the brotherhood, and must not be
affrighted if it do offend many of those that manifestly oppose the truth, and
immortally injure their brethren, by turning them out of the road of salvation,
to look after some new bypath, no less doubtful then perilous; for if St.
Paul did wish himself accursed from Christ, for his brethren, his kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9. 3. then none that takes upon him St. Paul's
calling, but is bound to have so much of St. Paul's zeal, as to think the
salvation of souls his greatest blessing, and to make it his chiefest aim; and
he that does the one, will certainly do the other, and consequently not regard
the causless displeasure of many, if he may take the right course to save but
one; and without doubt this doctrine does immediately tend to the salvation of
all, which advises men to take heed of hypocrisy in professing Religion, and
of apostasy in renouncing it, or of schism in receding from it; for schism is
a particular apostasy, even as a apostasy is a general schism: For the only
way to be assured of our future communion with God in happiness, is to be
assured of our present communion with God in holiness; and we cannot be assured
of communion with the Father of lights, unless we walk as children of the
light. It is in effect St. John's argumentation, 1 Epist. c. 1. v. 5, 6, 7. He
that says he has communion with God, must walk in the light; But, all we that
profess our selves Christians, do say we have communion with God, in and by our
Savior Christ, Therefore, we must all walk in the light. We that do profess
our selves Christians, as we do say that we have communion or fellowship one
with another; so we do much more say that we have communion with God, (not
inviting men to our civil, but to our Christian communion) and unless we make
good that saying, we cannot make good our own Christian profession; for he that
has communion with Christ, has communion with the Son of God, and he that
has the Son has the Father also. 1 John 2. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the
same has not the Father, (therefore Turks and Infidels, and Antitrinitarians,
do not worship the same God with us Orthodox Christians) but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also, (therefore Orthodox Christians in
having Christ, are sure they have communion with God. For although these latter
words, He that acknowledges the Son, has the Father also, be not in the Greek
originals, either of Greek or Latin Church, (for which cause they are by our
Interpreters inserted in different characters from the text, who did not desire
to follow Beza, where Beza did not follow the Church) yet they are in the
Vulgar Latin, and are owned by Clemens of Alexandria, in his comment upon this
Epistle, (as it is recorded in Bibliotheca Patrum) and also by the Syrus
Interpres; and indeed are in effect owned by the Spirit of God himself, for
that they are virtually included in the former words, by the rule of
Contrariety or Opposition: for by the same reason that whosoever denies the
Son has not the Father, it is most undoubtedly true, that whosoever confesses
the Son has the Father: therefore, all our labor must be that we may have the
Son; for in having him we are sure to have the Father. And this is the grand
doctrine of all the New Testament, this is the main Gospel Truth that the
Apostles maintained against all sorts of gainsayers in their time, and they
have left us their writings, that we should also maintain it unto the worlds
end, That the Christian Religion is the only way to eternal salvation.

This their doctrine was strongly opposed in their days by four sorts of men.
1. By the Gentiles not yet converted, for they still maintained their
heathenisme. 2. By the Jews not yet converted, for they still maintained their
Judaisme. 3. By the Jews not fully converted, for they still maintained a
mixture of Judaisme with Christianity; they mingled together the Jewish and the
Christian Religion. 4. By the Christians converted, but withal partly
perverted; for they brought in untrue professions, and ungodly practices into
their Christianity; they corrupted and depraved the Christian Religion, and the
Apostles were accordingly very careful, as to confute these heresies, so also
to confirm and establish the contrary truth; whence it is, that all their
writings are wholly taken up, either in those confutations, or in this
confirmation: For though the truth it felf is but one, yet the controversies
concerning it were no less then four; and the Apostles thought it necessary not
only to establish the truth in it self, that it might appear truth, but also to
establish it in our hearts, that it might appear truth to us, that is, truth
without controversy, not only a mystery of Godliness, but also a manifest and
confessed mystery, 1. Tim. 3. 16. Wherefore it will not be amiss for us to see
the state of the several Controversies, that so we may the more clearly see,
the more firmly embrace, the more constantly profess the truth.

The state of the first Controversy (which the Apostles had with the
Gentiles,) consisted of these two questions. First, whether there were a life
everlasting to be looked for after this life? Secondly, whether that life
everlasting were to be obtained by continuing in the idolatry of the heathen,
or by turning to the Religion of the Christians? And in both these questions,
the truth of the Christian Religion is declared, or rather demonstrated against
the heathenish superstition, out of the principles of natural reason; and that
truth summed up by St. Paul, 1 These. 1. 9, 10. How ye turned to God from idols,
to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he
raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.
There is a resurrection from the dead, therefore the soul dies not with the
body, but lives eternally; and this eternal life is not to be gotten by serving
Idols, but by serving the living and true God; and there is no serving him, but
by waiting for his Son from heaven: Thus was the Christian Religion justified
against Heathenisme, which afforded the first Controversy.

The state of the second Controversy which the Apostles had with the Jews not
converted, consisted but of this one Question, Whether eternal life and
salvation was to be obtained by the Jewish or by the Christian Religion? And we
find the Apostles still proving out of the Old Testament (the Ground of the
Jews Religion, and so acknowledged by themselves without the least doubt or
contradiction) that salvation was not to be had by Moses, but by Christ; so S.
Peter in his several Sermons, Acts 2. and 3. and 4. Christus Messiah, that
Christ was the Messiah, the Savior of the world, is the subject of them all.
This he proves, Acts 2. for that he had given the holy Ghost, and was risen
from the dead; and both his proofs are out of the Old Testament, which they
acknowledged the rule of their Religion; one out of the Prophet Joel, the other
out of the Prophet David. The same Doctrine he proves again, Act. 3. by a
miracle, restoring a lame man to his feet, in the name of Jesus Christ; but
because the Jews were so wedded to Moses, that no miracle was like to divorce
them from his doctrine, but such as himself allowed, therefore S. Peter does
likewise allege Moses his own testimony, v. 22. For Moses truly said unto the
fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren,
like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that prophet,
shall be destroyed from among the people. Yea, and all the prophets from
Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken have likewise
foretold of these days. As if he had said, I teach you no new doctrine
concerning the Messiah, but such as Moses, and all the Prophets have taught you
before; Moses himself bid you hearken to him no longer, then till God should
raise up that new Prophet unto you in his stead, and I hope you will hearken to
Moses, if you will not hearken to me; here is a miracle done in the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, which shows he came from God, here is the testimony of your
own Moses, that he should come, and that you should hearken unto him: you must
deny your own senses if you deny the miracle; you must deny your own faith
which you so zealously profess, if you deny Moses; so that you cannot deny
Christ Jesus to be the Messiah, if you will but stick to your own senses, and
to your own Faith.

And this manner of arguing was very necessary, to convince the Jews who were
wholly addicted and devoted unto Moses, and therefore not to be drawn from him
to Christ, but by the cords of his own testimony. For we see S. John 9. 29, 30.
That the Pharisees excommunicated the blind man for alleging a single miracle
to advance the authority of Christ; they plead for Moses, v. 29. We know that
God spoke unto Moses; and against Christ, As for this fellow we know not whence
he is: the blind man answers their plea for Moses, in answering their plea
against Christ, verse. 30. Why herein is a mavelous thing, that ye know not
from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. and again, verse. 32. Since
the world began it was not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one that was
born blind; If this man were not of God he could do nothing: As if he had
said, you prove that Moses was from God by the miracles he wrought; and I say,
here is a greater Miracle then any of his working; therefore I am as sure of
Gods speaking to this man, and being with him, as you can be that God spoke to
Moses, and was with him: yet we see that this miracle being alleged without
Moses did not convert them, and that makes S. Peter here allege Moses himself
for their conversion; and the allegation is so clear, that no eye, but may see
it, so undeniable, that no mouth, but must confess it, nor can any Jew now
believe Moses against Christ, but he must first believe Moses against himself.

The like doctrine is again preached by the same Apostle in his next Sermon,
Act. 4. 10, 11, 12. where he confidently avoucheth the lame man to have been
healed by the name of Jesus, and that by the same Jesus only they must expect
to be eternally saved, and this he proves unto them by the testimony of the
prophet David. The like is also the doctrine of S. Stephen's Sermon, Act. 7.
the sum whereof is briefly this, that Abraham and the Patriarchs worshipped God
rightly before Moses was born, or the Tabernacle and Temple were built, and
therefore the foundation of the true Religion is not to be sought for from
Moses, nor the exercise of it from the Temple; Moses himself confessing, that
his Rites and Ceremonies were to last but for a time, even till Christ should
come, who was that Prophet, whom the Lord would have them so to hear, as never
to expect any other after him.

The like is also the doctrine of S. Paul's Sermon, Act. 13. where he proves,
That Jesus is the Christ, and that all the Prophesies of the Old Testament lead
to his death and resurrection: For that by him alone, all that believe are
justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the law of
Moses. Therefore the Jews must embrace the Christian Religion, or be still
under an imperfect and insufficient Religion: In a word, this is not only the
doctrine of S. Paul, but also of all the other Apostles, in their several
Epistles, of which this is the Argument, That man is not justified by the works
of the Law, but only by Faith in Jesus Christ; or (which is all one) that
neither justification nor salvation may be hoped for by the observation of the
Jewish, but only of the Christian Religion: Accordingly the subject matter of
all their Epistles consists of these two Heads; First, of Promises that concern
eternal life, Secondly, of Precepts, as the necessary conditions to obtain
those Promises, which Promises and Precepts are as it were the two integral
parts of the whole Gospel: And thus was the Christian Religion justified
against Iudaisme, which afforded the second Controversy, and was the more
largely to be discussed, and the more fully to be decided, that we seeing the
undoubted grounds of our Christian Religion, may the more earnestly endeavor
to be good Christians, and by that means help to convert the Jews.

The state of the third Controversy (which the Apostles had with the Jews not
fully converted) consisted of this one Question; Whether the Christian Religion
alone, without any mixture of Iudaisme, was the true way to Salvation? And they
all agreed that it it was, and that the Law of Moses was but as a Schoolmaster
to bring us unto Christ. And therefore though the Apostles did at first permit
and ordain some practices of Iudaisme, yet was it only for that time by way of
Condescension to gain the Jew, not to last for ever by way of Constitution to
oblige the Christian: Therefore that decree of the Apostles, Act. 15. 29. is
looked upon by some Divines as merely local, binding only the Church of
Antioch; for S. Paul shows it did not bind the Church of Corinth in the meats
offered unto Idols, and therefore not in blood, nor in things strangled by the
same analogy, 1 Cor. 8. 4. But it is looked upon by all Divines as merely
temporal, binding no Church any longer then was necessary for the gaining of
the Jews. Thus excellently Aquinas (1. 2ae qu 103. art. 4. ad 3.) Ad literam
ista sunt prohibita, non ad observandum ceremonias legis, sed ad hoc, quod
possit coalescere Unio Gentilium and Iudaeorum insimul habitantium, Iudaeis
enim propter antiquam consuetudinem, suffocatum and sanguis erant abominabilia,
Comesti autem immolatorum simulachris poterat in Iudaeis suspicionem ingenerare
circa Gentiles, quod scilicet redituri erant ad Idololatriam; and ideo ista
fuerunt prohibita pro tempore illo, in quo de novo oportebat convenire in unum
Gentiles and Iudaeos; procedente autem tempore, cessante causa cessat effectus,
manifesta doctrinae Evangelicae veritate, in qua Dominu^ docet quod nihil quod
per os intrat coinquinat hominem, Mat. 15. and nihil est rejiciendum quod cum
gratiarum action percipitur, 1 Timothy 4. Fornicatio autem prohibetur
specialiter, quia Gentiles non reputabant eam esse peccatum. The Apostles
forbad things strangled, and blood, and meats offered to Idols, not to oblige
the Gentiles to the observation of the Ceremonial Law, but to bring the Jews
and Gentiles (now living together) into one peaceable Communion; that the
Gentile might not offend the Jew by eating blood and things strangled, which
had been forbidden by their Law; nor the Jew suspect the Gentile (as relapsing
to his former Idolatry) if he should eat things offered unto Idols; therefore
those three things were forbidden for that time only, till there might be a
right understanding, and a firm agreement betwixt the Jew and the Gentile; but
in process of time when the Gospel came to be fully published, the cause
ceasing the effect likewise ceased with it; for then both Jew and Gentile were
taught, that nothing that enters into the mouth defiles the man, S. Mat. 15.
11. and that every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused if it be
received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 4. But as concerning fornication, that
was especially forbidden merely in relation to the Gentiles, because though it
were a sin in it self, yet was it not so in their opinion: Thus the Angelical
Doctor determines concerning this decree of the Apostles; and to show it was
the undoubted judgment of his Church (which in some things clearly sways him
against the strength of his own reasons) he again in effect renews the same
determination: Fornicatio illic connumeratur, non quia habeat eandem rationem
culpae cum aliis, sed quia poter at esse similiter causa dissidii, quia apud
Gentiles Fornicatio simplex non reputabatur illicita propter corruptionem
naturalis rationis; Iudaei autem ex Lege divina instructi eam illicitam
reputabant: Alia vero quae ibi ponuntur Iudaei abominabantur propter
consuetudinem legalis conservationis, unde Apostolica Gentilibus interdixerunt,
non quasi secundum se illicita, sed quasi Iudaeis abominabilia, 22. qu. 154.
art. 2. resp. ad 1. Fornication is there reckoned up with those other things,
not that it had as little sin as they, but because it might have produced as
great a cause of contention; for the Gentiles through the corruption of their
natural reason accounted fornication as no sin, which the Jews knew to be a
sin, having their reasons enlightened and rectified by the Law of God; and as
for the other things they were forbidden; not as unlawful or abominable in
themselves, but only as abominable to the Jews: And indeed we cannot put
fornication into the same bed-role of indifferency with the rest, if we do but
consider, that the Apostles intent was not to give to those new believers a
rule of life, but a rule of peace; not directions for their conversation, but
for their communion; not to set down what was fit for their action, but what
was fit for their Union; not what was conducible in it self, but what was
conducible to their present agreement; in the first respect, their Decree had
been a very imperfect catalogue of things unlawful, a very imperfect rule of
abstinence; but in the second respect, we have great reason to suppose, that
neither as a catalogue, nor as a rule it needed any greater perfection: And
this was the judgment of the Latin Church concerning this matter, though the
Greek Church in the Trullane Council (can. 67.) seem to be of another opinion,
and forbid all manner of eating of blood, but the reason is evident, those of
that council looked upon this decree as a command of the text, and not as a
condescension of the Apostles, which doubtless was a mistake; the like to which
had been in the Asiatick Church before concerning Easter; whence in process of
time sprang up the heresy of the Quartadecimans; for whereas S. John the
Apostle and some other Apostolical men had out of compliance with the Jews in
Asia, whose Church was mainly fixed in those parts, kept the fourteenth day of
the first month (according to the law of Moses) for their Passover;
Polycrates afterward, and the Clergy of his Churches taking that for an
example or president, which was only a compliance or condescension, would have
persuaded the whole Christian Church to keep (...) not (...) (as Scaliger calls
it) to keep a Passover rather in remembrance of Christ's Passion, which was
upon a week day, then in Remembrance of his Resurrection, which was upon a
Sunday; the Reason was, the Churches of Asia had mistaken S. John's
condescension to the Jews, for an approbation to themselves; as if what he
allowed only to the Jews, he had also approved (and by consequent established)
for the Christians: The like mistake seems here to have been amongst the
Fathers in Trullo concerning eating of blood; whereas the Greek Church had
otherwise a right judgment concerning Apostolical condescension, which is, not
to look upon it as a dogmatical sanction; for so Theodoret in his argument upon
the Epistle to the Galatians, tells us, that some Jews had persuaded the
Galatians to stick to the Jewish ceremonies of Sabbaths, new moons, and
circumcision, saying, they should not follow S. Paul who was of yesterday, but
rather S. Peter, and S. James, and S. John which had been with Christ, and did
not forbid Circumcision, nor those other Ceremonies; whereupon Theodoret thus
declares his judgment, or rather the judgment of his Church (for he was
neither heretical, nor schismatical) (...). And true it was that those Apostles
did not then forbid Circumcision, because they thought it requisite for that
time to condescend unto the Jews; but these men concealing the cause laid hold
of the practice, and endeavored by that means to turn the Condescension into a
Constitution. The like was also the judgment of Oecumenius, on Act. 3. 1.
where he tells us that S. Peter and S. John went up to the Temple at the hour of
Prayer, (...), etc. not that they did care to Iudaize, but that they might
condescend to gain the Jews: so that we may safely conclude notwithstanding the
Canon of Trullo, as well as the practice of the Asiatick Churches; that the
judgment of the Catholic Church was always thus from the beginning, and must
be to the end; so that the Apostles did many things by way of Condescension to
the Jews, which they would not have drawn to the countenancing of Iudaisine,
for that they intended no Galemofry of Religion, no mixture of Iudaisme and
Christianity, but an utter abolition of Iudaisme, and an absolute establishment
of Christianity, though the abolition of Iudaisme was to be brought to pass not
in an instant but by degrees; Ut cum honor matter Synagoga sepeliretur, as S.
Augustine speaks, that their mother Synagogue might be laid in her grave with
honor, and without offense: And thus was the Christian Religion justified
against the mixture of Judaisme, which afforded the third Controversy.

The state of the fourth Controversy, (which che Apostles had with the
Christians converted, but withal partly perverted) consisted of as many
questions as there were present errors against the truth, or abuses against
the purity of Christian Religion; the errous were confuted by the Apostles, and
the abuses were rectified. And thus was the Christian Religion justified
against Heresy, and against Profaneness; First it was justified against all
other false professsions, and afterward against its own false professors: For
it had been absurd to persuade men to a Religion that was not able to justify
it self against all Religions and men whatsoever; because a Religion that
cannot justify it self, is much less able to justify those that profess it;
and a Religion that cannot justify, cannot save, and a Religion that cannot
save, is a Religion but in word only, not in power; for what man would ever
torment his body, were it not to save his soul? Who would ever forsake the
pleasures of the flesh, were it not to enjoy the comforts of the Spirit?
therefore must the Christian Religion be looked on as the way to salvation,
that men may be careful to walk in it, and as the only way, that men may be
fearful to walk out of it: For what they have of Religion that they have of
salvation, (whether really or phantastically) and what they do want of the one
that they do also want of the other: Accordingly S. Peter advises us all to
make our calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. For though our Election be
firm in it self (and we may bless God it is so, especially since we are fallen
under such strong delusions as might deceive if it were possible even the very
Elect) I say, though our Election be firm in it self, as being grounded on Gods
immutable purpose; yet is it daily more and more to be confirmed in us, by
making more and more sure of our calling, that is to say, of our calling to
righteousness, or of our Religion, in daily bringing forth more and more the
fruits of righteousness; for we cannot make sure of Glory but by making sure of
Grace, nor can we be sure of Grace but from the fruits and effects of Grace,
which are the remission of sins, and the purgation from sin according to that
excellent gloss of Oecumenius upon the Apostles benediction to the Hebrews in
his last words of that Epistle, Grace be with you all, Amen. (...): Grace be
with you, that is, The Remission of sins and the purgation from sin be with
you; or, to speak more to our present custom and capacity, the blessings of
Justification and of Sanctification be with you; for Justification is the
Remission of sins, and Sanctification is the purgation from sin, and the work
of Grace is to expel sin by justification, and by sanctification; to expel sin
in its guiltiness, or obligation to punishment, by justification; and to expel
sin in its pollution, or obligation to more sinfulness, by sanctification; for
sin has a two fold obligation upon the sinner; it obliges him to punishment
by its guiltiness, it obliges him to more sins by its pollution; and the work
of Grace is to oppose sin in both these respects, and the means whereby Grace
effects this great work is the Christian Religion, which is truly and
properly our calling as we are Christians, and callethus to the forgiveness of
our sins by faith in Christ, there is the justification; and calls us to the
amendment of our sinful lives by repentance from dead works, there is
thesanctification; Wherefore to make sure of our Calling, is to make sure of
Grace; and to make sure of Grace, is to to make sure of our Christian Religion,
which alone produces the works of Grace; and how we may do this, the same
Author teaches us in the same place; (...). If we do not wrong Gods goodness
by sinning, or by neglecting, that is, by Commission or by Omission; by sinning
against the light of Grace, or by neglecting the power and means of Grace;
which two have without doubt occasioned all the grand mistakes and miscarriages
of several Christian Churches in point of Religion: They either sin by
Commission against the light of Grace, or by Omission against the power and
means of Grace; and at last come to make a new Religion, by turning their old
sins into new Tenants. This is (...): To sin against God, and to neglect him;
to sin against him by Commissions, and to neglect him by Omissions; to do
either, is to wrong his grace and goodness, much more to do both; which, as it
may serve for a good caveat to all Christian Churches in general, so also to
every Christian man in particular; for our Commissions are the great
impediments of our justification, because though the sons of men will, yet the
Son of God will not justify a sinner that continues in his sins; our
Omissions are the great impediments of our sanctification, because though the
spirit of error may call him a Saint, yet the Spirit of Grace will not
sanctify him or make a Saint of that sinner, who neglects and contemns the
means of Grace; and these Commissions and those Omissions commonly go both
together in the loss of Religion, but the Omissions go generally before the
Commissions; As S. Paul says of the Apostate Christians in his time, Romans 1.
21. and the same doctrine will hold true of all Apostates to the worlds end.
That when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful,
(there is their Omissions.) But became vain in their imaginations, and changed
the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image, etc. (There Is their
Commissions.) And upon these follows the loss of their Religion, ver. 28. As
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind: it is first (...), they did not approve, then (...) they were
given over to such a mind as could not approve that which came from God; this
is a reprobate mind, a mind void of judgment, an undiscerning understanding,
which is sure to have sin with it, and damnation after it; for so says the
prophet, Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, Isa. 5. 19. here is
truly the reprobate mind in its sin, for it calls evil good, and good evil,
and in its punishment for it is under a curse, Woe unto them. So again, Prove.
17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just (whether
Person, or Thing, or Action, for the adjunct is put without any one of these
particular subjects, to show it belongs alike to all) even they both are an
abomination to the Lord; Their sin is in their own false judgment, their
punishment in Gods true judgment, who judges them as (...), a thing profane,
unclean, abominable, not to be endured by God or man, Let me then pray that I
may cordially and sincerely study not only the knowledge, but also, and much
rather, the practice and exercise of the true Christian Religion, lest the
neglect of the practice and exercise bring me to the dislike and contempt of my
Religion, and I begin to find fault with my Church when I should find fault
with my self (all men being apt to condemn that which they do neglect, that
they may justify their own neglects) for to find fault with the true and
laudable exercise of Religion is to call good evil, which was all we did at
first, and then it will be just with God to deliver me over to so much
Irreligion as to call evil good, which is that we do now.

CHAP. 2.
The certainty of Religion may be without the assurance of it, by reason of our
Hypocrisy, profaneness, and perverseness, though scarce by reason of our
ignorance: and that perverseness is the way to the worst kind of Irreligion, or
Atheism.

REligion may be sure in it self, and yet may not be sure to us. It is in it
self the certainty of all certainties, yet it is often in too too many men (the
more is the pity if against their will, the more is the shame if with their
will) one of the greatest uncertainties in the world. For there may be a
certainty of the object or of the thing, when there is little or no certainty
of the subject, or of the person; that is in plain English, the certainty may
be great, yet the assurance little or none at all; and so it is in this case;
for Religion has without doubt the greatest certainty of the object, or or of
the thing, because that wholly depends upon Gods immutabilitie or
unchangeableness, there is the greatest certainty; but it has ofttimes the
least certainty of the subject, or of the person, because of man's great
hypocrisy and greater inconstancy, there is the least assurance; for this is
the common bane of Religion, that men do profess it hypocritically, and
therefore cannot profess it constantly; they seek a Religion that will rather
save their estates, then save their souls, and consequently will more settle
their conditions then their consciences: thus they are first hypocrites, and
then they cannot stick to be apostates; for there is in hypocrisy Simulatio
sanctitatis and defectus sanctitatis (says Aquinas) first the pretense of
Religion, and then also the defect or want of it; for what is merely in
pretense, is certainly not in being; and Religion could not be pretended were
it not wanting; only in hypocrites the pretense appears first, but at last
also the want or defect of godliness; so that were their Religion unfeigned it
would not be inconstant; but because they have hypocrisy so far as to profess
religion out of custom, they cannot have constancy so far as to persist in
their profession out of conscience: we have the pattern of both kinds of
professors real and formal, in the first chapter of Ruth: The one in Ruth, the
other in Orpah. For the pleasure, the delight of this world says unto us all
as Naomi said to her two daughters in law; Go and return each to her mothers
house; and the formal professors do as Orpah did, leave their mother, the
Church (the only true Naomi, because she is Gods delight) when she is in
distress; Orpah non Religione, sed humanitate socrum secuta est, says Iunius,
Orphah followed her mother, not out of Religion, but merely out of common
courtesy, therefore she turns back again; so do all those that are of any
Christian Church, rather for good manners, then for a good persuasion; rather
for custom, then for conscience; but the real professors, who have followed
Religion out of conscience, and therefore have their consciences established in
Religion, are ready to say to their Church as Ruth said to her mother Naomi,
Whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge, thy people
shall be my people, and thy God, my God; As if she had said, I will never leave
the land of Israel, nor the communion of the God Israel; for so Aben Ezra
glosseth her words. Thus she resolves verse 16. and she strengthens her self
in this resolution, verse 18. for so it is in the Hebrew, she strengthened her
self; which we fitly translate she was steadfastly minded; for they who most
strengthen themselves in good resolutions, are most steadfastly minded, and will
not be guilty of unstedfastness; and thus do all they strengthen themselves,
who have not only a speculative, but also an affective knowledge of Religion,
who do not only know what they do in the worship of God, but also love what
they know. They taste and see that the Lord is good, Ps. 34. 8. and by that
spiritual gust know themselves to be in the way of blessedness, and
consequently will not be diverted or turned out of that way.

Thus we see there may be a certainty of Religion without an assurance thereof;
but if there be so, the fault is our own that we are Hypocrites, or formal
professors, looking after the outside rather then the inside of Religion; that
is, looking more after the form then after the power of godliness; for the form
of godliness may happily direct us to a conformity with men (which is like to
be as changeable as their humors) but it is the power of godliness alone that
directs us to a conformity with Christ, and makes us as it were unchangeable,
conforming us with our Savior, and confirming us in our selves, that is to
say, in our own consciences: wherefore from the form we must go to the power,
and that will make us pass from conformity to conscience, not so as to loose
the conformity, but so as to keep the conscience; for which cause the school
Divines do teach that divinity is not only a speculative science, in teaching
the knowledge of God, there is for the conscience; but also a practical science
in commanding and ordering the actions of men, there is for the conformity: and
as it is a science, so it has in it self that certainty which belongs to
sciences; nay it has a greater certainty, says Alensis, then any other
science whatsoever; for asking this question An modus sciendi in Theologia sit
certior quam in aliis scientiis, whether the manner of knowing divine truths,
be more certain in Divinity, then the manner of knowing natural truths is in
other sciences, he answers it is more certain, and he gives these three
admirable reasons for his answer. 1. Quia certior est modus sciendi per
inspirationem quam per humanam rationem, because the way of knowing by divine
inspiration, is much more certain then the way of humane ratiocination, or
collection, since the one is subject to error, the other not: and all divine
truths are made known to us by inspiration, as appears, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; I may not take any
doctrine for an instruction in righteousness, which I cannot prove was first
taught by inspiration of God, and if it be taught of God it may be found in the
Scripture, which is Gods word. 2o. Certius est quod scitur testimonio Spiritus,
quam quod testimonio creaturarum. That is more certain which is known by the
testimony of Gods Spirit then of the creature: But all that we know in Divinity
is known by the testimony of Gods Spirit, as says S. Peter. 2 Pet. 1. 21. For
the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: in Divinity we appeal to the
undoubted testimony of God the holy Ghost, and can say, Veni Creator, whereas
in all other sciences we can go no higher then the testimony of the creatures.
3o. Quia certius est quod per modum gustus, quam quod per modum visus. A man is
more sure of that which he discerns by his taste, then of that which he
discerns only by his sight: for what he discerns by his sight, he knows only
speculatively, and perchance to his great discontent, but what he discerns by
his taste, he knows also experimentally, and if the thing be good not without
great delight: and from these premises he proceeds to this dogmatical
conclusion or determination; Est certitudo speculationis, and est certitudo
experientiae: vel est certitudo secundum intellectum and secundum affectum; vel
quoad hominem spiritualem, and quoad hominem animalem. Dico ergo quod modus
Theologicus est certior certitudine experientiae, and quoad affectum, quia est
per modum gustus (Psalm. 118. Quam dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua) quamvis non
certior quoad speculationem intellectus, quae est per modum visus; item certior
est homini spirituali, quamvis incertior animali. 1 Cor. 2. Animalis homo non
percipit ea quae Spiritus Dei sunt) There is a certainty of speculation, and
there is a certainty of experience: there is a certainty that proceeds from the
understanding, and there is a certainty that proceeds from the will and
affections. Lastly, there is a certainty of the spiritual man, and there is a
certainty of the natural man: I answer then that the manner of knowing
Theological or Divine truths is more certain then the manner of knowing any
other truths, if we look upon the certainty of experience which proceeds from
the will and affections, because that certainty is by way of tasting. (Hence
the Psalmist says, How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter then
honey to my mouth) although it be less certain, if we look upon the certainty
of evidence, which proceeds from the understanding, because that certainty is
only by way of seeing. And none of us all is so quick-sighted in spiritual as
in natural things: and hence it is that this certainty of divine truths which
is very great in the spiritual man is little or none at all in the natural man;
Because the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The sum of all is this, The certainty that is to be
had of the Christian Religion, is greater then the certainty that is to be had
of other truths; but it must be in a subject rightly qualified; that is, First,
in a man of holy affections, who lives not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, else his profaneness will beguile him: Secondly, In a man of holy
resolutions, that desires not to satisfy his curiosity, but his conscience;
not to provide for his temporal, but for his spiritual interest, else his
hypocrisy will deceive him: Thirdly, in a man of holy intentions, that steers
not his course to heaven by the Cynosure of his own reason, and much less of
his own humors, but is wholly guided by Gods authority (for none but Gods
authority ought to sway in Gods cause) else his perverseness will defraud him of
his certainty: for those men that are guilty of hypocrisy, come short of it;
those that are guilty of profaneness, go beside it; those that are guilty of
perverseness, go against it: for as it is concerning Religion it self, so is it
also concerning the certainty that accompanies it; the profane person goes
beside it; the hypocrite comes short of it, the perverse person goes against
it; only the sincere, meek, good man obtains it; he that is sincere without
hypocrisy, meek without perverseness, good and honest without profaneness and
debauchery.

The same seed is sown in several grounds, but from some the sower has not so
much as his seed again, from other he has great increase: The spiritual seed
is the word of God, the rule of Religion; And as for this word some of it falls
by the way-side, that is, among profane and vicious persons, such as are in the
highway of perdition, where it is trodden under foot, and the fowls of the air
(irregular and extravagant fancies and desires) devour it; some of it falls
upon a Rock, where it can have no root nor moisture, (for only the mere
outside is earth, the rest is all stone) that is, among hypocrites and
dissemblers who hear the word with joy, and for a time believe, but in time of
temptation fall away: for temporary believers, as they believe with the times,
so also they believe but for a time, and soon fall away from their belief:
Lastly, and some of it falls among thorns, that is, among perverse and
refractory men (for such are called briers and thorns, Ezekiel. 2. 6.) men of a
wilful Religion, and therefore in truth men of no Religion, since Religion
depends not upon man's but upon Gods will; and here the word must needs be
choked; for a man that gives himself to be governed by his own will cannot
possibly submit himself to Gods will, or at least, not for Gods sake, but only
for his own sake; and a Religion that is not for Gods sake is certainly not of
Gods making; and consequently though it may be of a great growth (as we find by
sad experience) yet it cannot be of a long continuance, for herein Gamaliel
spoke as the oracle of God, if this counsel, or this work be of men it will
come to naught, Acts 5. 38. If the counsel be to serve our own ends, the work
is so to, and then both counsel and work are of men, of perverse and refractory
men; and being of men it will come to naught, and God forbid but so it should:
All this while here is a certainty of nothing, but only of the good seed. It
is most sure, the seed which God sowes is good, and yet neither hypocrites nor
profane, nor perverse men are fully assured of its goodness, because they have
but an assurance of speculation, not of affection; such an assurance as swims
only in the brain, to convince them by way of information; not such an
assurance as sinks down into the heart, to convert them by way of reformation,
making them out of love with their own errors; and much less by way of
confirmation, making them really in love with Gods truth: for this latter
assurance belongs only to those who follow St Peter's advice, laying aside all
malice or wickedness, (...), that is against the profane persons, and all guile
and hypocrisies, that is against the hypocrites; and envies and evil speakings,
that is against the perverse; as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that they may grow thereby, 1 S. Pet. 2. 1, 2. not grow rich, or
powerful, or honorable in this world; but grow pious, and religious, and
devout, prepared for a better world; for such men only receive that heavenly
seed in good ground, which is like to bring forth increase; such men only
receive the word in an honest and a good heart, (...), in a heart that is
honest and free from hypocrisy; in a heart that is good and free from
wickedness, that will not let the man be profane; in a heart that is good and
free from refractoriness, that will not let the man be perverse; for even
Aristotle's, (...), requires a man to be good in all these three respects;
without hypocrisy in his intention, without profaneness in his action, without
perverseness in his affection; and therefore surely Christ's school will not
admit of any other scholar, and if any other scholar be admitted, he will be
but little benefitted by his learning; for he that does not thus receive the
word of grace, has not yet tasted that the Lord is gracious, 1 S. Pet. 2. 3.

Nor is it requisite here to insist upon the impediment of ignorance amongst
us, who say we live in the sunshine of the Gospel, and that our eyes are open
to see more then all our fathers before us, or all our neighbors about us, or
all our brethren with us; for in truth we cannot justly complain of ignorance,
whom God has so effectually called to the knowledge of his truth, and faith in
him, by placing us in a Church, which is able to protest with St. Paul (and
indeed every true Christian Church, being the grand Apostle of its nation,
ought to make good this Apostolical protestation) Ye know how I kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you
publicly testifying repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, Acts 20. 21, 22. I say we cannot justly complain of ignorance, who have
our eyes open to see the truth; but we may and must complain of our detestable
unthankfulness, which has filled us with hypocrisy, and profaneness, and
perverseness; but especially with perverseness; for whiles our eyes are open, our
hearts are shut; shut faster then the iron gate, that lead unto the city, was
shut against St Peter, because we generally defy those whom God has called
his Angels, Apoc. 1. 20. for whiles they did go along with us, and we with
them, the iron gate which leads unto the City of God, the true Jerusalem, did
open to us of its own accord, (like Acts 12. 10.) we had no difficulty in
Religion, which we were not able to conquer. But now we have gotten very many
difficulties, which we shall never be able to subdue, till we have conquered
that which caused them all, our own perverseness.

Indeed we have gotten almost as many Religions as men, and yet as many
difficulties as Religions; for having turned our Jerusalem into Babel, God has
justly divided our languages, and which yet is far worse, has also divided our
minds; that since we would not all speak the same thing, we should not be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor.
1. 10. so far are we now from enjoying Gods blessing, because we have been far
from obeying his command; for the command has not the weaker obligation,
because it is uttered by way of benediction, but ought rather to have the
stronger influence, Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of all patience and consolation,
grant you to be like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus,
that ye may with one mind, and one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. We would not glorify God with one mouth, when we were
thereunto called; and now we cannot glorify him with one mind, that it is
more then evident, whiles we have pretended to thrust out the Papist, we have
let in the Atheist, and that in the most dangerous kind of Atheism, if we be
not overcome by it, but the most damnable if we be, the perverse Atheism: For
it is a misery which may be lamented, but cannot be denied, that though all the
world cannot make one and the same person more then one man, yet he may make
himself no less then three Atheists; an Atheist in his Understanding, by not
knowing God; an Atheist in his Will and Affections, by not loving and regarding
him; and an Atheist in his Life and Conversation, by not honoring and obeying
him. The first you may call the ignorant or blind Atheist, the second the
perverse, the third the profane Atheist; the heathen had most of the ignorant,
but the Christian has most of the perverse, and of the profane Atheist; and if
you will ask which of these two is the worser, there is no Divine but must be
unwilling to answer you, because he cannot be willing to countenance either;
but yet you may take this observation in part of payment, till you have a
fuller answer to discharge the reckoning, That our blessed Savior whiles he
lived on the earth, converted many Publicans and sinners, which were in the
number of profane, but very few Pharisees and hypocrites which were in the
number of perverse Atheists.

CHAP. 3.
Of the Substance and the Exercise of Religion, and the difference betwixt
them, in regard of the Authority, Certainty, and Immutability.

THere are two substantial parts of the Christian Religion; The first is
conversant in the knowledge; The second in the worship of God in Christ, so
that the substance of the Christian Religion is nothing else but that doctrine
and practice, which is made up of these two integral parts, the knowledge, and
the worship of God in Christ; the one uniting our understanding to the first
truth, the other uniting our will to the chiefest good, both together
perfecting the communion of the soul with God; so that of these two parts
consists het substance of Religion: But because Religion in the general
doctrine of it may only fill the head with empty speculations, all tending to
fancy and to curiosity, and not the heart with holy affections and heavenly
desires, which may tend to the sanctification of our sinful souls here, and
the salvation of our sanctified souls hereafter: It is most necessary that all
Christians make sure of a profession of Religion agreeable to their doctrine,
and of a practice agreeable to their profession; and these two will complete
the exercise of Religion, which is no other but the application, or
accommodation of the substance thereof to Time, Place, and Person; that is to
say, the profession of the knowledge, and the practice of the worship of God.

And this difference we may observe between the substance and the exercise of
Religion. First the substance of Religion is all immediately from God, but the
exercise of Religion in many things depends upon the authority of man:
Sacrificare est de lege naturae, determinatio sacrificiorum ex institutione,
says Aquinas, that men should offer sacrifice to God, is of the law of nature;
but that they should offer these kinds of sacrifices, or in these places, or in
these set times, or after this set form and manner, depends wholly upon
institution, either Divine as among the Jews, or Humane as among the Gentiles.

But we may not shoot at Rovers in so narrow a compass; the law of nature is
not sufficient to teach us the substance of Religion, but we must learn that
from the law of God.

For though it be the dictate of natural reason, that men should exhibit
worship to God as their first beginning and last end, yet the true determinate
worship that God accepts, depends wholly upon Gods own institution and
revelation. So Aquinas 22ae. q. 81. art. 2, Cultum aliquem Deo exhibere est de
dictamine rationis, at determinatum and verum exhibere pendet ab institutione
divini juris, That man should worship God is the dictate of natural Reason, but
that he should worship him rightly and truly, depends wholly upon supernatural
revelation; the one is matter of Instinct, the other is wholly matter of divine
Institution. And surely though many men now adays make very bold with God, yet
there is scarce any petty master of a private family amongst us, who would not
take it in high disdain, that any but himself should teach his family how to
serve him.

Let us then not think, but the great Lord of Heaven and earth alone, teaches
his servants to do unto him true and acceptable service, for fear we fall under
the sentence of that condemnation, S. Mat. 15. 9. But in vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

If the Savior of the world reject thy Religion, how can thou hope to be
saved by it? and surely he rejects that Religion as altogether vain and
unprofitable, which takes man's institutions and inventions for any part of Gods
worship, or he would never have added that word (...), (in vain) to the words
of the Prophet, for whereas Isaiah says, Their fear toward me is taught by
the precept of men, Isa. 29. 13. our Savior thus explains his saying, by way
of addition, In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. And truly, although in the exercise of Religion, the
outward order and decency depends much upon the constitutions of men, yet is
that outward order and decency no substantial part of the Religion, nor may it
so be taken, unless we will profess and say, that we have a Religion of our own
making; and then what remains, but that if we have made our Religion, we should
also make our God?

It is to be confessed, that great is the liberty of Christian Churches in
matter of ceremony; but those who will make ceremonies matter of Religion do in
effect take away that liberty, by turning it into a necessity, and do change
the nature of indifferency, by supposing it indispensable, if not making it so.
But herein Aquinas his observation is very judicious. In lege nova, quae est
lex amoris vel libertatis, dari tantum praecepta de operibus, quae cum gratia
necessariam habent convenientiam vel repugnantiam; caetera vero, quae non
habent, relicta esse determinationi humanae, and arbitrio superiorum, si ad
communem utilitatem pertinent, etc. That in the Gospel, which is the law of
love and liberty, God has given precepts only concerning those works, which
have a necessary convenience or repugnancy with grace, that is, works, which
immediately concern either sin or righteousness; but other things that do not
immediately concern either sin or righteousness, are left to the determination
and disposition of man; for if they be of public interest, they are left to
the judgment of our superiors, either Ecclesiastical or Civil; if they be of
private interest, they are left to the judgment of every man's own private
reason. Itaque non ut de Sacramentis, it a de Sacramentalibus, hoc est, de
dispositionibus ad Sacramenta vel conficienda, vel suscipienda, lex nova habet
praecepta divina; sed determinatio ipsorum est Ecclesiae relicta a Christo.
Therefore though we have in the Gospel explicit and direct commands about the
Sacraments themselves, yet have we not so about the Sacramentals, that is,
about those Rites and dispositions, which are necessary either to the giving or
receiving of them; but the determination of such Rites and Ceremonies is left
by Christ unto his Church.

The Jew indeed was confined by the text in the manner of exercising his duty
toward God by the Ceremonial Law, and toward his neighbor by the Judicial
Law; but the Christian is not so: he has documents only concerning the
substance or matter, not concerning the form or manner of his duty, either to
God or man; for such determinations has Christ left wholly to his Church, as
not belonging in themselves to Virtue and Religion, but only to Decency and
Order. Non enim ad orationem, prout est actus virtutis Religionis, de se
pertinet, ut fiat tali certo loco vel tempore, aut cum illa certa corporis
dispositione; neque ad restitutionem, quae est actus virtutis justitiae,
pertinet ut fiat in duplum, vel in quadruplum, and sic de similibus. As for
example, It belongs not to prayer as it is an act of Virtue and Religion, that
it be performed in such a certain place or time, or with such or such a posture
of the body; and it belongs not to restitution which is an act of justice, that
it be either twofold or fourfold: Therefore the duties themselves are only
commanded in the Gospel; but the manner of their performance is not under
command. And this is the first distinction or difference betwixt the substance
and the exercise of Religion, that the substance of Religion is all immediately
from God, but the exercise of Religion in many things depends upon the
authority of man.

Secondly, The substance of Religion requires an infallible or a Theological
certainty, grounded only upon the word of God; but the exercise of Religion is
contented with a moral certainty, depending upon the testimony of man: Which
being a proposition of great extent, yet of greater consequence, shall
accordingly be first divided, and then explained. I say therefore, The
substance of Religion, that is, any thing of Faith, Hope, or Charity, requires
an infallible or Theological certainty, grounded only upon the word of God:
Here, Dubious in fide infidelis est, is a sure rule, he that doubts in the faith
is an infidel; and again, Certitudo unius partis tollit probabilitatem
alterius, is another excellent rule, The certainty of one part takes away the
probability of the other; As the certainty of Christ's institution of both kinds
in the holy Eucharist, takes away the probability of receiving in one kind
after his institution; the certainty of praying in faith to God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, takes away the probability of praying in faith to any but
the blessed Trinity. But the exercise of Religion is often content only with a
moral certainty; nor indeed can we have any other certainty either of times,
places, or persons, but merely moral and humane.

Here the rule is good, Non est opus infallibili certitudine, sed sufficit
moralis and humana, quae secum patitur haesitationem and suspicionem de
contrario. In such cases there is no need of a Theological or infallible
certainty, but it suffices that we be guided by a moral or humane certainty,
which allows of many doubts and suspicions to the contrary; as for example,
that God is to be praised for the nativity of his Son is grounded upon
Theological certainty, for the angels sang praises to him for it. S. Luke 2.
But that he is to be praised for it on the twenty fifth day of December, is
grounded only upon moral certainty, because antiquity has accounted that for
the very day of his nativity: And it is no wonder that we can have no better
assurance of Christmas day, since we can have no better of the Lords day, which
we are sure is of apostolical imitation, if not of apostolical institution; for
we cannot be otherwise assured, that we keep not the second or third or fourth
day, in stead of the first day of the week, but only from humane testimony;
and yet he, that should have no better assurance of the resurrection of Christ,
whereon is grounded the duty of the day, would scarce deserve to be thought or
called a Christian. Time, place, and person may admit of doubts; but faith,
hope, and charity admit of none, the reason is, these latter are of the pure
substance, the former belong only to the exercise of religion.

Thirdly, the substance of religion is unchangeable, but the exercise of
Religion has passed under a great and notorious change; it was the same faith,
hope, and charity that saved the Jew, which now saves the Christian; but the
way of exercising all three of them was much different in the Jewish and in the
Christian churches.

Aquinas in his 22ae. q. 2. ar. 7. determines this question affirmatively,
Utrum explicit credere mysterium incarnationis Christi sit de necessitate
salutis apud omnes, whether explicitly to believe the mystery of the
incarnation of Christ be necessary to salvation in regard of all men: and he
thus demonstratively proves his determination; Illud proprie and per se
pertinet ad objectum fidei, per quod homo beatitudinem consequitur; via autem
hominibus veniendi ad beatitudinem est mysterium incarnationis and passionis
Christi; Dicitur enim Act. 4. Non est aliud nomen datum hominibus, in quo
oporteat nos salvos fieri; and ideo mysterium incarnationis Christi aliqualiter
oportuit omni tempore esse creditum apud omnes: That properly and of it self
belongs to the object of faith, by which a man obtains eternal blessedness; but
the way for a man to come to bliss is the mystery of the incarnation and
passion of Christ, for so it is said Act. 4. 12. There is none other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved; therefore the mystery of
Christ's incarnation was to be believed in some sort at all times and of all
men, that were to be saved: And he tells us that the Roman histories make
mention of a man taken out of his grave in the time of Constantine the great,
with a plate of gold upon his breast, wherein these words were engraven;
Christus nascetur ex virgin, and ego credo in cum; O Sol, sub Irene and
Constantini temporibus iterum me videbis. Christ shall be born of a virgin, and
I do believe in him; O Sun, in the time of Irene and Constantine thou shall see
me again. This he brings as a proof that such of the Gentiles as were saved,
did believe in Christ.

The proof perchance may be questionable, but the doctrine cannot be so; for
even Adam in his innocence had an explicit faith in the incarnation of Christ
as the only means to bring him to the consummation ofglory, though happily not
till after his fall; he had an explicit faith in the passion and resurrection
of Christ to deliver him from the guilt and punishment of his sins.

And if the explicit belief of the mystery of Christ's incarnation be so
necessary to salvation, we are little beholding to those men, who forbid the
commemoration of that mystery, and the testification of that belief: but
however thus we see, Omnes sideles usque ab Adamo re quidem ipsa Christianos
fuisse, says Eusebius, lib. 1. cap. 1. That the Christian Religion was always
the same in substance, though not in exercise, and the same Religion both of
Jew and Christian Ratione objecti formalis, non ratione objecti materialis, in
regard of the formal, though not in regard of the material object of faith: the
same God worshipped by them both, if they were true worshippers, and with the
same acts of faith, hope, and love; to believe in him, to trust in him, and to
obey and serve him; but yet a far different form and manner of profession of
faith, and exercise of worship.

And thus Justin Martyr clears the truth of the Christian Religion to Tripho
the Jew. (...). We do not think you had one God, and we have another, nor do we
trust in any other God but yours (for there is no other) even the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; only we trust in him not by Moses, nor
according to the law, but by Christ, and according to the gospel; for the law
which was given in Horeb is now antiquated, for it was given only to you Jews;
but the law which we serve God by, is a law given to all nations of the world,
and is to abide to the worlds end: for Christ is given unto us as the law, and
as an everlasting law; his Testament as a faithful Testament to remain for
ever, after which no law, no commandment is to be expected, or may be received.

Thus far Justin Martyr to the Jew, because thus far the Apostle had stated the
question to the Martyr (and indeed to all Christians) in the epistle to the
Hebrews, the sum whereof is briefly this* that Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God, coequal and coessential with the Father, and the holy Ghost, is perfect
God and perfect man in the unity of the same person; and is that only eternal
King, Priest, and Prophet, which God in the fullness of time gave unto his
Church, to govern, instruct, and sanctify it for ever: and this he proves by
the promises before the law, by the types and figures under the law, and by the
general consent of all the prophets. And therefore in this same Christ, the
Christian Church has already a perfect knowledge of God in this world, and
shall have a perfect enjoyment of him in the world to come; and therefore may
expect no other Doctrine either for sanctification here, or for salvation
hereafter.

Now in that the old Testament is alleged to prove and confirm the New, it is
evident that the substance of Religion is one and the same in both Testaments,
unless we will suppose the Spirit of God to have made use of unfit and unproper
proofs; a thing not agreeable with the spirit of a prudent man, who gains his
knowledge by succession of time, and much less agreeable with the Spirit of the
omniscient and only wise God, who sees all things at once in the
looking-glass of eternity; and if the Spirit of God confirm the new Testament
by the old, and has left both the old and the new Testament to confirm us;
then it is evident that no Christian can seek to weaken or diminish the
authority of either Testament, but he must be an enemy to his own confirmation
in the Christian faith: Wherefore among all the contestations and contentions
that have been in the Church of Christ, that controversy does least become
Christians, and does most shake the foundation of Christianity, which does seek
to undervalue the authority of the word of Christ; for if there be no
infallible certainty in the word of Chrst, it is impossible there should be any
infallible certainty in the Christian Religion, therefore they are the greatest
enemies to the certainty of the Christian Religion, who seek to add to the
Church by detracting from the Scripture; for if the Scripture has not a most
undoubted authority, the Church can have none at all; for sure we are, the
Scripture was delivered to the Church without any faults or corruptions, and
therefore we are bound not only in common charity, but also in common prudence
and justice to believe that the Church has so kept it, because all the faults
of the Text are to be laid upon the Church, to whose care and trust God did
commit the keeping of the text: for God requires two things of his Church;
first, to be a faithful keeper, then to be a faithful interpreter of his
word; and if we will needs say she has not been faithful in the keeping, how
can we choose but say, she may be as unfaithful in the interpreting of the
word of God? So that they are the greatest schismatics that ever were, who
under pretense of extolling the authority of the Church, do question, nay,
debase the authority of the Scriptures for these men have begun an everlasting
schism, which must needs last as long in the Church, as there shall be any
Christians so well persuaded of Gods truth, as to think it was worth the
registring; and of the books wherein it was registered, as to think them worth
the keeping. And Cassander himself seems to be of this opinion in his
consultation of Religion, in the chapter of the Church: I cannot deny but the
chiefest cause of this calamity and distraction of the Church is to be
ascribed to them, who being puffed up with an empty kind of pride of
ecclesiastical power, did contemn and repel those, who rightly and modestly
admonished them; wherefore I think there is no firm peace to be hoped for,
unless they begin the reconciliation who began the distraction; that is, unless
they who are set over the ecclesiastical government, do remit somewhat of their
excessive rigor, and do yield somewhat to the peace of the Church, and
hearkening to the instruction and advice of many pious men, do correct some
manifest abuses according to the rule of Gods word, and of the ancient Church,
from whence they have lately swerved.

I will set down the words in Latin, for their sakes who do understand the
Author, as well as I have the sense of them in English, for their sakes who do
desire to understand their Religion.

Non negarim praecipuam causam hujus calamitatis and distractionis Ecclesiae
illis assignandam, qui inani quodam fastu ecclesiasticae potestatis inflati,
recte and modeste admonentes superbe and fastidiose contempserunt ac
repulerunt: Quare nullam firmam pacem sperandam puto, nisi ab iis initium fiat,
qui distractionis causam dederunt, hoc est, nisi ii, qui ecclesiasticae
gubernationi praesunt, de nimio illo rigore aliquid remittant, and Ecclesiae
paci aliquid concedant, and multorum piorum votis and monitis obsequentes,
manifestos abusus ad regulam divinarum literarum, and veteris Ecclesiae, a qua
deflexerunt, corrigant. Cassander in consult. de Rel. ad Ferdin. 1. and Max. 2.
Imp. cap. de Ecclesia.

His judgment is plainly this, that the Scripture is to rule and govern the
Church, and that to advance the authority of the Church against the authority
of the Scripture (much more above it) is to give the occasion of a calamitous,
if not of a remediless schism and distraction, a distraction not possibly to
be remedied, till this irreligious tenent, which is the cause of it, be
renounced; and it is high time (though the tenent it self be yet scarce one
hundred years old) for all good Christians, that wish better to Christ's
interest then their own, to renounce it, and leave raising objections against
the holy Scripture, thinking to set up the Church by pulling down the word of
God; for besides that both Scripture and Church by their joint authorities can
never make us too sure of our Religion, it is not possible for the Church to
stand, if the Scripture fall, but they must needs both fall together.

Whereas let the Church not be questioned as a faithful keeper of the Text
(which she must be, if the Text has not been faithfully kept) no sober man
will question her as a faithful interpreter thereof; and so the Church will
have authority sufficient to confute all Heresies, and to compose all schisms;
but to deny the Text to have been preserved inviolable and incorrupt
(especially in the sense and Doctrine, if not in the very words and titles of
it) is to deny the Churches faithfulness in preserving it, and the Churches
veracity in deriving it, and consequently to deny the Churches authority in
expounding it; for if she has given us a false Text, how can we think she will
give us a true gloss: wherefore we must abhor this tenent, not only because it
fills the mouth with blasphemies, but also because it fills the heart with
uncertainties, a thing as dreadful in Religion, as detestable in common sense;
for every true Christian is bound to believe an absolute certainty of the
Christian Religion, and consequently that neither the authority of the
Scripture may be doubted, which has given the rule of Religion; nor the
authority of the Catholic Church, which has derived that rule to us, and is
entrusted by our blessed Savior to continue and derive the same rule to all
mankind to the worlds end. Saint Luke justifies both in the preface to his
Gospel, where he professes that he therefore put the Gospel in writing, that
Theophilus might know the certainly of those things wherein he had been
instructed. S. Luke 1. 4. Whence naturally follow these two inferences.

First, that writing is a more sure way of instruction, then preaching; there
is the authority of the Scripture.

Secondly, That the word being written is supposed to be preserved as it was
written; (unless we will say that Saint Luke writ his Gospel only to instruct
Theophilus, but not Christians of after ages) there is the authority of the
Church. Saint Luke makes the Gospel thus written, and thus preserved the rule
of certainty, and how shall our ungodly or uncharitable scruples make it the
rule of uncertainty?

CHAP. IV.
That though the substance and exercise of Religion be different in themselves,
yet they ought not to be accounted so now in our profession, and much less made
so in our practice; for that whosoever is not sure of the exercise of his
Religion will not much regard the certainty that is in the substance of it.

IT is not enough for a man to set his heart to seek the Lord, that he may
confirm himself in the true Religion; but he must also set his face to seek the
Lord, that others may be confirmed by him: and tu conversus confirma fratres,
it concerns not only every true minister, but also every true member of
Christ; and thou being converted strengthen thy brethren. S. Luke 22. 32.

And how could he strengthen them, but by having a profession agreeable to his
faith, and a practice agreeable to his profession; for they could not b^
strengthened by Saint Peter's faith, as it was internally in his heart, but as
it was externally in his communication and in his conversation; and indeed this
was the ready way for Saint Peter (and is for every Christian) not only to
strengthen his brethren, but also to strengthen himself: For though the
substance of Religion is written in Gods book, yet is it not written in that
man's heart who has not a tongue to profess it, and a hand to practice it:
wherefore it nearly concerns every good Christian to be ready to say with Saint
Paul (be his accusers never so importunate, and his judges never so unjust)
Acts 24. 14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the law and in the prophets.

A Text that joins the substance and the exercise of Religion both together,
and consequently must teach us so to join them; for as we cannot have better
words for our profession, so we cannot have a better example for our practice;
I will therefore accordingly enlarge my self upon them, that our Religion may
be the same with Saint Paul's, not only in substance, but also in profession
and in practice.

And I hope the Divinity will not be the worse because it is like to be
propounded by way of Sermon upon a Text; for ministers may now adays speak Gods
truth more plainly in the apostles names then in their own; and this is a truth
that would be plainly spoken, because it so nearly concerns the glory of
Christ, and the salvation of Christian souls: (...), says Saint Cyril (ep. ad
Celestinum papam, in actis concilii Ephesians. pars prima) If Christ be evil spoken
of, how shall we that are his ministers hold our peace? (...); and if we hold
our peace now, what shall we be able to say in the day of Judgment? and clearly
our Savior Christ is now evil spoken of, not only in the holy circumstances
of Religion, as times, places, and persons consecrated to his name; but also in
the very substance of it, in his holy word and Sacraments, nay in his own most
holy prayer by some men, that would be thought to promote Religion in its
substance, whiles they discountenance and baffle it in its exercise, that is to
say, both in its profession, and in its practice; both in the profession of the
apostolical Christian faith, and in the practice of the immediate worship of
Christ.

Wherefore let us consider what Saint Paul if he were present would say to
these men; for I will say no more then his words do warrant me, and by
consequent shall under my unpolished writing, but only produce his sayings, as
that prophet did to Iehoram king of Judah who gave him a letter from Eliah,
after he was assumed into heaven; for Eliah was taken up into heaven in the
time of Iehoshaphat, as appears 2 Kin. 2. 11. and Elisha had in that kings
reign succeeded Eliah, as appears 2 Kin. 3. 14. where for Iehoshaphats sake
Elisha regards the request of the king of Israel, to procure water for his
perishing army; but this writing came from Eliah to Iehoram, the son of
Iehoshaphat reigning in his fathers stead after he had committed that horrid
massacre upon his brethren, 2 Chr. 21. 4, 12. and Iunius in his notes gives
this reason for it, sic oportuit impium regem ab absentibus reprehendi, qui
praesentes non fuisset passurus, Thus was it fit that the wicked king should be
reproved by one that was absent, who would not endure the reproofs of those
that were present.

And R. David is of the same opinion (as indeed Iunius in his Notes does
frequently borrow many expositions from the Jewish D^. not the (...) the
allegorical, but the (...) the literal interpreters, whereof Kimchi is judged
the very best) and he gives us this gloss; this writing from Eliah (says he)
was delivered after Eliah was ascended, but the meaning is that the thing had
been revealed by Eliah to one of the prophets, who commanded him to write it in
a book, and give it to Iehoram, and tell him, that it was a writing sent to him
from Eliah, that so Iehoram thinking the writing sent to him from heaven might
humble his heart: So will I here present our backsliding age with a reproof
from S. Paul, that has been so many years dead, because I see that
back-sliders do not regard the reproofs of their ministers who are now living;
and I cannot but hope if I have not willingly mistaken the Apostle, that no
co^sciencious and godly man (such as we all pretend to be) will willingly
mistake me.

We must then look on S. Paul's profession in this place, as a true Christians
profession, because it is a profession of his Christian Religion, consisting of
two parts, of his worship, and of his faith, which are the two essential or
substantial parts of Religion; sides and cultus, faith in God, and the worship
of God; and though the faith be put last in the order of the words, yet is it
first in the order of nature; for because S. Paul believed all things which
were written in the law and in the prophets, therefore did he worship the God
of his fathers.

But before our Apostle shows the substance of his profession what it is; he
does show the necessity of it, why it is; for the necessity of his Christian
profession is imported in these words [But this I confess unto thee, that after
the way which they call heresie] as well as the substance of it in these words
[so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in
the law, and in the prophets.]

And indeed as it is the great duty, so it should be the great labor of every
Christian to keep his heart true unto his Savior, and to keep his tongue true
unto his heart; to keep his heart true to Christ, that he may be unmovable in
the love of his Religion; and to keep his tongue true unto his heart, that he
may be unmovable in the profession of that love; and for both these we have
here an excellent president [So worship I the God of my fathers, believing all
things which are written in the law and in the prophets.] There his heart is
true to his Savior, in the substance of Religion; and before that; [but this I
confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I,]
There his tongue is true to his heart in the profession of it: for he looks
upon the profession of his Religion as a necessary duty, not to be omitted for
fear, not to be dissembled for shame, [I unto thee] hints both these, I a
prisoner at the bar, to thee a judge upon the bench; for Saint Paul was here
arraigned as a felon for his Religion, which has been allways the portion of
the godly; for the wicked presidents and princes could not but say, we shall
not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him,
concerning the law of his God, Dan. 6. 5. I say Saint Paul had been indicted,
and was here arraigned as a felon, or a delinquent that in the midst of a
general refusal or denial of Christ, he durst own to be a Christian, and would
be constant in the profession of his Christianity; and he shows that
notwithstanding all the affronts offered him, and the aspersions cast upon him,
yet his profession being truly Christian was such as he might not be afraid,
would not be ashamed of: [I unto thee] is enough against the fear, and [which
they call heresie] is enough against the shame. Let us put on the armor of
proof against the fear, and we shall need of no mask or vizard against the
shame.

And surely this Ego in the Text, Saint Paul's example is warrant enough not to
be afraid, for so says the holy Ghost by his mouth, Be ye followers of me,
even as I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Every man is bound to follow his
Church, where that follows his Savior; but because this refractory age thinks
it the nearest cut to go to Christ to run away from his Church, it will not be
amiss to show how our blessed Saviors example did move Saint Paul, that so
both examples together may the more forcibly move us not to be afraid to make
profession of our Religion: For so it is recorded of our blessed Savior, that
before Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good confession, or a good profession, 1 Timothy 6. 13. can we be called before worse tyrants then Felix and Pilate? Can we
look for better examples then Saint Paul and our blessed Savior, the one the
teacher, the other the King of Saints? and lo, Saint Paul professed his
Religion before Felix, our blessed Savior before Pilate, and both them
professed it when there was the greatest danger of that profession, when they
were in danger of their lives (not only of their livelyhoods) for professing
it; if the tyranny cannot be greater, why should the profession be less? for so
Saint Chrysostom sets down the profession of Christ before Pontius Pilate.
(...), I came to be a witness to the truth, or a martyr for it: a witness to
the truth in times of peace and prosperity; a martyr for the truth in times of
opposition and apostasy: so should every Christian think and say that he was
not born as a man, much less newborn as a Christian for himself, but for his
Savior, to be a witness to he truth: For if this principle of Religion were
doctrinal in our hearts to believe it, it would also be practical in our lives
to perform it; but we believe not the doctrine, and therefore regard not the
practice; the faith is first dead, then the work, so says the prophet, He that
believes in him shall not make haste, Isa. 28. 16. (id est) ex impatientia and
infidelitate ad res praesentes non confugiet, says Junius, He that believes
in him shall not make such haste, as out of impatience and infidelity to comply
with the present occasions or opportunities, more to keep his estate, then to
keep his conscience, as those miscreants did. v. 15. who said we have made a
covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies
our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves. Iunius thus rightly
explaineth their wicked meaning, we are as secure, as if we had made a covenant
with death, we have done as much as wise men can do, (and more then honest men
will do) to preserve our selves to make an agreement with those that are too
strong for us; we have cast up our banks against the overflowing scourge, and
though you call it lies and falsehood, which we have done, yet we know it is our
best policy, and our best security.

This is to make haste in times of persecution for Religion, and this he will
not do, who truly believes in Christ; and because such haste commonly ends in
confusion, the Greek interpreters (and Saint Paul from them) in stead of [shall
not make haste], do thus render the words, [shall not be confounded,] Romans 9.
33. A good Christian will make no such haste as tends only to shame and
confusion, because he believes in Christ, and therefore will patiently wait his
leisure, and zealously follow his example; that is, he will profess Gods truth,
maugre all the oppositions of malicious, all the scorns and reproaches of
ungodly and profane blasphemers: for so Saint Chrysostom says, our blessed
Savior made his profession: and he has good ground for saying so (as have
generally all the fathers for what they say, though our upstart Divines come
most commonly with an Ipse dixit, a proof rather of their confidence, then of
their doctrine, such a proof as is not indurable in sound Philosophy, and much
less in sound Divinity;) for Saint John had said so much before him, S. John
18. 37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world,
(...), not only to be a witness to the truth, but also to be a martyr for the
truth: This was our Saviors profession concerning himself, not only as he was
personally Christ, but also as he was mystically so, and in that regard must
needs concern every Christian who is a part of his mystical body; for it was an
excellent determination of the Feudarie law, si in praelio Dominum non mortuum,
nec ad mortem vulneratum reliquit Vasallus, Feudum amittit, (Cataneus in
Feudo.) If the fee-farmer or copyholder leave his lord in the battle, being
wounded, but not dead, nor having his deaths wound, he is to forfeit his
fee-farm or copyhold, because of his detestable unthankfulness.

This rule will much concern us Christians, if we seriously consider it, and if
not, it will concern us so much the more: For we all hold the right of our
inheritance to heaven as it were by copy from our blessed Savior, whom God
has appointed heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. This our Lord is often wounded,
Acts 9. 4. why persecutest, why woundest thou me? but cannot be wounded unto
death, for he is our almighty God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. If we run away
and leave him in the battles, or rather the uproars and counter-scuffles of
wicked and ungodly miscreants (for man can have no title to a just war against
his Maker, and much less against his Redeemer) we shall forfeit our copies, and
perchance may loose our inheritance.

Nor let us think to excuse our selves, by saying we took them who grievously
wounded our Lord for his friends (because of their specious and godly
pretenses) not for his enemies; for it is all one as to our sin, if we leave
him, and shall be all one as to our punishment, whether he be wounded by his
enemies or by his friends; for himself owneth to be wounded by his friends, as
well as by his enemies, Zech. 13. 6. and one shall say unto him, what are those
wounds in thy hands? (nay in thine heart Lord, for our profaneness has more
pierced thine heart, then their nails pierced thine hands) then he shall
answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends; that is,
such men as pretended to be my friends, saying they would advance the glory of
Christ, and the purity of the Christian Religion; for he that was wounded for
our transgressions, Isa. 53. 5. is still so wounded by transgressors, as our
transgressions do wound us; some wound us as enemies, that appear in their own
hostile colors, some as friends that carry a pretense, a show of
righteousness: If we leave him in his wounds, we forfeit our copies, and let go
our interest to heaven; for thar of Saint Mark, 14. 50. and they all forsook
him and sled, was before his title to his Lordship had been fully cleared, and
therefore obtained pardon; but now if we forsake him and slay, neither will his
mercy pardon us, nor can our own consciences admit his pardon until we return
again; for if we will needs forget him, why should we think he will remember
us? and we may forget him, not only by letting him slip out of our memory, but
also by letting him slip out of our commemoration; it is Aben Ezra's
observation upon the words of the Preacher, Eccl. 9. 15. yet no man remembered
that same poor man, (...) this word (...) is not only to remember in the
mind, but also to commemorate with the mouth; and so it is said, no man
remembered that poor man, because no man spoke honorably of him: so is it with
us, if we commemorate not our Saviors merits and mercies, we forget them; and
therefore if we profess not his truth, we may not be thought to remember it:
for we cannot but know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be
made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. He is that poor man who by his wisdom has delivered
the city of God, and in it our souls; Oh let it never be said, Through our
fearfulness, and much less through our unthankfulness, that we did not remember
that poor man.

Secondly, this profession is such as we may not be ashamed of, [after the way
which they call heresy.] Here was a course taken to make Saint Paul ashamed,
as well as afraid; for he was not only questioned for his life, to make him
afraid; but he was also questioned as if he had been a delinquent or
malefactor, to make him ashamed of his Religion; he was publicly indicted at
a grand Sessions, as if he had been some felon or murderer; and Tertullus would
fain persuade his judges that he and his accomplices were able to prove the
indictment, v. 5. For we have found this man a pestilent fellow (Graete (...),
a mere plague or pestilence, as ready to infect our souls, as the plague is
ready to infect our bodies) and a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world. (it was they were the movers of the sedition, though the
Apostle was accused for it) and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens:
(...), one that stood in the first rank or file, as ready both to maintain and
promote the sect: We may in brief say with S. Chrysostom, that they did seek
to make him odious for his disaffection, as well as contemptible for his
Religion, and accordingly used all cunning artifice that they might so do,
therefore they said; they found him as if he had been some runaway, whereas he
was no less then seven whole days together in the temple but their chiefest
spite was against his Religion, and therefore they revile and reproach that, as
if it were impious against God (fitter to infect souls then to save them)
seditious against the State, (fitter to make factions, then to compose them;)
and ignominious in it self, (fitter for Nazareth then for Jerusalem, and rather
to be called a Sect, then a Religion:) but he knows it to be the only way of
sanctification, of peace, of glory; and will not be discountenanced in it by
their reproaches, and much less driven from it by their menacies, which is the
resolution of every one that desires to be a man after Gods own heart, and the
performance of every one that is so, Psalm. 119. 61. the bands or the
companies,, (Hebr. the ropes, the cables, that are so twisted together as not
to be unravelled, and much less to be broken) the bands of wicked men have
robbed me, (have made a prey of me) but I have not forgotten thy law. If
neither fear could drive Saint Paul, nor shame could keep him from the
profession of his Religion, it is evident that he thought it necessary by a
double necessity, the necessity of command, and the necessity of means
conducing to the end; necessitate praecepti, necessitate sinis. First, the
profession of our Religion is necessary in regard of the precept, for we have
the command of Christ for it, S. Mat. 10. 32. whosoever therefore shall confess
me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But
you will say; this only concerns his person, and who is such a reprobate as to
deny his Savior; therefore see S. Mar. 8. 38. you will find it does also
concern his doctrine; whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of
man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels.

If godly, and devout, and efficacious forms of prayer be not Christ's words,
shame upon his Church for obtruding them; if they be Christ's words, shame upon
schismatics for rejecting them: if the apostles Creed be not Christ's word, how
came it to be universally received and professed in Christ's Church? if it be,
how may it be disused or despised by any Christians? Lastly, if Christ's own
most holy prayer, be not his words, let us leave it out of the text; if it be,
how can we leave it out of our prayers? nay, how dare we multiply cavils and
blasphemies, in stead of arguments or objections, against the use of it? for
all pretense of excuse is here taken away; let the adulterous and sinful
generation be ashamed of it, but let not the righteous, and the faithful
servants of Christ be so.

Though the whole generation adulterate the truth in corrupting the doctrine of
it, yet we must keep it undefiled; though the whole generation bid defiance to
the truth, by neglecting and reviling the practice of it, yet we must continue
in our uprightness; though the whole generation be adulterous and sinful going
a whoring after their own inventions, and turning away from Christ, yet that is
not ground enough for us to bear them company.

For it is equally necessary for every Christian to profess the true Religion,
(when he is thereunto called) and to abandon idolatry and superstition; that
idolatrous decree might no more be obeyed, which forbad Daniel to pray to the
true God, then that which commanded the three children to worship a false god:
In this case, the omission is dangerous as well as the commission; for the
omission denies God whom it does not worship, as the commission blasphemes God
by false worshipping; and therefore we ought not to be terrified from the true
Religion for fear of the lions ready to devour and break us in pieces, no more
then we ought to be terrified into the false Religion for fear of the fiery
furnace ready to burn us to ashes.

And this Divinity we may learn not only from the prophet Daniel in the
captivity, but also from the prophet Jeremy before it; who of purpose to
forewarn and forearm the Jews against the temptations of their bondage, did put
down that verse in Syriack, Jer. 10. 11. whereby they were to reprove the
Babylonians for their idolatry, whereas all the rest of his prophecy is in
Hebrew: so little were the Jews to be ashamed or afraid of owning their
Religion and their God in Babylon, that they were to reprehend the Babylonians,
for their idolatry even in their own language, and in their own territories and
dominions; and we that look upon the Scripture as a perfect rule of Faith and
Life, must look upon these prophets as teaching us how to behave our selves in
persecution or adversity, no less then we look upon the rest as teaching us how
to behave our selves in peace or prosperity: For so Kimchi himself tells us
upon the forenamed verse of the prophet Jeremy; that it was writ in Syriack,
to the intent the Jews might be ready to answer the Babylonians in their own
language, if in their captivity they should tempt them either to serve false
gods, or to deny the true; for (says he) this saying of God did the prophet
Jeremy send to the children of the captivity, that they might have it ready to
answer the Chaldeans.

Secondly, the profession of our Religion is necessary in regard of the end,
not only in regard of Gods command, but also in regard of our own salvation,
for we cannot have Christ without it: so says the Apostle, Heb. 4. 14. Seeing
then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession: The inference must be this, if
we hold not fast our profession, it is because we have not yet this High Priest
to make intercession for us, and without his intercession we cannot come boldly
to the throne of grace: the same exhortation he repeats again, Heb. 10. 21, 22,
23. and reenforceth it with the same reason, not for want of variety to express
himself, (for he was called Mercury, because he was the chief speaker, Act. 14.
12.) but to keep us from variety, or rather inconstancy in our profession:
wherefore thus he argues, we cannot draw near with a true heart in full
assurance of faith, unless we hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering; for the words are spoken consequenter, by way of consequence, and
from the eversion of the consequent, the argument is undeniable to the eversion
of the antecedent: Therefore, they who are not true to themselves, holding fast
the profession of their faith, cannot easily be true to their Savior by
drawing near to him with a true heart in full assurance of faith; and
accordingly he says not, Let us hold fast our faith, which is only internal;
but, Let us hold fast the profession of our faith, which is external: It is not
enough to say that we keep the one, unless we also can show that we keep the
other.

And what then can be the reason that so many men daily fall from the
profession of the faith, but merely a twofold ignorance (though they pretend to
knowledge) one of themselves, another of their Savior: They are ignorant of
themselves, know not their spiritual state or condition, know not when they are
on the mount, when they are called to the state of grace, and therefore say not
with Saint Peter, Lord, it is good for us to be here: And they are ignorant of
their Savior, acknowledge him not as the Captain of their salvation, or they
would never forsake his colors; they look no further then the outworks of
Religion, look not into the foundation of it, for if they did they would be
unmovable; the foundation moves not, no more can he be moved that sticks and
cleaves to the foundation.

O thou which art the way, the truth, and the life; the way wherein we should
walk, the truth to direct our goings, and the life to reward us at our journeys
end; Forgive us our strayings and straglings out of thy way, direct us in thy
truth, and never leave directing us till thou bring us to everlasting life, to
bless and praise thee our most merciful Redeemer, with the Father and the holy
Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Thus we see the necessity of being constant in our Christian profession, if we
will either hear St. Paul's doctrine, or follow his example. Let us in the next
place observe the substance of that profession, that we may be unshaken and
unmovable in our constancy: For Religion is best when it comes nearest God, as
having holiness from his purity, and peace from his unity, so also having
duration and perseverance from his enternity: Accordingly St. Paul's Religion
depends altogether on God, and therefore in the profession and practice of his
Religion, we are sure to meet with nothing but with unquestionable true
godliness; for the substance of his profession is twofold, professio cultus,
professio fidei, a profession of worship, [so worship I,] and a profession of
faith, [beleeving all things, etc.] Concerning his worship it is evident he had
the true Religion, for he worshipped God; and he had also the ancient Religion,
for he worshipped the God of his fathers.

His Religion was the true Religion, in modo colendi, in objecto cultus, in the
manner of his worshipping, and in the object of his worship.

First, in the manner of his worshipping, for it was with great fear and
reverence, (...) (says he) which is a word derived from much trembling; but
whether it be so in the word or no, is not material, it must be so in the
thing; for it is the very nature of true Religion to fear God, and therefore
the one is expressed and explained by the other, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God and serve him; if there be no fear, there can be no service,
if there be no reverence, there can be no Religion: Unless the Centurion, and
they that were with him, had feared greatly, they had never honored Christ by
saying, truly this was the Son of God; S. Mat. 27. 54. A Religion without fear
cannot pierce the heart to make room for God, much less open the mouth to
glorify him; and therefore the prophet Jeremy calling upon the Jews to return
to their Religion, labors to fill their hearts with the fear of God, Jer. 5.
22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence?

Secondly, St. Paul's Religion was also the true Religion, in objecto cultus, in
the object of his worship, (...), I worship God: Divineiy S. Aug. Quod colit
summus angelus, id colendum ab homine insimo; what is worshipped by the highest
angel, that is to be worshipped by the lowest man; angels then are
fellow-worshippers with men, not objects of their worship:

And as it is with Adoration, so also with Invocation; for they both alike tend
to the acknowledgement of the Supremest excellency, the one by Deed, the other
by Word; the one by bowing to his Majesty, the other by calling upon his Mercy;
And Bellarmine himself confesses, That the Invocation of Saints was no part
of the Old Religion in the Old Testament; because (says he) the Patriarchs,
and Prophets before Christ's death, were not admitted immediately into glory.
[In carceribus inferni detinebantur.] But is it not safer to say, that
Invocation being the highest honor we can give, may not be given save only to
the most Highest, by the Religion either of the old or of the new Testament?
for there is neither precept nor example, nor promise for the Invocation of any
but of God alone in all the book of God, so that we cannot Invocate either
Saint or Angel in Faith, and whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, (Romans 14. 23.)
And if our Prayers be turned into sin, (which was a curse prophetically
intended only against the person of Judas for betraying our blessed Savior,
Psa. 109. v. 7. nor can we have share in the curse, unless we have a share in
the treachery) I say, if our prayers be turned into sin, what shall we do to
pray for the forgiveness of our sins, if so be, that we still sin in praying?
So nearly does it concern all Christians to be sure that their Religion be (as
St. Paul's was) true in the Object of their worship:

And by the same reason that his Religion was the true, it was also the ancient
Religion. Doceant Adamum Sabbatizasse, was an excellent challenge against those
who maintained the morality of the Jewish Sabbath; Let them show it was a part
of Adams Religion, or they will never be able to prove it ought to be a part of
ours; for the same religion that saved him must save us; if it be the truest,
it will appear to the first: and so is it here with S. Paul's religion; as it
was the true, so was it also the ancient Religion, for he worshipped the God of
his fathers: (...), Patrio Deo meo, says the vulgar Lat. My Fathers God (and)
my God; whereby he had both the credit, and the comfort of his Religion;

First, S. Paul had the credit of his Religion, that it had been tried by so
long experience, for so many years together, and had justified it self in that
trial; Religion like an aged-man requiring our esteem by being gray headed, and
that practice of godliness being most venerable, which is likest God, in being
the Ancient of days. Dan. 7. 9.

And we of this Church of England can have no better plea for our selves, and
ought not to use a worse, then to say, that our Religion is the same Religion
with our Fathers, though not the same Superstition with it; wherein they had
left their first Fathers, (the Apostles, and the Primitive Christians) therein
only have we left them: for we profess with those Holy men, Ezra 5. 11. We are
the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was
builded these many years ago; we desire not to lay one stone more, nor one
stone less, then was anciently laid, only we are not willing to mistake a
false for a true Antiquity. Id verum, quod primum, that is the truest which was
the first; And it was our Blessed Saviors own way of reasoning; Non sic fuit
ab initio; It was not so from the beginning, and yet it had been so for a very
long time before.

Secondly, S. Paul had the comfort of his Religion, in that he worshipped the
God of his Fathers; for his Religion entitled him to the same God his Fathers
had before him, who had showed great mercy to them, and had promised to show
mercy to their children for their sakes; the Jews had comfort in their Fathers,
when they had not in themselves; Moses uses three Arguments why God should not
destroy the children of Israel for their Idolatry, Exodus 32. 11, 12, 13. The
first was his former benefits, lest they should seem to be lost and thrown
away; The second was his own glory, lest that should be obscured, and his Name
blasphemed; and neither of these two Arguments prevailed; his former goodness
had been too much abused, his after glory might be otherwise repaired: But then
follows his third Argument, his Promises to the Fathers, and that prevails,
then immediately, says the Text, And the Lord repented of the evil which he
thought to do unto his people, ver. 14.

Gods veracity is indispensable, and must be indisputable: And thus Jarchi
glosses upon this third Argument, If they have sinned against all thy Ten
Commandments, yet remember Abraham was upright in his Ten Temptations; let Ten
go for Ten; nay more, If thou have purposed to burn them, or kill them, or
banish them, yet remember Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel thy servants, thou will not do it; Remember that Abraham at thy command exposed himself to
burning, when he went to Ur (that is Fire) in the Chaldeaens: Isaac exposed
himself to killing, and Jacob exposed himself to a long Banishment, to a
wearisome Pilgrimage: And thus God himself comforted Hezekiah, Thus says the
Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears, Is. 38. 5.

So willing and so ready is God to show mercy, that he will find a cause to
show it to the Children for their Fathers sake, when he cannot for their own:
and doubtless it is to teach them not to trust in their own righteousness, if
they be righteous, nor to distrust his mercy when they have been captivated
under the dominion of sin and unrighteousness.

And thus much concerning the worship of God, the first substantial part of S.
Paul's Religion; The second substantial part thereof still remains undiscussed,
and that is his Faith: Concerning which we may observe two things, First, That
it was the Catholic Faith, Secondly, the Proof that it was so.

First, That his Faith was the Catholic Faith, [Beleeving all things.] A
Christians Faith may be called Catholic in a twofold respect, either
essentially or accidentally; essentially in the substance of it, when he
believes all those Christian Truths that God has revealed as necessary to
salvation, and believes them because of Gods Revelation; for as the second
Epistle of Saint John is called a Catholic Epistle, though writ to a private
person, because it is Catholic or universal in its Instructions, though it be
only particular in its occasion; so is the true Faith, the Catholic Faith,
though it may be continued only among some few true Believers (for what has
been already may be again, and this case has been in the days of Athanasius)
because it is universal in its Obligation, though perchance almost singular in
its Profession.

And in this sense the Catholic Faith and the Christian Faith are both one,
whence Athanasius calls that the Catholic, which others have called the
Christian Faith; although he insist most upon the true doctrine concerning the
Blessed Trinity, even as the Imperial Edict (cited in the Code, in the Title de
summa Trinitate and Fide Catholica) gives the name of Catholics to those
Christians who had a right belief concerning the holy and undivided Trinity;
not only (as we may suppose) because the chiefest heretics of those days had
erred in that doctrine, but also because they who erred not in it, could not
easily err in denying any Fundamental of the true Christian Faith.

And thus Aquinas very briefly and plainly tells us what is this Christian or
Catholic Faith, even that Faith which brings us here to the saving knowledge,
and will bring us hereafter to the blessed enjoyment of our Savior Christ.
Credibilia de quibus est Fides secundum se, quae direct ordinant ad Vitam
Aeternam, (Nam Fides est principaliter de his quae videnda speramus in patria,
Heb. 11. 1.) Ut Incarnatio Christi and Trinitas: At alia sunt de quibus non est
Fides secundum se, sed solum in ordine ad priora, sc. ad manifestationem eorum,
ut quod Abraham habuerit duos silios. (22 ae qu. 1.) Those truths do properly
and of themselves belong to the Christian Faith, which do immediately and
directly order and dispose the believer to eternal life; for Faith is
principally of those things which we hope to see and enjoy in heaven, Heb. 11.
1. such as are the Incarnation of Christ, and the Mystery of the Blessed
Trinity: But there are other truths which do not properly and of themselves
belong to the Christian-Faith, but only in order to these (to wit) as far as
they conduce to the manifestation of them, as that Abraham had two sons:

As for the first of these, they are to be explicitly believed of all
Christians alike; As for the second, it suffices if they be implicitly
believed by those who have not the means of an explicit Faith concerning them;
so that we may thus gloss S. Paul's words, [Beleeving all things that are
written,] viz. either explicitly or implicitly; all things explicitly that are
revealed to me, and all things implicitly that are revealed in the Text: For
every good Christian has a preparation of his soul to believe whatsoever is
contained in the whole word of God, and a resolution of his soul to believe it,
as soon as it shall appear to him to be so.

Thus again the same Angelical Doctor, Nam Fidei objectum per se, est, per
quod homo heatus es sicitur, per accidens autem and secundario, omnia quae in
sacra Scriptura Divinitus tradita, continentur. (22 ae qu. 2. art. 5.) The
object of Faith essentially in and of it self, is that which brings a man to
the beatifical Vision (for Faith is to end in Vision, as Hope in Comprehension,
and Charity in Fruition) But the object of Faith accidentally and secondarily
is whatsoever is contained in the holy Scriptures, that have been delivered to
us from God.

As for the first, every Christian is bound to believe them by an actual and
explicit consent or persuasion, and say with S. Peter (S. Joh. 6. 69.) We
believe and are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God: We
believe and are sure of this all alike, Superiors and Inferiors: but as for
the second, a virtual consent is sufficient, which is not in the persuasion,
but only in the preparation of a good Christians soul, whereby he is ready to
believe whatsoever shall appear to him to be contained in the holy Scriptures;
so that we may not unfitly say, that S. Paul's Profession here sets one rule for
a Christian man, and another rule for a Christian Divine, [to believe all
things in the Law and in the Prophets] For though both believe all things, yet
the Christian man believes many things by an Implicit which the Christian
Divine (who has a greater measure of knowledge) is bound to believe by an
Explicit Faith; for it is without all dispute, that God requires not the same
degree of Faith in all alike, neither extensively nor intensively, but to whom
much is given, of him much is required. Wherefore this is the Catholic Faith
essentially, a Faith that delivers and contains either explicitly or implicitly
all that God has revealed to man for his salvation.

Again, The Faith may be called the Catholic Faith accidentally, not in regard
of the substance, but in regard of the extent and diffusion of it; as when we
believe those Truths which have been believed at all times, in all places, and
of all men that professed the Faith of Christ: Quae ubique, semper, and ab
omnibus credita est, as says Lirinensis. And in this sense Faith is but
accidentally Catholic: For it is but an accident of the Christian Faith, that
it be thus generally received or professed; and therefore we find that in
several ages of the Church, the Christian Faith has not met with this
reception or profession: I told you of Athanasius before, another will tell
you, that when our Savior Christ was put to death, True Faith remained only
in the Blessed Virgin, Fides in sola Virgin remansit, so Picus Mirandula; and
long before him Bonaventure seems to have been of the same opinion, who gives
this reason why the Saturday was more peculiary devoted to the honor of the
Blessed Virgin, because that in Her alone was the Faith of the Resurrection,
during that Sabbath or Saturday which Christ passed in the Grave: Indubitanter
credendum est quod Virgo Maria semper in side stetit; Unde discipulis non
credentibus and dubitantibus, ipsa fuit in qua sides Ecclesiae remanserat
solida and inconcussa; and ideo diem sabbati solennizat in honorem ejus omnis
Ecclesia. (Bona in 3. sent. Did. 3. 13.) He says, all the Disciples had lost
the Faith (as loath that S. Peter should go alone) and that all the Church did
solemnize Saturday in honor of the Virgin Mary, who only had not lost it; but
he means surely his own Church, which he looked upon as all; for it will be
hard to prove, that any other Christian Church ever had this belief or this
practice, but only the Latin Church; and that Church has had both a long
time* and has accordingly instituted and appointed the Office of the Virgin
Mary to be said every week on Saturday, as the Office of the Trinity on Sunday,
of the Angels on Monday, of salus Populi on Tuesday, of the Holy Ghost on
Wednesday, of the Venerable Sacrament on Thursday, and of the Holy Cross on
Friday: (Missae votivae sive commune in missali secundum usum sacrum.) And the
Rubric gives this for the reason of that Institution; Quia Domino crucifixo
and mortuo Discipulis fugientibus, and de Resurrectione desperantibus, in illa
sola tota fides remansit: Because while the Lord Christ lay dead and buried,
the Disciples being all fled, and despairing of the Resurrection, his Virgin
Mother alone retained entirely the Christian Faith.

It is not my purpose to examine the truth of this relation, nor the use that
has been made of it, I only ask the Question, was not the Catholic Faith the
same then when it had so few Professors, as it was afterward, when all the
Disciples professed it, and by their Preaching caused the whole world to
profess it? If it were not the same Faith, then was the Blessed Virgin saved by
one Faith, and we by another plainly against the Text, one Lord, one Faith,
Ephesians. 4. 5. We must therefore say, it was the same Faith then, which is now, the
very same Catholic Faith, but essentially in the substance or persuasion of
it, not accidentally in the extent or profession of it: the same essentially,
for it [beleeved all things in the Law and the Prophets,] though not the same
accidentally, for there was not the same profession of that belief: For it is
the same spirit of Faith whereby one believes, and whereby many believe, as
plainly S. Paul declares; We having the same spirit of faith, as it is
written, I believed and therefore have I spoken, We also believe and therefore
speak: 2 Cor. 4. 13. Take I in the singular, or We in the plural, it is the same
spirit of faith, in many and in few believers; We also believe and therefore
speak. There is no speaking, no praying without this Faith, and there can be no
wilful neglecting either Time, or Means, or house of prayer with it; If we
believe, we will speak; If we will not speak, it is because we do not believe.

God takes it for an honor to be trusted, he that trusts him most, honors him
most; For he most believes both his Allsufficiency and his All-efficiency: In
thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, deliver me in thy Righteousness, Psalm. 71. 1,
2. O happy man who can pray to be delivered in Gods Righteousness, when he
cannot in his own; for surely God will always be righteous, though men seldom
be so; if we make him our trust, he will not fail nor deceive his trust;
therefore he that trusts most, honors most, because he believes most; and
he that believes most, prays most: for as he that believes, speaks in his
heart, the assent being nothing else but the internal word of the mind; so he
that speaks in his heart, speaks also with his tongue, the expression of
the mouth being nothing else but the external word of the heart; by the
internal word a man speaks so as to hear and understand himself; by the
external word he speaks so as that others may hear and understand him: For
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation, Romans 10. 10.

Are you for the belief? and why should you not also be for the confession? Are
you afraid to lose the righteousness of God for want of Faith? and why should
you not be afraid to lose the salvation of God for want of the Confession? If
we did look upon the profession of Religion as an act of Faith, (as we ought to
do) and not as an act of Custom, we would all labor to be as unchangeable in
our profession, as we desire to be thought unchangeable in our Faith; then
would this distinction of Faith essentially and accidentally Catholic, come to
nothing; for as the Christian Faith is at all times equally Catholic in the
Veracity of its persuasion, so it would also all times be equally Catholic in
the extent of its profession.

And good reason it should be so, since it is grounded upon Gods Word, which is
as unchangeable as himself, for so says S. Paul, [Beleeving all things that
are written in the Law and in the Prophets;] which is the reason or proof that
his Faith is truly Catholic, because it believes nothing but what is written:
Non credimus, quia non legimus, was S. Hieroms rule to confute Helvidius;
Mariam nupsisse post partum non credimus, quia non legimus: Hoc quia de
scripturis non habet autoritatem, cadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur: We
do not believe that the Blessed Virgin had any other child after our Blessed
Savior, because we do not read it; for what has not its authority from the
Scriptures, is rejected with the same facility that it is alleged: so S. Paul
here urges the Scripture, the written word, as the rule of his Faith, and the
Law and the Prophets as the specification of that rule.

Out of this Rule our Savior Christ confuteth the devil, S. Mat. 4. nor does
the devil cavil with the manner of his confutation, as some of late have done,
as if they thought it too little to be tormented by the devil, unless they
might also be condemned by him, objecting the uncertainty of the Hebrew Points,
or the difference of the Greek and Latin Translations, or the various readings
of the Text, and as various expositions of it; and yet it is observable, that
not one of those Texts there quoted by our Savior Christ does exactly agree
with the original, word for word; not one Text is the same with the Original in
words, though every one be in sense; As for example, in Deuteronomy. 8. 3. no mention
is made of Word, yet our Savior says, by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God; so Deuteronomy. 6. 16. the Text speaks in the Plural number, Ye
shall not tempt; Our Savior quoteth it in the Singular, Thou shall not tempt:
So Deu. 6. 13. Moses says, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him; but
our Savior Christ quoteth him thus, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve; altering one word, and adding another. O that men
would be ingenuous with God, and rather then not learn this good lesson, would
learn it from this bad Master, who durst not in Gods cause refuse to be tried
by Gods Word, but was far from loading himself with more sin, by seeking to
load the Word of Truth either with Cavils or with Calumnies: for if it be
written in the Law and in the Prophets, it is not to be gainsaid, it is not to
be contradicted; if it be not written there, as it was not in S. Paul's
Religion, so it may not be in ours.

But you will say, the specification of this Rule is too narrowly confined to
the Law and the Prophets; I answer, that by these words is meant whatsoever is
comprised in the Canon of the Old Testament, as it was established and received
in the Jewish Church: For the holy Ghost plainly says, that to them (i. e. to
the Jews) were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. now the Jews before and
at the coming of Christ were of two sorts, the one properly called Hebrews,
which lived in Jerusalem or Judea, and understood the Hebrew tongue, or else S.
Paul would not have spoken to them in it, Act. 21. 40. The other called
Hellenists or Grecians, either because they were dispersed among the Greeks, as
says Baronius, Judaeos in Graecia habitantes dictos Graecos, in Palaestina
Hebraeos; or because they used in their Synagogues to read the Bible only in
Greek, as Scaliger will have it, Quia Biblia Graece tantum legere soliti sunt:
We read of these two several sorts of Jews both together, Act. 6. 1. There
arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, that is, of the Jews
that used the Greek Bibles, against those Jews that used the Hebrew Bibles in
their Synagogues: And hence it came to pass, that as the Jews themselves were
of two sorts, so they did use a twofold Text of Scripture in their Synagogues;
the one in Hebrew, the orher in Greek; whence Tertullian in his Apology (cap.
18.) advising even Painims to search the Old Testament, whereby they might be
drawn to the Christian Faith, says, That it was to be seen in Ptolemies
library, or to be heard in Rome, and other places in the Jewish Synagogues, who
by paying a standing tribute, did purchase this liberty of openly reading the
Scriptures, and that not only in Hebrew, but also in Greek, in the same tongue
wherein they were translated in Ptolemie's library, as appears by a
supplication of the Jews unto the Emperor Justinian. (Authenti. 146. Col. 10.
quod sic incipit, Aequum sane,) wherein they make request, That it might be
lawful for them to read the Greek translation of the seventy Interpreters in
their Synagogues, as their custom before had been; for in all probability the
Jews of the dispersion made this petition, because they understood not the
Hebrew text, as did not the Jews of Palestine, who did partly understand it in
it self, but fully as it was translated in the Chaldee Paraphrase, which was
therefore read with the text in their Synagogues: and hence it came to pass
that the Greek text was first generally received by the Christian Church,
because those Jews which used it were dispersed among the Gentiles, and the
Greek was now become the common language of the world, and this Greek text or
translation having been used in the Apostles times for these reasons, to wit,
for the uniting of the Jews and Gentiles into one communion, and for the common
edification of both being so united, did happily cause Saint Luke to continue
the name of Cainan in the genealogy of Christ, (because he found it in the
Greek, though it was not in the Hebrew Bible) lest if he should have altered
the long received translation, he should have discountenanced the newly
received Religion, which evangelical condescension of his did no more authorize
the Greek translation to justle with the Hebrew text, then the Apostles
condescension before, of abstaining from blood and meats offered to idols, did
authorize the Gentiles to turn Jews, or the Jews to continue in their Judaisme.
But however, sure we are the Greek Translation was first generally received,
because it was generally understood both by Jews and Christians; whereas the
Hebrew text was then fully understood only by some few Jews, and scarce at all
by any Christians.

And thus did the Jews use two sorts of Bibles in their Synagogues, and
accordingly did they deliver both sorts down to the Christian Church, the one
in Hebrew, the other in Greek; but though they delivered down a double text of
Scripture, yet they delivered not down a double Canon of Scripture, as Josephus
himself does testify, lib. 1. contra Appionem, quoted by Eusebius, Eccl. Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 10. who affirms, That the Church of the Jews had but twenty two
books for the ground of their faith; (the Masorites say twenty four books,
counting Ruth apart from Judges, and the Lamentations apart from Jeremy; and
those that accounted Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, each two books, made the
number of the Canonical books of the Old Testament full out twenty seven) and
these books (says he) were all written before the time of Artaxerxes; and as
for those which were written after that time (as all that we call Apocrypha) he
tells us they had not the same authority with the others, because when they
were written, there was not so undoubted a succession of the prophets as had
been ever before. (...). So that though those other books came down in the
Greek Bibles (if at least they were in them at that time, which is very
questionable) yet they came not down as a part of the Canon, for that was the
peculiar privilege of those books alone, which had been written in Hebrew or
Chaldee, and deposited in the ark by the prophets. And indeed we do not read
that the Jews would hazard their lives for any one book of all the Apocrypha,
but toward the Canon they were so zealously affected, that as they embraced it
for the Book of God, so they would not be divorced from it by any terrors of
man. (...). Eusebius. l. 3. c. 10. It is inbred in all the Jews from their very
nativitie, to account their Testament the word of God, to stick close to it,
and if need require, willingly to dye for it.

To this Canon of Scripture it is that St. Paul here appeals, calling it the
Law and the Prophets; for so Christ himself had called it before, Saint Mat.
11. 13. For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John: and again, S.
Luke 16. 16. The Law, and the Prophets were until John, that is, they were the
Canon of the Scripture until John, but after that time there was to be another
accession to the Canon; and it is clear that neither under the Law, nor under
the Prophets did our blessed Savior comprize any of the Apocryphal books,
because none of them is quoted in all the New Testament, as prophesying of
Christ, a truth not denied by those who stand most upon the credit of the
Apocrypha; for even in the Greek Bibles printed at Paris by the authority of
Pope Sixtus Quintus, at the end of the second volume there is an Index of all
the testimonies alleged in the New, out of the Old Testament, and not one of
them is taken out of any part of the Apocrypha.

But you will say, if this division be good of the Old Testament, into the Law
and the Prophets, what is become of the books of the Kings, Chronicles, Job,
the Psalms, and all Solomon's works, even of that whole third part of the Canon
called by the Masorites (...)? for in Genesis 16. 5. The Masor a divides the whole
Testament into three parts, (...) The Law, the Prophets, and the holy writings.

I answer, They are included in these; for it is not imaginable that Saint Paul
left them out of his Bible, although here he does not expressly name them; and
indeed, the whole Canon of the Old Testament is sometimes called the Law only,
sometimes the Prophets only, sometimes both together, the Law and the
Prophets. 1. The Canon of the Old Testament is sometimes called the Law only,
as Neh. 8. 8. so they read in the book, in the law of God distinctly; where by
the Law must be meant the whole Testament, unless we will say that the Jews in
their captivity had contracted the heresy of the Samaritans, (whom they so
much hated) to admit only of the five books of Moses for their Bible.

2. The whole Canon of the Old Testament is sometimes called the Prophets
only, as 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be
established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper: his Prophets, that is,
his word, as it is recorded in his Book.

3. The whole Canon of the Old Testament is sometimes called both together, the
Law and the Prophets, as Saint Luke 16. 29. They have Moses (the penman of the
Law) and the Prophets, that is, they have the written word of God, or Canon of
the Text.

And those (...), those other books of the Bible are no less comprised in these
two by Saint Paul, then they had been by our Savior Christ before him; for
indeed this was the most usual way of citing the Old Testament, to call it the
Law and the Prophets; and there is but one place in the New Testament, that
seems to confirm the Masorites division of the Old Testament into the Law and
the Prophets, and holy writings, and that we find Saint Luke 24. 44. where our
Blessed Savior says, That all things must be fulfilled which were written in
the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning him, where
the Psalms are put for the (...), whereof they were but one, though a principal
part.

The sum of all is this, there is a difference betwixt the substance and the
exercise of Religion, that they may be separated in themselves; but the
difference is not so great, that they may prudently and justly be separated by
us, either in our profession, or in our practice; for we see plainly that St.
Paul's profession and practice, contain in them the very substance of Religion,
so that it is impossible for any man that disesteems the exercise of Religion,
to have any high regard or esteem of the substance of it; and it is observable
in the first table of the Decalogue (which wholly concerns our duty toward
God) that as the three first Commandments concern the substance of Religion, so
the fourth concerns the exercise of it.

The substance of Religion is nothing else but the knowledge and worship of
God; for Abraham being strong in faith, gave glory to God, Romans 4. 29. whereby
we may see and must confess, that faith, and consequently hope and charity do
glorify God as well as worship, though perchance not so publicly, yet sure as
cordially, for they glorify God in the inner, as worship and thanksgiving do
glorify him in the outer man; wherefore in these consists the substance of
Religion, whose work it is to glorify God, either inwardly, which is commanded
in the first, or outwardly, which is commanded in the second and third
commandments.

I say, that as the three first commandments concern the substance of Religion,
so the fourth wholly concerns the exercise of it: and as the first Commandment
teaches us the duties of faith, hope, and charity toward God; to believe in
him, to fear him, and to love him with all our heart, with all our mind, with
all our soul, and with all our strength; and the second and third, to worship
him, to give him thanks, to call upon him, to honor his holy name, and his
word; so the fourth commandment sets us a time (and other circumstances) for
the exercise of these duties, teaching us to serve him truly in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life; for it is a gross mistake of some who
make the fourth commandment a limitation or a restriction of the first, as if
he that required our love with all our heart (to show that we ought sooner to
be without our heart, then without his love) did require the public profession
of that love only one day in seven; no, we must know and profess the contrary,
for it is impossible that the greater should be limited by the lesser, and our
Savior himself has told us, that Thou shall love the Lord, is the first and
great commandment, Saint Mat. 20. 38. Wherefore all the rest which have their
greatness from this, cannot add any greatness to it, much less can they take
away any greatness from it, and consequently the fourth commandment must needs
lose its greatness, if it be brought to oppose this, that is to say, to confine
this love of God by restraining the exercise of Religion to the Sabbath, as if
Religion were made for the Sabbath, and not rather the Sabbath made for
Religion; they who look upon Sunday as the only Sabbath, do in effect say,
That Religion was made for the Sabbath; they who look upon other Festivals as
Sabbaths also, do in effect say, That the Sabbath was made for Religion: and
without doubt they are of the surer side (which is the drift we should aim at
in all controverted points) who say, Days were made for duties, and not duties
for days: for these men do say, That the substance of Religion is above the
exercise of Religion (which God himself has taught us in the very method of
the commandments, putting the greatest in the first place) and that the
exercise of Religion was ordained and appointed to preserve and maintain the
substance of Religion, but by no means to restrain or hinder the same.
Therefore it is safest explaining the fourth commandment, not by way of
limitation or restriction, as if it limited and restrained the three former to
it self (which those men do seem to be guilty of, who put down all other
Christian Festivals as unlawful and superstitious) but by way of specification
or application, as showing the necessity of exercising that Religion which is
taught and commanded in the three former, and not leaving it in our power to
omit or neglect that exercise.

This being laid for a sure ground, that we have Gods absolute command, not
only for the substance, but also for the exercise of Religion, it must needs
follow that they who regard not the exercise of Religion, cannot regard the
substance of it: and consequently, whosoever is unsettled in the exercise of
Religion (whether it be in the profession or in the practice thereof) cannot be
thought well grounded in the knowledge and love of God.

For Divinity is a science that teaches man to live to God, and therefore he
that most lives to God is the best Divine: the best scholar may be he that has
best ordered his study, but the best Divine is he that best orders his life:
and this Divinity St. Paul requires alike of all Christians, who profess to
believe in Christ, that they have a life answerable to their faith, a
conversation answerable to their profession. Romans 6. 9. Knowing this, that
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, there is the principle of
faith; and verse 11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: there is the duty of
life. He is the best Divine, he has the most Christian Logic that most makes
such collections: for Divinity treats only of the spiritual life, whereby man
lives in and to him, by whom he lives. And as the natural life has two acts,
the first (...), whereby it gives life; the second (...), whereby it gives
motion: so has also the spiritual life two acts; The first consists in the
knowledge and love of God: the second in the profession of that knowledge, and
in the practice of that love.

Of these two acts consisted Abraham's Religion, of these two parts consisted
his Divinity; even of Faith in God, (as says S. Paul) and of Works according
to that Faith, as says S. James; and if we hope to get into Abraham's bosom,
we must first get into his study. This was David's Divinity, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust
in the Lord, there is the knowledge and love of God, (for no man will trust him
whom he does not know, and much less him whom he does not love) and do good,
there is the profession according to that knowledge, and practice according to
that love; and we must be men after David's heart, if we desire to be men after
Gods own heart: In a word, This was the Divinity Christ left unto his Church,
S. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. First teaching all nations to know God, then teaching
them to observe his commands: and we cannot be good Christians unless we be
members of Christ's Church: and if we be good Christians, our faith will make us
live in Christ, and our conversation will be according to our faith: which was
the admirable prayer of the ancient Church upon Ascension-eve, (and I cannot
better conclude this discourse then with a prayer, nor have I learned to reject
a good prayer, because I find it in the Mass Book, no more then I may learn
not to say Eli, Eli, that is, my God, my God, with my blessed Savior, because
some out of ignorance, others out of malice will say, This man calls for
Elias, S. Matthew. 27. 46.) Praesta quaesumus omnipotens Pater, ut nostrae mentis
intentio, quo Unigenitus Filius tuus, Dominus noster ingressus est, semper
intendat; and quo side pergit, conversatione perveniat. Grant Lord we beseech
thee, that whither our Savior is ascended, we may also with heart and mind
thither ascend; and whither we ascend by our faith, there we mayalso dwell by
our conversation, even in Heaven.

Amen.
CHAP. 5.
The assurance we have of the substance of Religion, in that it is spiritual,
and resembles God the author of it, in his incommunicable properties of
Simplicity and Infinity; as also in his Immutabilitie and Eternity, which
are the two consectaries of Infinity; and also in his Omnipotency,
All-sufficiencie, and Omnisciencie, which are the three consectaries of his
Eternity.

THat Religion is of a divine nature, and therefore partaketh of Gods
properties, both incommunicable and communicable, may be thought an impertinent
discourse by some, because it deals in speculatives, and perchance an impious
discourse by others, because it may seem to destroy practicks, and so join
hands with the sacrilegious profaneness of this age, which trades wholly in
destructives, not only in regard of man, but also of God himself: Yet since
the end of Religion is to bring man to God, it cannot be amiss to see how near
the work thereof conduces to that end: and it may be proper, if not necessary,
to show the excellencies of Religion, that men's eyes being dazzled with the
admirable beauty, their hearts may be inflamed with the divine perfections of
holiness.

For Holiness and Religion are one and the same thing essentially, though they
are different in our apprehensions: therefore S. Peter calling upon us to be
religious, calls upon us in these words, 1 S. Pet. 1. 15, 16. But as he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: because
it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy: where it is evident, that we are
called upon for holiness, from the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God the Father, and the communion of God the holy Ghost: not only by the
authority of God the Father, [For it is written:] and by the example of God the
Son, [But as he which has called you is holy] but also by the communion of God
the holy Ghost, [^ Be ye holy, for I am holy:] as if he had said, Holiness can
have no fellowship with impurity, therefore unless you will be holy, you must
not only renounce the authority of God commanding, the example of God
conducting, but also the fellowship of God conversing and communicating with
you: For the force of the argument consists in the proper nature of God, and
our relation to and with God. Accordingly I cannot better show the excellencies
of Religion, then by showing how near its holiness comes to the very nature and
essence of God himself, and then none will doubt but the Angelical Doctor did
rightly say, Nomen sanctitatis duo videtur importare, Munditiem and firmitatem,
that holiness imports two things, purity: (for so (...) is one far removed from
the corruptions of the earth) and constancy, (for so sanctum or sancitum, and
lege firmatum are all one) and there is an absolute necessity of both these in
that man that will be truly religious: for he that will be joined to the most
High, must be far removed from the things below, there is the purity; and he
that will be joined to the first Beginning and last End, (which is wholly
immovable) must be firm and immovable in his conjunction, there is the
constancy. Therefore says the Apostle, Romans 8. 38. Certus sum quod neque mors
neque vita separabit me a charitate Dei: I am sure and certain (not only I am
persuaded) that neither death, nor life shall be able to separate me from the
love of God. He that knows it is all one to love Religion and to love God, will
never be separated from its love: and he that knows Religion to be the service
of God, will easily acknowledge, that such as is the master, such is his
service.

And therefore all Divines agree in this, that one and the same true Divinity,
but some have likewise said, that one and the same commandment (making the
first and second but one) does teach us the true knowledge of God, and of
Religion the proper service of God; for Religion is nothing else but the
immediate worship of God; Religio distinctius,, non quemlibet, sed Dei cultum
significat, (says S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 1.) If we say, Worship,
we may possibly mean a civil or a moral worship: but if we say Religion, we can
mean no other but Divine worship, or the immediate worship of God. And
therefore there is no one attribute of God, but shows in some sort the nature
of the true Religion; for such as God is in Himself, such also is the Religion
that serves and pleases Him.

I will accordingly endeavor (with Gods grace) to show the nature of Religion
from the very nature of God, yet with such a method as shall not seek to
satisfy the curious by its exactness, but only to establish the conscientious
by its godliness, always remembering, that when God shows a mortal man his
glory, (as he did to Moses, Exodus 33. 23. though he may see much, yet much more
there is which cannot be seen; nor can any Divine whatsoever see so much of God
as he does desire, nor can he express so much as he does see: It is enough
therefore if I draw such a scheme of Gods attributes, as is fittest to instruct
my self and others in the nature of true godliness.

God is a Spirit, and so is his service altogether spiritual, S. John 4. 24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in
truth. There must be nothing in his worship of carnal inventions, and much less
of carnal affections; for to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace, Romans 8. 6. wherein we have described in few words the
true and the false Religion; the one is spiritual, the other carnal; they are
both described, 1. In themselves [to be minded] for religion calls for the
soul, whether we serve God or Mammon; 2. In their causes, the cause of the one
is flesh, of the other spirit. 3. In their effects, the effect of the one is
life, and the assurance of it, peace; the effect of the other is death:
Religion then it self is to be minded, it always engages the soul, and the
true Religion is to be spiritually minded, eagaging the soul according to the
dictates of Gods holy Spirit. And indeed Religion has the chiefest properties
of a spirit; For

1. A spirit is invisible and imperceptible by the sense: so is the true
Religion, the natural man perceives it not, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and S. Paul calls
the things of Religion spiritual things, Romans 15. 27. The Gentiles have been
made partakers of their spiritual things, and 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown
unto you spiritual things. Take heed then of a carnal eye in Gods worship, that
loves to look upon an image; but much more of a carnal affection, that loves to
look upon it self.

2. A spirit has life in it self, and gives life unto the body: so Religion
has life in it self, and gives life to those that are religious, S. John 17.
3. This is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. The true knowledge of God in Christ, (which cannot
be without a practice answerable to it) is the true Religion, and that is life
eternal, both formally in it self, and effectually in regard of us. Christ is
not only the truth, but also the life, S. John 14. 6. And so also are his
words, S. John 6. 63. The words that I speak unto you they are spirit, and they
are life: no parting Christ's words from Spirit, nor Spirit from life; and again
verse 68. Thou have the words of eternal life. Let nothing go for Christ's word
which is not spirit and life, and so spirit as to give life: wherefore if you
see a Religion a fraught with beads, pictures, crucifixes, and such outward
ordinances, be afraid of it; for these and the like are men's carnal inventions,
mere carnal images; this is not Religion but superstition: Again, if you see a
Religion fraught with envy, malice, hatred, uncharitableness, spiritual pride,
perverseness, profaneness, licentiousness, disobedience, novelty, singularity,
be afraid of it; for these and such like are men's carnal practices, carnal
imaginations; this is not Religion, but faction, such as the Apostle casts
down, 2 Cor. 10. 5. And the prophet seems to prophecy against, Ier. 43. 13.
For what are the images of the house of the sun amongst us, but the humorous
imaginations of those that abuse the light of the Gospel? And this trial or
proof of the true Religion is substantial, it concerns the very nature and
essence of it; even as to be a spirit, is the very nature and substance of God;
there are other proofs that are also essential proofs of the true Religion,
though they be not taken from the substance of God, but from his properties,
and so that is the truest Religion, whose properties come nearest to the
properties of God. I will give you a short scheme of both together, that seeing
God himself in your Religion, you may love it with all your soul, with all your
mind, and with all your strength, because so you are bound to love your God.

God cannot be known any further in his substance, then that he is a Spirit;
and so accordingly is the substance of the true Religion, wholly spiritual: But
the greatest knowledge we have of God (the only eternal Spirit) is by his
properties, and by his attributes: his properties are internal perfections
belonging to him as a Spirit merely in regard of himself, as Simplicity,
Immutability, and the like; his attributes are as it were external perfections
belonging to him in regard of his creatures, as he is the God of the spirits of
all flesh, as Mercy, Justice, Liberality, and the like; or if you desire not to
distinguish between Gods properties and his attributes, you may say, that the
properties of God are either such as remove from him all kind of imperfection
that is in the creature, as Simplicity, which removes from him composition;
Immutability, which removes from him Changeableness; Immensity and eternity,
which remove from him Circumscription or Confinement, the one of place, the
other of time; and these are called incommunicable properties, because they are
not communicable to any creature; Or the properties of God are such as do
assign to God all manner of perfection, First, in his understanding; as Wisdom
and Truth. Secondly, In his will, as Goodness and Liberty. Thirdly, In his
power of action, as Omnipotency; and these are called communicable properties,
because they are communicated to the creature, and are to be found in the
creature, though in a proportion and perfection infinitely short of what is in
the Creator God blessed for ever: Thus angels and men have Truth, and
Goodness, and Power, though not an Unerring truth, not an Allsufficient
goodness, not an Almighty power; but they have not Simplicity, Infinity,
Immutability, Eternity, which are the incommunicable properties.

And herein consists the supereminencie of the true Religion above any creature
whatsoever, that it shareth even in these incommunicable properties of God,
even in his Simplicity, Infinity, Immutability, Eternity.

And first it shares in his Simplicity: now the Simplicity of the divine
essence is such, that it admits of no composition at all, neither Physical
composition of matter and form; nor Logical, of subject, and accident; nor
Metaphysical, of act and power; whereas the purest spirits that are admit of
Logical and Metaphysical composition, though not of Physical, God only
excepted, who admits of neither, So Aquinas pr. part. qu. 40. Propter divinam
Simplicitatem est duplex identitas in divinis, eorum quae in rebus creatis
differunt; quia enim illa excludit compositionem subjecti and accidentis,
quicquid attribuitur Deo est ejus essentia; quia autem excludit compositionem
formae and materiae, in divinis idem est abstractum and concretum; Because of
the simplicity of the divine essence; there is a twofold identity in God, which
is not in any creature; First, an identity of essence and attributes, because
there is in him no composition of substance and accident, Secondly, an identity
of abstract and concrete, because there is in him no composition of form and
matter; and all action proceeding from form, it is evident that he who is the
agent in and of himself, can be nothing else but a pure form without any
mixture of any matter, Nam quod est primo and per se agens, patet quod sit
primo and per se forma, 1 par. qu. 3. art. 2. So likewise Religion admits of no
compositiou, but must still remain in its own Simplicity; for

1. There is in Religion no Physical composition of matter and form, some will
make Decency the accidental form of Religion; others the Evangelical counsels
the essential form and perfection of it, but both are mistaken; for the same
holiness is the Religion of the Christian, that was of the Jew, though not the
same beauty of holiness: There is no separating the essential matter of
Religion, from the essential form of it; and what is not intrinsecally holy,
that is, both materially and formally, cannot properly be said to be a
substantial part of Religion. Some look upon faith, hope, and charity as the
formal part, upon the other duties of the Decalogue as the material part of
Religion, but indeed such considerations are merely notional, they are not
real; for no man can reject an article of faith, but he must also reject a
commandment; nor can any man wrong any commandment, but he must also wrong an
article of faith; thus can you not expunge or deprave any commandment that
contains your duty toward God, but you must expunge or deprave some article of
faith concerning him: so also of the second table, he that depraves any one of
those commandments, depraves those articles of faith that concern the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints. Lastly, he that denies or depraves that
part of Gods law which concerns himself, without any relation to his neighbor,
does also deny or deprave some of those articles of faith that concern himself,
as The forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting.

As for example, you cannot think that any common drunkard or unclean person
does so much as seriously consider, much less truly believe the Resurrection of
his body, which he does continually defile with with his intemperances and
uncleanness. And this truth being granted, which is not to be denied, and
scarce to be disputed, it must needs follow, that it is impossible there should
be an absolute infallibility of Faith in any man, till there be in him an
absolute impeccabilitie of life: for from the corruption in manners, will
proceed the corruption in doctrine; and from corruption in doctrine, corruption
in manners; so that the doctrine cannot be the form, and the duty the matter of
Religion, since the false doctrine corrupts the duty, and the defective duty
corrupts or depraves the doctrine, and we must allow the substance of Religion
to be altogether incorruptible: and because there can be in it no corruption,
it is evident there is in it no Physical composition.

Secondly, There is in Religion no Logical composition ex subjecto and
accidente: for no part of it but is substantial and essential: Faith can no
more save without good works, then good works can be without faith: It seems
the man had faith, who came running to kneel to our blessed Savior, and to ask
him, What he should do to inherit eternal life, (sure a better faith then any
of our Solifidians have, who neither run, nor kneel, nor ask) yet our Saviors
answer is, Thou know the commandments: (S. Mark 10.) He says not, Thou
know the faith in Christ, and yet without doubt he included it; but so it
is, Christ himself teaching us to go to heaven by obedience, does plainly show,
there can be no true faith without it; and Bona opera sunt perniciosa ad
salutem, is a most pernicious and blasphemous doctrine, though Amsdortius
broached it out of zeal to the doctrine of Justification by faith in Christ,
and out of opposition to the merit of condignity in good works: for it is not
the right way to build up faith by pulling down obedience, since the Apostle
himself tells us, that the truth of the Gospel was made known to all nations
for the obedience of faith, Romans 16. 26. and it is evident, that faith it self
is an act of obedience, and a duty enjoined in the first commandment; so that
we cannot take away faith from obedience, but we must take away obedience from
the first and great commandment, that most requires it; which will not be so
much as good Judaisme, and therefore sure cannot be good Christianity: for the
Jews did of purpose in their doctrine, as it were, entangle the commandments
one with another, to show that one could not be violated alone, and that our
obedience was alike due to all: therefore did they teach, that the preface, I
am the Lord thy God, was directly on the other side answered by the sixth
commandment, Thou shall do no murder: for he that kills a man, destroys the
image of God. The first commandment it self, Thou shall have no other gods but
me, was directly answered by the seventh, Thou shall not commit adultery: for
idolatry is a spiritual fornication. The third, (for it seems they looked on
the second as included in the first) Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord
thy God in vain, was answered by the eighth, Thou shall not steal: for he that
will be a thief, will not stick to forswear himself. The fourth, Remember that
thou keep holy the sabbath day: was answered by the ninth, Thou shall not bear
false witness: for he that will not keep the sabbath, does bear false witness
of God, that he did not rest on the seventh day. The fifth, Honor thy father
and thy mother, was answered and as it were seconded by the tenth, Thou shall
not covet: for he that gives the reins to his concupiscence, shall beget a son
that shall dishonor and disobey him, (Salomom Iarchi in Cantic. cap. 4. v. 5.)
Thus did they make one commandment not only as a second, to vindicate and
avenge; but also as a principle champion, to fortify and strengthen another,
that we should pay the readier obedience to them all: for they did not this to
confound our duty toward God, and our duty toward our neighbor; but to
show, that though these several duties might be distinguished, yet they might
not be divided nor separated: for that no one commandment of the Moral Law was
accidental, but all alike substantial in that obedience which God does now
require, and will hereafter reward; so that there is no composition of Subject
and Accident in Religion.

Thirdly and lastly, There is in Religion no Metaphysical composition ex actu
and potentia, of act and power: for though this Metaphysical composition is in
the Angels, yet it is not in Religion: It Is in the Angels, for they have not all
their essence and perfection together, but as it were successively, some after
other: so that in this respect Religion has a prerogative above the Angels,
(and therefore may not stoop down so low as to worship them) for that has its
whole perfection altogether; the Old and the New Testament differing only in
modo, not in re; for the same Faith, Hope, and Charity saved Abraham that still
saves us: and hence it is evident, that all is either superstition of faction,
which cannot consist and be maintained without addition to the text, the only
rule of Religion, though it pretend not to be addition, but only exposition or
declaration: As for example; When Christ has said, Drink ye all of this; that
the Laity or Clergy not administering are not bound to drink of it, may pretend
to be a declaration of the Church, (Ecclesia declarat, nullo divino praecepto,
Laicos aut Clericos non conficientes, ad bibendum obligari: Council. Trid. Sess.
21. cap. 1.) but it is indeed a depravation of the truth by way of addition:
Again, when God has said, Thou sh'alt not worship any graven image; for any
man to say, Thou shall not worship the graven image of Venus, or Bacchus, or
Jupiter; but thou may worship the image of Christ, and of the saints, seems
to be a declaration, but is indeed a down right depravation by way of addition;
and yet this is the fleight whereby Baronius endeavors to elude the second
commandment: and why may not we as well say, Thou shall not kill, that is, Thou
shall not kill a Roman Catholic; but thou may kill an heretic? Thou shall
not steal; that is, Thou shall not assault or invade the property of a brother,
one of the godly party; but thou may of one that is a malignant, or a
reprobate, and yet not be guilty of stealing? In a word, to instance in the
fifth commandment, which has been alike trampled upon by the two grand
factions of Christendom; Honor thy father and thy mother, says God; that is,
If he be not an heretic, says the one side; for then he may be
excommunicated, deposed, and killed: If he be not a reprobate, says the other
side; for then he may be dishonored, and disobeyed, and destroyed: for having
no share in grace, he has no right to dominion. Both these grand factions from
several principles inferring one and the same conclusion, because both by their
additions deprave the truth of the Text: so that if we will needs allow that
our glosses may be additions to the rule, we must of necessity overthrow the
rule, and by not allowing Religion to be all-together at once, we shall come to
make it none at all.

It is not to be denied but Religion has had, and may have additions in regard
of men, but not in regard of it self; Si de prophetia loquamur, in quantum
ordinaturadfidem Deitatis, sic quidem crevit secundum tres temporum
distinctiones, scil. ante Legem, sub Lege, and sub Gratia; non autem quatenus
per eam humanum genus in suis operibus dirigitur, says Aquinas 22ae. qu. 174.
art. 6. Prophecy may be said to have received increase as to Articles of Faith
toward God; for he has revealed himself more fully under the Gospel, then
under the Law; and more fully under the Law, then before it; but not as to
duties of life, either toward God or toward man. The Christian knows and
believes more then the Jew, because Christ is more fully revealed unto him then
to the Jew, but yet Christ is still the same to both, The same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. The same before the Law, [yesterday;] Under
the Law, [to day;] and under the Gospel, [for ever.] One Christian may know and
believe more then another, nay more then himself; for as he increases in
years, so also in knowledge and faith; yet the truth of the Christian Religion
is but one and the same at all times, only more fully understood at one time
then at another: for which reason God requires a preparation of mind in every
true believer, to be ready to believe more when it shall be revealed to him to
be Gods truth; and to do more, when it shall appear to him to be for Gods glory.

The first part of this position concludes it impossible that there should be
any certain catalogue of the fundamentals of Faith, not only for all men, but
also for one and the same man at all times, because that may be revealed to one
which is not to another; nay to one man at this time, which was not at that
time. The second part of this position concludes it necessary, that the
Evangelical Counsels should sometimes become a piece of the Law; namely, If the
case be put that a man can in any of those particulars of Voluntary poverty,
Obedience, or Chastity, show or exercise more fully and sincerely his love of
God: and therefore says S. Hieroms gloss upon S. Matthew. 19. 20. All these
things have I kept from my youth up; Mentitur adolescens, The young man lies;
for if he had indeed kept this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, he
would not have been grieved for being commanded to sell all and give it to the
poor, no more then he was grieved for keeping all unto himself. And Origin
tells us, it was written in some other Gospel that he had met withal in Hebrew
(but sure not of sufficient authority to discountenance the Greek: for Aquinas
that tells us this story, says, Si placeat alicui suscipere illud, If any man
please to receive it) That when the young man began to scratch his head at this
saying, the Lord replied unto him, How do thou say, thou have kept the Law,
which requires to love thy neighbor as thy self, and behold many of thy
brethren, the children of Abraham, are ready to die for hunger upon the
dunghill, whiles not only thy body, but also thy house is full even to
superfluity? (Aquin. 22ae. qu. 189. art. 1. resp. ad 1.) We must therefore say
with Gulielmus de sancto Amore, in libro de periculis Ecclesiae. Paupertatem
praecipit, non actualem sed habitualem; scil. si gloria Christi id postularit,
ut cum ait Luc. 14. 26. Si quis venit ad me, and non odit patrem, non potest
esse meus discipulus; non praecipit parents contemnere, sed tantum si Christo
se opponant: That this is not a counsel, but a command, whereby our blessed
Savior commands, though not actual, yet habitual poverty; though not a
real, yet a ready forsaking of all, if the glory of Christ should so require;
as when he says, (S. Luke 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hates not his
father, he cannot be my disciple: the command is but conditional, to wit, If
his father oppose his Savior, there he must go from the one, to come and
cleave to the other. And so Aquinas himself states this question, saying,
Nullus est actus perfectionis sub consilio cadens, qui in aliquo eventu non
cadat sub praecepto, quasi de necessitate salutis existens: (22^e. qu. 124.
art. 3. ad 1.) There is no act of perfection under an Evangelical Counsel, but
may in some case fall under a precept, as being necessary to that man's
salvation. And in this particular case of voluntary poverty, he says thus,
Abrenunciatio propriarum facultatum in actu, est quoddam perfectionis
instrumentum, sed secundum praeparationem animi pertinet direct ad
perfectionem: (22ae. qu. 185. ad 2.) For a man to renounce his property
actually (that he may betake himself wholly to meditation and prayer) does
conduce instrumentally to perfection; but for him to renounce it potentially in
the preparation of his mind, does appertain directly to perfection; that is,
to the perfection of Christianity: and so in effect he says thus much, He
that will not part with his estate when Christ calls for it, is far from
showing himself a good Christian. How little this precept is now observed by
those who see their poor brethren ready to starve for Christ, both at home and
in foreign countries, and yet neither lay their miseries to heart, nor lay their
hands to their relief, Christ does now see, and will hereafter judge, when he
will not only say, Depart ye cursed, to those that made them hungry, thirsty,
and naked, but also to those that let them continue so, St. Mat. 25. 41, 42.
and good reason, for such men forget their brother Joseph in the pit, sitting
down to eat and drink, while he is ready to perish; they forget themselves, and
renounce their own bowels; they forget their God, and renounce his
commandments, not only as enforced by right of dominion (for being Lord of
all, he might call for all, without showing any other cause for it) but also as
being enforced by the light of reason: for it is observable that Saint Paul
uses more arguments to stir up the Corinthians to a liberal contribution for
the poor Saints at Jerusalem, then he uses to the stirring them up to any
other Christian duty whatsoever; for he has concerning this duty almost two
whole chapters together, 2 Cor. 8, and 9, chap. and almost as many arguments as
verses in those chapters, I will touch upon the chiefest of them, either to
fill our hearts with charity and compassion, if we will be Christians; or to
fill our faces with shame, if we will at the same time be both unchristian and
uncharitable.

The Topic of his first argument is ab exemplo, the example of the
Macedonians, cap. 8. ver. 2. That their deep poverty abounded to the riches of
their liberality, their poverty has made them rich in good works, shall our
riches make us poor in them? v. 3. Beyond their power they were willing of
themselves, and shall no exhortation make our willingness answerable to our
power? v. 4. Praying us with much entreaty to receive the gift, in the Greek it
is to receive the grace; they accounted it as a grace or favor to relieve
others, and shall we account it as a burden? they did beseech Saint Paul to
receive, and shall not he beseech us to give? they looked on this charity as a
ministering to the Saints, and a professing themselves to be of their communion,
shall we neglect it, and yet be thought either to regard or believe the
Communion of Saints? And v. 5 He sets down the reason that moved them to this
bountifulness, They had given themselves to the Lord, and could not stick at
giving of their estates to his members: and consequently may it not justly be
inferred, He that will not give of his estate to his poor brother, has not yet
given himself unto the Lord? again, v. 7. Ye cannot show (says he) that you
abound in faith, and other spiritual gifts, unless you abound in this grace
also: and v. 8. This is the only way to prove the sincerity of your love: v.
9. The only way to follow the footsteps of Christ, and to show our
thankfulness to him, for emptying himself, that he might fill us. v. 10. It Is
expedient for you; (more profitable for you then for them) v. 12. It Is
acceptable to God. v. 14. It Is agreeable to justice, which loves equality
among Christians, that as your liberality supplies their temporal, so their
prayers may supply your spiritual wants. Again, in the ninth chapter, he
insisteth altogether upon the same exhortation: as v. 5. That he had sent Titus
of purpose to make up beforehand their bounty; so we translate it, because it
was so in respect of their distressed brethren; but the Greek says (...), your
blessing, and so it was in respect of themselves: and accordingly the Apostle
quotes a verse out of the 112 Psalm, which begins with a blessing upon him
that practices this duty, as the only man that fears God; and it is such a
blessing as shall never come to an end; for he says, His righteousness
remains for ever: and well it may, for it is nothing else but a sowing seed
to immortality; such a sowing of seed as shall return an infinite increase;
first, to themselves, Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness:
secondly, to their poor brethren, It supplieth the want of the saints. thirdly,
to God, but is abundant also by many thanks givings to God: whence Beza most
excellently, Piis hominibus beneficentia est pro omnibus latifundiis; A true
godly man looks upon his liberality as his best patrimony; for keeping his
wealth, makes him rich only toward himself, but giving it to others makes him
rich also toward God.

I should here ask pardon for this digression, (though consisting of the most
needful doctrine for this hard-hearted and close-handed age) but that S. Paul
has said, Charity is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. and our Savior
Christ has said, That to fulfill the Law, is to fulfill all righteousness, S.
Matthew. 3. 15. so that charity alone is in effect, all righteousness: and that
discourse may not be called a digression from religion, which directly leads to
righteousness. But yet to return more closely to my present purpose, I say,
Religion received no new essential perfection from the Gospel, which before it
had not in the Law: for though faith is imperfect, and did admit increase in
several ages of the Church, and may still admit increase till it come to
vision; and though charity is imperfect, and must admit of increase till it
come to fruition, yet the rule both of faith and charity was not perfect from
the first beginning: so that the perfection of Religion is tota simul,
altogether at once, righteousness being immortal, and having that privilege of
immortality or eternity, that it is always present to it self; for there was
nothing left out in the first institution of it; what is substantially Religion
now to us, was so to our first father Adam; but we need not go so far back:
it is enough for Christians to look for the foundation of their Religion from
Christ and his Apostles: I say therefore more particularly, That what is
actually Religion now, was so in the Apostles times; what was then potentially
Religion, is so still, notwithstanding any declaration of the Church, and all
those additional doctrines which Pope Pius the I V has annexed to the
Niceno-Constantinopolitane Creed, and which the Clergy of Rome is still sworn
to maintain and propagate as the Catholic faith, without which none can be
saved, are no more articles of faith now, then they were in the Apostles days;
as Traditions, Seven Sacraments, The sacrifice of the Mass for quick and dead,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, The invocation of Saints, The worshipping of
images, The use of Indulgences, and that the Church of Rome is the mother and
mistress of all Churches, (vide Cherubinum in Bullario, Bulla 88. Pii Quarti.)
These and the like tenants of the present Church of Rome, either were articles
of faith to the Apostles, or cannot be so to us, unless we will divide the
Catholic from the Apostolic faith: and accordingly Baronius makes it his
masterpiece, to persuade the world, that what ever is now in the belief or
practice of the present Roman Church, and is rejected by the Protestants, was
all believed and practiced by the Church in or near the Apostles times: and
this makes him drain in all the chief controversies of the Protestants and
Papists into the first hundred years of his History; and that makes him so
bitter against the Protestants in the first Tome of his Annals (though their
name was unknown to the Church above 1400 years after) laying aside the
Historian, that he may put on the Dogmatist. And so much for the Simplicity of
Religion, wherein it partakes of the first of Gods incommunicable properties.

The second incommunicable property of God is his Immensity or Infinity,
whereby he is Omnipresent and Incomprehensible, and it is nothing else but as
it were an excess of spirituality or immateriality: For all material substances
are in their own natures circumscriptible and boundable, not so the spiritual
and immaterial substances; they are not to be circumscribed or confined
terminis localibus, sed terminis essentialibus: no spirit can be confined to or
by the bounds of any place, though all spirits are confined to and by the
limited bounds of their own essence, save only one, which is the God of
spirits: He acknowledges not any bounds of essence, cannot confine himself,
much less does he acknowledge any bounds of place, to be confined by another.
And this boundless Infinity of God, appears in three respects, for God may be
said to be infinite or incomprehensible three manner of ways, Cogitatione
nostra, Essentia sua, Communicatione essentiae; in our apprehension, in his own
essence, in the communication of his essence.

1. Cogitatione nostra, God may be said to be infinite and incomprehensible in
our apprehensions: as 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for
them that love him. From whence we cannot but argue thus, Si non Divina, multo
minus ipse Deus; If not the things God has prepared, have entered into the
heart of man, much less God himself that prepared them. Hence Aquinas denies,
that any created understanding can see the essence of God by a vision of
comprehension, (1. par. qu. 12. ar. 1.) the reason is, because his Infinity
makes him incomprehensible: and truly for our parts we must confess, that we
rather know of God what he is not, then what he is, so far are we from fully
knowing him. And so is it also with Religion, we cannot know it at all, till
God has enlarged our souls; and after that enlargement we cannot know it
perfectly, for if we could, (admirabilis amoris excitaret sui) we should be so
in love with it, as to love and desire nothing else: for so it is with the
Saints and Angels in heaven, who fully knowing the excellency of loving and
praising God, can do nothing else but love and praise him.

2. Essentia sua: God may be said to be infinite in his own essence and being:
and this Infinity of God is evidenced in his Omnipresence or Ubiquity, whereby
he is so present here, as to be present every where: and this belongs not to
Angels, no nor yet to the glorified body of Christ, though united to his Deity;
for a body cannot lose its property, which is to be in a place; but it must
also lose it self, and no longer remain a body. But this does in some sort
belong to Religion: for what is spoken of Christ's coming to judgment, may also
be fitly spoken of his coming into the soul of man: (S. Matthew. 24. 27.) As the
lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West; so shall also
the coming of the Son of man be. And indeed this alone is it which both makes
and proves the Church to be Universal or Catholic, because the Spirit whereby
it is quickened and governed, has this ubiquity. S. John 3. 8. The wind
blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not
tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that is born of
the Spirit: Spiritus spirat ubi vult: The Spirit breaths where it lists, is
not confined to a corner in Africa, as said the Donatists; nor to a chair at
Rome, as says the Papist; nor to a Family of Love, as says the Catharist: and
this argument alone is able to evince, That Religion is of God, not of man,
because of its Universal presence: for such have been the distempers of men,
that there is now scarce any one visible Church in the Christian world, which
will allow any true Religion out of its own communion; and what men do not
easily allow, they do easily wish; so that not to allow it to be so, is in
effect to wish it were not so: and consequently, If Religion did depend upon
the will of man for its enlargement, it would in short time be confined to a
very narrow compass of the world: But blessed be God, it is far otherwise, and
we may say of Religion, as the Schole has said of God the Author of it, it is
every where by its essence, and by its power, and by its presence: by its
essence, to fill the soul, and to enlarge the heart: by its power, to overruled
the affections, and by its presence, to overlook and guide the actions: and as
Religion is thus always present to us, (though few take notice of it) so the
Religious man is always present to himself, the good Christian imitating his
Savior Christ, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Semper
eadem may be the Motto of the soul that is truly Religious, though not as to
its action, (for even our prayers are not always the same, though our
necessities are, but sometimes with greater, sometimes with lesser fervency)
yet as to its resolution: a sanctified man always resolves for the best, though
he does not always perform what he resolves; and he is always ready to give an
answer of the hope that is in him, if you look upon him in his resolution,
though if you look upon him in his action, he may sometimes scarce seem to have
any hope of eternity, or if he have, may seem not to regard that hope.
Wherefore it is best for us to believe that Religion is always present to it
self, and always present with us, calling upon us to fear God and to keep his
commandments; for this belief will make God himself always present with us, to
sanctify us here, and to save us hereafter, and will make us delight in the
presence of his grace, till we come to enjoy the presence of his glory. Thus
the Apostle says, that our blessed Savior has undertaken to present us holy,
unblameable and unreprovable in the sight of God. Col. 1. 22. (...), to make us
stand by in a readiness; and Saint Jude recommends all faithful souls to him
that is able to present them faultless, v. 24. (...), to make them stand in his
presence, he will not make them stand there who do not care to appear there;
what we most love, we most willingly fancy as present with us: so he that truly
loves God, most wishes his presence, (...), there is a great reverence which
belongs to the presence of a man that overlooks us, much more to the watchful
eye of eternity, the Sun of righteousness, and his overlooking countenance, and
over-spreading light; if shame will not let us offend against a man on whom we
can have but an accidental dependence for a temporal and momentany being, how
much more will it keep us from offending against God, on whom we have an
essential dependence both of our being and of our well being for ever? (...),
eye-service to men is forbidden, Ephesians. 6. 6. because our masters on earth cannot
be always present with us, so that eye-service to man is but mere hypocrisy
and dissimulation; but it is not so toward God our master in heaven, who is
always present with us, so that the best way to serve him cordially is to serve
him with eyeservice, considering that he always looks upon us; and therefore we
ought always to act as in his presence. Excellently the Casuist Reiginaldus,
Adjumenta operandi bonum in ordine ad nosipsos, sunt, consider are Christum ut,
mandantem, spectantem, adjuvantem; The main helps that encourage any man in
regard of himself to do that which is good, is the consideration of Christ's
presence, as if he were actually standing by him, to command, to observe, and
to assist him, that he commands me to obey, observes me in my obedience, and
assists me in obeying: whosoever truly has this consideration of Christ,
cannot but have his heart full of true Christianity, and he that has his heart
full, cannot have his mouth or his hand empty; for out of the abundance of the
heart not only the mouth speaks, but also the hand acts and works.

But Gods Infinity though it most appear to us in his Omnipresence, yet is it
the immediate property of his essence, which being a pure act or form, admits
of no materiality to limit and to confine it: and so also are the duties of
Religion in some sort infinite in their very essence; for nothing is
proportionable to God, but what is infinite and like himself; and therefore it
is said, Be ye perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, St.
Mat. 5. 48. God justly requires a perfection of degrees in all duties of
Religion, though he graciously accepts a perfection of parts; it is well for us
that the truth and sincerity, not the measure and degree of our faith or
repentance puts us in the state of salvation, for else we should not only be
always doubtful of that state, but also very often come short of it: and yet
in truth our faith, and repentance, and obedience is infinite as it is in Gods
acceptance, though not as it is in our performance; for though it be performed
in much unrighteousness, yet it is accepted in an infinite righteousness, even
the righteousness of the eternal Son of God.

3. Communicatione essentiae, Thirdly and lastly God may be said to be infinite
in the communication of his essence, which he has communicated in an infinite
variety to infinite sorts of creatures, which all have their being only from
him. So also Religion is infinite in this respect, that it can never be enough
communicated: he that is truly converted himself, will make it his whole work
to strengthen his brethren, according to that advice of our blessed Savior,
St. Luke 22. 32. which having been given to St. Peter in his own person, cannot
but more peculiarly belong to all his successors, then many things else that
are more zealously claimed by most of them: and how then may the Scriptures be
denied to the people in a tongue they know, or prayers be obtruded to them in a
tongue they know not, since the Scripture communicates Religion from God to
man, and prayer expresses the desire of that heavenly communion? Wherefore
that of the Trent Council, Sess. 22. cap. 8. Ne tamen oves Christi esuriant,
pastores frequenter aliquid in missa exponant, etc. Least the flock of Christ
should be hunger-starved, the pri^st ought often to expound the missal, is in
effect a tacit Confession, that though Religion ought to be effectually
communicated to the people, to feed their souls unto the full; yet they are
resolved it must not be so, but that they shall still wholly depend upon the
priests for a little broken bread; whereas all that know good to be naturally
diffusive of it self, most willingly acknowledge, that Religion the greatest
good of this world, and the only practice of the next, the more it has of
goodness, the more it ought to have likewise of the diffusion.

The third incommunicable property of God is his Immutability; for as God
changes not in his essence, I AM has sent me unto you, Exo. 3. 14. so he
changes not in his government or dominion of souls, I am the Lord, I change
not, Mal. 3. 6. he changes not as our Lord, and we cannot pretend to change as
his servants; for Religion has also its share in this Immutability; in which
sense I persuade my self Justin Martyr called Abraham a Christian, and Socrates
too, though a heathen, yet observing some of that righteousness, all which we
Christians do or should observe: and he proves that the Christian Religion is
that whereby God was then, and is now truly worshipped and glorified: what the
heathen had of idols, they had of Paganism, what of moral duties or of
reasonable service, they had of Christianity; (for there is no reason why the
martyrs (...), may not agree with the Apostles (...), Romans 12. 1. So likewise
the Jews and the Christians have the same Religion in substance, though not in
ceremonies or circumstance, or the old Testament could not be brought so
appositely to prove the doctrines of the New: (or Moses have been said to bear
the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11. 26.) and so likewise all Christians have one
and the same Religion, though they have many different professions; the
Christian Religion being altogether unchangeable, one and the same in all
places and at all times, and what is otherwise will be found either to be
superstition, or faction, or matter of order, but in no case matter of
Religion, it being impossible that what is truly Christian in one place or
time, should be made either Antichristian or Unchristian in another. And this
property of Immutability Religion partakes in a higher degree then the
sublimest spirit in the highest order of Angels; for they are all changeable by
a power without them, though not by a power within them: but Religion is not
so, God himself cannot make another Religion or service of himself, then that
which he has already made, I mean as to the substantial and internal nature of
holiness, consisting in the immediate duties of Religion: Aliquid dicitur
mutabile dupliciter, uno modo per potentiam quae in ipso est, altero modo per
potentiam quae est in altero. Aquin. par. 1. qu. 9. what is absolutely
unchangeable cannot be changed by any power, either within or without it self:
so is God, so is the service of God, Religion, which God cannot change no more
then he can change himself, that is, no more then he can change his truth that
taught it, his justice that prescribed it, his excellent majesty that still
requires it, his infinite mercy that still accepts it; for it was Gods own
Spirit that spoke those words by the mouth of Gamaliel, Acts 5. 38, 39. If this
counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye
cannot overthrow it: and upon serious examination we shall find it most true
in our Christian Religion: what has been either in the doctrine or practice
thereof merely the counsel or work of men, has in every age of the Church come
to naught, and so will to the worlds end: but the counsel and work of God in
the Christian Religion never yet was, never shall be overthrown; for the gates
of hell might prevail against the Church of Christ, could they prevail against
the Christian Religion that upholds the Church.

But since chopping and changing in the profession and practice of Religion is
now the great sin of many that would be thought the best Christians, I will
endeavor to show that it should be also their shame no less then it is their
sin, for in vain is the pretense of Godliness in changing that which God has
ordained should partake of his own unchangeableness: and indeed in every
respect that God himself is unchangeable Religion is so too; now God is
unchangeable in three respects, essentia, voluntate, loco; in his essence, in
his will, and in his place; and Religion would fain also have this immutability.

First, God is immutable in his essence, Rev. 1. 4. Grace be unto you, and
peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come: from him who
always was, always will be the same that he now is; as if he had said, From him
that is wholly immutable in his essence; that is, from God; for no man is the
same either that he was, or that he shall be: and no Angel is the same that he
was, for there was a time when he was not: and the first Council of Nice
thought it a sufficient proof of the judgment of the Catholic Church
concerning the Divinity of Christ, in that they said, she anathematized those
who said, There was a time when he was not, which is all one as if they had
said concerning him, That he was God, who was, and is, and is to come; for God
alone may be said to have an unchangeable Being, who has his Being from
himself: all creatures whatsoever have once changed from a not-Being to a
Being, and would again change from a Being to a not-Being, did not the same
hand which at first made them, still preserve them; for it is proper only to
the Creator, who alone is of himself, to be alone unchangeable in himself: and
so is Religion unchangeable in its essence; for being the service of God it
must be like its master, since by the rule of Relatives, Change in the service
cannot but proceeed from change in the master, at lest from some change in his
will, if not in his nature: and therefore the argument rather pleads against
the worship of Angels, which is alleged by Bell. l. ^. de beat. and can. San.
c. 14. then for it where he thus argues: the Angels were worshipped before
Christ's incarnation, by Abraham and Lot, Genesis 18, and 19. but the Angel forbad
St. John to worship him, Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9. ob reverentiam humanitatis
Christi, for the reverence he did bear to Christ now in the nature of man. I
answer, That reason is more forcible against invocation which humbles the soul,
then it is against adoration which humbles the body, since Christ took upon him
as well the soul of man as his body; and consequently, if we may not adore the
Angels without disparaging the humane nature in Christ, much less may we
invocate them without fear of that disparagement. But because this answer does
not satisfy the argument, but rather invert it, if not retort it; I answer
secondly, That therefore the worshipping of Angels cannot be made good
Religion, because it was not as good Religion in S. John, as it is supposed to
have been in Abraham: For if it had been once good Religion, it would have been
so still, and must needs be so for ever; since it concerns the very object of
worship which must be unchangeable, and not the manner of it, which may in some
respects be capable of change: For Religion is Gods service, and knows no more
how to change it self, then how to change its master; else serving the time,
would come to be good Divinity, instead of serving the Lord, which now is taken
for a false reading of the text (Romans 12. 11.) occasioned by short writing of
(...), which being enlarged by vowels, might easily be turned into (...),
instead of (...). Wherefore we must say, that the same religious worship is
commanded in Genesis and in the Revelation, in the first and in the last book
of Gods word; and if the Angel might not lawfully be worshipped by S. John, he
might not lawfully be worshipped by Abraham, or by Lot; that is to say, not
with a religious worship; and therefore we must confess, that their worship, if
religious, was directed only to the Son of God, who then frequently appeared
with the Angels, as it were preluding to his own incarnation: If not religious,
but either a civil or a moral reverence in acknowledgment either of the Angels
government, or of their excellency; it is improperly alleged as an act of
Religion: for if worshipping of Angels had been a duty of Religion either to
Abraham or to Lot, it must also have been so to S. John; and then the Angel
would not have said, See thou do it not, but, See thou do it. And this is proof
enough, That worshipping of Angels is no part of Religion, because it self is
confessed to be a changeable worship; but Religion cannot be denied to be an
unchangeable service in its own nature and essence, even as the God is, whom it
serves.

Secondly, God is immutable or unchangeable in his will: Vult mutationem, non
mutat voluntatem, as says Aquinas (par. 1. qu. 19.) He wills a change, but
changes not his will: and accordingly God threatening destruction to the
Ninivites, and yet not destroying them, may not be said to have changed his own
will, but to have willed their change. For though in Promises and in Precepts
Gods revealed will is a declaration of his secret will; yet it is not so in
Threats or comminations of vengeance; there God does not so much declare what
himself wills, as what we deserve: therefore threats may not be fulfilled, and
yet Gods will still be the same; not so Promises or Precepts: for God would not
promise, if he did not intend to perform; nor would he command, if he did not
intend we should obey: from his Promise, we have an interest in his mercy, for
all good is clamable: from his Precepts, his Justice has an interest in us;
for all evil is punishable, and all transgression is evil; so that God cannot
promise or command what is not according to his will, unless he should dispense
either with his mercy or with his justice: but in predictions of vengeance the
case is otherwise; God does often threaten what he does not will, and therefore
may change his threats, and yet not change his will: for his threats show not
so much his will or his intent, as our deservings: that mischief is already
toward us in its causes, and will befall us in effect, if by speedy repentance
we prevent it not. Wherefore though all promises of mercy, that have not a
condition specified, are to be understood absolutely, because they give an
undeniable and universal right; and all precepts of justice are to be
understood absolutely, because they have the nature of a rule or law, to which
the subject may not give an exception, but must yield his obedience; yet
prophecies of vengeance are to be understood only conditionally, because they
are not declarations of Gods will, but only of man's present state and
condition; that in the condition he now is, he deserves destruction, but if he
repent and change his condition, Gods will is still fulfilled though his threat
be not; for he therefore threatened destruction, because he was willing to
save, not to destroy; so that God is still unchangeable in his will, and the
change is only in man, who changes his condition.

And so also the true Religion would have us change, but will not change it
self; and consequently remains unchangeable in the wills of those that truly
love and practice it, for they do not desire that any thing of Religion should
be otherwise then it is by Gods appointment; they would not have it lawful to
transgress a commandment, or disbeleeve an article, and much less can they
think it lawful to corrupt or expunge either; they cannot away with nice
distinctions, or quarrelsome disputations in Gods service, to mispend that zeal
in words, which was given for actions, conceiving them more willing to
disclaim, then to obey the rule, who are desirous to distinguish or to dispute
upon the command: they cannot rely upon unwritten traditions as the ground of
Religion (they can, as the ground of decency and order) because they have
altered, and may alter after the will of men; (besides that some of them do
directly oppose the revealed will of God:) for what tradition ever found such
general reception, as that which the Jews called the prophecy of Elias, That
the world should last 2000 years before the Law, 2000 years under the Law, and
2000 years under the Gospel: yet very many and good Divines do not think this
tradition of sufficient authority for any one to believe, not only because the
computation of the time past confutes it; but also because it directly opposes
that saying of Christ, S. Mark 13. 32. But of that day, and that hour knows
no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son of man, but the
Father only: to which it is a vain reply, That though the day and hour be
uncertain, yet the time and the year may be known; for the reason wherefore God
will not have his coming to judgment revealed unto men, is, that being sure of
the thing, but not sure of the time, they should be always prepared for his
coming; which reason is as forcible against the knowing of the year, as it is
against the knowing of the day or hour; nor would our Savior Christ so readily
have owned the ignorance of that day, if the year had been revealed before by
one of his Prophets; for S. Augustines answer is here most true, Nescivit
adrevelandum, Christ said he knew it not, because he would not have it revealed
or known to us: agreeable to which is Epiphanius his distinction, of (...),
(Haer. Arian.) Christ had a twofold knowledge, one of Speculation, another of
Use; his knowledge of Speculation concerned himself, and by that he knew the
day of judgment; his knowledge of Use concerned us, and by that he said he
knew not the day of judgment, because he would not have us to know it; which
distinction Melancthon has turned into this rule of Theology; Dicta,
alialoquuntur de Officio Christi, alia de essentia: sic hoc dictum loquitur de
Officio; Officium Filii Dei est in hoc ministerio, cohortatari ad vigilantiam,
non definire tempus and horam, ne homines reddantur securi: Some sayings are
verified of the office of Christ, some of his essence; this saying, That he
knew not that day and hour, is verified of his office: for it was the office of
Christ in his ministry, to exhort men to watchfulnes, not to define times or
hours, which was in effect to invite them to security.

Thus we see this famous tradition, so generally cried up by the Jews, as the
prophecy of Elias, is upon examination found to be very uncertain, which makes
very sober men infer, that there is, or may be the same uncertainty in other
traditions: and therefore they that will be sure to serve God in faith, must
and will appeal to the written word, which alone abides one and the same for
ever: for Religion, being Gods cause, loves to be tried by Gods undoubted word;
and where she cannot say, How read thou? she cannot but say, Why beleevest
thou? that our Faith should not stand in the wisdom, much less in the devices
of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. for that faith which stands in
the wisdom of men, stands like a house built upon the sand, tottering and
shaking at every violent blast or storm: but that faith which stands in the
power of God, stands firm and immovable by virtue of that power.

Thirdly, God is immutable in place: whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I flee from thy presence? Psalm. 139. 7. for by reason of his
Immensity being in all places at once so as to fill them, he cannot possibly
change his place.

And so also is Religion immutable in place; that is to say, in its proper
place, the faithful soul, though not in its common place, that is, the Church
or Congregation of believers: or Religion is immutable in the Catholic Church,
though not in particular Churches that are members of it: for the proper place
of Religion, where it may be found, and where it is preserved, is the holy
Catholic Church which we believe in our Creed, and that consists only of the
Elect, for none are joined in Communion with Christ but those that have the
Spirit of Christ, and they though never so far asunder, have one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. It is admirable to consider the great mutations
that have befallen both Eastern and Western Churches; how that in several ages
they have more or less changed their Liturgies (though in no age abolished
them) yet it is more properly said that these Churches have changed their
Profession or Exercise of Religion, then that they have changed their Religion;
for that still remains the same Christian Religion in all Churches that still
remain Christian, though under diverse and different professions.

The fourth incommunicable property of God is his Eternity, which is a branch
of Immutability, as time is of motion; for Eternity is a duration or
continuance which has neither beginning nor ending: so Psalm. 91. 2. Even from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God; Thou art God from everlasting; that
is, without beginning: and thou art God to everlasting; that is, without end.

And so also is Religion Eternal both from everlasting and to everlasting; from
everlasting in the reason of it, because it is a service or reverence due to
God by virtue of his excellent Majesty; and consequently, that due is Eternal
with his very Being: but only to everlasting in the practice of it, because
there was no creature from everlasting to practice it: how then should we
exceedingly desire to know Religion, how to love it, how to practice it,
whereby alone our souls are prepared to believe Eternity, and to enjoy it, and
to employ it? an irreligious soul, could it possibly get to heaven, would not
know what to do there; for there is nothing but the practice of Religion, or
praising God, Rev. 19. 1, 5, 7.

Again, as God in that he is Eternal, owes his Beginning and Continuance to
none but only to himself: and as Eternity because it is from it self, is
therefore without a Beginning; and because it is of it self, is therefore
without an end: so true Religion has in some sort its Being from it self, for
it is bonum in se, it is good in and by it self, and therefore has its
subsistence in and by it self; let the whole world turn Atheist (as it is
turning apace) yet the true Religion will still be the true Religion: there may
be in the practice of Religion many things good, because they are commanded;
but in the substance of Religion, the internal goodness is the reason of the
external command: so that Religion is indeed a beam of that light which
proceeds from the Father of Lights, showing unto Angels and men what they are
to know, love, and do, and so leading them both to the Light everlasting: for
as God himself is, so is his service; and therefore I could not better explain
the properties of Religion, then from the properties of God; Only God has his
properties immediately flowing from his own essence, but Religion partakes of
these mediately from God, as it is his service: God has these properties not
only Formally in himself, but also Originally from himself: Religion has them
Formally in it self, but Originally from God; Thus has Religion all those
properties of God which are incommunicable to the Creature, and thereby appears
to have in it self more of Divinity then any Creature whatsoever, either in
Heaven or in Earth: for these being the properties of the true Religion in it
self, show it to be spiritual far above the nature of all created spirits,
whereby themselves draw nearer to the God of Spirits in their affections, then
in their natures.

If therefore, thou O man desire to be truly Religious, thou must desire to be
spiritually minded; and the way to be so, is to have a kind of Simplicity or
Incomposition, that is, a sincerity of the soul in the love of God; To have a
kind of Immutability, that is, a Constancy; to have an Immensity, that is, a
servent Zeal and Alacrity, which will not endure to be straightened or confined;
and to have an Eternity, that is, an unwearied perseverance in the Faith, and
Fear, and Love of God: Nay, indeed these same properties are already in thy
soul if thou be truly Religious: for then thou art spiritually minded, and thou
can not but have an uncompounded soul, by sincerity of its service, not
dividing thy affection betwixt God and Baal, betwixt Christ and Belial: Thou
can not but have a constancy in his service, which will let thee be no
Changeling (a thing as monstrous and abominable in the second, as in the first
birth;) thou can not but have an alacrity and fervency of spirit, which will
not be circumscribed or confined either to, or by time, or place; neither to a
Conclave at Rome, nor to a Consistory at Geneva, nor to a Conventicle in
England; for as Christianity it self is not confined, so neither the soul as
it is Christian; but joins in Communion with all Christians that ever were, or
that are, or that shall be, in the honor and love of Christ; thy house is too
little, thou will to the Church; nay the Church is too little, thou will to the
Catholic Church, the whole Church Militant; thy spirit shall be with theirs,
when theirs is with Christ; nay the Catholic Church is too little here on
Earth, thou will up to that part of it which is triumphant in Heaven: for
Christian duties as they are practiced here will cease with our lives,
therefore the Christian soul will look after such duties as she may practice in
Heaven; and at least in habit, if not in act, will even here be eternally
Religious; as we are divinely taught by our own Church, saying with a most
Catholic spirit, It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should
at all times, and in all places give thanks unto thee O Lord, holy Father,
Almighty, everlasting God, thereby showing us the Immensity of Religion, That
it is not to be circumscribed, to, or by any place, for it is meet that we give
thanks in all places; and also the eternity of Religion, that it is not to be
confined to or by any time, for it is meet that we give thanks at all times,
Eternity being the blessedness we look for, the means whereby we compass it,
must needs be eternal, not only in the efficient cause, God himself; but also
in the instrumental cause, that is Religion.

And since Omnipotency, All sufficiency and Omnisciency are but three branches
of Eternity; It is necessary before I come to the Communicable Properties, that
I speak of them; for God in that he is Eternal, is Omnipotent, since there
could be no other fountain of power, unless we would make two Eternals: and the
same God as he is Eternal is All-sufficient, for having his being of himself,
he must needs also have it perfectly in himself; and lastly, the same God as he
is Eternal is also Omniscient, for it is the Property of Eternity, to have all
things present to it, as to be always present to it self: wherefore it will be
worth our while briefly to consider these Properties as they are in God, and as
they are also in Religion, the service of God; and first of the Omnipotency.

Gods Omnipotency or Almighty Power appears especially in two things; First,
that he has power to do all that he will; Secondly, that he has power over
all when he will; had he not the First, he could not be Almighty in himself;
had he not the second, he could not be Almighty in our esteem; the first tends
to the Execution, the second to the Declaration of his Almighty power; The text
does ordinarily prove them both together, as 1 Timothy 6. 15. the Son of God is
called the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords:
The only Potentate that has power to do all that he will, and has also power
to do all when he will; as King of kings, and Lord of lords: Wherefore those
men that under pretense of setting up Christ's kingdom; do fight against the
power and authority of earthly Kings and powers, do directly oppose this Text
as well as very many other; for they would so make Christ a King and a Lord, as
not a King of kings and Lord of lords, but as a king and lord of the meanest of
the people; whereas though there be never so many kings and potentates and
lords, yet he is truly, the only Potentate, the only King, the only Lord,
because he is so in and of himself; for all others have power, and kingship,
and lordship from him; as himself has taught us, S. Mat. 28. 18. All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; It will be a hard task for any man to
show who it was that took this power from Christ, and gave it to the people,
that kings and princes here on earth should have their power derived from them
and not from Christ; but yet least we should think the Power and Kingdom of
Christ, not the same with the Power and Kingdom of God, we find them both
joined together, Rev. 11. 15. where it is said, The Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever
and ever; He, not they, to show there is but one kingdom, but one power, of
Christ and of God: and lest we should further think, the kingdom of Christ
could not be set up without pulling down other kingdoms, it is made evident in
the 17 v. that his kingdom is set up, by taking to himself his great power to
reign, not by giving it to the people; v. 17. We give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, which art, and wast. and art to come, because thou have taken to thee
thy great power, and have reigned: where we see the Elders in heaven give
thanks to God, for taking to himself his Almighty power; In imitation whereof
our Church has taught us to say, We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship
thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord God,
heavenly King, God the Father Almighty, joining also God the Son, and holy
Ghost in the same power and in the praise; and without doubt we have little
reason to persecute, but we have great reason to honor a Church, that teaches
us so to praise God here on earth, as we shall hereafter praise him in heaven:
for thus is God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost Almighty in power, and
therefore thus to be praised for being so. If then thou murmr and repine
under this power when it punishes thee, or presume upon it, much more rebel
against it when it sustaineth thee, thou art as far from heaven as thou art
from true thankfulness.

But if God has this Almighty power, that he can do all, how is it that S.
Paul says, He cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. The answer is easy, God
cannot do what he cannot will, and he cannot will any thing of impotency, for
that were directly to overthrow his Omnipotency; and in this sense did
Nazianzene speak like a Divine, saying, (...), One kind of impossibility with
God, is his unwillingness; as the text plainly says of the Son of God, That he
could there do no mighty work, (S. Mar. 6. 5.) that is, he would there do no
mighty work, because of their unbelief; which unbelief of theirs was so great a
miracle to him, as that it hindered his working all other miracles: accordingly
Divines do say, That some things are impossible to God, in regard of his own
will, because he cannot will them; as to give a new Gospel, to make a new
Religion, to destroy the whole world with a second deluge, to extirpate the
Catholic Church, which imply no contradiction in themselves, and therefore
might be done, though God having promised the contrary, cannot now will to do
them: Habent rationem factibilium, sed non habent rationem factoris. Other
things are impossible to God in regard of themselves; because they are (...),
or (...)* non habent factibilium rationem, are not things to be done; nec
rationem factoris, and therefore God cannot do them, as those things that imply
a contradiction; as for the same thing to be and not to be at the same time:
for this being a contradiction, cannot be without a lie; and therefore that was
a strange assertion of Bellarmines, (lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 7. and deinde) and
not maintained for its own sake, when he said, Per divinam potentiam posse ab
homine tolli facultatem seu potentiam intelligendi, interim ut maneat homo:
That God can take away a man's reasonable faculty or power of understanding, and
yet leave him still a man: for that is all one as to say, That God can make the
same man reasonable and unreasonable: for if he take away his reasonable
faculty, he makes him unreasonable: and yet, if he leave him still a man, he
leaves him reasonable: for this indeed were Impotency in God, not Omnipotency;
if he could make both parts of a contradiction true, because they cannot both
be made true without a lie

And thus also is Religion Omnipotent, by virtue of Gods Omnipotency: for it
has power to do all, and has power over all; Casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having in
a readiness to avenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 5, 6. The power of the sword
may cast down images, but it is only the power of Religion that can cast down
Imaginations, and they no less then the other, do exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God: the power of the sword can bring into captivity every man to
the obedience of the Conqueror; but it is only the power of Religion can bring
into captivity everythought to the obedience of Christ: That power can avenge
the disobedience without, which is but half disobedience; but it is only this
power can avenge the disobedience within as well as without, that is, all
disobedience. Will you raise an army against Religion? Alas! That can scatter a
people that delight in war; for when Christ shall come to judge among the
nations, they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks, Isa. 2. 4. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day, v. 17. and this being the sign the prophet has given us of the
coming of Christ's kingdom, let not those who are of a quite contrary
disposition, pretend to be under Christ's government, who labor to exalt man,
not Christ: for as Dagon fell before the Ark, so must all ensigns of hostility
fall down before Christ's banner: and if they that carry them, do not fall to
the earth with them, it is because they have not yet seen the light of Christ,
nor heard his voice, saying, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Act. 9.

But we shall the more clearly see the splendor of this Omnipotency, if we do
seriously consider, how suddenly the light of the Gospel, notwithstanding all
oppositions and persecutions, did shine to the remotest corners of the earth;
insomuch, that Polidore Virgil says, (lib. 2. Hist.) Ab initio orti Evangelii
Britanniam fidem recepisse; That Great Britain received the Faith from the
first preaching of the Gospel; and yet Britain was looked upon as divided from
all the habitable world, (and penitus toto divisos orb Britannos) many years
after Christ. But Gildas says more expressly, (De excidio Britan. in Biblioth.
Patrum, Tom. 5) Tempore ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris, etc. We know that
Britain received the faith toward the latter time of Tiberius: now the very
last year of Tiberius was the year of our Lord 38 in Baronius his account; so
that it is evident if Gildas say true, (and he was worse then mad if he
produced his scimus to broach a lie) That Britain received the Christian Faith
within five years after the resurrection of Christ: and therefore sure not from
the Church of Rome; for that Church did not it self receive that faith, till
the 45 year of the Lord, that is, at least ten years after the resurrection of
Christ, as says the same Baronius, that in the year of Christ 45, on the 15 of
the Calends of Febr. (that is, the 17 of our January) the Church of Rome was
instituted by S. Peter, and the Popes chair erected there; and on that day this
prayer was used in ancient rituals, Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ineffabili
sacramento Apostolo tuo Petro principatum Romae urbis tribuisti, unde se
Evangelica Veritas per tota mundi regna diffunderet, Praesta, quaesumus, ut
quod in orbem terrarum ejus praedicatione manavit, Universitas Christiana,
Devotione sequatur. (Bar. Antichrist. 45. nu. 1.) And surely if the truth of
the Gospel did go into all the world from Rome, and came not to Rome till the
45 year of Christ: there were at least ten whole years from the Resurrection
and Ascension of Christ, wherein the truth of the Gospel did lie as it were hid
in a corner: but this was certainly far otherwise, and Baronius his old prayer
must therefore be accounted a new invention, and might easily from the very
style of it be so proved; for sure very few parts of the now Christian world,
did stay so many years for the Christian Faith: And if the Church of Rome were
so unhappy to stay so long for Christianity, that she might get Supremacy, she
may still be so unhappy (for ought we know) as to keep the Supremacy, and lose
the Christianity: however certain it is, that innumerable other Churches, and
amongst the rest, this of Britain received the Christian Faith long before that
time, the Sun of Righteousness breaking forth like the Sun in the firmament,
not unto any one place or people alone, but unto all: What providence brought
Joseph of Arimathea, or any other Apostolical man to England before St. Peter
came to Rome, might perchance be accounted a curious, but would certainly be a
vain dispute: it is enough for the proof of the Omnipotency of the Christian
Religion, That the Savior of the world who died for all, did not suffer the
distance of place to keep or intercept from any the speedy knowledge of his
salvation.

The second branch of Eternity is All Sufficiency: and therefore God as he is
eternal, is likewise all-sufficient; as he is eternal of himself, so he is
all-sufficient in himself: which all sufficiency consists of these three parts:

1. That he has an absolute perfection.

2. That he has this perfection in and from himself.

3. That this perfection is not only sufficient for himself, but also for all
things besides himself.

First, God has an absolute perfection not only of essence or being, but also
of operation or working; for even in that grand Objection, That the wicked do
flourish, and the righteous are oppressed, appears a threefold perfection of
Gods operation; First, in the variety of his providence, that he dispenses
both prosperity and adversity: Secondly, in the justice of his providence, that
he punishes sin in his own servants, who though they can say, their
adversities are greater then other men's, yet can they not say, they are so
great as are their own sins: Thirdly, in the mercy of his providence, that he
punishes them only temporally, therein showing his mercy to be greater then
either their adversities or their sins.

And so also true Religion has an absolute perfection both in its being, and
in its working; that is, both in its substance, and in its exercise: and what
defects or faults are to be found in the exercise of it among any sort of
Christians, belong to the men, not to the Religion: Some will needs kneel to
Images that were of their own making, others will not kneel to God their Maker;
the one may go for the exercise of Superstition, the other for the exercise of
profaneness, but neither can go for the exercise of Religion.

Secondly, God has his perfection in and from himself: For who has first
given unto him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? Romans 11. 35. (...),
who has given first unto him? We may, and do, and must give unto God: O give
thanks unto the Lord, says the Psalmist, there is our (...), our giving unto
him; but even in this is his (...), his giving first to us: for he gives us the
grace, before we give him the praise; we give, but he gives first: for he has
his perfection in and from himself, we have ours in and from him.

And so has Religion its perfection in and from it self, whence it is called
the beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 96. 9. The Christian Religion is the Beauty of
earth, even as Christ the Author of it is the Beauty of Heaven: And the Beauty
of Holiness which is in Religion, consists not in our adorning of Churches, or
in outward pomp and Ceremonies, but in its own internal harmony and congruity
to, and conformity with him, who is the very Beauty of Heaven, the proper place
of Holiness, as being the habitation of the Holy One: If thou come to worship,
thou receivest beauty from the holiness, not the holiness beauty from thee; thy
soul is beautified thereby, and made the Love of God and Angels, but Religion
was so of it self ever before: as it is said, Psalm. 93. 6. Holiness becomes
thy house for ever; the holiness of Gods House is a becoming holiness, and it
is a holiness for ever, a holiness that was before the creation of the world,
and a holiness that shall be after the end thereof: Therefore outward ornament
may not be pleaded for as matter of Religion, but only as matter of decency;
for decency has much of its perfection from men, but Religion has all its
perfection in and from it self: and as God is proved to be all-sufficient from
himself, because he made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. (for even the
wicked though without the order of particular, yet are within the order of
universal providence:) For God wills himself and his own goodness only as the
end, but all other things as ordered to that end, that is, for himself, and in
relation to his own goodness: So is it with Religion, it admits of Ceremonies,
not for theirs, but for its own goodness, and thereby appears to be sufficient
of it self without them: If the shadow grow longer then the substance, it is an
argument the Sun is yet either not at its height, or past it: so where
Ceremonies are more looked after then piety and godliness, it argues in men a
defect of Religion and goodness: God using the creature as an instrument, does
not so use it, for the want of virtue, but for the abundance of his goodness,
non propter defectum virtutis, sed propter abundandam bonitatis, says Aquin.
par. 1. qu. 22. So Religion using the ordinances of men, does it not for want
of sufficiency in it self; but to impart some excellency to those ordinances,
Ut dignitatem causalitatis communicet, to communicate to them so much virtue,
as to make them, though not the essential yet the accidental causes of devotion
in us, and therefore we may no more reject such Ordinances, then we may reject
the helps of devotion.

Thirdly, Gods perfection makes him not only All-sufficient for himself, but
also for all things else besides himself: Psalm. 84. 11. For the Lord God is a
sun and a shield, (a sun to give life, and a shield to preserve it) The Lord
will give grace and glory, (grace to our sanctification, glory to our
salvation, that is, a full sufficiency for this life, and for the next) And no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, that is, he has
already given all good things that we were able to receive, and when we shall
be able to receive the rest, he will give them too; for he will withhold none,
according to that of the same Prophet, Psalm. 145. v. 16. Thou openest thine
hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing; scil. whether it be
living in earth or in heaven: So is true Religion, not only sufficient in and
for it self, but for us also: for what other reason can be given, why so many
men are contented to lose all, that they may keep their consciences, but only
this, That Religion wants no perfection in it self, and brings them that follow
it to enjoy the perfection that is in God.

The third branch of Eternity is Omnisciency, and God in that he is Eternal, is
also Omniscient. Now the Omnisciencie of God consists in these two things;
First, in that he fully knows himself: Secondly, in that he fully knows all
other things in and by himself.

First, God fully knows and understands himself, the whole compass of his own
mind and intentions, what they are, have been, or ever shall be, because
eternity is present to its self: hence it is said, Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18. and this is a property not
belonging to the Angels, and much less to men: the Angels know what their
intentions have been, and still are, but not what they shall be for ever,
because then they could comprehend Infinity, which cannot be in the
understanding where it is not in the essence: but as for us men, we know not
what our intentions have been, (Remember not the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25. 7.
q. d. I have forgot them, O do not thou remember them:) nor what they are, Jer.
17. 9. The heart of man is deceitful above all things, (and indeed never more
deceitful then when it labors to deceive it self:) nor what they shall be:
the best way concerning those, is to say with the Psalmist, Keep thy servant,
Psalm. 19. for he that cannot tell what he shall resolve to morrow, can less
tell what he shall resolve all his life: but God knows all his intentions from
the beginning to the end, so that he alone fully understands himself.

Secondly, God fully knows all other things in and by himself: this is a truth
acknowledged by the father of lies, though therefore acknowledged that it might
be abused, as truth is still by all the devils instruments: Genesis 3. 5. Ye shall
be as Gods, knowing good and evil; that is, all things: for they were either
good or evil; the lookingglass of eternity in it self representing all things
to it self; Good things by their proper forms and resemblances; Evil things by
the contrary good: Bonum in se per speciem, malum non per privationem in se
existentem, sed per bonum oppositum, Aquin. par. 1. qu. 14. Thus the Lord is a
God of knowledge, (1 Samuel 2. 3.) as fully knowing himself, and as fully knowing
all other things in and by himself. So also is Religion a thing of great
knowledge; cares not for an implicit faith in the knowing, no more then in the
assenting part: cares not for a faith which does not know for it self, no more
then for a faith which does not assent for it self; and so is in effect
omniscient, because it makes us know our selves, and know our God, that is in
the serpents words, Know good and evil: for we know evil in knowing our selves,
and we know good in knowing our God.

First, Religion is in effect omniscient, because it makes us know our selves;
nothing else cares to look after the deceitfulness of the heart, but sure
nothing else can find it out: no man knows so much of himself, as he that is
religious; he knows his own heart, his own thoughts, what they have been,
exceeding sinful; what they are, very penitent; and in some sort, what they
shall be, very perseverant: for upon supposition of Gods grace, he can promise
to himself a perseverance in the way of godliness. This you will say is a
comfortable doctrine, and I doubt not, but if you addict your self wholly to
your devotions (to have a constant communion with God) but you will find it as
certain as it is comfortable. For if natural reason makes men very knowing, that
well improve it, though it be but the dim light of men; how much more does
Religion make men knowing, that rightly use it, since it is no other then the
glorious light of God? so that to live but one day according to the rules of
piety and devotion, will make a man more truly wise; then study without piety
will make him, though he be a constant student very many years. The prophet
David tells us this, Psalm. 119. v. 98. Thou through thy commandments have made
me wiser then mine enemies; but lest any should say, That may easily be, that a
good man should be wiser then his enemies: for none are enemies to good men
that have not first lost their wits as well as their honesty; therefore he
adds further, I have more understanding then all my teachers, v. 99. And lest
we should still object, That the teachers are not always the wisest, especially
if they teach too soon, before they have been diligent learners; he adds yet
further, I understand more then the ancients, v. 100. that is, then those that
have been longest learners before they became teachers: That Is the most
profitable wisdom, which makes a man wiser then his enemies, for it keeps him
from being circumvented; that is the most honorable wisdom, which makes a man
wiser then his teachers; for it gives him a preeminence of understanding far
above his condition; that though he is called to be a learner, yet he is
enabled to be a teacher: Lastly, that is the most infallible wisdom, which
makes a man wiser then the ancients: for that gives him a preeminence of
understanding above the condition of mortality, which can attain to no greater
wisdom, then such as is gained by long travel of study; and confirmed by
longer experience of years: so that if we desire that wisdom which is most
profitable, most honorable, and most infallible; we must do as this holy man
did, converse more with God then with men: for so he professes, v, 104.
Through thy precepts I get understanding: we may see that understanding is to
be gotten by studying the precepts of men, but we cannot get it, savingly but
by studying the precepts of God: for the prophet Daniel says, The light
dwells with God, Dan. 2. 22. and S. John says, He that loves his brother,
abides in the light: what is this light, but the truth, or the true Religion
which has these two properties of light, that it is (...). that it enlightens
and reproves; it enlightens the understanding by the knowledge of God; it
reproves the will, the affections, and the actions for the practice of evil.

Secondly, Religion is in effect Omniscient, because it makes us know all
things besides our selves; that is, all things that are proper and profitable
for us to know; things wherein are the true comforts of this life, and the true
blessings of the next; so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 15. The spiritual man
judges or discerns all things: the more he is spiritual, the more he is able
to discern: the more he increases in Religion, the more he increases in true
wisdom and knowledge: as the man in the Gospel, when his eyes were first
opened mistook men for trees, but afterward when he was perfectly cured, he
could distinguish both aright: so the spiritual man at his first conversion,
has but a confused knowledge of the things necessary to his salvation, but
afterward he comes exactly to judge and to discern them all: nor will his
faith whereby he knows in part, leave him till he come by degrees to a clear
vision. Let several knowing men all rejoice in the excellencies of their
several knowledges, but let this be the privilege only of the religious man,
That he alone knows whom he has believed, and whom he may trust: for he alone
is able to know how God disposed of him before his life, and how he will
dispose of him after his death.

CHAP. VI.
The assurance that we have of the substance of Religion, in that it resembles
God in his communicable Properties, as Truth, Goodness, Purity, and Liberty.

IT is the special privilege of the good Christian, that the same Religion
does make him imitate God here, which will make him enjoy God hereafter: for
the same God who is the Author of Religion, is also the best pattern of it,
because Religion resembles him not only per modum vestigii, but also per modum
Imaginis, not only as having his footsteps (for so every creature represents
the Creator) but also as having the exact lineaments and pourtraitures of his
very Image; so that Gods Service is best known by the knowledge of himself, and
the Properties of the true Religion are best declared by declaring the
Properties of God.

The Incommunicable Properties have been already spoken of, his Simplicity,
Infinity, Immutability, Eternity, and the three branches or adjuncts thereof,
his Omnipotency, All Sufficiency, Omnisciency; I now come to the communicable
Properties of God, which are especially these three, Truth in his
Understanding, Goodness in his Will, and Activity in his operative faculty,
answerable to his Truth and Goodness; for the Intellective faculty is vain
without the Affective, the Affective without the Operative: and therefore
according to the proportion and perfection of the one, is also necessarily the
proportion and perfection of the other: God first knows, then wills, then
works; As he knows, so he wills, not Irrationally; As he wills, so he works,
not Ineffectually: And so is Religion very Intellective, and very Affective,
and very Active or Operative; these three properties are all joined together,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep therefore and do, for this is your wisdom and your
understanding: where we have wisdom for the Intellective, keeping or observing
for the Affective, and doing for the Operative faculty of the soul: Accordingly
Divines tell us, there are some virtues that are Catholic or Universal,
belonging to the whole worship of God in general; and having alike influence
upon all the Commandments, or upon all the duties of Religion, whether they
concern God immediately in himself, or mediately in his Image; and these
Catholic virtues are Wisdom and Prudence in the Understanding, Integrity,
Alacrity, and Constancy in the Will; and Zeal and Perseverance in the action;
that Election, Affection, Action, may all join together to glorify him, who is
the first Truth to direct our Election, the last Good to satisfy our
Affection, and the chiefest Excellency to excite and provoke our Action:
Wherefore it is the property of Religion to make a man more judicious, more
affectionate, and more industrious then he was before, though he had never so
piercing a Judgment, never so strong and vehement Affections, never so
industrious an Action.

For the soul of man though it consist of these three faculties, the
Intellective or knowing, the Affective or desiring, the operative or working;
the Intellective faculty whereby it knows what is to be done, the Affective
whereby it desires to do it, and the Operative or Active, whereby it sulfils
that desire in doing; yet this very soul does not, cannot rightly know or
desire or do, till it be thoroughly instructed, exalted, and quickened by
Religion; nay, on the contrary all the while it continues irreligious, it is
stupid in knowledge, perverse in affection, and sluggish in action: for though
there is in all spirits a power of knowing what is true, of desiring what is
good, and of effecting what they desire, yet we cannot but acknowledge that
these three faculties in all men (who have their spirits clogged with sinful
flesh) are very much weakened by sin, and consequently must labor, that they
may be strengthened by piety and godliness: yet will I not enter upon a
particular enumeration of Gods communicable Properties (I have been too long
already upon this argument) much less upon a particular explication of them;
for it will be sufficient for my purpose, (which is the advancement of the true
Religion in the hearts and lives of men) if I briefly insist only upon these
three (to which all the rest may be reduced) and they are, Truth in his
Understanding, Goodness in his Will, and Purity in his Action; (for we cannot
better consider Gods Activity, then in the Purity of his Action) unto which we
must also annex a short discourse of Liberty, as belonging to all three, that
is to say, to Understanding, and Will, and Action.

And these three Properties of Truth, Goodness, Purity, as they are eminently
in God, and evidences of his perfection, so are they also eminent in Religion,
the service of God.

And first of the Truth of God and of Religion.

God is true by a metaphysical and by a moral Truth.

First, By a metaphysical Truth, as having the true knowledge of all things,
Psa. 139. 2. thou understandest my thoughts long before: God understands our
thoughts before they are; the angels not when they are, and therefore they are
defective in truth, because defective in understanding: for Truth
metaphysically is a conformity of the thing with the understanding: and
accordingly our blessed Savior is particularly called the Truth, as being the
Omniscient Wisdom of God, and the eternal Understanding of the Father, even as
the holy Ghost is the eternal Love both of Father and Son.

Secondly, God is True by a moral Truth, as having his Affection, Expression,
Action, agreeable to his knowledge, and that in three respects.

1. As Truth is opposed to Falsehood, for God neither wills nor speaks an
untruth.

2. As Truth is opposed to Dissimulation, for God neither dissembleth nor
deceives.

3. As Truth is opposed to Inconstancy, for God changes not his judgment in
truths declared or determined; he changes not the event in truths foretold or
prophesied; for in promises he keeps his word and his truth, if man perform the
conditions; in threats he may not keep his word, and yet keep his truth,
because they are but conditional:

And as for deceiving the Prophets Ezekiel. 14. 9. and 1 King. 22. 23. we
generally and truly answer, Tradit diabolo decipiendos, he delivers them over
to the devil, to be deceived by him; so says the Text, Because they received
not the love of the Truth that they might be saved, for this cause God shall
send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might
be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2
These. 2. 10, 11, 12. a text that gives us a fearful, but yet a full account of
all those strong delusions among men, which led directly to the Father of lies:
the first step was a voluntary unrighteousness in not loving the truth: the
second step is a strong delusion in believing a lie: the third step (God keep
them from treading in that, who have trodden in the two former) is a necessary
damnation both for not loving the truth, and for having pleasure in lies: but
still God is true, though every man be a liar; for God deceives the Prophet
Ez^. 14. 9. as he hardens the heart Exodus 10. 1. permissive non efficienter,
permissively no^ efficaciously, by not inhibiting or not purging those ill
qualities that are already is the heart, not by infusing any ill qualities into
it; and therefore though he says, I have hardened Pharaohs heart, yet he says
unto us, Harden not your (own) hearts; and accordingly he threatens in
Ezekiel, to destroy such a prophet from the midst of his people, whose heart
was hardened so fa^ as to deceive himself and others, whereas he could not in
justice destroy him only for being that which himself had made him nay, this
permission is most plainly set forth in that parable of 1 Kin. 22. for all that
God does there, is only to let the evil spirit go forth, that is, not to
inhibite him from going and deceiving, not to send him down from heaven: For it
is evident, that the evil spirit never did, and never can come into heaven
again, since he was first thrown down from thence. And thus briefly God is True
Metaphysically and Morally; Metaphysical truth consisting in the right
apprehension of things as they are in themselves; Moral truth in the right
affection and profession of things as they are apprehended; and this profession
is either in word by veracity, or in action by sincerity, or in continuance of
action by constancy; so that moral truth is opposed to falsehood, because it is
the same with reality; to dissimulation, because it is the same with sincerity;
and to wavering and floating, because it is the same with certainty.

And this same metaphysical and moral truth is also in Religion, passing from
the Master into his service: for the Father seeks such to worship him, who
worship him as he is, that is, who worship him in spirit because he is a
Spirit, and who worship him in truth because he is the Truth, S. John 4. 23,
24. The worship in spirit points at the metaphysical truth of Religion, which
requires a true apprehension of God; the worship in truth points at the moral
truth of Religion, which requires an Affection, Profession, Action agreeable to
that true apprehension; and for both these has our own Church taught us to
pray (Collect 7th Sunday after Tri.) Graff in our hearts the love of thy Name,
Increase in us true Religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great
mercy keep us in the same. Do you look for the metaphysical Truth of Religion?
It Is in the knowledge of Gods Name, (which must be presupposed before the love
of it, since no man can love what he does not know) that you know God by his
true Name, such as himself has proclaimed Exodus 32. 5, 6, 7. or, that you
apprehend God as he is, not set up to your self an idol in stead of God, as do
all those who worship not the Father, by the Son, in the unity of the Spirit:
Again, do you look for the moral truth of Religion? It Is in the love of Gods
Name, that you love him according to your knowledge, or that you have your
affection agreeable to your apprehension: for to know God, and not to love him,
is in effect to proclaim you do not truly know him, since the same God is the
first Truth and ground of our knowledge, and also the last good and cause of
our love: and you may here likewise find this moral truth of Religion in all
respects: First, in its Reality, for it is the very true Religion opposed to
falsehood, or superstition, it is indeed Gods Name. Secondly, in its Sincerity or
Fidelity, for it is all Goodness, not only in the tongue but also in the
heart, and in the hand, as Truth is opposed to Dissimulation or Hypocrisy:
Thirdly, in its certainty or perseverance [And of thy great mercy keep us in
the same] as Truth is opposed to uncertainty or to levity and inconstancy.

Religion then has and must have a twofold truth; the first consists in a
right apprehension whereby we believe the thing as it is: the second, in a
right affection, profession, and action, whereby we love and profess, and do
the thing as we believe: and there cannot be a more religious prayer invented
by the wit of Piety, nor a more affectionate prayer practiced by the zeal of
Charity, then that which is so remarkable both for its Piety and for its
Charity in our own Church (Collect 3. Sunday after Easter) Almlghty God, which
show to all men that be in error the light of thy Truth, to the intent that
they may return into the way of Righteousness, there is its piety toward God
rightly descanting upon Gods intent in showing the light of his truth; to make
men righteous, not to make them inexcusable; These things I say that ye might
be saved, S. Joh. 5. 34. not only convinced, says our blessed Savior, and
yet he spoke to those who had not the love of God, v. 42. Grant unto all them
that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ, Religion, that they may eschew
those things that be contrary to their profession, and follow all such things
as be agreeable to the same; there is its charity toward men, affectionately
desiring, that as they have a Christian Communion, so they may also have a
Christian conversation, lest their unchristian conversation destroy and
disanull their Christian Communion, which without doubt it has done already in
many ages of the Church, and will do still to the worlds end, unless God in his
mercy fill our hearts more and more with this true piety toward himself, and
with this true charity one toward another. And for this cause the Commandments
are in the judgment of some Divines accounted practical Articles of the
Christian Faith, because if these be left out in our conversation, what is true
in it self of our Creed, is as it were false to us, since either our profession
gives the lie to our apprehension and affection, or our action to our
profession: for this is the difference betwixt speculative and practical truths
(speculative and practice credibilia) those things that we must believe
speculatively, and those that we must believe practically; the first, which are
summed up in the Creed, are truly believed if there be a conformity of the
thing with the Understanding; but the second, which are summed up in the
Decalogue, are then only truly believed, when there is a conformity of the
affection, and of the profession, and of the action, with the belief: thus they
that worship Images do expunge the second, and they that resist Magistrates do
expunge the fifth Commandment, if not out of their books, yet at least out of
their Faith; in their Books they may be true believers, but in their Lives they
are (in these particulars) little less then Infidels.

Now see in what a miserable condition is the irreligious miscreant, who so
believes as to make void his own faith; and so receives the truth, as to make
the truth it self a lie to him, either for want of a sanctified affection in
not loving it, or for want of a sanctified action in not practicing it: and
hence we may likewise see and must confess, that not he who knows most of the
doctrine of Faith is the best Believer, but he that most loves what he knows in
speculatives, and he that most practices what he knows in practicks: so that a
great Scholar may fully know the truth, and yet to him it may be as a lie,
because he loves it not, for to him it is what he desires it should be;
contrariwise an ignorant peasant may not fully know the truth, and yet to him
it may be the saving truth, because he loves it, for what is wanting in his
head, is made up by his heart: O my soul glory not in the knowledge of Christ,
but in the love of that knowledge: glory not in thy learning (if thou art
Mistress of any) but in thy Religion, to which thou ought to be a servant:
learning may make a man wise to ostentation, but it is only Religion can make
him wise to salvation. Do not then with Pilate, ask thy Savior what is truth,
and then go away without his answer, much less may thou turn to those Jews
that help to crucify him: for if thou know these things happy art thou (not
because thou know them, but) if thou do them: thy happiness consists not in
knowing Christ, but in practicing him; nor is it possible for a man to be long
defective in his practice, and not to be defective also in his knowledge, since
what is sinful in the deliberate action, is sinful in the will; and what is
sinful in the will, is erroneous in the judgment or understanding: and this
is the reason that a man may be a heretic, not only in credendis but also in
agendis, not only in Articles of Faith, but also in Duties of Life; nay,
indeed he cannot easily be a heretic in the Duties of Life, and still remain
truly Orthodox in the Articles of Faith: as for example, he that prays to a
Saint or Angel in stead of God, directly overthrows the first Commandment, but
indirectly also the first Article of his Creed, I believe in one God; for
Prayer is a Sacrifice that may be offered only unto God: again, he that
wilfully dishonours his Governors whom God has set over him, directly
overthrows the fifth Commandment, but indirectly also the ninth Article of his
Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints; for being
a Lover of division, he is not a true believer of that Communion: and this we
may take for a general doctrine fitter to be received then opposed.

First, that any practical error which is against our duty toward God, does
tend to a speculative error against some part of the Creed which concerns
God: as he that does not honor God as God, does in effect deny him to be maker
of heaven and earth; therefore says the Psalmist, O come let us worship and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker; as if we could not truly
believe him to be our maker, if we will not worship him with all possible
reverence and fear.

Secondly, that any practical error which is against our duty toward our
neighbor, does tend against some Article of the Creed that has relation to
men: as he that will not be subject to the authority of his lawful governors,
Civil or Ecclesiastical, does in effect deny, The Catholic Church; and the
Communion of Saints.

Thirdly and lastly, that any practical error against the duty which a man
owes unto himself, does tend against some Article of Faith that concerns
himself: as he that is a common drunkard, or unclean, or profane person, does
in effect deny the Forgiveness of sins, and the Resurrection of the body.

Wherefore when Almighty God requires every Christian to be true or faithful
unto the death, that he may receive a crown of life, (Revel. 2. 10.) he
requires of him a double truth or faithfulness, not only that he be true and
faithful in his Belief, but also (and much rather) that he be true and
faithful in his life.

First, God requires a faithfulness in our Belief, by a right apprehension of
Gods word, not adding thereto, nor diminishing therefrom: for that is forbidden
from the beginning of the Law, (as Deuteronomy. 4. 2.) to the end of the Gospel, (as
Revel. 22. 18, 19.) not adding thereto by Superstition, nor diminishing
therefrom by Faction: for as the superstitious seeks to flatter his God
(Religiosi sunt Deorum amici, Superstitiosi Deorum adulatores) so the factious
seeks to flatter himself: do thou thy duty, and let alone thy flattery: for it
is not safe for thee to flatter thy God, and much less to flatter thy self.

Secondly, God requires faithfulness in our affection, life, and conversation;
that we may be saithfull professors of his truth, and as faithful witnesses
to it: for a man may be Gods witness by speaking, by living, by dying, and he
that is commanded to be faithful unto the death, that is, to be faithful in
dying (if God call him to it) is already supposed to be faithful in speaking
and in living: for he that bids thee be fathfull unto thy death, does surely
suppose thee already faithful in thy life, and commands thee to continue so:
and this faithfulness is showed by thy words in confessing, and that is
veracity; by thy deed; in professing, or practicing, and that is fidelity; and
by thy perseverance unto the death both in words and deeds, and that is
constancy.

This is the truth of Religion both formally and efficiently; formally in
regard of it self, and efficiently in regard of us; that as it is true in it
self, so it also makes us true and faithful at all times, and in all respects:
and if you further desire to know how far any Christian Church has followed,
or does follow this truth, you may try it by this touchstone, which being
infallible in reason, cannot be erroneous in Religion. (...), says Aristotle,
(lib. 4. Eth. cap. 13.) Greece is not so happy as to afford us a name for this
moral truth, and may justly own to be Graecia mendax upon that account: but he
that has that virtue, is called by Aristotle, (...) A true man both in life
and word: and is to be known by these three properties; that he is full of
equity, will do no man wrong; is full of authoriey, will ask no man's leave,
(whereas the hypocrite is not (...), himself for all others, but (...), all
others for himself;) and lastly, is full of modesty, will ask no man's praise,
and therefore will set forth himself, though in true colors, yet with the
least varnish; so also is the true Religion; first, it is full of justice and
equity, for it looks only after Gods glory, not after this worlds advantages,
and therefore declares things as they are, not as they conduce to men's
interests; secondly, it is full of authority, in all words and deeds still like
it self, neither dissembling what is, nor pretending what is not, that it may
please men rather then God, but says with S. Paul, For if I yet pleased men, I
should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. thirdly, it is full of modesty,
rather delighting in extenuations of its own worth, then in amplifications of
it; for though hypocrisy be a great talker, and a greater boaster, yet
Religion does very much abhor all vain babbling, and much more all vain
boasting; Not walking in crastiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully,
but by manifestation of the truth, commending it self in every man's conscience
in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. and therefore any Christian Church
whatsoever, that either turns Religion into State policy, making Christ's
interest subservient to its own; or that changes its Doctrine to please its new
lords and masters; or that boasts too much of its own Purity and Perfection, as
if none could be Christians but in outward communion with it, none good
Christians in comparison of it, must in these respects be said, not to be (...)
true Church: for though it be Metaphysically a true Church, yet is not so
morally, not according to moral truth, for that it wants either equity, or
authority, or modesty, or all three, that is to say, it wants some necessary
attendant of moral truth.

And here I had rather bewail then examine, rather deplore then detect the
present condition of many Christian Churches: It is enough that the now so much
despised and persecuted Church of England, cannot have it justly laid to her
charge, that either she labored to inter-weave her own with Christ's interest,
much less to advance her own interest above his for want of equity; or did not
deal plainly with those Churches that did so, for want of authorite: or did
revile other Reformed Churches (which surely had not been infallible, could not
be impeccable) for want of modesty: and my hope is, that a Church so full of
Moral truth, no less then of Metaphysical, as it has the God of Truth to own
it; so it will in due time find the God of Power to vindicate, to restore, and
to defend it: however, I doubt not, but many good Christians had rather suffer
in her afflicted communion, then reign in the prosperity and glory of those,
who either do cause, or do not regard her affliction. In the mean time, I
cannot but pass this for a general animadversion; That since only the true
Catholic is the true Christian, and he has two oposites, the pseudocatholick,
who is peccant in excess; and the anti-catholick, who is peccant in defect; it
fares with these two opposites, as it fares with those two extremes that oppose
the moral truth (...) The proud boaster loves to make show of more then is; so
does the pseudo-catholick, who obtrudes more for Religion then can be proved
Religion: (...) but the dissembler is quite contrary: for he denies things that
are, and dimininishes what he does not deny: so does the anti-catholick, who
denies that to be Religion which God has made so, and diminishes what he
cannot deny: (...)* (says the same Author) the boaster and the dissembler
both are to be blamed, because neither is so true a man as he ought to be, yet
more the boaster then the dissembler.

So also in Religion: the pseudo-catholick seems farther from the truth for his
superadditions, then the anti-catholick for his diminutions: for he that
avoweth uncertainties for certainties, brings a suspicion upon his faith, even
in most undoubted truths; whereas he that is wary and timorous in the choice of
his tenants, though he may be thought an enemy to his own knowledge, yet he
cannot be thought an enemy to Gods truth: for though he may stick a while at
the embracing of some divine truths, till they appear to him to be so; yet he
cannot easily obtrude any untruths for truths; and God will sooner pardon the
infirmity of a man in sticking at a truth, then the presumption of a man in
obtruding an untruth: for the first shows himself as a man subject to doubtings
(not able to command his own faith) but the other would fain be accounted
little less then a God, in making himself not the Interpreter, but the Author
of truths; and so challenging a dominion over the faith of others: which
however, ought not to dishearten us from knowing the doctrine of any Christian
Church; for as of old it derogated nothing from the truth of God, that some
Prophets did tell lies in his Name, so neither does it now derogate from the
truth of Religion, that there is so much mixture of men's inventions or surmises
with that truth.

But we must say of all these tares, that an enemy has sowed them whilst men
slept; and yet we may not think Gods Providence over his Church either careless
in not looking after it, or defective in looking after it to little purpose, as
if he, that is the keeper of Israel, did sleep when Israel most needed keeping:
for the Apostle has said, Oportet haereses esse inter vos, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
there must be sects or heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may
be made manifest; as if he had said, That must be, for which there is a good
reason why it should be, and there is a good reason why there should be
heresies amongst you; nay, indeed two good reasons, the one on your parts, that
you may be tried or proved; the other on Gods part, that they which are
approved may be made manifest; to set forth the power and glory of Gods truth,
which like the Sun shines the more gloriously when it has broken through some
great cloud that opposed it: for so much is true even of that wicked objection,
Romans 3. 7. If the truth of God has more abounded through my lie, unto his
glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner? it is most certain the Truth of God
does often more abound through our lies to his glory, and yet the Objection is
so ungodly and unreasonable [why am I judged as a sinner?] that the Apostle
does not think it worth the answering, but only silenceth such a desperate and
profane Disputant with a damnabitur, that he is like to be damned for his
pains, v. 8. whose damnation is just: for no argument so fit to confute him as
damnation, who will needs plead or dispute for the devil: Will ye plead for
Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to death?
Jud. 6. 31. what a shame is it for us Christians, that Baal should have so many
to plead for him, and God so few? that Superstition and Faction should so much
outstrip true Religion? the professors of the one, (for they both meet in the
same Baal, though they are so far asunder in themselves) going as much beyond
the professors of the other in zeal, as they come short of them in truth: and
yet still, since superstition and faction must needs be judged as sins, why
should they not be judged as sinners that maintain them? for neither should we
find a Disputant to defend it, if both be sins; neither should we find an
advocate to plead for it, if both alike uphold the worship of Baal: and yet
there are and will be swarms of such Advocates, multitudes of such Disputants,
notwithstanding Joash has said, Let them be put to death that so plead; and S.
Paul has moreover said, their damnation is just that so dispute: for neither
death nor damnation can silence the perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; wherefore
St. Paul's advice to Timothy is, from such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6. 5. and
we are little beholding to the Latin Translation for taking no notice of this
so necessary a text, yet God forbid we should therefore think it ought to be
expunged out of the Greek Copies, wherein both Latin and Greek Church so
jointly agree, or else out of our own practice and observation: S. Paul's advice
in controversies or rather corruptions of this nature, is, From such withdraw
thy self, not against such oppose thy self: he advises us rather to have no
communion with them, then to maintain disputations against them: for as in
carnal uncleanness, the only way for a man to have a clean body and a chaste
soul is to flee fornication, 1 Cor. 6. 18. not to resist it; so is it also in
this spiritual uncleanness, which makes men go a whoring after their own
inventions, we must rather avoid the temptation then think to overcome it,
rather shun the Disputants then think to answer their disputations: for men
whose faction is above their Religion, will never be silenced by arguments of
Religion; and men whose Interest is above their conscience, will never give any
ear to the plea of Conscience: and this reason is in effect given by S. Paul
himself, why in such a case it is better to withdraw then to withstand, v. 3.
For, says he, if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and
strifes of words: as if he had said, There is little hopes of doing good upon
such a man, for if he would have hearkened to any wholesome words and not only
to flattering speeches, he would have hearkened to the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ: we may say to those words which Christ spoke in his person, S. Matthew.
22. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
that are Gods: (for those words alone, if rightly followed, would suffer no man
to be a Pharisee, that is, a Separatist, either in Church or State; for if men
did give Caesar his due, there could be no sedition in the state; if they did
give God his due, there could be no schism nor heresy in the Church:) but we
must say to those words which Christ spoke in his doctrine, whether immediately
by himself or mediately by his Apostles; if such a Pharisee would have hearkened
to wholesome more then to pleasing words, he would have hearkened to the words of
Christ which he delivered both in his person and in his doctrine: and if he
would have received any doctrine but that which complied with his worldly
interest, he would have received the doctrine which is according to godliness:
but since he will neither hear the one, nor receive the other, it is to little
purpose to labor his conversion.

For first, he is ignorant in his understanding [knowing nothing] (...), (...),
says Oecum. for he who knows not that which he ought to know, is as if he knew
nothing; nay, he is much worse, not only possessed with ignorance, but also with
a kind of devil, as says the same author, (...), he that will not know God
cannot but know the devil; he that will not receive Christ and his wholesome
words into his understanding, shall not be able to keep the devil and his
poisonous dictates out of it.

Secondly, he is pertinacious in his will, which appears from his
contradiction, from his obstinacy, from his ambition.

His contradiction is discovered in that he teaches otherwise, (...), says
Oecumen. he teaches other things then those which of right are to be taught;
we may say, he first teaches otherwise then the Christian Church, opposing his
novelty against her antiquity; but at last he teaches otherwise then himself,
opposing his own novelty with new and worse novelties: his obstinacy appears in
this, he will remit nothing of his humor either for truth or peace, (...),
others may come nearer him, but he will not come nearer them; he will not
approach, or as we render it, he will not consent to wholesome words, for if he
draw near to the truth with his lips, yet his heart is far from it.

Lastly, His ambition and haughtiness of mind is seen, in that he is proud, he
scorns to be a follower of any, but will be a leader of all, and takes more
pleasure (because more pride) in being head of a faction, then in being an
inferior member of Christ, which shows his blindness, that he sees not the
blessing of those who are of Christ's communion, as well as his perverseness that
he will not join with those communicants; and accordingly the Apostle here
uses a word that hinteth both, (...), that is, he is blinded as it were with
smoke, for so Ulpian upon Demosthenes descanteth that word, (...), some derive
it from darkening the sight with smoke, there is his blindness; again (...),
says the same Critic, This word is derived from Typhon one of the Giants that
was so mad with pride as to raise war against the gods: wherefore we say of a
proud man that he is as that Typhon, there is his perverseness.

Thus far a heathen Critic may be alleged to interpret this strange word here
used by S. Paul; but the Christian Divine who knew that this warring against
God, which was but a fable in the Giant, was a truth in the devil, gives us
this gloss, (...), this kind of pride (that first swells against the true
Church, and at last against the God of truth) is a very great friend and
companion of the devils: so that the proud heretic and the perverse
schismatic (for they cannot well be parted, though they are very ill joined)
under a pretense of finding a new way to heaven, has brought himself directly
to hell gate, and being once there; the devil will not easily suffer him to go
from thence, but he will forthwith teach him to spend all his time and zeal,
upon idle questions, fit for none but those that dote; and upon quarrelsome
disputations, fit for nothing but to beget new disputes and endless
contentions: for if you once turn Questionist in stead of Dogmatist, seeker in
stead of believer, you must needs fall into logomachies, strifes of words as
endless as needless; therefore the Apostle says, (...), sick about questions,
(...), (says Oecum.) see here, To be a seeker is indeed to be sick, so to be
sick in mind, and that in Tullies language is to be mad, Nomen insaniae
significat mentis aegrotationem and morbum, (Cic. 3. Tuscul.) for madness is
nothing else but a sickness of the mind: and we cannot deny this if we observe
the course of such a man, which is not (...) but (...), not to spend time, but
to mispend it: (...), Diogenes appellat (...), and Euclidis (...), says
Laertius: Diogenes theCynick called Plato's Schooling mere fooling, and said,
to be Euclide's Scholar, was to be in choler; but S. Paul has found out an
expression that in one word speaks more then both these, though with less
acrimony, and that is (...) (a second strange word here used by the Spirit of
God, to show here is set forth as strange a monster) such devices and trifles
as are mere new nothings, whereby men do only deceive themselves and seek to
deceive others; for so Oecum. reads and glosseth the word out of S.
Chrysostom, inverting the Prepositions, and reading not (...) but (...), and
withal enlarging the sense; for (...) is an ill use of study and disputation,
not to confirm the judgment but to unsettle it, not to discover the truth but
to dissemble it; which mischief may go no further then him alone who is guilty
of the sin: but (...) is this same mischief as it seeks to corrupt and infect
others: (...), says Oecum. the infecting others with this itch of vain
disputing: for as a scabby sheep rubbing against those that are sound of the
same flock, infecteth them with his touch, so do these men (that have itching
ears, rambling heads, and hollow hearts) infect others by their conversation,
says S. Chrysostom. and from him Oecumenius.

All this considered, it is easy to see the reason why S. Paul said to Timothy,
From such withdraw thy self; he commands him as a Bishop to rebuke some
Presbyters, cap. 5. v. 19, 20. which shows his jurisdiction over them, but
breaks not his communion with them, but he must have nothing at all to do with
these, it is Oecumenius his observation, (...); he says not, converse with such
a man, and oppose him (converse with him according to your Christian Communion,
and oppose him according to your Episcopal Jurisdiction) but wholly depart from
him after one or two admonitions; (which is supposed from cap. 1. v. 3. where
Timothy is commanded to charge them not to preach other doctrine (...) the word
used here) for you shall never make that man your convert, who has made mammon
his God: and this indeed is the chief reason of the great distemper, and
greater disturbance in Christendom, that many men are mammons rather then Gods
Chaplains; and therefore are more ready to plead for Baal, (that is, for their
own lording it over their brethren) then for God, more for Belial (that is, for
their own licentiousness) then for Christ; hence it is, we have fiercer
disputations against men, then for God: and the reconciliation would be easily
effected, as to what concerns Gods interest, were it not impeded and hindered by
our own. Hence it is also, that many under a pretense of settling and
regulating Religion, do indeed disturb and disorder it; and in stead of rightly
guiding the Christian, do indeed misguide him; whiles they stand so much upon
ceremonals which are of their own making, as that they much more neglect
morals, which are Gods undoubted commands: and so desire to have their converts
be some of Paul, some of Appollos, some of Cephas, as they little regard, and
less care to see they be truly all of Christ.

And yet amidst all these grand miscarriages of men, (which no Rhetoric can
sufficiently express, no repentance can sufficiently bewail) though we find
much that may trouble us in the practice of Religion, yet we find nothing that
can excuse us if we practice it not: for there is matter enough uncontroverted
on all sides, to engage the whole soul of man, if we would take notice of that
engagement: Satis ampla pietatis exercendae materia est in iis rebus de quibus
utrinque convenit: nam de side in Christum mortuum and resuscitatum pro nobis
collocanda, and de charitate Deo and proximo exhibenda, controversia nulla est:
at in his duobus capitibus pietatis summa consistit, says the most judicious
and pious Cassander, in his book De officio pii viri. What pity is it that
there should be the greatest defect, where is the least controversy amongst
Christians? This made the forenamed Author profess, that he was nothing at all
satisfied with those men, who pretended, that the contentions of Christians
hindered their progress in Christianity: for (says he) There is matter enough
for the exercise of piety, which is quite exempted from all controversy: for
all sides agree, that we must be saved by faith in Christ crucified for our
sins, and raised again for our justification, and by the love of God for his
own sake, and of our neighbor for Gods sake: and in these two heads (says he)
of faith and charity, is comprised the sum of all true Christianity: and Saint
Paul had said no less before him, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6. The end of the commandment is
charity, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,
which Aquinas thus proves most substantially, Omnes enim virtutes de quarum
actibus dantur praecepta, ordinantur vel ad purificandum cor a turbationibus
passionum, sicut virtutes quae sunt circa passiones; vel saltem ad habendam
bonam conscientiam, sicut virtutes quae sunt circa operationes; vel ad habendam
rectam sidem, sicut illae quae pertinent ad divinum cultum; and haec tria
requiruntur ad diligendum Deum, nam cor impurum a Dei dilectione abstr ahitur,
propter passionem inclinantem ad terram; conscientia vero mala facit horrere
divinam justitiam propter timorem poenae; fides autem ficta trahit affectum ad
id quod de Deo fingitur, separans a Dei Veritate: (22ae. qu. 44. art. 1.) All
the virtues whose acts are commanded in the Law, directly tend either to the
purging of the heart from the disturbances of the passions, as those virtues
which teach us to order our affections; or they tend to the getting and keeping
of a good conscience, as those virtues that concern our works and operations:
or they tend to the getting and keeping of a true Faith, as those virtues which
immediately concern the worship of God: and all these three are required to the
true love of God: 1. A pure heart, for that else will cleave to the earth by
its impurity: 2. A good conscience, for that else will run from God because of
its guiltiness: 3. an unfeigned faith, for that else will follow a fiction in
stead of God, and falsities in stead of his truth. This being taken for
granted, which cannot rationally be denied, the meanest man that is will find
little cause to be discouraged or disheartened in the Christian Religion, by
reason of (...), or (...), or (...), from all which S. Paul so exceedingly
dehorts S. Timothy, that there are amongst Christians so many strifes about
words, and so many vanities (and novelties and emptinesses) in those strifes:
for if he will have a diligent care of his own heart, that it may be pure; of
his own conscience, that it may be good; and of his own faith, that it may be
unfeigned, he will not dangerously neglect his duty either toward himself, or
toward his neighbor, or toward his God; but will always find matter enough
to busy his soul here, and take a sure course to save his soul hereafter: and
it is evident from the ensuing words, that none but they who swerve from these
three, scil a pure heart, a good conscience, and a faith unfeigned, do turn
aside unto vain janglings.

And for this cause our blessed Savior chides not only the Scribes and
Pharisees, but also the meanest of the common people, for not following and
embracing the undoubted truth, though there were at that time as great
contentions in the Jewish, as are now in the Christian Church: S. Luke 12. 54,
56, 57. And he said also unto the people, Ye hypocrites, can ye discern the
face of the sky, and of the earth; But how is it that ye do not discern this
time? yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right? He chides
them for being quick-sighted in matters of earth, but as it were pur-blinde in
the things of heaven; that they could of themselves judge rightly of the
seasons for their profit, not so for their amendment; and notwithstanding he
professes that he came not to give peace on earth, but rather divisions, such
as should divide the nearest and dearest relations, from and against
themselves; yet he gives no writ of ease to any man, that he should leave off
being a judge in matters of his salvation; for if divisions hinder them not
from judging what is right in husbanding their lands; why should they hinder
them from judging what is right in husbanding their souls?

To apply this to our present purpose, since it is not in our power to doubt
either of Christian faith, or Christian Charity, as necessarily required, and
immediately conducing to salvation; why should it be in our will to neglect
them both: for this is in effect to proclaim that we had rather with Martha be
troubled about many things, then with Mary choose that good part which shall
not be taken from us; it is in effect to declare, that we will have a Religion
rather to serve our selves, then to serve our God; rather agreeable with men's
present humors, then with Gods eternal truth: otherwise our whole labor would
be to conform our selves to that eternal truth in our understandings by faith,
in our wills by charity, which two would make us also conformable thereto in
our lives, either by our obedience, or by our repentance: so says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. V. 104. Through thy precepts I get understanding,
therefore I hate every false way: as if he had said, Through thy word I get the
knowledge of the saving truth, and that makes me avoid and abandon whatever is
destructive of salvation: for every way is a false way that leads from truth,
and from the God of truth; wherefore the Greek translation thus renders the
latter part of the verse, (...), I hate every wicked way: for a false way is a
wicked way, and a wicked way is a false way, the Urim and Thummim being
inseparably joined together; so that what is against the light of the truth, is
also against the perfection of life: and indeed the way of wickedness is a
false way, according to Aristotle's own determination of falsity, who in the
fifth of his Metaph. cap. 29. says, that things are said to be false, ((...))
either because they are not in being; so a Chimaera, or a castle in the air, is
said to be false: or because they make a false appearance, and beget in us
false apprehensions; and so a glass that represents those colors, and those
proportions which are not in the object, is called a false glass. In both these
respects is the way of wickedness properly said to be a false way; both because
it is defective in a true being, (for it is a mere non entity) and also because
it is excessive in a false being; making a false appearance, and begetting in
us false apprehensions, as if it were pleasant and profitable, when as it is
the only cause of all our woe and misery, of all our punishment, whether of
sense, or of loss.

And it is observable, that every irreligious man has in himself these two
properties of a liar, a wilful liar, which is the falsest of all false men;
(...) first, he loves and embraces that which is false, and secondly, he
desires to propagate and derive it to others: so the irreligious man, (whether
he be irreligious out of superstition, or out of faction) delights in the
error of his own way, and desires to bring others into the same perdition, as
we find it spoken by the mouth of truth, S. Matthew. 23. 15. That Scribes,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when
he is made, they make him twofold more the child of hell then themselves:
factious men and hypocrites are much more zealous for their own new and false
opinions, then for Gods eternal and undoubted truth: so that were there nothing
else in impiety and irreligion, but only its own falseness, yet that alone
were enough to make it eternally odious to God, the God of truth; and to the
godly man, the lover of truth: for God cannot but be true, even as he cannot
but be God; and as he is God, he is truth, for God is truth: and for this
reason some Schole Divines do answer negatively to this question, Whether God
can dispense with a lie, as he can with the other commandments; and the reason
is, because in his own essence he is truth; so the master of Advertencies upon
S. Chrysostom. and the four Doctors of the Church, (S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, and S Gregory) An Deus possit in mendacio dispensari, sicut in aliis
praeceptis Decalogi? Negatur: Quia ex sua Essentia est Veritas. But we may go
much further, because the truth will go along with us; for not only the ninth
Commandment, which requires us to be true men, is indispensable; but also all
the rest of the moral Law, which requires us to be good men; for indeed we
cannot be one without the other: therefore is all the moral Law alike
indispensable, that is, all that is intrinsecally moral by its own nature,
whereby we do not only obey God, but also imitate him; and not extrinsecally
moral, being made so by Gods command or by Divine precept, whereby we only
obey God, but do not imitate him: and the reason is, because all that is
contrary to what is intrinsecally moral is a lie; and consequently contrary to
the truth of God, and God cannot, will not dispense with his own truth.

And this is the cause that whatsoever is evil in it self, is necessarily
displeasing unto God, and that indeed under a twofold reason; for as it is evil
in it self, and defective in a right being, so it is opposite to his goodness;
and as it is a lie, and redundant or excessive in a false being by a
counterfeit appearance and representation, so it is opposite to his truth. Men
may, and do too much, out of stomach and animositie oppose one another in
matters of disputation, but it is out of some spice of atheism, if they
wilfully oppose Gods undoubted truth in matters of Religion; either
speculatively by going in a false way, or practically by going in a wicked way.

The next communicable property in God, is Goodness in his Will, which appears
in that he has been so diffusive of himself, in communicating his being to the
creature: therefore is our creation put as a ground of our thankfulness and
thanksgiving, Psalm. 149. 2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; which
could not be if God had not created us out of his Goodness to give us a good
being, to make us the object of his mercy; but out of his power, that by his
absolute dominion, he might give us an everlasting ill being, to make us the
object of his justice. Therefore it is an excellent position of the Protestant
Divines in Colloquio Mempelgertensi, recited by Osiander, Neque ex lege, neque
ex ratione humana, sed ex solo Evangelio de praedestinatione electorum
judicandum est, That neither out of the law, nor out of humane reason, but
only out of the Gospel, can we rightly judge of the predestination of the
elect; and the Gospel condemns none for reprobates, but those who despising the
riches of Gods goodness and forbearance, by their infidelity and impenitencie,
heap upon themselves damnation.

But let us more particularly consider this Goodness of God both in regard of
it self, and also in regard of us.

First, In regard of it self, and so it is an essential and universal Goodness,
demonstrable these three ways, per viam efficientiae, per viam sufficientiae,
per viam eminentiae, as says Bonavent. by the way of efficiencie, for he made
all that is good; by the way of sufficiency, for he satisfies the desire of
all with good; and by the way of eminency, for all that is good being made by
him, is most eminently in him that made it,

Secondly, Consider we this Goodness of God in regard of us, and so it is the
rule or exemplarie cause of all goodness in man; for our good of Nature is
according to the image of God the Father; our good of Grace is according to the
Image of God the Son; our good of Glory shall be according to the Image of God
the Holy Ghost: for as the Father and the Son enjoy each other in the communion
of the holy Spirit, so shall we enjoy them in the same communion. And thus also
is the Goodness of Religion, in it self it is an universal and essential
goodness, demonstrable by way of efficiency, that it makes men good (those that
have it, though not all those that profess it;) by way of sufficiency, that it
makes men contented; (St Paul and Silas were better contented in their prison,
then the Magistrates that put them there, were in their palaces) and by way of
eminency, for that must needs be eminently good, which has filled the earth
with so much goodness, which were it not for Religion, would be filled with
nothing but rapine and unrighteousness.

Again, In regard of us, the goodness of Religion is the rule or exemplary
cause of all goodness; Similitudo formae est in omni agente, vel secundum esse
natural vel secundum esse intelligibile, (says Aqu. par. 1. qu. 15.) The
similitude of every form is in the agent that labors for that form, either
according to its natural, or according to its intellectual being; so is the
similitude of Religion in every man that works according to Religion, God
saying unto us in the Gospel, Go and do likewise, (S. Luke 10. 37.) as he said
in the Law, See thou do it according to the pattern in the mount. the form in
the beginning of the action is the end, but in the end of the action it is the
form; so also is Religion the end of our living, and the form or pattern of our
life: as the knowledge and love of God was the form of man in his first
creation (as being the Image of God in him) and yet withal the end for which he
was created.

The third communicable property in God is Purity in his Action; for as is his
Power so is his Purity; since all matter of impurity is also matter of
Impotency: and most true is that position of Divines, Removentur a Deo actiones
culpabiles, poenales, corporales and inconvenientes, all culpable or penal, or
corporal or inconvenient actions are removed far from God; we may say in one
word, all impure actions: so that in saying Gods work is pure, we do in effect
say, it is holy as not culpable, it is unpassionate as not penal, it is
unwearied as not corporal, it is unblameable as not inconvenient.

But it shall be enough at present to say God is pure, as loving purity, and
commanding it, and as punishing impurity.

First, God is pure as loving purity, Blessed are the pure in heart for they
shall see God, S. Matthew. 5. 8. the eye of the soul is to be refined and purged,
before it can behold such a heavenly beauty; hence it is that the voice of
reason proclaims our sinful eyes to be as bats eyes when they should discern
some more excellent created truths, ((...) says Ar. 2. Metaph.) how much more
does the voice of Religion proclaim our dimness of sight when we should discern
that one supereminent uncreated truth: for as the bird that is used to
darkness, cannot endure to see the Sun; so also a man that is habituated to the
works of darkness cannot look upon the Father of lights, and much less
steadfastly six his eyes upon the Sun of righteousness.

Secondly, God is pure as commanding Purity, S. James 4. 8. cleanse your hands
you sinners, and purisie your hearts ye double-minded; an impure mind is a
double mind, so thinking of heaven, as also (and much rather) of earth: that
mind only is pure, which is a single mind, and that mind only is single
which thinks of heaven, where is very much to settle and to compose, but
nothing at all to distract and divide the soul: wherefore he that thinks wholly
of earth, cannot draw near to God, and consequently God will not draw near to
him; and what is the effect of Gods being at a distance from us, is most
terrible to think, and yet more terrible to find: which made the Psalmist cry
out so earnestly, Psalm. 69. 19. Draw nigh unto my soul and save it; for if God
be far off, we can have no hope of salvation.

Thirdly, God is Pure as punishing impurity. Our Savior did cast out all
wicked spirits, but he is said most of all to have rebuked the unclean spirits:
and S. Paul advising us to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and of the spirit, as having the promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1. does plainly show, that
we can have no good of Gods promises as long as we continue in any filthiness
either of flesh or spirit; and if we have not a share in his promises, we are
sure to have a share in his punishments:

And thus also is Religion pure in its action, as doing what is pure; and pure
in its affection, as wishing and requiring others to do it; and pure also in
its disaffection, as punishing those who delight in impurity; nor can any man
be impure and impenitent in his impurity, and not be excommunicated by the
Canon of Religion, though happily the Canon of the Church may not take notice of
him, or not be able to reach him. This consideration of Gods Purity should make
us repent and abhor our selves in dust and ashes, because of our manifold
impurities, for the heavens are unclean in his sight, Job 15. 15. nay, the
purest bodies of heaven, the moon, and the stars, Job 25. 5. nay, the purest
spirits of heaven, the angels, Job 4. 18. (he charged his Angels with folly:)
so that we need not (with Rabbi David) be overmuch inquisitive why Isaiah's
Seraphins have six wings, when Ezekiels Cherubins have but four; for the
Prophet himself gives the reason of six, Isa. 6. 2. twain to sly withal,
there is the readiness of their obedience; twain to cover their faces, as not
daring to see (says Targum) there is their reverence; and twain to cover
themselves, as not daring to be seen (says the same Paraphrast) there is their
fear; if these three virtues, Obedience, Reverence and Fear, be so truly
angelical, what are our contrary vices, not only in Gods presence, but also in
his service, but such as we may be ashamed to name, and much more afraid to
own, that is to say, diabolical? for if all these purest creatures of heaven be
impure in his sight, and tremble at the thought of their impurity; how much
more we that are of earth, nay, of the most contemptible part of the earth, of
the dust of the earth, Genesis 2. 7. and daily grovelling in that dust by our
affections, before we return to it by our dissolution, and in that respect
alone, fitly called worms twice together in one breath, Job 25. 6. man that is
a worm, and the Son of man that is a worm: we then who have the most impurity,
ought not to have the least trembling, but as we have out-passed those ten
Lepers in our uncleanness, so we may not come short of them in their holy fear
and faith; for as their fear made them stand afar off, so their faith made them
lift up their voices, and say, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us, S. Luc. 17. 12,
13. then will he give us such a purity as will not only make us show our
selves to the Priest, but also to our God; such a purity as will wash our eyes
to see him, and much more our hearts to love him: for so says S. Peter, Act.
15. 9. purisying their hearts by faith; not a faith which costs the purse no
alms, the body no fasting, the soul no praying (for no true Israelite will ever
offer that unto the Lord which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24.) but a faith
which so purifies the soul by knowing the truth, as much more by obeying it;
for so says the same Apostle, Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying
the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that you
love one another with a pure heart fervently 1 S. Pet. 1. 22. this is the
purity of the true Religion, it purifies the soul not only by faith, but also
by obedience, and by love, which yet are now generally farthest from many men,
who would fain be thought to come nearest Purity.

Thus we have seen Gods truth in his understanding, his goodness in his will,
and his purity in his action, and it still remains that we consider his
Liberty, as belonging to them all; for Liberty being nothing else but the
dominion and power of action, must needs be originally in the understanding,
which alone is able to judge and deliberate of what is to be done, what not;
formally in the will, which resolves to do or not to do; but effectually it is
only in the action, which is the product of the said deliberate resolution:
this liberty is now briefly to be handled; First, as it is in God, and then as
it is in Religion for being the service of God:

Gods Liberty is seen in five respects; in that he is free from sin, free from
misery, free from obligation, free from servitude, and free from coaction,
which is the reason that he can both will and do, what and when, and where
himself pleases.

I need not insist on the proof of these, for to name them is to prove them,
nor can any man deny Gods Liberty in any of these respects, but he must deny
him to be God; and in all these same respects we may see and must acknowledge
the Liberty of Religion, and to deny it to be free in any of these is to deny
it to be Religion, that is to say, the service of God; and to make it to be
state policy, that is to say, the service of men.

First, Religion is free from sin; for the superstition, and faction, and
profaneness, and other sins that are so rife among Christians to the dishonor
of Christ, and the reproach of Christendom, is a rust that cleaves to the men
(who are little better then iron) not to the Religion, which is as pure as the
Refiners fire; and therefore it is not safe nor fit to say of any order or
kind of Christians, that their Religion is rebellion, and their faith is
faction, though we cannot deny of too too many orders and kinds of men who
profess Religion, that they are both rebellious and factious.

Secondly, Religion is free from misery; ask the three children in the fiery
furnace, they will say, their Religion had made them persecuted; they will not
say, that it had made them miserable; they profess that they were delivered
into the hands of lawless enemies, most hateful apostates, [(...)] (meaning
sure those of their own brethren which had renounced the Law of Moses and their
Religion, and helped the Babylonians to persecute and infest Jerusalem) and to
an unjust King, and the most wicked in all the world, [(...):] thus those
blessed Martyrs will tell you, they were in persecution (the greatest that ever
was) but they will not tell you they were in misery; nay it seems they told the
quite contrary, for none else could have told it but from their mouths, that
the angel of the Lord came down into the oven, and smote the flame of fire, and
made the midst of the furnace as it had been a moist whistling wind; but you
will say, these men were partial witnesses in their own cause, therefore ask
their persecutors, they will tell you the same, for the Princes, Governors and
Captains, and the Kings Counselors being gathered together, saw these men
upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them: nay
ask Nebuchadnezzar himself, who was the author of the persecution, and he will
tell you that though he had caused these holy men to be so much afflicted, yet
he could not cause them to be miserable; for at that instant when he had
thought they had been burnt to ashes, he heard them sing in the flames (as
says the Greek Translation, (...)) and that (probably) made him look about to
see whence that melody proceeded, and finding so sweet a breath to come from
the blast of his fire, he was astonished and rose up in haste, and went to the
mouth of the furnace (which before bade him keep his distance, in that it
consumed his officers) and called forth the holy and blessed Martyrs, who
having been delivered from a present death, could not be looked on but as men
newly risen from the dead.

Thirdly, Religion is free from obligation; there is no greater humane
obligation then that of nature, and there is no greater natural obligation then
that which we owe to our Parents; yet that may not be alleged to keep us from
serving God: so Aquinas determines the case, Si ergo cultus parentum abstrahat
nos a cultu Dei, non jam esset pietatis, parentum insistere cultui contra Deum,
and ideo in tali casu dimittinda sunt officia pietatis in parents propter
divinum Religionis cultum (22 ae qu. 101. art. 4.) If our duty to our Parents
take us away from our duty to our God (as if the Father should command his son
to turn rebel or Idolater, or the like) we must forsake our parents and cleave
to God, and show the prevalency of that duty we owe to God, by being undutifull
to our parents, in such a case: again, there is no civil obligation greater
then that we owe to our Governors; yet, if they command us to sin against God,
by not speaking nor teaching, by not praying nor preaching in the Name of
Jesus, we have our answer put into our mouths (and God put it into our hearts,
lest atheism get possession there in stead of Christ) whether it be right in
the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye, Act. 4.
19. there is no obligation of man that can reach to the altar of God, to make
us either neglect it or defile it: usque ad aras did stint the heathen, and
much more the Christian in his obedience; he that obeys the Magistrare to the
altar, gives him his right; he that obeys him beyond or above the altar, does
him wrong, loading his authority with that sin which cannot help to hold it up,
but may help to pull it down: it is much to be observed that among all the high
Priests of the Jewish Temple, none has that signal character of recommendation
in the Text, that is, given to Azariah, because he withstood Uzziah the king
when he invaded the Priests office, 2 Chr. 26. 17. therefore says the holy
Ghost concerning him, he it is that executed the Priests office in the Temple
that Solomon built at Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 6. 10. as if none had been high
Priest but he, who had so zealously so magnanimously vindicated the honor and
the authority of the Priesthood: for this is Rabbi David's gloss upon the place;
he was not the first Priest of Solomon's temple, for that was Zadok; nor was he
the only high Priest, for there were many others; but our Rabbis say, this
was Azariah in the days of Uzziah, who gave his mind to the holiness of the
Temple, and would not let Uzziah offer Incense; therefore it is said of him,
this is he that was the high Priest, because he was zealous for the glory of
the Priesthood, and accepted not the person of Uzziah, so Kimchi. And it
appears again, that this Azariah was not to be named without some special note
or title of honor; for in the ninth Chapter, and the eleventh verse, after the
reciting of his Ancestors, though some of them had executed the same office as
well as himself, yet he alone is called the Ruler of the house of God, 1 Chro.
9. 11. none had kept so good rule and order in the house of God as he,
therefore none so fit to be called a ruler of it: And if Thomas Becket did
indeed stand merely upon Gods interest in the controversy betwixt him and his
Liege Sovereign; the doctors of Paris did very ill in disputing eight and
forty years after his death, whether he were damned or saved; for no duty that
he owed to his King, could oblige him to be undutifull to his God, and if he
suffered death for not being undutifull to his Father in heaven, there is no
doubt but as a dutiful child he received his inheritance; yet in that the
Doctors disputed it so long after, it is evident, that his Festival was not
presently instituted in the Latin Church, (much less celebrated with this
Preface, Gaudeamus omnes in Domino, diem festum celebrantes sub honor Thomae
Martyris, de cujus Passione gaudent Angeli, and collaudant Filium Dei: Let us
all rejoice in the Lord, celebrating a Festival for the honor of Thomas the
Martyr, for whose passion the Angels rejoice and praise the Son of God: by
which Preface, the Festival of this supposed Martyr, is preferred before the
Proto-martyrs in dignity, though it follow the same three days after in time:)
or else the Doctors of Paris did think it lawful, if not laudable, to dispute
against the solemnities of their own Church, when they found so much done upon
so little ground; and did also themselves in effect declare, that as no civil
authority could, so likewise no ecclesiastical authority can oblige equally
with God, much less either above him or against him.

Fourthly, Religion is free from servitude; the Church may be in bondage, not
so the Religion that makes a Church; the Israelites asked liberty of Pharaoh
for themselves to go and serve God; they asked not liberty for Gods Service,
that had never been in durance nor in captivity: and S. Paul very plainly
determines this controversy, (for so profane men are willing to make it when
Gods Church is under persecution, though in it self it be an undoubted truth) 2 Timothy 2. 9. I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds, but the word of
God is not bound: the bonds that are upon the hands are far from the tongue,
and farther from the heart; they cannot hinder an honest man from speaking Gods
truth amidst the enemies thereof, much less from loving it: excellently
Oecumenius, (...), no bonds can fetter the tongue but only fearfulness and
unfaithfulness, and those are ingredients of the worlds, not of Gods Religion.

Fifthly and lastly, Religion is free from Coaction, there is no oblation so
acceptable as that which is voluntary, and there is no oblation so voluntary as
that whereby a man offers himself to God: therefore it is the doctrine of the
Church, that the children of Jews and other Infidels who never embraced the
Christian faith, ought not to be baptized without their Parents consent, till
they can give their own; not only because it is against the justice of nature,
to take the child from his own Parents whilst he is yet as it were a limb or
part of them, (which he must needs be till he can dispose of himself) but also
because it is against the nature of Religion, to offer unto God an unvoluntary
Sacrifice: and for the same reason, though the Church never thought she could
be sufficiently zealous in propagating the Catholic Faith, yet she never
thought that Jews and Pagans were to be compelled to embrace it, only they
were to be compelled not to hinder or to blaspheme it; so Aquinas 22ae qu. 10.
art. 8. Utrum infideles compellendi sint ad sidem? Whether Infidels are to be
compelled to the Christian Faith? he answers with a distinction, those Infidels
that never received the Faith, are not to be compelled to it, quia credere est
voluntarium, because to believe is to give a voluntary assent; but those
Infidels who once received the Faith, and are since fallen from it (as
heretics and apostates) are to be compelled by corporal punishments to become
regular and orderly Christians, that they may be made to fulfill their promise,
and to retain what they did receive: Nam sicut vovere est voluntatis, sed
reddere est necessitatis; ita fidem accipere est voluntatis, sed tenere eam
acceptam est necessitatis: For as it is voluntary to make a vow, but necessary
to keep it when it is made; so it is voluntary to receive the faith, but
necessary to retain it when it is received. And St. Augustine in the second
Book of his Retractations, ca. 5. does most ingenuously recall his former
opinion; that schismatics were not to be constrained and compelled to the
communion of the Church, I retract (says he) that in my first Book against the
party of Donatus; I did say, I was not pleased that the secular power should
violently force schismatics to the communion of the Church, and vere mihi tunc
non placebat, quia nondum expertus eram vel quantum mali eorum auderet
impunitas, vel quantum eis in melius mutandis, confer possit diligentia
Disciplinae; and indeed this course then pleased me not, because I had not yet
seen the experiment, either how much mischief their uncurbed licentiousness
would produce, or how much the diligence of a severe discipline would conduce
to their amendment: so St Augustine: and yet all this while, the coaction or
compulsion does in truth reach no farther then to conformity and order; it
reaches not to Religion, which can no more be driven into the hearts of
hypocrites by the power of the lawful Magistrate, then it can be driven out of
the hearts of true believers by the outrageous persecutions of Tyrants and
Atheists: so that we must conclude, that though none are more exposed to
violence then religious and godly men, (for he that would needs make his
beloved Son perfect with sufferings, will not make his unworthy servants
perfect without them) yet Religion it self is wholly exempted from all
violence, being the Queen Regent of heaven and earth, to give commands both to
angels and men, but to receive commands of neither.

CHAP. VII.
The assurance we have of Religion, for that it resembles God in his attributes
of Justice, Grace, and Mercy.

IN the last place, we come to the attributes of God, which are as it were
external perfections, belonging to him in regard of his creature; though not to
be truly and fully known from our creation, but from our redemption; for no one
attribute of God is rightly understood by those who are not of the Church of
God; not his Justice, for they know not God in himself, that he is of purer
eyes then to look on iniquity; not his Mercy, for they know not God in his Son,
in whom alone he shows mercy: not his Wisdom, for they know not God in his
word, the fountain of all true wisdom: not his Truth, for they know not God in
his promises, and cannot say, he is faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 23. and
so of the rest: they that are not of Gods Church cannot know his attributes,
because they are not to be known from our creation, but from our redemption;
and they that are most truly of Gods Church, that is to say, non numero sed
merito, as Aquinas has distinguished not only by outward profession, but also
by inward affection, do most truly understand Gods Attributes: they clearly see
the severity of his Justice, requiring a full satisfaction for sin: they
clearly see the goodness of his Mercy accepting of satisfaction from his Son,
when he could not have it from his servant: they clearly see that vast Wisdom
which found out this way to save man when he was lost: and they clearly see
that unchangeable Truth, which both calls and brings him to salvation.

But I will follow my former method, and insist only on the chief Attributes,
to which the rest have relation, and may therefore have reduction: and these
Attributes are three, Justice, Grace, and Mercy: Justice, whereby he renders to
every man according to his works; Grace, whereby he freely gives what is
wanting to us, and Mercy whereby he freely forgives what is due unto himself;
these I say belong to God in relation to the creature: for though his Justice
flow from his Truth, yet he could not show that justice either in punishing or
in rewarding, were there not a creature to be punished or rewarded; so likewise
his Grace in giving, and Mercy in forgiving, though they flow from his Goodness
and his Liberty (which they deny who will not let him have mercy on whom he
will have mercy) yet he could neither show his Grace in giving, nor his Mercy
in forgiving, were there not an indigent creature to want his giving, and a
sinful creature to want his forgiving.

The first of these Attributes is Justice, which we must first contemplate in
God, and then in Religion as it is his service.

God is just by universal, and by particular Justice:

First, By universal Justice, and that in two respects; both in regard of
himself, as willing and doing all manner of right: (Shall not the judge of all
the earth do right? Genesis 18. 25.) and also in regard of us, being the rule of
all justice in man: Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
the judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.

Secondly, God is just by particular Justice, retributing to every man
according to his works, Romans 2. 6. who shall render to every man according to
his works: and v. 5. the day of judgment is called (...), the day of Gods
righteous judgment, because it is all one in him to judge, and to judge
righteously: thus did S. Chrysostom qualify the mistake, or rather rectify
the abuse which was in some inconsiderate men from Gods decree of election;
Thou say that God has predestined; and I say, that God is a righteous
judge, and will reward thee according to thy deservings.

But it is objected against Gods universal justice, that he commanded some
things contrary to his own Law, as Abraham to slay Isaac, and the Israelites to
spoil the Egyptians; the one against the sixth, the other against the eighth
commandment. It Is answered by some Divines, Generali derogans speciali
voluntate: that God did in these cases derogate from his general will by his
special will: but we may not easily approve this answer; because Gods will
cannot clash with it self, and therefore he may not be said to command that by
his special, which he forbids by his general will; and consequently, God in
commanding Abraham to kill his son, did not make murder lawful, but made that
killing no murder, by passing upon Isaac the sentence of death: and commanding
the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, did not make it lawful to rob and
steal; but made that spoiling no robbery, since he who was Lord of all had
translated the right of property: and this is most acutely dicussed by the
Master of subtilties, (Scotus in lib. 1. sent. did. 44.) Quando in potestate
agentis est Lex, and rectitudo Legis, potest tale agens ordinate and recte
agere, aliter quam Lex illa dictat; quia non subest illi Legi, and sic ejus
potentia absoluta non est inordinata: When the Law and the justice of the Law
are both in the power of the agent, we need not then fear any obliquity in the
action, whether he act by his ordinary, or by his absolute power: for if by his
ordinary power he act not according to the law, by his absolute power he can
make the law to be in that case no law; and where there is no law, there is no
transgression: this rule being allowed, which cannot be denied,, we shall
little need to patronize Gods, justice in commanding Abraham to kill his son,
who was guilty of death; nor yet in delivering over his own Son to the death of
the cross, who knew no sin, and therefore could have no guiltiness: nor shall
we need to say, That the Israelites had but their due from the Egyptians, for
making so much brick, and building so many cities, (although that be an answer
recommended to us by great antiquity, for so Irenaeus lib. 4. advers. IIaeres.
cap. 49. Labores enim quos pro Egyptiis immerito pertulerunt Israelitae,
precium rerum acceptarum excesserunt,) for Gods will being the rule of justice,
it is evident, 'that whatsoever he wills is just because he wills it: therefore
since he willed the death of Isaac, it could be no murder; and his willing the
spoiling of Egypt, made it no theft: for murder or theft he cannot will,
because either is intrinsecally evil; but he can make that no murder, or that
no theft, which else would be so, by giving one man authority over another
life, or property, as being himself supreme and absolute Lord of all: for that
rule of law and reason so much insisted upon against tyrannical governors,
Pars est justitiae Rectoris, servare leges a se latas, It is a part of justice
in a Governor, to keep his own laws, is true only amongst men, where making a
law is not an act of absolute dominion, proceeding from the power to dispose of
life, or property, or liberty, but an act of government for the preservation of
good order in them all: but in God the making of a law is an act of absolute
dominion, and he can by his absolute power and authority so dispose of
liberty, or property, or life; that to take away liberty may be no
oppression, to take away property may be no stealing, to take away life may be
no murder: and it is more proper to say, that God wills the alteration, making
that which otherwise had been evil, not evil, and consequently not forbidden;
then that he wills the dispensation, making that which is forbidden, not evil:
for if God wills any thing, it cannot possibly be evil, but is therefore good
and just because he wills it; nor needs there any other proof or reason of his
justice, even as there cannot be any other reason of his will; so that Johanan
and his fellow captains, might without any scruple of conscience, or staggering
of faith, say unto Jeremiah, Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will
obey the voice of the Lord our God, Jer. 42. 6. for the command of God could
not but make that good, which otherwise might happily have been evil. Hence the
Apostle answers this objection, Is there unrighteousness with God? no otherwise
but by his will; Romans 9. 14. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; and
he that will not take this answer, is looked upon as a very foul disputant, as
one that denies principles, and therefore not to be disputed withal, v. 20.
Nay but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? as if he had said, Here
I dare not dispute, and how dare thou? sure we are, he had the Spirit of God
who gave this answer, and therefore if we have the same Spirit, we cannot but
take it: but yet in the 21 verse the answer is not only to the person, but
also to the thing, and it is fully resolved into Gods Power, Has not the
potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor,
and another unto dishonor? If he has not power, he cannot do it; if he has
power, we in vain dispute against his doing it; whether it be potentia
absoluta, his absolute power, which respects jus dominii, his right of
sovereignty and dominion, to do with his creature what he will; or potentia
ordinata, his ordinary power, which respects jus imperii, his right of
government, to do with his creature what is just, it is in effect all one; for
his will is the rule of justice, and his power is the measure of his will.

We can never overthrow his power by our disputations, but we may turn it into
mercy by our submission: and sure if we look to come to blessedness, we must
follow their examples who are in the state of bliss; and they in all their
hymns do still ascribe power unto God, Rev. 19. 5. Allelujah, that is, Praise
the Lord; for the Lord God omnipotent reigns; they thankfully acknowledge the
power of his kingdom, and as willingly submit unto that power; to teach us,
that there is no fruition of his mercy, without submission to his power; for
his power is the activity of his will, as his will is the result of his
wisdom: and as his will is a sufficient reason of his power in working, (for
who has resisted his will?) so his wisdom is a sufficient reason of his will
in ordering his works; for who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has
been his counselor?

Wherefore we must always take this for a sure ground, that the will of God, as
it is with power, so it cannot be without wisdom, and consequently not without
justice, which is the dispensation of wisdom; and this will either instruct
our ignorance, that we may be sure to dispute for God, or overruled our
perverseness, that we may be silenced from disputing: most seraphically
Bonaventure in 1. sent. did. 41. Cavendum est, ne dum voluntatem Dei
magnificare volumus, potius voluntati ejus derogemus: si enim non esset alia
ratio, quare Deus istum elegit, and illum non, nisi quia placet; certe non jam
occulta dicerentur divina judicia, sed manifesta, cum quilibet hanc rationem
capiat; nec dicerentur mirabilia, sed potius voluntaria: etc. We must take
heed, lest whiles we seek to magnify the will of God, we rather derogate from
his will: for if there be no other reason why God elected this man, and not
that man, but only because it pleased him, surely the judgments of God would
not be called secret, but manifest: for every man understands this reason, nor
should we say that his judgments are wonderful, but rather that they are
wilful.

I will conclude this debate with the pious determination of S. Augustine,
Iudicia Dei secreta esse possunt, injusta non possunt: The judgments of God
may be unknown, but they cannot be unjust: for he cannot will without his
wisdom, (and therefore not without his justice) as he cannot work without his
will; he that is not unwise in his will, cannot be unjust in his will; and he
that is not unjust in his will, is much less unjust in his work: and so briefly
in defense of Gods universal ustice.

Again, it is objected against Gods particular justice, that he blesses Edom,
and afflicts Israel: It Is answered, Edom may have temporal success, but
that is no blessing: for there is no greater unhappiness then for a man to
prosper in his sins, whereby his eyes are blinded, and his heart is hardened;
and therefore the prosperity of the wicked, as it begins not in a blessing, so
it ends in a curse. Thus Ieroboams rebellion prospered, to make the ten tribes
first lose their Religion, then their liberty and property: first, to make
them idolaters, and after that to make them captives and bondslaves: for their
rebellion occasioned their idolatry, and their idolatry occasioned their
captivity. On the contrary, Israel may have temporal affliction, but it is no
curse; nay indeed properly no punishment: Habet rationem medicinae, non poenae,
God chastising his servants not to torment them, but to amend them: but let the
one go for prosperity, the other for adversity, because the world will needs
think them so: then take this for a second answer, not concerning Edom: for he
is not worth it in all his prosperity; but concerning Israel. First, Non poena
sinalis, it is no final punishment, it lasts not long, much less for ever:
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Secondly, Non
pietas totalis; Israel when he was at best, could not but say, His father was
an Amorite, and his mother a Hittite, when he had most of God and of piety, he
had more of man, and what he had of man he had of sin and impiety. Thirdly,
Impietas totalis; though their piety was not perfect, their impiety was so: for
they were guilty of a general defection and apostasy as God himself objecteth
and answers this doubt, Jer. 5. 19. Wherefore does the Lord our God all these
things unto us? Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your
land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours: (...) says
Rabbi David, measure for measure, like for like; we may say (...) justitiae
divinae, the retaliation of Gods justice, desertion for desertion: nay, God
himself has said it, Ye would needs be serving strange gods, ye shall now
serve strange men. And it is observable, that before God generally deserted the
Jews, giving them up to captivity and slaughter, they had generally deserted
him, giving themselves up to their own inventions and impieties: which makes
God accordingly ask the question of himself and of them, shall I not visit for
these things? Jer. 5. 29. Gods visitation is a great argument of man's disorder:
the people of Israel were now generally out of order, and for that cause were
generally visited; Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? [Such
a nation as this,] all nations are wicked, and provoke Gods wrathful
indignation for vengeance, but it is such a nation as this, that makes his soul
desire to be avenged; such a nation, that is so wicked beyond the rest, that
sins so impudently against the light, so unthankfully against the means, so
impenitently against the power of grace.

First, so impudently against the light of grace; for he says, Pour out thine
indignation upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms
that have not called upon thy name, Psalm. 79. 6. much more then upon Israel,
that has known thee, and yet has not called upon thy Name, but has
persecuted those that did call upon it, as if they had rather been the enemies,
then the servants of the living God: for if outer darkness be a just punishment
for not rightly using the twilight of nature, what darkness of darkness shall
punish the abuse of the clear sunshine of the light of grace?

Secondly, so unthankfully against the means of grace, accompanied with Gods
own holy Spirit, which made S. Stephen say, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised
in hearts and cars, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 55. you are
uncircumcised in your hearts, and hate the saving truth, and that makes you
uncircumcised in ears that you will not hear it: he tells them plainly, that
they are not only revolters from the truth, but also rebels against it: for
here is a spiritual rebellion against the Spirit of God, and therefore against
the God of spirits; ye do indeed make resistance, ye do always resist the holy
Ghost: so great an undutifulness could not have been without a greater
unthankfulness; men being first unthankful to God for his Word and Sacraments
in neglecting them, and then undutifull against both, to justify their
neglects.

Thirdly, so impenitently against the power of grace; for these means of
falvation are powerful means: hence is the Gospel called by St. Paul, the
power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16. and the preaching of the cross,
called, unto them that are saved, the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. that is, the
power of God to salvation; for it is also to them that are not saved the power
of God, but to condemnation: hence the Apostle plainly reproves those that are
not reformed by the preaching of the Word, and administering of the Sacraments,
as denying this power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. having a form of godliness,
that is, having the word and Sacraments, but denying the power thereof, that
is, not one jot the better for having them.

Now then in this case, here is the abuse both of Word and Sacraments, which
only constitute a Church, no wonder then if this abuse overthrow a Church: and
these two were in the Jews before their final desolation; not the Sacraments
rightly administered, for not a passover in any good order for many years
together: not the Word rightly preached, for the Prophets prophecy falsely,
says the Text, Jer. 5. 31. and the more falsely they prophesied, the more
generally they were received, which makes the Spirit of God use this
exclamation, a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land, q.d.
Clergy and Laity are both alike quite out of order, for it is committed in
the land, and both so shamefully out of order, that it must be called, a
wonderful and a horrible thing that is committed by them, or as the Hebrew
terms it, an astonishment, or an abomination: but what is this abomination?
Even the general apostasy both of the Clergy and of the Laity, of the
Priests and of the people, the Prophets prophecy falsely, there is the apostasy
of the Clergy: and my people love to have it so, there is the apostasy of the
Laity: for thus had Jeroboam taught them to make their own Priests, that so
they might make their own Religion; for no other would worship his golden
calves, but Priests of his own, not of Gods making, 1 King. 12. yet dares he
not find fault with the appointed service of the Temple, or the Religion
established, as with that which was vicious, but only as with that which was
too labourious, v. 28. It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; then he
proceeds to make Priests of the lowest of the people which were not of the sons
of Levi, v. 31. because his design was to appeal to the people; and he
therefore appealed to the people, that they might think the right of
Sovereignty and Dominion to be, where they found acknowledged the right of
appeal, to wit, in themselves, and stifle the thought of ever returning that
obedience which was but matter of courtship or of courtesy, not of duty or of
necessity: and moreover, he made Priests of the lowest of the people; that by
their false doctrine the people might still be encouraged in their
state-heresie, to defy their allegiance; whilst he to make sure work was
adding thereto a church-heresie, to defy their conscience: what a fair
pretense was here? what a foul intention? first he finds fault with their
grievances, v. 4. [thy father made our yoke grievous] then becomes their head
in the Rebellion, v. 20. [is made king over all Israel:] and at last changes
their Religion, and makes two calves, v. 28. was this a delivering of their
bodies to damn their souls? a saving their estates to lose their consciences?
but yet no good is to be done, till the Priests be in too; and because the old
ones will not consent, new ones must be made that will: never yet was there a
sedition in the State, without a schism in the Church; the people first
forsaking their obedience, then not enduring them whose duty it is to reprove
their disobedience: thus there was a general Impudence, Unthankfulness,
Impenitency, both in the people and in the Priests of Israel, before their
final destruction, which makes the Prophet say, and what will you do in the end
thereof? Jer. 5. 31. that is, what will you do in the end that you will make,
or in the end of the sin? and what will you do in the end that I shall make, or
in the end of the sinner? the end that you will make, will be to pass from
contention to sedition, from sedition to rebellion, from rebellion to
impenitency and hardness of heart, to think you do God service in advising with
the devils instruments, for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.
23. and witchcraft cannot but advise with the devil either in himself or in his
adherents: the end that I shall make of it, will be your temporal destruction
here, your eternal demnation hereafter, and both according to the rule of that
justice, which though you may dally, I may not dispense with; for you have been
faulty in your temporal obedience toward your superiou^s, in throwing away
your allegiance, and so are guilty of temporal destruction, having cast off
those whom I appointed to govern and to protect you; and you have been faulty
in your eternal obedience toward me, in throwing away my commandments, and so
are guilty of eternal damnation, having cast out that conscience which I placed
in your beasts to check and to admonish you, that you might repent and be saved.

And now we see a full and satisfactory reason, why God so destroyed his own
chosen people the Jews, as he never destroyed any other nation; for he
destroyed Egypt but for one generation, but Israel he has destroyed for many
generations: Gath and Askelon were so laid waste as not to have one house left
standing by another, but only Jerusalem was so laid waste as not to have one
stone left lying upon another: the reason is given by the Spirit of God, Psalm.
73. 26. Lo, they that for sake thee shall perish, thou have destroyed all them
that go a whoring from thee, Ecce qui elongant se a te peribunt, behold, they
that put themselves far from thee, shall perish; he says not, behold, they
that sin against thee shall perish, for then all the world should be destroyed;
but behold they that go far from thee; he that goes far from God is a sinner;
but it follows not, he that is a sinner goes far from God; that belongs only
to such a sinner as delights in his distance from God, regards not the offers
of reconciliation, and is resolved not to come near him; which is the perverse
resolution of shameless apostates, men that were once so near God as to be of
his communion, but were soon weary of his company, and therefore now so depart
and separate from him, as to rejoice in their separation: and this appears from
the ensuing words, Perdes omnes qui scortantur a te, thou will destroy all them
that go a whoring from thee; which is a sin that none can commit, but only a
wife, which first separates from her husband in her affection, then in her
conversation, and at last cleaves to another man: so was it with the Church of
the Jews, the Spouse of God, she did first forsake internal communion with God
by Faith and Love, then external communion by holiness and obedience, till at
last she revolted to other gods; and accordingly she is thus reproved by the
Prophets, for playing the harlot with many lovers, for polluting the land with
her whoredoms, and committing adultery with stones and with stocks, (Jer. 3.
1, 2, 9.) this brought desolation upon that Church, a desolation as remarkable
as had been the apostasy; there is an Ecce belongs to both; Behold they
forsake, and behold they perish: Lo they that forsake thee shall perish: none
can properly forsake God, but he that once had some interest in him, and
possession of him; this the heathen never had, but only Israel, wherefore
justice requires that they should perish with a greater confusion then the
heathen, because for a greater sin, that is to say, for a greater contempt, for
a more abominable unthankfulness, and for a more unpardonable impenitency: and
as for those that repented and yet were destroyed, they cannot but say, their
sins were greater then their sufferings; and being destroyed only temporally
when they might justly have been destroyed eternally, they cannot but say, Gods
mercy was greater then their sins.

Thus we have weakly vindicated Gods Justice, both in general and in
particular; and if we have insisted too long upon that vindication, yet sure it
is only too long as to the theme, but not too long as to our times, wherein we
have seen those severe proceedings of Gods Justice, as would almost make us
cast off the hopes of Mercy, but that there is sometimes the greatest mercy in
that justice which destroys temporally, that it may spare eternally; and
therefore we do, must, and will believe, that God does punish us here, that he
may spare us hereafter, beseeching him also to spare those whom yet he does not
punish.

And this same justice as it is in God himself, so is it also in his service,
the true Religion; and that so essentially, that it is impossible for an unjust
man to be truly religious; for he that will not give man his due, will not give
God his due; nay, indeed he cannot give God his due, whose commandment he
breaks, and whose authority he despises in not giving it to man: It is the
Apostles argument, (1 S. John 4. 20.) If a man say, I love God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his brother whom he has seen,
how can he love God whom he has not seen? for indeed true charity is so kind,
as not to seek her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and therefore cannot be so cruel, as to
take away another due; neither from the inferior by oppression, nor from the
equal by pride and contempt, nor from the superior by disobedience.

Therefore let Religion toward God be taken for the ground and foundation of
all justice toward men, for it is evident, that he who most loves God for his
own sake, most loves man for Gods sake; and it is the property of love not to
do, but to suffer wrong, and where is no doing of wrong, there can be no
injustice; so that though that famous axiom be most true, justitia primum,
deinde charitas, justice first and then charity; yet is the truth thereof to be
understood concerning the priority of nature, and of obligation; that a man is
bound to be just before he can be charitable (for he may not rob Peter to pay
Paul, he may not pillage a Church to build an Hospital) not concerning the
priority of time or of generation, for so it is clear there can be no execution
of justice but with and from charity, and all charity comes from God, and tends
to him, love being the affection that relates to good, and all good relating to
God the chiefest good.

But I must keep my self to the same method concerning the Justice of Religion,
which I followed in discoursing of Gods Justice, and therefore say, that
Religion is just by universal and by particular Justice.

First, Religion is just by universal justice, in willing and doing generally
what is just, according to that excellent rule, Fiat justitia and pereat
mundus, let justice be done, though the whole world be undone; nor can that man
be truly religious who is afraid that justice should take place, lest the law
should have its due, the Church should have her due, and the several orders of
men should have their due; for to fear this, is in effect to fear lest God
should have his due, for none of these can have any due, but what God has
given them; and he that fears lest God should have his due, in what he has
given unto others, cannot but fear lest God should have his due in what he has
reserved to himself; and such a fear as this must needs expel all true
Religion, which is nothing else but an obligation of giving God his due, either
mediately in his authority, or immediately in himself.

Therefore no prayer can more truly proceed from the affection of Religion,
then that of our Church: Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most
gracious favor, and further us with thy continual help, that in all our works
begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name: he that
heartily prays thus is sure not to be irreligious, for he cordially desires
to glorify Gods Name; and he that carefully does this is sure not to be
unjust, for his works exactly follow the rule of universal justice, as being
just in the means no less then in the end; in the means, beginning and
continuing with God; no less then in the end, determining and ending with him;
he that uses unjust means to compass a just end, though he may be thought to
end in God, because of the justness of his end, yet cannot be thought to begin
or continue in God, because of the unjustness of his means; but Religion
desires to be so completely just, that she cannot allow any unjustness either
in the means or in the end; and this appears from those two special axioms
which are to be found in no other science, but only in Divinity; not in
state policy, but only in Religion; not in Machiavils, but only in Christ's
School: 1o nolle malum propter bonum, not to do evil that good may come: 2o
velle bonum been, not to do good so as that evil may come: but as the thing
must be good we do, so it may not be made evil by our manner of doing: these
two, being the general, or rather the peculiar rules of Religion, show how much
she disdains to be enthralled under the captivity of injustice, how much she
detests that base thraldom, and those men that would so enthral her: and by
these two we may easily distinguish Religion both from faction and from
superstition: for faction is usually peccant against the first rule, vult malum
propter bonum, it will not scruple to do evil that good may come, it will not
boggle at a Schism or a sedition for a Reformation; Superstition is usually
peccant against the second rule, vult bonum non been, it will have that which
is good (suppose invocation, adoration) not after a good manner, that is to
say, not according to Gods institution, but according to man's invention.

Secondly, Religion is just by particular justice, retributing to every man
according to his works; which practice of Justice was eminent in the primitive
Church, wherein every notorious offender was put to an open shame, some kept
from the Sacrament, (...). others from the Church it self, thrust out of doors,
(...), and none at all fully received till condign satisfaction given to the
whole Congregation, by a long and a strict course of public humiliation;
insomuch that from only two Canons of the first Council of Nice (can. 11. and
12.) we may collect no less then four several Orders and ranks of Christians,
not distinguished from the doctrine, but only from the discipline of the
Christian Religion; for they all professed the same faith, but they all enjoyed
not the same privileges; but one was an order of hearers, another of
penitents, a third of such as were admitted to the prayers, a fourth of such as
were not admitted to the oblation; and accordingly these four orders had their
four several times defined by the Council, which are there called (...) a time
of hearing their sins, before they were admitted to penance; a time of penance,
before they were admitted to the prayers of the Church; a time of praying with
the Church, before they were admitted to the oblation or to the communion; and
a time of partaking in the oblation, and rejoicing in the communion of Christ
and of his members: and all this after they had gotten to be admitted into the
Church; for some who had been forward in their apostasy, but were still
backward in their repentance, were not so much as suffered to enter into the
Church, but were kept without doors, as those who had no right to be accounted
in the lowest and meanest order of Christians.

This practice has of late been neglected (if not opposed) by some, because it
has been abused by others, and satisfaction is now a days rejected as a piece
of penance, in regard of the Church, because it has been cried up as a piece
of penance in regard of God; yet is this so necessary a practice of Religion,
that our Church cannot but wish it might be restored again; and that wish,
though it be for the execution of justice, yet is it from the affection of
charity (not the affectation of tyranny) for the Church desires it not for her
own sake, but for their sakes who indeed want it, and are in danger of
perishing eternally for the want of it; men that either have sinned
notoriously, or at least are inclined so to sin, whilst they use their liberty
for an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. or for a cloak of maliciousness, 1
Pet. 2. 16. and it is most evident that such men ought to be punished out of
justice, but are punished clearly out of charity, for they are therefore put to
open penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in
the day of the Lord, and that others admonished by their example might be the
more afraid to offend.

But the less the Church can now exact this penance of us, the more ought we to
exact it of our selves, and the rather because every notorious offender wrongs
three together, his God, his neighbor, and himself; his God, by his
disobedience; his neighbor, by his disturbance; himself by his distemper; so
that it matters not which he most condemns in himself, whether his injustice or
his irreligion, since the same two integral parts of justice, are also the two
integral parts of Religion, viz. to flee evil, and to do good: and as Religion
challenges all the soul, both in its intellective part, to embrace God as the
first Truth; and in its affective part to cleave to God as the last good; so
also does justice challenge all the soul, it challenges the understanding, to
know which is the right way; it challenges the will to follow it: Justitia
quoad legem regulantem est in ratione seu intellectu; sed quoad imperium, quo
opera regulantur secundum legem, est in voluntate, says Aquinas: Justice as it
propounds or prescribes the rule, is seated in the reason or in the
understanding; but as it commands our obedience to the rule prescribed, so it
is seated in the affection or in the will; whence it comes to pass, that few
are the number of the just, as also of the religious, because none can be
either truly just or religious, but he alone whose whole soul is sanctified,
but he alone who is rectified both in his reason and in his affection, both in
his understanding and in his will: and it is no less then the work of a whole
age, both for Gods grace and for man's industry, to rectify either; and hence
it is, that God is specially called the God of the just, ex speciali cura and
cultu, from the special care he has of them, (to protect them here, and to
reward them hereafter;) and from the special worship or service he has from
them, none doing him service but the religious, and none being religious but
the just. But whence then so much injustice among Christians, even too much for
the heathen that know not God to practice, and for the infidels that believe
not God to profess? I answer, merely from the want of Religion; in which want
they are too too often the greatest sharers, who are, or might be the only
possessours; for Pagans can have but a negative want of godliness, such as they
could not compass not having the true light of God to show it but Christians
have moreover a privative want of godliness, such as they might and should have
compassed, had they not bid defiance to that light which showed it: which makes
the Spirit of God pronounce a severe sentence against them from the mouth of S.
Peter, saying, It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, (or the way of justice, (...), that is, the way of Religion)
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them: they are in a very bad condition who know not the way of righteousness;
but they are in a far worse, who do know it but will not follow it; they are
under a fearful doom who never turned to the holy commandment; but their
judgment will be intolerable who have wilfully turned from it: and it is to be
feared, that God will ere long take from some Christians their Religion, if he
do not speedily give them more justice; for he will not long endure that men
should speculatively honor his Name, but practically blaspheme it: wherefore
it is to be supposed, that he will either make such Christians as regard not
justice, more just in their actions, or less religious in their protestations;
that he will make them either afraid to violate the commands of Christ, or
ashamed to pretend to the profession of Christianity.

The next attribute we are now to consider in God is his Grace, whereby he
freely gives what is wanting to his creature: for Grace is the participation of
the divine nature, and therefore above the condition of every man that has it,
and much more above his deserts, unless we will needs say, that men may deserve
to partake of the divine nature, because they have corrupted and abused their
own: and this grace as it is in God, is the actual communication of his
goodness, whereby he diffuseth himself to the sons of men, as they are capable
to receive him, and never leaves to derive into them heavenly influencies, till
he has instated them in the eternal bliss of heaven; which goodness of God is
more particularly revealed unto us in that covenant of Grace, which God freely
and favorably made with us when we were his enemies, and therefore will
certainly fulfill now we are his friends: Ero Deus tuus and seminis tui; I will
be thy God, and thy seeds after thee: for which promise there was no reason but
his own undeserved grace, though now his promise be a good reason of his
performance; and yet still his grace will approve it self to be free grace,
though we acknowledge that his promise has made him a debtor; and where there
is a debt, there may seem to be matter of justice, not of grace; for we may not
limit this universal proposition, Promissum cadit in debitum, A promise becomes
a debt, by distinguishing upon him that makes the promise, and saying, It Is to
be understood of the promises of men, but not of God, Promissio creaturarum,
non Dei, as says Paraeus) in Ursinum, page 158.) for in truth Gods promise is
more truly and universally a debt, then the promise of any creature whatsoever;
because his promise is always of that which is really good for us, and
therefore undoubtedly claimable by us; whereas the creature may promise what is
not really good, and consequently what we may not care to claim: as for
example, [All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship
me,] was a large promise, but yet could not be made a debt, because it could
not be made worth the claiming; whereas Gods promise to Abraham but only of
one small corner of those kingdoms, was taken for a good debt, and a sufficient
title to the land of Canaan, which was from thence called The land of promise:
wherefore we may say safely with great confidence, and with greater comfort, that
Gods promise obliges him not less, but rather more then our promises can
oblige us: for we may promise in materia indebita, or modo indebito, in an
unwarrantable matter, or after an unwarrantable manner; so that either he that
has made the promise may be bound to recall his word, or he to whom it is made
may be bound not to claim it; either of which is enough to disannul the justice
of a debt: but we are sure God cannot promise any thing not really and
completely good in the matter, and in the manner, and therefore his promise
must needs be laid hold on, as a debt worth claiming, and more worth the
having, so that we cannot but look upon him, as obliged to a most substantial
and real performance of all his promises.

And yet still here is nothing but mere Grace, not so much as merit of
congruity: for though a promise becomes a debt in God, no less then in man; yet
that debt is a debt only of favor, not of justice; and God is obliged to pay
it only in faithfulness which he owes to his own truth, not in justice which
he owes to our works or to our deservings. Wherefore let a promise of Grace go
for a debt, but let it go for a debt of Grace, not for a debt of justice, that
God may be bound only to himself, and not to us: for as it was only his own
mere grace, that first made him give us bond, so it is only the same grace
that at last makes him keep it: a grace that ought rather to supply us with
arguments for devotion, then for disputation: for since it is evident, that
being enemies we could never have reconciled our selves; it cannot be obscure,
that now we are friends, we ow to him more then to our selves, both the
enjoyment and the continuance of our reconciliation.

And this is the most comfortable doctrine that can be preached to those, who
have rather wounded hearts then itching ears, that would rather hear sound then
pleasing divinity; for such men must needs be desirous to have God more
magnified then themselves, and are contented to expect their salvation from
him, as well as with him: for seeing themselves unable to make satisfaction for
the least of their sins, they dare not hazard their salvation upon the greatest
of their righteousness; but are willing to say with S. Paul, For if when we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled we shall be saved by his life, (Romans 5. 10.) It was the death of his
Son that wrought our reconciliation, and it is the life of his Son that works
our salvation; by grace we are saved, and this grace is the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, because purchased by him, derived from him, and continued through
him; but yet this grace cannot so well be known by it self (for so it is like
God the author of it, altogether invisible,) as by its effects; and they are
five according to Aquinas: Sunt autem quinque effectus gratiae in nobis, quorum
primus est, ut anima sanetur; secundus, ut bonum velit; tertius, ut bonum quod
vult, essicaciter operetur; quartus est, ut in bono perseveret; quintus est, ut
ad gloriam perveniat: (12ae. q. 111. art. 3.) There are five effects of grace
in us, the first is, that it heals the soul of its natural malady or
distemper, whereby it is prone only to evil: the second, that it makes us will
what is good: the third, that it makes us do the good which we have willed: the
fourth, that it makes us persevere in doing that good: the fifth, that it
brings us to glory, to enjoy God the fountain of goodness: so that in short,
where we find most goodness both in the will and in the deed, there we may be
sure is most grace; and where least goodness, least grace; and where no
goodness, no grace.

And this is also the truest touchstone of Religion, whereby we may discern
gold from dross, which oftentimes glitters as much in the show, but yet still
comes far short in the value; the glory may be alike in both, but the goodness
is far different: That Religion which makes the best men, will upon this
account be found the best Religion; and that made S. Augustine so zealous to
describe the manners of the true Church, as himself professes, lib. 1.
Retract. cap. 7. Jam baptizatus cum Romae essem and Manichaei jactarent de
falsa and fallaci continentia vel abstinentia, qua se ad imperitos decipiendos
veris Christianis praeferunt, scripsi duos libros, unum de moribus verae
Ecclesiae, alterum de moribus Manichaeorum: When the Manichees did brag of
their false and fallacious continence or abstinence, and upon that pretense did
much deceive the ignorant people, as if they forsooth had been the only true
Christians, I thought it high time to write two books, one of the manners of
the true Church, the other of the manners of the Manicheans: his drift was from
the good manners to find out the good Religion, whether it were in the
Manichees or in the Church: and he tells us that the Manichees did extol
themselves among the ignorant multitude chiefly by these two d^vices, by crying
down the Scriptures, and by crying up themselves, and their own great
continency.

Their first device was to cry down the Scriptures, as if they had found a more
perfect way of Religion then the word of God had taught them; and concerning
this, the Father gives his definitive sentence, (lib. de moribus Eccl. Cathol.
cap. 9.) Convictorum hominum ultima vox, That this is the last plea of men that
are convinced, but will not be converted. And again he says the same in effect
by way of interrogation, which before he had said by way of definition,
Nescitis quanta imperitia lacessitis libros quos and soli reprehendunt qui non
intelligunt, and soli intelligere nequeunt qui reprehendunt? Are you indeed so
ignorant as not to see what a madness it is to revile those books, which only
they reprehend who do not understand; and only they cannot understand, who
will needs reprehend them? (August. lib. de moribus Eccl. cath. cap. 25.)

Their second device was to cry up themselves, and particularly their own
continency, that though their auditores, their common sort had wives, yet their
electi, their choice ones had none; and concerning this the same Father answers
thus; lib. de mor. Manichaeorum, cap. 19. Vidi ipse plures quam tres Electos,
simul post transeuntes nescio quas foeminas, tam petulanti gestu adhinnire, ut
omnium trivialium impudicitiam impudentiamque superarent; that even their elect
ones did pretend to much more continency, then they did observe; but concerning
this, the world would more willingly leave men to the judgment of their own
consciences; how to serve God with the most purity and with the least
distraction, if they did but answer to themselves this Question, whether it is
better, that they which have wives be as though they had none, 1 Cor. 7. 29. or
that they which have no wives be as though they had them? for what is best, is
doubtless in this as in other cases the determination of Religion: for that
labors to make men like God both in their bodies and in their souls; in their
bodies by sobriety, temperance, and chastity, either virginal, or vidual, or
conjugal; in their souls by holy meditations and more holy affections; and
where men do most truly express this holiness in their lives and conversations,
it is not to be doubted, but there is the best and the purest Religion, although
it is often seen, that where is the best and the purest Religion, there men do
not always express the same in their lives and conversations; which made the
same S. Augustine declare this as a dogmatical sanction, ex malorum
Christianorum moribus non vituperandam esse Ecclesiam. (Aug. lib. de mor. Eccl.
Cath. cap. 34.) that the Church is not to be blamed for the misdemeanors of
some men that live in her communion, since she her self condemns those
misdemeanors, and labors to correct them.

The upshot of all may be this, that not the practical but the doctrinal,
miscarriages of men are to be imputed to the Church, and where are fewest of
such miscarriages there is most of truth and goodness, where is most of these,
there is most of the pure Religion: for as manners make the man, so Religion
makes the manners; and it is little other then the doctrine of devils, that
says, hell is full of moral honest men, though it pretend to set up faith: for
S. Paul plainly shows, that faith alone was the cause of all moral honesty in
the Jews, Heb. 11. so that it is too much for any man to doubt, much more to
deny, but that faith alone is the cause of all true moral honesty in the
Christians; whence our blessed Savior preaches only moral duties, S. Luk,
21. 31. take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, etc. he bids them be temperate, sober, and
content, watch and pray; and what is all this but moral honesty? yet if this
rightly done (and it is rightly done only in true believers) proceed not from
faith, we must infer, that we may stand in judgment without faith, for so it
follows, v. 36. that ye may stand before the Son of man; nor would Christ have
thus taught daily in the temple, v. 37. had this not been the right way of
preaching true faith in Christ; and what he prescribes in his doctrine, he
performs in his practice, for his nights were spent in praying, as his days in
preaching: and therefore to say that hell is full of moral honest men, is to
say, that hell is full of true believers, and consequently to blaspheme that
precious faith in Christ, which could not sanctify the hand in working, did it
not first sanctify the heart in believing; and we cannot but say, that Noah's
preparing the Ark, and Abraham's offering his son, was materially an act of
obedience, (that moral honest virtue which this world cares not to profess,
much less to practice) though it was formally an act of faith; and so we may
say concerning those other examples there cited by S Paul; wherein some virtue
that belongs to the catalogue of moral honesty, will come in for the material
part, though faith alone may happily challenge the formal part of the
performance; and Aquina's distinction of actus virtutis imperatus and c^^^tus,
will reconcile the difference; for all virtuous acts truly so called are the
acts of faith imperative, as commanded by it, (whence S. Augustine styled the
best works of unbeleevers but gilded or glittering sins) though only the
peculiar acts of believing and confessing be the acts of faith elicitive, as
immediately and directly flowing from it: for faith is in the soul, as the soul
is in the body; and as all motion in the body is by redundancy from the soul,
so all good motion in the soul is by redundancy from faith; and hence it is
there is so great an influence of our words upon our manners, and of our
manners upon our doctrine, and consequently upon our faith; for as evil words
corrupt good manners, so also evil manners corrupt good words; it having been
the fate of Religion, first to decay in men's lives, then in their doctrines;
first in their works, then in their faith; so that irreligion first gets into
our conversations, then into our catechismes; and the miscarriages of Churches
have first been practical, and after that dogmatical, men being generally more
zealous for their credit in laboring to justify their errors, then for their
innocence in confessing that they have erred.

The third and last Attribute we are now to consider in God is his Mercy,
whereby he freely forgives what is due unto himself: For as the act of grace is
most clearly evidenced in freely giving what was not due unto the creature, so
is the act of mercy most conspicuous in freely forgiving what is due from it:
Aquinas makes Gods Mercy the foundation of all his works of distributive
justice even in rewarding the righteous; then much more is it the foundation of
his not working according to his vindicative justice in the punishment of our
unrighteousness:

It Is a heavenly contemplation of his, (and such heavenly contemplations are
very frequent in the angelical doctor) opus divinae justitiae semper
praesupponit, opus misericordiae, and in eo fundatur, (1 Par. qu. 21. ar. 4.)
the work of Gods Justice always presupposes the work of his Mercy, and is
founded in it: for the creature can have nothing due to it, but for some thing
that is in it, and the creature has nothing in it which did not flow
immediately from the goodness of the Creator; therefore that goodness alone
must be looked upon as the ground and foundation of all that the creature is
capable of, which alone put the same into a capacity of any thing at all: Et
sic in quolibet opere Dei apparet misericordia quantum ad primam radicem ejus,
cujus virtus salvator in omnibus consequentibus, and etiam vehementius in eis
operatur, sicut causa primaria vehementius influit, quam causa secunda: words
that deserve to be engraven with letters of gold, and much more to be engraven
in our hearts, and this is the meaning of them: there is no work of God but
mercy is the ground and root of it; and this ground is preserved in all the
building, this root, is seen in all the fruits that grow from it, nay, it has
a great efficacy of working above them all, even as the first cause has a
stronger influence then the second and all that come after it. Will you then
ask me why God rewards the best of men, the righteous, far above their deserts?
it is because his mercy first made them men to be capable of righteousness, and
made them righteous to be capable of reward; and that being the first cause
must needs have the strongest influence: Will you ask me again, why God does
not reward the worst of men, impenitent sinners, according to their ill
deservings? I must answer again, it is the same mercy, because that was the
first cause of the creation, and therefore cannot but have the strongest
influence upon the creature; and consequently though his justice do as it were
force him to punish (for his law must be satisfied either by our active or by
our passive obedience) yet his mercy will not let him punish to the utmost, and
hence comes in the citra condignum in the Schools, that even the damned in hell
shall be punished, much less then they have deserved: If you ask me in the
third place, why God forgives so much sin in the best of sinners, the true
penitents; that he may discharge them from all punishment? you must still be
contented with the same answer; for it is nothing but mercy which having been
the first cause of his working, will have the greatest preeminence, and the
strongest influence amongst all his works, nay, over them all, as says the
Psalmist, his mercy is over all his works, Ps. 145. 9. Deusnon miseretur nisi
propter amorem, in quantum amat nos tanquam aliquid sui, says the same
angelical Doctor, Gods mercy is from his love, and his love is from himself,
he shows us mercy because he loves us, and he loves us because he sees
something of himself in us, nothing else being truly good and lovely in us, but
what the fountain of goodness and love has made so: and hence it comes to
pass, that where is the most of God, there is also the most of mercy; where is
most of his image, either by the first righteousness that of innocence, or by
the second righteousness, that of repentance, there also is most of his love;
there is some of his love toward the worst men because there is some of his
image in them, which they had by their creation; but there is very much of his
love toward the best men, because there is very much of his image in them,
which they have from their sanctification: We are all dull of our
apprehensions, and cannot easily discern Gods mercies by a right valuation, but
more dull of our affections, and will not easily profess and acknowledge them
by our thankfulness: but the Apostle, whose eyes were opened to discover, whose
heart was opened to perceive, whose mouth was opened to express the goodness of
God toward men, breaks forth into this great exclamation, but greater
admiration for us all, O altitudo divitiarum, O the depth of the riches, who
has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed again? Romans 11. 33, 35.
here in the words is mentioned (...); but in the thing is made good (...), a
sigure notorious in Rhetoric for want of words, and so called because the
latter clause of the sentence does not contribute or give its part to make up
the full sense, as Exo. 32. 31. If thou will forgive their sin; and S. Luke 13.
9. and if it bear fruit; where nothing more is said to make up a perfect sense,
but the rest is left to be understood from the silence of the speaker; this
figure is notorious in Rhetoric the very art of speaking, merely for want of
speech; but it is much more notorious in Divinity, the art of doing, merely for
want of deeds; for if when we have done all, we are unprofitable servants, what
shall we say of our selves that we can do nothing? this is indeed a true (...),
for here is nothing to be given back again, God has given us all, but we can
give him nothing; and that he might be sure to leave nothing ungiven, he has
given us him who is all in all; he has given us himself in our creation, he
has given us his Son in our redemption, he has given us his holy Spirit in
our sanctification; but who (either first or last) has given unto God, and it
shall be recompensed unto him again? If we give any thing to him, it is but what
we first received from him, and we cannot give that so entirely as we received
it; it came better to us then it can return from us; so that we must needs
confess, all that is given, is given only on one side, without any the least
recompense on the other; and consequently none of Gods gifts to man can
properly come under the consideration, much less under the claim of justice,
but all of them flow from the inexhausted fountain of his free and undeserved
mercy: by this mercy alone it is, that he wills our salvation, and has given
us his oath that he wills it, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel.
33. 11. which made the ancient Father fall into a rapture, and break forth into
this exclamation, O nos soelices, quorum causa jurat Deus! O miserrimos si ne
juranti quidem Deo credimus: O happy we for whose sakes God has been pleased
to swear. O most unhappy, if we do not believe him upon his oath! by this mercy
alone it is that he inviteth us to repentance, the only means of salvation;
that in his invitation he condescendeth to our infirmities, and bears with
our delays; by this mercy alone it is that upon our repentance, he actually
delivers us from the bondage of sin and Satan, working that deliverance by
his Son, and sealing it by his holy Spirit; and that altogether freely, that is
to say, so far without our good deservings, as above them, so far with our ill
deservings, as against them; so says the Apostle, Romans 3. 24. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: what did
we do for Christ that he has redeemed us? what can we do for God, that he
should justify us? It is reasonable, that we first show what we have done
toward our redemption, before we presume to boast what we can do toward our
justification: Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy
free Spirit, says the Psalmist, thereby showing, that the salvation he
beseeches God to restore unto him, is as free, as the Spirit whereby he
restores it; Eodem modo retinetur quo acquiritur; no more merit is to be
pleaded for our retaining of Gods Spirit, then was for our first receiving him;
the Spirit was free, when he first laid hold on us, and is as free now he still
upholds us; I will heal their backslidings, says that Spirit, I will love them
freely, Hos. 14. 4. he heals us freely, he loves us freely; we were backsliders
when he did heal us, we are backsliders now he does love us: what the sick man
does toward his cure, who provokes his physician by backsliding and wilfully
relapsing into his disease; that we have done to God, why he should heal us,
why he should love us: and how then shall we not always think of this free and
undeserved mercy, which is the surest salvation of our souls, and therefore the
best employment of our thoughts? and how shall we but once think of it, and not
find words answerable to our thoughts, not be ready to sing our Hosanna to the
Son of David? we have an excellent president from two sorts which were in the
lowest degree of speakers, the multitudes and the children, S. Mat. 21. the one
cannot speak orderly, the other cannot speak plainly, yet both join together in
this heavenly consort, and sing their Hosannas to our blessed Savior, both
orderly and plainly; nay, we may find a president by way of supposition,
though not by way of position, from a sort that are in the very highest degree
of not speakers, for so says Truth himself, Verily I say unto you, if those
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out; S. Luke 19. 40.
as if he had said, if these two that are in the lowest degree of speakers (the
multitudes and the children) should hold their peace, and not magnify that
mercy which they cannot deserve (which is therefore the more to be magnified,
because it it has been the less deserved) then would the very stones cry out
which are in the highest degree of not speakers; as not having any organs that
conduce to so much as the making of a noise (and therefore sure not to the
uttering of a voice) and yet even these should not only speak but also cry
out, speak very loud, if we should be so unthankful as to hold our peace; for
God who can out of these stones raise up children unto Abraham, S. Matthew. 3. 9.
can also out of these stones raise up Saints unto himself, to sing hosannas to
his Son; nay, indeed he has raised up both children to Abraham, and saints
unto himself, as it were out of these stones, in mollifying the hard hearts of
men, to make them capable of the impressions of his grace; and in opening their
lips, that he might fill their mouths with the expressions of his praise and
glory: a mercy that in this respect is greater then all the rest, because
without this we could not be thankful for them, and unthankfullness is able to
make the greatest mercies no mercies at all.

So that now we may clearly see how to answer that curious and fond Question,
What did God do before the Creation? not by saying that he was making hell for
such Questionists; but, that he was wholly employed in making heaven; for
doubtless, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost delighted in himself from all
eternity, and consequently was making heaven for himself; for he is indeed his
own heaven, his own blessedness, rejoicing everlastingly in himself: but we may
yet go further, and say, that he was making heaven also for us men; for that
same goodness which made him rejoice in himself, as being his own blessedness,
made him also rejoice in his workmanship, as that which should proceed from
himself, and as that which should be blessed in himself: and that same goodness
made him in time give us a being, and such a being, as was capable of
blessedness, as was capable of the joy of heaven, by rejoicing in the God of
heaven: for as God is his own heaven by rejoicing in himself, so is he also our
heaven, by making us rejoice in him; O the happiness of a judicious soul, that
contemplates this mercy, but much more of a religious soul, that embraces it,
for doubtless such a soul begins to go to heaven, by delighting it self betimes
in God; according to that heavenly advice given by the Psalmist, Delight thy
self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart; what else
is the work of heaven, but to delight thy self in the Lord? what else is the
reward of heaven, but to have the desires of thy heart? If thou do the work,
thou will not miss of the reward; but though thou have not all that thou can
imagine, which is the desire of the brain, yet thou will have all that thou
can enjoy* which is the desire of the heart; thou may want the corporal
rest of thy body, but thou shall not want the spiritual rest and repose of thy
soul: thou may be much oppressed by man's cruelty, but thou will much more be
refreshed by Gods mercy, which always brings a great refreshment in its
contemplation, to show it cannot be without an unimaginable joy in its
fruition: we may think those men merriest that sing loudest; but the Apostle
tells us of another singing, which thought it has much less noise, yet can it
not but have much more cheerfulness, Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in
Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your heart
unto the Lord: a true and lively faith in Gods mercy (which is most useful in
all times, but most needful in the worst times) will neither let us want
company, for it will make us speak to our selves, nor want a speech, for it
will teach us to speak in Psalms and Hymns, nor will it let us want mirth, for
it will cause us to sing and make melody in our hearts; Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, speaking, and singing, and making melody, all is too little to
welcome the very thought of mercy, and what then can be enough to express the
joy and the enjoyment of it? but if we look upon the verse before, we may there
discern a double fullness, a fullness of wine, and a fullness of the Spirit; he
that is filled with wine (the joys of this world) may sing lowdest, but he that
is filled with the Spirit (the joys of the world above) surely sings sweetest;
for come what can come, this man must either not be miserable, or, which is the
greater happiness, not be discontented with his misery: for (as it follows in
the verse next after) he is giving thanks always for all things to God; and
therefore he is giving thanks also for those things which seem to bring him the
greatest discomforts and disturbances, because his disturbances cannot be so
fixed upon his body, as his soul is fixed upon his God: and looking with an eye
of faith upon the eternal mercy, he cannot but look with an eye of scorn upon a
little momentany and temporal misery: thus we find S. Paul and Silas singing
Psalms to God in the prison, after all their stripes; having been scourged in
the day, yet singing in the night; these two discords, scourging and singing
make up an admirable harmony; when their bodies were most tormented and
straightened, their souls were most comforted and enlarged; and the prison doors
being opened, and the prisoners bands loosed by the singing of a Psalm, show
the great power of the key of David, that the readiest way to get out of prison
is to make use chiefly of that key, which will turn thraldom it self into
liberty, and therefore cannot but turn liberty into a blessing: for surely such
men who can make heaven where it is not, can much more enjoy heaven where it
is; they who can find liberty in their captivity, cannot but find a great
blessing in their liberty, which they esteem to consist not so much in their
free egresses and regresses unto men, as in their frequent approaches and
addresses unto God; wherefore let my soul be evermore busied in contemplating
Gods eternal mercy, and my heart in loving it, and my mouth in praising it;
that when I am driven to such exigencies as least to enjoy my self, I may then
find such opportunities as most to enjoy my God: Let me always be saying with
Israel, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, Genesis 32. 10. I am not
worthy of the least of thy temporal mercies, and much less of that eternal
mercy which caused them; I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, whether
showed me as a natural man, or as an Israelite, and a Christian, or as a true
Israelite and a good Christian; whether mercies that concern the state of
nature, or the state of grace, or the state of glory: I am not worthy of the
least of them all, and what then shall I offer thee for the greatest? I will
offer mine heart for an holocaust, I will offer the calves of my lips, for a
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; that though I cannot deny in my self the
greatest unworthiness, yet I may never discover the least unthankfulness: for
though my being unworthy did not keep me from receiving Gods mercies, yet my
being unthankful will keep me from retaining them; it being alike against the
very nature of mercy to look for recompense, and not to look for
acknowledgments: nor can there be a truer acknowledgement of Gods undeserved
goodness toward us, then by ascribing all that we have, are, and hope for to
his mercy; this one thing alone is to us as God, even all in all: 'twas
creation when we were not, it is preservation now we are, it is glorification in
what we hope to be: Mercy is illumination to those in darkness, Confirmation to
those in weakness, Comfort to those in sadness, Health to those in sickness,
Liberty to those in prison, Clothing to those in nakedness, Joy to those in
life, and Life to those in death; he that can truly and heartily ask for mercy
cannot want a prayer to show his necessities, and shall not want a remedy to
redress them; for he has both the Spirit and the gift of Prayer, the Spirit of
prayer in the zeal and sincerity of his affection, the gift of prayer in the
congruity and fitness of his expression: Jesus thou Son of David, have mercy on
me, S. Luke 18. 38. was enough to open the blind man's eyes to see his Savior,
his heart to believe in him, his mouth to glorify him; we may from those few
words observe the Spirit of Prayer in the earnestness of the supplicant, and
the gift of prayer in the fitness of his supplication: so that neither did he
stint the Spirit by confining himself to a set form of words, for he cried,
says the Text, showing the earnestness of his affection; nor did he quench the
Spirit by confining himself to the very same words till he had obtained his
answer, for he cried so much the more, says the Text, approving the fitness of
his expression, thereby intimating, that they might justly have been ashamed
who rebuked him for praying, not he, who maugre all their rebukes and taunts
would not be driven from his premeditated and set form of prayer: I will also
use the same prayer in all my wants and distresses, and will not doubt but as
this form is already to me the opening of my mouth, or rather of my heart to
pray, so it shall be also the opening of heaven to let in my prayers, that they
may have immediate access to him whose mercy is himself, and who therefore
delights in mercy as in himself.

Thus have I briefly spoken of mercy as it is in God, and now come as briefly
to show how mercy is also in the true Religion the service of God; for in this
above all is the true Religion to be discerned and distinguished from faction
(for all false faith is faction, whether it be addicted to blindness or to
perverseness, to superstition, or to separation) the true Religion is always
most inclinable to mercy, but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Prove.
12. 10. where the word (...) that is translated the wicked has its derivation
from commotion or agitation, and does most properly signify those wicked who
are turbulent, seditions, and factious: even their tenderness is
hard-heartedness, even their mercy is cruelty; whereas a righteous man
regards the life of his beast, rather then not show mercy, he will show it to
his beast, though in some respects incapable of mercy, in others unworthy of
it; thus then it is, the righteous is merciful to his beast, the unrighteous
is not merciful to his brother, so near a conjunction is there betwixt
righteousness and mercy; faction may often pretend to piety but never to mercy;
but the true Religion admits of no piety without mercy: wherein it follows both
the pattern and the precept of its Founder, who has left his mind concerning
this matter no less then thrice upon public record, once in the old, twice in
the new Testament: in the old, Hos. 6. 6. For I desired mercy, and not
sacrifice; and as he desires so he accepts, for to what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices, (says the Prophet Isaiah at the very same time)
while your hands are full of blood? Is. 1. 11, 15. In the New Testament, S.
Mat, 9. 13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: and again, S. Mat. 12. 7. But if ye had known wha^ this means, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless,
where our Savior Christ requires of all that will be his disciples (that is,
good Christians.)

In the first place to look after mercy, 1. in its nature, and then in its
exercise.

1. In its nature, here is mercy with sacrifice, by way of conjunction; mercy
in sacrifice, by way of command; and mercy above sacrifice, by way of
comparison: I will have mercy and not sacrifice, affords all these three
Expositions.

2 In its exercise; for we are bid, Go and learn what this means: Our Savior
sends us all to his School, and he sends none only to look on like idle
spectatours, or to gossip and tattle like idle auditors, but he sends all to
learn the lessons that he there teaches them: and not so much to learn the
words of those lessons as their meaning, Go ye and learn what that means,
that is, go learn it intellectually to understand it; cordially to love it,
practically to perform it; that mercy is the chiefest ingredient of your
Religion, and ought to be the first of your sacrifices: for he that will have
mercy rather then sacrifice, surely will accept of no sacrifice without mercy:
and this appears from the very occasion of citing the Text, for it is cited, S.
Mat. 9. 13. to confute those that out of a mistaken zeal would needs be
factious and turn Separatists, accounting themselves too good to keep company
with sinners: It is cited S. Mat. 12. 7. to confute those that would needs be
superstitious, making an idol of the Sabbath, and condemning the disciples for
plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath Day, when they were an hungered; and
much more is it still to be cited against them amongst us, who in the same
practices are both factious and superstitious; men that most talk of Religion,
yet least care for mercy; for we see that we have now a Religion without
sacrifice, but we can never have a Religion without mercy; Sow to your selves
in Righteousness and reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground, for it is time
to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you, Hos. 10. 12.
there cannot be righteousness without mercy, for both these make but one
exhortation of seeking the Lord, whom we must seek no less by mercy then by
righteousness, or we shall so seek him as not to find him: for even at his own
altar will he not be found of us, if we come thither to seek him without mercy,
before we are reconciled to our brother; and therefore in this case we are
plainly told it is in vain to offer our gifts, which is in effect to say, that
God will not be there for to receive them, S. Mat. 5. 23, 24. nay, even in
heaven, which is his throne, will he not be found by us, unless we come with
mercy to seek him there; and therefore the benediction of purity, Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God, presupposes the benediction of
mercy, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: for were it
possible for a soul to be in heaven, and there to see God, which had not
obtained mercy, which had not its sins forgiven, that soul could not be truly
blessed: First, because it could not love God, looking upon him as not
reconciled in Christ, and therefore not as a loving Father, but as an impartial
Judge: for if to whom little is forgiven the same loves little, S. Luke 7. 47.
then by the same rule of proportion, where is no forgiveness, there can be no
love, supposing that there is sin which needs to be forgiven. Secondly, because
that soul could not love it self, as being odious and abominable whilst under
the guilt of sin: for even the damned souls in hell, though they do not
contract the guilt of new sins (for then unrighteousness would be immortai) yet
forasmuch as they are still under the guilt of their old sins (which could not
be washed away but only by that blood which they trampled under their feet,
and by that repentance which they would not let come near their hearts, and
being not washed away still remains upon their souls) cannot but be eternally
odious and abominable to themselves, because they cannot but be eternally under
the guilt of sin: so that we may infer with good Logic and better Divinity:
that if the reward of the pure in heart (which is to see God) without the
reward of the merciful (which is to obtain mercy) be no blessedness, then
surely purity without mercy is no righteousness, for it is not possible that
true righteousness should be without a reward.

And indeed it is not possible that true righteousness should be without mercy,
whence it is that the Seventy Interpreters do render the Hebrew word (...)
which is mercies, by the Greek word (...) which is holinesses, as appears Isa.
55. 3. cited by S. Paul, Act. 13. 34. the prophet had said, I will give you the
mercies, but the Septuagint, and from them S. Paul did say, I will give you the
holy or just things; they both did mean the same gift, though the one called it
mercy, the other called it holiness: and indeed in the Hebrew the same is the
good and the merciful men, (...): and S. Paul tells us, that peradventure for
such a good man some would even dare to dye, Romans 5. 7. scarcely for a
righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die: by the righteous man he means (...), the man rigorously just, that
would do no wrong; but by the good man he means (...), the man piously
merciful, that would do all manner of good: and this man he accounts so
obliging, that peradventure some would not stick to lose their own lives so
they might save his; and by thus comparing the righteous man and the good man,
he shows that our Saviors love to us was beyond compare, who was pleased to
die for us when we were yet sinners, that is, so far from being good men, that
we were not so much as righteous men, so far from having the positive
righteousness of doing good, that we had not so much as the privative
righteousness of not doing evil.

Thus does the Apostle prefer him that is righteous, according to the rules of
mercy, before him that is righteous according to the rules of Justice, from the
example of God himself, who delighted in the righteousness of mercy above the
righteousness of justice; and therefore was not so zealous to commend his love
of justice in destroying us, as his love of mercy in saving us: go and do thou
likewise, is the use that the best Preacher that ever was either in heaven or
in earth makes of this doctrine, S. Luke 10. 37. when the answer had been made
that he was the neighbor to the wounded man, who had showed him mercy, it
follows presently, then said Jesus, go and do thou likewise: and they that do
willingly hear this Preacher, do as readily obey him, having a desire that
mercy may rejoice against judgment in them here, because they have a hope that
mercy shall rejoice against judgment for them hereafter; and this is the
reason of the Apostles inference, Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you: this privilege and prerogative we men have above the angels,
that God has forgiven us very much, when as he has forgiven them nothing;
they share equally with us in all Gods other attributes, but in this attribute
of mercy we that have been the sinners are the greatest sharers: and therefore
I dare not say it is an error of charity to assert, that the Blessed Virgin
had no sin to be forgiven her; I may say it is an error, for it is against the
Text, Death passed upon all for that all had sinned, Romans 5. 12. nay, I may say
it is in some sort an uncharitable error against the charity that is due to
the blessed Virgin, for though this doctrine may seem to add to her honor,
yet it must needs detract and diminish from her joy, since her self has
proclaimed these words, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior, and we know what his salvation was whom she calls
her Savior, even that which gave him his name Jesus, S. Mat. 1. 21. which was
to save his people from their sins: so that if she had no sin, how could she
have this Jesus for her Savior? and I dare not say, that she had him not for
her Savior, when I see her so rejoicing in his salvation, wherefore the error
must be contented to go without the charity, for there is no charity in denying
the mother of God, the greatest interest in God, the interest in his mercy; no
charity in denying the mother of our Savior, the best interest in her own Son,
the interest in his salvation: I dare not then exclude the blessed Virgin out
of that number of which S. Paul has spoken these words, Even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you, and can but wonder that some who have phansied
her more tenderhearted then Christ himself, should ascribe so much
tender-heartedness to so little need of forgiveness: for it is not unknown to
travelers, that in some Christian Churches where this doctrine of the
Immaculate conception is maintained, our blessed Savior is pictured as one
ready to pursue and smite the sinner, when as his mother is pictured as one
ready to shelter and to receive him, which false representation seems to have
proceeded from as false an imagination broached by Gabriel upon the canon of
the Mass, Lect. 8. Sibi reservavit justitiam, Virgini Mariae concessit
misericordiam; there being two principal boons of the heavenly kingdom,
justice and mercy, the King of heaven has reserved the justice to himself, but
the mercy he has bestowed on the blessed Virgin: it is very unsound and unsafe
divinity, that robs the King of Saints of the fairest slower in his Crown, to
make a garland for his mother; but besides the unsoundness and unsafeness,
whereby it may destroy us, there is also in it some unreasonableness whereby it
destroys it self; for all inclination to mercy in the creature is merely from
receiving it, as in the Creator merely from giving it: God being mercy in
himself at first has mercy because he will have mercy, and at last will have
mercy because he has had mercy on us; so that in him, giving or showing mercy
is the only cause of mercy, because he cannot repent him of his own gifts; but
man being misery in himself, learns to show mercy by having first received it,
and continues to show mercy, because he still expects it; so that in him,
receiving mercy is the only cause of showing mercy, for that he will not be
unthankful to God for the free gift of his mercy, wherefore this supposition
that the Blessed Virgin needed no mercy, cannot be agreeable with this
position, that she is most ready to show mercy, unless we will grant a non
sequitur in the Apostle who thus argues concerning Christ himself (the only
fountain of mercy, as God, to give it, the only channel of mercy, as men, to
derive and to convey it) that because he was tempted in all points as we are,
therefore he is the more to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
Heb. 4. 15.

And the same doctrine which he preaches concerning the head, he enforces
concerning the members, advising them therefore to forgive, because they had
been forgiven, therefore to be kind and tenderhearted to their brethren,
because God for Christ's sake had been kind and tenderhearted to them: he
makes choice of the best Topic that can be for an argument to persuade them
to mercy, even the infinite and undeserved mercies of God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: Forgive one another: even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven
you: here are the two first persons of the most holy, blessed, and glorious
Trinity, and if we look back upon the 30. verse we may see the third person;
and grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
Redemption; how shall they not grieve that holy Spirit? even by doing what
follows in the next words, v. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you with all malice, and be ye
kind one to another, etc. this bitterness and malice least grieves your
spirits, but it most grievs Gods Spirit, which cannot enter into a malicious
soul, and much less will dwell there: wherefore you must put away all
bitterness, wrath, and anger, if you would have this heavenly guest come into
your souls, and you must keep them away if you would have him make any stay and
abode when he is come: the Apostle reckons up three several kinds or degrees
of that fury, which opposes and grieveth Gods holy Spirit; the first is
bitterness, a light distaste or dislike of the mind: the second is wraths a
violent commotion and disaffection of the heart; both these contain themselves
within doors, and are to be rectified not by Aristotle's but by Christ's
Ethics, which alone reach to the inward man: the third is anger, an outward
exorbitant passion, that expresses it self in clamor and evil speaking, and
malicious doing; not one of these but is against some act of true mercy, and
accordingly the Apostle prescribes three acts of mercy which will expel them
all: for first he requires us to be (...) benigni, kind or courteous, that is
against the bitterness in the distaste or dislike of the mind: Secondly, he
requires us to be (...) misericordes, tenderhearted or merciful, that is
against the wrath, the strong inward impression of anger in the heart: Thirdly,
he requires us to be (...) donantes or condonantes, forgiving or pardoning,
that is against the anger or fury, the outward expression of exorbitant passion
either in our words or works: and as a sufficient motive to all this
(notwithstanding it is so contrary to flesh and blood) he only wills us to
consider how much kindness, tender-heartedness, and forgiveness we have all
found from God, and then we shall never think it much to be kind and
tenderhearted, and to forgive one another: and to this motive, though enough
of it self, we may further add another argument (for we have need of arguments
more then enough to confute our unbridled fury, and of motives more then enough
to make us restrain it) that he who has purchased all this mercy for us, has
taught us not to pray for it, and therefore not to hope for the blessing of it,
upon other terms, but only upon this very condition, if we practice it;
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; as if he
had said, make us to forgive as we desire to be forgiven, no less then make us
desire to be forgiven as we stood in need of forgiveness: and this is agreeable
with S. Chrysostom's gloss of the words, not upon the place, but in his 27
Sermon upon Genesis, (for it was his way of preaching, to explain many Texts as
he quoted them) (...). Let us not think that in forgiving others we do a
courtesy to them, for indeed we do the courtesy only to our selves, who by
this means do reap the benefit of that forgiveness which God has promised, and
our Savior Christ has purchased, but without forgiving can have no hopes to
be forgiven: and this lesson are we taught all along throughout our Saviors
whole life and doctrine, examine we his doctrine, it is for the greatest part
nothing else but so many several instructions and injunctions of mercy; I will
make but one instance, and that in his Sermon upon the mount, S. Mat. 5, 39.
But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; and v. 44. But I say unto you,
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despightfully use you, and persecute you; as if he had
said, what ever others have said before it matters not, if you will be my
disciples you must observe and obey what I say unto you, and I say unto you,
that all your labor and zeal must be to overcome one another in goodness and
in mercy. Again, examine we our Saviors whole life, we shall find it nothing
else but one continued practice and president of mercy: sometimes we find him
preaching and praying, to cure the souls; sometimes working miracles, to cure
or relieve the body; sometimes helping the body, sometimes helping the soul,
but always doing some good either to body or soul: so that we can have no truer
touchstone to discover and discern gold from dross, true Christianity from vain
Hypocrisy, then is this of showing mercy: nor may we object, That many and
great injuries have provoked us to wrath, and that solicites us to revenge: for
though it cannot be denied but this last and worst age of the world, has
silled our mouths with too many such objections; yet our hearts may in no case
be full of them, but herein also we must imitate our blessed Savior, who
though he were the party offended, yet came himself to make the atonement and
reconciliation, and has left not only his example, but also his blessing
behind him to encourage us to do so to, saying, Blessed are the peacemakers,
S. Matthew. 5. 9. If thine enemy come first to thee, he will get this blessing,
and thou will lose it; and if thou lose this blessing, how will thou keep thy
Savior that pronounced it? It is a mere madness in any man to break down that
bridge over which himself is to pass, the bridge over which we hope to pass in
our journey from earth to heaven is mercy; he that breaks down this bridge,
breaks off his own passage into eternal rest: Hypocrites may pretend zeal for
an occasion of cruelty; but true Christians will be sure to follow the example
of Christ, to be always doing some act of mercy: and wheresoever we find
massacres and outrages, we may safely say, there is the pretense, but there is
not the power of the true Christian Religion: that looks after no blood, but
the blood of Christ, to contemplate the merit of it with admiration, to
congratulate the mercy of it with thankfulness: that blood never baths, but it
likewise supples; whether the blood of a goat will soften the Adamant or no,
let the naturalist dispute; but that the blood of the immaculate Lamb does
soften the most stony hearts, the divine must determine. Therefore if the heart
be still in its hardness, it is still in its uncleanness; for it cannot be
cleansed but by the blood of Christ, and that blood never cleanses but where
it softens. It Is the part of salvages to overcome good with evil, but it is the
part of Christians to overcome evil with good; Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good: every Christian must look for this fight,
and strive for this victory: the fight is to encounter with evil, the victory
is to overcome it: the fight is against a twofold enemy, the one without, the
malice of the devil and his instruments; the other within, our own weakness and
impatience; and the victory is likewise twofold, one is over our enemies, for
we overcome evil; another is over our selves, for we overcome evil with good:
this is the way to be more then conquerours, and to get the victory over the
greatest Potentates, even while they trample us under their feet; not by
resisting, much less returning their outrages, but by forgiving them: Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do, was a voice of our dying Savior, and
therefore perchance weak in its noise, but sure strong in its power; for if it
did not shake the foundations of hell to conquer the devils tyranny, yet it
did pierce the battlements of heaven, to open Gods kingdom, insomuch that those
thousands which were afterward converted at two several sermons, Acts 2. 14.
and Acts 4. 4. did ow their conversion more to this one voice, then to those
very sermons which converted them.

And as the Head himself declared his Almighty power most chiefly in showing
mercy and pity, so has he given the same privilege to his members, to
conquer more by their mercy then by their power, by their praying then by their
fighting, by their tears then by their swords. Saul was the man at whose feet
the witnesses laid down their clothes whiles they stoned S. Stephen, so that he
seems to have had the chiefest hand in that Protomartyrs blood: Omnium
lapidantium vestimenta servabat, ut omnium manibus lapidaret, says S. Aug. in
Psalm. 147. He kept the clothes of those that stoned Stephen, that he might
stone him with all their hands. Was there ever a more bloody persecutour then
this Saul, that embrued not only his hands, but also his heart with blood?
That breathed out threatenings and slaughters against the disciples of the Lord,
andcunningly acted his threatenings by others hands, that he might not put
himself out of breath; yet even this persecutour is presently after made a
convert; and the text intimates in the history, no other reason of his
conversion, but this prayer of S. Stephen immediately before the stones had
beaten his soul out of his body, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And I
doubt not, but that prayer of our own Church, [That it may please thee to
forgive our enemies, persecutours, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts,]
will yet in Gods good time, work the conversion of some of those men, who now
think they do God good service by denying others to serve him; and God forbid
that we should ever cease thus to pray even for those that most resist and
oppose our prayers; though thereby they do also resist, and oppose their own
conversion.

The Church of Christ may in times of persecution lose its power, but may not
lose its mercy; for it can be no longer Christian then it is merciful;
Merciful in giving, freely ye have received, freely give, (S. Matthew. 10. 8.)
Merciful in forgiving, not until seven times, but until seventie times
seven, Saint Matthew. 18. 22. Deus semper miseretur puniendo citra condignum,
praemiando ultra condignum, says the Schole, God is always merciful in
punishing less, in rewarding more then we deserve; so is God Church, always
merciful both in its rewards and in its punishments. The dispensations of
Baptismal and of Penitential grace, both such acts of mercy, that they fall
under an (...), that no sufficient retribution, no sufficient amends can be
made for them; yet both these acts of mercy are so proper to the Christian
Church, that among all the sects of the world, we cannot find one which comes
near the Christian Religion in the zeal of bringing those that are born in sin,
to Baptism; and of those that have lived in sin, unto Repentance. It was a
question in S. Cyprians time, whether infants might be admitted to baptism
before the eighth day; and Fidus the Presbyter thought not, because the law of
Circumcision required a stay till the eighth day, and Baptism succeeded in the
place of Circumcision: but S. Cyprian and the orthodox Clergy of the Church of
Carthage were of another opinion, and the sixty six good Bishops give this as
the chiefest reason for it, in their Epistle to Fidus the Presbyter, (Cypr.
epist. 59. cum Pamel.) Universi poitus judicavimus, nulli bominum nato
misericordiam Dei and gratiam denegandam; nam cum Dominus in Evangelio suo
dicat, Filius hominis non venit animas hominum perdere, sed salvare, quantum in
nobis est, si fieri potest, nulla anima perdenda est: We all with one consent
agreed, that the mercy and grace of God was to be denied to none; for since our
Lord and Master himself has professed in his Gospel, that he came not to
destroy men's souls (we translate lives, but the Greek is (...) souls) but to
save them; it is our duty as much as lies in us, to keep all souls from the
danger of destruction. This was that Councils main argument why children should
be baptized in case of necessity, before they were eight days old, though we
have now a generation that will not baptize them till almost twice that number
of years. But Solomon's judgment stands upon record, whereby still to discern
which is the true mother, and which the false: for she who has the tender
bowels is certainly the true mother, not she who cares not what becomes of the
child; (1 King. 3.) so is it still; Faction is merciless and cruel, fears not
to see the sword drawn, to be not only bathed but also sheathed in blood;
whereas the true Religion is of tender bowels, would have none of her children
perish or be in danger of perishing; therefore since baptism is the only
ordinary means of saving children, by taking away the guilt of their original
sin; and repentanee is the only ordinary means of saving men, by taking away
their actual sins, the true Christian Church never yet thought fit to delay the
one, nor to deny the other: but even in the strictest discipline that ever was
exercised against notorious offenders, they that returned to the bosom of the
Church were admitted to penance, and those penitents that were in danger of
death, were also admitted to the holy Communion; we have Presidents or rather
precepts for both in the first Council of Nice; the 11. Canon admitting the
offenders to penance; the 13. Canon admitting the penitents to the holy
Communion: (...), says the 11. Canon, those that under Licinius had denied the
Christian faith, being not compelled thereunto by the violence of persecution,
though they were unworthy of mercy, yet they were not excluded from it, but the
Council admitted them to penance: Again, (...), says the 13. Canon, those that
were under penance, if they were in any imminent danger of death, were
presently permitted to receive the holy Communion, as the provision necessary
for their last journey, though if they recovered of their sickness, they were
to be reduced back again to the order of penitents, till they had fully
accomplished their enjoined penance; and this relaxation or indulgence (says
the same Canon) was the ancient and Canonical Law of the Church, (...), and the
like may be proved from the Epistle of the Clergy of Rome to S. Cyprian (Cyp.
cum Pamel. Epist. 31.) wherein they profess a relaxation of penance to those
that by sickness were summoned to Gods Tribunal, though they were resolved that
the rest should stay till they had a new Bishop: Thus we see it was the Law of
the Church in the times of the severest discipline, that mercy should be above
justice; and the holy communion administered (in case of necessity) even to
those whom the ecclesiastical censures did still exclude from it: against this
Law of the Church Novatus was peccant in the defect, for he would admit none to
penance that had once fallen away; but Novatianus was peccant in the excess,
for he would needs have all promiscuously admitted without any penance; And S.
Cyp. mightily opposed them both (which may show us the antiquity of this
discipline, for he lived within 230 years after the passion of our blessed
Savior) as well Novatus his inhumanity, in admitting none, as Novatianus his
facility in admitting all: for Novatianus was so zealous of increasing his
party, that what heretic or apostate soever would come to him, and be
rebaptized, might be received into his Congregation without any recantation of
his error or of his apostasy; but Novatus on the other side was so rigid and
severe, that he would not receive those that had recanted, and made earnest
suit to undergo their penance, that they might be again fully reconciled to the
Church: S. Cyprian in many of his Tracts, especially in his Epistles,
complains frequently of the petulancy of both these Sectaries and their
Adherents, advising all Christians that had a care of their souls to abstain
from their company, and much more from their communion; and to keep themselves
to the well grounded and well settled discipline of the Church, which as it
refused no penitents, so it durst not countenance any in sin and in
impenitency; and yet even this severe Bishop in his greatest strictness for
Church discipline, though he would not allow the Martyrs and Confessors to be
too importunate for the over speedy reconciliation of notorious offenders (in
which he had also the approbation of the Clergy of Rome) yet if an offender had
been overhastily reconciled, he would not by any means make void that act of
mercy: thus we read, that when the Bishop Therapius had given the peace of the
Church to Victor the Presbyter (for the Bishops were in those days the
governors in chief, if not in whole of the Ecclesiastical Communion) before he
had made public satisfaction for his offense, though S. Cyprian and his
colleagues were much troubled that he had so hastily received him into the
Communion of the Church nulla infirmitate urgente, when as no dangerous
sickness of his had called for a dispensation of the Canon, yet they would not
revoke that act of grace that had been done by Therapius, but let Victor still
enjoy the benefit of it, thereby showing that the true Religion though it stand
much upon the exactness of Justice, yet is much more delighted in the exercise
of Mercy; the words of S. Cyprian and his fellow Colleagues met together in a
Synod merely about Churchdiscipline, are very remarkable, Sed librato apud nos
diu consilio, satis fuit objurgare Therapium collegam nostrum quod temere hoc
fecerit, and instruxisse ne quid tale de caetero faciat; pacem tamen
quomodocunque a sacerdote Dei semel datam non putavimus au-ferendam. (Cyp. Ep.
59. cum Pam.) after we had taken long and full advice about this business, we
thought it enough to reprove Therapius our Colleague, that he had done this
rashly, and require him to do so no more; but the peace which had been given by
a Priest entrusted of God to give it, though given after never so ill a manner,
we did not think fit to take away again, and therefore declare, that Victor
shall still enjoy the communion of the Church. But what do I speak of Mercy
above Justice in the true Religion, when she would not call for Justice at all
were it not that she might show Mercy? for thus she proceeds to deliver a
sinner to Satan, that she may keep him from hell; as faith the Apostle, 1 Cor.
5. 5. to deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; true Religion would not
exercise that Justice which is for the destruction of the flesh, were it not to
make way for that Mercy which is for the salvation of the spirit, therein
resembling God himself who thrusts men away from him merely out of the
necessity of Justice, but embraces and receives them from his incessant
desire and delight of showing mercy.

CHAP. VIII.
The assurance we have of Religion, in that it makes us reverence and fear
God, ascribing the honor due unto his Name; and of the ten proper Names of God
collected by S. Hierome.

HE that is willing to expostulate with God, can never be unwilling to offend
him; for it is impossible that man should ever be dashed out of countenance by
the consideration of any sin, who is resolved to justify and maintain all his
sins; such a man is more fit for the School of the Peripateticks, then for the
School of the Prophets, because he is made rather for disputation then for
devotion: and truly this is the chiefest reason that we can allege for the
continuance of all those grand miscarriages that are in the practice of
Religion, whether by way of superstition or of profaneness; that men wedded to
their own corrupt practices are in a manner resolved to expostulate with God
rather then to comply with him; it is such a Clergy humor as this, which the
Prophet Malachi complains of Mal. 1. 6. saying, unto you, O Priests, that
despise my Name; and ye say, wherein have we despised thy Name? they would
needs be disputing when they should have been repenting; for all this while
they did neither honor God as a Father, not fear him as a Master; for so says
the Text, a son honors his father, and a servant his master; if then I be a
father where is mine honor, if I be a master where is my fear? says the Lord
of hosts, unto you O Priests that despise my Name? It is a foul shame for any
to despise Gods Name, but most especially for those who are most bound to
glorify it, that is, for his Priests who are peculiarly consecrated to serve
God, and therefore ought to be more particularly devoted to his service; no man
may securely contemn Religion, but he least who is entrusted to teach it, for
what he is entrusted to teach, he is much more commanded to practice: and truly
this is the proper work of Religion (which the Prophet here calls for) to
glorify the Name of God, that is, to honor God as a Father, and to fear him
as a Master; for without this honor and this fear, we cannot take God for God,
but it is the work of Religion to make man take God for God: and how can that
be, but by acknowledging and professing his Verity, Omnipotency, Goodness and
Excellency? so that the work of Religion most especially consists in Faith,
Hope, Charity, and Reverence, or holy Fear; for by Faith we acknowledge Gods
eternal truth or Verity, by Hope his Omnipotency, by Love his allsufficient
Goodness, and by Fear or reverence his Sovereign Majesty or supertranscendent
excellency.

Thus he that believes in God acknowledges God to be God, because he
acknowledges him to be the first Truth or chiefest Verity; he that hops in
God acknowledges God to be God, because he relyeth on his Omnipotency; he that
loves God with all his might, acknowledges God to be God because he takes
him for the chiefest good, being wholly satisfied with his allsufficiency: and
lastly, he that fears God with all his might, acknowledges God to be God,
because he takes him for the Sovereign Majesty, or for the greatest
excellency; wherefore God is truly to be honored as a Father by Faith, Hope,
and Charity, and to be honored as a Master by Fear and Reverence: and the true
Religion reaches us to honor God both as a Father and as a Master; as a
Father by believing in him, for shall not a Son believe his Father? though all
others believe him no further then for his honesty, yet his own Son is bound to
believe him also for his authority: again, to honor him as a Father by hoping
and expecting a blessing from him, and more particularly our inheritance; for
as faith looks to the promise, so hope looks to the thing promised; and we can
never look upon God too much, and much less can we look for too much from him:
For if we being evil know how to give good gifts to our children, how much more
shall our heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, S. Luke
11. 13 the word Father is there titulus argumentosus, not so truly a word as
it is an Argument; if father be the antecedent, how shall not giving the holy
Spirit be the consequent? and yet it is observable, that no such gift is asked
explicitly in our Lords most holy Prayer, to which this promise has immediate
relation, to teach us that much more is asked in that most holy prayer then is
mentioned, and yet much more is given then is asked when we do indeed say Our
Father, with a true filial affection.

Thirdly, True Religion teaches us to honor God as a Father, by loving him
with all our strength, with all our soul, with all our might; for every child
does love his natural Father, unless himself be a monster of nature, and does
therefore love him because he is principium vitae, because he is the beginning
of his natural life; much more do the children of God love their spiritual
Father, who has be gotten them again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and
that sadeth not away, reserved in heaven for them; 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. our fathers
here do beget us but to dead hopes, for we are born to dye, and are often
unable to maintain us when we are begotten; but our Father in heaven, has
begotten us to a lively hope, or to the hope of everlasting life, and is no
less able to preserve life then he was to give it, for he has an incorruptible
and undefiled inheritance that fades not away, reserved in heaven, to bestow
upon his children; so that he is infinitely more to be loved, not only as the
giver of life, but also as the preserver of it: thus does the true Religion
teach us to honor God as a Father, by Faith, Hope, and Charity; and it does
also teach us to honor him as a Master, by due and lowly reverence; for to
worship, and reverence, and to fear God is to take and acknowledge God for God,
because it is to take and acknowledge him for the chiefest excellency; for
reverence always presupposes excellency, and therefore according to the
proportion of reverence, is the opinion of excellency: Let me then show what
opinion I have of Gods excellency by my reverence, and let me worship and fall
down, and kneel before the Lord my maker, and not only my maker, to call for
my lowest reverence, but also my Master to quell and punish mine irreverence;
for though I may easily draw near him with my lips, yet I can hardly draw near
him with my knee, whilst my heart is far from him; there is indeed the same
natural distance of the knee, and of the mouth from the heart, but not the same
moral distance; for so the mouth is much farther from the heart then is the
knee; the profession of godliness may be altogether without the heart, but not
so the practice of it: it is much easier for a man to be an hypocrite in his
words then in his deeds, in his pretenses then in his practices: for actually
to serve God is a matter of labor and vexation, even in regard of the outward
man, who all that while is withheld from serving himself either in his profit
or in his pleasure; but verbally to serve God, that is, to talk of serving him
is nothing at all, it being as easy a piece of lip-labor to say to God, as it
is to say to man, Your humble Servant; and yet still be far from doing him any
service; thus did that Son, who being commanded to go work in the vineyard,
presently answered, I go Sir, but went not, S. Matthew. 21. 30. and those who are
most ready to promise their fealty and homage to their master in heaven, are
too too often least ready to perform their promises; which is the cause of that
reiterated complaint in the Text, this people honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me; a complaint that needs still be much repeated
because it is still so little regarded, for setting aside this empty honor of
our lips, and what have we left but Ichabod, where is the glory? for in truth
the glory is departed from our Israel, the ark of God is taken, nay, trampled
under our feet: and all this irreligion and profaneness must needs be where men
will have a Religion that shall so honor God as not also fear him, that shall
pretend to honor him as a Father, but not care to fear him as a Master: for a
Son that refuses to be a servant, will soon refuse to be a Son; and he that
once begins not to fear his Father, will soon begin not to honor him; and a
servant that cares not to continue a servant by fearing his Master, will easily
not care to turn an enemy by provoking him; for he cannot desire to please him,
if he do not fear to displease him, either by disrespect to his person, or by
disobedience to his commands: and therefore it is very necessary, that we all
think of Gods Majesty which is able to confound us, no less then of his mercy
which is willing to save us; and come into his presence with fear and reverence
to acknowledge his incomprehensible greatness no less then with Faith, Hope,
and Love to acknowledge his infinite and undeserved goodness: thus does
Hierotheus speak of God in the language of the divine Arcopagite (libro de
divin. nom. cap. 1) (...) and again, (...), his being is above all being to
show the greatness of his Majesty; his loving is above all loving, to show the
goodness of his mercy, which made Damascene, undertaking to write of the
Orthodox Faith, after he had begun his first Chapter de Deo, immediately give
this Title to his second Chapter, de Effabilibus and Ineffabilibus,
Cognoscibilibus and Incognoscibilibus, because the things concerning God are
both (...), such as we can neither know nor express; and hence it is, that our
knee is fitter to proclaim the Majesty of God then is our tongue; for the
tongue cannot express what the man does not know, but the knee can and will
acknowledge the Majesty of God, though we cannot know it, if so be we do indeed
but truly believe it: and it is observable that in the 99 Psalm after the
Psalmist had declared the greatness of Gods Majesty, he exhorts men to glorify
him in their words, but much more in their deeds, for he calls upon them but
once to praise him, v. 3. let them praise thy great and terrible Name; but he
calls upon them twice to worship him, v. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and
worship at his footstool, for he is holy; and again v. 9. Exalt the Lord our
God, and worship at his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy; taking it for
granted, that the Name of God was more to be magnified by reverence and
adoration though we spoke but little, then by all the loud praises and hymns
which we could utter, whilst we continued guilty of irreverence: and S. Paul
setting forth the condition of a true convert, makes him reverent in his
behavior as well as zealous in his thanksgivings, for (says he) falling down
on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth; he
falls down and worships, there is his reverence; he reports that God is in you
of a truth, there is his thanksgiving; and if either of these be wanting, for
ought we can see by the Text, he is yet no true convert, but is still in the
same state of ignorance and of unbelief as when he first came into the Church
to hear those that prophesied.

But the better to set forth the reverence that is not to be parted from the
true Religion, I will briefly run over those ten Names of God, which S: Hierome
has collected together in one of his Epistles to Marcellus (ep. 136.) for
there is not one of those Names but will strike a terror into the soul of man,
when he comes to bow himself before the most High God; which is the reason that
not one of all these Names is once mentioned in the Book of the Canticles, Quia
in hoc spirituali Epithalamio merito ea nomina praetermittuntur, quae ad
incutiendum terrorem accommodata erant, because that Song of Songs being made
to express the marriage joy of the soul with Christ, it was not thought fit to
use any of those terrible names of God which might occasion the interruption of
that joy.

The first Name of God is (...) rendered (...) by the LXX, but by Aquila
according to its Etymology, (...), the strong one; this Name Exodus 20. 5. is
joined with Jealousy, in that very Commandment wherein God requires our
Religion to be with reverence, as well as without Idolatry; (...) a jealous
God; he is God and able to punish us, he is jealous and will not let us escape
unpunished, no, nor our children after us, if we show that we hate him by
loving irreligion; whether it be by superstition or by profaneness, whether by
idolatry or by irreverence; for we may certainly bring a vengeance and a curse,
not only upon our selves, but also upon our posterity, by our irreverence
which is against the positive precept, no less then by our Idolatry which is
against the negative precept of the second Commandment.

The second Name of God is (...), and this Name we find Hab. 1. 12. in these
words, Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One? (...) [My
God] and [mine Holy One] are put as terms convertible, for he is but my Idol
not my God, unless he be also mine Holy One, that is, one whom I conceive to be
holy, and rejoice that he is so; the profane person cannot deny God to be the
Holy One, though he rejoice not in his Holiness; he would fain make a division
betwixt these two properties of God, Power and Holiness; he would either have
God a strong one without holiness, to allow profaneness; or he would have him a
holy one without strength, that he might not avenge it. But we must look upon
his strength as the fortress and bullwork of his holiness, that if we will not
learn to detest profaneness and irreverence because of his holiness, yet we may
learn to dread it because of his strength.

The third Name of God is (...), which we meet withal in the first words of
the Bible, Genesis 1. 1. (...) Dii creavit, where is a noun of the plural number
signifying God, with a verb of the singular; which strange Syntaxis has one
gloss among the Jews, another among the Christians: among the Jews it is taken
for an argument of the greatness of Gods majesty, for so says Aben Ezra (...)
In the holy tongue (that is, in the Hebrew) it is a course or way of honor to
speak of a great person in the plural number, to wit, thereby to intimate his
greatness: but among the Christians this same manner of speech is taken for an
argument of the Holy and Undivided Trinity; The noun in the plural number
signifying the plurality of Persons, the verb in the singular number, the Unity
of essence; we may accordingly make an excellent use of either gloss in our
devotions: for if we seriously consider the greatness of Gods majesty, we will
be sure to keep our distance in our prayers, and not be guilty of that undecent
and ungodly familiarity which begets a contempt of God, if at lest it be not
begotten of it: for it will certainly end in a slighting of his majesty, if it
do not begin in it. This ungodly familiarity with God, teaches us to offer
that to God which does cost us nothing, contrary to his resolution who was a
man after Gods own heart, and therefore best acquainted with his liking, 2 Samuel
24. 24. Nay, but I will buy it of thee at a price, neither will I offer
burnt-offerings unto the Lord my God of that which does cost me nothing: for
indeed such offerings do but proclaim a contempt of God, as appears, Mal. 1. 7.
They that offer polluted bread, do in effect say, The table of the Lord is
contemptible; and they are accordingly sent to Court to learn better manners,
and better language, v. 8. Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased
with thee, or accept thy person? the Chalde Paraphrase says, (...) to thy
King, but the Hebrew word is (...) to thy under Governor, (and indeed the Jews
had no other after their captivity,) offer such stuff as this but to the
captain that is set over thee, to thy Governor who is no King, but himself
under command, and he will reject thy gift, and scorn and disdain thee; and how
then dare thou offer it unto thy God, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords?
how dare thou offer the blind, the lame, the sick to him for a sacrifice,
which is thy bounden duty, when as thou dare not offer it to thy Governor as
a free and a voluntary gift? we may offer unto God blind prayers, for want of
premeditation, which is the souls foresight; lame prayers for want of good
affections, which are the feet of the soul; and sick prayers, by reason of our
undigested devotions; (...), (so I conceive it should be read in Hes^chius, and
not in two words, (...) He is sick whose stomach is oppressed with crudities
and inconcoctions, so that he cares not for his meat, and is besides clean out
of temper; and such are sick prayers, which are crude, indigested, distempered
prayers: thus we may offer unto God, blind, lame, and sick prayers; but in so
doing we do rather in truth offer him defiances then prayers, we do rather
contemn then worship him; unless we will say, that God is less honored with
the Christians prayers then he was with the Jews sacrifices, or that we have a
greater privilege granted us, that we may more securely dishonor him. Again,
if we seriously consider, that there is an incomprehensible mystery in this
incomprehensible majesty, three persons in one God, we will labor for such
prayers as may be suitable with the properties of the persons, no less then
with the majesty of the Godhead: thus if we consider the power of the Father,
the wisdom of the Son, the charity of the holy Ghost, we will earnestly desire
to have our mouths and our hearts filled with powerful, wise, and charitable
prayers, not guilty either of emptiness, or of indiscretion, or of faction: but
however it is necessary that in all our prayers we invocate One God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing
the substance; for the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are equally to be
worshipped, and equally to be glorified: nor may we communicate with other
Christians in their prayers, who worship not one God in three coequal and
coeternal Persons, no more then we may with Turks and Jews, who worship an
idol in stead of God: for S. John in saying, Whosoever denies the Son, the
same has not the Father, 1 S. John 2. 23. has plainly taught us, that Turks
and Jews do not worship the same God with us Christians, and since we do
certainly worship the true God, it must needs follow that they do worship an
idol in stead of God; wherefore doubtless all Anti-Trinitarians are idolaters:
for though many of them talk much of the spirit, yet they have kept him only
in their mouths, but thrust him out of their Creed, and consequently in vain do
they pretend to godliness, whiles they fight against God: for they cannot truly
honor him in their prayers, whiles they falsely conceive of him in their
belief, not acknowledging Three Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in one
immortal, invisible, and only wise God.

The fourth Name of God alleged by S. Hierome, is (...) quod Septuaginta
[virtutum;] Aquila, [exercituum] transtulerunt, (says he) which the Septuagint
translate Powers, but Aquil a translates Hosts. And this name we find Isa. 6.
3. Holy, holy, holy, the Lord of Hosts, which is the (...) of the Cherubims,
the true ground of the hymn called (...) in the Church; for (...), is but a
declaration of (...), Holy O God, Holy O Powerful, Holy O Immortal, is but an
exposition of this, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath: and who can say,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, and not say also, Heaven and earth are
full of the majesty of glory? and who can confess that heaven and earth are
full of Gods majesty, and not earnestly desire, that his own soul may not be
empty of it? And indeed this Name of God, the Lord of Hosts, is able to strike
terror into their hearts, who make it their work to terrify all the world,
multitudes of armed men, who have violence in their mouths to threaten, and
swords in their hands to act their threats: for it is not their multitudes, or
their strength can bear them out in their impiety and injustice, since there is
far greater strength (and there are far greater multitudes with God, then with
them, even all the hosts of Heaven and earth. Let this consideration move me to
take that care of my soul, which the approach of an army would me to about mine
estate; that I may take heed above all, least I be spiritually plundered: for
what have I worth the keeping, if I have lost my Savior? and how shall I not
lose my Savior, if I lose my Religion? Let therefore those angry fellows of
the children of Dan, ransack me as they did Micah, (Judge. 18.) yet shall they
never get any power over my Religion; nor shall it ever be said, They have
taken away my God; for I am commanded by my Savior, who best knew the right
way of salvation, not to fear those hosts which kill the body, and are not able
to kill the soul; but rather to fear him who is Lord of hosts, and is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell, and will certainly so destroy all those
hosts that oppose him, if they impenitently persist and persevere in their
oppositions. Let me thus in my greatest frights, think more of spiritual then
of carnal Terrors; and though I may perchance be almost frighted out of my
wits, yet I shall be sure of this, that I shall not be frighted out of my
Religion.

The fifth Name of God is (...), quod nos excel sum dicimus (says the same
Saint Hierome) the most High: and this Name is recorded, Genesis 14. 18. where it
is said, that Melchisedeck was the Priest of the most High God: and thus let me
with the heavenly host, say, Glory to God in the Highest, S. Luke 2. 14. let me
always think of his Highness, who is no less above heaven then above earth; He
is in the Highest, I am in the lowest, in a twofold deep, in duplici prosundo,
inobedientiae and miseriae, as S. Gregory said of Jonas, when he was swallowed
up in the whales belly; in the depth of disobedience, and in the depth of
misery, and therefore in the depth of misery, because in the depth of
disobedience. Out of these depths have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord hear my
voice, and let thine ear consider well the voice of my complaint, that I may be
delivered out of the depth pf misery, and let not thine eye be too extreme to
mark what is done amiss that I may not be confounded in the depth of
disobedience; so shall I say with great admiration. and greater consolation,
Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself
to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. the
higher he dwells, the lower he humbles himself to behold me; the greater is
his condescension, the greater is my consolation; let me then delight in my
devotions, as being the only means to bring down my Savior, and to raise up my
soul.

The sixth Name of God is (...) QUI EST, unfit me, I AM, has sent me unto you,
Exodus, 3. 14. and again, I AM that I AM. This Name of God should make me
constant in my Religion, zealously to practice it at all times, and resolutely
to maintain that practice in the worst times: for my Master in calling himself
I AM, forbids me to be a changeling in his service; and indeed true
Christianity is able to say with Christ, Before Abraham was, I AM, (.John 8.
58.) for the same faith, hope, and charity that is now truly Christian, was so
from the beginning, and will be so unto the end: these were before Abraham,
they were with him, they still remain after him: many Christian professions
were of yesterday, and may not be tomorrow, because they depend on men, who at
first contradict others, and at last themselves; but the Christian Religion
has truly deserved that motto of Semper cadem; that it was, is, and will be
always the same. Men may give rules which one day may be like old Almanacks out
of date; but the rule of righteousness which is of Gods giving, is the same for
ever; therefore the wise man would have us so to fear the Lord as not to meddle
with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. for to be given to change
shows us rather to fear, men then to fear the Lord, since they are but he is
not so given; the changers here spoken of says Ralbag, were (...) such as
would change the very commandment, the very Law it self if it were possible;
and that is no wonder: for he that resolves not to obey the Law, must needs
desire to change it, because that standing still in force does still require
him to obey, and accordingly must check his disobedience; so then he that is
willing to change himself, may probably pass from worse to better; but he that
is willing to change his rule must necessarily pass from bad to worse, and
still recede more and more from Religion, for that cannot but say with its
Author I AM, but he makes it his business to say, I AM NOT.

The seventh Name of God is (...) adonai, quem nos Dominum generaliter
appellamus, says S. Hierome, which we generally interpret Lord; and this Name
is mentioned Genesis 18. 30. and 32. in Abraham's supplication for Sodom, O let not
the Lord be angry, and I will speak: other Lords are often angry when we
intercede for our brethren, but this Lord is most pleased with such
intercessions, and will cause our prayers to return with a blessing either upon
their heads if they be so righteous as to be capable of it, or at least into
our own bosoms, if we heartily pray for the pardon of their unrighteousness;
Thus Abraham's prayer, though it did not prevail to save Sodom, yet it did
prevail to save Lot, his kinsman that was in it, for so says the Text, Genesis
19. 29. It came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God
remembered Abraham (surely for his Prayer in the Chapter before) and sent Lot
out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overoverthrew the cities in the
which Lot dwelt. his prayer was effectual for the inhabitants of that wicked
place in tanto, in part, for it saved some; and would have been so in toto, in
whole, to have saved all, had they been capable of salvation: but what it
wanted of efficacity in one way, it had in another, for the effectual servent
prayer of a righteous man cannot but avail much, if not to heal those for whom
he prays, yet sure to heal himself; (S. Jam. 5. 16.) but this word (...) is
derived from (...) Basis, the foot or base of a pillar, that sustaineth the
building; qui basis instar sustentat mundum; he who is the supporter of the
whole world; thus Exodus 23. 17. where the Hebrew word is (...) the Chaldee
Paraphrast says Dominus seculi, which shows that the name (...) adonai is
given to God for this reason, quia Dominus mundi, because he is the Lord of the
world; he is so the foot or basis to sustain it, as that he is also the head to
govern it; O happy man that is called to be a servant to such a master, who is
the Lord, Josh. 3. 13. (...) therefore called (...) adonai, the Lord, because
he is the Lord of all the earth; why should he fear this, and slatter that
great man, to the betraying of his trust, the dishonouring of his Lord, the
wounding of his conscience, and the endangering of his soul? Is not this indeed
to set up Baal which signifies a lord, against the true God? to set up a false
lord against the true Lord, the Lord of all the earth? Let my soul be zealous
for the ark of the Covenant of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth: and if
Jordan part not to let me go through on dry ground into the Land of Canaan, but
that I be forced to cry with the Psalmist, Save me, O Lord, for the waters are
come in even unto my soul, Psa. 69. 1. (for this indeed is a time for Jordan to
overflow all his banks) yet this is my comfort, these same waters shall be to
cleanse me not to drown me, to wash me not to destroy me; for he whose Ark I am
commanded to bear) the Lord whom I serve, sits upon the water floods, and
rules the raging of the Sea, and the noise of its waves, and the madness of
his people (though more outrageous then they all) and he will overrule all
those to his own glory, and the sallvation of all those who cast not off their
alegiance to him, but are true and faithful to his kingdom, and zealous and
painful in his service.

The eighth Name of God is (...) Jah; Quod in Deo tantum ponitur, and in
Allelujah extrema quoque syllaba sonat, (says the same Father) these two
letters that make up the word (...) Jah, are never joined together but only
when they make up the Name of God, or when they make up his Praise, for whereas
the Jews do reckon numbers by letters, they put (...) and (...) that is nine
and six together to make up fifteen; rather then venture upon (...) and (...)
which would make ten and five, because these two letters joined together do
make up this Name of God; this I take to be S. Hieromes meaning when he says
of Jah, quod in Deo tantum ponitur, that it is only to be found in God, to
wit, in his Name, and in the Song that praises him, which is, Hallelu-jah, the
Song of the Saints and Angels in heaven, Rev. 19. 1. I heard a voice of much
people in heaven, saying Allelujah; O let me sing this Song here whilst it is
my duty, that I may come to sing it hereafter when it shall be my reward; and I
am the rather encouraged to sing this Song, because it has in it this
comfortable Name Jah, which has its derivation from (...) idem quod (...)
esse, and does in effect proclaim that doctrine which is set down in Wisd. 1.
13, 14. verse. for God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the
destruction of the living, for he created all things that they might have their
being; Jah is the fountain of being, and made me out of nothing, that I might
have a being, and therefore I trust will so uphold me that I shall not make my
self worse then nothing, to wish that I had never been; as it is better to have
no being or to be annihilated, then to be everlastingly miserable, to be driven
or banished from God, the author of life into hell, there to be tormented in
everlasting flames, so to have only a sinful being, when the spirit of grace
is totally banished, and shut out of the heart, this is a kind of moral
annihilation; for as S. Augustine says, In quantum mali, in tantum minus
sumus, every sin being clongatio a Deo, a withdrawing of the soul from God, the
more sins we commit and the longer we trade in sin, the farther we go from God;
and as those that live under the North Pole far distant from the Sun, want
light and heat, being pincht with cold and encompassed with darkness, so a
sinful soul that is at great distance from God, having no communion with him
by his spirit, is in darkness and in the shadow of death, it is likewise
chilled with fears, and frozen with perplexed doubtings, full of terror and
amazing griefs, which are peccati pedissequae, the black handmaids or
attendants of sin, which is the work of the devil; for all that God made was
good, and without him nothing was made; therefore as Augustine often inculcates
in his Soliloquies, c, 5. Malum (or peccatum) nihil est, quia sine verbo factum
est, sine quo factum est nihil; Illud autem malum est quod privatur illo bono
per quod omnia facta sunt, quaecunque sunt: Sin is a kind of nothing, it is a
mere privation of good, as a shadow is of light, and cold of heat, and a sinner
deprived of all grace, having only a bare being as a creature, is nothing in
the esteem of God his maker, who only, or chiefly values men, so far as he
beholds the Jewels of his Spirit, his heavenly graces, as Love and Charity,
Humility and Meekness, etc. residing and shining in them.

O thou, whose Name is (...) Jah, so enrich and possess our hearts with thy
grace, that Christ may dwell in them by his Spirit, and we may dwell in him by
faith, that the life of grace which we live here may be seconded and crowned
with the life of glory hereafter.

The ninth essential proper Name of God is (...) Jehovah, which is called (...)
the Name of four Letters, and of so many, and no more or less, consists the
name of God, as it is used among all Nations, as Greeks, Latins, Italians,
Germans, English, Chaldeans, Syrians, Aethtopians, Egyptians, Assyrians,
French, and Persians, and others, which are recorded by the elaborate Learned
Zanchius, which as he says, l. 2. de Not. Dei, c. 12. Est res magna, and
admiratione digna, is (as his name is) a great or weighty matter, deserving
admiration, not done without a special providence, and by divine Ordination;
whereby God intended to declare and manifest, that as his name should be known
to all Nations of the world, so likewise that he is God and Lord of all not
only of the Jews (as the Apostle speaks) but also of the Gentiles, and that in
all the four parts of the world, Electos habeat quorum sit Jchovah, Pater and
Servator; he has a set of certain number of Elect, of whom he is Jehovah (or
Lord) their Father also and preserver, etc. even as Christ says in the Gospel,
that he would gather his elect at the day of Judgment from the four winds, e
quatuor mundi plagis, from the four quarters of the world; agreeable to which
is that which Apoc. 4. is spoken of the four Beasts, i. e. the Ministers of the
Word, whom he would stir up or appoint, to preach the Gospel that all the Elect
may by the preaching or publishing of it be drawn and turned to Jehovah their
Lord.

This Name is termed by the Fathers, and other Writers (...), ineffabile, not
for that it ought not to be uttered, as the Jews superstitiously conceited, who
bore such an awful respect to that name, that they deemed it a crime worthy of
death, for any but sacred lips (those of the Highpriests) to express or name
it, and that on set times, and in certain places, as in the Feast of Expiation,
and in the Temple, and in the solemn benediction, Number. 6. 24, 25, 26. but this
is not the reason why it is termed by the Ancients (...) ineffable, the proper
cause or reason of it is to be fetched or derived from the nature or essence of
God, because this is incomprehensible, therefore the Name Jehovah which denotes
or signifies it, is said to be unutterable, whence it is called or styled in
the Jewish record (...) Shem Hammeporasch, nomen separatum, a separated or
distinct name, not only for that it is separate or far remote from our
understandings, which cannot reach unto or dive into the profound notion of it,
but also because that it is incommunicable to any creature, it being as they
term it (...) haschem, the Name by way of eminence, the Name of Gods Essence,
signifying and denoting him the great Lord of heaven and earth, that is, and
was and ever shall be to all eternity; that in it the parts of time past,
present, and to come are included, is well known to those that have skill in
the Hebrew tongue, and might as easily be demonstrated; it then signifies such
an eternal essence or being ((...)) so the Platonic Iamblicus calls God, who
by his Almighty power has not only created, but still by his wise and
powerful Providence, preserves and governs all things in heaven and earth, and
3ly gives a being to his promises, by a real performance: Promissa complendo
eaquodammodo facit esse and realiter subsistere, so Zanchius: this is intimated
in that saying of God himself to Moses, Exo. 6. 3. I appeared to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, by my Name [Almighty] but by my Name [Jehovah] I was not
known unto them: the meaning of which words is this, that the Patriarchs had a
sense or knowledge of his power in the Creation of the world, and destroying
the same by a sloud, likewise by many experimental mercies, by many blessings
and benefits which he conferred on their persons, in their many and great
deliverances, whereby he declared himself to be (...) most powerful and all
sufficient, having a store of all good things locked up in the treasury of his
goodness, however he had not as yet fully declared himself to be Jehouah, for
that he had not actually performed that grand promise, Genesis 15. 13, 14. which
he made unto Abraham and other Patriarchs, of delivering his people, the
Children of Israel, out of the heavy bondage which they sustained many hundred
years under the oppressing hands of the Egyptians; but he assured Moses that
now he was about to complete that promise in their deliverance: and hereby God
insinuated to Moses, that the Name Jehovah signifies him qui constans sit in
omnibus promissis suis, and omnia promissa sua quasi facit subsistere, who is
constant and faithful in the performance of all his promises (the duties and
comforts which from this sacred Name may flow into our lives and consciences,
are diverse.

First, From that expression of God to Moses, by my Name Jehovah, etc. we may
infer, that they only know God to be Jehovah, who doubt not of his good or
fatherly will toward them, and have found by a joyful experience, or felt in
the quiet peace and calm of an undisturbed conscience, that he is true and
faithful in the fullfilling of his word, in that by a gracious pardon, he has
abolished the guilt of their sins, and by the powerful work of his spirit upon
their souls, abated the strength of their imbred corruptions, and all this in
and through the Lord Christ, in whom God has manifested and declared himself
to be Jehovah, in promissis verax and constans, so says the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.
20. speaking of Christ our Savior, In him all the promises of God are yea and
amen, i. e. have their complete perfection, per Christum habent suum
implementum, Grot.

Secondly, as the principal scope or end of this revealed Name Jehovah, is not
only that hereby we acknowledge God to be the Lord, who created all things out
of nothing, and gave them a being; but also to teach or mind us of this truth,
that all his promises both of the things of this life, and that which is to
come, shall by him be certainly completed, because that he who has promised
is most faithful, besides powerful and true in his performance: from hence
our Christian duty is to exercise our faith by an humble and patient reliance
on his promises, expecting a joyful issue of them, and an undoubted
performance, whilst we argue thus with our selves.

The Lord our God, the great Jehovah is omnipotent or almighty, he can do what
he will do, and he will do what he has promised; it is he who has chosen us
before all worlds to salvation by Christ Jesus, it is he who has in great
mercy promised to all believers the remission of all their sins, and with it
regeneration of our corrupt natures, protection in the midst of dangers, help
in adversities, sustenance in this life, by a constant and fresh supply of all
good things for our support and comfort, perseverance in faith and well-doing;
and lastly, a full possession of eternal life; even the beatifical vision in
heaven, which is our essential happiness, he has sealed up those blessings by
a gracious promise to us; he who once promised to Abraham above 400 years
before, to redeem his people out of Egypt, and to bring them into the promised
Land of Canaan, a type of heaven, and at last when all things were desperate,
when their bondage was great and grievous, when they groaned under their heavy
burdens, and were mightily oppressed with their taskmasters, then he awaked
out of the sleep of his connivance, and made good his ancient promise by
destroying their enemies, and delivering them out of bondage, whereby he
declared himself to be indeed Jehovah, a God keeping his promises, how then can
we doubt but that he will do the same or more for us by performing what he has
promised, and that with a solemn Oath to us; i. e. to save our souls by
translating them by Christ to heaven, when they are released by death out of
the prison of our bodies, he can do this, for he is (...), and he will do it
for he is our faithful Creator, our Lord Jehovah; therefore though our flesh
rebels within us with fears and doubtings, though the world without us assault
us with afflicting troubles, though the devil that (...) as Naz. calls him,
that unwearied, implacable, restless enemy; begirt and infest us with diverse
temptations, though our sins speak discomfort and beget horror in us, nay,
though an Angel should teach or preach the conttary to us, yet ought we not to
fear by distrusting Gods faithfulness and truth, which like himself, is
immutable and infallible, and changes not; upon this rock of his fidelity we
ought to build our faith, believing that what things soever he has decreed and
promised whether they be temporals, or spirituals, the good things of this life
or the other, we shall receive them at his merciful hands, if we perform what
is required on our parts, the condition of the new Covenant, viz. Faith and
Obedience, resigning up our souls wholly to God in an humble submission to his
will, and waiting with patience for that word he has promised, and is yet to
come. Thus David waited upon the Lord, Psa. 40. 1. (...) I waited patiently
upon the Lord, etc. this waiting on God (which implies a patient expectation of
what he has promised to us hereafter in his word, together with an humble
resignation of our wills to his) it requires a great measure and strength of
grace, such as was in Abraham, and that

First, In regard of the things waited for, which are far beyond, or transcend
any thing which we can hope for in this world.

Secondly, In regard of that long day, or that long period of time which God
has taken and prefixed before he will complete his promise.

Thirdly, the tediousness of delay which results from the former.

Fourthly, the many oppositions, troubles, crosses, afflictions and
disappointments which in our way in this life we meet with.

Fifthly, the scandals or offenses received from them which are in high esteem
for Religion, when we see them fall into enormous sins we are apt to question
Gods promise of perseverance made unto us, where he says, I will never leave
nor for sake you;

Add to all these a sixth, and that is the untoward peevishness of our
fainting nature apt to sink under the least discouragement. In these respects
there must be more then an humane spirit to hold up the soul and carry it along
to the end of that which we wait for; and they that with the Prophet David,
Psa. 62. 1. truly wait upon God, from whom they expect salvation, they are thus
spirited, thus quickened with divine grace, though they be cast into the place
of Dragons, Psalm. 44. 2. (or whales) overwhelmed with the sea of calamities,
and covered with the shadow of death, though with Jonah they lie in the midst
of the whales belly, in a place of darkness, and in the deep, yet their faith
in the great God, whose Name is Jehovah, will then and there show it self
lightsome and full of life by a gracious dependence on Gods truth and
faithfulness, and expecting in his good time a comfortable issue of his
promises: Such waiters whose God is the Lord Jehovah, in whom they trust, on
whom they depend, and whom they constantly obey, not departing from his
precepts, when he seems to have forsaken them in their greatest distresses,
such men are the prime, the only Christians, who have in their soul the seal
of Gods grace to assure them of their future happiness, O thou whose Name is
the great Jehovah, and rulest all things in heaven and earth, send down from
heaven the habitation of thy glory, thine Holy Spirit into our hearts, and so
possess our souls with an awful fear of thy Majesty, and a filial love of thee
for thy goodness and mercy, that we abhorring all things that may displease
thee, and obeying thy precepts, may in the end of our days obtain the end of
our hopes, and the fruit of thy promises, which is the salvation of our souls,
and eternal bliss, through the merits of our blessed Redeemer, our Lord Christ
Jesus.

The tenth and last Name of God is (...) schaddai, by which God often styled
himself, when he spoke unto the Patriarchs, to uphold their spirits, and
sustain their faith in the midst of their troubles, Genesis 17. 1. the Lord
appeared unto Abraham, and said unto him, I am (...). In the same words he
bespake Jacob, Genesis 35.11. hence it was that they also when they were to speak,
or make mention of God, often used that Name or word. Thus Isaac when he
blessed Jacob, Genesis 28.3. said, the God whose Name is (...) bless thee, and
make thee to increase and multiply; so Jacob said to Joseph, the God (...)
appeared to me in Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me.

As for the notion or meaning of the Name, Galatinus l. 2. c. 17. out of R.
Moses the Egyptian, and Algazel, determines it, that it is a compounded term,
and made up of these two parts or particulars, (...) which is in composition
the same with (...) qui, and (...) which signifies sufficient and sufficiency,
so that (...) in the whole latitude or acception of it denotes the
alsufficiency of God, (...), qui in se and a se sufficientiam, and abundantiam
omnimodam habet it a ut nullius open indigeat, i. e. who in himself and from
himself has a sufficiency and abundance of all good things, and needs not the
help of any creature. There is in God a fallness of power whereby he can do
what he will, his will being the only rule and bound of his power: therefore
the Septuagint do often render this word (...) by (...) and Job 8.3. by (...),
he that does or works all things; so in our English Translation, does the
Almighty pervert justice?

As there is in many a man an empty fullness, when bladder-like his soul is
blown up with windy fancies of having what he has not, or of more knowledge
then he truly has, so in God there is a fullness without any the least defect
or degree of emptiness in God and Christ (who is God and man in one person)
there is (as the Schools speak) Plenitudo repletiva and diffusiva, or plenitudo
abundantiae and redundantiae; and abounding fullness, because no good thing, no
gift nor grace is wanting in him, and a redounding fullness, because what gifts
or graces soever be in us, they are all derived to our souls from him the
ever-living and overflowing fountain and spring of them, from whom they slow
into our souls per Spiritum tanquam per canalem, through the spirit as it were
a conduit-pipe, without any loss of them in him, or without any the least
diminution: and of his fullness have we all received, Joh. 1. 16. a fullness
without any want argues a great perfection; quod plene habetur perfect and
totaliter habetur, Aquin.

Now if men through the door of faith opened by Gods blessed Spirit, did see
the fullness, the excellency, and alsufficiency of God, it would so fill them
with admiration, joy, and content, that having a communion with God by his
sanctifying spirit they would care for nothing else; they considering what the
Lord is, and beholding his glorious face in the glass of his Attributes, viz.
his Wisdom, Power, and Justice, etc. upon this consideration they would say
with the Prophet David, The Lord is on our side (or with us) we will not
therefore fear what man can do unto us, Psa 118. 6. the Lord is ours, therefore
we can lack nothing that is good for us: and if the Lord be thine, then his
Power is thine to sustain thee under any cross, to redeem thee from troubles,
to help thee in distress, to succor thee in the greatest needs, and to support
thy weakness in the performance of any duties; his Wisdom too is thine, thou
have an interest in it, it is thy portion, so that if thou desire to be
instructed in the knowledge of his word, to understand those hidden mysteries
which are contained in it, if thou openest thy mouth to him in prayer, he will
open thine eyes that thou shall see mirabilia leg is, the wondrous things of
his Law, Psa. 119. 18. and be also wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. his
Justice likewise is thine to vindicate thee when thou art injured, if thou
committest thy cause unto him; and to clear thine innocence, when thou art
falsely traduced by the malevolent, and to deliver thee out of the hands of the
oppressor; so for his Truth and Holiness, the former is thine to make good his
promises of blessings in this life, and of happiness in that to come, if by
faith and full affiance thou dependest on him; so the latter, i. e. his
Holiness is thine, to sanctify thy corrupt nature, and to free thee as from
the guilt, so from the power of sin.

This is the portion of all the Sons and servants of God, who is (...) a God
all-sufficient, who can and will do for us more then either we desire or
deserve, if we wholly rest and rely upon his goodness; Happy is the man who is
in such a case, in so blessed a condition, as to have a close union and near
communion with the great God of heaven, or (to speak in the Prophet David's
phrase) who has the Lord for his God, Psa. 144. 15. whose alsufficiency they
atterly deny who worship any other God, as did the Gentiles, who multiplied
Deities, and sacrificed to more then one, such are Polutheists, who divide the
glory of Gods excellencies amongst those petty Numens, even as they are no
other then practical Athiests, and truly worship none, who through infidelity
question Gods alsufficiency; for if he be God he is (...) alsufficient, who by
small or unlikely means can bring great or mighty things to pass; they doubt of
his being alsufficient, who walk in uneven ways, and use evil means to work
out their ends, and to effect their enterprises, as did Ahaziah the son of
Ahab, who in his sickness sent messengers to Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, to
enquire of him whether he should recover of his disease, 2 Kin. 1. the like did
the wicked Saul, 1 Samuel 28. when being in a great strait by the Philistines
that warred against him, he went to a woman that had a familiar spirit to know
of her whether he should conquer his enemies; but this did not holy David, he
apprehended God to be all-sufficient, that having promised him the kingdom,
would in his good time effect what he promised, wherefore he used no sinister
or unlawful means to accomplish his desires, but waited on God for the
performance of his promise: he had many opportunities to have gotten the Crown,
oftentimes Saul fell into his hands, so that he might have destroyed him, but
he would not do it, he would not touch him to his hurt, because he was the
Lords anointed, but committed himself to the will of God, waiting his leisure,
so after a few years his desires were accomplished, his grand enemy flain, and
he settled in the Throne: of this holy frame of spirit was that good Jonathan
the Son of Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 6. when he said (...) non est Jehovae impedimentum,
there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few; so was Asa
affected toward God, his heart was possessed with high thoughts of his
all sufficiency, 2 Chr. 14. 11. when Zerah the Ethiopian came against him with
a thousand thousand men, and three hundred chariots, then (says the Text) he
cried unto the Lord his Lord, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help
whether with many, or with them that have no power; help us, O Lord our God,
for we rest on thee; the Lord heard his cry, and did help him; that huge host
was overthrown in a moment; this Victory he obtained by his faith in the Lord
of Hosts, who is all-sufficient.

The thinking of him not so to be, is the cause of all those indirect courses
which men take to accomplish their worldly designs, as when they lie, and
dissemble, swear and forswear, to get riches or go to conjurers and witches;
such men put not their whole trust and assiance in God, but rather conceive
that God cannot do what they desire by himself, or by his own power, unless
they help him with their crafty wiles and politic devices: when Peter denied
Christ was it not out of fear? and from whence was that fear? was it not
because he did not apprehend God to be allsufficient, a strong buckler of
defense, so that without his lying and dissimulation, he could have rescued him
out of the Jews bloody hands, although he had owned his Lord and Master Christ
Jesus.

To conclude, if this comfortable Name of God were thoroughly digested by faith
in our souls, if we did believe that he is (...) God almighty, and
all-sufficient, we should walk before him, or as in his presence (as Enoch,
Abraham, and David did) with a perfect heart, we should fear him for his
all-commanding power, and love him for his Goodness, of which there is in him a
transcendent fullness: we should be cheerful in adversity, being content with
God alone, and think our selves very rich and happy though we be poor, when we
have God for our possession; we should then see an emptiness in the creatures
here below, through whom God shines, so that whatsoever excellency or beauty,
whatsoever worth, virtue, or comfort is in them, it is an high degree in God
who gave them their being and all things that attend it; the consideration of
this would make us more to delight in God, and not dote on them which are but
shadows in respect of that everlasting Sun, and all their excellencies or
perfections but so many beams descending from the Father of Lights, or as so
many blossoms of the (...), the first Goodness; so that if we separate these
particularities from that universal good, and not admire God in them, or be not
thankful to God for them, all our affections spent on them would be unchaste,
and their embraces adulterous; hence it is said in the Scriptures, that men (in
regard of their blind dotage on them) are said to go a whoring after vanities,
or the creatures, which are vain and empty, if compared with their makers
fullness.

Lastly, if God be all-sufficient, then let him be our only stay and comfort;
Let us trust in him alone, being persuaded of this truth, that he can help and
support us, without the assistance of the creatures, but not all these without
his blessing and providence: ever look at God through the creatures, who
subsist by him, who is a present help in trouble, and often sends best success,
when we are at the lowest or in a sad desperate condition, because we usually
then rely upon him most, and go to him alone by prayer and supplication: and
then may we expect great mercies when we have a great faith in the great God of
Heaven, who delights in them, who by their affiance or whole dependency on his
powerful Goodness bring much glory to him: to this great all-sufficient and
Almighty God, to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be given and ascribed all
honor, praise, dominion and power, etc. Amen.

Most gracious God, who art all-sufficient in thy self, and from the
inexhausted Treasury of thy goodness conveyest all things for the use of our
bodies, and comfort of our souls; give us we pray thee largeness of spirits
suitable to thy bounty toward us; O enlarge our hearts with love and
thankfulness to thee, and let both display themselves in large expressions of
duty, that our thankful lips may ever praise, and our holy lives glorify
thee; and above all Lord give us thine own self, in blessing all thy gifts unto
us, and give us withal thy Son Christ Jesus, that he may be ours in the pardon
of all our sins by the merit of his death and passion, and in the saving of our
poor souls, and we his by serving him all our days in holiness and
righteousness; Grant this, heavenly Father, for his sake who died and now sits
in heaven at thy right hand, making intercession for us. Amen,

FINIS.
ALLEGIANCE AND CONSCIENCE Not fled out of England; OR THE Doctrine of the
Church of England CONCERNING Allegiance and Supremacy; As it was delivered by
the former Author upon the Occasion and at the Time of Trying the King by his
own Subjects; In several Sermons, Anno 1649. on the words of Ecclesiastes,
Eccles 8. 2, 3, 4.

By EDW. HYDE D. of Divinity.

Tert. ad Scap. c. 2.

Colimus Imperatorem, ut Hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem; Ipse
omnibus major est, dum solo Deo minor est.

1 Samuel 26. 6.

Fear God, and Honor the King.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field Printer to the University. MDCLXII.

TO THE READER, Whether Christian, Un-Christian, or Antichristian.
ALlegiance and Conscience are both joined together in the Title of this Book,
because they are both joined together in the true Christians heart; nor is that
man able to lay fast hold on conscience, who is ready to shake hands with his
allegiance; whether he be a Jesuited Papist or a Jesuited Protestant, it
matters not, if he has bid farewell to his Allegiance, he cannot keep company
with his Conscience; tell me not of your Communion with me against Antichrist,
if you will not keep my communion with Christ; I desire not to be your
fellow-Protestant in those things, wherein I cannot be your Fellow-Christian:
If Rebellion be in your Reformation, though it be never so pure in other
things, yet it still needs to be reformed in this, that Rebellion is in it; as
therefore you say in that your Reformation has Reformed Religion to the Creed,
you have a pure faith; so I say must Religion reform your Reformation to the
Commandments, that you may have an unspotted life; and give me leave to tell
you, that though in pretense you may be a brother of the second, perhaps in
time of the third or fourth Reformation, yet in purity you come far short of
the first as much as a Rebel comes short of a good Christian: your Reformation
has thrown you out of your Religion; you do not embrace the Gospel, unless it
be such a Gospel as the Cainites heretofore embraced, (...), Epiphan. haer. 18.
such a Gospel as was taught by Judas that betrayed his master, that Christian
Religion which was taught by all the rest of Christ's Apostles, teaches
Allegiance unto Kings: Christ in his own example practiced it, and by paying
tribute would rather part with his own right, then seem to oppose or question
theirs; (...), says S. Athanasius de Incarn, Christi, most divinely: how can
you then look to be thought or called (good) Christians, if you neither regard
the word of Christ for your instruction, nor the works of Christ for your
imitation? and the same Father in his Epistle (...), tells us what manner of
Churchmen they are, which run this way, saying, (...), they are Spies to look
into other men's livings and patrimonies, (and believe it many of them amongst
us have in this kind used most exact prospectives) not Bishops, to look over
their life and doctrine; for they cared not (says he) in their Ordinations to
hear S. Paul's words to Timothy, (...), a Bishop must be blameless, (which words
the Church still retains in ordination of Ministers) (...), only think and
speak high against Christ, and no matter then for thy Christianity: I know he
speaks the words of Christ our Savior, and against the Arrians; yet since the
Lords anointed is rendered by the 70 Interpreters (...), his Christ, and that
Translation is justified by the Apostles, Act. 4. 26. it is manifest that one
who truly loves Christ, cannot hate the Lords Anointed; whether written in Text
or in shorthand, whether ruling in his Son, or in his servant, whether he be
Christ in heaven, or Christ on earth: and therefore I may well take Athanasius
his (...) for the Lords anointed on earth, and say they are (...) not (...),
which poison men's souls with such venomous tenants against Kings; they cannot
be of the true Church whilst they belch out such impure blasphemies, despising
dominion, and Speaking evil of dignities, offering that defiance to their King,
which S. Michael would not offer to the devil, and bringing railing accusations
in stead of Arguments; and yet S. Michael had not only a fitter object, but
also a better ground for railing; because his dispute was with the devil, and
it was about real Idolatry, which he would have caused the people to commit in
worshipping the body of Moses; theirs (with their King and Church) only about
imaginary Idolatry, which was and is not to be found, but in their own fears
and jealousies: it stands not with a true Church no more then it stood with S.
Paul (since every true Church is but one grand Apostle, or Doctor of the
Gentiles of that Nation where it is) to appeal to the people, that is a way to
introduce, though not a many-headed, yet a manyhearted Religion; not a
many-headed Religion, but rather a no-headed, for such as would have no Bishops
were anciently called (...) men without heads, Niceph. l. 18. c. 45. and the
Council of Ments, c. 22. gives them monstrous heads if any at all; saying, they
are Hippocentauris similes nec equi nec homines, they have too much of the man's
understanding to be horses, and they have too much of the horses kicking and
wincing to be men; but (...) they are either such as have no head, or as bad as
though they had none: but surely it is the way to introduce a many-hearted
Religion; witness our own late divisions, which have produced as many Religions
as men; our Christian unity and verity being both banished together: this is
the excellent Divinity you have of late read to your disciples, which is able
to dash the very venom of Popery out of countenance, and throw it in your own
faces: this is the new way you have taught the people to Truth and Peace, by
which they shall be sure never to come to either: for if they may innovate in
Forms of Religion without their King, why not in forms of Law? If they may
change Law without him, why not against him? if against him, why not against
his life? and consequently why not murder him with the sword of pretended
Justice, whom God commands to honor? See the High Court of Justice erected in
your assembly, this is your new way to truth: and if the people may deal thus
with their King, where he is supreme, why not with all other supremes
whatsoever? and consequently by succession and with success (for ought we know)
why not rise against their Magistrates, till the last Resurrection, and put
them to death, till death it self shall be swallowed up? But I return; this
placing dominion in the people (for appealing to them is no less) teaches them
to think, they need not Christ in his Kings to rule and govern them, they can
govern themselves; they need him not in his Priests to intercede for them, they
can pray for themselves; they need him not in his Prophets to instruct them,
they can preach to themselves: Was ever Christ so reviled, and so opposed in
all his three Offices together before? Is not this fully to act Antichrist?
(...), 2 These. 2. 4. to sit not in, but upon the Temple or Church of God, non
in Templo Dei, sed in Templum Dei sedet; tanquam ipse sit Templum Dei, quod est
Ecclesia; as says S. August. l. 20. de Civ. Dei, c. 19. where also he expounds
this Antichrist not of one single person, but of a whole body of men, or a
mixed multitude; and I pray, why may not Antichrist reign rather in an (...),
in a Government of the many-headed, then in any other kind of Government,
since this alone is a Government not of Christ's making? Surely no one character
of Antichrist, but will more exactly befit this, then any other Government:
and if we will suppose (which is very probable) that those Parables which do
show what Antichrist was in the Jew, may also teach what he shall be in the
Gentile, then persecution of those who are sent unto the people, much more of
those who are set over them by Christ, murder committed upon their persons, and
rapine upon their inheritance, must be his chiefest qualities: See S. Luke 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. verses, where we have a perfect emblem of (...), when servants
rule their Masters, Subjects their King, which is the pestilent spawn of that
viperous doctrine, Dominion is founded in the people. and without all question
it is more immediately Antichristian to oppose Kingship, then to oppose Kings,
since this may be only against the persons, who are men; but that must be also
against the authority which is Gods; whence they are called his Kings, his
Anointed, 2 Samuel 22. 51. or rather Christ's authority, for himself says, Mat.
28. 18. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, and is from him
derived unto Kings, whence 1 Timothy 6. 15. he is called the only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; for Kings are of Christ's, not of the peoples
making: the Text shows where Christ has given his power to Kings, but not
where he has given it to the people; and consequently for them to assume it
without his gift, and against his command, must needs be Antichristian: so
that (...), and (...), and (...) are in effect all one, to sight against
Monarchy is to sight against God, who alone originally, and against Christ, who
alone autoritatively is the only Monarch: but to return again to the Church;
does not this appeal to the people let in the Rabble over all that is called
God, and over all that is called Christ, the Anointedof God, and over all that is
called Christian, the service of God, credenda, speranda, facienda? must we not
believe, and pray, and live as the rout will have us? or have no outward
profession of our faith, no public exercise of our prayers, and no communion
or Fellowship of our life? see what strange calves this rebellious Jeroboam
(this striver for the people, for so does his Name import) has already set up
in this our Bethel, the house of God: Prayer thrown out of its proper dwelling;
the public worship of the Lord, forbidden on the Lords own day, and in the
Lords own house, and all because the people will have it so: for it is not the
public circumstances of time and place can make a public worship, when the
persons that perform it are not public, because they are no Ministers, and the
substance of the worship performed is not public but merely private, both for
the matter, because the (supposed) Minister prays only for his own party, and
according to his own humor, and for the form, because the people (nay most
times himself) do not know his prayer: Is not this truly to profane the
Sabbath in stead of sanctifying it? to cry up the day, but to beat down the
duty of it; as if Religion were more in days then in duties, more in accidents
then in substances, more in circumstances, which are but shadows, then in
realities: I cannot persuade my self but our late throwing away the public
worship of God, exercised in such an excellent Book of prayer, as was public
both in its form (for known unto, and admired of all Christians) and in its
matter (for of such Petitions only, as equally concerned all) and introducing
a mere private worship instead of it (if I may call that a worship of God,
which has so little reverence toward his Majesty, and so few evidences of his
authority) was the most sacrilegious profanation that ever any Christian people
has yet been guilty of; (people I say, not nation; for neither with us is this
Apostasy yet become National, and God forbid it ever should:) and yet the
reason of all this, and much more then this, is only that, (which formerly was
the plea of Comedians not of Divines) populo ut placerent quas fecissent
fabulas, that they might please the people at least with some new invention,
since they were displeased (for some base worldly ends) with their old
Religion: and it makes many a Christian heart tremble to think, that we are
very near a Babylonian Captivity, and the truth of God is breathing its last
gasp amongst us, because we are come to that desperate condition of the Jews
(and are as ready as they were to endungeon our Jeremies that tell us of it)
described by the Prophet, Jer. 5. 30, 31. a wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in the land; the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their means, and my people love to have it so, and what will you do in the
end thereof? there is a generation of false Prophets in the land, and the
Priests, that bear rule by their means, applaud their prophesying (for so the
70 render it, (...)) and my people love to have it so, i. e. to have false
Prophets in stead of Priests, hoping thereby to save their tithes; and what
will you do in the end thereof? as yet this horrible thing is beautiful in
your eyes (...) says Ezra; but what will you do in the end when you shall know
it will be bitter? (...) it is now a Naomi, that is, pleasant, but it will then
be Marah, that is, bitter: and will say unto your souls, Why call ye me Naomi,
seeing the Lord has testified against me? Ruth 1. 20, 21. but I must leave
this argument to some better head, and more authentic hand; I undertake to
speak only the heart of the true English Protestant, who bids me tell you,
that Divinity alone makes him of the true Church, which had its being before
his Church, not with it, and much less from it: Divinity of the new stamp (if
it may be called Divinity, which has man not God for its author) must needs
on both sides turn faith into faction, and Religion into Rebellion; that man
(and the same reason holds in Christian Churches as in Christian men, since a
Church is but a Congregation of men) I say, that man who will not shame his
Religion here, nor himself hereafter, must with the Psalmist, have respect unto
all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. v. 6. then shall I not be a shamed when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments; or, so shall I not be confounded, neither
internally in mine own conscience, nor externally before the world, nor
eternally before the dreadful tribunal of Christ: and this threefold confusion
cannot possibly be avoided by any Christian Church or man, but by having
respect unto all Gods Commandments: To all; 1. In toto universali, in their
full number, it is as Antichristian to leave out the fifth, as to leave out the
second Commandment, as heretical to leave out the thirteenth as to leave out
the ninth Chapter to the Romans. 2. In toto Essentiali, in their full
Obligation, there is as great an obligation upon the fifth, as upon the fourth,
though the one may chance be cried up, to pull down the other: 3. In toto
Integrali, in the several particular duties, that depend either upon their
number, or upon their virtue and obligation; of which we must observe our
Saviors Divinity, in the mouth of his Apostle S. James 2. 10. whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, (i, e. impenitently by not
repenting of his sin, or doctrinally and magisterially by justifying it) is
guilty of all, the reason is, because he keeps the rest for his convenience,
not for his Conscience: (his convenience, the great cynosure of this new
Reformation:) and it is no less an Evangelical then it is an an Angelical Truth
uttered by Aquinas 22ae. qu. 5. art. 3. that it is impossible for him who
pertinaciously disbeleeves one Article of faith, to believe any of the rest,
though with his mouth he may confess them all; Nam caeteros omnes non tenet per
sidem, simpliciter veritati primae inhaerendo, sed propria voluntate and
judicio: It Is so in the Decalogue, as it is in the Creed; a wilful belief, is
no true faith; a wilful Religion is no true Religion; for true Religion
depends wholly upon Gods not upon man's will: but least some men's furious zeal
should chance overrule S. James his Epistle, the same divinity has also
proceeded from our Saviors own mouth (and his mouth must instruct us, or his
blood will not save us) S. Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of heaven; he that shall thrust a Commandment out of his life, not
only personally, but also doctrinally [shall teach men so] shall be thrust out
of heaven for his pains: [he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven:] call your selves what you will, the godly, the faithful, the
well-affected, the Saints, Christ will call you the least in his kingdom; if
you thrust Allegiance out of your Church, which is not one of the least, but
one of the greatest Commandments; the first of promise with God, though the
last of performance with you: Allegiance, that respects so many Commandments,
that it is impossible but it should most nearly respect the Conscience:
Wherefore I must needs be most heartily sorry, that I cannot say with S. Paul,
Act. 28. 19. I was constrained to appeal unto Caesar, not that I had ought to
accuse my Nation of, for I have too much to accuse my Nation of in the High
Court of Justice, that I cannot appeal unto Caesar: the poor Church of England
(in whose behalf I speak this) was not long since calumniated to be a Mary
Magdalene for her devils; but now sure there is great reason she should be so
for her tears; having little else left her to do (though yet more to suffer)
but to mourn and weep: and if any say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? she is
ready to answer as that Mary once did, because they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him, S. Joh. 20. 13. I have been wholly
excluded from all their consultations and actions, both concerning his death
and burial; they have taken away my Lord, my Lord the King; a King that
understood Divinity more exactly then the most learned; expressed it more
appositely then the most eloquent, (witness that heavenly piece, which shows
him to have been more (...) then (...), more truly golden in his mouth, then in
his Crown) and practiced it more strictly, then the most conscientious amongst
his best Divines; a King which infinitely propagated the true Christian Faith
by his life, but much more justified it by his death; for show me, all ye
Christian Churches in the world, since you have learned to mix man with God,
your own Interest with his in your Religion, which of you all have had the
happiness to have such a King live in your Religion? I am sure none of you all
have had the honor to have such a King (if you have had a King) to dye for it:
be his death never so much the sin and reproach of the Nation ('it is such a sin,
such a reproach as not all the Ocean that surroundeth us can wash away) yet
it is the Justification and glory of the Church, that he confirmed that same
true Protestant Faith by his death, which he had ever professed and defended in
his life; as Christ did Christianity in its first plantation, so did he in its
best Reformation, seal it with his blood; the greatest conquest the Church of
England can ever get over its enemies, so far is she from being conquered by
them in contriving it; for as that wrangling Disputant, whom no arguments could
convince, was quite silenced by him that said, though I cannot dispute for my
Savior, yet I can dye for him; So has King Charles silenced all the enemies
of this poor Church, many indeed by disputing, but many more by dying: Reason
enough why, in common gratitude, beside special duty, we should not easily
forget our Allegiance much less disclaim it, least of all renounce it: but
there are yet more particular reasons, which immediately concern the
Conscience, and those you may gather from the ensuing discourse: which is a
collection of diverse Sermons, that were once truly a word in season, though
now they are not (or may seem not to be, at least in their opinions, who will
needs be too much judicious, and too little conscientious; but the Apostle will
justify the Author in the press as well as in the Pulpit (having his out of
season for the one, as well as his in season for the other, 2 Timothy 4. 2.)
though he desire rather to justify his Church then himself, and condemn
himself for all, save only for the integrity of his affection to God and his
Church, to the King and his People; that the infatuated sons of the earth may
no longer so scuffle to possess this world, as ever to hazard the quiet
possession of it; and that they may no longer so possess this world, as to
hazard their interest in the next; it being S. Paul's express Maxim, they that
resist (much more if they impenitently persist in that resistance) shall
receive to themselves damnation: here then is a Looking-glass for the good
Subject, to see his duty; the bad, his guiltiness; the one to receive the
comfort of a good, the other to feel the burden of a bad Conscience: the
expressions were at first plain, and the method easy upon force, because a
Countrey-auditour may easier be posed then instructed; and they ought to be no
other now upon choice, because a censorious Reader may sooner be instructed
then ashamed: The discourse was at first abruptly broken off with the Kings
life; but it is since completed in regard of length, though in no other
respect; would the malice of bloud-guilty and bloodthirsty men, which is
already complete in all other respects, were also complete for the length and
duration of it: But O my soul come not thou into their secret (and God keep
them from coming into thine) for in their anger they slew a man (yea, more then
a man, a King) and in their self-will they dug down a wall (enough to make
an everlasting breach in this distracted Kingdom) cursed be their anger for it
was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel; I will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49. 6, 7. when and where Simeon and Levi, Laity
and Clergy are partners in such a grand iniquity, then and there this is Gods
sentence against them, and must be his Churches Prayer: but I have nothing to
say to them, only hope they will not be angry with me if I still pray for
their conversion, though I may not quietly preach for it: This small Tractate
speaks to and of those only who still keep the old true Protestant Religion of
the Church of England, and with it their Allegiance and their Conscience: and
the spokes-man verily persuades himself, that he is the meanest, not of seven,
but of seventy seven thousands of Israel (the true Sons of the Church) that
have not bowed their knees unto Baal, Baal Berith, that is, Baal for a
Covenant, in his holy pretensions; but since turned into Baal-Peor, that is
Baal for the mount Peor, to overtop all, through the pride of his spirit, or
Peor in the other sense, to corrupt all, through the Libertinism of his flesh
(in his unholy performances) Baal Peor he is without question, though beyond
example, for all that have joined themselves to this Baal have not only eat
the offerings of the dead, Psa. 106. 28. but also of the Living: and it is most
notorious that those of that unhappy City, which first began these troubles,
and that they might do it with some colorable pretense, commonly called the
most Orthodox Divines Baals Priests, are now themselves by the just judgment of
God made Baals bondslaves: and those of the Ministry who were most defamed with
that ignominious and false aspersion, are by the mercy of God, the chiefest, if
not the only men of their order, who would rather lose all, then be Baals
Chaplains: they were frightened with the consideration of that Text, which once
made Origin break out with tears, and speak rather with his eyes then with his
tongue in the Pulpit, Psa. 50. 16, 17. verses: (Lord how many dumb Sermons
should we have now adays, by those who would be thought the only Preachers, if
they would, as he did, lay that Text unto their hearts) but unto the ungodly,
says God, why do thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in thy mouth,
whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee; when
thou saw a thief thou consentedst unto him, etc. See who they were that most
hated a Reformation amongst us, even they who though they did cry it up, yet
did practice it down; they who did see a thief, (yea, such a thief as
impudently answered the Prophets question, Mal. 3. 8. will a man rob God? and
put it out of question) and yet consented unto him; no wonder if such men have
let their mouth speak wickedness, and with their tongue have set forth deceit:
no wonder if the next verse also concern many of them, thou satest and spakest
against thy brother, yea, and have slandered thine own mothers son, her truest,
her best, her eldest Son, and withal, most of her true younger Sons: but it is
not a slander can frighten them from their Religion, who fear God rather then
men, Illi mors sibilus, cui plausus vita; they served not God as hypocrites,
and therefore have not fallen from his service as Apostates; such men are still
of the same Church (though they cannot so publicly profess it) and of the same
Religion established in that Church: and to them this Treatise belongs, which
though it be not elegant enough to be (their Mothers) the Churches Apology, yet
it is true enough to be the Churches doctrine: for that never taught other then
true Allegiance to Gods on earth, then true Conscience to God in heaven; and
never thought that the one could be without the other: so that the true Church
of England may still with Bishop Jewel in his Apology, give solemn thanks to
Almighty God, Quodin Anglia Regia Majest as non minuitur, but it must be with
relation to its Religion, not to the men that have pretended it: the Religion
of the Church of England is for Obedience and Faithfulness to Kings, in the
highest degree, though some outward professors of that Religion, have been as
highly for disobedience and unfaithfulness, much more then we could have
imagined, because much more then others ever practiced: but let not any man
say, that to be an Apostle has Treason in it, because one of the twelve was a
Traitor; especially since our Defender of the Faith has also defended the
true professors of our Church, in that his Seraphical Book (...), the most
unquestionable image of himself, of his Piety, of his Patience, and of his
Charity; a book infinitely above the spirit of any man but a King; and as much
above the Piety of any King, but such a Christian King, so thoroughly conversant
with Christ, not only in his doings, but also in his sufferings, not only in
the innocence of his life, but also in the persecutions of it: E^pectore mult
is tribulationibus macerato prodiere Psalmi, says Musculus: The Psalms of
David, the sweetest of devotions, flowed from the bitterest Marah, the
bitterness of his soul: so our David could not have made such Cherubical
ditties, fitting the best of Angels, had he not been persecuted and reviled by
the worst of men: this discord gave occasion to that heavenly Music: but I
show my defect of Allegiance whiles I thus labor to express it: that book is
above all the acknowledgements of Allegiance, and can stoop no lower then the
Conscience: Come and see a Miracle here all ye whose eyes are so wide open to
see nothing, but what no body else can see, your own holiness; Come and see a
Dead King ruling in his true Subjects souls, whom (whilst he was living) you
would not suffer to rule over your bodies; but now he is dead, you must, and
God grant only you may, I say, you must expiate his death, either with your
eyes or with your hearts; wash away the guilt of it, either with your tears or
with your blood: believe it, all annals, and among the rest some Dypticks, or
Church-Calenders will speak of him as a most glorious Saint; but I will not
tell, how they will speak of you: and now, if you can, come and call this
doctrine, Court-flattery, which was preached, not when the King was on his
Throne, but when he was going to the Bar, and published now he is in his Grave;
then perchance it might have been thought Flattery, when there was a Scepter to
adorn it, and a Sword to defend it; but now that it is so generally decried, so
publicly discountenanced, so resolvedly detested and opposed, it can be
thought no other then a most divine soul-saving truth, which forces
conscientious Ministers to hazard their temporal safety by proclaiming it,
because they see you hazard your eternal salvation by resisting it: and yet to
speak but the plain truth, it is flattery at no time to say of Kings, Ye are
Gods, for the Text avows it; But it is most desperate flattery at any time, to
say of Subjects, Ye are Kings, for the Text denies it; and it is not to be
doubted, but those men who have already flattered Subjects into Kings to make
us slaves, will as easily flatter those their Kings into Tyrants, to perpetuate
our slavery: For my part, this I will say boldly, in regard of my calling as a
Minister of the Church of England, not in regard of my person, who am the
unworthiest of all the Ministry, and I am not afraid of saying it before men,
because I am not afraid of saying it before God, If I am deceived in this
Doctrine of Allegiance and Supremacy, it is my Church has deceived me: and I
humbly conceive, the Church will yet further say for her self, If I am
deceived, God has deceived me; Domine si decipimur, a te decepti sumus, Lord,
if I, the now distressed Church of England, or the poor Ministers who are truly
of my Communion, be deceived in the points of Allegiance and Supremacy, it is
thou have deceived us, for we are deceived by thy holy Word; and now let us hear
that Word speak for it self, Eccles. 8. 2, 3, 4.

ECCLES. 8. 2, 3, 4. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in
regard of the Oath of God;

Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil thing, for he does
what soever pleases him:

Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what
do thou?


ALlegiance and Supremacy do belong to Kings, by the appointment, and from the
authority of the King of Kings: it is from him they have the right to govern,
it is from him they have the inseparable Rights of Government, to be above and
over all, which we call Supremacy; to be truly and faithfully loved, served,
honored and obeyed of all, which we call Allegiance: two doctrines upon which
Christians did heretofore more severely insist then other men; and the Reformed
Churches have hitherto more insisted then other Christians; So that we cannot
fall from them but we must fall both from the glory of the true Christian
Religion, and from the (present) most glorious part of that, the Reformation:
we must turn Papists, nay, the worst of Papists, Jesuited Papists, and renounce
our Reformation: Doctrines both of a heavenly descent, for had they risen out
of the earth, they would have been more agreeable with the tempers of men, who
had their original from thence, and still have their affections there: but now
they are so opposite, so repugnant to flesh and blood (corrupt flesh and blood,
which is too proud and rebellious to endure a Supremacy over-awing it, too
unfaithful and licentious to endure an Allegiance bounding and confining it)
that the most powerful Doctor of the Gentiles writing of this Argument, is
observed to labor exceedingly for variety of expression, as if his adversaries
who before calumniated the weakness of his presence, would now also in this
calumniate the want of Power in his writings, and not so much as say his
Letters are weighty and powerful, though his bodily presence is weak, and his
speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10. for though that blessed Apostle write very
fully and expressly of all points of Divinity, yet does he seek out for
demonstrations chiefly in these three; Justification by Faith in Christ,
Resurrection from the dead, and Obedience to the Civil Magistrate; and he is
particularly urgent and pressing in this latter, to show us that we ought most
carefully to lay it up in our Consciences, and most conscionably to practice it
in our lives and conversations; preparing and fore-arming the Church of Christ,
against those wolves in sheeps clothing, those Godly seditious men, which
should arise after his departing, and speak perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them, Act. 20. 30. the like method did God himself observe in
the Old Testament (and I hope that we Protestants, who take the Word of God
only for the Rule of our Faith, will not at one time reject both the New and
the Old Testament) for least men should at any time among the Jews (as
stiff-necked a people as our selves) either for Apostasy refuse, or for
hypocrisy dissemble, or for timorousness conceal this heavenly doctrine which
is so necessary for the salvation of souls; he which before with Abraham did
provide himself a sacrifice, does here with his posterity provide himself a
Priest, sends such a Preacher as can neither be seduced with Apostasy, nor
corrupted with flattery, nor silenced with fear, even his own holy Spirit to
preach it, in these words, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, etc.

Which words are not a Text but a Sermon concerning Allegiance and Supremacy
due to Kings; wherein you have these three parts,

First, The Preacher, (...) I.

Secondly, The manner of his Preaching, I Counsell] I counsel thee.

Thirdly, The Doctrines of his Sermon, and they are two:

1. That of Allegiance, [to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of
the Oath of God, Be not hasty to go out of his sight, v, 2, 3.

2. That of Supremacy, [where the word of a King is, there is power, and who
may say unto him, what do thou? v. 4.]

I will handle these in their order; and First of the Preacher, in this
particle I: and who this I is, we may learn from the first words of the Book,
The words of the Preacher, the Son of David, King in Jerusalem; that is, the
words of Solomon without question, for no other Son of David was King in
Jerusalem: but why then does not the Preacher set down his Name? he that had no
less then six names can he not allow himself so much as one to be known by for
this Preacher had no less then six names, three properly his, and three
allegorically his; the three properly his, were

1. Solomon, from peace, 1 Chronicles. 22. 9.

2. Jedidiah, because the Lord loved him, 2 Samuel 12. 25. and this was a name of
Gods own giving, who is not observed to give names in Scripture, but to such on
whom he stamped some great and glorious character of Excellency by reason of
their office; as to Abraham and Jacob, who were both Priests and Prophets; to
Solomon, who was a King; to John Baptist, who was a special Prophet; and to our
blessed Savior, who was all three; certainly to point out some eminency in
them above the people; for though the Congregation be never so holy, yet have
they nothing to do with the Holy of Holies, nor may any Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, without danger of going down into the pit, say, in opposition to Moses
and Aaron, You take too much upon you, Numb. 16. 3. when they take no more then
God has given them.

3. Lemuel, Pro. 31. 1. [The words of King Lemuel] which must necessarily be
this King Solomon, unless we could in the Text find out some King of Israel
whose name was called Lemuel, that was so holy, as to be a Penman of the holy
Ghost: Aben-Ezra says he was called Lemuel quasi (...) Lamo El illis Deus,
because he ordered the Israelites so in matters of Religion, (as appears 1 Kin.
8. 21.) that in his time they worshipped God only: others say, he called
himself Lemuel, quasi (...) Lamouel quod a Deo ordinatus fuerit, because he was
specially ordered or ordained of God, to preserve his worship and service; but
we need not criticize upon words, whether Lemuel be ordinans ad Deum, or else
Ordinatus a Deo, it is but little different in sense, though much in sound from
that of Jedidiah, beloved of the Lord; he that is beloved of God, being
ordained of him to enjoy his love, and ordering himself reciprocally to God,
because he loves him; these were our Preachers three Names which were properly
his, and each of these well befits him as a Preacher of Allegiance; a man of
peace, and a man of God, ordained of God for his mission, beloved of God for
his Commission: we have also three more names of Solomon which were
allegorically his too, and they are put all together, Prove. 30. 1. Agur,
Ithiel, and Ucal; Agur, a collectour or gatherer, quod sapientiam colligeret,
says Jarchi; he took pains first to gather his wisdom, then to utter it:
Ithiel mecum Deus, God is with me; and Ucal, praevalebo, I shall prevail, I
have been a Gatherer, God is with me, and I shall prevail; three such
properties of a Preacher as shows him to come not from the camp of the
Soldiers, but from the School of the Prophets, without which he ought not to
preach, or we shall have little benefit of, and less Allegiance in his Sermons:
so that all these six Names intimate so many properties in this, so many duties
in any other Preacher; especially of this doctrine, and are as so many
obligations upon the hearers of it.

First, He must be a man of peace, that his life may agree with his doctrine,
and his doctrine may agree with his Gospel, which is or should be the Gospel of
Peace; It Is a false Trumpet in Sion that sounds the alarm to a temporal war
against Kings, instead of a spiritual war against sins: This doctrine of
Supremacy and Allegiance, being truly understood and carefully followed, will
silence all such Trumpeters, or make them spend their breath in vain; for it
will not allow a Co-ordination of Sovereignty in the same Commonwealth, or two
Supremes in one Kingdom, since that is much to gainsay the Rule of Christ, Mat.
6. 25. No man can serve two masters; but more to disturb the peace of
Christendom, by setting up two masters to claim that service: O God, since the
commands of men are so different from and between themselves, that they will
not allow us our outward peace, make us to love thy commands, in which there is
no contrariety, that so we may attain to that inward peace, which this wicked
world cannot give, and this tumultuous world cannot take away.

Secondly, he must be a man Beloved of God, at least according to the outward
effect or sign of love, as being trusted with his Commission; which must needs
be a special grace or favor, gratia gratis data, though not gratum faciens; a
grace or love in regard of his employment or function, though not of his
person; (in that respect the Laity may be as much beloved of God as the
Clergy;) like as a Prince is thought to love him most whom he most employs, yet
may not love the person of that servant, but his ability of doing him service:
so does God sometimes in his Ministers; only there is this difference, the
Prince finds God gives the ability, and that gift is an undeniable argument of
his love to the function, though not always of his love to the person that
discharges it: O God, let thy Priests, though clothed with many infirmities in
their Persons, be always clothed with righteousness in their calling, lest
they ceasing to be a sweet savor to thee, begin to stink in the nostrils of
thy people; it being just with thee to suffer profane men at first to vilify,
and at last to nullify that calling, whose Ministers set a higher price upon
the advantages of this world, then upon thy truth; and seek to please men by
venting distempers and Novelties, rather then God, by preaching Allegiance and
Conscience.

Thirdly, He must be Lemuel, Ordinans ad Deum, and Ordinatus a Deo, ordering
all to God, and ordained of him; It Is not for every well-meaning (much less for
every ill-meaning) man, to turn Preacher; unless we will exclude God from the
Sermon: and a Priest that fills his own hand, is like to fill the peoples
heads with corrupt fancy, but never to fill their hearts with sound Piety: O
God, let those only be heard amongst us, whom thou have sent, for none else
are like to go on thine errand, or deliver thy message: men that send
themselves do most commonly preach themselves, and labor to set up a consusion
in the Preacher, that they may expel Obedience out of the doctrine.

Fourthly, He must be Agur Ithiel and Ucal, a gatherer, God is with me, and I
shall prevail; these must all go together, because the one produces the other:
a gatherer, from hearing, reading, observing; all little enough to get a stock,
and often times too little to get a judgment to dispense it: he gathers, and is
not therefore the less inspired, for God is with him; his own gathering,
hinders not Gods inspiring: Study is no enemy to inspiration, but rather
advances it: For God is with him, and he shall prevail; first over himself to
settle his own conscience, then over others, to rectify theirs: O God, endue
thy Ministers with this righteonsness, that so thou may make thy chosen
people joyful; joyful in the love and practice of their Allegiance, that they
may be joyful in the testimony of a good Conscience; knowing that no man who
is bound to be subject for Conscience sake, can at the same time be a bad
subject, and yet have a good Conscience.

Thus our Preacher of Allegiance and Supremacy here, has six names, and not
one of them but well befits both his office and his doctrine; and yet he
prefixeth not so much as one of them to the title of his Sermon; chiefly sure
to teach us, that the doctrine was not of his own invention, but of Gods
Inspiration: Like as the ancient Fathers in the first Nicene Council, would not
set any date under the confession of their faith, lest it might be thought to
be of their own making: Haereticorum tantum consuetudo erat, edere professionem
fidei, Chronologia temporum and consulum consignatam, says Binius (in Council.
Chalc. p. 416, 417. edit. colon.) so the Preacher here, would not put too his
own Name, that he might not be thought to preach his own words: and indeed the
Hebrew Title of the Book [(...)] plainly shows as much, which is not (...), but
(...), either (...) or (...), not a he but a she Preacher, that is, not a
Preaching man, but a Preaching soul, or a Preaching wisdom: and such is our
Preacher here, a preaching soul or Conscience to himself, a preaching wisdom
to others, or a preaching soul in setting forth humane frailties and falsities
(for this Book was the public testimonial of his repentance) and a preaching
wisdom in setting forth the divine power and truth.

And according to the Preacher is the manner of his preaching, which is my
second general part, he preaches by a grave, judicious, conscientious advice
or counsel, I counsel thee.

Indeed in the Hebrew Text there is no such word expressed, but yet by the
propriety of that language it is necessarily to be understood, [I to keep the
Kings Commandment] that is, I warn thee, or I counsel thee, or I command thee
to keep the Kings Commandment: So Aben-ezra fills up the Text, (...) the
meaning of this particle I (says he) is this, I warn and counsel thee, or I
command thee: And since King Solomon was a most notorious sinner before he was
this Preacher, or Preaching soul, or Preaching wisdom, we may thus gloss upon
his words.

First, I warn thee, as my self a sinner, sent to preach to my self and others,
there is (...) the Greek Title.

Secondly, I counsel thee as a Preaching soul, (...), pouring out mine own
conscience.

Thirdly, I command thee as a Preaching wisdom, (...), setting forth Gods
Truth, which two last make up (...) the Hebrew Title of this Book: and all
three are admirably consonant with this doctrine of Allegiance in the best
times, much more in these our wicked days, which are the last and the worst of
this wicked world, the earth growing weary of it self now it is near its
dissolution.

First, I warn thee as a Preaching sinner, (...): Angels happily can best teach
us, because they are Intelligences, pure understanding spirits; but surely men
can best admonish us, who have been and are under the same infirmities of the
body, under the same distresses of the soul: Dives could say S. Luke 16. 30. If
one went unto them from the dead, they will repent; It is so here, one from the
dead comes to preach repentance; one who had been so long dead in sin, that he
was certainly at hell-gate, but the hand of an extraordinary mercy pulled him
thence; one whom others that looked more upon his sin then upon his repentance,
painted hanging betwixt heaven and hell, as being doubtful of his salvation;
such a one as this, comes here to warn us to take heed of disloyalty and
disobedience; himself a sinner advises us to repent us of our sins; that he
may keep us from those plunges of conscience, which himself has sustained: the
memory of his own sins is grievous unto him, and that makes him remember us of
ours; he accounts his own burden intolerable, and therefore labors to diminish
and lessen ours; we were best give him audience, here is an expertus loquor in
the Text; better see our sins in his admonition, then in our own consciences,
better see them in our own consciences here to condemn us, then hereafter to
confound us; better men show them us in the time of mercy, then God show them
us in the time of wrath: Ego peccator, I am a grievous sinner, which have been
guilty of much disloyalty and disobedience against the King of Kings my dread
Sovereign Lord, I warn thee to keep thy Kings Commandment, and that in regard
not only of the Oath, but also of the wrath of God.

Secondly, I counsel thee as a Preaching soul, (...) in its first sense, (...):
I counsel thee as a Preaching soul, pouring out mine own conscience, that I may
have some influence upon thine: that Sermon comes nearest to the soul of the
hearer, which comes first from the soul of the Preacher; In other arts, the
best words; but in Divinity the best thoughts are the most powerful Oratory;
Conscience is the best Eloquence; the most persuasive arguments are neither
(...) in the affection of the hearer, nor (...) in the excellency of the
speech, but (...) in the conscience of the speaker: God having spoken to the
Preachers conscience, makes him speak to the consciences of those that hear
him, nor is there a greater curse upon earth then an hypocritical Ministry,
that pretend zeal of Religion and want integrity of Righteousness: for if the
Shepherd be smitten, the sheep will be scattered, S. Mat. 26. 31. if hypocrisy
get into the Pulpit, it is no wonder to find it in the pew: If the Clergy once
place Religion in fine words and fair pretenses, no wonder if the Laity forsake
all Religion to seek after a Reformation: Therefore our Savior first says, ye
hypocrites, to the Scribes and Pharisees, and after that, to the common people,
S. Mat. 15. 7, 8. Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, you Doctors
of the Law, that give false expositions upon the fifth Commandment, v. 5. and
6. and prefer your Corban before your Obedience: Isaiah did first prophecy of
you that were the seducers, and after that of them who were seduced by you,
saying, (truly of both, but primarily of you) this people draws nigh unto me
with their mouth, and honors me with their lips (calling for a Reformation)
but their heart is far from me; for it is full of rebellion: O my blessed
Savior, do thou first preach that to mine, which thou would have me preach
to another soul, lest I so preach, as not to convert others, or so convert
others as to condemn my self.

(...) as a Preaching soul I counsel thee, I warn thee as a Preaching sinner, I
counsel thee as a preaching soul, I warn thee as a preaching sinner, who by
woeful experience know the shaking palsies and convulsion fits that proceed
from sin; I counsel thee as a Preaching soul, speaking that from mine own heart
which I would have enter into thine: yet this is not all, I command thee as a
Preaching Wisdom, uttering no other then the truths of God, must also come in
concerning this doctrine of Allegiance to Kings, (...), that is (...) in its
other sense, I command thee as a Preaching Wisdom: It is said of our Savior
Christ, S. Mat. 7. 29. he taught them as one having authority, and not as the
Scribes; and the reason of his so teaching is intimated in that question of
those who themselves could not teach so in that question of the Scribes, S.
Mat. 13. 54 whence has this man this wisdom? for Christ was indeed the the
wisdom of God, and this was the reason he taught in the Power and authority of
God: so is it with them that preach Christ (whether it be as a Savior, or as a
Lawgiver, for they who preach him but one of those two, preach but half
Christ) the more of Gods Wisdom, the more of Gods Power is in their Preaching:
as much as they have of the wisdom of this world, whether it be in fancy or
faction, so much they have of weakness and impotency, as much as they have of
the wisdom from above, so much they have of power and Authority: and indeed
this is the main thing pointed at in this word (...) that is, (...) a preaching
wisdom; to show it was not Solomon's but Gods Word, and not so much Gods Word
as Gods Wisdom; and therefore not to be read or heard as the word of man, but
as the Word of God; If we look upon this Sermon in the Text, or any of the rest
in the whole Book, as the word of man, though as the wisest of men, for so was
King Solomon, we shall find work for our wits to censure it, if not for our
wilfulness to contradict it; (for no one book in all the Bible has been more
upon the rack, more stretched upon the tenter-hooks, by all sorts of men, then
this) but if we look upon it as the Word of God, which is our duty, not only
for this Sermon of Allegiance, but also for all the rest contained in the Book,
we shall find matter for our consciences diligently to observe, and for our
conversatious dutifully to practice: and as concerning this particular Sermon
of Allegiance and Supremacy here in these verses of my Text, it has a peculiar
preeminence of perspicuity above any other in the whole Treatise, so that he
that runs may read, and he that reads must understand, and he that
understands cannot gainsay it: whereas in many other doctrines of this Book,
there is something which through error may be mistaken, but more which through
contumacy may be contradicted; Insomuch as Aben-czra tells us, that the wise
men of the Hebrews, had once a consultation of concealing this Book from their
children, because many things in it seemed to incline to a side or party, and
that an heretical party, (...): and he instanceth in that place of cap. 11. v.
9. which though it carry much horror in the conclusion, [Know that for all
these things God will bring thee to judgment;] yet it seems to open a gap to
all manner of Licentiousness in the precedent concession [Rejoyce O young man
in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes] but here our preaching wisdom is so very plain. that there is not so
much as a seeming concession (though that be indeed the strongest prohibition)
for the least disloyalty against Kings, either in thought, word, or deed: all
three are captivated under an absolute necessity of being true and faithful:
The thought, v. 2, because of the Oath of God, for he knows the heart: the
word, v. 4. who may say unto him, what do thou? the deed, v. 3. Be not hasty,
etc. all which must needs recommend this doctrine to our great attention for
the observation, but much more to our good affection for the practice of it:
for we cannot but take notice, that this Book which was penned of purpose to
show the vanities of all things in the world, has been abused by all sorts of
men to the patronage of their several vanities, only the disloyal subject
never yet brought a proof from hence for his disloyalty: the whole book is
nothing else but Speculum vanitatis, a Looking-glass for men to see therein
their vanities, not only the vanities of their possessions, riches and
honors, but also of their actions and affections and administrations; and the
best of those too; their actions and affections in the study of wisdom, c. 1,
v. 12. and performance of divine service, c. 5. v. 1. and their
administrations, even whilst they administer justice, says Tremellius upon my
Text, Civilis administrationis vanitatem ostendit ex abusu Tyrannico
administrantium: he shows here the vanities of civil Government and
Administration of Justice, because of the Tyranny and Oppression of those that
administer it: But though we can willingly grant the discovery of Vanities in
the administration of Government, yet we cannot find the least pretense for
resistance against that administration, no more then we can for defiance of
wisdom and public devotion, because of our mixing vanities with both: this
very book that was made to show men the vanities of their best actions, has in
many others been alleged to maintain the vanities of their worst: the solitary
Monk from this omnia vanitas, has erected his exemption from common Offices of
humanity, under pretense of meditating only on Divinity; the inquisitive
Schoolman has from hence raised his doctrine of perpetual doubting; from cap.
9. v. 1.) to the great discomfort and greater destruction of souls: the profane
Libertine has from cap. 3. v. 19. learned to scoff at the thought of the
resurrection or eternal life; and the stupid worldling, from cap. 2. v. 14, 15.
has learned to slight the thought of death; and so we might instance in many
more particulars; Only the sin of undutifulness and unfaithfulness to Kings
never yet from any part of this Book has obtained so much as a seeming
defense; which shows, that our Preacher in this matter labored to be a
Preaching Wisdom, not only to the wise and learned, but also to the ignorant
and foolish; to leave even the meanest of the people inexcusable for this sin,
this horrid sin of disloyalty, which though it least lodges in their hearts,
and is never to be contrived by their heads, yet is always acted by their
hands: Let a man be never so impatient in hearing (as Festus was to S. Paul,
Act. 26. 24. which made him lay the imputation of madness upon the Apostle for
the words of truth and soberness, v. 25.) Let him be never so inconsiderate in
censuring, as the Barbarians were to the same S. Paul, Act. 28. 4. thinking him
at first a murderer, whom presently after they were ready to worship as a God:
Lastly, let him be never so imprudent in collecting and observing, looking
rather upon the sound then upon the sense of the Text (like those Interpreters
of weak judgments but strong persuasions complained of, 2 Pet. 3. 16. which
were so unlearned as to understand nothing, yet so unstable as to wrest every
thing) yet this doctrine of Allegiance cannot possibly be mistaken, much less
depraved, either by his impatient hearing, or by his inconsiderate censuring,
or by his imprudent collecting: Let him run a way with what piece of it he can,
and take it without respect or relation to the whole (which has hitherto much
wronged Gods Word both written and preached) yet'tis not possible for him to
take so little of the Text, but it will be able both to stop his mouth and
condemn his heart: So that here we may forgo that incomparable Rule of the
Civilians, Incivile est particulam aliquam Legis sumere non perspect a tota
Lege; it is very uncivil to lay at the catch with the Law, and take that only
which serves our own turn, I say we may forgo this Rule (which yet is much more
true of Gods then of man's Law) and notwithstanding fear no mischievous tenants
or practices, to be deduced from this portion of the Text: In a word, let any
seditious miscreant deal here with Solomon, as Saul did with Samuel, as he
turns about to go away from him, being resolved not to serve his purpose; lay
hold upon the skirt of his mantle and rent it of, yet that very little parcel
will signify unto him, that if he persist in his wilful disobedience, The
Lord will rent him from his Kingdom, and that the strength of Israel will not
lie nor repent, 1 Samuel 15. 27, 28, 29. but teaches Israel, there is no way for
them to be saved, that are guilty of such a dismal lie, but by repentance which
may satisfy us, that our Preacher here in this Doctrine of Allegiance is a
Preaching Wisdom beyond himself in other Doctrines, that begin and end where
you will, catch what you can of the Text, it will wholly speak for your King
and will silence you: I know not how I have been over pressive in this
patticular almost to a Tautology; But that can never be too much spoken which
can never be enough understood: [a preaching sinner, a preaching conscience, a
preaching wisdom; I hope we shall accordingly open not our ears but our hearts
to his doctrine; a preaching sinner (who has sin in his person not in his
Sermon) is fittest to admonish us; a preaching conscience is fittest to advise
us; a preaching wisdom is fittest to overrule us: here is not only conscience
and wisdom preaching this doctrine that we may not sin against it, but here is
also a sinner preaching it, that we may repent us after we have sinned: Solomon
preaching before his Apostasy at the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8. 22.
where he was first a Preacher and had his first Congregation) and afterward in
his Proverbs and Canticles is a miracle and monument of grace; but preaching in
Ecclesiastes after his wives had seduced him to be a Chaplain to Chamosh the
abomination of Moab, 1 King. 11. 7. he is a miracle and monument of mercy; O
the infinite comfort from such a preacher if we follow him! O the infinite
condemnation if we do not!

And so it is high time I should pass from the Preacher and the manner of his
preaching, to the matter of his Sermon, To keep the Kings Commandment, etc.
wherein are comprised two doctrines that inseparably belong to Sovereignty, the
one of Allegiance, the other of Supremacy; the doctrine of Allegiance is
clearly set down v. 2, 3. and that of Supremacy, v. 4. the first teaches the
duty of Subjects, the second shows the reason of their subjection: Allegiance
is the duty of Subjects, and Supremacy is the reason of their subjection: In
both it must be my endeavor only to make my self and you truly understand
this Preachers Sermon, and so lay it to our consciences as he propounds it: for
Solomon here speaks both of Allegiance and Supremacy, as they concern the
conscience and divine obligation, not as they concern humane conveniences or
consultations: therein showing himself a true Preacher, speaking to men's souls
by which they hope to live in the next, not to their interests by which they do
live in this world; and first of the Allegiance.

A Sermon of Allegiance can never be unwelcome to a good Subject, or a good
Christian; not to a good Subject because it puts him in mind of that condition
wherein God has placed him; not to a good Christian, because it puts him in
mind of that duty which God has commanded him: and here is a Sermon of
Allegiance briefly but fully setting it forth in its positive and in its
privative act.

1. In its positive act, to be true and faithful to the King, in loving,
honoring, and obeying him; loving his person, honoring his authority, and
obeying his commands: I advise thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and the
reason thereof, and that because of the Oath of God.

2. In its privative act, not to be guilty of any disloyalty or dis-allegiance,
either in affection, Be not hasty to go out of his sight, or in action, stand
not in an evil thing, and the reason thereof, for he does whatsoever pleases
him.

First, Of the positive Act of this Allegiance, to be true add faithful to the
King, in loving, honoring, and obeying him, in these words, To keep the Kings
Commandment: it is in the Hebrew, (...) Os Regis observa, observe the Kings
mouth: to observe argues an act of loving, honoring and obeying; In this sense
does God say unto the Jews, Ye shall observe all my statutes, and Christ says
unto his Apostles, Teaching them to observe all things, Matthew. 28. 20. that is,
to love, honor, and obey them: So here, to observe the mouth or command of the
King, is, to love, honor, and obey his commands, with an unwearied diligence,
with an undisturbed patience.

First, It is to love them; for who cares to look after that which he does not
regard? Ubi amor ibi oculus, is as true when made convertible, ubi oculus ibi
amor; the eye is the quickest messenger of the souls affection, yet not so
quick as at any time to go without its errand.

Secondly, It is to honor them; and that not cursorily or merely for fashion
sake, but with the engagement of the soul to know them distinctly, and to
perform them diligently: there is an outward honor in (...), in eye-service,
or the service of the man; but there is moreover an inward honor in (...), in
soul-service, or the service of the mind; the first is in all manner of
serving, and the second is peculiarly in observing.

Thirdly and lastly, It is to obey them; for observation is vain where it is
not active; and idle, where it is ineffectual; which makes our Savior join
observing and doing both together, S. Mat. 23. 3. that observe and do, and
consequently the Preacher here bids us so observe the Kings Commands as to be
sure not to leave them undone, for then our observation will but make us guilty
of the greater contempt: the wise Historian sets those down for little better
then a mutinous rabble, of whom he says, Interpretari magis quam exequi, they
were more ready to interpret then to execute all commands: truly to observe a
command is to love, honor, and obey it, and not only so, but also with the
greatest patience, as it is serving, with the greatest diligence, as it is
observing: with the greatest patience, as it is serving, for what more tedious
then wholly to attend upon another will and pleasure? yet this you must do if
you are bound to serve, for that is to wait; and with the greatest diligence as
it is observing, for wherein can you be negligent if you may not once close,
much less turn away your eye? yet this you may not do if you must observe, for
that is to watch: as then this word intimates waiting, it requires all possible
patience; and as it intimates watching it requires all possible diligence; and
yet neither patience nor diligence can be so great as is the reason of them
both, in the next words, and that in regard of the Oath of God: where
Aben-Ezra's gloss is most admirable, a Jew writing to the admiration, yet much
more (as the case now stands with us) to the shame of Christians: the Preacher
(says he) uses two such arguments as are both unresistable; the one is the
word of the Kings mouth, the other is the word of thine own mouth; (...) for
what has proceeded from the Kings mouth; (...) for what has proceeded from
thine own mouth; that is to say, because he has commanded, and because thou
have covenanted so to do, sc. to be true and faithful to thy King: and the
same Doctor goes on as admirably, (...) for a King among men will not acquit
him that rejects his word, (...) and much less will the King of truth, the King
of Kings hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain: here is a probable
conjecture, that among the Jews there was some kind of Oath made unto their
Kings, not unlike to our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; there is mention
made of a League or Covenant that King David made with the Elders of Israel in
Hebron before the Lord, when they came to anoint him King, 2 Samuel 5. 3. which
Covenant was reciprocal without question, that David should not molest them for
making Ishbosheth King for two years, and after Saul's death, yet staying five
years longer before they came to anoint David King over them (says Kimchi) and
consequently that they should play no more such pranks with him; be no more
false to nor averse from his Sovereignty; though mention is made only of David
in the Covenant, as of the chiefest party, yet the Elders did swear too, by
Kimchi's own confession, though he record not the words of their part of the
Oath; and indeed it were strange if a Nation instructed in the Law of God
should against that Law be forward to bind it self under an Oath not to do
good to such or such a man, ((...) says Philo of his own Countrymen) and not
be much more forward to swear homage and allegiance to their Kings, which that
Law did oblige them to; but it is sufficient for us that the Jews did think
themselves bound without any peculiar Oath, by virtue of their general Covenant
with God, To be true and faithful to their Kings, for that the fifth
commandment was one of those ten to which they had vowed their obedience; nay
it was indeed the first commandment of promise, and they looked by their
obedience to inherit the promisedland: and if that nation did think so
religiously of the obligation of an Oath or Vow, as to pretend that for an
actual breaking of a commandment, (as it was answer enough for them why they
did not relieve their father or mother, to say, they had sworn by Corban (by
the gift on the Altar) not to do it, Mat. 15. 5. what will become of us who
have sworn to the keeping of this commandment, to the honoring of our Father,
and rather then keep the commandment will break our Oath; Jews, Pharisees and
Sadducees that deny the resurrection, shall rise up in judgment against this
generation and shall condemn it; for they made the keeping of an Oath their
pretense for breaking the fifth commandment; but we have nothing, save the
breaking of an Oath, or rather of many Oaths to allege for our selves, in that
we have so shamefully broken it; and can only say, we have made our selves
guilty of perjury, that we might be guilty of rebellion; what? have we not as
great hopes as had the Jews, have we not as great Promises as they had? why
then should we have a less obedience? To be undutiful is not the way to obtain
our inheritance in earth much less in heaven; especially since God looks upon
this grand undutifulness to kings, as if it were unto himself: And we may
challenge all Christendom to show us any nation or people, that is not fully as
defective in Conscience, as it is in Allegiance. Jannes and Jambres that first
withstood Moses (Gods immediate Vicegerent though not to them) and then
resisted the truth, having left this unhappy legacy to all their followers,
that as they are men of corrupt minds, for want of obedience, so they are
reprobate concerning the faith, for want of a good Conscience.

God will not so far countenance rebellion, as to let the true Religion long
continue, and much less thrive under it: and it is the general observation of
all sound Divines, that the Scripture does most commonly join the fear of God
with Obedience to Kings, as 1 Pet 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King, not
supposing the one possible without the other; and to show it is not, they are
both joined together in one act of Fear, Prove. 24. 21. My son, Fear God and the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; as if he had said,
they fear neither: They that out of levitie, much more out of malice, fear not
to forsake their Allegiance to their King, cannot fear to forsake their
Conscience to their God. It Is only the Calendar of Antichrist that can put
those in for lovers of God, who were haters, and who were, or would have been
Murderers of Kings; As S. Faux, S. Garnet, S. Ballard, our homebred Traitors;
S. Jaquis Clement, who murdered Henry the third, and S. Raviliak who butchered
Henry the fourth of France; why do they not also write (as some old Heretics
did in effect; of whom Epiph. haer. 18. (...), They boast of their kindred with
Cain, and the Sodomites, and Esau, and Corah, and Judas, and say these only
were endued with wisdom from above) I say, why do they not also write S. Esau
for hating, S. Cain for killing his brother: S. Cham for scoffing, S. Absalom
for persecuting his Father? S. Corah for reviling, S. Judas for destroying his
Master, and S. Lucifer for endeavoring to destroy his God? A King, much more a
Religious, a just, a merciful, a wise King, is all these; A Brother, a Father,
a Master, a God: It Is not Ithat say so, it is my Savior, S. John 10. 34. I have
said ye are Gods, 'and the Preacher here says little less, when he gives this
reason for Obedience, because of the oath of God: and sure I am, damnation is
not so plainly threatened in all the Bible, to any sin against God, as it is to
this of Disobedience, which strikes at him through the Kings loins: for sinners
of a high nature, though they have the same sentence in effect, as that They
shall never be forgiven, etc. S. Matthew. 12. 32. yet it is not delivered after
such a terrible manner, it is not said, They shall be damned; but of those that
live and die in the guilt of this sin it is said in plain terms, They shall be
damned, Romans 13. 2. They that resist, (living and dying in that resistance)
shall receive to themselves damnation: This is the judgment of the Scripture,
and this was the judgment of the Church for near five hundred years together
after Christ, in the first and best times of Christianity; hence S. Ambrose
pronounces this sentence concerning Maximus that had risen up in open
rebellion against his Sovereign Lord the Emperor Gratian and murdered him, but
was himself shortly after slain by Theodosius: Maximus occisus est, nunc in
Inferno docens exemplo miserabili, quam durum sit arma suis Principibus
irrogare: Ambros. in or at. funebr. de exitu Theodosii) Maximus is slain, and
being now in hell teaches by his miserable example, how dismal a thing it is
for subjects to take up arms against their Prince; a terrible saying, and a
more terrible History in the Records, but yet good in the use, and comfortable
in the example of it; for it proclaims to us, that our Gratian will not long be
without a Theodosius to avenge his blood; God keep them from hell that did shed
it: and S. Ambrose his expression comes very near our case, For Arma suis
Principibus irrogare, is to lay a kind of Tax or Assessment upon the King, by
forcing him to raise or keep an Army in his own defense; Maximus is in hell
(says S. Ambrose) for doing this, and killing his master as it were in a
huddle, and by the chance of war, (if I may so speak) then much more will those
Rebels be tumbled down headlong thither, who upon deliberate consultations put
their King in continual danger of death, and lengthened their bloudthirstiness
to bloudguiltiness, their bloudguiltiness to Parricide, but shorten their
Parricide by once murdering: It Is very dangerous to injure Kings; but more
dangerous to say, we may by law kill them, (cum laud interimi possint, being
now disowned by Mariana's own disciples) since God Himself is their pledge or
undertaker, Isa. 38. 14. O Lord I am oppressed, undertake for me, it is in the
Hebrew (...) Be thou my pledge: A apledge must be ejusde^ generis, of the same
stock, of the same value, not only (...) (as the Greeks call him) one that
will engage body for body, soul for soul, but also (...), one that has a body
and a soul answerable to that engagement: and consequently none can have God
for his pledge, but he that is (...) Like unto God; none can have Christ for
his pledge, but he that is (...) Like unto Christ; all true believers are so,
and as they are so, may comfortably use this prayer of the Prophet Christ,
Christ a King and a Priest, they a Royal priesthood, 2. Pet. 2. 9. (yet neither
Kings to usurp the Crown, nor Priests to invade the pulpit) He anointed, so
they; But every good King is more then so; Hezekiah had upon him a double stamp
of Christ's image, not only as a King spiritually, to govern his own
affections, but also as a King temporally to govern Gods people: and in that
regard he had a double title to say unto his Savior, Be thou a pledge for me,
not only as a true Believer, but also as a Religious King; the text is plain,
Touch not mine Anointed, for one of these little, much more for one of those
Great Kings; and David caused him to be put to death, that did but help to kill
Saul, though he were required so to do by the King himself, 2 Samuel 1. 9. 14,
15, 16. Saul could not give leave for his own subject to kill him, much less
could his subject take that leave without his giving: so that The oath of God
in my Text may not unfitly be interpreted The curse of God; soil. upon us and
upon our children, in case we be guilty, according to those words of Dan. 9.
11. Therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the Oath that is written in the
law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him; this Oath
that is written in the law of Moses is no other, but those curses that are
pronounced, Deuteronomy. 27. and 28. the ground of the Commination in our Liturgy,
which lawless men may easily put out of the Church, but they cannot so easily
put themselves out of those curses: Among the rest this is one of them, Cursed
be he that sets light by his father or his mother, and All the people shall
say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27. 16. much more if he be bound not only by the commandment,
but also by the Oath of God to honor Him; it being Jarchies note upon Lam. 2.
10. That Nebuchadnezzar though at first he so far reverenced the elders of Sion
as to put them in coaches, yet when they spoke but slightly concerning
Zedekiahs Oath to him, which he had so shamefully broken, he then tied them by
the hair of the head to the horses tails, and so dragged them to Babylon. He
that can make light of an Oath, not only God, but also the Heathen that know
not God, will expose him to shame, because he has exposed himself to all
manner of wickedness.

And this much, or rather this little (for in this argument non tam copia quam
modus quaerendus est) concerning the positive Act of Allegiance, To keep the
Kings commandment, and the reason of it, Because of the Oath of God. Come we
next to the privative act thereof which is, Not to be guilty of Disallegiance,
verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil thing, etc.
wherein is forbidden all manner of Disallegiance and disloyalty; not only in
the Action, but also in the Affection: Be not not hasty to go out of his sight,
there is forbidden Disallegiance in the Affection, and stand not in an evil
thing, there it is forbidden in the Action, and the reason of both; For he does
whatsoever pleases Him: First here is forbidden Disloyalty in the Affection,
Be not hasty to go out of his sight:

1, Be not easily induced to take dislike or distaste against Him, by
undervaluing his Person, and misjudging or misrendring his Actions; for either
of these will bring thee in time to undervalue if not to undermine his
Authority: therefore says God himself, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile
the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the people; it is in the Hebrew, (...) Deos ne
vili pendas, Thou shall not think or speak lightly of the Gods, that is, of
Princes and Governors who are called Gods, because they are his Vicegerents:
Deos, Dei ipsius agentes vicem, so Tremellius: He calls those Gods, who are
Governors in Gods stead; and S. Paul acknowledges this Text to be a part not
of the Judicial but of the Moral Law; saying for himself and all after him, It
is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, Act. 23. 5.
The same command which is more particularly expounded by our Preacher, Eccles
10. 20. where the very same word (...) that was used Exodus 22. 28. indefinitely
concerning any Governor, is particularly joined with (...) the King, as the
chiefest, for it is said, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: Be not
hasty to think amiss of Him, for suspicion is a diminution of reverence, and
therefore it is not safe (if it be lawful) to suspect them whom we are bound to
honor.

But Tremellius gives us another gloss, Ne perturbate a facie ejus abito, most
significantly to the Hebrew, Do not turn away from Him as if thou were angered
or troubled. Thus Sheba and the Israelites turned away from King David, after
their expostulations, 2 Samuel 19. 41, 43. And more then thus, they turned away
from Him in the next chapter, 2 Samuel 20. 1, 2. At first it was, why have our
brethren the men of Judah, stolen thee away, 2 Samuel 19, 41. A mere groundless
surmise of the Kings being addicted to a private party, if not of his being
misled by it; but at last, the trumpet is blown, and they say, (shame upon them
Miscreants for so saying) We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance
in the son of Jesse; and to speak Gods truth in Gods cause, It is very
difficult, if not impossible, for any man to have the least tincture of
disloyalty in his affections, and not to show it in his words and actions,
since out of the abundance of the heart, both the mouth speaks, and the hand
acts: which brings me to the second part of this prohibition, that forbids
all disloyalty in the action, Stand not in an evil thing.

For who is it that is not too hasty in his affection to err there, sometimes
by hatred, sometimes by anger? Let such a one be far better then a man, let him
be an Angel; but he that without consideration or conscience, can put all his
hasty affections of hatred or anger into actions, let him be worse then the
worst of men, let him be a Devil; Humanum est errare, diabolicum perseverare,
It Is the part of a man to fallinto error, but it is the part of a Devil to
persist in it: hasty affections of evil may go for errors or infirmities
common to man, of which Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from
my sin? Prove. 20. 9. But premeditated consultations, and actions of mischief,
have too long a continuance in the soul, not to defile the heart, and too great
a sway there, not to harden it: wherefore if thou think an evil thing, yet
abide not in that thought; however do not so think it as to do it; and if thou
have done an evil thing, yet abide not in that doing, do not so do it as to
stand in it; Stand not in an evil thing. It should not get into thy mind to
think it, nor into thy affection to desire it, much less into thy action to
perform, and least of all into thy resolution to approve it; and all these do
more particularly concern that evil thing of Disloyalty; for it is much to be
observed, that amongst all the affections no one is reciprocal betwixt God and
man, but only Love not Fear; for we must fear him, but he cannot fear us: not
hatred, for he may hate us, but we may not hate him; but love so proceeds from
God to man, as that it may lawfully, or rather must dutifully be returned back
again from man to God: and just so is it with Kings and Princes, we may safely
return them love for love both in our affections and in our actions, but we
must take heed of making other returns, suppose hatred for hatred, because they
are called Gods.

And it is a most remarkable history that is recorded concerning Saul, a
wicked King; the same Samuel that says unto Him, God has rejected thee, durst
not himself reject Him: He that tells Him, God has rent the kingdom of Israel
from thee this day, had not withal rent his own Allegiance from his King: For
though he came no more to see Saul till the day of his death, nevertheless he
heartily mourned for him, 1 Samuel 15. 35. Nay observe yet more, David himself
after He was anointed King, yet waits Gods time and way to be actually invested
in the kingdom, and is very tender concerning the point of Disallegiance to his
yet surviving Sovereign; His heart smote him because he had cut off Saul's
skirt, 1 Samuel 24. 5. (what would it have done, if He had cut off His head?) Nay
he would not let any of his servants touch Him, verse. 6, and 7. and gives the
reason of it, verse. 10. I said I will not put forth mine hand against my Lord,
for He is the Lords Anointed. Nay, yet further, He refuses not to swear
Fealty and Allegiance to Him, and kindness to his posterity after him, v. 21,
22. and did exactly keep his Oath in slaying those who brought him the head of
Ishbosheth; so careful was God of David, and David of himself, that though he
were made King, yet he made not his own way to the possession of the kingdom
nay yet more, after another persecution, he is still the same man, 1 Samuel 26. 8,
9, 10, 11. and will rather fly for the safety of his own life, then seek to
destroy his Sovereign: he was afraid to go a Kingcatching for fear that might
teach him to go a King-killing; therefore he says, There is nothing better for
me, then that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel
27. 1. and at last when the Amalekite had done this horrid act of killing King
Saul, (for no Israelite would do it, the Armor-bearer that was not afraid to
kill himself, was afraid to kill his King, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5.) you see how David
punished him for doing it, caused him to be put to death, and said unto him,
Thy blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying,
I have slain the Lords Anointed, 2 Samuel 1. 14, 15, 16. and moreover cursed the
place where it was done, v. 21 The mountains of Gilboa must have no more dew
nor rain, because upon them had been spilt the Kings blood; and He bids not
tell it in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters
of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, v.
20. He looks upon this act as the reproach of Israel, though it were done by an
Amalekite, how much more if the Israelites themselves had done it? and in truth
they were very much guilty of it; for it was their not destroying Amalek
within, that made God leave Amalek without to destroy them: for as this
Amalekite had not been left to kill King Saul, if Saul had obeyed Gods
commandment of utterly destroying Amalek, 1 Samuel 15. 3. so questionless, If
Israel had destroyed the spiritual Amalek for warring against them, (which is
the reason why Amalek was to be destroyed, 1 Samuel 15. 2.) That is, the sinful
lusts of the flesh, which warred against the Spirit, and made them in their
hearts return into Egypt, God had not suffered Saul to spare the temporal
Amalek without them: 'twas once in their power to have destroyed Amalek, but
now it is in Amaleks power to destroy them; and they may pronounce that as a
sentence, which their brethren afterward pronounced only as a wish or
imprecation, His blood be upon us and upon our children: it is our not
destroying the spiritual Amalek, has given the temporal Amalek power to
destroy both our King and us, and our childrens children.

In all these particulars, of Samuels mourning, of David's relenting, lamenting
and weeping, of Saul's perishing not by an Israelite, but by an Amalekite, of
the Amalekites being put to death, and mount Gilboas being put out of heavens
blessing, the Word of God does as it were make Proclamation in the name of the
King of heaven, That it is, it can be no other then a fire from hell, that
cannot be quenched but by a Kings blood.

But what should the Preacher talk of hell to Amalekites that look not after
another world, so they may enjoy this? Let us therefore see what success of
disloyalty he bids them expect, even in this world: and sure it is like to be
none of the best; for there is upon earth a Power, if not a Person left to
punish it, even the very same power which such men abuse, and therefore will
not be tardie, may not be sparing. 1. their punishment, as it follows in the
next words, For he does whatsoever pleases him: Be not hasty to go out of his
sight, much more, Be not hasty to put him out of thy sight, stand not in this
evil thing; For he does whatsoever pleases him.

This doctrine of Allegiance is enforced by reasons, that concern both the
inward and the outward, both the spiritual and the carnal man; that if it work
not upon us as called to the inheritance of another world, yet it may, as
loving the inheritance of this. The Preacher sets down both reasons, The first
concerns the spiritual man who looks after his conscience, to him he pleads the
Oath of God. The second concerns the carnal man that looks after his interest,
to him he alleges the power of Kings; For he does whatsoever pleases him.
And this is S. Paul's method after him, who writes the most demonstratively of
all the Apostles in all the doctrines of Christianity, yet in this doctrine
does he after a sort strive to go beyond himself: for in this he does not only
use demonstrative or convincing arguments taken from the nature of the cause,
but also prevailing or persuading arguments taken from the condition of the
Person; this great Doctor in other doctrines thinks it enough to use those
prooofs which we call argumenta ad rem, but in this he is moreover industrious
to apply those proofs, which we call argumenta ad hominem: not only fit to
prove the thing, but also fit to reprove and charm the man that gainsays it. In
other documents of Christianity he preaches by the demonstration of the
spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. But in this, he uses another kind of demonstration,
which we may call A demonstration of the flesh; for so he argues, Romans 13. 4.
He is the minister of God to thee for good; as if he had said, If not for Gods
sake, yet for thine own sake thou must be subject; if not for thy Conscience,
yet for thy convenience; if not for the good of thy soul, yet for the good of
thy body, if not for thy everlasting salvation, yet for thy temporal
preservation. Thus after the confounding arguments of resisting Gods Ordinance,
and receiving damnation, to work upon the Conscience; he brings his persuading
argument, [He is for thine own good] to work upon the man: He is the minister
of God to thee for good: and the same method that he uses in his preaching, he
uses also in his praying, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, I exhort therefore that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men, For Kings and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: Nor are these very words, In
all godliness and honesty: an argument to work only upon the conscience, but
also upon the condition, or the person of the man; who though he may cast away
the practice, yet is loath to cast away the repute of godliness: for (...) is
honesty properly Honesta quaedam morum gravitas, quae reverentiam conciliat
says Beza; so then, he that will be godly, or will be thought godly must
zealously pray for Kings; he that will have the power of godliness in (...), or
the form of godliness in (...), the reason will extend to both, for the one may
relate to the inward Conscience, the other may relate to the outward condition.
So in my Text, after the Oath of God, an argument of piety, to work upon the
Conscience, here is, a whatsoever pleases him, an argument of power to work
upon the condition; For he does whatsoever pleases him; and therefore
Isacides gives this gloss upon the whole verse, Be not so hasty or foolish, (as
if thou were planet struck, for so the word signifies) as once to think thou
can go out of his sight, or sly to any place where he has not power to
reach thee, (...). To a place where he has no dominion, (...) For he has
power and dominion in every place; (Quis nescit long as Regibus esse manus?)
And stand not in an evil thing, or an evil word, (for it is in Hebrew (...)
which signifies both) that is, says Jarchi, Stand not out in a contestation
against him, for if he has a mind to revenge himself upon thee, he has power
to do it: For where the word of a King is there is power; that is, says the
same Author, for the word of God blessed for ever, gives a King power; and who
may say unto him, What do thou? but this concerns the next grand doctrine of
the Text, the doctrine of Supremacy, in the last verse, Where the word of a
King is, there is power, and who may say unto him what do thou?

Which words may well set forth the doctrine of Supremacy, because they contain
in them the definition of the Supreme Power on earth, What it is; and the
disposition of it, Where it is: First the definition of it, What it is; It Is
such a power as has no other above it. [Who may say unto him, What do
thou?] Secondly the disposition of it, Where it is, It is in Kings: Where the
word of a King is there is power: so then the Supremacy of a King consists in
these two things, First, That there is all power with him; Secondly, That there
is no Power above him.

First, That there is all power with him; Where the word of a King is, there is
power: power indefinitely, not some power, not half power, not this or that
power, to show, that All power is there: that is, All lawful power, for power
against law or without justice is mere impotencie; God can give no such power,
and it is he that gives the power in the Text: therefore we must say All power,
it being ill to play the sophisters with man's, but worse with Gods law: nor is
it lawful to distinguish, where the law distinguishes not, according to the
known rule, Ubi lex non distinguit, ibi non est distinguendum: this sophistry
first brought the worshipping of Saints and Angels, nay of images into the
Church; even by distinguishing where God did not distinguish: so did those in
the second of Nice elude the Text, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, saying, (...). He put this Only upon (...), not upon
(...), (since called (...),) upon Religious and divine worship which is due to
God himself, not upon an inferior sort of worship which we may lawfully
exhibit to Saints and Angels, and their images: Council. Nic. 2. Act. 4.) And
again, The Scriptures do not forbid us to worship images, but to worship them
as God, (...), Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 5. The same sophistry is still continued by
some whose great learning is not a sufficient authority to maintain their false
Religion, in eluding not expounding the second commandment, saying, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image, i. e. not the image of Venus, Jupiter,
Bacchus, or those Heathen gods; but thou may make thee a graven image of
Christ; or the Christian Saints, or of the Angels, and worship them: just such
a consequence and just such divinity will be here, if we will needs
distinguish where God distinguishes not: he says, Where the word of a King
is, there is power, he distinguishes not what power; if we will needs say,
yes, there is some power, but not the sole power; or some Supreme power, but
not all the Supreme power, we shall make God in effect speak and require
contradictories in the same commandment, as the Papists in the second, make him
approve as well as forbid Idolatry, so we in the fifth shall make him allow as
well as forbid Rebellion: for if there be but some power in the King, it is
enough if there be but some obedience in the people: and if there be not a sole
Supreme power in the King, there must be another Supreme power besides him,
which may lawfully resist him in his own Dominions; which is to frame a monster
in nature, Duo prima in eodem ordine, two firsts in the same rank and order,
but much more is it to frame a hideous monster in grace, making the same
commandment require us to obey, and yet allow us to resist the Higher powers,
which is impossible to our humane reason, and much more to Gods divine
Religion: wherefore we must say, that by power is here meant All power, which
is to be confined only by the Kings word, not his Subjects; by the place of
his Dominion, not by his partners in it: Where the Kings word is there is
power; his word is not every where, no more is his power; but his word is where
he has right to command, and consequently, there.

He has also power to execute his commands: so that the words of the Text,
Where the word of a King is, there is power, do naturally speak thus much in
effect, All lawful power (in his own Dominions) is so with him, as that no
power can be without him but by usurpation, no power against him, but by
rebellion, no power above him but by both: for all lawful power is with him,
and therefore what power soever is without him, or against him, or above him,
must needs be unlawful, if it be without him, it is unlawful by Usurpation,
because it invades his right; if it be against him, it is unlawful by
Rebellion, because it resists his Authority; if it be above him, it is
unlawful both by Usurpation for invading, and by Rebellion for resisting: and
therefore the Apostle, Romans 13. 1. calls him powers (...) in the plural
number, not one single power but many powers, (and yet he speaks of one single
Person, He is the minister of God; he bears the sword, and that single Person
a King, for it is such a one as receives tribute, v. 6) I say the Apostle
calls the Supreme or Sovereign power, (...), Powers, not only plurally
because it is a multiplied power, or many powers in one, but also indefinitely,
because it is an unlimited power, All power in one unlimited, I say, in regard
of any persons appointed by God to limit it, though not in regard of laws; now
what the law does limit, not man but God does limit; Aristot. 3. Pol. 16. does
make the Sovereignty of God and the laws all one, in that admirable Axiom of
his, (the foundation of all Politics, or of all good rule in them) (...). He
that bids reason govern, bids God and the laws govern, (he makes God and the
laws but one government) but he that lets in a man, lets in a wild beast: we
let not in the man upon the laws when he is a King, (much less when he is a
Subject) in saying he is powers, but we let in God upon the man; and therefore
call him powers plurally, because he is many powers, nay powers indefinitely,
because he is All powers in one person: whereas no one subordinate power may be
called powers, without some limitation or qualification; but the Supreme power
may be called so absolutely, and sine additamento; because all powers are
originally in him, and derivatively from him, (if not by man's (for some have
lately questioned that) yet sure by Gods law, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your
selves to the King as Supreme, unto governors as unto them that are sent by
him;) even as all motions are originally and virtually in the first Mover: the
power of judging whether it be to make laws, or to repeal them, the power of
punishing offenders against those laws; or the power of the law, i. e. of
peace, and the power of the sword, i. e. of war, are his powers: and our
Savior Christ though he openly said, My kingdom is not of this world, (which
may shame them that under pretense of Christ's kingdom, would engross Supremacy
to their consistories) yet did he at that very time as openly declare what was
the power of the Kings of this world, saying, If my kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews, S.
John 18. 36. Then would my servants fight; not against me, but for me: go you
that say and practice otherwise, and tell the Eternal Truth, that he was
mistaken, and knew not the constitutions of your kingdom, (while indeed you
know not the constitutions of his) But withal take heed that then you put not
your kingdom out of this world, for the words are undeniable and irresistible,
If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants sight that I should
not be delivered unto the Jews: they would fight with their hands and with
their hearts, when their hands fail them; fight with earth by striving against
men in battle; fight with heaven by striving with God in prayer; and much more
fight with hell, by striving against devils, black-mouthed slanderers and
back-biters, scorning their mammon, rather then their King should be delivered
to the Jews, to his malicious and bloodthirsty enemies: whatever the Subject
can lawfully do by his hand, or by his head, or by his heart, to defend the
King; and bring his enemies to condign punishment, that is the Kings power,
both for himself, and against his enemies: nor may we seek to pull this power
from a King, no more then we may seek to pull a King from his throne; for if
assistance be the servants duty, [Then would my servants fight that I should
not be delivered says Christ, making it their duty so to do] It Is not possible
but resistance should be his guilt; a dangerous guilt to himself, a scandalous
guilt to his Religion, so says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 1 Let as many servants as
are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of honor, that the name of
God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.

What an unsufferable impiety does possess those men, who think God may
securely be blasphemed by their Oaths; but what an unpardonable impudence has
bewitched those, who think there is a greater blaspheming of God in an hasty
Oath, then in a studied Rebellion? Those tongues (will certainly and
deservedly) one day want a drop of water to cool them that are now set on fire
from hell, customarily and impenitently to blaspheme the God of heaven; but yet
we must say, what we cannot but see, that God is and may be blasphemed with the
hand as well (or rather as ill) as with the tongue: it is not a yea and a nay in
the mouth will keep us from being blasphemers, if there be a rebellious sword
in our hands: the unruly tongue and the unruly hand do both blaspheme our God;
and this text of S. Paul seems to make the unruly hand the greater blasphemer;
for that blasphemes not only the name of God, as the tongue does, but also his
doctrine; [That the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.] Is not our
Religion the Doctrine of God? and how shall we dare to blaspheme that our
selves, or give others the cause of blaspheming it? It Is not only a false, but
it is also a blasphemous doctrine to say that a servant may count his own master
not worthy of all honor; much more to say, that a Subject may dishonor and
reproach, nay disobey and resist his King: it is a doctrine not only against
the Law, but also the Gospel, it is against the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, v. 3. and none can preach or approve it, but men that are Proud, doting
upon questions, and strifes of words, supposing that gain is godliness, v. 4,
5. and from such we must turn away: for it is easy from their conversation to
judge of their condition, if that be the conversation of the godly which is
there described by the Apostle, then are such men in the state of grace, and
condition of godliness; but if it be not, then in vain do they come with
godliness in their mouths, and with Rebellion (which is the greatest
ungodliness) in their hands and in their hearts: so that we may now answer the
Preachers question in my Text, Who can say unto him, What do thou?

Even such men as S. Paul here speaks of, but no other, if they be ashamed of
owning the character, let them be ashamed of answering the question, and to
show to all the world, that this is the doctrine of all good Protestants, I
will set it down at large as Musculus (a learned protestant writer) has
delivered it upon the Psalms; and I will bring my instance as Job does his
interpreter, but One of a thousand: and that shall be upon the fourth Psalm.

This Psalm (says Musculus) is of the same argument with the former (though it
appear not by the Title or Inscription) and was made upon the same occasion,
viz. King David's being driven from Jerusalem (his royal City and Palace) by
Absalom and his confederates accordingly, first he makes supplication to God
for mercy, v. 1. then presently falls expostulating with his enemies, v, 2. [O
ye sons of men how long will ye blaspheme mine honor, and have such pleasure
in vanity, and seek after leasing?] He expostulates not with (...) filii
hominis, with the rout or meaner sort, but with (...) filii viri, with the
Grandees, and chiefest of the people: Capita populi alloquitur, Primates,
Ductores, (called by others Ordines regni) he calls out upon the chiefest or
principal men, the Trustees of the nation, and lays the rebellion to their
charge, as indeed (says he) they are generally the causes of all grand
miscarriages in the people; wherefore it is said, Number. 25. 4. Take all the
heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord; these (says he) do most
deserve, but will least endure to be reproved; Non ferunt talem Ecclesiasten
qui delinquentes Magistratus corripiat: The Minister may not be suffered to
tell the Magistrate when he is a delinquent; and and indeed (says he) few
Ministers are willing to take upon them that dangerous part of their office;
what therefore can be expected but that God should send the Turk, or some such
extraordinary scourge (You will think him a Prophet, if you consider how
Germany has been scourged) to whip us with scorpions, since we regard not his
other chastisements? but however the Prophet David, for he says this as a
Prophet not as a King, in Gods, not in his own name) reproves these great ones
in the first place, and his reproof consists of two parts; first, that they
blasphemed his honor, that is, reviled his government, (which for Subjects to
do to their Prince, is in the Septuagints phrase to be little better then Sots,
(...) say they) Secondly, that they did love vanity and seek after leasing,
Quodres vanas and impossiviles studiose tentabant, that they labored with
might and main to compass that which was impossible, and consequently labored
in vain: Totius populi rebellionem vanitatem esse vidit ac mendacium, They
thought they could do great matters by raising up the people against their
King; but he looking upon his God with the eye of faith, and upon their actions
with the eye of Religion, (which is a spiritual not a carnal eye, measuring the
strength of a party by their cause, not by their number) calls all their
contrivances against him but a lie and vanity, a mere lie to deceive them, and
vanity to deceive it self.

After his reproof, follows his instruction, in the third and fourth verses,
Quod non tam adversus se quam adversus Dominum rebellando in surgunt, That they
did not so much rebel or rise up against him, as against God who had chosen
him; which God was now his Protector and would in due time be his avenger. [He
will hear me] Comminatur adversariis, futurum ut nihil contra se efficiant,
quantumvis moliantur; He tells his adversaries they should never be able to
prevail; to throw him upon his knees was the way to keep his crown upon his
head; for though they would not, yet God would hear him: therefore they were
best retreat from their furious march against him, and retire into their own
consciences, v. 4. Stand in aw and sin not, or Be ye angry and sin not; (for so
the Septuagint renders the words, and S. Paul justifies their translation, Ephesians.
4. 26. by his (...)) we may join them together, Stand in aw and sin not, by
being angry with your King, or be ye angry and sin not; be so angry with him as
not to sin in your anger, not to provoke the King of Kings: Commune with your
own hearts, not, comment upon his actions, much less pretend Religion for your
rebellion, as if you could offer an acceptable sacrifice to God, whiles your
King lay bound upon the altar: therefore he says, v. 5. Offer the sacrifice of
righteousness, nam omnino verisimile est Davidem iniqua hic illorum not are
sacrificia, dum hortatur ut sacrificia justitiae sacrificent, he does seem to
blame their ungodly sacrifices, in that he calls upon them to offer the
sacrifice of righteousness; and particularly intimates that sacrifice of
Absalom, of which it is said, 2 Samuel 15. 12. Qumque immolaret victimas, facta
est conspiratio magna, Whiles they offered sacrifices the conspiracy waxed
strong: Absalom had pretended a Vow, a Covenant which he had made with God, v.
7. [Absalom said unto the King, I pray thee let me go and pay my vow, which I
have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron.] but he intended nothing less then
Religion, only to use that as a cloak for his rebellion to cover it; or as a
color to disguise it: hence the people did at first resort to him,

[For it was in their simplicity, they knew not any thing, v. 11.] only
Achitophel may well be suppposed to have been at first the grand contriver,
because he was all along the grand counselor; and yet even he will not seem to
come to the conspiracy, but rather to the sacrifice; because forsooth he had
been formerly one of David's Counselors: therefore he comes not till Absalom
sends for him, and he sends for him whiles he offers sacrifices, v. 12. that
the sacrifice, not the conspiracy, might be thought the reason of his coming:
thus he could mock men, but he could not mock God, who takes from him that
grace which he had abused to his pretenses, not applied to his practices:
though he came to this rebellion by sacrificing, yet he went from it by
hanging: his great wisdom and policy which at first deceived others, at last
deceived himself; which may teach us, That nothing can so soon destroy
Religion, as to use it for a pretense of rebellion; a sacrifice that is offered
for a conspiracy, will at last offer up the conspiratours: Achitophel then put
the halter about his neck to hang himself, when he put the sacrifice upon his
conspiracy, to blaspheme his God: but I may not deviate from the footsteps of
my author, who will needs follow Absalom and his conspiratours to the next
Psalm also; which (says he) does likewise concern the same argument, Psalm 5.
verses 4, 5, 6. For thou art a God that have no pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall any evil dwell with thee; such as be foolish shall not stand in thy
sight, for thou hate all them that work vanity; Thou shall destroy them that
speak leasing, the Lord will abhor both the bloodthirsty and the deceitful
man: Notat autem his versibus conjuratorum Absalomi impietatem, insipientiam,
dolos and crudelitatem: impii erant erga Deum rebellando Uncto Dei;
Insipientes, quod impossibilia, sibique ipsis noxia tentabant; Dolosi ac
mendaces quod quum hactenus habiti fuerant ministri Regis, malitiose contra eum
conjurarunt; Crudeles, quod necem Regi machinabantur: so Musculus. In these
verses he sets forth the impiety, folly, treachery and cruelty of Absaloms
conspiratours: they were impious toward God for rebelling against the Lords
Anointed; they were foolish and unwise in themselves, for attempting
impossibilities; they were treacherous and false to the people, for pretending
to be the Kings Ministers, when they were conspiratours: and they were cruel to
the King, for complotting his death and destruction: by which we may see, what
it is in the judgment of Gods word, and those Divines that follow it, to say
unto a King, What do thou? It is no less then to be guilty of wickedness, of
malice, of folly of leasing, of vanity, of cruelty and of hypocrisy; and who
they are that say it, even wicked, malicious, foolish, vain, lying,
bloodthirsty and deceitful men; which brings me to discuss the second thing,
wherein consists a Kings Supremacy, which is this, that there is no Power
above him: a violence there may be above him, a power there cannot be, for Who
can say unto him, What do thou?

Our Savior Christ says unto Pilate, Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above, S. John 19. 11. If then
Subjects have any power against or above their Sovereign, let them show when
and where, and how it is given them from above; for to say, it is given them by
the people, is to say, it is given them from below; not from above: from below,
as low as earth we are sure, (for they are but Flii terrae, sons of the earth)
if not as low as hell: (and indeed this doctrine seems to have risen from the
bottomless pit, which is like to throw so many souls down headlong thither) but
certainly not from above; for the Doctrine which is from above, is like the
wisdom which is from thence, first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality or wrangling,
without hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17. But this doctrine is altogether impure,
unpeaceable, ungentle, hard to be entreated (resolves upon non-addresses) it is
void of mercy and all good fruits: never without very great partiality or
wrangling, and greater hypocrisy; therefore it cannot be from above. The
doctrine and wisdom from above, says Per me Reges regnant; By me Kings reign,
Prove. 8. 25. which very Text Pope Adrian in his epistle to Charles the great of
France, alleges to justify that expression of Constantine and Irene in their
writings at the second Council of Nice, Per eum qui conregnat nobis Deus; a
strange expression of theirs, By him who reigns together with us, that is,
God; yet had it been more strange, if in stead of writing God their
Fellow-Sovereign, they had writ the people so: but yet this expression being
justified by a Pope so many hundred years after Christ, may well persuade a
moderate Papist to turn Protestant, and confess, that the power of Kings
depends not upon the Pope; however it must persuade a modest Protestant not to
turn Pagan, and profess, that the power of Kings depends upon the people; as
the one tenent is Antichristian, so the other is unchristian; let those men
therefore be ashamed, that in this, may learn of a Pope to be Protestants, and
of Antichrist to become Christians.

King David after he had murdered Uriah, and with him questionless many more of
his subjects, yet says, Against thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. And
that very Bishop of Millain, which in the same case of murder did most sharply
reprove, and severely repeal the Emperor Theodosius in his person, yet is most
zealous from this same very text, to justify him in his authority: Is it
possible that a son should have a lawful power to destroy his Father, a servant
his Master, or a man his God? Did Cham only discover his fathers nakedness?
and was he cursed for ever? what then would God have done to him, if he had
whipped his father, or if he had butchered him whiles he was naked? If Cain were
a runagate for killing Abel, what would God have made him, had he killed Adam?
I have heard that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62. 11. but I have not heard
that it belongs unto the people, either to give or to take it away: And to show
that no subject can dispose of his Allegiance, it is here grounded upon the
Supremacy, that like as this is not of his making, so that cannot be at his
disposing; but as the Supremacy is grounded upon the power, so the Allegiance
is grounded upon the oath of God; and since Supremacy of power in Kings, is
grounded upon Gods power, there can be no supreme over them but only God. This
was the Divinity of the Primitive Christians, even before their Kings were
Christian, (and God forbid the Church of Christ should so far act the part of a
stepmother, as to make them fare the worse for being her sons, to make them
lose their own Rights for defending hers; for it were to reproach Christ to
make men losers by Christianity) Thus says Iren. lib. 5. adv. haer. c. 20.
Cujus enim Jussu homines nascuntur, hujus Jussu and Reges constituuntur, By
whose command men are brought into the world, by his command are Kings
appointed to govern them when they are there; and to govern them not only in
temporals, but also in spirituals, or else not to govern them, but only a part
of them, and that the worst part, their bodies, whereas they are not men
without their souls also. But because this truth is strongly opposed on both
sides, as well by the Consistory, as by the Conclave, it is requisite that we
farther declare this second Maxim concerning the Kings Supremacy, That there
is no power above him, by these two ensuing conclusions;

First, no Power but is inferior to his in causes.

Secondly, no Person but is inferior to him in power.

First, no Power but is inferior to his in causes, and that not only in civil
Causes, (which has been hitherto asserted) but also in Ecclesiastical. Thus
not Aaron but Moses gave the commands concerning the exercise of Religion, from
the first beginning of it: Thus Joshua, not the High priest, succeeded
afterward in the same charge; and the judges again after him, or else one
Levites idolatry, another fornicacation, would not have been ushered in with a
Non erat Rex in Israel, In those days there was no King in Israel (to govern
the Levites as well as others) Judge. 17. 6. and 19. 1. and afterward, when
Kings were established under that Title, as Supreme in power, over Israel: it is
plain that David and Solomon, Josiah and Hezckiah, did both order Religion in
its exercise, and reform it from corruptions: so that it is the peculiar
commendation of good Kings in the text, that they did destroy idolatry, and the
reproach of wicked Kings, that They did set it up; and though we find the
people often reproved for worshipping, yet we never find them once reproved
for not destroying the calves of Bethel, or any other idol: so that were there
no prohibition in the Text against a popular reformation to conclude it sinful
for want of obedience, yet, since there is no precept nor example for it, none
that will not throw away both justice and modesty, can pretend it to be a work
of Religion and righteousness, unless there be a Religion and Righteousness
without, or (to speak more plainly and more truly, both together) against the
Text. And as it was before Christ's time, so ever since, (till of late years)
there was the same Supreme in Church and Commonwealth, where the Commonwealth
was Christian: according to that golden rule of Theodosius (in the Acts of the
first Ephesine Council, sacra ad Cyrillum,) (...), You must know that the
Church and the Commonwealth are so knit together, that both do make but one
body; and therefore can admit but one head: and when the Donatists in S.
Augustines time thought much that the Civil magistrate should interpose in
matters of Religion, the good Father, (Epist. 50.) alleges the text against
them, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, serve the Lord with
fear; and gives this gloss upon it: Aliter Rex Domino servit quia homo est,
Aliter quia etiam and Rex est: Quia homo est ei servit vivendo sideliter; quia
vero etiam Rex est servit, leges justa praecipientes, and contraria prohiben'es
convenienti vigore sanciendo; sic servivit Hezekias, lucos and templa idolorum,
and excelsa destruendo, etc. A King serves God otherwise as he is a man, and
otherwise as he is a King; as a man he serves him by living faithfully; but as
a King he serves him by making and executing pious laws to propagate and defend
his service; so did Hezekias, so did Josias serve him; nay so did the King of
Nineveh serve him, in commanding a fast upon Jonahs preaching; so did Darius
serve him, in allowing Daniel to break the image, and casting his enemies into
the lions den; so did Nabuchodonosor serve him, forbidding his subjects to
blaspheme his Name: In hoc ergo serviunt Reges Domino in quantum sunt Reges,
quum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi Reges. Then do
Kings serve God as Kings, when they do those things for his service which none
can lawfully do but Kings: This (says he) could not be in the Apostles times,
when the Kings of the earth did stand up, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and his Christ; but now that text is fulfilled, all the Kings
of the earth shall worship him, Quis mente sobrius Regibus dicit, nolite curare
in regno vestro, etc. Who but a mad man will say to Kings, Do not you look
after the Church, what is it to you, whether the people be Religious or
sacrilegious? and again, Epist. 48. he answers the same objection concerning
the Apostles times, and since their times till some late centuries of years;
It Is most evident, that Christian Kings and Emperors did call all the general
councils, confirm their canons, and order the chief matters of Religion;
Eusebius goes so far as to say that holidays were appointed by the Emperor
Constantine, (Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 4. and that himself did once say to
the Bishops, when he had invited them to a feast, (...), You are appointed
Bishops, or Overseers of Gods service within the Church, but without the Church
God has appointed me to be a Bishop; you must perform the Divine Service, but
I must see it performed.

The like is evident concerning all the ancient Councils.

The first general Council was called by Constantine, and he gives this reason
for it, because it much concerned him to see that truth and peace ((...))
should be preserved in the Church.

The second was called by Theodosius the first, and the Fathers of that Council
in their (...) to the Emperor, do first make this profession, that they were
gathered together by his writ, [(...)] and then make this petition, that their
decrees might be confirmed by his authority: [(...).]

The third, by Theodosius the second, and Valentinian; The Monks petition them,
not to neglect the Church of God adulterated by Heretics, [(...)] but to call
a Council to suppress them: and the Council it self professes they were
gathered together by the Emperors Edict [(...)] calling them for their pains,
Most Relgious Emperors, Lovers of Christ and beloved of God; (Democratical
frenzy had not yet so poisoned Religion, as to teach Churchmen to speak
irreverently of Kings, much less to act disobediently against them) and Pope
Celestine in his Epistle to Theodosius tells him plainly, Major vobis fidei
causa debet esse quam regni; ampliusque pro pace Ecclesiarum clementia vestra
debet esse sollicita, quam pro omnium securitate terrarum. You ought ('it is not
courtesy, but duty) You ought (says he) to set a higher estimation upon your
faith, then upon your Crown; and to be more sollicitous for the peace of the
Church, then for the peace of your kingdom; and he gives an irresistible reason
for this undeniable truth, Pro vestri enim imperii salute geritur, quicquid pro
quiet Ecclesiae vel sanctae Religionis reverentia laboratur; for the same
consultations which establish peace and purity in the Church, do establish
peace and safety in the Commonwealth

The fourth general Council was called by the Emperor Martian, [(...)] are the
words of the Fathers in the second Action; and in the sixth Action, they call
him plainly a Defender of the Faith, a new Constantine, a new David, nay a new
Paul too. [(...)] They thought a Religious King in some sort equal to an
Apostle, though not for preaching the Gospel, yet for propagating it; much like
unto that gloss of Aben-Ezra, upon Lam. 2. 6. The Priest is to teach the law,
and the King is to defend the law, (...) and the law is committed to them both.

The fifth general Council was called by Justinian, and the Bishops with one
acclamation say unto him, Zizania tu ejecisti, Ecclesias tu emendasti, (in
collat. 4. ad sinem) it is you have thrown out the tares, it is you have reformed
the Church; and himself in his form sent to the Council to be read before they
opened the Synod, says, he called this Council as his Predecessors had the
other before him; Constantine that of Nice; Theodosius the first, that of
Constantinople; Theodosius the second, that of Ephesus; and Martian, that of
Chalcedon; and says, that Constantine, Theodosius and Martian, did very much
assist the Bishops in their several Councils for the recovering either of the
verity, or unity of the Church.

The sixth general Council was called by Constantinus Pogonatus: his own Edict
directed to Pope Domnus, (but by reason of his decease delivered to Agatho)
professes as much; wherein he requires him to send some of his Church, (not
only (...), but (...)) and gives this reason why he requires it, ((...)) We
were ordained and appointed (of God) to preserve the faith holy and incorrupt
as we received it; the Pope will now tell the Emperor so, sed non fuit sic ab
initio, from the beginning it was not thus; no nor in many hundreds of years
after; and in the sixteenth Action of this Council, the acclamations of the
Bishops to the Emperor at first calling him Another Constantine, another
Martian, another Theodosius, another Justinian, are a proof beyond exception
(for no History is so irrefragable as the Acts of a Council) that those
Emperors had called the forementioned Councils; and the petitions at last of
the same Bishops; praying for him as the Defender of the Orthodox Religion, as
the bulwark of the Church, and as the Defender of the Faith, cannot but assure
us that they thought it the Emperors duty to call those Councils, because they
thought them bound to defend the Faith, and to protect the Church: [(...)] You
see the title of Defender of the Faith to a King, is of much greater antiquity
then our Henry the eight, as well as the reason of it: and so many several laws
in the Code and in the Novels of the Catholic Faith, of the Sacraments, of
Churches, of Bishops, of Synods, of Heretics, will be an evidence to the
worlds end of the Supremacy of Kings in causes Ecclesiastical, no less then
those other titles in the institutes and digests that concern liberty and
property, and the affairs of this world, will be an invincible evidence of
their Supremacy in civil causes.

But I may not insist longer upon this Argument, such kind of quotations being
fitter for the school then for the pulpit; I will only add this one more from
Pope Adrian's own mouth, to Charles the Great of France; whom he calls
Spiritualem Compatrem, that is, either his Spiritual Godfather, for his
patronage and care over his Person; or, his Fellow-Father in spirituals, for
his jurisdiction and government over the Church; and he labors to give him
such punctual satisfaction in all particulars concerning the second Nicene
Council; as if he feared that of Franckford called by Charles, would (as indeed
it did) over balance that of Nice procured by himself, no less in truth, then
it did in authority: but we think his Compater to his Lord and Master a little
too high, though his Successors will not stoop so low: for as we allow the
Supreme no superior, so we must allow him no equal, which is my second
conclusion;

No person but is inferior to him in power: as no power but is inferior to
his in causes, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, so no person or persons whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, but is and are inferior to him in power: we
understand not that Singulis major and Universis minor; or if we understand it,
think, that Omnis anima speaks as well Universis as Singulis, and therefore not
only one and one by himself, but also one and all Subjects together, all are
inferior to their Sovereign, because they are all bound to submit unto him:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. Their convening
together does as much take off their souls, as it does their subjection; (...)
and (...) can never agree, but the (...) is joined with the universis in the
text. [(...)] therefore of them also no less then of single persons must the
(...) in the next verse be necessarily understood: Whosoever resists, or How
many soever resist, both alike are comprehended in [They that resist,] and
[they shall receive to themselves damnation.] The word here used (...),
subordinetur; let every soul be subordinate, a word that more particularly
points at the Ordines regni in the very signification of it, because they can
never want power to make resistance, and seldom want chaplains that encourage
them to make it; but Ordines sunt ordinandi and subordinandi, or else Ordines
will be Confusiones; Orders must be ordered and subordinate, or though called
States yet will be Ruins, though called Orders will turn Confusions, both of
the text and of the kingdom: and certainly the reasons alleged by S. Paul as
equally concern Ordines regni as other Subjects, and those as well all, as
some, Universos as well as Singulos.

First, Gods ordinance, which may no more be rejected by all, then by some, by
all together then by single persons in particular.

Secondly, Damnation, which may be incurred by all, as well as by some; by a
Parliament, as well as by Private Gentlemen. It Is true, the King may not be so
great a terror to all as to some; because all joining together may not be
afraid of his power; What then? yet I hope all have consciences as well as
some; and though happily it may not be said of the all, of the whole kingdom,
Ye must needs be subject for wrath, because all subjects holding together need
not fear their Kings wrath; yet it may and must be said of them all, Ye must
needs be subject for Conscience sake (as it is in the first verse) For be they
never so many that combine together, that will give no satisfaction to the
Conscience, in regard of it self, nor release in regard of God: and yet even
this very objection is sufficiently answered in the verse before, in that he is
said, To bear the sword as the Minister of God, and therefore, Not to bear the
sword in vain: For though happily, (or rather unhappily) in regard of his
Person, he may bear the sword in vain, and perish under it, yet in regard of
his office, he cannot; for so he is the Minister of God, and consequently a
revenger of wrath, that cannot fail of his revenge, (...), says Epiph. Haer.
40. adversus Archontichos, He has from God the right of the sword, (not from
any other) and he has it for revenge. Would to God those men who follow these
Heretics in multiplying powers and principalities, though not in heaven, yet
in earth, (and in some other things too; for these Archontici did abhor
baptism, and slight the Communion, (...), Epiph. ibid.) I say, would those men
who follow these Heretics in this gross opinion, would likewise seriously go
along with this learned Father in his solid confutation, there would never
again be any cavilling disputes upon the 13 to the Romans. His confutation in
brief, is this; You Archontici think by multiplying powers in heaven, to
overthrow the dominion and power of one God, but indeed you rather establish
it: For if in earth there may be so many principalities and powers in one
kingdom, all subject, not repugnant to one King, then much more so in heaven,
(...), In every kingdom upon earth there are many principalities, but they are
all under one King: Nothing can be more plainly spoken to set up Ordines Regni,
powers and principalities in kingdoms, and yet not to set them up against, much
less above their King. And this may serve to prove, That no person or persons
Civil, but is and are inferior to him in power: It now remains that we prove
the same of the Ecclesiastical: And we must still have recourse to St Paul's
Every soul, Romans 13. 1. where St Chrysostoms gloss is most irrefragable, (...),
etc. it is manifest that he requires this subjection of all, not only secular
men, (whom he calls (...), as looking chiefly after the affairs of this life)
but also spiritual men, Priests and Monks, because he says, Every soul; though
you be an Apostle, or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or whatever else, you must
needs be subject, (...), for subjection does in no kind impair Religion, so St
Chrysostom. Subjection does not impair Religion, and why then should Religion
seek to impair subjection, and that not only in Babylon, but also in
Jerusalem; unless this impairing of subjection has made it lately become
Babylon. Most admirable is that public and open profession of all the Fathers
in the fourth Council of Constantinople, (being the eight general in account)
to their Emperor Basilius, in the ninth Action, (...). We know very well, O
Emperor, that there are Arch-Prelates and Prelates, and Abbots, and Priests,
and Monks in your Dominions, and that you are the Prince and President, or
Governor of them all: but because these testimonies of the Greek Church, may
be thought of less validity in this case, which concerns the pretended
Supremacy of the Church, we will add a testimony of their own writers, and
that shall be Saint Bernards, (which if true concerning the Archbishops
examption from Papal, much more true concerning his or the Popes exemption from
Regal power; for that is the power alone that bears the sword, of which the
Apostle speaks, Romans 13. 4.) Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere (Epist.
42. ad Archiepisc. Senon.) He that upon the Apostles words will come with an
exception, must come with a deception. Nay more then their own writers, a
testimony of their own Popes, Nec animam Papae excipit, he excepts not so much
as the soul of the Pope, says Aeneas Silvius, who was himself a Pope: (in
gestis Council. Basil.) A Pope indeed, but so a Pope, that he may well shame not
only Papists, but also Protestants; as some of their late principles and
practices have been; for never since Christ's time was such a notorious scandal
given to the Church of Christ by Churchmen; as has been of late by some who
would be thought the best of Protestants, but in this have showed themselves
the worst of Christians: that a whole Company of Divines should so forget, if
not renounce the Supremacy and Allegiance due to their King (for which he had
the Oath of God, and their own multiplied oaths) as to consult of Religion in
his Dominions without his consent, to change that Religion without his
authority, and as much (as in them lay) to force him to change it against his
Conscience!

O Dear Jesu, blot this sin out of the monuments of men's memories, that it be
not our lasting shame here; and out of the Book of Gods remembrance, that it be
not their everlasting confusion hereafter. Amen.

(...), (ait Dositheus Graecus, Council. Flor. sess. 25. Addit Ecclesia
Anglicana) (...) will ye, that we betray our Divinity (the Doctrine of our
Church?) I will rather die, then either Latinize or Scotize.

FINIS.
Errata; prior numerus paginam, alter lineam notat.
Page 33. l. 8. leg. the. ibid 13. errors. 40, 9. del. or. 55, 22. the. 109,
9. usum sarum 20, 19. (...) 155, 7. imperfect. 159, 5. admirabiles amores. 285,
2. breasts. 310. 19. salvatur 335, 27. man. 338, 3. (...). 387. ^. pro word
leg. which. 391, 10. (...). 397, 19. leg. in an high.


