NEWS FROM LEICESTER.

Being the Copy of a Letter sent from thence the 6. of June, to Mr. William
Jones Inhabitant in Covent Garden.

Wherein is declared how the Earl of Stamford being sent thither by the
Parliament to see the Militia ordered, coming to the Angel, at Leicester, met
with another Nobleman sent thither by His Majesty for the same purpose.

Likewise a true Relation of a Combat fought between the Earl of Stamford and
the said Nobleman, the 4. of June, 1642. Also the Resolution of the Gentry and
Commonalty of Leicestershire, presented to the said Earl of Stamford by the
Major and Aldermen of the said City.

Another LETTER sent to Mr. SPEAKER, From the Commissioners in the County of
Essex concerning the MILITIA.

June 8. 1642. Ordered to be forthwith Published and Printed.

Henry Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for I. Horton. June 10. 1642.

A Letter sent to Mr* SPEAKER*
Mr. Speaker.
HAving in obedience to the Order of both Houses attended the Lord Lieutenant
of the County of Essex this day to Brent-wood, for the putting of the Ordinance
of the Militia of this County in execution; his Lordship has directed us to
give you an account of the service, so far as it could be yet prosecuted, as
he has himself done to the House of Lords. There were five Companies of the
Ordinary Train bond, this day drawn into the field, being about a 4th part of
the Trained bonds of this County, and all that were directed to meet at this
place, their numbers were full, and their Arms complete, a supply being made
by Volunteers of those Arms that were carried forth of the County, upon the
late expedition for Scorland, and one of the said Companies (being under the
charge ^f Captain Massam) was doubled to the usual proportion, a sixth company
did appear at this place, consisting of about 500 Volunteers, under command of
Captain Barrington, youngest son of Sir Thomas Barrington, The Declaration of
both Houses touching their indemnity, was read in the head of each Company,
and the Captains, Officers and Soldiers being required by the Lord
Lieutenant; to observe such further directions as in pursuance of the said
Ordinance should be hereafter given them in charge by his Lordship, or us his
Deputy-Lievtenants, for the service of his Majesty, and the Parliament, in
defense of the Kingdom, they did unanimously express Resolution so to do,
and in the same cheerfully to spend their lives and Fortunes.

Brent Wood 7. of June, 1642. Thomas Barrington William Masham William Hicks
Mart. Loomley Thomas Cheek. Henry Mildmay. Har. Grimston. Ric. Everard. John
Barrington.


Another Letter from Leicester.
Brother,
IT is no^ unknown unto you and all men what great care and labor the Houses
of Parliament has bestowed in ordering of the Militia and putting the Kingdom
into a posture of defense. Likewise it is not unknown what Plots and Stratagems
the malignant Party have used to prevent their Religious Designs, leaving no
way unattempted that might either conduce to the furtherance of their own
designs, or hindering the perfecting of the other, such has been their
practiced in all ages but at this time especially at Court, wherewith their
flattering and dissembling words, they work more mischief betwixt King and
Parliament, then even their lives can make amends for.

A true Example I will give you of the same which happened lately at Leicester.

Upon the 4 day of this present month the Earl of Stamford, arrived at
Leicester, being s^^t thither by the High Court of Parliament to dispose and
order the Militia, but coming to the Angel where ^e intended to l^^e, there
met him a Lord sent from the Kings Majesty with Commission under the br^^d
Seal for the same business, which Noble man seeing the Earl demanded the
occasion of his coming thither, withal told him he heard he came to seduce
the Kings Liege-People, withal charging him in his Majesty's name to depart,
as for the Militia he had authority from his Majesty to order it, and he
conceived that they were bound rather to obey him according to his Majesty's
Command, then the Parliament, many other sharp and uncivil words he gave the
said Earl, which so incenst him, he drew his Sword and wished him to depart or
he would make that place too hot for him, the Lord and his ser^nts (...)w, so
did the other, betwixt whom there grew a desperate Combat, but it being Market
day the multitude of people rushing in took the Earl of Stamfords part, and
made the other leave the Town with shame, the people hissing, and calling him
Popish Lord, and many opprobrious words, in which time the Mayor and Aldermen
were assembled, and came to the Angel, where after a large expression of
sorrow for that sad accident, they presented to him a paper wherein was writ
their Resolution, the contents whereof was to this purpose.

1. They resolved in all Lawful Obedience to fulfill his Majesty's just
Commands.

2. They resolved to maintain as far as in them lay, the true Protestant
profession, and according to his Majesty's Command, to execute the Laws
against Recusants.

3. They resolved in all Obedience to submit themselves to the Commands of the
high Court of Parliament, knowing it to be most expedient both for his
Majesty's safety, and the Kingdoms future security, withal manifesting such
hearty Obedience and earnest Zeal to the said Earl, both concerning the
Militia, that the said Earl hardly knew how to give them so great thanks as he
conceived was due for such large expression of their love.

Nevertheless he with a deal of courtesy thanked them and animated them on
to a hasty performance of what they had promised, and withal told them that
he would make known to the high Court of Parliament, from whom they should
receive a grateful acknowledgement as a just reward for all their Service at
which the people gave a general shout crying a Stamford a Stamford with such
joy, that the good Earl was forced to withdraw, tears of joy standing in his
eyes, to see his Countries love and obedience.

This is all that at this time happened only there is great expectation that
on tha^ general training day our numbers will be full, the manner of which
meeting, in my next Letter I will give you notice of till which time I rest.

Your Loving Brother Adam Jones.
From Leicester, June 6. 1642.
FINIS.

