THE ALCORAN OF MAHOMET Translated out of Arabique into French; BY THE Sieur Du
Ryer, Lord of Malezair, and Resident for the King of France, at ALEXANDRIA.

And newly Englished, for the satisfaction of all that desire to look into the
Turkish vanities.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1649.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THere being so many Sects and Heresies banded together against the Truth,
finding that of Mahomet wanting to the Muster, I thought good to bring it to
their Colors, that so viewing thine enemies in their full body, thou may the
better prepare to encounter, and I hope overcome them. It may hapily startle
thee, to find him so to speak English, as if he had made some Conquest on the
Nation, but thou will soon reject that fear, if thou consider that this his
Alcoran, (the Groundwork of the Turkish Religion) has been already translated
into almost all Languages in Christendom, (at least, the most general, as the
Latin, Italian, French, etc.) yet never gained any Proselyte, where the Sword,
its most forcible, and strongest argument has not prevailed: And indeed the
greatest Doctors of their Religion have never alleged any thing for the truth
thereof; but the success of their wars, and greatness of their Empire, then
which nothing is more fallacious: for that which both in former, and these
latter Ages has been common to the bad with the good, cannot be a certain
evidence of the justice of a Cause, or the truth of Religion.

Thou shall find it of so rude, and incongruous ^ composure, so fa^ced with
contradictions, obscene speeches, and ridiculous fables, that some modest, and
more rational Mahometans have thus excused it, that their Prophet wrote an
hundred and twenty thousand sayings, whereof three thousand only are good the
residue (as the impossibility of the Moons falling into his sleeve, the
Conversion and Salvation of the Devils, and the like) are false and ridiculous.
Yet is the whole esteemed so sacred, that upon the Cover thereof is inscribed
-- Let none touch it but he who is clean. Nor are the vulgar permitted to read
it, but live and die in an implicit faith of what their Priests deliver; which
indeed (as faith the learned Grotius) is a manifest argument of its iniquity:
Grotius de ver. Re^. Christ.
For that merchandise may justly be suspected* which will not be sold, unless
unseen: and though all men are not alike perspicacious in the knowledge, and
discer^nig of things, some by arrogance, and vain conceit of themselves, others
by affection; Some by custom, being drawn into error: yet should we belive
that the way to eternal life cannot not be understood by them, who without any
respect of profit or preferment* seek it, submitting themselves, withal they
have, to God, imploring his assistance, we should sin against his infinite
goodness. Therefore (Christian Reader) though some, conscious of their own
instability in Religion, and of theirs (too like Turks in this) whose
prosperity and opinions they follow, were unwilling this should see the Press,
yet am I confident, if thou have been so true a votary to orthodox Religion, as
to keep thy self untainted of their follies: this shall not hurt thee: And as
for those of that Batch, having once abandoned the Sun of the Gospel, I believe
they will wander as far into utter darkness, by following strange lights, as
by this Ignis Fatuus of the Alcoran. Such as it is, I present ^o thee, having
taken the pains only to translate it ^ut of French, not doubting, though it
has been a ^oyson, that has infected a very great, but most unsound part of
the universe, it may prove an Antidote, to confirm in thee the health of
Christianity.

THE FRENCH EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe Book is a long conference of God, the Angels* and Mahomet, which that
false Prophet very grossly invented; sometimes he introduces God* who speaks
to him, and teaches him his Law* then an Angel, anon the Prophets, and
frequently makes God to speak in the plural, in a style that is not ordinary.
He declaimeth against such as worship Idols, particularly against the
Inhabitants of the City of Mecca, and against the The Coreis were a powerful
family in Arabia, in Mahomets time.
Coreis, who were enemies to his design. He entitled this book the Alcoran,
as one would say, the Collection o^ Precepts: He likewise termed it El Forcan,
that is that distinguishes good from evil: He divided i^ into many Chapters,
to which he gave what inscription he thought good: he most commonly intituleth
them with words that are in their first line without regard to the matter they
treat of, an^ speaks little of their Inscription; He divided in to many
signs, or Verses, that contain his ordinances and fables, without observation
either of the consequence, or connection of the discourse, which is the cause
that thou shall find in this Book a multitude of incongruous pieces, and diverse
repetitions of the same things. It has been expounded by many Mohammedan
Doctors, their exposition being as ridiculous as the Text; They affirm the
original of the Alcoran to be written upon a Table kept in Heaven, that the
Angel Gabriel brought this Copy to Mahomet* who could neither write nor read,
and style him Prophet, or Apostle, in honor. Thou shall find at beginning of
some Chapters letters of the Arabique Alphabet, which some men will not
expound; They fear to utter things that may displease their false Prophet:
Most of their Doctors affirm those Letters to be the first letters of the Names
of God. Thou shall find the exposition in this version; Thou will wonder that
such absurdities have infected the best part of the world, and wilt a vouch,
that the knowledge of what is contained in this Book, will render that Law
contemptible.

A Summary of the Religion of the TURKS.
THe Turks believe one sole God, in one sole Person, Creator of heaven and
earth, the rewarder of the good, and punisher of the wicked; who has created
Paradise for the recompense of the righteous, and Hell for the last punishment
of crimes. They believe that Mahomet was a very great Prophet, whom God sent
into the world to teach men the way of salvation, and call themselves
Musulma^s, that is to say, recommended to God, or saved.

They believe the Decalogue of Moses, and are obliged to observe it; they
celebrate Friday as the Christians Sunday, that day they assemble in Temples at
noon to pray.

They are obliged to pray five times a day, viz. in the morning, at noon, at
the evening, when the Sun sets, and an hour within night.

They fast the month, or moon, which they call Ramazan; during this month, they
neither drink nor eat all the day, until the Sun be set, but in the night
drink and eat, according to their appetites, flesh and fish, except the flesh
of swine, and wine, that is at all times forbidden them; after this fast they
have the feast of great Bairan, as the Christians Easter after Lent. They are
great founders of Temples, and Hospitals, and are obliged to give to the poor
the first day of the year, the tithe of what they have gained during the
preceding year.

They believe, that after being well washed, saying some prayer appropriate to
that Ceremony; they have also the soul purified from all filthiness and sin,
which is the cause that they wash and bathe often, especially before they pray.

They have no Sacrament, but Circumcision; they cause their children to be
circumcised at the age of seven or eight years; and when they can pronounce
these words, La ^^^a ill^ a^ha Mehemet rasoul allha, that is, There is but one
God, Mahomet is his Prophet and Apostle; this is their profession of Faith;
nevertheless there is no mention of Circumcision in all the Alcoran; they say
they observe it in imitation of Abraham, whose Law is recommended to them by
Mahomet: they believe that the Alcoran was brought to him at several times by
the Angel Gabriel, in the City of Mecca, and that of Medina, because the Jews
and Christians had altered the holy Scriptures, and the Law of God.

They are permitted to have four wives, married at the same time, and as many
Concubines as they are able to maintain.

They can put away their wives when they think fit, paying them what they
promised them in contract of marriage, and marry again at their pleasure; but
the women are bound to tarry until they are assured that they a^^^ ^ith child
before they marry again; and their (...) ^^^re obliged to keep, and take the
care of the (...) The children which they have by their slaves (...) ^^^^rently
esteemed with those of their wives, and are a^ held as legitimate.

They have Temples, Colleges, and Hospitalls well revenued; they have covents
of Religious, that live exemplarily; obey their Superiors without
contradiction, and dance after the sound of Flutes and other instruments when
they make their prayers.

They have moreover another sort of Religious Vagabonds through the world,
clothed like fools of that Country; they often go naked, and cut their skin in
many places, are held to be holy persons, and live by alms, which are never
refused them; both the one and the other sort of Religious are called Dervis,
they are known by their habit, and can retire and marry when they please.

They deny Jesus Christ to be God, or the Son of God; neither believe they in
the holy Trinity: they say that Jesus Christ was a great Prophet, born of the
Virgin Mary, a Virgin both before and after her delivery; that he was conceived
by divine inspiration, or by a divine breath, without a father, as Adam was
created without a mother; that he was not crucified, that God took him into
heaven, and that he shall come again on earth at the end of the world to
confirm the Law of Mahomet; they likewise affirm that the Jews thinking to
crucify Jesus Christ, crucified a man among them that resembled him.

They pray to God for the Dead, they invoke their Saints, A great question
among Mahometans.
of whom they have a large Legend, nevertheless they believe not Purgatory; and
many among them imagine that the soul and body remain together in the grave
until the day of Judgment.

They have Mecca and Medina, that are two Cities of Arabia, in great
veneration, because Mahomet was born at Mecca, and buried at Medina: they make
thither great pilgrimages, and believe that Land to be Holy: They bear likewise
singular respect to the City of (...), for that it has been the Birthplace,
and ha^^^ (...) ^f many Prophets.

They use no Clocks; at the hour of the^^ ^^^rs their Priests ascend the
highest part of the Tower, that is in a corner of the Temple, and with a loud
voice call the people to prayer, singing prayers, composed for that purpose.

WE the Consuls, Governors, Protectors, and Defenders of the Privileges,
Freedoms, and Liberties of the City of Marseillis; do certify, and attest to
all to whom it shall appertain, that Mr. Andrew du Ryer, Lord of Malezair,
Gentleman in Ordinary of the Kings Chamber, and heretofore Consul to his
Majesty in Egypt, has executed the charge for the said Consulship like a man
of honesty and honor; no complaint having been made at any time, or his
administration, or deportment during the time of his abode there, and that he
exercised that office; Neither was any complaint ever made of the said Mr. du
Ryer, during the time he sojourned at Constantinople for the service of his
Majesty; but all the Captains and Officers of Merchant Vessels, and of others
that negotiated in the same parts, received of him all favor as in matters
that concerned them, as in affairs that did relate to the service of his
Majesty, and the advantage of his Subjects traffic: in testimony of which,
We have drawn and signed these presents, and have put and affixed to them, the
Seal, and accustomed Arms of this City.

At Marseillis the 12. day of Feb. 1633. De Bourgogne, Consul. I. Savornin,
Consul. Meinardet, Consul. By the said Consuls Boet.

To Mr. DU RYER, Lord of Malezair, Gentleman in Ordinary of the Kings Chamber
at Constantinople.
SIR,
HAving heard by the report of many Merchants of this City, the good offices
that you have daily performed toward them of our Nation, and particularly our
fellow Citizens, who all unanimously much commend your assection, and singular
care to protect and defend them; We thought our duty to return you by these
lines, a thousand thanks, and that the more affection, for that your courtesy,
and not their merits, carried you to all those good offices, of which they and
we shall ever keep a perpetual memory, to render you any acknowledgement when
occasion shall be offered, and give you a testimony by our services, that you
have not cast your seed upon barren ground: In the mean time, Sir, we beseech
you, be pleased to continue to us the honor of your friendship, and effects of
your favor, as we shall desire in all emergent occasion to testify that we
are really,

Sir, Your most affectionate Servant, the Consuls, Governors of the City of
Marseillis. Monthouliau, Francis Nappolon, Du Pont.
From Marseillis this 24. of August 1632.
A Translation of the Command of the grand Seignior, concerning Mr. Malezair.
ILlustrious and Excellent Commanders, refuge of the great Triumphant, Eminent,
Glorious, and Honorable Lords, endued with the special graces of God,
Bashaws* or Viceroys, Beyes, or Governors, that are upon the roads of our most
August Port to the Realm of France, God perpetuate your glory, just Judges of
the Nusulmans; Minerals of Virtue and Knowledge, that are upon the road of our
most August Port to the Realm of France, God increase your virtues, Honorable
and trusty Governors, Captains of Frontires and Castles, Captains and Patrons
of Galleys and Vessels, Customers that are upon the road of our most August
Port to the Realm of France, God augment your Honors and glory. When this most
August command shall come to you, know, that the Lord of Ryer* a Gentleman of
France, is sent from us into France for many important affairs; when he shall
arrive, going and coming to the places of your command, by sea, or by land in
our Ports, our Cities under our Castles, and in any other place whatsoever, I
command you to receive with all affection, and good reception, and suffer no
displeasure to be done to him, directly, or indirectly. You shall cause to be
given to him whatsoever shall be necessary for him in paying, and shall
facilitate with your whole power his passage, with his two servants, his
coffers* and baggage; and when he shall have performed in France what has
been commanded him, and shall return to our most August Port* you shall do in
like manner, and shall be careful not to violate this our High command, or
capitulations; Thus know him, and having seen these my most August command, you
shall leave it in his hands* and shall give full and entire credit to this my
last illustrious mark.

Given at Constantinople the last day of the month of Diel Heget, 1041. Sealed
above with the Mark, or the Seal of the grand Seignior, Amurat Sultan, and
Signed at Base-Hussein.

A TABLE.
THe Chapter of the Preface, containing seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio.
1 Chapter. 2. The Chapter of the Cow, containing Two hundred fourscore and
seven Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 3. The Chapter of the Lineage of
Joachim, containing Two hundred Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 30 Chapter.
4. The Chapter of women, containing One hundred and seventy Verses, written at
Medina. Folio. 47 Chapter. 5. The Chapter of the Table, containing One hundred,
and twenty Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 64 Chapter. 6. The Chapter of
Gratifications, containing One hundred sixty and fifteen Verses, written at
Medina. Folio. 77 Chapter. 7. The Chapter of Prisons, containing One hundred
and six Vers^s, written at Mecca. Folio. 92 Chapter. 8. The Chapter of the
Spoil, containing Seventy and five Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 108
Chapter. 9. The Chapter of Conversion, containing One hundred twenty and seven
Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 115 Chapter. 10. The Chapter of Jonas,
containing One hundred and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 128 Chapter.
11. The Chapter of Hod, containing One hundred twenty and three Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 136 Chapter. 12. The Chapter of Joseph, containing One hundred
and thirteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 164 Chapter. 13. The Chapter of
Thunder, containing Forty and three Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 154
Chapter. 14. The Chapter of Abraham, containing Fifty Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 158 Chapter. 15. The Chapter of Hegir, containing Seventy and seven
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 162 Chapter. 16. The Chapter of the Be,
containing One hundred and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 165 Chapter.
17. The Chapter of the Voyage by night, containing One hundred and eleven
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 173 Chapter. 18. The Chapter of the Cave,
containing one hundred and ten Verses-written at Mecca. Folio. 181 Chapter. 19.
The Chapter of Mary, containing Fru^score and eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 188 Chapter. 20. The Chapter of Beatitude, and of Hell,
containing One hundred and thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 193 Chapter.
21. The Chapter of the Prophets, containing One hundred and twelve Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 200 Chapter. 22. The Chapter of Pilgrimage, containing
Seventy and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 203 Chapter. 23. The Chapter
of True-believers, containing One hundred and eighteed Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 209 Chapter. 24. The Chapter of Light, containing Seventy and
four Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 214 Chapter. 25. The Chapter of the
Alcoran, containing Seventy and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 221
Chapter. 26. The Chapter of Poets, containing One hundred twenty and seven
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 224 Chapter. 27. The Chapter of the Pismire,
containing Fourscore and thirteen Verses, writtrn at Mecca. Folio. 231 Chapter.
28. The Chapter of History, containing Fourscore and eight Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 237 Chapter. 29. The Chapter of the Spider, containing Sixty and
nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 244 Chapter. 30. The Chapter of the
Grecians, containing Sixty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 248 Chapter. 31.
The Chapter of Locman, containing Thirty and four Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 252 Chapter. 32. The Chapter of Worship, containing One hundred and
thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 255 Chapter. 33. The Chapter of Bands,
and Troops of Soldiers, containing Fourscore and seven Verses, written at
Medina. Folio. 257 Chapter. 34. The Chapter of Saba, containing Fifty and four
Verses, Written at Mecca. Folio. 263 Chapter. 35. The Chapter of the Creator,
containing Forty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 267 Chapter. 36.
The Chapter entitled, O man, containing Fourscore and eight Verses, wrirten at
Mecca. Folio. 271 Chapter. 37. The Chapter of Orders, containing Fourscore
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 275 Chapter. 38. The Chapter of Truth,
containing Fourscore and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 280 Chapter.
39. The Chapter of Troops, containing Seventy and five Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 284 Chapter. 40. The Chapter of the True-believers, containing
Eighty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 289 Chapter. 41. The Chapter
of Exposi^ion, containing Fifty and four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 295
Chapter. 42. The Chapter of Counsel, containing Fifty and three Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 299 Chapter. 43 The Chapter of Ornament, containing Eighty and
nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 303 Chapter. 44. The Chapter of Smoke,
containing Fifty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 307 Chapter. 45. The
Chapter of Genuflexion or Knee bowing, containing Fifty and nine Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 310 Chapter. 46. The Chapter of Hecaf, containing
Thirty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 312 Chapter. 47. The Chapter
of the Combat, containing Fourscore and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio.
316 Chapter. 48. The Chapter of Conquest, containing Twenty and nine Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 319 Chapter. 49. The Chapter of Enclosures, containing
Eighteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 322 Chapter. 50. The Chapter of the
Thing Judged, containing Forty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 324
Chapter. 51. The Chapter of the Things dispersed, containing Sixty Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 326 Chapter. 52. The Chapter of the Mountain,
containing Thirty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 328 Chapter. 53.
The Chapter of the Star, containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 330
Chapter. 54. The Chapter of the Moon, containing Fifty and five Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 332 Chapter. 55. The Chapter of the Merciful, containing
Eighteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 384 Chapter. 56. The Chapter of
Judgment, containing Fourscore and nineteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio.
336 Chapter. 57. The Chapter of iron, containing Twenty and nine Verses,
written at Medina. Folio. 338 Chapter. 58. The Chapter of the Dispute,
containing Twenty and two Verses, written at Medina. Folio 341 Chapter. 59. The
Chapter of Exile, containing Twenty and four Verses, written at Medina. Folio
344 Chapter. 60. The Chapter of Trial, containing Eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 346 Chapter. 61. The Chapter of Array, containing Fourteen Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio 348 Chapter. 62. The Chapter of the Assembly,
containing Eleven Verses, written at Medina. Folio 349 Chapter. 63. The Chapter
of the Wicked, containing twelve Verses, written at Medina. Folio 350 Chapter.
64. The Chapter of Deceit, containing Eighteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio
351 Chapter. 65. The Chapter of Divorce, containing Eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 353 Chapter. 66. The Chapter of Prohibition, containing Twelve
Verses, written at Medina. Folio 354 Chapter. 67. The Chapter of Empire,
containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 356 Chapter. 68. The Chapter
of the Pen, containing Fifty and two Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 358
Chapter. 69. The Chapter of Verification, containing fifty and two Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio 360 Chapter. 70. The Chapter of the Ascent, containing
Forty and four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 361 Chapter. 71. The Chapter
of Noah, containing twenty and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 363
Chapter. 72. The Chapter of Devils, containing Twenty eight Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 364 Chapter. 73. The Chapter of the Fearful, containing twenty
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 366 Chapter. 74. The Chapter of the Wrapped,
containing Fifty and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 367 Chapter. 75. The
Chapter of the Resurrection, containing Forty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio
368 Chapter. 37. The Chapter of Man, containing Thirty Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 369 Chapter. 77. The Chapter of them that are sent, containing
Fifty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 371 Chapter. 78. The Chapter of News,
containing Forty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 372 Chapter. 79. The chapter
of them that take away, containing Forty and six Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio 374 Chapter. 80. The Chapter of the Blind, containing Forty and two
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 375 Chapter. 81. The Chapter of Roundness,
containing Twenty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 376 Chapter. 82. The
Chapter of the opening of Heaven, containing Seventeen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 377 Chapter. 83. The Chapter of them that weigh with false
weights, containing Thirty and six Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 84.
The Chapter of the Cleft, containing Twenty and five Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio 378 Chapter. 85. The Chapter of the Sign Celestial, containing Twenty
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 379 Chapter. 86. The Chapter of Star, or of the
North Star, containing Seventeen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 380 Chapter.
87. The Chapter of the High and Mighty, containing Seventeen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 380 Chapter. 88. The Chapter of the Covering, containing Twenty
and six Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 381 Chapter. 89. The Chapter of the
Morning, containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 382 Chapter. 90. The
Chapter of the City, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 383
Chapter. 91. The Chapter of the Sun, containing Fifteen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio 384 Chapter. 92. The Chapter of Night, containing Twenty Verses,
written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 93. The Chapter of the Sun rising, containing
Ten Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 385 Chapter. 94. The Chapter of Joy,
containing Eight Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 95. The Chapter of
the Fig, containing Eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 386 Chapter. 96. The
Chapter of Blood congealed, containing Seventeen Verses, written at Mecca.
ibid. Chapter. 97. The Chapte^ of ^lory or Power, containing Five Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio 387 Chapter. 98. The Chap^er of Instruction, containing
Eight Verses, written at Medina. ibid. Chapter. 99. The Chap^er of the
Ear^hquake, containing Eight Verses, written at Medina. Folio 388 Chapter. 100.
The Chap^e^ of Horses, containing Eleven Verses, w^itten at Mecca and Medina.
ib^d. Chapter. 101. The Chapter of Aff^iction, containing Eleven Verses,
writ^en at Mecca. Folio 389 Chapter. 102. The Chapter of Abundance, containing
Eight Verses, written at M^cca. ibid. Chapter. 103. The Chapter of the Evening.
390 Chapter. 104. The Chapter of Persecution, containing seven Verses, w^i^ten
at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 105. The Chapter of Elephanes, containing Five Verses,
written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 106. The Chapter o^ Coreis, containing Four
Verses writ^e^ at Mecca. Folio 391 Chapter. 107. The Chapter of the Law,
containing Seven Verses, written a^ Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 108. The Chapter of
Affluence, containing Three Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 109. The
Chapter of Infidels, containing Six Verses, written at Mecca. Folio 392
Chapter. 110. The Chapter of Protection, containing Four Verses, written at
Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 111. The Chapter of the Co^d of Palm, containing Eleven
Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 112. The Chapter of Salva^ion,
containing Four Verses, Written at Mecca. Folio 393 Chapter. 113. The Chap^er
of Separation, containing Five Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. Chapter. 114.
The Chapter of the People, containing Six Verses, written at Mecca. ibid. The
Life and Death of Mahomet. A needful Caveat or Admonition to the Reader.
THE ALCORAN OF MAHOMET.
CHAP. I. The Chapter of the Preface, containing seven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful; Praised be God, gracious and
merciful: King of the Day of Judgment. It is thee whom we adore; it is from
thee we require help. Gu^de us in the right way, in the way of them that thou
have gratified; against whom thou have not been displeased, and we shall not be
misled.

CHAP. II. The Chapter of the Cow* con^aining ^wo hundred fou^scor^ and seven
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. See Erpennius his Grammar.
I am the most wise God. There is no Error in th^s Book; it guides into the
right w^y, those that-are r^ghteous, who believe what they see not, who make
their P^ayers with affection, and dispense in Alms, a part of the Goods that we
have given them. Such as believe the things that are inspired into thee, in
those that have been Preached before thee, and at the end of the world are not
ignorant they are guided by their Lord, and shall be blessed. Misery is upon
unbelievers. Whether thou reprove them, or do not reprove them, they will not
be converted, God has shut up their heart, their ears and eyes, and they shall
suffer great torments. See the Explication of Gelaldin.
Many men say, we believe in God, and the Day of Judgment, and do not believe;
they think to deceive God, and them that believe in God; certainly they deceive
themselves, and know it not. God will augment the infirmity which they have in
their heart, and they shall undergo the rigors of an infinite pain, by reason
of their lying. When it was said to them; Pollute not the earth, they said, We
are true observers of the Law of God; notwithstanding, they were they that
polluted the earth, but they knew it not. When it was said to them, Believe ye
as the world believes? They said, Shall we believe as fools believe? See
Gelaldin.
they themselves are fools, and know it not. When they met with such as believe
in God, they said, we believe as you do: And when they returned toward the
devils, their companions, they said, We believe as you, and mock at those men:
Certainly God mocketh them, and continues them in their Errors, to their
confusion. They that have purchased Error, for the right way, have gained
nothing in their commerce, and are not well directed; they are like to such as
kindled fire, and when it has enlightened what is about them, God has
deprived them of light, and left them in darkness, deaf, dumb, blind, and they
shall never be converted; or as a cloud of Heaven, full of darkness thunder,
and lightning, they stopped their ears with their fingers, by reason of the
noise, and for fear of death; but God sees the unbelievers, he caused
lightning to approach, that ravished from them their sight; they have followed
what appeared to them, and are detained in darkness: But if God had pleased, he
had deprived them, both of hearing, and sight; for he is omnipotent. O People!
worship your Lord, who created you, and all that were before you; it may be,
That you will fear him that has extended the Earth, that raised the Heaven,
and caused Rain to descend; that caused the production of Fruits to enrich you.
Say not, that God has a companion equal to him, because you know the conttary.
If you doubt that I have sent my servant, come, and bring some Chapters like to
the Alcoran, and call to witness the Idols that you adore; if you are good men,
if you have not done it, or cannot perform it, Fear the fire of Hell prepared
for Infid^ls, and Idolaters; and declare to true believers, who do good works,
That they shall enjoy the immense pleasures of Paradise, wherein flow many
Rivers; they shall there find all sorts of fair and savory Fruits, which God
has prepared for them; they shall consider, if they be like to such as they
had before in the world: They shall there have wives, fair, and delicate, and
shall dwell in eternal felicity. God is not ashamed to compare a little The Puny
is a stinking worm, frequently growing in Beds in hot Countries.
Puny to an extreme Greatness: Now, so it is, that true believers know, that it
proceeds from their Lord. The wicked demand, what God does mean by that
comparison? He by this means mis-leadeth, and directs many men; but
mis-leadeth none, but the disobedient. Such as pervert his Testament, and his
Promises; such as retrench his Commandments, and defile the Earth, are damned.
Why will you be impious, seeing that God has given you life after death? He
will cause you to dye, he will raise you again, and you shall all return before
him to be judged. He it is, that created whatever is upon Earth, and ascended
to Heaven, has ordained seven Heavens, knowing all things. Remember to
instruct men, See Kitab el tenoir.
that thy Lord said to his Angels, I would create a Vicar upon Earth; and when
they answered, Will thou there place him that shall defile it, and shed blood,
while we exalt thy Glory, and sanctify thee; I know said he, what you know
not. He taught Ad^^ the names of all things, who discovered them to the Angels,
to whom God said, Declare to me the names of all things that I have created, if
you know them; they replied, Praise is due to thy Divine Majesty, we know
nothing but what thou have taught us, thou alone art knowing and wise. He said
to Adam, Declare to them the names of all things that I have created. After he
had taught them, God said, Did I not tell you, that I knew what is not, neither
in Earth, nor Heaven; and that I understand whatever you make manifest, and
whatever you keep most secret? Remember thou, that we said to the Angels,
Humble your selves before Adam; they all humbled themselves, except the Devil:
He was already proud, and in the number of the wicked. We said unto Adam, Dwell
thou and thy wife in Paradise, and eat there what thou likest, but approach not
that Tree, lest thou be in the number of the unjust. The Devil made them to
sin, and depart from the Grace in which they were; then we said to them,
Descend you enemies one to another, you shall have a dwelling upon Earth, and
goods wherewith to live for a time. Adam begged pardon for his fault of his
Lord, he pardoned him, because he is gracious and merciful, and said, Descend,
and go all of you out of Paradise; there shall hereafter come to you, a guide
from me. Such as shall follow him, shall be delivered from fear and affl^ction
(at the day of Judgment;) such as shall be impious, and conceal my
Commandments, The Alcoran in the old and new Testament.
shall burn eternally in the fire of Hell. O children of Is^a^l, remember the
Grace I have done you, I will satisfy my Promises, perform yours, fear me, and
believe in what I have sent from Heaven, confirming what was before taught you;
be not the first impious, and forsake not my Law at any rate; fear me, and
cover not the Truth with a lie, neither willingly conceal it: Make your prayers
at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and worship your Lord with them that adore
him. Will you command people that have no care of their souls, to do good? Will
you meditate upon Scripture, without observing it? Entreat for succor with
patience, and with prayers they abound not, but in them that are obedient, that
believe they shall one day behold their Lord, and shall return before him to be
judged. O children of ^sra^l, call to mind my favors. I have preferred you to
all the world; fear the day, wherein one Soul shall not be chastised for
another; when prayer shall not be heard, neither ransom succors nor prot^ct^on
to be found for the wicked. Remember, that we delivered you from the hands of
Phar^oh, who affl^cted you through the violence of torments, who murdered your
children, abused your wives; and that your Lord increased your miseries,
because of the enormity of your crimes. Remember, that we divided the Seas to
save you, and that we drowned Pharaohs men in your view; nevertheless, you
worshipped the Calf, when we detained Moses with us forty nights, in which you
were extremely too blame; after this, we pardoned you, it may be that you will
give me thanks. We gave unto Moses the Book, that distinguishes good from
evil; perhaps you will be converted. Remember, that Moses said to his people,
Gelaldin says, the innocent slay the wicked.
You were too blame for having adored the Calf; repent, and be converted to
your Creator: Slay one another, that will be a thing acceptable to God; he will
pardon your crime, he is gracious and merciful. You said, O Moses, we will not
believe thee, for that we see not God; then you were smitten with thunder, We
have pardoned you: See Gelaldin.
you saw your misery with your own eyes: nevethelesse, we raised you after your
death; perhaps you will give me thanks. We covered you with the shadow of
clouds, we caused Manna and Quails to fall upon you, and said, Eat the good
things we have given you. They did us no harm, when they murmured; they
afflicted themselves. We said, Enter into that City, Gelaldin says, it is
Jerusalem See Kitab el tenoir.
and eat therein what shall content you; enter in at the gate, with humility,
and say, Remove our sins from us. I will pardon your offenses, and increase the
Graces of those that are righteous: then the wicked altered their words that
were taught them; but I sent my indignation from Heaven upon them, according to
their demerits. When Moses demanded drink for his people, we said, Smite the
Rock with thy Rod, incontinently there sprung forth twelve Fountains, and every
man knew his place, where to drink: Eat, and drink the good things of God, and
defile not the Earth any more. You said unto Moses, we are not satisfied with
one sort of meat; entreat thy Lord that he give us what the Earth produces,
Beets, Cucumbers, Garlic, Lentils, and Onions; he said, Desire you to change
good for evil? Go down into Egypt, you will there find what you require. They
were beaten with disgrace, and poverty, and returned into the wrath of God, for
that they disobeyed his Commandments, and unjustly slew his Prophets, for
which they were greatly to blame. All those that shall believe Christians, Jews
or Samaritans, such as shall believe in God, at the day of Judgment, and do
good work^s, shall be recompensed by their Lord, See Gelaldin.
and be free from fear, and affl^ction, at the day of the Resurrection, When
we received your promise, to believe in the Old T^stament, we ra^sed a
mountain over you, to over-shadow you, and sa^d, Comprehend with affection,
what we teach you, and remember; perhaps you will fear the fire of Hell, and
disobedience; nevertheless, you have gone astray, without the mercy of your
Lord you shall be in the number of the damned. You know what befell those that
observed not the Sabbath; we said unto them, Be ye abhorred, and despised as
Apes; See Kitab el tenoir.
We left this punishment, as an advertisement to their temporaries and
posterity, and particularly, to be for an example to the true believers.
Remember thou, that Moses said unto the people, God commands you to sacrifice
a Cow. They answered, do thou mock us? He replied, God defend me from being
in the number of the ignorant; they said, Call upon thy Lord, that he instruct
us what Cow that ought to be; he said, it must be a Cow of a middle age,
neither young, nor old, and do what is commanded you; They said, pray unto thy
Lord, that he show us of what color it ought to be. It must, said he, be of a
bright, yellow color, that it may delight the eyes of the beholders. They
said, Invoke thy Lord, that he instruct us, what it ought to resemble, and we
shall (if it please him) be obedient to his Commandments; He said, God
answers you, that it must be a Cow, that never bare the yoke, to till the
earth, neither water the fields, round, and that has never labored, neither
has spot upon her body. They said, thou have now spoken truth; they then
sacrificed her, and it wanted not much, but they had not done it: When you have
slain any one, you are then full of wrath, and become proud; God brings to
light whatever you conceal; We said, smite that dead body with a piece of that
Cow: so God raises again the dead, The Turks believe that a man shall rise
again, being smitten with the tongue of that Cow.
and manifests to you his miracles; it may be you will comprehend them, yet
your hearts are hardened, more obdurate then Rocks; for Rivers flow from Rocks,
when they cleave and appear, or when they fall and overturne by the permission
of his divine Majesty. God is not ignorant of your actions. Do you desire the
Jews should believe you, because many among them write the word of God, and
alter it at pleasure, after they have comprised it? When they meet with true
believers, they say, we believe in God, and being assembled, they say among
themselves, See Bedaci.
have you entertained those true believers, for that God has instructed you,
that they may find no excuse against you at the day of Judgment, before his
divine Majesty? See Gelaldin.
Understand you not that they would excuse themselves upon what you have said
to them? Know they not that God knows whatever they conceal, and what they
bring to light? There be some that know neither to read nor write, that
understand nothing of Scripture, but what they have learned from the lies of
their Doctors, yet they think to be knowing men. Miseries is upon them that
conceal the Scripture in their hands, that alter it, and say, that what they
read proceeds from God to profit any thing thereby. Misery is upon them,
because of what their hands have written; misery is upon them, and upon what
they have gained, in blaspheming against God. They have said, we shall continue
in Fire but a certain number of days: Say unto them, have you capitulated
with God? He will not act against his promises: Will you speak of God what you
know not? Such as have gained ought, and were entangled in the sin of their
gain, shall for ever remain in the flames of Hell; and they that have faith
in God, and do good works, shall eternally enjoy the delights of Paradise.
Remember thou, that we taught the Commandments of the Law, and how we said to
the children of Israel, worship one only God, do good unto your father and
mother, to your allies, orphans and the poor: speak mildely unto the people,
make your prayers at the time appointed, and pay your Tithes; ^^verthelesse
they were disobedient, except some ver^ few am^^g them. When we received the
Commandment of God, and that we said, shed not your blood, neither fo^sake your
houses, you approved it, your selves are w^tne^ses; Nevertheless you slew
many, and constrained a great number to desert their habitation, you assisted
each other in injustice, and impiety. If slaves have recourse to you you shall
redeem them, their deliverance is appointe^ you: Do you believe one part of
the Scripture to abjun^ the other? The reward of any of you that shall do this
thin^ is ignominy in this world, and to be precipitated into the most grievous
torments of H^ll at the day of judgment God is not ignorant of your actions.
Such as purchase the life of the world, to quit Paradise, shall not be eased in
their miseries and be utterly deprived of succors. Certainly, we gave the Law
to Moses and after him sent many Prophets; We inspired knowledge into Jesus the
son of M^r^* and strengthened him by the Holy Ghost, but you arose against the
Prophets that came contrary to your affections, you belyed on^ part, and slew
another. The unbeleevers said, our heart i^ hardened; It is God that has cursed
them, by reason o^ their impiety, and few of them will believe the
Commandments of his divine Majesty. When God has sent them any Book,
confirming the Scriptures, which they before approved ( viz. the Old Testament,
and the Gospel) they demanded succors when they meet with the wicked, and
being succored, they either understood it not, or would not receive it. The
curse of God is upon Infidels, especially upon them that have sold their souls,
and through envy disobeyed his Commandments: He bestows his grace on whom
he pleases, they are returned in the displeasure of his Divine Majesty, who
has prepared for them grievous torments, because of the enormity of their
crimes. When it was said to them, Believe in the Commandments of God; See
Kitab el tenoir.
they said, Do we not believe in what has been commanded us? Nevertheless
they have no faith in the truth which God has sent, confirming the Prophecies,
and the precepts that they before approved; Say unto them, had you heretofore
slain the Prophets, if you had believed in his Law? Moses certainly had caused
you to see Miracles; but ye adored the Calf after his departure, wherefore you
were greatly too blame. We received your promise, to observe the Commandments
of the Law, and raised a The Turks believe that God raised a Mountain over the
Israelites, to overshadow them.
Mountain over you; Understand with affection what we teach you, and hearken
what is commanded you; they answered, we have heard, and disobeyed, and
inclined their heart to the adoration of the Calf, because of their impiety.
Say to them, does your faith command you to do it, if you believe in God, and
life eternal? T^^nk upon death, if you be righteous; They regard not their past
errors, but God knows the unjust: Thou shall find them with diligence, and
desire to live a long time; The wicked hope to live a thousand years; but they
shall be exempt from the punishment to live long; God beholds all their
actions. Say to them, who is an enemy to Gabr^^^? He by the permission of God
has inspired into Maho, met.
thee the Alcoran, that confirms the ancient Scriptures, and guides the good
in the way of their Salvation, and declares to them the joys of Paradise. He
that is an enemy to God, the Angels, his Prophet to Gabriel and Michael, shall
be rigorously chastised, God is an enemy to Infidels. We have sent thee
precepts, clear, and intelligible, none will abjure them but the wicked: Some
of them have acted against their own promises, and the greatest part is
incredulous; many of them that have knowledge in the written law, have forsaken
it, even when God sent them any Prophet to confirm the Scriptures, that they
had before received, and approved: They cast the book of God behind their
backs, as if they knew it not, and adhered to what the Devils taught in the
reign of Solomon, (yet Solomon sinned not, but the Devils only, that instructed
the people in Magic) and what was taught by the two Angels, Arot and Marot
Magicians.
Arot and Marot in Babylon. Before they taught the people, they said, We are
not sedition, neither be you impious. The people learnd of them, what
concerns the separation of the man and the woman, and what breeds hatred
betwixt them. They did not harm to any by their Magic; but through the
permission of go^, the people learned of them what might hurt, and not to be
profitable to them; they instructed in Magic them that sold their part in
Paradise, at the loss (...) their souls, although they knew their error, that
they ha^ before believed in God, and feared his divine Majesty Repentance
inspired by God is exceeding profitable, they understood to know it. O you that
fear God, say not honor us; say, regard us, and hearken to what is commanded
you. To Infidels are prepared dolorous torments the Jews and Christians desired
not that God should sen^ you good, but God very liberal, gratifieth with his
mercy whom he pleases: he will not alter his Commandments, neither forget
them; he will moreover teach other^ more profitable, or of the like nature;
know you not tha^ God is omnipotent? understand you not that to God appertains
the Kingdom of heaven, and of earth; who excep^ God will be your protector?
Will you question your Prophet, as Moses was heretofore questioned? He that
shall change faith into impiety, The Jews and Christians who have the written
Law.
shall forsake the good way. Many that have knowledge in the Scripture,
endeavored t^ mislead you through impiety and envy, notwithstanding they are
not ignorant of the Truth; forgive them, and beware of them, until God has
(otherwise) disposed, he i^ Omnipotent. See Gelaldin.
Make your prayers at the time appointed, and pay your Tithes, you shall find
before God the good that you do for your souls; he beholds all your actions.
They have said that none but the Jews and Christians shall enter into Paradise,
it is their falls invention; say unto them, if you be good men, bring your
Reasons on the contrary, he that resigneth himself to God, and is a just man,
shall be recompensed by his divine Majesty, there needs not be any fear for
him, he shall not be tormented in the fire of hell. The Jews say, the Christians
are void of reason; and the Christians affirm the Jews to be without reason,
nevertheless they study the Scripture, so speak the ignorant, God will
determine their difference at the day of the Resurrection. Who is more unjust,
then he that hindered, that God be remembered in Temples, and that studieth
naught but their destruction? such men cannot enter therein, but with fear and
terror; they shall have on earth shame upon the ^orehead, and, in the other
world, shall suffer exceeding ^reat torments. The East and West are Gods,
whither so^ver men turn themselves, the face of God does there meet ^^em, his
Divinity extends through the whole earth. They said, believe you that God
has a Son? Praised be God on the contrary; whatever is either in earth or
heaven, appertains to his Divine Majesty, and all things o^ey him; he has
created heaven and earth, and when he ^illeth any thing, he says, Be thou, and
it is. The unbe^eevers sa^d, if God speak not to us, or if thou performest ^o
miracls, we will not believe thee; their predecessors have said as much, and
their words have been like unto their ^earts; we have caused miracles to appear
to the righteous, and have sent thee to preach and instruct the people; in^uire
not why those that shall descend into hell will not be^ieve thee; the Jews and
Christians will not be satisfied of ^hee, until thou follow their opinion; say
unto them, there is ^o better guide in the world then God; take heed lest thou
^ollow their appetites, after that thou have comprehended ^he knowledge which
we inspired into thee, who except God, will be thy defendor? They whom we have
taught the Scripture, that study and read it with truth, believe the con^ents
of it; and they that do not believe, are damned. O chil^ren of Israel call to
mind the favor that I did you; I pre^erred you before all the world, fear the
day wherein one ^oul shall not be able to assist another, when a ransom shall
not be accepted, neither excuse; and when the wicked shall not be protected.
Remember thou, that Abraham requested of the Lord an accomplishment of his
Word; he said to him, I will establish thee among the people, to teach them the
mysteries of my Law: and he said, what shall become of my ^^nage? He answered,
Paradise shall not be open to the unjust. We have established the Temple of
Mecca for a sure refuge of the people, in repentance; he made his Oratorie ^t
Abraham's Abraham's place is an Oratory in the temple of Mecca.
place; and we have commanded Abraham and Ismael to keep clean my house for
them that shall repair thither in procession, with humility and adoration. When
Abraham received this command, he said, Lord fortify this City, and enrich its
people with all good things, and all the inhabitants thereof, that shall believe
in thy divine Majesty, and the day of judgment. God said, I will for a time
enrich the Infidels also, and precipitate them i^ to the fire of hell, where
they shall remain to all eternit^ When Abraham and Ismael raised the
foundations of the Temple of Mecca, A^raham said, Lord accept our vows; cho^
understandest all, and know all things: Lord give us the grace to be
obedient to thy Commandments, and let a people issue from our loins that may
observe thy Law: Show t^ the way we ought to follow, and have mercy upon us;
tho^ art gracious and merciful: Lord send to this thy people Prophet of their
nation, to preach to them thy Co^mand^ments, to instruct them in Scripture and
knowledge, an^ to purify them, thou art omnipotent and wise. No manshi^
abandon the Law of Abraham, but to his own damage, have chosen him in this
world, and he is in the other, ^ the number of the just. Remember thou, that
his Lord sai^ to him, Be thou obedient to thy Lord, and trust thou in hi^ he
said, I resign my self to God, Lord of the Universe: H^ commanded Jacob and his
children to follow the Law (...) God. My children, God has taught you his Law,
trust yo^ in him, be obedient to him, even unto death. Were yo^ present when
Jacob was near unto death? and when he sa^ to his sons, Whom will ye adore
after me? They answere^ We will worship thy God, the God of our Fathers
Abr^ham, ^smael, and Isaac, one sole God; we resign our selves his pleasure.
The good that those men gained, remained t^ them, and the evil that you shall
commit, shall be against yo^ enquire not after what they did. They have said, Be
ye e^ther Jew, or Christian, you shall follow the right way. Sa^ unto them,
contrariwise. The law of Abraham is most jus^ he was not of the number of them
that believed in man^ Gods. Say ye, We believe in God, in what he inspired into
Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, in what w^^ taught Moses, Jesus,
and all the Prophets; we rely upon Go^ If they believe as you do, they shall not
err; if they abando^ your faith they will have a controversy with you, but Go^
shall protect you; he understands whatever they say, an^ what they do; he has
purified his Law, and what better purification is there, then that of his
Divine Majesty? Say unt^ them, will you dispute with us concerning God, who is
you^ and our Lord? We will answer with our action, and you shall answer with
yours; all our confidence is in his Divine pleasure: Will you say, that
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, were Jews or Christians? Are you m^re
knowing then God? Who is more unjust, then he that concealeth the miracles that
he has seen to proceed from God? He is not ignorant of all your actions. The
good that those men have done, remain to them; and the evil that they shall
commit, shall be against you: enquire not after what they did. Some ignorant
among the people will say, Their Prophet does not appoint them to turn the face
to that side, to which they turned heretofore, when they made their O^isons.
Say unto them, The East and W^st belong unto God; he directs in the right way
whom he pleases. As we have conducted you into the right way; we have likewise
commanded you to do that which is just; that you be witnesses against the
people at the day of judgment, See Gelaldin.
and the Prophet witness against you. I have not ordained, that you turn your
face as heretofore, when you made your Orisons, to the end, they may be known
that follow the Prophet, from them that return to their impiety. It will be
^^rksome to the people to turn to that side, except to such ^s God has guided
into the right way. God will not make ^aine your belief; he is gracious and
merciful to his people. I see that thou liftest up thy face to Heaven, turn
which way shall please thee; but turn ^h^u toward Mec^a, wheresoever thou
art: They, These are the Jews and Christians that follow the written Law.
to whom heretofore the ^nowledge of Scripture was given, knew that the Truth
^^oceeded from their Lord; what they do is not concealed from God, when thou
shall meet them; and that they will ^ot turn themselves, as thou, in making
their prayers; ^oe not thou likewise turn, as they, they turn not all the
^^me way, follow not their appetites, having comprehen^ed the knowledge that
has been inspired into thee, least ^hou fall into the number of the unjust.
Many, to whom ^e have given the knowledge of the written Law, under^^and it
perfectly, as also do their children; nevertheless, ^^ey conceal the Truth,
and are not ignorant that it pro^^edeth from thy Lord: Be not thou of the
number of them that doubt. Turn thy self always toward Mecca. Do^ good
wheresoever thou art, God will be with thee; he i^ omnipotent. From what place
soever thou go forth, tu^^ thy face toward Mecca: This is reasonable, and
ordaine^ by thy Lord. Whatsoever you do, is not hid from God wheresoever you
are, turn toward Mecca, that none man find wherewith to reprove your actions,
but the unjust^ fear not them, but fear me. I will accomplish my Grace upon
you, and you shall be guided through the right wa^ We have sent unto you a
Prophet of your Nation, the shall teach you my Commandments, and purify you.
H^ shall instruct you in the Scripture, in knowledge, and (...) what you
understand not. Remember me, I will rememb^^ you; praise me, and be not in the
number of the wicke^ O ye that are So the Turks style themselves
True believers* implore uccor with pa^^ence and prayers. Certainly, God is
with such as are patien^^ Say not, that those that are slain for the defense of
the Law, are dead, contrariwise they are alive, but you kn^^ it not. I will try
you, and afflict you through the loss ^ your goods, and disease of your
persons: Paradise shall ^ for them that shall be patient, and shall say in
their af^^ction, We are given up unto God, and shall return bef^^^ him to be
judged; his Grace shall be upon them, and the shall not err. Safa and Me^oa
are mountains near Mecca
Safa and Moroa are tokens of his power He that shall go on Pilgrimage to
Mecca, shall not do^^ miss to visit those two places; he that obeys, shall
(...) well, God rewards them that do good works, and kn^^eth all things. I
will lay my curse upon such as conceale^ Commandments, they shall be accursed
above whate^ is in this world; except them that shall be converted, t^ shall
do good works, and bring to light what they con^^^led, I will give them my
Grace; I am gracious and merci^ The wicked that died in their impiety, shall be
etern^^ accursed of God, of Angels, and of all the World, ^^ shall never be
eased in their torments, and shall be, w^^^out end, deprived of protection.
Your God, is one ^ God; there is none other God, but God gracious and
^^^cifull. The Creation of the Heavens, and the Earth, difference of the day
and the night, the Ship that sai^ on the Sea for the advantage of commerce, the
Rain that falls from Heaven, to give life to the Earth after its death, the
diversity of Winds, and the Clouds that move between Heaven and Earth, are
signs of the unity of God, to those that can understand it. There be, that
adore Idols, and love them; The True-believers love but one sole God. When thou
shall see the wicked, know they shall one day see the punishment of other
crimes. All strength and virtue proceeds from God, most severe in his
chastisements. When that a part of them that had embraced the true Law,
separated themselves from the company of True believers, and that any mischief
befell them, they could not reunite themselves: Then they said, in their
affliction, If we another time meet our companions, we will separate our selves
from them, as they have separated themselves from us: Thus shall God give them
to understand their error, See Kitab ^l. tenoir.
with exceeding sorrow, and they shall be eternally confined in the fire of
Hell. O ye people! eat what is good and savory in the Earth, and follow not the
steps of the Devil; he is your open enemy, he will command you that which is
evil, and filthy; and to speak of God what you know not. When it was said to
the Infidels, obey the Commandments of God, they said. We will follow the
steps of our Fathers; we will observe, what they observed: surely their Fathers
were unwise, and mis^led; they are like to him that cries, and understands
nothing of what is spoken, but the voice; they are deaf, dumb, blind, and
without judgment. O ye, that believe in God, eat the good things that he has
given you, and give him thanks, if it be him that you worship. He forbids
you to eat Carrion, Blood, Swines flesh, and whatever is not killed, in
pronouncing the name of his Divine Majesty, except it be in extreme
necessity; and in this case, it shall not be reputed disobedience, nor sin;
God is benign, and merciful: what they eata, that conceal the Word of God,
for any profit or advantage, shall be nothing but matter of fire in their
bowels. God shall not speak to them at the day of judgment, but with fury; he
will not purify them, and they shall suffer rigorous torments. They that have
purchased error for the right way, and punishment for pardon, shall burn ^^ the
fire of Hell; for that God has sent the most true Boo^ that contains his
Commandments; they that impugn^ what is contained in that Book, are in an
exceeding great error, far from the truth. It is not justification to turn the
face, making your prayers toward the East or West; h^ shall be justified, that
shall believe in God, the day o^ judgment, the Angels, the Scriptures, and the
Prophets and that in charity shall impart some part of his goods te^ his
parents, to orphans, to the poor, to pilgrims, and t^ slaves. Such as believe
in God, and have his fear before their eyes, persevere in their prayers, pay
Tithes; they satisfy their promises, and are patient in their adversities, O^
ye that believe! the Talio is commanded you in murder* the free for the free,
the slave for the slave, the woman for the woman. But if any one pardon the
blood of his brother, he shall prosecute the malefactor, according to wha^ he
shall see ^ost advantageous, through damages and interests: It is a facility
which God has given you, through his mercy. He that shall do injury to the
malefactor, having received satisfaction of him shall suffer grievous torments;
at the day of judgment you shall find life in the Talio. The Talio is a pain
equal to the offense
O you that are w^se! it may be you will fear God: He commands you to make
your Testament, when you approach unto death; give legacies of your substance
to you^ Father, and Mother, your near K^n^ed, and bestow Alms on the poor. If
any man alter your Testament, the sin shall be upon him, and upon all them that
shall alter it: God understands, and knows all things: If any one fe^reth
that there is an error in the Testament, that opposes Reason, he shall do
well to reconcile the parties with affection, God is gracious and bountiful. O
ye that bel^eve! Fasting is commanded you, as it was them that were before you;
you shall fear God, and Fast, particularly, a certain number of days: but if
any one among you is sick, or in travel, at the time of Fasting, he shall
count the days that he fasted not, and shall fulfill them at another time. Such
as are not of strength to Fast, shall ^^tisfie for Fasting, through Alms; he
that shall obey, shall do well; If you Fast, you shall do well. Fast the
month of Ramazan is their Faster, which continues 30 days; during which, the
Fast.
Ramazan, in which the Alcoran descended from Heaven, to guide men into the
right way; it contains pre^epts of Divine Right, and distinguish good from
evil, all those that live to this month, ought to Fast. He that is ^ick, or in
a voyage, shall accomplish the days that he fa^ted not another time, at his
convenience: God wills that his Law should be light unto you, and not a
burden; ^is will is, that you observe the days of fasting, and that ^ou
return him thanks, for that he has guided you in the ^ight way, perhaps you
will give him thanks; I will be near unto my servants, when they shall enquire
of thee concerning the mysteries of my Law; I will hear their Suppli^ations
when they invoke me, See Gelaldin.
that they may persevere in ^bedience to my Commandments; peradventure they
will ^llow the right way. It is lawful for you to know your ^ives the night of
fasting, they are necessary to you, as ^our clothes, and you are to them as
necessary as their ^arments: God knows, that otherwise you should have
^trayed your souls; he is bountiful to you, and has par^oned you, know them,
and perform what God has ap^ointed you. Eat and drink, until you may
distinguish white thre^d from a black by the light of the morning, ^en begin to
fast until night; Know not your wives when ^ou are in the Temple: Such are the
limits prescribed of ^od, transgress them not: So God manifests his
Com^^ndement to the people, perhaps they will have the fea^e (...) his divine
Majesty before their eyes. Dispend not your ^oods unprofitable, and with
vanity, and corrupt not the ^udges with gifts, and presents, to eat
maliciously the sub^^ance of another, they will question you concerning the ^ew
Moon; say ye, That it is the sign of the time ap^ointed for pilgrimages; It
is not reasonable that you ^ould enter the house of another a back way, he that
^ares God, does well to enter through the gate. Fear ^od, and you shall be
happy; fight for his Law against ^em that assault you, and do wrong to no
man, he loves ^at them that are unjust; fly Infidels wheresoever you find
them, and expel them out of the place, from which th^^ shall have driven you;
Sedition is worse then murder fight not against them at Mecca, until they
assault you; they there fight you, kill them, such is the punishment (...)
Infidels: if they set a period to their infidelity, God wi^^ be to them
gracious and merciful: Fight against them t^ avoid sedition: Faith proceeds
from God: If they des^^ from their impiety, you shall exercise no hostility
against them, but only against the wicked: If they fight you in the month of
Mharam, you shall fight them also in that sa^^ month, and observe a
reciprocation in honors. Offe^ them that shall offend you in that month, in
the same manner that they shall have offended you. Fear God, a^ know that he
is with them that fear him, dispend for (...) glory, and throw not your
selves into your own destruc^^on; do good, he loves those that do good,
accompli^^ the Pilgrimage appointed, if you be not hindered by yo^ enemies, or
have not conveniencie to perform it; Sha^ not your heads, until you arrive at
the place appoint for Sacrifices; if any of you be diseased, or sick in the he^
he shall there give satisfaction by fasting, alms, and S^crifices, when you
shall be in a place of safety, and se^^ from your enemies. Such as shall be
hindered to accompl^^^ Pilgrimage, and such as have not means to satisfy for
(...) sacrifices ordained, shall fast three days, during the ti^^ of
Pilgrimage, and seven days at their return, which in all ten days, See the
explication of Chasai.
if they be not inhabitants at Mecca, w^^ their wives and Families. Fear God,
and know, that h^ severe in his punishments; Pilgrimage ought to be per^^^med
in a certain month, they that shall desire to perfo^^ it, at the time
prescribed, shall not know their wives, t^ shall be humble, and shall have no
quarrel in that voya^^ God knows all your good actions, he shall augment y^
faculties, Beda^i faith, pass where Ad^m an^ Ab^^^am p^ssed.
he is a great rewarder. O you that are wise, f^^ me, you sin not in
demanding good from your Lord, making merchandise in that voyage. When you
shall part from the Mountain of Arefat, remember God in of Mouchar, remember
how he has guided you, and how were before out of the way; pass through where
that ^ple were wont to pass, and implore pardon? of God, he is gracious and
merciful. Having finished your Orisons, remember God with affection, as your
Fathers remembered you; There be among the people, that say, Lord give us good
in this world, and have no part in the other. Others there be, that say, Lord
bestow on us the good of this world, Paradise in the other, and deliver us from
the fire of Hell; They shall all find the good and the evil that they have
done, God is exact to keep account He that shall advance his voyage two days,
shall not sin, neither he that shall retard it, if he fear God, Fear God,
and know, that you shall all one day appear before his Divine Majesty to be
judged. There be men whose speech will be pleasing to thee in this world, they
will call God to witness what is in their hearts, nevertheless they are very
pernicious, when removed from thee, and traveling upon the earth, they there
commit filthiness, and ruin both Village and fruits. God loves not
disorders; When it was said to them, fear God, pride, with sin, possessed
them, but Hell shall be their habitation. Some there be among the people, that
sell their own persons, out of a great desire to please God, surely he is
gracious to them that serve him. O ye that believe in God! be obedient to his
Commandents, and pursue not the steps of the Devil, he is your open enemy; if
you sin against God, having once learned his Commandments, know, that he is
omnipotent to chastise you, and prudent in all his works. Will the wicked
expect that God should appear to them in the obscurity of a Cloud? Or else
the Angels with Command to extirpate them, they shall be assembled before his
Divine Majesty to be judged. Demand of the Children of Israel, how many
Miracles were made appear to them? He that alters the grace he shall have
received of God, shall be severely punished. The wicked esteem the life of the
world, and scorn those that believe in God; but such as believe God, shall be
above them at the day of Judgment; he enricheth with innumerable good things
whom he pleases. The world was all of one Religion, See Kitab el tenoir.
before impiety took place: God sent his Prophets to instruct the people, to
show them their error, and declare to them the joys of Paradise; he sent with
them, the book of truth, to judge the differences among men, no man
contradicted the Contents of it, but The Jews and Christians.
such as had knowledge of the Scripture, and this caused the envy that is
risen among them; God guided them that observed his Commandments, and such, as
with his permission, obeyed his will, he directs in the right way, See
Gelaldin.
whom it pleases him. Do ye believe to enter Paradise, unless that happen
to you, that befell your Predecessors? They were touched with miseries, and
diseases, and trembled until that very instant that the Prophet said to the
true believers that were with him; When shall divine succor come?
Notwithstanding Divine succor was not far off; They shall question thee
concerning what they ought to expend; Say unto them, you shall assist with your
goods, your father and mother, your allies, Orphans, the poor, and pilgrims.
God will understand all the good you shall do; Fighting is enjoined you,
although it be against your will; it may chance that you will shun that
which is profitable to you, and likewise love what is pernicious to you, God
knows what you know not. They shall ask of thee, if they shall fight in the
month of Mharam; say unto them, great battles shall happen in this month, that
shall shut up to the people the way of the Law of God; and impie^ies, that
shall hinder the multitude to go to Mecca. To drive the people from Mecca is
an exceeding great sin: Sedition is worse then murder; The wicked shall not
cease to fight you, until they have, if they can accomplish ^t, mislead you
from your Religion. His good works among you, that shall quit his Law, and die
an Infidel shall be vain in this world, and himself be confined in the fire
of Hell; Such as bel^eve in God, that separate themselves from the impious,
that abandon their houses for the service of his Divine Majesty, and that
fight for the Faith, hope for his mercy, he is gracious and merciful. They
will enquire of thee concerning wine, and games of hazard; say unto them, that
it is in them a very great sin, and yet of utility to men; but the evil that
they cause, is much greater then the profit they reap. They will demand what
they ought to expend in ^ood works; say unto them, what shall remain to you,
your ^wne affairs being done. So God teaches you his Com^andements,
peradventure you will call to mind the things ^f earth and of heaven. They will
enquire concerning Or^hans; say unto them if their substance be intermingled
^ith your own, do them no wrong, they are your bre^^ren in God, he knows
them that do good, and those ^^t do evil: if it had pleased him, he had
detained much ^ore from you, for he is Omnipotent and just. Marry not ^omen
that believe in many gods, until they believe in one ^le God; a Slave that is
a true believer, is of more va^^e then a free Infidel, notwithstanding she is
beautiful. ^fidels shall be summoned to hell fire, and God calls ^en to
Paradise, and to his mercy, through his mere ^od pleasure, and declares to
them his Commandments, ^haps they will remember them. They will enquire of ^ee
concerning the monthly terms of women; answer, ^^at they are unclean; separate
your selves from your ^ives when they are menstruous, and come not nigh them
^^till they be purified; when they shall be clean, ap^roach them, according
to what God has commanded: ^e loves them that repent of their errors, that
are clean ^d purified; your wives are your tillage, go to your til^ge at your
pleasure, and do good for your souls; you ^all one day find it, fear God and
preach his Comman^^ments to the true believers. Your Religion does not per^it
you to swear by God in vain, and oftentimes to ^^stifie your selves; God
understands and knows all ^ings, he will not regard what you shall speak
at ran^ome, that shall not be hurtful to any, but he will see that it shall
be in your heart. He will be gracious and mer^ifull to such as shall swear,
not to touch their wives the ^ace of four months if they return to them; he
is gra^ious and merciful; but if they desire to repudiate them, ^e
understands, and knows all things. Women di^orced, shall tarry until their
Terms be past four times, before they marry again, it is not permitted them
to con^eale what God has created in their womb, if they be^ieve in his divine
Majesty, and the day of Judgment, if they fly from their husbands, they shall
be brought aga^^ to them, which is a thing reasonable. They ought to ^nour
them, and their husbands likewise ought to hono^^ them, but the husbands have a
degree of advantage abo^^ them, God is Omnipotent, and most wife in what he
(...) dameth. Divorce the first and second time, ought to b^ performed with
mildness, courtesy, and good deeds; is not lawful for you to take any thing
from your wives, what you have given them, if you both fear a disability not
satisfying the Commandments of God; but if y^^ both fear to transgress the
bounds prescribed by Go^ you shall do well to accord together, such are the
commandments of his divine Majesty, such as transgress the are exceedingly
too blame. He that shall have repudiated wife thrice, shall not resume her,
until she has been m^ryed to another that has divorced her: then they may
(...) turn to each other, and marry again without Sin, they think
themselves able to continue within the l^^ prescribed by God, which he
manifests to the wise ^ prudent. When you shall repudiate your wives, appo^
them the time they must tarry, before they again man take them with civility
and modesty, and in the like m^ner dismiss them, give them presents according
to your ^bilities, and take them not, to abuse nor torment the^ they that do
this, offend their own Souls. Mock no^ the Commandments of God: Remember his
favors, (...) how he has taught you Scripture, knowledge and (...) mysteries
of his law; Fear God, and know that he ^^derstandeth all your actions. When
you repudiate y^^^ wives, appoint them the time they ought to tarry, be^^^^
they marry again, and hinder them not to marry ac^^^ding to the Commandments
of God. These things preached to them among you that believe in God, and the
day of Judgment, it is requisite so to make use^ them. God knows what you
know not. The woman (...) give suck to their children two years entire, if
they fire to accomplish the time appointed to suckle them, (...) father shall
nourish and cloth the wife; and his childr^^ according to his faculties:
expend not, but according the measure of your goods: the father and mother
shall not necessitate themselves for their children: the heir shall perform
what is above ordained, he shall entertain his father and mother according to
his abilities;) See Gelaldin.
) if the parents desire to weane their children before two years be expired,
they may do it without offending God, if they both agree to it. If you cause
your children to be nursed by other women then your own wives, God will not be
offended, in giving them their sallary, according to reason and honesty: fear
God, and know that he sees what ever you do. Widows shall tarry four months
and ten nights after the death of their husbands, before they marry again;
this time being accomplished, they shall do what shall seem good to them,
according to reason and honesty, God knows all your actions. You will not
offend God in speaking a word in secret to women that you research in marriage,
although you conceal in your mind your design to espouse them, he
understands what ever you think of them; know them not secretly, until you
have pronounced the words appointed by the Law; and enter not the bonds of
marriage, until the time set down in writing be accomplished, God knows
whatever is in your hearts: take heed unto your selves, he is gentle and
gracious to them that fear him. It is no sin to repudiate your wives, before
you have touched them; you shall give them some presents, and do good unto
them, according to the proportion of your wealth, or poverty; and civilly
entreat them, as is the custom of honest men. If you repudiate them before you
have touched them, and have bestowed on them any presents of garments,
movables, and other things, they shall have the moity, if they release it not
to you, or if the husband, remitting with his own hand the tie of marriage,
does not leave to them the whole, of courtesy: it is requisite to gratify
them, and to forget nothing of the benefits between you, God beholds all
your actions: stand upon your guard, when you make your prayers, especially,
that at noone, and be obedient unto God. If you fear your enemies, and cannot
place your selves on your knees, neither perform the Ceremonies that are
appointed you; omit not to say you^ prayers on foot, or on horseback, and
being freed from fear, remember God, and how he has taught you, what you know
not. Such as die, shall be good to their wives by their Testament; they shall
bestow on them wherewit^ to live during the time they must tarry before they
marry again; drive them not from your houses: If they willingly depart, the sin
of what they shall do in their own persons, shall not be upon you. God is
omnipotent, and just; you shall likewise do good to your wives that you have
divorced, according to your power, it is a thing reasonable among such as fear
God: Thus God teaches you his Commandments, perhaps you will learn them. See
you not them that departed their houses for the fear they had of death? they
are thousands in number; God has said to them, die: after this, he raised them
again: God is the Benefactor of the people, but the greatest part return him no
thanks for his Favors. Fight for his Law, and know, that he understands and
knows all things. Who is he that will afford him a good turn? He will
augment him with multiplicity of increase; he gives good, and takes it away
from whom it pleases him; you shall all return before him to be judged.
Know thou not, that a company of the children of Israel, after the death of
Moses, said to their Prophet, send us a King, we with him will fight for the
Law of God? He answers them, have you disobeyed the Commandments of God? If
they enjoyne you to fight, you will not do it: They said, we have no greater
desire, then to fight for the glory of his divine Majesty; we for this Cause
have abandoned our houses, and those of our parents: nevertheless, when they
were commanded to fight, they all, except some few of them, retired; but God
knows them that sin against him. Their Prophet said to them, God has sent
Saul to be your King; they answered, why shall he be our King? we rather
deserve the royalty then he, he is not rich enough; he replied, God has
chosen him to command you; he hat increased his knowledge, and stature, he
gives royalty to whom he lists, he is liberal and prudent in all his
actions. Their Prophet said to them, the sign of his reign shall be, that the
Arc shall appear to you from God, to confirm your hearts; wherein shall be
contained the remainder of what the people of Moses and Aaron let^, and it
shall be borne by Angels; this shall be to you the sign of his reign, if you
believe in God. When Saul went forth with his troops to fight his enemies he
said, God shall try you by a river; he that shall drink of that river, shall
not be mine, unless he drink with his hand; they all, except some few of them
drank at their pleasure; and having past that river with the true believers,
they said, we have ^ot this day strength sufficient to resist Goliath and his
troops; but such as believed in God, and feared his divine Majesty, said, how
often, through the permission of God, ^ath a small troop defeated a great
army? He is with them that are patient: when they saw Goliath with his troops
appear; they said, Lord, give us patience, confirm our steps, and give us
victory over the Infidels. They, through the permission of God, vanquished
their enemies: See Gelaldin.
David slew Goliath, and God gave him the Royalty, and knowledge of ^ture
things. Had not God raised the people one against ^he other, the whole earth
had been full of disorders; such are ^he miracles of God, as I declare to thee
with truth; thou ^t indeed one of the Prophets of his divine Majesty. We ^ave
conferred our graces on the Prophets, on some more ^hen on others; many have
spoken to their Lord, and some ^ave been more elevated then others. We gave
knowledge ^o Jesus the Son of Mary, and fortified him through the holy Spirit.
Had it pleased God, the Prophets that came ^eretofore, had not been slain,
after they had taught his Commandments. Men were of different opinions; some
believed in God, others were impious; had it pleased God, ^hey had not been
slain, but he does what pleases him. O ye that are true believers! dispense
in alms some part ^f your wealth that we have given you, before the day arrive,
wherein you shall find no ransom, alms, protection, nor prayers that can
succor you. Certainly Infidels are greatly too blame. God! There is but one
only God, living, and eternal; think not that he slumbreth or sleeps: that
ever is in heaven or in earth is his; who shall intercede for thee with his
divine Majesty, unless by his permissio^ He knows all the actions of m^n,
and whatever they ha^ done; they know nothing, but what it has pleased hi^
teach them, The largeness of his Throne contains h^ven and earth, and the
conservation of both is not trou^some to him, he is Omnipotent and glorious.
The ^ ought not to be abjured, it manifests the difference faith and impiety:
He that believes not in Tagot, or devil, and has faith in God, lays hold
on the stron^ knot, that cannot be dissolved, broken, or cut a sunder. ^
understands and knows all things; he aideth and sisteth them that believe
in his unity; he will cause the^ come out of darkness, and will guide them
into light: wicked shall have Tagot, and the devil for their protect^ he shall
cause them to forsake the light, and shall lead t^ into darkness: such men
shall remain eternally in ^ fire of hell. Con^ider you not his action, to whom
God (...) given the royalty? That is Nebrot.
When he disputed concerning God (...) Abraham; Abraham said to him; My Lord is
he that giv^ life, See Gelaldin.
and death; He said, I, even I, give life and death (...) my subject, when I
see good: Abraham answered, (...) causes the Sun to rise in the East, make
thou it to ari^^ the West; then the Infidel was confuted, God is n^^ guide to
unjust persons. Have thou considered the actio^ him that came into a Village
desolate and ruined, and ^ How is it that God can be able to give life unto
this ^lage after its death, and re-establish it after so great a^ine? Then God
caused him to die, after the space of hundred years raised him again, and said
to him, How (...) have thou continued here? he answered; I have sojoun^ here a
day and a half; On the contrary, thou have be^ here an hundred years; consider
thy meat and drink, (...) they are not altered through length of time; and
beh^ thine Ass is death, see his bones, that are white; thou (...) become an
example to all the world, and to posterity; the bones of thine Ass; I will
recollect and revest t^^ with flesh: Seeing this miracle, he said, I affirm
that (...) is omnipotent; Remember thou, that Abraham said, (...) show me how
thou revivest the dead; God said, D^ ^hou not believe my omnipotency? He
answered, yea Lord, but hear my prayer for the repose of my heart; God said;
Take four birds, cut them altogether in pieces, and ^arry the pieces upon
those mountains; this done, call them, ^hey shall speedily return to thee; God
knows all things, and is most prudent in all his works. The action of them
that dispend their goods for his glory, is like unto a grain of Corn that
producerh seven ears, and every ear an hundred grains: God multiplieth the
wealth of whom it pleases him, he is liberal and omniscient: Such as dispend
their substance for ^is glory, without repining, and reproach, shall be
recompen^ed by his Divine Majesty, and be delivered from fear and ^ffliction
at the day of Judgment. Good words and pardon ^re preferred to alms, followed
with repentance: God is most rich and merciful. Oh ye that believe in God!
render not your alms unprofitable through repining and reproach, ^s do those,
that give alms with ostentation and hypocrisy; they believe, neither in God,
nor the day of Judgment, their good works are like to a Rock, whereon was
little earth, there fell great rain that carried it away, and left nothing
thereon: their labor shall be in vain, and they reap no merit, for God loves
neither the hypocrites nor the impious. The action of such as do good, to
please God, or to save their souls, is like to a grain sown upon an high
place, whereon fell great and small rain, that caused its fruit to multiply:
God beholds all your actions. Is there any one among you that desires to
have a garden enriched with palms, and grapes, wherein flow many fountains,
and rivolets, and that is filled with all manner of fruits, that old age should
overtake him with young and infirm children, and that an hot wind come, and
burn up his garden? God so teaches you his mysteries; peradventure you will
bear them in mind. Oh ye that believe! dispend in pious works, and give alms
of the wealth you have acquired, and of the fruits of the earth that God has
given you; desire not wealth ill gotten, or wherewith to give alms; such are
not received but to your shame; And know, that God is most rich, and worthy of
praise. The Devil will cause you to fear poverty, and will command you
filthiness, and God promises to you his grace and mercy; he is munificent,
and omn^^ent he gives knowledge to whom it pleases him, an^ whom knowledge is
given, on him is bestowed an exceed great Treasure, which none but the wise do
value; God holds your alms, and vows, and the wicked shall be prived of
protection at the day of Judgment. If you s^ your alms to appear, it shall
not be amiss; if you ^ceale them, you shall do well, that will cover many of
y^ sins; God knows all your actions. You are not obliged lead men into the
right way, God guides whom he liste^ the good and the alms that you perform,
shall be for y^ souls; give not alms but for the love of God, you shall
rewarded for the good works that you shall do, and no justice shall be done
against you; Be benefactors to (...) poor, that are not accommodated for the
service of G^^ and that cannot labor. The ignorant believe them to rich, by
reason of their probitie and goodness, you she know them by their
Physiognomie, and in that they dema^^ nothing with importunity; God will know
the good y^ shall do toward them; They that give alms, by day or night,
secretly or publicly, shall be rewarded of Go^ there needs be no fear for
them, they shall be exem^ from affliction at the day of Judgment; Usurers
shall r^ again, like to men possessed with Devils, because the have said, that
traffic, is like unto usury; God permiteth traffic and prohibiteth Usury;
he to whom t^^ word of God comes, and who has abandoned us^rie, what is
past, is to himself, God will pardon his fault but he that shall return to
exercise usurie, having once abandoned it, shall be punished in the fire of
Hell; God abhors usurie, he loves them that are almes-givers, an^ hates
Infidels; Such as believe in God, that do good works, and that make their
prayers at the time appointed and pay their tithes, shall be rewarded by his
Divine Majesty, they shall be delivered from fear and affliction at the day of
judgment. O ye that believe in God! have the fear of him before your eyes,
and forsake Usury. if you will obey his Commandments; if you do not this,
God and his Prophet will make war upon you; if you be converted, your
principal remains unto you; Do injustice to no man, it shall not be done unto
you. If your debtors be ^nable to pay you, and a^e in want, you shall do well
to stay their convenience; if you give them alms, you shall do well; fear the
day when you shall return before God, and that every one shall be paid,
without injustice, of what he shall have gained. O ye that believe in God! when
you shall charge your selves with a debt, cause no act to be drawn; the Notarie
shall write the Contract between you, conformable to Justice, and shall not
refuse ^o write it, as God has instructed him, but the debtor shall entirely
satisfy what he shall owe, and shall have the ^eare of his Lord before his
eyes; If he that ^s a debtor is a fool, or sick, and is unable of himself to
discharge ^t, his guardian, or he that shall overse^ his affairs, shall give
satisfaction for him. Call with you two witnesses, if ^ou cannot find two men,
one, with two women shall suf^ice, whose testimony you shall accept; if the
one be ^anting to her duty, the other shall cause her to remember; these
witnesses shall not refuse their testimony, notwithstanding they be called in
a greater number. Make no difficulty to write your testimony, whether it
concern little or much, and limit the time wherein payment ought to be made;
such writings are just before God, give more efficacy to testimony, and are
requi^^te ^o avoid your complaints one of another; If your merchandise be
present, you shall take it between you at the same time, then shall you not
sin in not drawing a writing, or contract. Call witnesses when you sell or
buy; neither the witnesses, nor the Notary shall receive any damage; If you
shall do that which is forbidden, you shall do very ill: Fear God, he will
teach you his Commandments, he knows all things. If you are in a journey,
and cannot find a Notary, you shall give earnest; If one trusts in the other,
he that shall be trusted in, shall satisfy his promise, and fear God his
Lord; no man shall conceal his testimony, he that shall conceal, shall sin
in his heart; God knows all your actions. Whatsoever is in Heaven, or in
Earth, belonging unto God, whether you conceal, or reveal what in your minds,
he shall require an account of you, he p^^doneth, and chastises whom it
pleases him, he is o^nipotent. The Prophet believed in all that God sent him,
as likewise all the true believers: Such as believe God, the Angels, and
Scriptures, and generally all (...) Prophets, without exception, say, We have
heard (...) obeyed; Pardon us oh Lord! Thou art our refuge; G^^ requires of no
man more then he is able to peeform the good that a man shall do, shall be for
himself, (...) the evil that he does shall be likewise agninst him. L^^
excuse us, if we have forgotten thee, or sinned; L^^ charge us not with any
heavy burden, as thou di^charge them that were before us; charge us not with
t^^^ which we are not able to suport, blot out our sins, (...) give us thy
mercy; Thou art our Lord, give us victory against the Infidels.

CHAP. III. The Chapter of the Lienage of Ioachim, containing two h^^dred
verses, written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am (...) most wise God God!
There is but one only God, ^^ving, and eternal; He has sent to thee the Book
(...) contains truth, and confirms the Scriptures, (...) were sent before
it. He sent the Old Testament, and (...) Gospel, that were heretofore guides
to the people; (...) has sent the Alcoran, that distinguishes good from
^vill; they that believe not in the Law of God, shall (...) severely chastised.
He is omnipotent and revengefull: N^thing is hid from him in Heaven, or in
Earth; It is (...) that formed you in the wombes of your mothers, as it pl^^sed
him, there is no God, but the omnipotent, and (...) God. He it is that sent to
thee the Book, whose prece^^^^ are necessary, See Kitab el tenoir.
they are the original, and foundation the Law, like in purity one to the
other, and with contradiction. Such as in their heart incline to depart from
the truth, do often follow their inclination, desirous of sedition, and to
understand the explication of the Alcoran; but none understand its explication,
but God, and such as are profound in learning; they say, we believe in God, all
things proceed from his divine wisdom, nevertheless none remember, ^ut the
wise. Lord cause not our hearts to err, after thou have guided us into the
right way, give us thy mercy, thou art most bountiful toward thy creatures.
Lord thou art he that shall assemble the world at the day of Judgment, at
which day nothing shall be found doubtful, when thou will not go against thy
promises, and when wealth and children shall not serve to the wicked, but to
kindle the fire of Hell. The Infidel lineage of Pharaoh, and those that
preceded him, blasphemed and abjured the Law of God, but he surprised them in
their sin; he is grievous in his chastisements. Say to the Infidels, they
shall be vanquished, and shall be gathered together into the fire of Hell, that
is prepared for them. You have an example in the two Troops that fought for the
glory of God, they beheld with their eyes, Infidels become true believers, like
unto themselves; God strengthens with his aid, whom it pleases him; this
shall be for example to such as shall clearly see. The love and desire of
women, of children, of riches, abundance of gold, and of silver, of horses,
cattle, and of tillage, are pleasing to men; such are the riches of the life
of this world, but the most assured refuge is in God. Say unto them; I will
declare unto you things much better for them, that shall have the fear of God
before their eyes: they shall dwell eternally in Paradise, where flow many
rivers, with women beautiful, and lean, and all manner of content. God
beholds them that adore him, and that say, Lord we believe in thy Law, pardon
our sins, and deliver us from the torments of fire. The patient, the
persevering, true believers, the obedient, the good men, such as beg pardon of
God in the morning; the Angels, the Learned, that love Justice, testify that
there is but one only God. The Law of salvation, is a Law pleasing to his
divine Majesty; no man contradicts this truth, among The Jews and Christians.
such as know the written Law, but through envy. He that shall not obey the
Commandments of God, shall find his divine Majesty very exact to call him to
an account. See Gelaldin.
If the impious dispute with thee; say to them, I am wholly resigned to the will
of God, The Jews and Christians.
with all such as have followed me. Ask of such as know the written Law, and
them that know it not, if they resign themselves to God; if they do, they
will follow the right way; The Arabians.
if they go astray, thou have none other obligation, but to preach to them;
God beholds them that adore him. See Kitab el tenoir.
Declare grievous torments to those that conceal his Commandments, that kill
the Prophets, and injure them that instruct the people in Justice; the good
works that they do, shall be unprofitable to them on earth, and they shall be
in the other world d^prived of protection. See thou not a party of them that
know the written Law, how they were called to a Lecture of the Book of God, to
the end they might judge with equity the differences that are among them? but
many are returned to their sin: they contemned the Scripture, in that they
said, the fire shall not touch us, but for a certain number of days; They are
deceived in their blasphemies, what will become of them, when we shall assemble
them at the day of Judgment, when nothing shall be doubtful, and every one
shall be recompensed, as he shall have merited? No in justice shall be done
unto them. Say, Lord thou possessest the Kingdoms of the world, thou give
Royalty to whom thou see good; from thy hand, oh Lord, proceeds all good,
thou art Omnipotent, thou causest day to enter the night, and night the day;
thou causest life to come out of death, and death out of life; thou enrichest
without measure whom thou see good. The believers shall not obey the
unbelievers, to the exclusion of true believers; he that does this thing,
^bserveth not the Law of God; but if you fear your enemies, God wills that
you fear him also, he is the assured refuge of the righteous; say to them
whether you conceal what is in your heart, or whether you manifest it, God
knows all things; he knows all that is either in Heaven or Earth, he is
Omnipotent; Think on the day wherein every one shall find the good and the
evil that he has done, then shall you desire to be cleansed from your sins,
See Gelaldin.
and that the number of your good works exceed that of your evil. God wills
that you fear him, he is gracious to them that worship him. Say to them, If
you love God, follow me, God shall give you life, and pardon your sins, he is
gracious and merciful. Say to them, obey God and his Prophet; If they return
in their sin* God will very severely punish them, he loves not Infidels. God
elected Adam, and Noah, the lineage of Abraham, and the lineage of Joachim, the
one proceeds from the other, God knows and understands all things.
Remember thou, how the wife of Joachim said. Lord I vow unto thee the fruit
that is in my womb, free, See Kitab el tenoir.
and exempt from all affairs, to serve thee in thy Temple: Accept him from me,
who offer him to thee with affection: thou understandest and know all
things: When she was delivered, she said, Lord I am delivered of a Daughter,
thou know thou have given her to me; I have named her Mary, I will preserve
through thine assistance, her and her posterity from the malice of the Devil;
accept her Lord, with a pleasing acceptance, and cause her to produce good
fruits. Zachary had the care of the education of this daughter, and whenever
he went into his Oratorie, he there found a thousand sorts of different fruits
of diverse seasons. He said one day, oh Mary! whence do these good things
proceed? she answered, they proceed from God, who enricheth without measure
whom he pleases. Then Zachary prayed to the Lord, and said, Lord give me a
progeny that may be pleasing to thee, and that may observe thy Commandments;
Lord hear my prayers. The Angels called him, and said to him; I declare to
thee from God, that thou shall have a son, called John, See Gelaldin.
he shall affirm the Messiah to be the word of God, that he shall be a great
person, chaste, a Prophet, and one of the just: Lord, answered, Zachary, how
shall I have a son, I am old, and my wife is barren? The Angel said to him,
so God does as pleases him: Lord, said Zachary, give me some sign of the
conception of my wife: The sign, that I will give thee, answered the Angel,
shall be, that thou shall not speak in three days, but by signs; Remember
thou thy Lord often, praise him evening and morning. Remember thou, how the
Angels said, Oh Mary, God has chosen and purified thee above all women of the
world; oh Mary, obey thy Lord, praise him, and worship him with them that
worship him. I relate to thee how the matter past: thou were not with the
Ministers of the Temple, when they cast in their pens to draw lots, and to see
which of them should have the care of the education o^ Mary, Oh Mahomet.
neither when they entered upon this difficulty. Remember thou how the Angels
said, oh Mary, God declares unto thee a word, from which shall proceed the
Messiah, named Jesus the son of Mary, full of honor in this world, and that
shall be in the other, of the number o^ Intercessors with his divine Majesty;
he shall speak^ in the cradle, as a man betwixt thirty and fifty years and
shall be in the number of the just: She said, Lord how shall I have a child
without the touch of a man? he answered, so God does as pleases him; when he
createt^ any thing, he says, be thou, and it is. I will teach him the
Scriptures, the Mysteries of the Law, the Old Testament, and the Gospel, and
he shall be a Prophet sent to the children of Israel. Jesus said to the
children of Israel, I come to you with evident signs of my mission from your
Lord, I will make unto you of the slime of the earth* the figure of a Bird, I
will blow upon it, incontinently it shall be a Bird, and by the permission of
God, shall fly; I will heal them that are borne blind, and the leprous, I will
raise again the dead, I will teach you what you shall eat, and what you ought not
to eat; this shall serve you for instruction, if you believe in God; I am come
to confirm the old Testament, and what has been taught you heretofore.
Certainly it is lawful for you to eat things that have been heretofore
forbidden. I am come to you with signs of my mission, that testify that I am
truly sent from your Lord; ^^are God, and obey me, God is my Lord, and your
Lord, ^orship him, this is the right way. When Jesus knew their impiety, he
said, who shall sustain the Law of God (...) my absence? The Apostles answered
him, we will sustain ^^e Law of God, we believe in his unity; be thou a
wit^esse before God, that we resign our selves wholly to the ^leasure of his
divine Majesty. Lord we believe in what ^hou have commanded, and we have
followed the Pro^het, thy Apostle, write us in the number of them that ^rofesse
thy Law. The Jews conspired against Jesus, and God caused their conspiracy to
turn against them, he ^noweth the designs of Conspirators. Remember thou, ^ow
the Lord said, O Jesus, I will cause thee to die, I ^ill elevate thee to my
self, and remove thee far from ^nfidels, and prefer those that have obeyed
thee, to Infidels, at the day of Judgment. That day shall assemble you all
before me; I will judge the differences between you, and will punish the
impious, in this world, and in the other; none among them shall be of power to
protect them, I will reward them that shall have believed in my Law, and have
done good works; God loves not the unjust. I relate to thee these mysteries,
and teach thee the Alcoran; Jesus is with God, as is Adam, God created him of
the Earth; he said, be thou, and he was: this truth proceeds from thy Lord,
be not thou of the number of them that doubt; If any one dispute with thee
concerning thy Doctrine, say to them, Come, call together your children and
ours, your wives and ours, let us assemble and address our prayers to God; I
will lay the curse of his divine Majesty upon liars This discourse is most
true, there is no God, but God alone the omnipotent, and wise. If they depart
from his Commandments, he shall well observe the unbelievers; say to them, The
Iew^ and Christians.
Oh ye that know Scripture! come with words alike true between you and us; Do
I worship other then God? I do not associate him with any one, and acknowledge
none other Lord but him; but if they turn aside from the way of faith; God
knows them that shall pollute the Earth; Say to them, be ye witnesses that
we believe in God. Oh ye that understand Scripture, dispute not the Law (...)
Abraham, to wit, if he observed the Old Testament, (...) the Gospel, they were
taught after him, perhaps you w^ acknowledge your error. Oh ye that have
disput^ wh^t you knew not! Abraham was no Jew, nor Christian he professed the
unity of God, he was a true believer, a^^ not of the number of Infidels. The
people, and partic^larly those that followed him, of his time, as also the
Pr^phet Mahomet, and all true believers have known t^ truth of his Law. Part
of them, to whom heretofore w^ given the knowledge of Scripture desired,
seduced y^ from the right way, but they themselves erred, and th^^ knew it not.
Oh ye that know the Scripture! do n^ maliciously conceal the Commandments
of God, co^ not the Truth with a lie, neither willingly hide it. Many of them
that know the written Law, said from t^ break of day, believe in what has been
taught them, the believe in the Law of God: Nevertheless, at evenin^ they were
themselves of the number of Infidels, pera^venture they will be converted.
Believe not, but such (...) follow your own Law; Say to them, The true guide,
the guide of God. The knowledge that was given to you was not given to any
other, but to you: If the Infide^ shall dispute against you, before your Lord,
at the day (...) judgment; say to them, Grace proceeds from the hand of God:
He is bountiful, and omniscient; he p^^doneth whom he pleases, and is
altogether merciful. (...) thou intrustest thy wealth to the hands of many of
the^ that know the written Law, they will faithfully resto^^ it to thee* There
be also many of them that will n^^ restore it, if thou take not heed; because
they have said* They have no belief in the Arabians, they blaspheme against
God, and know their blasphemies. He that sha^ satisfy what he has promised,
and shall fear God, shall be beloved of God; he loves such as have fear of
him before their eyes; such as pervert his Commandments for any profit, shall
have no part in Paradise; he will not protect them, neither regard, or pardon
them at the day (...) judgment; and they shall be rigorously punished. There
^e of them, that alter the Scripture in reading it, and will make believe that
what they read, is in the Scripture, al^hough it be not; they blaspheme, and
know it well. God ^^ve not to man the Scripture, knowledge, and prophesies, to
say to the people, Worship me instead of God; ^ut indeed, to say, Observe
exactly what you have learned (...) Scripture, and what you read. God does not
command ^ou to adore Angels, nor Prophets: Will he command you ^^piety, having
instructed you in his Law? Remember that he received the Promise of the
Prophets, to preach ^is Commandments without fear, and that he has taught ^ou
Scripture; and knowledge; and that after this, See Kitab el tenoir.
came a Prophet, that confirmed the doctrine that was taught you, that you
might believe his words. Have you not approved (...)? Have you not received
what was promised unto you? We have received it; be therefore witnesses against
your selves, and against them that have followed you, and I will be a witness
against you, and against them. Such as ^oe astray from the right way, shall be
wicked; Desire they ^o observe any other Law, then that of God? Whatever is in
Heaven, or Earth, obeys him; either willingly, or by force: And you shall all
one day appear before him, to be judged: Say to them, We believe in God, in
what he has inspired into us, in what he inspired into Abraham, Ismael, Isaac,
Jacob, and the Tribes, in what was ordained by Moses, by Jesus, and generally
all the Prophets from God; and we are wholly resigned to his pleasure. The
Sacrifices of them that desire to follow other Law, then the Law of Salvation,
shall not be accepted; they shall be in the other world, in the number of the
damned. God guided not those that followed impiety, after they had professed
his Law; and having seen, and testified that the Prophet is true, by signs,
clear and evident, that appeared to them. God guides not the unjust, they
shall be for ever cursed of his divine Majesty of Angels, and of all the
world; they shall find no relaxation of their torments, and at the day of
judgment be deprived of protection; except such as shall be converted, and do
good works, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. See Kitab el tenoir.
Such shall be impious toward Jesus, having believed the Boy of Moses, and
shall augment their impiety against Mohomet, shall never be converted, they
shall err etern^^^ly. All the treasures of the Earth shall not be able to sa^
the wicked that die in their impiety, great punishmen^ are prepared for them,
and none of them shall be able (...) protect them. You shall not be justified,
until you ha^ dispensed in pious works, part of the goods you posse^^ God will
take notice of the alms you bestow. All me^ were permitted the children of
Israel, except what Is^ forbad to himself, See Kitab el tenoir.
before the old Testament; Say to the Come, and bring the old Testament, and
consider it, will appear if you speak the Truth. These that shall ^^terwards
blaspheme against God, shall be exceedin^ too blame. Say, God has spoken
Truth, follow ye (...) Law of Abraham, that is pleasing to him: He profe^ the
unity of his Divine Majesty; he was not of them t^ believed in many Gods. The
Temple of Mecca is the (...) that God established on Earth, to be therein
adored; blessed it, and men shall there find the instructions of (...) right
way, with clear and evident signs of his omni^^tency; to wit Abraham's place (
say the Turks) is a Stone kept in the Oratory of Mecca, upon which, Abraham
ascended, when he raised the foundations of the Temple of that City: the marks
of his feet are upon the Stone to this day.
Abraham's place: He that shall enter to this Temple, shall be in a place of
safety and pri^^ledge. God has commanded that Pilgrimages be m^^ thither, by
such as shall be able. He that is impious, (...) know that God has not to do
with him. O ye that h^^ knowledge of the written Law, do not willingly
co^ceale the Commandments of God, he knows all yo^ actions; Say to them, O
ye that have the knowledge (...) Scriptures, divert not from the way of
Salvation the that believe in the Law of God; you desire to alter, (...)
pervert it, but God is not ignorant of what you do. (...) ye that believe, if
you obey many of them that have (...) knowledge of the written Law, they will
mis^lead you i^ the number of the wicked. How can you be of the i^pious, since
you are taught the Commandments of G^^ and that his Prophet, and his Apostle
is among yo^ He that resigneth himself to God, is in the rig^ (...), O ye
that fear God, die in the profession of his V^y, embrace his Law, and remember
the favor he has ^wed you: you were all enemies of each other; he has ^ed
your hearts, and through his special Grace you ^^tinued united to each other
as good brethren: you ^e upon the brink of a pit of fire, from which he with^^
you. Thus God manifests to you his mercies, per^^ you will follow the right
way. Some there be among (...), that exhort the people to do good; they command
to that which is honest, and abstain from what is unreaso^^^le; these men shall
be happy: Be not like them that ^e abandoned the Truth, and followed lies;
notwith^^nding the Truth was known to them, they shall suffer ^at torment in
the day wherein the visage of the good ^ll be white, and that of the wicked
shall be black. It ^ll be said to them that have black visages; Have you ^owed
impiety, after you made profession of the Faith? ^ste this day the torment due
to your sin. Such as shall ^e white visages, shall be in the favor of God; in
which ^y shall eternally continue. See there the Mysteries of (...) Law of God,
which instructs thee with Truth. God ^leth that no injustice be done to his
people; whatever ^n Heaven, or in Earth, appertains to him, he dispo^th all
things. There has appeared no Nation on the ^^rth that has followed a better
way then you; forbid (...) to do that which is not reasonable, and believe in
one ^ely God; The Jews
If those that heretofore had knowledge of ^e written Law, had believed in God,
they had done ve^^ well; there be among them that believe what is verita^^e,
but the greatest part are impious. They shall not hurt ^^u, but with their
tongue, and shall find no protection against you; if they fight you, they
shall turn their ^cks; they were beaten with shame and ignominy, where ^hey
made a stand, except, when they embraced the Law ^f God, and observed the
precepts that were taught the ^aithfull: When they returned in the wrath of
God, they were beaten with poverty; because they believed not the word of his
Divine Majesty, but slew his Prophets without reason, and disobeyed his
Commandments. They that heretofore had knowledge of the written Law, not all
alike: there be among them that persevere obedience, and in the night meditate
on the miracle God, worship him, and believe in his Divine Maj^ and the day of
Judgment; preach honesty, prohibit do things dishonest, and apply themselves
to good wo^ certainly, they are good men. Hide not the good w^ which you
perform, God knows such as have his (...) before their eyes. Riches and
children shall be unp^table to Infidels with God, they shall eternally dwe^ the
fire of Hell: The Alms that they give in this w^ are like to a wind exceedingly
hot, or extremely (...) that fell upon the tillage of them that did injury to
(...) own souls, and wholly destroyed it. God did no inju^ to them, they were
mischievous to themselves thr^ their sins. O ye that believe in God, esteem no
man be elected of God, that is not of your Religion: (...) wicked endeavored
to bring you into their disor^ malice appeared in their mouth, and that which
(...) heart cherishes, is yet greater: We have taught you Commandments of
God; if you observe them, shall protect your selves from the malice of
Infidels. (...) ye! you love them, and they love not you; you bel^ generally in
the Scriptures, and they believe not (...) you believe: When they met you, they
said, We beli^ in God; and when they were gone from you, they bit^ anger their
fingers ends: Say to them, Die with y^^ choler, Benou Selimeth.
God knows what is in your hearts. If g^ happen to you, they are displeased;
and when evil be^leth you, Benou Ayirteth.
they rejoice: If you have patience, and (...) God, their malice shall not hurt
you; God knows their actions. Beder is a place bebetween Mecca and Medina,
where Mahomet gained a battle.
Remember the morning, when some of (...) people deserted the true-believers in
the field of batte^ and when two of thy Companions forsook the fig^ God was
their protector: All True-believers ought trust in him. He protected you at
Beder, where you were few men ill armed* perhaps you will fear him, and give h^
thanks for that favor. Say to the True-believers, Suffice^ it not, that God
succoreth you with three thousand of (...) Angels: Truly, if you have patience,
and fear God, he will ^e to succor you at need, and your Lord will assist you
^h five thousand of his Angels sent from Heaven; he (...) not send you this
assistance, but to declare to you his ^otection, and to confirm your hearts.
Victory proceed^ from his Divine Majesty: He is omnipotent, and pru^t in all
his works; he will extirpate in this world one ^t of the wicked, or will so
sharply reprehend them, ^t they shall become desperate. Thou have nothing to
(...) whether he shall pardon, or chastise them, because ^y are wicked:
Whatever is in the Earth, and in Hea^, is his, he pardons as he sees good!
he is gracious (...) merciful to the righteous. O ye that believe! be not
^urers, and fear God; peradventure you will obey his ^^mmandements; Fear the
fire of Hell prepared for In^^els. Obey God, and the Prophets, his Apostles,
your (...) shall be forgiven you; beg pardon speedily of your ^rd. The extent
of Paradise contains Heaven and ^rth; it is prepared for the good. God loves
them that ^e Alms in joy, and in affliction; that subdue their pas^n, and
forgive such as offend them: he loves them that (...) good, and that after the
commission of any sin, remem^r his divine Majesty, and implore his pardon. Who
but ^od forgiveth sins? Such as persist not in their errors, and knowledge
their sins, shall be recompensed with the ^ercy of God, and enjoy his favor in
Paradise. There were ^^retofore Laws and Means to conduct men into the right
^y; but consider what has bin the end of Infidels. The ^lcoran was sent to
instruct the world, to guide men in the ^^ght way, and to preach to the good.
Dishearten not, nei^^er afflict your selves in fighting; you shall be
victorious, you believe in God; if you have been wounded, the like ^^rts have
befallen the impious. God so diversifieth days among men, to the end he may
know them that are truly ^ealous in his Law; and that among you, witnesses be
taken against the malice of Infidels. God loves not the unjust ^e forgiveth
sins to those that believe, and extirpate Infi^els. Do you believe to enter
Paradise, and that God know^th not them that fought gallantly? He knows them
that were patient in adversity, and persevered in obedien^ his Commandments.
You expected death before yo^ it; At the battle of Beder.
you saw it with your eyes, and were victorious. ^^^tainly Mahomet is the
Prophet, and Apostle of God* were many Prophets before him; when they died, on
slain, you returned upon your steps to impiety: The^ return upon their steps,
do no harm to God; he w^ ward only such as acknowledge his favors; and me^ not
die without his permission, and that in a time p^ bed and predestinate. I will
give the good things (...) world to whom it pleases me, and will abundantly
^^pence them that praise me. How many Prophets, an^ with them, that were not
dejected through their a^ons that befell them, in fighting for the Law of (...)
They were not weakened, neither humbled to the I^ God affects them that are
patient in their adver^ and such as persevere in his Law. They said in their
^ctions, Lord pardon our sins, confirm our steps, an^ ^^^tect us against the
Infidels. God gives them the (...) of the Earth, and the Treasures of Heaven;
he (...) them that do good. O ye that believe in God, if y^ ^bey the wicked,
they will cause you to return upon steps, you shall return to the number of the
da^ truly God is your Lord, he is the best protector; I w^ fear into the hearts
of Infidels, because they have w^ reason adored many Gods, and the fire of Hell
she their habitation. God has made the truth of his ^^ses to appear to you,
when by his permission you fle^ Infidels, until you were weary of fighting;
ne^ less you contradicted what the Prophet ordained disobeyed him, after he
had caused you to see who desired with affection. There be among you that (...)
the goods of this world, and others that love the (...) things of heaven; God
has withdrawn you from t^ ^^fidels, to try you, he has pardoned your sins,
he is ^^tifull to them that observe his Commandments. (...) you retreated from
the Combat, and yielded without son, the Prophet recalled you, and gave you to
kno^ error, with a thousand pains; afflict not your (...) with the loss of
the spoil that escaped you at the day of ^ictory, neither with the mischief
that befeil you when ^ou were vanquished, God knows all your actions. After
your labor, he sent you great repose, part of you slept (...) all safety, and
the residue suffered themselves to be ^rried away at their pleasures, they had
thoughts of God ^^ntrary to the truth. Think on the ignorant, that say, ^ave we
seen any of the succor that God has promi^^d? Say to them, all things proceed
from God. They ^^nceale in their souls, what they publish not, and say, had ^e
been free of our own wills, we had not been slain; say (...) them, although you
had stayed in your houses, and in our beds, death would have taken away them
that were ^rived at the hour of their destiny; God approves that is in your
hearts, and knows what you have in our souls: Certainly the Devil seduced
them that fled, ^hen the two Armies were in battle, and that, because of ^me
sin they had committed; nevertheless God par^oned them, he is gracious and
merciful to his people. Oh ^ee that believe! be not like the Infidels, that
said, spea^ing of their breathren that were slain in the Army; that had they
continued in their houses, they had not ^^ed; God puts this sorrow in their
heart, because of their impiety; he gives life and death, and beholds all
^our actions; if you be slain for his Law, or die in his fa^our, it shall be
more advantageous to you then all the ^^easures of the world; and if you die,
or be slain, fight^^g for the Faith, you shall appear before his divine
Ma^estie to be rewarded: Through the grace of God thou ^ast rendered them
docile; although thou be severe (...) them, they will not depart from thee,
pardon them, ^ray for them. Take their advise in occasions offered, See
Gelaldin.
and being resolved to do any thing, trust thou in God; ^e loves them that
trust in him, he protecteth you; none shall obtain victory over you; if he
abandon you, who shall protect you? All the faithful ought to resign
themselves to the will of his divine Mejestie. It is not lawful ^or the
Prophet to deceive; he that shall be a decei^er, shall appear at the day of
Judgment with his deceit, to be judged; then shall men be paid with (...)
they have gained, no injustice shall be done to them (...) shall have loved
God, and Hell shall be the Habitation them, that through deceit shall return in
the displeasur^ his divine Majesty; They shall not be all equally ent^ted, God
shall appoint them their rank and place, he holds all their actions, he
assuredly rewarded the (...) believers, when he sent them a Prophet of their
own ^^tion to preach to them his Commandments, and inst^ them in the Alcoran;
they before his coming were (...) manifest error: When any mischief befell
you, it (...) befell the Infidels; you have demanded, When does (...) mischief
come? it proceeds from your selves, certa^ God is Omnipotent. What befell you
when the (...) Camps encountered, happened through the permission God, to
distinguish the true believers, that dispense the goods with affection for the
glory of his divine Majest^ from them that abandoned the fight; when it was
said them, Come, fight for the Faith, and answered, had (...) thought of
fighting, we had not followed you; then we they nearer to impiety, then to the
Faith; nevertheles^ they had not all of them that in their heart, that was
(...) their mouth, God knows what they keep secret: The be of them that said
to their brethren; Stay, and go (...) to the Combat; your Companions had not
been slain, hi^ they obeyed us; say to them, Deliver your selves from death, if
you can avoid it, continuing in your houses. Believe not that those that were
slain for the Faith are dea^ on the contrary, they are alive with God; they
rejoy^ for that such as ^an to hinder them to fight, did not mee^ them; fear
not for them, they shall rejoice eternally (...) the favor of God, he w^ll
abundantly reward them tha^ fight for his Law. Those that obeyed God and the
Prophet, after being, overcome that did good works, and feared his divine
Majesty, shall receive great rewards. When it was told them, the people have
conspired against you* take heed to your selves; this discourse increased the^
faith; and they said, it suffices that God is our protector, they were filled
with the grace of God, no more evil befell them, and they observed the
Commandments of his ^ivine Majesty. He is gracious to them that obey him. The
Devil will cause in you a fear of the Infidels, fear them not; but if you be
good men, fear me. Afflict not ^our selves to see the wicked run to impiety,
they hurt not God, he will not give them rest in the other world, where they
shall be severely chast^sed. I increase the wealth of Infidels to augment their
pain, they shall in the and feel grievous torments. God will not leave the
faithful in the state that you are in; he will one day separate ^he good from
the evil; he does not teach you what is to ^ome; he, for that effect chooses
among the Prophets whom he sees good. Believe therefore in God, and his
Prophets; if you believe in God, fear to offend him, you shall be rewarded.
Believe that such as are too sparing, and avaritious of the wealth that God
has given them, do well; on the contrary, they do very ill, what they spare
without reason, shall strangle them at the day of Judgment. The inheritance of
heaven and earth is Gods, he knows all things. Certainly God heard the speech
of them that said, God is poor, and we are rich; he has said, I will write
what they have spoken, and keep an ex^ct account of the murder they have
unjustly committed on the persons of the Prophets; I will say to them at the
day of Judgment, taste of the torments of hell fire, which you have deserved.
God does not lead into darkness them that worship him. There be that say, God
has commanded us not to believe the Prophets, until their sacrifice be
consumed by fire: say to them, there came to you Prophets heretofore with
miracles that you demanded, you had not slain them, had you been righteous; if
they belly thee, know, they belyed the Prophets that were before thee, that came
with miracles, the Psalter, and the book of light. Every man shall taste of
death, and your reward shall be paid at the day of Judgment; he that shall
depart from the fire of hell, and enter into Paradise, shall be happy. The
wealth of this world is but matter of Pride, that you may be tried in your
riches and persons. Hearken not to the Jews and Christians, that have known the
written Law before you, neither to them that belie^ in many gods, they offend
God through their blasphemy if you have patience, and fear God, you shall make
a ver^ good resolution. God has accepted the speech of the that know his
written Law, when they promised him (...) preach to the people his
Commandments, and not co^ceal them; nevertheless they have contemned them, a^
changed them for profit of little value, and have gain^ nothing but misery;
think not that such as rejoice of the evil they have done, and affect to be
commended (...) what they have not done, have escaped the punishme^ of their
crimes, they shall certainly suffer great torment The kingdom of heaven and of
earth is Gods, he is O^nipotent; the Creation of heaven and earth, the
diff^rence of day and night are evident signs of his Omnip^tencie, to such as
have judgment. Such as have, remember God, standing, sitting, or lying down,
and consider^ the creation of Heaven and Earth have said, Lord, the have not
created* these things in vain; blessed be the Name, deliver us from the
torments of hell fire, thou w^ render miserable him that thou shall thither
precipitat^ and the wicked shall be deprived of protection at the da^ of
Judgment. Lord, we have heard them that say, believe in your Lord, we believe
in thy unity, pardon o^ faults, blot out our sins, and give us grace to die in
the number of the just; bestow on us what thou have pro^^sed by the Prophets,
and suffer us not to be miserable a^ the day of Judgment; thou do not
contradict wh^ thou do prom^se. The Lord heard them, and said (...) them, I
will not suffer your works to be lost, as well (...) men as of women. I will
blot out the sins of them tha^ went out of Mecca, to separate themselves from
the wi^ked; I will cover the offenses of them that forsook their houses, that
assembled to fight for the Faith, and we^ flain; I will open to them the gate
of Paradise, wherein flow many rivers, to recompense their good woorks. There
is with God great reward: envy not the Infidels, who^ thou shall see posiesse
a little wealth in the earth, hell is prepared to be their habitation; and such
as fear Go^ shall dwell eternally in gardens, wherein run many rivers, with all
manner of content. God is a great rewarder of the just. Among them that know
the written Law, there be, that believe in God, in what was before time taught
you, and in what was preached to them, surely they obey God, and forsake not
his Law: They shall receive a great reward from God, he is exact in his
account. O ye that are true believers, be patient in your adversities,
persevere to do well, fight for the Faith, fear God, and you shall be happy.

CHAP. IV. The chapter of women, containing one hundred and seventy Verses
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Kitab el tenoir.
O ye people, fear your Lord that created you of one sole person, and created
his wife of his rib, of whom issued many men and women. Fear God, by whom you
swear, and say, the belly The ancient Arabians swore by by the name of God,
and the belly of their wives because they feared their sterility.
of your wives, God exactly observes your actions. Give unto orphans what
appertains to them; and render not evil for good; devour not their
substance, it is a very great sin. If you fear to do injury to Orphans, fear
also to do wrong to women; marry those that please you, two, three, or four:
if you apprehend you shall not be able to entertain them equally; marry but
one, or the slaves that you shall have acquired; this is most necessary, to the
end you offend not God. Give to women their dowry with a good will; if they
give to you any thing that is pleasing to you, receive it with affection, and
civility. Bestow not on fools the wealth that God has given you for
subsistence; assist Orphans, give to them the garments that shall be necessary
for them, and entertain them honestly; instruct them until they have attained
to years of discretion, and are capable of marriage; if you believe they
demean themselves wisely, restore to them their faculties, and devour them
not unjustly before they be of age. He that shall be rich, shall abstain from
their goods, and he that is poor, shall take with honesty, according to the
pains he shall undergo for them: when you make to them restitution of their
goods, take witness of your action, God loves good accounts. The children
shall have a good part of what their father, and mother, and parents left after
their decease, of little or of much there appertains to them a portion
prefixed and limited. When they divide their goods, the kindred shall have
care of the poor and Orphans; do good to them, and honestly entertain them.
Such as fear to leave after them a weak progeny of little children, ought to
fear to wrong Orphans, they must fear God, and courteously entertain them.
Those that unjustly devour their substance, swallow fire into their bowels,
and shall burn in a great fire. God recommendeth to you your children, the son
shall have as much as two daughters; if there be more then two daughters, they
shall have two thirds of the succession of the dead; if there be but one, See
Bedaci.
she shall have the moity, and her kindred a sixth part of what shall be left
by the dead: if there be no children, and the kindred be heirs, the mother of
the dead shall have a third; if there be brethren, the mother shall have a
sixth, after satisfaction of the legacies contained in the Testament, and of
debts. You understand not to whom it is most requisite to do good, to your
children, or to your father and mother, give them their portion ordained of
God. The moity of what their wives shall leave belongs to you, if they have
no children; if they have, you shall have the fourth part of what they shall
leave, after payment of the legacies and debts: they shall have the fourth of
your succession, if you have no children; if you have, they shall have the
eighth portion. If a man of woman be the heirs of each other, and have neither
father nor mother, nor children, and have a brother or sister, each of them
shall have a sixth part of the succession; if they be more, they shall share
the third, after payment of legacies and debts, without fraud, following what
God has ordained, he knows all your actions, and is prudent in what he
ordains, it is so ordained by his divine Majesty. He that shall obey him, and
his Prophet, shall enter into Paradise, where many rivers flow, and shall dwell
in eternal felicity; he that shall disobey God and his Prophet, shall be cast
headlong nto the fire of hell, where he shall suffer ignominious torments. If
your wives commit adultery, take four witnesses of their fault, that be of your
Religion; if they bear witness, keep them prisoners in your houses until
death, or until God shall otherwise ordain; punish whoremongers, concubines,
and adulterers; if they repent of their fault, do them no harm, God is
gracious and merciful to them that repent. Conversion depends on God, he is
merciful to them that commit sin ignorantly, and speedily repent, he is
Omniscient, and most wise. Pa^don is not for them that do wickedly, to the
very hour of their death, we have prepared great torments for them that shall
die impious. O ye that believe in God! it is not lawful for you to inherit
what is your wives by force, take not violently away what you have given them,
unless they be surprised in manifest adultery; see them with civility, if you
have an avertion from them, it may chance that you hate a thing, wherein God
has placed much good; but if you desire to repudiate your wives, to take
others, and that you have given them any thing, take not any thing that
appertains to them. Will you take their wealth with a lie and a manifest sin?
How shall you take it, since you have approached each other, and that you have
promised to use them civilly? Marry not the wives of your fathers; what is past
was incest, abomination, and a wicked way. Your Mothers are forbidden you, your
Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, Neices, your Nurses, and your foster-sisters, the
mothers of your wives, the daughters that your wives have had by other
husbands, of whom you shall have a particular care: The daughters of women that
you shall have known, are also forbidden you; if you have not known them, it
will be no sin: the wives of your sons are likewise prohibited, and two
sisters; for what is past, God is gracious and merciful: Married wives are
likewise forbidden you, except the women slaves, that you shall have acquired.
God has so commanded you, except what is above forbidden, it is lawful for
you to marry at your pleasure. If you desire women for money, and neither
commit concubinage, nor adultery, give them their salary for which you shall
agree, so you shall not offend God, he is omniscient, and most wise. He that
shall not be able to espouse women of free-condition, shall marry such women or
maids, that are slaves, as shall please him. God knows the faith of the one,
and other. Marry your wives with the permission of their parents, and give them
their dowry with honesty: If women of free-condition, that have committed
neither concubinage, nor adultery, secretly nor publicly, fly into second
nuptials, and come to commit adultery, they shall be doubly punished, more then
the daughters of Love. See Gelaldin.
The marriage of slaves is for them that fear whordom: If you abstain from
marrying them, you shall not do amiss. God is gracious and merciful; he is
willing to teach you his Law, and direct you in the way of them that preceded
you; he is gracious and merciful to his people. Such as follow the appetite of
the wicked, decline extremely from the Truth. God wills that his Law be Light
unto you, for that man was created weak. O you that believe in God, devour not
your substance among you with ufury; but if you traffic, be peaceable in your
affairs; slay not one another, God is merciful to them that obey him: He that
disobeyeth, through malice and injustice, shall burn in the fire of Hell; it is
an easy thing to God to punish them. If you depart from mortal sins, I will
cover your faults, and cause you to enter into Paradise: covet not through
envy, what God has given to your neighbor; men and women shall have the
wealth they have gained; beg Grace of God, he knows all things. Give to your
associates what appertains to them. We have ordained a portion, prefixed to
the one and the other, in the succession of your Father, Mother, and Kindred,
God sees all. The men shall have authority over the women; they shall have
them in their keeping; they shall have in their power the wealth that God shall
give them; and shall have care of what shall be convenient to be expended for
them. Discreet and obedient wives observe, in the absence of their husbands,
the Commandments of God, make remonstrances to them that shall be disobedient,
and remove them from your Bed, chastise them. If they obey you, seek not
occasion to abuse them uniustly. God is most high, and most mighty. If you fear
there may happen some difference between a man and his wife, send to them some
of their Kindred, to put an end to their quarrel, and reconcile them. God will
give his peace to them, he is omniscient. Worship God, and say not that he has
a companion equal to him; do good to your Father, and Mother, your Kindred,
Orphans, the Poor, your Neighbors, Pilgrims, your Friends, and your Slaves. God
loves not the proud. We have prepared rigorous torments for them that are
avaricious, that recommend avarice to the people, that conceal the Graces that
God has bestowed on them, and that are impious. Such as dispend their wealth
with hypocrisy, believe neither in God, nor the day of Judgment; and those
that shall have the Devil for their companion, will be in exceeding bad
company; he shall not approach them, if they believe in God, and the day of
Judgment, and give Alms in some part of the riches God has given them. God
knows them, and does no injustice to any one, of the weight of a small Ant.
If the righteous do good of the quantity of a Pismire, God shall multiply it,
and give them a great reward. In what condition will Infidels be at the day of
Judgment; for that we have witnesses of all Nations against their impiety* and
that we will call thee for a witness against them of their deportments? That
day, the Infidels that have disobeyed the Prophet, shall def^^e to be consumed,
like to the Earth; and not to have concealed or altered, through their
discourse, the Commandments of God. O you that believe, make not your prayers,
being drunk, until you know what you speak; neither likewise being polluted,
unless in passing on the way, until you be cleansed; if you be in a journey,
or sick, or go to discharge your belly, or have known your wives and find no
water to wash you, you shall lay hand upon the sand, and wipe your face and
hands. God is graciou^ and merciful to his Creatures. See thou not how thos^
that know the written Law, purchase Error? how the desire to mis-lead you
through their riches, and divert yo^ from the right way? God knows your
enemies, it is enough that he is your defender and protector. Such (...)
Judaize, alter the word of God, say to the Prophet^ We have heard, and
disobeyed thee, they heard without hearing; they say, preserve us, have a care
of us; nevertheless do they pervert the word of God, in reading it and alter
his Commandments, they should do better t^ say, Lord we have heard, and
obeyed; hearken only t^ us, and regard us: But God has cursed them, and f^^
of them will believe in his Divine Majesty, O you tha^ have knowledge of the
Scriptures I believe in the Alcoran that confirms the old and new Testament,
before that (...) deface your visages, and cause them to turn behind your
backs. He speaks to the Jews and Christians.
I will curse Infidels, as I have cursed them of the Sabbath; the Commandment
of God is incontinently executed; he pardons not them that associate him with
companions equal to him, except this, he forgiveth sins to whom it pleases
him: He that says God has companions, blasphemeth, and mortally sins.
Consider not such as affirm themselves to be good men; contrariwise, God makes
those good men that please him; no injustice shall befall them at the day of
Judgment. Consider how they blaspheme, it is sufficient that God manifestly
beholds their sin. See thou not them that have knowledge of the written
Law, that believe in Habot and Tago^, Idols; that say to the Infidels, Behold
the way of them that believe in God? Certainly, God has cursed them; he, whom
he curses, shall find none to protect him. Shall they alone have part in the
kingdom of Heaven, without giving Alms? They will envy their Neighbor, for
the favors God has conferred on him. Certainly, we gave to the posterity of
Abraham, the knowledge of the Scriptures, and Prophecies; we bestowed ^n them
great abundance of wealth. There were of them that believed in the Scripture,
and others that contemned (...); but they shall be punished in the fire of
Hell. I will ^ause them to burn, and change their burned skin into ^ new skin,
that they may suffer the more. God is omnipotent, and prudent in what he
ordains. I will cause those that have believed in God, and have performed
good works, to enter into Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, where they shall
dwell eternally with most beau^ifull women. I will give them to enter the shade
of Paradise: God recommendeth to you, Fidelity among your selves, to render
faithfully what has been entrusted to you; and when you shall judge
differences that shall happen among the people, judge with equity. It is a good
work that he commands you; he beholds, and knows all things. O ye that
believe! obey God, and the Prophets, and such as command over you; if you be in
controversy concerning any point, refer it to God, and his Prophet, to
understand the Exposition; if you believe in God, and the day of Judgment, you
shall do well: this will be the best interpretation that you can attain to.
See thou not, that they who think to believe in what has been inspired into
thee, and what has been inspired into thy Predecessors, incline to dispute
before Ta^o^? Nevertheless, they have commanded not to believe in that Idol;
the Devil labors to seduce, and withdraw them from the Truth. When it was
said to them. Obey the Commandment of God, and his Prophet, they departed from
thee: What will they do, when there shall happen to them any punishment of
their past sins? They will return to thee, and swear by the name of God, That
they desire Peace, and to do good Works; but God knows what is in their
hearts, and has abandoned them. Cease not to preach to them, and to declare to
them the Word of God; the Prophets, and Apostles were not sent, but to preach,
and to be heard through the permission of his Divine goodness. If, when they
have hurt their souls, they come to thee, and demand pardon of God, thou shall
beg pardon for them, they shall find God gracious and merciful: The will not
believe in his divine Majesty, until they ha^^ disputed the difference with
thee, that is among them and when they shall no more doubt of what thou sha^^
have done, they will without contradiction obey the^ We have ordained them to
kill each other, and to fo^sake their houses; they have not done it, except
very fe^ of them: and although they did it, they did it not, to obey what
should have been to them a great benefit, an^ an exceeding merit; we had given
them a very gre^^ reward, and guided them to the right way. He that sha^ obey
God, and his Prophet, shall be with them who^ God has endued with his Grace;
He that knows it, resigneth himself to his divine Majesty. O you that are
True-believers! be upon your guard, assembled to fight stoutly for the Law of
God. There be among you that be cowardly, when any discomfiture has befaln
you; they have said, God protected me, that I was not with them: And when God
gave you victory, they spak as if there had been no understanding between them,
and you. Would to God, I had been with them I should have acquired exceeding
great merit. Fight for the glory of God, against them that prefer the life of
this world, to that of Heaven: I will give an exceeding great reward to such as
shall fight, that shall be victorious, and to them that shall be slain,
fighting for the Faith. Wherefore fight you not for the Law of God? for the
liberty of women and children, This place is Mecca.
weak and afflicted, that cry, Lord deliver us out of this place; the people
thereof are unjust, give us a protector, give us an assured refuge. They that
believe in God fight for his Law, and Infidels fight for the Devil. Fight
against them that serve the Devil, his policies are weak. Consider those to
whom it was said, C^ase to imbr^w your hands in the blood of Infidels,
persevere in your prayers, and pay tithes. When they were commanded to fight,
part of them were afraid of the multitude, as of God, yea, more afraid of the
multitude then of God, and said, Lord thou have not enjoined us to fight,
unless thou have differed us to a near end. Say to t^^m, The wealt^ of the
earth is but a small thing, there (...) great riches in the other world, for
him that shall have ^e fear of God before his eyes. No injustice shall be ^ne
to you; wheresoever you are, death will meet you, ^^twithstanding you may be in
strong Citadels. If good ^^ppen to the Infidels, they say it proceeds from
God; ^evill befall them, they say that comes from thee. Say (...) them, All
proceeds from God, what then is the will ^f those men? they cannot comprehend
this discourse: ^he good that happens to you, comes from God, and ^he evil
that befalls you, is of your selves. We have ^ent thee to the people, to
teach them the mysteries of my Law; it is sufficient that I am witness. He
that obeys the Prophet, the Apostle of God, obeys God; if they be
disobedient, thou art not sent to be their tutor. They say, They will obey
thee, and when they are gone from thee, many of them ponder in their heart
other things then they have spoken, but God shall write their thoughts, and
abandon them. Resign thy self to God, and be content that he is thy
protector. Will they not meditate on the Alcoran? Were it sent from any but
from God, there would be therein many contradictions. When they had any
assurance of victory, or feared to be overcome, they published it, although
they had referred all to the Prophet to the most knowing among them, and to
them that obeyed the Prophet, who knew what ought to be published, and what to
be kept secret. If the grace of God had not bin with you, and his mercy, you
had followed the Devil. Fight for the Law of God, employ but thy person, and
be not troubled, if the true believers be without arms, See Kitab el tenoir.
the misery of the wicked shall never end, God shall augment their calamity,
and increase the punishment of their crimes; he that does well, shall find
well, This is the ^attell of Beder; the enemies of Mahomet made two battles.
and who does evil, shall find evil, God regards all. When you are saluted,
return the salute with honor and affection, God puts all in account. God!
there is but one only God, he shall assemble you all at the day of Judgment,
of that there is no doubt. Who is more true in his words then God? What have
you to do with those wicked ones, divided into two Troops? God ruined and
destroyed them, because of their sins; will you direct into the right (...)
him, See Kitab el tenoir.
whom God has made to err? He, whom he s^^ cause to err, shall not find the
right way. They de^^ that you may be Infidels, as they are, obey them not
^lesse they shall return to the Law of God; See Gelaldin.
if they fors^^ it, kill them where you find them, contract no friends^^ with
them, except with such as shall come to enter leag^ with you, with sorrow for
what is past; to fight again Infidels with you. Had it pleased God, he had
given the advantage over you, and they had beaten you, if they ^^part from you,
and follow your Religion, God perm^teth not you to do them injury. You shall
find some th^^ shall incline to believe you, and their companions, th^^ will
turn all to confusion, and fall into it themselves: ^ they separate themselves
from you, if they desire not pea^^ of you, and desist not to do you mischief,
take and k^^ them, where you find them, we have given you absolu^^ power over
them. One true believer ought not to slay another true believer, unless it be
through ignorance; H^ that shall slay a true believer through ignorance, shall
redeem from slavery a true believer, or shall pay damages and interests to the
kindred and Heirs of the dead, if they through courtesy discharge him not of
them: If he be of your enemies, and a true believer, he shall ransom from
captivity a true believer; If he be of your confederates, he shall pay damages
and interests to the kindred, and heirs of the dead, and redeem from
captivity a true believer; If he shall be destitute of means to perform
this, he shall fast two months together for a penance appointed of God; God
knows all things, and is prudent in what he commands. He that shall kill a
true believer of deliberate purpose, shall be chastised in the fire of Hell,
the wrath of God, and his curse shall be upon him eternally. Oh ye! who are
true believers, when you fight against Infidels for the Law of God, cause your
selves to be known, and say not to them that salute you, thou art not a true
believer; If you desire the good things of the world, God possesses riches
innumerable, you were before like to them, but God has given you grace, and
^^eth all your actions. The faithful that continue in ^^eir houses without
sickness, are not equal in merits (...) such as employ their persons and
faculties for the Law (...) God; he prefers by many degrees, them that fight
^r his Law, and employ their wealth and persons for ^is service; to those that
remain idle in their houses he ^s their protector, and has prepared for them
a sure re^uge in Paradise: he gratifieth by many degrees of fa^our, them that
fight for his Law, above those that live ^t ease in their houses, he is
gracious and merciful. The Angels said to the Infidels that they put to death,
where were you with your Religion? they answered, we were weak and impotent in
the City of Mecca; they said, was not the Earth large enough for you to depart
from the wicked? Hell shall be their habitation, except the women and children
that were weak and impotent; peradven^ure God will pardon them, he is gracious
and merciful; he that shall depart from the wicked to follow his Law, shall
find many places favorable to him, assuredly he will recompense him that
shall quit his house, that shall be slain for his glory, and to follow his
Prophet, he is gracious and merciful. When you shall be in a journey, you
shall not offend God to abridge your prayers, that the Infidels may not
surprise you, they are your declared Enemies; when thou shall be near them,
and shall appoint the true believers to make their prayers, keep about thee a
party of them for a guard, while the residue make their prayers; having
finished their Orisons, they shall do as the first; take arms, and keep a
guard, during the time their companions shall make their prayers: the Infidels
desire that you quit your arms to surprise you; you shall not do amiss to
quit them, if rain trouble you, or you be sick, but continue always upon your
guard, God has prepared for Infidels ignominious torments: Having finished
your prayers, Remember God, standing, sitting or lying down, and pray when you
shall be in a place of safety; prayer is commanded the faithful in a prefixed
and appointed time. Be not negligent to pursue the Infidels, if you suffer,
they shall suffer (...) you; but you hope for that which they must not hope for
God knows all their actions, he is most prudent (...) all his works. We have
sent to thee the most true Book, the end, thou may judge the differences that
are amo^^ the people, as thy Lord has instructed thee. Contend (...) with
Traitors, and ask pardon of God, he is gracious a^^ merciful. Dispute not
with those that betray their soul^ God loves not treacherous sinners, they
conceal themselves from the world, he is with them when they hide their hearts
such things as are displeasing to him, (...) knows all their actions: O ye!
you dispute for the in this world, who shall dispute for them against God (...)
the day of Judgment? who shall that day be their pr^tector? He that shall
implore pardon of God, have offended him, shall find him gracious and merciful
who does evil, shall find evil, God is Omniscient, a^^ most wise. Gelaldin
says a great and little sin.
He that commits a venial, or a mortal sin, a^^ would excuse himself,
commits evidently a mortal sin* Many of them had endeavored to seduce
thee, had th^^ not been directed by the grace and mercy of God. B^^ they
seduce only their own souls, and shall do thee (...) harm; God has sent to
thee the Book that containe^ his Commandments; he has taught thee what thou
di^ not understand, and his grace is eminently upon thee there is no good in
the multiplicity of their secrets or di^course, except in such as command alms,
honesty, a^^ peace among the people, with desire to please God, the^ shall
recive from his divine Majesty a great reward. (...) that shall contradict the
Prophet, having had knowled^^ of the right way, and shall follow other paths
then that (...) the true believers, shall relapse into his impiety, I wi^^
cause him to burn in the fire of hell, where is the habitatio^ of the wicked.
God pardons not them that say, he ha^ companions, except this, he pardons all
things as he see^ good; he that affirms that God has a companion greatly
erreth, and is estranged from the truth. If they invoke other then God, they
invoke Idols, the devil, obstinate, and cursed of God; when he said to him,
thou wi^^ not give me power over them that worship thee, but I will seduce them
from the right way, I will prolong their wicked life, to retard their
conversion, I will cause them to cut off the The ancient Arabians cut off the
ear of any beast and gave him liberty through their country for expiation of
their sins.
ears of beasts, they shall disobey thy commendements, and they shall envy thy
creatures. He that demands succors of the devil, is in manifest perdition,
he will promise to men long life, and retard their repentance, but he promises
them but a vain glory; hell is the dwelling place of such men, out of which
they shall find no issue; Such as shall believe in God, and do good works,
shall dwell eternally in Paradise, where flow many rivers. God is most true in
what he promises, who is more then God in his words? Your lies, and the lies
of them that know the written Law, do him no harm; See Gelaldin.
be that shall do ill, shall be punished, and shall find no protector; he that
shall do well, See Kitab el tenoir.
and shall believe in the Law of God, shall enter into Paradise, and shall have
no injustice done to him; what better law is there, then to resign thy self to
God, and to be an honest man? Follow the Law of Abraham; God chose Abraham, to
love him; whatsoever is in heaven and in earth, belongs to his divine
Majesty, he knows all things. They will question thee concerning women; say
to them, God teaches you in that, what you were taught in the Scripture
touching Orphans, and women; give to them what is appointed by the Law, and
desire not to espouse them, only to possess their wealth; God teaches you
likewise to give to Orphans what appertains to them, and not to iniure them;
he will understand your good actions. If a woman fear to be illentreated by her
husband, and that he will divorce her, they shall do well, mutually to accord,
for peace is exceeding good. If you be too obstinate, and cannot agree
together; if you do good to your wives in divorcing them, and fear to wrong
them, God will take notice of your actions. If you believe you cannot keep
equality, and justice among your wives, although you apply your selves to it;
Incline not altogether to your own appetites, and leave not your wife, as a
thing left in toleration. If you live in a good accord and fear to injure them,
God will be merciful to you. If they separate themselves conformably to the
precepts of the Law, God will enrich them with his protection, he is bountiful
and wise, and whatever is in Heaven, and Earth obeys him. We have recommended
to you the fear of God, as we have heretofore, to them that had knowledge of
the written Law. If you be impious, know, that whatever is in Heaven and Earth
is Gods; he has no need of his creatures, must be exalted, it suffices thee,
he is thy protector. If he will, he can cause you to perish, and put other
creatures in your place, for he is Omnipotent. He that loves the good things
of the Earth, shall find in God all the wealth of this world, and of the other,
he understands and sees all things. Oh you that believe! be true in your
testimonies, notwithstanding it be against your selves, against your Father and
Mother, and against your kindred, and consider the rich no more then the poor,
God is the protector of the one, and the other; follow not your appetites, to
favor the rich more then the poor, pervert not the Truth, be not sc^^pulous
to testify what you know, God knows all your actions. Oh ye that believe in
God! and his Prophet, and the Book that was sent before him; know, he that
blasphemeth against his divine Majesty, against his Angels, the Scripture, the
Prophets, and life eternal, greatly erreth, and departs from the Truth. God
pardons not them that have embraced his Law, and then have forsaken it,
having believed in his divine Majesty, and are returned again to their
impiety; declare to such men, they shall feel heavy torments. Such as obey
Infidels, to be great in this world, extremely delude themselves; greatness
proceeds from God; It is written in the Book that was sent to you, that the
Infidels shall mock you, when they shall hear the word of God, and you shall
obey his Commandments; Tarry not in their company, if they change not their
discourse, otherwise you will be like to them, God will assemble into the fire
of Hell all Infidels, and wicked persons. Some of them that observe your
actions, said, they were of your party, when any felicity happened to you; and
when the Infidels had advantage over you, they said, they were with them, and
that they fought against you; God at the day of judgment shall judge the
difference that is between you, and will not give advantage to Infidels, over
them that observe his Law. The wicked think to deceive God, but God deceives
them, they are negligent to make their prayers, they are hypocrites before the
world, and remember not his divine Majesty, except very few of them, uncertain
whether they should follow the faithful, or the Infidels; he whom God shall
cause to go astray, shall not find the right way. Oh ye that believe! obey not
Infidels, to the exclusion of true believers; will you give God manifest
occasion to chastise you for your sins? The wicked shall be in the lowest
place of Hell, and shall find no relief, except such as shall repent, that
shall do good works, resign themselves to God, and obey his Commandments,
they shall be with the true believers, and receive from God a very great
reward. He will not send you misery, if you give him thanks for his favors,
and obey him; he accepts the acknowledgement of his benefits, and knows all
things. He wills not that what evil is committed, be published; he that
publishes the evil he does, is very much to blame; if you manifest the good
you do, or if you conceal it, and abstain from doing evil, he will be
merciful to you, he is omnipotent. Such as blaspheme against God and his
Prophets, his Apostles; such as would make a distinction between the
Commandments of his divine Majesty, and the precepts of his Prophets, such as
affirm they believe in some of the Prophets, and believe not in all, and take
a middle way between faith and impiety, are indeed impious, we have prepared
for them ignominious torments; but they who believe in God, and generally in
all his Prophets, and Apostles, shall be recompensed of God, gracious and
merciful. They that know the written Law, will require thee to cause to
d^scend from Heaven a Book, and written Tables; They demanded of Moses greater
things, and said, The Jews.
Cause us to behold God with our eyes, then thunder surprised them by reason of
their impiety: They adored the Calfe, after having had the knowledge of our
Commandments; nevertheless, we pardoned them, and gave to Moses an absolute
dominion over them. We raised the Mountain over them, following our promises,
anh said to them; Enter the gate of the Temple with adoration and humility, and
no longer transgress the observation of the day of Rest; We for this matter
received from them a strong promise, but they swarved from what they had
promised, and we cursed them, because of their impiety, by reason of the
murder they committed-without reason, on the persons of the Prophets, and of
the words they uttered, viz. Our heart is hardened; Contrariwise, God imprinted
infidelity in their hearts, they shall never believe in his Law, except very
few of them, because of their malice, and the blasphemies they vomited against
Mary: they said, The Christians.
We have slain the Messiah, Jesus, the Son of Mary, the Prophet and Apostle of
God: Certainly they flew him not, neither crucified him, they crucified one
among them that resembled him; such as doubt it are in a manifest error, and
speak not but through opinion. Certainly they flew him not; on the contrary,
God took him up to himself, he is Omnipotent and prudent in all his actions:
Such as have the knowledge of Scripture, ought to believe in Jesus before his
death, he shall be a witness against them of their actions at the day of
Judgment; We have prohibited them that Judaize, by reason of their sin, things
that were permitted them; We have prepared for them great torment, because they
mislead the world from the right way, because they take Use that is forbidden
them, and unjustly eat the substance of their neighbor. Such of them as are
profound in Learning, and all the faithful, believe in the Scriptures, both
ancient, and modern; I will give great rewards to them that shall make their
prayers at the time appointed, that shall pay Tithes, and believe in the day of
Judgment. We have sent thee our inspirations, as we sent them to Noah, and the
Prophets after him; as we heretofore sent them to Abraham, Ismael, Isaac,
Jacob, the Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonas, Aaron, and to Solomon, and gave the
Psalter to David, We have told thee who were the Prophets that preceded thee;
but we have not spoken to thee, concerning the merits of all them. Moses spoke
to God, as his Prophet, and Apostle; all declared his mercy, and preached the
torments of Hell, to the end men might have no cause of excuse; God is
Omnipotent and prudent in all his actions: He shall be witness that the
Alcoran was sent to thee with his Commandments, the Angels likewise testify
it; but it ought to suffice thee, that God is witness. The Infidels that
hindered the people to follow the Law of God, were exceedingly erroneous; God
will not pardon them, he will lead them into the path of Hell, where they shall
remain eternally, it is a thing easy to his divine Majesty. Oh people? A
Prophet is come to you, who preaches to you the Truth from the Lord, believe
him, you shall do well; if you believe him not, know, that whatever is in
Earth, and in Heaven is Gods, and that God knows whatsoever you do. Oh ye
that understand the written Law! Obey the Commandments of God, and speak not
of his divine Majesty but with truth; the Messiah, Jesus, the Son of Mary, is
a Prophet, and an Apostle of God, his Word, and his Spirit, which he sent to
Mary; believe therefore in God, and in his Prophets, and say not there be three
Gods, put an end to that discourse, you shall do well; For there is but one
God, praised be God, he has no Son; whatever is in Heaven, and in Earth
obeys him, it is sufficient that he is witness. The Messiah esteems it no
dishonor to be the servant of God, neither the Angel, nor the Cherubins, He
that holds it a dishonor to be at his service, is too proud; he shall
assemble all the world at the day of Judgment, and every one shall receive the
recompense that he shall have merited, he shall augment his favors upon them
that shall have believed in his divine Majesty, and have done good works; he
shall chastise them that shall have held it a dishonor to be his servants, and
have been proud upon the Earth, they shall find no safe refuge but in his
mercy. Oh people! God has sent you a Protector, a most strong argument, and a
most clear light; they that shall trust in God, shall enjoy his grace, and he
shall guide them into the right way. They will enquire of thee concerning
successions; say to them, God teaches you touching successions, as follows;
If a man decease without issue, and has a sister, she shall have the moity of
what he shall leave, and shall inherit it, if she have no children: If they be
two sisters, they shall have two thirds of what the deceased left; if they be
many brothers, and many sisters, the Son shall have as much as two daughters;
God teaches you his Commandemements, depart not from the right way, he is
Omniscient.

CHAP. V. The Chapter of the Table, containing an hundred and twenty verses,
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye that believe in God! Satisfy
what you have promised; it is permitted you to eat of the beasts that be in the
world, except of what shall be hereafter declared. Hunting is forbidden you,
during the time that you shall go on Pilgrimage to Mecca. God ordains what
he will. O ye that believe! say not, That it is permitted to do what God has
prohibited, perform what is commanded you, during the month of Pilgrimage;
give no impediment to such as carry presents to Mecca, neither to them that
assume The old Arabians in devotion, p^t the leaves and b^a^^^es of Trees upon
their necks, like collers, as the Peasa^ts in many places in France do the
herbs of S^. John.
Collers, neither hinder Pilgrims to repair thither, to demand the Grace of
God, and his mercies. It is lawful for you to hunt, when you shall have
finished your pilgrimage; beware lest some pesons cause you to sin, and hinder
your going to Mecca; to oblige you to punish them, repose your confidence in
the justice and fear of God, and not in the sin and malice of your neighbor.
Fear God who is severe in his chastisements. It is forbidden you to eat
Carrion, See Kitab el tenoir.
Blood, Swines flesh, and whatsoever is not killed in pronounc^ng the name of
God: you are prohibited to eat Animals strangled, choakt, knocked down,
precipitated, that are slain striking each other, and such as beasts shall have
slain; if you find them not alive, to let out their blood, in pronouncing the
name of God. You shall not eat of beasts sacrificed to Idols: Consult not with
Southsayers or Lots, it is a great sin. The day shall come when they that have
abandoned your Law, See Gelaldin.
shall be desperate; fear not them, and fear me: The day will come, when I
shall accomplish your Law, and my grace shall be abundantly upon you: The Law
of Salvation, is the Law that I desire to give you. If any one be in necessity,
and eats of what is prohibited, without a will to sin, God shall be to him
gracious and merciful. They will demand of thee, what is permitted them to
eat? Say to them it is lawful to eat all sorts of beasts that are not
unclean, and whatever has been taught you from God, touching beasts that has
been wounded by Lions or Dogs, eat the beast you shall take, and remember God
in blooding them; fear God, he is exact to take account. This day it is
lawful that you eat what is not unclean, and the meats of them that know the
written Law, The Jews and Christians.
their meats are lawful for you, and yours for them. You are permitted to
espouse maidens and women of free condition, that are of your Religion, and
maidens and women of free condition, that know the written Law, giving them
their dowry with civility; commit neither Concubinage, nor Adultery with them,
neither secretly or publicly; the good works of him that shall renounce your
Law, shall be unprofitable, he shall be at the day of Judgment in the number of
the damned. O ye that believe in God, when you would make your prayers, wash
your faces, your hands to the elbow, and pass your hand over your head, and
over your feet to the ancles. If you be polluted, purify your selves; if sick,
or in a journey, or about to discharge your belly, or have known women, and
find no water to wash you, lay hand on the sand, pass it over your visage, and
wipe therewith your hands. God enjoyneth you nothing irksome, but wills you
be clean, and desires to accomplish his grace upon you; peradventure you will
give him thanks. O ye that believe in God! call to mind his grace, and promise
he made to you, when you said, We heard, and obeyed, fear him, he knows all
that is in your hearts. O ye that believe in God! obey his Commandments, and
be true in your Testimonies, take heed that no man move you to offend God, in
divert^ng you from what is just; render justice to all, his fear inviteth you
to it; have it before your eyes, he knows all your actions; has promised
his grace, and great recompenses to the True believers, that shall do good
works in this world, and has prepared Hell to punish Infidels. O ye that
believe in God! remember his favor toward you, when some persons would have
extended their hands upon you, and how he delivered you from their malice;
Corcis Enemy to Mahomet.
Fear him, all true believers ought to resign themselves to his will. God
received the promise of the Children of Israel to observe his Commandemements,
he established among them twelve Captains, and said to them, I will be with you
when you shall make prayers, pay your Tithes, believe in the Prophets, defend
them, and shall lend to me any alms; I will cover your sins, and cause you
enter Paradise, wherein flow many rivers; and he among you that shall be an
Infidel, shall be entirely erroneous from the right path. When they swarved
from what they had promised, we gave them our curse, and hardened their heart;
they have altered the words of the Scripture, and abjured what they had
approved. Thou shall not know them that shall be Traitors, except very few of
them; forgive and depart from them, God loves them that do good. We likewise
received the promise of those who call themselves Christians, but they have
forgotten what they promised; they have altered what was taught them, and we
have cast among them enmity and hatred, even until the day of Judgment. That
day God shall cause them to know what ever they had done for their punishment. O
ye that know the written Law! our Mahom^t.
Prophet is come to bring to light many things of the Scripture, which you
conceal, and he likewise leaves in silence many things, that it is not time
to make manifest. God has sent you a Book full of light, to conduct into the
way of Salvation them that love him, to bring them out of darkness, and by his
special grace, to lead them into the way of Salvation. Certainly he that
says, that the Messiah, the Son of Mary, is God, is impious: Say to him who
can hinder God to exterminate the Messiah, and his Mother, with whatsoever is
in the Earth, when it shall seem good to him? God is King of Heaven and earth,
he created with them what seemed good to him, he is Omnipotent. The Jews and
Christians have said, we are the Children of God, his wel-beloved; Say to them,
shall not God chastise you for your sins? Certainly ye are men; He that
created you, pardons, and punishes as it pleases him, he is the King of all
that is in Heaven or Earth, and of whatever is between them, he is the refuge
of the righteous. O ye that have knowledge in the written Law! The Poophet, the
Apostle of God is come to instruct you in a time that there is none other
Prophet but he on the Earth; Will you say that no man preached to you the
torments of Hell? Certainly the word of God is this day preached to you, the
torment of Hell, and the Omnipotency of his Divine Majesty. Remember thou
what Moses said to his people, Oh people, call to mind the grace of God toward
you, he has chosen from among you Prophets, and Kings, has conferred on you
what he has given to none in the world: Enter into the holy Land, as God has
commanded, turn not your backs to your enemies, lest you be in the number of
Reprobates: They answered, oh Moses! there are Giants and Tyrants in the Holy
Land, we will not enter into it, until they be gone out of it, if they forsake
it, we will enter into it. Then two men of them that were in the grace of God,
said to them, enter at the gate, and fight against them, you shall be
victorious, trust in God, if you believe in his Law: They said, oh Moses! we
will not enter, so long as those Tyrants dwell therein, go and fight against
them with thy Lord, we will here attend. Then said Moses, Lord, I dispose but
of mine own, and my brothers person; separate us from this wicked people; the
Lord said to him, the entrance into the Holy Land is prohibited to this people,
they shall wander forty years upon the Earth, in confusion and amazement,
afflict not thy self with the deportments of the wicked; teach them the
History of the Sons of Adam, how they offered sacrifices, how the sacrifice
of the one was accepted that of the other was not: he through envy menaced his
brother, to murder him; his brother said to him, God receives the sacrifices,
and holocausts of such as have his fear before their eyes: assuredly if thou
extendest thine hand to slay me, I will not stretch forth mine to hurt thee; I
fear the Lord of the Universe; If thou chargest thy self with the murder of
my person, with thy past sins, thou shall go to hell, where the unjust shall
be punished: The murder of his brother seemed easy and advantageous for him,
he slew him, and is in the number of the Damned. God sent a Raven that made a
pit in the Earth, and showed him the manner to bury the body of his brother:
Then said he, would to God I had been weak and impotent, that I were like to
this Raven? I must bury the body of my brother, and he was penitent for his
offense; by reason of this murder, we ordained to the children of Israel, that
he who shall slay a person innocent, shall be punished, as if he had slain the
whole world, and he that shall give him his life, shall be recompensed, as if
he had given life to the whole world. My Prophets came to the Children of
Israel, taught them my Commandments, and caused them to see Miracles,
nevertheless many of them were disobedient? the punishment of them that oppose
the will of God, that of his Prophet, and that endeavor to pollute the earth,
is to be slain, hanged, to have the right foot, and the left hand, or right
hand, and the left foot cut off, and to be extirpated from the earth; they
shall have in this world shame on the forehead, and shall feel in the other,
great torments, except such as shall be converted before their death, and shall
know, that God is gracious and merciful. Oh ye that believe! fear God, fight
for his Law, you perhaps shall be happy. All the Treasures of the world shall
not be able to redeem Infidels at the day of Judgment, they shall endure
exceeding great torments, they shall desire to go out of the fire of Hell, but
shall dwell there eternally. Cut off the hands of those men and women that
steal, they contract upon themselves the wrath of the world, and the
punishment that God has prepared for the wicked: He that shall turn, and do
good works, shall be pardoned, God is gracious and merciful to the penitent.
Know thou not that the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Earth is Gods? that he
chastises and pardons whom it pleases him? and that he is Omnipotent? Oh
Prophet! afflict not thy self, to behold them running to impiety; that say
with the mouth, we believe, and have no faith in their hearts; neither for them
that Judaize, and hearken to the lies of their Doctors, to relate them to
others; they pervert the language of the Old Testament, and say; If you be
instructed in those precepts, you ought to observe them, if they instruct you
not in them, take heed to your selves. Such as make use of the name of God, to
move the people to sedition, are without faith, God will not purify their
hearts, they shall have in this world shame upon the forehead, and feel in the
other extreme torments. They listen to blasphemies, and eat what is
prohibited; If they repair to thee, and submit themselves to thy judgment,
judge their controversy with equity, converse not with them; if thou depart
from their company, they shall not hurt thee, if thou give judgment between
them, Judge with equity, God loves the just: How shall they submit to thy
judgment, seeing they have the Old Testament, which contains the
Commandments of God? They will not execute thy Judgment, neither believe in
the Old Testament, whereis the guide of the right way, and a light to the
Prophets, to judge the differences arising among true believers, among Jews;
their Doctors, and there Priests, who study the Scripture, and are witnesses
that it contains the truth, fear not the world, but dread me; sell not,
neither exchange my commandments for any price. Such as judge not conformably
to the Law of God, are Infidels; We have ordained the Talio, man for man, an
eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, a
wound for a wound; he that shall observe it, shall do well, and such as shall
not judge conformably to the Law of God are unjust. We sent after many
Prophets, Jesus the Son of Mary, who confirmed the ancient Scriptures, to him
we gave the Gospel, full of light, to conduct the people to the right way, with
a confirmation of the Old Testament, a guide and instruction for the righteous.
They that follow the Gospel, ought to judge as it is commanded in the Gospel;
such as judge not conformably to what God has taught them, are disobedient to
his divine Majesty. To thee have we sent the Book that contains the truth,
and confirms the ancient Scriptures, determine the differences that shall
arise among the people, as I have inspired thee, and follow not the appetite of
men that will abjure the truth which I have taught thee. We have instructed all
of you in a Law, and assured means to lead you into the way of Salvation; you
should all have been of one and the same Religion, had it so pleased God; he
has done this to prove you; Do good, and know, that you all shall be
assembled before him, and he shall resolve the doubts that are among you. If
thou judge the differences that are among them, judge comformably to what
has been inspir^d into thee, and follow not their appetites; be careful they
seduce thee not, and move thee to doubt many things that God has taught thee;
if they disobey his Commandments, know, he will severely punish them, because
of the enormity of their crimes. The greatest part of the world are impious; Do
they affect the Judgment of the Ignorant? What better Judge for the good, is
there then God? O ye that believe! obey not the Jews, nor the Christians, they
mutually obey each other in their impiety, he that shall obey them, shall be
like unto them, God guides not the unjust. Thou see such as are unstable in
their Faith, flock to them, and say, they fear a change of times, but God shall
give advantage and victory to his Prophet, and they shall repent to have
concealed in their minds the Miracles of his divine Majesty. What will they
allege for excuse, who swore by the name of God, exactly to observe their
Religion, and to be with you? Their good works shall be unprofitable, and they
in the number of the Damned. Oh ye that believe! if you abandon your faith, God
will put others in your place, that shall love him, and he them, and this to
your great ignominy, and the advantage of converted Infidels, that shall fight
without fear, for his Law: Thus God bestows his grace, as he sees good, he
is liberal, and Omniscient. You ought certainly to obey God, See Gelaldin.
and his Prophet, his Apostle; they who believe in God, that make their prayers
at the time appointed, pay tithes, and are in the protection of God and his
Prophet, shall be beloved of his divine Majesty, and be victorious. Oh ye true
believers! obey not such as scoff at your Religion, who have knowledge of the
written Law; obey not Infidels, and if you are good men, fear God; obey not
them that deride your prayers, it is the action of those that are unwise. Oh ye
that understand the written Law! will you not abhor me, if I believe not in
God, in what he has inspired into me, and into them that preceded me? The
greatest part of you are wicked. Say to them, Did I instruct you to do evil,
when I preached to you the effect of Gods mercy? Those whom he curses, against
whom he is incensed, whom he has metamorphised into Apes, and Swine, and who
have adored Idols, shall be confined in the fire of Hell, they are in a very
evil way. When they come to thee, they will say, they believe in the Law of
God, they will enter thine house with impiety, and go forth in the like
manner, but God knows what they conceal in their heart: Thou shall see many
of them embrace Paganism, follow a lie, eat what is forbidden, and this to
displease their Doctors, and Priests, who have forbidden them to speak lies,
and eat meats that are unclean. The Jews said, the hand of God is shut,
contrariwise, it is their hand that is shut, and they shall be accursed by
reason of their discourse: certainly the hands of God are open, and he does
good to whom he pleases: Many amongst them, through impiety, and
disobedience, alter what is in the Scripture; but we have cast among them
hatred, and horror, even to the day of Judgment, God has extinguished the
fire which they had kindled, to make war against the righteous; they
endeavor to pollute the earth, but God detesteth such as cause disorder; he
remitteth their sins that know the Scripture, believe in his Law, and fly
impiety, they shall enter Paradise, that is full of delights. They have read
the Old Testament, the Gospel, and all Scriptures, they enjoyed abundance of
all good things; nevertheless many have disobeyed the Commandments of God. Oh
Prophet! preach what God has taught thee; whether thou do preach it, or
do not, he will defend thee from the malice of men, he abhors Infidels.
Oh ye that know the written Law! if you observe not the Old Testament, the
Gospel, and Scriptures which God has sent you, you shall be without merit.
Many of them through impiety and ignorance, pervert what is contained in the
Scripture; afflict not thy self with the actions of the impious. The Jews,
Samaritans, Christians, all that shall have believed in God, the Resurrection
of the dead, and have done good works, shall be exempt from affliction, there
is nothing for them to fear at the day of Judgment. See Kitab el tenoir.
We received of the Children of Israel a promise, to believe in our Prophets,
and Apostles; Yet have they slandred many, and slain such as would not follow
their appetites: they believed there was no punishment for their crimes, and
became deaf, and blind; After this, God pardoned them, nevertheless, they
returned in their sin, and are again become deaf, and blind; God beholds all
their deportments. Certainly, they who affirm the Messiah, the Son of Mary, to
be God, are impious; the Messiah commanded the Children of Israel to worship
God, his and their Lord; the entrance into Paradise is forbidden to him that
shall say, God has a companion equal to him, Hell shall be his habitation,
and the unjust shall find none to protect them at the day of Judgment. Such
as affirm there are three Gods, are impious: there is but one God; if they
defist not from such discourse, they shall burn in the fire of Hell; if they
turn, and implore pardon of God, he will be to them gracious and merciful. The
Messiah, the Son of Mary, is a Prophet, and Apostle of God, like to the
Prophets that came before him; his Mother is holy, and both of them did eat and
drink. Consider how I manifiest my unity to Infidels; how they blaspheme, and
depart from the Truth; say to them, Will you worship in stead of God, what can
neither benefit, nor hurt you? God understands and knows all things. O ye
that have knowledge of the written Law! speak of your Religion with reverence,
and follow not the appetites of such as go astray, and walk in an evil way.
The Infidels were accursed by the tongue of David, and of Messiah, the Son of
Mary, because of their disobedience; they abstain not from things that are not
approved; they do them, and through obstinacy will continue them. Thou shall
see many of the Inhabitants of Mecca adhere to them, by reason of the sin they
conceal in their hearts. God assuredly will be incensed against them, and they
shall be confined eternally in the torments of Hell. If they had believed in
God, in his Prophet, and the Scriptures, they had not obeyed Infidels, but many
of them are impious. Thou shall find the Jews, and Inhabitants of Mecca, who
believe in many Gods, to be very great enemies to the faithful, and the
Christians to have a great inclination, and amity toward the True-believers;
for that they have Priests, and Religious, that are humble, who have eyes full
of tears, when they hear mention of the Doctrine which God has inspired into
thee, because of their knowledge of the Truth, and say, Lord, We believe in thy
Law, write us in the number of them that profess thy Unity, who hinders us to
believe in God, and the Truth wherein we have been instructed? We desire with
passion, O Lord, to be in the number of the jest. God shall hearken to their
prayer, and pardon them; he shall open to them the gate of Paradise, wherein is
the reward of the righteous, and the Infidels shall inhabit the abyss of Hell.
Oh ye who are True-believers! inh^bit not the eating of what God has
permitted, offend not God, he abhors them that offend him, eat of the meats
that are lawful for you, and have his fear before your eyes, he will not
chastise you for what you have spoken at random, contrary to your faith,
without design of offending him, but he shall punish you for your oaths, if you
observe them not; the satisfaction of an oath not accomplished, is to give food
to ten poor of your Religion, and to cloth them, or to enfranchise a slave
that is a True-believer; he that is destitute of means to perform this, shall
fast three days immediately succeeding, such is the satisfaction of a
not-accomplished oath; keep exactly your faith, so does God teach you his
Commandments, you will, peradventure, give him thanks. Oh ye that believe in
God! Wine, Games of hazard, Idols, Lots, and divinations are abominations, and
filthy practices of the Devil, depart from him, perhaps you will be righteous.
The Devil desires to fow among you dissension, and horror, through wine, and
games of hazard, to choke your remembrance of God, and of praying to him;
abandon wine, and games of hazard, be obedient to God, and the Prophet, his
Apostle, and take heed to your selves; If you disobey God, know that the
Prophet is obliged only to preach publicly the word of his divine Majesty;
the True-believers, and the righteous have not provoked God in drinking wine,
and playing at games of hazard, before they were prohibited, they will abstain
for the future, and perform good works, God loves them that do good. Oh ye
that believe! God proves you by one thing, to wit, by hunting, whether you
take the game with your hands, or coursing on horseback, to discern them
among you that fear him, and believe in his Law; whosoever shall offend him,
shall be severely punished. Oh ye that believe! kill not your game, during the
time of your pilgrimage to Mecca; whosoever shall kill of deliberate purpose,
shall be judged, as if he had slain his Neighbors beast, he shall be judged by
one among you, and be condemned to offer a present at the Temple of Mecca, or
to give food to the poor, or to fast, or perform somewhat of like nature, for
the expiation of his error; if he have repentance in his mind, God will pardon
what is past; if he return in his sin, God will be avenged on him, he is
omnipotent, and avengfull. It is permitted that you fish, and eat of fish
during your Pilgrimage, but hunting by land is absolutely forbidden in this
voyage; fear God, you shall all one day be assembled before him to be judged,
he has appointed the month of Pilgrimage, he has established the Temple of
Mecca for the devotion of the people, and has forbidden to give impediment to
such as bring thither oblations, and those that assume The ancient Arabians put
upon their necks the leaves of trees, in devotion, when they arrived at Mecca.
Collers, to the end, you may learn to understand that he knows all things
both in Heaven, and Earth, and that he is Omnipotent. Know ye, that he is
grievous in his chastisements, and gracious and merciful: The Prophet is
obliged but to preach his Commandments, he knows all that you conceal in
your hearts, and whatever you make manifest: Evil must not be equal to good,
notwithstanding it be pleasing to you: Oh ye that are wise! have the fear of
God before your eyes, peradventure you shall be happy. Oh ye believers! desire
not the knowledge of all things, you will afflict your selves; be not curious
to know at what time the Alcoran was sent from Heaven, God pardons your
former curiosity; See Kitab el tenoir.
your Predecessors were alike curious, and in the number of unbelievers God
has commanded nothing touching These are the Ceremonies of the ancient
Arabians, which Mahomet renounceth.
the she Camel, whose ear is slit, neither that which is at liberty in the
field, neither concerning the Ewe that has brought forth seven Lambs, neither
the Camel, of whom have issued ten Camels, but the wicked invent blasphemies
against his divine Majesty, and are unwise; When it was said to them come, and
observe what God has taught his Prophet, they replied, it sufficed them to
follow what their fathers had observed, notwithstanding their fathers were
ignorant and erroneous. Oh ye believers! See Kitab el tenoir.
be careful of your selves, such as be in error shall not hurt you; if you
follow the right way, all of you shall one day be assembled before God, who
shall discover all your works, and reward you according to your merits. Oh ye
believers! make your Testament, when your death approaches, and take two
witnesses of your own Religion, that are honest men; If you are in a journey,
and sickness surprise you, you shall take two witnesses, such as you shall
meet with, to serve your testament, and having prayed, shall deliver to them
your will. If you doubt their integrity, cause them swear to be faithful in
their testimonies, and not give themselves to be corrupted by your kindred.
Conceal not your testimony, lest you be in the number of sinners. If you
discover those two witnesses to have erred in their testimony, substitute two
other in their place, although they partake in your succession, and take oath
of them to be more veritable in their dispositions, then the two others,
otherwise they will offend God, and be numbered with the unjust. It is better to
speak Truth, then to be in fear, lest your falsehood be detected; fear God,
and hearken to his Commandments, he guides not them that disobey him. He
shall one day assemble his Prophets and Apostles, and say unto them, what did
you answer, being questioned concerning my unity? they shall reply, Lord, we
are ignorant, thou alone know all things. He shall say to Jesus, Oh Jesus,
Son of Mary, remember thou my grace toward thee, and thy mother, I
strengthened thee with the Holy Ghost; Thou spakest in thy Cradle, as a man of
forty or fifty years, thee did I instruct in Scripture and knowledge, the Old
Testament, and the Gospel; Thou did form of earth the figure of a Bird,
did breath upon it, and it did fly, thou did cure the borne-blind, and the
leprous, did revive the dead, I delivered thee from the Jews, when thou did
preach to them my Commandments, and wroughtest miracles, which the wicked
affirmed to be magic, and enchantment. Remember, how thou did command thy
Apostles to believe in me, and obey my Prophet, and how they said, we believe
in one sole God, be thou witness that we entirely resign our selves to the
will of God. Remember Mahomet.
thou, that the Apostles said, Oh Jesus, Son of Mary, can thy Lord send us from
Heaven a Table covered with meats to satisfy us? Jesus answered them, Fear
God, if you believe in his Law; they said, we have an appetite, and desire to
eat of the food of Heaven, for the repose of our hearts, and to know if thou
speak the truth, of which we shall be witnesses. Then said he, Oh God my
Lord, cause to descend upon us from Heaven a Table covered with meat, this day
shall be celebrated by us and them that shall succeed, this shall be a sign of
thy omnipotency; enrich us with thy grace, thou possessest all treasure. God
said to him, I will cause to descend from Heaven the food which thou desire,
and whosoever shall be impious, shall be punished with torments, that no man
yet has suffered. He shall say at the day of ^udgment, oh Jesus, Son of Mary!
did thou enjoyne the people to worship thee, and thy mother, as two Gods?
Jesus shall answer, praised be thy name; I will take heed of speaking what is
not, thou know if I have said it, thou art omniscient, thou know what is
in my soul, and I have no knowledge of what is in thee; I delivered nothing but
what thou did command me to speak: to wit, Worship God your Lord, and mine,
I am witness from the time that I was in the world, until thou did cause me
to dye; thou did observe the deportments of the people, thou see all; if
thou chastisest men, they are thy Creatures; if thou do pardon them, thou art
omnipotent and wise. Then shall God say, this day shall good works be
profitable to the righteous, they shall enter into Paradise, wherein flow many
rivers, there shall they dwell eternally, with my grace, in exceeding great
felicity; the Kingdom of Heaven, of Earth is Gods, he is Omnipotent.

CHAP. VI. The Chapter of Gratifications, Gelaldin justifies this Chapter of
Animals.
containing one hundred and seventy five Verses, written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: Praise be to God the Creator of
Heaven, of Earth, of darkness, and of light; such as believe not in their
Lord are in error. See Gelaldin.
He it is that created you of the dust of the Earth, and appointed a prefixed
time for your death, and resurrection; nevertheless you doubt, he is God in
Heaven and in Earth, he understands the secrets of your hearts, and
whatsoever you make manifest; he knows the good and evil that you commit,
that his Commandments have been taught the Inhabitants of Mecca, and that they
have abjured them; they opposed the revealed Truth, but shall be chastised for
their contempt, They consider not how much people we have destroyed, in past
ages; we gave them places to dwell in, See Gelaldin.
more strong and spacious then those which you inhabit, sent them about of
rain, caused fountains flow in the places of their habitation; after this did
we extirpate them, by reason of their sins, and established in their place a
new people. We have sent to thee the Scripture, written in Vellam, the
unbelievers have handled it with their hands, yet say, it is evident sorcery
and enchantment, that they will not believe therein, unless they see an Angel
descend, to confirm it. Should we have sent an Angel, they had perished by his
presence, unless we had sent him under the Figure of a man, like unto them, and
clothed as they are. They derided the Prophets, and Apostles, thy
Predecessors; derision is fallen upon such as contemned them. Say to them, go
through the world, and consider the end of them that abjure the Law of God; say
to them, to whom appertains whatsoever is in Heaven and earth? it is Gods. He
will employ his mercy to save you; doubtless he will assemble all of you at
the day of Judgment. Nevertheless Infidels believe not in his Unity; they
consider not, that whatsoever moves by night, and by day, and whatsoever is in
the world, belongs to his Divine Majesty, who understands and knows all
things. Say to them, require you other protection then that of God the
Omnipotent, Creator of heaven and earth, who nourishes all things, is
nourished by none? Say to them, I have received a command to embrace the Law of
Salvation. Be not ye in number of unbelievers; I fear to disobey my Lord, and
fear the torments prepared for the wicked at the day of Judgment; he that
shall deliver himself, shall enjoy the grace of God, which is supreme
felicity: If God will punish you, none shall deliver you from his punishment;
if his Will be to do good to you, he is Omnipotent, always victorious, and
has all power over his Creatures; he is most wise and Omniscient. Say to them,
What better testimony is there in the world then that of God? Say to them, He
shall testify between you and me, to whom he has inspired the Alcoran to
instruct you: Will any among you that shall learn it, say there is any other
God, but God; I will not say so; there is but one God, and I am innocent from
the sin you commit, in associating him with a companion equal to him; many of
them that understand the written Law, have knowledge of the truth of the
Alcoran; their children also know it, but such as forsake their own souls,
will not believe in God. Who more unjust, then he that blasphemeth against God
and his Commandments? Certainly the wicked shall be miserable; I will assemble
all of them, and say, where are the gods which you did associate with God? They
shall have none other excuse, but to say, by God, Lord, we were of the number
of Idolaters. Consider how they will lie, and disavow their blasphemies: some
there be among them that hearken to thee, we have hardened their hearts, they
will not learn the Alcoran, because their ears are stopped. When they shall
hear related all the miracles of the world, and shall see them with their
eyes, they will not believe until they have disputed against thee. The wicked
say the Alcoran is but a lie, and Fable of Antiquity; they forbid the people to
believe it, and contemn it; certainly they destroy their souls, and know it
not; thou shall see when they shall be detained in the fire of hell, they will
say, would to God I might return into the world, I would obey the Commandments
of his divine Majesty, and be in the number of true believers. They knew the
truth, but concealed it; should they return into the world they would return to
their impiety, they are liars. They affirm, there is none other life then that
of the world, neither any resurrection; when they shall be before God, they
shall acknowledge their errors, he shall cause them to feel the chastisements
due to their blasphemies. Such as believe not in the resurrection, are wretched
men, they shall be afflicted for their sins at the hour when ever death shall
surprise them; they shall bear on their back the burden of their crimes, and
avouch the life of this world to be but deceit and vanity, and the life of the
other to be full of felicity for the righteous; O Mahomet.
nevertheless the wicked are not converted. I know thou will be incensed
against such as shall say, they desire to obey thee, and shall renounce thy
Doctrine; they that contemn the Commandments of God are impious, they have
belied the Prophets thy Predecessors; the Prophets endured their lies, and were
patient, until we destroyed them; God declineth not what he has promised.
Thou know what the Prophets foretold: if men abandon thee, can thou covet
to continue on earth (to instruct them) and to be in heaven at the same time,
to cause prodogies appear (testimonies of thy mission.) Had it so pleased God,
See Gelaldin.
he had brought them all into the right way, nor had they been in the number of
the ignorant. Certainly he hears the prayers of the righteous, that hearken
to his word; he will g^ve resurrection to the dead, and assemble them to
receive recompense according to their merits. They have said, we believe not in
the Prophet, if he show not to us some miracle from his Lord: say unto them,
God has showed you many miracles, but most of you do not understand them; the
beasts that walk upon the Earth, and the birds that fly in the Air, are in
the number of h^s cre^tures: We have not omitted to write any thing that is
writt^n ^n the Book kept in heaven; all men shall one day appear before God,
such as shall not have believed in his Law, shall be deaf and dumb, and inhabit
darkness: God misleadeth whom it pleases him, and guides in the right way
whom he sees good. Say unto them, have you ^^lt the punishment of God? Have
you had knowledge of the day of Judgment? Will you invoke any but God, if you
be good men? If you implore him, he will deliver you from the evils that you
fear; and if it please him, you shall abandon the Idols, which with
unbelievers you adore. We sent our Prophets to them that were before you, when
they contemned them, we sent afflictions to procure their conversion, which had
not been done without the miseries that we brought upon them. Nevertheles their
heart is hardened, the devil caused them to find disobedience more
advantageous, and they forgot what was taught them. When we opened the gate of
happiness, they exceedingly rejoiced, and were ungrateful; but when they
thought least of it, they were chastised, became desperate, and were extirpated
for the great glory of God; Lord of the Univers, say unto them, if God rendered
you deaf, blind, and ignorant, what other god then God shall restore your
sight, hearing, O Mahomet.
and knowledge? Consider how I manifest my Unity; nevertheless they will not
believe it, say unto them, have, you had a sense of the scourge of God secretly
and publicly? Has God condemned any but the wicked? He sent not the Prophets
and Apostles, but to proclaim the felicity of Paradise, and preach the
torments of Hell: He that shall believe, and do good works, shall be exempt
from fear at the day of Judgment, and unbelievers shall be punished, because
of their disobedience: Say unto them, I told you not that I had in my power all
the treasures of God, neither that I had knowledge of the future, and past; nor
do afirme, that I am an Angel, I only act what has been inspired into me; is
the blind like to him that sees clearly? Consider what I say. I preach not the
day of Judgment but to such as apprehend it, they shall find none other then
God to protect them; The poor.
peradventure they will fear his divine Majesty. Molest not them that pray
unto God evening and morning, and that desire to see his face, thou shall not
be accomptable for their actions, See Gelaldin.
neither shall they give account of what thou do; if thou disturbest them,
thou shall be in the number of the unjust. We have proved men by one another;
they have said among them with derision, behold those among us, to whom God
has given his graces: does God not know them that acknowledge his benefits?
Salute with affection true believers, when they come to visit thee? God loves
civility, clemency, and humanity, and will pardon him among you, that shall
offend him through ignorance that shall repent of his error, and do good
works, he is benign and merciful. Thus do I recount the graces of God, and
discover the way of sinners; Say unto them, I am forbidden to worship what you
adore, lest I should go astray from the right way. I have received from God a
light, which ye have contemned; God is Judge of all things, judges with
truth, and is most just in his Judgments. I cannot forthwith give you a sight
of the torments of hell, neither of the chastisement of God, which you with so
much instance require; this depends on his divine Majesty; had I this power,
our difference would be soon at a period. God knows the unjust, in his power
are the keys of the future, none knows but he; he knows whatsoever is in
the earth, and the sea, the number of the leaves that fall from the trees, and
of the atoms that are in the darkness of the earth. There is nothing dry or
green in the earth, that is not written in the Book of Light. He it is that
causes you to die in the night, and knows the good and evil that you have
committed by day; he shall cause you to rise again at the day nominated; you
all shall appear before him, he shall give you knowledge of your sins, and
shall chastise you after your demerits; he is always victorious and
omnipotent. He shall send to observe your actions; and when you shall arrive at
the hour of death, he shall dispatch his messengers, who shall not fail to
execute his commands; the people shall repair to him, as to their Lord, he is
extremely exact to keep account. Say unto them, he shall deliver you from the
darkness of the sea, and of the earth; when you shall in secret, or publicly
invoke him; if he deliver me, I will return him thanks for his grace: Say unto
them, God can deliver you from darkness, and all other afflictions; yet say
you, he has a companion associate with him: Say unto them, we can send
punishments from above, and from below; he is able to disunite, and cause you
to taste a thousand miseries, which you shall bring upon each other. Consider
how I show them the effects of my Omnipotency; they will peradventure
comprehend my sayings: Those of thy Nations have rejected them, notwithstanding
they are most true: say unto them, I am not your Tutor; every thing has its
time, you shall hereafter understand the truth. Depart from them that speak of
our Law with contempt, until he speak otherwise; the devil would induce thee
to forget my Commandments, and cause thee to sit down with the unjust: the
true believers shall not regard their discourse, neither cease to ^dmonish
them, peradventure they will be converted. Depart thou from such as sport and
mock at their Religion, the wealth of this world renders them haughty;
declare, they shall be severely punished; none is able to protect or hear them
but God, no ransom is able to deliver them; they shall find the good and ^vill
that they have committed, shall drink a liquor extremely cold, and endure
grievous torments, because of their impiety; say unto them, shall we worship
instead of God, what can neither benefit nor hurt us? Shall we return on our
steps to our sins, having been guided by his divine Majesty, like unto him whom
the devil has seduced? He left him dismayed, and astonished in the midst of
his voyage, having forsaken his companions, that showed him the right way. God
guides men to the way of Salvation I will wholly resign my self to the
pleasure of his divine Majesty: Make your prayers at the time appointed, and
pay tithes, you all shall appear before God at the day of Judgment, to give
account of your actions. He it is that created heaven and earth* Remember thou
the day wherein he said, Be thou, and every thing was: he shall reign, and at
that day command an Angel to sound the Trumpet, to call to universal
Judgment, the living and the dead. He knows the future, present, and past;
is most ^ise, and nothing is hidden from him: Remember thou that Abraham said
to his father The Arabian^ say, Az^r (...) Abraham's ^urna ^e, and that his
father was called Terec Azer.
Azer, wherefore do you worship Idols instead of God? I perceive your family
to be in manifest error: God showed to Abraham the Kingdom of heaven, and of
earth, and he was in the number of the blessed. Abraham seeing by night a most
clear Star, asked in himself, if it were his God; no, replied he to himself,
my God does not rise and set; seeing the Moon to arise, he demanded if that
were his God; no, said he to himself, certainly God will not guide me to be of
them that are erroneous: when he beheld the Sun rising, he likewise asked, if
that were his God; and when he saw it set, he said to his people, I am innocent
of the sin which you commit, in adoring many gods, I wholly commend my self to
his Will, who created heaven and earth, and profess his Unity: His people
would dispute against him; he said to them, will you dispute against me
concerning the Unity of God, who has instructed me in the right way? I fear
not your Idols, my God does what pleases him, and knows all things, will you
not consider it? How shall I fear your Idols, since you are not afraid to
affirm, that God has companions equal to him, which you have no reason to
adore? If you understand the truth, who is more true, you, or I? Such as
believe in God, and shall not cover the truth with a lie, shall be delivered
from the torments of hell, and conducted into the way of salvation. We
instructed Abraham with reasons to dispute against his people; I give knowledge
to whom I see go^d, and exalt whom I please. Thy Lord, O Abraham sees and
knows all things; we gave to Abraham, Isaac, and J^c^b his sons; we before
instructed Noah and his lineage in the right way; we taught it David, Solomon,
Job, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Zachary, St. John, Jesus the Son of Ma^y, Eliah,
Ismael, Joshua, Jonas, and Lot; we gratified them above the residue of the
world; we elected their Fathers, Brothers, and Progeny, and guided them in the
right way: Thus God guides whom he sees good: Men before adored Idols, and
believed there were many gods, nevertheless he blotted out their past errors,
when they were converted. If they slander them that have knowledge of the
Scriptures, and of Prophesies, will give power over their persons to men that
shall mislead them with the Infidels: Those whom God guides, believe in the
Unity of his divine Majesty. Say unto them I require no reward for having
preached to you the Alcoran, he teaches to all the world the Commandments of
God. The Jews have not honored him as was their duty, they understood not his
graces, when they said, he has instructed the people in nothing that is
profitable. Say unto them, who gave the Tables unto Moses? who instructed him
in the Scripture, which they have written in Vellam, to guide and illuminate
the people? They have published what pleases them, and have concealed much;
they shall learn in the Alcoran what they know not, and what their fathers
understood not: Say to them, God after that left them obstinate, and amazed in
their errors. We have sent from heaven that Book full of blessedness, it
confirms the Scriptures that were sent before it, to the end thou may
instruct the people of Mecca, them that inhabit about that City, and the rest
of the world. Such as shall believe in the day of Judgment, believe in what is
written in this Book, and shall pray to God to deliver them from the torments
of hell: Who is more unjust then he that blasphemeth against God? that says,
God has inspired into him what he utters, notwithstanding he has received
no inspiration from his Divine Majesty. Who more unjust, then he that says,
he will cause to descend from heaven, things like to those which God inspired
into his Prophets? When thou shall see the wicked at the point of death, and
the Angels stretching forth their hands to take their souls: say unto them,
This day the torments of hell shall be the punishment of the blasphemies that
ye have vomited against God, and your disobedience to his Commandments. God
shall say to them, you are come before us without riches, and children, naked
as you were created, and have cast behind your backs the instructions which we
gave you; I see not with you the Idols you adored; you are separated from each
other, and have forsaken them, that you esteemed on earth, should have been
your protectors; God separateth the good from the wicked, as the corn from the
ear, and the stone from the Date: He causes the living to spring from the
dead, and the dead from the living: behold the works of God; why will you
depart from his Law? He divides the morning from darkness, has established
night for the repose of men, and the Sun and Moon to compute ages, years,
months, and seasons; such are the effects of Gods power, he is Omnipotent, and
knows all things. He it is that created the Stars to give you light, and
guide you in the obscurity of the earth and sea; he gratifieth with his grace,
and such as learn his Commandments. He it is that created you of one sole
person, that gave you the earth to inhabit, and preserves you in the world,
he has conferred his grace on such as have obeyed his Commandments, has
made rain to descend from heaven, and caused the earth to produce diverse sorts
of herbs, green things, and corn; he has caused the Date to spring forth, and
the Palm tree, with gardens enriched with Grapes, Olives, Pomgranets, and many
fruits alike, and different. Consider how fruits increase and multiply; this
serves for instruction of Gods Unity, to them that have his fear before their
eyes: the Infidels have adored the devil, with God, who created them, and
said, that God has sons and daughters, such is their ignorance; praised be
God, he created heaven and earth; how shall he have a son, who has no wives?
He created and knows all things, he is your God, and your Lord, there is none
other God but he; worship him, he conserveth all things, he is seen of no man,
and beholds all things, he is benign, and nothing is concealed from him. O
people, there is come to you a light from your Lord to conduct you, he that
sees clearly shall receive advantage; and he that shall be blind, shall
continue his misery; I am your Tutor, neither observe I what you do; Thus do I
declare the mysteries of my Law, the wicked shall in the end confess that thou
have taught my Commandments to such as inclined to learn them. Act what thy
Lord has inspired into thee, there is no God but he; separate thy self from
the society of unbelievers; Had it pleased God, they had not disobeyed his
Commandments, thou art not their Tutor, injure not them that worship Idols,
they injure God through malice and ignoranc^ every man esteems what he has
done, and pleases himself in his opinion. Certainly they shall all be
assembled at the day of Judgment, and be chastised after their demerits. They
have sworn by the name of God to fight for the faith, if some miracle appear
to instruct them; miracles proceed from God, they know not the time wherein he
will make them to appear; although they should see miracles, they will not be
converted. I will overturne their hearts, blind their sight, and they shall
never be converted, I will leave them in their errors, and disobedience, with
contempt and confusion. If we should send to them Angels, should the dead come
and speak to them, and should we bring about them all the witnesses of the
world, they shall not believe, if it so please God, most of them are ignorant;
we have allotted an enemy to each Prophet; as the Devil is an enemy to men, he
tempts them with the ornament of his discourses, to render them proud. If it
had pleased thy Lord, they had wanted that power; depart thou from unbelievers,
and their blasphemies, and incline not to their will; they shall find no
advantage in their impiety. Do you desire another Judge then God, who has sent
to you the Book that distinguishes good from evil; Such as know the Scripture
are not ignorant that this Book was sent from God, and contains the Truth; Be
not thou in the number of them that doubt, the word of God exactly comes to
pass, no man can hinder its effects, God understandet^ and knows all things.
If thou incline to the will of most men, they will seduce thee, they believe
but their own opinions, and are liars. Thy Lord knows them that err, and
such as follow the right way. Eat what shall be slain in pronouncing the name
of God; they taught you what was forbidden, eat not, unless constrained
through necessity: Many err from the right way, and pursue their own
appetites, and ignorance, God beholds them that offend him; fly public and
secret sin, sinners shall be severely chastised; eat not of what is not
let-bloud in pronouncing the name of God, lest you disobey his Commandments.
The Devils will tempt them that serve them, they will persuade unbelievers to
dispute against you, if you incline to them, you shall be Infidels as they are.
I raised again many of them that were dead through their sins, I converted
them, and gave them a light to illuminate them, in the darkness, wherein
Infidels shall dwell for ever, because they delight in their disobedience: Thus
will I place in every City, leaders, that shall seduce the wicked, and
themselves, but shall not understand it: When they beheld any sign (of the
truth of the Prophet) appear; they said, they will not believe in him, unless
he were accompanied with the virtues, and merits of other Prophets; God makes
choice of them on whom he conferreth the grace of prophecy, he shall chastise
such as discourse in that manner, with ignominy in this world, and they shall
feel in the other great torments, by reason of their impiety. God rejoices
the hearts of them that he inclines to lead into the way of Salvation, and
punishes them that digress from the right path; his wrath fell upon the
Infidels so soon as he ascended into Heaven. The way thou followest is the
right way; we have recompensed such as have understanding to profit, they shall
be happy, God shall be their protector, because of their good works. Remember
thou the day wherein we shall assemble the people, and when it shall be said to
the Devils, Oh ye bands of Devils! wherefore are you risen against men? The
chief of those men that shall have obeyed them, shall answer, Lord, suffer us
to be revenged on each other, and let each command in his turn; See Gelaldin.
Oh Lord, teach us the prefixed time that thou have appointed to our miseries:
The Angels shall answer, Hell shall be your habitation, you shall there remain
eternally, and so long as it shall please God: Your Lord is most wise, and
omniscient; the wicked shall obey the wicked, because of their sins. Oh ye
Bands of men and Devils! have you not seen my Prophets, and Apostles of your
own Nation, who have given you to see Miracles? who have preached my
Commandments, and the day of Judgment? They shall answer, they have seen the
Prophets, and Apostles, but that the life of the world rendered them proud, and
shall confess themselves to have been wicked. God shall not destroy Mecca for
the injustice therein committed, until he has sent an Apostle to the
Inhabitants, to teach them his Commandments; every one shall be punished
according to his works, thy Lord knows whatsoever is done in the world. He
has no need of his people, he is altogether merciful, he can destroy you if
it please him, and establish in your place another people, as he has
established you in the place of your predecessors. If you be not converted, you
shall not escape the torments of Hell; Say unto them, do as you understand him,
I will comport my self, as I shall apprehend him; you shall in the end
understand who shall have the good part in the other world. None shall give
succor to Idolaters, they, they offer to their Idols of the fruits that God
has created, and say, (following their thoughts) behold our God! Such
sacrifices ascend not to God, their Idolatry has induced many of them to
sacrifice their own Children to their false Gods, they have destroyed them, and
were ensnared in their Religion; which they had not done, had it so pleased
God; Separate thy self from them and their blasphemies they have said, that
the fruits of the earth, and the benefits of God were unclean, and would not
eat of them. God gives food but to those whom he is pleased to gratify. They
have prohibited to ride on some beasts that God gave them, and slew them for
food, without pronouncing the name of his divine Majesty, which is a great
sin, but they shall be punished according to their demerits, They have said it
is lawful for men to eat what is in the bellies of beasts, and that it is
unlawful for their wives, and when they had slain them, they did eat for
company; but God shall chastise them for their discourse, he is most wise, and
Omniscient. Such as slay their Children are wretched men, fools and ignorant,
they have forbidden to eat the good things that God has given them, to
blaspheme, and are gone astray from the right way. It is God who created the
gardens full of fruits, and herbs of diverse colors, with Olives, Pomegranets,
and other fruits alike, and different: Eat of the fruits of the Earth: Pay the
due, appointed when you reap, and dispense not your substance lightly; God
abhors prodigals: Of clean beasts, some there be that have borne the burden,
and others that are young, and have not borne it; Eat what God has given you,
and follow not the footsteps of the Devil, he is your open enemy. Say unto
them, behold eight pair of beasts, viz. two pair of Weathers, See Kitab el
tenoir.
two of Ewes, two of Camels, and two pair of Cowes, of which is it permitted,
or forbidden you to eat? Is it lawful for you to eat the males, or females?
Which are those that God has forbidden you? Who is more wicked then he that
blasphemeth, to seduce from the right way the people that are ignorant? God
guides not the unjust; Say unto them, In all that God has inspired into me, I
find not that it is prohibited to eat of those beasts, except they die of some
disease, and if they be slain without pronouncing the name of God. The flesh of
Swine is forbidden you; if you eat of it, you incur the wrath of God; If any
one be in necessity, and eats without design to provoke God, he shall find
God gracious and merciful. We forbad the Jews to eat of beasts whose feet were
cloven, and of the fat of Beasts, except of such as is interlarded in the
flesh, the entrails and the bones. We enjoined this prohibition by reason of
their sin, and we are veritable in our words, and exact in our promises: If
they slander thee, Say unto them, the mercy of God is great, and the wicked
shall not avoid the punishment of their crimes. The Infidels have said, had it
pleased God, we had not been unbelievers, neither our fathers also, and nothing
had been prohibited. Their predecessors spoke as they, until they felt the
punishment of their sins. Say unto them, Are you assured that God is content
with your proceeding? Tell us, whence arises this assurance? You, in this,
follow but your opinion, you are but liars, Gods providence is great; he had
guided all of you in the right way, had it so pleased him. Cause them come
before us, who said, It is unlawful to eat of clean Beasts; were they present
when God made the Prohibition? If they say they were present, say not as they,
Neither follow the appetites of blasphemous Infidels, who believe not in the
end of the word, and worship many Gods. Say unto them, Come, I will instruct
you what is by God forbidden to be eaten; there is but one sole God, say not,
he has companions equal to him; do good to your Father and Mother, and slay
not your children, in fear of dying with famine, God shall bestow on you and
them also, what shall be necessary; commit not whoredom, either privately or
publicly; kill no man, if justice do not command it: God requires you to
observe what is above (ordained) perhaps you will consider it. Take not the
goods of Orphans, but to succor them, until they be of age, of discretion,
measure, and weight, with good weight, and just measure. I enjoin no man any
thing, but what is in his power to perform. Judge with equity, although it be
against your parents and allies; satisfy what is above (ordained) God
commands it, peradventure you will consider it; it is the right way, which
you ought to pursue: go not aside, God commands it, perhaps you will fear his
divine Majesty. We taught Moses our Commandments; it is a peculiar grace to
instruct the righteous, and guide the people in the right way; it may be you
will believe in the Resurrection. O ye Inhabitants of Mecca! We have sent to
you the Alcoran, full of benediction, perform what is ordained, the impiety,
your sins shall be forgiven you; say not, That God has sent his Law to the two
Nations that preceded you; and that it is hid from you. Will you say, The Jews
and Christians.
That had God taught you the Scripture, you had been more obedient then they?
Certainly he has taught you his Commandments, it is a special grace to guide
you into the right way: Who is more unjust, then he that blasphemeth against
his divine Majesty, and departs from his Commandments? Such men shall be
rigorously chastised in the fire of Hell. Will they expect that the Angels came
to visit them? That God should punish, and declare to them his miracles? Will
they look for the day of Judgment, wherein repentance and conversion shall be
unprofitable? Such as believe in one part of the Law, and reject the other,
have no foundation in their belief. God shall make them to know their errors,
and shall punish them after the enormity of their crimes: He that shall do a
good work, shall have a reward tenfold. Whosoever acts any wickedness, shall
be punished in like manner; neither shall he receive injustice. Say unto them,
God has gvided me in the way of his Law; such as profess the Law of Abraham,
profess the unity of God; Abraham was not in the number of unbelievers; my
prayers, my vows, my life, my death shall be consecrated to God; he has no
companion, I wholly commend my self to his divine pleasure. Say unto them, Do
I desire to worship other God, then the Lord of the Universe? The good that a
man does, is for himself, and the evil that he commits is against him; you
all shall one day appear in the presence of God, he shall resolve your disputes.
He it is that prolongeth your posterity, and exalts some above others, to
prove you; your Lord is exact to chactise the wicked, and gracious and
merciful to the righteous.

CHAP. VII. The Chapter of Prisons, containing an hundred and six Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Mahomet entitled this Chapter, the Chapter of Aaraf, which is a place
between Paradise and Hell, where men suffer no punishment. See Mokari, Bedaoi,
and Kitab el tenoir.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: I am God, the most wise, the most
true. This Book was sent to thee, to preach to the True-beleevers; doubt not
the Contents of it. Say unto them, Believe in what was sent to you from your
Lord, and worship none other God but him; few there be among you that consider
it. How many Cities have we destroyed? How often have we inflicted our
punishment on their Inhabitants by day, and by night, when they reposed?
Nevertheless, they said nothing, but that they were greatly afflicted. We will
examine the people to whom we have sent our Prophets, and require account of
what they have learned, and of what they have done. We will examine our
Prophets, and demand an account of such as have followed, and obeyed them. I
will cause them to remember what they have done worthy of reward. We forsook
not our Prophets when they preached to them the Truth; their actions shall be
weighed in the balance of equity; the balance of the blessed shall be
ponderous with good works; and they whose balance shall be light of good
works, shall be damned, for having contemned our Commandments. We gave you
your habitation on the Earth, and there bestowed on you what was necessary for
your nourishment; but few of you are grateful to me. We created and formed
you, and commanded the Angels to worship Adam, which they performed, except the
devil, to whom we said, what hindered thee to worship Adam, when we commanded
thee? He answered, I am better then he, thou have created me of fire, and have
created man of the mire of the earth; then said we to him, depart out of
Paradise, it is not the habitation of the proud, thou shall be in the number of
them that shall be laden with ignominy; the Devil answered, Let me alone
until the day of the Resurrection of the dead; wherefore have thou tempted me?
I will seduce men from the right way, I will hinder them on the right hand, and
on the left, and on all sides, to believe in thy Law, and the greatest part of
them shall be ungrateful: we said to him, be gone out of Paradise, thou shall
be abhorred of all the world, and deprived of my mercy; I will fill hell with
such as shall follow thee. O Adam! dwell with thy wife in Paradise, and there
eat of whatsoever shall please thee, but approach not that Tree, lest thou with
thy wife be in the number of the unjust. The devil tempted them* and dispoyled
their bodies of their vestments of grace; he said to them, God has forbidden
you to eat of the fruit of that Tree, that you may not be Angels, or eternal;
he swore that he spoke the truth, and filled them with ignominy, because of
their pride. They knew their nakedness, having eaten of that fruit, and to
cover themselves, took leaves of Paradise; their Lord called them, and said,
Did I not forbid you to approach that Tree? I told both of you, that the devil
was your open enemy; they said, Lord, we have offended thee, and injured our
souls, if thou do not compassionate us, we shall be in the number of the
damned: he said, Depart out of Paradise, ye enemies of each other, you shall
inhabit the earth, until the time appointed; you shall there live and die, and
go from the earth to the day of Judgment. O ye children of Adam! we bestowed
on you vestment of graces, signs of our Omnipotency, peradventure you will bear
it in mind. O ye children of Adam! beware lest the devil seduce you, as he
did your Father and Mother, when he caused their departure out of Paradise; he
dispoyled them of their garments, and made them know their deformity; he shall
appear to you, with such as follow them, and you shall see him, when you least
think thereon; he protecteth the Infidels: when they commit any fault, they
say, we follow the Law of our Fathers, God has so commanded us. Say unto them,
Does God command you to offend him? Will you speak of God what you know not? he
has appointed you to do Justice, to worship him, and embrace his Law. Many
shall rise again, as you have seen them; some shall be in the right way, others
shall be damned, because they have obeyed the devil, and believed they were in
the right way. O children of Adam, cloth your selves decently, when you shall
repair to the Temples; eat and drink what pleases you; be not prodigal, God
abhors them that spend their wealth unprofitably: Say unto them, who made
the prohibition of decent clothing, when men go to the Temple to worship God?
Who has forbidden to eat of the goods that God has given you? This is lawful
for true believers. God shall so expound his Commandments at the day of
Judgment. Say unto them, God has forbidden you whoredom, private and
public, disobedience, injustice, desire to adore any other god but him, and to
speak of his divine Majesty what you know not: every one has his
predestination, and none can advance or retard it. O ye children of Adam, did
not the Prophets teach you my Commandments? Such as shall fear me, and do good
works, shall be delivered from affliction ^t the day of Judgment; and they
that disobey my Commandments, that arise against the Faith, shall dwell
eternally in hell fire. Who is more unjust, then he that blasphemeth against
God and his Commandments? Such shall be punished conformably to the Scripture.
When the Angels of death shall cause them to die, they shall say, Where be the
Idols that you adored instead of God? they shall answer, that those false gods
have forsaken them, and shall acknowledge their Idolatry; but God shall say to
them, enter into hell with the men and devils that are condemned; they shall
execrate the Sec^s that preceded them; and being assembled, they shall say,
Lord, judge them, they seduced us, augment their miseries in hell. God shall
say, We will add to their, and your pains, but you understand it not. They
shall say among themselves, we are not the cause that you were unbelievers, you
were not such to please us, suffer with us the torments that you have merited.
I will not open the gate of heaven to such as disobey my Commandments, until
a Camel pass through the eye of a needle, so will I chastise sinners, hell
shall be their bed, fire shall be their covering; and such as shall have done
good works; according to their power, shall dwell eternally in Paradise. I will
remove deceit far from their heart, rivers shall flow in their fields with
delights; and they shall say, praised be God, who has brought us hither,
otherwise we had bin in the number of the erroneous: Certainly the Prophets,
Gods Messengers, taught us the truth, in saying, the observance of the
Commandments of his divine Majesty should render us heirs of Paradise. Such as
shall be saved, shall tell the damned, that they have found the grace foretold
them of God, and we will demand of them, if they have not met with the
punishment that his divine Majesty did denounce against them; they shall say
aloud, Yes, and that the curse of God is upon the unjust, that misled men from
his Law, and they shall be eternally in the number of the miserable. The
Mohammedan Doctors believe, that such as shall have do^e as much good as evil,
and whose balance shall not decline, neither on the scale of good works or of
bad, shall dwell in the place called Aaraf, with them that have done neither
good nor evil; and this place is between Hell and Paradise.
Between the blessed and the damned, there is a separation, and a place called
Aaraf, or prisons, wherein are many persons, who know the blessed and the damned
by their countenances, they call to the blessed and salute them, yet they go
not into Paradise, notwithstanding their great desire to enter. When they turn
their eyes toward the damned; Lord, (say they) involve us not in the number of
the unjust. Such as are in that place, call to the damned, they know them by
their visages, and say, to what served your riches? and that ye arose against
the Faith, and Commandments of God? Behold the faithful (whom ye contemned)
you swore they should be deprived of mercy; God has spoken to them, and has
said, enter into Paradise, and fear not, you shall for ever be exempt from
affliction; the damned shall cry unto the blessed, Give us of the water which
you drink, and the meats that you eat; they shall answer, The drink and bread
of Paradise is prohibited to Infidels, who sported with their faith, that were
proud of the wealth of the earth, and that scoffed at the Commandments of God;
he has forgotten them, because they forgot the coming of the day of
Judgment, and blasphemed against his precepts. We are come to the Inhabitants
of Mecca to instruct them in the Alcoran; we teach it unto men, to give them
knowledge of the right way, and to acquire the mercy of God, if they believe in
that Book: Shall they expect to believe until they know its explication? Its
explication shall appear at the day of Judgment; that day, such as shall have
lived without faith, shall say, Certainly the Prophets delivered the Truth;
shall we partake of their prayers, will they intercede for us, until we return
to the world to do better then we have done, and to obey Gods Commandments?
But they shall be damned, because of their blasphemies. God is your Lord, he
created the heaven; and the earth in six days, and sits on his Throne; he
causes the night incontinently to succeed the day; the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, move at his command, and all the world obeys him; praised be God, Lord
of the Universe: pray to God privately and publicly, he abhors the unjust;
pollute not the earth, after the ordure is removed; pray to God to avoid his
chastisements, and obtain his mercy, which is for the righteous. It is God that
sends the winds to dissipate the rain, when they carry the clouds; we drive
them charged with water, into places dry, dead, and ruined, and cause the rain
to fall there, that they may produce herbs and fruits; so will we cause the
dead to arise again; perhaps men will remember the good land brings forth
good fruits, through the permission of its Lord, and the bad land produces
only darneill. I teach my Commandments to such as are not ungrateful:
Certainly we sent Noah to instruct men; he said, O ye people, worship one God
alone; if you adore other then him, you shall be punished at the day of
Judgment; their Rulers answered, O Noah! thou art in a great error; He
replied, I err not, I am a messenger sent from God to preach his Will; I give
you most wholesome advise, God has taught me what you know not. Is it strange
to you, that he has sent you his Commandment by the tongue of a man like your
selves, to declare to you the torments of Hell? Fear God, he will pardon your
sins; But they belyed Noah, we saved him in the Arc, with his retinue, and
drowned those that contemned our Law, they were altogether blind. We sent Hod
to his brother Aad, and to his retinue, he said, Oh ye people? worship one God
alone, whom will ye adore, or whom fear, but God? The Teachers answered, thou
art in an extreme ignorance; we believe thee to b^ in the number of liars; he
replied, I am not a liar, I am a messenger sent from God, to preach his
Commandments, I give good and salutary advice, wonder not that God teaches
you his precepts by the tongue of a man, like you, who declares to you his
pleasure. Remember that he left you on Earth after Noah, that he increased you
in number, force, and power; Call to mind his grace, you shall be happy. They
answered, are we come to this, to worship one God alone, and to relinquish what
our fathers adored? Show us the truth, whereof thou do preach, if thou art
true; he said, the wrath and indignation of God shall fall upon you; will you
dispute with us of the names, that you and your fathers imposed on your Idols?
God did not enjoyne to worship them, neither have you reason to do it; expect
your punishment, I will expect it with perseverance. Then did we deliver him
from their malice, and all the true believers that were with him, and destroyed
those Infidels, by reason of their impiety. We sent Salhe to Temod, and his
people; he said to them, Oh ye people! worship but one God, he shall show you a
miracle in this The Turks believe that Salhe, through Gods permission
metamorphosed a rock into a Camel.
Camel, suffer it to feed on the Earth, and do to it no harm, left you be
chastised: Remember, how God left you on the Earth after Aad, he gave you to
dwell in the valleys, in the plains, and mountains; Remember God, and pollute
not the Earth any more. Their Captains who were proud, demanded of the poor,
if they believed that Salhe was indeed the Messenger of God? they answered, We
believe in his words, and in his doctrine; Then said those proud men, We abjure
what ye believe, we condemn him, and they slew the Camel of Salhe in derision,
disobeyed the Commandments of God, and said, Oh Salhe! Let us now see the
punishment that thou did preach, if thou art of the Prophets; at the same
time, an Earthquake, with thunder surprised them, and they remained dead as
carcasses in their houses. Salhe forsook them, and said, Oh ye people! I
declared to you the will of God with fidelity, but ye detest them that affect
you, and give you good counsels. Remember thou how Lot spoke to the people,
saying, Will you daily defile your selves with whoredom? and with a
filthiness that was never yet seen in the world by any your Predecessors?
Will you love men better then women? will you love sin rather then piety? They
said, Let us expel Lot and his family from our City, for that they will not
contaminate themselves with us, but God delivered him out of their hands, and
those of his house* except his wife, who continued with them that were
punished: We caused a rain to fall upon them, that destroyed all of them.
Consider the end of the wicked: We sent Chaib to the Country of Madian, he
said, Oh ye people, worship one God alone, weigh with good weights, measure
with good measure, and retain nothing from your Neighbor: Possess not the
high ways, to give terror to the people, Neither divert True-believers from
the Law of God: Remember, that you were but a small handful of men, and he
caused you to multiply; consider the end of the wicked; If any among you
embrace the faith, and others contemn it, have patience, until God judge your
differences, there is no better judge then he; Their Teachers said; Oh Chaib,
we will banish thee from Madian, thee and those that are of thy faith, if thou
art of our Religion; he answered, should I not abhor your Religion, I should
blaspheme against God, who has delivered me, I will follow it, if it please
God, he knows all things, I recommend my self wholly to the will of his
divine Majesty; Lord judge our controversy, thou art the best Judge of the
world. Then said their Teachers to the people, if you follow Chaib, you are
damned; not long after an Earthquake, and Thunder surprised them, and in the
morning they were found dead in their houses; such as belyed Chaib, found no
safety in their habitations, they were wretched, he abandoned them, and said,
Oh ye people! I have preached to you the will of God with fidelity; I will no
longer afflict my self with the malice of the wicked. We infflicted sickness
and poverty on them that disobeyed the Prophets, whom we sent to the
Inhabitants of Madian; peradventure they will be converted. We proved them
through diseases and health, and gratified them in many occurrences, yet they
said, our fathers were afflicted with sickness and poverty, we shall be as
they, but we chastised them for their sin, when they least considered it. Had
the Inhabitants of Mecca had our fear before their eyes, and obeyed our
Commandments, we had opened to them the blessing of Heaven and Earth; we will
punish them, because they are impious: Some there be, that shall be afflicted
in the night, when they sleep; and others that shall be tormented by day, when
they sport, and recreate themselves; they believed God to be a deceiver, and
are damned. God guides into the right way True-believers, and makes them Heir
of the Earth, after their parents; had he so pleased, he might have destroyed
all the world, he might have hardened the hearts of the people, and no man had
harkned to his word. I recount what things befell that To Mecca.
City, many Prophets have been sent to its Inhabitants, and wrought many
miracles, yet would they not relinqui^h their former impiety; thus have we
hardened the hearts of Infidels; they violated their promises, and we found
most of them to be wicked and disobedient. We sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his
people, he to them showed miracles, which through their malice they contemned,
but consider the end of those wicked men; Moses said unto Pharaoh, I am a
messenger sent from God, the God of the Universe; when I speak of God, I
deliver the Truth; I am come, through his command, to tell thee, thou must
dismiss with me the Children of Israel, and no longer detain them in thy
dominions. Pharaoh said, if thou come from God, and art true in thy sayings,
let us see some miracles; then he cast upon the ground his staff, which was
changed into a Serpent, showed his hand, that appeared exceeding white to the
eyes of the Spectators. The Doctors of Pharaoh said, this man is a Magician, he
would have us to abandon our Country, what is your opinion? detain him
prisoner, and his brother, and send into your Cities, to assemble Magicians.
The Magicians of Pharaoh appearing before him, they said, Gelaldin says Moses
his hand was ^owne.
what shall be our reward, if we shall be victorious? He replied to them, you
shall be well rewarded, and shall be of them that approach my person. They
said, oh Moses! will thou first cast down thy staff on the ground, or shall we
ours? Moses bad them cast down theirs, which they did, enchanting the eyes of
the spectators, and terrifying them with an extraordinary enchantment; God
inspired Moses to cast down his Rod, which devoured the staves of the other,
and the Truth appeared above falsehood, and above the vanity of their actions;
they were vanquished, to their confusion, forsook their magic, and prostrating
themselves on the earth, uttered these words; We believe in the Lord of the
Universe, the Lord of Moses, and of Aaron; Pharaoh said to them, Ye believe in
the God of Moses without my permission; this is a deceit, invented by you, to
drive the people out of my Dominions; but you shall soon know the punishment
that I will lay upon you, I will cut off your feet and hands, and command you
to be crucified. They answered, We recommend our selves wholly to the will of
God, whatsoever is thy revenge on us, thou shall not hinder us to believe in
the miracles that we see, neither to obey the Commandments of his divine
Majesty; Lord give us patience, and to dye in the number of True-believers.
Then said Pharaoh's Doctors, dismiss Moses, and his people, that they may go
whither they see good, to pollute the Earth, that they may leave thee in quiet
with thy Gods; He said, I will cause their Childeren to be slain, their wives
to be abused, and I will inflict upon them a thousand torments. Moses said to
his people; Implore succors of God with patience, and prayers, the whole Earth
is Gods, he gives it to inherit, to whom he sees good: the other world is for
the righteous. They said, Oh Moses! We, before, thy coming, desired the death
of our enemies; he replied, God will not destroy your enemies, to leave you
alone upon the Earth, he shall behold your actions. We afflicted Pharaoh and
his Subjects with famine, perhaps unbelievers will consider it. When any
happiness befell them, they said, they well deserved it, and when they fell
into misery, they affirmed Moses and his people to be the cause of it; It is
God that punished them, but of this most of them were ignorant. They said unto
Moses, cease to show us thy miracles to inchant us, we will not obey thee: We
sent upon them a Deluge, Grasse-hoppers, Lice, Frogs, and Blood, one after
another; nevertheless they were proud, and in the number of the wicked. When
our wrath fell upon them, they said, oh Moses! call upon thy Lord, that he
give us what to thee he promised, remove his displeasure from us, we will
believe thee, and will dismiss with thee, the Children of Israel: When we
delivered them from affliction, they sharpened their tongues, murmured, and
violated their promises; we avenged our selves upon them, and drowned them in
the Sea, for that they contemned our miracles, and we gave the West and East to
the Children of Israel, who were humble before us; we gave them our blessing,
our word was accomplished upon them, because of their perseverance, and we
destroyed the Armies of Pharaoh. The Children of Israel having past the Sea,
met with men that adored Idols, and said, oh Moses! make unto us Gods, like to
the Gods of this people; he answered, ye are ignorant; these men are wretched,
what they do is but ignorance and vanity; shall I desire that you worship
other Gods, then God that preferred you to all the world? We have delivered you
from Pharoah's people, who caused you to endure great torments, they murdered
your children, abused your wives, and you suffered heavy afflictions for the
punishment of your sins. We detained Moses on the Mountain thirty nights, and
ten other nights, which is in all forty nights; when he went up, he said to his
brother Aaron, be thou my Lieutenant, command this people in mine absence, and
follow not the path of the wicked. When Moses at the time appointed arrived at
the top of the Mountain, and that his Lord spoke to him, he said, Lord permit
me to see thee, he said, thou shall not see me; behold this Mountain, if it
continue firm in this place, thou shall be able to see me; when the Lord
appeared upon the Mountain with his light, it was reduced to ashes, and Moses
amazed, fell on the ground, as dead. When he rose again, he said blessed be
the name of God, I desire to obey him, and believe that no man living is able
to behold him. He said to Moses, I have chosen and preferred thee to all the
world, I have made thee a Prophet, thou have talked with me, receive the grace
which I have bestowed on thee, and be not ungrateful. We gave to him the
Tables, whereon was written what was necessary for the salvation of men, and we
said to him, receive with affection, what I give thee, and command thy people
to observe the contents of those Tables. I will precipitate into Hell such as
transgress my Commandments; I will deprive the proud of my graces, they will
not believe in my Law, although they see all the miracles in the world; if they
see the right way, they will not follow it; they see the way of error, and
pursue it; because they have abjured my Commandments, and rejected my grace,
the good works of them that disobey me, and that believe not in the
Resurrection, are unprofitable, they shall be chastised after their demerits.
The people of Moses, after his departure, adored the Calfe, a bellowing God,
saw they not, that it spoke not to them? neither could conduct them into the
right way? Nevertheless they adored it, for which they were greatly too blame.
When this Calfe fell to the ground, and they found their error, they said, if
God have not pity on us, we shall be miserable. When Moses returned, he said to
them, whom did ye obey after my departure? You were too hasty to worship that
Idol; he in displeasure cast against the ground the Tables that God had given
him, took his brother by the head, and dragging him to him, said Son of my
mother, how have thou governed this people? I wanted power, replied he, and
could not divert them from their evil; It wanted little but they had slain me,
do me no harm; rejoice not my enemies with my misery, and account me not with
those that adored Idols: Moses said, Lord pardon me, and my brother, give us
thy mercy; thou art the merciful of the merciful. The wrath of God, and the
infamy of the world shall fall upon them that worshipped the Calf, and
blasphemed against God; he will be pitiful to such as shall repent, and
believe in his divine Majesty. The displeasure of Moses being allayed, he
again took the Tables, whereon was written the way of salvation, for such as
have the fear of their Lord before their eyes; he caused to be separated from
his people, at a time appointed, threescore and ten persons, who were surprised
with an earthquake, and with thunder; and said, Lord, thou could have
destroyed them, before they adored the Calf; will thou destroy us all, because
of the sin of the ignorant that are amongst us? Thou have desired to prove this
people; thou guidest, and causest to err whom thou please; thou art our
Protector, pardon our sins; for thou art altogether merciful; give us thy
grace in this world, and guide us to the day of Judgment, near to thy divine
Majesty: He said, I will punish as I see good, my mercy embraces the whole
world; it is for such as have my fear before their eyes, that pay Tithes, obey
my Commandments, follow the right way, believe in the Prophet, This is Mahomet.
who can neither write nor read, and what is written in the Old Testament, and
the Gospel; See Kitab el tenoir.
he shall command them things honest; he shall prohibit things uncivil; he
shall teach them what meats are clean, and forbid them to eat what is unclean;
he shall deliver them from Ceremonies, weighty and trublesome, and from the
chains that strictly bind them: Such as shall believe in him, that shall honor
him, that shall defend him from his enemies, and follow the light that we shall
send him, shall be happy. Say unto the people, I am indeed a messenger sent
from God, to whom appertains the kingdom of the Heavens, The Turks believe
that Mahomet could neither write nor read.
and of Earth; there is but one God alone, he gives life and death, as seems
good to him. Believe in God, and in his Prophet, who can neither read nor
write. Such as shall believe in God, in his Word, and follow the Prophet, shall
not err; they shall follow a very good way. There are some of the children of
Israel that knew the truth, and judge with equity. We divided them into twelve
Tribes, when Moses required drink for his people, we inspired him to strike the
rock with his rod, whence flowed twelve fountains, and every one knew the place
where he should drink; we covered them with the shadow of clouds; we caused
Manna and Quails to descend upon them, and commanded them to eat of the good
things which we gave them. They did not hurt us (when they murmured) but
afflicted themselves. This is the holy land.
It was said to them, Dwell in this City, and eat therein what shall please
you; enter at the gate with adoration, See Gelaldin.
and beg pardon of your sins. I will pardon you, and will augment the graces
of the righteous; nevertheless the wicked that were among them, altered the
words that were spoken to them, and perverted them; and we sent upon them our
indignation from Heaven, because of their impiety. Ask of them concerning a
village that was upon the shore of the Sea, whose inhabitants observed not the
Sabbath, and fished on the day of rest; they saw in that day, Serpents appear
upon the water, and other days they saw none. Thus are tried them, because of
their disobedience: A party of them said, Fish not, O people, it is lost labor;
God shall destroy and chastise them with grievous torments, then their Doctors
said, They shall implore pardon of the Lord, perhaps they will fear to offend
him another time. When they rejected what we taught them; we saved such among
them as abstain from evil-doing, and grievously afflicted the wicked, because
of their disobedience; when they gloried in their sin, we said to them, Be ye
contemned, and abhorred, as Apes; thy Lord shall send to them at the day of
Judgment, persons to torment them; he is exact in punishing the wicked, and
merciful to the righteous. We sent upon them good and evil, to prove them,
peradventure they will be converted. Their posterity left a progeny, heirs of
their doctrine; nevertheless, they returned to their sins, and say, the Lord
shall pardon them; they beg pardon of him; and return daily to their sin: See
Gelaldin.
Shall not account be required from them, of what is ordained in the Scripture?
To wit, not to speak of God, but with truth: They have read the Truth, but have
not comprehended it. Paradise is only for the righteous; I will not deprive
them of recompense, who make their prayers at the time appointed, and observe
what is contained in the Scriptures. Remember thou, how we raised a mountain
over them, to shelter them, and how they believed it would fall upon their
heads; we said to them, Learn with affection what we teach you, and remember;
perhaps you will fear disobedience. Thy Lord caused to come out of Adams
reins, all his posterity; and asked them, saying, Am not I your Lord? they
answered, yes, thou art our Lord, we know it well: They cannot therefore say at
the day of Judgment, That they knew not his unity; they shall say for excuse,
Our fathers adored many gods before us, we are their posterity; will thou
destroy us, because of their iniquity? Thus do I discover my mysteries to men;
it may be they will be converted. Relate to them the history of him that saw
our miracles; he was dispoiled of his understanding, the Devil followed it,
and he was in the number of the wretched. Had we so pleased, we had exalted him
through the knowledge of our wonders, among the Doctors; but he crouched to the
ground, and followed his own appetite, like to a chafed dog; if thou chase him
with choler, he puts forth his tongue; if thou leave him at rest, he will
still put forth his tongue, like to the Infidels, that contemn our
instructions; if thou recount to them our miracles, or do not recount, perhaps
they will be converted, perhaps they will not be converted, and shall be like
such as have abjured our Commandments, and injured their own souls. He whom
God guides, is well guided; and he whom God mis-leadeth, is in the number of
the miserable. We have created Hell to punish* Devils and men; they have
hearts, and comprehend no^ the truth; they have eyes, and see it not; ears have
they, and hear it not; they are like to beasts, and worse then beasts; they
are altogether ignorant. The most beautiful names of the world appertain to
God: Beseech him by the beauty of his name, and depart from them that depart
from the truth, through the names that they impose on their Idols; they shall
be chastised after their demerits. Some there be that follow the truth, and
judge with equity, I will by degrees punish them that shall reject our
Commandments, when they shall think thereon. I will defer their punishment
some time, because my wrath is violent: Remember they not, that they said,
Mahomet is possessed of the Devil? On the contrary, he declares the joys of
Paradise, and preaches the torments of Hell. Consider they not the Kingdom of
Heaven and of Earth, which God has created of nothing? The fear of death shall
arrive before they have acknowledged their sins; in what will they believe, if
they have not faith in the Alcoran? He whom God shall mis-lead, shall find none
to guide him; he shall leave Infidels confounded in their disobedience. They
shall enquire of thee concerning the hour and day of Judgment. Say unto them,
No man knows it but God; but the greatest part of the world believe it not. I
have not power to do either good or evil of my self, if God do not permit it;
If I knew the future, I should provide wealth to preserve me from poverty: I am
sent only to declare the joys of Paradise, and preach the torments of Hell to
them that believe in God; he it is that created you of one sole person, and
created his spouse of his rib, to dwell with her: When she doubted of being
with child, she ceased not to travel as she was wont; but when her conception
rendered her heavy, they both besought God, their Lord, and said, Lord give an
happy progeny, to the end we may be in the number of them that return thee
thanks for thy favors. When God gave them a son, a r^ghteous man, they
associated him in what he had given them; and all of them exalted the glory of
his divine Majesty, above the Idols of the Infidels, that adored things which
could create nothing, that are things created, and can do neither good nor
harm. If you call Idolaters to the right way, they will not follow you; if ye
invoke Idols, misery shall be upon you; will you be mute, to profess the unity
of God? will you worship the Creatures, instead of the Creators Go, adore your
Idols, and may they hear your prayers, if you believe them to be Gods: Have
they feet to walk, hands to touch, eyes to see, and ears to hear? Say unto
them, if ye invoke your Idols, and conspire against me, you shall find none to
protect you, God is my protector, he has caused the Alcoran to descend from
Heaven, he is the defendor of the righteous, what ye adore, can neither benefit
nor hurt you; If thou invokest Idols, they shall not hear thee, they shall
look upon thee, and shall not see thee; do what is lawful to be done, command
things honest, and depart from the ignorant; if the Devil would seduce thee,
trust in God, he hears and knows all things; such as fear him remember his
mercies and chastisements when they are tempted of the Devil. Although Infidels
know the Truth, the Devil cease not to continue them in their sin, they
always follow their impiety; If thou go to them to instruct them, they say,
thou singest an old song, say unto them, I do what my Lord inspired into me,
what I teach you, is the light of faith, the right way, and the grace of God
for them that believe in his divine Majesty; for such as hear the Alcoran, and
study it, perhaps God will give you his mercy. Remember thou ^od in thy soul,
worship in public and private, pray unto him evening, and morning, and be not
in the number of the ignorant. The Angels that are near to thy Lord, neglect
not to worship him, they praise and adore him with humility.

CHAP. VIII. The Chapter of the spoil, containing seventy and five verses,
written at Medina.
Mahomets men differed concerning division of the spoil, which they took at
the battle of Beder; Mahomet divided it among them.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. They will demand of thee, to whom
appertains the spoil? Say unto them, the spoil appertains to God, and his
Prophet; Fear God, live with mutual amity, and obey his divine Majesty, and
his Prophet, if you believe in his Law; Such as fear when they hear mention
of God, who augment their faith, when they have heard relation of his miracles,
who trust in him, who persevere in their prayers, and dispend in pious works
some part of their wealth, believe in the unity of his divine Majesty; they
have the degree of their habitation in Paradise, shall receive from their Lord
pardon of their sins, and exceeding great treasure. When thy Lord caused thee
to go out of thine house to go against the Infidels, a party of the true
believers had a great aversion to fighting, See Gelaldin.
they disputed with thee the necessity of Combats, having seen and known that
their enemies led them to a certain death; Call to mind, that God promised you,
that a party of the Army of the Enemies should obey you. Desire you other thing
then the glory and honor of victory? God confirms the Truth by his words,
and destroys the wicked, he ratifieth the Truth, and destroys falsehood,
although it be contrary to the will of the impious. Remember, that your Lord
heard you, when you of him implored succors, and that he assisted you with a
thousand of his Angels sent from Heaven; God sent you this aid, only to let
you know his grace, and to confirm your hearts; victory proceeds from God,
he is omnipotent, and most prudent: Remember that God covered you with a secure
sleep, and caused water to descend from Heaven, to wash, purify, and deliver
you from the malice of the Devil. Plant in your heart generosity, and
patience, and go on with assurance. God has said to his Angels, I will be
with you, confirm the steps of the True-believers; I will cast fear into the
heart of the wicked, strike them on the head, smite them on the fingers, and
feet, because they have contradicted my will, and that of the Prophet. God
severely chastises such as disobey his Commandments, and oppose the will of
his Prophet; the unbelievers have heretofore tasted of his punishments in this
world, and shall in the end feel the pains of the fire of Hell. Oh ye who
believe in God! turn not the back to the wicked, as vanquished, when they
approach to fight you, he that shall turn the back, shall return in the wrath
of God, and be thrown headlong into the fire of Hell. You slew not the
Infidels at the fight of Beder, God himself slew them. See Gelaldin.
Ob Mahomet.
Thou did not cast stones against them, God did cast them to advantage the
True-believers; he understands whatsoever they say, and knows all their
actions: certainly, he will augment the affliction of the wicked. When ye
required victory, it was given you; if you relinquish your impiety, you shall
do well; if you retutne to fight against the Prophet, know, that he will
protect him against you; your men of War shall advantage you in nothing,
notwithstanding they be numerous; for that God is with the True-believers. O ye
that believe, obey God and his Prophet, depart not from him, since ye have
heard the Commandments of his divine Majesty, be not as those that say, We
have heard, and were deaf and dumb. The ignominy and misery that God lays ^n
beasts, is to be deaf and dumb, and to want the use of reason: Had God seen any
good inclination in the Infidels, he had not left them in their de^f^nesse; but
although they had heard clearly, they should have always departed from his
Law, and have been obstinate. O ye that believe in God! obey God and the
Prophet, demand life eternal in your prayers, and know that God will separate
the Gall from the Liver; he will separate the Infidel from the True-believer,
and you all shall appear before him, to be ^^compensed and chastised ^or your
works; fear the punishment that shall be inflicted, especially on the
seditious, and ungrateful, God is ^evere in his chastisements; Remember that
in the territory of Mecca ye were but ^n handful of weak men, and with fear
of being taken, and destroyed by the unbelievers; God saved, protected, and
enriched you with all manner of good things, peradventure ye will give him
thanks. Oh ye that believe! betray not God, no^ the Prophet, neither such as
confide in you, and have entrusted their wealth in your hands, otherwise your
riches, and children shall torment you in the other world. There is with God
great reward for the righteous. O ye that believe! if ye fear God, he shall
remove your enemies far from you, and pardon your sins, his goodness is
infinite. The wicked have conspired against thee, to punish and stay thee, or
drive thee from M^cca; but God has rendered their conspiracy ineffectuall, he
knows all the designs of conspirators. When his miracles were related to
them, and his Commandments taught them, they said, we have heard them, we had
^a^d the like things, had we so inclined; it is but a song, and a fable of old
m^n: Remember thou, how they laid, my God, if what Mahomet declares be true,
cause a shewer of fl^nt-st^nes to fall upon us, and rigorously chastise us; He
shall not chastise them, when thou art wi^h them, neither when they beg pardon
of him; Who is he that is able to ^inder God to punish them? They are not in
his grace, when they hinder True-believers to enter the Temple of Mecca; he
protecteth only such as have his fear before his eyes, but most of them
understand it not. Their prayers are very light, they go hand in hand in the
Temple, but shall one day feel the punishment of God, because of their impiety.
The unbelievers that expend their wealth, to turn the people from the Law of
God, shall have sorrow for their expense, they shall be infamous, and
precipitated into the fire of Hell. God shall separate the good from the
wicked, he shall cast the wicked headlong into Hell fire, and they shall be in
the number of the damned: if they repent, he will remit what is past, and if
they return to fight against the Prophet, they shall be entreated as the
first: kill them, to avoid sedition, that there may be no law in the world, but
the Law of God; If they forsake their impiety, God shall behold their actions,
if they depart from the faith, know that God alone is your Lord, and protector.
The fifth part of the spoil that you shall gain from your enemies,
appertains to God, the Prophet, his parents, orphans, the poor, and to
Pilgrims that are in want; observe what is above ordained, if ye believe in
God, in what we have inspired into our Mahomet.
Servant, and in the day, wherein the distinction of the good and the bad was
known at the encounter of the The day of battle of Beder.
two Camps: God is omnipotent, ye were in an high place, the nearest to Medina,
your enemies were a far off, by the valley, and the enemies Cavalry below
you; See Gelaldin.
had ye promised to give battle, ye had transgressed your promise, by reason
of the great number of Infidels, but what God will, is speedily executed, he
shall destroy such as are wicked, having seen that battle, an evident sign
of the true mission of the Prophet, and shall give life to True-believers; he
understands and knows all things, he caused you to see in a dream your
enemies in a small number, had he made them to appear numerous, ye had feared
to fight, but he delivered you from fear, he knows what is in the hearts of
men: When he caused you to appear in their view, he made you seem few in
number, to accomplish his will, all things depend on God. Oh ye that believe!
make an Halt, when you are in view of your enemies Troops, and pray to God with
affection, perhaps you shall be happy, obey God, and the Prophet, his Apostle;
if disorder and terror surprise you, you shall loose your reputation,
persevere, God is with them that continue to do well. Be not like them that
went out of their houses with dissembled joy, and hypocrisy, and turn the
people from the right way, God knows all their actions; The Devil caused
them to find pleasure in their doings, saying to them, none shall this day
obtain victory over you, I will be with you; and when they beheld the two
Camps in battailia, he returned on his steps, fled, and said, I am innocent of
the evil that you commit, I The Turks believe, that the Devil saw the Angels
fight for Mahomet.
see what you see not, I fear the omnipotent God, he is severe in his
punishments. The wicked, and such as were weak in their faith, speaking of the
True believers, said, These men glory in their Law: It was replied to them, he
that relyeth on God, shall find him to be more powerful then his enemies, and
that he is most prudent in whatsoever he does. Thou saw the Angels that slew
the Infidels, they did beat them behind and before, and said to them, taste the
torments of the fire which you have merited, God is not unjust to his
Creatures. The people of Pharaoh were Infidels, and those that preceded them,
contemned the miracles and Commandments of God, but he rigorously chastised
them, he is omnipotent, and most severe in his punishments, he shall destroy
them that alter the graces he has given to the people, until they have
altered the grace he has conferred on themselves. Pharaohs people were
Infidels, their Predecessors disobeyed the Commandments of thy Lord; See Kitab
el tenoir.
but we destroyed them because of their sin, we drowned them for that they
were unjust; The wicked are like to beasts, they shall never believe in God.
Such as promised not to assist the unbelievers, and violated their promise, had
not the fear of God before their eyes; if thou meet them in a journey,
separate thy self from them, their punishment pursues them, peradventure they
will consider it. If you fear that any one will betray you, and be wanting to
their word, receive no promise from him, neither promise him any thing, God
abhors Traitors: Believe not that Infidels escape the punishment of God,
return with your whole strength to fight against them; the halters of your
horses shall terrify the enemies of God, and of you, and of other persons who
ye know not, but God knows them all. Your expense for his service, shall be
paid you, and no injustice shall be done to you; If thine enemies incline to
peace, thou shall do ill to incline, as they, trust in God, he understands
what they say, and knows whatsoever they do; if they desire to betray thee,
God shall protect thee; and all True-believers endeavor to unite their hearts;
but although thou should expend all the riches of the world, thou shall not
be able to unite them, God shall one day unite them, he is omnipotent, and
prudent in all his works. O Prophet! the protection of God suffices thee, and
the righteous that follow thee. Exhort the True-believers to fight against
Infidels; if ye be twenty assembled with resolution and perseverance, ye shall
vanquish two hundred Infidels; if ye be an hundred, ye shall overthrow a
thousand, the unbelievers are ignorant; but God will lighten your burden he
knows your weakness; if ye be an hundred true believers, ye shall defeat two
hundred Infidels; if ye be a thousand, you shall subdue two thousand by the
permission of God, he aideth such as expect his succors with perseverance. The
Prophet cannot be a prisoner, he shall establish himself on earth with
advantage, over unbelievers; Ye desire the wealth of the earth, and God will
give you the treasures of Heaven, he is omnipotent and wise. If God had not
taught you his Commandments, ye should have suffered great torments; eat of
clean beasts that he has permitted you to eat, and fear God, he is gracious
and merciful to them that have his fear before their eyes. Oh Prophet! say to
them, that shall be prisoners in thy hands, God knows what is in your hearts,
he shall reward you for what ye shall have lost, and shall pardon your sins;
If you be converted, he is gracious and merciful. If they betray thee, they
betrayed God before thee, separate them from the True-believers, God knows
all things, and is most prudent in what he ordains. Such as have believed in
God, as have departed from the wicked, as have employed their wealth, and
persons to fight for the Law of God, such as have protected the Prophet, and
defended him, are all protectors, and friends to each other; you shall have no
consideration of the alliance of the True-believers, that desert not the
company of Infidels, until they be separated from them. If they require of you
succors touching Religion, you are obliged to protect them, except against such
as have confederacy with you, God sees all your actions. The Infidels protect
each other, if you obey them, great disorders shall ensue, and many seditions
in the earth. Such as have believed in God, as have deserted the wicked, as
have fought for the Law of God, as have established the Prophet, and defended
him against his enemies, are indeed faithful and True-believers, they shall
receive from God pardon of their sins, and exceeding great treasures. Such as
having believed in God, have departed from the wicked, and have fought with
you, are yours, they shall be the Heirs of their parents, God has so appointed
it, he knows all things.

CHAP. IX. The Chap^er of Conversion, containing an hundred twenty and seven
Verses, written at Medina.
Reader, this Chapter begins not as the rest, with these words, In the name
of God, gracious and merciful; because these are words of peace and salvation,
and for that in this Chapter, Mahomet commands to break Truce with his
enemies, and to assault them. Many Mohammedan Doctors have entitled this the
Chapter of punishment, or pain. See the Exposition of Gelaldin, and that of
Bedaoi, and el tenoir.

A Letter Parent from God, and his Prophet, to the unbelievers with whom ye
have made truce. Travel in safety the space of four months, know, ye shall
not render God impotent, and that he will lay shame upon your forehead. Advice
for the people, at the day of great Pilgrimage, from God, and his Prophet: God
approves not the action of them that adore Idols, his Prophet is innocent from
that sin; If ye repent, ye shall do well, if ye abandon the Law of God, know
ye shall not escape the punishment of your crime; preach to the unbelievers,
that they shall suffer grievous torments, except those with whom ye have made
Truce, who fall not from what they have promised, and that protect none against
you. Observe exactly until the prefixed time, what you have promised them, God
loves them that fear him: When the mo^th of He^am shall be past, kill them
where you shall meet them, take them slaves, detain^ them prisoners, a^^
observe where they pass to lay ambush for them; if they be converted, if they
pray at the time appointed, and pay tithes, leave them in quiet, God is
merciful to them that rep^nt. If the Infidels demand quarter of you, give them
quarter, to the end they may learn the wo^d of God; teach them his
Commandments, for they are ignorant. How should they have Truce with God and
his Prophet? If they believe neither in the one, nor the other, except them
with whom you entered Truce in the Temple of Mecca? If they observe their
promise to you, observe what ye promised to them, God loves such as have his
fear before their eyes* How shall they have truce with you? If they have
advantage over you, they will respect neither your alliance nor confederacy;
They will speak well of you, and contemn you in their heart, the greatest part
of them are impious, they have preferred the riches of this world to the
Commandments of God, and have hindered the people to follow his Law, as if
they knew not what they did; they bear no respect to the True-believers,
wherein they are exceedingly too blame. If they turn, and make their prayers
at the time appointed, if they pay Tithes, they shall be your brethren in God.
I teach the mysteries of faith to such as have understanding to comprehend
them, if they break their promise and disturb them of your Religion, kill their
Captains, as persons without faith, they will perhaps put an end to their
impiety. Slay such especially that renounce their faith, who have endeavored
to drive the Prophet from Mecca, and have begun to slay you, will you fear
them! will ye be terrified by them? It is reasonable that ye fear God; if ye
believe in his Law, fight them, God shall chastise them by your hands, he shall
render them dishonorable, and protect you against them, he shall fortify the
hearts of True-believers, and expel melancholy, he pardons whom he sees
good, knows all things, and is most prudent in what he ordains. Think ye to
be forsaken of God, and that he discerns not them that have fought gallantly
for his Law, from such as have adored Idols, and disobeyed his Prophet? The
True-believers abandon not their Religion another time to profess it: God
knows all your actions, Infidels must not enter into the Temple of Mecca,
knowing that they are Infidels, the good works which they shall do in this
world shall be unprofitable, and they shall dwell eternally in the fire of
Hell. They that believe in God, and the day of Judgment, that make their
prayers at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and worship one God alone, shall
visit the Temples of his divine Majesty, and such as fear the creatures more
then the Creator err from the right way; We have ordained that such as shall
bear fresh water to Pilgrims, and them that shall visit the Temple of Mecca,
shall be in the number of them that believe in God, and the day of Judgment.
Such as fight for the faith are not all equal in graces, and merits before
God, he guides not the unjust. Such as have believed in God, as have departed
from the wicked, and employed their wealth and persons to fight for his Law,
shall have a particular degree, and a particular place near to his divine
Majesty, they shall be the more happy. Go^ through his goodness declares to
them, that they shall enter into delicious gardens, where they shall remain
eternally, there is with God a very great reward. Oh ye that believe! obey not
your fathers, nor your brothers, that love rather to follow impiety, then the
faith. Such as shall obey them, shall offend exceedingly; if your father, your
children, your brothers, your wives, your parents, your friends, the wealth
that you have gained, the fear of losing your riches, and apprehension of
poverty, have more of power over you then God and his Prophet, and hinder you
to fight for the faith, the Commandment of God shall be executed against you,
he guides not the wicked, and has protected you in many occasions. Remember
the day of battle of Hanin, when ye rejoiced in the multitude of your men, it
did not advantage you, fear made you find the place too narrow for flight, and
ye turned the back as vanquished: Remember that God, at that time, put his
Prophet, and the True-believers in a place of safety, and sent invisible Troops
to chastise the Infidels, he pardons sins as seems good to him, he is
gracious and merciful. Oh ye that believe in God! Unbelievers are unclean,
permit not that they enter into the Temple of Mecca after this year, if ye have
apprehension of want, God shall enrich you with his grace, if it please him, he
is omniscient and most prudent. Fight against them that believe not in God, no^
the day of Judgment, that forbid not to act what God has prohibited, and his
Prophet has forbidden, and that judge not according to the Law of truth,
wherein they were instructed, who heretofore received the written Law: they
choose rather to pay Tribute, then to be converted, therefore are they
contemptible. The Jews have said, that the Son of God is most powerful; the
Christians, that the Messiah is the Son of God; their words are like to the
words of the Infidels that preceded them, but God shall lay upon them his
curse. Consider how they blaspheme; they adore their Doctors, and Priests, and
the Messiah also, the Son of Mary; who commanded them to worship one God alone,
there is but on sole God: praised be God, there is nothing equal to him; they
would extinguish the light of God with their mouth, but he shall not suffer
them; he shall cause it appear, notwithstanding it be vexatious to the
Infidels. He has sent his Prophet to conduct men into the right way, to preach
the Law of Truth, and to make it eminent above all other Laws of the world,
against the will of Idolaters. O ye that truly believe! many of the Doctors and
Priests eat unprofitably the substance of the people, and divert them from the
Law of God: declare to such as treasure up, and expend nothing in pious works,
they shall suffer great torments at the day when the fire of hell shall be
kindled upon them, it shall burn their forehead, sides, and back; it shall be
said to them, behold the wealth which ye have treasured up for your souls, taste
the fruits of your treasures which ye have amass^d, When God created the heaven
and the earth, he ordained the year of twelve months, amongst which four are
privileged. O stead not God, especially in those months; fight at all times
against unbelievers, as they will fight against you, and know that God is with
them that have his fear before their eyes. Sloth and forgetfuln^ss abound in
impiety; God misleadeth thro^gh negligence the unbelievers, that prefer one
month to another, in imitation of what is command^d: they permit to do what
God has forbidden, and delight in the malice of their actions, but God is not
the guide of the wicked. O ye that believe! wherefore have ye inclined to the
earth? Why did ye prefer the wealth of this world to that of Paradise; when you
were commanded to go forth of your houses to fight for the Law of God? The
riches of this world are contemptible, if you consider those of heaven; if you
leave not your houses to fight with the Prophet, God shall severely punish you,
and put other persons in your places; you shall not protect the Prophet, God
alone is his protector; he protected him when he went out of Mecca; he, with
his Companion, they being both in a cave, he said to his Companion, afflict not
thy self, God is with us; He has defended, and succored us by invisible
troops; he has debased the word of unbelievers, and exalted that of true
believers; he is Omnipotent and wise. Fight according to your power for the Law
of God, you shall do well if you have knowledge to understand it; if you
require the wealth of this world, honor, and reputation, they are not far from
you, they follow you at hand, but the punishment of crimes and misery are as
yet far remote of Infidels; they swear by the Name of God, that they were
unable to go out of Mecca with the Prophet, in which they destroy their souls,
for God knows them to be liars: excuse them not, that thou know not them
that spoke truth, and those that were liars. True believers will not excuse
themselves from fighting, or employing their wealth and persons for the Law of
God; he knows such as fear him. They that believe not in God, neither the
day of Judgment, refuse to go with thee, they doubt the mysteries of Faith,
but shall continue in their doubt, to their confusion; had they inclined to go
out against the enemy, they had arms to perform it; God contemned their going
out, rendered them negligent, and caused them to remain with the sick, the
women, and children; had they gone forth with you, they had brought with them
more of disorder then affection to the service of his divine Majesty; they
hate you, nevertheless you hearken to them: God knows them that are too
blame, they hated thee heretofore, accused thee of all their mischief, until,
through the permission of God, the truth appeared against their will: many of
them said, excuse us, and scandalize us not, and they fell themselves into
scandal and impiety: but hell is the habitation of those wicke^ persons; if
good happen to you, they are discontented* if evil befall you, they say, they
took heed to themselves, and foresaw it, and depart from you with joy; say unto
them, nothing befell us, but what God had ordained, h^ is our Lord; See
Gelaldin.
all true believers are resigned to the will o^ his divine Majesty; say unto
them, will ye expect, tha^ one of the two graces (either victory, or martyrdom)
befall us? we will expect with you, until God has chastised you by our hands;
expect, we will expect with you say unto them, expend through force or
affection for the glory of God; your works shall not be accepted of him,
because you are Infidels, your alms shall be unprofitable, for that you believe
not in God, nor in his Prophet; y^ praise not God, but with negligence, and
with regret for what you spend for his service. Be not then amazed at the
quantity of their treasures, neither the number of their children; God shall
make use of them to punish them i^ this world, and shall destroy them with
their wickedness. They swear by the name of God, that they are yours, and are
not, and fear to be discovered; if they meet with any Den, Cave, or House,
wherein to hide them, they speedily repair thither. There be of them that say,
it is ignominious to give alms; if they give alms, it is with cholor if they
gave them for the love of God and his Prophet* they would say, God is our
benefactor; he will give u^ through his grace, and to the Prophet, whatsoever
shall be necessary, our hope is in him. Alms are appointed for the poor, for
them that recommend themselves to God, to redeem Slaves, for such as are in
debt, and necessitous God knows all things, and is most prudent in what h^
ordains, There be among them, who deprave the Prophet, and say, he shall
understand what we say; say unto them, should it be to you a great advantage to
hear well* The Prophet believes in God, and teaches true believers the Truth?
the mercy of God is for them that believe in his divine Majesty; Such as
detract from the Prophet shall feel grievous torments; they swear by the Name
of God, that they desire to content God, and his Prophet; it is reasonable that
they content them, if they be good men; know they not, that such as transgress
the Will of God, and that of his Prophet, shall be eternally damned? The wicked
fear lest God should discover to the righteous the malice that they conceal in
their souls, and that they contemn them; Say unto them, ye shall be contemned,
for God brings to light what you fear. If you question them concerning what
they say, they will answer for excuse, that they had no evil intent, and that
they but jest; say unto them, will you jest with God, with his Commandments,
and his Prophets? There is none excuse for you, ye are truly impious; if God
pardon any one of you, he shall rigorously punish such as persist to offend
him. The wicked teach among them impiety to their posterity, they depart from
the truth; they go hand in hand, and agree to disobey God; they forget God,
and God forgets them; he has prepared hell for them, where they shall
remain eternally; he has cursed them, and they shall feel the torment of
infinite pains. The wicked that were before you, shall undergo them like you,
they were more powerful then you, they possessed store of wealth, and had many
children, they possessed part of their substance, and ye possess yours, as did
your predecessors; ye were plunged in impiety, as they were plunged, but the
good works that they have done in this world, shall be to them unprofitable,
and at the day of Judgment, they shall be in the number of the miserable. Have
they not known the History of their Predecessors, the History of the people of
Noah, of Aad, of Temod, of Abraham, and the cities that were subverted? The
Prophets preached to them the Commandments of God, who did to them no
injustice; they drew affliction on themselves, through the enormitie of their
crimes. The true believers mutually obey each other; they command to do what
things are honest, prohibit to act what is not approved; they make their
prayers at the time appointed, distribute tithes, obey God and his Prophet; God
shall remit to them their sins, he is Omnipotent, and has promised to them
gardens, wherein flow many rivers, and an habitation full of content in Eden;
he has promised them his grace, which is the perfection of felicity. O
Prophet! fight against the Infidels, fortify thy self against them, hell shall
be their habitation; they shall swear by the Name of God, that they have not
traduced thee; nevertheless they have detracted and uttered words full of
impiety: they have denied to have been enriched through the grace of God, and
of his Prophet; if they turn, they shall do well; if they abandon the Faith,
God shall punish them in this world, and in the other, with grievous torments,
and on earth they shall find no protector; there be of them, who have inclined
to capitulate with God, and have said, if God does good to us, we will believe
in him; when he did good to them, they were niggards, and avaritious; they have
erred, and disobeyed his Commandments, but he chastised them, because of their
impiety; he has imprinted it in their hearts until the day of Judgment, for
that they have disobeyed him, because they violated their promises, and by
reason of their lies; know they not that God understands what they conceal
in their hearts? and that he knows what is present, past, and future? There
be of them, who deride the true believers, that give alms according to their
power; God shall deride them, and they shall feel the rigor of eternal pains;
implore pardon for them, or implore it not, when thou shall beg sixty and ten
times pardon for them, God shall not pardon them, because they are ungrateful
toward him, and his Prophet, God does not guide them that disobey him; they
rejoiced to be left behind the Prophet, when he went to fight for the Service
of God, they had an aversion to fight, and employ their persons and goods for
the Service of his divi^e Majesty; they said, we will not go out of our houses
with this heat; say to them, hell is much more hot, could you comprehend; they
shall laugh at a little in this world, and shall weep much in the other, for a
punishment of their sins. If thou meet them, and they demand permission to go
out with thee, to fight for the Faith; say to them, you shall not go out,
neither shall ye ever fight against the enemy with me, ye were slothful and
cowards the first time, remain with the unbelievers; pray not for them after
their death, and stay not at their Tombs, because they believed neither in God,
nor his Prophet, and died in their wickedness. Be thou not astonished, neither
at the abundance of their wealth, nor the number of their children, God will
make use of them, to chastise them in this world, and will destro^ them in
their impiety. When command was sent to them to believe in God, and fight with
his Prophet, the most powerful among them desired thee to excuse them, and
said, Leave us with them that continue in their houses, and desire to remain
with the sick, the women, and little children: God hardened their hearts, and
they shall never learn the truth. The Prophet and true believers that were with
them, and fought, and employed their persons, and goods for the Service of God,
shall be blessed; he has prepared for them gardens, wherein flow many rivers,
with perfection of felicity. Some of the Arabians came to excuse themselves of
going to the war, and such as renounced God and the Prophet, remained in their
houses, but they shall rescent grievous torments, because of their wickedness;
the sick, the impotent, and those that want means to be present at the war,
offend not God in ab^ding in their houses, provided they be faithful to his
divine Majesty, and his Prophet. The righteous are not obliged to do but what
is in their power, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. Such as
repaired to thee to fight, Benou Moc^en.
and whom thou did dismiss for want of occasion, did not offend God; they
returned to their houses with tears in their eyes, with discontent, to have
wanted means to employ in the Service of his divine Majesty; the war is
appointed to such as entreat thee to exempt them that are rich, and have wealth
to subsist, they require leave to remain with their wives and children, God
has hardened their hearts, and they know it not; they shall come to excuse
themselves, when thou shall meet them; Say unto them, excuse not your selves, I
do not believe you, God has given us to understand your news, he and his
Prophet likewise has rendered your good works vain and unprofitable; ye shall
one day appear before him that knows what is past, present, and future, he
shall cause you to remember whatsoever you have done, and shall punish you
according to your demerits. They shall conjure you by the name of God, when you
approach them, to depart from them; depart from them, they are full of
uncleanness, hell shall be their habitation, where they shall be tormented for
their crimes. They shall beseech you to love them; if you love them, know, that
God abhors them that disobey him: The Arabians, who observe not the precepts
which God has sent to his Prophet; are ye more impious and ungrateful? God
knows all things, and is most prudent. There be persons among the Arabians,
who account it lost money that they expend for the Service of God, and protract
their departure, to retard yours, and make you to attend; the wheel of misery
is upon them, God understands what ever they say, and knows all their
actions; there be among them who believe in God, and the day of Judgment; they
esteem that their expense for the Service of God draws them nigh to his
divine Majesty, and they invite the Prophet to pray for them, God shall give
them his mercy, he is gracious and merciful to them that obey him. They that
first arrived at Medina, the first of them that went out of Mecca, to depart
from the wicked, such as were at the battle of Beder, and such as imitated
them in well doing, shall enjoy the grace of God, he has prepared for them
gardens, wherein flow many rivers, with supreme felicity. There be Arabians
about you, and in Medina, they affect impiety; you know them not, but I know
them all, I will chastise them twice on earth, (to wit, through ignominy and
death) and they shall feel in the other world exceeding great torments. Others
there be, that confess their sins, and who do good and evil works;
peradventure God will pardon them, he is altogether gracious and merciful;
take of their substance for alms, thou shall render them righteous and shall
purify them, pray for them, thy prayers shall procure them the mercy of God,
he understands and knows all things. Know they not, that God accepts the
conversion of his Creatures, that their alms are pleasing to him, and that he
is gracious and merciful? Say unto them, do what shall please you; God, his
Prophet, and the True-believers shall see what you do, you shall one day appear
before him, who knows the present, past, and future; he shall make you to
know whatsoever ye have done* and shall chastise you after your demerits. There
be others that attend the pleasure of God, either his grace, or his wrath, his
punishment, or his mercy, God understands what is in their souls, and is
most wise. They that esteemed, that the Temple built by unbelievers, to seduce
the righteous, to distinguish the wicked from the good, and to observe such as
had before fought against God, and against his Prophet, is the Temple of his
divine Majesty, swear that they desire to do well, and that their intention
is most honest, but they are liars, and God shall be witness of their
falsehood; make not thy prayers in that Temple, make the prayers in the Temple
founded on the fear of God, that is reasonable; there be persons in that Temple
who desire to be purified, God loves such as have a clean soul; Who is he that
builds best, he that foundeth his bullding upon the fear of God, or he who
lays the foundation of his building upon the brink of a ditch of sand, which
falls, and ruineth it self? They who esteem the Temple built by unbelievers,
to seduce the people, to be the Temple of God, shall be with that Temple, and
with the Infidels that built it, burnt in the fire of Hell; God guides not the
unjust, their building shall serve only to torment them, God knows their
design, and is most wise; he purchases of True-believers their souls and
goods; and gives them Paradise; if they be slain, or if they slay when they
shall fight for the faith, they shall have what he has promised to them in the
Old Testament, the Gospel, and in the Alcoran: Who better satisfies what he
has promised, then God, Declare to them, that they have made a good purchase,
they have gained the height of felicity. Such as are firm in their faith, who
pray, honor, and worship God, who observe his Commandments, and all
True-believers, shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, with all manner of
content. The Prophet, and True-believers ought not to ask pardon of God for
Infidels, notwithstanding they be their parents, having had knowledge that they
are damned, because of their infidelity. Abraham prayed not for his father,
until he had promised him to adore one God alone; when he knew his father to
be an enemy to God, he declared himself an enemy to his sin, he ceased
praying for him, although he was exceeding charitable, and patient in his
afflictions. God misleadeth not them that he has put into the right way, he
gives them to understand what they ought to do, he knows them that deserve
to be seduced, and such as merit to be guided through the right way. The
Kingdom of heaven and Earth is Gods, he gives life and death to whom he sees
good: Who, except God shall protect you? he has given his grace to the
Prophet, and to such as followed him in his affliction, although it wanted but
a little, that the hearts of many of them inclined not to the party of the
unbelievers, but he pardoned them; he has been gracious and merciful to three
persons who deserted the Prophet, and were sorry for their error, they knew
there was no sure refuge, but in God, he pardoned them, when they were
converted, Kiab bin Malik, h^lal bin A^ihe, Mesrarhe bin ^abin.
he is gracious and merciful to such as repent. Oh ye that believe! fear God,
be righteous; the Inhabitants of Medina and the Arabians, that dwell about that
City, ought not to contradict the will of the Prophet of God, neither dislike
what he approves, because they have endured neither thirst, nor pain, nor
anguish for the service of his divine Majesty; they have not been trampled
under-foot by their enemies, they shall irritate the Infidels, and shall
receive no displeasure; on the contrary, they shall acquire merit, and perform
a good work. God does not deprive them of recompense that do well, he shall
write down their expense for his service, and the number of the Idols that they
shall destroy, for reward of their good works. It is not necessary that all the
faithful go to the war, it is sufficient, that of every lineage, and of
every Nation there go a party, while the rest shall learn the Laws and
mysteries of faith, to instruct their Companions, when they shall return from
their voyage, perhaps they will fear the chastisement of God. Oh ye that
believe in God* fight against them that would cause you to be defiled in
impiety, be valiant, and know that God is with them that have his fear before
their eyes. When God caused to descend from Heaven, any Chapter of the Alcoran,
some of them said, through disdain, that will increase the faith of this
people. Certainly it augmenteth the faith of True-believers, it rejoices them*
and enflameth the wrath of his divine Majesty upon Infidels, who persist in
their pollutions, and dye in their wickedness. They know not that God tries
the good, once, or twice a year, they will not be converted, it is lost time to
preach to them. When God sent from Heaven any Chapter of the Alcoran, they
beheld each others, and said, does any one see us? They returned in their
impiety, and God turned their heart from the right way, for that they would not
learn the Truth. God has sent you a Prophet of your own Nation, who, with
passion, desires to deliver you from your obstinacy, and is extremely affected
to instruct you in the way of Salvation, God is mild, and pitiful toward
True-believers. If they abandon the faith, say unto them, God is my protector,
there is but one sole God, I recommend my self to the will of his divine
Majesty, he is the Lord of the Majestique Throne.

CHAP. X. The Chapter of Jonas, containing an hundred and nine verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am God the merciful. The
precepts contained in this Book proceed from the Omnipotent: Does the people
wonder that we have inspired a man to preach to the wicked the torments of
Hell, and to declare to True-believers, that they shall find true what their
Lord to them has promised? The wicked say, that it is but sorcery and
enchantment. Certainly God is your Lord, who created Heaven and Earth in six
days, and sits on his Throne, disposing all things; no man intercedeth for
his Neighbor without his permission; he is your God and your Lord, worship him
alone, will ye not consider it? you all shall be one day assembled before him;
he promised with truth, that he will cause men to die, and raise them again, to
recompense such as have believed in his Law, and done good works: The
unbelievers shall drink a boiling drink, and shall endure great torments,
because of their impiety. He it is that gave light to the Sun, and brightness
to the Moon, that created the signs to know the number of years, the account
of months, and of whatsoever he has created, these things teach with truth,
the miracles of his divine Majesty, to such as have knowledge to understand
them; the difference of day and of night, and what God has created in Heaven
and in Earth, are marks of his unity to them that have his fear before their
eyes. They who believe there is no resurrection, such as place their content in
the wealth of this world, they that trust in their riches, and that are
ignorant of the commandments of God, shall be precipitated into the fire of
Hell, because of their sins, and the True-believers shall be conducted by his
divine Majesty into delicious gardens, wherein flow many rivers, they shall
there find whatsoever they shall desire, and shall say at the beginning of their
prayers, praised be God; afterward they shall say, Salvation be to God; and at
the end of their prayers, praise be to God, Lord of the Universe. Although God
does sometimes suddenly chastise men, he always attends the time of their
Destiny. I will leave them that shall not believe in the Resurrection, in their
errors, to their confusion; When man is afflicted, he invoketh us standing,
sitting, lying, and in all postures, and when we have delivered him from his
affliction, he persisteth in his wickedness. It seems good to the wicked to
do in this manner, we destroyed their Predecessors when they believed not in
the Prophets, neither obeyed the precepts that we sent them, and have
established you on the Earth in their place after them, to see your
deportments. When thou teach our commandments to them that believe not in
the Resurrection; they say, that the precepts of the Alcoran are altogether
contrary to what thou preachest, and that thou have altered them; Say unto
them, I have no will to alter them of my self, I do but what is inspired into
me of God, I fear to be punished at the day of Judgment, should I disobey his
divine Majesty; Say unto them, Had it pleased God, I had neither read, nor
taught you his Commandments, I sojourned a long time with you, before I taught
you, will you not learn them? Who is more unjust then he that blasphemeth? God
does not aid the Infidels that worship what can neither benefit nor hurt them,
and say, their Idols shall intercede for them; will you instruct God in any
thing that he knows not, of what is in Heaven or in Earth? Praised be God, he
has no companion. Men were all of one Religion before Infidelity took place,
and if God had not said that he would defer the punishment of the wicked
until the day of Judgment, he had already destroyed them in this world,
because of their impiety; They say, We will not believe in the Prophet, if God
make not some miracles to appear in him; Say unto them, God knows what shall
be; expect, I will expect with you: when we gave them to taste of content after
their affliction, they had subtilty upon our Commandments: Say unto them, God
is more subtle then you, his Messengers shall write your subtilties; he it is
that made men to travel upon the earth and sea; It is he that sends them a
favorable wind to rejoice them in their ships; when tempest surpriseth them,
they believe that the waves will overwhelm them, then they invoke God, with
desire to embrace his Law, and say, if God does deliver us from this danger,
we will believe in his Unity, and return him thanks for this mercy; and being
delivered from peril, persist in their wickedness. O people! you draw mischief
on your selves, you require nothing but the wealth of this world, you all shall
appear before us to be judged according to your works; the life of the world is
like to the rain, which we cause to descend from Heaven, it causes with
mixture all sorts of herbage to spring forth, for the nourishment of men, and
beasts. When the Earth is adorned with flowers, and enriched with its fruits,
the Inhabitants oftentimes believe they have the power to cause their
production; then send we our chastisements day and night upon the Earth, and
render it as mown, and as if the day before it had brought no fruit. Thus do I
discover mysteries to such as have knowledge to comprehend them. They beg their
salvation of God; he saves and puts in the way of salvation whom it
pleases him. He shall not cover the visage of them that have done good works,
they shall appear without shame, and dwell in Paradise; where they shall remain
eternally; and such as shall have done evil shall be punished after their
demerits, they shall be covered with shame, and none shall be able to protect
them, they shall be as if a great part of the obscurity of the night had
covered their countenance, they shall be condemned to the fire of hell, where
they shall dwell eternally. Think on the day, wherein we will assemble all the
world, and will say to the Infidels, hell shall be your habitation; where be
the Idols you adored? we have separated you from each other. Their Idols shall
say to them, you have not worshipped us, God is witness; was there any thing
between us and you, that rendered us ignorant of your adorations? That day shall
every one see what he has done, and know that God is Truth it self; their
Idols shall be separated far from them, and they shall understand their
blasphemies. Say unto them, who enricheth you with the wealth of heaven and
earth? Who causes life to come out of death, and death out of life? Who
disposes all things in the world? They shall answer, it is God: Say unto them,
why have you not therefore his fear before your eyes? God is indeed your Lord,
what is there after the Truth, but falsehood? How will you depart from his Law?
his Word shall be accomplished against Infidels. Say unto them, Have your Idols
the power to cause men to die, and to rise again; how shall they be able to
blaspheme after these reasons? Say unto them, Are your Idols able to conduct
you into the right way? God guides the people into the way of Salvation; who
ought rather to be followed, he that guides the people into the right way, or
he that misleadeth them? What reason have ye to follow the evil way; The
greatest part of them follow but their own opinion, but their opinion is not
conformable to the Truth; God knows all their actions, there is no falsehood
in the Alcoran, it confirms the ancient Scriptures, and perspicuously
explaineth them; there is no doubt, but it proceeds from the Lord of the
Universe. They say Mahomet has invented this Book; say unto them, come and
bring any thing that resembles it in Doctrine and Eloquence, and call the
Idols which ye adore, we shall see if you are sincere; on the contrary, they
have blasphemed, and have talked of what they understood not, when they heard
the exposition of the Alcoran: Thus did their Predecessors; but consider what
is the end of the unjust; There be among them, who will believe in this Book,
and others that will not believe; Thy Lord knows them that defile the earth;
if they slander thee, say unto them, I will answer with my actions, and ye
shall answer with yours, ye are innocent of what I act, and I am innocent of
what ye do. There be persons among them that have inclination to hear thee,
but art thou able to cause the deaf to hear? Should they not be deaf, they
would learn nothing; Others there be, who look toward thee, but art thou able
to guide the blind? should they see clearly, they would not follow the right
way; God does no injustice to men, they do injury to themselves, through the
enormity of their offenses. I will cause them to rise again at the day of
Judgment, as if they had remained but one hour of a day in the grave; they
shall know each other, and the wicked who have not believed in the
Resurrection, shall be damned: I will show thee many of them whom I will
chastise; I will cause thee to die before they be chastised, and they all shall
appear before me to be judged; God is witness of their actions, he shall punish
them according to their demerits; every Nation of the world has had a Prophet
sent from God, who has judged with reason, and without injustice, the
differences that were among them touching Religion: They have said, at what
time shall the wrath of God appear? Say unto them, I, of my self, can neither
procure good nor evil, if God does not permit it; every one has his destiny,
when the time of their destiny arriveth, they can neither retard, or advance it
one hour. Have ye considered the punishment which God heretofore sent, by day,
and by night against the wicked? When ye felt it, ye believed it, and fell into
it headlong. It shall be said to the wicked at the day of Judgment, taste
eternal torments; shall you not be punished according to your demerits? They
will ask of thee, if the pains denounced against the wicked, and if the
Resurrection be matters of truth? Say unto them, yes, my Lord is most exact in
his words, and all the treasures of the world shall not be able to redeem one
soul. They shall repent of their sins, when they shall feel the punishment of
their offenses, but shall be condemned without injustice; whatsoever is in
heaven and in earth appertains to God, he is exact in his promise, yet the
greatest part of the world do not know him. He it is who causes to die, and
gives life, and shall assemble men at the day of Judgment. O people! God has
sent you instructions, and remedies for your infirmities; he has sent a guide
to conduct true-believers into the way of his mercy; it shall be to them of
more advantage, then the treasures that they accumulate: Have ye considered the
good things which he has created for you? Ye have appointed one part to be
eaten, and have prohibited to eat of another: Has God permitted you to
blaspheme against him? The opinion of such as blaspheme against God, shall be
but misery at the day of Judgment; God is full of goodness for the people,
but most of them are ungrateful. In whatsoever place thou art, whether thou
teach what is contained in the Alcoran, or whether thou labor, I am always
present, nothing is concealed from thy Lord, of whatsoever is in heaven and
earth; be it great or little, all is written in the intelligible Book, that
explaineth all things. There needs no fear for such as recommend themselves
to God, they shall be exempt from the pains of hell. The true-believers who
have his fear before their eyes, shall suffer no torments in the other world;
it is declared to them on earth, that they shall have all content, the word of
God admits of no alteration; they shall enjoy perfection of felicity in
Paradise. Afflict not thy self for the words of the impious, virtue proceeds
from God, he understands, and knows all things; whatsoever is in heaven and
in earth appertains to him: They who worship Idols, follow but their opinion,
and are liars; God has created the night for repose, and the day for labor;
such as hear his Word, find therein marks of his omnipotency. They have said,
do ye believe that God has a Son? Praised be God, he is most rich, and has
no need of any person, he possesses whatsoever is in heaven, and earth; you
have no reason in what ye allege; will you speak of God what ye know not? God
does not aid in this world them that blaspheme against him, he shall cause
them to feel after their death great torments, because of their impiety:
Instruct them in the History of Noah, how he spoke to his people, and said, O
people! if my abode with you, and the preaching of the Commandments of God, be
irksom to you, know, that all my support is in God; assemble your Doctors, with
your Idols, and conceal not what ye do; go whither you will, ye shall find
none to protect you; if ye contemn my instructions, I require not of you a
reward for my pains; I desire to receive of none other then God the Omnipotent,
and recommend my self to the Mill of his divine Majesty. They slandered Noah,
then did we save him in the Arc, and them that were with him; we prolonged
their posterity on earth, and drowned the wicked; consider the end of such as
heard the word of God, and contemned it. We sent to them other Prophets after
Noah, they made them to see miracles, and gave them most salutary instructions;
but they did not believe in what they had no will before to believe. Thus I
harden the heart of the wicked. We after them, sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his
subjects, without miracles, they arose against our Commandments, when the
truth was preached to them, and said, it was but Magic and enchantment. Moses
said to them, will you say that the Truth is Sorcery? God does not assist
Magicians and Sorcerers; they said, Art thou, with thy brother, come to divert
us from the Religion of our Fathers, and to be esteemed on earth? We will
believe in thy words. Then Pharaoh commanded to summon the most skillful of his
Magicians; they being assembled, Moses said to them, cast down what ye have a
will to cast down on the ground; having cast down their cords and staves,
Moses said to them, know ye none other thing but Magic? God shall render it
vain, and unprofitable; he abhors such as defile the earth, he confirms
the Truth through his Word, although it be against the will of the wicked. Few
men believed in Moses, because of their fear to displease Pharaoh, and his
Ministers. Pharaoh was powerful on earth, and in the number of the wicked.
Moses said, O people! if ye believe in God, resign your selves to his will;
they answered, All our confidence is in God; Lord, do not thou abandon us to
the malice of the unjust: deliver us through thy mercy from the hands of
Infidels. We inspired Moses and his brother to dwell some time in Egypt with
their people, and to make Oratories in their houses, therein to make their
prayers, and Preach to true believers. Lord, said Moses, thou have enriched
Pha^oah and his people in this world; they go astray from the way of thy Law;
confound their riches, and harden their hearts, they will not believe until
they see thy judgments, and feel the effect of thy wrath; he said, I h^^e
heard the prayers of you both; be faithful in your Embassy, and follow not
the way of the ignorant. We gave passage through the sea to the children of
Israel; Pharaoh pursued them with hatred and envy, until his people were
drowned. Then said Pharaoh, I believe there is none other God, but the God of
the children of Israel, and I wholly recommend my self to his Will. Thou do
now believe in God, O Pharaoh! and were before disobedient to his
Commandments, filling the earth with thy enormities, I have delivered thee
from this peril, that thou may be an example to posterity; for many among
the people are ignorant of my omnipotency. We gave the Children of Israel to
dwell in places full of delights, and enriched them with the good things of the
Earth, they knew the differences that arose among them touching Religion, thy
Lord shall judge them at the day of Judgment. If thou doubtest what we have
taught thee, repair to them that have read the Scripture before thee; what thy
Lord has taught thee is most true; be not thou of them that doubt, neither of
such as derogate from the Commandments of God, thou shall be in the number of
the wretched. Those whom God will chastise, shall not believe in his divine
Majesty, should they behold all the miracles of the world, until they see the
torments of Hell. The faith is exceeding profitable to the Cities that have
received it; when the Inhabitants of the City of Jonas embraced it, we
delivered them from our punishment, we delivered them from ignominy, and
enriched them, until the time appointed; if it pleased thy Lord, all the world
should believe in him; will thou abhor the people until they believe in God?
No man can embrace the faith without his permission, he sends his indignation
against them that disobey his Commandments: Say unto them, Consider all that
is in Heaven and Earth, miracles and preaching are of no use to such as will
not believe; shall they expect what their Predecessors expected? Say unto them,
expect, I will expect with you. I will deliver my Prophets, and the
True-believers, from the torments of Hell, it is reasonable that I deliver them
that obey my Commandments. Oh people! who causes you to doubt of the Law
which I teach you? I will not worship the Idols that you adore, I worship one
God alone, who shall cause you all to dye; I will embrace his Law, it
commands to profess his Unity, I am not of them that say, he has a
companion equal to him. Adore not what can neither benefit nor hurt thee, if
thou do it, thou shall be in the number of the unjust. If God will afflict
thee, none can deliver thee from affliction; if God will do good to thee, none
can deprive thee of his grace, he has given it to whom seems good to
himself, he is gracious and merciful. Oh people! God teaches you the truth;
whosoever shall follow the right way, shall save his soul, and whosoever shall
go astray, shall destroy it. I am not your Tutor, I do but what is inspired
into me; I have patience in my perseverance, I will expect the Judgment of God,
there is no better Judge then he.

CHAP. XI. The Chapter of Hod, containing an hundred twenty and three Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. I am the merciful God. The signs
contained in this Book are most true, they proceed from the most wise, who
knows all things. Worship ye but one God alone, I preach to you from him the
torments of Hell, and declare the joys of Paradise, that ye may implore pardon
of his divine Majesty, and be converted; he shall give you an happy life in the
world, until the time appointed, and shall reward every one according to his
works. I fear, lest you should be chastised at the day of Judgment; if you
forsake the right way, you all shall be assembled before God to be judged. The
heart of the impious inclined to hatred of the Prophet, and they would have
concealed themselves for some time from God; they are covered with their
garments, that they may not be known, but God knows what is in their souls,
he understands whatsoever they conceal, and whatsoever they make manifest.
All the Creatures of the world live of his grace, he knows the place of their
repair, and the place where they must dye, all is written in an intelligible
book, that explaineth all things. He it is that created Heaven and Earth in
six days, See Kitab el tenoir.
his Throne was before upon the waters, (the Alcoran) exhorts you to
well-doing. If thou say to the wicked, that they shall rise again after their
death, they will say, it is but witchcraft and sorcery; if retard some time to
chastise them, they say, there is no punishment for their crimes; but they
shall not avoid it, in the day when it shall appear, and they shall feel the
rigor of the pains which they contemn. If we confer riches, and health on
the impious, and deprive them of them, they despair in their impiety; if we
give them good after their evil, they say, misery has forsaken them, they
rejoice, and become arrogant. Such as are humble and patient in their
afflictions, and do good works, shall obtain pardon of their sins, and a
very great reward. Perhaps thou will forget to teach something of what I have
inspired into thee, and be afflicted, because they say that what thou speak
shall bring thee no profit. Certainly, thou art sent only to reprove them of
their sin, thy Lord is omnipotent, and shall chastise them after their
demerits. Assuredly, they will say, thou have Controve supra.
forged the Alcoran, and that it is of thy invention; Say unto them, come and
bring with you ten Chapters of your invention, like to the Alcoran in
instruction and Eloquence, and call to your aid the Idols that ye adore; if you
be righteous, if they hear not your prayers, neither afford you succors, know
then, that the Alcoran descended from Heaven, through Gods permission, and that
there is but one sole God, will yet not trust in him? I will bestow the riches
and honors of the Earth, on many persons that affect them, and in the end they
shall be confined in the fire of Hell, and the good works that they shall do
in this world, shall be unprofitable in the other. They who observe what God
has ordained, study the Alcoran, and believe that it proceeds from his
divine Majesty, to teach the right way, and to obtain his mercy, as before it,
was the book of Moses. Such as shall believe in the Alcoran, shall be happy,
doubtless the fire of Hell is prepared for the Infidels who will not believe
therein, but the greatest part of the world is incredulous: who is more impious
then they that blaspheme against God? Such men shall not see his face; the
Angels shall say, at the day of Judgment, behold them that have been impious,
a curse is upon them, and upon the unjust that have mislead the people from the
right way, they were indeed Infidels. Such men shall not escape the punishment
of their crimes on Earth, they shall find none that is able to protect them but
God, he shall augment their pains, because they would not abandon their
wickedness, neither receive the light of faith. Such are miserable men, their
Idols shall not afford them succors, they doubtless shall be eternally damned:
and such as shall believe in God, do good works, and be converted, shall dwell
for ever in Paradise. The wicked are as deaf, and blind, and the True believers
are like those who have good sight and perfect hearing; shall they be in
parallel to each other? will ye never consider it? We sent Noah to reprove men
for their sins, he said to them, worship but one God alone, otherwise I fear
ye shall be chastised at the day of Judgment; The Doctors of the Infidels
answered him, we see thee to be a man, like us, and that such as follow thee
are poor people, blind, and without counsel; we perceive not that thou have
any grace, that ought to prefer thee to us; contrariwise, we believe thee to
be a liar; he said, oh people! know ye not that God has taught me what I
preach to you, that he has given me the grace of Prophecy, and deprived you
of it? shall I exhort you to acknowledge his grace, seeing ye abhor him? Oh
people! I require no recompense of you for my pains, God will reward me
largely. I desire not to banish True-believers from my company, they shall one
day appear before their Lord, but I perceive that ye are ignorant. Oh people!
who shall hinder God to punish me, if I abuse True-believers? Will ye not
consider it? I say not that I possess the treasures of God, I know not what
shall be; I say not that I am an Angel, I say not to them whom you contemn,
that God shall enrich them, God knows what is in their souls; should I
maintain such discourse, I should have great blame. They said, oh Noah! we
have a long time disputed together; if thou art sincere, let us see the pains
which thou preachest to us; God, said he, when it shall please him, shall cause
you to see them, you shall not escape them, my instructions shall be to you
unprofitable; if God will prove you, he is your Lord, and you shall one day be
assembled before him to be judged. Will the unbelievers say, that thou have
forged the Alcoran, and that it is of thine invention? Say unto them, if I have
invented it, sin will be upon me, and I am innocent of your blasphemies, God
inspired into Noah, that none should believe in his words, but such as had
already believed in him: He said unto him, build an Arc conformable to the
inspiration that we have sent thee, but speak no more to me of the unjust, they
shall be drowned; the passengers derided him and his Arc; he said to them, ye
scoff at me, I will laugh at you, and we shall see them that shall best
understand; he whom God shall chastise, shall be covered with shame, and
perpetually tormented. When our will was to destroy that people, and the light
of the morning appeared, and the water boiled in Noah's pot, we commanded him
to charge his Arc with two beasts of every kind and Species; all creatures
were destroyed, except those, of which we before made mention, as well such as
believed, as them that did not believe, and that but a few: Noah said unto
them, ascend the Arc in the name of God, who shall cause it to swim, and to
anchor; the Lord is gracious and merciful toward us. When the Arc began to
flote, like to a Mountain, Noah called to one of his sons who stayed on the
Earth, and said, my Gelalldin says that he was called Kinan.
son, come up into the Arc with us, and remain not with the Infidels; he
answered, I will ascend an high mountain, that shall save me from the waters;
Noah said to him, none is able this day to deliver thee from the punishment of
God, if it be not through his mercy; The waters being risen, he was in the
number of them that were drowned: God commanded the Earth to drink its water,
and the Heavens to pour down no more rain; the water diminished upon the
Earth, after the people were drowned, and the Arc rested upon the Mountain
called Gioudy; thus were the unjust extirpated; Noah prayed to his Lord, and
said, Lord, my son that remained in the waters was of my lineage, thou did
promise me to save my family, thou do exactly perform thy promise, thou art
true in thy words, and most just in thine actions: Oh Noah! answered ^od, that
son is not of thy lineage, he has offended me, and disobeyed my Commandments,
do not enquire of me concerning that which thou ought not to know,
otherwise thou shall be in the number of the ignorant: Lord, said Noah, I will
take heed, through thine assistance, to enquire of thee what I ought not to
know, if thou have not pity on me, I shall be in the number of the miserable.
God said, oh Noah! descend from the Arc with Salvation, and blessing upon
thee, and upon a part of them that are with thee; I will enrich the other part
with the wealth of this world, to punish them most severely at the day of
Judgment. I teach what shall be, what neither thou, nor thy people have not
yet known; be patient in thine afflictions, Paradise is for them that have my
fear before their eyes. We sent Hod to the people of Aad, his brother; he
said unto them, oh people! adore but one God alone, otherwise ye shall be in
the number of Infidels, I require of you no recompense for the pains I take in
preaching to you, he that created me, shall reward me; will ye never be wise?
implore pardon of God, be converted, and obey his divine will, he shall send
you rain from Heaven, and shall increase your strength, and riches, be not in
the number of the wicked; they answered, oh Hod! thou show us no reasons to
prove thy sayings, thy words shall not make us to quit our Gods, we give no
credit to thy discourse, and tell thee, that some one of our Gods shall
severely chastise thee; He said, take God and your selves to w^tnesse that I am
innocent of the sin that you commit, in adoring Idols; if you conspire
against me, none shall be able to protect you at the day of Judgment, I
recommend my self to the will of God, mine and your Lord, he conserveth all
the cr^atures of the Earth, and loves them that follow the right way. I have
discharged my duty and commission, I have taught you what God commanded me, if
you go astray, he shall establish another people in your place, you do him no
harm through your impiety, he exactly observes whatsoever is done in the
world. When we destroyed that people, we by our special grace delivered Hod
from their malice, and all the True-believers that were with him, we delivered
them from great affliction. The people of Aad contemned the Commandments of
God, and disobeyed his Prophets, they followed the will of the obstinate, were
cursed in this world, and shall be accursed at the day of Judgment, because
they disobeyed his divine Majesty, with design to extirpate the people of Hod,
his brother. We sent Salhe to Temod, his brother, and his people; he said to
them, oh people! worship one God alone, he it is who has created you of the
dust of the earth, and filled it with many sorts of fruits, that you might
inhabit it; beg pardon of him, and be converted, he hearkneth to his creatures,
and hears their prayers: they answered, oh Salhe! it was hoped thou would
have been our Captain, before the prohibit^on was made, to adore the Gods of
our fathers, we exceedingly doubt of what thou preachest; Oh people! said
Salhe, know ye not that God taught me what to you I preach, and that he has
given me his grace? who shall protect me if I disobey him? You can but augment
my pain, should I believe you. O people! this Camel, which God for you has
created, shall be to you a miracle, and instruction, suf^er it to feed, and do
it no harm, The Turks believe that Salhe changed a rock into a Ca^ell.
lest you be suddenly chastised. They through contempt, wounded the Camel.
Then said he unto them, ye shall live in your houses for the space of three
days before ye be destroyed; what is foretold to you, is no Fiction: when we
destroyed them, we through our special grace saved Salhe, and the
true-believers that were with him; thunder surprised those Infidels, and in the
morning they were found in their houses dead, extended as carkases, Thus did
Temod and his people contemn the Commandments of God, to their disadvantage^
Our Messengers that came to Abraham's house, declared to him the birth of Isaac,
Jacob, and their posterity; they mutualy saluted, when they en^^ed into his
house, he caused roasted flesh to be brought to them to eat, and perceiving
that they did not eat, contemned them in himself; and was terrified with their
coming; they said unto him, fear not, we are sent to Lot, to extirpate the
inhabitants of his City; Abraham's wife being present, began to laugh, when they
foretold the birth of Isaac, Jacob, and their posterity; she said, ah God!
shall I beat a son, I, who am old, and have an husband extremely aged? this
would be a miracle; they answered, are ye astonished at the power of God? O ye
of the family of Abraham! God has given you his bl^ssing, praise and glory are
due to him in all places. When Abraham was freed from his fear, and they
having announced the birth of his children, he disputed with them a long time,
touching the inhabitants of the City of Lot; he was of a mild disposition; and
frequently repeated the pra^ses of God. The Messengers said unto him, O
Abraham! put an end to thy questions, the hour is come, wherein God has
commanded to destroy them, they shall unde^goe inevitable torment. When they
arrived in Lots house, he was grieved, in that he was not able to secure them
from the insolency of the people; he said, behold here a day extremly difficult
to pass; The inhabitants of the City having knowledge of their arrival,
repaired to Lots house to continue their filthiness: Lot said unto them, O
people! I have two daughters, whom I will give you, fear God, trouble me not,
abuse not my guests; is there none among you to show you your error! They
answered, thou well know that we have nothing to do with thy daughters,
thou know what we require; he said, were I of sufficient power, I would
dwell in a fortified place to avoid the assaults of your malice: Then said the
Messengers of God unto him, O Lot! we are Angels sent from God, those villains
shall not approach thee, go this night out of the City with thy family, none
shall look back but thy wife, she shall feel the punishment prepared for the
wicked, they shall be punished early in the morning; be gone speedily, the day
approaches; when we destroyed them, we turned the City upside down, and
caused it to rain upon them stones, marked with fire, to confound them. Such
chastisement is not far from the Infidels (that are in Mecca) We sent Chaib
into the Country of Madian, See Kitab el tenoir, and Gelaldin.
he said, O people! Worship one God alone; weigh with good weights, and measure
with good measure; detain nothing from your neighbor, and defile not the
earth, if ye believe in God, otherwise I fear you may be punished at the day
of Judgment; the little that shall remain, shall bring you more of content
then all that ye can purloin, in weighing with false weight, and measuring with
false measure. I am not sent to be your Tutor, but only to declare the word of
God: they said, O Chaib, does thy Law enjoyne us to abandon the gods of our
Fathers, and hinder us to make of our goods what shall seem good to us? thou
art not of an humor good enough to be our Director. He said, O people! see ye
not that God has taught me what I preach? He has given me wealth for
subsistence: I contradict you in nothing but what is forbidden you, I will do
nothing but what is reasonable, and conform the most I shall be able to Justice;
my whole support is in God, I recommend my self to the will of his divine
Majesty, before which I must one day appear. O people! take heed least ye
become criminal, if ye forsake the company of the righteous, and lest that
befall you, that happened to them who would not believe Noah, Hod, Salhe, and
Lot; the punishment of God is not far from you, beg pardon of him. and be
converted, he is merciful and amiable. They said, O Chaib! we understand not
all that thou say; we see thee amongst us without force and power; were thou
not accompanied, we would stone thee; thou shall have no dominion over us. He
said, O people! esteem ye my company, and fear ye it more then God? Have ye
turned the back toward him? He knows all your actions, live after your own
manner, I will live after mine, you shall hereafter know your error; he whom
God will chastise, shall remain in perpetual misery, you shall soon
understand who shall be the liar, you or I; expect the issue, I will expect
with you: when we commanded to destroy them, we (through our especial grace)
preserved Chaib, and the true-believers that were with him; thunder surprised
those wicked ones, and they in the morning remained dead, extended as carkases
in their houses. Thus were the Inhabitants of Madian chastised like the people
of ^emod. We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his Doctors, with Miracles, with
Arguments and Reasons most clear and intelligible; but those Doctors followed
his will, and obeyed his commandments, notwithstanding they were contrary to
reason; they shall follow him at the day of Judgment, as they followed him
upon earth; that day shall they be accursed, and shall find none that shall be
able to protect them: the punishment of Mecca shall be like to that I relate to
thee; there be of its Inhabitants who subsist, and that do not subsist, and are
no more; we have done them no injustice, they have drawn mischief on
themselves, and their Idols have been of no use to them, but to augment their
misery, when God has commanded to destroy them: Thus has God surprised the
inhabitants of Mecca, he has chastised them, because they were unjust; this
shall serve for example to them that fear the day of Judgment; all men shall
there be gathered together, all the world shall see it; I will retard it until
the time appointed, that day shall no man speakwithout my permission; there be
that shall be miserable, and others who shall be happy; the miserable shall dwell
in the fire of hell, they shall cry and complain so long as the earth and the
heavens shall endure, and so long as it shall please God, who does as seems
good to himself. The happy shall enjoy Paradise, where they shall abide
eternally, so long as earth and heaven shall endure, and so long as it shall
please God. Doubt not what the unbelievers worship, they adore but the Idols
which their Fathers worshipped; assuredly I will chastise them as their Fathers
were chastised. Moses preached the old Testament, yet did the wicked contradict
his Precepts; had not God said that he will not punish them, until the day of
Judgment, he had already destroyed them, because they are in an exceeding
great error; thy Lord shall reward every one according to his works, he knows
all their actions. Observe exactly what has been commanded you, with them that
are converted; transgress not the Law of God, he beholds whatsoever you do.
Incline not to the affections of the unjust, lest the fire of hell surprise
you, and you be deprived of protection. Pray to God evening and morning, and a
part of the night; prayers blot out sins; it is the doctrine of Preachers; be
patient, and persevere, God will not deprive the righteous of their reward: He
prohibited your Predecessors and their posterity to defile the earth;
nevertheless there were few among them that abstained; the unjust acted what
ever pleased them, and were guilty before God: He shall not destroy Mecca, if
the Inhabitants thereof obey his Commandments; and if it pleased him, the
whole world should be of one Religion, they to whom he gives his grace,
transgress not his Will, his Word shall be accomplished, and hell shall be
filled with devils, and the wicked of all Nations. They have recounted to
thee, and thou understandest whatsoever things are necessary for them, and what
the Prophets have heretofore taught; thine heart has been strengthened, they
contain the truth, and they shall be for a lesson to true believers. Say unto
Infidels, doc, on your part as ye shall understand, we will do on our part as
we understand, and attend the issue, we will attend it with you; whatsoever is
in heaven, and in earth appertains to God, all men shall be assembled before
him, worship him, resign your selves to his Will, he knows whatsoever the
people does.

CHAP. XII. The Chapter of Joseph, containing an hundred and thirteen Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the merciful God. These
signs are the signs of the Book which distinguishes good from evil. We
have caused to descend from heaven the Alcoran, written in the Arabique tongue,
peradventure ye will learn it. I deliver unto thee in the Alcoran, one of the
best things that I have inspired into thee. Thou were before the coming
thereof, in the number of the ignorant. Remember thou, that Joseph said to his
father, My father, I saw in a dream eleven Stars, the Sun, and the Moon, I
saw them adoring me. My son, said his father, discover not thy dream to thy
brothers, they will conspire against thee, the devil is an open enemy to men,
thou shall be elected of the Lord in this world, he shall teach thee the
explication of Dreams, he shall accomplish his grace upon thee, and upon the
lineage of Jacob, as he did accomplish it upon thy fathers, Abraham, and Isaac;
the Lord knows all things, and is most wise. The History of Joseph shall
serve for example to posterity; remember thou, how his brothers said, our
father loves our brother Joseph more then all us together, he is in an
exceeding great error, let us kill Joseph, and cast him into some secret place
remote from us, his absence will render the face of our father more gentle
toward us; after his death we will be converted. One of them said, you shall
not do well to kill him but cast him into the well, some passengers will take
him, and carry him into an unknown Country: They said to their Father,
Father, wherefore do thou not send Joseph into the Fields with us? We will
be very car^full, he shall sport and recreate himself; I fear, said he,
that ye will neglect to p^eserve him; do thou fear (said they) that a wolf
should devour him in our presence, and that we want strength to defend him? In
the morning they led him with them, and cast him into a Well. We inspired him
to prophecy to them what should befall them for the mischief they acted, but
they wanted knowledge to comprehend it; they in the evening returned to their
fathers house, with eyes full of dissembled tears, and said unto him, father,
we sported, and ran who should run the best, Joseph remained with our baggage,
a wolf came that devoured him; thou will not believe us although we speak the
truth; then they showed him his shirt, which they had sprinkled with blood; it
is you that has done it, said he, you shall answer it before God, he is my
protector, and was patient, without lamenting. There past that day The
Levantins well; a Caravan, a number of persons traveling together.
a Caravan near to that Well, who desiring to draw water to drink, let down a
bucket, on which Joseph took hold to get out; they gave him clothes, led him
away secretly, and sold him at a good rate for ready money; they would not kill
him, in which they were honest men. He that bought him in Egypt commanded his
wife to have care of him, that he might one day be useful for their service,
and be to them instead of a son. Thus did we establish Joseph in the country of
Egypt, and taught him the exposition of dreams, thy Lord is Omnipotent, but few
men know him: when Joseph came to the age of manhood, we gave him knowledge and
prudence; thus do we reward the righteous. His Masters wife became amorous of
his beauty, she one day shut him into her chamber, and solicited him with love;
God defend me (said he) to betray my Master, and be unchaste (he was in the
number of the righteous) and fled to the door; his Mistrisse ran after him, and
to stay him, tore his shirt through the back: she met her husband behind the
door, to whom she said, what other thing does he merit, who would dishonor
thine house, then to be imprisoned, and severely chastised? Lord, said Joseph
she solicited me, that infant which is in the cradle, and of thy parentage
shall be witness: Then the infant in the cradle said, if Joseph's shirt be
torn before, she has spoken truth, and Joseph is a liar; if the shirt be rent
behind, Iosep^ has delivered the truth, and she a lie: then her husband b^held
Joseph's shirt torn behind, and knew that it was extreme malice, and said to
Joseph, take heed to thy self, and beware this act be not divulged: do thou,
speaking to his wife, implore pardon for thy fault, thou art truly guilty. The
women of the City, said among themselves, that the rich man's wife was amorous
of his Slave, and that she had solicited his love, and had erred from the
right way, which she understanding, made them an exceeding fair feast, and
caused Joseph to enter the Parlour where they sat; while they carved their
meat, they were so surprised, and entangled with Joseph's beauty, that they
instead of carving their meat, cut their fingers. O God! said they, this is not
a man, but an Angel; then said she unto them, behold him whom I loved with so
much passion: she another time importuned him, to satisfy her desire, and
perceiving that he would not condescend to her will, menaced him with the
prison, and to make him miserable: O God! said Joseph, I had rather be a
prisoner, then do what she desires, deliver me from her malice, defend me from
inclining to her lubricity, and from being in the number of the wicked: his
Lord heard his prayer, he understands and knows all things. This woman
seeing Joseph's resolution, judged it requisite to imprison him for some time;
he was put prisoner with two men, one of which told him that he had dreamed
that he pressed grapes to make wine; the other said, that he dreamed that he
carried bread upon his head, which the birds did eat, they demanded of him the
interpretation of their dreams, because he seemed to them to be a good man: he
said to them before ye break fast, I will interpret your dreams. I will first
tell you what God has taught me, and how I quit, and abandon the law of
Infidels, and embrace the Law of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, we
ought not worship many gods; such as believe in the unity of God, are endued
with his grace, but few men give him thanks. O Prisoners! who has more power,
Idols, or one sole God, who is omnipotent? The gods which ye adore are but
Idols, whom ye and your fathers call by such a name, as seems good to you, ye
have no reason to worship them; God does not enjoin you th^s, he commands you
to worship him alone; this is the right way, but the greatest part of the
world, of this are ignorant. O prisoners! the one of you shall give wine to
drink to his Master, the other shall be hanged, the birds shall feed on his
head, the interpretation that ye have required shall be accomplished. He
besought him that should be saved, to remember him when he should be near to
his Master; but the devil caused him to lose the remembrance of Joseph, who
remained prisoner, the space of nine years: At that time the King of Egypt saw
in a dream seven fat kine, which seven lean kine devoured; and seven green
ears of corn, with seven dry ears, of which he required the interpretation
of his Doctors; they answered, that the dream was very obscure, and that they
knew not the interpretation; the prisoner that had been set at liberty, said,
that he would forthwith give the interpretation of the dream, remembered Joseph,
and calling him unto him, said, O righteous man! explain unto us what is the
signification of seven fat kine, devoured by seven lean, and seven green ears
of corn, and as many dry, peradventure I shall return to the King and his
people, and they shall understand the interpretation of this dream. Joseph said
to him, ye shall sow the earth seven years following, which shall abound in
fruits, preserve your Harvest in the ears, and take only what shall be
necessary for life; after this, there shall come seven years barren, and
unfruitful, in which the people shall suffer much. The King of Egypt having
learned the interpretation of this dream, commanded to call Joseph; the
Messenger said unto him, O Joseph! return to thy Master, and require of him the
meaning of the women who did cut their fingers, he has knowledge of their
malice, has caused them to assemble, and demanded of them what was their
design, when they solicited thee with love; they answered, they knew no sin
in thee, and his wife confessed the truth, saying, she had importuned thee, but
that thou art a very just man. Joseph answered, by this it appears that I am no
traitor to my Master in his absence, God guides not traitors; I will not say I
am a man without sin, the spirit of man inclines to evil, except such to whom
God has given his particular grace, he is gracious and merciful to whom
seems good to him. The King having talked with Joseph, entered him into the
number of his domestics, and made him superintendent of his All the revenues
of the Crown.
revenews, because he knew him to be a man of spirit, faithful, and thrifty.
We, by our special grace, establish Joseph in the Country of Egypt, where he
did what seems good to him. I deprive not the righteous of their reward on
earth, the recompense of the other world is yet greater for them that believe
in my Law, and have my fear before their eyes. The brethren of Joseph returned
to buy corn; he said to them, when ye shall come again, bring with you your
young brother by the father, you shall find I will make you good measure, and
lodge well my guests; if you bring him not, there shall be no corn for you,
approach not this kingdom without him: They answered, Lord, his father loves
him exceedingly, nevertheless we shall endeavor to perform what thou enjoynest
us; he commanded his servants to put their money for corn in the bottoms of his
brethrens sacks, perhaps said he, they will return, or acknowledge this favor
when they shall come into their Country. When they arrived at their father,
they said, Father, there is no more corn for us, if our young brother go not
with us, if he go thither we shall have good measure, and we will be careful
of him. You will be careful, said he, as you were heretofore of your brother
Joseph; God will defend him better then you, he the merciful of the merciful.
When they poured forth their corn, they found their money at the bottomes of
their sacks, and said, our father, what shall we desire more, our money is
restored to us, and we have bread for our family, permit that our brother go
with us, we shall have better measure, that is a small thing to the King of
Egypt; I will not send him with you, unless ye all swear before God to bring
him back again, if there be no great impediment. They swore to fulfill his
will; then said he, I take God to be witness of your oath: O my sons! enter not
all together into the City, but go in at several gates, to the end the people
may not be jealous of you; God commands what to him ^eemeth good, I rely on
him, all true believers ought to ^esign themselves to his divine will; they
entered the Ci^y as their father enjoined them, to content him; being arrived
before Joseph, he took his little brother by the hand, and said to him, trouble
not thy self for what shall become of thy brethren; having filled their sacks,
he causad a Cup adorned with precious stones to be put into the sack of his
little brother; caused it to be given out, that they of the Caravan had stolen
the Kings Cup; and sent men after them to search; those strangers protested
they saw it not, and that they came not into Egypt to steal, that they were
sureties for each other, and that he who had stolen it deserved punishment. The
Cup was found in the sack of his young brother; he caused him to be
apprehended, and accused them all of theft; Lord, said they, his father is old,
he will be extremely afflicted for his absence, take one of us in his place,
thou shall in the end find us to be honest men: God forbid, said he, that I
should detain other then him who was found guilty of theft, that would be
injustice; finding themselves out of hope to free their brother, they saved
themselves in a secret place remote from the City; where the eldest said to his
brethren, you know the oath we took at our departure, and how heretofore we
entreated Joseph, I will not go out of Egypt without my fathers permission, God
is most just, he shall dispose of me and my brother as shall please him, return
to your father, and say unto him, thy son was taken in theft, we saw him, and
endeavored to our power to deliver him, they of the Caravan shall be
witnesses. Jacob said at their return, they were the cause of that accident,
that did not displease you; and he took patience, saying, God perhaps will
favor my sons to return in health; he knows in what condition I am, he is
most prudent in what he ordains. He retired from among his sons extremely
afflicted, and bewailed the loss of his son Joseph; had his eyes continually
covered with tears, and he bore in his heart great sorrow. His sons said unto
him, Do^ thou yet remember Joseph, to add to thy grief, and hasten thine end?
I am (said he) extremely desolate, I leave all to the will of God; he has
taught me what ye know not. My sons return into Egypt, and inquire t^dings of
your two brethren; despair not of the Spirit of God, none despair of Gods
Spirit, but the wicked. When they came unto Joseph, they said unto him, The
famine that is in our Country, has extremely afflicted us, it has often
constrained us to come to buy Corn; thou, of thy favor, have made us good
measure; thou have caused our money to be restored for alms, God will reward
thee, he recompenceth such as are Alms-givers. He said unto them, Ye remember
what ye did unto your brother Joseph: They replied, Certainly thou art not
Joseph. I am Joseph, said he, and behold my brother Benjamin. God has given us
his grace; he rewards him that has his fear before his eyes, and is patient
in his afflictions; he depriveth not the righteous of recompense. God, said
they, has poured his favors upon us in saving thee, whom we have exceedingly
offended. Be not (said he) ashamed, God this day pardons you that sin, he
is gracious and merciful; return to your Father, and bear to him this shirt,
cast it upon his face, he shall recover sight, and return hither with him, and
with your whole family. The Caravan was then half way upon return, when Jacob
said to them that attended him, I smell the odor of my son Joseph; you deride
me, but what I speak is most true: They told him, that he was still in his old
error; some days following, one of his sons arrived with tidings of Joseph;
and cast the shirt that he had given him, upon him; and incontinently he
recovered his sight, and said, Did I not always tell you, that I knew what ye
knew not; they said, Our Father pardon us, and ask the forgiveness of God for
us, who have exceedingly offended him: He answered, I will beg pardon of God
for you, he is gracious and merciful. When they arrived before Joseph, he took
his Father by the hand, saying, Enter without fear into Egypt, caused him to
fit down, and his brethren fell prostrate before him. My Fa^^er, said he,
behold there the interpretation of mine ^d dream, God has rendered it true, he
has favored ^e, in delivering me from prison, and conducting you ^ther; he
has put an end to the jealousy which the de^ll had procured between me and my
brethren. The word is liberal to whom seems good to him; he know^h what is
necessary for his people, and is most prudent ^n what he ordains. Lord, thou
have given me wealth, and knowledge to interpret dreams. Creator of Heaven and
Earth, thou at my protector, give me the grace to die in thy Law, and place me
in the number of the righteous. This History of Joseph, He speake^h to Mahomet.
is an ancient History which I relate to thee. Thou were not with his brethren
when they conspired against him; nevertheless, the greatest part of the people
are incredulous. Demand no reward of them for having preached the Alcoran, it
instructs only the wise. How many signs be there in Heaven and Earth, of
the unity of God? yet the people believe not therein, and most of them adore
Idols; assuredly God shall punish them at an unexpected hour, and in a time
which they know not. Say unto them, Behold the right way, I call to the way of
Salvation and Light, such as follow me. I return thanks to God, for that I am
not in the number of unbelievers. We sent aforetime none but men to instruct
the people, will not men consider what has been the end of the wicked that
were before them? Paradise is for them that are righteous; will ye not be
converted? They caused the Prophets to lose all hopes of their Conversion, and
believed them to be liars; but we protected them, and delivered from their
malice such as seemed good to us. nothing shall exempt the wicked from the
punishment of their pains; they shall serve for example to men of spirit. The
Alcoran contains no blasphemies, it confirms the ancient Scriptures, and
reaches True-believers the way of Salvation.

CHAP. XIII. The Chapter of Thunder, See Gelaldin and Bedaoi.
containing forty three Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am the most wise and merciful
God. These precepts are the precepts of the Book sent to thee from the Lord; it
is a thing most true, but few men incline to believe it. It is sent from God,
who raised Heaven without a prop, and with a column, that appears, and
sits on his throne, disposing all things. He causes the Sun and Moon to
move, until the day appointed; he disposes all things at his will, and
manifests to men the signs of his omnipotency. Peradventure you will believe
in the Resurrection of the flesh. He it is that has extends the Earth,
raised the Mountains, caused the Rivers to flow, who created of all sorts of
Fruits, the Male and Female, and covers the day with the obscurity of the
night. These things are signs of his unity to such as consider them. He has
created many fields of diverse sorts, and Gardens filled with Grapes, and many
different Fruits; he created Datetroes, thick as Groves, and Forests, and
others that are scattered through the fields; some are moystened with waters,
and others have a more pleasing taste. These things are signs of his unity to
such as consider them. Thou art amazed at the lies of Infidels, be astonished
at their discourses; when they deny the Resurrection, and say, What, shall God
yet once again create us of the dust of the Earth? when we shall be earth,
shall we be a new people? They are impious, they shall have yoaks upon their
necks, and shall remain eternally in the fire of Hell; they precipitate
themselves into eternal pains, and contemn the mercy of God, so did their
predecessors; but God is gracious to such as convert. Chastise severely the
obstinate Infidels. They have said, We will not believe in the Prophet, unless
we see some miracle to appear. Say unto them, I am not sent but to preach the
word of God. He has sent persons to every Nation, to teach them the right way;
nothing is hid from him in the world; he knows what women bear in their womb;
he knows the time and period of every thing, the present, past, and future;
he is great and omnipotent. He understands what you keep secret, and what ye
make manifest; he knows where they be who cove^ themselves with the
obscurity of night, and them that travel in the clearness of day; every one
has his guardian by his commandment, who observes what he does, and
depriveth none of grace, that has not offended his divine Majesty, and none
can hinder him to punish whom it seems good to him. He it is, who gives you
to see the lightning which terrifieth men, and nourishes his Creatures by the
rain which he causes to fall; he created the clouds charged with moisture,
causes thunder to make a noise, ^ar^eth the Thunderbolt, and strikes whom it
pleases him; the Angels tremble in his presence, yet do the wicked dispute his
omnipotency. He it is who ought to be implored; the prayers of them who implore
another God are ineffectuall, they are like to such as are very thirsty, and
stretch forth the hand toward a Fountain, to which they cannot reach; the
prayers of the wicked are impiety: Whatsoever is in Heaven, and in the Earth,
the shadow of the morning* the obscurity of the evening humble themselves
before God, through force or affection. Say unto them, Who is the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, but God? who, except God shall protect you? your Idols can
neither benefit, nor hurt you: Is the blind like unto him that sees clearly?
is darkness like unto light? shall they adore the Creatures in stead of the
Creator? God has created all things, and is omnipotent, he causes rain to
descend from Heaven, and Rivers covered with Foam, to flow in the Valleys. The
Gold, the Silver, and Metals which ye melt to adorn and enrich your selves,
are like unto froth. Thus does God teach what is profitable and what
unprofitable; froth suddenly vanishes, and is of no utility to men: So
falsehood vanishes before truth. Thus does God speak through a parable, to them
that obey him, and gives them Paradise. All the riches of the Earth, and as
much again, cannot ransom the Infidels, they shall be eternally tormented in
the fire of Hell. Who knows, that the truth contained in this Book, was not
sent to thee from God? He that doubts is blind; men of Spirit do not doubt.
They who satisfy what they promise to God, who transgress not his
Commandments, who have his fear before their eyes, who apprehend the day of
Judgment, who are patient in their afflictions for love of his divine Majesty,
who make their prayers at the time appointed, who give alms privately and
publicly, and blot out their offendes with good works* shall be blessed. They
shall enter into the Garden of Eden with their father, their wives, and
families; the Angels shall visit them; shall salute them, and say, Behold the
recompense of your perseverance, behold eternal grace. Such as shall swarve
from their promise, and disobey the Commandments of God, and pollute the
Earth, shall be accursed of God, and severely chastised; he gives, and
deprived of wealth, as seems good to him. The unbelievers rejoice in the
riches of the earth; but those riches are of little value, if they consider
them of the other world. They say, If Mahomet does not make some miracle to
appear from God, we will not believe him. Say unto them, God guides, and
misleadeth whom it pleases him; he confirms the hearts of them that have
faith in his Law; the Remembrance of God confirms the hearts of
True-believers: Such as shall do good works, shall be happy. We have sent thee,
as we did send other Prophets, to them that preceded thee. Teach the people
what we have inspired into thee: When they, shall disobey thee, say unto them,
God is my Lord, there is but one God alone, I am wholly resigned to his divine
will; my refuge is in his goodness. If the Alcoran should make Mountains to go,
should it cause the Earth to open, and the dead to arise, all would proceed
from God. True-believers ought not to despair of any thing, God shall guide all
the world into the right way when it shall please him; and unbelievers shall
not escape the punishment of their crimes. Thou shall dwell with them until the
word of God be f^lfilled: He swarveth not from what he promises; they derided
the Prophets that came before thee, I prolonged the time of their punishment,
and in the end rigorously chastised them; and with what affl^ct^ons? Does not
God behold the actions of every man? They have said, God has companions, to
whom they have given names after their fancy; will you instruct God in any
thing? The wicked take delight in their wickedness, and are gone astray from
the right way. He whom God shall mislead, shall find none to guide him, he
shall be affl^cted in this world, and yet more in the other. None shall be able
to save him but God; Paradise is promised to them that have his fear before
their eyes; they shall enjoy eternally all manner of content, such is the end
of the righteous; and Hell is prepared for Infidels. They, to whom we have
given the knowledge of Scriptures, rejoice in the doctrine which we have sent
thee; there be that abjure one part; say unto them, I recommend unto you only
the worship of one sole God, who is the assured refuge of the righteous. We
have sent the Alcoran in the Arabique tongue, to the end the Arabians may
comprehend it: If thou do follow the will of unbelievers, having had the
knowledge of the unity of God, who shall be able to save or protect thee? We
sent Prophets before thee, commanded them to marry, and they had children.
Prophets cannot perform miracles without the permission of God, and the end of
every thing is written in his Book; he blo^^eth out, and leaves permanent what
seems good to him, he cannot alter. I perceive that some of the wicked have a
design to murder thee; thou art obliged only to preach to them, I will keep
an account of their sins to punish them, See they not that their Countries and
possessions diminishes daily through thy conquests? God commands what
pleases him, no man can escape his judgments, he is most exact in his
acc^unt; their predecessors used subtilties as they, but God is more subtle
then they; he well knows the good and evil which every one does: they shall
one day understand who must have Paradise. They say thou art no Prophet, say
unto them, It is sufficient that God is witness of the truth between you and me;
who is he that knows what is written in the Book of his divine Majesty?

CHAP. XIV. The Chapter of Abraham, containing fifty verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am the merciful God. That Book*
We have sent it to thee to bring the people out of darkness, to guide them to
the light, and the way of thy Lord, always victorious and glorious; Whatsoever
is in Heaven, and in Earth, is Gods; misery is upon unbelievers, they shall
undergo at the end of the world exceeding great torments. They who prefer
the wealth of this world to that of Heaven, who go astray from the way of the
Law, and would pervert it, are in a great error, far from truth; The Prophets
spoke the language of them to whom they were sent to instruct them, God guides
and misleadeth whom to him seems good, he is omnipotent and prudent. We sent
Moses with prodigies, to bring the children of Israel out of darkness, and to
conduct them to light, he taught them the Commandments of the Law, to serve
for instruction to such as shall persevere to do well, and shall not be
ungrateful for the favors they have received. Moses spoke to his people, and
said, remember the grace of God toward you, he delivered you from the men of
Pharaoh, who caused you to suffer great afflictions, who murdered your
Children, abused your wives, and laid upon you great evils (sent from God,
because of your sins.) The Lord has said, if ye be not ungrateful, I will
augment my graces upon you; if ye be impious, you shall be afflicted. Moses
said to his people; if you and all men be impious, know that God will be
always glorious, and has no need of you. Know ye not what befell (before you)
the people of Noah, Aad, Temod, and their posterity, that none had knowledge of
but God; because of their great number? He sent them his Commandments by his
Prophets, they bit their fingers for anger, and said unto them, we renounce,
and condemn your Doctrine: The Prophets said unto them, is there any doubt in
the belief of the unity of God, Creator of Heaven, and Earth? he calls you
to remit your sins, and deferreth your punishment unill the day appointed:
They answered, ye are men like unto us, will you hinder us to adore the Gods of
our fathers? Produce arguments of strength sufficient to prove what you preach;
the Prophet replied, We are men as you are, but God gives his grace to whom
seems good to him; we are come to you through his permission, the
True-believers ought to trust in him; wherefore should we not be resigned to
the will of God, who has guided us in the right way? we will continue in
well-doing, the righteous trust in his divine Majesty. Then said the Infidels
unto them, we will banish you from our Country, if you be not of our Religion;
but God inspired into them, that the Infidels should perish, and that they
should inhabit the Land after them; that he would protect such as should have
his fear before their eyes, and fear the pains that are prepared for the
wicked. The Prophets were protected of God, and the obstinate wicked were
destroyed: they shall be precipitated into Hell, and drink of water full of
corruption, urine and blood, death shall appear on all sides before their eyes,
before they have swallowed that drink; they shall not dye in that misery, they
shall suffer yet greater pains. The good works which the wicked have done, are
like to dust carried away by an impetuous wind, they shall be unprofitable to
them, and they shall be extirpated, because they depart from the truth: See
they not that God has created Heaven and Earth? that he can destroy them, and
create in their place a new people, if it seem good to him? This is not
difficult to God, all things are known to him. The more impotent of them that
have followed the wicked, shall say at the day of Judgment, we obeyed you, will
you this day deliver us from the punishment of God? They shall answer, had God
guided us in the right way, we had conducted you thither, we are alike
miserable with you, we cry and lament in our misery, but find neither refuge
nor protection. The Devil shall say unto them, what God has promised to you
is infallible, I foretold it to you, I caused you to transgress his
Commandments through my tentations, I had none other power over you, but to
tempt you, you did me no harm, when ye hearkened to me, you drew mischief on
your selves, I am not your Tutor, neither are you mine, I was impious, when
heretofore I suffered you to adore me; Hell is prepared for you, and for all
unbelievers, there shall they endure great torments, and the righteous shall
enter into Paradise, wherein flow many rivers, where they shall dwell
eternally, with all manner of blessedness and content; See thou not how God
speaks by a parable? A good word is like to a good tree that has taken root
in the Earth, and has raised its branches to heaven, and produces its fruit
in due time, through the permission of his divine Majesty; he teaches the
people his parables, perhaps they will be mindful: An evil word is like to a
bad tree, that has been torn from the Earth, there is nothing to sustain it,
and it is without root, or fruit: God fortifieth the True-believers through his
word in this world, and in the other, and causes the unjust to err, he does
what to him seems good: See thou not them that have changed his grace into
impiety, and have made such as have followed them to dwell in the house of
perdition? They shall abide eternally in the fire of Hell. They say, that God
has a companion equal to him, and err from the way of his Law, Say unto
them, ye shall have wealth in this world, but Hell is your Rendezvous. Say to
the True-believers, who make their prayers at the time appointed, and give
aims in private, or in public, that the day shall come wherein they shall
neither buy nor sell, and where every one shall be recompensed for his works.
Say unto them, God has created the Earth, and the Heavens, he makes the rain
to descend from Heaven, which causes to spring forth all sorts of fruits to
enrich you, he created the ship, that through his permission saileth on the
Sea, he created the Rivers, the Sun and the Moon, which move continually,
he created the day and the night, and bestows on you whatsoever ye desire,
his favors toward you can neither be numbered, nor recounted, nevertheless the
Inhabitants of Mecca are always impious and wicked; Abraham said, Lord protect
this City, and make it to be the refuge of the world; Keep me and my Children
from the worship of Idols, they have seduced a part of the people; he that
shall follow me, and profess thy unity, shall be mine; if any one disobey me,
thou art gracious and merciful: Lord, one part of my Lineage inhabiteth Mecca,
in a place unfruitful, give them the grace to persevere in thy service,
incline the hearts of men to affect them, enrich them with the f^uits of the
Earth, peradventure they will thank thee; thou know whatsoever is in the
world, I know it not; nothing that is in Heaven, or in Earth is hid from thee;
praised be God, who has given me Ismael and Isaac in mine old age, he hears
prayers when it pleases him; Lord, give me and my posterity the grace to
persevere in well-doing, hear my prayers, pardon me, and pardon my father, and
all True-believers at the day of Judgment. Think not that God is ignorant of
the actions of Infidels, he deferreth the punishment of their crimes until the
day that all men shall have their eyes opened: that day shall they behold their
sins before their eyes, and their hearts shall be full of desolation; If thou
preachest to the people the day of Judgment, has God (will the wicked say)
preserved us to this present time, to do what thou do appoint us? Say unto
them, have ye not sworn heretofore, that there is no resurrection? Ye have
dwelt with the unjust, ye have seen how they have been chastised, and how we
have spoken to you in parables. Certainly they conspire, but God knows their
conspiracy, their policy is to tempt the Prophet, to see if he will make the
Mountains to move. Think not that God will violate what he has promised to
the Prophets, he is omnipotent, and avengefull. Consider the day wherein the
Earth and Heavens shall change their face, and all people shall rise again;
that day shall one sole God omnipotent, command men to come out of their
Monuments; Thou shall that day see the wicked bound in their chains, their
garments shall be full of pitch, and guitran, their faces shall be covered with
fire, that day shall he recompense and chastise every one according to his
works, he is exact to keep account; This Book was sent to instruct the people,
and teach them that there is but one God; the wise will remember.

CHAP. XV. The Chapter of Hegir, containing seventy and seven Verses written at
Mecca.
Hegir is a Valley near Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the merciful God. The signs
are the signs of the Alcoran, which distinguishes good from evil. How may
the Infidels hope what the True-believers hope for? depart from them, See Kitab
el tenoir.
let them eat the substance of the poor, let them become rich, and content
themselves in their hopes, they shall see one day what their end shall be; We
have destroyed no City until the time destined to its ruin was expired, there
is no Nation that can advance or retard its destiny. The wicked have said, oh
man! who believe that the Alcoran was sent to thee, we will affirm that thou
art a Sorcerer, until the Angels do assure us that thou are true: The Angels
shall not descend to the earth, unless to chastise them, and they shall not be
able to retard the time of their punishment; we certainly have sent the Alco^an
upon earth, and will preserve it without alteration; we heretofore sent
prophets one after another, the wicked scorned and contemned them; thus I
imprint impiety in the hearts of the wicked, they shall not believe in the
Prophet, and shall incur the punishment of their predecessors: should we open
the entrance of heaven, and should they behold the Angels go in, and go out at
the shadow of the gate, they would yet say, their eyes were enchanted, and that
they were bewitched: we created signs in heaven, and adorned them with
Stars, to cont^nt the minds of them that consider them; we sheltered them
from the assaults of the devil, but the Butterfly follows every thing that
shines, and believes it to be a Star; we extended the earth, and raised the
mountains with proportion; we have made it to produce all sorts of fruits to
sustain and enrich you; we have reserved in our power the keys of the
treasures thereof, to distribute to them by measure what shall be necessary, we
caused a fresh wind to arise, and sent rain to water them; it is not you that
caused the fruits thereof to spring forth; it is we who give life and death,
and d^spose of all things in the world. We know who they were that did proceed
you, and who they shall be that shall succeed you; I will assemble all at the
end of the world to be judged; we created man of the slime of the earth, and
before him the devil, of fire, without smoke. Remember thou, that God said to
his Angels, I will create man of the slime of the earth, I will breathe upon
him, to give him life, prostrate your selves before him; the Angels adored him,
except the devil; God said unto him, wherefore do thou not adore man? He
replied, I will not adore him, thou have created me of fire, and him of the
mire of the earth: He said, get thee out of Paradise, thou shall be banished,
and accursed until the day of Judgment. Lord, said the devil, lay not thy
curse upon me until the day of Judgment; he said, thou shall be accursed
until the day nominated; Lord, said the devil, I will tempt all the
creatures, because thou have tempted me; I will cause them to disobey thy
Commandments, except such as shall trust in thee, and recommend themselves to
thy divine Will. God said, this is the right way, thou have no power over the
righteous who follow my Law, but only over the Infidels, for whom hell is
prepared. Hell has seven gates, and every gate has its particular work; the
righteous shall dwell in gardens, adorned with fair fountains, we will free
them from all rancour; they shall repose upon beds like brethren, with respect,
and affection, and shall be in eternal felicity: Declare to them that worship
me, that I am gracious and ^^^ciful, and my chast^sements are s^v^re and
rigorous Preach unto them the H^story of the guest of Abraham, they sa^^ted him
when they e^^red his house; Abra^^m was ^^^^ified at their coming: they said
to him, fear not us, we are the Messengers of God; we declare to thee that thou
shall have a son, who shall be a great personage: Do you tell me (said he) that
I shall have a son in mine old age? why speak ye in that manner? We tell thee
the truth, despair^ not of the grace of God. none but the wicked despair: O
Messengers of God! (said Abraham) what do ye require? We are sent to destroy
the Infidels, and to preserve the whole family of Lot, except his wife, she
shall remain with them that shall be punished. When these Messengers came to
Lots house, he told them, he knew them not; they said to him, we are come to
thee, to clear this people of their doubt of Gods Omnipotency; what we speak
unto thee is most true; cause thy family this night to go out of the City, and
follow their steps, that none among you look behind him, and go whither you
shall be commanded; the wicked shall in the morning be destroyed. The
Inhabitants of the City came to Lots house to see those strangers; Lot said
unto them, I beseech you defile not your selves with my Guest, fear God, and
dishonor not your selves, behold my daughters, take them; They said, we do not
hinder thee to lodge thy guests, and remained confounded in their drunkenness.
In the morning thunder surprised them, we overthrew the City upside down, and
caused it to rain stones with fire, that utterly destroyed it. This shall serve
for example to passengers that shall see those ruins, and for a mark of the
Omnipotency of God, to them that shall believe in his divine Majesty. They that
inhabited the wood near to Medina were impious, but we avenged us on them, they
served for example to posterity, as did the people of the City of Lot. They
that dwell in the Valley of He^ir, have defamed the Prophets; we gave them to
see our Miracles, and taught them our Commandments, they contemned them, but
they reposed in the morning in their houses built upon the mountains, and in
their fortesses; when thunder suprised them, their treasures did not save them,
and they were all destroy^d. We created the heavens and the earth to be signs
of the Truth, and of our Unity: The hour of Judgment approaches; absent thy
self from thy self from thy people with mildness, That is, the Preface of the
Alcoran, containing seven vers^s.
thy Lord who created all things, knows all. We taught thee seven signs, and
the most precious Alco^an. Tarry not to consider the diverse sorts of riches
which the wicked possess^; affl^ct not thy self, if they persist in their
impiety; Say unto them, I preach none other thing but the word of God, and the
pains of hell. We will chastise the wick^d, as we chastised them that divided
the Alcoran, who approved one part, and rejected the other. I am thy Lord, I
will require of them an account of their actions, preach what has been
commanded thee, and depart from Infidels, we will preserve thee from them that
shall scorn thee, as likewise from such as adore Idols; I know that thou will
be grieved at their discourse, but praise and adore the Lord until death.

CHAP. XVI. The Chapter of the Be, containing an hundred and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. See Gelaldin.
The chastisement of God is not far remote; desire it not before its time;
praised be God, he has no companion, he causes the Angels to descend, and
sends his inspirations to whom it pleases him; preach his power, and the
pains of Hell to unbelievers; there is no God but he, fear him, he created the
earth and the heavens, he is more powerful then your Idols, and created man of
the mire of the earth, nevertheless he is obstinate in his pride* he created
clean beasts for your use, you draw (from them) great emolument, and
advantage, to cloth and nourish your selves, ye see their beauty when they
feed; and and when they lead them to pasture, they bear the burden and
whatsoever ye will send into Cities, what ye cannot carry without them, but
with exceeding great travel; God is gracious and merciful toward you; he
created horses, and mules, and asses to bear you; he created many glorious
things, of which you have not knowledge. He teaches them the right way, who
observe his Commandments; had it pleased him, he had guided all into the way
of his Law. He s^ndeth you water from Heaven to take away thirst, and causes
plants to bring forth, and trees that nourish your flocks; he makes the Olive
trees to produce, the Date trees, Vines, and all sorts of fruits. These things
are arguments of his Unity, to such as consider them; he created the night, the
day, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, that move at his pleasure, these things
are signs of his Omnipotency to them that are wise; He created whatsoever is on
Earth of diverse colors kind, and species; he created the sea, which affords
you fish, pearls, and other precious stones to adorn you; thou see how the
ships sail upon the waters, and divide the waves for the advantage of
commerce, peradventure you will give God thanks for his favors. He raised the
mountains to make firm the Earth, and to hinder it to move, he created the
rivers, and established way^s to guide you; he made the Stars to conduct you by
night upon the sea, and the mountains to direct you in your way by day* who but
he could have creat^d what he has made? will you never consider it? It is not
in your power to keep account of his mercies, he is altogether gracious and
merciful, and knows the secret of your souls: the Idols that ye adore can
create nothing, but are things dead, without motion, and know not in what time
the world shall rise again; your God is one sole God; such as believe not the
end of the world, such as deny his Unity, and boast of their false belief, are
abhorred of his divine Majesty; when they are interrogated concerning what God
has inspired into Mahomet; they answered, that he preaches Fables of
antiquity, but they shall bear their burden at the day of Judgment, who have
seduced them from the right way, and have not known it. They that were before
them were deceivers, God overthrew their habitations, the ruins fell upon
them, and he chastised them; when they least thought of it; he shall make them
ashamed at the day of Judgment, and shall demand of them, where be the Idols
for which they disputed against true-believers? Such as have knowledge of Gods
Commandments, assure that shame shall be upon the foreheads of Infidels, and
that the Angels shall cause them to die, because of the enormity of their sins;
They will say at the hour of death, that they believe in God, and are penitent
for their faults, God knows what they have done; he shall command them to
enter into hell, where is the abode of the proud: He shall command them who
have his fear before their eyes to enter the house of Eternity, and the
gardens Eden, wherein flow many rivers, there shall they dwell eternally with
the height of their desire. Shall the wicked continue in their sin, until the
Angels cause them to die, or until the day of Judgment? Thus did their
predecessors. God was not unjust toward them, they drew mischief on themselves
through their iniquity; they were chastised and felt the punishment which they
had despised; they have said, had it so pleased God, our fathers and we had
adored him alone; so spoke their predecessors. The Prophets are not obliged,
but to preach and instruct the people. We sent a Prophet to every Nation, to
instruct it, and to command the worship of one sole God, and to quit the
adoration of Tagot, and of Idols; God guided some into the right way, and
others were seduced; consider what is the end of the wicked; if thou
indeavourest to put them into the right path, thou shall lose thy time, God
guides not them that desire to err, they shall be deprived of protection at
the day of Judgment; they have sworn by their faith, that God will not make
the dead to rise again, but he shall cause them to rise again, to chastise
them according to his promises; but the greatest part of men do not know it,
did they know it, they would acknowledge their errors, and the impious would
acknowledge their blasphemies. When we willed any thing, we said, be thou, and
it was! They that depart from the wicked for the love of their Lord, and shall
convert themselves, shall be rewarded in this world, and yet more in the other,
had they knowledge to understand it. Such as patiently endure the injuries of
unbelievers, and trust in their Lord shall be recompensed when they least think
of it. We heretofore sent but men to preach our Law; ask of them that have
knowledge of the written Law, The Jews and Christians.
if it be not true? We have sent to them the Alcoran, to the end thou may
instruct men in our Commandments, peradventure they will consider it. The
earth shall produce nothing to them, that shall conspire against the Prophet,
they shall be chastised when they least think of it; God shall afflict them in
their commerce, they shall not escape his punishment, and their substance shall
diminish by little and little before their eyes; God is gracious and merciful
to them only that honor him: See they not the shadow of that which God has
created, sometimes at the right hand, sometimes at the left, to adore his
divine Majesty, they certainly are contemptible; whatsoever is on the earth,
and in the heavens, beast, and Angels, worship God with humility, fear their
Lord, and obey his Commandments. God has commanded them to worship and to
fear one God, alone, to whom obedience is due, eternally; whom will ye fear
but God? who but God shall protect you? when evil befalls you, you have
recourse to his divine goodness; being delivered, some of you give him thanks,
and yet believe not in his Law: You seek only the riches of the earth, but you
shall see what shall be your end, they say that their wealth proceeds from
their Idols: by God! an account of their blasphemies shall be required of them;
they affirm that God has daughters; assuredly they deceive themselves, and
are not well satisfied, when it is said to them, that a daughter is born to
them; they fly such as declare to them the punishment of their sins, God shall
leave them in igmony, and they shall be contemned as the earth which they
trample under their feet; because they believe not in the day of Judgment,
misery shall perpetually pursue them; God shall command for ever, and be
eternally powerful and victorious. Should God chastise men when they offend,
he should leave no living creature upon the earth, he deferreth their
punishment until the time appointed, they can neither advance nor retard it;
they affirm God to have that which themselves are not satisfied to have; they
lie, when they say that paradise is for them, doubtless they are erroneous,
and shall be precipitated into the fire of hell. By God! we have sent
heretofore Prophets to the people, the devil seduced men, and was master of
the wicked in this world, but in the other they shall rescent great torments:
We have sent thee the Alcoran, to clear to men the doubts touching Religion,
and to guide true believers into the right way. God sends rain from heaven
to refresh the earth, this is an evident sign of his omnipotency, to them that
hear his word; ye have yet a token of his omnipotency in the beasts that give
you milk, to nourish you, and another mark in the fruits of the earth, in the
fruits of Date trees, and the Vines, from which you extract wine, and receive
profit. These things are signs of his omnipotency, to such as comprehend them.
The Lord inspired the Be to dwell in the fields, to lodge in trees, in Hives,
and to eat of all sorts of fruits, it produces honey of diverse colors, that
serves for a remedy to the diseases of men; these things are signs of Gods
omnipotency to them that consider them. God has created you, and shall cause
you to dye; There be persons among you that shall be full of ignominy in their
life, to the end they may understand that God is omnipotent, conferreth
benefits on some more then on others. Slaves have no part in the faculties of
their Masters, neither are they associate with them, nevertheless they
associate to God another God equal to him, and blaspheme against his grace.)
God has created you men, and women, has given you Children, and Children to
your Children, he has enriched you with the riches of the earth; Will you
after this grace believe in your Idols, which are things inanimate, vain, and
unprofitable? Will ye be ungrateful for the benefits of God? Will ye
Worship what can neither benefit not hurt you? Believe not that there is
another God companion and associate with God; He knows what ye know not,
he teaches you a Parable: A Slave that is poor cannot give Alms, and he who
is rich gives alms secretly and publicly, as he sees good; are they both
alike? Ought they to be put in parallel? Praise be to God: Certainly, the
greatest part of men know not his graces, he teaches you a parable: Behold!
two men, the one was borne deaf, and dumb, and given in charge to his Guardian,
he knows not how to employ him, he is capable neither of doing, nor speaking
well, is he like to him that speaks, that understands, teaches men
Justice, and follows the right way? Whatsoever is in Heaven, or on Earth
appertains to God, when he commands any thing, it is performed in the
twinkling of an eye, yea sooner, he is omnipotent: He it is that causes you to
come out of the womb of your mother, that gives you hearing, sight, and
sense, perhaps ye will return him thanks; See ye not the birds that fly in the
Air; who sustaineth them but God? It is an evident sign of his omnipotency
for the True-believers, he has given you houses to inhabit, and the skins and
furs of beasts to cover you, he has given you their hair, and wool, to
furnish your houses, and enrich you; he created trees and clouds to overshadow
you, made the Mountains and Caves to cover you from rain, created garments to
defend you from the heat of the Sun, and the rigor of cold, he has
accomplished his grace upon you, peradventure you will resign your selves to
the will of his divine Majesty, and profess his Unity. If the unbelievers
depart from the way of the Law, thou art obliged only to preach to them
intelligibly; they know the grace of God, and contemn it, for that the
greatest part of them are impious; preach unto them the day, wherein I will
raise again all the Nations of the world, and the Prophets and Apostles who
have preached to them my Commandments, there shall be no excuse for Infidels,
neither shall they find protection, or relaxation of their miseries: When they
shall behold their Idols, they shall confess that they were mislead, they
shall understand the unity of thy Lord, and that their Idols are not able to
intercede for them. God has added to the punishment of Infidels, has sent
them evil upon evil, because they hinder the world to follow his Law: Preach
unto them the day, wherein I will cause to rise again all the Nations of the
world, with the Prophet who preached to them, to be witness of their actions; I
will be witness against them of thy Nation; I have sent thee the Book that
unfoldeth the mysteries of my Law, to guide the people into the right way, and
to declare the joys of paradise to such as profess my unity. God commands
you to do only that which is reasonable, he commands you to give alms, and
do good to your parents, he forbids whordom, disobedience, and injustice,
enjoyneth you to do good, perhaps you will consider it. Perform what ye have
promised to God, break not promised faith, ye call God to be witness of your
promises, he knows all your actions. Do not like the woman who spun a thread,
foulded it, and afterward entangled it and spoiled it, believe not that there
is deceit and error in your Law; If the unbelievers be more in numbers then
you, God permits it, to prove you; he shall clear to you at the day of
Judgment the doubts that be among you; had it so pleased him, you all had
observed one and the same Law; he guides, misleadeth whom it pleases him, and
will exactly require of you an account of your actions. Believe not that there
is deceit in your Law, take heed of stumbling; having once confirmed your
steps, ye shall be severely chastised, ^f ye seduce the people from the right
way; do not violate what ye have promised to God, for any price, his grace is
of more advantage to you then the wealth of the earth, had ye knowledge to
understand it; your wealth is perishable, and the riches of heaven are
eternal; he shall recompense them that persevere in well-doing, and whosoever
shall do good works, shall be blessed in this world, and in the other. When
thou shall read the Alcoran, implore God to deliver thee from the malice of the
Devil, abominable to all the Creatures, he has no power over them that trust
in his divine Majesty, his power extends over such as go astray, who obey
not him, and adore many Gods. When we alter any precepts (God well knows what
he orda^neth), they say thou art a liar, but the greatest part of them are
ignorant; Say unto them, that assuredly the Holy Ghost has taught it from thy
Lord, to confirm believers in their faith, and to guide into the right way
them that profess his unity, and to anounce to them the joys of Paradise. I
know, that they will say that a man has taught him the Alcoran. He whom they
presume to have taught him, is a Persian by Nation, and speaks the Language
of the Persians, and the Alcoran is in the Arabique tongue, full of instruction
and eloquence. They who will not believe in God, shall suffer great torments;
such as renounce his Commandments, blaspheme against his divine Majesty; those
that reject his Law, after having professed it, shall feel the effect of his
wrath, and be punished for preferring the wealth of the earth to the riches of
Heaven; God guides not unbelievers. They in whose hearts he has imprinted
disobedience, those whom he has deprived of hearing, and sight, are ignorant,
they doubtless shall be at the end of the world in the number of the damned;
he is merciful to them that convert, and repent to have mislead the people
from the right way and persevere in obedience to his Commandments. Be thou
mindful of the day, wherein man shall dispute against himself, and every one
shall be rewarded according to his works without injustice. God teaches you a
Parable; Behold a free and Privileged City, on the which God pours his
graces on all sides with abundance, and is ungrateful for his benefits; but he
sent upon it misery, famine, and fear, because of its ingratitude. God has
sent to the Inhabitants thereof a Prophet of their Nation, they have slandered
him, and were chastised, because of their sin. Eat of what God has given
you, and give him thanks for his grace; if it be he whom ye worship, he
forbids you to eat of Carrion, of Blood, and Swines-flesh, and whatsoever is
not slain in pronouncing the name of God; he will be gracious and merciful to
them who shall eat through necessity, without design to offend him. Lie not,
in saying, Behold that which is permitted to be eaten! blaspheme not against
God; such as blaspheme against him, shall not prosper in this world, and in the
other shall suffer grievous torments. We did heretofore prohibit the Jews to
eat of what we have recounted to thee, we did to them no injustice, they drew
mischief on themselves through their sin; thy Lord is gracious and merciful
to them that ignorantly offend him, who convert, and do good works. Abraham
was obedient to God, and professed his unity, he adored not Idols, and gave
thanks to God for his mercies; God elected, and guided him into the right way,
he gave him wealth in this world, and placed him in the other, in the number of
the blessed. We have inspired thee to follow the Law of Abraham, he professed
the unity of God, and adored not Idols, he established the Sabbath among the
Jews, of which they dispute; God shall judge their d^fference at the day of
Judgment. Call the people to the Law of God with prudence, and preachings, and
dispute against them with good arguments, God knows them that depart from the
right way; if they evilly entreat you, entreat them as they shall entreat you;
if ye be patient, patience is advantageous to them that take it willingly, have
patience for the love of God, and afflict not your selves with the deportments
and malice of the wicked, God is with the righteous, who have his fear before
their eyes.

CHAP. XVII. The Chapter of the Voyage by night, containing an hundred and
eleven verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, The Turks believe that this night of the Voyage Mahomet ascended into
Heaven with the Angel Gabriel: he was mounted on a white Burac, which is a
beast partly Mule, partly Ass, and partly Horse. He saw all the Prophets that
preceded him, all the wonders of Paradise, and saw God, who sat on his Throne.
See Kitab el tenoir, Tesfiir anf Giauhoir, and the exposition of Gelaldin. The
Bedaoi intituleth this Chapter the Chapter of the Children of Israel.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to him, that caused his
servant to go in one night from the Temple of Mecca, to the Temple of
Jerusalem; we have blessed that Temple, and whatsoever is about it, in token
of our omnipotency. We gave to Moses the Old Testament, to instruct the
Children of Israel, and to deterr them from the worship of any other God, but
of me; to forbid them to adore the lineage of Noah, or the lineage of them that
we preserved in his Ark. To quit their says, and return to it often.
Noah is my creature, and my servant, acknowledging my benefits; we prohibited
in Scripture the children of Israel, to defile twice the Earth, left they
kindled too great a fire; when that befell you, See Kitab el tenoir.
we stirred up our servants against you, and they entered by force into the
midst of your houses; this was as soon executed as promised. In the end, we
gave you advantage over your enemies; we gave you wealth, and children to
succor you, and ye were more numerous then the Infidels; the good and the evil
that you shall do, shall be for your souls. We stirred up the wicked against
you, because of your sins, to afflict you through the murder, and bondage of
your persons; and they destroyed the Temple of Jerusalem, as they had ruined it
the first time. Your Lord shall pardon you, if you convert, we have established
Hell for a perpetual prison of Infidels. The Alcoran guides the righteous
into the right way, it declares to them a great reward, preaches to the
wicked the torments of Hell; and exhorts men to weldoing, although they are
inclining to evil, and prompt to sin. We created the day and the night, they
are two signs of our omnipotency: we caused the night to pass away, and the
day to appear for labor; and to the end ye might know number of ages, of
months, and of years: we explained our mysteries without obscurity, and have
enjoined every one to bear the burden of his iniquities at the day of
judgment; that day will we make men to see the account of their sins, they
shall be recompen^ed and chastised according to the good and evil that they
shall have committed, and none shall bear burden of his neighbor: we sent to
the people Prophets and Apostles to preach to them our Commandments, before
they were chastised, before the destruction of a City: we advert^sed the
principal inhabitants thereof; when they disobeyed us, we chastised them
according to our word, and destroyed them. How many Cities have we ruined since
Noah's flood? The sins of the people and known to their Lord; he gives the
riches of this world to them that desire them, to cause them to fall headlong
into Hell, where they shall repent of their iniquities, and be deprived of
mercy. He who shall labor to acquire the riches of Heaven, shall be protected
of thy Lord in this world, and enriched with the Treasures of Heaven in the
other. Consider, how we prefer our Creatures one to another* the reward of
Heaven is much greater then that of the Earth. Believe not that there be two
Gods, otherwise you shall repent of it, and be deprived of protection at the
day of judgment. Thy Lord has ordained to worship him alone, and to honor
your father and mother, especially in their old age, and say nothing to them
that may afflict them, neither vex them; speak to them with respect, do not
contemn them, pray to God to compassionate them, as they pitied, when they
brought you up in your infancy. God knows whatsoever is in your souls; he
will be merciful to you, if ye obey him. Give to your parents what
appertains to them, do good to the poor, and to pilgrims, be not prodigal,
the prodigal are brethren of the Devil, ungrateful for the favors of their
Lord. Contemn not the poor, if ye desire to obtain the mercy of God, speak to
them with mildness, and endeavor to content them; do not entirely shut your
hands, neither altogether extend them; if ye do otherwise, ye shall offend.
Thy Lord gives, and takes away his graces, as seems good to him; he
knows his people, and understands all their actions. Slay not your children
for fear of necessity, I will give whatsoever shall be necessary for them; the
murder of children is an exceeding great sin, fly whoredom, it is a thing
unclean, kill no man without reason; we have commanded to pursue him that shall
have slain his neighbor, but let not the heir sin maliciously, prosecuting the
innocent for the guilty. The innocent is in Gods protection: take not the goods
of Orphans, and be careful of them, until they be in years of discretion;
satifie your promises, an account shall be required of you; measure with good
measure, and weigh with just weights. Busy your selves not with that which you
ought not to know. There shall be required of you an account of the sins ye
have committed, in seeing, hearing, and thinking. Be not proud, ye shall never
be so long as the Earth, neither so high as the Mountains; such sins are
exceeding great before thy Lord: It is one part of what he has inspired into
thee, to preach to his people: Say not, there be two Gods, left thou be
confined to the fire of Hell. Your Lord has elected you, with all those men
and women that obey his Commandments, for his sons and daughters, as the
Angels; yet say not that God has children. We made mention in the Alcoran of
whatsoever is necessary to be preached to the people; say unto them, If there
be a God with God, as ye affirm, invok him that has his Throne in Heaven;
praised be God, he has no Companion, he is most high and great. The seven
Heavens praise him, and all that is in Earth glorify him, but ye comprehend it
not, he is gracious and merciful, We will separate thee from the wicked; we
will harden their hearts, and stop their ears. When thou shall read the
Alcoran, and say, There is but one God, they will turn the back, and deride
thee, I know what they desire to hear; they would have the people to hearken
to the words of the unjust, who say, That thou art a Sorcerer, and a Magician;
consider to whom they compare thee; they certainly are in error, and are not
able to find the right way. What! we are (say they) bones and flesh, shall we
rise again, and become new Creatures? who shall cause us to rise again? Say
unto them, Although ye be stone, iron, bones, and flesh, he who first created
you, shall raise you again. They shall shake the head at thee, and ask of
thee. In what time they shall rise again? say unto them, Peradventure it shall
be suddenly. When ye shall be called out of the graves by the Commandment of
God, ye will believe that ye have remained but very little time in the world;
then shall the Infidels confess, that the Devil has deceived them, and that
he is their open enemy. Your Lord knows you all, he will pardon, or chastise
you, as seems good to him: We have not sent thee to be their guardian; thy
Lord knows whatsoever is in Heaven and in Earth. Certainly, we gave graces to
some Prophets, which we gave not to others; and we gave the Psalter to David;
Say unto the Infidels, invoke the Idols which you adore, and see if they are of
power to deliver you from affliction. They that implore God, desire to be nigh
unto him; who are they that shall nearest approach his divine Majesty they who
hope in his mercy, or such as fear his punishment? Certainly his punishment
ought most to be feared. We will destroy all the Cities of the world before the
day of Judgment, and chastise the wicked with rigorous torments; this is
written upon the Tables kept in heaven; nothing has hindered us to manifest the
miracles which the inhabitants of Mecca desire to see, but the contempt showed
by their predecessors. Tenod saw the miracles of the Camel, and contemned it;
I will no more show miracles, but to make the people to apprehend the torments
of hell. Remember thou, that we have said to thee, that thy Lord knows all
that the world does; that which we gave thee to see (in the voyage by night) is
to prove the people as the cursed tree, See Gelaldin.
which is spoken of in the Alcoran; there be persons that will believe it,
others that will not believe; but I will try them to augment their confusion:
Remember thou, that we commanded the Angels to humble themselves before Adam,
and that they did humble themselves, except the devil; who said, shall I adore
him whom thou have created of the earth? who is he whom thou have preferred to
me? Certainly, if thou tarry until the day of Judgment, I will destroy his
race, except that small number that shall be under thy protection. Thy Lord
said unto him, get thee hence, hell shall be thy punishment, and the punishment
of them that shall follow thee; deceive by thy speeches them whom thou shall be
able to deceive, seduce whom thou can seduce with the wealth of the earth,
cause them to exercise Usury, and commit the sin of whoredom; tell them, there
is neither Resurrection nor Judgment; whatsoever thou shall promise them shall
be but vanity and falsehood; thou shall have no power over them that shall
worship me, I will protect them against thee. It is your Lord, who causes the
ship to travel upon the waters, for the advantage of traffic; when the
tempest charge you, your Idols forsake you, he alone is able to protect you,
nevertheless when he has caused you to arrive at the Port, you deny his
Unity, and follow your impiety; believe ye that he will another time make the
sea calm to you? and that he will send you a favorable wind, if you do not
acknowledge him your protector; Believe ye to return again to the sea? He
shall send you an impetuous wind, that shall overwhelme you, with your
impiety, and ye shall find none to protect you against him. We have conferred
on men many favors, we have ^onducted them on the earth, and sea, enriched
with all sorts of riches, and gratified them above all creatures of the earth;
preach to them the day wherein I will assemble before me all the Nations of the
world, with the Prophet that shall have preached to them. He to whom shall be
given the Book of the Account of his works in his right hand, shall read his
account entirely, no injustice shall be done to him, and he shall be happy. He
that shall be blind in this world, shall be so in the other, and shall not see
the right way. They would divert thee from performing what we have inspired
into thee, to induce thee to blaspheme against me. If thou do it, thou shall be
of their friends; were it not for the strength that we have given thee, they
would make thee to incline to their impiety, had thou done it, we had given
thee to taste of great afflictions in this world, and in the other; thou had
found none to protect thee against us; it wanted not much, but they had
affrighted thee at Medina, to cause thee to go out of it; had they driven thee
thence, they had not continued there long after thee. We heretofore sent our
Prophets to instruct the people in our Law, thou shall find therein nothing to
change; make thy prayers when the Sun shall set, at the beginning, and at the
end of the night, and at the dawning of day, the Angels shall be witnesses of
thine orisons; spend one part of the night in prayer, this shall be an
augmentation of merit, thy Lord shall establish thee in the place of his glory:
Say, Lord, into whatsoever place I go, make me to enter, and go forth with
truth, give me thy protection; Say, See Gelaldin.
that truth is come, and that vanity is vanished; this Book shall heal the
people of their error, it shall bring them into the way of mercy, and increase
the misery of unbelievers. We have exhorted men to abandon their impiety, they
have not done it, and despaired when they were touched with affliction; Say
unto them, each of us does after his will, and God knows him that follows
the right way; they shall demand of thee concerning the Soul: Say unto them,
the soul is an effect of God, he has given you very little knowledge;
assuredly, had it so pleased him, he could have deprived you of the knowledge
he has given you, you shall find nothing that is able to protect you but his
mercy? Say unto them, if the devils, and men were all assembled against me,
they should not be able to compose a Book like the Alcoran. We have taught in
the Alcoran whatsoever is necessary for the salvation of men, nevertheless the
greatest part of the people depart from the Truth, and say, we will not believe
thee, unless thou cause fountains to spring out of the earth, and make in this
place a garden, beautified with Date trees, and Vines, with rivers flowing in
the midst, or unless we see, descend from heaven a part of the pains which
thou preachest; we will not believe thee, unless God and the Angels come to
thy assistance, unless thy house be of fine gold, and that we see the Book of
Truth sent from heaven; we will not believe in thy Parchment, unless we see
descend from heaven a Book which we may be able to read: Say unto them, praised
be my Lord, am I any thing but a man sent from him? what hinders men to
believe, since there has been sent to them a Pilot to conduct them into the
way of salvation? They say, that thou art a man, and not an Angel: Say unto
them, should the Angels have inhabited the Earth, God would have sent an Angel
to instruct them, it suffices that he is the witness of mine actions between
you, and me, he knows and sees all things; he whom God guides, is well
guided, and such as God shall cause to err, shall find none to put them into
the right way; he will assemble all of them at the day of Judgment, they shall
be infamous, deaf, mute, and blind, and condemned to the flames of hell,
because they are wicked, and have said through derision, that they are bones,
and flesh, and that they shall rise again as new creatures; see they not that
God has created heaven, and earth? that he can create yet more, and has
established a destiny indubitable, and infallible? The unbelievers are
exceedingly too blame: Say unto them, should you possess all the treasures of
the world, yet would ye fear to make expense for the service of God; man is
too avaricious; we gave to Moses nine marks of our Omnipotency, known to the
children of Israel; Pharaoh told him that he was a Magician; His hand, his
staff, the deluge, grasshoppers, lice, frogs, blood, fear, and famine. See
Bedaoi.
assuredly, said Moses, these signs and miracles that thou see, proceed from
God, Lord of heaven and earth; I believe, Oh Pharaoh! that thou forsakest the
Truth: Then would Pharaoh have driven him out of Egypt, but we drowned all
those that were with him, and commanded the children of Israel to inhabit the
land; we will assemble them at the end of the world, to reward them after their
works: We have indeed sent thee the Alcoran from heaven, to proclaim the joys
of Paradise, and to preach the torments of hell; we have sent it, to the end
thou may teach it to the people; we have sent it clear, and intelligible,
that it may be understood, according to occurences. Say unto them, believe, or
b^l^eve it not when, those that have knowledge in the written Law heard it
read, they prostrated themselves on the ground with humility, and said, praised
be God, what he promises, is infallible, and incontinently is his command
executed; they wept, prostrating the face toward the earth, and the reading of
the Alcoran augmented their devotion; Say unto them, implore God, call God
merciful, all his Attributes are most glorious. Make it not appear to the
world how often thou shall pray, neither how often thou shall read the Alcoran,
and fear not to pray to God, and to read (the Alcoran) follow in this the
middle path, and say, praised be God, he has no Son, he has no companion,
neither protector to preserve him from contempt, his greatness is perfect and
complete.

CHAP. XVIII. The Chapter of the Cave, containing an hundred and ten Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to God, who has sent
the Alcoran to his servant. There is no contradiction in this Book; it teaches
the right way; it preaches to the wicked, that they shall suffer great
torments, and proclaims to the righteous, that they shall enjoy an eternal
felicity; it preaches the torments of Hell, principally to such as affirm,
That God has a Son; they are ignorant, like to their predecessors; they are
arrogant in their discourse, and utter nothing but blaspemies: Will thou
destroy thy self in following their footsteps? If they believe not in the
Alcoran, they shall one day have sorrow, and shall repent it. We adorned the
Earth, with whatsoever is upon it, for the advantage of men. One part thereof
is happy and plentiful; and the other unfruitful, and desert. Do ye not
believe that the sleepers that entered the Cave, and the Paper wherein their
names were written, be our miracles? when those men entered the Cave, they said,
Lord, give us thy mercy, and guide us into the right way: Then did we cause
them to sleep for the space of some years, and awaked them, having continued
some time in that Cave, to make it appear which of the two Religions was the
most just. I will relate to thee their History with truth; they were young men,
who had the fear of their Lord before their eyes; we strengthened them, and
increased their faith; when they were with the Infidels, they said, Our God is
Lord of Heaven and Earth, we will never worship but one God, otherwise we shall
separate our selves from the truth: This people have adored Idols without
reason; who is more unjust then he, who blasphemeth against God? When they
deserted the Infidels, they worshipped one God alone. Enter into the Cave, God
shall make his mercy toward you to appear, and shall guide you through a path,
smooth and pleasant. When the Sun arose, he cast his rays on the right side of
their Cave, and on the left, at his going down; they in the mean time were in
the most spacious place of this Cave. This is one of Gods miracles; he whom he
guides, is well guided; and whom he misleadeth, shall find none to give him
succor, or to guide him. Believe ye that they should be awake? Assuredly they
slept and turned themselves, sometimes to one side, sometimes to another:
Consider how their Dog extended his feet before that old habitation of stone;
if any one had entered toward them, he would have caused them to fly, and had
affrighted them. In the end we awaked them, and they mutually enquired of each
other in what place they were, and how long they had there continued; one of
them replied, That they had been there a day or two; then they all said, God
knows the time that we have abode here, send one of us to the City with money
to buy bread and meat; let him not be fearful, neither make himself known to
any; if we be known, they will murder, or constrain us to follow their
Religion, in which we shall be eternally miserable. Thus did we stir up the
people against them, to the end they might know that thy Lord is true; when he
said, He will cause the dead to arise again, the Resurrection is indubitable;
nevertheless unbelievers dispute among them, concerning the History of the
Sleepers, and say, That they built a secret place to retire themselves, God
knows the Truth. The True-believers believe that they made no building; the
Infidels say they were five, and that their dog was the sixth, they speak by
opinion; but the True-believers affirm them to be seven, and their dog to be
the eighth. Say unto them, My Lord knows how many they were; few persons
except God, know their number: Doubt no more the History of the Slee^ers, the
matter is averred and known; dispute no more with the Jews, and say not, I will
do this to morrow, without saying, If it please God. Call God to mind, after
thou have forgot him, and say, The Lord shall guide me, and teach me the
History of the Sleepers, See Gelaldin.
who remained in the Cave three hundred years; there be who affirm they
continued there nine hundred years. Say unto them, God knows the time of
their abode there, he knows whatsoever is in Heaven, and Earth, he
understands and sees all things, he alone disposes every thing, and has no
companion; Preach what thy Lord has inspired into thee, his word admits of
no alteration, there is no safer refuge then in him; dwell with those that
invoke him morning and evening, and desire to see his face; depart not from
their company, if thou desire to have content of life in this world; obey not
those whose heart we have hardened, and are unmindfull of us; follow not their
impiety, whatsoever they do, is but offense and sin. Say unto them, the truth
proceeds from your Lord; who shall desire [it] shall be True-believers, and
who shall not desire [it] shall be an Infidel, we have prepared Hell to
chastise the impious, and prisons wherein to detain them. They shall implore
succors against the melting pit, into which they shall be plunged, as into
waters, it shall roast their faces, and shall be their drink; I will not
frustrate of reward them that shall have done well, they shall enjoy the
delights of the gardens of Eden, wherein flow many rivers, they shall have
bracelets of ^ine Gold, they shall be clothed with green, with Scarlet, and
shining colors, and shall sit on thrones, with an eternal felicity. Declare
to them this parable; there were two men, I gave to the one of them gardens,
where^n was store of fruits, he in contempt told his companion, that he was
more wealthy and powerful then he, and entered into his gardens, being an
Infidel, and an Idolater, and said, I do not think these shall ever have an
end, they shall endure a long time without withering: His companion said to
him; If thou do not ackowledge this to proceed from God, and if thou be
ungrateful toward him that created thee of dust, and made thee a man, thou
shall soon find thy gardens ruined; this comes from God my Lord, who has no
companion; all strength, and truth proceeds from his divine Magesty; If I
have less of substance then thou, God can give me fruits more fair then those
of thy gardens, or send thunder that shall destroy them, he shall fill them
with water of rain, that shall encompasse them, and hinder thee to approach
[them.] In the morning this Infidel found his gardens destroyed to the very
roots, he was extremely perplexed, by reason of the expense he had made to
plant them eavenly; and he said, would to God I had not adored Idols: He shall
find none that is able to protect him at the day of Judgment, but God, all
protection, and grace issues from his divine bounty, and the end of the
righteous shall be happy. Speak unto them this parable, the life of the world
is like unto rain fallen from Heaven, that refreshed and revived the herbs of
the Earth, and in the morning were dry as chaste, carried away by the wind;
God is omnipotent: Riches and children are the ornaments of this life, but good
works are eternal, they are acceptable to God, and give us hope of his grace.
Be thou mindful of the day when the mountains shall walk, and thou shall see
the Earth to be plain; that day we assemble the good and the wicked, and will
not fail of my word to any person; that day shall the Infidels beseech the
Lord to save them, he shall say unto them, you came unto us naked, as when we
at first created you, and ye believed on Earth, that there was no resurrection;
Then shall he give to every one the Book, wherein shall be written the account
of their sins; Thou shall see the wicked trembling with fear, saying, behold
here our destruction! What is there in this Book? It contains their venial
and mortal sins, and detecteth their offenses, they shall find the number of
their crimes before their eyes: Thy Lord is unjust to none; Remember thou that
we commanded the Angels to prostrate themselves before Adam, and that they
humbled themselves, except the Devil, who was in the number of Angels, he
disobeyed his Lord; nevertheless Adam and his posterity have obeyed him,
although he is their open enemy, and particularly of the Infidels. Consider ye
not that God created Heaven and Earth, that he made you, and has no need to be
aided of you? Be thou mindful of the day, when it shall be said to Idolaters,
call upon your Idols that ye have worshipped, for remission of your sins;
they shall implore them, but none shall hear their prayers, we have ruined
them; the wicked shall behold the fire, into which they shall fall, and find
none to save them. We taught men in the Alcoran, many parables, yet do the
wicked abound in questions and dispute too much; What hinders men to believe,
since there is come to them a guide, to conduct them into the right way? If
they beg not pardon of God, what happened to their predecessors, and at Beder,
shall befall them, they shall be visibly punished; I send Prophets only to
anounce the joys of Paradise, and to preach the torments of Hell; the
unbelievers dispute vainly, to obscure the truth, they deride my Commandments,
and the fire of Hell; who is more unjust then he who knows the Commandments
of his Lord, and disobeyeth him, and forgets his past sins? We have
hardened their hearts, they shall not understand the Scripture; we have stopped
their ears, they shall hear nothing; if thou call them to the right way,
they shall not follow thee, thy Lord is gracious and merciful; should he
chastise them after their demerits, he should forthwith destroy them, he
tarrieth until the time that he has promised to punish them, and they shall
find none of power to protect them. We have destroyed Cities, when their
Inhabitants have offended, and we prefixed the day of their ruin. Remember
thou that Moses said to his servant, I will travel incessantly, until I see a
place where two seas meet, although I travel an Age. When he came to that
place, he and his servant forgot their fish, he had taken his way through the
Sea: Having continued their voyage some time, Moses was an hungry, and demanded
somewhat to eat of his servant, who said to him, Saw thou what happened at the
Rock* I have forgotten our fish, the Devil made me to forget it, he
miraculously took his way through the Sea; that Rock is the place which we
seek: they both returned on their stops, discoursing together, until they came
to that Rock? where they found one of our servants, on whom we had conferred
our graces, and inspired knowledge; Moses said unto him, permit me to follow
thee, that thou may teach me knowledge; and instruct me; He replied, thou will not be able to abide patiently with me; how will thou patiently endure to
hear a thing which none in the world eve^ knew? Moses said, thou shall find me
exceeding patient, and I will not disobey thee; He answered, if thou follow me,
enquire nothing of me, and hear only what I shall say to thee. They went
together, and they being in a boat, he brake a planck; Moses said to him, thou
have broken this vessel, to drown us, it is a strange thing; He answered, Did
not I tell thee, that thou will not be able patiently to abide with me? Moses
replied, excuse me, and afflict me not, I had forgotten what thou did enjoyne
me; They went on together until they met with a child, whom he slew; Moses
said to him, thou have slain an innocent, that has not slain any one; thou
have done a thing without reason, and that ought not to be approved: He
answered, did I not say, thou will not be able patiently to abide with me?
Moses said to him, excuse me this time also, if I demand ought else of thee,
abandon me. They coninued their way unto a Village, where the Inhabitants
refused them bread; at that time they found a wall ruined, which he raised
again; Moses said unto him, thou should have been paid for repairing this
wall, if thou would: He answered, now behold the place of our separation,
nevertheless I will explain to thee what thou went impatient to learn. That
boat belongs to two poor men, who labor on the sea to gain their
subsistence, I would have pierced it, to preserve it to those poor men, because
there was an Infidel Prince, who by force seized on the good vessels for his
service. That infant which I flew was an Idolater, the son of a true believer,
a righteous man; we feared he might cause his father to sin, and seduce him
into his error, and infidelity; the Lord through his goodness would have him to
be destroyed, to deliver his father from his malice. The wall appertains to
two infant Orphans of this City, there is under it a treasure that belongs to
them, their father was a righteous man, God through his goodness wills: that
the treasure be preserved for them, until they attain to years of discretion;
he likewise willed me to do what I have done: behold the exposition of what
thou were impatient to learn. If any one enquire of thee concerning Alexander
the great, relate to them his History: we gave him on earth what he desired, he
went as far as the West, where he found a fountain guarded by a man, who said
to him, O Alexander! chastise men through the murder of their persons,
bondage, and ransom; he answered, I will put to death unbelievers in this
world, and the Lord shall punish them in hell, and the righteous shall enjoy
the glory of Paradise; I will tell the wicked, that God has given us what we
have desired. After this, he continued his way until he came to a place, where
the Sun rises; he found that it rises in a country, where they have nothing
to shelter them from its heat, the thing is so: we taught Alexander how to
shelter himself; he followed his way, until he arrived between two mountains,
inhabited of a Nation that spoke a Language, which he could hardly understand;
they said to him, O Alexander! Jagog, and Magog defile the earth, can thou
put between them and us an obstacle, to hinder that they may not come to us?
God, said Alexander, has not given me means to do it; but assist me with your
power, I will put between them and you a strong separation; give me iron that
can cut stones, that I may build betwixt the two mountains, and that I may
fortify the way that devideth them; blow when the iron strikes the stones, to
^indle fire, and pour on m^lten brass to join the stones and iron together; if
they come, they cannot pierce through the mountains, neither find a way to come
to you, this is a favor which God conferreth on you, his promises are
infallible; when the hour arriveth, he is true in what he promises; we will
permit them to mix each with other; we will assemble all of them when the
Trumpet shall sound; then will we open Hell to the wicked, and to such as would
neither see, nor hear the Alcoran; Do they imagine them that worship me to be
their gods? we have prepared hell to punish them. Say unto them, shall I relate
unto thee what shall befall the damned, their works shall be unprofitable in
this world, although they think to do well; good works are unprofitable to them
that contemn the Commandments of their Lord, and believe not in the
Resurrection, they shall not want balance at the day of Judgment; hell shall
be their habitation, because they deride our Commandments, and our Apostles,
and Prophets; The righteous shall enjoy eternally the delight of Paradise
without discontinuation. If the sea were ink, to write the wondrous works of
my Lord, it will sooner have an end, then his miracles: Say unto the Infidels,
I am a man like you, God has taught me that there is but one God; he that
believes in the Resurrection, studieth to do good works; worship but one God,
who is without a companion.

CHAP. XIX. The Chapter of Mary, containing fourscore and eighteen Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: God is the rewarder, conductor, (of
the righteous) liberal, wise, true: Zachery, the servant of thy Lord remembered
his grace, when he in secret prayed to his Lord, and said, Lord, my bones are
become feeble, and mine head is white with old age; Lord, I was never rejected
in my prayers, hear my petition, give me a son to succeed me, that may be mine
heir, heir of the lineage of Jacob, and be pleasing to thee. O Zachary! I
declare unto thee, that thou shall have a son, named John, no man has yet been
called by that name; he said, Lord, how shall I have a son, my wife is barren,
and I am too old? It was answered him, the thing shall be as I have said unto
thee, it is easy to thy Lord; who created thee; he said, Lord give me some
sign of the conception of my wife; he said to him, thou shall not speak for
three nights. Then went he out of his Oratory, and made signs to the people,
to make their prayers evening and morning. Oh John! See Kitab el tenoir.
learn the Scripture with affection; We from his infancy gave him knowledge,
clemency, charity, piety, affection toward his father and mother, and not
violence and disobedience. We blessed the day of his nativity, the day that he
shall dye, and the day that he shall rise again. Remember thou what is written
of Mary, she retired toward the East, into a place far remote from her
kindred, and took a veil to cover her, we sent her our Spirit in form of a
man; she was afraid, and said, God will preserve me from thee, if thou have his
fear before thine eyes; he said, oh Mary! I am the Messenger of God thy Lord,
who shall give thee a Son, active, and prudent: She answered, how shall I
have a son without the touch of man? I desire not to be unchaste; he said,
The thing shall be as I have told thee, it is facile to thy Lord; thy son
shall be a token of the omnipotency of God, and of his special grace toward
such as shall believe in his divine Majesty; She became with child, and retired
some time, into a place remote from people, where she sustained the colors of
Childbirth, at the foot of a Date-tree, and said, why am I not dead? wherefore
am I not in the number of persons forgotten? The Angel said to her, afflict
not thy self; God has placed a brook under thee, shake the foot of this
Palm, and the Dates shall fall, gather them up, eat and drink, and wash thine
eyes, say unto them that thou shall meet, that thou fastest, and have made a
vow not to speak to any one, until thy fast be accomplished. Her parents met
her while she bare her Infant, and said unto her, oh Mary! behold a strange
thing; oh sister of A^ron! thy father did not command thee to do evil,
neither was thy mother unchaste; She made signs to her infant to answer them;
they said, how shall the infant in the Cradle speak? Then her infant spoke, and
said, I am the servant of God, he has taught me the Scripture, has made me a
Prophet, blessed me in all places, and commanded me to pray unto him; hoe has
recommended to me purity through the whole course of my life, and to honor my
father and mother; he has not made me either violent or malicious, praised
shall be the day of my birth, the day that I shall dye, and the day of my
resurrection. Thus spoke Jesus, the son of M^^y, with truth, of which ye
doubt: God approves not the discourse of them that say he has a son;
praised be God, when he wills any thing, he says, be thou, and it is; he is
mine and your Lord, worship him, this is the right way; there be persons, who
in this regard have been of different opinion, but misery is upon the
incrudulous, they shall be miserable at the day of Judgment. The Infidels are
manifestly erroneous from the right way; If thou preach to them the torments of
Hell and their ignorance, they will not hear thee. We are Lords of whatsoever
is on Earth, and dispose of every thing at our pleasure, they shall be one day
assembled before us to be judged. Remember thou what is written of Abraham, he
was a righteous man, and a Prophet, he said to his Father, adore not what
neither sees; nor understands any thing, and that cannot be profitable; I
know what ye know not, follow me, and I will conduct you into the right way;
worship not the Devil, he is disobedient unto God; otherwise I fear that God
may chastise you, and you may be in the number of the damned. He answered, oh
Abraham! do thou abhor my Gods? unless thou change thy discourse, I will
stone thee, depart from me for a long time; he said, May God inspire you, I
will pray for you, he is exceeding good, and will hear my prayers; Whom will ye
adore, when I shall be gone from you? Worship God my Lord, and your prayers
shall be heard; he departed from them, and worshipped one God: We gave him two
sons, Iasaac, and Jacob, both Prophets, we conferred our grace upon him, with
an eloquent and true tongue. Remember thou what is written of Moses he was a
righteous man, our Prophet and Messenger; we called him on the right side of
the Mount Sinai, drew him near unto us, and taught him our secrets; We through
special g^^^ gave him a brother, named Aaron Remember thou what is written of
Ismael, he exactly observed what he promised, was a Prophet, and an Apostle of
the Lord, preached purity, and recommended to men to make their prayers often,
and was pleasing to his Lord. Remember thou what is written of Enoch, he was a
just man, and a Prophet, and we took him up to an exceeding high place. God
gave his grace to these men, among the Prophets of the lineage of Adam, among
them whom we caused to embarke with Noah, among those of the lineage of
Abraham, and Israel, and among those that we assembled and guided into the
right way. When the miracles of the merciful were related to them, they fell
prostrate, and adored him with tears in their eyes; their posterity forsook
their footsteps, abandoned the Law, and followed their own appetites; but they
shall be precipitated into Hell, except such as shall be converted, and do good
works, they shall enter into Paradise, and no injustice shall be done to them,
they shall enter into the garden of Eden; what the merciful [God] does
promise, is infallible; they shall hear nothing spoken in Paradise that shall
displease them, they shall hear the salutation of Angels, and morning and
evening shall have what they desire; such is Paradise, which God gives to his
creatures that have his fear before their eyes. I Gelaldin says, ^ that
Mahomet complains to the Angel Gabriel for having been so long absent from
him.
descend not from Heaven* but by the permission of the Lord, he is master of
our actions in Heaven and Earth, and of whatsoever is between them, he has not
forgot thee, worship him, and persevere in thy adoration, know thou any
person that is named, like him? Man says, what, shall I dye and rise again? He
considers not that God has created him of nothing; I will one day assemble
the Infidels, and Devils, I will cause them to appear at the gate of Hell upon
their knees, and will cast upon them all manner of misery, because they have
increased their impiety toward their Lord. I know such as deserve to burn in
Hell, they shall be thrown thither headlong, this is a most just sentence
pronounced by the Lord. I will save the righteous, and forbid^^^ fidels to fall
on their knees before Idols: when the unbelievers, and many of the faithful
heard my Commandments preached, they said among themselves, that they were in
a better way then their neighbor; how many have we destroyed before them, in
past Ages, more rich then they, and hypocrites like unto them? Say unto them,
God prolongeth the l^fe of the erroneous, that they may know their errors, and
learn the knowledge of the pains prepared for them, they shall understand who
shall be the most miserable; and who shall have been most weak in their faith,
and least affectionate to the service of his divine Majesty; God shall increase
their faith, who shall follow the right way; and such as be obedient to him,
shall enjoy his grace. Have thou considered the action of the wicked? They
demand, if they shall have riches and children after their Resurrection? Would
you know what shall be? would you capitulate with the merciful? I will not do
it; I will write all that they say, and will add to their miseries; I will
give to them in this world, what they require, and they shall rise again naked
(without treasure, and children. See Gelaldin.
) They adored Idols, to have their protection. Certainly they erred in that
adoration; they shall renounce them, and be their enemies at the day of
Judgment. See thou not, how we have sent the Devils against unbeliev^rs, to
seduce them? Be not impatient to to see them punished, they shall be judged at
the day appointed. Be thou mindful of the day, when I shall assemble all the
righteous in the presence of God, and pr^cipitate all the wicked into Hell;
their prayers shall not be heard, except such as have accomplished their
promises to the merciful. They have said, Do ye believe that God has a Son?
You utter a strange thing; it wants not much, but that Heaven and Earth open
themselves, and that the Mountains fall, with their utter destruction. They
call God, God the Son; God has not to do with a Son; whatsoever is in Heaven
and Earth, adore him; he knows the account and number of all things of the
world: Men shall appear before him at the day of Judgment, and the
True-believers that shall do good works, shall be beloved of his divine
Majesty. We have sent thee the Alcoran, written in thine own Language, that
thou may proclaim the delights of Paradise, to them that fear me, and preach
the torments of Hell to such as dispute with obstinacy against the Faith. How
many of the wicked have we destroyed in past ages? Have thou heard speak of
them? Have thou heard mention of their memory?

CHAP. XX. The Chapter of Beatitude, and of Hell, containing on hundred and
thi^ty Verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, the Mahometans have entitled this Chapter Tthe, which is two letters
of the Arabique Alphabet, ^o wit, Tt and He; where in this place, Tt
signifies* Thouba, that is to say, Beatitude; and H^ Hao^h, that is to say,
Hell. See the gloss, and interpretation of Gelaldin, and Bedao^; they have
entitled this Chapter of Beatitude, and of Hell.

IN the name of God gracious and merciful. We have not given thee the Alcoran
to torment thee, but to instruct therein the righteous. It was sent thee by
him, that created the Heavens and the Earth; the merciful sits on his
Throne; whatsoever is in Heaven^ and Earth, whatsoever is between them, and
beneath the Earth, appertains to him. He knows thy thoughts, he
understands what thou keep secret, and what thou make manifest. God!
there is but one God, all the glorious names of the world are due unto him.
Know thou the History of Moses? When he beheld the fire, he said to his
family, Stay ye here, I see a great fire, I will bring to you a spark, and you
shall find in it the right way. When he approached, it was said unto him, O
Moses! I am thy Lord, put off thy shoes, thou art in the holy Valley of Toy, I
have elected thee among my people, hear my word, and receive mine inspirations;
I am God, there is none other God but I, worship me alone, and make thy prayers
as it is ordained; The hour unknown to the world approaches, wherein I will
recompense and chastise every one after his works: Take heed lest the wicked
seduce thee from the right way; if thou follow their appetite, thou shall be
destroyed; Is it not what thou have sworn to me? he answered, Lord, I will
apply my self unto thee, and will lean upon my staff; I will beat the fruits
of the Trees to make them fall upon my flocks; I have yet another manner to
nourish my sheep with this staff; I will make use of it to defend, and preserve
them from mischief; God said unto him, O Moses! cast that staff to the ground,
behold a Serpent, it creeps, take it, and be not afraid, I will cause it to
return to its former condition; draw back thine hand, and put it under thy arm
it shall become white and shining, without harm, and pain, it shall be a most
certain sign of my Unity, I will give thee to see the miracles of my
Omnipotency; go to Pharaoh, he is in an exceeding great error, and seduced
from the right way: Moses said, Lord, rejoice my heart, and facilitate my
commission, unloose the knot of my tongue, that they may understand my speech:
give me Aaron to assist me in this business, that I may praise thee, and highly
exalt thy glory, thou only art our protector. God said, thy prayer is heard, we
were favorable to thee another time, when we inspired thy mother to put thee
into a coffer, and expose thee to the river of Nile; the water drove thee to
the shore, whence Pharaoh took thee; I caused thee to be beloved of him, to
have care of my people; when thy sister sought t^dings of what was become of
thee, she said, who will guide us where he is? who will conduct us to him that
keeps him? we sent thee back to thy mother, to stop her tears, and put an end
to her affection. Thou slewest a man, we have delivered thee from the hands of
thine enemies, and have approved thy perseverance; thou have continued some
time with the inhabitants of Madian; after this we sent thee to preach our
Commandments; I have made choice of thee, go with thy brother to Pharaoh, and
lie not in speaking of me, he is gone astray from the right way; speak to him
both of you, with mildness, peradventure he will hearken to you, and will fear
the fire of hell; they answered, Lord, we fear that he may torment, and rise
up against us; he said, fear nothing, I will be with you, hear what he will
say, consider his actions; address your selves to him, and say, we are the
Messengers of the Omnipotent God; dismiss with us the children of Israel, and
no more torment them, we are come hither by the Commandment of God, thy Lord.
Salvation is for such as follow the right way; damnation for them that
blaspheme against his Law, and depart from his Commandments; Pharaoh said unto
them, who is your God? Moses said, my God is he that created the world, and
guides men into the right way. Pharaoh said, what law did your predecessors
observe? what is become of them? Moses answered, God knows in what condition
they are; nothing is concealed from God, he extended the earth, and established
the ways; he causes rain to descend from heaven, and makes to spring forth
the plants, herbs, and fruits which ye eat, and that nourish your flocks. These
things are signs of his Omnipotency to them that understand them. We created
you of earth, and to earth will we make you to return, and will cause you to
come out of it once again; we showed miracles to Pharaoh, but he was
incredulous, contemned them, and said, O Moses! Are thou come to drive us out
of our Dominions with thy Magic? I will show thee [Magick] like to thine; let
us meet at a place, and day prefixed between the and me, to come together;
Moses said unto him, let us make choice of the day of your feast; if it seem
good to you, the people may assemble at the Sun rising: After this discourse,
Pharaoh withdrew, recollected all his subtilties, and at the day and hour
prefixed, came with his people to the place appointed, where Moses was, who
said unto them, misery is upon you, blaspheme not against God, he will punish
you, and destroy them that blaspheme against him; The people of Pharaoh
differed in opinion what they should do, kept their design secret, and said to
Pharaoh, these two men are Magicians, they would chase you from your Country,
through their Magic, and seduce your subjects from your Religion; recollect
your subtilties and power, and choose persons capable to dispute against them,
this day shall be happy to him that shall be victorious. They said to Moses,
will thou first cast thy staff on the ground, or shall we ours? Their cords
and staves arose against Moses through their Magic, and crawled: Moses spoke
low, between his teeth; we said unto him, fear nothing, thou shall be
victorious, cast thy staff in thy right hand on the ground, it shall devour
what they have done, it is but witchcraft and magic that produces neither
Profit nor Content. Then fell the Magicians of Pharaoh prostrate on the ground,
and said, We believe in the God of Aaron and Moses; Pharaoh said unto them,
believe ye in him without my permission? Moses is your master, I will cut off
your right feet, and your left hands; or your left feet, and your right hands,
and cause you to be hanged on Palm trees, that ye may know who is the more
severe in his chastisements, I, or the God of Moses; They said, the miracles
that thou have seen, have they not touched thee? He that created us, does
things which are not in thy power to perform; thy power extends only in this
world, we believe in God our Lord, who will pardon our sins; thou art the
cause that he abhors us with our magic, he is more powerful then thou,
and eternal; Hell is prepared for Infidels, they shall find repose neither in
their life nor death, and the righteous that shall do good works, shall
eternally enjoy the pleasures of the gardens of Eden, wherein slow many
delicious rivers, such is the reward of them that are purged from their sins.
We said unto Moses, go out by night with my people, and make them a dry path
through the Sea, fear not that thine enemies may overtake thee, neither be
afraid of being drowned, Paraoh shall follow them with his troops; I will
overwhelm in the sea, and will mislead him with his people, he shall not follow
the right way. O children of Israel! we delivered you from your enemies, and
conducted you toward the mountains of Sinai: we caused Manna and Quails to
descend upon you, and said, eat ye of the good things that we have given you,
and be not ungrateful, otherwise my wrath shall fall upon you; he upon whom
mine indignation shall fall, shall be thrown headlong into the fire of hell; I
will be merciful to such as shall convert, do good works, and follow the right
way. O Moses! who pressed thee to absent thy self from thy people? He answered,
behold he that follows my steps, I am come up to receive thy Commandments.
We after thy departure estranged thy people from thee, and Samery seduced them
from the right way; he returned upon his steps to his people, in great
displeasure, and said, O ye people! did not God promise to you all manner of
content? he protracted the effect of his promises, because of your sins, will
you that his wrath fall upon you? wherefore have ye transgressed what ye
promised to me? They said, we have not transgressed our promises of our own
accord; we took the most weighty ornaments of the people, and cast them into
the fire, Samery himself did cast them in; he made the body of a bellowing
Calfe, and said, with his followers, behold there your God, the God of Moses
whom he has forgotten; Saw they not that this Calf spoke not to them, and that
it had not power to do good or evil? Aaron had said unto them, before the
coming of Moses; O ye people! you have been seduced by this Calfe; the
merciful is your God, and your Lord, follow and obey me: They said, shall we
abide here until Moses return? Moses at his return said unto Aaron what
hindered thee to follow me, when thou saw them to turn aside from the Law of
God? wherefore have thou disobeyed me? O son of my mother! (said Aaron) drag me
not by the beard, and hair, I feared to displease thee, if I forsook the
children of Israel, and disobey thy Commandments; Moses said unto Samery, what
was thy design? he answered, I saw what this people sees not, I took an
handful of the earth of the footsteps of the Messenger of God, and made the
Figure of a Calfe, the fairest that I could; Moses said unto him, go, get thee
from among us, thou shall fly the presence of men all the days of thy life;
thou shall say unto them, come not nigh me, touch me not, the time of thy
punishment is appointed, thou shall not escape it, behold thy false god, behold
the Calfe which thou have adored, I will cause it to burn, and will cast the
ashes thereof into the sea; your God is one God, and there is none other God,
but the God that knows all things: Thus do I relate to thee things past; we
have sent thee the Alcoran, such as shall abjure it, shall bear their burden
at the day of Judgment, and be eternally tormented; I will one day require an
account of their burden, and will assemble them with all their subtilities;
when the Trumpet shall sound, they shall demand of each other, how long they
have continued in the world? they shall say, that they have remained there but
ten days and ten nights, I know all that they will say; the most prudent among
them shall say, that they have been but one day. They shall enquire of thee
concerning the Mountains; Say unto them, God shall tear them up, and level
them with the Earth, thou shall see them levelled and beaten down: then shall
men without retardment follow him that shall summon them to universal
Judgment, they shall humble themselves before God, thou shall that day hear
low and humble voices, that day shall prayers be ineffectuall, except of them
that shall be pleasing to God, whom he will permit to speak. He knows
whatsoever men do in this world, and what must befall them in the other, and
they know it not, they shall humble themselves, and hang down the head before
the living and eternal Lord, all Infidels shall be damned, and the righteous
of True-believers that have done good works, shall not fear injustice. We have
sent the Alcoran in the Arabique tongue, it teaches men our Commandments,
peradventure they will fear impiety; it teaches them what they ought to know;
Exalt the glory of God, King of the world, he is truth it self; press not thy
self to read the Alcoran, until thou have well understood it. Say, Lord
increase my knowledge; We heretofore prohibited Adam to eat of the forbidden
fruit, he was unmindfull of our Commandment, I found in him no perseverance.
Remember thou that we commanded the Angels to humble themselves before him,
they humbled themselves, except the Devil, who refused to do it. Remember
that we said, Adam, the Devil is thine enemy, and the enemy of thy wife, he
will endeavor to make you miserable, to cause you both to go out of Paradise,
where thou suffer neither hunger nor thirst, nor cold, nor heat; The Devil
tempted them, and said, oh Adam! I will conduct thee to the tree of eternity, a
treasure that shall never perish, they did both eat of the fruit of that tree,
then knew they their filthiness, and took the leaves of trees to cover their
nakedness; Adam disobeyed his Lord, and became miserable, nevertheless he
heard, and pardoned him, and showed him the right way; he said, descend from
Paradise, ye enemies of each other, I will hereafter send you a guide, he that
shall follow him, shall not err, and shall be blessed; He that shall go
astray, and will not believe in me, shall be miserable in the world, and blind
at the day of Judgment; that day shall he say, Lord, wherefore have thou made
me blind* I had good sight when I was in the world: I did this day forget thee,
as thou did forget my Commandments: thus do I entreat Infidels. The
torments of the other world are more grievous then those of the Earth, and of
longer continuance; do not unbelievers tremble, when they consider how many
men upon Earth we have destroyed in past Ages? Their misery shall serve for
example to them that are wise; Had not thy Lord said, that he will defer the
punishment of the wicked until the time appointed, he had already destroyed
them. Be patient, and endure their discourse, praise thy Lord before the Sun
arise, before it sets, an hour before night, and at the end of day thou
shall do a thing acceptable to him: The life of the world is sweet to tempt
you, but the riches of thy Lord are better, and eternal. Command the people to
make their prayers at the time appointed, and be not impatient toward them, I
require no riches of thee, I will enrich thee, and in the end Paradise shall be
for the righteous. The unbelievers have said, if Mahomet shows not some racle
from God, and knows not the exposition of the books of our predecessors, we
will not believe in him; We before his coming destroyed many wicked persons,
who said, Lord, had thou sent us a Prophet, we had observed thy
Commandments, before we became infamous, and laden with ignominy; Say unto
them, every one expects his end, expect ye, and ye shall one day know them
that follow the right way, and have not erred.

CHAP. XXI. The Chapter of the Prophets, containing an hundred and twelve
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The day approaches, wherein the
people shall render an account of their actions, but they consider it not, and
depart from the Commandments of God; if they hear them, they laugh, they
understand them not, and keep secret their evil intention. Is not Mahomet a
man like to you? Will ye say that he is a Magician? you see the contrary; God
hears whatsoever is spoken, both in Heaven and Earth, and knows all things.
They say, certainly Mahomet has dreamed what he speaks, he has invented it,
and is a Poet, we will not believe him, unless he show some miracle, as did the
Prophets that were before him. We have laid waste many Cities, because their
inhabitants were incredulous; we sent before thee but men who were inspired of
us; Enquire of them, to whom heretofore was given the knowledge of the written
Law, if ye know it not; they were men that did eat and drink, and were mortal^;
we effected what we promised to them, we preserved them with such as believed,
and destroyed the incredulous; We have sent you a Book to instruct you, will ye
understand it? How many Infidel Cities have we made desolate? How many new
people have we established in their place? When they felt our punishment, they
fled; fly not, and return to what has delighted you, return into your houses,
peradventure ye will yet cover the riches of the Earth; They said, misery is
upon us, we are too blame; Thus did they talk, until they were destroyed. We
have not created Heaven and Earth, and whatsoever is between them, to sport
with; had it been our will that they should have scoffed on Earth, they should
scoff likewise in Heaven. On the contrary, I oppose the truth to falsehood, to
confound it, and in effect it does confound it. Misery shall be upon you,
because of your blasphemies; whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, is Gods; the
Angels are not ashamed to worship him, they praise him day and night, and exalt
his glory without blasphemy. The Infidels worship Gods made of Earth; Have
they power to create any thing? Were there in Heaven, and on Earth another God,
they would not accord; praised be God, Lord of the Universe; what the Infidels
relate, is untrue. He asks no counsel when he will do any thing, as do
men; will they worship any other God but him? Say unto them, produce your
arguments, behold what we have to speak unto you, behold our reasons, and those
of our predecessors; Certainly, the greatest part of them are ignorant of the
truth, and go astray. We inspired into all the Prophets which we sent, that
there was but one God that ought to be worshipped. They said, believe ye that
the Angels are the sons of God? Praised be God; on the contrary, they are his
creatures, he loves them, they speak not but after him, and obey what he
commands them, he knows all their actions past, and future, they pray for
no man but through his permission, and fear to displease him. Who among them
will say I am God, instead of God? he shall be cast headlong into the fire of
Hell; thus do I entreat unbelievers. Know they not that the Heavens and the
Earth were shut up? We opened them, and gave life to every thing, through the
rain which we made to descend; will they not believe in my unity? We created
the Mountains to hinder the Earth to move, we made therein ways large and
spacious for our Creatures, we covered it with the Heaven, and have exempted it
from falling, nevertheless they despise our Commandment. It is the Lord who
created day and night, the Moon and the Sun, all things praise and exalt him
in Heaven; we created no person to dwell for over on Earth; all men shall taste
of death, I will prove you with good and evil, and ye shall appear before me
to give account of your actions: The Infidels scoff at you, when they see you,
and say, behold them that deride our Gods! They obey not the Commandments of
God; he created man of dust, and shall show you the effects of his omnipotency,
be not impatient to see the punishment of the wicked, who say, when shall be
the day of judgment? did they know it, they would remove the fire from their
backs and visages; that day shall surprise them, it shall astonish them when
they think least of it, they cannot retard it, and shall be deprived of
protection. Certainly they scorned the Prophets that were sent before thee, but
they were punished after their demerits. Say unto them, who but the merciful
[God] preserves you day and night? nevertheless ye reject his Commandments;
Have they any other God but me, that is able to save them? Their Gods cannot
defend themselves: I will not protect them, yet will I enrich them, as I
enriched their fathers, and will prolong their life, to punish them on Earth;
Know they not that their estates diminish on all sides through thy Conquests?
Is it so, that they are victorious? Say unto them, I preach to you what God
has inspired into me, but the deaf hear not when they are exhorted; When
they are a little touched with the chastisements of God, they say, oh misery!
We are too blame, and are unjust; I will weigh their works at the day of
Judgment, that I may do injustice to no person, of the weight of a grain of
mustard seed, and will most exactly account. We gave to Moses and Aaron the
Book that distinguishes good from evil, and commanded them to preach our
Commandments to them that had our fear before their eyes. That Book is
blessed, and was sent from us; nevertheless unbelievers reject and condemn
it. We heretofore instructed Abraham in the right way, and knew that he was a
righteous man. Remember thou that he said to his father, and his people, what
Idols do ye adore? They said, we find that our Fathers adore^ them; he said
unto them, your fathers and you were exceedingly erroneous: they said, do
thou speak the truth, or do thou jest? He said, Certainly your Lord is the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, I swear to you that he created them; Having
convinced those Idola^er^, he said, by God, I will make Warn upon your Idol^,
he broke them with an hatchet in their absence, except the gr^atest Idol, on
which he hung his hatchet, and said, peradventure they will accuse him to have
broken the other: Seeing at their return their Idols broken, they said, who
has in this mannner handled our Gods? He is impious; we heard it is a young
man, named Abraham, who derideth them, bring him before the eyes of the people,
perhaps they shall find witnesses of his Action. They said unto him, oh
Abraham! it is thou that have so abused our Gods, he said on the contrary, it
is that great Idol; They enquired of each other if those Idols spoke, and if
they had motion; afterward they returned to themselves, and said to the
people, ye are too blame to adore those Idols; he threw them headlong against
the ground, and they said, oh Abram! thou well knew that they spoke not at
all; he answered, why therefore do ye worship what can neither benefit nor
hurt you? You defile your selves in adoring them instead of God, do ye not
know him? Then they said, burn Abraham, and let us defend our Gods, if ye are
righteous men: but we commanded the fire to lose its heat, to preserve Abraham;
They would have tormented him, and we destroyed them, we saved him, as we
preserved Lot, we conducted him into the Land of blessing, gave him Isaac, and
Jacob, and the Children of their Children, righteous men, and True-believers,
to instruct the people in the way of Salvation; we inspired them to do good
works, to pray at the time appointed, to pay Tithes, and to worship us; We
gave to Lot prudence and knowledge, and delivered him from the Inhabitants of
the City, who were the most vicious upon Earth, we were gracious to him,
because he was righteous. Remember Noah, and that he heretofore invoked us;
we heard his prayer, and delivered him from great danger, and all that were
with him in the Arc; we delivered him from the hand of the wicked, whom we
drowned. Remember David and Solomon, who rendered Justice in the field,
whereinto the flocks of the village entered by night without Shepherds; we are
witness of their Judgments, we instructed Solomon in Justice, we gave his
prudence and knowledge; the Mountains adored us with David, and with him the
Birds praised us; we were with them when they praised us. We taught you the
manner of sowing [seed] to preserve you from necessity; peradventure ye will be
thankful to me. We commanded the winds to obey Solomon, and know all that he
did. The devils obeyed him, they dived into the sea, to fis^i for Gems for him,
and traveled also in other matters; and we hindered them to act mischief
against men. Remember Job, who prayed to his Lord and said, I am in exceeding
great affliction; thou art the merciful of the merciful: we heard him, and
delivered him from his affliction; gave to him our grace, and to his family,
and to them that were with him, who had patience, and trusted in me. Remember
Ismael, Enoch, Delcafel is Ely.
Delcafel and Zachary, they persevered in well doing; we gave them our grace
because they were righteous. Remember Jonas, See the book composed by Abdel^a^y
who forsook his people in displeasure; he believed I could do nothing
against him; but he cried in the dark, and said, There is no God besides thee,
praised be thy name; I am too blame for having offended thee: We heard him, and
delivered him from his disaster. Thus do I protect true-beleivers, when they
invoke me. Remember Zachary, who made his prayer^ and said, Lord, I know there
is no better heir in the world then thy self; yet let me not die without issue:
We heard his request, gave him a son, named Jon, and rendered his wife
fruitful. All these Prophets went on with alacrity to do well, and invoked us
with humility, with desire to obtain our grace, and with fear of the torments
of hell. Remember Mary, whose womb I blessed; we inspired into her our Spirit,
and gave her a Son, a miracle in the world. Your law is on only law, and I am
one only God, worship me, and be not impious; ye all shall appear before me to
be judged, I will protect the true believers that shall have done good works,
and will write what they shall do for their reward. M^sery is upon the Cities
that we have ruined; their inhabitants shall not return into the world, until
the passage be opened to Jagog and Magog, and they come running from the
eminent places of the earth; then shall the day of Judgment approach; the
promised Truth shall not be far off, it shall trouble the sight of the wicked.
Who shall say O misery! We are miserable, we did not foresee this disaster; we
have been excedingly too blame for having offended God. It shall be said unto
them, ye worshipped instead of God, the firebrands of Hell, into which ye shall
be cast headlong: Had your Idols been Gods, as ye believed, they should not
have entered Hell; they, and those that have adored them, shall be eternally
damned; they shall groan, complain, and shall not be heard: Such as shall be in
paradise, shall be far remote from them: they shall not hear their howlings,
and shall enjoy eternally what they shall desire, the cries of the damned shall
not afflict them; the Angels shall meet them when they come out of their
graves, and shall say, Behold now the day that was foretold you in the world; a
day, wherein we will open the heavens, and the book of the account of all men,
as we promised to your predecessors. We exactly perform what we promise; we
have written in the Old Testament, and afterward in the Alcoran, That the
righteous shall inherit the Earth: This Book shall teach the way to Paradise to
them that shall worship me: We had not sent thee, but in favor of men; say
unto them God has always inspired into me, that your God is one God, will ye
not obey him? If they go astray, I have taught you how they must be entreated.
Say unto them, I know not whether the punishment denounced to you shall be
speedy, or tardy. God knows what is known, and unknown in the world, I know
not whether he will try you, or defer his punishment until the time appointed:
He is a most just judge, and most merciful, he is not such as ye speak him.

CHAP. XXII. The Chapter of Pilgrimage, containing seventy and seven Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye people! fear God. The
Earthquake that shall happen at the day of Judgment shall be wonderful; ye
shall that day see mothers forget their children, and every one shall bear his
own burden; ye shall see men drunk, not with Wine, but amazed and astonished at
the great j^dgments of God. There be, who dispute of the Deity with ignorance,
and follow the will of the Devil, voluntary and obstinate: It is written, he
shall seduce them that obey him, and shall conduct them into Hell. O ye people!
if ye doubt of the Resurrection, consider how we created you of the dust of the
Earth; with a little water sprinkled upon the dust, with congeaied blood, and a
little flesh entirely, and not entirely formed. I form in the Wombs of Women,
what seems good to me, at the time appointed. I cause you to come forth
children, then I give you life, and make you to arrive to the age of virility;
some die young, and others live to extremity of age, to the end they may learn
to live well. Consider the Earth, dry, dead, and barren; when we shall cause
rain to fall, it shall change the face, shall produce and nourish its fruits of
all sorts, ^air, and pleasing. Because God is truth it self, he raises again
the deed, and is Omnipotent. There is no doubt but the day of Judgment
approaches, and that God will cause the dead to rise again. There be men that
dispute of God without knowledge, without reason, without authority, and go
astray from the way of his Law; they shall be full of ignominy and shame in this
world, and shall feel in the other, the pains of Hell. God does no injustice to
his people. There be who adore him with scruple; if good befall them, they
persevere to adore him; if evil, they return to their impiety, and l^se the
riches of Earth, and the riches of Heaven: These tw^ losses are exce^ding great
they invok Idols instead of God; they invoke what can neither benefit, nor hurt
them; Such prayers are by-ways, far remote from the Commandments of God; they
worshi^ that which does rather mischief, nor advantage them. Certainly, God
shall make the True-believers, that do good works, to ^nter into Gardens,
wherein flow many Rivers; he does what seems good to him. He that is angry,
that God gives succor, and protection to Mahomet in this world, See KITA. BELL
tenior.
and in the other, let him tie a cord to a beam of his house, and hang
himself; he shall see if his choler will be allayed. God has sent the
Alcoran, as heretofore he sent the other Scriptures; it contains his
Commandments, clear and intel^igible; it guides into the right way whom it
pleases him: He at the day of Judgment shall judge the differences that are
between the faithful, and Infidels; between the Samaritans, the Christians,
and Idolaters; he is omniscient. See thou not that all that is in Heaven, and
on Earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Mountains, Trees, and Beasts, adore
him? Many worship him with zeal, but many likewise merit to be punished: None
shall esteem him, whom God shall despise, he does as seems good to him. These
two contrary parti^^ the Believers and the Infidels, have disputed of the
Deity; but the Infidels shall be encompassed with flames of Hell, they shall
have shirts of fire, boiling water shall flow in upon their heads; the fire
shall burn what is in their bellies, and shall roast their skin, they shall be
beaten with clubs of Iron; when they think to go out of this fire, they shall
enter further into it, and be eternally tormented. God shall cause the
True-believers, that have don good works, to go into Gardens, wherein flow many
Rivers; they shall be adorned with bracelets of Gold, and Pearls; they shall be
clothed with Silk, and enjoy eternal felic^ty, because they have professed his
Unity; and the Infidels shall suffer great torments, for that they have hindered
the people to embrace the Faith, and visit the Temple of Mecca, which God has
establis^ed to be therein adored of all the world: He that shall be solicited
to visit it, and shall enter it, with ^^^^gn to return to his impiety, shall be
severely punished. Remember, that we showed to Abraham the place to build the
Temple of Mecca; that we commanded him to adore me alone, and to purge my
Temple from Idols, for the satisfaction of them that should there make
processions. Men shall come thither to visit thee from all parts, on foot, and
on horseback; they shall receive profit, they shall there make there prayers
at the times appointed, and the days nominated; they shall thank the Lord for
his benefits toward them, and the riches which he has giv^n them; and shall
make likewise processions at the old Temple. He that shall reverence it, shall
do exceeding well, and shall be recompensed of his Lord. It is lawful for you
to eat of all clean Beasts, except of such as have been heretofore prohibited:
Depart from the pollution of Idols; beware of bearing false witness, and be
obedient to God. He that says, God has a Companion, is like to him that fell
headlong from Heaven, whom the Birds devoured, and the wind cast into a remote
place, full of miseries. He that shall reverence the signs of the power of
God, will not doubt of his Law, and shall be rewarded for his good works at the
time appointed. If he visit the old Temple of Mecca. We have given to all
Nations of the world a Law to offer their Sacrifices, and to return thanks to
their Lord, for having given them advantage above all sorts of Beasts. Your God
is one God, obey his Commandments, proclaim a great reward to them that are
obedient to him, to them that tremble ^ith fear, when they hear mention of his
name; that are patient in their adversity, that pray at the time appointed, and
dispense in alms some part of the wealth that we have given them. We have
created the female Camel for a sign of our unity, she shall be profitable to
you in this world. Remember to pronounce the name of God, when ye shall
sacrifice her, standing on her feet, when she shall fall dead on the ground,
eat of her flesh, if it like you, and give to eat to such as shall require it.
We have made her subject to you; The Pilgrims Sacrifice a Cammel at MECCA.
pera^venture ye will be thankful to me for this grace. God promoteth before
him, neither the flesh of this Beast, nor the blood, but only the good works
that ye perform. He has thus subjected it; That ye may exalt it, and give him
thanks for having guided you into the right way. Proclaim to the righteous,
That God will remove far from them the malice of the wicked; he abhors
Traitors, and the ungrateful: Declare to such as fight against Infidels, to
repair the injury they have don them; that God is sufficiently powerful to
protect them. When they were driven from their houses without reason; they
said, God is our Lord: Had not God stirred up the people against each other,
the Covents of the Religious, the Churches of the Christians, the Synagogues of
the Jews, and the Temples of the Believers, had been ruined, (through the
multitude of the wicked, See Gelaldin.
and their malice.) The name of God is exalted in the Temples of believers, and
therein is his Law defended and protected. God is most strong; he has all
power over his people. Those whom God has established on Earth, with victory
over their enemies, make their prayers in the manner ordained; pay Tithes, and
enjoin to do what is honest and civil; forbid to do what is prohibited of God,
who knows the end of all things. If the Infid^ls traduce thee, their
predecessors traduced Noah, And, Chiab, Abraham, and Lot, they also slandred
Mos^s: God for a time deferred their punishment, but in the end most severely
chastised them. How many Cities have we destroyed, because of their impiety? We
have overthrown, and made them desert, through the death of their Inhabitants.
Shall those of Mecca walk for ever upon Earth* with an hard heart, without
reflecting upon what has heretofore befalne the Infidels? Their eyes are not
blind, but their hearts are blind, and hardened: They will require thee to
cause the wicked to be speedily chastised; God will not go against what he has
promised: One day before thy Lord, is as a thousand years before men. How often
has the punishments of impi^us Cities been deferred, that in the end were
destr^yed? The whole world shall one day be assembled before me, to be
recompensed after their merits. Say unto them, O people! I preach unto you
publicly the torments of Hell, such as shall believe, and do good works, they
shall receive pardon of their sins, and a precious treasure; they that shall
endevor to make void the faith shall be damned. We sent our Prophet to read only
our Commandments to the People; the unbeleivers read many things that are not
in the Alcoran; but God has made vain what the Devil had there inserted, and
confirmed the precepts of his Law: What the Devil there inserted, serves for
sedition to them that are weak in their faith, and have an heart the Infidels
are in an exceeding great error, and are far from the Truth. Such as have the
knowledge of Scripture, know that the Alcoran is truth it self, which proceeds
from thy Lord: They believe in it, and humble their heart in reading it. God
guides into the right way such as believe in the truth: The Infidels shall be
in doubt, until they be surprised of the day of Judgment. That day shall they
be rigorously chastised, that day shall God command, and judge the good and the
bad; the righteous that shall have believed, and done good works, shall enter
into delicious Gardens; and the Infidells that shall have disobeyed his
Commandments, shall suffer exceeding great torments, See Gelaldin.
They that departed from Mecca, and went to Medina, to abandon the society of
unbeleivers, and were slain; or died of sickness, shall be rewarded of his
divine Majesty. God is the greatest benefactor in the world? he shall give them
to enter where they shall desire; he is omniscient, and most merciful. The
believers that shall take revenge of the injury that the unbeleivers have done
them, shall be protected of God; He is gracious and merciful toward his
people; he makes day to enter into night, and night into day; he hears the
Prayers of True beleivers, and sees whatsoever they do and will protect them,
because he is truth it self. Idols are but vanity; and God is most high, and
omnipotent. Do thou not consider that God sends the rain from Heaven, and
that the earth becomes green? He is benign to his people, and knows all
[things;] whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, is his; he has no need of his
people and ought to be exalted. See thou not that God has subjected to you
all the beasts that are upon the Earth? See thou not that the ship runs
upon the SEA, through his command, to transport you and your substance? See
thou not, that he hinders heaven to fall upon the earth? certainly he is
benign, and merciful; He it is that has given you life and death, he shall make
you to die, and shall raise you again, nevertheless man is ungrateful for his
favors. We have given a Law to all the Nations of the World, to guide them into
the right way; if they observe it they will not dispute against thee. Invoke
thy Lord, thou art in the right way; if they dispute against thee: Say unto
them, God knows all your actions, he shall judge your differences at the day of
judgment: knew thou not that God knows whatsoever is in heaven or in
earth? All is written, and this is most easy to his divine Maj. Idolaters
adore without reason, Idols that understand not whether they be gods or no,
that shall be without protection at the day of Judgment; when they preach to
men my commandments, they know by their countenance those that are impious,
and ungrateful for my graces; they would with wrath fall upon them that
instruct them. Say unto them, I declare unto you things more grievous: God has
prepared the fire of hell to chastise Infidels. O people! A parable is related
to you, hear it. All the Idols that ye adore cannot create a fly; when they
shall be assembled to do it, if the flies corrupt any thing that is offered to
them, they have not the power to drive them away, because of their impotency,
and the weakness of them that adore them: They praise not God in that manner
as is just and reasonable, he is most strong, and most powerful, he has
chosen messengers to bear and and execute his Commandments among Angels and
men, he hears whatsoever they say, beholds whatsoever they do, he knows
whatsoever they have don, and all things obey him. O ye that believe! honor and
worship your Lord, and do good, perhaps, ye shall be blessed; Fight for the
establishment of his Law with affection, he has chosen you to follow it, he
has not given you a Law heavy and troublesome. It is the Law of Abraham your
father, he has styled you the Resigned to God; before the coming of the
Alch^ran. The Prophet shall testify against you at the day of judgment, and ye
shall testify against the people, that the Prophet has preached to them the
right way; persevere in your prayers, pay tithes, and trust in God, he is your
Lord your Prophet and your protector.

CHAP. XXIII. The Chapter of True Believers, containing an hundred and eighteen
verses, written at Mecca.
I the Name of God, gracious and merifull. Certainly the True beleivers shall
be blessed, that make their prayers with humility; they abstain from reviling,
they pay tithes, they commit not whoredom, they touch not other women, then
their own, and their slaves, such as covet other, transgress the bounds of
reason; they that faithfully preserve what has been entrusted to them, they
that effect what they have promised, and that make their prayers at the time
appointed, shall be heirs of Paradise, where they shall dwell eternally. We
formed man of the dust of the earth, with mire blood congealed, with a little
flesh and bones, which we invested with skin; we another time created him, when
we breathed into him, the soul in the body, and blessed him, as one of our
fairest ornaments. O men! ye shall all dye, and shall rise again at the day of
judgment; we created above you seven heavens, See Gelaldin.
and have care of the conservation of al people that are beneath, we send water
from heaven to satisfy your necessities; we make it to fall upon the earth, and
have power to cause to pass away and deprive you [of it.] We have created, and
made gardens to bring forth Date trees, Grapes and many other fruits, by which
ye live; we created trees in the mountain of Sinai, that produce oil, and Or
dying Colors.
tincture; ye receive great advantage by beasts, they sustain you with milk,
and afford you many other proffits, ye mount them, and ships also carry you
whither ye desire to go. We sent Noah who spoke to the people, and said,
worship one God alone, what other God will ye implore but him? Will ye not fear
to worship another? The chief among the people that were idolaters, said to
their adherents, this man is a man like your selves, he would appear, and be
esteemed more then you; if God would be adored alone, as he says, he would
cause an angel to descend, that should bring his Commandments; we have not
heard spoken to our Predecessors, what he says; he is a man possessed of the
Devil, tarry, and ye shall see what will become of him. Then Noah said, Lord,
protect me against them, and defend me from their blasphemies; we commanded him
to build an Ark, when our commandment was given to destroy the wicked, and when
the water of his caldron boiled, we commanded him to enter into the Ark, with
two beasts of every kind, and species; all men we destroyed, except them of
whom we have before spoken, (we said unto him) speak not to me for Infidels,
they shall be drowned, when thou shall have taken order for every thing that
must enter into the Ark, with thee, Say, praise be to God, who has delivered
us from the malice of the wicked, Lord, give us to descend in a blessed place,
thou art the best Pilot in the world. It was a sign of my omnipotency to prove
the people of Noah, we created after them another people, to whom we sent an
Apostle, to instruct them to worship one God; and he said, what God will ye
adore other then God? will ye not fear his wrath? Their Doctors that were
impious, who denied the Resurrection of the flesh, and on whom we had conferred
the wealth of the Earth, said, he is a man, he eats and and drinks like
you, if ye obey not a man like to your selves, shall ye be destroyed? does he
promise you to return into the world, after having been bones and dust? O
abuse! O abuse! ye are abused in what he promises, he is a man like other^, he
is a liar, we will not believe him. That apostle said, Lord, preserve me from
their blasphemies, they shall repeat suddenly of their impiety, then thunder
surprised them, and destroyed them, as they deserved, we made the land dry and
barren without fruit, and created other persons in the^^ place. Man cannot die
before his hour, and none can retard it; we sent our Apostles, and our Prophets
to instruct the peopl, but they were slain one after another, every Nation
traduced the Prophet that we sent to them, and we made them serve for examples
to posterity, and destroyed the wicked. We sent Moses and his brother Aaron to
Pharaoh, and his Doctors, with our miracles, and with most intelligible
reasons; they arose against the Faith, they tormented the children of Israel,
and said, shall we believe in a man like to our selves, of them that obey us?
They slandred both of them, and were in the number of the damned. We gave to
Moses the Book of the Law, peradventure it will guide the children of Israel
into the right way; we created Jesus, and Mary his mother, they are signs of
our Unity; we established them in an eminent place, where they stayed near a
fountain. O Apostles and Prophets! eat of the frurts of the earth, and do
good, I know whatsoever ye do, your Law is one law, and I alone am your Lord;
take heed to your selves, follow not the law of the Infidels, every one likes
what he does, depart from the wicked and leave them in their errors, an account
shall be required of the^ of the riches, and of the children that we have given
them but they know it not. Such as fear the punishment of their Lord, that obey
his Commandments, profes his unity, give Alms of the substance that he has
given them, and fear in their hearts, that they are not acceptable to them,
shall appear in his presence; such as shall obey him, shall enjoy his grace; he
requires not of any man what he is unable to perform. We have a book that
declares the truth, no injustice shall be done to him that shall do what he
is able; certainly the Infidels are in ignorance of the Alcoran, they act what
is quite contrary, to that which is commanded true believers; but we have
punished the chief among them in their prosperity. Be not this day resolute, ye
shall not be protected of us. Our Commandments are taught you, nevertheless ye
are returned upon your steps, and are risen against the Faith, and in
discoursing by night, withdrew your selves from the righteous. Consider they not
the words [of the Alcoran?] ^oth it contain any thing that has not bin
ordained to their predecessors; know they not the Prophet that God has sent to
them? Wherefore will they not acknowledge him? Will they say that he is
possessed of the devil? On the contrary, he reaches them the truth,
nevertheless the greatest part of them detest him; if their will had place,
heaven and earth, and whatsoever is betwixt them should be confounded; we have
instructed them in the Law which they ought to observe, but they have renounced
it; Do thou require of them any recompense for thy instructions? Thy Lord
shall reward thee, there is none that is of power to recompense thee better
then He. Call them to the right way; such as shall not believe the
Resurrection, shall err. If we pardon and deliver them from affliction, they
will still continue in their errors, to their confusion; we heretofore
chastised them, nevertheless they humble not themselves, neither implored
their Lord; and when we opened upon them the gate of our Judgments, they
became desperate. God has given you sight, hearing, and sense, but few among
you return him thanks, he it is that has created you of earth, ye shall one
day be assembled before him to be judged; he it is that gives life and death,
and makes the difference of day and night, will you not honor him, neither
consider? On the contrary, they have said, as did their predecessors, wherefore
shall we die? our bones shall be dust, and shall we rise again? This was
heretofore promised to our fathers, and to us; certainly it is but an old song;
Say unto them, to whom appertains the earth, and whatsoever is in the earth,
if ye know [its Creator and King?] They will say, it is Gods; Say unto them,
know ye not then, that he that created y^u can raise you again? who is Lord of
the seven heavens? who possesses the throne of heaven? they will say, it is
God; say unto them, will ye not fear then to worship any other God but him? Say
unto them, who is King of all things? who sustaineth them, and is sustained of
none? They will say, that it is God; Say unto them, why then do ye deceive your
selves? we have taught them the truth, but they have rejected it, and said,
that God had a son; were there another God with God, the one would undo what
the other has done, and they would rise the one against the other. Praised be
God, what they affirm is not true, God knows that is past, the present, and
the future, he has no companion: Say, Lord, give me o see the effect of all
that thou have promised to them, and put me not among the unjust, deliver us
from evil, and do good to us, I know their impiety; Lord deliver me from the
temptations of the devil, deliver me from their malice; when any one among
them dies, he says, Lord, permit me to return into the world, I will do
better then I have done; there is no return, it is to speak in vain, there is
an obstacle behind them, that detaineth them until the day of Judgment; when
the Trumpet shall sound, nothing shall retard them, they shall not glory, nor
discourse with each other: the balance of the blessed shall be heavy with good
works, and the balance of the cursed shall be light of good works. Have not my
Commandments been preached unto you, wherefore did ye contemn them? They shall
say, Lord, our misery prevailed over us, we were mislead, Lord deliver us from
this misery, the contrary was promised to us, truly we are exceedingly too
blame. It shall be said unto them, depart into the fire, and never speak to
come out. Many of them that worship me, say, Lord, we believe in thee, pardon
our sins, thou art merciful. Ye have derided them, O ye wicked! and have
despised my Commandments, but I will reward them for their perseverance, and
they shall be blessed. It shall be said to those that rise again, how many
years have ye remained in the earth? they shall answer, we have bin there a
day, or some days, ask of the Angels appointed to keep the account, ye have
bin there but a little time, did ye not know it, do you believe that I have
created, and assembled you before me in vain? Praise and exalt God, King of
Truth, there is no God but be, he is King of Heaven: he is void of reason that
invoketh another God with Him, he shall give account of his actions, and the
Infidells shall be miserable: Say, Lord, pardon the sins of the righteous, thou
art the great merciful.

CHAP. XXIV. The Chapter of Light, containing seventy and four Verses, written
at Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. We have sent this Chapter
containing our Commandments clear and intelligible, peradventure ye will learn
them. The Is a man or boy kept unlawfully.
Catamite and the Concubine shall be whipped with an hundred stripes; take heed
lest clemency cause you to forget the precepts of the Law of God, believe in
his divine Majesty, and the day of Judgment; Some of the True-believers shall
be witnesses of their punishment: The Catamite lying with a Concubine, or an
Infidel, the Concubine lying with a Catamite or Infidel, these things are
forbidden the True believers. He that shall accuse an honest woman of adultery,
shall be whipped with twenty four stripes, unless he prove his accusation by
four witnesses, and shall never be credited in testimony. They that do such
things, are without the obedience of God, except those that repent, and
satisfy what they owe, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. They that
shall accuse their Wives of adultery, and have no witnesses, shall swear four
times that they speak the truth, and shall the fifth time call for the curse of
God to be upon them, if they be liars. The Wife shall be exempt from
punishment, if she swear four times that her husband is a liar, and if the
fifth time she pray that the wrath and indignation of God may be upon her, See
Gelald^n.
if what her husband has said be true; In this manner does God gratify you,
that ye may understand the truth, he is most gracious and most wise. That Troup
that made defection from the True-believers with a lie, and false testimony,
did you no harm; on the contrary, they did advantage you; every one shall bear
the burden of his sins, the most m^licious among them shall be thrown
headlong into the torments of Hell; This is Abdallabin Selouk.
It was an happiness that ye heard the sense of the believers from their own
mouth, when the said, that those men lied impudently; if they had not presented
those four witnesses, they had found none other, One of Mahomets wives was
accused of adultery with Safoiian, by Mahomets enemies.
they are liars, without the grace and mercy of God, they should have already
felt great torments in this world and in the other, because of that imposture:
When they spoke of what they were ignorant, ye deemed it to be nothing, but it
is an exceeding sin before God, if when ye heard it, ye said, that to speak of
those things did not concern you, ye knew it to be an imposture, God
forbids you to relapse, if ye believe in his Law, he thus declares to you
his pleasure, he is omniscient and most prudent; Such as desire to cast
obloquie among the True believers, shall be rigorously chastised in this world,
and in the other, God knows that of which you are ignorant: Had not God bin
favorable to you, he had chastised you in burning fury, he is gracious and
merciful. Oh ye that are Tru-believers! follow not the footsteps of the
Devil, he will enjoin you vice and sin; had not God gratified you with his
mercy, not any among you should have been purged from that imposture, but God
purifieth whom he sees good, he bears all and hnoweth all your intentions.
The most rich and powerful among you have not sworn to do no good to their
parents, the poor, or to them that fight for the law of God, nevertheless they
do it not to them, and fly them; desire they not that God should pardon them?
He is neither gentle nor pitiful but toward True-belivers. They that accuse
of immodesty, women chaste, innocent, and faithful, shall be accursed in this
world, and shall suffer great torments at the day; when their tongues, their
hands and their feet shall testify against them; at the same time shall God
pay to them what shall be due unto them without injustice, and they shall know
that God is truth it self.

The wicked women shall speak as the wicked men, and the wicked men as the
wicked women: The good [women] shall speak as the good [men] and the good [men]
as the good women; the good are innocent of the imposture of the wicked, they
shall enjoy the grace of God, and the treasures of Paradse. Oh ye that are
True-beleivers! enter not into another house without permission, if ye salute
them that dwell there, ye shall do well; peradventure ye will be mindful, if ye
find none of the house enter not without permission, if they speak to you to
return, ye shall return, it is better (then to stay at the door) God beholds
all that ye do, ye shall not offend God to enter into houses inhabited, if ye
have affairs there, God knows all your intentions. Speak unto the
true-believers, that they contain their sight, that they be chaste, that they do
good, and that God knows all their action. Speak unto the True-beleiving
women* that they retain their fight, and that they be chaste, that they suffer
nothing of their beauty to be seen, but what ought to be seen, that they cover
their bosom, and their vissage, that they permit them not to be seen, but by
their husbands, their Children, the Children of their husbands, their brothers,
their nephew^, their sisters, their women, their daughters, maidservants and
slaves by their domestiques, that are not capable of marriage, by children that
regard not the beauty of Women, and that they move not their feet, to show
they are well shod. Implore pardon of God, peradventure ye shall be happy; many
maidens of your own Religion, the daughters of the righteous, or your slaves,
if they be poor, God shall enrich them with his grace, he is most liberal and
omniscient. Such as have not means to marry, shall live chastely, until God
has given them means: Such as have desire to marry their slaves, shall have
power to pass a contract of marriage, if they know them to be wise, and shall
give them part of the wealth that God has bestowed on them, despise not your
wives that are chaste, to commit whoredom; if ye desire good in this world, if
ye contemn them God shall be to them propitious and merciful; we have sent
to you these precepts, clear and intelligible, like to them that were taught
your Prede^essours, to be preached to the righteous; God illuminateth the
heaven and the Earth, as the Lamp that is in the Lanthorn of of Crystal, fed
with oil of the blessed Olive.

It seems to be a Star full of light, which goes neither to the West, nor
the East, and yeildeth brightness upon brightness; God guides by his light
whom it pleases him, he teaches his people parables, and is omniscient, ^e
permits you to praise him in your houses, there to be mindful of his name,
and to exalt him evening and morning. Oh ye men! your affairs ought not to
hinder your remembrance of his divine Majesty, to make your prayers at the time
appointed, neither to pay Tithes. Fear the day when the hearts of men shall be
perplexed, and their fight troubled, when God shall reward and chastise every
one after his works, and shall augment his grace upon the good; he enricheth
with his innumerable benefits whom to him seems good. The good works of the
wicked are like to mists in a spacious pl^in, they seem to be water, when afar
off, and being appreache^, nothing is to be there found; They shall find
before God the book, wherein is written whatsoever they have don, he shall
punish them according to their dem^rits, he is exact to keep account. Their
actions are moreover like to the darkness that is in the bottom of the sea,
that is covered with wave upon wave, obscurity and darkness upon one another,
he that is in this darkness cannot see his hand; he that shall not be
illuminated by God, shall not see a jot; See thou not, that whatsoever is in
Heaven and Earth exalts the glory of God? The Birds extend their wings before
him to praise him, he hears the prayers of all his creatures, and
understands the praises that they give him, he knows all that they do, he
is King of Heaven and Earth, the refuge of all the world* Soest thou not how he
assembleth the clouds? how he plac^th them one upon another? considerest thou
not how the rain falls through their pores? and that God causes fresh water
to descend from the mountains? He has given it to whom seems good to him, he
causes the brightness of lightning to approach men, which blinds their sight,
and overwhelmeth the day with night; These things are signs of his
omnipotency, to them that consider them; He created of a little water, all
sorts of living Creatures; some creep upon the Earth, others walk upon two
feet, and others upon four; he created what pleased hi^, he is omnipotent.
Certainly, he has sent a law clear and intelligible, to conduct into the right
way whom it shall seem good to him. The Infidels say, We believe in God, and
his Prophet; nevertheles a party among them abandon his Law, and believe not in
his divine Majesty: when they are called before God, and before the Prophet, to
judge their differences, many among them refuse to come; if they come, it is
with contempt. They are greatly afflicted at heart, do they fear that God and
his Prophet will do them injustice? On the contrary, they themselves are
unjust. When the True-beleivers are called before God, and the Prophet to be
judged; they s^^, We have heard and obeyyed, they are not ignorant. Th^se that
shall obey God, and his Prophet, shall be blessed. Many swear to fight
gallantly for the Faith, when they shall be commanded to march against the
enemy, say unto them, Swear not, your obedience to the Prophet shall be
pref^rred to your Oaths, God knows whatsoever ye do; say unto them, Obey God,
and his Prophet; if they be disobedient, they shall bear their burden, and ye
shall bear your own; if ye obey, ye shall follow the right way. The Prophet is
obliged only to preach intelligibly God promised to the True beleivers, that
shall do good works, that they shall live long up-upon e^rth, as he promised to
them that were before them, that they might establish the Law that he gave
them; he shall change their fear into assurance; he shall deliver them from
terror, that they may adore him alone, without companion. He that is wicked,
will depart from the obedience which he owes to God: Make your prayers at the
time appointed, pay Tithes, and obey the Prophet, God shall give you his mercy.
Believe not that the Infidels are more powerful on Earth than We; they shall
be precipitated into the fire of Hell. O ye that are True-beleivers! your
slaves and servants of Free-condition shall require leave of you, to enter
where ye shall be thrice, viz. Before the prayer at break of day, after noon,
and after supper, they shall not offend in entering without leave, where ye
shall be at another time: they enter there to serve you. In this manner does
God teach you his Commandments, he knows the humor of his Creatures, and is
most prudent in all that h^ ordains. It is ordained to your children, when
they shall be at age of discretion, to demand of you permission to do what they
shall desire, as did your pred^cesso^s: Thus does God teach you his
Commandments; he is gracious and merciful. The old and d^cr^pit women shall
not offend God, to quit their vails, and discover their faces; provided it be
without vanity, and design to show their ornaments: If they abstain, they shall
do well, God hea^eth whatsoever ye say, and knows all that is in your he^rts.
The blind, the lame, the sick, See Kitab el tenior.
and you also, shall not sin, to eat in the house of your children; at the
house of your Father and Mother, brothers, sisters, Uncles, Aunts, Friends; and
in the house of your servants; ye shall not offend God, if ye eat together, or
apart. When ye shall enter into any house, salute each other from God, with
blessing and affection. Thus does God teach you his Commandments, peradventure
you will learn them. When those that believed in God, and his Prophet, repaired
to the Prophet, they retired not without his permission. Such as required leave
(to depart) believe in God, and his Prophet; if they require leave of thee for
any business, license whom shall seem good to thee, and p^ay to God for them;
See Kitab el tenoir.
he is gracious and merciful. Call not the Prophet, as ye call one another
among you: God knows such as shame ully depart out of the Temple, and the
French. Such as disobey his Commandments, ought to take he^d, least some
mischief befall them, and that they suffer not great tormen^s; Whatsoever is in
the Heavens, or on Earth, is Gods, he knows if ye are zealous in your faith,
See Gelaldin.
or be hyp^crites; ^e knows the day wherein a^l the wor^^ shall be assembled
before him [to be j^dged.] ^n th^^ d^y shall men see what what they have done;
he knows all things.

CHAP. XXV. The Chapter of the Alcoran, containing seventy and seven Verses,
wrinten at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: praised be he that sent the Alcoran
to his servant to instruct the world; he is King of the Heavens and Earth; he
has no Son, nor Companion in his rign; he created and ordained every thing.
The Infidels worship Gods that can create nothing, and are things created; they
can neither do them good nor evil, they can give neither life nor death,
neither cause them to rise again. They say that the Alcoran is but a fable of
thine invention, invented with the assistance of some other person; but they
lie and blaspheme. They say that it is but an old Song, and a fable of the
Ancients that thou writ^st, and that thou studiest morning and evening. Say
unto them, it was sent by him that knows all things in Heaven and Earth,
alt^gether gracious and merciful. They said, wh^ is this Prophet? He eats
bread and meat, and walks through the streets; we will not believe him,
unless an Angel descend from heaven to preach to us with him, unles that
Angel enrich him, and that he have a Garden full of good and savory fruits; he
is but a wizard, or one possesed of the Devil. Consider to what they compare
thee; certainly they are in error, and cannot find the right way. Praise and
bless him, that is able to bestow on thee a greater good, when it shall seem
good to thee, to wit, Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, and houses of
pleasure. They have denied the certainty o^ Universal Judgment, and we have
prepared the fire of Hell to punish them; wrath shall carry them away with
terrible cries: when they shall behold the place of the assembly of judgment;
when they shall there appear, they shall be desperate, and shall cry, O misery!
Cry not O misery, cry O mis^ries! (in the Plu^al) ask of them which is better,
and more advantageous, that, or paradise, which is prepared for the recompense
of the righteous, where they shall dwell e^ern^lly with all manner of felicity;
this is it that God has pro^ised, and that which was impetrated of his divine
Majesty, (for them that have his fear be^or their e^es) I will one day ass^mble
I dolate^s, with their i^^ls; God shall say unto them, you are they who have
seduc^d my creatures from the right way. They shall say, praised be thy name:
we ought to have worshipped non^ but thy divine Majesty, but the weal^h that
thou gav^st to our Magistrates, and their life, which thou did prolong, caus^d
them to fo^get thy Commandment^, they were pernicious men, in that they a^jured
thy Law, they cannot this day be exempt from the punishment of our crim^s,
neither protect us against thy wrath. The Idolaters shall be rigorously
punished The Prophets that we sent before thee, did eat bread and meat, and
walked through the streets: we prove them one after another: Persevere, God
beholds them that are patient. Those that believe not in the R^sur^ect^on,
have s^id, The Angels are not ^escended from Heaven, we have not seen G^d,
they are become proud, and are fallen into an exceeding great error but the
wicked shall one day be without comf^rt, when they see the Angel, they shall cry,
help, help! We will set before their eyes all the sins that they have
commi^ted, the good works which they shall think to have do^, shall be like to
dust, which the Wind carries away, and the blessed shall enjoy a most certain
good, they shall hear of nothing but what contenteth them. When the Heaven and
the air shall divide themselves, and the Angels shall descend, then shall the
truth appear, and the merciful shall reign, that day shall be tedious to
Infidels, they shall bite their fingers, and sa^, would to God I had f^llowed
the Prophet and his Apostle! Oh misery! would to God I had not contracted amity
with such an Infidel he seduced me from the right way, he hind^ed me to
believe in the A^coran which God sent, certainly the Devil has tempted men,
Then shall the Prophet say, Lo^d, such as have followed me, have obe^ed what is
written in the Alcoran, and the Infidells have rejected it we have appointed an
enemy among the wicked, to every Prophet of them that were before thee, but it
suffices thee that God guides and protecteth thee. The Infidels have
demanded, it the Alcoran was sent all at once; I have so done to confirm the
truth in thy heart, I have sent it piece by piece, they shall not show thee any
thing like unto it; I have instructed thee in the truth clear and intelligible,
the incredulous shall be confined in the fire of Hell, and be most miserable.
Certainly, We gave to Moses the book of the Law, we sent with him hi^ brother
Aaron to assist him, and said unto them, Go both of you, p^each unto
Infidells, we will destroy them, unless they be converted. When the people of
Noah despised our Commandment, we drowned them, and made them sure for example
to posterity, and prepared great torments for the impious. Remember Aad, T^mod,
and those that dwelt nigh unto the well, a long time after them; we spoke to
them in parables, and destroyed them. Oh ye wicked! consider the misery of the
City, upon which fell that mischievous rain, that destroyed them, because the
Inhabitants believed not in the Resurrection. When the Infidels saw thee
appear, they d^^ided thee, and said, This Prophet would seduce us, and make us
to abandon our God, We had patience, and deferred our punishment: they shall
know at the day of Judgment them that have bin seduced; Have thou considered
the action of him that spoke of his God after his fantasy? Were thou his
Tutor, to hinder him to speak? Do thou believe that the greatest part of the
wicked hear, and understand what thou speak to them? They are like beasts,
and worse; See thou how thy Lord sheddeth the Rose, were it his will, it
should be permanent, the Sun has caused it to melt, and attracteth it gently
to himself. He it is that created the night for repose, and the day for labor.
He it is that sends the winds by his special grace, he makes rain to descend
from Heaven, to refresh the Earth, to give it life, to water the beasts, and
for the contentment of men; we have divided it among them, that they may be
mindful of our grace, nevertheless, the greatest part of them are ungrateful.
Had we so pleased, we had sent to every City a Preacher, to preach unto the
Inhabitants the torments of hell; obey not Infidels, preach to them frequently
what is written in the Alcoran It is God that has sweetened the water of
Euphrates, that joined the two Seas, that made them fa^t, and put between them
a separation, to hinder them to mix: He created man and woman of a little
water, to increase and multiply together; thy Lord can do whatsoever him
pleases, yet do the Infidels adore what can neither hen^ fit nor hurt them,
and assist the Devil their master to tempt the world We sent thee only to
pr^ach the torments of hell and to proclaim the joys of Paradise: Say unto
them, I require not of you a reward for my preaching, he that shall be
acceptable to God, will follow the way of his Law: Praise and exalt thy Lord,
trust in him, he knows all the sins of men; he created the heavens, and the
earth in six days, and sits on his Throne; learn this of him that knows
it. When it was s^id to the Infidels, worship the merciful [God;] they s^id,
what merciful? shall we worshipp what ye appoint us? and they added to their
impiety. Blessed be he that created the signs of heaven, that created the Sun,
and the Moon, full of brightness and light, and has made the days to succeed
each other, to return him thanks for his graces. The servants of the merciful
that walk with humility, that salute the ignorant when they speak to them; Such
as pray to* and worship God day and night; such as say Lord* deliver us from
the torment of hell; those that fear God, that are not prodigal, nor covetous,
that follow the middle way, betwixt prodigality and avarice, those that worship
one God, that kill no man but with reason, and following the Commandments of
God, and that are not luxurious, shall enjoy eternally the grace of God; such,
as do the contrary shall be chastised, their punishment shall be augmented at
the day of Judgment, and they shall be damned for ever, except him that shall be
converted, and shall have don good works, God shall give him pardon of his sins,
he is gracious and merciful. They, who do good works and repent, who make no
false O^th who are humble, and are not (wilfully) deaf and dumb when they
hear the Alcoran read, and say, Lord, give us and our posterity children, that
may be the light of our eyes, and be obedient to thee; work in us a fear to
disobey thy Commandments; such persons shall enjoy eternally the delights of
Paradise, for reward of their perseverance; they shall there find salutations,
and benedictions, with immense graces. Say unto the wicked, God will not
enlighten you, neither hearken to your prayers, because ye have traduced his
Prophet; the time of the punishment of your c^imes shall suddenly arrive.

CHAP. XXVI. The Chapter of Poets, containing an hundred and twenty seven
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: God is most pure, he understands
all things, he is most wise. These signs are the signs of the book that
distinguishes truth from falsehood; will thou destroy thy self, because men are
impious? If I will, I can cause my judgments to descend upon them, that shall
humble them, they despise my Commandments, they scoff, but shall be rigorusly
punished; see they not how many fruits we have made to spring out of the earth?
It is a token of our omnipotency, nevertheless the greatest part of them
believe not that thy Lord is the omnipotent, and the merciful. Instruct them
how thy Lord said unto Moses, thou shall be my Messenger to the Infidels, and
the people of Pharaoh, that they may have my fear before their eyes. Moses slew
an Egyptian.
Moses said, Lord, I fear they may traduce me, and that my tongue cannot be
loosed; send with me my brother Aa^on, they know the fault I have committed,
and will put me to death. The Lord said to him, they shall not put thee to
death, go both whither I command you, I will be with you, and will hear what
they say; say to Pharaoh, that ye are the M^ssengers of the Lord of the world,
and let him dismiss with you the children of Israel; Pharaoh said unto Moses,
have I not seen thee within this house a little child? Did thou not dwell
with us many years? Did thou not kill a man? thou art impious. Moses said, I
did what I did, I was in the number of the seduced, I fled when I feared you;
since that time God has given me knowledge, and placed me in the number of his
Prophets and Apostles, he has sent me his grace, to set before thee the evil
that thou do commit, in causing thy self to be adored of the children of
Israel; Pharaoh said unto him, who is that God of the world? he answered, it i^
the Lord of Heaven, and Earth, and of whatsoever is between them. Pharaoh said
to them that were about him, Hear ye not what he says? Moses continued his
[speech] and said, my Lord is your God, the God of your Fathers, and of your
predecessors. Pharaoh said, this Prophet that is sent to you is a fool; Moses
said, I am indeed the Mess^^ger of the Lord of the West and East, if ye had
understanding to know him: Pharaoh said, if thou worship any other God but me,
I will cause thee to be put unto the bottom of a pit; Moses said to him, will thou do it, seeing I am come to thee with reasons so strong, and arguments so
infallible? Pharaoh said unto him, bring thy reasons if thou art true: Then he
cast his staff on the ground, and it was changed into a Serpent, he drew hi^
hand out of his bosom, it appeared white, and shining to the eyes of the
spectators. Then said Pharaoh to them that were about him, certainly, behold
here a skillful Magician, he would drive you from your Country through his
magic, What say ye? They answered, he, with his brother must be terrified, and
men must be sent into all thy Cities, to assemble the most knowing Magicians of
all thy Dominions; when they came together at the day appointed, it was
demanded of them, if they were called to follow the magic of Moses, and of
Aaron? They said, what shall be our reward if we be victorious? Pharaoh said
unto them, yes, ye shall be rewarded, and be among them that approach my
person. Moses said unto them, will you cast your staves on the ground, or shall I
first cast mine? They cast their cords and their staves first, saying with the
assistance of Pha^aoh we shall be victorious; then Moses cast his rod on the
ground, w^h. devoured their cords and staves; when they beheld this miracle,
they fell prostra and said, we believe in the Lord of the world, God of Moses
and Aaron; Pharaoh said to them, if ye believe in Moses without my permission,
ye shall see what shall befall you; he is your Master, he understands Magic
better than you; I will cause your right feet and left hands, or your right
hands and left feet, to be cut off, and cause you all to be hanged? they said,
this shall do us none harm, we shall return before God our Lord, we hope that he
will remit our sin^, because we shall be the first converts. We said unto Moses,
go with Israel my servants, and fear not the people of Pharaoh that shall
follow thee: Pharaoh sent his Commissioners through his Dominions to assemble
the people, and said, (speaking of the children of Israel) those men are few
in number, they have displeased me, but I will well awake them. We moved
Pharaoh, and his people to depart out of Egypt, to pursue the children of
Israel; we caused them to quit their gardens, fountains, and houses of
pleasure, and made the children of Israel heirs of their trea^ure, they
surprised them at the rising of the Sun; when the children of Israel beheld
them, they said we are ov^taken, Moses answered, no, my Lord is with me, he
shall guide me, then we inspired Moses to strike the sea with his Rod,
incontinently it divided it self on both sides, like two mountains; we saved
him, and all that were with him, and drowned the men of Pharaoh; which shall
serve for an example to the incredulous and obstinate, the Lord is omnipotent
and merciful. Relate to unbeleivers the History of Abraham, when he said to
his father and his people, whom do ye adore? they answered, we adore our Idols;
he said unto them, do they hear you when ye invoke them? do they do good unto
you when ye worship them, or mischief when ye neglect them? they answered, we
find that our fathers worshipped them as we do; Abraham said unto them, you and
your fathers worship vain things, ye adore only Idols, mine enemies, I will not
worship them, I will worshipp the Lord of the world, who created, guides, and
nourishes me, who gives me health when I am sick, who makes me to live, and
will cause me do dye, and from whom I hope for pardon of my sins at the day of
Judgment: Lord give me the knowledge of thy will, grant that my tongue and
words may be credited as true, by posterity; put me into the number of the
heirs of Paradise; pardon my Father, who has bin in the number of the
Erroneous, and make me not ashamed at the day of the Resurrection; at the day,
when riches and children shall be u^profitable, except to such as shall have an
heart estranged from impiety; God shall make the righteous to approach to
Paradise, and the wicked to see hell: they shall say, can the Idols that ye
adore save you? can they save themselves? They shall be, with you, their
adherents, and the devils, thrown headlong into the fire of hell. The Idolaters
shall despute in hell, with them whom they have worshipped, and shall say, by
God, we were abu^ed when we adored you, the wicked seduced us, we have none
this day to intercede for us neither friend to protect us; could we return into
the world, we would believe in the Law of God; this discourse shall be for
example to the wicked that believe not that thy Lord is the Omnipotent and
merciful. The people of Noah's time slandered the Apostles and Prophets that
were sent to them; N^ah their brother said unto them, fear God, I am his
Messenger, sent to preach unto you; fear God, and obey him, I ^equi^e no
recompense for my Instructions, God the sole Lord of the world shall reward my
labors, fear and obey him; They said, shall we believe in thee, and thy
followers, who are infamous? He said, I know not what they do, my Lord k^epeth
account of their actions; if ye knew ^he right way, ye would not worship
Idols; I drive not true believers from my society, I am sent only to preach
the torments of Hell; They said, O Noah! if thou quit not this discourse thou
shall be stoned; Noah said, Lord, this people is impious, judge our difference,
deliver me from their malice, and all true believers that are with me, We
preserved him, and those that were with him in the A^k, and destroyed them that
remained on the Earth: This is an Evidence of our Omnipotency, yet the greatest
part of Infidels believe not that God is omnipotent and merciful. The people
of Aads time traduced the Apostles and Prophets that were sent unto them; Hod
his brother said unto them* fear God, I am his Messenger, sent to preach unto
you with fidelity. Fear God and obey him, I require of you no recompense of my
preaching, the Lord of the Universe shall abundantly reward me; Will ye build
Towers, and lofty Palaces, as if ye should dwell eternaly in the world? Will ye
be cruel, without compassion on your selves? fear God and obey him: fear him who
gives you his grace, bestows on you wealth, children, gardens, and
fountains; I fear that ye shall suffer grievous pains at the day of Judgment:
They said unto him, art thou come to be preached unto, or ^o preach to us? Thou
relatest to us old men's Fables, They slandered him, and we destroyed them: this
is a token of our Omnipotency, never thel^sse the greatest part of Infidells
believe not thy Lord to be Omnipotent and merciful. The people of Temod belyed
the Prophets that were sent unto them: his brother Salhe said unto them, fear
God, I am a Messenger sent from God to preach to you, fear God and ob^y him, I
require of you no recompense for my preaching, the Lord of the Universe shall
recompense my labors: will ye forsake ^ternal riches, to cleave to the wealth
of this world, to put your trust in your gardens, your fountains, your
tillages, your dates, and fruits? shall ye be esteemed prudent if ye build
houses of pleasure in the mou^tains? fear God, obey his Commandments, and obey
not the wicked, that defile the earth, and do no good. They s^id unto him, thou
art a Magician, and an Inchanter, thou art but a man like unto us, show us some
miracle, if thou be indeed a Prophet sent from God; he said: behold there a
Camel, The Turks believe this Camel was changed into a rock by S^lhe.
he has a place to drink at a day appointed, ye likewise have it to drink as
he, ^o him no harm, otherwise shall ye be punished at the day of Judgment.
They did hurt this Camel through contempt, but ^ad cause to repent it, and were
severely punished.

This is an example for posterity: nevertheles the greatest part of Infidels
believe not that thy Lord is altogether gracious and merciful. The Citizens of
Lot traduced the Prophets that were sent unto them; Lot their brother said,
fear God, I am a faithful Messenger sent from him, to preach to you, fear God,
and obey him, I require of you no reward for my pains, God will reward me; will
ye cleave to the world, to reject that glory that he has created for you? ye
forsake good to embrace evil. They said, O Lot! if thou change not this
discourse, we will banish thee from our City; he said, perhaps I am one of those
whom ye abhor; Lord deliver me, with my family, from their hands. We saved him
with all his family, except his Wife, who remained with the inhabitants of the
City, we caused to fall upon them a rain that destroyed them. This is an example
for posterity, nevertheles the greatest part of Infidels believe not that thy
Lord is omnipotent and merciful. They that inhabit the A Forest near to Madian
Forest, slande^ed the Prophets that were sent unto them: Chaib said to them,
fear God, I am a faithful messenger sent from him, to preach unto you the
torments of Hell: See Gelaldin.
fear God and obey him, I require no reward of you for my preaching, the Lord
of tree Universe shall recompense me, Measure with good measure, and weigh with
good weights, detain nothing from your neighbor, defile not the earth, fear
him that created you, and al those that were before you They said unto him,
thou art a forcerer, thou art but a man like us, we believe thee to be a liar:
if thou art indeed sent from God, cause a part of Heaven to fall upon us, he
answered, God knows that of which ye are ignorant, they traduced him, but
were chastised: being covered with a cloud that rained upon them a shewer of
fire, and they were burned, as if it had been the day of Judgment: this is a
token of my power, but the greatest part of Infidels believe not that thy Lord
is Omnipotent and merciful. Certainly the Alcoran was sent by the Lord of the
world, the faithful Spirit inspired it into thine heart, that thou may
preach to the people the pains of Hell in the Arabique tongue; the Scriptures
heretofore made mention [of it] if the Infidels of Mecca are ignorant of it,
the Doctors of the Children of Israel have knowledge to understand it,
although that we have not sent it in the language of the Persians, yet cease
not to instruct them in that which they know not; we have imprinted ^ lie in
the hear^s of the wicked, they shall not believe what is written in the
Alcoran, until they see the punishment prepared for Infidels at the day of
Judgment; that day shall come at unawares, of which they are ignorant. They
say, let us tarry, and not believe as yet, in what is contained in that book,
are they impatient until they see their punishment? Have thou seen how they
have some years deferred it, and how, in the end, that which we promised befell
them? their riches were to them unprofitable. We have not destroyed Cities
without having forewarned them of their destruction, we are unjust to none.
That devils did not bring the Alcoran, it was to them of none advantage, they
could not compose it, they are re^n^te [from the Angels] and cannot hear their
speech; say not there is another God with God; if thou say it, thou shall be
chastised; preach the torments of hell to them that shall follow thee; be
humble and civil to true believers; if they disobey thee, say un^o them, I am
innocent of what ye do* and am resigned to the Will of God, omnipotent and
merciful; He beholds thee when thou do pray, and worship him; he hears
and knows all things. Shall I tell ye to whom the devils appresse hemselves?
they apply themselves ^o liars, they tell to them what they have heard spoken,
but they all lie. The erroneous imitate the Poets; See E^teri, and Kitab el
tenoir.
they are confuted in their discourse, and say, they have don what the^ have
not, except those that believe in God that do good works, who often think of
his divine Majesty, and that have been protected against the injustice of
Infidels; the unjust shall know, that they shall one day rise again.

CHAP. XXVII. The Chapter of the Pismire, containing four-score and thirteen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. God is most pure, he understands
al. These mysteries are the mysteryes of the Alcoran, which distinguishes the
truth from a lie, it conducteth men into the right way, and proclaims the
joys of Paradize to such as believe in the Law of God, who make their prayers
at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and have knowledge of their end. They that
believe not in the day of Judgment, like well of wh^t they do, and are in
confusion, they shall be in ^he number of the damned. The Alcoran was conveyed
to thee from the most prudent, that knows all things* Remember thou that
Moses? said to his family, I see a fire, I go to it, I will bring you tidings,
I will bring you a spark, peradventure you shall be warmed; When he drew near
to the fire, h^ heard a voice that said to him, oh Moses! that which is in this
fire, and whatsoever is about it, is blessed; praise is due to God, Lord of the
Universe; I am God omnipotent, and eternal: Cast thy staff on the ground:
When Moses beheld his staff to move, as it had been alive, He went back very
sorrowful, and returned no more, Fear not that staff, my messenger and my
Prophets have no fear in my presence, he that shall be converted, shall find
me gracious and merciful. Put thine hand into thy pocket it shall come forth
white without harm, it shall be one of the nine marks of my omnipotency*
Pharaoh, and his Ministers were altogether erroneous; when they saw my
Miracles, they said that they were but sorcery; they disposed them, and
increased their impiety. Consider what is the end of the wicked, and how they
have been destroyed? we gave knowledge to David and to Solomon, they said, God
who has gratifyed us above many of his servants that have beleivd in his
omnipotency, Solomon was David's heir, and said to the people, we understand
the Language of birds, we know whatsoever can be known, it is an exceeding
great grace. Solomon's Army being one day assembled before him, composed of men,
Devils, and birds, he lead them to the valley of Pismires; a Pismire their
Queen, cried out, oh Pismires! enter into your houses, least Solomon and his
troops trample you under foot, without knowledge of it. Solomon hearing these
words, remained sometime without speaking, and in the end began to laugh,
saying, Lord assist me, that I may give thee thanks for the benefits, and
graces which thou did conferr upon my Father; If I do well, thou will accept
it, place me through thy mercy in the number of them that exalt thy glory; He
called for the A Bird so called.
Whoope, and said, wherefore see I not the Whoope? is she in the number of the
absent? I will punish and put her to death, if she have not a l^^^^ll excuse;
not long after, she humbled her self before Solomon, who asked her whence she
came? she answered, I come from seeing what thou see not, I come from the
Kingdom of Saba, whence I bring certain tidings; I have found a woman, their
Queen, who has whatsoever is necessary for a King; she has a great and
magnificent Thron, I have found that she with her Subjects adore the Sun, the
Devil caused them to delight in this their Action, he has seduced them from
the right way, and they shall be in Error until they worship one God, who
sends rain from Heaven, and makes the earth to produce plants and fruits,
who knows whatsoever is in the hearts of men, and what they utter; God! There
is but one God, Lord of the Universe. Solomon said, I shall soon see if thou
speak truth, or whither thou be in the number of the liars, go, bear to her
this letter, and obs^rve what she and her people shall answer; At her arivall,
the Queen said to her Ministers, Oh ye that are raised to dignity in my
dominions! a Letter is given me from Solomon, of this tenor. In the name of
God gracious and merciful, rise not up against me, and obey me. Give me
counsel, what I ought to do, I will do nothing without your advice, and what
you see not with your eyes: They answered, Our welfare and misery depend on
thee, command whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and we will obey thee. She
said, When Kings enter a City, they introduce many disorders; they abase, and
humble the chief of the Inhabitants, and the most eminent; if Solomon and his
people come hither, they will use [us] in the like manner. I think it requisite
to send to him an Ambassador with some presents, perhaps he will take a
resolution to return. When the Ambassador arrived in Solomon's presence, he said
unto him, Do ye bring me presents? God has bestowed on me more riches then on
you, presents rejoice you, because ye love them: Return to them that sent you,
I will go visit them with forces so great, that they shall not be able to
resist; I will drive them out of their dominions, and they shall be miserable,
if they obey me not: Then he said to his people, Sits, who will bring to me the
Royal Seat of that woman, before she and her subjects obey me? One of the
Devils said unto him, I, I will bring it before thou arise from thy place: I am
strong enough to bear it, I will carry it carefully. One of them that attended
S^lomon, Gelaldin says he knew the name of God.
who knew the Scriptures, said, I will bring it to thee in the twinkling of an
eye: When Solomon beheld this Throne before him, he said, Behold here a favor
of God, to try if ^ would acknowledge his benefits. He that returne^h thanks to
God for his graces, performs his duty; he rejects him that is ingratful. I
will try if she follows the right way, or whether she be in the number of the
seduced. They changed something in her Royal seat, to try if she would know
it, when she arrived in Solomon's presence. At her arrival, they showed it her,
and asked if it resembled her own; she replied, It resembles it, This Quee was
called Balkis.
as if it were the same: She had knowledge of the right way; but that which the
people, and she adored, instead of God, had seduced them from the obedience of
his divine Majesty. They spoke to her to enter into a gallery; See Gelaldin.
when she beheld the pavement, she believed it to be water; and in lifting up
her robe, fearing to wet it, discovered her Leg. Solomon told her, that the
pavemen^ was of pollished glass, and exhorted her to embrace the Law of God.
Then she said, Lord, I am too blame, in having offended thee; I am obedient
with Solomon, to the Commandments of the God of the Universe. We sent Salhe to
Temod, and his people, to exhort them to worship one God: he said unto them, O
people! fly to the mercy of God; if ye implore pardon of him, ye shall be
pardoned. They said, would thou draw us into thine error? and into the erro^,
of them that are with the^? He said, God shall chastise you, ye are seditious.
They were nine persons in the City that def^led the earth, and did no good;
they said among them, Let us this night kill the Prophet, and his adherents: we
will say to them that seek him, That we saw him not, neither them that slew
him; and will swear that we speak truth: They were cunning, but we were more
subtle then they, and they knew it not. Consider what was the Issue of their
stratagems: we destroyed them with their followers; and their houses are become
desert, because of their impiety. This shall serve for example to them that
have knowledge of Our omnipotency: We served the Proph^t, and all the
True-beleivers that were with him: Remember then the History of Lot, who said
to his Citizens, Will ye always defile your selves in uncleanness, in each
others veiw? will ye love men more then women? ye are ignorant. They replied,
Let us drive Lot and his family out of our City; they defile not themselves like
us, we preserved him, with all his family, except his wif^; she remained among
them that were chastised. We caused it to rain upon them, a rain that gave them
to know the severity of our chastisements. Say unto them, praised be God, that
destroys the wicked, and salvation to all those who he has chosen; are they
not more happy, then such as believe there are many Gods? who created the
Heavens and the earth? who caused rain to fall from heaven* who has made many
delicious gardens to bring for^h? you have not the power to cause the plants to
spring forth, without the assistance of God* certainly unbeleivers do err from
the right way. Who has established the earth, and made the rivers to flow? who
has made heavy the mountains? who but God has put separation that is between
the Seas? The greatest part of the world know it not. Who renders men
miserable? who delivers them from affliction when they invoke him? who has
caused you to multiply, and leave your posterity on Earth, but God?
Nevertheless few men give him thanks. Who guides in the darkness of the
Earth and Sea? who but God sends the winds, the forerunners of rain? he is
most high, and m^st powerful, but the wicked will not consider the effects of
his omnipotency. Who forms men? who makes them to live, dye, and rise again?
who enricheth them with the wealth of Heaven, and of Earth, but God? Say unto
them, produce your reasons, bring your arguments, if what ye alleadg be true;
Say unto them, none but God knows what is in Heaven and Earth, no man knows
the future, present and past; do men know the day of the Resurrection?
Contrariwise they doubt, and are blind. The wicked have said, what? we shall be
dust, as are our fathers, and shall come forth out of our Graves! This was
heretofore promised to our fathers, and to us, this is but a fable of old men:
Tell them, that they consider not what was heretofore the end of the wicked;
afflict not thy self, for that they conspire against thee, and that they
demand at what time they shall see the punishment that is foretold them: Say
unto them, it is not far from you, ^e throw your selves headlong into it, but
God is pitiful toward his people, nevertheless the greatest part give him no
thanks for his grace, thy Lord knows what is in their heart, and whatsoever
they speak; there is nothing in Heaven or Earth, that is not written in a most
intel^igible Book; the A^coran explaineth to the children of Israel the
greatest part of their difficulties* it will guide them into the right way, and
deliver from Hell them that shall believe thee, the Lord shall judge them at
the day of Judgment, he is omnipotent and wise; Trust thou in God, thou art in
the way of truth; the dead and deaf shall not hear thee, and unbelievers
shall depart from t^ee pensive and astonished, thou ought not to guide the
blind, neither to make the deaf to h^ar, except such as shall believe in the
Alcoran, and be obedient, when the time of the punishment that is denounced
against them shall be come; we will cause a Beast to com from under the earth,
that shall speak unto them, and shall say, The people believe not in the Law of
G^d, they know not his wondrous works. Be thou mindful of the day, when I will
assemble a multitude of all Nations that have disobeyed my Commandments, to
give account of their actions: I will say unto them, ye have traduced my
prophets, ye know not what ye said, what hove ye done? Then shall they be
punished for their sins, and be inexcusable, they shall not speak a word. Do
not infidels see that we have created the night for rest, and the day for
travel? this is a sign of my Omnipotency; Be thou mindful of the day wherein
the Angel shall sound the Trumpet, and whatsoever is in Heaven or Earth, shall
tremble with fear, except such as shall be in the favor of God; that day shall
thou see the Mountains suspended, to move like the Clouds, this shall be a work
of God, who created all things, and knows their end; He that shall have done
good works, shall be rewarded, he shall be without fear; and they that had don
evil, shall remain in the fire of Hell; It shall be said unto them, are ye no:
chastised according to your demerits? Say unto the people, I command you to
worship the Lord of this privileged Mecca. See Gelaldin.
City, al things appertain to him; I command you to believe in the unity of his
divine Maj. and to study the Alcoran, who so does good, shall find good. Say
unto them that shall be seduced, I am sent only to preach the torments of Hell.
Say to true-believers, praised be God that has given you to see his Miracles,
and has given you knowledge of the right way; thy Lord is not ignorant of what
they do.

CHAP. XXVIII The Chapter of History, containing four score and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. God is most pure, he understands
all things, and is most wise. These mysteries are the mysteries of the Book
that distinguishes the truth from a lie. I relate to thee the history of
Moses, and of Pharaoh with truth, for the contentment of True-beleivers.
Pharaoh was powerful on Earth, he entreated his Subjects as seemed good to
him, he tormented ted one party, and murdered their Children, he abused their
wives, and was of them that defiled the Earth. I gave my grace to the^ that
were afflicted on earth I made them successors of Pharoahs Kingdom, I
established them in his Dominions; I made Pharaoh, Haman, and their Army to see
what they most feared; we said, to the mother of Moses, give suck to thy Child;
if thou fear that they will mischief him, cast him upon Nile, fear not,
neither afflict thy self, I will restore him to thee between thine arms, and
place him in the number of Prophets. The domestiques of Pharaoh found him upon
the water, and saved him, to be one day their enemy, and to tormen^ them,
because Pharaoh, Haman* and their people were Infidels. Pharoahs wife said unto
him, I entreat thee not to suffer this Infant to be slain, mine eyes rejoice to
see him, he shall one day be proffitable for our service as our Son, but they
were ignorant of what should befall them; the heart of his mother was freed
from fear, when she beheld him in the hands of Pharoah's wife, and scarce could
she refrain to let them know that she was his mother; we caused her to have
patience, and she had faith in our promises; She spa^e to his sister to follow
him step by step, she followed afar off, without intimation that she was his
sister, or that she regarded him. We had before prohibited Moses to suck the
milk of any other nurse; then that of his mother; his sister said to Pharoahs
servant, will ye that I provide you a nurse, and people that shall carefully
nourish him? We caused him to be restored to his mother, to nurse him; she
ceased from her sadness, when she knew, and saw that God was sincere in what he
had promised, but the greatest part of the people know it not. When Moses was
aged, about thirty three years, we gave him knowledge and wisdom; thus do I
reward the righteous; Moses entering one day into the City, met two men that
fought; the one was of the Children of Israel, and the other was an Egyptian,
and of his enemies, whom he assaulted, and slew; after this he said, the Devil
tempted me, he is the open enemy of men; Lord, I have offended thee, pardon me;
he pardoned him, he is gracious and merciful; Lord, since thou have bin so
gracious to me, I will never give aid or succor to Infidels. He continued in
the City with fear, and kept himself upon his guard, on the mor^ow he again met
him, whom the day before he had defended, who sought likewise ^ith another
Egyptian, and required his assistance; Moses said unto him, thou art seditious;
he replied, oh Moses! will thou slay me, as thou did slay him yesterday? Will thou be a murderer of all men, or a just man? Not long after a man came [in
hast] to him from the utmost part of the City, who said unto him, oh Moses! the
Officers of Pharaoh have conspired against thee, they desire to put thee to
death; save thy self, and follow my council: He departed from the City with
fear, keeping himself upon his guard, beseeching his Lord to deliver him from
the hands of Infidels; he went toward M^adian, and said, Lord suffer me not to
follow an evil way, he met a great number of persons that made their flocks to
drink, he with them found 2 maids that could not water their Cattle, he said
unto them what do ye two here? We have not strength to draw water to give our
beasts to drink, we tarry for the Shepherd, our father is too old to draw [it]
He drew water out of the well to water their Cattle, and withdrew to a shade,
because of the heat of the Sun, saying Lord, I am deprived of all the graces
which heretofore then did confer on me, I ^m now poor and nec^ss^^^us. One of
those maidens came to seek him, and bashfully said unto him, my father calls
thee, to recompense thee for the pains thou have taken in watering our catle;
when he was in the old man's presence, he related what had befaln him. The old
man said, fear nothing, I will deliver thee from the hands of the wicked; one of
his daughters said to her sister, give to this man to eat, and reward his
pains, he assisted us with affection; their father said unto him, I will marry
thee to one of my two daughters, on condition, that thou will have a care of my
flocks the space of eight years; ten years if it please thee, said Moses; I
will not forsake thee, thou shall find me an honest man, I will serve thee the
two terms, either 8. or 10. years, as shall seem good to thee, God is witness
of what I say. After the term expired, Moses forsook the house of his father in
law, withdrawing with his wife, he beheld affar off a great fire on the side of
the mountain, and said to his Wife, tarry here, I see the fire of the
omnipotent, I will speedily return, I will bring you a spark, peradventure you
shall be warmed; when he drew near to this fire, they cried unto him from the
right side of the valley, from an eminent place, and from a bush O Moses! I am
God, Lord of the Universe, cast thy staff on the ground; when he beheld his
staff to move, as it had bin alive, he fled for fear, and returned no more: O
Moses! draw near, and fear not, thou art in a place of safety, put t^ine hand
into thy pocket, it shall come out white and shining, without harm; draw back
thine arm into thy sleeve, it shall return to its former condition, thy staff
and thine hand shall be two signs of my Omnipotency to Pharaoh and his
Ministers, who disobey my Commandments, Moses said, Lord, I have s^ain an
Egyptian, I am afraid they will take away my life, command Aaron who is
eloquent, to go with me, to aid me, and to confirm what I shall say, I f^ar they
will traduce me: I will give thee thy Brother for thy assistant, I will give to
you both strength to defend your selves from their malice; go, do what is
commanded you, ye shall be victorious, and all those that shall follow you: when
Moses came to Pharaoh, he made him to see my miracles, and preached my
Commandments to his Ministers; they said, this is bu^ magic and witchcraft, we
have not heard these things to have bin spoken to our predecessors. Moses said,
the Lord knows him that teaches the right way, and him that ought to have
part in Paradise, Infidels shall be most miserable. Pharaoh said to his
Ministers, do ye know any other God but me? O Haman! let me offer sacrifices,
and build a Temple* shall I deceive myself with the God of Moses? I believe him
to be in the number of liars. He b^came proud on earth, with his Ministers, and
they b^lieved that they should never be assembled before me to be judged; we
surprised him with his people, and caused him to perish in the Sea; consider
what is the end of unbelievers; we abandoned them, and they are in the number
of the condemned to the fire of hell. They shall find none to protect them ^t
the day of Judgment; we cursed them on earth, and at the day of the
Resurrection they shall be abominable to all the world. We taught Moses our
Commandments, after the destruct^on of many Infidels before his coming. We gave
him the Book, to be a light to the people, to conduct them into the right way,
and acquire our grace, peradventure they will remember. Thou were not with
Moses when we spoke to him; we created another age after him, thou did not at
that time dwell with the Inhabitants of Madian, neither did thou ^each them
our Commandments; it is we that have instructed thee in the History of past
ages; thou were not on the mountain when when spoke to Moses; we sent thee
through our special grace, to preach to men the torments of Hell; they have not
yet had a preacher like unto thee, perhaps they will consider it; when they
felt any punishment for their sins, they said, Lord, had thou sent us an
Apostl to instruct us, we should have obeyed thy commandments, and have
believed in thy Law: and when on our part they were instructed in the truth,
they said, does Mahome^ work miracles like Moses? do they not traduce what
Moses did, when they say, that Moses and Mahomet are two aparent Sorcerers? and
when they said that they believed neither Prophet, nor Scripture? Say unto them
bring any book from God, that better teaches the right way then the Old
Testament, and more savingly then the Alcoran, I will follow it, if ye speak
the truth: If they be not heard when they shall require this book, know, that
they follow only their own appetites, and their impiety; who is more erroneous
then he that follows but his own passion, and is not guided of God? he
guides not Infidells; Certainly we have sent them the Alcoran, peradventur;
they will believe in it; they to whom we heretofore sent this book believe in
the contents thereof; when they hear it read, they say we believe in those
words, it is the very truth that proceeds from God; we believe in the unity
of his divine Majesty, they shall be doubly rewarded, because they have
persevered in well-doing; they have overcome evil through their good deeds,
and have expended in good works part of the wealth that we gave them. When they
heard the faith evil spoken of, they withdrew themselves, took leave of the
company, and said, ye shall answer for your and we for our actions. Regard not
the ignorant, thou shall not convert all them that thou shall desire to
convert; God converteth, and guides into the right way whom he pleases, and
knows such as serve him. They said, if I follow with thee the right way, I
must forsake my Country. Shall not I establish them in a place of safety, where
they shall find all sorts of fruits to enrich them? but the grea^est part of
the people know it not. How many Cities have we destroyed that took pleasure in
their evil life? No man inhabited them any more, except very few; and we
became heirs of their riches. God shall not destroy Mecca, until he have sent
an Apostle to instruct the Inhabitants thereof in the right way; God destroys
not a Ci^y, if the Inhabitants be not unjust, and disobey not his Commandments,
The wealth of this world which ye p^ssesse, pleases you, but the riches of
Heaven are much better, and eternal; will ye not understand it? Have we not
kept promise with them to whom we promised Paradise? and with them to whom we
promised the riches of this world, and in the end were in the number of the
damned? Be thou mindful of the day when thy Lord shall call them, and say unto
them, where are your Idols, which ye believed to be my Companions? the chief of
them shall say, Lord, behold those that were seduced like us, we are innocent of
their Idolatry, they adored not us, they shall speak that day to the Idolaters
to invoke their Idols, but they shall not hear them, they shall be visibly
chastiz^d on Earth: B^ thou mindful of the day when thy Lord shall call them,
and say unto them, wherefore have ye not believed my Apostles and my Prophets?
they shall be confounded, and rem^in dumb. He that shall be converted, and do
good works, shall be happy. Thy Lord creates what pleases him, and makes
choice of what seems to him good. Praised be God, he has no companion, he
knows what is in the hearts of men, and what they make manifest; he is God,
there is no God but he, praise is due to him in the beginning, and in the end,
he commands over all things, and all people shall one day be assembled before
him to be judged: Say unto them, Had God given a continual night, even until
the day of judgment, what other God is there that is able to you give light?
will ye not hear me? had God given you a continual day until the day of
Judgment, what other god could have given the night to refresh you? will ye not
consider his benefits and his grace? he has created the night for repose, and
the day for labor, p^radventure ye will give him thanks. Be thou mindful of
the day, when thy Lord shall call the Infidels, and shall say unto them, where
are the Idols that ye worshipped? We will call a witness of every Nation, and
will say to the Idolaters, bring your arguments that may prove the plurality of
Gods; Ye shall this day know your blasphemies, and that there is but one God.
Caron was of the people of Moses, he was proud, because of his riches; we gave
him so great treasures, that many men were burdened when they conveyed away the
Keys. Remember how his people said unto him, Rejoice not above measure in thy
great wealth, God abhors the that rejoice without reason; Beg of him
paradise, with thy riches forget not to do good in this world, give alms of
the substance which God has given thee, be not disobedient to him on Earth, he
abhors those that disobey him; these riches were given thee, because thou
di^st instruct the people in the Old Testament; know thou not that God?
destroyed in times past many rich and opul^nt persons? Who is more strong, more
powerful, more rich then God? He will not enquire of the wicked the number of
their sins, he knows all, and the account. Caron one day went forth in
public, with all his retinue; They that affected the wealth of this world,
said, Would to God we had as much wealth as Caron; he is happy! but the more
knowing among them said, ye are unhappy, the grace of God is more advantageous
to them that believe in his Law, and do good works, then all the treasures of
Caron; none shall receive his grace but such as shall obey him, and persevere,
in obedience to his Commandments. We deprived Caron of all his treasures, and
none was able to protect him against us; then they that had coveted his riches,
said, oh miracle! God gives to, and depriveth of wealth whom to him seems
good; Had not God given us his grace, we had bin necessitous; certainly the
wicked shall be miserable; I will bestow Paradise on them that hate vanity and
disorder on the Earth, and shall have my fear before their eyes; whosoever
shall do good, shall find good who does evil, shall be chastised after his
demerits. He that has taught thee the Alcoran, shall cause thee to return to
the Mecca. See Gelaldin.
place that thou desire: Tell the Inhabitants of that place, that God knows
them that teach the right way, and such as go astray. Thou did not expect the
Alcoran, it is a special grace of thy Lord; assist not the Infidels, and take
heed least they seduce thee, after having learnt what has bin taught thee;
Preach to the people the unity of God, Be not in the number of them that belive
many Deities, adore God alone, there is no God but h^; al things shall have end,
except his face, he commands over every thing, and all men shall one day
appear before him to be judged.

CHAP. XXIX. The Chapter of the Spider, containing sixty nine verses written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: I am God most wise. Men have
believed that it is sufficient to say we believe in God, and that they be not
proved: Certainly God proved their predecessors, and knew such as were zealous
in his Law, and them that were Infidels. Do they who have done evil, think to
escape the punishment of their crimes, and not to be judged? Such as hope to
see God, shall behold him at the time appointed by his divine Majesty; he
understands and knows all things. He that fights for the faith, fights
for his soul; certainly God has no need of men, their sins shall be pardoned
who shall believe in his divine Majesty, and shall do good works. We enjoined
the children of Israel to honor their father and mother, and to do good to
them; if they press thee to worship many Gods, thou shall be damned, if thou
give ear to them, obey them not in this matter, ye shall be assembled before
me, I will set before you all that ye have done, I will reward you according to
your works, and place such as shall have observed my Law in the number of the
blessed. There be men who affirm, that they believe in God, and are impatient
when evil befalls them from God to prove them. If God give victory to the
True beleivers, they say, that they are on their side, but does not God know
what is in their heart? he knows them that believe in his Law, and those that
are impious. The Infidels, said to the True-beleivers, do like us, follow our
way, we will bear your sins; They will not bear them, they are liars, they shall
bear their own burden; shall not an account of their sins be required of them
at the day of Judgment? We sent Noah to instruct men, he lived upon the earth
900. and 50. years. The flood surprised, and destroyed the people of his time,
because they were unjust, and we saved Noah and those that were with him in the
Ark; this ought to serve for example to all the world. Remember Abraham, who
said to his people, adore one God, and fear him, ye shall do well, if ye have
knowledge to comprehend it; ye worship but Idols, and are but liars, those whom
ye worship cannot benefit you; implore succor of God, worship him, and give him
thanks for his graces, ye shall one day appear before him, if ye traduce me,
those that were before you traduced the prophet^, Gods Messengers: Messengers
are obliged only to discharge their message; are ye ignorant that God causes
men to dye, and shall raise them again? it is a thing easy to God: Walk
through the earth, and consider how God has extirpated your predecessors, and
created after them another people, certainly he is omnipotent. He punishes and
pardons as he sees goed, yo^ shall one day be assembled before him to be
judged; you shall not render him impotent, either in the Earth, or in the
heavens, ye shall find none of power to protect, or defend you against his
divine Majesty; such as obey not his Commandments, who believe not the
resurrection, and despair of his mercy, shall suffer great torments; the people
answered, kill Abraham, and burn him; but God delivered him from the fire that
they had kindled, which shall serve for example to True-beleivers. He said unto
them, ye adore only Idols, because of your love to the wealth of the world; ye
shall despise and curse each other at the day of judgment. Hell shall be your
habitatation and ye shall be deprived of protection. Lot believed in his words,
and said, I will retire ^o the place which my Lord shall appoint me* he alone is
omnipotent and most wise. We gave to Abraham two sons, Isaac and Jacob: we
caused Prophets to be borne of his race and t^ught his progeny the Scripture:
we rewarded him in this world, and he shall be at the day of judgment in the
number of the blessed. Rmember Lot, who said to his people, Ye defile your
selves with filthiness unknown to any before you, ye incline to the love of
men, ye rob upon the high ways, and defile on another. This people answered,
Let us see the Judgments of God, if what tho^ speak be true. Then he said,
Lord protect me against unbelievers. When our Messengers came toward Abraham,
to declare to him that he should have children; they said unto him, We will
ruin Lots City, and destroy all the inhabitants thereof, because they are
impious. Abraham answered, Lot dwells in that City; they said, We know all
that is within it, and we will preserve him, with all his family, except his
wife, she shall be in the number of them that shall be punished. When our
Messengers arrived at Lots house, he was troubled, in that he had not strength
sufficient to defend them from the malice of the people; they said unto him,
fear nothing, neither afflict thy self. We will preserve thee and all thy
family, except thy wife; she shall abide among them that shall be destroyed; we
will cause the indignation of God to fall upon this City, because of their
impiety; it shall serve for exampl to posterity We sent Chaib to his brethren,
the inhabitants of Madian; he said unto them, Worship one God, fear the day of
Judgment, and defile not the Earth. They impudently traduced him, but were
surprised by an Ear^hquake, and rem^ined dead in their houses, as c^rkases. We
destroyed Aad, and Temod, their ruin is yet apparent in the places of their
habitations; the Devil tempted and seduced them from the right way,
notwithstanding they knew their error. We destroyed Caron, Pharaoh, and Haman;
Moses preached to them my Commandments; they contemned them, and became proud
in the Earth, but escaped not the punishment of their crimes. We chastised some
by an impetuous wind, and other were surprised by thunder; we deprived them of
their riches, and they were drowned. God was not unjust toward them, they drew
mischief on themselves through their impiety. They that worship Id^ls are like
to the Spider; she builds her house of her cob-wed, that cannot defend from
heat or cold. They would not adore Idols, did they understand what they do; God
sees what they worship, he is omnipotent and wise. I teach the people these
parables, and none but the wise understand them. Truly God created heaven and
earth, it is a sign of his Omnipotency to True-beleivers. Instruct them in the
Book that is inspired i^to thee; make thy prayers at the time appointed,
prayers divert men from sin; to be mindful of God is the best work thou can
perform, he knows all the actions of men. Dispute with mildness against them
that have knowledge of the written Law, except against the wicked that are
among them. Say unto them, we believe in what has been taught you, and in what
has been taught us; Your God, and our God is one God; we are resigned to his
divine will. We have sent thee the Alcoran, as we sent to them the old
Testament: Such as understand the Old Testament, bleive in the Truth of the
Alcoran. Thou have not written it with thine own hand, had thou written it,
thou had caused them to doubt, who desire to make it void: certainly it
contains, and teacheh Intelligibly the Commandments of the Law; none but
infidels reject it. They have said, we will not believe in this Book, unles God
work in it some miracle. Say unto them, Miracles proceed from God, I am sent
only to preach the torments of Hell. Is it not sufficient, that we have sent
thee the Alcoran to instruct them? it contains the effects of my mercy and
precepts, necessary for their salvation. Say unto them, it suficeth that God is
witness of mine actions, betwixt you and me; he knows whatsoever is in
heaven; and in Earth: they that believe in Idols, and have not faith in God,
are damned. They urge thee to make them see the punishment of their crimes; if
the time were come, they should soon feel it; they shall rescent it, when they
least think of it, but they know it not; they shall press thee to make them
see it. Say unto them, Hell is prepared for Infidels. When they shall be
plunged, in torments over their heads, and under their feet, it shall be said
unto them, taste the punishment which ye have deserved. O ye people that believe!
the earth is sufficiently large and spacious for you to separat your selves from
the wicked; worship me alone, al creatures shall die, and be assembled before me
to be judged. The true beleivers that shall have don good works shall inhabit
Paradise, wherein flow many rivers, wherein is the reward of the righteous, of
them that persevere to do good, and are patient in their affliction, and trust
in their Lord. How many beasts be there that have not wherewith to live? God
nourishes them, and you also; he understands and knowet^ all things. If thou
ask of the I^fidels, who created Heaven and Earth, the Sun, and the Moon? they
will say, It is God. Wherefore then do they deny his Unity? God en^icheth and
impoverisheth whom pleases him he is omniscient. If thou demand of them, who
causes the rain to fall from Heaven, to give life to the Earth, after the
death thereof? they will say, It is God. Say unto them, Praised be God, that ye
avouch it; nevertheless, the greatest part of men understand it not. The life
o^ this world is but sport and vanity, life is in Paradise, ha^ they knowledge
to comprehend it. When they enter into a ship, and see the tempest, they call
upon God, and protest to profess his Law. And when he has preserved them on
the Land, they are imgrateful for his grace, and return to their Idolatry, they
shall too late understand their error. Know they not that we have established
in Mecca all safety and freedom? and that men are taken away by violence to be
slain, and made slaves? believe they in things unprofitable? shall they be
ungrateful for for the graces of God? who is more impious then he that
blasphemeth against God, and impugneth the known Truth? Is there no place in
Hell for the wicked? I will guide into the right way them that shall fight for
the Faith, God is with them that do good.

CHAP. XXX. The Chapter of the Grecians, containing sixty Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the most wise God. The
Grecians were vanquished upon the frontier of the Persians, but shall be
victorious before the end of seven years. God disposes all things from the
beginning to the end; When they shall be victorious, the True-beleivers shall
rejoice in the victory that God shall give them; he protecteth whom to him
seems good; he is omnipotent and merciful. He has promised them victory, and
departs not from his promises; of which the greatest part of men are
ignorant; they affect the life of this world, and consider not their end: Will
they not consider that God has created the heavens and the earth, and all that
is in them? and has appointed to every thing a limited and prefixed time?
Certainly the greatest part of the people believe not in the Resurrection: Will
they not consider the end of their predecessors, who were more powerful and
wealthy then they? God has sent to all an Apostle to teach them his Law, he
has don to them no injustice, they have drawn mischief on themselves through
their iniquity; the end of the wicked shall be like to their works, they
despise the Commandments of God, and deride them, but God shall cause them to
die, and rise again, and all shall be assembled before him at the day of
Judgment; that day shall they be desperate, their Idols shall not intercede
for them, they shall forsake them, and they shall be separated from the
true-believers. Such as believe in God, and do good works shall enjoy the
delights of Paradise, and the wicked shall be chastised according to their
demerits. Praise God, pray unto him evening and morning, praise is due to him
in heaven and earth; pray unto him before the Sun set, and at the hour of noon*
he makes the dead to come out of the living, and the living out of the dead;
he causes the barren earth to revive, and grow green after its death; in like
manner will he cause you to arise again, and come out of your sepulchers: it is
a sign of his omnipotency, to have created you of earth* to have given you
flesh and bones, and to have created the woman (of the rib of the man) to dwell
with him; he has commanded you to love mutually, and to exercise charity among
you, these things are signs of his omnipotency to them that consider his
graces. The creation of heaven and earth, the diversity of tongues, the
differences of your visages, and of your color, the night created for repose,
and the day for travel, the lightning that terrifieth the people, and which
through rain causes the earth again to flourish, are signs of his Omnipotency:
It is a token of his Omnipotency to sustain the heaven, and the earth; ye shall
come out of your sepulchers when he shall call you; whatsoever is in heaven and
earth obey him; he causes men to dye, and to rise again, he alone is God in
heaven and earth, he is Omnipotent, and knows all things. He speaks to you
in a parable, drawn from your selves, your slaves; are they your companions? do
they equally partake with you in the goods which God has given you? How then
will ye say that God has a companion equal to him? Thus do I unfold his
mysteries to persons that have knowledge to comprehend them; c^rtainly the
wicked have followed their apetites with ignorance; who shall guide him whom
God shall cause to err? he shall find no protector; embrace the law of
Salvation, God has established it, that men may observe it; it admits no
alteration, but the greatest part of the wo^ld are ignorant of it: Fear God,
make your pra^ers at the time app^inted; be not like to them that say, God has
a companion; neither like to them that are at present in the number or
Heretics, and were before as ye are; every Sect is pleased in its opinions,
when any evil b^falleth them that call upon God, and are converted:
nevertheless some of them return to their Idolatry; after the reception of his
grace, they are ungrateful, they shall awhile be tolerated, and in the end
they shall, too late understand their error: Have we taught them reasons and
arguments, that prove that I have a companion? The people rejoiced when we
enlarged to them our graces; and became desperate, when evil befell them; see
they not that I give, and take away wealth, as to me seems good, This is a
taken of my Unity to such as obey my Commandments. Give to your neighbor what
appertains to him, and particularly to the poor, and true beleivers, if ye
desire to see the face of God; such as shall do it, shall be blessed. The money
which ye put to Usury increases in the hands of men, God shall not suffer it to
prosper; the alms which ye give shall make you to see the face of his divine
Maj. and shall be doubly restored to you. God has created you, he enricheth
you, and causes you, to die and rise again can your Idols do as much? Praised
be God, he has no companion; disorder appeared in the e^rth, and in the sea,
because of the iniquities of men; peradventure they will be converted, when
they shall feel the punishment of their crimes: Say unto them, go throughout
the earth, and consider the end of your predecessor, the greatest part of them
were Idolaters; embrace the true Law before the day comes, when none shall be
heard; that day shall the wicked be separated from the good, the impious shall
give an account of their impiety, and such as shall have lived well, shall
enjoy the joys of Paradise, the grace of God shall be their recompense, God
abhors Infidels. It is a sign of his Omnipotency, to send the winds to bring
you rain, and make you to taste the fruits of his grace; the ship runs upon
the water through his permission, for the advantage of your commerce; will ye
not be thankful to him for his benefits? We sent to every Nation Prophets and
Apostles before thee, they came with most intelligible precepts, and with many
miracles; we chastis^d those that slandred them, and protected the faithful.
God sends the winds that elevate the clouds, and extends them in the air
in many pieces at his pleasure; he causes the rain to fall where he lists,
and rejoices whom to him seems good of them that expect it with impatience;
consider the effects of his bounty: he causes the dry and barren earth to
flourish again, and restores the dead to life, he i^ Omnipoten^. We sent the
winds to assemble the clouds that covered men with their shadow, nevertheless
they are returned to their impiety; the dead shall not understand thee, neither
likewise the dumb, thou art not obliged to lead the blind, none shall hearken
to thee but such as shall believe in my Law, and be obedient: Say unto them,
God created you impotent, he has given you strength, and after, having reduced
you to the weakness of old age, does what to him seems good; he knows men's
secrets, and does what pleases him; ^he wicked shall swear at the day of
judgment, that they have remained but an hour in their sepulchers; they lie in
like manner, when they deny the Resurrection; the true believers, that know the
truth, shall say unto the^, ye have remained there the time appointed in the book
of God, to w^t, until the day of Resurrection; behold the day of resurrection!
ye knew not at what time it should arrive; this day excuses shall be
unprofitable to Infidels, they shall be ^eprived of protection. We have taught
in the Alcoran all that is profitable for the salvation of men; if thou
teach them my Commandments, unbeleivers will say, thou bring nothing but
disorder; thus God hardneth the hearts of the ignorant. Be patient, and
persevere; what God promises is infallible; beware lest unbeleivers shake thy
perseverance.

CHAP. XXXI. The Chapter of Locman, containing thirty four Verses written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: I am the most wise God. The Turks
say, that Locman was a great Doctor in David's time.
These precepts are the precepts of the book filled with doctrine, it guides
into the way of salvation; the righteous who make their prayers at the time
appointed, that pay tithes, and believe in the day of Judgment, they are guided
by their Lord, and shall be blessed. There be who deride this book, they
ignorantly depa^t from the law of God, and have despised it, but shall one day
be severely punished: when they are taught the comandments of God, they turn
the back with disdain, they will not hear, and have ears stopped; Say unto
them, you shall in the end suffer infinite pains: Such as believe in the Law of
God, and do good works, shall eternally enjoy the delights of Paradise; what God
promises, is infallible, he is Omnipotent, and altogether wise, he created the
heaven, and sustaineth it without a pillar, appearing to your eyes; he lifted
up the mountains upon the ear^h, to fasten and hinder it to move; he has
thereon dispersed many beasts, and sent rain from Heaven, which causes plants
to spring forth, and herbs of diverse sorts. Behold [here] what God has created
show me what your Idols have created; assuredly idolaters are manifestly
seduced from the right way. We inspired knowledge into Locman and spoke unto him
to give God thanks; he that returns thanks to God for his graces, does good
for his soul; God rejects the ungrateful, and praise is due to him in all
places. Remember thou that Locman said unto his son, O my son! believe not thou
that God has a companion, it is an exceeding great sin: we have commanded man
to honor his father and mother; his mother bears him with grief upon grief
and weaneth him at the age of two years; be thou not ungrateful for Gods
benefits, honor father and mother, thou shall be one day before God to be
Judged. If thy parents press thee to believe that God has companions, obey
them not, follow the way of them that obey him, all men shall be one day
assembled before him, to be rewarded according to their works. O my son! if
thou do evil, of the weight of a grain of Mustardseed, or of the weight of a
rock, or of the greatness of heaven and earth; God will know it, and put it in
account, he is exact and omniscient. O my son! make thy prayers at the time
appointed, do what is honest and civil, fly what is not approved, and be
patient in thy adversities; regard not the world, disordred through pride;
converse not with the proud, God detesteth the haughty; observe thy steps, walk
with modesty, speak gently, they be persons that bray like Asses when they
speak: see thou not that God has created for men all that is in heaven and
earth, and conferreth on them his graces in general, and particular. There be
ignorant [persons] that dispute of the Diety without reason; when it is said
unto them, do what God has appointed, they answer, we will do what we saw don
by our fathers. They consider not that the devil calls them and their
fathers to the pains of Hell* he that obeys God, and does good works, fastneth
him to the strongest knot, and will have a care of him at the hour of his end.
The impiety of the wicked ought not to afflict thee, they shall be one day
assembled in our presence, to be chastised; I will show them all that they have
don, I know what is in the hearts of men, I will prolong a while their
punishment upon earth, and precipitate them in the other world, into the fire
of hell. Have thou not damanded of them who created heaven and earth? they
said, it is God; say unto them, therefore (...) be God; nevertheless the
greatest part of them are ignorant. Whatsoever is in heaven and Earth is Gods,
he has no want of the world, praise is due unto him in all that he does; if
all the Trees of the world were Pens, and the Sea Ink, they could not
comprehend the effect of his Omnipotency, he is Omnipotent, and knows all
things. He created, and shall make you to rise again with one word, he
understands and sees all things. Consider they not that God causes the
night to enter into the day, and the day into the night: that he created the
Sun and the Moon, that move in the heaven, until the day appointed, he knows
whatsoever ye do, because he is truly God; they that invoke other then him,
invoke things vain and unprofitable: God alone is most high, and most mighty:
See thou not how the ship runs upon the water, for a token of his
Omnipotency, to such as acknowledge his graces? When the Wars arose against the
Infidels, many called upon God, with resolution to follow his Law: when he
saved them on the Land, some persevered to do well, and others returned to
their impiety: none but deceivers and ingratfull [persons] despise his
Commandments. O people! fear God, and the day when the father shall not be able
to succor his child, neither the child serve his father, Gods promises are
infallible; be not proud of your riches, neither that God tolerateth and
suffers you, he knows the time when ye shall be chastised, the hour that
the rain shall fall upon the earth: he knows what is in the wombs of women,
whether it be male or female: none but God knows what thou will ^o to morrow:
none but he knows the place where thou shall die; he knows all, he knows
all

CHAP. XXXII. The Chapter of Worship, containing an hundred and thirty Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the most wise God. D^ubtless
this book was sent by the lord of the Universe, will the wicked say that thou
have invented it? On the contrary, it is the truth it self, which proceeds
from thy Lord, to preach to them that heretofore had none to instruct them;
peradventure they will follow the right way. God created heaven and earth, and
all that is between them, in six days, and sits on his Throne; who shall
protect you? who shall hear your prayers but he? will you never consider it? He
disposes all things in heaven and earth, all men shall one day be assembled
before him to be judged; a thousand years are but one day before his divine
Majesty; he knows what is past, present, and future, he is omnipotent and
merciful, he has created every thing for his people, he formed man of the
dirt, and dust of the earth, he inspired the soul into his body, he gives you
hearing, sight, and sense, but few men return him thanks for his graces; they
say, what, shall we die, and return to be a new people? Certainly they believe
not in the Resurrection. Say unto them, the Angel of death shall cause you to
dye, and ye shall return before God to be judged. Thou shall then see how the
Infidel will hang down the head before their Lord, and say, Lord, we now see
the certainty of the Resurrection; we this day know the truth of thy words,
permit us to reurn into the world, we will be righteous, we now understand what
is profitable and necessary for us, we could have given a guide to every
person, my word is most true, I will fill hell with the wicked, and Paradise
with the righteous; thus shall men be rewarded and chastised according to their
works. Taste (o ye wicked!) the pains that ye have deserved, in refusing to
believe in this day which ye have found; we leave you in the miseries du to your
incredulity; taste the eternal torments that ye have merited through your
impiety. Such as believe in the mysteries of my Law are humble, they worship me
alone, and praise me when they here mention of me; they are not proud, rebel
not against my Commandments: they arise from their bed to make their prayers
with fear and hope, and employ in pious works some part of the wealth that we
have given them. No man has either seen or knows what God reserveth to
recompense the righteous for their perseverance. The believers and unbelievers
shall not be alike entreated; the believers that have don good works, shall
enjoy Paradise, as the reward of their labors, and the unbelievers shall be
precipita^ed into the fire of hell; the more they shall labor to get out, the
further shall they enter into it; it shall be said to them, taste the pains of
eternal flames, which ye would not believe. I will make the wicked to taste of
the torments of the world, and the pains of hell, if they be not converted. Who
is more unjust, then he that knows the Commandments of his Lord, and
disobeyeth them? we will be avenged on his impiety: we gave a most true Book to
Moses, to instruct the children of Israel; we put into the right way those
among them that persevered in their faith, and obeyed our Commandments. Thy
Lord shall judge the difficulties of the Infidels at the day of Judgment; see
they not how much people we destroyed in times past, that reposed [confidence]
in their houses? It is a token of our Omnipotency, will they never understand
it? See they not how I thrust forth water in desert and barren lands? that I
cause herbs to spring forth for the nourishment of men and beasts? will they
never consider it? They demand, when will the day of Judgment come? Say unto
them, that da^ shall not bring contentment to Infidels, and they shall be
without protection. Depart thou far from them: perseveere, and attend they wait
an occasion to mischief thee, but thou shall see them chastised.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Chapter of Bands, and Troops of Soldiers, containing
fourscore and seven Verses, written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Prophet! fear God, and obey not
unbelievers, God knows all things, and is most prudent in what he ordains;
observe what thy Lord has taught thee, he knows the actions of men;
recommend thy self to God, it ought to suffice thee, that he protecteth thee.
He has not given two hearts unto men, he has not enjoined us to call your
wives your mothers; those which you call your Children, are not all your
Children, ye speak it only with the mouth, but God always speaks the truth,
and guides men into the way of salvation. Call your neighbor by the name of
his father, this action shall be acceptable to God, provided, that ye have no
evil desig^^^^ (...) the heart; is ye know not his name, call him your
brothe^, (...) God, or Sir, God is gracious and merciful. The Prophet is
obeyed of them that believe in God, and honor his wives, as their Mothers.
Kinsmen are heirs of each other, it is so appointed by his divine Majesty to
the Believers that went out of Mecca to follow the Prophet: It is ordained in
Scripture to do good to your parents. Remember thou that we received the
promise of the Prophets of thee, of Noah, of Abraham, of Moses, and of Jesus
the Son of Mary, (to worship but one God) we received a strong promise: An
account shall be required of their actions, and the wicked shall feel the
rigor of infinite pains. Oh ye that believe in God! remember his favor
toward you; when ye were charged by troops of Enemies, he sent against them an
impetuous wind, and troops invisible to your eyes, to fight them, he sees all
that ye do; those invisible troops came from the East, and from the West, from
above, and below, when your sight was troubled, and your hearts failed you,
because of the great number of your Enemies; ye had already conceived a very
bad opinion of the Law of God; then were the True-believes tried, they trembled
with fear; The wicked, and such as were weak in their faith, said, that
whatsoever God and his Prophet had promised them, was but abuse and vanity;
Remember thou how a party of them said to the Inhabitants of the Territory of
Medina, there is no safety for you with Mahomet, return into your houses:
Remember thou how many among them required dismission, and said, that their
houses were forsaken: Their houses were not forsaken, but they had a design to
fly; had they returned to their houses, they had on all sides persuaded them
to follow impiety, they should not there have made long abode, because the
before had promised God not to fly; he would have required an account of their
promises. Say unto them, flight shall be to you unprofitable, if ye fly death,
for that ye ought no longer to continue in the world. Say unto them, who is
able to protect you against GOD, when he shall resolve to destroy you? take
none other protector but him; he knows them that were dissuaded to go to the
^e^ell to spare their Wealth and Persons. They cast (...) upon thee, when they
are surprised with fear, they turn their eyes into the head, as a man that
dies, and when they are delivered from fear, they traduce thee, because of
their extreme avarice. Such men believe not in God, he renders all their works
unfruitful, it is a thing easy to his divine Majesty. The Troops of the
Infidels believed they were invincible, and when they saw the troops of the
True believers, they desired to fly. The Infidels desired to draw the Arabians
to their party, and have intelligence to know in what condition you are; had
they bin of your party, few of them had bin slain; the adhering to the Prophet
of God serves to you as a Cittadell, it serves as a Bulwark to them that
apprehend the day of Judgment, and think often on his divine Majesty. When the
believers said, behold! what God and his Prophet promised us, they are sincere
in their promises; the sight of their enemies increased their faith, and zeal
toward God and his Prophet. There be persons among the True-believers who have
performed what they promised to God; many of them are dead in obedience to the
Commandments of his divine Majesty, others attend the same thing, and swarve
not from what they have promised; God shall recompense them for their zeal, and
chastise the Infidels, or pardon them if it so please him, he is gracious and
merciful. God shall destroy the unbelievers with their wrath against the
believers; he protecteth True-believers incombats, he is strong and omnipotent.
The Jews descended from their Fortress, to give aid to the Infidels, but God
cast fear into their hearts; a party of them were slain, and the rest taken
slaves; they by their death made you heirs of their lands, their houses, their
riches, and fortresses which you were not able to conquer; God is omnipotent.
Oh Prophet! if thy wives be too ambitious of the wealth of the earth, and of
garments too sumptuous; Call them, Say unto them, that thou will deal well with
them, and wilt repudiate them wi^h mildness and civility. If they love God and
his Prophet, if they are virtuous, his divine Majesty will give them an
exceeding great reward: Oh ye wives of the Prophet! such of you as shall be
unchaste, shall be punished doubtly more then other women, this is a thing
easy to God; such among you as shall obey God and his Prophet, and shall do
good works, shall be rewarded more then other women, an exceeding great reward
is prepared for you. Oh ye wives of the Prophet! ye are not like other women of
the world; fear God, and believe not in the discourse of such as have design to
seduce you, speak with civility, abide in your houses; go not forth to make
your beauty appear, and to make a show, as did the ignorant of old; pray to God
with affection, give alms, obey God and his Prophet, God will deliver you from
his wrath, and will purify you: be mindful of the ^aw that is taught you in
your houses, he is merciful to them that honor him, he knows all the
actions of the Prophet, he has promised his mercy, and an exceeding great
reward to those (Men and Women) that shall obey his Commandments. Those men and
women that believe in his unity, that resign themselves to his divine pleasure,
that are patient and humble, the speak the truth, that fast, give alms, and are
chaste; and (...) men and women that observe his law, ought not to coutr^ his
actions, neither those of his Prophet, nor say, that the could do better the^
they, if they would endeavor [it.] (...) that disobeyeth God and his Prophet,
erreth from the rig^^ way; Remember what thou did say to him whom G^^
favored, Mahomet was amorous of Zeid his slaves wife, he caused him to
repudiate her to marry her, because of her beauty.
to receive him into his Law, and whom the did gratify with liberty, that
said, divorce not thy wi^^ and fear God; thou concealest in thy mind a design
whi^^ God shall discover, thou fear the people, but it is thy (...) to fear
God alone. When Zeid did repudiat his wife, we ^^ryed thee to her, to the end
their might remain no error among the True-belelevers; when they shall
repudiate the wives, they shall observe in repudiating them, what God ha^
ordained. The Prophet sins not in doing what God ha^ permitted; the law of God
was in this manner observed by (...) predecessors, and the command of his divine
Maj. is execu^^^ without delay. Such as preach the word of God, his Apost^^ and
Prophets, fear none but his Divine Majesty, it suffice them that they are in
his protection. Mahomet is not yo^ father, He is not the father of Zeid, to
espouse the wife which he put away.
he is the Apostle of God, and the last of all the Pr^phets, God knows all
things, there shall not come another Prophet after him. Oh ye that believe in
Go^! thi^ frequently on his divine Majesty, praise him morning an^ evening, he
shall give you his mercy; the Angels implo^ pardon, that he may deliver from
darkness; he is mercif^^ to true beleivers, the Angels shall salute them on his
beha^^ at the day of Judgment, See Tefsianf Jo^hir
he has prepared for them an exceeding great reward.

Oh Prophet! we have sent thee to be witness of the deportments of the People,
and as a light to conduct them into the right way, proclaim to the
True-beleivers tha^ they shall receive of thy Lord an exceeding great grace;
obey not Infidels, nor the wicked, fear not their malice, and trust in God,
thou ought to be satisfied that God protecteth thee.

O ye that believe! it is not lawful for you to abuse your Wives; if you
repudiate them before ye have ^nown them, deal well with them, and dismiss
them with ^ildnesse and civility. O Prophet! we permit thee to know ^he women
to whom thou have given dowry, the women-^laves which God has given thee; the
daughters of thine Uncles, and of thine Aunts, that have abandoned with ^hee
the company of the wicked; and the true beleiving wife that shall be given
thee, if thou will marry her, and that she be not the wife of a true-beleiver.
We know what w^ have commanded true beleivers, touching their wives and their
slaves; we have instructed thee therein, to the end thou offend not God, he is
gracious and merciful to such as obey him. Thou shall retain whom of thy wives
thou shall desire to retain, and shall repudiate such as thou shall desire to
repudiate, and shall lie with them that shall please thee; it is better that
thou repudiate, without offending God then to see them male contented, and sad;
they shall be contented with the good that thou shall do to them, in divorcing
them; God knows what is in your hearts, he is Omniscient, and most merciful.
Mahomet had nine wives.
It is not lawful for thee to know other women then thine own, it is not
lawful for thee to exchange them, although the beaty of others please thee,
except thy slaves; See Gelaldin.
God regards all. O y^ that believe I enter not into the houses of the
prophet without permission, except at the hour of repast; and that by chance,
and without design, if ye are invited, enter with freedom; when ye shall have
taken your repast, depart out of the house, and tarry not to discourse one with
another, this molesteth the Prophet, he is ashamed to bid you be gone, but God
is not ashamed to tell you the truth. The wives of the prophet shall have the
face coverd when ye speak shall unto them, this better resented of purity both
in them and in you. You ought not to importune the Prophet of God, neither to
know his wives; this would be a most enormous sin; if ye conceal any design, or
discover it, know that God knows all. They shall not offend God in suffering
themselves to be seen of their fathers, their children, their brethren, their
nephews, their maid servants, and their she-slaves, they shall fear God, he
sees all; God and the angels Bless the Prophet
pray for the Prophet. O ye that believe! See Gelaldin.
pray for the Prophet, and obey him: He that shall disple^ God and his Prophet,
shall be accursed in this world, an^ shall feel rigorous pains in the other;
such as do injur^ without reason, to those (men and women) that believe i^ God,
commit an exceeding great sin. O Prophet! spea^ to thy wives, and thy
daughters, and the wives of true-believers, that they cover themselves with
vailes, they sha^^ be more honored, and shall receive no displeasure, God i^
gracious and merciful. If the wicked, the whoremongers, and those of Medina,
that are weak in their faith, quit no^ their impiety, I will give th^e absolute
power over them* few among them will respect thee, but take thou them, and slay
them wheresoever thou shall meet them, God so commanded those that were before
thee; thou shall find no alteration in the Law of God. The people will enquire
of thee, when shall be the day of Judgment? Say unto them, that God alone
knows it, and that thou know not if it shall b^ very speedily; but that
God has prepared for Infidells an exceeding great fire, wherein they shall
burn eternally, hey shall find no protection, they shall be cast headlong into
the fire, and shall say, would to God we had obeyed his divine Majesty, and the
Prophet his Apostle; they shall say, Lord, we obeyed our Masters and Superiors,
they seduced us from the right way; Lord, chastise them doubly, and give them
thy curse: O ye that believe! be not like them that displeased Moses, he was
innocent of the crimes that they laid upon him, he was inspired of God; fear
God, and speak with civility, your works shall be acceptable to him, and he
shall pardon your sins; He that shall obey God, and his Apostle, shall be
happy; fidelity and obedience are pleasing to him in heaven and in earth* and
upon the mountains. Such as depart far [from him] as did Adam, do injury to
themselves, and are ignorant, he shall chastise those (men and women) that
shall be disobedient and impious; he will give his grace to those (men and
women) that shall believe in his Law, he is gracious and merciful to them that
obey him.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Chapter of Saba is a Province of Liemen.
Saba, containing fifty four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. See Gelaldin
Praised be God, whatsoever is in heaven, and in the earth appertains to him,
praise is due unto him, he is most wise and Omniscient: he knows whatsoever
enters into the earth, and comes out of it, whatsoever ascends to heaven,
and descends, he is gracious and merciful to his creatures, the wicked
demand if they shall see the day of judgment; Say unto them, yes, and that thy
Lord knows the time; he knows what is past, present, and future, and all
that is in heaven and in the earth, even to the weight of an Atome; what is yet
less, and what is yet greater then an Atome, is written in a book that
discovers every thing; he shall reward the true-beleivers that have don good
works; he shall give them his mercy, and enrich them with precious treasures:
such as have endeavored to suppress his Law, shall feel the effects of his
indignation. They that understand the Scripture, know that God has taught thee
the very truth, to guide the people into the right way, into the path of honor
and virtue; but the wicked said among them, will ye believe a man, who
affirms, that after your death ye shall rise again, and be new creatures? he
lies impudently, he is possessed of the devil. Certainly they that believe
not in the Resurrection, are in an exceeding great error, and shall suffer most
grievous pains: see they not what is above, and what is below them? Consider
they not the heaven and the earth? If I will, I can render it barren, and cause
a piece of the heaven to fall upon them for a sign of my Omnipotency. We gave
our grace to David, and spoke to the mountains, birds, and metals with him, to
praise me; we commanded him to make cuirasses, and Iron was soft in his hand,
as wax. O lineage of David I be not ungrateful, I see whatsoever ye do* we made
the winds subject to Solomon, he commanded them evening and morning, from the
East to the West; we gave him a fountain, and brook of dissolved brass; the
devils, through our permission, wrought it to his mind, and we punished in the
fire o^ hell such as refused to obey him. They built for him lost palaces, and
Depein pi^d.
spacious houses; they formed basins for water, channels, and pools: we said
unto him, O lineage o^ David! be not ungrateful for my graces, for that few
persons do acknowledge [them,] When he dyed, through ou^ Commandment, nothing
discovered his death to the devils, bu^ the worms that had eaten the end of
his staff^ whereon he leaned; when the devils saw him fall, they perceived,
that had they known the future, and what was h^ from them, they should not have
labored so long a tim^ in his service. The Inhabitants of Saba have a mark of
m^ Omnipotency in their Country, viz. two gardens, the one on the North side,
and the other toward the South. (i^ was said unto them) eat of the good things
that your Lord has given you, and return him thanks; their Country is
delicious, God has been merciful toward, them, nevertheless they are
ungrateful and impious; we sent the river o^ Arem that overflowed their
gardens; we changed them into two gardens of thorns of Cyprus, and a little An
Judian Date.
Tamarinde; thus did we punish them, because of their impiety. We established a
way with many cities, for facility of commerce among them, See Gelaldin.
and the City which we blessed, and spoke unto the people to follow that way
night and day with safety, and without fear: They said, God destroys us
through the length of this way; they returned to their impiety, and we
dispersed them upon the earth, to serve for example to posterity, and
instruction to such as persevere in my Law, and acknowledge my graces. The
devil caused them to believe his opinion, they followed him, except some of
the true believers that were among them; he had no power over them, but to know
them that believed in the Resurrection, and such as doubt. Thy Lord observes
and regards all. Say unto them, invoke your Idols, they have not power of the
bigness of an Atome, neither in heaven, nor earth, God has no companion, they
shall find none to protect them at the day of Judgment, none shall intercede
for them without the permission of his divine Majesty; if they receive any
relaxation in their fear, they enquire of each other what God spoke, and
answer, that he spoke the truth; that he is most high, and most mighty; Say
unto them, who enricheth you with the good things of heaven and earth? they
will say that it is God. Say unto them, who of you, or of us follows the
right way? Or who of you, or of us is seduced? Enquire not after our sins, we
are not curious to know what ye do, God shall assemble us at the day of
Judgment, and shall judge our differences with equity, he i^ an exceeding great
Judge; say unto them, let us see the Idols that ye have worshipped; certainly
there is but one God, omnipotent and wise. We have not sent thee but to declare
to men the joys of Paradise, and to preach to them the pains of hell, but the
greatest part knows it not; they ask in what time they shall see the
punishment that is preached to them; and if thou speak the truth; say unto
them, when the time thereof is come, ye shall not be able to retard, or advance
an hour: they have said, that they will not believe in the Alcoran, but thou
shall see them one day assembled in the presence of thy Lord, thou shall see
that they shall accuse one another; the poor^ shall say unto ^he rich, you have
hindered us to obey the Commandments of God; they shall answer, have we seduced
you from the way that was taught you? On the contrary, you were wicked and
malicious: they shall say, on the contrary, you employed night and day your
Artifices to render us ingratfull for the graces of God, and to induce us to
believe that he has companions equal to him; they shall repent of their sins,
when they shall see their punishment; we will lay chains upon their necks, and
they shall be chastised after their demerits. The chief Inhabitants of the
Cities, said to the Prophets that we sent to them to preach the torments of
hell, that they believe not their words. We have (said they) more riches, and
more children then those that believe in their discourse, we shall not be
damned, as they affirm; Say unto them, my Lord gives and takes away riches as
seems good to him, but the greatest part of the people know it not; your
wealth and your children shall not give you access to God; such as shall
perform good works, shall be rewarded, and shall live eternally in the
delights of Paradise; they that s^all endeavor to suppress our Law, shall be
cast headlong into the fire of Hell: Say unto them, my Lord gives, and takes
away wealth as to him seems good; he makes vain the alms which ye shall
give, if ye observe not his Law; he is the rich of the rich: Be thou mindful
of the day, when I shall assemble the Idolaters, and shall say to the Angels,
behold them, who have adored you; they shall say, praised be God, thou alone
art our Master and protector; they adored not us, they worshipped the devil;
the greatest part of them believed in his word, this day they are not able to
benefit, or hurt one another; they will say to the unjust, taste the torments
of hell fire, which ye would not believe. They said, when thou did preach
unto them our Commandments, this man would hinder us to worship the gods of our
fathers, he is a blasphemer. They have said, that the Alcoran* is but Sorcery
and Magic, and read not the books that we have sent unto them. Their
Predecessors did like them; they traduced our Apostles, and hindered them to
preach the tenth part of what we had inspired into them, they traducd them but
how were they chastised? say unto them, I preach to you to pray to God two by
two, or alone, or in company; ye shall know one day, that your friend Mahomet
is not possessed of the Devil, and that he preaches to you the pains of hell;
I require no reward of you for mine exhortations, God shall reward me, he sees
all. Say unto them, God teaches his Prophets the truth, and what is to come;
the truth appeared, and falsehood was discovered, and the liars were deprived of
his mercy; if I wilfully go astray, or if I act what God has enjoined me, this
shall be for my soul: God hears, and is present at all things. Thou shall see
the Infidels filled with fear and affrighted when they shall come out of their
sepulcher, they shall not escape the punishment of their incredulity; they
shall then say, that they believe in the Alcoran, but I will show to them from
far the law which they have despised in the world; they shall be precipitated
with their ignorance, into a place remote from mercy and pardon: they shall be
separated from the true-believers, because they have doubted the Commandments
of the Law of God.

CHAP. XXXV. The Chapter of the Creator, containing forty and five Verses,
written at Mecca.
This Chapter it entitled the Chapter of Angels, in the Book Tefsir and
Ioahir, which treats of the exposition of the Alcoran in Turkish.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to God, Creator of
Heaven and Earth, who created the Angels, the Messengers of his Commandments;
they have wings, two, three, and four; he makes of his Creature what seems
good to him, he is omnipotent; none can comprehend the grace that he has given
to his people, it is incomprehensible, he is omnipotent and most wise. Oh
people! Remember the grace of God, is there a Creator beside him? he enricheth
you with the riches of Heaven and Earth, there is no God beside him. How can
the wicked blaspheme against his divine Majesty? If they traduce thee,
certainly they traduced the Prophets that were sent before thee, they shall be
one day assembled before God to be judged. Oh ye people! what God has promised
is infallible; glory not in the wealth of the Earth, beware least the Devil
seduce you, and render you proud; because that God does a while defer the
punishment of your crimes. The Devil is your enemy, be ye his enemies, he
leads them that follow him into the fire of Hell, where they shall suffer the
rigors of infinite pains; their sins shall be remitted that believe in God,
and do good works: Oftentimes, he that delighted in what he does, believes he
does well; God misleadeth and guides whom it pleases him; be not unwilling to
depart from the wicked, God knows all their actions. He sends the winds
that drive the clouds unto barren and dry places, to refresh the Earth, and
cause it to revive after its death; in like manner will he raise again the
dead. He that affects greatness, shall find in God all manner of greatness;
good speeches ascend even to his divine Majesty, and our good works are
acceptable to him. Such as conspire against the Prophet, shall endure great
torments, and their conspiracy become vain and unprofitable. God has created
you of dust and mire, be created* you men and women; the woman neither
conceives, not brings forth, but through his permission; no man can either
prolong or shorten his life, but following what is written in the book [kept in
heaven] these things are easy to God. Those two Seas are not like to
Eaphrates, whose water is sweet and pleasant to drink; the water of the Sea is
cold, and salt, nevertheless ye eat of the fish of the one, and the other; Ye
fish out of the Sea, gemmes, to adorn you; you see the Ship to run upon the
waters, and cleave the waves, for the advantage of your commerce, peradventure
you will return thanks to God for his graces. He causes the night to enter
into the day, and the day into the night; he created the Sun and the Moon,
that run in the Heaven till the day appointed. That God who created these
things, is your Lord, the empire of the world is his; the Idols that ye worship
have no more power then the skin of an Almand; if ye invoke them they shall not
hear you, they shall deny you at the day of Judgment, and are not of power to
let you know either the joys of Paradise, or the torments of Hell. Oh ye
people! ye are poor and necessitous, ye have need of Gods assistance, and God
has no want of you; praise is due to him in every place; he will destroy you,
if it seem good to him, and create another new people in your place; none
shall bear the burden of another, be it never so light or heavy, no, not when
they are near of Kin. Preach thou the torments of Hell to such as fear their
Lord, without seeing him and make their prayers at the time appointed. He that
takes heed of offending him, labors for himself; all the world shall be one
day assembled before him to be judged; The blind are not like to such as see
clear; darkness is not like to light, the shade and coolness are not like to
the heat of the Sun; the living are not like the dead; God causes himself to
be understood of whom he pleases, thou can not make the Commandments of God
to be understood by them that are in their Sepulchers; we have sent only to
preach the pains of Hell, and the joys of Paradise, there is no place in the
world where they have not been preached; If the Jnfidels traduce thee, their
predecessors likewise traduced them whom we sent heretofore, to preach to them
the mysteries of faith, and the scriptures; they were surprizd in their sins,
were rigorously chastised. See thou not how thy Lord caused rain to fall from
Heaven, to make the Earth produce many fruits of sundry sorts, and to nourish
in the Mountains the Goats, the Stags, and Hinds? to nourish the Crows and
Ravens, the men, and beasts of diverse kinds and form? God gratifieth his
creatures that acknowledge his benifits, he is omnipotent and merciful. They
who d^voutly read the book of God, who make their prayers at the time
appointed, and bestow in pious works, secretly or publicly, part of the
wealth that we have given them, have hope of a recompense that shall never
perish; God shall recompense and augment his Graces upon them, he is merciful
toward the good, and accepts the acknowledgment of his graces. The Book that
we have sent thee contains the truth, it confirms the ancient Scriptures,
GOD knows and sees all things. We have given the understanding, of the
Alcora^ to such as We have chosen among our creature; there be some who have
ill discharged what we taught them; some have performed what was enjoined them,
and others have taught it with affection and diligence through Gods permission.
This is a great grace, they shall enter into the garden of Eden, where they
shall remain eternaly; they shall be adorned with collars of gold, enrichede
with precious stones, the^ shall be clothed with fine silk, and shall say,
praised be God, who has delivered us from affliction, he is most merciful, and
accepts the thanks of his creatures; such as through his special grace shall
enjoy the house of eternity, shall be free from all pain, and the Infidels
shall be cast headlong into the fire of Hell. They shall not dye in those
torments, and their torture shall neve be assuaged; thus shall the wicked be
chastised, they shall in vain implore succor of God, and say, Lord deliver us
from these pains, we will do better then we have done heretofore I will no
more prolong your life on Earth, I have sent you my prophets and Apostles, They
preached unto you my Commandments, you would not hear them, taste now the pains
of Hell, which ye have merited, the wicked shall this day be deprived of
protection. Certainly God knows whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, he knows
all that is in the hearts of men He it is that has made you to multiply on
earth, impiety shall rise against the impious, it shall render them abominable
before God, and put them into the number of the damned; Say unto them, have ye
well considered the Idols that ye have worshipped? Tell me, what have they
created on Earth? Were they Gods companions in the Creation of the Heavens?
Has God sent to them a Book, and reasons, to authorize their impiety?
Certainly the wicked instruct one another only in pride and arrogance; God
sustaineth the Heavens and the Earth, he alone is able to sustain them, he is
gracious and merciful. The wicked swore to fight for the increase of the faith,
if there should come to them a Preacher to instruct them; and when he came,
they augmented their wickedness, became proud in the earth, and conspired
against the True-deleivers; their conspiracy fell upon themselves, and they can
expect none other things then what was ordained against their predecessors, the
law of God admits none alteration. Consider they not what was the end of
their Predecessors? who were more wealthy and powerful then they? Nothing is
impossible to God, he knows all things, and (...) omnipotent. Should God
punish the people when they ^^nd him, he should leave no living creature on the
earth, deferreth the chastisement of the wicked until the time appointed, when
their time shall be come, he will punish them according to their demerits, he
sees all.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Chapter entitled, O Man, containing four score and eight
verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, the Mahometans have entitled this Chapter with two letters of the
Arabique Alphabet, i, s. The Bedaoi says, that i signifies ia, that is to say
o particul^ vocativa, and s, is an abreviation, that signifies insan. [i e]
Man, and that the Angel, speaking to Mahomet, began this Chapter in this
manner, O man! I swear by the Alcoran, etc. See Tefsir, Kitab el tenoir.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh man! I swear by the Alcoran,
full of Doctrine, that thou art a prophet, sent to teach the People the right
way. This book was sent by the Omnipotent and merciful; that thou may
instruct men in that which was not taught their predecessors; Certainly, what
was said is true, viz. That the greatest part of them is incredulous; we will
put a chain upon their neck, and bind their hands to the very chin; they shall
lift up the head to complain, but we will place before and behind them great
obstacle, we will cover their sight with darkness, and they shall not see a jot.
Misery is upon them; whether thou do reprove, or not reprove them, they shall
not be converted. If thou preachest to them that belive in the Alcoran, and to
such as believe in what they have seen, proclaim to them a general pardon of
their sins, and a very great reward. I make the dead to arise again, and
write exactly in a book the good and the evil that men commi^. Relate to them
the Parable of those of the City, whither thy Lord sen^ his Prophets; we sent
into them two Prophets, they slandered both of them; we succored them by a
third; they all three said to the Inhabitants of this City, we are sent from
God to preach to you his Commandments. They answered, ye are but men like us,
God has not sent us a sign to make you known, ye are liars. They said,
certainly God knows that he sent us to you; we are obliged only to preach to
you his Commandments; They answered, would ye make us Infidels like your
selves? If ye end not this discourse, we will stone you, and make you to suffer
heavy torments. They said, be your evil with you, who has heretofore so ill
instructed you? Certainly you are wick^d; Then a man came running from the
utmost part of the City, who said unto them, oh people! obey the Apostles of
God, obey them that require no reward from you for the pains which they take in
teaching you, and who are in the right way. Wherefore shall not I worship him
that created me, and before whom ye all shall be assembled to be judged? Will
ye worship another beside him? If it be his will to chastise me, your Idols
cannot save me, I should be extremely erroneous, should I believe in your God;
hear and understnnd what I say unto you. [Neverthelesse they sl^w h^m] and said
unto him, go, enter into Paradise; He said, in dying, would to God this people
knew the graces that his divine Majesty has conferred on me, he placed me in
the number of the blessed; After his death we did not send Angels from Heaven
to chastise the wicked; I will send them but once to destroy them; they shall
one day be dumb, for shame that they have not followed the True believers, and
of, being mocked by them that I sent to preach unto them my Commandments; Will
they not consider how much people we have destroyed in times past, who are not
returned, and that shall be one day assembled before me to be judged? The
Earth, dry, dead, and barren, as a sign of my omnipotency for the wicked; we
made it revive, and became green again, and to bring forth fruits, with which
they were satiate; we there created Gardens, Date-trees, and Vines, we cau^ed
Fountains to flow; they eat of the fruits which are not the works of their
hands; will they not acknowledge the works of their Lord? Praise is due to him
that created the male and the female of all plants that the Earth produces,
who created man and woman, and many other things, of which they have no
knowledge. It is a sign of my omnipotency, to separate the day from the night,
and to make the Sun to run to his appointed place. We have appointed to the
Moon her signs, she goes and comes always through her old way; the Sun
neither hasteneth, nor retardeth his course at any time, neither does join
himself by night to the Moon; the night comes not until the end of the day.
And all, to wit, the Moon, the Sun, and the Stars exalt my glory in the Heaven:
it is a mark of mine omnipotency, to have born their Fathers upon the waters in
the Ark, and to have given them vessels like the Ark to bear them; had it
pleased me, I had caused them to be drowned, without succor and salvation; I
saved them through my special grace, until the time appointed. The wicked
despise the signs of Gods omnipotency, and scoffed, when they were required to
fear the wrath of his divine Majesty, present, and to come, and that their
iniquities shall be forgiven them. When it was said unto them, give alms of
the wealth that God has given you, they answered, shall I give him to eat to
whom God shall give bread when it shall please him? They are in a very great
error. They will enquire of you when the day of Judgment shall be; and if ye
believe it, tell them that they must expect but one sole voice, that shall
surprise them, they shall quarrel, they shall not be able to make their
Testament, neither return to see their parents; in the end they shall go out of
their Sepulche^^, and present themselves before God, when the Trumpet shall
sound; Then shall they say, we are most miserable, to have departed from our
graves, behold what God has promised us! The Prophets spoke to us the Truth,
viz. That the world ought to expect but one voice; This day shall all men be
assembled before their Lord, no injustice shall be done to any person, and
every one shall be rewarded, and chastised after his works: Such as shall go
into Paradise, shall be in exceeding great repose, with al^ manner of
contentment, they and their wives shall be safe from all evils, lying on
delicious beds, they shall have all sorts of fruits, and whatsoever they shall
desire, they shall be saluted on the behalf of the Lord, gracious and
merciful. God shall say to the wicked at the day of Judgment, Depart ye this
day from the company of the good; did I not forbid you to worship the Devil,
your open enemy, but to worship me alone, and that it was the right way? Did I
not tell you that the Devil seduced a multitude of the people? Ye would not
believe it, behold Hell, that is prepared for you, through your incredulity. I
will shut their mouth, their hand shall speak, and their feet shall be
witnesses of their crimes; If we will, we can make the Infidels blind, they
shall find no way, they shall not be able to go or come, and shall be succored
of none; had it been our pleasure we could have transformed them in their
houses, and they had not been able to go forth; I will cast their head against
the ground, and will render them infamous, whose life I shall prolong, and they
shall not know their errors. We have not made them to understand the mysteries
of the Alcoran, but that was not necessary; it is but to preach to the living,
who comprehend what is spoken to them; it is most true, that the wicked shall
be punished: See they not that we alone have created all the beasts of the
earth, over which they command? We have made them subject to them; Some serve
them to ride on, and others for their nourishment; will they be ingratfull?
Nevertheless they have worshipped Idols, they adored what could not deliver
them from the pains of Hell. Afflict not thy self at their discourse. I know
whatsoever they say, and all that they keep secret in their souls; Does not man
consider that we created him of dust? And that he is to arogant? God has
taught us how he formed his Creatures, nevertheless the wicked have said, who
is he that can give life to bones that are rotten? Say unto them, he it is that
created you at first, and that knows what he created; he makes fire to come
out of the Green Woods which ye burn, and created the Heaven and the Earth;
cannot he create other creatures like unto you? yes, without doubt, he creates
what pleases him, he knows all things; when he wills any thing, he says,
be thou, and it is; praised be he, to whom all things appertain, and before
whom you all shall return [to be judged.]

CHAP. XXXVII. The Chapter of Orders, containing fourscore Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. See Kitab el tenoir.
I swear by the orders of Angels that worship God, and attend his commands, by
them that hinder men to obey the Devil, and by them that read and meditate on
the Alcoran, that your God is one sole God, Lord of the Heaven, and the Earth,
and of all that is between them, he is Lord of the West, and of the East. We
adorned the Heaven and the Earth with Planets, and have kept them safe from the
malice of the Devils; they cannot hear what is spoken in the Firmament, they
are shamefully driven away on all sides, and shall be eternally tormented; if
they hear any thing spoken, they hear it greedily, and follow [it] speedily,
but the shining Planet persueth them, [and detecteth their malice.] The wicked
have demanded if we created any thing more illustrious then they; Certainly
we created them all of the dust of the Earth: Thou art amazed at their
blasphemies, they deride thy amazement, and shall never be converted. When they
shall see miracles, they shall scoff, and say, that it is but evident magic
to believe that they shall dye, and after, being earth, bones, and dust, they
shall rise again with their Fathers and predecessors: Say unto them, that they
shall rise again, and that they ere seduced from the right way; that the world
shall be but once destroyed, and they shall see what will befall them at the
day of Judgment: They shall that day say, they are wretched, and the Angel
shall say unto them, behold the day of Judgment, behold the day that the Godly
shall be separated from the wicked; behold the day which ye would not beleiv^* It
shall be said to the Angels, gather them together, assemble their wives, and
their Idols, put them into the way of Hell, and stay them, to give account of
their deportments, and why their Idols do not succor them. Certainly they
shall desire to be in the number of them that have obeyed GGDS Commandments:
they shall quarrel among them, and shall say, it is you that have seduced us
from the right way, through your oaths; ye swore that ye followed the law of
God, and observed his Commandments: they shall answer on the contraay, we have
no power over you, you your selves were in manifest error, the word of God
shall be accomplished against us, and we shall for company suffer the torments
of hell; if we seduced you, we were likewise seduced, and we shall this day be
your compaions in punishment. That day shall the wicked be in this manner
afflicted: they become insolent on earth, when it is told them there is but one
God, and say, shall we abandon our gods for a foolish and lying Poet? on the
contrary, he teaches you the truth, as did the Prophets that were before him;
ye shall be chastised, and entreated according to your demerits. Such as shall
obey Gods Commandments shall have a place of safety wherein to rest, with all
sorts of fruits, in pleasant gardens, sitting orderly on delicious beds, with
glasses full of drink, pleasing to the taste, which shall not make them drunk.
Their wives white as fresh eggs, shall not cast an eye upon any but upon them;
they shall talk together, and one among them shall say, I had on earth a
companion, who asked me if I believed in the Resurrection; and if after being
reduced to earth, bones and dust, we shall rise again? come with me, let us go
see what he does; he shall see him in the bo^tom of hell, and shall say unto
him, by God; it wanted little but that thou had seduced me, without the grace
of God I had bin damned, as thou art we are not in the number of the dead, we
shall not suffer any pain; on the contrary, we are in exceeding great
happiness: thus are the righteous rewarded; who are the more happy? they who
are in our felicity, or such as are near to Zacon, the tree of hell? This tree
comes out of the bottom of hell, it rises high, and the branches themselves
resemble the heads of devils; the damned shall eat of the fruit thereof, they
shall drink boiling water, and hell shall be the place of their habitation;
there Fathers were Infidels, they followed their footsteps, and the way of them
that were seduced before them; we sent unto them Preachers, whom they refused
to hear, but consider what is the end of the righteous, and that of the wicked.
We saved No^h, and gave grace to such as obeyed him, we delivered him with his
family from a great danger, and perpetuated his progeny; he shall be praised of
all them that shall come after him, because we gave him our blessing; thus do I
recompense the righteous, he was in the number of them that obeyed my
Commandments; we saved him, and them that followed him, and drowned the
infidels. Remember Abraham, God gave him an heart free from impiety and malice;
he said to his father and his People, wherefore worship ye false gods instead
of the true God? think ye to escape the punishment of your crimes? Then he had
a vision in heaven, and said, I am sick of your Idolatry, they departed from
him with purpose to be converted, and empty the Temples of Idols of their
treasures; he said to the Idols, wherefore eat ye not the sacrifices that are
before you? wherefore speak ye not? and gave them a great blow with his right
hand: the people came together with wrath because he had stricken their gods;
he said unto them, will ye worship the works of your hands? know ye not that it
is God that created you? then they said among them, let us build a great pile,
and put fire to it, and cast Abraham into the fire; they conspired against him,
but we rendered them ashamed and confounded. Abraham said unto them, I go
toward my Lord, he shall guide me into the way of salvation; Lord give me a
son that may be in the number of the righteous; we declared to him that he
should have a son, exceeding wise, when he arrived to years of discretion; he
said unto him, my Son, I dreamed this night that I must sacrifice thee, what
will thou that I do? he replied, my father, do what is commanded you, ye shall
find me full of patience; when his father laid him on the ground, and put the
knife nigh unto his throat; we said unto him, O Abraham! it is enough thou have
satisfied thy dream; thus do I entreat the righteous, thus were we wont to
prove them. We redeemed hi^ son with a fair Ram; he shall be praised of
posterity, and tho^^ that shall come after him, shall bless his memory. The do
I reward the righteous, he was in the number of the^ that obey my Commandments.
We declared to him that he should have a son, called Isaac; from whom should
issue many believers, and unbeleivers. Certainly we gave our grace to Moses and
Aaron; we delivered them with their followers from an evident peril, we
protected them, and they were in the number of the victorious; we gave them the
book full of light, and conducted them into the right way; they shall be
praised in ages to come, and posterity shall bless their memory. Thus do I
recompense the righteous, they were in the number of them that obeyed my
Commandments: Elias is in the number of my Prophets and Apostles; he said unto
the people, wherefore fear ye not God? wherefore worship ye the Idol Balan, and
forsake the Creator of the world? God is your Lord, and the Lord of your
predecessors; they traduced him and were condemned to the fire of hell, except
such among them as obeyed my Commandments? We left his memory happy to
posterity: thus I reward the righteous, he was in the number of them that
obeyed my Commandments. Lot was in the number of my Prophets and Apostles:
Remember thou, how we delivered him and his family from evident peril, except
his wife, who remained among them that were chastised; having saved him, we
destroyed the wicked; they saw in the mo^ning the foot steps of the ruin that
befell them the night before; will ye not understand this mirale? Jonas was in
the number of the Prophets. Remember thou, that he fled in a ship, and was the
cause of evil to the Saylors, he was swallowed of a Whale; ^ad he not repented
of his fault, he should have continued in the belly of that fish until the day,
of Judgment; we cast him on the shore extremely feeble we covered him with
leaves of Filbert, and sent him to preach to more then an 100000 persons, that
we reconverted, whose decease ferred until the time appointed. The Infidells
have demanded if thy Lord has daughters, as they have sons? did we create the
Angels male and female in their presence? They lie, when they say, that God
has a son; has he desired to have daughters rather than sons? how can you
thus blaspheme? Consider ye not that he is God alone, without children? have ye
any reason or authority to speak in this manner? bring your arguments, produce
your reason, if ye are true. The Infidels have said, that the Angels were of
the lineage of God, but the Angels well know that the Infidells shall be
damned, because of their blasphemies. Praised be God, he has neither son nor
daughter, other then the righteous that worship him, and obey his Commandments.
You, with your Idols cannot escape the punishment of your sins, ye shall be
condemned to the fire of hell. There is none among the angels that knows not
his place, and his order in Paradise, to praise and worship his divine Majesty.
If the Infidels say, we observe the Religion of our predecessors, we are in the
right way; Say unto them, that If they belive not in the Alcoran, they shall in
fine know their incredulity. We have promised protection to beleivers, and
Prophets, they shall be protected and victorious; depart for a time from the
wicked, consider how God punishes them, they shall feel the punishment of
their impiety; will they cast themselves headlong into the torments of hell?
assuredly they will be astonished when the shall feel them; depart from their
company, and consider that they shall not be able to escape the punishment of
their crimes. Praise thy Lord, the Lord of power and greatness, above the
wicked; salvation be to the Prophets, and eternal praise to the God of the
Universe.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Chapter of Truth, containing fourscore and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Mahomet entitled this Chapter with the Letter named in the Arabique
Alphabet, Ssad, which signifies in this place, Ssidk, that is to say, Truth.
See the Gloss of Geladin, Kitab el tenoir. They have entitled it the Chapter
of Truth.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Alcoran, that this
Book teaches the way of Salvation; nevertheless, the Infidels resist the
Faith, and are among themselves of a different opinion. How many have we
destroyed in times past, that were like unto them? They cried, and required
succors, but they were no longer to be succored. The Infidels wonder, that a
man like themselves should be sent to instruct them; they say, That he is a
Magician, and a liar, to preach one sole God. It is a strange thing! Their
Doctors forsook their Assemblies, they went to preach through the City, and
said, Persist to adore your Gods; we abjure the belief of the unity of God,
the last Sect did not preach it; it is an evident lie. Was Mahomet chosen among
us to receive alone the Alcoran descended from Heaven? Certainly they doubt the
Alcoran, they shall know the truth, when they shall be in the fire of Hell.
Have they in their power the Treasures of the mercy of thy Lord, omnipotent and
bountiful? Possess they the Kingdom of the Heavens and Earth, and whatsoever
is betwixt them? If it be so, let them ascend into Heaven with their forces;
assuredly, they shall be shamefully beaten in all places. The wicked heretofore
defamed Noah, And, Pharaoh, the maker of Charms, and Temod, the Inhabitants of
the City of Lot; those that dwelt in the Forest, and their companions, traduced
the Prophets, and were punished after their demerits; nevertheless, the
Infidels consider not that they shall be chastised, when the trumpet shall
sound at the day of Judgment, and that they shall no more return on earth to be
converted. They say in scorn, Lord give us to see the Book of the Account of
our sins, before the day of Judgment. Persevere, and be patient, be not
troubled at their discourse, and call to mind our servant David, stout and
zealous in my Law; the Mountains and the Birds praised me with him; they
assembled in his presence, and obeyed him; we gave force to his reign, and
endued him with knowled and eloquence. Have thou learnt David's quarrel, when
they hindered him to enter into the Temple? and how he feared his Enemies? When
they entered toward him, they said unto him, Be not afraid, we have a dispute
among us, judge our difference with equity, and teach us the right way. This
man is my Brother, he has fourscore and nineteen sheep; I had but one, which
he has ravished from me, because he was stronger than I. David said, He has
done thee wrong, art thou troubled for one Ew? The greatest part of men arose
against their neighbor, except such as believe in the Law of God, and observe
his Commandments, which are few in number. Then David knew that we had tried
him, he implored pardon of his sin, he humbled himself, worshipped us, and was
converted. We gave him pardon of his fault, we drew him near unto us, and
lodged him in a place of content. I said unto him, O David! we have established
thee on Earth, to determine the differences that shall arise among the people,
follow not thine own appetite, it will seduce thee from the way of Salvation;
such as shall err from my Law, shall suffer grievous pains at the day of
Judgment. We have not in vain created the Heaven, and the Earth, as the wicked
affirm; misery shall bef^l them, they shall be cast headlong, and burnt in the
fire of Hell. Shall I alike entreat the believers, and unbelievers? the
righteous and the wicked? This Book! We have sent it to thee, and blessed it,
to the end the people may meditate the mysteries thereof; and the wise reap
advantage for their salvation. We gave Solomon to our servant David, he was
extremely zealous in our service. Remember that horses, ready and vigorous,
were presented to him about evening; that he forgot to make his prayer at the
hour of Vespers; and said, What? Have I preferred the love of the wealth of
the Earth, to the remembrance of God, even until the Sun set? He caused them
to be led back again, and sacrificed some of them (for expiation of his
fault.) He caused their legs and neck to be cut off. We tried Solomon, we
caused a suppositious person to fit on his throne, and afterward restored him
to his dominions. He said, Lord, give me thy mercy, give me so happy a reign,
that the like has not been seen; thou art liberal toward thy creatures. We
made subject to him the winds, which blowed at his command, where it pleased
him. We made the devils subject to him; some built his Palaces, others dived
into the Seas, to bring him Pearls, and others were bound and chained to attend
his commands; he retained and dismissed whom he listed, with rendering an
account. We drew him near unto us, and lodged him in a place of content.
Remember our servant Job, that he prayed to his Lord, and said, That the Devil
had heaped misery and affliction upon him. It was said unto him, Strike the
earth with thy foot; thou shall see water spring forth to wash thee, and to
drink: We restored to him his children, and his riches, through our special
grace, to be an example to posterity. It was said unto him, when his wife would
have made him to murmur, Take rods in thy hand, strike thy wife, and swerve not
from what thou have promised. We found him patient and zealous in obedience to
our Commandments. Remember our servant, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, affectionate and
zealous in our Law; we saved, and chose them, among the righteous. Such as have
my fear before their eyes, shall enjoy the delights of the Garden of Eden;
where they shall repose upon most glorious beds; they shall there have all
sorts of fruits, and delicious drink; and their wives shall not look on any
but on them. Behold, what is promised to them at the day of judgment, and
these pleasures shall never end. The wic^ed and Infidels shall be precipitate ^
into the fire of Hell, they shall drink boiling water in abundance, and water
extremely full of all manner of noysom smells; they shall be precipitated into
the flames, and shall say to them that have obeyed them upon Earth, May ye be
perpetually tormented, you have seduced and misled u^: On the contrary, may
your selves be tormented, you have been the cause of our misery, Shall we not
be able to see them whom we believed on Earth to be Infidels? and whom we
de^ided? cannot our eyes see? Thus shall the damned quarrel. Say (to the
people) I am sent only to preach unto you the Unity of God, the Omnipotent
Creator of Heaven and earth, and of all that is between them. Behold* the best
Sermon that I can make unto you; nevertheless you despise it. I know not what
happened in Heaven when the Angels quarrelled. God has inspi^ed it into me and
I am ^ent but to instruct you, and to preach publikly the pains of Hell.
Remember thou that God said to his Angels, I will create man of the mire of the
Earth; when I have formed him, I will breath against him, and inspire my S^irit
into his body; prostrate your selves before him with humili^y. The Angels there
prostrated themselves, except the Devil; he was proud, and already in the
number of the wicked. Thy Lord said unto him, wherefore do thou not humble
thy self before the work of my hands? Thou art in the number of the proud; he
replied, I am better then man, thou have made me of fire, and have created him
of the dust of the Earth. Then thy Lord said unto him, Get thee hence, thou
shall be chastised on all sides, and my curse be upon thee until the day of
Judgment. He answered, Lord, defer my punishment until the day of the
Resurrection; he said, I will defer it until the day appointed. He replied,
through thy permission I will tempt all the world, except such as shall be
zealous in thy Law, and shall obey thy Commandments. He said, I tell thee true,
I tell thee true, I will fill Hell with thee, and those that shall follow thee.
Say unto the people I require of you to recompense for my instructions, I am
not importunate. Certainly this Book is sent only to instruct men, you shall one
day know the truth of what it contains.

CHAP. XXXIX The Chapter of Troops, containing seventy five Verses written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. This book was sent by God, the
Omnipotent and wise. We sent it to thee, the contents thereof are most true:
worship one God alone, and obey his Commandments; faith proceeds from him
alone: Such as worship any other but him, worship Idols. They have said, we
would not invoke our Idols, had they not power to draw us near to God:
Certainly God shall judge one day the difference that is between the beleivers,
and unbeleivers; he guidet^ not him that is a liar and impious. If he would
have a son, he would make choice of one of his creatures, that should be
pleasing to him praised be God, there is but one God, always victorious, he
created the heavens and the earth with proportion; he makes the night to enter
into the day; and the day into the night he created the Sun and the Moon, which
perform their course in heaven, until the day appointed, he is omnipotent and
merciful: He has created all of you of one sole man, of whom he created his
wife; he has given you clean beasts, male and female; he formed you in the
wombs of your mothers, form upon from: he brought you out of three The
obscurity of the mothers belly, her womb, and the skin that infol^ you in the
womb.
obscurities, he alone is your God, and your Lord, the kingdom of the world
appertains to him, there is no God but he. How can the Infidel depart from
his service? If ye will not worship him, he has nothing to do with you, he
desires not that his creatures should be impious; his Will is, that they
praise him; this is his pleasure, and none shall bear the burden of his
neighbor, ye al shall be assembled before him, he will show ye what you have
done, he knows what is in the hearts of men: When man is touched with any
affliction, See Gelaldin.
he invoketh God, and turns; and when he is in prosperity, he forgets his
vows: he has said that God has a companion equal to him, and erreth from the
way of his law Say unto him, thou shall be a while tolerated, in the end thou
shall be cast headlong into the fire of hell; and he that shall pray to God day
and night, erect, prostrate, or on the knee, with fear of the torments of hell,
shall enjoy the mercy of his divine Majesty. Are such as labor to be compared
to them that are idle? They that have judgment will understand this discourse.
Say unto them, oh ye people that believe in your Lord! have his fear before
your eyes; Such as shall do good works in this world shall enjoy abundantly the
riches of the earth, God will innumerably reward them that persevere in
obedience to his Commandments; Say unto them, I am commanded to worship one
God, to profess his Unity, and to be obedient to him. Say unto them, I
apprehend the day of Judgment, if I disobey God my Lord. Say unto them, I will
worship but one God; worship ye others, whom ye will. Such as shall despise the
Law of God, shall lose their souls, and families at the day of Judgment. These
are two great losses, and most certain they be involved in eternal fire. Thus
God preaches to true beleivers. O my creatures! speak unto them, that have my
fear before their eyes, that they adore not idols, and that if they turn to
their Lord, they shall enjoy the delights of Paradise. Proclaim to them that
hear my Word, and obey my Commandments, that they are in the right way, and
well advised; can thou deliver from the fire of hell him that shall be
condemned? Certainly such as obey God, shall enjoy the pleasures of Paradise,
wherein flow many rivers, and there shall they dwell eternaly. This is the
promise of God he swerveth not from that which he promises. See thou not
that God sends rain from heaven, and makes the rivers to run upon the
earth, he causes plants to spring forth, and herbs of diverse colors; thou
see them become yellow; and then altogether dry; this is a sign of his
omnipotency. Has not he to whom GOD has given the light of Faith, received a
great grace from his divine Majesty? Misery is upon them, that have a heart
hardened and forget his law, they are manifestly seduced; he has sent an
excellent book for the instruction of men, his precepts are alike in purity,
and without contradiction: They that fear God, tremble when they hear mention
of this book, and find their rest in the word of his divine Majesty. This book
is the guide of the righteous, God by it guides whom pleases him. He whom God
shall seduce, shall find none to guide him, he shall be precipitated into the
fire of Hell at the day of Judgment; it shall be said that day to the wicked,
taste the torments that ye have merited; their predecessors defamed the
Prophets, and were punished when they least thought of it, God rendered them
ign^mini^us in this world, and they shall feel in the other, tormen^s much more
grievous, and they know it not. We have taught in this book what is necessary
for the salvation of the people, peradventure they will learn it; it is in the
Arabique tongue, without falshod and contradiction, perhaps the people will fly
from impiety; God teaches you a parable: Two men are associates in their
traffic; the one is wicked, the other an honest man, are they alike? Praise
is due to one sole God; the greatest part of the Infidels understand it not.
Thou shall die, all men shall die, and ye shall be assembled at the day of
Judgment, when ye shall dispute together; Who is more unjust, then he that
blasphemeth against God, and against the known truth? Shall not the wicked be
damned? Such as shall believe the Prophet, and fly impiety, shall obtain from
God what they desire; such is the recompense of the righteous, God shall pardon
their sins, and reward them for their good works: does not he protect his
servant? They will terrify thee wi^h the Idols which they adore; but he whom
God shall mislead, shall find none able to guide him, and none shall be able
to seduce him whom he shall guide, is not he the omnipotent and revenging? If
thou ask of the Infidels, who created heaven and earth? they will say it is
God; Say unto them, have ye therefore considered the Idols which ye adore, can
they exempt you from the wrath of God, when it shall be his pleasure to
chastise you? Shall they be able to hinder his grace, when it shall be his will
to pardon you? Say unto them, my refuge is God, I am resigned to his Will, the
wise trust in his divine Majesty. Say unto them, oh people! do as you
understand him, I will do as I understand him; ye shall know in the end, that
whosoever shall be condemned shall be ashamed, and be precipitated into
eternal torments, We have sent unto thee the most true book, to instruct the
people; He that shall follow the right way, shall meet with nothing but good; and
he that shall go astray, shall meet with nothing but evil; thou art not the
guardian of the wicked; God causes men to dye when the hour of their death is
arrived; he deferreth the death of many during their sleep, and remitteth that
of others to the time appointed, this is a sign of his omnipotency, to such as
consider it, Will ye worship any but God? Say unto them; how shall your Idols
be able to intercede for you, since they want power? know you not this? Say
unto them, we ought to invoke one God alone, King of the heaven and earth; you
all shall one day assemble before him to be judged. The Infidels tremble with
fear, when they hear mention of one sole God, and rejoice when they hear speak
of their Idols; Say unto them, God is Creator of the heavens and the earth, he
knows the past, present, and future; (Lord!) thou shall one day judge the
differences of thy creatures: Should the Infidels possess all the riches of the
earth, and yet as much more, they would not be able to escape the fire of Hell
at the day of Judgment; they shall be punished more greivously then they
imagine, their sins shall be set before them, and they shall feel the rigors of
the torments which they despise: man calls upon us, when he is in affliction,
and we give him our grace, he says, he meriteth it: on the contrary, this is
to prove him, but most of them are ignorant of it; their predecessors spoke as
they; the good that they have done, has profitted them nothing; and the misery
that they have merited, is fallen upon them, they shall not escape the punishment
of their crimes. Know they not that God gives and takes away wealth from whom
pleases him? This is a signs of his omnipotency for the righteous. Say unto
them, oh people! they who have off^nded God, ought not to despair of his grace,
he is gracious and merciful; be ye Converted, and recommend your selves to his
will before ye be condemned, otherwise ye shall remain without protection;
follow the instruction that God has sent to you, before ye be chastised, the
punishment of your crimes shall surprise you, ye know not the time; the wicked
shall be afflicted, for that they have not obeyed Gods Commandments, they shall
know their damnation, and the sin that they have committed, in scorning the
trve-believers: They shall say, had God guided me into the right-way, I had had
his fear before my eyes. When they shall see hell, they shall say, could I
return into the world, I would be in the number of the righteous; on the
contrary, my Commandments were taught you, but ye became proud, and despised
them. Thou shall s^e that day how the visages of Infidels shall be blackned: Is
there not a place in hell prepared for the proud? God loves, and puts into
a place of felicity them that fear him, they shall not be touched, either with
displeasure or affliction; God has created all things and disposes all at his
pleasure; he has in his power the keys of heaven and earth, such as disobey
him are damned. Say unto them, oh ignorant [men] will ye enjoin me to worship
another god, besides God? It has been preached to you, and your predecessors,
that all your good works shall be unprofitable, if ye adore many gods, and that
you shall be in the number of the damned: there is but one God, worship him,
and be mindful of his graces. The Infidels have not praised God as he ought to
be praised, they have no knowledge of his power, he shall make earth to
tremble, and gather together the heavens by the strength of his right hand at
the day of Judgment; praised be God, he has no companion. When the Trumpet
shall sound the first time, he shall cause to dis, whom he will have to die in
the heavens and earth; the second time all the world shall rise again, and
attend his commandments; the earth shall be full of the light of the Lord
thereof, he shall bring his book, where in shall be written what the Prophets
and Martyrs have taught, he shall judge the world with equity, and shall not do
injustice to any; every one shall be rewarded and chastised for his works, he
knows all that they have don he shall send the Infidels into the fire of hell,
in troops; ^hen they shall be arrived at the gate, it shall open before their
eyes; it shall be said unto them, behold Hell, which ye have merited; were
there not Prophets and Apostles, to teach you the Commandments of God, and to
preach unto you on Earth the coming of this rigorous day? They shall say, yes,
but the word of God shall be accomplished against the wicked. It shall be said
unto them, go, enter into Hell, ye shall abide there eternally, it is the
habitation of the proud. Such as shall have the fear of God before their eyes,
shall be conducted in troops to the gate of Paradise, the gate shall open
before their eyes; it shall be said unto them, behold what ye have gained, the
peace of God is with you, ye have not been ignorant, enter into Paradise, ye
shall dwell therein eternally. They shall say, praised be God, for that we
believed in his Law; and because we are heirs of his grace, we will go into
Paradise, into what place shall seem good to us, God gives his blessing to
the righteous. Thou shall see the Angels about the throne of thy Lord, who
shall praise and exalt his glory; they shall say, God has judged his creatures
with equity, praise is due to the Lord of the Universe.

CHAP. XL. The Chapter of the True-believer, containing eighty five Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Gelaldin entituleth this Chapter, Of the Pitiful.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. God is prudent and wise. This Book
is sent by the omnipotent, who knows all things, who pardons sins, and
accepts the conversion of his Creatures, he is severe in his chastisements,
and indulgent to his people, there is no God but he, and all the world shall
one day be assembled before his divine Majesty [to be judged.] No man disputes
against the precepts of the Alcoran, but the wicked; be not thou discontented
if they live on earth with some felicity; the people of Noah's time contemned
his instructions, their posterity did like them, and every Nation has
conspired the death of them whom God sent to instruct them; thy disputed to
obscure the truth through their lies, but they were punished; and after what
manner? So is the word of God accomplished against the wicked, they all shall
be damned. The Angels that are about the Throne of God, and those that bear
him, praise and exalt his divine Majesty, they believe in his unity, and beg
pardon of him for the True-believers; Lord, Lord, thy mercy extends through
the whole world nothing is hid from thee, either in Heaven or Earth, pardon
their sins that convert, and embrace thy holy Law, deliver them from the fire
of Hell, open to them the gate of the gardens of Eden, which thou have prepared
for them their Fathers, wives, and children, and them of their lineage that
shall do good works thou art omnipotent and wise Depart from sin, he that shall
depart [from it] shall resent the effects of Gods mercy at the day of Judgment,
and shall enjoy eternal felicity; the Infidels shall be hated of God, his
hatred is far more dangerous then yours; will ye be Indels after being called to
the observation of the Law of Salvation? They said, Lord, will thou cause us to
dye twice and shall we twice rise again? But they shall say at the the day of
Judgment, Lord, we confess we have offended thee, we acknowledge our sin, in
having renounced the belief of thine unity; Shall we never go out of Hell, to
observe thy Law, and follow the way of salvation? No, ye shall suffer in the
fire of Hell, because that ye have believd them that adored Idols, and because
ye have said, that God has companions equal to him. All things obey one sole
God omnipotent, he it is that made you to see his Miracles, and sends you the
riches of Heaven and Earth; none consider it but such as are converted. Pray to
God, and observe his LAW, although it be against the will of the wicked; he
elevateth his Creatures to what degree he lists, he has created his Throne,
and sent his inspirations to whom he sees good, to preach the day of
Judgment; that day shall the people come out of their Monuments, and none shall
be able to hide himself from his divine Majesty. Who shall command that day?
It shall be God alone, victorious; that day shall he recompense every one after
his works, without injustice, he is exact to make account. If thou preach to
the wicked the day of Judgment, their heart will lift them up, and they shall
be full of affliction, their prayers shall not be heard, and none shall
intereede for them: God knows them that have eyes of treachery, and sees all
that is in the hearts of men, he judges of every thing with truth; the Idols
which they worship are without power, God alone understands all things, and
is omnipotent. Consider they not what was the end of their predecessors? who
were more powerful, and more wealthy then they? God surprised them in their
sins, there was none of power to save them, for that they despised the
Prophets of his divine Majesty, they contemned his Law, and were impious, but
he severely chastised them, he is omnipotent, and most severe.

We sent Moses with miracles, with reasons clear and intelligible to Pharaoh,
to Haman, and Caron; they said that Moses was A Sorcerer, and a Liar; and when
he preached to them the truth on our behalf, they said, kill him, with all
those that believe him, and make their wives infamous; but their conspiracy was
but impiety: Pharaoh said, hinder me not to kill Moses, let him invoke his God
to save him, I fear that he may alter your Law, and introduce some disorder in
the Land; Moses said, God, mine and your Lord, shall defend me from the malice
of the proud, that believe not the day of judgment: Then a man of the
domestiques of Pharaoh, that secretly profess the true Law, said, will ye slay
a man that declares that God is his Lord? and that has made you to see
miracles? if he be a liar, his lie shall be against him, but if he speak the
truth, something of what he has preached shall befall you, God guides nether
the wicked nor liars. Oh people! you this day command on Ear^h with splendour,
who shall defend us from the wrath of God, if it fall upon us? Pharaoh said, I
speak nothing to you, but what I have told you heretofore, and I will guide you
all into the right way, He of his Domestiques, that secretly professed the true
Law, said, oh people! I fear lest ye be chastise as have been your
predecessors, as were the people of No^^* Aad, Temod, and those that were after
them; God will (...) do injustice to men, I fear for you the day of judgment, a
da^ when ye shall rise again with terror, to render account ^ your actions, he
whom God shall seduce shall find none (...) guide him. Certainly Joseph came
hertofore with instructions, clear and intelligible: nevertheless ye doubted,
even until his death, and said, that after him God shall not send^ Prophet
like unto him, thus does GOD seduce the wicked, that doubt of his Law; he
hates such as dispute without reason, they are abhorred of them that believe
in his divine Majesty; Thus God hardneth the heart of the proud, and tyrants.
Pharaoh said to Haman was Pharoahs Leiutenant General.
Haman, build me an high Palace, peradventure I shall arrive at the Heavens, and
as high as the God of Moses, I believe him to be a liar. Thus Pharaoh delighted
in his wicked actions, he erred from the right way, and his conspiracy was but
his destruction, He of his family that was a True-beleiver, said, oh people!
follow me, See Gelaldin.
I will guide you into the right way, the riches of the earth pass away
lightly, and the riches of Heaven are eternal; he that does evil shall find
evil; who does good, man or woman, beleiving in God, shall enter into
Paradise, where he shall be enriched innumerably, with all manner of riches*
Wherefore invite you me to precipitate my self into the fire of Hell, since I
exhort you to salvation? Ye invite me to be wicked, and to believe that God
has companions, and I know it is not so; I call you to the omnipotent and
merciful [God,] doubtless I will not worship your Idols, they cannot hear
you, either in this world, or in the other; we all shall be one day assembled
before God, who will condemn Infidels to the fire of Hell; consider hereafter
what to you I have preached: I am resined to the will of God* he beholds all
the actions of his creatures, he shall chastise them for the evil that they
shall commit, and for their wicked designs. He sent his punishment upon the
Lineage of PHARAOH, they deserved to be precipitated into the fire of Hell,
they shall burn evening and morning. It shall be said to them at the day of
Judgment, oh people of Pharaoh! go, enter into the fire of Hell. The Infidels
shall quarrel in Hell, the poor shall say unto the rich; We followed you, are
you able this day to deliver us from eternal flames? they shall answer, we all
are damned with you, God is a most just Judge. The damned shall say to the
Ministers of Hell, Pray to your Lord, that he may assuage these torments for
one day; they shall answer, had ye not on earth the Prophets and Apostles of
God to instruct you? They shall say yes; pray therefore to God your selves; the
wicked love nothing but impiety; I will protect on earth my Prophets, and them
that observe my Law, and particularly at the day of judgment; that day the
wicked shall have no excuse that shall advantage them, my curse shall fall upon
them, and they all shall be damned. We taught Moses the way of Salvation, and
made the Children of Israel heirs of his instructions, to instruct them that
shall understand them. Persevere and be patient, the promise of God is
infallible; implore pardon of thy sins, and exalt the praise of thy Lord
evening and morning. They that dispute against the Commandments of God are
without reason, and have naught in their souls but pride and ignorace: Implore
succor of God, he understands and sees all things, the Creation of the
Heavens, and of the Earth, is greater then the Creation of men, but the
greatest part of men know it not; the blind is not like to him that sees
clearly; he that does good; is not like to him that does evil, neither is
obscurity such as the light, but few men consider it. Doubtless the day of
Judgment shall come, nevertheless the greatest part of men will not believe
it: Your Lord has said, call upon me, I will hear you; Such as shall resist
my Law, shall go into Hell, and be eternally seduced. God has created the
night for repose, and the day for travel, he is bountiful toward his
Creatures, but the greatest part of the peopple are ungrateful, GOD is your
LORD, Creator of all things, there is no GOD but he. How can the wicked
blaspheme? So do they blaspheme that are ungrateful for the graces of GOD; he
has established you on Earth, he has covered you with the Heavens, he has
formed you, enriched you; he your God, your Lord, blessed be God, Lord of the
V^^ verse, he it is that gives and depriveth you of life, there no God but he,
be obedient to him, and observe his La^ Praised be God, Lord of the Universe,
who has create^ you of mire. Say unto the Infidels, I am forbidden to wo^ship
the Idols that ye adore; God has taught me his ^nity, I have received command
to worship none but the Lord of the Universe; he created you of dust, mire, and
co^gealed blood, he causes you to be born little Infants, h^ makes you to
arrive to the age of discretion, to virility, and old age; many dye before that
age, and all attain to the time of their destiny, peradventure ye shall
understand his unity; he it is that makes you to live and to dye, and when he
wills any thing, he says, be thou, and it is. See ye no^, that they that
dispute against his Commandments, depar^ from his Law? Such as reject our
Commandments, and what we enjoyed our Prophets to preach to men, shall find
their errors, when they shall see chains on their necks, and fetters on their
feet; they shall be dragged and burned in Hell; then shall it be said unto
them, where are those Idols that ye adored upon Earth? they shall answer, they
are departed from us, certainly they are without power; thus God seduceth
Infidels, to their confusion. It shall be said unto them, these pains befall
you, for that ye were proud and insolent without reason; enter within the gates
of Hell, which is the habitation of the proud, ye shall dwell there eternally.
Be patient and persevere, the word of God is infallible; I will make thee to
see a part of what I have promised to men, I will cause thee to dye, and thou
shall behold them all assembled to be judged. Certa^nly we sent Prophets before
thee, we have spoken to thee of one part of our, Apostles, and the rest are
concealed from thee; neither Prophets nor Apostle can preach any thing without
Gods permission; he chastises the wicked when he pleases, he shall judge the
differences that are between them and the Prophets, and shall destroy the
unbelievers. God has created the beasts for your use; Some ye eat and others
serve you to ride on, [from them] ye reap profit, they bear the burden, as
likewise do the ships for the advantage of your commerce; God manifests to
you his graces: And what graces! Will ye despise them? Do not unbelievers
consider the end of those that were before them, who were more powerful and
rich then they? their treasures did not save them, they derided the Peophets
and Apostles that preached to them; and in the end felt the pains that they
had despised. When they shall fear the torments of hell, they shall say, We
believe in one God alone, and renounce Ido^s. This profession of Faith shall be
unprofitable to them in Hell; they shall incur the rigor of the Law of God,
that was observed against their predecessors, and all unbeleivers shall be
damned.

CHAP. XLI. The Chapter of Exposition, containing fifty and four Verses
written at Mecca.
Reader, Gelaldin intituleth this Chapter, Of Adoration,

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The Alcoran was sent by the
gracious and merciful God: It explaineth divine Mysteries in the Arabique
tongue, to them that have knowledge to understand them; it proclaims to the
good, the delights of Paradise, and preaches to the wicked the torments of
Hell; nevertheless, the greatest part of the world pepart from the Faith, and
hear not thy words: They say, We have obdurate hearts, we cannot comprehend
what thou preachest, our ears are stopped, we are too remote to hear what thou
say. Observe thy Law, we will live after our own. Say unto them, I am a man
like you, your God is one sole God, be obedient to him, and beg pardon of him
for your sins: Misery is upon unbelievers, that pay not Tiths, and believe not
in the day of judgment. The believers that shall do good works, shall enjoy an
infinite reward. Say unto them, How, will ye be wicked toward him that created
the Earth in tw^ days? Monday and Tuesday.
how can you say that he has a Companion equa^ to him? He is sole Lord of the
Universe; he raised the Mountains, blessed the Earth, and gave to every Regio^
the particulars thereof in four days, for them that shall have need: See
Gelaldin.
After this he ascended into Heaven, that was like unto smoke, and said unto
Heaven and Earth, Ye shall obe^ me, either through force or affection: They
answered, Lord, we will be obedient to thy Commandments. He created seven
Heavens in two days, Thursday and Friday.
and disposed every Heaven after his own will; he adorned them with Stars, and
preserves them from the malice of the Devil. See Gelaldin.
This is a^ effect of his Omnipotency; he is omnipotent, and knows all
things. If the unbelievers depart from the Faith, say unto them, I have
threatened you, as heretofore thunde^ did the people of Aad and Temod, when the
Prophets taugh^ them the Law of the ancient True believers, to wit, To worship
but one God; They said, Were it Gods pleasure to alter our Law, he would have
sent us Angels to preach unto us; we will not believe in thy mission. The
people of Aad waxed proud on the Earth without reason, and said, Who is more
powerful then we? will they not consider, that he that created them, is more
powerful and wealthy then they? Nevertheless they despised our Commadments. We
sent against them a cold and impetuous wind, in an unhappy time, that made them
to suffer on Earth shame and ignominy, because of their crimes: He shall cause
them to feel the pains of Hell, that are much greater then those of the Earth,
and they shall be eternally deprived of protection. We instructed the men of
Temod in the right way; they preferred blindness to light, and impiety to
Salvation; they were surprised by thunder, and suffered great afflictions,
because of their sins. We saved none of them, but the believers, who had our
fears before their eyes. Be thou mindful of the day that the Enemies of God
shall be assembled in Hell; they shall defend their cause before the Judge,
until testimony be brought against them; their ears, their eyes, and their skin
shall be witnesses of their iniquities: They shall say, Wherefore do ye
witness against us? They shall answer, He that made us to speak, gives speech
to every thing; he it is that created you, and ye are this day assembled before
him to be judged. Ye did not well conceal your selves, when ye offended him;
your ears, your eyes, your skin are witnesses against you; ye believed that God
should not see your sins, this was your opinion: Certainly he shall chastise
you and you all shall be in the number of the damne^. Persevere, and be thou
patient, the fire of Hell shall be the^r habitation; they shall not be able to
please God in the flames. We have given them the Devils, for their Companio^s,
who caused them to delight in sin. The word of God shall be accomplished against
them, as it was accomplished against their predecessors; as well men as Devils,
that are condemned. The unbelievers have said, Hear not that Alcoran, it is
full of error; peradventure ye shall be seduced. I will cause them to suffer
grievous pains, and will chastise them after their demerits; such is the reward
of Gods enemies. They shall remain eternally in the fire of Hell, because they
despise his Commandments. The wicked shall say at the day of Judgment, Lord,
let us see the Devils, and the men that seduced us; we will trample them un^er
our feet, and precipitate them to the bottom of h^l. Such as shall have
professed the Law of God, as shall have obeyed his Commandments, shall be
visite^ by the Angels, and shall that day be free from fear and affliction.
They shall say unto them, Rejoice ye in Paradise, that is prepared for you; ye
shall there find all the contentments that ye shall desire; they have been
prepared for you by the gracious and merciful. There is nothing better then to
pray to God, then to do good works, and to profess his unity. Good and evil
are not a like: Ex^ell evil with thy good works. There is an exceeding great
antipathy between Faith and Jmpiety: Faith is given to such as persevere to do
well, and to them that are endued with the grace of God. The Devil will tempt
thee, but implo^e assistance from God; he hears and knows all things, The
night and the day, the Sun and the Moon, are signs of his Omnipotency: Adore
neither the Sun, nor the Moon, worship God that created them. If the Infidels
res^st the Faith, the Angels that are in Paradise defist not, notwithstanding,
to exalt the glory of his divine Majesty, day and night, without intermission.
It is a sign of his Omnipotency, to see the barren and dry Earth to change the
face, and become green, when it is watered with rain. He that makes the plants
to revive, is he that makes every thing to live and dye, he is Omnipotent.
Such as depa^t from our Commandments, cannot hide themselves from us: Shall he
that shall be precipitated into Hell, be better lodged then he that shall be
saved at the day of Judgment? Do what shall please you, your Lord beholds all
your actions. I will chastise them thot traduce the Alcoran, it is a precious
Book; it is approved by the ancient and modern Scriptures, it is sent from the
glorious and merciful. None other thing shall be spoken to thee, then what
has been spoken to the Prophets that preceeded thee; thy Lord is merciful and
just. Had we sent the Alcoran in the Persian tongue, to a Prophet; an Arabian
by Nation; the wicked would have said, That the divine mysteries are not well
explained. Say unto them, It is the guide of Believers, and a remedy to their
ignorance. Infidels have deaf ears, they are blind, and hear not, a^ those that
are called too far off: Certainly, we gave the Book and the Law to Moses.
Unbelievers doubt, but if thy Lord had not said, That he would defer their
punishment until the day of Judgment, he had already chastised them in this
world, because they doubt of the truth. Whosoever shall do good, shall find
good; and the evil that a man commits shall be against him. Thy Lord does
no injustice to his Creatures: None but he knows the day of Judgment; no
fruit nor flower springs out of the Earth, and woman neither conceives nor
brings forth, but by his permission. Be thou mindful of the day that the lord
shall call Idolaters, and demand of them where be their Idols? They shall say,
Lord, we acknowledge thy Unity; None of us will hereafter adore those false
gods. They that worshipped one God, departed from Idolaters, they know that the
punishment of their sin is infallible. Man never cease to require riches, and
is troubled when evil befalls him; if we give him good after his affliction,
he says, that he foresaw it, and has no thought of the coming of the day of
Judgment; if he be converted, thy Lord opens to him the gate of Paradise. I
will make the wicked to know their wickedness, and will most severely punish
them; when we bestow wealth on man, he follows his Idolatry and his sin, and
when he is touched in affliction, he abounds in prayer: Say unto them, know
ye not that the Alcoran proceeds from God? nevertheless ye have renounced
it, who is more impious then he that impugneth the known truth? I will cause
them to see my miracles, even to the utmost parts of heaven and earth, and in
their own persons, to the end they may know the truth of the Alcoran. Suffices
it not them that thy Lord sees all things? nevertheless, they are in doubt of
the Resurrection, and of being assembled before him to be judged, certainly God
is omniscient.

CHAP. XLII. The Chapter of Counsel, containing fifty and three Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. God is prudent, wise, majestique,
he understands all things, and is omnipotent; God has sent thee the same
inspirations that he sent to them that did precede thee; he is omnipotent and
wise, whatsoever is in heaven and in earth appertains to him; he is
omnipotent, and knows all things; the heavens open at his command, the Angels
exalt his glory, and implore his pardon for them that are on earth; he is
merciful, he beholds them that invoke Idols, and knows them all, but thou
art not their Tutor. We have inspired into thee the Alcoran in the Arabique
tongue, to preach to the Inhabitanta of Mecca, and such as dwell about that
City; we have sent thee to preach unto them the day of Judgment; there is no
doubt that one part of men shall be saved, and the other shall be damned; had
it pleased God, he had created them of one and the same Religion, he gives his
grace to whom he lists, and Infidels shall be deprived of succor, because
they have required the protection of Idols; but God is the true protector of
the world: he reviveth the dead, and is omnipotent, he shall one day judge all
the difficulties, and resolve all your doubts in your Religion, he is my Lord,
I recommend my self to his divine Will; he created your wife of your selves, he
created all beasts male and female, and caused you to multiply; there is not
any thing like unto him, he keeps the keys of the Treasures of heaven and
earth, and takes away, and gives wealth as pleases him. The Law that I gave
to Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, is that which I commanded thee to observe,
viz. to believe in one God. The infidells are angry when thou preachest to them
the unity of God, he teaches it whom he pleases and guides into the right
way them that obey him; the wicked approve some points of his law, and reject
the rest, although they have knowledge of his Unity, and that through the envy
that is risen among them; if thy Lord had not heretofore said that he would
defer their punishment until the day of Judgment, he had already destroyed
them; many of those, who after them shall have knowledge of the Scriptures shall
doubt of his Law; but follow thou the way that is appointed thee, and follow
not their appetites; Say unto them; I believe in the Book that God has sent. I
have received commandment to preach unto you that God is your, and our Lord; ye
shall answer for your actions* and we shall answer for ours; it is not
necessary to dispute against us, God will one day assemble us in his presence
to judge our differences, he is our refuge; such as dispute against the faith
after knowledge of the truth, are without reason? their arguments shall be
vain with God they shall be the object of his wrath, and shall suffer
exceeding great pains. God has sent the Alcoran with truth and balance; he
will not instruct thee when the day of judgment shall be: Such as have no faith
in him, ask when it shall come, and they that believe him, fear the coming
thereof, and know it to be infallible; such as doubt, are erroneous from the
right way. God is merciful to his people? and enricheth whom he pleases, he is
strong and omnipotent, he increases the graces of him that desires the riches
of Heaven; he gives the wealth of the earth to them that effect it, and
depriveth them of the riches of Heaven: Are there wicked ones among men that
teach them a false Religion prohibited of God? God has not revealed it to the^
had he not deferred their punishment until the day of Iudgmment, he had already
destroyed them, they shall in the end feel grevious tormens, ye shall see the^
fear their own deportments, ye shall see them chastised after their demerits;
and the believers that do good works, shall enjoy the delights of Paradise,
where they shall find whatsoever they shall desire, this is the great grace of
God; this is that which he has proclaimed to the faithful that believed, and
have done good works; say unto them, I require none other recompense for the
pains that I take in preaching to you, then to love my kindred; he that shall
do any good work shall be rewarded; God is merciful, and good works are
pleasing to him. Will they say that thou have blasphemed against God? If it
please God, he shall hinder thee to hear this discourse, or will imprint
patience in thine heart; he abolisheth lies, and confirms the truth through
his words; he knows whatsoever is in the hearts of men; he accepts the
conversion of his creatures, he pardons their sins, and knows all their
actions; he hears the prayers of the faithful, that do good works, and
augmenteth his grace upon them; but Infidels shall undergo the rigours of
eternal pains. Had God equally enriched all his creatures, they had bin in
confusion upon Earth he enricheth whom he pleases; he sees and knows all;
he sends rain when men despair of his grace, he is the protector of
believers, and praise is due to him eternally: the creation of the Heavens, and
of the earth, and of all that moves between them, is a sign of thine
omnipotency: If evil befall you, believe that ye have deserved it, nevertheless
he pardons you many things; ye cannot escape his punishment on earth, and
none is able to protect you against him. The Ves^el that runs upon the
water, big as a mountain, is a token of his omnipotency, to them that persevere
in his Law, and acknowledge his graces. He shall reprove the wicked for their
sins, and shall pardon many: They that dispute against his Commandments, cannot
escape their punishent; the riches that ye possess are the riches of the
earth; the riches that God bestows on them that trust in him, are eternal:
They that depart from mortal sins, that repent to have committed them, that
beg of God to be heard, and persevere in their supplications; they that take
council, and consult among them what they ought to do, that employ in good
works part of the wealth that God has given them, that implore his help in
their afflictions; such as do good, and such as commit evil, shall be
recompensed, and punished according to their works. God abhors Infidels; ye
have no power over them that implore his assistance in their affliction, and
repent; your power extends over them that doin justice to the people; and
d^sobey on earth the Commandments of his divine Majesty, they shall suffer
great torments. Such as persevere in well-d^i^g, and pardon their Neighbor, do
what God has Commanded. He whom God shall m^sl^ad, shall find none to guide
him. Thou shall see that the Infidels shall ask if they may return into the
world, when they shall behold the fire of H^l; thou shall see them fly with
ex^ream fear of eternal ignominy; they shall look awry upon hell, and the
believers shall see that the wicked, that have lost he^r Souls, that have
misled their family, and all the impious, shall be eternally damned, none shall
be able to save them, and he that God shall mislead, shall not find the right
way. Say unto them, beg pardon of God before the ^ay come, that ye shall find
no way to return into the world, nor excuse for your sins. If they disobey
thee, we have not sent thee to be their Tutor; thou art sent only to preach
unto them. When we give to man any p^osperity be rejoices, and when affliction
befalls him, ^e is ingrat^ful for the grace of his Lord, King of the heavens
and earth God gives children, sons and daughters ^o whom he pleases, he
knows all things, and is omnipotent; he speaks not to man but by
inspiration, and parable, without being seen; he sends his Prophets and
Apostles into whom he inspireth what pleases him, he knows all things and is
omnipotent; Thus have we sent thee our spirit to teach thee our Commandments;
thou know not before what was written in the Alcoran, neither the mysteries
of faith we have sent it to thee to be a Light to the world, I will guide into
the way of Salvation whom I please, I will giude him into the way of the Lord,
to whom belongs all that is in Heaven and Earth, and who disposes of all
things.

CHAP. XLIII. The Chapter of Ornament, containing eighty and nine Verses,
written at Mecca.
Exteri entitled This Chapter, the Chapter of Gold.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: God is prudent and wise. I swear
by the book that teaches to do well, that we have sent it in the Arabique
tongue, peradventure ye shall understand the Alcoran; it is written in in our
original Book, majestique and mysterious. Shall I conceal from you the book
of Salvation, if ye be wicked? How many Prophets and Apostles have we sent in
past Ages, whom unbeleivers have despised? We destroyed the most powerful among
them, and all have incurred the pain of their predecessors. If thou ask of them
who created Heaven and Earth, they will say, that it is the omnipoten, who
knows all things. Who has extends the earth under you? Who established the
ways to guide you? It is God, he causes the rain to descend from Heaven in
your necessity; he makes the dead, dry, and barren fields to revive; in like
manner shall the dead come out of their Sepulchers. He it is that created
whatsoever is in the world, of diverse kinds and Species, and created the SHIPS,
and BEAST, to carry you. Remember the grace of your Lord, say, praised be he
that created ^or us these things; we had not the power to create them. They all
shall return before the Lord to be judged. The Infidels have divided God into
many parts. Certainly he that says that there are many Gods, is impious; has
he appointed you to say, that the Angels which he has created are his
daughters, seeing that he gives you sons? When it is declared to some
Infidels that a Daughter is born to him, he is not satisfied, (he desires to
have a son) will they say that God adorneth himself, and takes ornaments to
beautify him like their Idols? It is a manifest error they say, that the
Angels that worship God, are the daughters of his divine Majesty; I will write
what they say, and will r^quire of them a^ account of their discourse at the
day of Judgment. They have said, had it pleased God, we had not adored the
Angels; They know not what they say, and ignorantly blaspheme; do they observe
any Scripture that has been taught them heretofore? On the contrary, they say
that their fathers lived in like manner, and that they follow their steps; they
have said as much to all the Prophets that were sent unto them. When thou
spakest to them to observe that is contained in the Alcoran, and to abandon the
Idols which their fathers worshipped, they answered, that they believed neither
in thee, nor in thy mission; but we avenged our selves upon them; Consider what
is the end of blaspheme^s; Remember thou, that Abraham said to his father, and
his people, I am innocent of the sin that you commit, in adoring Idols, I
wo^ship him alone that created me, he shall guide me into the way of Salvation,
and has left his words to posterity; perhaps the Infidels shall be converted.
I deferred heretofore the punishment of Idolaters, until they had learned the
truth and that a Prophet came to instruct them; When he preached unto them the
truth, they said, that it is but witchcraft, and that they would give no faith
to it. Had the Alcoran been sent to a man, ^Olid bin Magui^he, and Ar^ua bin
M^s^oud, in whom the Arabians had confidence. See Kitab el tenior.
Master and Lord of two Cities, or Villages, they had esteemed and approved it.
Would they dispose of the graces of GOD? He has divided the riches of the
world among men; Some there be that are more eminent, and scorn each other, but
the mercy of God is more advantageous then the riches of the Earth, which they
accumulate: Although all the people be not of the same Religion, we cease not
to bestow on the wicked houses adorned with seeling, enchased with silver,
stairs, doors, and Beds of silver and gold; These things are the riches of
the Earth, and Paradise is for them that are righteous. I will cause to fall
headlong with the Devils, such as shall reject the Law of the merciful; the
Devils shall be their companions, they shall seduce them from the way of
Salvation, and they shall not know it. When we shall come to judge the
Universe, they shall say, would to GOD we had been as remote from you, as the
West is from the East. Oh what company for you! This day your repentance and
your hopes shall be vain; ye were Infidels for company, ye shall be companions
in the Fire of Hell. Will thou make the blind to see, and the deaf to hear?
Will thou guide them that wilfully err? If they dye before being punished on
Earth, I will be avenged on them in the other world. Shall I show thee during
thy life, the punishment that we have prepared for them? We can do it, but do
thou only what has been commanded thee, thou art in the way of salva^ion,
instruct men therein; an account of thy mission shall be required of thee. I will
require an account of their mission that we sent heretofore to instruct the
people, we will demand of them, if we appointed them to worship any other God
but us. We sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his Ministers, he caused them to see our
Miracles, and preached to them our Commandment; he told them that he was the
Messenger of the God of the Universe, nevertheless they scoffed. I showed them
no greater Miracle then that of Moses his sister, and we chastised them,
because of their n^redulity. They said unto Moses, oh Magician! pray unto thy
Lord, that he deliver us from these evils, and we will be converted; when they
were delivered, they violated their promiser; and Pharaoh said to his people,
am not I King of Egypt, does not the River NILVS flow under my obedience? Know
ye not that I am more powerful then that poor wretch Moses, that knows not
what he says? Give him Pharaoh caused bra^^lets of guil^ed Iron to be given,
with Collers, to criminalls, and made the^ to go t^^o^gh the City.
bracelets of Gold; we will see if the Angels, and those that follow his
Doctrine, will testify the truth of his words. He terrified his Subjects, they
obeyed him, for they were Infidels, but we were avenged on them when they
provoked us; we drowned them, and made them serve for example to posterity,
like those that preceeded them in impiety. The people would not hearken to the
Son of Mary, when he spoke by parable; they said, our Gods are more
profitable to us then his lies, and questions. On the contrary, they were
refractory; he is our servant, we conferred on him our grace, and made him like
to the other Prophets of the Children of Israel: Had it pleased me, I had
created Angels on earth in your place; the coming of Jesus, the Son of Mary
shall be a sign of the certainty of the day of Judgment, See Gelaldin. And
Kitab el tenoir.
doubt not concerning that day. He said unto men, ^ollow me, it is the right
way, beware lest the Devil seduce you, he is your open enemy. I come to teach
you the Commandments of God, to resolve the doubts, and judge the differences
that are among you; Fear God, and obey him he is your Lord and mine, worship
him, it is the right way; The people doubted his Doctrine, but misery shall be
upon the wicked, they shall suffer great torments at the day of judgment; will
they expect that day for their conversion? it shall surprise them, and they
know it not; that day shall they be enemies one of another, God shall say to
the righteous, fear not, ye shall not this day resent any affliction; The
believers that have obeyed my Commandments, shall enter into Paradise, you and
your wives shall there rejoice, ye shall* drink in cups of fine gold, ye shall
there find whatsoever ye shall desire, and all that can content the mind, and
delight the eyes, and ye shall dwell eternally in supreme felicity; behold the
Paradise that ye have gained by your good life! it is enriched with abundance
of fruits, which ye shall eat with contentment; and the wicked shall remain
eternally in the fire of Hell, they shall not be eased in their miseries, and
shall be dum^ with despair; we do no injustice to them, they drew mischief on
themselves, through their disobedience; They shall demand of the Keeper of the
fire, will thy Lord never deliver ^s from these pains? He shall answer them,
ye shall abide there Eternally; We have taught men the truth, but the greatest
part of them would not believe it. The wicked have conspired against thee, and
we conspired against them; think they that I know not their secrets, and
whatsoever they utter? The Angels our Messengers keep account. Say unto them,
if God have a Son, who shall we first adore? Praised be God, King of the
Heavens and of the Earth; the matter is not as the Infidels deliver it: Leave
them implunged in their impiety, let them Laugh and rejoice, until the day of
their punishment arrive: One God alone ought to be worshipped in Heaven and
Earth, he is most wise and omniscient. Praised be he to whom appertains the
Kingdom of the Heavens and Earth, and whatsoever is between them. He knows
the hour and the day, that all the world shall be assembled before him to be
judged. The Idols that the Infidels adore, shall not be able to intercede for
them; the good intercede for them tha^ have knowledge of the truth; If thou ask
of men, who created them? they will say, it is God; How can they then depart
from his Commandments? Lord, this peole is incredulous; Depart thou far form
their company, they shall in the end, too late, acknowledge their errors.

CHAP. XLIIII. The Chapter of Smoke, cnotaining fifty nine Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. God is prudent and wise. I swear
by the book that distinguish- the good from evil; that we sent it the night of
blessing, to teach the people the torments of hell; this book explaineth our
commandments, and all that we heretofore commanded the Prophets; this is a
special grace of thy Lord, he hears and knows all things, he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, a^^ of all that is between them, believe in his omnipotency.
There is no God but he, he gives life and death to whom he lists, he is your
Lord, the Lord of your fathers and predecessors; the wicked deride this
discourse, but the day of judgment attends them; that day the heaven shall
resemble smoke, that shall cover the world; that day shall the people say,
behold here grievous torments; Lord deliver us from this misery, we will
believe in thy Law: Their conversion shall be in vain, because when the Prophet
preched to them, they scorned his words, and said, that he was a foolish
teacher; and when they were comforted on earth, they returned to their impiety:
Remember thou the day when they were vanquished, and taken by force, and that
we were revenged on their impiety; We heretofore tried the people of Pharaoh;
my beloved Prophet preached to them my Commandments, and said, Come follow me,
oh ye servants of God! I am a faithful Messenger of his divine Maj. resist not
his Law; I will teach you his Comandments, he shall defend me from your malice he
shall preserve me from being stoned; but if ye will not believe me, depart far
from me. He prayed to his Lord, when he knew that that people were unbelieving
and impious, God said unto him, go by night out of the City with my servants
if the men of Pharaoh pursue thee, enter into the sea, through a path large and
spacious, thine enemies that shall follow thee shall be drowned. How many
gardens, fountains, and places of pleasure, wherein they took delight, did they
forsake? They fell into the power of another with all their treasures, and none
lamented them, either in Heaven or earth; they expected not that punishment. We
delivered the Children of Israel from Pharoahs tyranny, he was powerful, and a
great sinner. We elected them through our certain knowledge among all the world,
and tried them through our Miracles, and Commandments. The wicked say, we shall
dye and not rise again; If the Resurrection be true, cause our fathers to
revive to evidence the truth of thy words; Are they more powerful then their
predecessors, whom we destroyed, because of their impiety? We have not created
in vain the Heaven and the Earth, and whatsoever is between them; we created
them for certain signs of our Unity, the greatest part of the world understand
it not; the day of Judgment is the time appointed for their punishment, that
day none shall be able to save his neighbor, or parent, or friend; nor shall
any be saved, but those to whom God shall give his mercy, he is omnipotent and
merciful. The fruit of the Tree of Hell, called Zacon, shall serve for food to
the wicked, it shall boil in their bellyes like pitch, or water. They shall cry,
take the wicked, drag them into the fire of Hell, pour upon their heads all
manner of torments. It shall be said unto them, taste the pains of Hell; ye
believed [your selves] to be the Omnipotent and precious on Earth, behold the
punishment of which ye doubted! The righteous shall be in delicious places in
Gardens adorned with Fountains; they shall be clothed with purple, they s^all
behold each other face to face; we will assemble them with women, pure and
clean, who shall have most beautiful eyes, that shall have fruits savory and
delicious, of all seasons; they shall never dye, and shall be delivered from the
torments of Hell, through the special grace of thy Lord, behold supreme
felicity! Certainly, we have sent the Alcoran in thy tongue, peradventure the
Arabians will learn it; they covet thy ruin, but persevere thou, and expect
the time of the punishment of their crimes.

CHAP. XLV. The Chapter of Genuflexion, or Knee-bowing, containing fifty nine
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. God is most prudent and wise. This
Book is sent by the Omnipotent and wise. The Heavens and the Earth are most
certain signs of his Unity, to such as believe in his Law; your Creation, and
the Creation of all Creatures, are marks of his greatness to them that have
his fear before their Eyes; the difference of the night, and the day; the rain
that he sends from Heaven, to cause fruits to spring out of the Earth, and to
revive it after its death; and the diversity of wind^, are signs of his
Omnipotency to them that have knowledge to comprehend it. I relate to thee the
wonders of God with truth; in what will Infidels believe, if they believe not
in the word of his divine Majesty? Misery is upon them that hear the
Commandments of God, and become proud, as if they had not heard them. Preach
unto such men, that they shall suffer ^he rigors of infinite pains. They deride
the Faith when they are spoken to: Certainly, they be punished in the fire of
Hell, their riches shall not be able to save them, neither the Idols which they
adore; they shall be eternally damned. This Book guides men into the way of
salvation; they that shall not believe in the Law of God, shall feel the
effects of his fury. He created the Seas that bear the Ships for the advantage
of your commerce, peradventure ye will acknowledge this grace: He has created
for you, all that is in Heaven and on Earth; it is a sign of his goodness to
such as consider it. Speak unto them that believe in the Law of Salvation, that
they pardon those that have not the fear of God before their Eyes. God shall
chastise them after their demirits. Whosoever shall do good, shall find good;
and ye shall be assembled before his divine Majesty, to be judged. Certaiuly we
instructed the children Israel in the Scripture, and our Commandments; we
taught them knowledge, and gave them the grace of Prophecy; we enriched them
with all sorts of riches, and preferred them to all the world. We taught them
our Law, none disputed against our Commandmenes, but such as had knowledge, and
that through the envy thar arose among them; but thy Lord shall judge their
differences at the day of Judgment. We have sent thee our Law, observe it, and
follow not the appetites of the ignorant, they shall not be able to deliver
thee from eternal pains. The Infidels obey each other, and the true-belivers
obey God. This book is the light of the world, it guides into the way of
Salvation and the mercy of God, them that believe in his divine Majesty. Do the
wicked imagine they shall be entreated like the godly in their life and death,
and that they shall not be judged? God has created heaven and earth for a mark
of his power, he shall judge every one according to their works, and shall do
injustice to none: Consider how they worship what comes into their fancy, God
has seduced them from his certain knowledge, he has rendered them deaf, has
hardened their heart, and blinded them; who shall guide, if God seduce them? Do
they not consider it? They say our resurrection shall be like the life of this
world; some die, others are born; length of years cause us to die, they know not
what they say, and speak but by opinion. When they are preached unto, they have
no other' discourse to utter, but make our fathers to revive, if what we say be
true. Say unto them, God causes you to live and die, and shall assemble you at
the day of Judgment; there is no doubt in this, but the greatest part of the
people know it not. God is the King of the heavens and earth, and of the day of
judgment; that day shall he assemble the Infidels; thou shall see all Sects,
and all Religions assembled before him upon their knees, every sect shall see
their sins written in a particular book and shall be al chastised after their
demerits, It shall be said unto them, behold the book that speaks against
you, we have exactly written what you have don; God shall give his mercy to the
righteous, that is, supreme felicity. It shall be said to the wicked, have not
the Commandments of God bin preached to you? Ye became proud and were
incredilous; when it was told you that the promises of God and the day of
Judgment were indubitable; ye said that i^ was but an opinion, and that ye
believe it not; in the end ye shall acknowledge your offense, and shall suffer
the pain^ that ye despised; God shall say unto them at the day of Judgment, I
have this day forgotten you, as ye forgot the coming of this day, the fi^e of
hell shall be your habitation, none shall deliver you, because ye derided my
Law, and waxed proud with the riches of the earth. They shall never get out of
this Fire, neither be able to repent. Praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and
earth, glory is due to him in all places, he is omnipotent and wise.

CHAP. XLVI. The Chapter of Hecaf, containing thirty five Verses, written at
Mecca.
Hecaf is a Valley in the Country of Licmen, upon the frontiers of Ar^bi^. See
Gelaldin, and the Book entitled, Kitab el Tenoir.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: God is most prudent and wise. This
Book was sent by the Omnipotent and wise. We created the heavens and the earth,
and all that is between them, for a sign of our Omnipotency and Unity, and
appointed to every thing a prefixed and limited time. If the Infidels depart
from that which has been preached to them, Say unto them, have ye considered
the Idols that ye adore? show me what they have created on earth, are they Gods
companions in the creation of the heavens? bring me a Book sent from heaven
before the Alcoran, that contains like it, what remained of the doctrine of
our Predecess^rs, we shall see if ye be true* who is more seduced then he that
worshipeth things that can neither hear his prayers, nor protect him at the day
of judgment? That day shall the Infidels be enemies to each other, and the
Idols shall not acknowledge them that have worshipped them. When they heard the
Alcoran read, they affirmed it to contain the truth; and when they were
commanded to observe it, they said, that it is but magic. Will they say that
thou have invented it? Say unto them, if I have invented it, ye cannot deliver
me from the punishment of God, he knows all that is in this book, it is
sufficient that he is witness between you and me, he is gracious and
merciful: Say unto them, I am not the first Prophet, nor the first Apostle
that God has sent, I know not what God shall determine of you and me, I do but
what he has inspired into me, and am sent to preach the torments of hell; have
ye considered in what condition ye shall be, if the Alcoran be sent from God?
Ye have renounced it, but one of the children of Israel is witness that it is
sent from God, and has believed in his divine Majesty, nevertheless ye are
become proud; God guides not the proud. The Infidels say to the believers, if
the Alcoran were any good thing, you should not exceed us in observing it, it
guides not into the way of salvation, it is but an old Fable; The book of
Moses that came before it, teaches the right way, and the Will of God: Say
unto them, the Alcoran confirms the Scriptures sent heretofore to them that
precedeed us, it is in the Arabique tongue; he preaches the pains of hell to
unbelievers, and declares the joys of Paradise to the righteous. Such as
shall believe that God is their Lord, and shall obey him, ought to fear
nothing, they shall suffer none affliction at the day of Judgment, they shall
enjoy Pardadise for the reward of their good works. We have recommended to man,
to honor father and mother, and to do good to them; his mother bears him with
pain, she brings forth with dolor, she gives him suck, and weaneth him at
the end of thirty months; she has care [of him] until he be in a condition to
govern himself, and has attained to age of discretion. Then he says, Lord,
inspire me to be grateful for the grace that thou have given to my father and
mother; if I do well thou will accept it, take care of my posterity, I trust in
thee, and desire to obey thy Commandments: Their prayer shall be heard, their
sins shall be pardoned, and they shall enjoy the joys of Paradise, prepared
for the righteous. He that shall ^peak to his father and mother in civility,
and shall say unto them in derision, will ye bring me yet once more into the
world after my death? will ye revive me from my grave? many are dead heretofore,
that are not returned: he shall be punished of God, his father and mother shall
require help of his divine Majesty, and shall say unto him, my son, misery is
with thee, believe in God, and in the Resurrection, the word o^ God is
insallible; if he reply that it is an old Fable, he shall feel the punishment
of God, the word of his divine Majesty shall be accomplished against him, as it
has been accomplished against them that did prece^e him in impiety, as well
devils as men, they shall be damned; they shall be in ^undry degrees of payns,
he shall chastise them after their demerits, and no injustice shall be don to
them, It shall be said to the wicked that would depart out of hell fire, ye
expelled your felicity, when ye lived in the world; your punishment was
deferred until this present, ye shall this day be punished in this fire,
because of your prid^ and crimes.

Remember thou the brother of Aad, who preached the torments of HELL in the
Valley of HECAF, his words was heard in his time, and are come to pop^sterity,
viz. worship ^ut one God alone; i^ you do otherwise, I apprehend for you the
day of Judgment: they answered him, art thou come to hinder us to adore our
gods? let us ^ee the torments that thou preachest to us, if thou art true: he
laid, God knows in what time he will chastise you; I preach to you what has
been appo^nted me to preach, but I see that ye are obstinate. When they beheld
a black c^oud appear, which approached the place of their habitation, they said
behold a cloud that shall give us rain; on the contrary, it is the punis^ment
that ye have demaned, it is full of an in p^^^ous wind that shall destroy you
though the Commandment of God in the Morning their houses were found empty of
inhabitants: Thus God chastises the wicked, ye dwell in the places which they
inhabited; they had hearts; eyes, and cares but their hearts, eyes, and ears
were to them unpre^ntab^e; the evil which they despised befell them, when they
neglected to observe the commandments of God. We have destroyed whatsoever is
round about Mecca, and have made the effects of our omnipotency to appear;
paradventure the inhabitants thereof will be converted. The Idols that they
worshipped, and those to whom they sacrificed, did not save them; on the
contrary, they forsook them, because of their blasphemies-Remember thou, that
we sent to thee devils, that desired to hear a Lecture of the Alcoran; when
they heard thee, they said, Hark, he begins; and when thou made an end they
returned with exceeding great fear, and said to their companions, we have heard
a Lecture of a Book sent from heaven after the book of Moses, it confirms
the ancient Scriptures, teaches the truth, and guides the people into the way
of salvation. O people! hear him that calls you to the Law of God, and to the
observance of his Commandments; believe him, God shall pardon your sins, and
deliver you from the pains of hell: such as shall not hearken to him, shall not
escape the punishment of their crimes, and shall be deprived of protection at
the day of Judgment; such men are seduced from the way of salvation. Consid^r
they not that God, who created heaven and earth, did not labor in creating
them? that he is able to give life and death, and is omniponent? Be thou
mindful of the day that the Infidels shall desire to get out of the fire of
hell; it shall be said unto them, are not the pains that were preached to you
true? they shall say, yes Lord; it shall be said to them, taste then the
torments which ye have merited through your impiety. Persevere thou, as the
Prophets thy pedecessors persevered. Be not impatient, till thou see the
punishment of Infidels; they shall see it when they shall rise again, and
shall believe that they have been but an hour in their sepulchers: This is that
which God has commanded to preach, he shall destroy those only that disobey
his Commandments.

CHAP. XLVII. The Chapter of the Combat, containing fourscore and eight Verses
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Good works are vain and
unprofitable to the wicked, and to them that hinder their neighbor to follow
the Law of God; he pardons their sins who believe in what Mahomet has
preached; it is the very truth that proceeds from his divine Majesty, but the
Infidels have followed vanity, and the believers have embraced the truth sent
from their Lord; Thus God speaks to the people in parables. When ye shall
meet the Infidels in time of war, cut their necks, pursue them until ye take
them prisoners, then bind them; after this, ye shall either give them liberty or
put them to ransom, until their party shall lay down arms. If God pleased, he
could give you victory without fighting, but his will is to prove you; he
guides into Paradise, them that are slain for the defense of his Law, and
gives them his grace. Oh ye that believe in God! If ye protect the Law of God,
God will protect you, he will confirm your steps, and destroy the Infidels,
because they have contemned his commandments, and their good works shall be to
them unprofitable; consider they not what has been the end of the impious that
were before them, and that God has destroyed them; He shall destroy them in
like manner, because he protecteth the Believers, and Infidels are deprived of
his protection; he makes the righteous to enter into Paradise, into gardens
wh^reof flow many rivers, The punishment of the wicked is sometimes deferred in
this world, they live like beasts, but the fire of Hell is prepared for their
punishment. How many cities, Mecca.
stronger, and more opulent then that which they caused thee to abandon, have
we destroyed? They found no prot^ction. Are such as embrace the Law of God like
to them that follow their own appetites? God has promise^ Paradise to them
that have his fear before their eyes; there be in Paradise rivers of water,
that receives no alteration; there be rivers of milk that never corrupts,
rivers of wine, savory and delicioius to the taste; rivers of honey, pure and
clean; fruits of all sorts, and the grace of God for them that shall obey his
Commandments; the wicked shall remain eternally in the fire of Hell, where they
shall drink a boiling liquor, that shall burn their entrails. There be persons
among the Infidels, that hear what thou do preach when they are gone from
thee; their Doctors demand of them what thou have said concerning the day of
Judgment? God has hardened the hearts of such men, and they shall never follow
but their own passions. God increases the graces of them that obey his
Commandments, and fortifyeth them in their perseverance; Shall the Infidells
tarry until the day of Judgment surprizeth them. The signs of that day has
already appeared, that day shall repentance be in vain; There is no God but
God, implore from him pardon of thy sin; and for these men and Women, that
believe in his Law, he knows what they do day and night; If the Chapter of
the place where Justice is rendered, had not been sent and had not made mention
of Combats, thou had not seen them that doubt of the Law look upon thee with
eyes troubled, because of their fears of dying. Teach them obedience, and speak
to them with civility. Had they believed, and obeyed, when they were appointed
to fight, they had performed a good work. Have ye disobeyed? Have ye abandoned
the Law of God, to defile the earth? and to deprive your s^lves of his mercy?
God renders them whom he curses, and who comprehend not the truth of the
Alcoran, deaf and blind. Have they a firm heart? Such as have returned to their
impiery, after having known the right way, were tempted of the Devil, and
particularly, when they told the Infidels that they would obey them in any
thing, God knowetth all their secrets; what will become of them when the Angels
shall cause them to dye? they shall beat them before and behied, because they
have in^urred the wrath of God, and desp^sed his Commandmen^s; their good works
shall be unprof^^able; think they tha^ God will never make manifest their
malice? If thou will, I will make it appear, thou shall know them by their
countenance, thou shall discover them by their voice, and speech. Say unto
them, God knows all your actions; he shall prove you, to discover the
believers, and the unbelievers. The wicked, who hinder the people to follow the
way of salvation, that contradict the Prophet, after they have had knowledge of
the Law of God hurt not his divine Majesty, their actions are vain
unprofirable. Oh ye that believe! obey God, and his Prophet, and render not
your good works ineffectuall through disobedience; he pardons not the wicked;
who seduce the people from the way of Salvation, and dye in their impiety; Be
not fainted-hearted and slothful ye shall be victorious; God is with you. He
will not deprive you of reward; the life of this world is but foolish pastime
and delusion; if ye believe in God; and have his fear before your eyes, he
will recompense for your good works, he requires not an account of your
riches; if he do require it [of you] it is to hinder you to be avaricious, and
to banish usury from among them that believe in his Law: Oh people! ye are
commanded to make some expense for the love of God; he that shall be a niggard
and avaricious; in this occurrence, shall be avaricious and a niggard to
himself. God is rich, and ye are poor; If ye despise his Law, he will create in
your place other persons, that shall not do like you.

CHAP. XLVIII. The Chapter of Conquest, containing twenty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
This is the Chapter, Of the taking of the City of Mecca.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. We have given thee a manifest
victory. God pardons the sin that thou did commit, when thou were too
prompt, and when thou were too tardy, [to fight for his Law;] he shall
accomplish his grace upon thee, he shall guide thee into the right way, and
shall powerfully protect thee; he has delivered the hearts of the believers
from fear, to augment their faith; he disposes the forces of the Heavens and
Earth, he knows all, and is most prudent. He shall make them that shall obey
his Commandments, to dwell in Gardens, wherein flow many rivers, and shall
remit to them their offenses, this is supreme felicity; The Infidels, the
wicked, the disobedient, and unjust, that have evil thoughts of God, shall be
accursed of his divine Majesty, misery shall always pursue them, and his wrath
be eternally upon them; he has prepared for them the pains of Hell. God
disposes the powers of the Heavens and Earth, he is omnipotent and wise. We
have sent thee to be witness of the deportments of those of the Nation, to
proclaim to them the joys of Paradise, and to preach to them the pains of
hell, to the end they may believe in God, and in his Prophet; that they may
praise him, honor him, and exalt his glory evening and morning; Such as shall
obey thee, obey God; the hand of God is stronger then the hand of men; he that
shall sin, shall offend against his own soul; and he that performed what he
has promised to God, shall have an exceeding great reward. Such of the
Ara^ians as have no inclination to ^ollo^ thee, say, thou imployest our WEALTH
and PERSONS to go with thee* implore therefore pardon of God for us; but they
speak not with the mouth, what they have in the heart; Say unto them, who but
God is able to do ought for you? if it be his will to bring good or evil upon
you, he is omnipotent, and knows all that you do. Ye believed that the
Prophet and True-believers should be slain when they fought for the Law of God;
ye believed that they should never return to their houses. This opinion
rejoiced your heart, but you were deceived, and were your selves destroyed with
them that believed not in God, nor his Prophets, God has prepared the fire of
hell for Infidels; the Kingdom of the heavens and earth appertains to him,
he punishes and chastises whom he lists, he is gracious and merciful. When
ye shall go to the spoil, such as refused before to follow you to the sight,
will say, permit us to go with you; they would pervert the Word of God. Say
unto them, ye shall not follow us in this occasion. God has not heretofore
ordained it; they will reply, certainly ye are envious, against us; on the
contrary, they understand not the Law of God, except very few among them. Say
to the Arabians, that refused to follow thee, ye shall be called to fight
against miserable men, ye shall fight them, neverthel^sse they shall still be
obedient to God; if ye obey and fight for the Faith, he will largely reward
you; if ye desert his service, as heretofore ye have done, he shall severely
chastise you. The blind, the lame, and the sick, are not obliged to go to the
war. He that shall obey God and his Prophet, shall dwell eternally in gardens,
wherein flow many rivers; and he that shall disobey Gods Commandments, shall be
punished for his disobedience. God accepted their action that repaired to thee
under the tree, he knew what they had in their hearts, their confirmed he
steps, and gave them victory, he is omnipotent and wise. God had promised you
great spoil, he gave it you, and delivered you from the hands of the people;
this shall serve for a sign of his omnipotency to the true-lievers, he will
conduct you in to the right way; none but you could have achieved that
conquest, he well knew that that was for none other, he is omnipotent: if the
wicked fight you, they shall fly, they shall turn the back, and find none to
protect them. Observe the Law of God against them, do as was heretofore
commanded you; the Law of God admits no alteration; God has delivered you from
their hands, and delivered them into yours in the midst of Mecca, having given
you victory over them; he beholds all their actions, they have despised the
Commandments of his divine Majesty, and hindered you heretofore to go to the
Temple of Mecca; they are at present prisoners; without the assistance of the
true-believers that were within the City with you, ye had not known them, ye
had trampled them under our foot without distinction, and had offended God
without knowledge of your sin. God bestows his mercy on whom he pleases; had
ye been separated from the unbelievers, we had severely punished them. When
they were succored of the ignorant, and had some advantage, God put his
Prophet, and all the believers in a place of safty, they had recourse to the
word of force and virtue, wherein they did better then the Infidels, God
knows all. Assuredly the dream of the Prophet of God was true, when he
dreamed that ye were in the Temple of Mecca without fear, your hair shaven, and
beards trimed; fear nothing, God knows what you know not; in lieu of this
dream, he has given you a great victory; he it is that has sent you his
Prophet, to teach you his Law, more salutary then all other Laws of the world.
It is sufficient, that God is witness that Mahomet is his Prophet and Apostle;
it suffices that the true believers who are with him, bear testimony. God
increases his mercy toward those Infidels that convert; thou shall see them
worship God, humble themselves before his divine Majesty, and implore his
grace; thou shall know them by their aspect, they shall have in their
countenance the marks of their zeal; it is so written in the old Testament and
she Gospel; they are like a plant that produces its leaves, that grows strong
by little and little, and becomes big, afterward it takes strength upon its
roots, becomes a great tree, and the wood thereof serves to make war against
Infidels. God has promised his mercy, and an exceeding great reward to the
Infidels that shall be converted, that shall believe in his Law* and do good
works.

CHAP. XLIX. The Chapter of Enclosures, containing eighteen Verses written at
Medina.
Exteri entitled This Chapter, the Chapter Of Walls.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye that belevie! prefer not what
ye have done, to what God and his Prophet has performed, and fear God, he
hears what soever ye say, and sees all that ye do. O ye that beleieve! when
ye shall speak to the Prophet, speak not louder then he; cry not, as when ye
talk among your selves, least ye render your good works vain and unprofitable,
and know it not; God has tried the virtue of them that speak low in the
presence of the Prophet, he shall pardon their sins, and give them an
exceeding great reward. They that call thee behind the Enclosures, know not
what they do; had they attended until thou had been toward them, they had
done very well, God is gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! if any Infidel
desires to preach to you, distinguish the truth from a lie; if ye give credit
to the ignorant, ye shall repent you. Know that the Apostle of God is among
you; ye shall offend God, if ye obey unbelievers in many things, God wills
that ye embrace his Law, it shall rejoice your hearts; and make ye to abhor
disobedience and impiety: such as abhor it, are steadfast in their faith,
through his special grace, he knows them, and is most wise. I^ two Nations,
or two Provinces, of such as believe in God are at odds, reconcile them; if the
one do injury to the other, fight against him that is unjust until he repai^e
what God has ordained; if he make reparation, reconcile them with equity; be
just, God loves them that do justice to his people: all those that believe in
his LAW, are BRETHREN; make peace among your brethren, and fear God, he shall
give you his mercy O ye that believe! scorn not your neighbor peradventure
that he shall one day be of better value then you. O ye women! scorn not
others, perhaps they shall one day be more worth then you. Utter no reproaches,
and give no name to your neighbor that may displease him; call him by his
name, otherwise ye will disobey God: such as repent not, are exceedingly too
blame. O ye that believe in God! take heed of evil thoughts, these are
oftentimes in the number of sins; do no displeasure to your neighbor, and
speak to each other nothing that may displease: who among you would eat the
flesh of his dead brother? ye shall abhor it; fear therefore God, who is
gracious and merciful to such as have his fear before their eyes. O people! we
created you male and female; we have caused to issue out of your loins people
and Nations; ye koow each other, but your greatest honor is, to fear God, he
knows you, and understands, all your secrets. Some among the Arabians have
said, we believe; say unto them, say not we believe, but say, we are obedient,
otherwise faith shall not enter into your hearts; if ye obey God and his
Prophet, ye shall be recompensed for your good works, God is gracious and
merciful to them that obey his Commandments. Such as are beloved of God,
believe in his Unity, and in his Prophet, they doub not of his Law, and employ
their persons and wealth for the propagation of the faith. Say unto them, know
ye not that your Law proceeds from God? he knows whatsoever is in the
heavens and earth, he knows all. They think to do thee a pleasure in saving
them, say unto them, believe not that ye pleasure me, for it is God that
guides you into the way of salvation; ye ought so to believe it; God knows
all that is in the heavens and earth, and beholds whatsoever ye do.

CHAP. L The Chapter of the Thing Judged, containing forty five Verses written
at Mecca.
Mahomet has entitled this Chapter with the letter Kaf of the Arabique
Alphabet, which signifies in this place, Kda el mer, that is to say, the thing
judged; See Gelaldin, and Bedaoi, who have entitled this the Chapter of
Judgment, or the thing judged. Many Mahomitans say likewise, that Kaf is a
mountain that environeth the world, and that Mahomet swore by that Mountain.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Alcoran, worthy of
praise, that the Inhabitants of Mecca wonder that a man of their Nation
teaches them the torments of hell; they say, that he speaks strange things.
What, say they, shall we die? shall we be earth, and return into the world?
Behold a very strong return! We know assuredly what the earth will do with us,
we have a book, wherein all is written; they impugn the known truth, and are
in a great confusion: See they not heaven above them, how we have built it? how
we have adorned it? and how there is no defect? We have extended the earth,
raised the mountains, and caused all sorts of fruits to spring forth, for a
sign of our omnipotency. We have sent the blessed rain from heaven, made
gardens to produce grain, pleasing to the Reapers, and Date trees, exceeding
each other in height, to enrich our creatures. We have given life to the dead,
dry, and barren earth; so shall the dead come out of their sepulchers. The
peopl of Noah's time, those that inhabited ne^r the well, Temod, Pharaoh, and the
fellow Citizens of Lot; they that d^elt in the Forest, and people of King
Teba, did heretofore traduce our Prophets, Teba was a King of Lieme^.
and felt the punishment denounced against Infidells. Was it a trouble to us to
create men at first? nevertheless they ere in doubt if they shall rise again.
See ^edaoi
We created man without difficulty, we know the mo^ions of his soul, and
penetrate into his heart as the blood in to the veins of his body. O man! think
upon the day that thou shall see thy good and evil Angel near thee, at the
right hand, and on thy left, they have observed and written all that thou have
done; represent to thy self death before thine eyes, it is inevitable: Think on
the Angel that shall sound the Trumpet at the day of the Resurrection; that day
shall the wicked behold what was promised them, and all men shall come before
God to be judged. Their guardian Angels shall conduct them, and be the
witnesses of their deportments: It shall be said to the Infidells, behold the
day of which ye would have no thoughts; we have now opened your eyes, you shall
see this day more hard then iron; their guardian Angels shall say unto them,
behold here before your eyes all that ye have done; cast into Hell those
obstinate Infidels, that have hindrd their neighbor to do good, that have
offended in doubting of Gods Law, and have affirmed there was another god with
God; cast them into the most grievous torments. Then shall the Devil say to
them, Lord, I did not seduce them, they seduced themselves; God shall say,
dispute not before me, what was heretofore promised you is infallible, my Word
admits no alteration, and I will do injustice to none. God shall ask at the
day of judgment, if hell be full? it shall answer, is there any more? Paradise
is prepared for the^ righteous, who shall have the fear of God before their
eyes, it is promised to the^ that shall be converted, that shall obey the
Commendments of his divine Majesty, and persevere in their obendience. It shall
be said to them, enter ye into Paradise, exempt from all evil; behold the
eternal day, ye shall have all that ye shall desire and more. How rich and
powerful Cities have we in times past destroyed? their inhabitants sought in
their Countries places of retreat, and escaped not the punishment of their
crimes; this ought to serve for example to them that comprehend it, to them
that hear it, and to such that saw it. Certainly we created in six days,
without difficulty, the heaven and earth, and all that is between them.
Persevere, be not impatient for the words of unbelievers, exalt the glory of
thy Lord before the Sun go down, an^ before it rise; pray to thy Lord at the
entrance of the night, the last of all shall be worship. Hearken when the Angel
shall call thee to general Judgment; that day shall all the world hear the
Trumpet; the people shall come out of their sepulchers, and earth shall open
before the eyes of men, I give life and death, and all the world shall be
assembled before me to be judged. This assemble is easy for me to accomplish;
I know what the wicked say, thou shall not cause them by force to embrace my
Law* teach it those that fear the torments prepared for Infidels.

CHAP. LI. The Chapter of Things dispersed, containing sixty Verses, Gelaldin
Falkredin entitle this the Capter of things that disperse.
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the winds that disperse
the dust, by ^he clouds charged with rain, by the ship that runs upon the
waters, and by them that divide the wealth of the earth; that what has been
promised to you is true, and that the day of Judgment is infallible. I swear by
heaven, and the stars thereof, that ye are in an exceeding great error; God
expels liars far from him, he curses them that blasphem, and such as
believe not in the Resurrection: They ask, when shall be the day of Judgment?
That day shall they be punished in the fire of hell. It shall be said unto
them, taste the torments that ye have with impatience demanded. They who had
the fear of God before their eyes, shall be in gardens, adorned with fountains,
they shall enjoy the pleasures prepared for them by God, because they are
righteous; ^hey sleep very little by night, implore pardon of God at the
dawning of the day, and give alms to the poor that beg, and the poor that are
bashful. God manifests on the earth, and in your persons the signs of his
omnipotenc^; consider ye not that what is promised to you is written in heaven?
God is Lord of heaven and earth, he is truth it self, will ye not confess him?
^^d the Angels conveigh to th^e the books of Abraham? When they ^ntred into his
house, they saluted him; he likewise saluted them, made signs to his ^ervants
to bring a fat calf roasted, which he presented to them; he said unto them,
wherefore do ye not eat? and was afraid in his mind, of their coming. They
said, fear not, we are the Messengers of God; they declared to him that he
should have a son, that should be a great personage. Then his wife drew near
crying with a loud voice, and smiting her face, said, one that is barren
bears no child; they said, the thing shall come to pass as we have spoken,
thy Lord ordains what pleases him, and knows all. Abraham said unto them,
O ye Messengers of God! what is your design? they replied, we are sent from God
to destroy the Cities inhabited by the wicked, and cast upon them stones of
fire, whereon are inscribed the names of them that they shall strike: we will
cause all the righteous to depart from among them; if we find there but one
family of righteous, we will there leave an example to posterity for them that
fear the tormen^s of hell. Moses is a sign of our omnipotency; we sent him to
Pharaoh with reasons clear and intelligible, he despised my Commandments, and
said, that Moses was a Magician, and possessed of the devil, but we surprised
him, and drowned his people, to his great displeasure; Aad is an example of our
omnipotency: we sent an impetuous wind against those wicked people that
destroyed them. Temod is an example of our omnipotency, with his Nation; they
waxed prou^, and resisted the Commandments of their Lord; when it was said to
them, that the punishment of the wicked was defer^ed to another time, but
thunder surprised them, they saw it, they had not the power to stand on their
feet, and were deprived of protection. The people of Noah's time are an example
of our omnipotency, we p^stroyed them, because they were impi^us: we built
heaven with strength and virtue; I am he that gives power and strength; we
extended the earth, and created of every thing, male and female; perhaps ye
will consider it. Say unto them, turn ye to God; I am sent from him to preach
to you the pains of hell: believe not that God has another God with him; the
wicked said heretofore, that the Prophets and Apostles whom he sent, were
Magicians, and possessed of the Devil: have they recommended to their posterity
to do the like? Certainly they are in a great error. Separate thy self far from
their company, and be not troubled at what they say; preach the Alcoran, it is
profitable to the righteous; I did not create the devils and men but to worship
me. Say unto them, I require nothing of unbelievers for instructing them; I
require not that they nourish me, God enricheth whom he pleases, he is
omnipotent; the wicked shall be chastised as heretofore have been their
predecessors, in their malice, their time shall come, and misery shall befall
them at the day of judgment.

CHAP. LII. The Chapter of the Mountain, containing thirty nine Verses written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Mountain, upon which
God spoke to Moses by what is contained in the book written in parchment, by
the first Temple of Mecca, by the arches of the heavens, and by the sea full of
water, that God is one sole God and the punishment promised to unbelievers is
infallible, they shall not be able to escape it in the day when the heaven shall
tremble, and the mountains shall w^^^ ^^at day shall be unhappy (...) ^^ated in
the fire (...) that ye (...) pa^^ (...) our (...) ^ore (...) ^od (...) ^e (...)
^d (...) ^d (...) works; they shall repose upon beds well ordered, we will
marry them to wives that shall have fair eyes, they shall be attended of their
family, and be largly rewarded for their good works; every good action shall be
to them a degree of happiness; We will give them such fruits and Vines as they
shall desire; they shall present to each other the cup to drink, they shall not
speak an evil word, and shall not si^; they shall have pages about them for
their service, beautiful as pollished pearls, they shall discourse among them,
concerning what they did before on Earth, and say, We were in the world, we and
our families, with a great apprehension of the pains of hell, but God has
gratified us, he has delivered us from eternal flames. They shall say
moreover, we worshipped in the world but one God, most just, and most
merciful. Remember thou to preach the Alcoran; thou art not ungrateful for
the grace of God, thou art not possessed of the Devil; will they say that thou
art a Poet, a Rimer? that nothing must be expected from thee but fables of past
Ages? Say unto them, ye expect the time of my destruction, but I with you,
expect the time of your [ruine.] Do their superiors command them to speak in
this manner? Will they be obstinate in their errors? Will they say, that
Mahomet has invented the Alcoran? Certainly they are incredulous, let them
bring any discourse like to this book, in Doctrine and Eloquence, if what they
affirm be true. Were they created of any thing? have they created any thing?
have they created themselves? have they created the Heavens and the Earth?
Certainly they are incredulous: Have they in their power the treasures of thy
Lord? are they Giants? Have they a ladder, that may raise them to hear what is
spoken in Heaven? Let them produce some reason of their opinion; Believe ye
that God has daughters, and that ye have sons? Will ye require of him a
Salary for obeying his Law? Is he your debtor? The wicked are liars* do they
know what shall be? do they weite it? Desire they to conspire against thee? The
wicked often conspire against the righteous, that worship but one God: Praised
be God, he has no companion; If the Infidels should see a piece of the Heaven
to fall, they would say, it is a cloud driven by the winds; leave them in their
obstinacy, until they come to the day of their death, that day shall their
conspiracy be vain, and they deprived of protection: They likewise shall be
punished before their death, but the greatest part know it not. Have patience,
and expect the Judgment of God, thou shall soon see it; I will protect thee,
and thou shall not want help; Praise thy Lord, exalt his glory when thou shall
rise, praise him in the night, and before the Stars disappear.

CHAP. LIII The Chapter of the Star, containing sixty Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Star that
disappeareth, that your friend Mahomet ^rreth not, he speaks nothing of his
own, he speaks but what has been inspired into him by the omnipotent, and
most bountiful* God. The Angel approached him in the highest place of heaven,
within the length of two bows; and somewhat nearer; The Turks believe that
there is an Apple tree at the right side of throne of God, and that none can
ascend higher then its branches, no not the angels.
God has inspired into him, what he has inspired into his servant, who
altered nothing of what has been inspired into him. He has spoken what he
has seen, and in what form the Angel was. Dispute not against him, concerning
what he saw; he another time saw the Angel in Heaven, near to the Tree that is
at the right side of Gods throne; and although that tree was covered with that
which covered him, his fight was not dazzled, and he is not in error. Certainly
he has seen the great wonders of his Lord: Have ye considered Alat, Az, and
Menat, those three Idols? Will ye s^^are that God has daughters, and that ye
have Sons? ye will make a false Oath, and shall be in a manifest error; Those
Idols have nothing but the names which your Fathers and you have given them,
See Gelaldin.
God has not commanded you to worship them, ye follow only your passions,
remote from the truth, God teaches you the way of Salvation by the mouth of
his Prophet; does man obtain from Idols what he required of them? God is God in
the beginning, and the end; How many Angels be there in Heaven, whose prayers
are unprofitable, if God does not accept them? They that believe not in the day
of Judgment, say, that Angels are maidens, they understand not what they say;
they speak through opinion, and that opinion is not conformed to truth. Depart
thou far from them that reject our Law, and desire only the goods of the
Earth, and are ignorant of all other things. Thy Lord knows them that go a
stray from the right way, and such as follow the path of Salvation; all that is
in the Heavens, and Earth, is Gods, he shall chastise the wicked, See Gelaldin.
and reward the just. He pardons their venial sins, who fly sins
mortal, he is exceeding merciful. He knows that he has created you of
Earth, Great and small sins.
and that he formed you in your mothers womb. Extol not your selves, he knows
such as have his fear before their eyes. Have thou seen him that abandoned the
faith? a little wealth was given him, and nothing more; does he know what must
befall him? has he knowledge of what is to come? will he not learn what is
written in the books of Moses and Abraham? to wit, that none shall bear the
burden of another; man shall have but what he shall have gained; he shall in the
end see his labor be rewarded after his works, and all shall appear in the
presence of thy Lord. H^ it is that causes to laugh and mourn, to live and to
dye; he created the male and female of every thing, he gives and takes away
man's soul, when he lists; he is most rich, and has no want of any person. He
is the Lord of the Planet, which men adored. He destroyed A^^ and Temod,
drowned the people of Noah, who were most erroneous and unjust, overthrew the
City of Lot, and covered it with burning stone. In whom will they believe, if
they believe not in thy Lord? This Prophet is sent to preach to you the pains
of hell, as did the other Prophets that were before you; The day of Judgment
approaches, and none but God knows when it will come; wonder ye at this
discourse? Ye scoff, and lament not when ye are spoken to, but ye shall be
surprised in your sin, if ye humble not your selves before God, neither worship
him.

CHAP. XLVII. The Chapter of the Moon, containing fifty five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The day of Judgment approaches,
the Moon was divided into two parts, nevertheless Infidels believe not miracles
when they see them; they say that this is Magic, they lie, and follow but
their passion, but as is written. The history of past ages, full of salutery
counsels, was preached to them; nevertheless Preachers were to them
unprofitable; Depart thou far from them, when they shall be called to the
universal Judgment; which they will not believe; that day shall their eyes be
troubled with fear; they shall come out of the Earth, dispersed; like frighted
GRASSEHOPPERS, they shall flock to him that shall summon the^ Judgment, and
shall say, behold here a day unhappy for the wicked. The people heretofore
belyed Noah, and said, that he was possessed of the Devil; Noah exhorted them,
and invoked his Lord; in the end, he said, that his strength was gone, and that
he was overcome through the malice of men, then was he powerfully succored; we
opened the gate of the Heavens, and caused an extraordinary rain to fall, we
caused FOVNTAINES to issue ^orth from under the Earth, the water of Heaven and
Earth were gathered together, and overwhelmed the Infidels, because of their
sins; We saved Noah in the Arc, well pinned, and chaulked it floated upon the
water trough our p^^mission, to serve for a token of our omnipotency; will any
of the vn^elievers of this time consider this? will they consider the
punishment of their crimes, and the pains of Hell? We have made the Alcoran
easy to be understood, will there be any that study it? The wicked that
traduced Aad were chastised, but with what chastisement? We sent against them
an impetuous wind, in a day to them unfortunate, that caused men to fall like
palms rooted up, consider what was their puishment; We have rendered the Alcoran
intelligible, will there be any one that will study it? Temod and his people
traduced the Prophets, and contemned their exhortations; they said, there is a
man among us, who would seduce us from the right way, if ye follow him, he will
lead you into Hel^; was he alone elected among us, to receive the inspirations
of God? No, he is an Imposter; but in the end, they knew them that were wicked,
and liars. We sent the Camel to prove the Infidels; their Prophet observed
what they did, and was patient, the water was divided for them and for the
Camel, and each at his day found to drink, nevertheless they called their
Companions, and slew the Camel of Salhe, but in what manner were they
chastised? I darted thunder against them; which made them dry as chafe; We
have made the Alcoran easy to be understood, will there be any to study it?
Lots Citizens traduced him, and despised his instructions; We sent against them
an hot wind, with burning stones, that destroyed them, and we in the morning
saved Lot, with his family, throught our special grace; thus do I recompense
them that ackowledge my benefits. Lot had preached to them the pains of hell, we
surprised them, when they disputed against his exhortations, they saw his
guests to enter into the city, in the figure of men; we blinded their sight,
and said, Taste oh ye wicked! the punishment of your crimes; In the morning they
weary chastised with a perpetual chastisement, because they despised the words
of Lot* We have made the Alcoran intelligible, will there be any that will
study it? Certainly the men of Pharo^h were preached un^o; they would not obey
my Law, and despised my miracles, but we surprised them in their sins; Are
the Infidels that are among you of more value then those that preceded them?
Find ye any Salvation for them in the SCRIPTVRE? Will they say they shall
obtain victory over the believers? On the contrary, they are vanquished, and
turn the back. Certainly the hour of their punishment shall speedily come,
their time approaches, and their pain in Hell shall be greater then that of
the Earth, they are wholly seduced from the way of Salvation, and shall be
dragged, and cast headlong into eternal flames. We have created all things by
our sole power; we spoke but one word, and in the twinkling of an eye the
thing wa^; we heretofore destroyed a great number of Infidels like unto them,
will there be any that considers it? All the good, and the evil that they
have done is exactly written. The righteous shall dwell in pleasant gardens,
they shall drink in eternal rivers, they shall not speak a lie in their
assemblies, and shall dwell eternally near to the most majestique and
omnipotent God.

CHAP. LV. The Chapter of the Merciful, containing eighteen Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The merciful has taught the
Alcoran; he has created man, and given him the use of reason; he created the
Sun and the Moon to count seasons, the Stars and Trees adore him; he has
elevated the Heavens, established Justice, and commanded to weigh with good
weights; he has created the Earth for the habitation of men, with all sorts of
fruits, g^ain, and leaves; he created the winds and tempests: Oh men and
Devils! what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? He created man of Earth,
like a pot, and the Devils of the flame of fire; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but
your own Lord? He is the Lord of both the Wests, and both the Easts, what Lord
do you blasphem, but your own Lord? He makes the fresh water to mingle with
the salt, and the one easily mingleth with the other; what Lord do ye
blaspheme, but your own Lord? be bring^^^ Pearls, and Corrall out of the Sea;
what Lord do ye blaspeme, but your own Lord? he created the Ships that float
upon the Sea, big as mountains; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord?
Al things shall have end, and the majestique and glorious face of thy Lord shall
be permanent; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Whatsoever is in
Heaven and in Earth, imploreth his grace, he is ever himself; what Lord do ye
blasphem^e, but your own Lord? Oh ye men and Devils! I will require an account
of your actions; what Lord will ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Oh ye men and
Devils! pass the extremities of Heaven and Earth, go beyond them if ye can,
ye have not the power, what Lord do ye blaspheme but your own Lord? If he send
against you flames without smoke; and smoke without fire, ye cannot defend
your selves; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? When the heaven
opens, it resembles a rose, or a crimson colored skin; what Lord do ye
blaspheme, but your own Lord? The time will come, when ^n account shall be
required from men and Devils of their sins; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but
your Lord? The wicked shall be known by their countenance, an account shall be
required of their readiness and negligence; what Lord do ye plaspheme, but
your own Lord? Behold hell! which the wicked would not believe; they shall turn
round about, and round about, in boiling water, of which they sha^^ drink; what
Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Such as have had the fear of God
before their eyes shall enter inro Gardens, where the trees are covered with
branches and leaves, adorned with Rivers and Fountains, with abundance of all
sorts of fruits; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? They shall
repose upon fair beds, lined with Crimson; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your
own Lord? They shall gather the fruits of this garden, to their contentment;
what Lord do ye blaspheme but your own Lord? They shall there have wives, who
shall not cast a look, but upon them, and whom no person, man, or Angel shall
touch before them; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your Lord? They shall
resemble Corrall and Rubies; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? good
deeds are recompensed with good deeds; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own
Lord? There be yet other gardens, wherein are herbs exceeding green, Rivers;
Dates, Pomegranets, and all sorts of fruits; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but
your own Lord? There be in these gardens women, who have eyes exceeding black,
and bodies exceeding white, they are covered with pavillions, and none, either
men or angels shall touch them before their husbands; what Lord do ye blaspeme,
but your own Lord? They shall repose upon green Carpets, near rivolets, bordered
with flowers; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Praised be the name
of God thy Lord, honor and glory are due to him eternally.

CHAP. LVI The Chapter of Judgment, containing fourscore and nineteen Verses
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The day of Judgment will come, none
can deny it. That day shall many be afflicted and humbled, and many shall be
elated, and rejoiced; the Earth shall tremble, the Mountain open, and be
dispersed like dust carried away by the wind, ye shall be present at that day in
a threefold manner These are the Blessed.
Some shall have in their right hand the book, wherein shall be written all
their actions These are the Damned.
Others shall have it in their left hand, and The prop^e^s*
such as preceeded them in well-doing, shall be the nearest to his divine
Majesty, and the higher in Paradise, there shall be a great number of the first
ages, and few of the latter; they shall repose upon beds, adorned with gold,
and precious stones, they shall look upon each other; young boys shall go
about them with vessels, Cups, and Goblets, full of delicious drink, that shall
not offend ^he head, neither intoxicate them; they shall have all the fruits
that they can covet, and such vy^nds as they shall desire; they sha^ have w^m^n
with black eyes, and who shall be white as polished pearls, for recompense of
their good works; they shall not hear an evil word spoken, they shall not sin,
and shall hear perpetually the voice of them that bless them; They that shall
hold their book in their right hand, shall be near an Apple Tree, fresh and
without throne, and near the tree of Muse is a fruit common in Egypt.
Muse under a pleasant shadow, by flowing water, with store of fruits, of all
seasons; they shall use [them] with freedom, lying on delicious beds. We have
created the daughters of Paradise Virgins, and affectionate to their husbands,
for the content of them that shall have in their right hands, the book of the
account of their actions, and of many of those that were in the first Ages; and
of many of such as shall be in the latter: Those that shall have their book of
account in the left hand, shall be tormented with an exceeding hot wind, they
shall drink boiling water, they shall be in a black, hot, and salt smoke, for
that they were Luxurious in the world, for that they were negligent to observe
the Commandments of God, and continued in the enormity of their sins. The
Infidels say, what! after death we shall be earth, and dust, and shall we rise
again with our fathers and predecessors? Say unto them, you, your Predecessors,
and posterity, shall all be assembled before God to be judged; Then, oh wicked
Imposters! shall ye eat of the fruit of the Tree Zacon is the tree of Hell.
Zacon; ye shall fill your belly; ye shall drink boiling water, and be daily
altered; behold your condition at the day of Judgment. We created all of you;
if ye believe it not, See Gelaldin.
consider the wealth ye possess, did you your selves create it? We have
appointed that ye shall dye; we can if we please, put other creatures like unto
you in your place, and metamorphize you into another form; which ye know not;
we caused the soul to enter into the body; if ye consider not this, think upon
your tillage; do ye make the earth to bring forth fruits? or do I cause them to
spring forth? If I will, I can render your fields dry as straw, without grain,
nevertheless are ye proud; Ye say, what! shall cut grain that we have sown be
lost? No, we will preserve it; Consider the water that ye drink, have ye made
it to fall from the clouds? or did we cause it to descend? if we please, we can
render it so salt, that ye shall not be able to drink it, if ye acknowledge not
this grace, consider the fire that ye kindle; did ye create the wood that
burns? We created it, to put you in mind of the fire of hell, and for the
profit of the people. Exalt the name of God most mighty. I swear by him that
makes the Stars to fall, (this is a great oath, if ye understand it,) that the
Alcoran is a book worthy of praise, all therein is written in good order, no
person shall handle it, that is not clean and purifyed; it is sent from God,
Lord of the Universe; if ye renounce what is written in this book, ye shall be
in the number of Infidels, and shall know the truth, when the soul shall
forsake your body; I know this better then you, but ye do not consider it; if
ye believe not to rise again, cause your soul to return into your body, when it
shall be upon your lips; when a righteous man dies, he shall find rest, and
all manner of concentment in the delights of Paradise, if he be of them that
hold the book of the account of their work in the right hand, and shall be free
from eternal pains: If he be in the number of Infidels, and seduced, he shall
be precipitated into hell; this is is a most certain truth, Exalt the name of
thy Lord omnipotent.

CHAP LVII. The Chapter of Iron, containing twenty nine verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. All that is in the Heavens and
Earth, exalts the glory of God, he is omnipotent and wise; the Kingdom of the
Heavens and earth is his, he gives life and death to whom he pleases, he is
without beginning, and without end, he knows all that me^ make manifest, and
whatsoever they keep secret, he knows all things. He it is that created the
earth, and the heavens in 6 days, and fitteth on his throne, he knows
whatsoever ^reth into the earth, and all that comes out, he knows ^^atsoever
descends from heaven, and whatsoever ascen^h, he is with you in whatsoever
place ye are, and sees (...) your actions; the Kingdom of the heavens and
earth ^ his, and all things obey him; He makes the night to ^ter the day, and
knows what is in the heart of men. ^elieve in God, and his Prophet, expend in
pious works ^^me part of the wealth that he has given you, he shall ^ive you
more. Do good abundantly to them that believe (...) his Law; wherefore will ye
not believe in God, and his Apostle, who teaches you the Commandments of your
word? Ye have promised him to embrace his Law; he has ^nspired his
Commandments into his servant, to bring ^ou out of darkness, and guide you
into light, he is graci^us and merciful. Who hinders you to make any ex^ence
for his glory. The inheritance of the heavens and earth is his; Such as for his
service have expended any thing before the taking of Mecca, are not equal in
merit to them that fought to conquer that City; they are far above them that
fought not, and shall be protected of his divine Majesty; he promises Paradise
to the righteous, and ^^oweth all your actions. Who is he that shall lend to
him any alms? he shall increase his substance, and give a great reward: Be thou
mindful of the day, when thou ^halt see those men and women that have obeyed
my Commandments, with a light, that shall go before them, it shall be said to
them, this day it is declared to you, that you shall enter into, and dwell
eternally in Gardens, wherein ^^ow many Rivers, and where ye shall find
supreme felicity. Be thou mindful of the day that the wicked shall say to the
True-believers, Behold us, cast your eye to our side, that we may partake a
little of your light. They shall say unto them, return upon your steps to
demand light. There is a place, betwixt them, that has a secret gate, full of
grace, and repose for the righteous, and without environed with misery for the
wicked; they shall call upon the righteous, and say, were not we of your
RELIGION? they shall reply, yes, but ye betrayed your souls, through
disobedience, ye d^ubt^d of the LAW Law of God, your blasphemy, rendered you
insolent, (...) the hour of your death; the Devil made you proud, and moved
you to rise against the Commandments of his div^^^ Majesty; this day there is
neither ransom, nor favor f^^ you; the fire of Hell is the habitation of the
wicked. O^ what an habitation! Such as believe in God think it no trouble to
humble their hearts at the remembrance of the Alcoran, and the truth that it
contains; they are not like them that heretofore ha^ the knowledge of the
written Law, they have been a long time without Prophets, their hearts are
hardened and the greatest part of them have been impious, Know, that God
restores life to the Earth after the death thereof we have taught you the
mysteries of faith, peradventure ye will comprehend them; God shall multiply
the benefits that the righteous shall lend to him, and shall return them a
great reward; Such as believe in God and his Prophet, are righteous; Martyrs
shall be recompensed of God, they shall be covered with light, and the wicked
that disobey his Commandments shall be damned eternally; the life of this world
is but vanity, sport, and delusion; it is but pride; the abundance of wealth
and children is like to the rain, the wicked wonder at the plants that it
produces; in the end they wither, become yellow, and then are altogether dry;
The impious shall suffer great torments, and the good shall enjoy the mercy of
God; the life of this world is but matter of pride, implore pardon of God;
Paradise large as heaven and Earth, is prepared for them that shall believe in
his divine Majesty, and his Prophet, th^s is an immense grace, which he
conferreth on whom he pleases. All the evil that ye suffer on earth, in your
goods and persons, is written in a Book before i^ befall you; it is an easy
thing to God; to the end that ye affl^ct no^ your selves extraordinar^ly in
your dis^leasures, and that ye rejoice not overmuch in your contentme^ts; God
loves not the proud, he has not to do with the covetous, who recommend
avarice to the peopl; and who neglect their duty. Praise is due to him, praise
is due to him in all places; Certainly we sent our Messengers with our
Commandments, we sent with them their Scriptures, and ^lance, that the people
might weigh with good weights. (...) gave iron to men, it causes great evils,
and great good (...) the world, God knowath them that fight with zeal for (...)
Law and his Prophet, without seeing him, he is strong (...) omnipotent. We sent
Noah and Abraham to instruct (...) people; we instructed their progeny in the
Scripture; (...) followed the right way, and many disobeyed our com^^ndments;
We sent after them our Prophets and Apostls; (...) sent Jesus the son of Mary,
we taught him the G^spel; (...) put civility, clemency, and chastity into the
hearts of ^^m that followed him; we did not command them to ^p virginity, they
kept it of their own accord, because of ^is desire they had to please God; they
have not obser^ed their Law as they ought, many have been disobedient, ^we have
rewarded those among them that believed. O (...) that believe in Jesus! fear
God, and believe in his pro^^^, ye shall have double ^he reward of Gods mercy,
he shall ^^don your sins, he is gracious and merciful; I teach you ^^se things,
to the end that such as have heretofore receved ^^e written Law, may know that
they have no power over (...) grace of God, he gives it to whom he lifts,
certainly ^ is immense,

CHAP. LVIII. ^he Chapter of the Dispute, containing twenty two Verses written
at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. God has heard the speech of her
that disputed with thee, concerning the action of her husband; she exhibited to
him ^er complaints, he hears all your discourses, he hears and ^eeth all.
No person among you shall swear never to ^^uch his Wife no more then his
Mother; your wives ^^e not your mothers; your Mothers are those that conceived
and brought you forth; they that speak (...) that manner, speak uncivilly, but
God is gracious, and merciful. He that shall have sworn to touch no mo^^ his
wife, and shall desire (afterward) to know her, sha^ give liberty to a slave,
for satisfaction of his oath, before he touch her; this is commanded you, God
knows (...) your actions: if he have not the power to free a slave, he shall
fast two months together, before touching her; if he cannot fast, he shall give
to fifty poor: Thus ought ye to do, if ye believe in God and his Prophet, God
so appointed it, and has prepared great torments for them t^^^ transgress his
Commandments. They that shall disobey him and the Prophet, shall be cove^ed
with shame and ignominy, as were their predecessors in impiety; God has sent
his Commandments on earth, those who shall reject them, shall be severely
tormented at the day that he shall revive them, he shall declare to them all
that they have don, he has kept account, and they have forgotten it, he sees
all. See thou not that all that is in the heaven and earth is Gods? If ye be
three secretly met together, he is the four^h; if ye be five, he is the sixth;
if ye be more or less, he is always with you whresoever you are. He shall
relate to men at the day of judgment all that they have don, he knows al
things. See thou not the actions of them to whom private meetings were
prohibited? they return to their sin, and do what was forbidden them; they
assemble secretly with malice to conspire against thee, and to di^obey thee;
and when they come toward thee, they say, that thou have spoken things that
God has not inspired thee to utter, they know in their souls that God will
chastise them for their discourse, and that they all shall go into hell, where
their Rendezvous is: Oh ye that believe! make no private meetings to offend
God, to conspire against his prophet, and to disobey him; assemble ye to
perform acts of virtue, and to serve God, hare his fear before your eyes, ye
shall one day appear before his divine Majesty to be judged. Private assemblies
proceed from the Devil, for the affliction of the righteous; he brings no
evil upon them, but through Gods permission; and all believers ought to resign
themselves to his divine Will. O ye that believe! when ye shall be assembled
with your prophet, and are entreated to enlarge your selves, in^arge ye your
selves, God shall enlarge to you his grace. When ye are bid to rise, rise, Go^
shall raise up all the true-b^lievers that are among you, and p^ace the learned
some degrees above others, he knows your actions. O ye that believe! when ye
shall be disposed to deliver any secret to the Prophet, speak to him with
truth, good shall ^efall you, and [he] shall purify you: if ye fear to impart
to him ^our secret, God will not give you his grace. Make your prayers at the
time appointed, ^^^tribute tithes, ob^y God and his Prophet. God knows what
ye do: See thou not them that have abandoned his law? the wrath of his divine
Majesty is fallen upon them, they are of different opinion in their lie, and know
not that they lie, but he has prepared for them a great punishment, because of
their blasphemies; they have concealed their falth, and are ^educed; Certainly
he has prepared for them grievous pains, their wealth and their children shall
not be able to deliver them from his indignation, they shall be precipitated
into the fire of hell, where they shall abide eternally. B^ thou mindful of the
day, when he will cause them to revive; they shall swear as they swear before
thee, that they believed in his Law; they affirm they do good, and are liars,
the devil has prepossessed them, and has made them forget the word of God;
such as follow him are damned. They that transgress the will of God, and that
of his Prophet, are overcome of the devil: God has said in the Scriptures,
thou shall not obtain victory over me, neither over my Prophet, he is
omnipotent, and always victorious; thou shall find none of them that believe in
his Law, and the day of judgment, that does not ex^ctly observe the
Commandments of his divine Majesty, and those of his Prophet, although their
fathers; their Children, their brethren, and companions oppose them. God has
imprinted faith in their hearts, he has strengthened them through his Spirit,
and shall cause them to enter into ga^dens, wherein flow many rivers, where
they shall abide eternally: he shall be satisfied with their obedience, and
they shall be content with his grace. Such as shall obey his Commandments shall
be happy.

CHAP-LIX. The Chapter of Exile, containeng twenty four Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God; gracious and merciful: Whatsoever is in the heavens and
earth, exalts the glory of God, he is omnipotent and wise; he it is that has
exiled the wicked from among them that have knowledge of the written Law; when
he the first time exiled them, ye believed not that they should depart from
their houses; ye believed that their cittadels would defend them from his
punishment, but he surprised them, and did cast terror into their hearts, and
they destroyed their dwelling places with their own hands, to assist the
true-believers. O ye that are wise! consider their end. If God had not
appointed them to quit their Country, he had chastised them in some other
manner; they in the end shall suffer the pains of hell fire, because they have
disobeyed his Commandments, and his Prophet; he that shall disobey him, shall
be severely chastised: ye cut not Palm trees, and leave none standing, but
through Gods permission; he covers with shame and infamy them that disobey
him. See Kitab el tenior.
He commands you to give to the Poophet* a part of the spoil that ye shall
gain from your enemies, as well of Horses and Camels, as of other spoils; he
endueth him with power and authority over whom he pleases, he is omnipotent.
He enjoyneth you to give to the Prophet a part of what ye shall conquer over
them of the City of Mecca; he commands what pleases him. Give a share to
God, to the Prophet, his Parents, Orphans, the poor, and pilgrims, that no
disorder may arise among you that are rich; perform what the Prophet shall
command you, abstain from what he shall prohibit you, and fear God, he is
severe in his chastisements: do good to the poor, that have forsaken their
faculties and ho^ses, and separated themselves from the wicked, for the service
of God, and to defend his Law and his Prophet. The^ that before them forsook
their Houses for the service of GOD, affect those that have followed them, they
bear them no malice for the wealth they possess, although they themselves are
necessitous. They that are not avaritious, shall be happy; such as shall suceed
them, shall pray for them, and say, Lord, pardon our sins, and our brethren,
that were our predecessors in the observance of thy Commandments; infuse no
malice into our hearts against them that follow thy Law, thou art gracious and
merciful: See thou not, that the wicked say to their brethren, wicked as
themselves, had ye not so soon left Medina, we had gone out with you, and had
never obeyed him whom ye have obeyed; had ye fought, we had defended you; God
sees that they are impious; had they delayed to go forth, they should not
have gone forth with them; had they fought, they would not have succored them,
they had turned the back, and had found no protection; they fear men more then
God, because they are ignorant. [The Jews] shall not fight against you
together, unless in their fortresses, and behind walls; the War among them is
cruel, but think not that they may assemble and unite themselves, their hearts
are divided because they are ignorant, they are like their predecessors who
were chastised and slain, and shall suffer great torments at the day of
Judgment; they are like to him whom the devil had seduced, and said to him, I
am innocent of thine impiety, I fear God, Lord of the Universe; the end of
both is to be cast headlong into the fire of hell, where they shall abide
eternally, such is the reward of the wicked. O ye that believe! fear ^od, and
consider what ye shall do at the day of Judgment; fear God, he knows
whatsoever ye do; be not like to those that forget his Commandments, he
forgets them, and they continue in the number of the damned, they shall be
most miserable; and such as shall go into Paradise shall be blessed. If w^
should make the Alcoran to descend upon a mountain, it will open it self, with
the fear it will have of the Word of God. Thus do I speak in parables to the
people, peradventure they will be converted. There is but one only God, who
knows what is present, future, and past, he is gracious and merciful; there
is but one God, King of all things: He is holy, the deliverer, true, the
punisher, strong, powerful, glorious. Praised be God, he has no companion, he
is God the Creator, who has formed whatsoever is in the world, all glorious
attributes are due to him; whatsoever is in heaven and earth, exalt his glory,
he is omnipotent and wise.

CHAP. LX. The Chapter of Trial, containing eighteen Verses, written at Mecca.
Some Mohammedan Doctors have entitled this the Chapter of Vocation, because it
entreats of women that forsook their husbands, to follow the Law of Mahomet,
who appointed to try their hearts, intention, and to know their Vocation.

IN the name of God gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! obey not mine,
nor your enemies; ye show kindness to them when ye meet them; nevertheless
they reject the truth that has been sent unto them, and chase away the Prophet
and you also, and that, because ye believe in God your Lord; Seek not their
friendship; when ye fight against them for my Law, I know what ye ought to
fear, and ye know it not; he that shall do what is here above prohibited,
follows an evil way; if they have advantage over you, they will be your
enemies, they will stretch forth their hands and tongues against you, they will
revile you, and desire that ye may renounce your faith; if ye do it, ye shall
have no content in your wives or children at the day of judgment, ye shall be
separated from them, and God shall behold all your actions: ye have a fair
example in Abraham and them that were with him, when they said to the people,
we are innocent of the sin that ye commit, in worshipping any other God but
God; Abraham said to his father, I will ^ot implore pardon of God for thee, I
am not able to deliver thee from his punishment, if thou art an Idolater; Lord,
all our confidence is in thee, our refuge is in thy mercy; protect not
unbelievers against us, pardon our sins, thou art merciful and wise; ye have
in them a fair example for them that fear God, and apprehend the day of
Judgment. God has not to do with them that obey Infidels, neither has he
need of any person, and praise is due to him in all places; peradventure he
will establish for the future great amity between you and them that ye hate, he
is omnipotent, gracious, and merciful; he does prohibit you the conversation
of them that fight not against you for his faith, and that expel you not from
your houses, he does not forbid you to do them justice, he loves the just; He
forbids you to converse with them that fight against your faith; that drive
you from your houses, and aid to expel you; he prohibiteth you to obey them,
and to contract amity with them; such as obey them, shall be exceedingly too
blame. O ye that believe in God! when the wives of your enemies shall throw
themselves into your party, try their conscience; if ye know them to be
faithful, and to believe in the Law of God, restore them not to the
incredulous Infidels, it is not lawful for them to know them, neither for the
women to teach them; give them subsistence, ye shall not sin in espousing them:
marry them not after the laws of unbelievers; demand of them what dowry they
require, they shall demand of you what ye are willing to bestow on them;
continue in accord, God so commands, he shall be your Judge at the day of
Judgment, he knows all your actions, and is most wise. If your wives revolt
to the party of unbelievers, and ye suffer any damage, ye shall repair that
damage to him that suffers, out of the booty that ye shall conquer; fear
God, and believe in the Law of his divine Majesty. O Prophet! when women shall
desire to embrace thy Religion, with firm purpose to believe in one only God,
not to steal, neither to commit adultery, neither to murder their children, to
lie, blaspheme, or be disobedient, receive them, implore pardon of God for
them, he is gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! obey not them against
whom God is angry, they despair of their salvation, as the wicked dispaired,
that died heretofore in their impiety.

CHAP. LXI. The Chapter of Array, containing fourteen Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise God all that is in heaven
and earth, he is omnipotent and wise. O ye that believe! say not that ye do
that which ye do not, God abhors them that say they do what they do not,
and loves them that fight in rank and file for his Law, like to a strong wall.
Remember thou that Moses said to his people, ye shall do me no harm, ye shall
know in the end that I am the Messenger of God; but God seduced them from the
right way, when they departed from obedience to his Commandments, he guides
not the wicked. Remember thou that Jesus, the son of Mary, said to the children
of Israel, I am the Messenger of God, he has sent me to confirm the old
Testament, and to declare to you that there shall come a Prophet after me,
whose name shall be Mahomet. When he came with miracles, reasons most
intelligible, and arguments infallible, they said that he was a Magician; who
is more impious then he that blasphemeth against God? The Infidels would
extinguish with their mouth the light of faith, but God shall make it manifest
against their will; he has sent his Prophet to guide the people into the way
of salvation, to teach them the truth of his Law, and make it more evident then
all other Laws of the world, against the will of Infidels. O ye that believe!
Will ye that I teach you one thing, that shall deliver you from the pains of
hell? Believe in God, and in his Prophet; employ your wealth and persons in
fighting for his Law; ye shall do exceeding well, if ye have knowledge to
understand it, God shall pardon your offenses, he shall cause you to en^er into
gardens, wherein flow many rivers; he shall cause you to go into the
beautiful Palaces of Eden, where is supreme felicity; he shall confer upon you
yet another grace, which ye desire, viz: victory over your enemies. O ye that
believe! maintain the Law of God; Jesus, the Son of Mary, said to his Apostles,
who will maintain the Law of God with me? he shall be supported, and protected
of God. The Apostles answered, we will maintain it; One part of the Children of
Israel believed in Jesus, and another rejected his Law; we gave succor to them
that believed against their enemies, and they were victorious.

CHAP. LXII. The Chapter of the Assembly, containing eleven Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise God all that is in heaven
and earth, praise the King, holy, majestique, and omnipotent, who has sent his
Prophet, an Arabian by Nation, to preach his Commandments to the Arabians, to
purify them, to teach them the Scriptures, and mysteries of faith, they were
before seduced from the right way. They that shall come after them, shall not
see a Prophet equal to him, this is a special grace of God, the omnipotent
and wise; he conferreth it on whom he lists, and his graces are immense. They
that preach the old Testament and perform not what it enjoyneth, are like to
an Ass charged with books; Such are they that disobey the Commandments of
God; he guides not the impious. Oh ye Jews! believe not your selves to be the
beloved of God, expect death, ye shall understand your error; they believe not
that they shall be chastised for their sins, but God beholds all the unjust:
Say unto them, ye shall find one day the death that ye fly; ye be sent back
before God, who knows what is present past, and to come; he shall set before
you all that ye have done, to be judged. Oh ye that believe! when ye are
called to the assembly of Friday, to make your prayers, pray, and quit your
trade, this shall be a good act, it ye understand it; when you shall have
finished your prayers, separate your selves, go whither you please, and b^g of
God his grace, call frequently to mind his divine Majesty, and ye shall be
happy. When the Infidels saw any thing of profit, or any divertisement, they
forsook thee, and went out from the Sermon; Say unto them, how great riches and
delights are there with God? he is the Rich of the rich.

CHAP. LXIII. The Chapter of the wicked, containing twelve Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. When the wicked shall come to
visit thee, they will say, that they are witnesses, that thou art a Prophet
sent from God; He well knows that thou art his Prophet, he sees that they
dissemble, and fell their faith to enjoy wealth in the world, wherein they
commit evil, they say with the mouth, we believe in the Law of God, and are
impious in their fouls, impiety is imprinted in their hearts, and they will not
learn the mysteries of faith; The beauty of their bodies shall not displease
thee, when thou shall see them; they erect themselves when they speak, and
resemble a piece of wood set up against a wall; they fear all rumors that fly
abroad, and are your enemies. Beware of them, doubtless God will destroy them;
how can they blaspheme against his Law? When it was said to them, Come to the
Prophet, he shall beg pardon of God for your sins, they shook the head, and
withdrew with pride; misery is upon them; whether thou implore pardon for them,
or do not implore it, God will not pardon them, he abhors the wicked. They
say, do no good to them that follow that Prophet of God, until they abandon
him; the treasures of heaven and earth are Gods, but they comprehend it not;
They say, if we return to the City of Medina, we will drive thence shame and
infamy, and will there establish greatness and honor; on the contrary,
greatness, power, and victory proceed from God, his Prophet, and them that
believe in his Law, but Infidels understand it not. Oh ye that believe in God!
your riches and your children ought not to seduce you from his service; such as
shall forsake it, shall be in the number of the damned; give alms of the wealth
that he has given you, before the hour of your death arrive; Then shall the
wicked say, Lord, if thou had not so soon caused me to die, I had embraced
thy Law; God retardeth not the day of any one, when the hour is come; he
knows all that ye do.

CHAP. LXIV. The Chapter of Deceit, containing eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious, and merciful. Praise God whatsoever is in
heaven and earth, he is King of all things, praise is due to him, he is
omnipotent; He it is that has created you; Some observe his Commandments, and
others are unbelievers, he beholds all your actions. He created the heavens
and the earth, he formed you, and ye shall be one day assembled before him to
be judged; he knows all that is in heaven and earth, he understands your
secrets, and what ye publish, he is not ignorant of what is in the hearts of
men. Have ye not heard what did heretofore befall the wicked? They were
punished, they dyed in their misery, and in the end shall suffer grievous
torments, because God has sent them Prophets to instruct them, and they said,
what! shall a man like our selves teach us the right way? They despised them,
and forsook the Law of God; he has not to do with them, neither has he need
of the world, praise is due to him in all places; do the wicked believe that
they shall not rise again? Contrariwise, God shall make them to revive, and
shall declare to them all that they have done; this thing is easy to his
divine Majesty; Believe in God, his Prophet, and the light that he has sent
you, he knows all your actions. Remember thou the day, when he shall summon
all to Judgment, this shall be the day of D^ceipt; they shall be known that
have deceived themselves, and those that have deluded their neighbors. See
Kitab el tenoir.
That day their sins shall be pardoned, that shall have believed in his unity,
and have done good works, they shall dwell eternally in Gardens, wherein flow
many Rivers: the Infidels that despise his Commandments shall be precipitated
into hell, where they shall burn eternally. No evil befalls you, but through
Gods permission; he gives patience to him that believes in his divine
Majesty, and knows all. Obey God and his Prophet; if ye obey him not, know,
that the Prophet of God is obliged only to preach the truth of faith; there is
but one God, all True-believers resign themselves to his divine will. Oh ye
that believe! ye have children, and wives, that are your enemies, beware of
their malice, if ye pardon them; if ye depart from them, God shall be to you
gracious and merciful. Wealth, and children do often hinder you to obey God;
but know, that he rewards abundantly the righteous; fear him with all your
power, hearken to his Commandments, obey him, give alms, he that is not
avaricious shall be blessed; if ye lend any thing to God, he shall cause it to
multiply, he shall pardon your sins, he accepts the acknowledgement of his
benefits, and is most merciful* he knows what is present, past, and future
is omnipotent and wise.

CHAP. LXV. The Chapter of Divorce, containing eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. O Prophet! when ye repudiate your
wives, repudiate them, following the Ordinances and Laws, and reckon the time
that they ought to tarry before they marry again; Fear God your Lord, cause
them not to depart their houses, neither expel them before the time appointed,
if they be not taken in adultery; Such are the Ordinances of God, he that shall
transgress them, shall do injury to himself, peradventure God will enjoin
something concerning them, of which ye are ignorant. When the time that they
ought to tarry shall be finished, retain, or dismiss them with civility; ye
shall take persons of your Religion, honest men, that shall be witnesses of
your actions, depose with truth what ye have seen; it is so appointed to them
that believe in God, and the day of Judgment. God shall deliver from
affliction him that shall have his fear before his eyes, and shall enrich him*
when he least thinks of it; He that shall trust in him, shall not be deceived,
he does what he pleases, and has appointed a prefixed time to every thing. If
the women hope no more to have their months, and doubt that they are
misreckoned, they shall tarry three months, before they marry again, if they
be not Nurses; if they be with child, ye shall abstain till their delivery;
whosoever fears God, rejoices in the observance of his Commandments. What
is above, is ordained of God; he shall pardon their sins, that have his fear
before their eyes, and give them an exceeding great reward. Cause them that ye
repudiate, to dwell in your houses, or near to you, abuse them not; If they be
with ch^lde allow them what shall be necessary for them, until they shall be
delivered; if they desire to nurse their children, ye shall give them an honest
salarie, and entreat them with civility and courtesy; if ye like not this, ye
shall cause them to be nursed by another, whose pains ye shall reward. If ye be
not wealthy, you shall allow according to your power; God does not enjoin any
one to expend more then his ability permits, he shall give you good after
evil; how many have been the Cities that have heretofore disobeyed the
Commandments of God, and of his Prophets? We have kept an exact account of
their sins, their Inhabitants have been chastised, and shall be in the end, in
the number of the damned; God has prepared for them grievous torments. Oh ye
that are wise! fear God, he has sent you the Alcoran; he has sent you a
Prophet, to teach you the mysteries of his Law, to lead you out of darkness,
and to guide into light them that shall believe in him, and do good works: he
shall open to them the Gate of Paradise, wherein flow many Rivers, where they
shall dwell eternally, with all manner of content. God! He it is, that created
the seven heavens, and as much of earth, and ordains among them what pleases
him, to the end ye may know that he is omnipotent, and knows all things.

CHAP. LXVI. The Chapter of Prohibition, containing twelve Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God; gracious and merciful. Oh Prophet! prohibit not for the
contentment of thy wives, to do that which God has permitted thee, he is
gracious and merciful; he has appointed to do what is permitted by your Law,
he is your Lord, is omniscient and most wise. When the Prophet went to visit
one of his wives, God revealed to him, what she desired to say to him, he
approved one part, and rejected the other; when he told his wife what was in
her will to speak to him, she demanded of him, who had revealed it to him; He
that knows all things has revealed it to me, that ye may be converted, your
hearts are inclined to do what is forbidden; if ye act any thing against the
Prophet, know, that God is his protector, the Angel Gabriel, and all the
believers will defend him, the Angels shall protect him against you. If it be
his will to repudiate you, God shall give him for the future, other wives in
your place, that shall be obedient; True believers, humble, faithful, devout,
contented, mild, clean, virgins, and not virgins: Oh ye that believe in God!
strenthen your selves, you and your families, in obedience to his
Commandments; the Idolaters shall burn in the fire of hell, with their Idols;
the Angels deputed to torment them, disobey not God, they execute whatsoever is
commanded them. Oh ye that are Infidels! there is no excuse for you, ye shall
be chastised after your demerits. Oh ye that believe! turn to God with
affection, he shall pardon your sins, and make you to enter into Gardens,
wherein flow many rivers; the light of faith shall go before the Prophet, and
them that have followed him; When God shall recompense them, they shall say,
Lord, give us thy light, pardon our sins, thou art omnipotent. Oh Prophet!
fight against the Infidels, and the wicked, fortify thy self against them,
hell shall be their habitation. God teaches unbelievers a parable, and says,
the wives of Noah, and the wives of Lot were under the power of my two
servants, righteous men; they betrayed them, but did not escape the punishment
of their sin. It was said unto them, enter into the fire of hell with them that
go into it. God teaches them a parable, that follow his Law; Take example by
the wife of Pharaoh, she prayed to God, and said, Lord build me an house in
Paradise, deliver me from Pharaoh, from his works, and unjust men. Mary the
daughter of Josaphat preserved her virginity; we inspired into her our Spirit,
she believed the words of her Lord, and the Scriptures; she was in the number
of them that obey.

CHAP. LXVII. The Chapter of Empire, containing thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. Praised be he to whom belongs the
Empire of the world, who is omnipotent, and has created life and death, to let
you know which is the better; he is omnipotent and merciful. He has created
seven heavens, one upon another; thou see nothing of what he has created,
that is not proportioned; raise yet thy sight to heaven, thou shall not there
see any thing defective; behold it twice, or more often, thou shall not
perceive therein any thing vain or imperfect. We have adorned the heaven, and
the world with Stars, we expelled thence the Devils, we prepared for them a
great fire, and the torments of hell for unbelievers. They shall hear horrible
and terrible voices, that proceed from despair and wrath; when they shall be
cast thither headlong* when they shall enter into hell by troops, the Overseer
of the torments shall say unto them, had you none on earth that preached to you
the pains of hell? yes, shall they reply, they were preached to us, but we
traduced our preachers, we said, that God did not command to do what they
declared, that they were liars, and seduced from the right way; Had we heard
them, and had we been wise, we should not this day have been in the number of
the damned; they shall confess their sins in the bottom of hell. Such as fear
God, without seeing him, shall receive pardon of their offenses, and an
exceeding great reward. Speak secretly, or publicly, God knows whatsoever
ye have in your hearts, since the time of your creation, he is blessed and
omniscient. He has established ways upon the earth, go on all sides, and
live of his good things: ye all shall revive, and be one day assembled before
him to be judged. Believe ye that he who is in heaven, cannot render the earth
dry and barren, and cause it to tremble? Believe ye, that he who is in heaven
is not able to send against you an impetuous wind, to destroy you? Ye shall
hereafter feel what are the torments of hell. Your predecessors would not
believe them, and were chastised for their incredulity. Consider ye not the
birds that fly over your heads, how they extend, and shut their wings? nothing
supporteth them, but that mercy that beholds all things. Who but God shall
protect you in your miseries? The Infidels are proud: Who shall enrich you, if
God restrains his grace? nevertheless ye persevere in your sins, and fly
the truth; Is he that creeps on his face, like to him that goes on his feet
in the right way? Say unto them, God has created you; he has given you
sight, hearing and sense, but few among you return him thanks for his graces:
Say unto them, he created you of earth, and ye shall one day be assembled
before him, to render account of your actions. The wicked dmaned when the day
of Judgment shall be; Say unto them, God knows, I am sent only to preach to
you the pains of hell; Their visages shall become black, when they shall see
the punishment of their sins approach. It shall be said to them, behold that
which ye have demanded with so much impatience! Say unto them, did you see that
God destroyed me, and them that were with me? No, he gave us his grace. Who
shall deliver the Infidels from the torments of hell? Say unto them, God is
merciful; we believe in him, and we are resigned to the will of his divine
Majesty, ye shall know hereafter them that shall be seduced. If the water that
waters your flocks enter under the earth, who shall give you other water, or
another Fountain to supply you?

CHAP. LXVIII. The Chapter of the Pen, containing fifty two Verses, written at
Mecca.
Bedaoi entituleth this the Chapter of the Letter Noun, n, and says, that it
is as much as to say, whale, or great Fish; Some other Doctors say, that Noun,
n, is the name of the Ink, or Table, on which the Angels write the
Commandments of God; Others affirm it, to signify the Ink-horn, but many of
the Mohammedan Doctors entitle this the Chapter of the Pen.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Pen, and by all
that is written, that thou art not possessed of the Devil; through the grace
of thy Lord; thou shall have an infinite reward; God has created thee, with a
creation high, and most illustrious. Thou shall hereafter know, and the
Infidels likewise shall know one day, them among you that are ignorant.
Certainly thy Lord knows them that are seduced, and them that follow the
right way. Obey not the wicked, they desire thee to be more indulgent toward
them, and themselves more mild toward thee; Obey not those infamous liars,
those bablers, sinners, seducers, and wicked persons, full of treasures and
children; When the Mysteries of faith are related to them, they say, that they
are but fables of antiquity; we will put upon their noses a mark of shame, and
ignominy; we have tried them, as Gardeners, when they have resolved in the
evening to cut off the morning following some fruits of their garden, for their
refection, and have not said, if it please God; By night, which they slept, God
sent fire into their gardens, that consumed them; in the morning they called
[each other] and said, come to put order to your garden, if ye desire to gather
the fruits; they believed the poor would enter they ran [to drive them away]
and found their fruits black, and their gardens blasted: Then they said, we are
seduced, we are sinners; one of them said that it was requisite to praise God;
Then they said, praised be God, we are great sinners; they approached each
other, and complained among themselves: They said, misery is upon us; we were
in a great error, peradventure God will give us hereafter more then the value
of what we have lost, we must beg his grace; thus God chastises on earth, whom
he pleases* but the torments of the other world are much more grievous: They
that have his fear before their eyes, shall dwell in gardens full of delights.
Shall I entreat the good like the wicked? How can ye judge it? have ye a book,
wherein you read what pleases you? have we promised to you any content at the
day of Judgment? Shall you have that day what ye have promised to your selves?
Ask of them, who will be surety for their belief? will their Idols, and
companions be their surety! Let them cause them to come, if they be true: Be
thou mindful of the day when sins shall be detected, and the wicked shall be
commanded to worship God, but they shall not be able to behold him, their eyes
shall be troubled with fear, and their sight covered with shame. They are
enjoined in the world to worship his divine Majesty, but they refuse to perform
it; I will punish them by little and little, when they shall least think of it;
I will defer the punishment of their crimes, because my wrath is strong; Do
thou demand of men any recompense for thy preaching? are they charged with any
expense? Have they in their power the book, wherein is the future, to write
therein what they affirm? Attend the Judgment of thy Lord, and be not like him
that was swallowed of the Whale. He invoked his Lord in his affliction; if his
Lord had not sent him his grace, he should never have come upon earth; when he
repented of his sin, his Lord pardoned, and placed him in the number of the
righteous. The unbelievers labor to shake thee through their looks, and that
through envy; they affirm, that thou art possessed of the Devil, when they
hear thee read the Alcoran; It was not sent but to instruct the world.

CHAP. LXIX. The Chapter of Verification, containing fifty two Verses, written
at Mecca.
Ekteri intituleth this the Chapter of Judgment, because that day all shall be
verified.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Verification approaches,
Verification approaches; God has not told thee in what time shall be the day
of Verification; Temod, and Aad would not believe in him that preached to them
the day of affliction and sorrow, but Temod was destroyed by an extraordinary
noise, and Aad by an impetuous wind that God sent against them seven nights,
and eight days together; they were overthrown, str^tched out like palms fallen
upon the earth: did any one among them save himself? Pharaoh, and his
predecessors, with the Inhabitants of the Cities that were overthrown because
of their sins, disobeyed the Prophets and Apostles of God, and were rudely
chastised. We preserved you in Noah's Ark, when the waters swelled, to serve for
example of our omnipotency to them that saw it, and to such as shall hear it
mentioned. Be thou mindful of the day when the Angel shall sound the Trumpet,
when the earth shall lift it self up, and the mountains tremble; then what
must come to pass, shall come to pass; heaven with weakness shall open, and
the Angel that shall bear the throne of God, shall be upon the border of the
heaven. Then shall eight Angels present the books, wherein shall be written the
sins of men, and nothing shall be concealed. Such as shall take in the right
hand the book of the account of their actions, shall say, we find what we
believed to be true, we know with certain knowledge the coming of this day,
and the felicity of life is in Paradise: It shall be said to them, eat and
drink of the good things of Paradise at your pleasure. They that shall take the
book of account of their actions in their left hand, shall say, would to God
that this book had been lost, I know not what is this account; would to God
that I had been eternally buried in the earth: the riches, authority, and
treasures of the world are to me unprofitable: It shall be said to the devils,
take them, bind them, and throw them headlong into hell, put chains seventy
cubits long upon their arms, and cast them into fire; they would not believe in
the Unity of God the Omnipotent; they have eaten the bread of the poor, they
are this day without protection, and want bread, and shall find nothing but the
pains of hell prepared for the wicked. I swear, although ye see, and although
ye do not see the Alcoran, it is the word of the Prophet, the Apostle of God,
it is not the word of a Poet, but few persons will believe it. It is not the
word of one that is wicked, but few men remember it; it is sent from God, Lord
of the Universe. The Infidels say, oh Prophet! if thou speak, we will not hear
thee, thy speech shall not enter into our hearts: Say unto them, there is none
among you able to deliver you from the punishment of your crimes; the Alcoran
instructs in the way of salvation them that believe in his divine Majesty; I
know that there are liars among you, whom God shall put into the number of
Infidels: the Alcoran is truth it self. Praised be the name of God Omnipotent
and Majestique.

CHAP.LXX. The Chapter of the Ascent, containing forty four Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Some persons have demanded when
shall the day of Judgment be, and in what time the wicked shall be chastised?
none but God is able to deliver men from the torments of hell; he is Lord of
the way that ascends to heaven, the Angels and Spirits shall ascend toward
him at the day of Judgment; that day shall seem to the wicked to endure fifty
thousand years; expect with patience; the wicked imagine they are far from that
day, but thou shall see it speedily, that day shall the heaven resemble
dissolved metal; the mountains shall be like to carded wool, which bends
downwards; none shall ask his neighbor who he is, and they shall look one upon
another; the unbelievers shall desire to redeem themselves from these pains,
through the loss of their children, their wives, their brethren, their
companions, their neighbors, and the loss of all that is on earth. The flame
of fire shall rise upon them, and shall burn the skin of their head; they shall
call upon those that are behind them, that have, like themselves, abandoned
the Law of God; and the covetous, that shall have heaped up treasures. Man was
created timorous, he is afraid when evil befalls him, and is arrogant when
good happens to him; except the believers, who are stable in their faith, that
persevere in their prayers, that give alms to the poor that beg, and those that
are bashful, that believe in the day of Judgment, fear the punishment of
God, and know none other women but their own, and their slaves, they shall be
exempt from affliction at the day of Judgment; those that shall act the
contrary, shall be in the number of the unjust. They who effect what they have
promised, and preserve faithfully what to them has been entrusted, who speak
the truth in testimony, and who make their prayers at the time appointed, shall
be honored in Paradise. Wherefore is it that the Infidels, who are about thee,
cast their eyes to the right hand, and to the left, with pride? do they require
to enter into Paradise, and be saved? We have created them as other men. I
swear by the Lord of the East and West, that we are able to change them into a
people, better then they, and that it is a thing easy for us to perform; leave
them in their errors, until they be come to the day when they are promised to
be chastised, and that they shall come out of their sepulchers to repair to
universal Judgment; they shall repair thither terrified, and their sight
shall be covered with shame; this is the day that has been heretofore preached
to them.

CHAP. LXXI. The Chapter of Noah, containing twenty eight Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Before men were chastised, we sent
Noah to preach to them the pains of hell; he said unto them, O ye people! I
preach to you the pains of hell, worship one only God, and fear him, obey me,
he shall pardon your sins, he deferreth your punishment until the day
appointed, and shall not retard it; when his hour shall be come, did ye know
it, ye would be converted. Afterward he said, Lord, I have exhorted this people
night and day, but mine exhortations have been very much in vain, they have
strengthened themselves in their impiety, and when I preached to them, they put
their fingers into their ears, and covered their heads with their garments,
that they might not hear; they continue in their impiety, and become proud: I
have preached to them publicly, I lifted up my voice, I have expounded to them
the mysteries of thy Law; I said unto them, implore pardon of God, he is most
merciful; he shall send you abundance of rain to water the earth* he shall give
you store of wealth, and many children; he shall give you gardens embellished
with fountains, and rivers; who h^ndreth you to honor God? He it is that has
created you in the condition wherein you are: consider ye not that he has
created seven heavens, the one upon the other? that he created the Moon with
her brightness, and the Sun with his light? he has caused the earth to bring
forth all sorts of plants; he will cause you all to return to earth, and to
revive; he has extended it, to the end ye may walk in the ways thereof, large
and spacious. Lord, said, Noah, this people has disobeyed me, they have
followed that which can give them neither prosperity nor profit, but rather a
most certain damage; they have conspired against me, and said among themselves,
forsake not your gods, forsake not O^^^^oa, Igout, Joac, and Nesar, they err
from the right way; Lord, add to their confusion. Then were they drowned
because of their sins, they shall be cast headlong into the fire, whence none
but God is able to deliver them. Noah said, Lord, leave not a wicked man upon
the earth, they will seduce thy creatures from the right way, they will leave
children, liars, and impious like themselves; pardon my sins, pardon the sins
of my father, my lineage, and those that shall believe in thy Law, and destroy
the unjust.

CHAP. LXXII. The Chapter of Devils, containing twenty eight Verses, written at
Mecca.
Some Mahometans entitle this the Chapter of Spirits.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Say to the people, I have received
an inspiration, which some devils heard of me when I read the Alcoran, and that
they said, we have heard the miraculous Alcoran read, it teaches the right
way; we believe in what it contains; we believe not that God has companions;
we believe there is but one God, we believe not that he has wives, or
children, our ignorant persons blaspheme against his divine Majesty,
nevertheless we imagine that they could not do it. There are who require aid of
the devils, and augment their confusion, because they say, that God will not
cause any to rise again; some devils have said, we have been as high as heaven,
and found it furnished with guards and stars, we stayed in a place a little
distant to hear; there is one star that watches them that hearken, and drives
them away; we know not if God hates the men that are upon earth, or if he will
teach them the right way; but we are now in the number of them that believe in
the unity of his divine Majesty: they said, oh ye people! we were before in the
way of error; we heretofore believed that God did not operate on earth, but no
person, in whatsoever place he be, can avoid obeying his Will; we heard the
book read that teaches the right way; we believe in what it contains; he that
believes in God, will not fear any misery or injustice: there be of us that
are good, and that trust in God; others there are, who are wicked and impious:
such as obey the Commandments of God, follow the right way, and the wicked
shall be precipitated into the fire of hell. Had the Infidels followed the
right way, we had sent them from heaven abundance of rain, and given them our
grace, I will try them, and such as shall despise the Alcoran shall be
punished. The Temples belong to God, invoke one sole God in the Temples: when
his servant rises, he worshippeth his divine Majesty; it wanted not much, but
these d^vils had published the plurality of Deities: Say unto the people,
worship God my Lord; I believe in one God, who has no companion, I can neither
guide nor seduce you, but through his permission; If I d^sobey him, none shall
be able to save me, and I shall want protection at the day of Judgment. I can
do no more for you, then to preach to you his Law; this is the subject of my
Embassy: He who shall disobey God and his Prophet, shall be damned, and shall
remain eternally in the fire of hell. The wicked shall know such as shall be
deprived of succor and protection, when they shall behold the pains prepared
for them. Say unto them, I know not whether what is promised to you, shall
incontinently happen, or whether God will defer it some time; none knows what
is to come but God, and those whom he has elected to be Prophets and
Messengers of his Will; he inspireth into them his Commandments, to preach to
men; he upholdeth all the actions of men, and keeps an exact account of every
thing.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Chapter of the Fearful, containing twenty Verses, written
at Mecca.
The Arabians have entitled this the Chapter of the Fearful; when the Angel
Gabriel brought this Chapter to Mahomet, he was afra^d of the splendour of his
light, and covered himself with his garments, which gave occasion to the Angel
to call him, and say, oh fearful! and not, oh Prophet! as he was w^nt.

See Gelaldin.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. O thou Fearful! Arise by night,
pray to God at midnight, until two third parts of the night, and more. Read
the Alcoran, and meditate thereon, observe what it contains; although it be
tendious to thee, thou will best comprehend it after thy first sleep, because
thou in the day have affairs that divert thee. Remember thou the name of God,
forsake the world to worship him, he is Lord of the West, and East, there is no
god but God, take him for thy protector: be not impatient at what the wicked
say; separate thy self from their society, without fear, leave me to punish
them; is there any one that is able to defend them? their punishment is
deferred, but I have chains of iron, bread full of thorns, and great torments
to inflict on them, at the day when the earth shall tremble, and the mountains
shall be dissolved into dust. O ye people! we have sent to you a Prophet, our
Apostle, to instruct you, as we did to Pharaoh; he was disobedient and
obstinate, and we severely chastised him. How will ye secure your selves from
the torments of hell, if ye be in the number of the wicked? What will ye do at
the day when Infants shall be men, and heaven shall be opened? What God
promises is infallible, these things are for the instruction of them that
desire to follow the way of salvation. Thy Lord knows that thou will arise
about the third part of the night, or at midnight, as likewise a part of those
that are with thee; he reckons the hours and the minutes of night and day, he
knows that thou can not reckon them exactly; he pardons thee, if thou
risest a little sooner, or a little later, read during this time what thou shall
be able to read of the Alcoran; God knows that there will be persons among
you that will be sickly, others that will be in travels for their affairs, and
some that will fight for the faith; these persons shall be excused: Read what
ye shall be able of the Alcoran, lift up your prayers to God, pay tithes, lend
to God some benefit, ye shall one day find the good that you shall have done,
and a very good reward; beg pardon of God, he is gracious and merciful.

CHAP. LXXIV. The Chapter of the Wrapped, containing fifty seven Verses,
Mahomet was wrapped in his garments when the Angel brought him this Chapter.
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. O thou wrapped! Arise, and preach
to the people the torments of hell, thy Lord is more powerful then the Idols,
make clean thy garments, be thou mindful of the pains prepared for
unbelievers; separate thy self from their company; lend nothing to Usury; the
day that the Trumpet shall sound, shall be extremely irksome to the wicked,
that day, let me chastise him whom I created, and to whom I gave riches, and
children, and whom I placed in plenty, nevertheless he demands more, and is
obstinate, to disobey my Commandments; I will add to his pains, because he
blasphemeth against the Alcoran; wherefore does he blasphem? he makes his
countenace sorrowful, covered with hypocrisy; when he beholds the people,
with his eyes melancholique, and estranged from the way of salvation, he is
proud, scorneth to follow the Prophet; says, that the Alcoran is but Magic,
and but the word of Man; he shall be precipitated into the bottom of hell,
nothing remains to him but to be burned; ninteen Spirits shall be appointed to
torment the wicked: they that punish the damned are Spirits. We have mentioned
this number of nineteen, to seduce the Infidels, and confirm the truth, and the
True-believers in their faith. They whom God instructs in the Scripture, and
who believe in his Law, are not in doubt of these Spirits; but such as have
evil in the heart, who doubt of his Law; and the wicked say, that he by this
number, means God; Thus God seduceth and guides whom he pleases; no person
knows the number of his Angels, but God. I swear by the entrance of the
night, and the morning, that hell is an exceeding great punishment, prepared
for the impious. The believers, and unbelievers, the good and the bad, shall
answer for their actions; and such as shall have their book of account in the
right hand, shall go into Paradise; they shall enquire of the damned, and say
to them, who did cast you into hell They shall answer, we did not pray to God
at the time? appointed; we gave not to the poor to eat; we believed there was
neither Resurrection, nor Judgment, until death surprised us, the prayers of
them that pray for them, shall be in vain. Wherefore is it that unbelievers
depart from the Law of God? They are like to the wild Ass, which flies as
far as he can, when he sees the Lion approach him; every one of them would
particularly see a book to instruct them, and apprehends not the day of
Judgment; Certainly the Alcoran teaches them the Law of God, that read it;
none shall understand it, but he that shall be pleasing to God; who shall have
his fear before his eyes, and shall implore pardon of his sins of his divine
Majesty.

CHAP. LXXV. The Chapter of the Resu^rection, containing forty Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear that it is most true, that
men shall rise again. I swear, that the wicked shall render an account of
their actions; think they that I cannot recollect their bones? I will recollect
all of them after they shall be corrupted; I am able to recollect their
fingers, as they had them in their youth. Certainly man is prone to blaspheme,
before the coming of the day of Judgment, and enquireth when that day will be.
When his sight shall be troubled, and the Sun and Moon gathered together, then
shall he say, whether shall I fly? It shall be said to him, thou shall have
none other refuge but in God; he shall be surprised, and all his offenses shall
be commemorated to him, and he shall witness against himself: Speak not then
in a word, if he will excuse himself, be not thou impatient; I know all that is
in his heart, I know what thou have taught him; I did read with him, that read
to thee the Alcoran, and made thee to understand it; Man presses himself to
go to his dishonor, and considers not his end, he shall raise the head, with
a countenance content to see God, but at the same instant shall have the face
covered with affliction, and shall know, that he is in the height of all
miseries; His soul shall be conducted toward God, when it shall be separate
from his body; If it renounce the Law of God, it shall go toward the damned,
toward them that extend their arms through despair. It shall be said to him,
God alone, whom thou would not obey, was thy Lord and protector. Does man
think to be forsaken, and that no account shall be required of his actions? Was
not he created through our special grace, of mire, and of congealed blood? Did
we not create him male, and female? He that has done this, cannot he revive
the dead.

CHAP. LXXVI. The Chapter of Man, containing thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Man continued a while, without
having in him any thing memorable; We created his posterity of his seed,
mingled with that of the woman; we gave him sight and hearing, and taught him
the way of Salvation. Some have embraced the faith, and others have been
Infidels; we have prepared for them chains, and bonds, to drag them into the
fire of hell. See Exteri.
The just shall drink of wine, that shall issue out of a fair Fountain; all
the servants of God shall drink [thereof] and shall cause it to flow, as shall
seem good to them. God will deliver from the pains of hell, such as shall
satisfy their vows, as shall apprehend the day of Judgment, as shall give
alms to the poor, to orphans, and prisoners, without hope of thanks, or
recompense, but only for the love of his divine Majesty, because of the fear
they have of the torments of the day, grievous and irksome to behold. God shall
rejoice, and reward them for their good works, he shall open to them the gate
of Paradise; they shall be clothed with silk, reposed on stately beds, and
shall not be troubled either with the heat of the Sun, or the cold of the Moon;
they shall be under the shadow of the Trees of Paradise, there shall they
gather fruits, as they stand, sit, and lie down; Vessels of silver shall be
brought about them, and round Cups full of a delicious drink, as much as they
shall desire, mingled with ginger, that shall issue out of a clear fountain,
and shall be encompassed with young pages to serve them, who shall resemble
polished pearls; when thou shall behold them, thou shall see a grace that
cannot be expressed; they shall be clothed with purple, and green shining silk,
and shall have bracelets of Silver; God shall give them a drink, clear and most
pure, these delights shall be the reward of their perseverance. We have sent
thee the Alcoran to instruct the people; attend the Judgment of thy Lord
against them that scoff, and obey not the wicked; Remember thou the name of
God, morning and evening, worship him by night, praise him a long time; the
Infidels affect the world, and think not on their end, neither the day of
Judgment; we created them, we have given them strength to walk, and if it be
our pleasure, we will establish other persons in their place. He that shall
desire to follow the Law of God, shall ^ollow it; but none shall follow it, if
it please his divine Majesty; he knows all, and ^s most wise, he gives his
^race to whom he pleases, and has prepared grievous ^^rments for the unjust.

CHAP. LXXVII. The Chapter of them that are Sent, containing fifty Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Angels that
followed [each other] thick as the hair of the foretop of horses, when God
sends them to execute his commands; by the Angels which he sends to punish
them whom he will destroy; by the winds which he sends to make the rain to
fall where he lists; by the Alcoran, that distinguishes good from evil; and
by the Angels that inspire into men the fear of the pains of hell, and implore
pardon of his divine Majesty, that the punishment promised to the wicked, is
infallible. Then shall not the Stars appear any more; the heaven shall open,
the Mountains shall walk, the Prophets and Apostles of God shall assemble, to
bear testimony against them that have despised their instructions; the good,
and the wicked, the believers and unbelievers shall be separated. I will not
tell thee when this day shall be, it shall be unhappy for the wicked. Have not
I heretofore destroyed the impious with their blasphemies? Have not they left a
posterity, wicked as they, whom I likewise have destroyed? Thus will I
hereafter destroy the Infidels, and misery shall be upon them eternally: Have
we not created you of weak seed, retained in the womb of your mothers, until
the time appointed? This is a grace that we have conferred on you; Misery shall
be upon the Infidels at the day of Judgment. Have we not created the earth, to
assemble the living and the dead? Have we not raised the Mountains? Have we
not given you fresh water to drink? Misery shall be upon the wicked at the day
of Judgment; It shall be^ said unto them, go into the fire of hell, which ye
would not believe, go into the smoke, divided into three parts, nothing shall
free you from the heat thereof, and flight shall not deliver you from that
fire; it shall cast forth black flames, that shall rise higher then the highest
buildings of the earth, and like to large coverlets of beds, extremely black.
The day of Judgment shall be unhappy to Infidels: It shall be said to them,
behold the day of the separation of the good from the bad; exercise your
flights, if ye can, to deliver you from the pains of hell; the day of Judgment
shall be unhappy to Infidels. The good, who shall have had the fear of God
before their eyes, shall be under the shadow of the trees of Paradise, nigh to
delicious fountains, with all sorts of fruits, that they shall desire. It shall
be said to them, eat, and drink at your pleasure, in reward of your good
works; thus are the righteous rewarded. The day of Judgment shall be unhappy
for Infidels. Oh ye Infidels! live in the world, ye shall be there suffered some
time; ye are wicked, but ye shall be miserable at the day of Judgment. The
wicked deride them that exhort them to pray to God, they shall be miserable at
the day of Judgment. In what will they believe, if they believe not in the
Alcoran.

CHAP. LXXVIII. The Chapter of News, containing forty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. What do the wicked enquire of
each other, touching the great news, of which they are in different opinion?
They shall learn it, they shall learn it; Have not I created, and extended the
earth? have not I raised the Mountains to establish it? Have not we created
you, male and female! Have not we created sleep, and the night for repose, and
the day of labor? have we not built over you seven heavens, and the Sun full
of light? have we not caused rain descend from the clouds, to cause the earth
to produce plants, and gardens of diverse fashions? The day of ^dgement shall be
a day of joy, and sorrow. When the Angel shall sound the Trumpet, all the world
shall come ^troups to universal Judgment; Heaven shall open its ^^es, the
Mountains shall walk, and hell is the place ^epared for the seduced, there
shall they remain eternal^. They shall find there no rest, neither drink, but
of boy^ng, and most stinking water, a reward conformed to their ^orks; the
Infidels believe not that they must render an ^ccompt of their actions, and
blaspheme, but we keep ^ccompt, and write exactly what they do. It will be
said (...) them at the day of Judgment, Taste this day the punishment that ye
have merited, your pains shall be augmented, and pains upon pains. They who
shall have had the fear of God before their eyes; shall be in a place of
felicity, in the gardens of a most fertile Land, enriched with grapes, and
Pomegranats; they shall drink in Cups full of a delicious liquor, and shall
hear no vain speeches, nor lying; such is the recompense of them that obey the
Commandments of God; He is Lord of the heavens and earth, none shall dare to
speak when the Spirits and Angels shall be assembled before him, none shall be
able to speak or pray for another, without his permission, This day shall be
the day of truth; they that shall be acceptable to him, shall retire toward his
divine Majesty. We have preached unto you, that the punishment of God shall
speedily come upon you; every one shall see all that he shall have done, and
the wicked shall say at the day of Judgment, would to God that I had been earth
and dust.

CHAP. LXXIX. The Chapter of them that take away, containing forty six Verses,
written at Mecca.
Gelaldin entituleth this, the Chapter of them that draw forth the soul.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Angels that take
away the souls from the bodies of Infidels, and the wicked; By the Angels that
accompany the souls of believers; By the Angels that exalt the glory of God: By
the Angels that guide the souls of the righteous, when they go into Paradise,
and by the Angels that are appointed for the affairs of the world, that all
people shall rise again at the day of Judgment; that day the earth shall
tremble, and the hearts of men shall tremble at the first time that the Trumpet
shall sound, at the second, their sight shall be troubled with fear, and they
shall say, Behold! we, we are returned upon earth, to the place whence we
departed; our bones were rotten, and our return to the world shall bring upon
us only misery; this second sound of the Trumpet is a sign of the wrath of God;
Then shall they be out of their sepulchers, revived upon the earth. Have thou
learned the history of Moses, and how God his Lord called him in the holy
valley, called Tor, and how he said, go toward Pharaoh, he is seduced from
the right way, and is in a great error; Say unto him, I called thee to the way
of Salvation, I will purify and guide thee into the way of the Law of God, to
the end thou may have his fear before thine eyes. Moses made Pharaoh to see
one of his great miracles, nevertheless he contemned Moses, disobeyed him, and
departed from the right way; he caused his people to assemble, and made
Proclamation, that he was their God, but God rigorously chastised him, because
of his blasphemies; this is an example of his omnipotency to them that are
righteous. O ye wicked! were ye more difficult to create then heaven? God has
raised the roof thereof, and proportioned it; he has made the night obscure,
and the day full of splendour, he has stretched forth the earth, has made
fountains to spring forth, to water the plants, and to give drink to beasts; he
has elevated and established the Mountains for you, and for your flocks. Men
shall call to mind the good and the evil that they have done, at the second
sound of the Trumpet, and hell shall appear open before their eyes. The
wicked, that have followed their own appetites on earth, shall be precipitated
into hell, and such as have had the fear of God before their eyes, and have
subdued their passions in this world, shall go into Paradise. The wic^ed will
ask of thee, when the day of Judgment shall be? none knows it but thy Lord:
Thou art not sent but to preach the pains of hell to them that fear that day,
as if they saw it present before their eyes; they shall imagine that they have
not remained in the tomb, but from evening until morning, when they rise
again.

CHAP. LXXX. The Chapter of the Blind, containing forty two Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. The Prophet frowned, had a surly
countenance, and withdrew himself when the blind came toward him. He will not
tell thee, if he will believe in God, and if he will profess thy preaching;
depart thou from him that shall depart from the Law of God, thou art obliged
only to preach to him, and not to make him to believe; but forsake not them
that shall come to see thee to be instructed, and shall fear God. The Alcoran
is sent for the instruction of men; it was copied upon the book that is kept in
heaven, to which honor and praise is due eternally. Wherefore is man impious?
Is it because he is created of a little water, retained in the womb of his
mother, until the time appointed? and because he found the way to come forth?
is it for that God causes him to dye, and to revive when it seems good to him?
He performs nor what God commands, neither considers the good things
that nourish him: We have sent rain, we opened the treasures of the earth, we
made all sorts of grain to spring forth; Blites, Olives, Dates, Gardens, and
fields full of fruits, and herbs to nourish you, and your flocks. When the
Angel shall sound the Trumpet the second time; Man shall fly his brother, his
mother, wife, and children; every one shall take thought for himself; that day
shall the wicked have countenances covered with affliction; the countenance of
the good shall be joyful, and such as have sought the way between faith and
impiety, shall have the countenance covered with earth, and dust.

CHAP. LXXXI. The Chapter of Roundnesse, containing twenty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. When the Roundnesse of the Sun
shall appear, the Stars fall, the Mountains walk, the Camel be without burden,
and without keeper; when the beast shall be gathered together, the Sea covered
with fire, Souls return into bodies, The Arabians buried their daughters
alive, when they had done a fault.
the Daughter demand why they put her to death; when the book of good and evil
shall open, when heaven shall cast often its ornaments, the fire of hell appear,
and Paradise be opened; then shall souls know the good and the evil that they
have committed. I swear by the Planets, by the obscurity of night, and by the
brightness of day, that the words of the Alcoran are the words of the Prophet,
beloved of God, powerful with his divine Majesty; ye ought to obey him, he is
a faithful observer of what is commanded him, he is not possessed of the
Devil, as ye have imagined, he has seen the Angel clearly, and without
riddle, and is not perplexed for what is to come; the words of the Alcoran are
not the words of the Devil; on whatsoever side ye turn you, it is only for
the instruction of men, and such among you, as will follow the right way, but
ye shall have no inclination to follow it, if it please God, the Lord of the
Universe.

CHAP. LXXXII. The Chapter of the opening of Heaven, containing seventeen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The souls shall know the good and
the evil that they have pone, when the heavens shall open, the stars fall,
the seas be gathered together, and the sepulchers be opened. O man! what makes
thee so proud as to rise against God, who has created thee, who has formed
and proportioned thee after what manner he pleased? O ye wicked! ye will not
believe the day of Judgment: there are Angels that observe your actions, and
are obedient to God. The just shall go into Paradise, and the unjust be
precipitated into the fire of hell, whence they shall never return. I will not
tell when the day of Judgment shall be; that day none shall be able to succor
his neighbor, and God alone shall command.

CHAP. LXXXIII. The Chapter of t^e^ that weigh with false weights, containing
thirty t^ree Verses, written at Mecca.
In the name of God, gracious and merciful. They that weigh with false weigh^s,
and measure with false measures, believe not to ris^ again, at the day when all
the world shall appear before God to be judged. Certainly the book wherein the
sins of the wicked are written, is kept in hell. Misery shall be upon In^^^^lls
at the day of Judgment; none doubts the coming of this day but the wicked:
when they hear the Commandments of God preached, they say, that it is but an
old fabl^ impiety retains them in this error, and induces them to abandon
the Law of his divine Majesty, but they shall be cast headlong into the flames
of hell. It shall be said unto them, behold the punishment which ye would not
believe. The book wherein the good works of the righteous are written, is
reserved in heaven; the Angels are witnesses, how the just shall enjoy the
delights of Paradise, they shall see the immense graces of God, reposed on
delicious beds, their countenance shall be covered with joy, and content; they
shall drink of purified wine, most savoury, that shall have the odor of Musk,
preserved in bottells, that none but themselves shall open, and it shall be
mixed with the water of the fountain of Paradise, where the Cherubins do drink.
The Infidells deride the true believers that would instruct them, nevertheless
when they return to their companions, they admire their doctrine, and say when
they see them, behold the seduced, but they are not sent to be their tutors.
The Infidells that shall be converted, and believe in the day of Judgment,
shall go into Paradise, they shall enjoy the grace of God, they shall behold
the grievous torments of the damned, that shall be punished after their
demerits, and shall find in the other world what they have done on earth.

CHAP. LXXXIV. The Chapter of the Cleft, containing twenty five Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The day of Judgment shall appear,
when the heaven shall cleave asunder, and the earth cast men out of their
sepulchers by the Commandment of God. O man! thou go daily toward death,
and shall find in the end the good and evil that thou shall have done: he to
whom shall be given the book of account of his actions in the right hand, shall
be blessed, he shall go with his companions into Paradise, where he shall enjoy
eternal felicity. He to whom shall be given the account of his actions in the
left hand, shall be damned, he shall be cast headlong into the fire of hell,
because of the unlawful pleasures that he has taken in the world, and for
that he believed not in the Resurrection: God beholds all that he does, and
keeps account. I swear by the redness that appears in the Air, when the
Sun sets, by the obscurity of the night, and the brightness of the Moon,
that you all shall change being and posture, and shall revive after your death.
Wherefore is it that the wicked believe not in God? why do they not humble
themselves when they hear the Alcoran read? they blaspheme against God, but he
knows all their actions; declare to them that they shall be chastised, and that
such as believe in his Unity, and do good works, shall receive infinite reward.

CHAP. LXXXV. The Chapter of Signs Celestial, containing twenty Verses,
written at Mecca.
Many Mahometane Doctors entitle this the Chapter of Castles.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by heaven, adorned with
signs, and by the day of Judgment, by the Angels and men, that they who have
made pits filled with fire to burn the true-believers, shall be witness of
their own malice and shall avouch, that the fire burned themselves, to make
them know the unity of God, and the truth of his Law. God is Omnipotent, and
always victorious, he is the King of the heavens and earth, he beholds all.
They that torment true-believers, and shall not repent, shall be damned, they
shall burn eternally in the fire of hell; and such as shall believe in God, and
do good works, shall dwell in pleasant gardens, wherein flow many rivers, where
they shall for ever enjoy supreme felicity. The wrath of God is strong, he
makes his creatures to die, and rise again when he pleases; he is merciful
toward them that repent of their sins, and loves them that serve him. He has
created his throne, to which praise is due eternally; he raises up whom he
lists, and nothing is to him impossible. Have thou heard the history of the
people of Pharaoh and Temod? God shall chastise in like manner them that shall
not believe in his Law, he knows them all. Certainly the precious Alcoran is
written in the book that is reserved in heaven.

CHAP. LXXXVI. The Chapter of the Starr, or of the North Star, containing
seventeen Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by Heaven, and the Star
that teaches men the way, I will not tell thee by what star; by the starr full
of brightness; that every person has a guardian (which observes the good and
the evil that it acts;) Does not man consider of what he is created? he is
made of a little sprinkled water that issues out of the body of man and woman;
God shall make him to rise again at the day of Judgment, and none shall be able
to protect or defend him from the wrath of his divine Majesty. I swear by
heaven that returns the rain, by the earth that opens it self, and
receives it, to produce its fruits, that the Alcoran distinguishes good from
evil, and that it was not sent in vain. The unbelievers conspire against the
Prophet, but God shall turn their conspiracy against them, and they shall not
know it. Be thou patient and a while endure the Infidels.

CHAP. LXXXVII. The Chapter of the High and Mighty, containing seventeen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Exalt the name of thy Lord, high
and mighty, who has proportioned all that he has created; he ordains what
he lists; and guides into the right way then that are pleasing to him; he
causes herbs to spring out of the earth, creates them green, renders them
dry, and alters them as to him seems good. I will read to thee the Alcoran;
forget nothing of what thou shall read, but that which God shall will thee to
forget, he knows whatsoever is kept secret in the world, and whatsoever is
made manifest. I will instruct thee in his Law; preach the Alcoran, it shall be
profitable to him that shall have the fear of God before his eye; such as
shall despise it, shall be miserable, they shall be precipitated into the fire
of hell, where they shall not be able, either to live, or die; and he that
shall embrace the Law of God; and shall be mindful of his name, shall be
blessed. Pray to God at the time appointed. Certainly the righteous shall be
heirs of the good things of the earth, and those of heaven that are exceeding
great, and eternal; this is written in the ancient books of Abraham and Moses.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Chapter of the Covering, containing twenty six Verses, written
at Mecca.
Gelaldin intituleth this, the Chapter of Judgment, because that day the
damned shall be covered with fire and fear. See Exteri.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Have thou heard mention of the
covering? That day shall the countenance of the wicked be covered with
affliction, they shall enter into fire that is extremely hot; they shall drink
of boiling water, they shall eat nothing but briars and thorns; they shall be
extremely lean, and famine shall not deliver them from an infinite number of
other miseries. That day shall the good be filled with content, they shall be
recompensed for their labors; in Paradise they shall hear nothing spoken that
may displease them, they shall see fountains flow, lying upon high beds, they
shall drink in fair glasses, fixed on diamonds, upon pillows well disposed, and
upon pallets well adorned; will not the wicked consider the miracle of the she
Camel? how it was created? how heaven was elevated? how the mountains were
disposed, how the earth was extended? Preach to the wicked the pains of hell,
thou art sent to preach to them, and not to constrain them, God will chastise
with his great chastisement him that shall abandon his Law, and traduce the
Alcoran: All men shall be one day assembled before his divine Majesty, to give
account of their actions.

CHAP. LXXXIX. The Chapter of the Morning, containing thirty Verses; written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, See Kitabel tenoir. Ye shall there see the exposition of
this passage.
gracious and merciful. I swear by the Morning, by the tenth night of the
month, by even and odd, and by the coming of night, that the wicked shall be
chastised. Is there any thing in consideration of this oath, that can move men
to fly uncleanness? Considerest thou not how God entreated Aad the Son of
Arem, that dwelt in pavillions supported by columns, so big, that there were
none like to them in his Country? Know thou not how he used Temod, who
hewed stones and rocks to inhabit the Valley? Know thou not how he entreated
Pharaoh, who pierced with pins the feet and hands of such as he gave up to
punishment? Know thou not how he entreated them, that heretofore erred from
the right way in their own Countries, and that increased their pollution? he
poured upon them diverse torments; he observes all that men do; he gives store
of goods to them that he does not try, and takes them away from such as he
proves. The wicked will not give honor to Orphans, they will not abstain from
eating the bread of the poor; they shall give an account, they too much affect
riches; when the earth shall tremble, and shall overthrow all the buildings,
when the Angels shall descend in order, by the command of thy Lord, then shall
hell be open to the wicked, they shall call to mind what was preached to them
in the world, and say, why did not I observe the Commandments of God during my
life: they shall be punished more then ever any has been, and shall be more
straightly bound then ever any has been bound. It shall be said to the blessed,
O thou soul! that haft observed with courage, and without fear the
Commandments of God, return to thy Lord with content, enter into the so^^ry of
the blessed, enter into Paradise.

CHAP. XC. The Chapter of the City, containing twenty Verses, written at Mecca.
Many have entitled this, the Chapter of Night.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Mecca.
I swear by that City which is permitted thee to conquer; I swear by the father
and the child, that we created man in misery; thinks he that there is none
stronger then he? He says, that he has expended great wealth; does he think
that none has seen what he has done? He declaims against Corets. See Gelaldin.
Have we not given him two eyes, a tongue, two lips? Have we not given him to
see the way of good and of evil? he shall be severely chastised, but I will
not tell thee with what kind of chastisement. Wherefore does he not deliver
slaves? Wherefore does he not give to eat to them that are hungry, to Orphans,
and his kindred that are in necessity, and to the poor? patience and charity
are recommended among true-believers, they shall be seated at the right hand;
and such as impugn the Mysteries of our Law, shall be at the left hand, they
shall be shut up in the fire of hell.

CHAP. XCI. The Chapter of the Sun, containing fifteen Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Sun, and his light,
by the Moon and her splendor, by the fire, and its elevation, by the night,
and its obscurity, by Heaven, and the Stars thereof; by the earth, and its
plains, by the creation of the soul, by the knowledge of virtue and vice, that
he that shall be purified from his sins, shall be most happy, and that he who
defiles himself with vice, shall be most miserable. The people of Temod
traduced their Prophet, because of their obstinacy; but certainly they were
chastised. The Apostle and Prophet of God said unto them. Behold the Camel of
God, suffer it to drink; they derided him, and slew that Camel, God severely
punished them, he spared not his chastisement against them.

CHAP. XCII. The Chapter of Night, containing twenty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the obscurity of Night,
by the brightness of Day, by the creation of man and woman, that your actions
are very different. He that shall yield to God the obedience that is due to
him, and believes in his Unity, shall go into Paradise; and whosoever shall
not praise his divine Majesty, and will not be converted, shall go into hell,
his riches shall not save him, and he shall be cast headlong into eternal
flames. It is we that guide the people, we dispose the beginning and end of
every thing; I preach to you the torments of hell, none shall enter there, but
the wretches that have blasphemed, and departed far from the way of salvation;
he that has the fear of God before his eyes, and gives alms, shall be
delivered from the fire of hell, every one shall be recompensed for what he
has done for the love of God; he shall be satisfied and contented.

CHAP. XCIII. The Chapter of the Sun rising, containing ten Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the brightness of the
rising of the Sun, and by the darkness of night, that thy Lord has not
forsaken thee. He does not hate thee, his delay shall be to thee advantage, and
in the end thou shall be content; Did he not well lodge thee, when thou were an
Orphan? Did he not well guide thee, when thou were seduced? Did not he enrich
thee when thou were poor? Do no injury to Orphans, devour not the poor, and
recount the graces that God has conferred on thee.

CHAP. XCIV. The Chapter of Joy, containing eight Verses, written at Mecca.
Mahomet complains to the Angel Gabriel, because he so long had refrained to
visit him.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Have not I rejoiced thine heart?
have not we delivered thee from the burden that was heavy on thy shoulders? we
have raised thy name and reputation, affliction is followed of content; when
thou shall have finished thy prayers, labor, and love thy Lord.

CHAP. XCV. The Chapter of the Fig, containing eight Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Figs and Olives by
Mount Sinai, and by the safety and freedom that is in this City [of Mecca]
that we created man with proportion, afterward we rendered him contemptible,
except the true believers that do good works, they shall receive an infinite
reward. After this (o wicked man) what makes thee to blaspheme against the
Faith? is not God the Judge of Judges?

CHAP. XCVI. The Chapter of Blood congealed, containing seventeen Verses,
written at Mecca.
Beddaoi and Gelaldin call this the Chapter of Reading.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Read the Alcoran, and begin
through the name of God, who created all, who made man of a little congealed
blood. Read the Alcoran, and exalt the glory of thy Lord, who has instructed
man in the Scriptures, who taught him what he knew not; nevertheless, he is in
a great error, he will not consider that he shall return before God. Have thou
considered him that would have hindered one of the servants of God to make his
prayers? have thou understood if he were in the way of salvation? have thou
seen if he blasphemed? if he has abandoned the faith? knows he not that God
forsakes him? If he desist not, he shall be dragged by the hair into the fire
of hell, with the wicked; he shall quit the place where they assemble, to
dispute against the faith, and the devils shall cast them headlong into
flames eternal. Disobey not the commandments of God, persevere in thy
prayers, worship God always; obedience to his commandments shall draw thee
near to his divine Majesty.

CHAP. XCVII. The Chapter of Glory or Power, containing five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. We sent the Alcoran in the night
of Glory and Power, I have not taught thee the graces of this night of glory
and virtue; the prayers and good works that are done that night, have more of
merit and efficacy, then those that have been performed in a thousand months.
The Angels descended that night to the earth, through the permission of their
Lord, and salute the true believers until the dawning of the day.

CHAP. XCVIII. The Chapter of Instruction, containing eight Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. They that understand the
Scripture, and believe in many gods, will not relinquish their Idolatry, until
they have heard the instruction of the Prophet of God; he shall read unto them a
book clean and pure, wherein are written the Precepts of the right way. They
that know the Scripture are not divided, until they have learned this
instruction. It commands to worship one only God, to make their prayers at
the time appointed, and to pay tirbes, this is the right way. The unbelievers
that know the Scriptures, and adore many gods, shall remain eternally in the
fire of hell, and shall be most miserable. They that believe in one God, and
perform good works, shall be most happy. they shall be recompensed of their Lord
in the garden of Eden, wherein flow many rivers, where they shall dwell
eternally. God shall be satisfied with their obedience, and shall give them his
blessing prepared for them that fear him.

CHAP. XCIX. The Chapter of the Earthquake, containing eight Verses, written
at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. When the earth shall tremble, and
shall cast bodies out of their sepulchers, man shall demand what it will do;
they shall tell him news, to wit, that God has commanded it to do so. That day
shall men come out of sepulchers from diverse places, and shall see the good and
the evil that they have done; he that has committed evil, of the weight of
an atome, shall be chastised; and he that shall have done good, of the weight
of an atome, shall be rewarded.

CHAP. C. The Chapter of Horses, containing eleven Verses, written at Mecca and
Medina.
Some Arabians have called this the Chapter of Return, or of them that return.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Horses, and the
noise they make with their feet, when they return to war, and by the fire,
which they make to arise, when they strike their feet against stones; that run
lightly through jealousy, and raise the dust in the midst of enemies, that man
is ungrateful for the graces of his Lord, he himself is witness of his
ingratitude, and too much affects the riches of the earth; knows he not
^^^t God will make all the world to revive? that he will ^^ing to light
whatsoever is most secret in the hearts of ^en? and that he knows all that
they have done?

CHAP. CI. The Chapter of affliction containing eleven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. When the extreme affliction shall
appear, I will not tell thee in what time this shall be, then shall all men be
assembled, stretched out like Quilts, and the mountains shall be like carded
wool. Such whose balance shall be weighty with good works, shall go into
Paradise; and they whose balance shall be light of good works, shall go into
hell, they shall go into a fire so hot, that I am not able to express the heat.

CAAP. CII. The Chapter of Abundance, containing eight Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Certainly all your care even to
the grave, is in the abundance of your wealth; but ye shall hereafter learn,
ye shall hereafter learn the truth; If ye had knowledge, ye would meditate on
the torments of hell, you shall see one day, that they are indubitable, then
shall ye ask where is Paradise?

CHAP. CIII. The Chapter of the Evening.
IN the name of God, It is an hour appointed to the Mahometans to pray.
gracious and merciful. I swear by the hour of the Evening, that men are
inclined to their destruction, except such as believe in God, that do good
works, and have in esteem truth and perseverance.

CHAP. CIIII. The Chapter of Persecution, containing seven Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Misery is upon him that
persecuteth his neighbor; persecution has its Counter-persecution. He that
heapeth up treasures, and is busied to count them, thinks they will make him
immortal, but they shall precipitate him into his misery; I will not tell thee
into what misery, but the fire of hell is always kindled to burn the heart of
the wicked; they shall be overwhelmed in flames, and bound to great pillars.

CHAP. CV. The Chapter of Elephants, containing five Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Considerest thou not how thy Lord
entreated them that came mounted upon Elephants, to ruin the Temple of Mecca?
Was not their conspiracy their own destruction? God sent against them flying
Troops, that threw upon them stones, whereon were imprinted their names; he
made them like to corn sown in fields, devoured by beasts.

CHAP. CVI. The Chapter of Coreis, containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Coreis had no humanity for them;
the people come every winter, and every summer, to worship the God of the
Temple of Mecca, which nourishes and delivers them from famine and fear.

CHAP. CVII. The Chapter of the Law, containing seven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Saw thou him that blasphemed
against the Law? He it is that devoureth the substance of Orphans, and the
bread of the poor: Misery is upon them that are not attentive to their prayers,
that are hypocrites, and hinder men to do well.

CHAP. CVIII. The Chapter of Affluence, containing three Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. We have given thee a great
affluence of our graces. Pray to thy Lord, lift up thine hands, he that ha^eth
thee, shall be accursed.

CHAP. CIX. The Chapter of Infidells, containing six Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Infidells, Idolaters! I worship
not what ye worship, and ye worship not what I worship; I will not worship that
which ye worship, and ye will not worship that which I worship; you observe
your Law, and I mine.

CHAP. CX. The Chapter of Protection, containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. A great number of people embrace
the Law of God, when he protecteth the true believers, and gives them vic^ory.
Exalt his glory, and implore pardon of him, he is most merciful.

CHAP. CXI. The Chapter of the Cord of Palm, containing eleven Verses, written
at Mecca.
Gelaldin entituleth this the Chapter of Loss. The wife of Ablheb did cast
stones in Mahomets way, in contempt. See Bedaoi.


IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Ablheb lost his hand; God
chastised him, his riches shall not save him, he shall burn in eternal flames,
with his wife that carries wood upon her neck, bound with a cord of Palm.

CHAP. CXII. The Chapter of Salvation containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto unbelievers, God is
eternal, he neither begets nor is begotten, and has no companion.

CHAP. CXIII. The Chapter of Separation, containing five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto them, God, who has
separated light from darkness, shall defend me from all the evils that he
has created, from danger, darkness, from them that blow against the knot of
the string, from Sorcerers, and the envious.

CHAP. CXIV. The Chapter of the People, containing six Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto them, I will beware of
the temptations of the Devil, and the malice of the people, through the
assistance of the Lord, and King of the people.

FINIS.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MAHOMET THE PROPHET of the Turks, And AUTHOR OF THE
ALCORAN.
MAHOMET, the son of Abdalla, a vicious Pagan, was born Posthumus at Now a City
called Medina-talnabi [ i.e.] the Town of the Prophet.
Jesrab, then a Village of Arabia Fe^ix; his Mother a Jewesse, both by birth
and Religion, dying when he was two years old, left him to his Some will have
to be his grandfather.
Uncle Abdal Mutalib, who being of vile condition, and unable to give him
education above the common ignorance and irreligion of his Country, at the age
of sixteen ye^rs, abandoned him to fortune, or after the barbarous custom of
the Arabians, sold him to the Ismalite Merchants, who exposing him to sale in
the Markets, he was purchased by Abdemonople, a wealthy Merchant; He after some
observation, and experience of his wit and industry, withdrew him from the
common drudgery of a slave, to employ him with his other factors in Commerce,
and finding him apt for those affairs, gave him the conduct of his Camels into
Syria, Egypt, Persia, and elsewhere. By which, in a short time, he became so
expert in his Trade, that as be increased the wealth and profit of his Master,
so he gained his good will, and affection.

At that time Heraclius being Emperor of the East, and the sea^mlesse coat of
the Church torn by variety of Sects, and Heresies, the Bishops and Governors
in Constantinople justly fearing divine vengeance, by reason of the Nestorian
heresy, which with that of the Monothelites, began afresh to infect their
Clergy, deliberated on some Ecclesiastical censure against them: When Sergins
a Monk, and Sectary of Nestorius, conscious of his error, and dreading the
punishment, fled secretly into Arabia, and found retreat and entertainment with
Abdemonople, the master of Mahomet, where finding slender hopes of propagating
his infectious Heresy (the family being Pagans) and less of overthrowing his
opposites in Religions, he resolved to take revenge on Christianity it self,
and to that effect began to practice on Mahomet, as a Subject prepared to
receive the impression of his design.

In the mean time, Abdemonople dyed, his riches being augmented through the
care and industry of Mahomet, who having before insinuated into the favor of
his Mistress Aijffa, by presents of rare toys, procured in his Travels, by
them, or through Sorcery (of which he was held guilty, and labors to purge
himself in his Alcoran) so charmed her affection, that of her slave, he was
advanced to be Lord both of her person, and fortunes.

Being thus grown opulent, he sometime continued his trade, but then willing to
take ease, as he had, during his voyages through several Countries, been a
Seeker, and inquisitive concerning the diversity of Religions professed through
the universe, so now (though irresolute which to follow) he rejected all, as
vain, and foolish, except Judaisme and Christianity, and approving the latter
as the best, accordingly framed his life, assuming a specious form of
Sanctimony, which brod admiration in them that considered his former education,
and gave him a repute above his expectation. But this hasty fruit was soon
corrupted, and with the touch of Ambition (like the Apples of Sodom) soon
vanished into stink and filthiness.

For Sergius, as subtle, as malicious, observing his disposition, and withal,
after some discourse concerning the two Religions, of both which he found him
excellently ignorant, seeing it no difficulty to distill into him the poison of
his Herefic, easily persuaded him, That Jesus Christ was but man simply; that
for the merit of his virtues he was held as Deified: that the sufferings of his
death were but humane inventions; that he was transported from this life to an
immortal, and glorious, by another way then that of Death: That there is but
one God, in one Person; so that the Faith of the Christians is vain, and
invented; and that of the Jews too loose and lean, through their own
obstinacy. That the Arabians being a dull and ignorant people, inclining
neither to the one nor the other, but all (as many as had been touched with the
fame of his new sanctity) admiring his perfections; The Jews and Christians
being likewise enemies to each other, and the Christians at variance among
themselves; He might in that juncture of affairs, assume the title of a Prophet
sent from God, to disabuse the one and the other, and save the world by another
Law. This Counsel of Sergius took the desired effect, and Mahomets thoughts,
before enflamed with his new gotten wealth, and fame, now entertained more
ar^^cu^ desires of being esteemed a Prophet, looking upon all other attributes
of Religion, and sanctity, as vile and abject.

To this effect, on a sudden he retires to a solitary Cave, not far distant
from Mecca, while Sergius proclaimed the vain perfections of his life, and
filled the ears of the people with the noise of his deservings. The term of
two years expired, Mahomet again appears to the world, and as if newly returned
from Oracles of Heaven, styles himself a Prophet sent from God, who willing
through his mercy, to withdraw him from that precipice of his everlasting
ruin, and admonish him of his error, afflicted his body with the
falling sickness, which Mahomet instead of repenting, made an advantage to
promove his wicked design. For his wife lamenting to see her self yoaked to one
so diseased, and tormented with an hideous infirmity, be excused it, and easily
wrought in her a belief, that being constrained frequently to converse with
the Angel Gabriel, his frail body, unable to abide the splendour of his
heavenly presence, fell into that distemper, and at the departure of the divine
Ambassador, recovered its former condition. His wife believing this, was not
wanting to divulge the rare qualities of her husband, his admirable sanctity,
and frequent converse with the Angel, which gained him the esteem of a Prophet
in his own house, and reverence among his Neighbors.

That this Infant-repute of his Holiness might be the better strengthened,
Mahomet thought it requisite to promulgate some Chapters of his Alcoran (as a
Remonstrance of his Commission) which as he saw occasion, he shaped (though
ill-favouredly) to his designs, giving out that he received them from the
Angel Gabriel, as the Counsels and precepts of God, who for that he had not
saved men, either by the Law of Moses, the Psalms of David, or the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, did now promise them infallible Salvation by the means of the
Alcoran, which though rudely, yet cunningly contrived, as complying with the
loose humor of the Arabians, enjoining nothing strict or burdensome, but
leaving all to liberty; as the sole means to allure them to a belief of it,
induced first the Parents and allies of his wife, then the more ignorant and
meaner sort to embrace it, and esteem Mahomet as the Messenger of God sent to
guide them into eternal felicity, and the enjoyment of Paradise, which the
easier to ensnare them, he fained to be full of such pleasures as fall under
sense, and a plentiful fruition of those delights, that in those more barren
and desert parts of Arabia they exceedingly wanted.

Having thus drawn to his devotion, a numerous, though vulgar party of the
people, who in opinion of his Prophetical Function were prompt to his
obedience; he thought it altogether as easy to obtain a Kingdom, as he had
found it not difficult to attain to the title of a Prophet; and to effect this,
having before, under pretense of Reformation of Religion, gained many
followers, while more stood as lookers on, not at all regarding that Decoy; he
resolved to yoke to it that other concomitant in popular disturbances, liberty,
proclaiming it to be the will of God, that all men should enjoy it, and that
the Edict might be first obeyed in his own family, enfranchized his Slave,
called Zeidi.

This bait, as it inhaunced his fame, so it added to his retinue: for as
multitudes, affecting novelty, and a mutation of condition, daily added
themselves to his party; so slaves from all parts of Arabia forsook their
Masters, and fled to him as their Redeemer, and embraced his Law, as the means
of their salvation. These through a fond conceit of his piety, ready to
sacrifice their lives at his command, he divided into troops, and sent to rob
the Caravans of Merchants that traveled through the deserts, and by this
means, having added to his treasure by spoil; and his retinue daily increasing
by a multitude of Fugitives and Vagabonds, who by reason of his liberty, to act
any villainy, resorted to him; he at length took up thoughts of employing them
in the confirmation of his Law, which he knew to be the ready way to his
establishment, in that power to which he aspired.

To this purpose he marches with his Troops toward Medina (the place of his
birth and burial) to preach in a Synagogue of Jews there inhabiting. These
less stupid then the Arabians, could not endure his impostures, and instead of
believing, did handsomely beat him, and drive his train from the town. This
repulse rather irritating then terrifying him, he drew all his force into the
field, and assailed the Jews in two several conflicts; in one of which, by a
wound on the face with a sword, that broke out his fore-teeth: He signed the
Articles of his Law with his blood, and continued a long time as dead in a
ditch; but being rescued by his Slaves, and recovered of his wound, he again
fought and vanquished them, and converted their Synagogue into a Temple, for
his own use.

The fame of his exploits increasing, with the number of his Sectaries (to whom
some Princes and eminent persons of the Country began to incline, giving him
their daughters in marriage) awakened the Nobles of Mecca, particularly the
family of Coreis, who wisely judging a new form of Religion, propagated by a
new way, force of arms, must inevitably introduce a new Government, of which
Mahomet, of base and obscure beginnings would be chief, as the Author, opposed
themselves to his designs, expelled all such as seemed to favor him, out of
the City, and several times gave him battle; in which he so valiantly
deported himself, that though he was sometimes put to the worst, yet he more
often prevailed; and giving freedom to such prisoners as would embrace his
Law, encorporated them into his Army, strengthening himself, and weakening his
enemies. Being in fine a complete Conqueror in the field, he assaulted the City
of Mecca, took it, and after some slaughter of the Nobility, his enemies,
proclaimed impunity to all that would acknowledge him a Prophet of God, by
whose favor (as he affirmed) and appointment, not by his own valor, he had
attained to that honor. After this Proclamation, many for fear of present
danger, and apprehension of future bondage, more out of ignorance embraced his
belief, and he enjoyed the vain felicity, to see himself General of an Army,
Lord of a vast Country, and to be esteemed, and reverenced as a Prophet.

About that time Heraclius the Emperor, disposing himself rather to improve
the Heresy of the Monothelites, then to defend the Confines of the Empire, not
only permitted Mahomet to domineere in Arabia, but gave advantage to Cosroes
the Persian King, to invade his Dominions: but at length awakened by the
alarmes of so puissant an enemy, levied a strong Army, and summoned the Sarra
signifies in their tongue a Desert, and Sahen to inhabit.
Saracens (a people so called from their inhabiting the Desert) to his
assistance. The Persian vanquished, and the Saracens expecting the salarie of
their labors, and with some importunity demanding it, were answered, that the
Emperor had not sufficient Treasure to pay the Christian Troops, and therefore
those Heathen Dogs must attend the convenience of their Prince. Incensed by
this contempt, they retired, See ^^^ds his Travel.
and marched by the way of Africa, where finding Mahomet busy to enlarge his
power; he aggravated their discontents, affirming it to be the Will of God,
that all men should enjoy their Liberty, that God was offended at their
oppressions, and willed them to oppose the tyranny of the Christians, and that
whosoever died in that holy war, his soul should be instantly transported to
Paradise. These motives raised them to a resolution of making defection, so
that they elected Mahomet their General, who incontinently deprived the
Emperor Heraclius of his Tribute, and his Officers (who were slain in
demanding it) of their lives. After this act, the whole Province, which that of
Egypt, revolted, and the people generally esteeming the success of Mahomets
arms (which he was diligent to employ) as a sure testimony of the goodness of
his Cause, embraced his Religion.

Heraclius having neglected to strangle this rebellion, in its birth,
endeavored to extinguish it, being now grown to considerable strength; and to
that end sent an Army under the Conduct of Theodesius his Favorite; his Army
was twice overthrown, the General slain, and the Mahometans pursuing their
victories, took from the Greeks the Countries of Egypt, Syria; and other
Provinces of Africa, where Mahomet increased his Triumphs, and erected his
Trophies.

Being now grown impotent, rather through his inordinate life, then burden of
years, he retired full of glory, as a King and Prophet, to Mecca, where he
resolved to end his days, having affirmed it in the Alcoran to be the most
holy City of the world, as that wherein stood the Temple of Abraham, built
miraculously by Angels, to be the Sanctuary of all that repair thither in
Pilgrimage. And therefore it was, that when he had by his Armies taken the City
of Antioch, he durst not enter into it in person, lest by the delightful and
fertile situation of it, he should have been enticed to desert Mecca; and
contradict his own Prophecy. His life now drawing to a period, a Plurisie
surprised him; On the seventh day, for Crisis of his disease, he became
frantique. Haly, one of his successors, ^stonisht at his distemper and frenzy,
not esteeming it one of the rare qualities of a Prophet and Redeemer (as he
styled himself) of so much people, derided him, yet willing to continue his
Law, that he might inherit his Power, carefully concealed it, and according to
his commands (yet living) watched his body after his decease. For he told his
followers, that he should rise again the third day, and ascend to heaven. They
observed this, and guarding his Corpse four days entire, with impatient
expectation of his Resurrection, were at length compelled by reason of its
putrefaction, to take him up, and bury him at Medina, where his Relics are
annually visited by the superstitious Pilgrims of his Religion.

Thus Mahomet the Prophet of the Turks, and Author of the Alcoran, died on the
twelf day of the Month June.
Rabeg, in the great climatericall year of his Age, having abused men with his
horrible impostures, full 23. years, dwelling in the esteem of a Prophet; ten
at Mecca, and thirteen at Medina. His coming was some years after the year of
our Savior 600. Heraclius being Emperor at Constantinople, Sadinion Bishop of
Rome; Clotaire King of France, Viteric of Spain, and Edbald of England. He was
of stature not tall, large sinews, and brown color, broad face, his head
disproportioned to his Body: yet may we well imagine the beauty of his body, to
surpass that of his mind, which was full of deceit, vicious, and cruel, never
sparing any thing to advance his lust (in which he equalled himself to forty
men) or to procure his revenge. He was (as himself confessed) altogether
illiterate, and though by nature subtle, and quick witted, yet often pusled
for the invention of delusive Miracles, to confirm the Arabians in their
Belief. For he continually preached to them, that God had sent him to confirm
his Law by force of Arms, and not by Miracles; yet the people instantly
demanding them, as signs of his Mission, he was constrained first to tell them
of a certain voyage to Heaven, which was briefly thus. The Angel Gabriel, with
threescore and ten pair of wings, came to him by night, as he was in bed with
his wife Aijssa, told him God had sent for him, he going down with this Angel,
found at his door an Heterogeneous beast, called Elborach, half Ass, half
Mule, but much swifter then either: (for it would go as far at one step as the
most quick-sighted could see) this Beast, or believer of the Alcoran, would not
let Mahomet mount him, unless he would first promise to pray for him, which
the charitable Prophet did, and was in the twinkling of an eye brought by him
to Jerusalem, where the Angel Gabriel tied the Beast with his girdle to a rock,
and taking Mahomet on his shoulders, carried him to heaven-gate. They knocked,
and the Porter understanding Mahomet to be there, instantly opened, and bade
him welcome; In this first Heaven he saw Angels, of diverse and monstrous
shapes; some composed of fire and snow, others of fire alone, every of them
diversely shaped; among the rest, one with the head of a Cock, whose feet
touched one Heaven, and head another (each Heaven being distant from the other,
a voyage of five hundred years) and when he crows (which is his language) he
moves the Cocks of the earth to crow: This Angel recommended him to another,
he to a third, and so one to another, until he came to the Heaven, where God
kept his residence. God courteously received him, asked him how his people did,
how they entertained his Law, and familiarly laid his hand upon his shoulder,
which was so cold, that it pierced to the marrow of his backbone. God had soon
done with him, only telling him how often his people should make their prayers,
which were so many, that as he was returning, in the fourth Heaven, Moses
advised him to go back to God, and entreat him that fewer prayers might serve
his turn, for his people were not able to make so many; which he did, and
after many returns, brought the number to five. This done, he went back to his
Elborach, which in a moment brought him to his house in Mecca, where he went to
bed again to his wife, she not once dreaming her husband would leave heaven for
her company, or thinking he had been there; all this he performed in the tenth
part of a night. The Turks at this day fondly believe this as a truth, but the
Arabians of his time requiring him to do as much in their view, he (unwilling
to take again so long a journey) replied, Praised be God, I am man and an
Apostle. He had other slights, which in sight of the people, by Art or Sorcery,
he performed, and they stupidly believed, and entertained as miracles: as a
Pigeon being by him taught to come and pick a pease out of his ear, he told
them it was the holy Ghost that came to tell him what God would have him do; so
an Ox brought him a Chapter of the Alcoran upon his horns, in a full
assembly. He likewise persuaded them, that being at dinner at the house of one
that pretended to be his friend (who had an intent to poison him, or he at
least was so informed) a shoulder of mutton served in to the table, forewarned
him, that he should not eat of it; and though many were present, none but he
heard or understood the language of the mutton, and yet he permitted one of his
dearest friends to eat of it, and die impoisoned. Such, and many of the like
nature were his miracles: As the bowing of trees, shaken by some sudden gust of
wind: the howling of Wolves, and braying of Asses, which is their language,
desiring Mahomet to pray for them; and he Prophetically understanding, as
religiously performed. His custom was often to inculcate into the ears of his
Auditors, that God gave him commission to fulfill his own desires in all
things; and to that purpose introduces God speaking to him. To thee O Prophet!
It is permitted to lie with all women that are given thee, or thou do
purchase, thy Aunts and kindred, and all good women that freely desire thy
company, and this is lawful for thee alone. His issue was one only Son, called
Casfim, who died before him, and many daughters; Fatione the eldest (in high
esteem at this day among the Arabians, and honored as the royal root of Aben
Alabecy) was wife to Haly. Zeineb the second was married to Osmen, after son to
Mahuvias, and perhaps to both successively, for they both succeeded in the
Empire of Arabia; to her is attributed the original of the other family of
Aben Humeia. Imiaultim and Naphisse are diversely mentioned by the most faithful
Historians, some delivering them as his daughters, others as his near kindred.
On the Seal which he used, were engraven these words, Mahomet, Messenger of
God. Heaven ordained him to be a scourge for the punishment of Christians, who
in multitudes at that time had forsaken the truth, to follow the Sects and
Heresies of the Arrians, Donatists, Nestorians, and others. The day of his
death was no less prodigious, then the course of his life, a Comet resembling
a sword, appearing at high noon, pointing from South to North, when it was
behold the space of thirty days, which that age interpreted to portend the
fatal rising and spendor of the Arabian Empire.

FINIS.
A needful Caveat or Admonition, for them who desire to know what use may be
made of, or if there be danger in reading the Alcoran.
By Alexander Ross.
GOod Reader, the great Arabian Imposter now at last after a thousand years, is
by the way of France arrived in England, and his Alcoran, or Gallimaufry of
Errors (a brat as deformed as the Parent, and as full of heresies as his
scald-head was of scurffe) has learned to speak English. I suppose this piece
is exposed by the Translator to the public view, no otherwise then some
Monster brought out of Africa, for people to gaze, not to dote upon; and as the
sight of a Monster, or misshapen creature should induce the beholder to praise
God, who has not made him such; so should the reading of this Alcoran excite
us both to bless Gods goodness toward us in this land, who enjoy the
glorious light of the Gospel, and behold the truth in the beauty of holiness;
as also to admire Gods judgments, who suffers, so many Countries to be
blinded and inslaved with this misshapen issue of Mahomets brain, being brought
forth by the help of no other midwifry, then of a Jew and a Nestorian, making
use of a tame Pigeon (which he had taught to pick corn out of his ears, instead
of the Holy Ghost, and causing silly people to believe that in his falling
sickness (to which he was much subject) he had conference with the Angel
Gabriel.

I know the publishing of the Alcoran may be to some dangerous and scandalous,
dangerous to the reader, scandalous to the higher powers, who notwithstanding
have cleared themselves by disliking the publishing, and questioning the
publishers thereof; but for the danger, I will deliver in these ensuing
propositions my opinion, yet with submission to wiser judgments.

1. Though it may be dangerous to such as like reeds are shaken, and like empty
clouds carried about with every wind of doctrine, yet to staid and solid
Christians, the reading of Mahomets Heresies will be no more dangerous, then the
reading of those errors which are recorded in Scripture, for in them are
mentioned many damnable errors and abominations of the Egyptians, Cananites,
Hittites, Sidonians, and other Gentiles, and of the Hebrews themselves, of the
Sadduces who denied Spirits, Angels, and the Resurrection.

2. Is there more in reading the Alcoran, then in reaing the Errors of ancient
and modern Heretics? surely Tertullian, Irenaus, Epiphanius, Austin, and other
Fathers were not of this opinion, who have left upon record to posterity, the
damnable heresies of Arians, Eutychians, Nestorians, Macedonians, and others:
and in the Alcoran there are not such dangerous errors as among the
Tetratheites, Angelites, and Theodosians, who held there were four Gods, or the
Tritheites, who affirmed there were three, or the Gnostics, Manicheans,
Cerdonians, Marcionites, who maintained there were two contrary Gods, the one
good, the other bad, whereas the Alcoran sets down there is but one true God;
and although it denies with Arius, the Divinity of Christ, yet it holds him a
great Prophet; nor does it speak so blasphemously of Christ as the Simonians,
who held Simon Magus, or the Ophites, and Manicheans, who said, the Serpent was
Christ, or Menander, who affirmed himself to be Christ, and the Savior of the
world. Besides; are not the damnable Heresies of the modern Familists, who deny
Christ's Divinity, making as many Christ's, as there be illuminated Elders in
their Congregations? are not also the Heresies of the Socinians,
Antitrinitarians, Adamites, Ser^etians, Antisabbatarians, and many others
exposed to the view of all that will read them? why then may not the Alcoran?
Besides, are men debarred from reading the Greek and Latin Poets? nay, are not
many of them translated into our English tongue? as also the modern Histories
of the East and West Indies, wherein are more damnable tenets then any in the
Alcoran, and they who have read the Jewish Talmud, and Cabala, will find them
as ridiculous pieces as the Alcoran.

3. If there were any loveliness, beauty, excellency, or any thing else in the
Alcoran that might win the mind, and draw the affection after it, I should hold
the reading of it dangerous, but whereas it is such a misshapen and deformed
piece, I think the reading of it will confirm us in the truth, and cause us
love the Scripture so much the more: for as a beautiful body is never more
lovely then when she is placed near a Black-moore, neither is truth more
amiable then when it is beset with Errors. Opposita juxta se posita clarius
elucescunt, the Gem receives luster from the foil, the stars from the night,
and fire is most scorching in Frost, even so by an Antiperistasis truth is
fortified by error. Who can think that the sight of a Hob-Goblin, or deformed
vizard should draw the child from the Nurse or breast of the Mother to embrace
it, whereas the sight thereof will rather cause the child hold faster by the
mother. The wise Spartans oft-times brought drunkards into the room where their
sons were, not that they should be induced thereby to love, but to abhor
drunkkenness, which they could not have done, had they not seen the unseemly
and rude carriage, the undecent behavior, and uncomposed gestures of the
drunkard. When Zisca had destroyed the Adamits of Bohemia, he preserved two
alive that they might reveal to the world the wicked errors of that Sect: Who
is so mad as to prefer the embracements of a filthy Baboon, to his beautiful
Mistress, or the braying of an Ass to a consort of Music? he deserves the
ears of Midas that will prefer the Cuckoes song to the ^weet notes of the
Nightingale.

4. Though the Alcoran be received among many Na^ions, yet this reception
proceeds not from any love they bear to it, or any loveliness they find in it,
but partly out of fear, being forced by the Sword, partly out of a preposterous
desire of liberty and preferment, and partly out of ignorance, as not being
suffered to read the Scriptures, nor to hear Philosophy, by which the errors
thereof may be detected, nor to enquire into the absurdities thereof, or to
dispute and question any thing in it: for which cause also it is not suffered
to be Printed, nor are Christians permitted to enter into Mecca, least their
absurdities and impieties of their Religion should be manifested: and thus are
those silly souls kept in blindness and ignorance, and therefore I never read
that any Nation did voluntarily receive the Alcoran, except the theevish
Saracens of Arabia, because it was a friend both to their theevery and lechery,
as permitting multiplicity of Wives and Concubines, and a reward for those that
shall murder and rob.

5. The Alcoran is translated into French and other vulgar Tongues, and the
chief heads thereof by Purchase in his Pilgrimage, by Heilin in his Geography,
and by others into our own tongue without scruple or exception; and I pray you,
why is the Arabic tongue, the language of that false Prophet, and in which he
writ his Alcoran, so much learned and taught in Schools and Christian
Universities, but that by it we may come to the knowledge of Mahomets La^ and
Religion? and how should we know this little ho^n in Daniel, that spoke high
and proud things against the Almighty, if we read not his life and doctrine?

6. There is a kind of necessity we should know evil as well as good, falsehood
as well as truth, that we may avoid the one, and so much more love the other;
he that has smelled a stinking weed will smell with more delight the sweet
Rose, he that reads the Alcoran will find it smell worse then Mahomets carcass
did, which after his death lay putrefying upon the ground, which his disciples
permitted for many days together, hoping he would have been as good as his
word, who made them a promise that he would rise again the third day; but at
last finding he had forgot himself, and that his body smelling not so sweet as
Alexanders did after his death, they were forced to bury it, or otherways the
dogs who were beginning to bury him in their guts had saved them a labor,
though Sugar be sweet in it self, yet it is much more sweet to him, that has
tasted Aloes; and though Italy in it self be a delicious Country, and garden
of the world, yet it is much more delightful, pleasant, and beautiful, to him
who has passed over the mountanous, craggy, and rugged Alps: Did not the
Prodigal love the bread of his fathers house evermore the better after he had
been fed on husks with swine? doubtless we shall find, that after we have fed
a while upon the course husks of the Alcoran, with the Arabian swine, we shall
with much more eagerness covet after the plenty of our Fathers house,
exhibited to us in his Word, where we shall find the hidden Manna, the bread of
Life, that came down from heaven.

7. Books of Palmistry, Phisiognomy, judicial Astrology, Necromancy; and other
superstitious and impious Arts have been permitted to come abroad, that men
might see the vanity of those Arts, the knavery and wickedness of the Artists,
the foolishness of credulous people, who suffer themselves to be deluded by
them, and the malice of Satan the arch-enemy of mankind, whose delight is to
abuse, delude, and destroy men: why then may not the Alcoran be read, that men
may see the vanity, impiety, and foolishness of it, by which the world has
been so many year cheated and abused?

8. They that learn Arts and Sciences, desire the knowledge, not only of the
good things, but of the evil things also, and the abuse of them, to the end
they may avoid them; there Logic speaks as well of sophistical and fallacious
syllogismes, as of demonstrative and topicall; Ethics treats of vices as well
as of virtues; Natural Philosophy handles the natures* not only of useful
and beneficial creatures, but also of hurtful and venomous, as of Serpents;
Physic speaks of poisons as well as of cures; Historians describe both the
virtuous and vicious actions of Princes; in Divinity we learn, not only what
God and good Angels are, but also what Satan is, and his wicked Angels; in
Navigation we must know, not only what places are Navigable, but also what are
not* how shall we avoid Rocks, Quicksands and Shelves if we know them not?
even so Christian Religion permits not only the reading of Scripture, but also
of heretical and heathenish books, as is said, that we may know what to
embrace, what to shun; therefore if you would know what be the damnable errors
to be avoided by Christians, read the Alcoran, and you shall find in it the
sink of all, or most part of ancient heresies.

9. In reading of the Alcoran, though it be, as Cato said of the three Roman
Ambassadors, that were to go to Antiochus, headless, heartlesse, and
footlesse, the one being maimed in his head, the second a fool, and the third
lame in his feet, I say, though it be without head or tail, as we use to speak,
being immethodicall and confused, contradictory in many things, written in a
rude Language, the Author himself being no Linguist or Scholar; nay, not able
to read or write, though also it consist of lies and senseless follies, yet
this benefit we may reap; I say, in reading of it, that we shall be forced to
admire and praise the goodness of God toward us Christians, who having
suffered a great part of the world to sit in the valley of the shadow of death,
to be oppressed with Cimmerian, yea more then palpable Egyptian darkness, has
placed us in the Temple, where we have the golden Candlestick of his Word, and
a clearer and more durable Lamp then that of Salomons Temple, yea even the Sun
of righteousness shining upon us in the Land of Goshen, whilst a great part of
the world does follow the Antichristian beast, we follow the Lamb upon mount
Sion; while they hear the voice of Satyrs, Ostrages, and Schrich Owls, we hear
the voice of the Turtle, and the Songs of Sion in our own Land: whilst they
feed on husks with swine, and drink the corrupted puddles of Mahomets
inventions, we are fed with Angels food, and eat celestial Manna, and drink
of the pure river of life, clear as Crystal: Again, we may tremble at the
reading of this Alcoran, when we consider the severity of Gods judgments, and
the fierceness of his anger, who for the contempt of his Gospel, in those
Countries where Mahomet is worshipped, has suffered so many millions of
people to be deluded, blinded, abused, and inslaved by that false Prophet, to
believe his lies; and by loathing the sweet Evangelicall Manna, to de^oure
greedily the poisonable guailes of his doctrine, and with it the wrath of God,
which has fallen on them, whilst the flesh is between their teeth, so that they
must needs perish everlastingly. Who would have thought that those Countries
which were honored by Gods own presence, by the Oracles of the Prophets, by
the presence, miracles and preaching of Christ, by the planting of the
Apostles, by the blood of so many Martyrs, should be thus besotted, and
inslaved by the tyranny of this grand Impostor? When we think on those things,
let us work out our salvation with fear and ^rembling, and let him who thinks
he stands take nee^ ^eas^ he fall: they were not greater sinners then we,
therefore doubtless except we repent, we shall all likewise pe^^sn^ the
^e^issne^s of Heraclius Government, his fa^^ing into the heresy of the
Mono^^ciites, the contempt of the Gospel, the ^^ighting of the Pastors, the
wicked^esse of the people, the continual Schisms, rents, ^^tres, and
divisions of their Ch^rches, were both the causes and occasions of these
miseries which have fallen upon them* le^ (...) take ^eed ^ae^ we^^ ^ot
partakers of their sins, least we also partake of their plagues.

10. The r^ading of the Alc^^an will in^o^e us to beat Mahomet with his own
weapons, to (...) of the head of the (...) with his own sword, and to woun^
this unclea^ (...) with c^^ pikt out of his own ^ings, for even unwit^^^ and
unwillingly, (...) is forced to acknowledge ma^^ (...) o^ (...) ^^^rming (...)
one true God the Creator of all things, and though he goes about to overthrow
the doctrine of the Trinity, yet he does plainly confirm it; when he speaks of
God, of the Word and of the Spirit, which three indeed are one (...) offense;
though distinct in subsistence; though he laboure^^ to overthrow the Gospe^,
yet he confirms it, when he calls it good, ful^, right, a light, and a guide to
salvation, for if it be full, good, etc. what need was there of his Alcoran and
though he indeavoureth to overthrow Christ's Divinity with Arius and Nestorius,
and the Jews his ghostly fathers, yet he affirms it, in calling Christ the
Word* for as the internal word of the mind is coeternall with the mind, so is
Christ the Word of his Father, coeternal with the Father; he establishes also
the Article of Christ's Conception and Nativity, affirming h^rs to be conceived
by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, whom he confesses to have been
a pure Virgin, both before and after Christ's birth: so he confirms the Article
of Christ's ascension into heaven, and diverse other points of Christianity, to
whom we are more beholding for his reverend esteem of Christ, then the Jews who
revise and blaspheme ^^m.

11. In reading the Alcoran, though we find much ^ung* yet in it we shall meet
with some gold, as Virgil did in reading of Ennius his Verses. Aeso^s Cock
found a p^ecious stone in a ^^mghill where is much dross some pure metal
will be found* even so in the dirt of the Alcoran you shall find some Jewels
of Christian virtues, and indeed if Christians will but diligently read and
observe the Laws and Histories of the Mahometans, they may blush to see how
zealous they are in the works of Devotion, Piety, and Charity, how devout,
cleanly, and reverend in their Mosques, how obedient to their Priests, that
even the great T^rk himself will attempt nothing without consulting his Mufti*
how careful are they to observe their hours of prayers five times a day
wherever they are, or however employed how constantly do they observe their
^asts from morning till night a whole month together? how ^o^^ng and
cha^itable the Must^^mans are to each other, and how careful of strangers, may
be seen by their Hospitalls, both for the poor and for travelers: if we
observe their justice, temperance, and other moral virtues, we may truly blush
at our own coldness, both in devotion and charity, at our injustice,
intemperance, and oppression, doubtless these men will rise up in judgment
against us; and surely their devotion, piety, and works of mercy are main
causes of the growth of Mahometanisme, and on the contrary, our neglect of
Religion, and looseness of conversation, is a main hindrance to the increase
of Christianity; is it not a shame, that they should read over their Alcoran,
once every month, and we scarce read over the Bible in all our life? that they
shall give such reverence to their Alcoran, as to honor the very Camel that
carried it to Mecca, and to lay up for holy relics the napkins and
handkerchiefs that rubbed off the sweat from his skin; and we shall prefer
lascivious Poems, and wanton Ballads to the sacred Word of Almighty God? do we
not make our selves unworthy of such an inestimable treasure?

12. The Turks are our neighbors, and their territories border upon the
Dominions of Christendom: there have been continual wars, and will be still
between us; it concerns every Christian who makes conscience of his ways, to
examine the cause, and to look into the grounds of this war, whether they be
just or not, which cannot be known but by reading the Alcoran, in which we see
the Mahometans to be the enemies of the Cross of Christ, in denying his Death,
and of his Divinity also, Eusebius. in vit. Constable. and l. 9. c. 9 Hist. Theod. l.
5. c. 24. S^crat. l. c. 7.18. Aug. l. 5. de civi. dei. c. 13.
in that they deny his Godhead: we shall find so many passages in it repugnant
to, and destructive of Christian Religion, that Christian Princes are bound to
oppose the enemies thereof; after the example of those glorious Emeprors,
Constantine, who made war against the Heathen Princes, Maxentius, Maximinus and
Licinius; of Theodosius the elder against the Tyrant Eugenius the worshipper of
Hercules, of Theodosius the younger against the Saracens, of Honorius against
the Goths, all enemies of Christ, by whose assistance they got notable
victories, and glorious triumphs.

13. We cannot do better service to our Contrymen, nor offer a greater
affront to the Mahometans, then to bring out to the open view of all, the blind
Sampsons of their Alcoran, which has mastered so many Nations, that we may
laugh at it, of which even their own wise men are ashamed, and are sorry it
should be translated into any other language; for they are unwilling that their
grand Hypocrite should be unmasked, or that the vizard of his pretended
holiness should be taken off, whose filthy nakedness must appear when he is
divested: they know that words and works of darkness cannot endure the light,
Trepidantque immisso lumine manes, the infernal Ghosts tremble at any glimpse
of light, and the wild beasts return to their dens, says David, Psalm. 10.4.
Vt jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones.
when the morning appears, not daring to seek their prey, but in the dark
night of ignorance; this great thief Mahomet has destroyed many thousand, and
under the Lions skin, this Ass has affrighted his beastly minded Saracens,
therefore let us take away the ring from this Giges, by which he has made
himself invisible, and let us with Hercules pull out this theeving Cacus out
of his dark den where he uses to hide and shelter himself, and expose his
deformed carcass to the public view, that we may wonder at it: and in
detecting his Errors, we follow the practice of CHIST, who discovered to the
world the damnable Tenets of the Scribes, Pharisees, Mat. 13.
Hypocrites.

14. The Turks are preposterously zealous in praying for the conversion, or
perversion rather, of Christians to their irreligious Religion, they pray
heartily, and every day in their Temples, that Christians may embrace the
Alcoran, and become their Proselytes, in effecting of which they leave no means
unassaied by fear and flattery, by punishments and rewards: Now, is it fitting
that they in charity and zeal should exceed us? we are bound to pray and
endeavor heartily for their conversion, from darkness to light, from error to
truth; but how shall we do this, if we know not the dangerous and damnable
estate they are in, which we cannot know but by reading their Alcoran?

15. In reading the Alcoran we shall see what is the force of superstition, and
with what violence men are carried headlong in the defense and maintenance
even of the most absurd and impious opinions; what Hecuba is more deformed then
the Alcoran? yet how do the Turks fight and struggle, toil and care, hazard
life and liberty, estates and all for it, as if it were the most beautiful
Helena in the world? these men cannot endure the Image of Christ, or of a Saint
in their Temples, calling this Idolatry, and yet they are the greatest
Idolaters in the world themselves, for never was there such an Idol as the
Alcoran, no man must touch it, till first he be washed, and that being done, he
must not touch it with his naked hands, but with a clean linen cloth; the
Priest must kiss it, and bow to it; he must when he reads in it hold it up on
high, for it is a sin to hold it lower then his girdle: Every piece of paper
that a Turk finds he must use reverendly, because the Alcoran is written in
paper, the Mule that carries it to Mecca is held in great veneration, so that
he or she is sanctified all the year after that can but touch him, and that
handkerchief which wipeth off his sweat is a holy relic: thus do they strain
at a gnat and swallow a Camel.

Rev. 20.
16. In reading the Alcoran and Turkish Story, we shall see who were Gog, and
Magog, that made war against the Saints, even the Turks an obscure people of
Scythia, therefore called Gog, because they were hid and unknown a long time,
and the Saracens who were a known people, and the open enemies of the Church,
therefore called Magog; these treacherously combined together, oppressed first
the Persians, and afterward the Greek Empire, with the famous Churches of Asia,
Greece, and Egypt: we shall also find that by the Star which fell from heaven,
and opened the bottomless pit, whose smoke darkened the Sun, and out of which
came the Locusts, whose terror is described by St. John, Rev. 9.
is meant Mahomet that great destroyer, as his name signifies, answering to
the name Appollyon, and Abaddon: for never was there such a destroyer, who by
his pestilent doctrine has destroyed so many souls, and by the sword of his
Locusts has destroyed so many bodies, and ruinated so many goodly Countries.

17. If you will take a brief view of the Alcoran, you shall find it a
hodg-podge made up of these four ingredients. 1. Of Contradictions. 2. Of
Blasphemic. 3. Of ridiculous Fables. 4. Of Lies. First, of Contradictions, he
does ordinarily say, and unsay the same thing; one while he tells us, that he
was the first that ever entered into Paradise, and elsewhere he says he found
men and women there; sometimes he affirms that Jews and Christians shall be
saved by their own Religion, and sometimes again that none can be saved who
embrace not his Alcoran; In one place following the Opinion of Origin, or
rather of the Origenists, he affirmed that all the devils shall be saved; in
another place he says, only those devils shall be saved who hearken to, and
obey his Alcoran. Secondly, of Blasphemy, for he blasphemeth God, in saying
that he prays for Mahomet, intimating hereby that he is inferior to that God
he prays to; he makes God also swear by Flies, Worms, and such base
creatures, as if he were their inferior, whereas God having none greater then
himself, swears only by himself; He blasphemes the Father, in saying he cannot
have a Son, because he is not married, as if there were no other generation but
what is carnal; he b^asphemes the Son with Arius, in denying his Divinity; he
blasphemes the Holy Ghost with Macedonius, affirming him to be the Creature of
a creature; he blasphemes God also, in making him the Author of his Alcoran,
bragging that his name is written upon the Throne of God, in that he is the
greatest of the Prophets, who has more knowledge then all the men and Angels
of the world: and many other bragging words he utters of himself, by which we
may see he is that little horn which sprung up among the ten horns of the great
and terrible beast of the Roman Empire, destroying three of the Roman horns, to
wit, the Asians, Grecians, and Egyptians; this is the horn that has many eyes,
as being crafty and vigilant, but his mouth speaks proud things, in blaspheming
and bragging, as we have heard. Thirdly, of ridiculous Stories, and which are
more unsavory then the Golden Legend, or Lucians true Narrations; he tells us
that he divided once the Moon, one half whereof fell into his lap, (this was
not then the Man in the Moon, but the Moon in the Man) the other on the ground;
these two pleces he fouldred again. Perhaps in memory of this lying miracle,
the Turks use it the half Moon for their Arms: He tells us of a great army of
men and Angels raised by Solomon, but much hindered in their march by an army of
Flies, which Solomon rebuked, where we have a witless conference between
Solomon and the fly; he tells you a strange story of Noah's Ark, how there the
Hog was generated of the Elephants dung, and a Rat of the Hogs dung, which
gnawing a hole in the Ark, at which Noah was affrighted; he touching the Lion
on the forehead, out of whose brains leaped out a Cat, (as Minerva did out of
Jupiters) which caused the Rat to run away: this is Philosophy indeed for a
Hog. Fourthly, of Lies, for he belieth God, in making him author of his impiety
and heresies; he belies Christ, in saying he was conceived by the smell of a
Rose; he belyeth the Holy Ghost, in affirming that he inspired Mahomet to write
the Alcoran; he belyeth the Virgin Mary, calling her the daughter of Amram, and
sister of Moses, confounding her with Miriam, whereas there were so many
generations between; he belyeth the Gospel, in saying it is corrupted by
Christians; he belyeth Christians, when he says they worship many gods, and
that they give to God a companion, when they acknowledge the Divinity of Christ;
he belyeth the Jews, in saying they make Elcazar a god; he belies the
Patriarchs, in saying that Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob believed his Alcoran,
being so many thousand years before he was born, or his Alcoran had any
existence: he belies also the Apostles, in making them his Scholars, who lived
near six hundred years before he was born. By all which we may see, who was the
Compiler of this Alcoran; not the God of Truth, but the Father of Lies; not
Christ and his Apostles, whose weapons in propagating the Gospel, were
powerful preaching, miracles, and patience in suffering; not the sword, the
chief means that Mahomet uses to force his Alcoran, an instrument forbid by
Christ, but used by him who has been a murderer from the beginning. But I
will not take upon me the task of refuting the Alcoran, being already refuted
by Cantacuzenus, Richardus the Monk, Cusa the Cardinal, Woodmanstadius,
Savanorolla, and others. I only thought good, upon entreaty of some learned and
religious men, to annex this brief Caveat, that the Reader might be the better
armed to encounter with any rub or difficulty be shall meet with in the reading
thereof. But before I end, give me leave to clear my self again in this point;
that it is not my meaning all should have the liberty to read the Alcoran
promiscuously. I know with the Apostle, that though all things be lawful, yet
all things are not expedient; there are children as well as men in
understanding: the nurse may use that knife which the child may not; and that
sword which may without danger be handled by a sober man, cannot without danger
be touched by a mad man: There are as well queasie as strong stomachs, and what
is meat to the one, may be venom to the other. Though Mithridates could
without hurt eat poison, others may not presume to escape so; it is lawful for
any to look upon a monster, but it is not expedidient for conceiving women;
that iron which an Estrich can digest, may destroy the stomach of other
creatures: how many have been deceived in gathering Hemlock for Parfly? It is
not for every man to meddle with Apothecaries drug^, he may chance meet with
poison as seen as an antidote* if all men were like Bees, to suck honey out of
Henbane, there might be no danger in reading of the Alcoran, but most men are
like Spiders, suck securely poison even out of the sweetest Roses; therefore
they only may surely and without danger read the Alcoran, who are intelligent,
judicious, learned, and thoroughly grounded in piety, and principles of
Christianity; but weak, ignorant, inconstant, and disaffected minds to the
truth, must not venture to meddle with this unhallowed piece, lest they be
polluted with the touch thereof, as they were who came ^eer to a leprous body;
and if we will not venture to go into an infected house without preservatives,
much less should any dare to read the Alcoran, that is not sufficiently armed
with grace, strength, and knowledge against all temtations. God grant we may
walk in the light of the Gospel whilst we have in, that we may not be
overwhelmed with the dismal night of Mahometane darkness, which God may
justly i^^tict upon us; for our sins, rents and divisions are no lesser then
those were of the Greek, and Asiatick Churches, and doubtless except we repent
we shall all perish with them, who for despising Gods sacred Oracles, are now
taught to reverence every piece of paper they find, which they are made believe
shall be put under the soles of their fee^ when they walk over the burning
grate to their fools Paradise, as Busbequius in his Epistle tells us, who lived
long amongst them, and was well acquainted with their opinions; but what I have
written here concerning the Alcoran, I submit to the judgment and wisdom of
those who sit at the Stern, and can see more then the Passengers.

FINIS.

