Mercy in her Beauty: OR, THE HEIGHT OF A DELIVERANCE FROM THE DEPTH OF DANGER.

Set forth in the first SERMON Preached upon that Occasion, By NATH: HARDY,
Master of Arts, and Preacher to the Parish of S. Dionis Back-Church.

PSALM. 118.17, 18, 19. I shall not die, but live, and declare the Works of the
Lord.

The Lord has chastened me very sore, but he has not given me over to death.

Open unto me the gates of righteousness, I will go into them, and I will
praise the Lord.

Basil. Mag. Hom. 9. (...).

Aug. in Psalm. 41. Quia magis crebra sunt mala, dulcior ^rit misericordia tua.
Etenim scriptum est quodam loco speciosa misericordia Domini in tempore
tribulationis, sicut nubes pluviae in tempore siccitatis.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Web and Will: Grantham, at the Black Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-Doore. 1653.

Sermons Preached and Printed by Mr Nathanaell Hardy M.A. and Preacher to the
Parish of S t Dyonis Back-Church.
Justice Triumphing, or The Spoilers spoiled: A Sermon preached on the 5th of
November in the Cathedral Church of St Paul's. The Arraignment of licentious
Liberty and oppressing Tyranny, in a Sermon at a Fast before the Lords in
Parliament; In the Abbey-Church at Westminster. Faiths Victory over Nature, A
Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mr John Rushout Junior. The safest Convoy or
The strongest Helper, A Valedictory Sermon before the Right Honorable Sr
Thomas Bendish Barronet, his Majesty's Ambassador to the grand Seigniour at
Constantinople. A Divine Prospective representing the Just man's peaceful End,
A Sermon at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Sr John Gayr Knight. Love and
Fear the inseparable Twins of a blessed Matrimony, A Sermon occasioned by the
Nuptials between Mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams. Divinity in
Mortality, or The Gospels excellency and the Preachers frailty, A Sermon at the
Funerals of Mr Richard Goddard Minister of the Parish of St Gregory's by Paul's.
Printed, and are to be sold by Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham at the
black Bear in St Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door, 1653.

To the Right Worshipful, Worshipful, and Wel-beloved, The Inhabitants of the
Parish of S. Dionis Back-Church, Health and Wealth, not only in this life, but
chiefly in that which is to come.
Worthy Friends,
IT is a full Decade of years since I first was called by Divine Providence to
begin the work of my Ministry among you: and it is not yet half so many months,
since in humane probability both my Ministry and life seemed to be at an end:
But the wise and gracious God ( in whose hands all our times are) has
mercifully lengthned my days (blessed be his name) for the greater good of my
own, Psalm. 31.15.
and (I hope) of your souls.

These Sermons which upon this comfortable occasion I lately preached, were by
some of you desired to be made more public, which I have fulfilled, so much
the more willingly, that I might testify before the world, first, my infinite
obligation to Almighty God for so remarkable a deliverance; and withal my
manyfold engagements to a great part of you for your affectionate love, and
multiplied courtesies.

And now (my Dearly Beloved, and longed for in the Lord) give me leave (
having this opportunity) to acquaint you with my serious thoughts and earnest
desires, and I trust through Gods grace that the transcript of them before your
eyes, will help to make a deeper impression of them upon your hearts.

And first, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for your steadfastness in the
faith, and your mutual amity, whereby you become exemplary to many parishes in
this wavering and contentious age. Oh that not only you, but all the people of
this Land were alike minded, one toward another according to Christ Jesus.
Romans 15.5.


Next, let me in the bowels of our common Savior beseech you, 2 Timothy 4 1.
and if this will not prevail, charge you before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall Judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his
Kingdom; that as you drink in the heavenly rain which comes often upon you,
so you endeavor to bring forth herbs meet for the great husbandman who
dresseth you. I bear you record ( and that without flattery) you are attentive
hearers, Heb. 6.7.
oh that you may be all forward doers of the word. Jam. 1.22.


There are some amongst you whose love toward me has been, not only in
tongue and in word but in deed, and that in a more than ordinary measure. 1 John 3.18.
But yet, let me freely tell you. There is nothing (if I know my own heart)
would so rejoice me as to see the fruit of my weak labors, in the holiness
of your lives. Believe it, this is the greatest Kindness a people can show to
their Minister, since whereas by a liberal contribution they add to his
comfortable subsistence upon earth, by a religious conversation, they increase
his eternal reward in heaven.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace which is
able to build you up, Act. 20.32.
and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified, Romans 15.30.
humbly entreating you to strive together with me in your prayers to God both
for me and your selves, that I may so preach and live, you may so hear and
do, as that we may behold each other, and all of us our Redeemer with joy in
the last day. So prays

Your faithful servant for Christ's sake in the Gospel, NATH: HARDY.

Phil. 2.27. the former part. For indeed he was sick, nigh unto death, but God
had mercy on him.
IF you please to peruse the five last Psalms of David, you shall find them
beginning and ending with an Hallelujah: Praise ye the Lord, being the Alpha
and Omega, the Prora and the Puppis, the first and the last words of each. Not
much unlike is Saint Paul's practice in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 18.16,
17.
who almost in the very entrance places an (...), I thank my God through
Jesus Chrict, and closes with a (...), To God only wise be glory through
Jesus Christ. In imitation of these patterns I shall place Thanksgiving, both
in the Front and Reere of my Discourse. Indeed what fitter Prooemium to a
gratulatorie Sermon than a Benedictus? Blessed therefore be God, who kept his
unworthie Servant from falling into the Grave, a Land of Silence and
Forgetfulness, and has now vouchsafed him the liberty of entering into his
House, the place of Prayers and Pr^yses. Blessed be God, who has brought my
feet from lying in a sick bed to stand in this holy Mount. Finally blessed be
God, who has given me a joyful occasion of handling, and just cause of
applying this Scripture to my self, by changing the third Person unto the
first; For indeed I was sick nigh to death, but God had mercy on me.

This Text naturally spreads forth it self into two maine boughs, each of
which have three branches sprouting from them.

Here is observable a Distress, and a Deliverance; a Danger, and an Escape, an
Affliction, and a Liberation: the former in those words, He was sick nigh to
death; the latter in these, but God had mercy on him.

In the Distress we have observable, the 1. Quality of the Danger what it was,
in the word Sick. 2. Extremity of the Measure, how great it was, in those words
nigh unto death. 3. Eminency of the Person, whom it befell, in the relative he.


In the Deliverance we have considerable, the 1. Efficiency of the Author, by
whom it was conferred, in the Word God. 2. The excellency of the Benefit, how
expressed, in those words had mercy on him. 3. The opportunity of the Time,
when vouchsafed, in the exceptive but.


These are the several Branches of this ^acred Tree, into which I have climbed
by the Ladder of humane industry, from which by the hand of Divine assistance I
have gathered, and by the same hand shall now scatter among you such Fruit as
has refreshed my own, and (I hope through Gods blessing) will nourish your
souls; and so I begin with the

Distress, He was sick nigh to death; and therein the quality of the danger in
that word sick. Genesis 1.


The Philosopher, observing the property of man's constitution, describes him
by risibile, to be a reasonable living Creature, that has the only power of
laughing; but the Divine considering the misery of man's condition no less,
aptly characterizeth him by flebile, an unfortunate wretch, that has the most
cause of weeping: Vagiluque locum lugub^i compl^t ut aequum'^^, cui tantum in
vit^ r^fiat tra^sire malorum. Lucr.
In this respect it is not unfitly taken notice of, how the newborn Babe
comes into the world crying, as if by the language of its present tears, it
would foretell the sadness of its future sorrows.

Among those many evils with which the life of man is beset, this of sickness
is one.

Aug in Ps. 111
One to which all are subject, quis non aegrotat in hac vita? quis tanguorem
^on experitur? nasci in hoc corpore mortali incipere aegrotare est: Who in this
life does not more or less taste of sickness? yea from the Cradle to the
Crutch, Birth to Death, Womb to the Tomb, we are continually liable to it.

One of which we may say, as Leah of Gad, Genesis 30.11. Mark 5.9.
A Troop comes, and to which that Devils name in the Gospel may fitly be
applied Legion: The Poet instancing in one kind of disease, speaks of a band
of Fevers, Nova sebrium, Horat. od. 3.

Terris incubuit cohors:
And Galen reckoning up the diseases to which one part of man's body, the eye is
subject, (...). Pythag. Apo. in Iambl. (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 16.
numbreth 112. how great an Army then must this Commander have, who begirteth
this Castle of the Body in every part and corner, and that with several
Soldiers! No wonder if the holy tongue, as it calls men (...) which
signifies dying men, because they are continually under the power of death, so
it styles them (...) sickly men, because they are exposed to such variety of
sicknesses.

Finally one which exceeds all those other miseries of this present life,
what dissension is in a City, discord in a Family, surfeiting to the Stomach,
ignorance to the Mind, that is sickness to the Body, disturbing and
oppressing it; yea, it is the worst evil of cold, hunger, and nakedness, of
heat, thirst, and warmnes, that they hasten upon us sickness and death.

That I may the better open this distress, give me leave to delineate it both
in the effects that flow from it, and the cause from which it flows.

There are two grievous attendants which sickness commonly brings along with
her, namely pain and weakness; by pain it takes away the comfort of all
enjoyments, even of life it self; Barzillai being old, said to the King, 2 S^m
19.35. Tria haec in ^mni m^rbo g^avia sunt, m^tus mortis, dolor corporis,
intermissio voluptatis.

Sen. Ep. 77.


Can thy Servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I hear any more the
voice of singing men, and singing women? wherefore should thy servant be a
burden to my Lord the King? Not much unlike may it be said of the sick man, Can
he eat, or can he drink? Can music, or any other pleasures then delight him,
when he is a burden to himself? And as by reason of pain, it renderth life
uncomfortable, so by reason of weakness, unserviceable, disenabling the body
from the performance of any work: Alas, how can the Clock go when the Weights
are plucked off? or the Watch move right, when the Wheels are out of order?

Both these sad effects are fitly expressed by two words, the one in the
Hebrew, the other in the Greek tongue, and it is the word which our Apostle
here uses. The Hebrew word -- (...) signifies both doluit and aegrotavit, to
be sick, and to be sorry: well are they expressed by one word; since they
commonly go together, both smarting pain in the ^^dy, and dolorous anguish in
the Mind being caused by sickness; in this respect the English word disease,
is very apposite, because it diseaseth and disturbeth the person; of this David
complained in his sickness, Psalm. 6.2, 3.
when he says, My bones are vexed, and my soul is also sore vexed. The Greek
word (...) implies both aegrotari, and imbecillem esse, to be sick, and to be
weak, Mat. 9 17. Psalm. 38.8.
and therefore the Noun of this Verb is elsewhere rendered infirmity: this
inconvenience likewise David found by his disease, when he said, I am feeble,
and sore broken; weakness being the inseparable concomitant of sickness. Quando
haec tam gra^^ia fa^iet vicino jam exitu, etiam a medi^c^ium action exclusus
fa^isc^^te jam corpore ubi ex^rcebit districtionis officium censor animus Salv.
ad Ec^l. Cathol. ^. 1. Iam. 5.


Meditations, which (I would to God) were more deeply imprinted on the minds of
men, those especially, who put off their repentance, and the Working out of
their salvation till a sick bed, as if when they are in pain, they could repent
with the more ease, or when they are weakest, they were strong enough for this
work: Alas, do you not know how unfit such a time is for any, but much more a
religious employment? This no doubt is one reason why Saint James, who in other
afflictions advises men to pray for themselves, in sickness counsels them
to call for the Elders of the Church to pray over them, because then for the
most part they are unable to pray themselves: in this respect it was (as I have
read) the saying of a virtuous Gentlewoman upon her sick bed, Let none defer
their preparation nor their prayers unto the bed of their sickness, Langhorn's
^un. Se^m. of M. s Mary Swain.
for then the mind is too much troubled with grief of body to be employed, as
they ought, in spiritual exercise. Tell me, whoever thou art that delayest till
this time, how know thou, but such a sickness may seize upon thee as in a
moment, may take away thy life? or if not, Quia deus non irridetur, ipse se
decepit qui mortem multis temporibus vixit and ad quaerendam vitam semivivus
assurgit and tu^c officio^us app^rct quando dominica saervituti omnia corporis
and anima subt^^huntur officia. Faust. Epist. prma.

Mat. 19.8. Gum omnes homine^ velint poevitentiam in sine vitae suae accipere,
v^x paueo^ videmus ^am secundum quod desiderant adipisci. Elig. de caex. dom:
hom. sext.


bereave thee of thy senses? or it may be so painful, that it is all thou
can do to wrestle with the pain; nay, let me tell thee, for the most part
such procrastinators, when that time comes* either repent not at all in their
sickness, or it proves but a sickly repentance. Oh then (my Brethren!) be
wise in time, do not lay the greatest load on the feeblest horse, put not the
weakest servant to the hardest labor, put not off the maine business of thy
souls health to the doleful time of thy bodies sickness.

You have heard what sickness does, or rather undoeth; it would not be amiss
to enquire whence it came, and how it was brought into the world. Indeed (as
Christ says in another case) it was not so from the beginning. Man in
innocence was created with a body of so equal and lasting a temperature, that
(had he not sinned) it had neither been taken down by death, nor put out of
frame by sickness. Sin it is which is fons Mali, morbi, mortis, has brought
in evil instead of good, death of life, and sickness of health. The Physician
being asked the cause of Diseases, answers, and most truly, mali humores,
evil humors in the body. But the Divine resolves it more fully, mali mores,
ill manners in the life. Philosophy teaches, and Experience confirms it,
that passiones animae sequuntur temperamentum corporis, the minds passions
much follow the bodies temper. Divinity preaches no less truly, that the
disorder of the body follows upon the distemper of the mind; Man's soul was
first sick of sin, and so the body becomes infected with sickness for
sin. It was the first sin of Adam which brought forth, and it is our own
actual sins that nourish this degenerate Brat, wherewith mankind is so
miserably infested.

A Meditation, which (if well pondered) would learn us to bear sickness
whenever it comes upon us without murmuring, and yet with mourning.

1. Why should thou repine at God when any disease seizes one thee? True, he
is the efficient, Nihil est quod de calamitatibus nostris Deo imputare
possumus, nos calamitatum nostrarum auctores sumus. Salvide Gub. l. 8 a Deo
punimur sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur. id ibid. Jerem. 4.18.
but thou art the meritorious cause; he inflicteth, but it is sin that
deserves; he punishes, but it is not till thou have provoked him, blame not
his justice, but thank thy own wickedness, the Moth that frets the garment is
bred of it; the Tree gives life to that Worm which kills it. Thy sickness,
oh man, is of thy self, and thy own ways and doings are they which procure
these things to thee.

2. When sickness smites thy body, let repentance smite thy thigh; when the
disease rages in thy members, let thy soul be angry at thy sin, and as thou
complainest of the effect, so labor to be sensible of the cause: Gr. Naz Epist
70.
(...) says the Divine excellently, sickness is an wholesome Discipline, it is
so when it teaches us to know our folly. Happy disease which opens our eyes
at once to see, and weep for our sins; Oh my soul, it is sin has caused
thy body to feel sickness, let sickness cause thee to feel the weight of
sin; it is wickedness has brought this weakness, let this weakness bring
thee to a sight and sense of thy wickedness, why should thou hold that sword
in thy hand, which has so sorely wounded it? or hug that serpent in thy
bosom, which has so painfully stung thee? rather since the fruit is so
bitter, pluck up the root, and let not sin reign any longer in thy mortal
body, seeing it has made thy body so mortal. And so much for the quality of
the danger: I pass on to the Extremity of the measure, nigh unto death.

Mort^m omni aetati commun^m ^ss^ sentio. Cic. de Sen^ct. tun^ ^repida^^^ cum
pr^pe a vobis credimus ^sse morte^, a quo prope non (...). parata omnibus lo^is
(...). Sen Ep^st 30. Tres sunt nun^ii ^^rtis, c^su^, infirmit^s, se ^^ctus,
casus nuntiat mortem late^tem, infirmit^s ap^^ ^^tem, senoctus p^aescut^m. Hugo
de. S. vict. de claust. An.
It is that, which in some sense is true of every man alive, this world is a
region of Ghosts, dying men, yea, young men in the prime of their days, strong
men in the full vigor of their age, are nigh to death, because death may then
be near to them. The Philosopher being asked what he thought of life, turned
him round and vanished out of sight, thereby intimating, how easily and
speedily life may be taken away: and some of them have no less truly than
aptly represented the distance between life and death by oculus, apertus and
clausus, an eye open and shut, which is done in a moment. But though this in
some respect be verified of all men, yet it is more especially true of two
sorts of persons, to wit, old men, and sick men, since old age is (...) a
natural disease, and a disease is (...) an accidental old age, both must
needs tend and hasten to death.

As for old men, they are so nigh to death, Nihil habet qu^d spere^ quem
senectus ducit ad mortem Sen. Ep. 30 Quemadniodum s^nectus adolescentiam
s^quitur, ita mors senectutem. i^. ibid ped^te^^^m morior dixit Alexis ^en^x
lent incedens.

Ch^ron me momordit dixit Daemonax sen^x pro cane, innuens s^nectutem morti
vicinam. Erasm. Apoth. l 6. and 8. (...)

Crat. Antiph.

Juvenibus incer^us hujus vitae terminus insta^, senibus vero cunctis maturior
ex hac luce ^xitus breviter concordat Cypr. de 12. abus. saec. (...).

Diog laert. l. 1.


that the Proverb says, they have one foot in the grave, young men may dye
soon, but they cannot live long; the dimnesse of light in their eyes, and
vapors that sometimes are drawn up into their brains, argue the Sun of their
life to be setting, the hoary frost, or rather white snow upon their heads,
proclaims that the winter of their deaths is approaching. The more strange it
is to see them doting on, who are going out of the world, and as if they could
set up under ground, their minds are most earthly whilst their bodies are
ready to drop into the earth: the more sad it is to think how both unwilling
and unfit they are to die, who yet are so unlikely to live; and as if with the
Eagle they could renew their youth, they flatter themselves in hope of life,
when yet they are as it were within sight of death; how short are such men of
that heathen Seneca, who said of himself, ante senectutem curavi been vivere,
in senect ute been mori, my care in youth was to live, but in old age to die
well, then no doubt perceiving his death to be at hand.

As old men, be they never so well, so sick men, by they never so young, are
nigh to death; what Anacharsis said of Seamen, that he knew not whether to
reckon them among the living or the dead, is no less true of sick men, who
indeed are not dead, because they breath, and yet not living because not lusty;
every man carries death in his bosom, but the sick man at his back, or
rather in his arms before his face.

In sum there is a threefold propinquity of death, possible, probable,
certain; it is possible the healthiest, strongest, and youngest may dye
quickly; it is certain old men (though they outlive far younger) cannot live
long; and it is probable that the sick man's death is at hand.

But yet this in the proper sense is not true of all sicknesses, that
distinction of sin cannot hold in Divinity, according to the Popish
acception, that some are venial, others mortal, since S. Paul says
indefinitely, and means it universally, that death is the wages of sin, but
Analogically it is true in Physic of diseases; some are only painful, others
mortal, the Gout in the Toe, a pain in the Teeth, a prick in the Finger;
these, though they cause pain, yet are not in their own nature deadly, nor is
the patient accounted the neere^ death for them.

Besides, of mortal diseases there is a difference, some are a long time
untwisting, others in a short time cut asunder the thread of life: thus the
Dropsy is a great while in drowning, the Palsy in shaking down, and the
Consumption in drying up the body, whilst the Fever in a few days burns,
and an Apoplexy, or Aposteme in a few hours suffocate it.

And yet once more in violent diseases, there is a difference, we do not say of
every man whom a Fever smites, that he is presently nigh to death; whilst
the body is vigorous, the Physic prosperous, (...). G^. Naz. O^at. 19.

Forsita^ quia verberatus est ab infi^^elibus in m^nisterio. Anselm. in loc.
Ch^ysost. in v. 29.


we account the patient hopeful; but those, in whom the virulency of the
disease so far prevails, as that both the strength of Nature, and skill of
Art seem unable to grapple with it, are only and justly looked upon as nigh to
death.

Such, no doubt, was Epaphroditus his case, for though some conceive this
danger might arise from stripes and scourges, which Nero should command to be
inflicted on him at Rome, yet it is more rationally and generally concluded,
that some violent sickness, by reason of a long Journey, had seized upon him;
and though it is likely this good man was not negligent (according as ability
and opportunity was afforded) to use means, yet the disease did so increase,
that as to life his condition was desperate, and therefore S. Paul says of him
he was nigh unto death.

Humana ^rugaelita^is nimia in pr^sp^ris r^bu^ oblivio est. Q^. Cu^t. l. 4.
(...). Greg. Naz.
To this low and weak estate is God pleased many times to bring men among
others, chiefly for a double end, and that he may mind them of their
dissolution, and quicken them in their devotion.

Of all things we are very prone to forget our latter end, and therefore God by
sickness puts us in mind of it, we are apt to put death far from us, and
therefore by some grievous disease God brings us nigh to death; a
presumption, we shall not dye yet, makes us not think of dying at all, and
whilst marrow is in our bones, color in our faces, appetite in our stomachs,
strength in our joints, health in our bodies, we easily persuade our selves we
shall not dye yet; no mervaile, if to fix our eyes upon the Grave, God chasten
us with pain upon our Bed, so that our life abhors bread, our flesh
consumes away, Job 33.18.19.20. Omnes (inquit Alexander sagitta ictus) jurant
me Jovis esse filium, sed hoc vulnus homin^m esse me cl^mat. ^en. Ep. 59.
(...). Plut. Apoth.
and our soul draws near to the grave. It was the confession of Alexander,
when let blood with an arrow: All men call me Jupiters Son, but this wound
proclaims me a mortal man: and yet more divine was that of Antigonus, who
acknowledged his disease to be sent as a Monitor, lest otherwise he might have
grown insolent through the forgetfulness of mortality. Sicknesses especially,
when desperate, are warning pieces to tell us the murdering piece of death is
ready to destroy, every ach tolls the Bell, but these, as it were, dig the
grave, and cry dust to dust; and good reason it is, that when we cast the
thought of death behind our backs, death it self should by these diseases
look us in the face, and as it were, pluck us by the throat.

2. In health we are no less apt to forget God than our selves, but sickness
minds us of him, in prosperity perhaps we mumble over a Pater Noster, but
adversity teaches us to cry Abba Father: Lord, says the Prophet, in trouble
have they visited thee, they who before were strangers, now would be familiar
with God, and give him a visit; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them, it may be before they did say a prayer, but now they pour out a
prayer. Is^. 26.16.


Though man by the formation of his body be made with an erect countenance, yet
he seldom looks up to heaven till some disease has laid him upon his back;
nor yet many times will a slight sickness prevail: God promises himself
concerning his people, in their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5.
ult. Luke 8.43. Luke 15.16. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 119. (...). Suid.
but for the most part it proves otherwise; ubi desinit medicus, ibi incipit
Theologus, the Divine's work begins not with many till the Physitian's is done,
it is late enough not to seek God till affliction comes, and yet we seek God
not early, but late in affliction. The Woman in the Gospel sick of a bloody
Issue, goes not to Christ till she had spent all (and that to no purpose) upon
Physicians, the Prodigal thinks not of going home to his Father, till he is
brought so low, that he would feign be fed with husks, but cannot get them: nor
do many lift up their eyes or hands to heaven, till they are scarce able to
lift up either. Indeed necessity is an excellent Mistress, especially of
Devotion: Most men will not pray till they must, it is misery, which like
Jonahs fish, puts them upon humble supplication, who never thought of God under
the gourd of Prosperity. In which respect, that Latin Proverb was not taken up
without just cause, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare; he that knows not how
to pray, let him turn Mariner: and no doubt those violent storms, which make
the Seas to roar, will teach him to pray. When those young Persian gallants
being beaten and pursued by their enemies, Dr. Jer. Tay. Sermon. (...). Chryso.
in Psalm. 129. (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 17.
came to the River Strymon, which was so frozen that their Boats could not
launch, and yet it began to thaw, so that they feared the Ice would not bear
them, then (though the day before they reviled both God and his providence)
most timorously they fall upon their faces, and ardently beg of God that the
River might bear them over from their enemies pursuit. The smart lasues of
Gods rod drive them home, and draw them near to him, who before were far
from him.

The Greeks aptly express the declining estate of a Kingdom by (...) falling
upon the Knee, and its ruined estate by (...) falling upon the Mouth;
expressions, which though they principally refer to the condition, yet
withal intimate the disposition of men in an afflicted condition, they whose
knees in health were like Elephants, without joints, could not, or rather would
not bend, in sickness fall upon their knees, nay, when nigh to death, fall
upon their mouths in humble adoration and earnest invocation upon God. And for
these causes, that men may both look forward to their end, and upward to their
God; he is pleased to bring them downward, almost to the Gates of Death, and
Chambers of the Grave.

To end this, let us all make account of, and prepare for straights. In health,
expect sickness, in sickness look for death, or to be brought nigh to it.
Diseases may come unsent for, let them not come unlooked for; if they happen
not, thou art not the worse, and it is labor well lost; if they do, thou art
the better fitted, and it is time well spent. Do not flatter thy self in
health, as if the mountain of thy body were so strong that it could not be
moved: Alas, one blast from heaven cannot only move, but remove, shake, but
overturne it, rather even then when thou art fed with fat pastures, clear
waters, thy Table spread, thy Cup full, thy Body hayle, often think of walking
through the valley of the shadow of death: Psalm. 23.4.
Happy is that man, whom when sickness arresteth, and death approaches to,
can say, and say it truly, This is no more then what I have looked and provided
for all my days. And so much be spoken of the second particular, pass we now
to the third.

3. Eminency of the person, whom this extreme disease befell in the relative
He. If you would know who this He was, be pleased to cast your eyes on the 25.
verse of the Chapter, Ver. 25.
where you find his name to be Epaphroditus, one that was not only a good
Man, but a Man of God, not only a Servant, but a Minister of Christ, and one
so eminent, Ibid.
as that Saint Paul dignifies him with the titles of his Brother, and
Companion, and fellow-Souldier; and yet of him it is here said that he was nigh
unto death.

Saints as well as sinners, Ministers as well as the People, are liable to
desperate diseases. In respect of temporal evils they have no more privilege
than others: And no wonder, since

1. That which is the cause both of sickness and death, remains in them, to
wit, sin: Indeed the power of sin is weakened, therefore they cannot be
hurt of the second death, P^ccatum separan^ inter nos^ and Deum peni^ ^us
auferri non pot^st, donec liberemur a corpo^e. B^rn. de 3. in adv. Sermon. 6.
but the being of it remains, and that necessitateth the first: they are so
freed from the guilt of it, that they shall not taste the torments of hell, but
yet they may drink deep of the miseries of this life: sin will not leave
the best man till it has brought him to his grave, well may it bring him to
his sick bed.

2. In respect of their bodily constitution, they are earthly houses, that will
moulder away, till at last they fall: earthen vessels subject to flawes and
cracks, till at length they break. The Saints are the Sons of God by grace,
but still the Sons of Adam by nature, the Ministers are Angels in respect of
their office, but still they are Men in regard of their persons, and being of
the same mould, and subject to the same dangers with others.

(...). Oecumen. ib. Causa morbi suit n^mia diligentia in me curando, in
doc^ndo evangelio, in d^f^nd^^da m^a causa, in vigil^is j^jun^o,
lucub^ationibus, etc. Aret. ibid.

(...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.

1 Cor. 11.30. 2 Cor. 12 7. (...)*


3. More specially, the very calling and employment of Ministers is such, as
exhausteth their spirits, weakeneth their bodies, and accelerateth both
diseases and death: our Apostle says of Epaphrodit* that for the work of
Christ he was nigh to death; v. 30. the work he there means is most probably
conceived to be the traveling of this good man to Rome, with supplies for his
wants, (to relieve a Christian, especially a Messenger of Christ, is the work
of Christ) but it is no less true of the work of Christ, which is p^culiarly
the Ministers, since the pains they take in preaching, often times Christ brings
them nigh to death. It was said of Archimedes, studiis quibus obtinuit famam
amisit vitam, the studies which got him credit lost his life; and it may be
said of many Ministers, the fastings, watchings, labors preachings, by which
they profit the peoples souls, hurt their bodies. Thus like the candle they
waste themselves that they might enlighthen, yea, like the salt they dissolve
themselves that they may season others.

4. Finally, God has choice and singular ends at which he aims, when he
brings his own Servants or Ministers into such desperate sicknesses, and
that both, in regard of sin and grace.

1. In regard of their sins, that they may be either purged or prevented, by
which means their sickness becomes their Physic, and the Malady it self a
spiritual remedy. It may be they have fallen into some gross sin, and
therefore they fall into some grievous sickness: So was it with those unworthy
Communicants, concerning whom Saint Paul says, for which cause many of them
were weak, many sick, and some slept. It may be God sees them prone to commit
some heinous fault which he restrains them from by some dolorous sickness,
as S. Paul had a prick in his flesh that he might not be puffed up in his
mind: so God sometimes wounds his Servants bodies, as knowing, that otherwise
they would have wounded their consciences.

2. In respect of their graces, that the truth of them may be tried, the acts
of them renewed, and the strength of them increased. God has many ways to try
men, among which sickness, especially if dangerous, is a sor^ trial, and
therefore when the Devil, (...). Chrysostom. T. 7. de Morb. and Med. Quo^dam
p^cscicus Deus peccare posse, in salutem flagellat cos infirmitate co^poris, ne
peccent: ut cis utilius sit fra^gi languoribus ad salutem, quam remancre
in^olumes ad d^mnationem Bern. de Int. Dom. cap. 46.

Probationes diversae sunt credentium, alius por aegritudinem, alius amissione
charorum, alius per damum pecu^iae probatur. Ambr. in Loc.


by Gods leave had tried Job in the loss of his Cattle, Servants, and
Children, he obtains license to inflict sores upon his body, making this his
last (as accounting it his fiercest) onset, Indeed then is the trial of a man's
faith, when God seems as if he would slay him, of his hope when all things
are desperate, of his love when God frowneth upon, nay beats him, of his
patience when the pain is sharp, of his courage when the sorrows of death
compass him, of his perseverance, when he holds fast his integrity to the
death.

To close up this, let it be a lesson of comfort, of charity, and of diligence.

1. Of comfort, when any sickness seizes on thee, remember whose lot it has
been as well as thine, and be not discouraged. When Christ would encourage his
Disciples against sufferings, he uses this argument, for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you: Mat. 5.11. it is that meditation which may
revive us when we are in pain and misery, so it fared with others of Gods
faithful ones before me. That argument of Eliah indeed was somewhat
passionate, 1 King. ^9.4. It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am
not better than my Fathers; but it is a pious reasoning for every Christian to
say, I am content Lord, if thou take away my health, exercise me with diseases,
I am not better than Job, David, Hezekiah, Epaphroditus, and others of thy
faithful Servants and Ministers; who am I, that I should think much to pledge
those holy men of God, though in a bitter Cup?

2. Of Charity, and that both to thy self and others.

1. Condemn not thy self as if God hated thee, because he corrects thee, or
as if he were more angry with thee than others, because he chastises thee more
severely then them. Indeed it is good in a time of sickness to reflect upon
thy self, (...). Chrysostom. T. 7. do Morb. and Med.
examine thy ways, and if conscience accuse of some great misdemeanour, to
humble thy self, and acknowledge thy disease the just reward of thy offense,
but otherwise, do not conclude thy own guilt or Gods hatred merely from the
premises of sickness, though virulent.

2. Censure not others as if they were therefore the worst of sinners, because
in their bodies the greatest sufferers. This is ( indeed) that hard measure
which Gods people and Ministers often meet with: When the Barbarians saw a
Viper upon Paul's hand, Act. 28.4. Psalm. 38.13. Quam praeposterum judicium
little qui ex variis malis, quibus nonnulli magni viri and doctores ecclesiae
laborare nonnunquam solent, finistre de illorum doctrina and salute judicare.
Zanch in Loc.

Eccles. 9.2. Psalm. 91.10.


they presently condemned him as a murderer; and David complains of his
enemies, that when he was sick, they spoke mischievous things against him: nay
Job's friends (though good men) were deceived with this fallacy, and accuse Job
of hypocrisy because of his calamity. And thus it is still, If a zealous
Christian, or faithful Minister be visited with a doleful sickness, his
Religion must be no better than Dissimulation, and his Doctrine Heresy: But
surely it is either Ignorance, or Malice, or both, that fills men's mouths
with such censures.

It is true, there never was sickness without sin, but the sickness is not
always proportioned to the sin: these things come alike to all, was the wise
man's Observation, nor does any sickness befall any man which may not befall
the best man. I know some assert a Saint to be Plague-free, grounding it upon
the Promise in the Psalm, that no plague shall come nigh his dwelling: But you
must know, this is only a temporal Promise, and therefore (as indeed all
such) has a double condition annexed unto it. The one ex part personae, on
the Saints part, which is to make the Lord, even the most high, his habitation;
Ver. 9.
if then good men, in pestilentiall times, through a distrustful fear, make
the Creatures their refuge, no mervaile if the plague infect them and their
dwellings. The other ex part rei, in regard of the thing it self, which is
only assured so far as it may make for Gods glory and his Peoples benefit. We
read in the former part of the tenth verse there shall no evil befall him,
whereby is intimated that the plague shall not then come nigh to, when it is
evil for a good man, but if at any time God see it good, either for the
manifestation of his own glory (to wit, of his justice in so severely
punishing his own, of his power and mercy in delivering from so deadly a
disease) or for the spiritual advantage of his people (in humbling them for
some scandalous sin by so smart a chastisement, in exercising the strength of
their patience by so sore a trial) not the holiest person is in such cases
exempted from the plague, nor is it improbably conceived that Job's botches,
Hezekiah's boyles, David's sores were not much different from, if not altogether
the same with the plague, who yet all of them were choice and eminent Saints.
Oh then, let us take heed how we lay the load of heavy censure upon the backs
of Gods Ministers and Servants.

3. Of diligence, that

1. We who are Ministers, improve the time of our health in feeding the flocks
of Christ, since when sickness comes, we shall be disenabled from our
employments: nay perhaps we that have taught others, may then have need to
learn our selves.

You who are the People, get all the good you can from us, whilst we are in a
capacity of doing good to you, ere long the Candle of our lives may burn dim
by reason of some sickness, yea, be blown out by death, and then we can no
longer give light unto you. Oh therefore walk in the light while you have it,
be willing to learn while we are able to teach, account our labors precious,
and let them be profitable to you, whilst God makes us able to bestow them
among you, which we shall not be, when that befalls us which did Epaphroditus
in the Text, to be sick nigh unto death: And so I have given a dispatch to the
first general, namely the distress: I now proceed to

2. The deliverance, Genesis part.
and therein the

1. Efficiency of the Author, God. Indeed both life and death, health and
sickness, are in Gods hand: That of the Poet, Vna cademque manus vulnus opemque
tulit, Ovid.
may in this respect be fitly made use of; the same hand of Divine Providence
is that which makes and closes the wound: He kills, and makes alive, he
brings down to the grave, and brings up, so sings Hannah. I form light,
1 Samuel 2.6:
and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things, is Gods own saying by the Prophet. Isa, 45.7.
Thy head cannot ache without his leave, nor leave aching without his help; but
though both are from him, yet with some difference. Of sickness, he is only the
efficient, sin is the meritorious cause. Of health he is so the efficient, as
that his mercy is the impulsive cause, for which reason perhaps it is here
said, God had mercy; that which moves him is his pity, and that which helps
us is his power.

Sunt aliqua media divinae providentiae, nox propter defectum suae virtutis,
sed propter abundantiam suae bonitatis, ut dignitatem causalitatis etiam
creaturis communicet. Aquin. part 1. q. 30. a^t 3. Luke 4.38.7.10. John 5.8, 9.
2 Kings 5.14. Isa. 38.21. John 9, 6.
True it is, God is for the most part pleased to make use of means in effecting
health, but this arises from the greatness of his goodness, not any defect
in his Almightinesse, as Aquinas pithily.

That he needs not means, appears in as much as he sometimes works
without any. Such were the Cures Christ wrought upon Peter's Wives Mother, the
Centurions Servant, and the Impotent Cripple, whom his Word only restored to
health. Nay many times the means he uses are improbable, yea, of their own
nature apt to produce a contrary effect. What virtue could there be in the
waters of Jordan to cleanse Naamans leprosy? or in the lump of figgs to heal
Hezekiah's sores? yea, the Spittle and Clay which Christ made use of, were more
likely to put out a seeing, than recover a blind man's eyes.

He stands not in need of means; but the most probable means stand in need
of him. It is to put honor on the creature that God vouchsafes to use it as
an instrument* and when the creature becomes an instrument of any good, it is
only as in the hand of God, working with, and by it. For, tell me, when any
are recovered, who is it that put the medicinal quality into the drugs which
heal them, but the God of Nature? who gives that wit and skill to man which
finds out their qualityes, and accordingly makes use of them, but the God of
Knowledge? Finally, who is it that commands a blessing upon, and gives
success to the means, but the God of Power? Man lives not by bread only,
nor is the Patient cured by Physic only, Mat. 4.4.
or chiefly, it is a word proceeding from the mouth of God that makes the one
effectual for continuation, and the other for restoration of health.

To apply this in a threefold admonition:

1. Art thou wicked? As thou desire health to be preserved, or renewed, make
thy peace with God by repentance: it is the ground upon which the Jewish
Converts mutually exhort each other to this duty, Hos. 6.1.
Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us, he
has smitten, and he will bind us up, though it be that indeed, which God out
of his Philanthropie sometimes vouchsafes, Creatorem nobit p^^pitium redda^us,
qui pot^^s est nos cum morbis ^ffligere, tum sana^e.

Ephe. de vi^. spirit. T. 1. Isa. 57.13. Iu^ges 10.14. Isay 36.7.


yet it is a fond presumption for any to expect that he should be a Physician
to them who are enemies to him. Me thinks an ungodly wretch should imagine that
God speaks to him in the words of the Prophet, when thou cryest let thy
companions deliver thee; or, as he says to the children of Israel, when they
committed Idolatry, Go and cry unto the Gods which you have chosen, the lusts
which you have served, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.
Had that accusation of Rabshakeh been true, his argumentation was solid, when
he sent that message to Hezekiah, But if thou say to me, we trust in the Lord
our God, is it not he, whose high Places, (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 4.6.
and whose Altars Hezekiah has taken away? And surely the conscience of a
wicked man (if not seared) cannot but check him in the like expressions, Will thou say I trust in God for health, or recovery? Is it not he whose Name thou
have blasphemed, Patience thou have abused, and Worship thou have neglected? Be
wise therefore, oh ye sinners, and instructed ye wicked of the earth! make him
your friend who must be your refuge, offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and
then, not till then, put your trust in the Lord. Your life, your health is in
his hands; look that your doings be right, (...). Chrysostom. T. 7. de Morb. and
Med.
and then your persons shall be precious in his eyes.

2. Art thou sick? learn whom to invocate, and on whom to depend for health,
upon no other than God.

Far be it from any of us in sickness (with Saul in danger) to run to the
Pythomise, and seek help of the Devil. Satan's best cures are deadly wounds; it
is far better to continue sick, then by such means to get health. Since whilst
thy mortal body is for a time restored, thy immortal soul is desperately
endangered.

Nor yet let us with the Papists seek to any Saints as Mediators with God for
our recovery. Whilst They have their several Saints for several Diseases;
Sebastian for the Plague, Anthony for the Gangreen, Patronilla for Agues, and
Benedict for the Stone: Let us have recourse to the one God in all Diseases.
Whilst they think it too great sauciness to be their own spokes-men to God;
and therefore go to saint somebody to prefer their Petitions for them: let us
hold it the best manners to go our selves of our own errands to God, not
doubting but that he, who bids us come, will bid us welcome.

2 Chronicles. 16 12.
Finally, let us not ^read in Asa's footsteps, who sought not to the Lord, but
to the Physicians; nor yet let us tread Antipodes to him in seeking to the
Lord, and not to the Physicians, whilst he affoards them: but as Gideon
commanded his Soldiers to cry, the sword of the Lord, and of Gideon; so let us
ever say, the blessing of the Lord, and the skill of the Physician. Indeed
where opportunity is vouchsafed, those two must not be severed. God will not
usually help without means, and therefore they must be used; the means cannot
possibly help without God; and therefore in the use of them his blessing must
be implored. They are equally bad to neglect and to rest on second causes, to
expect succor either from them originally, or without them instrumentally, to
rely on God without means, or trust to means without God. Surely, what the
King said to the woman, 2 Kings. 6 27.
If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? that all creatures
say to us in any distress, If the Lord help not, whenc shall we? except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it, except the Lord keep
the City, the watchman watches but in vain, Psalm. 127.1. Frustra ^st ^mul^
humana d^lig^ntia nisi divina a^^^dat provid^ntia. M^^c. ibid.
says the Psalmist. Indeed he does not say quia, because the Lord buildes the
house, but uisi, as excluding ^umane diligence: but except the Lord build,
thereby including divine providence: nor does he only say, nisi d^minus
consenserit, adjuverit, but nisi aedificaverit, custodicrit, unless the Lord
consent, (a word which only implies his will) or unless the Lord help, Id
ibid.
which extends to any kind of assistance (the meanest thing that concurreth
to any work, being causa adjuvans, an auxiliary cause) but unless the Lord
build and keep, which imply the concurrence of his power, as well as will, and
that as the principal agent in the building and keeping: the same assertion is
no less true in this present case, Luke 4.23.
except the Lord heal the patient, the Physician admnistreth but in vain.
Heal thy self, is only true of that Physician, to whom it was spoken: no other
Physician can of himself either heal himself or others. Tangit te Rex, Sanat
te Deus, was no less truly than humbly spoken when the Royal touch was given,
The King touches thee, God cures thee. It is so here, the Physician
prescribes the medicine, but God by that commands health. Oh therefore that
Physicians in administering, patients in receiving, would only depend upon, and
sue for divine Benediction, when the one writes a recipe with his pen, let him
pray with his heart; when the other receives the potion into his stomach, let
him lift up his eyes to God, Ezod. 15.^6.
who says of himself, I am the Lord that heals thee.

3. Art thou recovered? know whom to praise, and to whom to ascribe the cure:
could the ingredients of thy medicine speak, each would say of health, as the
depths and the Seas, Job 28.14.
of wisdom, It is not in me: It is, I am sure, the voice of all pious
Physicians, non nobis, not to us (oh man) not to us, Peter 5.1.
but to God be the praise of thy recovery. And therefore whilst the Atheist
looks no further than nature and art, let the Christian look higher at God
and his blessing: and as he must not forget that respect which is due to the
Physician, as the Instrument, so let the chiefest honor be given to God as
being the principal efficient. The truth is, for the most part, such is our
foolishness, Faciem quodamodo ponentes ad ea quae fecit, dorsum ponimus ad
artificem qui fecit.

Si quando nobis prosperi aliquid praeter spem nostram and meritum deus
tribuit, alius ascribit hoc fortunae, alius ^ven^^t, alius confilio, nullus d^o.

Salv. de Cub. l. 7.


that whilst we fix our eyes upon the blessings we receive, we turn our backs
upon the God that bestows them, and we are more ready to father them upon any
other than him, who is the true donor of them. Oh let not only gratitude but
justice, teach us to give God his due, when we gather the fruit let us cast
down our eyes on the root from which they sprout, when we feed upon the
acornes, let us lift them up to the tree from whence they fall, and being
refreshed by the flowing stream, let us reflect upon the springing fountain.
Oh my God, it is in thee that I live, let me live to thee; from thee I have
received health, to thee I return praise; I have the comfort, take thou the
glory of thy great mercy. And so I pass forward to the

2. Excellency of the Benefit, how expressed, in those words, Had mercy on him.

In mercy there are two things considerable, affectus, and effectus, the
passion, and the action, the inward pity, and the owtward bounty, that is in
the heart, this in the hand; that the bowels of mercy, this the works of mercy;
that called by the Greeks (...), and this (...), and both these, though not in
the same sense, Misericordia nonnullis quod mi^^rum cor faciat.

Aug con^r. adv. leg. l. ^. c* 20. Misericors dicitur aliquis si qua miscrum
cor hab^ns.

Aquin p^r. prim q. 21. art. 3. Isa. 63.6. I^rem 3^.20. Psalm. 10^.16. N^bis non
sibi loquitur, atque ideo nostris u^itur in loquendo. Hil^r. in Ps 126 (...).
Greg. Naz. Orat. 16.

Mise^icord^a est ali^rae miser^ae in co^d ^ostro comp^ssi^ qu^ uti^^^ (si
possimus) subven^^e compellimur. Aug. de civit. dei. l 9. c. 8.


are attributed to God, and here to be understood.

1. In mercy there is a laying of another misery to heart, The Gre^ke word
(...) is derived from the Hebrew (...) which signifies Ejulare, plangere, to
bewail and lament: a condolency with our Brothers calamity, being a choice
ingredient of mercy. This is that which the Holy Ghost asserteth of God in
Scripture, where it is said, in all their afflictions he was afflicted: And
again, My bowels are troubled: And again, Like as a Father pittyeth his
Children, so the Lord pit^yeth them that fear him: But withal, we must know,
that in these Phrases the most high is pleased to condescend, and speaking to
men, to speak of himself, as if he were a man. There is not then any sorrow or
compassion in him who is impassible, but by this is represented his good will
toward his people, whereby he is propense to succor them. And because the
afflicted person finds often times much ease and solace in that sympathy, which
another expresses toward him, that we may know the like solace is to be found
in God, this compassion is attributed to God; and indeed is, though not
formally, yet aequivalently, nay eminently verified of him. To bring this home,
in that God is said to have mercy on dying Epaphroditus, it implies thus much,
that God beholding and taking notice of, was as it were affected with his
imminent danger, having after a sort a friendly pity, and motherly yearning,
or rather a fatherly good will toward him. But this is not all that mercy
includes, and therefore know,

2. In mercy there is an endeavor to relieve him whose misery it condoleth, as
she suffers with, so she does for, and (according to her ability) either
helps him to bear the burden by putting under her shoulder, or wholly ^aseth
him of it by removing it from his shoulder. Hence the definition of mercy is
well given to be such a compassion of another misery, as puts upon a cheerful
employing our power for the sustaining him under, and delivering him ^ut of it.
This is that which in a proper and genuine sense agrees to God, whose property
is to deliver his out of their afflictions, Tristari de miseria alterius non
competit Deo, sed rep^ll^re miseriam alicri^s hoc m^xime ei competit. Aquin.
par. prim. qu. 21. a^t. 3. Nomen misericordiae pro op^re. Zanch. in loc.
Dicitur misericordia, quod miseriae ^^jusdam est Remotio, Est. ibid. (...).
etc. Greg. Naz. Orat. 16.

(...). Athanas. qu. 15. de parab. (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 16. A Ch^isto dicti
es^is Ch^istiani; (...) ea via qua Christus ambularet, and vos d^betis
ambulare. Bern. Ser ad p^st. Pr. 20.6. Sep^. V^re Magnus qui divini ^peris
interpres est ut imitatur Amb. in Ps. 118. (...). Greg. Nys. de Beat. Or. 5.
(...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 16.


and preserve them from destruction: and this no doubt, is that which our
Apostle here especially intends in this expression, God had mercy on him, that
is, he did remove his misery, and prevent his death by curing him of that
sickness which had brought him nigh to it.

Let the same mind be in us that is in God: when our brethren are under
sickness, or any other distress, to have mercy on them. It was our blessed
Saviors reasoning with the Ph^risees, though not altogether to the same
purpose, Which of you shall have an Ass or an Ox fall into the pit, and will
not straightway pull him out? Surely one man is of more worth then many Asses;
and shall we not, in what we may, succor him when fallen into some grievous
sickness?

That good Samaritan in the Type is no other than Christ in the Truth, who
pityed and healed man when dangerously wounded by sin, and as it was the
design of his death to cure mankind of his spiritual sickness, so his
practice in the course of his life to go about doing good and healing. If we
call our selves Christians, whom should we imitate but Christ, by performing
all offices of love to the sick* which lie within our Sphere? and if we have
no o^le but that of compassion, no wine but tears and prayers, let them be
poured into the wounds and diseases of thy neighbor; so shall we be Disciples
of Christ. But the Text leads us yet one step higher from Christ, as man, and
as God-man, to Christ as God, acquainting us with Gods mercy to a sick man: and
what more befitting man then to imitate God by practicing this God-like work
of mercy. (...), a merciful man is great and honorable, and that for this
reason chiefly, because he is like to God, in which respect Gregory Nyssen, and
Nazianzen call such a man a God, as having stamped upon him the Character of a
Deity. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 6.1. Luke
6.36 N^hil digniu^ quam u^ homo sit autoris sui imitator, and secundum modum
propriae facultatis div. ni ^it ^peris executor. Leo de quadr. Sermon. 5.

Psalm. 41.3 Prospicit p^uperi, aegro aegroto, attenuato. Vatabl ibid. Improbus
petito^, qui quod aliis negat sibi postulat, Homo esto tibi misericordiae
forma, si^ quomo do vis, quan^um vis, quam cito vis m^sericordia^ tibi sieri,
tam cito alii, tantum, tali^^r ipse m^sercre. Chrysol. Sermon. 43.

Mat. 15.7. Vita mari est similis, namque ut mare vita pro^cllas: Haec habet
and v^ntos naufragiumque f^equ^^s. An^h sacr.


is Saint Paul's counsel in general, Be you merciful, as your Father also is
merciful, so our blessed Savior advises in special: and yet more
particularly, as God had mercy on sick Epaphroditus, so let us on our sick
neighbor, by visiting him, (if we can by our skill or counsel do him good)
however by compassionating him, and interceding with God in his behalf.

And because this duty is that which (though so honorable) we are averse from;
give me leave to carry it a little further, and let you see it is profitable,
as well as honorable. Not only that you may follow God in mercy, but that you
may upon the like occasion obtain mercy from God, show mercy to ot^ers. It is a
sweet promise to feed on in a time of sickness. The Lord will strengthen him
upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all his bed in his sickness. That
bed must needs be easy which God makes, nor can he faint, whom God
strengthens, but to whom is it made? him and none but him who considers the
poor, so our Translation, b^t the Hebrew word (...) may as well be rendered
sick, one that is weakened by a disease: he who considers others in their
sickness, shall be supported by God in his. Which of us, beloved, does not
desire that God may show that mercy to us in our distress, which he did here
to Epaphroditus? But how can we except God should grant that to us, which we
deny to others? Blessed are the merciful, says Christ, for they shall obtain
mercy: Be then oh man to thy self, a pattern of mercy, and show with that
speed, and in that degree, mercy to thy sick, weak, languishing neighbor,
which thou would have God vouchsafe to thee in the like condition. But a
little more to unbowell this Clause.

The mercy here intended (as you have already heard) was the prolongation of
life, and restoration of health to Epaphroditus: and here a double question
falls in to be resolved, How this can be called a mercy? And
If a mercy in it self, yet how a mercy to him?


Qu. 1. It is a plausible Objection which is made, (...). Philem. Yant^ ^st
tribu, lat^o h^ jus mis^rae vi^ae, ut nec vita fit dicenda, sed potius mors,
vel qu ppiam aliud morte detertus.

Idiot de pati. Qu^d est di^i viv^re ^isi di^ torqueri.

Aug. de verb. dom. Sermon. 17 Chrysostom. in loc. Theoph. in loc. O^cum. in loc.


that life prolonged is no mercy, because it is a calamitous continuance in an
evil world: what is this world but a Coffer of Sorrows, Labyrinth of Troubles,
School of Vanity, Market of Fraud, Theater of Tragedyes, Flood of Tears, and
Map of Ruins? And can it be a favor for a man to continue long in a place of
miseries? The earth we tread on, the air we breath in, are as a Sea, wherein
winds and storms are ever blowing; and can it be a favor to be still tossed
up and down upon a blustering tempestuous Sea? Finally, this life is not a
life but a calamity, yea, rather a death then a life, because so miserable: to
live long is to be long tormented, and can this be a mercy?

Answ. To all this it is briefly, but fully answered. That though there be many
evils in the world, yet the world is not evil, nor is it evil to abide in the
world. These miseries are only accidental to life, and so hinder not, but that
preservation from death is a mercy. And therefore the Greek Fathers upon this
Scripture do hence most rationally confute the Manichees, who affirm the world
in its own nature to be bad, (...) so St. Chrysostom, (...). So Theophilact
in particular. What say thou to this, oh heretical Manich^e? If the world
be wicked, and the life which we now live in it, how does the Apostle call this
a mercy of God, that he lengthened Epaphroditus his days? The other life is
better than this, (...). Theoph. ibid.

Aristot. Eth^l. 1. c. 8 Plat. in Gorg. Ma^t. Ep. 70. l. 6.


surely then this must be good, an immature death is threatened, and inflicted
as a judgment, surely then the continuance of life must be a mercy, as those
forementioned Fathers excellently argue,

Life is a mercy, and yet health is a greater mercy. (...) was written upon the
porch of Apollo's Temple, health is the Princess of earthly blessings: and
Plato tells us that (...) was sung by every one to his Harp at the Schools,
and at Festivals. Beauty, riches, health, were the three things Pythagoras said
should chiefly be implored of the Gods; but among them health the chief:
indeed, it is that which makes life it self to be a mercy, since non est
vivere sed valere vita, To live is not so much to breath, as to be well.

Mercies then they are ( especially) when conjoined, and being so in their own
nature, ought so to be esteemed of by us: in which respect we ought to pray and
give thanks for them as blessings. Una est catena quae nos allig nos ten^t,
amor v^tae qui ut non est abujiciendus, ita miu^ndus est. Sen. Ep. 27.
It is no less a fault to undervalue, then to over-prize our lives and health:
this latter (I confess) is the more common, but the former is no less
culpable: we must not be so much in love with life as to dote upon it, because
it is short, yet we may so far love, as to desire, and endeavor that it may,
yea, with the Apostle here, account it a mercy, when it is prolonged.

I end this, If deliverance from death be a mercy, how great a mercy is
deliverance from hell? Corpus infra animam est and quaevis anima vilis
excellentissi^o corpore excellentio^ invenitur.

Aug in Ps 145.


If it be a blessing to have the danger of a mortal disease prevented, Oh what
is it to have the guilt of our deadly sins pardoned? Finally, if the health
of the body be a favor, how choice a benefit is the souls health? Surely by
how much hell is worse then death, sin then sickness, yea, by how much the
soul is better than the body, by so much is the one to be preferred before the
other. Oh my soul, thou wast sick, desperately sick of sin, so sick that
thou wast not only nigh to death, but dead in sins, and trespasses; but God
had mercy on thee, he has sent his Son to heal, to revive thee, by being
himself wounded, nay, slain: and his spirit to cure, to quicken thee by
killing thy sin, and renewing thy nature. Thou art indebted to thy God for
temporal, much more for spiritual: Bless the Lord, oh my soul, for thy life
of nature, health of thy body; but let all that is within thee praise his holy
name for thy life of grace, and eternal salvation.

Qu. 2. But it is further inquired, though this recoverie were a mercy in it
self, yet how could it be so to Epaphroditus a godly man? Had it been
deliverance by death, this were a mercy indeed; but deliverance from death
seems rather an injury than a courtesy, Ch^ys^^n loc. Mors po^it finem
omnibus, malis in h^ic vit^, da^ terminum malis in hoc sae^ulo, ^^imit omnem
calam^tatem. Be^n. de mod. viv. Se^m 30.
(...), we may easily refell the Heretic, but how shall we answer the
Christians who desiring to be dissolved knows not how to esteem the
deferring his dissoluttion a mercy? Had Epaphroditus been a wicked man, it had
been a great mercy to spare him, that he might make his peace with God by the
practice of faith and repentance; but to him, whose peace was already made,
what advantage could the prolonging of his life afford? Death it self to a
good man is a deliverance, a total, final deliverance from all sorrow and
misery for ever: And can that be a deliverance, M^ritur quide^ justus sed
secure, quippe c^jus mors ut praeso^t^^ exitu^ est vit^, ita i^troitu^ meli
oris. id. Ep. 1^5. Erit janua vitae, initium refrigerii erit, sanctae illius
men^is sca^a and ingressus in locum tabernaculi. Id. in sermon.
which keeps off our deliverance? per Augusta pervenitur ad augusta, This red
Sea leads to Canaan; through the valley of death we pass to the mount of
glory: And can that be a mercy which retardeth our felicity? Is it a courtesy
for a man to be detained from his wages, and held to labor? to be hindered from
rest, and called to work? to be withheld from his country, and wander in a
wilderness? Finally, to be kept out of a Palace, and confined to a Prison? And
yet, all this is true of a godly man, who when nigh to death, is called back
again to live longer in this world.

Answ. To answer this, though upon those forementioned considerations, it
cannot be denied but that death is a mercy to a Saint; yet those hinder not,
but that in other respects the continuance of life is a mercy, even to a godly
man. Chrysostom. in loc Theoph. in loc
As for that (...), which the Greek Fathers speak of, as if Saint Paul's
language were more according to custom than truth, and that when he calls
recovery a mercy, he rather speaks as men do account, than as it is indeed,
Chrisost. ibid. (...). Oecu. in Loc.

Phil. 1.24. Hieron. in loc.


it seems to me somewhat harsh, that to (...), the opportunity of gaining more
souls to God, which this preservation afforded him, is a far more rational
solution. Upon this account it was Saint Paul looked upon the prolongation of
his own life as needful: So he expresses it in the former Chapter. And here,
for the same reason, he calls the restoration of Epaphroditus to health a
mercy. To this purpose Saint Hieromes note upon the Text is very apposite,
Misertus est ejus ut majorem docendo colligat fructum, God had mercy on him,
that he, being a Minister, might by the preaching of the Gospel, gather in more
souls, and do more good.

Obj. But you will say, this seems not to be a full Answer: Indeed, had the
Apostle said, but God had mercy on you, namely the Philippians, this would be
very suitable; the recovery of a faithful Minister is, no doubt, a mercy to
the People; but still it remains a doubt, how the Apostle could say, as here
he does, God had mercy on him, to wit, Epaphroditus.

Repl. To which I reply, That the opportunity of this service was not only a
benefit to the Church, but a mercy to him, in as much as by this means.

1. He became a greater instrument of Gods glory; It is an high honor,
Considerandum est non esse parvam dignatione^ quum se Deus in nobis glorificat.
Calv. in lo.
which God vouchsafes to that man, whom he makes use of to serve and honor
him; and to a pious soul nothing is dearer than Gods glory, desiring rather to
glorify God than to be glorified with him: this Saint Paul declares to his
hope, yea, his earnest expectation, that Christ might be magnifyed in his body
whether by life or death. No wonder then, if considering how much Epaphroditus
his life might conduce to Gods glory, Phil. 1.20.
he reckoned it as a mercy. Besides,

Qui Christo vivunt, salicit^r in spem gloriae coelest^s exercentur. Calv.
ibid. Dan. 12.2.
2. He increased his own reward; the longer a good man, especially a goood
Minister lives, the more sinners he converteth, and they that turn many to
righteousness, says Daniel, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever,
nay, every soul that a faithful Minister winnes to God, is as a new gemme
added to that Crown, which shall one day be put upon his head.

Thus then the case stands; Epaphroditus indeed, by dying, had received his
reward, but by living he did the more service; by dying he had obtained glory
from God, but by living he brought glory to God: Act. 20.35.
and our blessed Savior says, It is a more blessed thing to give than to
receive; by dying he had enjoyed his recompense sooner, by living he made it
greater, that would have accelerated, but this augmented it, so that even in
respect of his own future happiness he was no loser but a gainer by the
prolonging of his life, and therefore most justly does Saint Paul say, God had
mercy on him.

Briefly, and yet clearly to state the whole matter.

Life and death may be considered and compared four ways,

1. In their formal nature, and so death is a privation, life a position of
good; and therefore death evil, and life good,

2. In their Causes, death is a fruit of sin, life an effect of love; our
wickedness deserved the one, Gods goodness conferreth the other; in which
respect, death is threatened as a punishment, life promised as a reward.

3. In their natural and proper effects, death bereaveth as well godly, as
wicked men of the society of friends, possession of their estates, yea, all the
comforts which this world affords, whereas by life we have the fruition of them
continued to us, so that in this regard also, life is far better than death,
even to a good man.

4. Lastly, in their accidental consequents, when a wicked man dies there
follows torment, but whilst he lives there is hope of his repentance, yea,
many times it so falls out, some come into the Vineyard at the eleaventh hour,
and to such life is a choice mercy indeed: when a godly man dies he is carried
into Abraham's bosom, placed in a state of bliss; but by living longer he
honors God, edifieth the Church, works out his salvation; he gains both
the more time to prepare himself for, get assurance of, yea, make an addition
to his future glory, and therefore in this likewise, and so in all comparisons
life has the pre-eminence, and the continuance of it is justly called by the
Apostle a mercy.

To close up this, life continued, health restored, are mercies; Qui^ hoc
credere queat, mutamus naturam rerum iniquitatibus nostris, etc. Salv. de Gub.
l. 6. Paris. de Universo prim. part pars tertia. c. 9. Petrarch dial. de valet.
corp. Est perniciosa s^nitas qu^ ad inobedientiam ducit.

Bern. de interdom.


oh let not us by abusing them to sin turn them into judgment, who can
believe it? and yet we may often see it, men change blessings into curses by
their iniquities, and as Parisiensis excellently expresses it, Ipsa beneficia
sibi faciunt poenalia and instrumenta contra seipsos divinae justitiae, They
make benefits to become punishments, and the fruits of Gods mercy instruments
of his justice. The truth is, it was not so much life as the right use, Saint
Paul conceived Epaphroditus would make of his life, which moved him to call it
a mercy, Multis periculo and pestilens sanitas fuit qui tutius aegrotassent:
Indeed these things are good or evil to us according as we employ them. It had
been a greater mercy to many impenitent sinners that they had continued sick,
or dyed, then that they were recovered. Let us therefore lay out our life, our
health, according to our several places, in Gods service, so shall it prove
glory to God, benefit to others, and a mercy to us: Oh my soul, thou have
received, as it were, a new life, improve it in new obedience; health is
restored to thy body, employ it in the service of thy God: why should thy honey
be turned into gall, thy shield into a sword, thy delicates into poison? Oh let
thy life be expended by thee, as it was intended by God; so shall thou have
cause to take up the Apostles language; God had mercy on me. And thus much
shall suffice for the second particular, I hasten to the

3. Opportunity of the time, which is the last branch employed in the ex^eptive
But. And a comfortable But it is; indeed, the sickness, like a flood was
carrying him away, God puts in a But and stops its current; Epaphroditus was
falling into the pit, But* God reaches forth an hand to uphold him. God does
not so preserve him that the sickness should not come, nay, when it is come he
does not hinder it from increasing, but when it is come to the height, then he
rebukes the disease, and says, hitherto thou shall come and no further. All
hopes of his recovery in man's eyes are perished, and lo, he is raised by the
hand of God. Means either are not afforded, or however unable to help. God
becomes his Physician, and commands the cure. It lets us see thus much, that

Jo. 5.7. En horam tuam domine, ades enim deus cui homo deest. Velasq. in Phil.

Herodes g^ntis judai^ae invasit regnum, libertatem sustulit, prophanavit
s^ncta; quicquid cultu^ est, abolevit, merito ergo genti sanc^ae quia ^umana
desunt, divina succurrant.

Chrisol. sermon. 116.


When all hopes are livelesse, and helps seem fruitless, then is the season of
Gods deliverance. That child's condition is very sad, whom the father and mother
forsake; but then the Psalmist finds God ready to take him up: And the causall
particle in the Original is very considerable, not only when, but because he
was as a forsaken babe, God vouchsafes to protect and provide for him; our
extremity being not only the opportunity when, but a motive why God will
deliver. It was a doleful complaint which the poor Creeple made to Christ,
(...), I have not a man to put me into the poole, but even that narration is an
efficacious prayer; The absence of man's help, being the season of Christ's
presence and succor. Saint Paul speaking of our blessed Saviors Incarnation,
says, it was when the fullness of time came; if you will know when that full
time was, the Evangelist answers, it was in the days of Herod the King: and
if with Chrysologus you look into those days, you shall find them days of
extreme misery to the Jewis^ Nation, their Temple profaned, Liberty
suppressed, Worship abolished, and the whole State full of confusion. In those
days was the fullness, because indeed the fitness of time come for him, who
was the Redeemer, to appear* and the horn of salvation to be raised up. In
which respect the Messiah is called by Moses a fit man, or according to the
Original, a man of opportunity. Thy way oh God is in the sea, and thy paths in
the great waters, Psalm. 77.19.
says the Psalmist. By which expressions no doubt he chiefly intends (as
appears by what follows) to note the imperceptible secrecy attending upon
many of Gods dispensations, so that we can no more discern the reason of them,
than we can any impression of a ships passage in the Sea, but yet withal it is
not an improbable allusion to understand Sea and great waters representing
doleful and perilous distresses: Gods usual course being to manifest himself
not in the shallow river of a slight trouble, but the deep sea of some
desperate calamity. The Disciples enter into a ship, but Christ come not, the
sable mantle of the night covers them, and Christ comes not, the wind
blows, the storm rages, the waves arise, and yet Christ appears not, but
when they have rowed 25. or 30. furlongs, Ioh. 6.19. (...). Cy. Alex. in Joh.
being far from land, and in the depth of danger, then they see Jesus walking
on the Sea, and drawing nigh to the ship to succor them. To this purpose is S.
Cyrills observation upon this story, Christ does not presently at the
beginning of the storm appear to his Disciples, but when they had rowed far
from land. Christ is not always at hand upon the first onset, but when through
prevailing fear, and almost overwhelming danger, our spirits begin to fail,
then he breaks forth as it were in the midst of the waves, calming the storm,
expelling our fear, and preventing our ruin.

It is very observable in that hundred and seventh Psalm, when the Prophet
celebrateth Gods goodness to several sorts of men in their dangers, that
their deliverance was not vouchsafed till their danger appeared remediless: of
travelers it is said, they wandered so long in the wilderness, Psalm. 107.3, 4,
5.

(...). Greg. Nyss. Tract in Ps.


till by reason of hunger and thirst their soul fainted in them, and then, not
till then upon their crying the Lord delivered them; The Captives are said to
sit in darkness and the shadow of death, by reason of their b^nds, yea, to
fall down and none to help them, and then this want of help obtains help, at
their earnest cry God saves them out of their distress; when sick, men are
brought so low that their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw
nigh to the gates of death, then God sends his Word and heals them: ver.
10, 12, 13. ver. 1^, 20.
finally, the Seamans soul is melted because of trouble, they reele to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man; yea, are at their wits end, Ver. 26.27,
28, 29.
not knowing what course to take, ere God begins to make the storm a calm,
and so brings them out of their distress. Thus God, as he can, so usually he
does help at a pinch, when Jacob wants bread at home, Joseph is heard of
abroad: when the Prodigal wants abroad, he is minded of going home; and when
we look with David on the right hand, Psalm 142.^4.
and there is no man, yea, on the left hand, nay round about us, and all refuge
fails us, Restat iter coelo, we may look up to God, and God is ready to
look down from heaven and help us.

And now if you shall inquire why God is pleased to cull out such a time of
succor, when in extreme peril, of curing, when sick nigh to death: I answer,
it is both in reference to himself and us.

In regard of himself,

1. Partly that it may appear to be his work, Those effects in the production
of which, God is as it were causa socia a copartner, making use of probable
means, too often the instrument is more looked upon than God* but those
effects wherein he is causa solitaria, the sole agent (effecting them as it
were by his own hand) enforce men to acknowledge it is his doing. Velasq. in
Phil. Permittit deu^ crescere pericula ut periclitan^ium merita augeantur:
extreme autem periclitantibus opem f^rt ut suam pot^ntiam demonstret. Mend in
lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2. n. 6.

Psalm 17.7. (...). Sept. Mirifica misericordia^ tu^^. Vulg.


Quando humana omnem spem negant, tune divina dispensatio clare fulget, In the
daytime, when other stars appear not, we know the light which shines is
only from the Sun; so when secundary means succeed not to whom but God can
the patient ascribe his recovery? and for this reason, ne opus coelestis
dextrae assignaretur virtuti humanae, that the creature may not rob him of his
glory, he chooses that time to deliver when the creature can afford no succor.

2. Chiefly, that in such works he may appear to be a God, in as much as his
Almighty power and mercy, hereby become illustrious: it is the prayer of David,
show thy mevailous loving kindness; the Septuagint and vulgar (agreeing in
this with the Hebrew) render it, make thy mercyes wonderful, and surely when
our misery is most doleful, Gods mercy is most wonderful, and therefore,
says Saint Gregory, we most admire Gods benignity, when we call to mind our
calamity: Tunc nol is m^^sericordiae dei mirifica^tur cum nobis ad memoriam
miseriae nostrae revocantur. G^eg hom. 18. in Ezech.

N^h^l extat quod Dei pot^ntiam vincat, nih^l quod omnipotenti illi nutui
obsistere v^leat. Sophr. Arch. hom. in Bible pat.

(...). Greg. Naz. Orat 32. Isa. 52.7. Te^tul. contra. Mar. l. 5. c 2. Psalm
4.5.3. Isa. 30.18. (...)


indeed God brings us nigh to death, that we may know our selves how frail
and mortal we are, that he may know us, or rather make known to us and others
our graces, and when we are nigh to death he has mercy, that we may know him,
not only speculatively, but experimentally, how great and mighty, how good and
gracious he is: The truth is, Omnipotenti medico, nullum vulnus insanabile, No
wound is incurable to this omnipotent Physician: and that he may appear to be
so, he often deferreth the cure till humane skill and help fails. In such
deliverances, the characters of Gods almighty goodness are plainly written so,
that the blind Egyptians can read them; and therefore seeing the Israelites
escape an imminent danger they acknowledge the Lord fights for them.

In respect of us, that the deliverance may be the more acceptable to us, as
well as honorable to him, To every thing, says Solomon, there is a season,
and indeed it is the season that puts a beauty upon every thing; in this
regard, that of the Prophet quam speciosi, how beautiful are the feeet of him
that brings good tidings, is rendered by Tetullian, quam tempestivi, how
opportune, that which is seasonable being ever beautiful; indeed in every
opportune mercy there is a double beauty, the one in the thing conferred, the
other in the time of conferring it. It is the prayer of the Church to God, Gird
thy sword upon thy thigh with thy glory and thy majesty, which latter words
the vulgar latin reads cum specie tua and pulchritudine tua, that is to say,
with thy beauty and thy beauty: and this is then most fully verified, when God
girds his sword to defend his Church in her lowest misery, and offend his
enemies in their highest insolency. It is a sweet and choice expression of the
Prophet, The Lord will wait that he may be gracious, which though it be chiefly
intended of his forbearing judgment, yet it is no less true of his
withholding mercy: God therefore often times delaying, that he may appear the
more gracious in bestowing deliverance; so true is that of the Father, Deus cum
differt non negat sed commendat dona, God in suspending intends not to deny,
but only to commend his mercy. Abraham's child was more welcome at seaventy,
than if he had been given at thirty, and the same Isaac had not been so
precious, (...). Cyr. Alex. in Joh. 6.19.
had he not been as miraculously restored as given. In fine, the language of a
depopulating war is the best rhetoric to extol the blessing of peace, how
welcome is a calm to the Mariner after a blustering storm? and health is
never so amiable, as when it brings letters of commendation from a long and
dangerous sickness.

To apply this, It is a meditation which should encourage us, to trust in God,
even when things are at the worst, and though all other succors fail, not to
let go our hold of him: As Appelles striving to paint a drop of foam falling
from a Horses mouth, after long study, despairing, let his pencill fall, and
that fall did it, Erasm. fimil.
Quod assequi non potuit casus expressit, effecting by chance what he could not
by art, and when both nature and art can go no further, divine providence
undertaketh, nay, effects the work, and therefore, as the Apostle says of
joy, I say of hope, Phil. 3 1. Flor. l 4. c. 8.
hope always in the Lord, indeed, magnae indolis est sperare semper, it is an
argument of an heroic mind, to hope always, and of a pious mind to place
that hope on God; David says of himself, Just^s s^mper sperat and in adversit
positus and fre^^^^ibus afflictu^ ^rumni^ d^spera^c^o^ ^ovit*

Ambr. in Ps. 118. oct. 19. (...). etc. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 117.


I have hoped in thy word, the Septuagint read it (...), and the vulgar Latin
accordingly super-speravi, which as S. Ambrose interprets it, is ad sperandum
semper crescere and spem spei adjungere, to add hope to hope, and that even
then when affliction is added to affliction: Excellent to this purpose is that
counsel of the Greek Father, When external means are least, let thy
confidence be greatest, for then God displayeth his power most, not at the
beginning, but when things are desperate, for this is the season of divine
help. It is our great fault that in dismal dangers we open the eye of sense,
and only pore upon the extremity of the trouble, whereas it becomes a Saint,
even then to open the eye of faith, and lo^ke upon the energy of Gods power.

And to carry it one step further, Let even the depth of misery be an
encouragement to our confidence, in as much as that is a time of deliverance:
when the night is at the darkest, we know daybreak is nearest, the lowness of
the ebb argues the flowing in of the tide to be at hand: so may we conclude
divine succor approaching from the premises of a grievous calamity
encompassing. ^zek. 1.16.
We read in the vision of the wheel, which Ezekiel (...) laid him by the rivers
brinke with no other shelter but an arc of bulrushes: Quid mirabilius
^^ll^inger^ po^uit illa, quae cum dolor^ pnerum ^xposucrat, nunc cum gaudio cum
recipit. Fer. Com. Exodus 2 8. Exodus 14 21. Aquae quae timebantur dextr^ laevaque
famulis dei murus eff^ctae, non solum perniciem nesciunt, sed and munimen
exhibent. Orig. hom. in Exodus

Patien^er susti^uit abs^rb^ri Jonam a ceto non ut absorberetur and in totum
periret, sed ut evomitus magis, subigeretur Deo, and plus glorificaret deum qui
i^sperabilem salutem ei d^^^ss^^. ^raen. adv. haer. l. 3 c* 22.

O martyrium and sine passione perfectum, satis p^ssi satis exusti sunt, quos
propt^rea D^us texit, ne potestatem ejus ^en^^ri vid^rentu^ Tertul. Scorp. cap.
8. Venit Leo and l. b^ravit leonem ^b or^ l^onis: Rab. in Lap. super loc.
(...). Chrysostom. in Act. Quod genus morbi and naturae vires attinet prorsus esset
moriturus nisi singulari dei consilio servaretur. Musc. in loc.

Solo jussu salu^e reddidit qui voluntate omnia creavit. Greg. Mag. in Evan.
hom. 28.

Post certamina desperata medicorum post medicami^a sumptu^sa, post inanem and
e^tiquissima^ curam ubi ars et peritia dese ^rat jam curantum ubi languentis
omnis jam consumpta fucrat substamia ipsi authori reverendum vulnus non casu
sea divinitus occurrit, ut quod humana art tot annis curari n^n potuit, sola
fide and humilitate cura retur. Chrysol. Sermon. 33. Videtis quemadmodum dat
locum morti, licentiam dat sepulchro, corruptioni posse permi^tit, negat nil
put edini, nil foe^tori: atque ut Tartarus vapiat, trah^t, ^abeat, admittit,
atque agit, ut hum^^a spes tota pe eat, et tota vis mun lanae d^speration^s
accedat, quatenus qu^d facturus est divinum (...), non humanum. Chrysol. sermon.
63.

1 Samuel 20.3. June the 10. my disease was at the highest.


how likely is this helpless Babe to be starved with cold, or tumble into the
river, or be devoured with a wild beast? But behold, whilst the child is in
this imminent danger, and the parents in perplexing fear, providence so
orders it, that Pharaoh's daughter becomes as a mother to the child, and the
childs mother is appointed to be his nurse, whereby his life is preserved.

How nigh in all probability was the Israelites destruction, when before them a
Sea, through which there could be no wading, on either side mountains, over
which there was no climbing, behind them a mighty host, with whom there is no
contesting, and yet from whom no means left of escaping. But lo, in this
depth of misery God has mercy on them, even to a miracle; the sea divides,
and at once becomes the Israelites passage, and Egyptians grave.

How small did the distance seem between Jonah and death, when the merciful
mariners were enforced for saving their own lives to cast him into the
merciless Sea, and yet there he sinketh not, a divine hand as it were holding
him by the chinne, when in the Sea swallowed by a greedy Whale, and there he
dies not; God would not deliver him from the tempest, he will from the Whale;
that which was most likely to consume him becomes the means to preserve him,
within three days the Whale delivers him safe, whole, and alive upon dry
ground.

Who ever thought to have seen those three worthies alive after they fell
down bound into the midst of a fiery burning furnace? But behold a martyrdom
effected without dying, whilst a fourth like the Son of God appears, at
whose command the fire forgets to burn, or so much as scorch.

Who did not expect but that Daniel being cast into a den of ravenous Lions,
should be devoured before the next morning, nay, the next hour? But see, the
Lions mouths are stopped by an Angel, and since they cannot feed Daniel, are
forced to keep a fast with him.

Were not Paul and his company in great jeopardy of death, when the thick
clouds had for many days obscured the light of Sun and Stars from them, the
violent storms exceedingly tossed the Ship, enforced them to cast out the
goods, yea, every moment they expect themselves to be made a prey to the roaring
waves, all hope that they should be saved being taken away? but behold, that
night an Angel of God stands by Paul, and from God assures him of his and
their preservation.

To come yet nearer to the instance of the Text:

It was no slight sickness afflicted David, when he said, My heart pants, my
strength fails me, as for the light of mine eyes it is gone from me; the
disease (it seems) had seized upon all his spirits, his animals in the
dimnesse of his eyes, his natural in the failing of his strength, his vital
in the panting of his heart; and surely then it must needs bring him very nigh
to death; yea, it seems David feared it, which made him so earnestly pray
against it in another Psalm: But when death is near, God is near too, hearing
his prayer, and preserving his life.

It is said of Hezekiah, that he was sick unto death, the disease was such that
he reckoned his bones should be broken, and an end made of him, yea, he
received a sentence of death from God by the Prophet, Set thine house in order,
for thou shall dye and not live: But that threat was only like Abraham's
precept, not a declaration of what God intended to do, but only a probation
to try what Hezekiah would do; and therefore notwithstanding the disease was
deadly, God becomes his Physician, prescribes a plaster of figgs, and
Hezekiah is healed.

The Centurions Son is visited with a Fever; that Fever brings him to the
very point of death, when as at the Centurions entreaty, Christ with a word
commands his recovery.

That woman's condition was desperate, when she was at once brought low in
estate and body: her goods are gone, her disease continues, the Physicians
have emptied her purse, but cannot stay her flux, nor is there any likelihood
but that this sickness will at length bring her to her grave. But her
deplorable state is a fit occasion for Christ to magnify his mercy, whilst by
a believing touch of his garment he makes her perfectly whole.

Finally, Martha sends Christ word that Lazarus is sick; Christ delayeth to
come, only lets her know this sickness should be for Gods glory: being sick
he dies, dying is buried, and having been some days buried he rotteth, nay
stinketh in the grave; and now is the time come for Christ by his powerful
voice to raise him from the sleep of death, and bed of the grave.

Lo here, more than a Jury of textuall witnesses, to which many more might be
added (besides this in the Text) all asserting this truth, and thereby assuring
our faith of Gods deliverance in the worst extremity. To all which give me
leave to add one more, even my own late experience of Gods marvailous
kindness vouchsafed to me.

It is not many weeks ago since it pleased the wise God to visit me with a
sore and violent Fever; that Fever so exhausted my spirits, and enervated my
body, that I might well take up David's expression, There was but a step
between me and death: Much about that time when the days of the year are at
the longest, the days of my life seemed to be at the shortest. Thus was the
first part of this Text verified, I was sick nigh to death, indeed so nigh,
that I was as a dead man in the opinion of the learned, yea, actually dead and
buried in the report of the vulgar, and truly I had ere this been not only
four days with Lazarus, but more than four weeks putrefying in the grave, had
not divine goodness prevented: But God had mercy on me, and so the other part
of my Text is likewise fulfilled: when the sickness had almost weighed me
down into the pit, God was pleased to put a grain of mercy and turn the
scale, so that I am here (beloved) this day, before God, Angels, and men, as a
bird escaped out of a strong snare, as a prey plucked out of the jaws of a
devouring Lion, as a brand snatched out of the fire of a burning fever.

What therefore remains, but that as in the beginning, so now in the close of
this discourse I take up a gratulation, Bless the Lord oh my soul, and let all
that is within me praise his holy name; Psalm. 103.1.137.5, 6.
when I forget to mention this deliverance, let my right hand forget its
cunning; when I cease (as opportunity offers it self) to publish this mercy,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; nor yet would I be ^^one, in
this work of praise; do you (all you here present) join with me. I doubt not
but many, the most, nay all of you in some kind, at some time or other, have
had experience of eminent deliverances: oh call them now to mind, and let your
grateful remembrance come up as a memorial before the Lord: I doubt not but
many of you, yea, very many, did put up prayers, fervent prayers at the throne
of grace for this mercy (which I now celebrate) my recovery. Indeed brethren, I
look upon my health, as S. Paul on his preservation, as a gift bestowed on me
by the means (to wit, 2 Cor. 1.11.
for the sakes and prayers) of many; and surely as prayers have been made, so
fit it is thanksgiving should be returned by many on my behalf, it were a
shame to be zealous in begging and cold in blessing; to cry aloud give us our
daily bread, and only whisper hallowed be thy name. Blessed therefore be the
Lord God of his unworthy servant, who alone does wondrous things; Psalm. 72.18,
19.
yea, blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let all that have been
petitioners for me say with me at least in their hearts, Amen, Amen.

And now my Dearly beloved Parishioners, and friends in the Lord, what is my
desire, but that you may have cause in allusion to the following words of this
verse, to say, God had mercy, no^ on him only, but us also; that my
preservation may be for your edification, as well for my consolation: that you,
who have already found benefit by my weak Ministry, may be more strengthened;
and those, who have heretofore been unprofitable, may now be bettered. Which
that it may be so, it shall be my endeavor* let it be your prayer for me, that
I may do this work of Christ more diligently and faithfully than ever; it
shall be my prayer for you, let it be your endeavor to hear the Word of
Christ more attentively and obediently for the time to come. So shall you have
cause to bless God for me, and I to bless God for you. Yea at that last and
great day you shall have joy in me, if my preaching become a means of your
conversion and salvation; and I shall have joy in you, whose conversion and
salvation shall prove an increase of my reward, and an addition to my glory.
Which God grant, etc.

FINIS.

