THE Commons Petition OF Long Afflicted England, TO THE CHIEF CHANCELLOR OF
HEAVEN, AND ONLY IVDGE OF EARTH.

With His Gracious answer thereto.

Published by C. I. for the Benefit of all True affected CHRISTIANS.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

The humble Petition of the poor distressed Commons of long afflicted ENGLAND.
IF bleeding souls, dejected hearts, find grace,
Thou all-disposer, turn not back thy face
From us thy Supplicants, thrice 3 Suns have worn
Their Summer suits, since we began to mourn:
Egypts ten plagues we have endured thrice told,
Since blessed Eliza was with Saints enrold.
Thy Messengers of wrath their viols power
Each day upon our heads, nay every hour
Plagues beget plagues, and fruitful vengeance grows,
As if there were no end set to our woes.
Have our black sins, good God, raised such a cloud
Twixt us and heaven, that cries, though nere so loud,
Can get no passage to thy mercy Seat?
Are our iniquities good God, so great,
So infinite, as neither groans nor tears
Can entrance get? Remember but the years
Of our afflictions: then forget, we crave,
Our sins, and bury them in deepest grave
Of dark oblivion, hide them in the side
Of our Redeemer; O let them be ty'de
In chains, that they may never rise again,
Let us no longer sue and cry in vain:
Let these our supplications; this complaint,
Tenderd by our late Sovereign, now thy Saint,
At last find grace: was it not we humbly pray,
Enough at first thou tookst that Queen away?
Was not that Dove, that Lamb of innocence,
Sufficient sacrifice for our offense?
Oh no, our sins out-^^'d her, and our crimes
Did threaten to outlive the last of times.
Thou did remove her, that she might not see
The sad beginnings of our misery.
Had Egypt thicker darkness then had we
When clearest eyes at midday could not see?
Unwholesome mists, strange fogges, rumors of wars,
Evil portending Comets, blazing stars,
Prodigious births and most unnatural seasons,
Spurning Philosophers quite beyond their reasons.
Frightiug the silly poor, the rich dehorting,
To leave their downy beds where they lay snorting.
Heaven in combust on seems, the sky in Arms,
The stars beat Drums, the sky does sound Alarms,
The air has often bloody colors spread,
And all to rouse us from the lazy bed
Of base security, yet naught will fright us,
Till we were robbed of that did most delight us,
Henry our joy: Henry whose every limb
Thteatned to conquer death, and not death him.
Henry our pride, yea even Henry the blessed,
In whom great Britain set up all her rest.
Who had not in that one an ample share?
What subject had not rather lost his heir?
What tender mother did not wish that Dart
Had glanced from him, and struck her darlings heart?
All they which virtuous were, all which were good,
Turned their watery eyes to streams of blood.
But needs must thine anointed leave the City
Before it be destroyed, such is thy pity,
And such thy goodness: Are there yet full ten
Is there good Lord, a number-lesse of men,
Whose innocence may slack thy kindled ire,
And keep this Sodom-Britaine from the fire.
Of thy just ones, is there not yet a sonle
Whose uprightness has power to control
Thy heav'd-up-hand of justice? if there be,
For his or her sake cause thy clemency
To waken mercy, let thy justice slumber,
And fave the greater for thy lesser number.
For his or her sake, we do humbly pray,
Respite of time give us a longer day,
And then enabled by your grace and favor,
Weel purchase pardon by our good endeavor.
Plague famine, darkness, inundations,
Wars we have endured, and Innovations,
With evpectation of the worst can follow
By Popish Prelates, that have hearts most hollow,
Their Plots discovered, even with fear and horror,
Makes us to sleep with care, and wake with terror.
Nor are we all this while from venom free,
The Catterpillar hangs on every Tree.
Lousy Promooters, Monopoly-mongers.
A crew of upstart Rascals, whose feirce hungers
Can nere be satisfied, a sort of slaves,
Far more unsatiate then are Whores or Graves,
And do more mischief then Egyptian flies,
That with their buzzing, blind the peoples eyes;
Yet at the last, God has us comfort sent
In the bright Sunshine of our Parliament,
Which may dispell the misty foggs of error,
And turn our clowdy day into fair weather.
The last Petition we most humbly crave,
Is; They one heart one mind may have.
A GRACIOUS ANSWER from our Blessed Mediator, etc.
YOur bold Petitions, Mortals I have seen,
And find it full of passion, full of spleen:
Prayers that enter heaven, and gain a hearing,
Are winged with Charity: heers no appearing
With supplications fraught with ire, or gall:
I do confess (poor souls) the truth of all,
And wish a period to your miseries,
But first your infinie iniquities
Must have an end: Alas you must begin
To love fair Virtue, as you have done sin,
You must redeem what is lost, and know,
As heaven has ever been to vengeance slow,
So by degrees is grace and mercy won,
Eyes that be full with gazing at the Sun,
Increase their grief: If you would mercy gain,
From unjust actions, you must then refrain:
How dares a wretched servant once require
From his just Master either grace or hire;
You must put off the shoes, with which you troad
The way of sin, ere you discourse with God.
Give me but ground for Comme^^^^ions,
Encouragement, and then your supplications
I shall receive: I left you rich, it is true,
And proud withal; You feared none, all feared you:
You were so far from fear, that you denide
To pay him fear, that gave you cause of pride:
You must be humbled, heaven ever punished yet
All kind of Rankness with an opposite:
He that will surfit ere he gain his health,
Must strictly fast. Had you sat still in wealth,
You never would have bowed your stubborn knee
Unto your great Creator, heaven or me.
I will not grieve your troubled souls too much,
Yet gently your ingratitudes i will touch,
And that you may the better know your errors,
I shall unto your memory call favors.
By you forgot, unthankfully forgotten,
My favors by you burried are, and rotten:
It is no ostentation to relate
Courtisies done to such as are ingrate;
I found you humbled like a scatterd flock,
Your very souls beaten against the Rock
Of Ignorance and Superstition,
Just in the way to follow to perdition,
I paid the shepherd, and the Pilot too,
And got nor Lamb, nor flock, nor fleece more then my due;
Where I never exacted from the common store,
Though all alike were Rich, alike were poor
For mine and thine, they are such things,
As scarsly known twixt Subjects and their Kings.
Princes like the Sun, should from the floods exhale
The wealth they raise: then in a shower let fall
In every place, as they see cause, a share,
And not consume them in the worthless air;
Their full Exchequers should like Conduits be,
Open to all, but to the poor most free.
And subjects should, like fields, be full of springs,
That naturally still fall toward their Kings.
The Commonwealth should always be in motion,
Seas flow to brooks, and brooks should fall to the ocean
Such Royal and such loyal community,
Keep Kings and subjects still in unity.
I cannot say I grieve, this place is free
From passion, as from iniquity.
But yet I must, since Scotland with it join,
Englands Exchequer is no better coin.
Sure there is false play, I fear the younger brother
Is grown too wise, too crafty for the other.
It is an ill made marriage where the Bride
Spends faster then the husband can provide.
Princes are Gods on earth, and subjects eyes
Upon their actions must not stand like spies.
It is a dangerous and ungodly thing
To pry into the Chamber of a King.
The Arc of State is sanctified, and must
Be only touched by such are put in trust.
But you expect an auswer to your petition;
Then know, poor souls, it is given me in commission
From heavens great King, to tell you all that's past
To what is to come, is but a spark or blast.
Your sorrows yet (alas) like women's throws,
Do go and come: but there must follow woes
Ere England be delivered, it will make
Your very intrailes bleed, your souls to quake.
The days will come, when (...) men will(...)
And children wish they never had been borne.
The sword will eat what plague has over-split
And fire consume what famine has not ripped.
The Gospels Sun will lose his glorious light,
And ignorance as dark as blackest night,
Will spread her sable wings about this I Will,
And Babylons proud Whore once more defile
Albions white Clifts with her infectious breath,
Except I shield you that have conquered death.
Repent, forsake your sin, and stop my ire,
And save your Sodome-Britaine from the fire.
FINIS.

