THE IVRY OF INQVISITION DE JVRE DIVINO. Whether by Divine Right it is lawful
to inflict punishment upon the offending Lordly Bishops; yea, or no.
They who being within the Church, have offended against Faith and discipline;
let them know the rigor of Princes: and let the Princes power establish that
discipline, which the distressed Church is not able to execute upon the necks
of the proud, Says Isidorus in his book of Authority and care of Kings.

TO inflict punishment upon the offending Lordly Bishops is no unholy thing,
but is a thing both lawful, just, and right.

The Argument. Argument

TO inflict punishment upon evil doers is no unholy thing; But the troubers of
the Church and State are evil doers; therefore Lordly Bishops being troublers
of the Church and State; it must needs appear that they are evil doers.
Conclusiion
And so it must needs of consequence follow, that to inflict punishment upon
the offending Lordly Bishops it is no unholy thing, but lawful, just, and
right.

To prove that it is lawful to punish evil doers, Saint Peter says, Peter
2.13.14. And Saint Paul says, If thou do that which is evil be afraid, for
he bears not the sword in vain; for he is a minister of God, and a revenger
to execute wrath upon that man that does evil, Romans 13.4.

Jeremy says, that the Lord is against them that Prophecy false dreams, and
do tell them, and cause the people to err by their lies, and by their
lightness, as it is Jeremiah 23.32. And how have our Lordly Bishops and
Prelates prophesied false dreams, and endeavored to corrupt the Church with
errors; and by their lies and lightness troubled the whole land (nay, all the
Kings Dominions, from consideration whereof, Theodoretus, ^ooke 1. cap. ^0. The
office of Bishop.
that saying of Constantine is no more but justice, If the Bishops (says he)
move troubles, by my hand they shall be put ^i^^ed, for my hand is the hand of
Gods Minister.

The office of a Bishop is to teach the People truth; and to instruct them in
the ways of peace and love; Therefore our Lordly Bishops who have set up lies
and falsehoods in stead of Truths, and have moved troubles in stead of Peace
and Love? have much abused that holy office unto which they pretend they are
called.

^eason.
The Reason (why to inflict punishment upon the offending Lordly Bishops is no
unholy thing) is plain: Because the Lordly Bishops are movers of troubles in
the Church and State.

^ow they ^^ve trou^^ed the church.
I. They have been movers of troubles in the Church, both by their establishing
of Popish Ceremonies; and by their Lordly Government.

By their establishing of Popish Ceremonies; by binding the consciences Paul
warned the Colossians to take heed of, saying, beware least any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the would, and not after Christ. And Saint Ambrose says, that by
good right, Book of ^^gins.
we are to condemn all new things that Christ has not taught, even all such
things says he, are to be judged detestable, and to be defied.

Ezekiel speaks (saying) will ye pollute me among my people for handfulls of
barley, and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to
save the souls alive that should not live, Ezekiel 13.19. and as the Prophet
Malachy speaks, now we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness
are set up, Malachi, 3.15. In his 11^. Epist.
It is not long since we might have taken part with Saint Austin in his
lamentation, nay the time of comfort does now consist chiefly in hope; This
thing says he, does greeve me, that so many things wholesomely commanded in
the holy Scriptures, are not regarded, and that our times are full of so many
presumptions, that he has been more sharply punished which with his bare
feet has touched the earth in the octavas, then the drunkards, etc.

II. They have also been movers of troubles in the State, and that both with
our neighbor nations, and also among our selves.

By troubles with our neighbor nations; in so much that had not How they have
troubled the State.
our land ere this might have been a woeful desolation, with our streets full
of blood, and our fields full of dead unburied Carcasses, whilst we having
our Swords embrude in the blood of our neighboring united nation of Scotland,
and their swords also persed into our sides; all being the subjects of one
King: In the midst of this woeful tragidie, we might have been all
surprised by a foreign enemy; witness that great spanish fleet, with all
their munition, wives, and children: But ever blessed be our good God who has
preserved us.

By troubles amongst our selves, by compelling to ungodly, and unlawful

Excellent is that saying of Cyrill, we travill says he, 17. Epistle to
Theodosi^^
earnestly in this thing above the rest, that the Ecclesiastical estate may
remain sure, in such sort as is seemly for the glory of God, and fit for our
times, that it may continue in peace and tranquillity by common consent without
varience, that it may be quiet in Ecclesiastical matters, that godly religion
may be preserved, and that the life of such as are chosen into the Clergy and
Priesthood, may be clear from scandal.

Let us but consider what the issue of their proceedings might produce; should
they have gone on in bringing Popish ceremonies, The end of their seremonies.
superstition and Idolatry into the Church, as may appear by their jestures,
by their ornaments, and by their actions.

By their jestures, in their bowings, and adorations before the Altar, Jehovah,
all which is Idolaty and superstitious.

Jeremiah, Trust ye not in lying words saying; the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, are these, Ier. 7.4.

Mark 9.36. This indeed is the practice of that great Idol of Rome the Pope.
But oh that all our Lordly Bishops, and idle Prelates would call to mind that
saying of Saint Austin, (...) his 7. Homil.
O brethren most dear (says he) If the best of men at the last day of
Judgment shall scarce be able to give an account for themselves, what shall
become of our Idle Lordly Bishops, and dumb Prelates; at whose hands so many
souls shall then be required.

These superstitious ceremonies belong to Rome, that great whore of Babylon;
but our reformed Churches cannot digest them: It has been found recorded in
the ancient records of London remaining in Guild Hall, that when King Lucius
sent to Rome to Elutherius the Pope, to know the customs, laws and there
established; that so the same might be practiced here in England, he received
this answer: ye may says he reject the laws of Rome, but the laws of God can
ye not reject; ye have received says he, (through the Grace of God) the laws
of God and the Doctrine of the faith of Christ into your Kingdom; you have the
old and new Testament in your Realm; take out of them by the grace of God, and
advise of your selves a law, and by that law, through Gods sufferance rule your
Realm. But be you Gods Vicor in that Kingdom but blessed be the Lord who has
put it into the Kings heart so to do without sending to Rome, for should we
not have sent to Rome for laws of discipline, we should have found Elutherius
dead, and instead of his grave counsel, nothing but Idolaty and Superstition:
and if our Lordly Bishops had not such counsel from Rome, I wonder how they
met with all their Romish Ceremonies: But now happy is this our Kingdom since
our gracious King does now advise with his subjects in calling that honorable
and happy assembly of Parliament; to establish the laws of this our Realm,
according to the waves of God written in his holy word and that since the
Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, Iermiah 10.21. our
gracious King himself is the true Vicar of God, and maintayner of his holy
laws; allowing no laws in his Kingdom but the laws of God.

Yet albeit these profane Prelates, In his coment on Isay 13.13.
(as Calvin says) would turn and withdraw us from under this government, yet
will we hold our selves fast unto it, because we assuredly know our selves to
belong to it; and leave them to your Majesty's further consideration, and to
the high and Honorable assembly of Parliament.

FINIS.

