A COMPANION FOR The Persecuted: OR, An OFFICE for Those, Who Suffer for
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

CONTAINING Particular Prayers and Devotions, for Particular Graces, and for
their Private or Public Wants and Occasions.

Printed in the Year, 1693.

The Introduction.
Reader;
I Here present thee with Prayers and Devotions, fitted to support the spirits,
and to direct and improve the virtues, of those who at any time, or in any
place, are called out by the wisdom and goodness of God, to suffer for the
cause of Truth and Righteousness.

The Charitable helps and offers of this kind, are very needful, and will be
very acceptable, to those who are actually laboring under the Cross, and
bearing affliction for the blessed Jesus. And as for others, who think they
have no need thereof for themselves; yet may they at all times find occasion
enough, if they please, to pu^ up such Prayers for their persecuted Brethren
and Fellow Members. For the Church of Christ, is still bearing his Cross in one
part or other; and whilst in one place he is cherishing some with the comforts
of Peace, he is elsewhere proving others of their Brethren with Tribulations.
Nay, since these Trials are common to men, and more especially to Christians,
he who says at present that he is most free from them, knows not how soon the
All-wise God may see fit to bring him under the same. And it is good to be
fore-armed and provided for a sharp conflict, which we are liable to be tried
withal; and the rather, because in the heat thereof, when these helps are most
needed, they are usually hardest to be got, and it is not so easy then to put
them into the hands of those, who want to be directed and assisted by them.

Indeed, by the bounty and indulgence of Almighty God, the true Disciples of
Christ have here their intervals of rest and quietness, and are oft-times
comforted and refreshed with worldly peace, and the favor of Princes. But when
God gives them this outward ease, it is more than his Gospel promises. Their
profession, is to be followers of a man of sorrows, and to look for Crosses and
Persecutions in his service; and, when they come, to take them up, and bear
them patiently after him. So that it must neither be contrary to their spirit,
nor expectations, to hear of sufferings; and it should never be thought a
service out of season, to instruct them how to bear them, and to furnish them
with such Prayers and proper Reflections, as may afford them both direction, and
support therein.

The first care in this Case, is to see that their sufferings be for the Truths
sake, or for a good Cause. Without this, the hopes of sufferers are but a
Dream, and there is no true ground of comfort or support in them. If they
suffer only for their own follies, or fancies, what reason has their blessed
Lord to thank them, for being fanciful or foolish? Or, if they suffer for
maintaining dangerous Errors, and for turning out of the way of Truth and
Righteousness, these are not things for him to reward, but to punish. It Is only
their suffering for some Doctrines, or Precepts of his, that can render them
his Martyrs or Confessors: And when they take care to be found in that way, and
suffer for harkening unto him, he will support them whilst they suffer, and
afterward make them ample amends for the same.

But when they take care to be found in a Righteous Cause, they must be careful
withal to honor him, and approve themselves, by all the parts and virtues of a
Righteous and truly Christian Carriage. Their study then must be, to show minds
advanced above all earthly fears and desires, to support themselves with the
comforts of Religion, and the belief of Gods Promises, to bear their
Afflictions for Christ's sake with patience and thankfulness, to weary out
their persecutors fury with their Religious constancy, to vanquish all their
injuries by returning prayers and kindnesses; and in all things, to evidence a
spirit, that is full of love, and holy zeal, and humble confidence in God; but
that is not either to be corrupted by the ease and comforts, or shocked and
broken by the threats or losses of this world. And by these and such like
virtues, they will be made conformable to the image of their suffering Savior,
and perform a service most fragrant and pleasing unto him, and most honorable
to Truth and a Righteous Cause. For the world does not afford a more glorious
sight, than to see a Christian with Religious bravery and constancy bearing
Christ's Cross, and by magnanimity and meekness, triumphing over all the powers
of Error and unjust Violence.

These, indeed, are hard services. But as they have great difficulties, they
will at last have glorious Rewards, and at present have great assistances. The
Almighty Spirit of God will support those, who seriously and Religiously set
themselves to suffer Christianly in his Cause: They will be set above
themselves, and will be guarded and fortified against human weakness, by the
powers of the Divine Grace. And this, as they must humbly and firmly depend
upon, so must they constantly and earnestly seek from him, by Prayers and
Devotion.

In the following Offices, it has been my aim and study, to be as helpful to
them as I can for this purpose. And therein, according as I was able, I have
not only suggested the true comforts and supports; but directed their eye to
the true spirit, duty, and carriage of Gospel-sufferers. And have taught them
under the same, to express such resentments, and aspire after such raised
affections, as may become those, who would honor God, and secure their own
future happy reward by their sufferings, and who count it a privilege to be
thought worthy by the Blessed Jesus to suffer in his Cause. And on this
Account, this little Book may be put into the hands of the Persecuted, not only
as a Form of Devotion, to be put up to God in holy and fervent Prayers; but
likewise as a Treatise of Instruction, to be read for the Knowledge of their
Duty, and as a Guide to their Practice; since therein they have a draught and
delineation of that Spirit which they are to nurse up and show forth, and of
those habits and virtues wherein they are to dress up their souls at such times.

I have been very particular in the Devotional provisions and supplies for
these purposes, and have had regard both to private and public necessities.
Which pains, I hope will be acceptable to devout minds, who, when they are
desirous to express their devotion on those particulars, will not be
unfurnished with fitting Forms, and may at any time use more, or fewer thereof,
as their leisure permits, or as their needs require.

And to the Body of Prayers and Devotions, I have prefixed a Collection of
select Scriptures, upon the several Duties, and most important needs and
desires, of sufferers for Righteousness. And this I have done, for the
sufferers guidance and instruction, as well as for their devotion. For, besides
the kindling and quickening of devout affections, and the strengthening and
supporting of their spirits amidst their Heavy Trials, when they use them as
sacred Hymns, or as matter of their Religious Meditations: These Texts will
teach them the necessity, and help to show them the Nature and Offices of all
those respective Duties, which are as Lev. 2. 13.
the salt to the sacrifice, without which their own Oblation of themselves
would be insipid, Mar. 9. 49.
and their Losses for Christ's sake would neither gain his favor and
acceptance, nor effectually recommend and do Honor to his Cause. And both the
Scriptures collected, and the Prayers composed for these ends, are as follows.

An OFFICE for Sufferers for Righteousness under Persecutions.
Scriptures for those who suffer for Righteousness.
Psalm. 94. and Ps. 125. Heb. 12. to v. 18. 2 Cor. 1. to v. 13. Ps. 12. and Ps.
14. Is. 51. Heb. 10. v. 23. to end.
I. For Receiving Persecutions, as Chastisements for former Offenses.
WHen we suffer striving against sin, we are chasten'd and corrected of the
Lord, Heb. 12. 4, 5. 6. 9.

The time is come, that judgment must begin at the House of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17.

I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my Cause, and execute judgment for me, Mich. 7. 9.

O Israel! Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity, Hos. 14. 1.

Remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and
loath your selves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed,
Ezekiel. 20. 43.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works; or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, unless thou repent, Rev. 2. 5.

If the Fig Tree continues barren, the Lord will say to the Dresser of his
Vineyard, cut it down, Luke 13. 6, 7.

Without Repentance, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Matthew 21. 43.

II. For Receiving Persecutions, as Trials of our Obedience, and as they bring
upon us Losses for Righteousness.
1. To be received with Contentedness, and with Thankfulness.
If the world hate you, you know that it hated me, before it hated you.

Remember the word that I said unto you, the Servant is not greater than the
Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

If you were of the world, the world would love his own: but because you are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore does the
world hate you, Joh. 15. 18, 19, 20.

If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God on that behalf.

If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of
Glory, and of God, rests upon you.

Rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his
Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13,
14, 16.

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, and leap for joy, for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, Matthew. 5.
11. 12. Luke, 6. 23.

2. With free Confession of Christ and his Truths.
If ye suffer for Righteousness sake, sanctify the Lord God in your hearts.

And be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; and be ready always to
give an answer to every man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and reverence, 1 Pet. 3. 14. 15.

Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my
Father which is in Heaven.

But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny, before my Father
which is in Heaven, Mat. 10. 32, 33.

For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness; and with the mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10.

3. With Integrity and Prudent Caution.
And let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of
their souls unto him in well-doing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1
Pet. 4. 19.

Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17. 15.

Though all this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined out of thy way.

Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19.

Stand, having your loins girt about with Truth, and having on the breast plate
of Righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, Ephesians. 6. 14. 15.

Walk in wisdom toward those that are without, redeeming the time.

Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how
ye ought to answer every man, Col. 4. 5, 6.

See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise.

Redeeming the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.

Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councils.

And ye shall be brought before Governors, and Kings for my sake.

Behold! I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and harmless as doves, Mat. 10. 16, 17, 18.

4. With Steadfastness and Constancy.
Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,
Ephesians. 6. 10.

Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, Phil. 1. 27. 28.

Contend earnestly for the faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud.
3.

Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles
of the Devil.

That ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand,
Ephesians. 6. 11. 13.

Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith, without wavering, (for he is
faithful who has promised.)

Not forsaking* the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some
is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching, Heb. 10. 23. 25.

And now, Lord! behold their threatenings; and grant unto thy servants, that
with all boldness they may speak thy word, Act. 4. 29.

5. With Faith.
1.
Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God.

Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6. 13. 16.

Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward, Heb. 10. 35. 38.

Look unto Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God,
Heb. 12. 2.

It is a faithful saying, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him,
2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.

Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory.

While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are
not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.

2.
And fear not them which kill the body. For not a sparrow shall fall on the
ground, without your Father.

Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

But the very hairs of your head are all numbered, Mat. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31.

When ye do well, and suffer for it, hereunto were ye called, 1 Pet. z. 20, 21.

It falls to none to be conformed to the image of his Son in sufferings, but to
them, who are called thereto, according to his purpose, Romans 9. 28, 29.

Whilst God continues his hedge about them, Satan cannot touch them, Job. 1. 10.

When he brings them under heaviness, through manifold temptations, it is only for
a season, and if need be, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

When he permits their Persecutors, to give them some trouble, the remainder of
wrath shall he restrain, Psalm. 76. 10.

God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

He is a very present help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1.

From him we shall obtain mercy, and find grace to help, in the (...).
most sitting season, Heb. 4. 16.

My Grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2
Cor. 12. 9.

And since what they suffer, is only according to the will of God, let them
that suffer, commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19.

6. With Trust in God.
The fear of man brings a snare; but who so puteth his Trust in the Lord,
shall be safe, Prove. 29. 25.

Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee, Is. 26. 3.

Blessed is the man, that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is,
Jer. 17. 7.

For he is a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble, Psalm. 9. 9.

He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth, he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire, Psalm. 46. 9.

Some trust in chariots, some in horses; but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God will we set up
our banners, Psalm. 20. 5, 7.

It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man.

It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm.
118. 8, 9.

Our Fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, Ps. 22. 4.

Thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee, Psalm. 9. 10.

He shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in
him, Psalm. 37. 40.

He will arise and have mercy upon Sion, when the time to favor her, yea, the
set-time is come, Ps. 102. 13.

I the Lord will hasten it in its time, Is. 60. 22.

But if you will not believe, surely you shall not be established, Isa. 7. 9.

And he that believes shall not make have, Isa. 28. 16.

7. Against Trusting more in other things, than in God, and fixing too much on
Earthly Dependances.
There is no King saved, by the multitude of an host; a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength.

An horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength, Ps. 33. 16, 17.

Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel, Jer. 3. 23.

Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be
laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Ps. 62. 9.

Cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of? Is. 2. 22.

Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.

His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day all his
thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 3. 4.

Cursed be the man, who trusts in man, says the Lord, and makes flesh his
arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord.

For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land,
and not inhabited, Jer. 17. 5, 6.

But blessed is the man, that makes the Lord his trust, and respects not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40. 4.

Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery, Psalm. 62. 10.

Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding, Prove. 3. 5.

For there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor council against the Lord, Prove.
21. 30.

Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
that walks in darkness and has no light? let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God.

Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks:
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This
shall ye have of my hand, you shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 10, 11.

8. With Patience.
Endure hardship, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3.

If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, Prove. 24. 10.

Wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee, Prove. 20. 22.

He that believes will not make have, Isa. 28. 16.

It is a good thing, that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3. 26.

Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise.

For yet a little while, 1 Pet. 5. 10.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 36, 37.

The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the
righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity, Ps. 125. 3.

Behold! the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain.

Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh.

Take, my Brethren, the Prophets for an example, of suffering affliction, and
of patience.

Behold! We count them happy which endure. You have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy, Jam. 5. 7, 8, 10, 11.

In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke 21. 19.

For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, shall find it, Mat. 16. 25.

Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due time we shall reap if we faint
not, Gal. 6. 9.

Consider him, that endured such contradiction of sinners, lest ye be weary,
and faint in your minds, Heb. 12. 2.

He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth,
Isa. 42. 4.

Because iniquity of persecutors shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.

But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved, Mat. 24. 12,
13.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10.

Here is the patience, and faith of the Saints, Rev. 13. 10.

9. With Prayer and unwearied Devotion.
Be patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer, Romans 12. 12.

Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may able to stand in the evil
day.

Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints, Ephesians. 6. 13.
18.

Is any among you afflicted? let him pray, Jam. 5. 13.

For my love they are my adversaries; but I will give my self unto prayer,
Psalm. 109. 4.

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith, without wavering.

Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is;
but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as you see the day
approaching, Heb. 10. 23, 25.

10. With Charity toward Persecutors.
1.
When ye suffer for well-doing, take it patiently; for this is acceptable with
God, 1 Pet. 2. 20.

And be ready to give an answer to every man that sees you suffer, and asks
a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Bless those that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
that despitefully use you and persecute you.

That you may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven, who does good
to the just and unjust, Mat. 5. 44, 45.

Moreover, Hereunto are ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example that we should follow his steps.

Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23.

He was oppressed, and brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, yet he opened not
his mouth, Isa. 53. 7.

When they Crucified him, then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do, Luke 23. 34.

They stoned Stephen, and he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord!
lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7. 59. 60.

Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we
entreat or intercede for our defamers, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.

2.
Let not thy heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the
day long.

For surely there is an end, and thy expectation shall not be cut off, Prove.
23. 17, 18.

Fret not thy self because of evil men, neither be thou envious against the
wicked.

For there shall be no reward to the evil man, the candle of the wicked shall
be put out, Prove. 24. 19, 20.

Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad when he
stumbleth.

Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from
him to thee, Prove. 24. 17, 18.

Charity suffers long, charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up.

Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks or imputes no evil.

Rejoices not in iniquity, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things.

And though I give my body to be burned, and have not this charity, it
profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Bless them which persecute you; bless, and curse not.

Recompense to no man evil for evil.

Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath; for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink.

Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12. 14, 17, 19, 20,
21.

11. With Charity toward the Persecuted.
1.
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of my People, Isa. 22. 4.

O! that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night, for the slain of the Daughter of my People, Jer. 9. 1.

W^ unto them that are at ease in Sion; that lie upon beds of Ivory.

That chaunt to the sound of the Viol, that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief Ointments; but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph, Am. 6. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26.

Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans 12. 15.

2.
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13. 3.

Be not thou ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord, nor of me his Prisoner: but
be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of
God.

The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my Chain.

But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me, 2 Timothy 1. 8, 16, 17.

Ye endured a great fight of afflictions, partly whilst ye were made a
gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst ye became
Companions of them that were so used.

For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better, and an
enduring substance, Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34.

Beloved, thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and to
strangers, which have born witness of thy Charity before the Church: whom, if
thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shall do well.

Because that for his Name sake they went forth.

We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellow-helpers to the
truth, 3 Jo. 5, 6, 7, 8.

He that receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward; and he that receives a Righteous Man, in the Name of a Righteous Man,
shall receive a Righteous Man's reward.

And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only in the Name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward, Mat. 10. 41, 42.

I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;

A stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not.

In as much as ye did it not, unto the least of these, ye did it not to me,
Mat. 25. 42, 43, 45.

12. With Motives and Encouragements to suffer.
Whosoever will be a friend of the World, is the enemy of God, Jam. 4. 4.

If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.

Ye cannot serve both God and Mammon, Mat. 6. 24.

And what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16. 26.

Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10.
28.

As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by
Christ, who comfort us in all our Tribulation, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5.

It is a faithful saying, if we suffer we shall also reign with him: if we deny
him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.

Whether we be afflicted, or whether we be comforted, it is for your
consolation and salvation; which is effectual in the enduring of the same
sufferings, which we also suffer.

And our hope of you is also steadfast, knowing, that, as you are partakers of
the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 6. 7.

I would ye should understand, that the things which happened unto me, have
fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel.

And many of the Brethren of the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, are much
more bold to speak the word without fear, Phil. 1. 12. 14.

I suffer trouble as an evil-doer, even unto bonds, but the word of God is not
bound.

Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sakes, that they may also obtain
the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2. 9. 10.

13. For Deliverance from Persecutions.
O! Let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish thou the
just, Ps. 7. 9.

Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.

O! Satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days.

Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.

Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children, Ps.
90. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Help us then, O God of our salvation, for the Glory of thy Name, Ps. 79. 9.

Arise, and plead thine own Cause; Remember that the Enemies have blasphemed
thy Name, and how the foolish Man reproacheth thee daily.

Forget not the voice of thine Enemies; the Tumult of those that rise up
against thee, increases continually, Ps. 74. 18, 22, 23.

Wherefore should the Heathen say, Where is their God? Ps. 79. 10.

Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He has said in his heart, thou God
wilt not require it, Ps. 10. 13.

Grant not the desires of the wicked, O Lord, further not his wicked device,
lest they exalt themselves, Ps. 140. 8.

Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men, Ps. 9.
20.

Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, Psalm. 83. 16.

14. For Trust in God, to be preserved under the same, and delivered from them.
The Wicked watches the Righteous, and seeks to slay him.

But the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand.

They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, Ps. 37. 19, 24, 32, 33.

Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man;
thou shall keep them secretly in a Pavilion, from the strife of tongues, Ps.
31. 20.

Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief
by a Law?

They gather themselves together against the soul of the Righteous, and condemn
the innocent blood.

But the Lord is my defense, and my God is the rock of my refuge.

And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off, Ps. 96. 20, 21,
22, 23.

For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be, Ps. 37. 10.

But the needy shall not always be forgotten; the expectation of the poor shall
not perish for ever, Ps. 9. 10.

For thou will save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down high looks, Ps.
18. 27.

So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the Righteous, verily he
is a God that judges the earth, Ps. 58. 11.

15. An Hymn of Thanksgiving for deliverance from Persecutions.
Oh! How great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of
men, Ps. 31. 19.

For thou, Lord, have heard the desire of the humble; thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear:

To judge the Fatherless and the Oppressed, that the man of the earth may no
more oppress, Ps. 10. 17, 18.

Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Ps.
97. 11.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

He that goes forth, and weepeth, bearing pecious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

The Lord has turned our Captivity, he has done great things for us, whereof
we are glad, Ps. 126. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord, Ps. 40. 3.

The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the
upright in heart shall glory, Ps. 64. 10.

Zion heard, and was glad, and the Daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy
judgments, O! Lord, Ps. 97. 8.

O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and
plentifully rewards the proud doer.

Be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that trust in
the Lord, Ps. 31. 23, 24.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness, Ps. 97. 12.

Sing unto the Lord, bless his Name, be telling of his salvation from Day to
Day, Psalm. 96. 2.

And my tongue shall speak of thy Righteousness, and of thy Praise all the day
long.

I will give thee thanks in the great Congregation; I will praise thee among
much People, Psalm. 35. 18, 28.

PRAYERS for Those who suffer for Righteousness.
I. A Penitential Prayer under Persecutions, as they are Chastisements for our
former Offenses.
1.
O Almighty Lord! Who art wont to show both thy Power and Mercy in correcting
Sinners, when the cry of sins grows great, and nothing but Affliction will make
them wise; justly art thou moved now at length, to visit thy People in this
Land with Persecutions, after we had first turned a deaf ear to all the Calls
of thy Mercy, and had long abused the blessings of peace. There is need, O God,
of our sufferings, to keep up a Reverence for thy Justice, and to reclaim us
from our iniquities; and this fiery Trial comes to purge us from our dross, and
to chastize us for our past Offenses; as well as to prove our present Obedience
and Constancy to thy Holy Laws.

Our Peace, O! Holy Father, had made us loose and contentious; and our Plenty,
had served chiefly to maintain Pride and Luxury. And the worldly Endowments
about Religion, had stolen our Affections away from it; and instead of
continuing thankful and true to thee, our hearts grew covetous and ambitious
after them, and preferred and took up with them for their Portion.

We are, O! Lord, a stubborn, and a stiff-necked People, still lifting up our
selves against thee, and against thy Vicegerents. We are given to Hypocrisy,
and take delight in Lies. Oppression and Rapine are to be found in our
dwellings; and Drunkenness and Adultery, have grown common and fashionable
Wickednesses, and have set up without shame in our streets. Thy pure Worship
and Service, had been grievously and shamefully neglected, or carelessly and
indevoutly attended, before it was given up to be persecuted amongst us. And
thine Holy Things have been desiled; thy Ministers have been despised and evil
entreated; and thy Sacred and Dreadful Name has been commonly and horribly
profaned, by rash and false Oaths, and by the most presumptuous and terrible
Imprecations. Is. 59 6.
Our Works, O! Great and Righteous God, have been Works of Iniquity; and when
thou have called us, we have not hearkened unto thee; when thou have smitten
us, we have not repented, but have Neh. 9. 29.
dealt proudly, and hardened our necks against thy Word.

To us therefore, O! Lord, belongs shame, and sorrow, and confusion of face;
and thou art Righteous in all that thou have brought upon us. Our sufferings
are far below our deserts, and we must needs justify thee, and condemn our
selves.

But Dan. 9. 9.
to thee, O! God, belongs mercy and forgiveness, though we have rebelled
against thee: And we return unto thee with true contrition and hearty
repentance for all our Iniquities, that thou may have Mercy upon us. Oh! for
the sake of thy Dear Son's most precious Blood, pardon all our sins, and
purify our souls. Perfect our repentance, and bring us home entirely to thy
self, and prevent all our backslidings. Help our slow and sloathful souls, to
be quick and vigorous; and our drowsy spirits, to be watchful in the ways of
Righteousness. Help thou us, Good Lord, for we are not able to help our selves,
and thou alone art our help. And when our sufferings have by thy help and Grace
reduced us to our duty, we shall then, O! Holy Father, thankfully receive any
Losses for Righteousness sake, and look on all the violent attempts of the
Enemy, as so many instances and messengers of thy Mercy, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

2. Out of the Office of Commination.
O! most Mighty God, and Merciful Father, who have Compassion upon all Men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; mercifully forgive us
our Trespasses; receive, and comfort us, who are grieved and wearyed with the
Burden of our sins. Thy Property, is always to have Mercy; to thee alone it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy People
whom thou have redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are
vile earth, and miserable sinners: But so turn thine Anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make have
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Prayers under Persecutions, as they are Trials of our Obedience, and bring
upon us Losses for Righteousness.
I. A General Prayer, for Mercies and Qualifications needful in Suffering-times.
O Blessed Jesus! Who now call us out to bear thy Cross, and to suffer
Afflictions for thy sake, who sufferedst a most ignominious Death for ours:
bring none of us to suffer, till thou have first prepared us for it; nor let us
suffer more, or longer, than thou will enable us willingly, and thankfully to
endure.

Let not any among us, O! Lord, come to suffer for our own follies, nor be
afraid to suffer for thy Righteousness. And give us all Grace to live according
to thy Precepts, that we may all have Courage and Comfort in suffering for
them. Let us not take liberty to transgress some duties of our Holy Religion,
whilst we suffer for others; nor ever hope to recommend our selves, or our
sufferings, to thy merciful acceptance, without studying to be entire in our
godly care, and having an eye to all thy Laws.

And when our Afflictions press most upon us, let the Graces and Comforts of
thy Holy Spirit abound most in us. Whatever else we lose thereby, let us not
lose Truth, and a good Conscience Preserve us steadfast in the belief of thy
Heavenly and Oppressed Truths, and undaunted in the Profession of them. Grant
us patience to bear thy Cross, and not grow faint or weary; and meekness to
bear our Persecutors, and not grow angry and bitter of spirit; and Charity to
forgive their Wrongs, and to overcome their evil with good. Strengthen our
Faith, of thy Heavenly Joys, to recompense all these earthly sufferings; and of
thy never-failing Help and Grace, to assist and support us under them, and to
deliver us from the same in thy due time. Let the greatness of our distresses,
drive us to be more constant and earnest in our Prayers. And as fast as
Afflictions come from our Persecutors, let succors and supports still come
from thee. O! Let us always have thy strength to bear us up, and find thee an
help at hand in our greatest needs; and then our patience and godly
steadfastness shall triumph over all the malice of our Persecutors.

And suffer us not, O! Father of Mercies, to be dashed to pieces in this storm,
and swallowed up in these waves. But in thy tenderness to our infirmities,
after we have suffered a while, send us ease. Shorten the days of these
sufferings, and hasten thy coming for our Deliverance; and bring us at length
to everlasting rest and peace in thy Heavenly Kingdom, through JESUS CHRIST our
Lord. Amen.

2. A Prayer Out of the Litany.
O! God Merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful: Mercifully assist our Prayers which we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us; and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty of
the devil, or man works against us, be brought to naught; and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being
hurt by no persecutions, may ever more give thanks unto thee, in thy Holy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Particular Prayers.
I. For Integrity, and not seeking to any evil ways for Help.
OH! Almighty Lord, thou have reserved us for days, when Is. 59, 15.
he that will depart from evil, is like to make himself a Prey. But grant me
Grace, These Prayers, that are made in the Singular Number, for ones own self;
may be turned into Common Collects for others as well as our selves, by a light
Change of We for I, Us for Me, Our for My or Mine, etc. as often as these Words
occur therein.
to esteem no Loss, comparable to that of Innnocency and of a good Conscience;
nor to harbor any fear, like to that of thy displeasure, and of the
intolerable and eternal pangs of Hellfire.

Let thy Laws, O! my God, direct all my steps, in my greatest dangers. Keep me
more studious in all my Counsels, of what is lawful for me, than of what seems
safe and serviceable in my necessity: And never suffer me to stoop to any sin,
in hopes thereby to put by fleshly trouble, or to serve any worldly turn.

In thy Providence, O! Father of Mercies, lies all my safety and protection.
And Oh! that I may ever commit my self to that protecting Providence, by
keeping close to thy Commandments. Oh! that I may never in any case forsake
them, but always look upon that as the ready way to have thee forsake me.
Whatever streights or dangers encompass me, the ways of my duty, O! Lord, are
the surest ways of thy mercy, and of my own safety. And Oh! that I may find
them to be ways of preservation and deliverance at present, and of everlasting
peace and joy in the end, through our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

II. For Constancy in Persecuted Duties.
1. Against being turned aside by Worldly Dangers or Losses.
O! Almighty and Everlasting God, Keep me constant to thy Truths and Precepts,
amidst all these violent Persecutions, which are ready to come upon me for the
same. Oh! that I may Phil. 1. 27, 28.
stand fast in thy ways, and be nothing terrified by the Adversaries thereof.
That I may Ephesians. 6. 13. and Jude 3.
stand fast in the evil day, and contend earnestly for the Faith. Let me not
Gal. 6. 9. and Heb. 12. 13.
grow weary of well-doing, or of godly suffering, nor wax faint in a good Cause
Enable me to stand to my duty, at all hazards, and to be ready, if the will of
God be so, to witness it unto Bonds; yea, or even to seal it with my blood, and
to dye for thee, as thou, Blessed Savior, have done for me.

Let not the fear of men, make me forsake thee; nor let my love of this World,
make me throw up my blessed hopes of a better. Nor give me up, for the sake of
any Losses or Terrors, to fall from my duty, or to Matthew. 10. 33.
deny thee before men, that thou may not finally deny me before the Angels
which are in Heaven.

Oh! that I may never leave thee, Oh! Holy Jesu, because thou art a Man of
Sorrows. But give me Grace, with Moses, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.
always to prefer the Afflictions of the godly when they are persecuted, before
the Joys of the wicked; and to choose to be among those, who suffer for
Righteousness, rather than among those, who seem best to thrive and prosper in
the ways of violence. Oh! that I may not grudge to take up the Cross, when that
is in my way to win the Crown; nor to endure a short tribulation for the
Kingdom of Heaven, which thou art ready to give to all that faithfully serve
and suffer for thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. Against being shaken in mind, or scandalized.
1. By the Defection of others, or by Variety of Opinions.
O Almighty and most Merciful God! keep me from being any ways unsettled, or
shaken in mind, about the way of thy Truth, and of thy Righteousness. Oh! that
thy Judgments may not make us harbor any suspicion, of the Truth of our Holy
Faith; but make us see, that they all come upon us, to try how far we can
suffer for it; or to punish us, because we have not been true to it. They are
sent, O! Righteous Lord, to punish the Looseness and Wickedness of our Lives,
amidst the Orthodoxy and Holiness of our Professions.

And let not any other Persons unsteadfastness in thy ways, how great or
numerous soever they be, cause me to waver, or once think of varying from the
same. Oh! that I may never follow weak minds, in their fickleness and
inconstancy; nor worldly minds, in Varying Belief and Professions, according as
they are blown about with every blast of worldly Interest, or Convenience. Let
me not think the worse of thy Truths, because others forsake them. Nor run in
to those, who prefer the ways of worldly ease, before the ways of innocence.
Nor grow weary of the ways of everlasting Life; because others, setting more by
worldly enjoyments, are ready to exchange them, when there is hopes of present
security thereby, for ways of everlasting death. Thy Truth, O! Lord, are
everlasting, and still the same. And Oh! that my Belief and Love thereof, may
always be one and the same too, for our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

2. Or, By a Reverence of any Men's Persons.
ESpecially, O! Lord, let not my reverence of any Men's Persons, cause me to
err from the way of thy precepts. Let not them carry me, against my own
Knowledge. Nor suffer me to ascribe more Authority, or to have more Belief in
their Examples; than in the plain Voice of thy Word, or in the clear and common
Notions of Right and Wrong, and of Natural Conscience. If they would have me
shut mine eyes against this Light; let me no longer reverence, or give ear to
them. Yea, Gal. i. 8.
Though an Angel from Heaven, should come and preach against the same, let me
not believe him. Romans 3. 4.
Let God be true, though they be held Liars. And let these Monitors be ever
firmly thought to speak right, though the most admired Persons gainsay it, and
both act and speak wrong.

Make me know, O! God, that thy plain Word, and the known and received Dictates
of Natural Honesty and Conscience, are always true and faithful; but that every
man, even the best of men, are liable to fail. Let me ever bear in mind, that
good men may alter and lose their goodness; but that evil and unrighteous
things, do not alter, nor can ever lose their unrighteousness. So that
whenever a good man falls, to do a manifestly evil, and unrighteous thing;
his doing it, can only make us think the worse of his Person, but is not in
any wise to make us think better of the unrighteous Action.

Teach me, O! Lord, that it is thy Law, and not their Example, which is to be
my Rule. That I am thy servant, not theirs; and am to hearken unto thee, not
unto them; and to Mat. 23. 9, 10.
call no man Master upon earth, in opposition to thee my great Master, who art
in Heaven. Oh! therefore let thy Truths, O! my God, and not other men's
practice, be my Guide; and let thy approbation and acceptance, not their
applause, be my recompense, through the Merits of our Blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

3. A Prayer for Faith.
O! Almighty and most Merciful Father, who both see, and sendest all these
sufferings, which are come upon us from the Adversaries of thy Truth; give me
Grace, to live by Faith in thee, and not by fear of them; and in all my Actions
under the same, to order my self as one who regards what thou promisest, and
not what they threaten.

Though I converse in the midst of them, and they are full of rage; yet keep me
ever mindful, O! Lord, that their Malice cannot hurt me, more than Satan's
Instruments could touch Job, till Job 1. 10, 11, 12.
thou give them leave. Whatsoever they devise against me, it will come to
nothing, till thy time, and Joh. 7. 10.
my hour is come. So that however they threaten, I know I am secure, till thou
call me out to suffering. And since I shall suffer nothing from them, but at
thy time, and under thy direction; in the midst of all this fear and danger, I
rest my Soul, O! my God, upon thy care, and cheerfully resign my self to thy
protection and good pleasure.

And if it seem good to thee to send some sufferings, thou, O! Merciful Father,
wilt graciously suit my Trials to mine Infirmities. Thou will order me no more,
than by thy Grace, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
I shall be able to bear; and Psalm. 76. 10.
the remainder of wrath will thou restrain. If thou tryest me, it will ^ Pet.
i. 6.
be only for a season. Thy Grace will take off their Violence, before it has
driven me beyond mine Innocence; Psalm. 125. 3.
nor will thou suffer the Rod of the wicked to rest upon the back of the
Righteous, till they are wearied out thereby, to put forth their hand unto
Iniquity.

And when thou have brought me into my troubles, make me believe assuedly, O!
my God, that thou will not leave me there. Though I am in no wise sufficient for
them of my self, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
thy Grace shall be sufficient for me; for thy strength is made perfect in our
weakness. Still as I need thee, O! Father, thou will be with me. Thou will
strengthen me by thy succors, when my Burdens grow too heavy for me. Thou who
sendest me tribulations, wilt send me comfort in them; and 2 Cor. 1. 4.
make my consolations abound by Christ, as my sufferings abound for him. And
make all the sorrows which I endure, to work for thy greater Glory, and my
greater good, in thy due time.

And Oh! that in the mean while, I may look steadfastly from the Cross to the
Crown, and be firm in the belief and expectation, that they who patiently 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
suffer for Christ, shall be sure to reign with him. Heb. 12. 2.
Set the joy before me, that for its sake, I may willingly endure the ^ross,
and despise the shame. And hold my eyes fast on 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
the exceeding weight of Glory, which shall Recompense our present Ignominy;
and on the things eternal, wherewith thou will repair our Loss of Temporal, for
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

4. A Prayer for Trust in God.
O! Almighty and most Merciful Father, whilst I walk here in the midst of fear
and danger, I humbly and cheerfully trust my self to thy care. I place my
safety, in an humble confidence in thee; and come to meet these difficulties,
and prepare to bear them, not in any vain presumption of my own strength, which
alas! at best is but weakness; no, nor of any earthly supports; but only in
the Name and Power of the Lord my God.

Lord! I trust to thee, who art able to save me, and have promised to help me.
I trust to thee, who love to be trusted, and have always been true to me, and
Psalm. 9. 10.
never failest those that trust in thee. I look for all my succors, and
deliverances, from thy Grace; and am not Is. 28. 16.
hasty to fix times to thy Providence, or to set bounds to my own patience; but
am contented, yea thankful, to receive them in thine own way, and at thine own
time, even at thy Ps. 102. 13.
set-time of sending them. Oh! help me therefore, O! my God, for thy
Faithfulness, and thy Mercies sake, and let me not be disappointed of my hope,
for our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

5. Against trusting more in other things than in God, and fixing too much on
Earthly Dependances.
GRant, O! Gracious Lord, that under all our trials and troubles, we may be
duly sensible of the vanity and inconstancy of all earthly supports. Oh! that
we may never Jer. 17. 5*
depart from thee, to trust in them. Nor give over our patient looking up to
thee, and thy wise Providence, whose Ways and Methods are far above out of our
reach; to presume on our own vain fancies and bold surmises, and Prove. 3. 5.
lean to our own understandings. Lord, give us not up to Hos. 12. 1.
feed on wind, which serves not to preserve us, but only to puff us up. Nor to
turn aside from regarding thy sure Promises, to support our selves, and delude
one another with lies and vain confidences; and to warm our selves at imaginary
Is. 50. 11.
Fires, and walk in the Light of those Sparks, which are not of thine, but
only of our own kindling.

Let us not rest our hearts, O! God, and place our confidence, in any Jer. 17. 5
Arm of Flesh; for there is no trust in them. For Ps. 62. 9.
surely men are vanity; yea, to be laid in the balance with thee, they are
altogether lighter than vanity. We cannot Jer. 17. 9*
know all that is in their hearts; and they daily, and suddenly, change their
minds and purposes; or their power fails, and they cannot bring their devices
to pass. For where they are the most fixed on things, and seem best prepared for
them; it is not Prove. 19. 21.
their device, O! Lord, but thy purpose which shall stand, and in a moment thou
breakest all their measures. And in a little time, Ps. 146 4*
they turn to their dust, and in that very day all their thoughts perish. They
are no staff of support, O! God, but Ezekiel. 29. 6.
a staff of reed to lean upon, and will break, Is. 36. 6.
and run into our hands and pierce them, when we lay our weight upon them.

Teach us then, O! Father, in looking upon them, not to look off from thee; and
to consider them, even the best of them, only as means of thy Care and good
Providence, which can preserve and deliver us without them by a thousand other
ways, though there is not any of them that can profit us without thee. And make
us all to look upon thee, as the Lord from whom comes our help, and in whose
sole Grace and Mercy we repose our entire and chiefest Trust, through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

6. Prayers for Patience.
1. In easy and unwearied endurance.
O! Almighty and most gracious God, who suitest thy Gifts to our Necessities;
in these suffering-times, give me a suffering spirit, and enable me to 2 Timothy
2. 3.
bear hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

Endue me with such patience under the same, as no heaviness, or length of my
Trials shall overcome. Let me not be driven by any cruel and unjust usage for
thy sake, to accuse thy Providence, or to revile my Persecutors. Let me not
show uneasiness under my sufferings, but willingly and contentedly bear them;
yea, rejoice in the same, and thankfully praise thee, Act. 5. 41.
that thou countest me worthy to suffer for thy Name. Keep me from growing
weary of bearing thy Cross, or from fainting under it. Though thou tarryest,
enable me to wait for thee. Oh! that I may persevere in waiting, and hold on to
the end, and never let go my patience, when my Persecutors have left me nothing
else, or cast away my confidence in thee.

Oh! that I may inwardly triumph in the Righteousness of my Cause, when I am
trodden down by the violence of the Oppressors. That I may be comforted to
think, that I have still the more of thy Love, as I bear the more of their
Malice. Oh! that I may be Romans 12. 12.
joyful in hope, as well as patient in tribulation; and count it an
extraordinary favor to me, that I have been called out to lose any thing for
thee, to testify my love unto thy Laws, and to dispose me for thy Gracious
Acceptance, through the Merits and Mediation of my dearest Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

2. In not envying the success of the wicked, in compassing unrighteous Devices.
O! Lord, who for wiseends, art ofttimes pleased to permit a Righteous Cause to
be worsted, and the devisers of unrighteousness to prevail against it: Suffer
us Pro. 24. 19. 20.
not to fret, or torment our selves, when we see such wicked men prosperous,
and triumph for bringing their unrighteous devices to pass. Let not that tempt
us, O! God, Pro. 23. 17.
to envy sinners, much less to think favorably; yea, or even doubtfully of
their wicked Violence. Never give us up to measure the Justice or Injustice of
Undertakings, by success; and to miscall apparently wicked things, naming Evil
Good, and Wrong Right, only because we see it prosperous. Let us not fall to
take part with the Injury, only because of its seeming prosperity; or to think
that God has forsaken what is right, because he permits it to be oppressed for
a while; or, when we see it once down, to despair of his ever raising it up
again.

Thy Judgments, O! most Mighty Lord, are unsearchable, and a great deep: teach
us with all humility to reverence them, not by bold expositions, especially in
favor of apparently unrighteous things, to abuse the same. They surprise us
with doing right, when all outward hopes and appearances thereof are gone. Help
us therefore, when things are at the worst, still to have hope and faith in
thee, to raise them up again. They open a way, and make a light of deliverance
to break forth, at thine own time. Give us patience in expectation, till that
time come. The Unrighteous, as Pharas was, are more in the way of thy mercy,
when thou keep thy plagues upon them, to soften their hearts, than when thou
take them off. Oh! let us not envy them for that ease, which hardens sinners,
and is their greatest unhappiness. They are kept up with successes, for full
trial of thy servants patience; and, if they will not repent thereof, to Matthew.
23. 32.
fill up the measure of their own wickedness. Genesis 15. 16.
Let us therefore learn therein, Gracious Lord, to adore thy forbearance, and
to imitate the same, not to repine at it: And to finish the work of our own
patience, that Ja. 1. 4.
patience may have its perfect work in us.

And however it passes here on earth, O! God, yet we are assured that at the
Great Day, the Judge of all the World will do exact Justice. The wicked shall
then be eternally punished, for all their prosperous wickedness: And the Just
shall be everlastingly recompensed, for all the sufferings which they have
endured, and for all the losses which they have sustained, in adhering to the
ways of Righteousness. Oh! therefore, blessed Lord! that we may ever detest all
wickedness, and carefully keep off from it, even when here we see it most
prosperous. And steadfastly reverence the ways of Duty and Righteousness, and
stick to them, even when we see them laboring under the Cross* and born down
with cruel Oppressions. Oh! that we may see, and believe assuredly, that
although we do not live to see the prosperity of the ungodly turned into
punishments, and the sufferings of thy Saints, exchanged for Crowns and
Glories, in this world; yet we shall certainly see the same fulfilled in both
to the uttermost, in another world. Where, Lord, grant that I may have my Place
of Ease, whatever Troubles I meet with here, for my Dear Savior Jesus Christ's
sake Amen.

7. For Prayers, and unwearyed Devotion under Persecutions.
O! Holy Father, give me Grace to look up to thee in all my distresses, and to
make holy and fervent Prayers, both my most bounden service, and my most sure
support, under all these Persecutions. Oh! that the growth of my sufferings,
may continually heighten and increase my Devotions. That I may be Romans 12. 12
instant in Prayers, and Ephesians. 6. 18.
watch thereunto with all perseverance. And the more straitness and scarcity I
find at any time, of public opportunities; make me so much the more diligent
and constant, earnest and affectionate, in my private devotions.

Let not the Malice of mine Oppressors, be able to estrange my soul from thee,
or make me weary of conversing with the Almighty. Let devotion be the life and
stay of my Spirit, and let me never forget, that my chief remedies against
their Violence, are Prayers and Tears. When they drive me from all confidence
in my self, teach me to run for sanctuary, and to seek help from thee. Even
from thee, O! my God, who with a Fathers pity and tenderness, beholdest what we
suffer for thy sake, and wilt support us under the same; who see our wrongs,
and wilt do us right in thy due time. And Ps. 56. 8.
who bottlest up all our Tears, and wilt remember them with surpassing and
eternal Mercies in the day of Recompenses, for our Dear Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

8. A Prayer for diligent Attendance on Public Assemblies.
ANd, O! Gracious Lord, in these Trials, give me Grace diligently to attend
upon the Public Ministrations, and to make one in offering up thy pure
Worship, in the Communion and Assemblies of the Saints.

Make me fully sensible, that when they most violently oppress us, we have most
need to fly to thee with joint accord, to help and defend us. And that when
they seek most to extirpate thy pure Worship, it lies upon us to meet together,
to pay the same and bear it up. Oh! that their Cruelty against it, may enkindle
in us a godly Zeal for it. That we may Heb. 10. 23, 25.
hold on our Profession without wavering; and resolutely stick to thine Holy
Assemblies, without which we can not pretend to stand up for thy Cause.

And Oh! that no difficulties, or hazardousness of these Assemblies, may make
us indifferent about thy service; and that none among us may lay hold thereof,
as an excuse for Irreligion, or profane Negligence. Make us all see, that we
can have no excuse in rejecting Prayers and public Ministrations, more than in
rejecting other Duties, only because they are persecuted, and have the Cross
upon them. Yea, Lord, let nothing seem so terrible to me, as being debarred the
opportunities of waiting upon thee. Nor any Loss seem so hard to be endured, as
losing this way of access to God, and the devotion of my Spirit.

Whilst I am serving thee, make me confident, O! my God, that thou will protect
me. My safety at all times, lies in the care and guardianship of thy good
Providence. And I can never have more reason to expect that careful Providence,
than when I am taken up in thine immediate service. But if suffering shall
happen to meet me there, let me comfort my self to think, that it finds me at a
good work, and can not come to me when I am better employed. And whatever I
lose in this case, make me sensible, O! Lord, that it is not lost, but most
wisely and well laid out; and that I can not part with my Worldly Substance for
a better Cause, or to my greater Advantange. Oh! that I may Heb. 10. 34.
rejoice in such spoiling of my Goods, as what is a Mat. 6. 20.
laying up Treasures for my self in Heaven. And be glad to have my poor
perishing substance thus lent to thee, to be repayd with an Eternal Inheritance
in thy Kingdom, through the Merits of my Blessed Savior and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ. Amen.

9. Prayers for Godly Prudence and Caution, in Days of Peril and Persecution.
1. For Prudence.
BUt though I am ready to come and suffer for thee, when thou call me to it;
let me not run upon it, O! Gracious God, before thy Call. Suffer me not to
expose my self to their Violence, needlessly: Nor to bring it upon my own Head,
for things that are no part of thy service. Nay, nor even for doing good things
unseasonably; or with such Unnecessary Provocations, or improvident Carriage
and indiscreet Circumstances, as are fit to fetch down troubles, when I might
have been safe in doing the same, with due foresight and godly caution.

Oh! that Conversing, as I do, in the midst of dangers, I may learn to Mat. 10.
16.
beware of men. That knowing Ephesians. 5. 16.
* the days are evil, and that trouble is hasting on apace of it self, I may
not throw away my quiet before I need, but redeem the time. Grant me the skill
and care, O! Merciful Lord, to be provident in all things, and Ephesians. 5. 15.
walk circumspectly. To Col. 4. 5.
walk in wisdom toward those that are without, that they may find nothing for
which to lay hold of me, but my Love and Zeal to thee, and a wise and faithful
discharge of my duty; which, though they persecute, thou, O! my God, wilt
graciously accept, for my Dear Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2. For Integrity therewith.
BUt together with Mat. 10. 18.
the wisdom of the Serpent, give me Grace, O! Holy Father, in all my trials to
show forth the innocence and sincerity of the Dove. Let all my wisdom and
waryness, be shown in doing of my Duty, but never in letting it fall. And in
doing it faithfully, without maim or disobedient reserves; diligently, without
remissness; and resolutely and undauntedly, when thou call me forth to show
boldness. Let it never carry me, to secure my self, by neglecting thee, or thy
service; or by acting against the rules of Truth and Righteousness, or against
the Honor and Interest of thy Cause. Under all my sufferings, O! Lord, help me
constantly and strictly to attend to the ways of Religion, that I may suffer
with innocence; and not to the worldly ways of Parties, which abound too much
with wickedness. And let me never forget, that there is as much need, of a good
and righteous Carriage, under sufferings for Christ; as of a good and righteous
Cause, for the same.

But in serving thee faithfully, O! Gracious God, let me not show rashness, nor
give the Enemies of thy Truth Advantage against me, by any culpableness or
unadvisedness of my own Carriage. Whatever I suffer, let it not be as the Fruit
and Chastizement of my own folly, and precipitancy. But grant, that in that
day, I may have the comfort and support to think, that it is all come upon me,
for my duty toward thee, and for an acceptable and well guided Zeal for thy
Glory, which, however it is spitefully treated by them at present, will be
graciously received, and remembered by thee at last for mine unspeakable and
Eternal Comfort, through the Merits of my only Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

10. A Prayer for Patience and Charity toward our Persecutors.
O! Blessed Lord, whilst we are suffering at their hands for thy Cause, fill us
with Patience, and Charity toward our Persecutors. Keep us always mindful,
that there is as much need, of a meek and forgiving Carriage, as of a Righteous
Cause, in those that suffer for thee. And that thou sendest Persecutions, for a
Trial of our Patience and Charity toward our Oppressors; as well as for a
Trial of our Constancy, to thy Truth and Righteousness.

Let us not fail, O! God, of a gracious Acceptance with thee, by our impatience
and wrathfulness against them. Yea, and let not the way of Truth and
Righteousness miscarry in our hands, through the scandal of our angry Passions.
Let us not prejudice any against the goodness of our Cause, by the bitterness
and implacableness of our spirits; nor tempt good minds, to be hasty in
concluding that we want Truth, because they see we can not be easy in
suffering for it, and want Charity.

In all our Trials, O! Blessed Jesus, let us steadfastly consider, how meekly
and charitably, thou did endure thine. And learn of thee, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
to suffer without threatening, and not only to bear our Enemies, but Mat. 5. 44.
to love them. To beat back their Violence, by unwearyed Patience; and to
overcome their inclinations, of heaping Injuries on our heads, by our daily
heaping Forgiveness and Kindnesses on theirs. And, instead of being angry at
those, by whom we suffer; let it please us, O! God, that we are counted worthy
to suffer for thy Name, and enable us to rejoice at our Losses in this World,
in hopes of the Blessed Recompense thereof in thy Heavenly Kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Particular Prayers for Patience toward them.
1.
HOwever Cruel or Unjust their usage be, give us Grace, O! Almighty Father, to
bear it patiently. Let us not seem fretful and uneasy at our Worldly Losses,
as if we paid thee this service with ill will, and were more affected with
those things, which they have taken from us, than with the Blessed Hopes of a
better and a more enduring substance. Let us suffer meekly, without wrath; and
quietly without noise: And neither disturb our own spirits, by discontent and
impatience; nor our Persecutors, by bitter Reproaches and Accusations; nor our
Neighbors, by wearisome Complaints.

In the midst of all their Troubles, give us inward composedness; and Luke 21.
19.
Patience to possess our souls, and have rest in our selves. And keep our
hearts at rest, O! God, on thy Promises, by Tit. 2. 13.
looking to the sure and blessed hope that is set before us: not on the
uncertainty of any worldly supports, or prospects of this Life, which, like the
Reeds of Egypt, are liable to break when we lean upon them, and to run into our
hands.

And let this patient endurance of all their unreasonable and unjust Violence,
Jam. 1. 4.
have its perfect Work in us. Let us not be wearyed out of it, or give way at
last to angry resentments; but show forth this calmness and sweetness of
spirit, to the end. Oh! let not our Patience be broke by their injuries, but
hold out, till at last it has broke them, and made them relent and grow weary
of inflicting the same; and till thou shall have graciously turned our troubles
from them, into everlasting Rest and Peace with thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

2
AND whilst thou art pleased to try us with these sufferings, O! Blessed Lord,
grant that we may never take a privilege for Lawless Wrath, on pretense of
being angry for thy Cause. Oh! keep us sensible under their sharpest
provocations, that Jam. 1. 20.
the wrath of man is much apter to transgress the Rules of Piety and
Righteousness, than to maintain them. Make us mindful that it belongs to thee
to punish wrongs done to thy Holy Religion; that thou art most interested in
the same, and most concerned to chastise the Enemies thereof, and wilt do it in
thy due time. And that when ungodly men persecute the ways of Holiness, our
part is constantly to profess and practice them, to plead when we are called,
and patiently to suffer for the same; but thine, to punish for them.

And, Lord, let us not be more hasty for wrath and vengeance, than thou art, in
thine own Cause. Let not us lose Patience toward them, whilst thou bear
with them; but study, and pray for their Conversion, and willingly, and
joyfully help on the same, that they may be saved at last, through the Merits
and Mediation (...) thy dear Son, our only Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Particular Prayers for Charity toward Persecutors.
1
HElp us, O! Father of Mercies* not only to bear our Persecutors Patiently, but
to treat them Charitably. Enable us to love our Enemies, whilst we suffer by
them; to forgive their wrongs, whilst we smar^ under them; and not to aggravat^
their evil usage, but, as thou Luke 23. 34.
did^ O! Blessed Jesu, whilst thou borest* the extremity of their Malice upon
the Cross, rather study how we may any ways lessen or excuse the same. Oh! that
we may approve our selves thy true followers, by 1 Pet. 2. 23.
suffering without Threatening; by Mat. 5. 44.
praying for them, whilst they are persecuting us; by returning blessing for
their cursing, kindness for their cruelties, and To. 12. 21.
by overcoming their evil with good.

But let none of us please our selves, O God! with thoughts or hopes of
Vengeance; nor Prove. 24* 17, 18.
rejoice at their fall, lest it displease thee, and thou turn away thy wrath
from their Heads, and direct it upon our own. Let us 1 Pet. 3. 9.
not render evil for evil, or railing for railing to any man, nor meet their
malice with bitter Passions and angry Returns. Keep us ever fully sensible, O!
Lord, that under the greatest cruelty of their usage, to show Patience and
Charity is our business; but that the taking Vengeance, must be left to thy
Justice. And enable us mildly to commit our Cause to thee, and desire that thou
would end our sorrows, not by their destruction, but conversion, through our
only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2.
LOrd, let not us fall to hate them, because they cruelly despite us; nor to
take up with any false Accusations against them; or, when they stand truly
chargeable with any smaller matters, to strain upon them so far, till we have
raised them into great and shameful Offenses, by our own evil surmises. Let not
us 1 Cor. 13 4, 5, 6.
vaunt our selves, because they unreasonably depress us; nor behave our selves
in any kind unseemly toward them, though they should cast off all regard of
humanity and decency toward us. Nor ever so far forget thee, as to rejoice in
any Iniquity, when it is like to prejudice their Cause, or to serve ours. But
to rejoice always in the Prosperity of thy Truth, and in seeing great
Temptations turned aside, and general Falls prevented, and in having good and
right things take place.

If they 1 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 7
provoke us, O! God, enable us to show patience. If they persist therein, help
us to suffer long. Let us bear all things without wrath, and endure all things
without weariness, and not forget to be kind toward them; to believe all
things favorably, and to speak all things charitably, whilst they are doing
all things contrary toward us. And to look upon all these, as parts of that
Charity, without which all our sufferings for thee are nothing worth.

Oh! Let Jam. 3. 17.
the Heavenly Wisdom, which keeps us pure from their errors and corruptions,
keep us also peaceable, without bursting into noise and quarrels; and gentle,
without yielding to anger and bitter words: and placable and easy in admitting
excuses, without any show of rigor in exacting Reasons, or of being studious of
Revenge. Let it keep us full of mercy and good fruits, without any mischievous
returns, or any proneness to cruelty and inhumanity, when it is in our way to
show the same. And without Partiality and Hypocrisy, as persons uniform in all
Acts of Virtue and Justice, when they serve others as well as when they serve
us; and who are careful not to put on any Virtue for a pretense, nor to decry
things as Evil in others, whilst we can allow of the same in our selves. Teach
us, O! Gracious Lord, that it is only by these Blessed Fruits, that our Belief
and Espousal of a right Cause, must approve it self to be the wisdom that
comes from above, and which, as it prceeds from thee, must gain us all
acceptance with thee, through the Merits of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

3 A Prayer against evil Surmises, and for Candor in Censuring those, who
either Persecute us, or fall from the way of Righteousness.
O! Gracious God, in Censuring the Persons or Actions of all those, who either
persecute us, or in these days of Trial are fallen from thee, let Equity and
Candor direct and govern all our Thoughts and Speeches, and let not ill will
bias us. Oh! that we may never charge them with imaginary Guilts, through our
own evil Surmises; nor hastily make sure of any things against them, whilst
they are really uncertain; nor make the worst of doubtful things, which
goodwill might easily think better of. Yea, where their Falls are plain and
manifest, grant us Grace, O Lord, to behold them, as thou did the wickedness
of thy Persecutors, with the bowels and compassion of a Friend, and not with
the malicious insults and triumphs of an Enemy. And to judge of them, with a
sense of humane infirmities, considering, that we also are liable to be tempted
our selves, and to fall by temptations, and therefore ought to Mat. 7. 1, 2.
mete out the same measure to them, in judging of their Actions, which we
desire that others would mete out to us again, when they come to censure ours.
Yea, O! Holy FATHER, cause us always to have before our eyes thy Clemency, as
well as our own Necessity; and keep us ready to afford those allowances and
abatements in their case, which we all need and desire at thine hands, and
through thy mercy hope to find from thee, in our own.

Let us not be rigorously hard upon them, for common Offenses, which are
ordinarily incident to frail and sinful Natures. Nor for such Falls in great
Trials, as may move pity upon the account of humane weakness, as well as
deserve blame for their own ungodliness. Let us not show severity in accusing
them violently, and condemning them without any mixture of mercy, for having
been overborn by fear, or for having complied too far for sustenance, or
safety; for having erred under some great astonishment, and where they had
little time for deliberation, and little help for Counsel and Advice; or for
falling any other ways, in very difficult and perplexed circumstances.

Suffer us not to favor any wickedness in them, O! Righteous God, and much
less to justify it. But when we are about to tax and condemn the Crimes, to
the end that we may show a just Zeal for thee and for thy Righteousness: Let us
remember withal, to consider the greatness and difficulties of their Trials;
and thereupon to pity their frailty, and to imitate thy mercy, which thou art
graciously pleased to show, both to them, upon their Falls, and likewise to us
upon any Falls of ours whereby we daily stand in need thereof, for our most
dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

11. A Prayer for Grace to turn the same, from carrying on impatience and anger
against others, to carry on amendment of our selves.
LOrd! under all these sorrows and sharp sufferings, teach us to look for the
cause thereof within our selves. Our own Sins, O! Righteous Father, are most
justly, though severely, punished in them; and our earthly affections and
dependances, need to be purged off by them. And therefore, instead of envying
and accusing others, and taxing the injustice of our Persecutors; make us look
up with reverence to thy Justice, and lay to heart our many private and public
Miscarriages, and learn thereby to condemn and amend the errors of our own
ways.

Grant, O! God, that the experience of our own fears and failures under our
Trials, may keep us humble and jealous over our selves, and charitable toward
the Falls of others. And let our daily proofs, of thy seasonable succors and
preservations, teach us to have firm Faith in thee, and to rely entirely on thy
care and gracious promises. Let the difficulties which we feel in sustaining
Losses for thy sake, show us the worldliness of our desires. Let the
inclinations which we find at any time, to ease or secure our selves by sin, or
to allow in our selves what we condemn in others; convince us of the
deceitfulness of our own hearts, and of the hypocrisy of our pretenses. Show
us all the roots of bitterness, which are ready to discover themselves when we
are tried; and when we see them, give us Grace to cast them out, and to purge
our Hearts of the same.

Thus, O! Holy Father, if we cannot amend our Confusions, make them, we humbly
entreat thee, thoroughly to amend us. And teach us by the needful and profitable
Discipline thereof, both to walk more perfectly in thy fear; and to bear them
with patience, remembering that therein we are reaping the just fruits of our
own ways; and to show Charity toward our Persecutors, as considering how we
have done amiss our selves, and how by such Mercy and Forgiveness toward
others, we are all to expect Mercy and Forgiveness of our own Offenses at thine
hands, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

12. A Prayer for Charity to the Persecuted.
O! Righteous Lord, who tryest thy People with heavy sufferings for thy Truth
and Righteousness sake; give me the heart constantly to own thy ways, and those
who suffer for them. Oh! that whenever I see 1 Cor. 12. 26.
a Member of thine suffering, as a good Fellow-Member, I may suffer with it.
That I may be among those, A^^. 6. 6.
who grieve for the afflictions of Joseph; and come in to bear a share of their
Adversity, who are enduring afflictions for thee; and Heb. 12. 3.
remember those who are in bonds, as bound with them.

Let 2 Timothy 1. 8.
not me be ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord, nor of any of those who are
his Prisoners. But rejoice to make my self a Companion of such, as are bearing
Tribulation for his Truths, and be glad when I can minister unto their
necessities, and relieve the same. When I see them Mat. 25. 42, 43. 45.
Sick, and in Prison, give me the heart to visit them, or strangers, and forced
to leave their own homes for thy Cause, to take them in; or in want of food,
and raiment, to supply them therewith. Give me Grace to do something like to
them, as I would do to thee, O! Blessed Jesu, were thou here before me, and in
their Condition.

And Oh! that I may look upon such services, as the most blessed opportunities
of showing my Love unto this self, remembering that thou will say unto us one
day, Mat. 25. 40.
in as much as ye did it unto the least of these, ye did it unto me. Yea, that
I may reekon my self therein, to be showing kindness, not so much to them, as
to my own soul. Knowing, that thus to communicate, and have fellowship with
them in their sufferings, is the way to communicate and have fellowship with
them in their Blessedness; and that Mat. 10. 41.
he who receives a Prophet, or a righteous Man, in the name of a Prophet, or
of a righteous Man, shall have a Prophet's, or a righteous Man's reward.
Wherewith thou, O! Father, wilt crown, both the Sufferers and their Partakers
in the end, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

13. A Prayer for deliverance from Persecutions, after one is wearied therewith.
O! Merciful God, who have visited my Bac^slidings, and tried my Faith, and
fixed adherence to thy ways with sharp Persecutions; look now with pity on my
sorrows and infirmities, and if it seem fit for thy Glory, and for my Good,
send me the sweet and speedy comforts of rest and peace.

Consider my weakness, O! God, for I am Psa. 14^. 6.
brought very low. Consider that it is thine own cause, and that I am
persecuted for thy sake. Consider those Ps. 69. 6.
that wait on thee, and let not them be ashamed, or disheartened for my cause.
Consider mine Enemies, and let not them still more and more Ps. 140. 8.
exalt themselves. And Ps. 74. 18, 22.
remember, that they daily reproach thy ways, and as often as thou give them
success against us, they triumph in it as thy favoring and owning of their
ungodly violence, and asperse thee with their wickedness.

Ps. 74. 22.
Arise then, O! Almighty God, and plead thine own cause. Arise, and right the
oppressed, and make the proud, and the Men that rage in ways of ungodliness and
violence, Ps. 9. 20.
to know themselves. Return not upon them, what they have done to us, O! Lord.
But Ps. 83. 16.
fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name; and give us ease
from their violence, and grace to turn it to thy praise, and to the performance
of all holy and thankful Obedience, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

14. Intercessions, or Prayers for others in Times of Persecutions.
1. A Prayer for Persecutors, who at any time, or any where, are oppressing
Truth, or Righteousness.
O! Most Gracious Father, show mercy, we humbly entreat thee, toward our
Persecutors, though they neither show mercy, nor justice toward us. Cure the
delusion of seduced, and seducing spirits. Let them not be led away with errors
any longer, nor intoxicated with the love thereof. Let them not continue to
resist thy truth; much less proceed to blaspheme and reproach it; and least of
all, to set themselves to fight against it by an arm of flesh, and cruelly to
persecute and extirpate the professors thereof.

Pity those who are ignorant, and set straight those who are perverse among
them. Remove those prejudices, which blind their eyes; and sweeten and mollify
their spirits, that they may no longer be driven aside by malice and bitter
passions; and dispose them by humility and meekness, and a sincere love of
truth and righteousness, to a joyful reception and acknowledgement thereof,
that instead of persecuting, they may fall resolutely to profess them, and, if
need be, to suffer for the same.

But if any still harden themselves in their error and violence, and think that
by destroying thy servants, Jo. 16. 2.
they please thee, and do God service: yet deal not thou with them, O! God, as
they deal with us; but save their Lives, though they seek to take away ours.
Though we suffer, yea, or die by their hands, let them not die in their errors
and wicked violence: But curb them, Good Lord, in their carier, and stop it in
thy due time.

And if it may seem good to thee, work this blessed change in them, by mild and
gentle methods. But if nothing else will touch their hearts with remorse,
afflict their bodies, O! Merciful Father, and let Prove. 29. 15.
the Rod give understanding, and teach them repentance. Yea, let all thy
crosses come upon them, rather than the curse of a seared Conscience.

And when there is nothing left but smiting to reduce them, Lord give not off
smiting them, till they are brought to see the wickedness of persecuting the
ways of truth and righteousness, and to make the best amends they can, by
standing up zealously for the same. Say not unto them, as thou Isa. 1. 5.
did to the Revolting Jews, who still grow worse and worse under their
corrections, Why should you be stricken any more? Nor deliver them up to the
wretched ease of incorrigeable sinners, who are therefore at ease because their
state is hopeless, and whose ease and respite is only that of condemned
Prisoners, who are sealed up for sudden and inevitable vengeance. But by
whatever means thou shall see sit to work the same; let their repentance
prevent thine eternal vengeance, through the Merits of our Dearest Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2. Prayers for the Persecuted, who happen in any place to be suffering for the
cause of Truth or Righteousness.
1.
O! Almighty and most Merciful Father, extend thy help and pity in these trying
times, to all the necessities and backslidings of thy Servants. Have Mercy
upon all, who either by their own worldly fears, and covetous desires, or by
the Art and cunning of Seducers, have been made to fall from thee, and raise
them up again. Neither suffer them to rest secure, nor to grow desperate in
their wickedness, but fill their hearts with such awakenings, as may put them
in the way of true Repentance.

And when any of them grow doubtful of what they have done, Lord, carry on
their doubts to a full Conviction. And when once they are convinced of their
Errors, give them no rest till they have amended them. Let their Act. 10. 31.
Prayers and Alms ascen^ up before thee, and bring down Grace still more and
more to see their fall, and to fit and fortify their Spirits to recover from
it. Enable them to overcome all fears of shame and worldly loss; to place their
truest, and their only honor in Repentance; and their highest interest and
safety, in rectifying and repairing what they have done amiss; and to study
above all things, how, despising worldly considerations, they may recover thy
Peace, and save their precious and immortal Souls.

Show Mercy also, O! Gracious God, on all those, who are shaken in mind by
these Storms, and begin to stagger in the Faith, and fix and settle them
therein. And on all those, who by thy Grace have resolutely withstood the same,
and daily perfect and confirm them. Oh! Lord, daily make them more numerous,
and let their Sufferings, like that of thy faithful Servants and Confessors of
old, be a fruitful Seed of a truly righteous and holy Church. Lengthen out
their Patience, whilst thou prolongest their Sufferings, and strengthen their
Faith, that they may steadfastly persevere therein. Let thy Providence supply
those wants, which any of them are reduced unto for a good Conscience. Give
them comfort under their Sufferings, and in thy due time an happy riddance
thereof, and endless and unspeakable joys at last in exchange for them.

The more their Enemies seek to root them out by unrighteous Persecution, Oh!
that they may answerably strengthen themselves the more in fervent and godly
Devotion. Make them to have a strict and conscionable eye to all thy Laws, that
whilst in these Persecuted points, they suffer as Saints, they miss not at last
of their reward, by taking liberty in any other things to live as Sinners. Oh!
that they may study in all things to please thee in their Lives, that so they
may be accepted in their Sufferings, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2.
AND though here, O! Righteous Father, for thine Holiness, and for thy Truths
sake, they are vile in the eyes of Men; let them be precious in thine Eyes, and
do thou own them from Heaven. Plead thou the cause of thy Servants, against
those that oppress them. Let their Persecutors see, that there is no fighting
against thee. Make them find, that Truth is stronger than they, and will at
last prevail over them. And that Persecutions, which they use for rooting out
the sincere Professors thereof, are overruled by thine Almighty Power and
Wisdom, to propagate and multiply them.

And when all others are ready to forsake us in our afflictions, do thou, O!
God, stick by us. Do thou stick by us in our extremities, and deliver us. Ps.
140. 8.
Let not the mischievous imaginations of the wicked always prosper, lest they
be too proud. Ps. 125. 3.
Let not the Rod of the Wicked rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, lest they
put forth their hand unto Iniquity. Shorten the days of these Sorrows, and make
have to help and deliver us. And work that Deliverance, if it please thee, by
the Conviction, rather than by the destruction of our Enemies, for our Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

3. Prayers for a Kingdom when in any Time or Place it happens to labor under
Persecutions, for any part of Gods Truth, or way of Righteousness: Or, when it
is torn to pieces by Intestine Divisions about the same.
1.
O! Almighty and most Merciful God, have Mercy upon this most wretched and
sinful Land, and exalt the greatness of thy Mercy, by curing the Height of our
Misery. And in the first place, purge our Sins, O! Lord, which are the chief
cause of all our Sorrows, and which are the heaviest Plague that we lie under,
though, alas! we are least sensible thereof.

Oh! give us not up to a Reprobate mind, and a seared Conscience. Let thy
Correction open all our Eyes, to see and abhor all that iniquity and
ungodliness, which calls aloud to thee for Vengeance. Oh! that we may see, what
it is to be false and faithless to God and Man; to forsake thee in our
Distress, and seek to unrighteous ways for Refuge. That we may lay to heart all
that Hypocrisy and Profaneness, all that shedding of Innocent Blood, all that
Violence whereof our hands are full, and the Spoils and Oppressions, and other
Wickednesses, which have reigned amongst us.

And by these foretasts of Sorrows, which we have already felt in the course of
these Iniquities: Grant, O! Lord, that we may be struck with Terror of those
insupportable Plagues and after-reckonings, which are yet to come if we
continue in the same. And that we may learn thereby to Sin no more, but apply
our selves faithfully to seek and serve thee, that we may be fit for thine
Eternal Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2.
AND when thou have cleared us of the Guilt, then Deliver us, O! Gracious Lord,
from the Curse of our Transgressions. Let not Power be employed to suppress thy
Truths, or a Righteous Cause, but to support them. Let not violence be able to
force the Seat of Justice, nor to hinder or pervert the due and free course
thereof. Bless the Labors of all those, who seek to have Truth and Equity take
place, and to plant and settle Peace on Righteousness. And set thy Face against
them, whose hearts and hands are set on ways of unjust Violence, and public
Disturbance. Turn their hearts, O! God, to be in love with Peace and Justice:
Or if still they will be obstinate against the same, weaken their hands, that
they may not be able to hinder us of the speedy and happy influence, and
settled enjoyment thereof.

Bind up our breaches, O! Father, and make all our unnatural broils and
bloodshed cease. We are a People shaken to pieces, do thou settle us. We are
all in confusion, do thou bring us into order. We are broken by our Sins, Oh!
do thou repair and heal us, by restoring us to ways of Righteousness. Our guilt
and misery have made us heartless, and void of courage; Oh! let Innocence, and
the light of thy Countenance, raise our Spirits. We lie comfortless in our
Iniquities, Oh! Oh! Let thy Spirit reform us, and then speak comfort to us.
Heal all the Sores of our Souls, and then lighten our Earthly Burdens. Keep
Life in this exhausted or in these Exhausted Kingdoms, when these Prayers need
at any time to be put up for more Kingdoms than on^.
Kingdom, which is ready to faint, and daily increase it in the same, and
settle us once more in Justice, and Holiness, Peace and Safety, for Jesus
Christ's sake, Amen.

4. Prayers for the Church, when in any any Time or Place, it is called to
suffer Persecution for Truth or Righteousness.
1. A general Prayer for things needful to the same in such Times of
Persecution.
O! Almighty Lord, who Acts 20. 2^.
have purchased to thy self a Church with thine own Blood; look in Mercy upon
the same, however Distressed ^ro' all the World. Especially upon ^^at part
thereof which languisheth in this Land, and suffer not the Adversary to lay it
was^e, or utterly to deface it, after thou have paid so dear for it.

Let not either Superstition, or immoral Wickedness, Corrupt and Profane thy
Worship; nor let Schism any longer tear thy Body to pleces. Let not vile Men go
on, to make Religion a Cover and Pretense for acting against moral Honesty and
Justice, lest the Hypocrisy of some beget Atheism in others, and lest thereby
loose Men be tempted to think, and take occasion to say, That there is nothing
under any Professions of Religion but serving Worldly ends, because they can
see nothing else under theirs.

Oh! That Truth and Righteousness may be set up in thy Church, and that Love
and Unity may be set up in our Hearts. That we may once more hear the Voice of
Joy and Peace, and receive Beauty for Ashes.

Pity a Church, O! Blessed Lord, which has long maintained Truth of Doctrine,
and Purity of Worship in the Nation; and which has openly professed, and bore
out the Doctrine of patient Suffering for Righteousness, and not resorting to
any evil means for Relief, in the Eyes of Men. Pity those who suffer, and are
in danger to be destroyed for their steadfast adhering to these thy ways, when
others generally fall off from them, and set themselves violently to persecute
the same. And hear their Cries, who mourn in Sion, and are afflicted for the
Dishonor that is brought upon thy Name, and for all the Violences which are
done to an Holy Religion.

Preserve them, Holy FATHER, by thy Power, and give them not up to the Will of
their Oppressors. But stir up thy Strength, and come and help us. Give us
Constancy against the Errors of our Persecutors; and in thy good time give us
rest from their Violence, for our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake,
Amen.

The Collect for the Fifth Sunday after Trinity.
GRant, O! Lord, we beseech thee, that the Course of this World may be so
peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in
all Godly Quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

2. Prayers for particular Graces or Blessings, when at any time, or any where,
it is violently broken, or pressed by Persecutions, to forsake the way of God's
Truth, or Righteousness.

1. Prayers for its Purity and Integrity.
1. O! Father of Mercies, who see all the Backslidings and Calamities of thy
poor Church amongst us; pity its misery, and possess it with such a Spirit, as
is fit to enliven and actuate thy Body.

Oh! Keep it in thy Truth, and save it from Heresy, and false Doctrines,
either about Faith, or Practice. Give it not up to teach Errors for Advantage,
or to justify unlawful ways for worldly Ends, and Securities. Nor suffer it to
suit its Doctrines to secular Turns, or to change Religious Principles, as it
shall be driven thereto, by worldy Necessities.

Fix it in ways of Holiness, O! Lord, that all its Ministrations may be such,
as become Saints. Suffer it not to mix sin in thy Service, or to teach it to
thy People. To pollute holy Offices, with any ungodly or unrighteous Petitions;
and prostitute and profane thy Worship, by falling therein to offer any
abominable things. Oh! let not its Ministrations become the Ministrations of
Unrighteousness, but be Holy and without Blemish, as besits thine House, and
becomes thy Spouse.

Whilst thou art pleased to try it with Tribulations, Lord, let them only purge
it, but not lay it waste. And revive a suffering Spirit among us, or instead of
when, say now, If the Church prayed for, is actually suffering.
when it labors under a suffering State. Make it willing then, and ready to
quit all Interests of this World, and live upon the hopes of a better. Enable
it contentedly, yea, joyfully to take up thy Cross, and to bear it after thee.
Oh! that at such times it may always be more afraid of Sinning, than of
Suffering. Oh! that it may never fall, to make the way of Gain, to pass for the
way Godliness; or to Preach up what is Unrighteous, because it is become
serviceable and safe. Nor ever seek to Error and Wickedness for Refuge, instead
of seeking to God, and trusting in him, and in his holy ways, for the same.

Oh! Father, in thy Mercy, guard it against all Error and Ungodliness; rescue
it from all Schisms and Divisions; and free it in thy due time of its Distress
and Persecutions, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2. O! Almighty Lord, Direct and Rule the Hearts of thy People by the Power of
thy Grace, that they may no longer run furiously upon Unrighteous Expedients,
nor by their Violence drive their Teachers into the Practice and Justification
thereof. Oh! that they may seek to hear true, and not pleasing things; and not
only hear, but love to be faithfully dealt with. And give them not up, O!
Father, to persecute the Preachers of Righteousness, who are ready to warn them
of the Error and Danger of their ways; or to despite them, and treat them as
their worst Enemies, only for telling them thy Saving Truths.

Lord, let not the love of Error, and Hatred of those Truths which are
according to Godliness and Honesty, always Reign in them. Let them not persist
therein without Remorse. Or, when they are smitten with Relentings, let them
not lie sealed up in their Iniquity, as the fallen Angels do, by despair of
Mercy, and seat themselves among those Sinners, who, when once they have done
ill, think they cannot be safe, but by doing worse.

Especially, O! God, deliver them not over to a Reprobate Sense, nor shut them
up under a Spiritual Blindness. But open their Eyes, to see from whence they
are fallen, and to seek after those things which are necessary to their
Everlasting Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


2. Prayers for cure of Schisms, and for Graces in divided Times.
1. DEliver this Church, O! Almighty Lord, from Schisms, which have torn it to
pieces. And grant that all those Members, who are broken off, may return to
offer up their Religious Services, in due Dependence upon their own Orthod^x
and Lawful Pasters: and to make Conscience of keeping Union, and of continuing
Subject and Obedient unto those, who are Rightfully set over them in the
Government of thy Church.

Let them not think it enough, O! God, to have Holy Prayers. But teach them
moreover, to put up these Prayers in such Assemblies, as keep Obedient and
United to those Spiritual Fathers, whom thou have called to be the Rightful
Governors of the Body. And make them know, that when, as good Christians, they
are careful to join in none but Holy Services; they must take care also, as
good Church Members, to present those Services to thine Hands, in the Unity and
Communion of thy Church; there to be accepted with thee, through his Merits and
Mediation, who is the Ephesians. 5. 23.
Head and Savior of the Body, even thy most Blessed Son, and our only Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

2. BEnd the Hearts of all amongst us, O! blessed Lord, to have Peace amongst
themselves. Teach them Humility and Submission to those, whom thou have put in
Authority over them. Let Love and Lowliness increase, and all self-denying and
amicable Tempers. And remove far from us Covetous and Aspiring Thoughts, and
Pride, and self-pleasing, and all Wrath and bitter Passions.

Reconcile all jarring Spirits; and cause all Discord and Division to cease.
And dispose us all, O! Jesu, thou Prince of Peace, to see those Truths, which
make for Peace, and tend to close our Breaches, and willingly to submit to
them. Let us not give way so far to Anger and bitter Passions, till none but
violent things will please us, and till we grow fond and greedy of any Error
that will make the Breach wider, but Zealous against such Truths as might serve
again to unite and bring us together. Oh! keep us strictly careful, both of
Peace and Truth. And as we humbly pray, that we may never give up thy saving
Truths for Peace; so do we likewise, that we may never divide from each other,
and be averse to Peace, when thy Holy Truths stand in no need thereof.

And whilst we labor under our unhappy Breaches; Let us not be wanting in any
mutual Offices of Humanity, good Neighborhood, or common Justice toward each
other: Let us not fancy, that their being of different Opinions, or of
different Churches from us, must put a stop to the Just Acts and Offices of
Gratitude, and to the Remembrance of former kindness; or that they must give us
a discharge, from any mutual Obligations of natural Kindred, or of civil
Relations.

Especially, O! Merciful God, keep us from placing all Religion in the Notes of
a Party. Let us not so over-ratc the real, or fancied Virtues of our several
Divisions, as to take up therewith; and become our selves as culpable, for the
Breach and allowed Neglect of some Duties, as we charge our Brethren to be, for
the Breach of others. But whilst on all sides we are zealous in pursuing those
points, wherein we differ; let us be zealous for others too, and not overlook,
or lay aside the care of good Life, and of that common Religion, wherein we all
agree, and which at last must deliver us all from thy Wrath, and prepare us for
thine Everlasting Mercies, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.


3. Prayers for the Bishops and Clergy, under Persecutions.
1. O! Almighty Lord, under all these Persecutions which are sent to prove and
purge us, have an especial care of the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church, who
are set to take of thy People, and to defend thy cause, and fill their Hearts
with the power of thy Spirit, and with all those Gifts and Graces, which are
needful to maintain their own Standing, or prevent the Falls of others.

Make them clear Examples, O! God, of Holy Living, and of truly Christian and
Righteous Suffering to thy Flock; setting before their Eyes the lively
Draughts, and constant Practice of Faith and Patience, Meekness and Charity,
and of a Heart mortified to this World, and full of the Thoughts and Hopes of a
better.

Give them Grace, O! Lord, to watch over thy People, with willing Minds, and
with unwearied Diligence. Oh! that they may Rule them prudently, and skilfully,
as wise Guides: And feed them faithfully, as good Shepherds. Oh! that they may
wholly apply themselves, to Preach thy Word, and to administer thy pure Worship
and Sa^rament, to comfort the Afflicted, ^o strengthen the Feeble-minded, ^o
confirm those that Stand, and to raise up those that are fallen, to quicken the
Indifference and Lukewarmness of some, and to curb and bridle the inordinate
Heat, and undue Passions and Violence of others.

And let them not think of quitting the trust and Charge of Ministering to
Souls, Joh. 10. 12.
when the Wolf approaches, or leave of caring for thy Flock, to take care of
themselves: But keep them ever mindful, O! Holy Jesu, that thou art v. 11.
the true Shepherd who gave thy Life for the Sheep; and that, as thy true
Followers, and faithful Ministers, they must be diligent at such times, in
Ministering to their wants, and attend upon the same at all hazards. Let them
show then, that they Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.
love thee, by feeding thy Sheep. Enable them to show 1 Jo. 4. 18.
perfect Love, which ^asteth out Fear. And give them Grace, Act. 4. 29.
to speak thy word, and to do thy work, with Boldness and Uprightness; neither
fearing the Faces of their Persecutors, nor tolerating, and muchless; feeding
the Diseases, or Vices of their Flocks; but remembering always, that in thy
Church, they preside and Minster for thee; and as they, who are to give an
Account for Souls.

Possess their Hearts, O! God, with such vigilant Care and Love for Souls, and
Holy Zeal, and Godly Courage and Prudence, as is requisite for Men iu their
High Trusts and Stations, and under the present wants, and Difficulties of thy
Church: And be with them in all they do, and in all they suffer for thy Cause,
for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake* Amen.

2. COmfort up their Spirits also, O! Lord, with the visible Effects, and good
Fruits of their Labors and Sufferings among thy People: But whatever success
they meet withal, let them not desist from thy Service, nor fall to do thy Work
negligently; but when there is the least appearance of their working good up
others, let it however satisfy and support them, that they have thereby shown
their Fidelity and Love to thee, and have delivered their own Souls.

And keep them from all vain Janglings, O! thou Blessed Spirit of Love and
Peace, and from falling into desires of Vainglory, or Emulation among
themselves. Let them not defile their own Spirits, or disparage thy Cause, by
turning aside to vent humane Passions, or to seek or serve any worldly ends.
But in all their Labors and Sufferings for thy Church, help them to approve
themselves pure and sincere, as Men, whose great care and chief business is to
serve thee, and to watch for the Good of Souls.

And whilst they are watching for thy People, Lord, let thy good Providence
watch over them. When thy Service, and the ne^ds of Souls do most endanger and
expose them, let them be safe in thy keeping. Put by the Malice and
Machinations of their Enemies, and give them Patience and unwearied
Perseverance, under all their Difficulties and Distresses: Support and Comfort
them under the same at present, and turn them all in the end to the furtherance
of thy Truth, and to the increase of their own Everlasting Peace and Happiness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


4. A Prayer for both Clergy and People.
O! Lord, whilst thou art trying us with Losses and Worldly Sorrows, make us
easy under the same, and careful to bear them with Patience, and raised
Affections. But let us not betake our selves to Pride, and self-pleasing, and
to feed those corrupt Passions, which our Afflictions should purge out, nor
ever fall to seek or think of great things here for our selves.

Oh! that our Tribulations may teach us to be humble, and to mortify our own
Passions. Oh! that our worldy Sorrows may cure and turn us, from being any
longer fond of this World, and from feeding our selves with any vain and
ensnaring Hopes or Desires thereof. And that whilst we are daily crossed in our
Fleshly Desires, we may cease to be any longer bent upon our own Wills, and may
in all things resign our selves up to thine.

Let not our Persecutions, O! Gracious God, be lost upon us, nor let us be
unprofitable Scholars in the School of Affliction: Let it not be justly
chargeable on us, that Tribulations could not mend us, nor the fiery Trial
resine our Spirits, and purge away our Dross. But bring us by our Sufferings,
to know our selves, and to set light by all Earthly things, and to take up with
thee for our Portion, and with the Sure and Blessed Hopes of thine Everlasting
Mercies, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

5. A Prayer for the Churches Defense, and Deliverance from Persecutions.
UNder all its Wants and Backslidings, Sorrows and Distresses, look thou upon
thy Church, O! Lord, and support and deliver it. Many are they who Combine
against it, and great is their Power, and Vigilant and Earnest is their Care
and Endeavor, to suppress and destroy it. And against all their Assaults, it
has no other Defense, but thy Grace and good Providence.

Do not thou forsake it then, O! God, for it flies to thee, and rests on thee
alone for Succor. Maintain it, for it is thine own Cause. And if it be cast
down, thine Enemies and theirs will triumph. Take the Matter therefore into
thine Hand, for no other is sufficient for it, and thou art most concerned
therein. Bring it safe through this Fi^ry Trial, and let it not be consumed
thereby, but, as 1 Pe^. 1. 7.
Gold is, only purged and putrified of its Dross. Give it a Cure, O! Lord, of
all its Errors and Impurities, and quietness in the End from Persecutions, and
Grace not to grow careless, or be Corrupted by days of Ease; but to improve the
same, in doing thee Honor and Service with more Freedom, and fewer
Interruptions, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

15. A Thanksgiving for any Comfortable Cessation, or for Rest and Ease from
Persecution.
BLessed be thy Great and Glorious Name; O! Father of Mercies, and God of all
Comforts, for the comfort of these days of ease, from our former Tribulations.
Thou have in great pity considered our Frailty and Weakness, and has Psalm.
125. 3.
not suffered the Rod of the Persecutors to lie too heavy, or rest too long
upon o^r Backs. Thou have not been Deaf to our Desires when we called upon
thee, nor suffered our Hopes in thy Gracious Promises to ^ail. Thou have
fulfilled thy Word unto thy Servants, who served and suffered for thee in
Confidence thereof; and have made the Wicked to cease from troubling us, and
exchanged the Fiery Trial of their ungodly Violence, for the sweet and
refreshing Comforts of this Rest and Peace.

O! Lord, let us never forget this great Mercy, nor abuse it. Let us not grow
Careless or Corrupt by the Blessings of Peace, or run into Earthly Affections
and Dependencies; and contract such Dross, as may need a second time to be
brought through the Furnace. But keep us sober, and purged and purified in our
Hearts and Minds; and maintain in us ^uch a Godly Zeal, and watchful diligence
under the same, as will make use of the blessed Opportunities of Peace, for
going on with more constancy, and with less hindrance and disturbance in thy
Service.

And make us learn, O! Gracious God, by our past Suffering, and Experience of
thy Goodness, to keep improved in Faith and Patience. Having found thee so
faithful in our necessity, give us Grace to rely upon thee. Let us Heb. 10. 38.
not cast away our confidence, nor Gal. 6. 9.
grow weary in well doing; knowing that in due time we shall reap, if we faint
not. Oh! that the sweet Remembrance of thy Mercies may ever fill our Hearts
with Love, and our Tongues with Praise. Oh! that it may make us careful in well
doing, and confident of thy Faithfulness and Care over us, whilst we commit our
Souls unto thy keeping, in holding to thy ways, through our Blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

AN OFFICE FOR Prisoners for Righteousness.
SCRIPTURES.
Psalm. 7. Act. 5. from v. 18. Mat. 10. Psalm. 10. Act. 16. from v. 18. 1 Pet. 4.
from v. 12.
1.
YE shall be Betrayed, both by Parents and Brethren, and Kinsfolk and Friends;
and some of you shall they cause to be put to Death.

And they shall lay Hands on you, and deliver you up into Prisons, and ye shall
be brought before Kings and Rulers for my Names sake.

And it shall turn to you for a Testimony.

But there shall not an Hair of your Head perish.

In your Patience possess ye your Souls,

And Meditate not before, what ye shall answer. But settle in your Hearts, that
I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom. which all your Adversaries shall not be
able to gain say, or resist, Luke 21. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Precious in the Sight of the Lord, is the Death of his Saints, Ps. 116. 15.

What mean ye to weep, and to break mine Heart? For I am ready not to be bound
only, but to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21. 13.

He that loves his Life shall lose it; and he that hates his Life in this
World, shall keep it unto Life Eternal, Joh. 12. 25.

2.
THE Lord hears the poor, and despises not his Prisoners, Psalm. 69. 33.

Deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are stronger than I. Bring my Soul
out of Prison, that I may praise thy Name, Psalm. 142. 6, 7.

Deliver me, O! Lord, from the evil man, preserve me from the Men of Violence.

Keep me, O! Lord, from the Hands of the Wicked, who have proposed to overthrow
my Goings.

For the Proud have hid a Snare for me, and Cords; they have spread a Net by
the way-side, they have set Gins for me.

They have sharpened their Tongues like a Serpent, Adders Poison is under their
Lips, Psalm. 140. 1, 3, 4, 5.

In the work of the Gospel, I suffer trouble as an evil Doer, even unto Bonds;
but the word of God is not bound, 2 Timothy 2. 9.

For many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my Bonds, are much
more bold to speak the word without Fear. Phil. 1. 14.

3.
REmember my Bonds, Col. 4. 18. Remember those that are in Bonds, as bound with
them, Heb. 13. 3.

Ye had compassion on me in my Bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your
Goods, whilst ye became Companions of those, that were made a gazing-St^ck by
Reproaches and Afflictions, Heb. 10. 33, 34.

I would have retained Onesimus with me, that in thy stead he might have
ministered to me in the Bonds of the Gospel, Philem. 13.

Be not thou ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner; but
be thou partaker of the Afflictions of the Gospel, according to the Power of
God, 2 Timothy 1. 8.

Both in my Bonds, and in the Confirmation and Defense of the Gospel, ye are
all Partakers of my Grace, Phil. 1. 7.

I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. In as much as ye have done it to one of
the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25. 36, 40.

4. An Hymn of Thanksgiving, for Deliverance upon a Trial, or out of P^ison.
IF it had not been the Lord, who was on my side, when Men rose up against me.

Then they had swallowed me up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against me.

Then the proud Waters had gone over my Soul, Psalm. 124. 2, 3, 5.

The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Floods of ungodly Men made me
afraid, Psalm. 18. 4.

They compassed me about like Bees, they thrust sore at me, that I might fall;
but the Lord helped me, Psalm. 118. 12, 13.

And I had the Sentence of Death in my self, that I should not trust in my
self, but in God which raises the Dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9.

But blessed be the Lord, who has not given me as a Prey unto their Death.

My Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is
broken, and I have escaped, Ps. 124. 6 7.

He sent down his Hand from above, and delivered me out of the great Waters,
from the Hands of strange Children.

Whose Mouth speaks Vanity, and their Right Hand is a Right Hand of Falsehood,
Ps. 144. 7, 8.

He delivered me from my strong Enemy, and from them which hated me; for they
were too strong for me.

He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he
delighted in me, Psalm. 18. 17, 19.

The Lord is my Strength, and my Song, and is become my Salvation.

The Lord is on my side; I will not fear what Man can do unto me.

I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord, Psalm. 118. 6,
14, 17.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

This Doxology may likewise be used at the end of the several proceeding
Collections of Scriptures, in this Office for Prisoners for Righteousness, as
also at the end of the several Collections of Scripture, in the former Office
for those, who suffer for Righteousness; when these Collections are read, not
only for Instruction, but Devotionally, as Hymns to God.

Prayers.
1. A General Prayer for all Prisoners.
O! Almighty and Everlasting God, thou see the Streights and Sorrows which I
endure in this place, and how unable I am to help my self, or to bring about my
own Deliverance. But the less Hope and Support I have in my self, the more I
look up unto thee, and place my Trust in thy Mercy. And when my own care can
avail the least, let thine, O! thou blessed Helper of the Helpless, appear the
most for me.

Give me a Body, O! my God, fit to bear the Inconveniences of this close place,
and Grace to be content therewith: Whilst I lie up here, let me not want
necessary Provisions, nor repine at the meanness thereof. Suit the lowness of
my Desires, to the hardship of my Circumstances, and let the greatness of my
study and care be, to ( indemnifie and content my Creditors, when for Debt.
do Justice, and show Temperance and Self-denials) not to please my self, or to
gratify my own Carnal Ease and Appetites.

Whilst I am here kept apart from my former acquaintance, Grant, O! Lord, that
I may carefully retire into my Self, and call mine own ways to remembrance.
And, Oh! that I may amend whatsoever is amiss there, and set all so straight
with thee, that I may delight to look into my own Heart, and to search out my
own Spirit. Lord! now thou have left me nothing else to do, make me apply my
self wholly to Luke 10. 24.
the one thing necessary. To grow in Holy Reverence, and Devotion of Spirit, in
the study of dealing justly, and fairly, with all who are any way concerned
with me; in Humility apud mortified Affections, in Patience and Contentedness.
Oh! plant and fill my Soul, with all Heavenly Virtues, and make bright all the
cloudy and dark parts thereof, with the Rays of thy divine Image. And then, O!
my God, I shall see something of thee, as often as I look into my self, and learn
to be pleased with my own Company, though others are kept from me.

And in whatsoever want I am of other Comforts, grant, O! Father of Mercies,
that both here, and ever hereafter, I may have the Comfort of thy Presence.
When all else are taken from me, do not thou forsake me. Though I dwell in a
disconsolate Room, let thy Spirit dwell with me. Let thy Law at all times
direct me, and let the Sense of thy Love comfort me. And after thou have
Graciously improved this Melancholy Restraint, to wean me from vain and carnal
Delight, and to set my Soul free in thy good time. O! my refuge and strength,
deliver me out of this Prison, and set my Body too at Liberty, for my dear Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

The Prisoner for Righteousness may use the preceding Prayers, for Integrity,
for Constancy in persecuted Duties, for Faith, for Trust in God, for Patience,
for Charity toward Persecuters, etc. in the foregoing Office for Sufferers ^or
Righteousness, as he sees cause.

And for more particular Circumstances and needs, of such as are Prisoners for
the same, they may express the Devotion of their Spirit in these Prayers
following:

2. Particular Prayers.
1. A Prayer for the Prisoner for any part of Truth or Righteousness, to use in
his Family.
O! Father of Mercies, who take the Poor and Helpless, under thine own more
immediate and especial care, when thou take those from them, whose part it is
under thee to take care of them; show the Riches of thy Grace and
Loving Kindness; I humbly entreat thee, to my ( When the Prisoner has not these
Relations, he may say, to my Father's House, and omit the Words contained
within the Marks () and make other Alterations, as this case shall require.
Dear Wife and Children.] Guide them always by thy Holy Spirit, and watch over
them with an indulgent providence. [Keep them obedient to Council, and continue
them under the Blessing of her care.) Preserve them from Want, and protect them
from Danger, and make them a mutual Comfort, and Support to each other. And in
the midst of all my Troubles, continue (both her and) them a constant Comfort
and Refreshment to me thy poor unworthy Servant.

And let me not, O! Gracious God, make them unhappy. Or, if we suffer in
common, for standing off from prevailing Violence, and because we will not
concur, or stake in with the wicked Actings of an unrighteous Generation; let
none of us repine at such Sufferings, but look upon them as Afflions, that are
willing to be embraced; yea, rather Triumphantly to be rejoiced in. I humbly
desire, O! Father, that may all trust thee with our selves, and cheerfully rest
upon thy Faithfulness, to make up to us any Losses, which shall befall us on
such accounts. Thy good Providence is a great and blessed portion in such
cases, as, praised be thy Name, thy Saints have found in all times, by joyful
Experience. And to that good Providence, O! my God, do I trust. It shall always
be my Hope and Confidence; and oh! that as it is the truest Blessing, so it may
ever be the happy portion, both of me and mine, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

2. Prayers for the Prisoner for Truth or Righteousness, to use for himself.
1. A Prayer for Deliverance from Enemies and Prosecutors, when at any time, or
any where, he is put in Prison, for any Parts of Truth, or Righteousness.
O! Merciful God, who art the Helper of the Helpless, and a Refuge for the
oppressed in the Day of their Troubles; be thou my Fortress and Help against my
Persecutors.

They are mine Enemies, O! Lord, for thy sake; and therefore set themselves
thus violently against me, because they cannot drive me to leave thee. And I
have no visible way left to appease their Hatred, because I dare not forsake a
jsut Cause, or go along with them in speaking and acting against that which is
right. And Psalm. 25. 19.
these mine Enemies are many, and Mighty; and they persecute me violently, and
have laid a Trap for my Soul, and Psalm. 22. 11.
there is none to help me.

But though I can neither appease their Hatred, nor withstand it; yet thou, O!
Lord, can alter it at thy Pleasure; or, if they persist therein, thou can
disappoint them. And to thee do I flee, and look for Succor. Help me
therefore, O! my Ged, for in thee do I trust. Help thou me, for I have none
else to help me, for Deceitful are the Promises, and Psalm. 108. 12.
vain is the help of Men. Ps. 22. 11, 19.
Make haste to help me, for Trouble is hard at Hand. Turn the Hearts of mine
Enemies, for seeking my Life; or, if they will persevere therein, bring to
naught their evil Purposes. Forgive them, Gracious Father, and bring not them
into such a P^t, as they have dug for me. But Preserve me from falling into
it, and from being lost in the Depth thereof, for my dearest Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2. A Prayer for Deliverance, from Frail and Faithless Friends, when they are
brought in at such Times, to accuse him for the same.
YEA, O! Gracious Father, not only the Envy and Malice of mine Enemies, but the
weakness of my own familiar Friends is made use of to destroy me. And a violent
Temptation is laid before them, to compass their own Safety, by joining to
compass my Fall.

But the Hearts of all Men, O! Almighty Lord, are in thine Hand. Thou can at
thy Pleasure fortify the fearful, and fix the wavering, and unresolved Spirit;
and give Fidelity, Honor, and Conscience, such Power with them, as shall
prevail over their corrupt Fears, and worldly Interests. Thou can as easily
strengthen the weakness of my Friends, and keep them from Breach of Confidence,
from all Faithless, or strained and false Accusations; as thou can turn, or
defeat the Malice of my Foes. And to thee, O! merciful Father, do I trust, that
neither my Foes shall have their Wills, in working of my Ruin; nor the weakness
of my Friends shall carry them against their Wills, to do the same.

And oh! as thou art my Confidence, so let me be thy Care. Keep me safe here
under thy custody, and receive me at last to thine Everlasting Mercy, for thy
blessed Son, and my only Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

3. A Prayer for Graces at such times, under his Sufferings and Persecutions
for any ways of Truth and Righteousness.
IN the mean time, O! Righteous Lord, whatsoever thou have appointed for me in
this Trial, I am content to bear it. And give me Strength and Ability to bear
it; yea, though it proceed to Blood. I resign my self up to thy good pleasure
therein. I humbly and meekly submit to it, as it is thy doing, and as it is
infinitely my Deserving, and own thy Judgment upon me for my Sins, especially,
etc. here name Particulars.
to be most Just and Righteous therein. But then, Holy Father, I most earnestly
entreat thee, that I may have all my Punishment in this World, but rest with
thee in thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Yea, as my Trial is a Suffering for thy Righteousness, I thankfully receive it
at thine Hand. But then, O! my God, whilst I am tried for thee, do thou show
forth thy Power, and the abundance of thy Grace in me. Grant me a Serene
Patience, calmly to bear my Sufferings, and contentedly and quietly to wait the
end thereof. Give me Courage and constant Presence of Mind, to behave my self
undauntedly; and Prudence, to act and answer in all things, wisely, and
becomingly. Give me Faith in thy power and promises, to hold on without
Fainting, in sure Expectation of thy Succors; and to endure all without
weariness, in Confidence of thy joyful and eternal Recompenses. Fill me with an
inflexible Integrity, and Constancy in my Duty, that I may not waver therein at
any time, much less fall from it, or from any Precepts thereof, to rid my self
out of my own great Troubles, or to bring any desired Events to pass. Yea, fill
me with such Constancy in thy ways, as will Psalm. ^25. 3.
not suffer me, how long soever the Rod of the Unrighteous rests upon me, to
put forth my Hand unto Iniquity. And give me Charity after thine own Example,
O! blessed Jes^, freely to forgive my Malicious Enemies, or Frail and Faithless
Friends, and heartily to pray for them, though they continue to persecute me.
Whilst thou keep on my Trials, deny me not these Graces, O! merciful Lord,
nor any others, which thou see needful for me, that I may acquit my self well
and acceptably under the same, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

4. A Prayer for a Mind raised above Earthly Things.
O! Father of Mercies, raise my Mind by these Afflictions, above the Love of
all Earthly Things. Yea, even of those things, which I have lavishly spent most
time upon, and have been the most inordinately fond of. I see now, and make me
daily to see it more and more, how vain and unprofitable they are when the evil
day comes. And oh! what I may learn thereby, and learn it perfectly, to fix
mine Eyes and Heart on thee, who have deserved more of me infinitely than I can
express to thee; and who can always help and comfort me; and wilt never leave
me, especially not then, when I am driven to thee for Succor, and find the
greatest Need to have thee stand by me.

Make my Duty, good Lord, to become my Delight; and Heavenly things, my
Treasure. For they are Comforts in Distress; stable Comforts, that will
accompany us to the Block, or the Grave, and beyond them; and will not fail to
make us infinitely, and for ever happy in thy Presence. Which Grant, O!
Heavenly Father, to me a wretched Sinner, for the sake of my dearest Savior
and Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen.

5. A Prayer for Peace with God, and a qui^t Conscience.
ABove all, O! blessed Lord, let me have the Comforts of thy holy Spirit, and a
clear and quiet Conscience, to support me under all these hard Trials. Show me
all my Sins, and give me Grace entirely to repent of them, and to be perfectly
set against the same. But assure me at the same time, of thy Mercies toward
all true penitent Sinners; and make me see, O! Gracious Father, that for
Christ's sake, thou art not only willing, but desirous and joyful to receive
them, yea, to Luke 15. 20.
run out, and meet them, as the tender Father did the Returning Prodigal.

And as for my Sins, O! God, though with the Prodigal, I have gone far, and have
lost my self in evil ways; yet by thy Grace, I am come also with him heartily
to return from mine Offenses. I am weary of my Sins, and am earnestly desirous
to forsake them. Though I have been lamentably careless in times past; yet now my
sincere desire, and full purpose is, to show a Godly care, and diligent
endeavor against the same, for the time to come. And I humbly depend upon thy
Grace, and trust to thy precious promises thereof, to perfect and give strength
to my sincere Endeavors.

Look upon me therefore, O! Father, and give me the Comfort to look upon my
self, as one, who, though he has been an offending, is now become a Returning
Son. Lot not my Sins rise up against me, after once I have truly repented of
them. Let them not be able to provoke thy wrath, or to trouble my Conscience.
But make me know, that however offensive I was in the ways of my Wickedness,
through the Blood of thy Son, I am acceptable to thee in the ways of my
Repentance. And that my Sins, however provoking, whilst I lay in them; give
thee no more provocation, after once I return from them. Yea, though great and
strong in themselves, yet, that after true Repentance, they are not too great
for my Savior's Merits, or for thy Mercies; not too grievous for thy Goodness
to forgive, or too strong for thy Grace to cure.

I am ready, O! my God, to return to thy Laws, not only in doing what they call
for, but, if thy Will be so, in suffering for the same* Yea, if thou call me
to it, I desire not to leave the way of Righteousness for any hazards, but to
suffer for it, even unto Blood. And though I know, O! Righteous Lord, that it is
not enough to die a Martyr for one precept, if I allow my self at the same
time, to live a known Transgressor of others. Yet give me the Comfort to look
on Martyrdom, as a sort of Baptism, as thou, blessed Jesu, wast pleased to Luke
12. 50. Mat. 20. 22.
style it, when thou spakest of thine own; and, like it, to purge and wash away
our Sins, if at the same time, when we are suffering for one Duty, we are
inwardly resolved and prepared in Heart, to observe all.

Lord, in the midst of my worldly Troubles, let me have Peace with thee, and
with mine own Conscience. And whilst thy Comforts do refresh my Soul, by thy
Grace strengthening me, I shall better bear any other Misery, which thou shall
give my Enemies leave to inflict upon my Body, and persevere faithfully to
serve, and patiently to suffer for thee, till thou shall Graciously take me out
of their Hands, to thine Everlasting Rest and Mercy, for Jesus Christ's sake.
Amen.

6. A Prayer for Graces needful for him at the Trial, when he is to be judged
for his Stedfastness to Gods Truth or Righteousness.
O! Blessed Lord, if by thy wise ordering, (...) I meekly submit, I shall be
carried from the place of Cus^ody to the place of Trial, or of further
Examination; do tho vouchsafe to go along with me. When I am questioned, teach
me what I shall say, that I may answer so honestly, as not to offend or
dishonor thee; and so prudently, as not to prejudice my self, nor bring
Trouble on any other Righteous Persons, for their bearing a good Affection to
Righteous Things. Give me presence of mind, and clearness of Spirit, in
appearing before all Tribunals; and wisdom and readiness in answering all
Questions. Let my Carriage be without Fear, or Confusion, or any evil or
insincere Arts, in all things acceptable unto thee, and becoming my Person and
Condition.

Suffer me not to be made a Sacrifice, by the Fears or Forgetfulness, the
mis-representations, or false Accusations of Witnesses; nor by the Fetches and
false colors, of Council; nor by the partiality, or misguided Zeal of Judges
and Juries. Or, if thou have otherwise determined, and I must fall; enable me,
Good Lord, to bear thy Will. And though my Blood, which is shed in this Cause, be
vile in the sight of Men; let it be acceptable, and of a sweet smell in thy
Sight, for my Blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

7. Prayers after Sentence of Condemnation is past upon him, for his
Stedfastness to the same.
EJACULATIONS.
THE Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it, Joh. 18. 11.

Not my Will, O! my God, but thine be done, Luke 22. 42.

Lord, I thank thee, for counting me worthy to receive this Sentence for the
sake of thy Righteousness.

Lord! lay not this Sin to their Charge, Acts 7. 60.

Forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke 23. 34.

A short Prayer upon his receiving the Sentence.
LOrd! I meekly submit to this heavy Sentence; yea, I thank thee for it, and
Glory in this shame, since it comes upon me for my Love unto thy ways.

And I humbly pray thee, to look upon their Ignorance, for their excuse; than
upon their Blood-Guiltiness, for their punishment. If they understood the ways
of thy Righteousness, they would not shed my Blood for keeping steadfast to the
same. But now Joh* 16. 2.
they think, alas! to serve and please thee, by slaying me. Luke 23. 34.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. And bring them timely to
see their Errors, and thoroughly to repent thereof. That they, who now in their
misguided Zeal for thee are my Enemies; may yet however at length be Loving and
Happy Sharers with me of thine Everlasting Mercies, through the Merits of our
dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Longer Prayer afterward.
O! Righteous Lord, since thou art pleased to call me, to give Testimony to thy
Righteousness with my Blood, I am content to do it. Yea, I thank thee, O!
Father, that thou have counted me worthy, to lay down my Life for thy sake: But
as thou tryest me to the utmost, s^ strengthen me to the utmost, I most humbly
beseech thee, that in this highest, and last Service, I may show steadfast Faith
in thee, and Charity toward my Persecutors, and meet my Death with that
constancy and devout Cheerfulness, which befits one who is pasing through the Red
Sea, to the Heavenly Canaan, and laying down his Life for thy Cause.

Though I stand Condemned, and vili^ied among Men, for this adherence to thy
ways; yet I humbly hope, that thou, O! my God, wilt acquit, and lovingly accept
me. And if I have thy Approbation, my Heart shall rejoice therein, and account
it enough for me, whatever the World thinks of me. Show them their Error, and
our Uprightness, O! Lord, in standing firm to these points, for which we
suffer. But if we cannot satisfy them, that the way for which they persecute
our Souls, is Innocent and Holy; let it however satisfy us, that so it is, and
that so it will be ^ou^d and declared by thee, before all thine elect Angels,
when t^ou shall appear in thy dreadful Majesty, to pass Sentence, both upon our
way and theirs.

And to the clearing of that Day, and the Trial of thy Righteous Tribunal, do
we humbly commit our Cause and Sufferings. Where our Hope is, that thou,
Blessed Jesu, wilt Graciously own and receive both, though they disdainfully
reject them. And that thou, Righteous Father, for Jesus sake, wilt both pardon
the real Guilt of our other Sins; and openly clear us of the fancied Guilt of
these ways, wherewith our Persecutors do falsely asperes thy Truths, and
Reproach us. Which grant, O! merciful Lord, that we may all comfortably expect
in our Lives, and comfortably find at our Deaths, for thy dear Son, and our
only Savior, Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

After this, he may at any time use such of the Prayers as he likes best, in
the preceding Office for Sufferers for Righteousness, to exercise and
strengthen his Faith, his Patience, his Charity, or other Graces, proper for
his Circumstances; or to assist him in making Intercessions for others.

8. A Prayer for Dying without Fear.
O! Almighty, and most merciful Father, perfect thy Strength in my Weakness,
and support thy Frail, and most unworthy Servant, in this last and greatest
Service, which I have now to pay thee, of laying down my Life, and leaving all
that is dear unto me in this World, for thy Cause.

Oh! let not me dishonor the Cause and Truths, for which I suffer, by showing
any mis-becoming Fears, or unwillingness to suffer. It Is not my mistrust of the
Righteousness of this Cause, O! my God; but the Conscience of my other Sins,
and of the common Errors of my Life, from the Rule of thy Holy Commandments,
which makes me at all afraid to appear at thy Righteous Bar. But cleanse thou
me from all my Sins, by the Blood of my dearest Lord, and then I may meet Death
with an humble Confidence, and Triumph over it.

I know, O! blessed Lord, that when Sin and Guilt, which are the Sting of
Death, are taken out; there is still an aversion in Nature, which is common to
us all, against this Change, and which found place in our Blessed Lord himself.
Mat. 26. 39.
But let the Influences of thy Grace, though not wholly purge off this
averseness, yet subdue and over rule it in my Spirit. Possess my Mind more with
the Righteousness of the Cause, for which I dye, and with the Blessedness of
coming to live with thee for ever after I am dead; than with the pains of Death
it self. And whatever Terror it would otherwise strike into me, let it arm my
Spirit, and sweeten all, to think that I die for thee, and that I die to be
received into thine Eternal Mercy.

Lord! perfect and accept my Repentance, and pardon all my Sins, and give me
Patience, and Presence of Mind to the last. Let me die like a Christian, with
Faith and Charity, willingly giving up my Life for a Testimony to thy ways, and
pouring out my Soul in Devotion toward thee, and in Prayers for my
persecutors; till from my Body, it shall pass into the Arms of thy Mercy, and
there be comfortably received by thee, through the Merits and Mediation of my
only Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ. Amen.

9. Short Prayers for the Condemned Prisoner for Righteousness, in his last
Extremities, or at other times, as he sees cause.
1.
O! Merciful Father, I throw my self upon thy Mercy, and most undeserved
Favor, as a poor wretched Sinner. I infinitely need it, and most earnestly
desire it. And I humbly hope for the same, to pardon all the Sins and Follies
of my Life, and to accept this Offering of my Death, through the abundance of thy
Grace, and through the sole Merits and Mediation of my blessed Lord and only
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

2.
LOrd! now the World is casting of me off, I seek to thee to take me in. Do not
thou reject me when they do, for I am thy Servant. Receive me, for I am coming
to thee* Receive me, for thou call me. Receive me lovingly, O! my dear God,
for I dearly love thee, and am forsaking all to enjoy thee. I have nothing
dearer to me in this World, than my Life; and that I am now making thee an
humble Present of, and parting with it for thy Cause.

And in this Oblation of my self, be thou pleased, O! blessed Jesu, first to
wash me with thy Blood, and to dress me with the Graces of thy Spirit, that I
may be an holy and acceptable Offering. And then do thou vouchsafe, O! Holy
Father, Graciously to accept the same, for thy dearest Son, and my dearest
Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

3.
O! Jesu, forgive me all my Sins, and forgive all my Persecutors, and grant
them timely and true Repentance. Now I am suffering for thy Cause let me be
sure of thy Support and Assistance. Now I am [ or ab^ut to dye, when it only
draws very near; but he is not yet brought to it.
brought to dye] for the ways of thy Righteousness, let them have Honor and
Service by my Death. Make it to work Godly Zeal and Stedfastness in thy
Followers, and Relenting and remorse in their Persecutors, and to carry me to
those most joyful and happy Mansions, which thou have prepared for all those,
who faithfully serve and suffer for thee, in thy Fathers Kingdom. Amen.

10 A Thanksgiving for Deliverance, when he is brought upon his Trial for the
Cause of Righteousness, or for his being set at Liberty.
BLessed be thy Name, O! Almighty Father, who have delivered me out of the
Hands of those who ^ought my Life, and Psalm. 31. 8.
have set my Feet in a large Room. Thou have Psalm. 35. 10.
delivered the poor from him that was too strong for him. Thou have delivered
him, who served thee, and counted not his own Life so dear to him, as the
showing his Love and F^delity unto thy Laws. Thou have Psalm. 37. 40,
delivered him, because he loved thy Name, and put his whole Trust in thee.

Lord! I will be glad, and rejoice in thy Salvation. I will ever praise thy
Love and Goodness, which is abundant in kindness and Succors, toward those who
fear thee, and are ready to expose their own Pesons in thy Cause. I will ever
magnify thy Faithfulness, which has not suffered thy Care of me to slacken,
nor thy sure word and promises to fail: And I will ever Reverently and
Thankfully adore thy Widom, and Power, and Justice, which turn the Councels of
the Wicked into Foolishness, and take the crafty in their own Snares; which
crown thy Servants Heads with Joy and Glory, but cover their Enemies with Grief
and Shame; which show plainly unto all who are willing to see the same, that it
is extreme folly to fight against thee, and that they are in the sure way of
Safety and Happiness, who make thee their Strength, and place their chiefest
Security and advantage in thy good providence and gracious Promises, and in
keeping steadfast to thy ways.

And Psalm. 70. 4.
let all those that love thee, O! Lord, rejoice and be glad in thee. Make them
Triumph in thy Righteousness, and trust themselves to thy Care. But put thine
Enemies. and mine in fear, that they may sin no more. And bring them to repent
of their persecuting thee and thy Servants, that they may not be brought to
suffer for the same in the Day of Vengeance. And keep me ever mindful, O!
blessed Father, of this most merciful Deliverance, that I may spend all the
Days of that Life, which thou have now renewed to me, in thy Service; and learn
thereby evermore to trust thee, yea, though the Pit be ready to shut her Mouth
upon me; and to place my chiefest comfort and safety, in keeping steadfast to
thy Laws, which will be sure either to make my Sufferings end here in present
Deliverance, or to* recompense them hereafter with unspeakable and everlasting
Joys, throuh the Merits and Mediation of my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Office for those who suffer for Righteousness.
THe Introduction, Page 1. Scriptures for Receiving Persecutions. 1. As
Chastisements of former Offenses, p. 9. 2. As Trials of Obedience, and as
bringing Losses for Righteousness. Which are to be received with. 1.
Contentedness, and Thankfulness. p. 11. 2. Free Confession of Christ, and his
Truths. p. 13. 3. Integrity and Prudent Caution, p. 14. 4. Stedfastness and
Constancy. p. 16, 5. Faith p. 17. 6. Trust in God. p. 20. 7. Against Trusting
more in other Things than in God, and fixing too much on Earthly Dependances.
p. 22. 8. With Patience. p. 25. 9. With Prayers and unwearied Devotion. p. 28.
10. With Charity toward Persecutors. p. 29. and 11. toward Persecuted. p. 33.
12. Motives to Suffer, p. 36. 13. For Deliverance from Persecution, p. 39. 14.
For Trust in God, to be preserved under the Same, and Delivered from them, p.
41. 15. An Hymn of thanksgiving for Deliverance from Persecutions, p. 42.


Prayers under Persecutions.
1. As Chastisements of Offenses, a Penitent: Prayer, p. 47. Another out of the
Office of Comminat. p. 50.
2, As Trials of Obedience, and bringing Losses for Righteousness. A General
Prayer for Mercyes and Qualifications, needful in Suffering Times, p* 51.
Another out of the Litany, p. 54.

Particular Prayers for,
1. Integrity, and not Seeking to evil ways for Help, p. 54. 2. Constancy in
Persecuted Duties: Against being 1. Turned aside by worldy Dangers or Losses,
p. 56. 2. or Shaken in mind, or Scandalized, 1. By Defection of others, or
variety of Opinions, p. 58. 2. By a Reverence for any men's Persons, p. 59. 3.
For Faith, p. 61. 4. for Trust in God, p. 64, 5 Against Trusting more in other
Things, and fixing too much on Earthly Dependances, p. 65. 6. For Patience, 1.
In easy endurance, p. 67. 2. In not envying the Success of the wicked in
Compassing unrighteous Devices, p. 69,
7. For Prayers and unwearyed Devotion under Persecutions, p. 72. 8. For
Diligent Attendance on Public Assemblies, p. 74. 9. For Godly Prudence and
Caution, p. 76. And for Integrity therewith, p. 78. 10. For Patience and
Charity toward Persecutors, p. 79. Particular Prayers for Patience toward
^^em, p. 81. And for Charity, p. 84. And against evil Surmises, and for Candor
in Cen^^ing either our Pers. or those who fall in Persec. ^^8.
11. For Grace under them, to carry on amendment of our selves, not impatience
against others, p. 91. 12. For Charity to the Persec. p. 93. 13. For
Deliverance from Persecutions, after one is wearied therewith, p. 95. 14.
Intercessions for others in Persecutions, to be used in any time, or for any
Place or Persons, whose case requires or stands in need thereof; 1. for
Persecutors, p. 97. 2. for the Persecuted, p* 100. 3. for a Kingdom, p. 104. 4.
for the Church 1. A general Prayer for things needful to the same in that
condition, p. 107. A Collect out of the Liturgy, p. 110. 2. Particular Prayers,
1. For its Purity and Integrity, p. 110. 2. For cure of Schisms, and for Graces
in divided Times, p. 114. 3. For the Bishops and Clergy, under Persecutions, p.
118. 4. For both Clergy and People, p. 123. 5. For the Churches defense, and
Deliverance from Persecutions, p. 125.


15. A Thanksgiving for any comfortable Cessation, or for Rest and Ease from
Persecution, p. 126.


The Contents of the Office for Prisoners for Righteousness.
Collections of Scriptures for Prisoners for Righteousness, p. 129. An Hymn of
Thanksgiving, fro Deliverance upon* a Trial, or out of Prison, p. 133. Prayers.
1. A General Prayer for all Prisoners, p. 135. 2. Particular Prayers of the
Prisoner, who at any Time, or in any Place, is in Custody for any points of
Truth or Righteousness* 1. For his Family, p. 138. 2. For himself, 1. For
Deliverance from Enemies and Prosecutors, p. 141 2. From False and Faithless
Friends, when they are brought in to acc^se him for the same, p. 143. 3. For
Graces under his Sufferings and Prosecutions, p. 144. 4. For a mind raised
above Earthl^ Things, p. 146. 5. For Peace with God, and a quie^ Conscience, p.
148. 6. For Graces needful for him at his Trial, p. 151. 7. A short Prayer on
receiving the Sentence of Condemnation, p. 153. A long upon the same, p. 154.
8. A Prayer for dying without Fear, p. 157. 9. short Prayers in his last
Extremities, p. 159. 10. A Thanksgiving for Deliverance on his Trial, or on his
being set at Liberty, p. 16^



An Advertisement.
THere is a Book, entitled, Of Christian Communion, to be kept on in the Unity
of Christ's Church, and among the Professors of Truth and Holiness: And of the
Obligations, both of Faithful Pastors, to administer Orthodox, and Holy
Offices; and of Faithful People, to Communicate in the same. Fitted for
Persecuted, or Divided, or Corrupt States of Churches; when they are either
borne down by Secular Persecutions, or Broken with Schisms, or Defiled with
Sinful Offices and Ministrations. In three Parts, Printed Anno Dom. 1693.

ERRATA.
PAge 36. line 23. dele with, p. 59. l. 20. r. T^uths, p. 70. l. ^^5. r.
Pharao, p. 99. l. 11. r. grew, p. 118. l. ult. r. take care of, p. 119. l. 6.
r. to prevent, ib. l. 28. r. Sacraments, p. 121. l. ult. r. upon, p. 1^4. l.
15. r. refine, p. 136. l. 20. r. ^ast, p. 12^ l. 27. r. Sufferings, p. 131. l.
10. r. purposed, p. 106. l. a. r. shut up, p. 13^. l. 27. r. Delights, ib. a;
after free, ib. l. 28. ^, after time, p. 139. l. 2. r. her Counsel, ib. l. 24*
r. strike, ib. l. 28. r. willingly, ib. Ma^g Note, l* 17. r. his Case. p. 140.
l. 2. r. that we may, p. 142 ('risset 124.) l. 18. r. from, p. 147. l. 10. r.
that I may, p. 135. l. penul^. r. look more. Besides others, which the Reader
is desired to correct himself.


