THE TRUE EUANGELICAL TEMPER.

WHEREIN Divinity, and Ecclesiastical History, are interwoven, and mixed, both
to the profit and delight of the Christian Reader, and modestly, and soberly
fitted to the present grand Concernments of this State, and Church.

Preached in three Sermons, at S. Martins in the Strand, upon that luculent
Prophecy of Peace, and Union, Esaias chap. 11. v. 6.7. and 8.

BY JO: JACKSON.

Cornelius a Lapide in Isaiae cap. 2. v. 4.

Christus per loge^ euangelica^ charitatis, modestiae, justitiae,
mansuetudinis, et patientiae, omnes gentiu^ rixas, et dissidia componet, odia,
et antipathias evellet, rixosos, et feroces compescet, facietque ut in eade^
Ecclesia amice versentur, quasi fratres Romani, et Graeci, etc. ANGLI et SCOTI,
secundum illud Isaiae cap. 11. v. 6, 7, 8. habitabit Lupus cum Agno, pardus cu^
hoedo accubabit, etc.

London printed by M. Flesh^r, for R. Milbourne, and are to be sold in Little
Britain at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1641.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, MOST CHRISTIAN, and grand Audience, of S. MARTINS.
Be these three following Sermons presented now unto their Eyes, which have
been lately unto their Ears:

Together with all possible apprecations unto them, of what they mostly
purport, to wit, Reconciliation, and PEACE:

From their most faithful, and Affectionate Servant, in the things of JESUS
CHRIST, I. I.

THE TRUE Evangelical Temper, And Disposition.
Esaias 11.6, 7, 8. 6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid; and the Calfe and the young Lion and the Fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them.

7. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox.

8. And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weane^
child shall put his hand on the den of the Adder.
Cockatrice.


(...).

LEt this one thing declare how famous and notorious this Text is; that two of
the Sibyls, in their Oracles, have not only pointed at it, but even translated
it Del Rio in loc. tantum non verbo tenus.
almost word for word. The one is alleged by Lactant. Institut. lib. 7. (...).
Lactantius, that Christian Cicero; and the other by him who has obtained to
be called the Sibylla Cumana apud Virgil. -- Nec magnos metuent armenta Leones,
Occidet and Serpe^s, and fallax herba ven^^i.

Prince of Latin Poets. So as this Prophecy has been contained neither within
the limits of Jury nor Christendom, but has been dispersed even among the
Gentiles which knew not Christ, and among the Heathen which have not called
upon his name; in so much as a Commentator unto the Text, asks the question
Gabriel Alvarez in locum.
, Who now can deny unto the Sibyls a spirit of Prophecy? I for my part do not;
neither will I grant it them. That excellent spirit of Prophecy might perhaps
seize upon them, as it did upon Balaam: But I rather think they borrowed these
Prophecies out of the Scripture, as the Israelites did jewels of the Egyptians,
and that they only did the office of Mid-wives, to translate them and bring
them to light; or because the term of borrowing is too gentle and modified,
because they neither acknowledge it, nor pay it again, in giving the glory to
God: Therefore, I say, they stole them out of holy Writ, and pride themselves
in the plumes of a Prophet indeed; in which regard, Justin Martyr, with great
wit and eloquence calls them and such like, Fures Mosis and Prophetarum, the
thieves, and free-booters of Moses and the Prophets.

Both circumcision and uncircumcision, the Jewish Rabbis, and Christian
Doctors take this Text to be meant of Christ, but with this vast difference,
that the Jews construe it, of Christ still to come, and of his temporal
Monarchy; The Christians of him already exhibited, and of his spiritual
Kingdom.

It is rich as the high Priests pectorall, both for words and matter; In words,
for the whole sentence is sweetened with a continued allegory. There are almost
as many metaphors as words. In matter, for it speaks all love, and peace, and
reconciliation, and meekness, and the like. Let (...). Eusebius. lib. 2.
Eusebius be the Expositor: It purporteth, says he, the turning of fierce and
brutall men, and people, who in regard of their savage and cruel nature,
differ nothing from beasts, unto sweet and calm and sociable manners and
conversation. So he. (...).
Procopius concurres: It signifies, says he, that men who before were ravenous
and belluine, to change their course of living, and to apply themselves to
quite contrary studies, and in the same Church, to participate of the same
spiritual meat. So he. And in a word, there is scarce one Classick Author to
be found, in best furnished Libraries, that glosseth otherwise.

I have prefaced and scholied sufficiently unto the Text, I come now to seek
out first the parts, and then the points of it: we must (...). 2 Timothy 2.15.
rightly divide, that we may (...). Gal. 2.14.
rightly proceed.

And for the parts thereof, they may be lessened, or multiplied, or varied,
according to the conceit and apprehension of the Preacher; but it is a safe
rule in the partition of holy Scripture, not to churne the sincere milk thereof
till butter come, nor to wring the nose of it till blood come, Prove. 30.33.
Bread must be distributed, not crumbled. Scripture must be dissected into
parts, not beaten into powder. I have therefore notioned and cast the Text
according to the number of the verses, into three plain and conspicuous
members, which have as natural a flux and emanation forth of it, as the light
in the air has from that which is seated in the body of the Sun, or as the
water in the rivelet has from the fount: They are these.

The first is the nocent, and inimicitious creatures, which are here enumerated
to be seven; first the Wolf, secondly the Leopard, thirdly the young Lion,
fourthly the Bear, fifthly the Lion, sixthly the Aspe, seventhly the Cockatrice.

The second is, the innocent and harmless creatures, which hold proportion of
number with the former, being seven also. The first is the Lamb, the second the
Kid, the third the Calfe, the fourth the Fatling, the fifth the Cow, the sixth
the Ox, the seventh the Child.

The third, and last is, the reconciliation, and conjunction of the two
diverse, nay adverse parties, expressed in an elegant gradation of four
ascents; first they shall dwell together, secondly lie down together, thirdly
eat and feed together, lastly, play and sport together. These are the parts.
The points or conclusions resulting out of these parts are likewise three; out
of each, one, which shall be the demensum, or proportion of three several
Sermons, every one of them being capable to be spread out so as to theme the
Preachers speech, and the Auditors attention, for an hours discourse.

Begin we then with the first of these three parts: The seven injurious
creatures; and there handle this Conclusion, for the first point, 1. Conclusion.
viz.

Man in his condition of nature and corruption, and even converted man, so far
as he is unregenerate, is a fierce and savage creature, yea even unto man.

Homo homini lupus, One man is a Wolf to another, has been so truly said of
old, that it has obtained the authority of an adage; and well may it, when you
see by this Text, it is Scripture-proofe. And would that were all; but man to
man is both a Wolf and a Cockatrice, fulfilling the Text from the Alpha to the
Omega of it; I, and all that is in the belly of it too; a Leopard, a young
Lion, etc. Yea, and more then is in the Text by far, He is an Ass for sloth;
Issacar is a strong ass, couching down between two burdens, Genesis 49.14. He is
a Stallion for lust; They are as fed horses, neighing after their neighbors
wife, Ier. 5.8. He is a Fox for craft, Go tell that Fox, meaning Herod, Luke
13.32. What not? he will piece the Lions skin with the Foxes tail; that is,
add craft to strength, subtilty to violence, to bring his ends, and designs
about.

But I must not range as in a Forest, when I am impaled with a Text. It will
be sufficient to make good, that man is what this Text puts upon him; and that
we shall easily do by other Texts of Scripture, which answer this, as face
answers face, Prove. 17.19. As iron sharpeneth iron, Proverbs 17.17.

First then, man to man is a ravenous Wolf. Benjamin is a rapacious Wolf, Genesis
49.27. Inwardly they are ravening Wolves, Mat. 7.15. I send you as sheep among
Wolves, Mat. 10.16.

Secondly, man is a Leopard. I saw a beast like unto a Leopard, says S. John
in his Revelation 13.2. So have I ten thousand; for man is a beast. Wicked men
are plain beasts; I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of
men, complains S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.32. Good men are too like unto beasts; So
foolish was I and ignorant, even as it were a beast before thee, complains
David, Psalm. 73.22. Surely, I am more brutish then a man, complains Agur,
Prove. 30.2. And also man is like unto a Leopard, in two things; a Leopard is a
swift creature; Swifter then Leopards; the Prophet Habbakkuks phrase, Chap. 1.
ver. 8. So is man, His feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3.15. A Leopard is a
spotted creature: so is man; spotted in himself, and coinquinating others,
with his vicious and infectious habits and customs; therefore the Prophet
Jeremy means the man-Leopard, not the beast-Leopard, when he asks, Can the
Leopard change his spots? Chap. 13. ver. 23.

Thirdly, man is a young Lion, or a Lions whelp, lurking and sculking to do
mischief. A wicked man is by David, Psalm. 17.12. assimilated to a Lions whelp
lurking in secret places. Judah is a Lions whelp, Genesis 49.9, lurking one while
for a prey to his lust, I pray thee let me come in unto thee, said he to
Thamar, before he lay with her; and again for a prey to his cruelty; Bring her
forth and let her be burned, said he, after he had lain with her: in both a
lurking young Lion.

Fourthly, man is a Bear; as very a Bear as either of those two which came
out of the wood and devoured the forty two children: As a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear, etc. Prove. 28.15. Nay worse then a Bear: for better meet a
Bear robbed of her whelps, then some sort of wicked persons, Pro. 17.12.

Fifthly, man is a Lion; Lest he devour my soul, as a Lion, speaks David, Psa.
7.3. And S. Paul in express terms calls Nero a Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. The Lord
delivered me out of the mouth of the Lion.

Sixthly, man to man is an Aspe also; one while a deaf Adder, stopping his ear
to the sweet voice of the Charmer; and another while an hissing one, having the
poison of Aspes under his lips, Psalm. 13.3.

Lastly, man is a Cockatrice, a Serpent, a Basilisk, biting the heel, and
stinging the face, and fascinating with an envious eye the prosperity of his
neighbor: Man, like the cup of wine in the hand of Solomon's drunkard, Prove.
23.32. bites like a Serpent, and stings like an Adder; he is ever either
weaving the spiders webs of vain and idle actions, or hatching the Cockatrice
eggs of wicked and sinful actions, Es. 59.4. Pope Alexander the third was so,
while he went about to make another so; when at Venice he insulted over the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and setting his foot upon his neck, recited the
thirteenth verse of the ninety first Psalm, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and
Adder, etc.

Thus we see man to man, is 1. a ravenous Wolf: 2. a swift and spotted
Leopard: 3. a lurking Lions whelp: 4. a cruel and ranging Bear: 5. ^ roaring
Lion: 6. a poisonous Aspe: 7. a stinging Cockatrice. Thus man degrades
himself, and (according to the phrase, Ap^c. 19.20.) receives charactere^
bestiae, the mark of the beast; receives it, I say, upon both the faculties of
his soul, and the members of his body. Upon his understanding the character of
the horse and mule, which have no understanding: upon his will, of the untamed
Heifer: upon his eye, of the fascinating Basilisk: upon his ear, of the deaf
Adder: upon his lips, of the poisonous Asp: upon his tongue, of the subtle
Serpent: upon his reins, of the lascivious Goat: upon his knees, of the stiff
Camel: upon his feet, of the swift Leopard, etc. all of them evil beasts, as
S. Paul speaks out of the Cretian Poet, Tit. 1.12.

The further enlargement, and filling up of this point, cannot better be done,
then out of Church-story, which is the true Aretine, and scourge of all these
Wolves and Leopards, etc. and has written their lives with the same liberty,
that Eadem liberate scripsit vitas Caesarum, qua illi vixerunt.
they led them, as Erasmus ingeniously said of Suetonius his history of the
twelve Caesar's; and in all Ecclesiastical Annals none fitteth this purpose so
well, as the history of the ten Persecutions of the Primitive Church, well
known by that name; wherein, because profitablenesse is interwoven with a great
deal of delight and variety, I will carry you along to wade through that
Acheldama, or field of blood, when Canicula Persecutionis.
the Dogge-starre, yea (to hold to the strict terms of my Text) the
Wolfe-starre, the Leopard-starre, etc. of Persecution so raged. Only first let
this be annoted, that it will be hard to reconcile Authors in the order of
their enumeration, for that which one reckons to be the sixth, another calls the
fifth, and that which to one is the seventh, to another is the sixth: which small
difference I suppose to have been chiefly occasioned from the short respite the
Church had between the second and third Persecution, even only one year,
during the Caesarship of Nerv^; but to fall on the thing.

The first Persecution.
NEro was the Orientem fidem primus Nero cruentavit. Tertul.
first incendiary, that made the bush burn; not smoke, or sparkle, but flame so
high, that he was believed by some to be that Antichrist; and hither is
referred the Buron. ad an. 12. Neronis.
Abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel, and mentioned by Christ. Two
great and signal Historians give in evidence against him, how infest an enemy
he was to Christians, though the Exi^iabilem superstitionem. Tacitus.
one of them call Christianity an exitiall superstition, and Genus hominum
novae and maleficae superstitionis. Sueton. in Nerone c. 16.
the other call Christians, A sort of people of a new and bewitching
superstition. But though the testimony of them, being our enemies, be good
touching the fact, yet Tacitus must be Tacit, and Suetonius, Tranquil,
touching the Religion; After the way that they (poor pur-blinde, pure blind
Pagans) call superstition, so worship we the God of our Fathers. In Neroni Cl.
Caes. Aug. Pont. Max. Ob Provinciam latronibus, and his qui novam generi humano
superstitionem inculcar. purgatam.
Spain, also was found a Trophy erected to his honor for purging that
Province of thieves and Christians. What a Lion was he (as S. Paul calls him) to
devour such Lambs as James the less, our Lords brother, S. Mark the
Evangelist, S. Peter and S. Paul, Apostles, etc? He put Christians to diverse
sorts of most exquisite torments, burned some, crucified others, covered others
with the skins of wild beasts, and baited them to death with dogs; others he
staked through, rosined and waxened over their bodies, and so set them lighted
up, as torches and lanthornes to passengers. About the fourteenth year of his
reign, he published this Edict, That Quisquis Christianum se profitetur,
tanquam humani generis convictus hostis, sine ulteriori sui defensione, capite
plectitor. Vide Corn. Tacitum. lib. 15. Annal. and Suetonium in Ner. c. 16.
if any professed himself a Christian, he should not be admitted to any
defense of himself, but be put to death as a convict enemy of mankind.
Lastly, what an Asp and Cockatrice was he when partly disliking the old
buildings of Rome, and partly out of vain glory to get himself a name by a new
structure, he set on fire the Edifices, Temples, and houses of the City, and
when he had done, clapped the wicked fact upon the backs of Christians?

The second Persecution.
ANd there was a transmigration of the same Wolvish, Leopardine, Leonine spirit
into Domitian the Emperor, who was the Secundus nempe erat qui contra nos
Christianos persecut^onis incendium ex^i^avi^. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. c. 13.
second Phaeton that set the Christian world on fire. He was the true heir of
Neroes cruelty, says I^ scel^ratam Ner^niani in Deum ^di^, and impietatis
successit. Eusebius. ib.
Eusebius: yea, more cruel then Nero in this regard, that he fed his eyes by
being a spectator of those wickednesses, which Nero only commanded to be done:
So Iussit s^eler a ^antum N^ro, non spectavit. Vid. Tacit. in vita Julii
Ag^icolae.
Tacitus of him, and Justin Martyr in his second Apology for Christians, has
the express form of his inquisition, viz. that they should swear to declare
the truth, whether they were Christians, and if they confessed, then by the Law
the sentence of death passed on them. What a proud stately Lion was he, to
command himself to be worshipped as God? What a Wolf was he, to hunt S. John
to the Isle Patmos, after he had caused him to be thrown into a Caldron of
scalding oil, out of which he came only anointed? What a Bear was he, to
devour Antipas that faithful witness, Apoc. 2. Cletus Bishop of Rome, etc?
What a Leopard was he in being swift to shed blood, when he fell upon the whole
family of David, in hatred to Christ, who was of that stock and lineage? Lastly,
nothing can be said more to declare what a ravenous beast he was, within the
Sept of Christ, then that now it was that there was erected an office of seven
Scribes, or public Notaries, who had the City of Rome divided among them into
so many several Wards, and had enough to do to take exact notice, and keep
Registers of the Martyrs that were put to death in the several streets, and
places of the City.

The third Persecution.
ANd Trajan, the Author of the third Persecution, though by nature he was one
of the most fair and debonaire men that ever lived, and was also so good a
Prince for the republike, that it is remembered of him, before his Peers and
Nobles, he delivered a sword to the Prefect of the Pretorship, bidding him,
Cape hunc ensem, and si bonus fuero, pro me; sin malus, contra me, eo utitor.
if he were good, to use it for him; if evil, against him: yet was he
metamorphosed into a Wolf, a Leopard, etc. against the Lambs, and Kids of
Christ's fold. I cannot now give you a nomenclature or list of the particulars.
Search and consult the Martyrologies, and you shall find the names of those,
who under this Persecution were red in their apparel, and their garments like
him that treads the wine press, Esaias 63.2. who were clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood, Apoc. 19.13. Only in general let it be noted that Suidas in
verbo Trajan.
Tiberianus his Prefect in Palestina informed him that there could not be found
Magistrates and Officers enough to take punishment on the Christians; and in the
Epistles of Plinius secundus, his Viceroy, there are extant to this day, two
famous and known Epistles Plin. Epist lib. 10. Epist. 97. and 98.
, the one of Pliny to Trajan, to enform him of the innocent manners of
Christians, and of their great sufferings, and to enquire what course he should
further take with them. Whereupon Trajan wrote back to Pliny, that henceforth
the Christians should not be sought for, nor hunted to judgment seats, but if
they were brought, and convict, and persevered, they should be punished.

The fourth Persecution.
THe fourth Persecution was a sore and long brunt, when the Wolves and Leopards
etc. were those three Emperors, Elius Adrianus, Marcus Antonius Pius, and
Marcus Aurelius Verus; wherein the Church had no breathing for whole twenty
years together; and now all went to the pot without respect of Sex, dignity,
or number; not of Sex; for the tender woman was no more favored then
stout-hearted men: Felicitas with her seven Sons, were all at once fellows in
martyrdom; not of dignity; for now suffered such eminent and virtuous persons,
as Photinus Bishop of Lions, Irenaeus, venerable Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna,
Justin Martyr that great and noble Philosopher, and diverse Bishops of Rome:
these were ecclesiastics; and amongst the laics, Hermes Prefect of the City,
with his Wife, Children, and whole family; which amounted to the number of
1250. persons, who were all fagotted together, to make one great bone-fire:
Lastly, not of number; for Granianus Proconsull of Asia, wrote to Adrian the
Emperor, that he would give over his place, and leave the government, for
that so great multitudes of innocent persons were daily drawn to the stake,
through the clamours and envy of the vulgar, being Sine ullo discrimine,
nominis tantum, et sectae rei.
guilty of nothing but a mere name and sect.

The fifth Persecution.
ANd after a long peace of above sixty years, began the fifth Persecution. The
Wolf and Leopard etc. now was Severus the Emperor; Vere Imperator sui nominis.
an Emperor of his own name, as they jested upon him, Severe was his name, and
severe his nature. The Gentiles now envying the long Summer of the Christians
peace, began to accuse them as close enemies of the Empire, and secret
beutefeaus of rebellion, that they refused to adorn, and add pomp to the
Emperors Victories, with flowers, carpets, laurels, Incense; that they refused
to swear by the fortune of Caesar; that they were still talking of a King and
Kingdom to come: whereupon in the tenth year of his reign, he sent forth a
general Edict that none should be Christians; and withal a special Edict was
sent to Rome, to the Prefect of the City, to enquire into the Colleges and
assemblies for them. But nothing that can be produced here, but is less then
the testimony of the noble and learned Tertullian, who now wrote that famous
Apology of his to Scapula, in the behalf of Christians. Existima^t omnis
publicae ^ladis, omnis popularis inco^m^di, Christianos esse causam. Si Tiberi^
ascendit in moenia, si Nilus non ascendi^ in arva, si Coelu^ stetit, si t^rra
movit, si fames, si tues, Christianos ad ^^ones, acclamatur.
They esteem us Christians, says he, to be the cause of all public misery,
or epidemicall incommodity; if Tiber swell up unto the walls, if Nilus water
not the Corn fields, if Heaven stand, or earth move, if there be famine, or
pestilence, etc. presently they cry out, Throw the Christians to the Lions.

The sixth Persecution.
ANd as if Severus had transpired his soul into Maximinus, the stirrer up of
the sixth Persecution, he now became the Wolf, and Leopard, etc. a man of both
barbarous body, and mind: that is declared by those titles, which even his own
gave him, calling him Cyclops, Busyris, Phalaris, Sciro, Trypho, Gyges; it was
occasioned from certain grievous earthquakes, which (according to the usual
scandal) was ascribed as a punishment to the Christians, because they would
not do worship to the Heathen gods: and though it were limited both to a short
time, (for it was precinct with a trienniall girdle) and only to the Clergy, as
the fomenters and nourishers of the Religion, yet did it so scorch within the
Tropicks of the Church, that many thousands suffered, and that by diverse and
sundry kinds of death, in so much as now Orige^ wrote a notable book de
Martyrio, to comfort the afflicted state of Christians.

The seventh Persecution.
ANd now Decius took place upon the Stage to play the beast, in the seventh
Persecution, which hitherto is judged to be the most cruel of all by far,
insomuch as many lapsed and apostatized from the faith, to the great both
dishonor and disadvantage of the Religion: which occasioned Cyprians notable
Book de Lapsis. He acted a double part, first using the violence and force of
the Wolf, Leopard, Lion, and Bear; for when he saw Christ served in every
place, and the fanes of the Heathen Gods to lie forlorn and neglected, he
threatened and menaced bitterly his Prefects, and Presidents, with all kinds of
ignominies and tortures, if they did not forthwith compel the Christians to
worship the Gods, whereupon they vyed cruelties, and strove who should overcome
each other therein: So did he vex the Church Varius apparatus suppliciora.
Gr. Nys. in vita S. Greg. tha^mat.
with various and interchangeable pomp of sufferances as Gregory Nyssen
speaks. Secondly, he made use also of the Serpentine craft of the Aspe and
Cockatrice. For his torments were so lengthened, and wire-drawne, to the end
Christians might feel themselves dye, and taste of the sorrows of the grave to
the utmost; that S. Cyprian called them, Tormenta sine solatio mo^tis. Cypr.
Ep. 8.
torments without the hope or comfort of death; and S. Hierome complains, that
he was the Christians Hostis call^dus, tarda ad morte^ supplicia conq^ire^s,
animas cupiebat Christianoru^ jugulare, non corpora.
crafty and subtle enemy, so wearying out their patience by tedious
sufferances, that he sought rather to kill their souls, then their bodies.

The eighth Persecution.
THe eighth Persecution lies more blind in Church-story then the other, and
the lines of it are drawn more dark and uncertain; who was the chief Wolf,
Valerian, or Aurelian, or Gaellus and Volusianus, remains in some difference:
some of the chief Lambs and Kids that were devoured, were Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, etc. in it many were flead alive, and
many for fear fled into deserts and caves, witnesses S. Jerome in the life of
Paul the Eremite.

The ninth Persecution.
THen arose the ninth Persecution, when Dioclesian was the Wolf for ten whole
years together, without any intermission, when (says the Plebs Dei depopulata
est, et omnis fere orbis sacro cruore Martyrum infectus est. Severus Sulp^tius
lib. 2. Sacr. hist.
Historian) the people of God was depopulated, and almost the whole world
besmeared with the sacred blood of the Martyrs: it was occasioned by a Prophecy
or Oracle spread abroad, that if all the Christians were but once slain, the
Roman Empire should notably flourish: whereupon the tyrant raged without all
mercy, in so much as in one month above 17000. suffered. Eusebius was an
eyewitness of these things, who tells a most tragical story hereof, how some
were shaven, some racked, some whiped, some burned, some drowned, some
beheaded, some hanged, some crucified, some famished, some pulled in pieces,
without all respect of modesty, women were exposed naked to torture: it was
free for every one to bastinado a Christian where he met him, with staves,
sticks, clubs, bridles, rods, whips, ropes. Many had their thighs broken,
others inverted with feet upward, and head downward, and a fire being
underneath; were so smoaked and suffocated to death; others anointed with
scalding lead, others with hot water, others given for meat to the beasts of
the field, others to fish of the Sea, others had sharp needles thrust under
their nails, others tied to stakes and trees, and famished, till they did gnaw
the flesh off their own arms and feet. In a word, this Beast did boast of
two things, of the De aucto imperio, and delet^ nomine Christian^.
increase of the Empire, and of the blotting out of the very name of a
Christian.

The tenth Persecution.
LAstly, Julian that Apostate and Renegado from the Christian faith, played
both the strong and subtle Beast, whilst he shut up the schools of the
Christians, that so he might introduce ignorance and barbarism, whilst he
prohibited them of bearing any public office, inflicted both corporal smart
and pecuniary mulcts upon them, called them himself, and commanded others to
nickname them Galileans, restored the Temple to the Jews to despite the
Christians, appointed some to be torn in pieces with horses, caused the
bellies of Women and Virgins to be ripped up, filled with oats and barley, and
set as troughs to the swine, etc.

I have, me thinks, been telling a long and a sad story, and Lupus in
f^bula, still a Wolf, and a Leopard, and a Lion, and a Bear, and an Adder is
in one end of it. And, if enquiry were made lower, have there not been, are
there not now, as very Wolves and Leopards as these? what was Bonner and
Gardener in Queen Mary's days? what was H. 8. of whom a Cabala or tradition
goes, that on his deathbed, he confessed, he had never spared man in his
wrath, nor woman in his lust? what was Charles the fifth, Immanuel Meteranus
lib. 2. descriptione bell. Belgici.
who was guilty of the blood of 50000. Protestants whilst he was in the low
Countries? what was the Duke of Meteran. lib. 4.
Alva, who destroyed 18000. Protestants in Belgia, in six years time only?
what was the incendiary of the Massacre in France, August the sixth, Anno 1572.
when in one night there were ten thousand Protestants butchered with wicked and
cruel hands? what a kennell of these Wolves, Leopards, etc. was there in
France, where one hundred and forty thousand were thus served, in the space of
two and twenty years Dietericus post. in festum S. Steph.
, beginning the account at the year of the last patience of the Saints, 1564?
And lastly, that it may appear indeed, what bloud-hounds the Papists are, what
a Shamble their Church is, consult^ grand Witness of their own, greater then
exception, Antonius Ciccarell^* who continues on the history of Platina; he in
the life of Pope Gregory the thirteenth of that name, relates that the
Ambassador of the King of France, in an Embassy to the said Pope, the better to
ingratiate his Master with his holiness, told him, that from the death of the
Admiral, in fourteen years, there had been put to death in France, for the
Religion, seventy thousand Heretics, as he called them. So true is that of In
Psalm. 118. T^ta terra purpurata est sanguine Martyrum.
Saint Augustine, The whole earth is almost a purple Island, scarleted and
redded with the blood of Martyrs. And, all doubt removed, if we had but
Stephens eyes to see heaven open, and behold first all the Martyrs of the old
Testament, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zacharias; and then all the
Martyrs of the new Testament, from the blood of the Proto-Martyr Stephen, to
the blood of him or her, who lastly suffered, it may be yesterday, or to day,
under the Popish Inquisition, or Turkish slavery, or elsewhere: And lastly, if
we withal take the word Martyr in the fullest importance, and significancy of
the word, for those who have suffered for a good cause, in their good names, in
their estates, in imprisonment and restraint, as well as in life or limme, (for
it is a ruled case, Possumus, and nos sine ferro, and flamma esse Martyrs.
that a man may be a Martyr without sword or fire) then, I say, what a goodly
troop of red-coated Soldiers would they be? how infinitely beyond the
stupendous Armies of Xerxes or Semiramis? Who would not ask after them, Who
are these that come out of Edom with their garments red? But it may be thought,
I follow the chase after these beasts too hot, and too far; but I wish both
Magistrates and Ministers would join together to hunt these Wolves, etc. to
their holes, and to their dens, and there keep them from ranging abroad, to
prejudice the flock of Christ. It is now high time to fall upon Application.

The Application.
THe clew or thread to guide the Application of this point, must be that Text of
S. Paul to Timothy, 2 Ep. Chap. 3. ver. 16. All Scripture is profitable for 1
Doctrine, for 2 Reproof, for 3 Correction, for 4 Instruction, etc; together
with that other, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever is written, is written for our learning,
that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. So as
right Application of Scripture is the bending of it to a fivefold Use; First,
Doctrinall against ignorance; Secondly, Elenchicall, or Confutative against
error; Thirdly, Corrective, against vice; Fourthly, Instructive, or Directory,
how to walk exactly, and circumspectly, in reference to that particular truth:
And lastly, Consolatory, against fear or despair. A method (certainly) very
Scripturall, and Authentic, but of more frequent use with the Divines of other
Countries, then with our English Divines. They may be resembled unto the five
stones that David gathered up, when he went with his sling against Goliath. And
if a Preacher could but sling them with that vigor and strength that he did,
(for it was not David's sling, but his arm, nor Scanderbegs sword, but his
force* which were so considerable) and then with the dexterity of the men of
Gibeah, who threw stones at an haires-breadth, Judges 20.16. surely he would
make the greatest opposite either to the Theory, or Practick of Divinity, to
stagger and fall down; only here is the discrepance, those five stones were
all smooth ones, but these three of them only, that is, Doctrine, Instruction,
and Consolation, are smooth, two of them, that is, Reproof, and Correction,
are sharp and rugged, as that wherewith Zippora cut off her sons foreskin.
Amant homines verita^em luc^ntem, non redarguentem.
Men love truth when it shines, but not when it redargues.

1 (...).
The Doctrinall use.
THe Doctrine whereunto this point is profitable, is this; to justify, and
propugne Gods manner of dealing with his Church; that he should allow such
Nimrods, mighty hunters in the Forest of his Carmel, such Boares in his
Vineyard, such Wolves, Bears, Leopards, and Lions, in his holy Mountain, as
the Church is here styled verse 9. such Adders, and Snakes in his bush; that
man's malice should execute, what Gods grace decrees; that the blood of Martyrs
should be the seed of the Church; that Religion should batten with blood; that
God should tie the child to both breasts, of milk and blood; that the bush
should burn and not consume; that while wicked men go about to cross Gods
decree, they bring it on, and while they rush against his will they fulfill it;
that Christ should both be as loving an husband to his Spouse, as Elkanah was
to Hanna, and yet Vir sanguinum, a bloody husband too, as Zippora called Moses;
that it should be asked of Gods dearest servants, Who are these who come out of
Edom with their garments red? Lastly, that he whose ways are always equal,
whose actions are exactly commensurate with equity and justice, who lays
judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plumb-line, should thus let
loose the chain, and turn such Wolves upon his Lambs, such Leopards upon his
Kids, etc. as if his Church were rather a kennell, then a fold.

Which because it is one of the grand tentations, therefore both to clear Gods
justice, and to prepare our souls against whatsoever the day may bring forth,
I will make the more exact disquisition and inquiry into the reasons and
grounds hereof.

And first, let it be considered, that it is none other thing then Christ has
foretold and forewarned his Church of, that they must be as sheep among wolves,
that they must be as sheep to the slaughter, that they must be hated of all
men for his names sake, that in the world they should have tribulation, that
the time should come, that in killing them men should think they did God good
service, and the like: So as no man can say, there is any breach of Covenant,
or nonperformance on Gods part, or that, as it is in the Proverb, he holds
in the one hand a piece of bread, and in the other a stone.

Secondly, no tentation took hold of them in this kind, but what very many of
them desired; and longed for more then for their appointed food. Many of the
militant Saints have longed for the death of martyrdom, and dug for it more
then for hid treasures, and rejoiced exceedingly to find the grave, Job 3.21,
22. Melchior Adamus in vita Lutheri.
Luther desired it, and prayed all his life, that by this death he might
glorify God. In the third Persecution, under Trajane, the Christians, quasi
manu facta, gathered together like a band of Soldiers, and appeared in whole
troops in Asia, and Bythinia, offering themselves to martyrdom, so that the
Proconsull cried out, O miseri, si cupitis mori, non habetis praecipitia and
restes? Tertul. ad Scapul. cap. ult.
Oh miserable wretches, if you desire to dye, are there not precipices and
halters enough? Omnes ad martyrium quasi aves ad alveariu^ co^volantes. Baron. ex
D. Chrysostom.
all did take wings and fly to martyrdom, as Bees to the hive. In Edessa,
women ran with their children in their arms, ready with haste, to let them
fall forth, as Mephibosheths Nurse did him, striving which should first lay
down their lives for Christ's sake. In the ninth Persecution under Dioclesian,
they sought it as eagerly as ambitious Prelates did Bishoprics.

Thirdly, hereby they lose nothing: nay were they not infinite gainers? the
Martyrs themselves, who went the farthest in suffering, and were not rent and
torn only, but devoured of these Wolves and Lions, would not (some of them,
not then; not one of them now) have saved one drop of that blood, which they
sold at so brave a rate: have they not now for a short pain, got a durable
pleasure; for a sinful miserable and transitory life, acquired to themselves
an holy and happy eternity?

Objection. And so might they have done too, if their candle had burned to
within the Socket, and they gone to their graves like a rick of Corn, which is
white unto the harvest?

Answ. Perhaps so indeed, and perhaps otherwise, but by that path, their Crown
of glory had neither been so 1 certain, nor so 2 soon, nor so 3 weighty; not
so certain; for (alas!) how many are so far from suffering any thing for
Christ, by way of passive obedience, as they will do nothing, by way of active?
how many have outlived their piety, forsaken their righteousness, and in the
hot sunshine of prosperity have ungirt and cast off that cloak which the
wind of adversity would have caused them gather close unto their breast? Not
so soon neither; and that is to be accounted for some loss, when as one day
in Gods Courts, is better then a thousand elsewhere; Not so massy; for if any
shall sit on Christ's right hand and on his left; if any shall shine as the Sun
in the kingdom of the Father; if any shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge
the twelve tribes of Israel; if any shall have palms in their hands and
crowns on their heads, it shall be the slain witnesses: and therefore
Martyri^ coronari.
to be crowned with Martyrdom, is the ecclesiastical form of speaking, and
S. Steven the Protomartyre of the New Testament had to his name, as by divine
dispensation, a Crown, and hence blessed (...). Ign. Ep. 11 ad Romans
Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Romans, professes He had rather dye for
Christ, then reign over all the ends of the earth.

Fourthly, Is there any way so much to glorify God and Christ? can the members
do more honor to the head then in suffering for it, or with it? has any man
greater love then this, to deny himself, and lay down his fame, his riches,
his life for his friend? Oh how does it cry up Christ, in the world, that he
has such servants, as can drink of the cup that he drank of; such followers,
as can dye for the faith of him, who dyed for the love of them.

Fifthly and lastly, there is no way, or means, whereby to make the
condemnation of these ravenous Wolves, and Lion rampants, more just, nor their
doom more heavy, then by suffering them to bring on their own heads, the
blood of Martyrs; Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints, and especially such a death, and of such Saints. How bitter a curse
that was, when the Jews imprecated themselves with His blood be on us, and on
our children; the event has declared, when full 1600. years flux of time now
already past, has obtained no relaxation thereof, and his blood is upon those,
upon whom his servants blood is upon. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? When
Zacharias, the last Martyr of the Old Testament, was slain between the Temple
and the Altar, he dying said, The Lord shall look upon it, and require it, 2 Chronicles. 24.22.

2 The (...).
elench or use of redargution.
THe error which this point is profitable to confute and redargue, is twofold;
First of the Jews, Contra 1 Iudaos.
and secondly of certain Christians Judaizing. The error of the Jews is, that
they stick in the bark, and expound the text to be fulfilled to the very
letter of it, that the Wolf, and the Lamb shall (indeed) without any trope, or
metaphor at all, dwell together, and the Leopard and Kid lie down together,
etc. Whence they then infer that fundamental, and soule-splitting venom of
doctrine, which is directly antipodes to Christian Religion, That the Messiah
is not yet come, because these antipathies, and jarres do still remain amongst
the creatures as fresh, as if Adam had but feign yesterday or to day.

The erring and Judaizing Christians here are the Millenaries, 2 Iudaiza^tes.
a sect of learned, and critical Christians, who expect in the last thousand
years of the Church, the cream of all militant perfection, and excellency of
manners; and that all sowernesse amongst Christians shall be absorpt of
Charity, and the discords of their dispositions shall be tuned up to so sweet
an unison, and harmony of love and sympathy, as Wolves and Leopards shall
cohabit with Lambs, and Kids; feroce and belluine men, with the meek and
placable. Lactantius was slipped unawares into this opinion, and S. Jerome does
(not lightly) stigmatize, and animadvert him for it, and not Lactantius only,
but very many of good name, in diverse ages of the Church, being taken (it
seems) partly with the probability of the text, Apoc. 20.2. Satan was to be
bound up a thousand years, and partly with the authority and magistrality of
the first assertor of it, Baron. ad an. 118.
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, a man of that sanctity, and esteem, that he
drew no meaner adherents to him, the^ Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, etc. but it is
sufficient to note these things with an obeliske; They are dead tenets, and
opinions, and we will not do with them, as Saul, and the Witch with Samuel,
call them up from their dorters again.

3. (...).
The use of Correction.
NOw the vice or fault which this point is profitable to correct, is that
froward, morose, churlish, rugged; nay far more, that cruel, fierce, inhumane,
belluine disposition, which is not only in natural and wicked men, but even
in such as are in part regenerate, and sanctified. Better be beasts then like
beasts: and yet such are the blots and spots of our semi-conversions, so great
is the imperfection of our regeneration, as after grace has blunted the point,
and rebated the edge of our corruption, yet is there still too much of the jaw
of the Lion, and of the paw of the Bear in us, too little of the man, too much
of the beast, so as we may abhor our selves in dust and ashes, and cry out
with Agur, and David, (as before was mentioned) Surely I am more brutish then
any man, and have not the understanding of a man in me. So foolish was I, and
ignorant, even as it were a beast before thee. To give a touch upon each
particular again: there is too much of the greediness of the Wolf still
remaining, as appears by our rapacity, by our snatching, and catching, at far
more then is our own, or can justly call us Master. Too much of the Leopard,
both in our swiftness to evil, and in our spots, and streaks, with sinful
customs, and habits. Too much of the Lions whelp, in hunting after an
unlawful prey. Too much of the Bear in cruelty, oppression, and fierceness.
Too much of the Lion too; we would roar, and have all the beasts in the
forest tremble: if we say the Asses ears are horns, we would have none dare
gainsay it. He is militantly triumphant in these days, that would not be
(...), some great one. Too much of the Aspe i^ our venomous and scalding words,
which burn like coals of Juniper. And lastly, too much of the Cockatrice, or
Basilisk in our envious and evil eyes. Alas, that we should thus defile that
humane nature of ours, which God vouchsafed to take into union with his
Godhead. That Primitive love and gentleness, which did so much of old adorn
the manners of Christians, is now only not utterly lost; we go not only to
law one with another, (which S. Paul so decryed) but to revilings,
contestations, fightings, combats. Raca and Fool are now tempers and
modifications of speech. Where is there a a Bonaventure that I may worship In
fra^re Bonaventura Adam peccasse non videtur.
, in whom Adams fall could scarce be seen. Well, it becomes us to be humbled
under the apprehensions hereof, and to bewail and lament this taint and
irregeneracy of our natures, and to fall upon the practice of
thorough-mortification, not giving over till we be gentle, and innocent as
Lambs, Kiddes, Children, etc.

4. (...).
The use of Instruction.
ANd the practice* or piety that this point puts us upon, is a fourfold
Instruction.

First, we must not vex our selves, or take scandal at Gods providence, and
dispensation toward his Church, nor distress our selves with bootlesse
problemes, Why God should let loose Wolves, and Lions, and Bears into the very
fold of his Church, among his Lambs and Kids; That we shall tread upon the
Adder and Basilisk, Psalm. 91.13. That he will make a covenant betwixt us and
the beasts of the field, Job 5.23. That we shall stop the mouths of Lions,
Heb. 11.33. These and the like are temporal promises; and the grand rule, or
Canon of them is, That they must be understood, Cum exceptione crucis, and
castigationis. These Nimrodians are but what they are, and what they will be
unless God change them, that is, Wolves and Bears, etc. and for the Church it
is profitable to melt away her dross, and purge away her tin; and therefore
Cyprian in his Book De lapsis, observes that the seventh Persecution, under
Decius, was justly inflicted by God, to reform the depraved manners of the
Christians.

Secondly, we must carefully shun such beasts, as we would not stand too near
the grate at the Tower: it is not always the voice of the sluggard to say,
There is a Lion in the way. It is folly, without a warrant in our hand to take
the Bear by the tooth, or the Lion by the paw: just the spirit of the sprighty
Ascanius in Op^at aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem.
Virgil, to wish a Lion to come out of the forest and meet him. Such usually
trace their own ruin, whilst they turning again, all to rent them.

Thirdly, if Gods providence have cast thee with Daniel into a den of Lions,
so as thou may take into thy mouth David's complaint, My soul is among
Lions; then do as men in woods and forests, when they spy the wild beast
coming, climb a tree? what tree? even the tree whereon our Lord hung. Climb
it, how? By faith, and meditation, and prayer, stretch thy self upon his
Cross, Tell him, if thou perish, thou do perish, but it shall be at the foot
of him that was crucified. Cry, O Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, be thou my Jesus. The name
of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous shall run unto it and be safe,
Prove. 18.10. Diogenes in vit.
A Sparrow pursued by an Hawk, fled into the bosom of Xenocrates, which he
refused to put out again, saying, It was a dishonest thing to betray a guest.
The moral, or rather the theology of it, is easy:

Fourthly, suppose the worst; that it be the will of God, thou suffer from
these beasts, be lacerated and torn with these Bears and Wolves, devoured by
these Lions, poisoned by these Aspes, stung by these Cockatrices; Lay thine
hand upon thy mouth, possess thy soul in patience; the Lord will look upon
it, and require it; it will, assuredly, make for thine advantage, and their
smart. When the Tyrant Phocas had betrayed Maurice the Emperor, his Master,
had slain his wife and children, and was ready to bereave himself at once,
both of life and diadem, yet did he not blaspheme through grief of heart, but
put to silence the voice of murmuring, with that versicle of Psalm. 119.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and right are thy judgments. But that which falls
most fit and opposite here, is the last words of Ignatius, who when he was
thrown to the wild beasts to be devoured, (for that was his kind of
Martyrdom) meekly concluded thus: Frumentum Dei sum, and molor dentibus
ferarum, ut purus Dei panis sim. Surius in vita B. Ign.
I am Gods grain, or corn, and must be grinded between the teeth of these
beasts, that I may so make pure bread to my God.

5. (...).
The use of Consolation.
LAstly, even out of this strong, comes sweet; out of this Lion, and Wolf, etc.
comes an honeycomb of comfort; better be the Martyr, then the Tyrant, better be
the Lamb then the Wolf, the Kid then the Leopard. If we suffer with him, we
shall reign with him. A venerable old man, walking the streets of Alexandria,
in time of Persecution, upon notice given that he was a Christian, is suddenly
enclosed by an unruly company of Idolaters, who after all manner of
despightfull usage, both in words and deeds, began jointly with much scorn, to
demand of him, what great miracles has this Christ of thine done, whom thou
make to be God? To whom the blessed Saint made ready and cheerful answer; I
can quietly and patiently endure all these wrongs which you do me, and more
and greater, if need be, without disquiet to my self, or trouble to you. But
yet, more fit and concenter, is that aculeate speech of Chrysostom. when Eudoxia the
Empress raged against him, like a Lioness, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Epist. ad
Cyriacum.
I pass not for all the threatenings of the Empress. If she will banish me,
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: If she will saw me asunder,
let her, I have Esaias for an ensample: If she will throw me into the Sea, I
remember Jonas: If she will cast me into the furnace, I remember the three
Children: If she will stone me, I remember Stephen: If she will take mine head,
I remember John Baptist: If she will throw me to the Lions, I remember Daniel:
If she will take my goods, let her take them; Naked came I out of my Mothers
womb. Thus the horse in Job neighs at the trumpet, the Leviathan laughes at
the Spear. Faith sucks comfort even out of the most adverse estate that can
befall a Christian.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE TRUE EUANGELICAL TEMPER. The second Sermon.
ESAIAS 11.6, 7, 8. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid, etc.


IN the former Sermon, was only prosecuted the first of those three parts,
into which the Text was divided, which was the pursuit and hunting of the seven
nocent, and harmefull creatures; wherein (in some sense) we may be termed with
Nimrod, mighty hunters before the Lord, so to dare to hold a Wolf by the
ears, to wash a Leopards spots, to take a Lions whelp by the beard, a Bear by
the tooth, a Lion by the paw, an Adder by the sting, and to crush the eggs of a
Cockatrice.

The second part of the Text, now to be handled, are the parties innocent, and
injuried, which are enumerated to be seven also, that so the one might hold
proportion in number, with the other; and of these seven creatures, six of
them are beasts, as well as the former; but then they are not Evil beasts, as
before was quoted out of Tit. 1.12. they are such beasts as are in league with
man, Job 5.23. they are such beasts as while the Law was up, ( illius aram,
etc.) furnished Gods Altar with Sacrifices, and now under the Gospel, our
tables with meat. Lastly, they are such beasts, as are emblemes and
hieroglyphics of Christian virtues, and graces, and whereunto man may be set
to school, to learn charity and civility, and meekness, and patience, and
innocence, and obedience, and peace, and the like.

I will do, as God did unto Adam, Genesis 2.19. bring them unto you: not (as he
there) to consider their names, but their natures.

The first is the Lamb, a most meek, and harmless creature; therefore the
phrase of the Old Testament is, a Lamb without blemish, Exodus 12.5. and of the
New Testament, an immaculate Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.19. A Lamb was the type of Christ,
under the Law: So was the Paschall Lamb, and the other offertory Lambs too;
but Christ himself under the Gospel; Behold the Lamb of God, was said of him,
John 1.29. So were all the Apostles of Christ, Lambs too, Behold I send you
forth, as Lambs among Wolves, Luke 10.3. and not they only, but all the
servants of Christ, unto the end of the end of the world, are Lambs; feed my
Sheep, feed my Lambs, Ioh. 21.15.

The second is the Kid, a most innocent creature also, second to none but the
Lamb, therefore was there a positive Law, with the Jews, both given Exodus 23.
and 34. and repeated, Deuteronomy. 14. not to sees the Kid in the mothers milk. Not
that there was any direct, or formal sin, in that manner of Cookery, but that,
and such like injunctions are called Sepes Legi^.
hedges of the Law, to train up the mind of man from fierceness, and cruelty,
and to accustom it to meekness, and gentleness. As also, because it was a
creature that did no cruelty, therefore it should suffer non^. A Kid is a
creature, acceptable to God for Sacrifice; the Paschall Kid was as allowable,
as the Paschall Lamb, You shall take it either from the Sheep, or from the
Goats, Exodus 12.5. acceptable to Angels for a present, being both Gideons
present, Judge. 6.19. and Manoahs, Judge. 13.19. acceptable to man for meat,
which was the ground of the thrifty sons complaint, Thou never gave me a Kid,
to entertain my friends, Luke 15.28. Lastly, so acceptable to Tamar, that for
a Kid she sold her honor, and honesty too, unto Judah her Father in Law, Genesis
39. a Kid with Tamar went as far, as mandrakes with Rachel.

The third is the Calfe; a dish for three Angels at once, Genesis 18.7. He ran to
the herd, and fetched a Calfe tender and good. Nay, even to entertain God, in
Sacrifices, By the blood of Goats, and Calves, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.12.
Yea in our spiritual sacrifices, he requires Vitulos labiorum, The calves of
the lips, Hos. 14.3. to entertain God? Yea sufficient to be a God, some have
thought. Jeroboam made two golden Calves, 1 King. 12.28. Yea, Aaron the man of
God did it, Exodus 32.4. made a molten Calfe.

The fourth is the Fatling. S. Hierome, in translating the (...)
Hebrew word, renders it Ovis.
The Sheep; the Seventy Translators of King Ptolomy render it (...).
the Bull; the interlineary Bible of Aria^ Montanus Pecus pingue.
concurres with our best, and latest English Translation of K. James; it
follows well the Calfe, (the third of these) for they are put together, both
Vituli saginati.
Ier. 46. and Luke 15. thrice in that Chapter mention is made of the fat Calfe.
Whereby, in a fair parabolicall interpretation, is meant no less, no worse a
thing, then Christ himself. The indulgent Father there represents God; the
elder and thrifty brother, the Jew; the younger and prodigal, the Gentile; the
Fatling killed to entertain him, Christ slain, and crucified; the melody, the
whole Chore of Heaven, and heavenly-minded men, rejoicing at the conversion of
a sinner.

The fifth is the Cow, an holy, and useful creature too; holy to God, in
Sacrifices; Cineres rufae vaccae.
The ashes of a red Cow you have, Number. 19. of which the Apostle makes mention,
Heb. 9. Useful also, and profitable unto man; it is part of the description of
a lucky, and prosperous man, that his Cow calveth, Job 21.10. and, in that
grand, and noonday Prophecy of Christ, which is in the seventh of Esaias, it is
said, A man shall nourish a young Cow, Esaias 7.21.
etc. and for the abundance of milk thereof shall eat butter.

The sixth is the Ox, so as now I have (...). Bos in lingua. vide Eras. Chil.
an Ox upon my tongue, as the Greek proverb has it, though in another sense.
And the Ox is, as the former, another brave piece of the Creation. Indeed
there is, in Moses his Law, an Ox to be stoned to death, and his flesh not to
be eaten, Exodus 21. but that was Bos* cornupeta, a pushing Ox; and Job 6.
there is Bos mugiens, a lowing Ox, but that is only when he wants fodder.
Otherwise, the Ox is first, a wise creature; he knows his owner, Esaias 1.3.
Secondly, a profitable creature; he treads out the Corn, 1 Cor. 9.9. Where
no Oxen are, the crib is clean, but much increase is by the strength of the
Ox, Prove. 14.4. and this excellency is peculiar to the Ox, that Bos lassus
fortius figit pedem.
the more weary he is, the more strong does he fix his footings. Lastly, he is
an holy creature, being one of the beasts for oblation, and sacrifice, he that
sacrifices an Ox, etc. Esaias 66.3.

The seventh and last of these innocent creatures, is an innocent indeed, a
Child, the true, and most perfect emblem of innocence, and humility. And this
last of the seven, is most elegantly set forth in a gradation of three steps.
First a Child, in indefinite terms, but employed to be more then an Infant; for
it can go, yea it can lead, a little Child, says the text, shall lead them;
and if it were no more then so, even that were a fair copy of meekness and
innocence. Our Savior else wrote worse Hieroglyphics then Pierius, who both
Matthew. cap. 18. and 19. sets up little children as looking-glasses of grace to
dress our selves in: and S. Paul else missed the rule as far as our Savior
the example, when 1 Cor. 14.20. he bids us in malice to be children. Secondly,
Ablactatus.
A weaned Child, and that is a more perfect copy then the other. Therefore
David expressing his lowliness, Psalm. 131. says, My soul is even as a weaned
Child. Thirdly, Lacte^s.
a sucking Child, the most perfect, and absolute copy of all, nothing in the
world being so innocent, and meek, as the Child, which hangs yet upon the
Mothers breast, Psalm. 22.9.

I have gone through all these seven several Prototypes, and copies of
goodness, meekness, gentleness, patience, innocence, and the rest of graces
which are of the same lineage and affinity. Enumerate them now only by their
bare names, and no more: the Lamb, the Kid, the Calfe, the Fatling, the Cow,
the Ox, the Child. And now this second part of the text is also ripe, to
gather that observation, or conclusion, which most naturally buddeth out of it.
It is white unto the harvest. The Mower (that is, the Preacher) may fill his
hand, and he that binds up the sheafes (that is, the Auditor) his bosom. And
it is this;

Religion charactereth it self upon the regenerate soul in innocence,
Conclusion.
and patience, etc.

Or thus:

The doctrine of the Gospel, sincerely obeyed, first Christianizeth men, and
then civilizeth them.

Or thus:

Grace of Regeneration, as it gets ground, and wi^^ upon the soul, does exp^^
and thrust out, fierce and brutall passions, and introduces gracious habits of
sweetness, peace and love.

Or thus:

Sanctification truly wrought in the heart lays aside the rapacity of the
Wolf, the spots of the Leopard, the lurking of the Lions whelp, the cruelty of
the Bear, the roaring of the Lion, the poison and calumny of the Aspe, the
sting of the Cockatrice; and on the contrary, it degrees into the soul the
immaculatenesse of the Lamb, the innocence of the Kid, the humility of the
Calfe, the nutriment and sustentation of the fatling, the milkie fruitfulness
of the Cow, the labor, and profitablenesse of the Ox, the lowliness of the
Child.

I will make choice to enlarge, and spread forth this point, by way of fact,
choosing the fairest examples out of divine, and ecclesiastical story, that so
it may hold better measure with the method of the former.

And out of the Old Testament, I will take only two instances, of Abel, and
Zacharias, the first, and last of its Martyrs. How innocent a Lamb Abel was,
and how cruel a Wolf his brother Caine was, hear Saint John speak, 1 Epist.
3. chap. 12. verse. Caine was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous. And for the other, Zacharias, how meek a Lamb was he, who when
he was stoned to death, said no more but this, 2 Chronicles. 24.22.
The Lord will look upon it, and require it.

But the new Testament is our proper scene; where begin with the Ram, and
hee-Goat of the flock, the High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was
the true spotless Lamb indeed. He may also be resembled to each one of the
seven inimicitious beasts, but in another sense: As first he was a Wolf, for he
was his Fathers Benjamin, being his natural and begotten son, worth ten
thousand of us, who are only his adopted sons; and Benjamin is a Wolf, Genesis
49.

Secondly, he was a spotted Leopard, but it was with our sins, when he bore the
iniquity of us all.

Thirdly, he was rightly a Lions whelp. Judah, our Lords own tribe, is so
termed in his Fathers legacy, Genesis 49.9.

Fourthly, he was a Bear too, but it was when he roared like a Bear, Esaias
59.11. that is, Cried out with strong cries and tears, says the Apostle to the
Hebrews.

Fifthly, he was a Lion, but it was to victorize for us, not to prey upon us: so
he was the Lion of the tribe of Judah.

Lastly, he was an Adder, or Serpent, but it was the Serpent lift up upon the
Cross.

But now he is all these innocuous and harmless creatures, Sensu currenti,
even in the purport and acception that they stand here. As,

First a Lamb; not streaked, like Jacobs Lambs, but an immaculate Lamb, says
S. Peter.

Secondly, a Kid, broyled on the coals of his Fathers wrath, boiled in his
Mothers milk, [ Blessed are the paps, etc.] A Goat; the escape Goat that carried
our sins into the Wilderness, out of his Fathers sight.

Thirdly, a Calfe, slain to entertain the prodigal Gentile, home to his Faher^
house, Luke 15.

Fourthly, a Fatling, or a Sheep; so (...)
S. Hierome translates the word, Ovis. S. Hieron.
and then Christ is rightly so termed, As the sheep dumb before the Shearer:
the Text the Eunuch light on out of Esaias, Acts 8.32. and the very word and name
JESUS anagrammatizeth into (...).
Thou art a Sheep.

Fifthly, a Cow, the red Cow under the law; not the type, but the antitype, Heb.
9.13.

Sixthly, an Ox, but according to Solomon's phrase, Prove. 7.22. As Ox to the
slaughter.

Lastly, a Child, under that term the prophecy presents us to him, Esaias 7.16.
and in the Acts, Chap. 4.27. he is called The holy child Jesus; Yea even the
Devils and Oracles knew him by this title; for when Augustus Caesar was at the
cost of an Hecatomb at Delphos, to know who should succeed him in the Empire,
the Oracle at last answered, An Hebrew boy, etc. whereupon presently he
returned to Rome, and built an Altar in the Capitol, which he called Ara
primog^niti D^i. Suidas in vita Augusti. Niceph. l. 1. c. 17.
The Altar of Gods first born son.

Next after our guide-starre, let us bring on the stage the four Evangelists,
the Qua^uor tubae. Aug.
four trumpets of God, to blow abroad the grateful fame of a Savior, the
Quatuor quadrigae. Calvin.
four Steeds or Palfries to carry the Son of righteousness about the world,
and see if they also were not Lambs, etc.

S. Matthew, at first a greedy Wolf, a tolling Publicane, but after his
calling, Sequela, a following Calfe, in leaving all, and following Christ; a
fruitful Cow, in feeding the Church with the milk of his Gospel, which he
wrote in Vide Baron. in Martyrol. Roman. ad Sept. 21.
Hebrew; A laborious Ox, in his Eusebius. Hist l 3. c. 1. Socrat. l. 3. c. 15.
Apostleship to the Ethiopians; And lastly, a Lamb, a Sheep of the slaughter in
his In Aethi^pia praedicans Martyrium passus est. Mart. Romans
Martyrdom.

S. Mark, the epitomizer of S. Matthew, after he had played the fat Calfe in
feeding the Church, the Cow in nourishing it with the sincere milk of the word,
the Ox in treading out the corn of the bread of life, first by writing his
Gospel at the request of the brethren at Rome, and then by going into Egypt,
and being the first that constituted a Church in Alexandria; he lastly was a
slaughter-Lamb also, for being bound with cords, hurryed through sharp stones,
and grievously afflicted, he in the end suffered Martyrdom Vide Bedam. Eusebius.
hist. l. 2. c. 14, 15. and lib. 3. c. ult. Hieron. de Scriptor. Eccl. Niceph.
hist. l. 2. c. 43. Lippom. Tom. 7. and Sur. Tom. 2. etc.
, in the eight year of Neroes reign.

S. Luke the beloved Physician, an Ox indeed, and so the Painters draw him
with an Ox by him, for he did write so (...).
in order of all both that Jesus did or taught; that he did Mugire Euangelium
per totum orbem.
mow and low the Gospel abroad over all the world, as Albertus Magnus spoke of
Aquinas, who for his natural silence and taciturnity was called bos mutus, a
dumb Ox; and after with two horns he had gored all unbeleevers, with his
Gospel, and with his Acts of the Apostles, the Annalls of the Primitive Church,
and had also been a plain itinerant in Preaching the Gospel Epiphan. haeres. 51.
in France, Italy, Dalmatia, and Macedonia; he Multa passus pr^ Christi nomine.
Romans Martyrol.
suffered many things for the name of Christ, and Nazian. in Orat. 1. cont.
Julian. Niceph. l. 2. c. 43. Pauli^us Nolanus ad Severum, Epist. 12.
dyed a holy Martyr, although some doubt thereof Vid. Baron. in Romans Mar. ad
October. 18.
.

S. John, lastly, having written his Eagle sighted Gospel, and towred aloft
into the highest mysteries of Divinity, seen and written his Divine
Revelations, founded and governed all the Churches of Asia, suffered casting
into a hot Caldron of oil, banishment into Pathmos, and was a Martyr in will,
though not in deed, being spent with old age, died in his second childhood at
Ephesus, preaching love and charity, threescore and eight years after the
passion of his Lord, and Master Vide Hieron. in Scrip. Eccl. and Baron. ad
December. 27. Romans Martyr.
: And thus much of the four Evangelists.

And next unto them, let us behold the Apostles of Christ, and see whether they
also were not sent forth as sheep among Wolves; whether in their lives they
were not innocent as sucking children, and in their deaths, As the sheep
before the Shearer? Before the Shearer? Nay that was not all, to be shorn
only, they were oves occisionis withal, sheep for the slaughter: they light
of such Wolves as did not tondere, but deglubere, not fleece them only, but
devour them also.

Begin with S. Peter, the great Apostle of the circumcision, who after he had
streamed down upon the Church such abundance of sincere milk, as himself
styleth it, and that at two breasts, his two most Catholic, most orthodoxe,
most inspired Epistles, and Euangelized abundantly with his tongue in preaching
the Gospel, as well as with his hand in writing; he lastly was crucified under
Nero, as his Master was, but after a diverse form, with his head downward,
just like a Sheep upon the Cambrell Vid. Baron. Annal Romans Mar. Heg^sip.
juniorem de excidio Hicros. lib. 3. c. 2.

Acta passionis, quae seruntur Lini nomine.


.

S. Andrew the Apostle also, though he have added nothing to the Canon of
Scripture, yet much increase came to the Church by the labor of this Ox; for
he preached the Gospel in many Countries, in Thracia, Scythia, Achaia, went
over Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bythinia, unto the Euxine Sea, etc. and having
finished his course, he was lastly, apprehended by Aegeas the Proconsull, shut
up in Prison, grievously whipped and beaten, crucified upon an Olive tree,
where he hung two days Euangelizing to the people Vid. Notat. Baron. ad Nov.
30. Romans Mart.
.

S. Philip, Niceph. hist. l. 2. c. 39. Lipom. To. 6 Surius Tom. 3. Martyr.
Roman. ad Maii 1.
after he had converted almost all Scythia to the faith of Christ, at
Hierapolis, a City of Asia, was fastened to the Cross, and stoned to death,
treading the steps both of his Master, and of Stephen the Protomartyr.

S. James Eusebius. l. 2. c. 22. Josephus Antiqu. l. 20. c. 8. Origin. lib. 1.
contra Celsum. Martyr. Romans ad Maii 1.
called James the less, and James the just, and James the brother of our Lord,
and first Bishop of Jerusalem, was knocked in the head like an Ox, or Calfe,
after he had been thrown down from a Pinnacle of the Temple, and his thigh broke.

S. James Martyrolog. Romans ad 25. Julii.
the brother of S. John the Evangelist, was about the feast of Easter beheaded
of Herod Agrippa.

S. Bartholomew Martyrol. Romans ad 25. August
, first as a good sheep gave his fleece and milk, by diligent divulging the
Doctrine of the Kingdom, and then his skin also, like another Zisca, the
Bohemian Captain, for he was excoriated, and flead, his skin pulled over his
ears alive.

S. Thomas, Vid. cundem Authorem cum annot. Baronii ad December. 21.
called the Apostle of India, having blown the trumpet of the Gospel to the
Parthians, Medes, Persians, Hyrcans, and Brachmans, and lastly coming into
India, after he had there also thrust in the tender plants of Christian
Religion, was by the Kings command, thrust through with darts.

Judas Thaddeus, Vid. eundem librum ad October. 28.
after he had, like an Ox strong to labor, ploughed up the fallow grounds of
Judea, Galile, Samaria, Idumea, Arabia, Syria, and Mesopotamia, and had thrown
in the seed of the Gospel, died one of the glorious witnesses of Jesus Christ;
some say slain by the Idolatrous Priests.

Simon the Canaanite Idem ibidem.
fellow-Martyr, as well as fellow-Apostle with Thaddeus, after he had brought
the glad tidings of salvation into India, and entered Persia, together with
Thaddeus, having by their joint endeavors brought an innumerable company of
souls, to subject their necks to the yoke of Christ, both together received
the crown of Martyrdom.

Matthias, Idem ad Feb. 24.
elected into the room of Judas Iscariot, having promulgated the Gospel in
Judea, and Ethiopia, was served like the rest, Martyred by the Axe or Hatchet.

Lastly, S. Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, Idem ad Junii 29.
after manifold labors, in taking upon him the care of all Churches, and both
by preaching, and writing, giving so much milk, that he may be resembled to the
Cow, in the seventh of Esaias, which was so fruitful at the Paile, that for the
abundance of milk she did give, the owner might eat butter. He, I say, though
he escaped Neroes hands, the first time of appearance before him; yet the second
time, he was devoured of the Lion.

Thus we have seen not one of the four Evangelists, not one Apostle, (Saint
John's miraculous deliverance only excepted) went to their graves, Sicca morte,
with a dry winding sheet. All of them were Lambs, Kiddes, Calves, Fatlings,
Cowes, Oxen, Babes, in their fruitful, and innocent lives, in their patient
and silent deaths.

But we must not here break off; let us continue on the story down lower
still, from the Apostles, and Evangelists, unto their Disciples, and Scholars,
and there we shall see the very same, that they were Lambs, both in their
lives, and in their deaths.

1. In their lives.

Hear first the Apostles evidence, Heb. 11. which though there spoken of the
Fathers of the Old Testament, yet most applicable to the primitive Saints of
the New: Thorough faith they subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the
fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens, women received
their dead raised to life again, others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. And others had
trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover of bonds, and
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawne asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the world was not worthy, etc.

Next, let Plinius Secundus, Viceroy to Trajan, under the third Persecution,
witness: who in his Epistles yet extant certifies his Lord about the
blameless behavior of Christians, and how they did but sing Antelucanos
Hymn^s.
Psalms and Hymns, before the dawnings of the day, etc.

And here again takes place fitly the Certificate of Graninianus, the Emperor
Adrian his Proconsull in Asia, that the Christians were persecuted and killed,
Sine ullo crimine, nomini^tan^u^, et sectae rei.
without any fault at all, being guilty only of a name, and sect.

Lastly, Consult Baronius, especially in his second Tome, touching the manners
of the ancient Primitive Christians, and there you shall find, ex scriniis,
most honorable verdicts, and testimonies of their lamb-like, child-like
integrity; not only from their friends, as Origin against Celsus, Tertullian
to Scapula, etc. but even their enemies being Judges, such as Porphyrie,
Julian, the Sibylls, the Oracles, etc. That they were temperate, chaste,
peaceable, far more virtuous livers then the Philosophers of the Gentiles;
That they would not lie, that they abhorred Theaters, and public spectacles,
especially of blood; that they were kind, liberal, merciful, especially to
such as were in bonds for Christ; that they were faithful subjects, valiant
Soldiers, profitable Co^monwealths men, thankful in prosperity, cheerful in
adversity. These and such like are by the most faithful Writers of the story
of those times, given in, to be the guise of those worthy Saints. But I shall
shame our selves in recounting their just praises. Their Panegyric is our
Libell, their Encomium our Invective, and Satyr. Our conversations compared to
theirs, are but as foyles to set off the luster of those militant glories.

2. In and at their deaths.

What meek Lambs, and innocent Babes there too! we cannot say of them as
Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.14.
What means this bleating of Sheep, and lowing of Oxen? No; the Saints in
their most unjust sufferings, and undeserved deaths have not been bleating
sheep, but dumb Lambs, Esaias 53.7. not lowing Oxen, but m^^e Oxen, as Aquinas
before mentioned. When French History.
Marshall Biron will dye like a mad man, and Parry like a Cambd. Elizab.
braggard; then shall Gods sheep lie dumb before the shearer; They shall
keep silence in that day, because it is an evil day. Come then, let us draw
near them, and sit down on the ground beside them, in the day of their
sorrow, as Jobs three friends, and we shall not hear them charge God
foolishly, though their grief be very great. Yea, go nearer, and draw the
Curtains of their deathbeds, and hear them exspiring, and breathing out
their last breath with a perfumed Comfite, or a Sugar-plumbe in their mouth,
that is, (...).
with a word of piety, (as Nazianzene testifies S. Basil did) both to sweeten
the sorrows of death to themselves, and to minister grace unto the hearers.

And first I must needs begin with Ignatius, the most blessed Bishop of
Antiochia, full sixteen hundred years ago, within five, and S. Peter's Chrysostom.
hom. de transl. S. Ign.
immediate Successor in that Chair, when he was thrown to the Beasts, said no
more then thus. I am Gods grain and must be ground between the upper, and
nether millstone of these beasts teeth, that I may make pure bread unto God.
Lo, if his soul were not even as a weaned child; and indeed, Niceph. Hist. l.
2. c. 3.
some say he was that very child that Jesus took up in his arms, in the
Gospel. The example does so suite the Text, that I could not pretermit it here,
though it be mentioned See the first Sermon.
before: neither is it coleworts twice sod.

Next him, let us make mention of Polycarpus, Bishop of Smirna, and some say
that Individual Angel of the Church of Smirna, whereunto the second of those
seven Asiatique Epistles are written. He was disciple to S. John, and Master
to Ireneus, and in a word, a man so venerable amongst both the Christians, and
Heathen, that his ordinary style was, The Doctor of whole Asia. He when the
cursed Proconsull tempted him to deny Christ, and he should save his life,
answered meekely as a Lamb, I have served Christ these fourscore and six
years, and he never harmed me, and shall I now deny, (...). Eusebius. His. l. 4.
c. 14.
and blaspheme my King, and Savior?

Cyprian Bishop of Carthage may well be remembered next, who was of noble
descent, and both Orator, and Senator of Carthage, before he was by public
applause Pontus his own Deacon wrote his History, and is prefixed before his
Works by Pamelius.
elected Bishop, he suffered banishment, and the next year martyrdom about
260. years after Christ: when he came to the block, he gave his heads-man 20.
pieces of Gold, and dyed also meek as a Lamb or Kid, with these words in his
mouth, God be thanked for vouchsafing my soul this Gaole-delivery out of the
dungeon of my body.

S. Ambrose Bishop of Millane, dyed in Millane on Easter eve, in the year of
Christ 397. Count Stilico made suite unto him, when he was fastened to his
bed, that for the public good of the Church, he would seek by his prayers to
obtain of God, the prolongation of his own life. S. Ambrose answered, I have
not so lived amongst you, that I am ashamed to live longer; neither do I fear
to dye, because I have a good Lord. Did he not herein, though he were the
great Shepherd of Millane, speak like a Lamb? Spondanus epist. Baron. annal.
a speech only worthy of S. Ambrose, and so gnomicall and weighty, that
Possidius in vita D. Augustine. c. 27.
S. Augustine highly commends it. But let us come now a great deal lower, in
tract of time.

Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, who, like another Deborah, judged this
Israel forty years, and that so happily, that even Io. de Seres, in his
French Inventory.
the French Historian says, she proved thereby to the world that a Woman
might govern as well as any man: when in her Sisters quinquennium, she was
one day apprehended, to be carried she knew not whither, seeing some of her
servants standing aloof off, she said no more, but these two words, tanquam
ovis, alluding to Isaiahs Prophecy of Christ, As a sheep to the sl^^ghter,
etc.

John Picus, Jo. Picus ex Mirandulae principum generenatus, secretarum naturae
rerum cupidus explora^or, consummatus simul Philosophus and Theologus adhuc
imberbis, etc.
Earl of Mirandula, a most diligent searcher into the secrets of nature, and
an exact both Philosopher, and Divine, before he was capable of transgressing
Moses his Law, in cutting the tuffes of his beard; in a word, The wit of the
world: If Christ's death, and our own, said he, were ever in our eyes, how could
we sin? welcome death, not as an end of trouble, but as an end of sin.

Ferdinand Earl of Darby, who died in Queen Elizabeth's days, having at his
death four Physicians, and two Divines, the Bishop of Chester, and Mr. Leigh
his own Chaplain, said to one of his Physicians the day before he died, Stowes
Chronicle in Q. Elizabeth.
I know for a certainty, I must now die, and I will take away with me only one
part of mine arms, I mean mine Eagles wings, so will I flee swiftly into the
bosom of Christ my Savior. Nobly and Christianly spoken indeed! and therefore
the more noble because the more Christian-like.

The (...). Jo. Brosserius de Juello.
Jewel of Bishops, Iuell Bishop of Sarisbury, riding to preach at Lacock in
Wilts, a gentleman meeting him on the way, and seeing his body weak, and spent
with divine labors, advised him to return back again, replied, Nay, D.
Humphred. in vita Juelli.
it becomes a Bishop to die preaching; alluding to that brave speech of the
Emperor Vespasian Xiphil. in vit. Vespas.
, It becomes an Emperor to die standing. There was a brave Ox, that would
tread out the corn, till he fell down in the yoke. Where such Oxen are, the
crib cannot be empty.

Lastly, I will make up the Decade with a meaner person, but neither mean in
knowledge, nor grace, Elizabeth Folks, who alluding to the Text, 1 Cor. 13.
last verse, when her soul was ready to take flight out of her body, concluded
her mortality with these words, Now farewell faith, farewell hope, and welcome
charity. and it is so aculeate, and excellent, that I find it Melchior Adam in
vit. Theol. German. (...).
made up into a Greek distich, and cut upon the gravestone of Doctor Boraius,
professor of Divinity there, and is now to be read in the Church at Basil.

If any desire any more of these Mucrones verborum. Cic.
pointed and diamonded speeches, which do indeed Relinquere aculeum in
auditorum animis.
leave a sting, and goad in the mind of the pious Auditor, or Reader, they
must frequent the house of mourning, especially when the Christian decumbent
grows near to the grave, and his life to the Sepulcher, for then the soul
grows more divine, when the tabernacle of the body begins to rent, that it can
look out of the chinks, and espy the beams of an heavenly light. He must also
ransack story, especially Ecclesiastical Annals, which is the best piece of
history, and most especially Martyrologies, the best piece of Church-story.

Scaliger says he had rather have been the Author and composer of one Ode in
Horace, then King of all Arragon. I had rather utter from my heart, out of a
true Christian sense and feeling, such a sentence or Apophthegme, as these
recited are, when I am Gods prisoner, and gone up to my last bed, then be the
sole famed Author of all Horace his Odes, yea, of all Homers Rhapsodies, whom
nine Cities strove about, which should be his birth-spot; Yea more, of all the
Sibylline Oracles. But I must contain, and fall upon

The Application.
ANd that also according to the two former guid-texts of 2 Timothy 3.16. and Romans
15.4. and according to the former method of 1 Doctrine, 2 Improofe, 3
Correction, 4 Instruction, and 5 Consolation.

The Doctrine resulting hence is this; (...).
Those whom Christ justifies by his merit, he also sanctifies by his Spirit. So
much is collected to my hand by an Orthodoxe professor Zach. Ursinus ad loc.
, Commenting to this Text; and the context, or alliance that the text has with
the protext, or verse immediately foregoing, makes it very plain: for verse 5.
of this Chapter, our Prophet thus vaticinates, Righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins: Lo there
Christ justifying us by the imputatio^ of his righteousness. Then instantly
follows; The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kidde, etc. Lo there Christ sanctifying us by the imparting of
inherent righteousness; and to the same thing it appertains, that Apoc. 7.14.
mention is made of robes washed, and made white in the blood of the Lamb. Why,
how does that sound? Is it not enigmaticall and full of Problem, to wash white
in blood? Is it not rather white in milk or water, red in blood, or wine? but I
answer, No; it is of brave significancy to express, the bleaching, whitening,
alablastering, cleansing quality of Christ's blood, the sanctification of true
justification, that the red scarlet lace of Christ's blood, must be entortled
and interwoven into a bracelet, with a white silken thread of holiness and
regeneration; or that it must tie about the bunch of hyssope, which to be of a
cleansing nature is implied by that of David in the Psalm. 51.
chief of his Penitentialls, Wash me with hyssope, etc.

So likewise, in the description of Christ which is Cant. 5.10. My beloved is
white, and ruddy: it is thus glossed, white in his life, ruddy in his death;
white in his holiness, red in his Passion. Or make those two Epithetes run
down from his head, and beard, who is the head, unto the skirts, and
phylacteries of our garments, who are the members, and it must thus be glossed:
ruddy to us, in justifying us, by his blood, and so washing us from the guilt
of sin, and white, in sanctifying us by his Spirit, and so washing us from the
filth of sin. The brief is no more then thus: if we be Christ's, we will
crucify all those sensitive, irrational, heady, impetuous natures of the
Wolf, Bear, Lion, etc. and get formed in us the innocence of the Lamb, Kid,
Calfe, and Child, in eschewing evil, the negative part of sanctification; and
the fruitfulness and labor of the Cow, and Ox, in doing good, which is the
positive, and affirmative part.

The Redargution. 2 (...)^

NOw secondly for the Elench, and use of improofe, it shows what Paradoxes, and
mere lies in divinity, those Satanized proverbs of the world are, which the
wise men of the world (forsooth) cry up as Maxims of Prudence, Oracles of
State, principles fit to come out of the School of the wisest Masters: they
are such as these, Make your self a sheep, and the Wolf will eat you, Make
your self a worm, and you shall be trod upon: Bear one injury so as you
invite not a new: It is no fault to repel force with force, nor to undermine
fraud with fraud: An injury cannot be done to him that is willing to receive
it, etc. Brave Articles of the worlds Creed! Thus the Devil makes us false
spectacles, and we are willing to put them on, till we miss the bridge and
fall into the ditch. Thus partly by the forcery, and false information of
others, and partly by the blindness, and false apprehensions of our own
mind, inward corruption being strengthened by outward infection, we are
misled from virtue, and grace, and dashed in pieces, as a wave upon the rock.
The very utmost proficiency, that any man can attain to, in the worlds
school, is not to love patience, and innocence, only to allow it; and that
but M.S. M.F.
in two cases, neither, the one of necessity, the other of advantage: so making
it a stupifying medicine in the former, and a matter of merchandising in the
latter. And I do not much marvel at it, when I consider that depraved reason
leads quite awry, and that which is most rectified falls far short of
conceiving, how strong, and honorable a grace, patience, and meekness is.
Therefore the Stoics were defamed by all other Schools, for introducing their
patience, which indeed was no better then a counterfeit or carcass of true
patience, being only a stupid senslesnesse, and wretched carelessness.

Patience is ever an act of power, for there is much strength required to bear
burdens, and especially injuries, the greatest of burdens. Hence it is that
to forgive sins is assigned to be a proper act of Gods omnipotency, Exodus
34.6. And so again, impatience is a sign of weakness, and therefore
children, women, and sick persons, are observed well by Arist. Rhet. l. 2.
Aristotle to be most revengefull. How wickedly therefore did that base Tuscane
jest on God, and abuse the text, [ Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord] in saying, Revenge was so sweet a morsel, as God kept it for his own
tooth. Well; let it be the denigration, and such a spot in the Mahometane, or
Turkish religion, as no Fullers soap can wash out, that the allowance it gives
to revenge was one of the great inducements at first, and now is one of the
greatest fomenters of that Idolatry, and which draws the most followers and
Proselytes unto it: and on the contrary, let that scandal of the Christian
Religion, that it makes men Cowards, be remembered to the glory of it, That
Patience, and Christianity are of the same dimensions; that a Lamb, a Kid, and
a fat Calfe are the propper Coat, or arms that Christian Religion bears; a
Child the Crest, a Cow, and an Ox the Supporters; Lastly, that other lesson
he suffered his Ushers that went before him to teach: but patience, and the
like, he reserved for himself to sit in the Chair, and be the grand Master
thereof: Learn of me, for I am lowly and meek, and you shall find rest for
your souls.

The Correction. 3 (...).

ANd thirdly, If the true Disciples of Christ be Lambs, and Kids, etc. Then be
it pressed to the just correction of the depraved manners of us modern
Christians, whose very lives are, in short, a daily, horary, momently breaking
of that great Evangelical precept of love, and charity, which is the
fulfilling of the Law, and bond of perfection. Oh God! if the breaches of
charity, by jealousies, surmises, suspicions of the heart, by the dejections,
and falling down of our countenances upon our brethren, by the wincking and
scorning of our eyes, by the detraction, calumny, and revilings of our
tongues, by virulencie and gall of our pens, and by the violence of our
hands, if, I say, these, and the like were the fulfillings of the Law, what
godly Gospellers, and Professors should we be! but I must contract my self,
and take in this sail of speech. The longer I was in the enlargment, and
filling up of the point, the more brief may I be in Application. Therefore
because Rectum index sui, and obliqui.
that which is straight shows at once both its own rectitude, and the
crookedness of the contrary; I will give you here an excellent Scheme of
Charity. For Charity is like Nebuchadnezzars tree, in Daniel, which has many,
and far-extended boughs and branches, which as they seize upon, and respect a
new object, so do they still take up a new name. As thus; faith is the root of
Christianity. Charity is the bole of the same tree, which when it is exercised
promiscuously toward all men, it is called (...).
Philanthropie: when toward certain men, (...).
Friendship; when toward our blood and allies, (...).
Natural affection: when toward strangers, (...).
Hospitality: when toward the faithful, (...).
Brotherhood: when toward our superiors, Officiositas.
Duty: when toward our inferiors, Humanitas.
Humanity, or courtesy: when toward men in prosperity, and welfare, (...).
Goodwill: when toward men in misery, (...).
Mercy. A tree, you see, so laden with fruit, that the boughs of it bend down
to the ground, and court the hand of him that passes by to pluck off her
grapes.

The Instruction. 4 (...).

THE Instruction is a goad to prick us on to beware of that dangerous Rock of
pseudo-Martyrdome. There is a foolish affected kind of Martyrdom, when a man
exposes his estate, good name, liberty, life, and all to sufferance and
danger, and God shall pay him for all in this one word, Who required these
things at your hands? The Arians, and Arius himself suffered grievous things
for their Tenets, but they were but pseudomartyrs. The Donatists suffered many
things from the civil Magistrate, and reputed themselves Lambs and Martyrs, but
S. Augustine nervously takes from them that glorious wreath. The Arminians in
the Low Countries, and Papists in England, have not suffered a little neither,
heretofore, but it was because they might not be suffered to plunder
Commonwealths, perplexe States, betray Princes, lead Captive simple women, etc.
Therefore they are pseudomartyrs. There may be Wolves in Sheepsskins. Therefore
as Saint Paul speaks of one that is (...).
a widow indeed, so must we look to it, that we be Lambs, Kids, Calves indeed;
that there be not so much of the Calfe in us, as not to know either what, or
why, or how, or when to suffer: for circumstances, individuate actions, and the
innocence of the Lamb, should be joined with so much of the wisdom of the
Serpent, as to direct our actions both in suffering, and doing, by fair and
probable means, unto glorious ends. To this purpose then, let us here subvect
such safe and necessary rules, as if God call us to suffer here, our patience,
and innocence, may be made up into a crown of Martyrdom.

The rules here are only three.

The first is, that a Sheep for the slaughter must first be a Sheep of the
fold; A true Martyr must be a true member of the Church. Extra Ecclesiam non
est Martyrium. Vide Baron. ad an. 362. n. 37.
It is a ruled case, No Martyrdom without the pale of the Church. Where there
is not the truth of Religion, there cannot be the truth of Martyrdom. It must
not be respected what, but who it is that suffers. He that is not a member of
the body, cannot suffer for the head. If a Turk should advance Christ above
Mahomet, or a Jew above Moses, or a Pagan above an Idol, and should suffer for
so doing, were he therefore a Martyr?

Secondly, next the righteousness of the person, the righteousness of the
cause is requisite; which is as necessary to remunerable suffering, as fuel to
make a fire, or dough to make a cake: to suffer, that is well, but then it must
be for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10. as Christians, 1 Pet. 4 16. It is not
the pain, but the cause that makes the Martyr, says the old rule; there were
three at once on one Cross; one to be saved, another to save, a third to be
damned Omnium similis poena, sed dissimilis causa. Aug. conc. 2. in Psalm. 34.
; they had all the like punishment, but not the like cause.

Thirdly, there is requisite also, right ends and intentions, it is the end
that crowns the work. The glory of God, the honor of Christ, the sealing of
the truth, the propagating Religion, the confirming the weak, the comforting
the strong, the confounding the adversaries; these and such like are
warrantable, and justifiable ends, in undertaking sufferings. Saint Augustine
presents a complaint against such as Quaeritis Martyrum gloriam, etc.
did seek the Glory of Martyrs, etc. Some out of vain glory, others out of
Libido moriendi, Sene^.
a lust of dying. Some out of stiffenesse of spirit, and the like affect, and
draw on themselves sufferings, when they receive no summons thereto from God,
nor shall receive comfort from themselves.

5 (...).
The Consolation.
LAstly, are we the Lambs and Kids of Gods fold, the Calves of his stall, the
Kine of his pasture, the Oxen of his crib, the Babes of his Nursery? what then
can be more comfortable? Does God take care for Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. Is a good
man merciful to his beast? Was Jacob so careful of his flock, as not to
over-drive it? and shall not God be much more careful of us? Yea, surely, if
we make it but our care to be his Lambs, and Kids, he will make it his care,
1. To protect us; to take us out of the paw of the Lion, and of the Bear; to
deliver us, as he did S. Paul, out of the mouth of the Lion, so far as that
deliverance conduces to our eternal good. 2. To provide for us; He gives
fodder unto his cattle. He muzleth not the mouth of the Ox. He can first
feed us by Ravens, and then feed the Ravens that call upon him. He will feed
his Sheep, and his Lambs, both with daily bread for our bodies, and
spiritual Manna for our souls. 3. To save us; He will both set the Goats on
his left hand, and the Sheep, Lambs, Kids, on his right.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE TRUE EUANGELICAL TEMPER. The third Sermon.
ESAIAS 11.6, 7, 8. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid, etc.


THe Text at the first was tripartited, and two of those parts are already
handled, to wit, the seven nocent Creatures, in the first Ser. and the 7.
innocent in the last. There now remains to be spoken too in this, the third,
and last general part, which is the concord and agreement of these most
diverse, yea adverse parties, the Wolf with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid,
etc.

It was cautioned in the Law not to yoke an Ox, and an Ass together Deuteronomy.
22.10.
, and the Gospel too bids us not be unequally yoaked 2 Cor. 6.14.
, but what is it to be unproportionably yoaked, if this be not? a Lamb to a
Wolf, etc. And it is yet more strange, if (with Hierome, Rupertus, and others)
we observe that this accord is not made, by way of the retrograde motion, as
Crabs swim backward; as if the Lamb should degenerate, and go dwell with the
Wolf, or the Kid go lie down with the Leopard, so forsaking their own
righteousness, and taking up others vices. But it is the regular, and straight
course of regeneration, the Wolf turning Lamb, and the Leopard turning Kid;
Craft and Cruelty being the terms from which, and simplicity, and innocence
the terms to which of this Conversion.

But most remarkable of all is it, to consider the full and perfect expression
of this their reconciliation, and atonement, which is a graduall expression,
growing up to the height of its emphasis by four steps. The first is that they
shall dwell together; not under one Canopie, or under one elevation of the
Pole, but under one house, and roof. And if it were no more, this wants no
weight of significancy of it self, for cohabitation contains in it all the
offices of matrimonial dearnesse. And S. Peter requires no more of Husband and
Wife, but that they be (...). 1 Pet. 37.
dwellers together, or housed together, as the word imports.

The second is that they lie down together. A further degree of neereness. To
have one bed, is more then to be in one house; under one covering, more then to
be under one roof. Can two walk together except they be friends? is the
question, Amos 3.3. but lie down together sure they cannot, especially so
near, as one to keep another warm, Eccles. 4.10.

The third is to feed, and eat together. Another degree of vicinity, and
neerenesse. Therefore the Law when it separates one from close, and familiar
accesses to another, severs a mensa, as well as a thoro, both from board, and
bed. Nathan therefore expressing in his parable of David's conviction the near
approaches of Wedlock, says it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his
own cup, and lay in his own bosom, 2 Samuel 12.3. Lo there is mensa, and
thorus, board and bed together again. And David said the like to Mephibosheth,
Thou shall eat bread at mine own table, when he would show him the utmost of
kindness, 2 Samuel 9.7.

The fourth is, that they play and sport together. A thing so true a symbol of
deerenesse, and always so connate thereunto, that Abimelech in the Genesis 26.8.
book of Genesis, looking out of a window, and seeing Isaac sporting with
Rebecca, concluded thereupon she was surely his Wife. Which thing also
Zorobabel in the Apocryphal Esdras Esd. 4.29
thus expresses: I saw, says he, Apame the Kings Concubine, the daughter of
the noble Bartacus, sitting at the right hand of the King, and taking the
Crown from his head, and setting it upon her own head; she also stroke the
King with her left hand: and yet for all this the King gaped and gazed upon her
with open mouth: if she laughed upon him he laughed also; but if she took any
displeasure at him, the King was feign to flatter, that she might be reconciled
to him again.

These are the four degrees to make up this one entire union and accord. And
now the way is opened for the third, and last Conclusion, which is this:

It is a disposition and temper truly Evangelical, and savouring of Christ, to
be peaceable, and reconcilable, and that in all the several approaches of
love and union.

Or thus:

The Gospel is a true cause of peace, and peace is a true effect of the
Gospel.

Or thus:

The Messiah where he is Monarchical, and rules, is also Eirenarchicall, and
atones.

Christ Jesus is the true Augustus of the world, and the Scepter of his
Kingdom as it is a righteous, so is it also a peaceable Scepter; wheresoever
and whensover he is known and obeyed, there and then he does by his Word and
Spirit, waste and take away all hatreds, enmities, and antipathies, and makes
Wolves, and Lambs, Leopards, and Kids, Lions whelps, and Calves, Bears, and
Kine, Lions, and Oxen, Asps, and young Children, (for thus the Text conjugates
them) dwell together, lie down together, eat together, and play together; that
is, have friendly and mutual intercourse of affections, actions, customs,
habits.

Therefore is he called in his type Melchisedech, King of Salem Genesis 14.18.
, which the Apostle renders Heb. 7.2. (...).
King of peace. Therefore also Solomon was another type of him: Solomon, I say,
in whose days abundance of peace flourished, not David, a man of War and blood.

Therefore again was he born under the reign of peaceable Augustus, who
enjoyed such cessation of war, that he shut the gates of Ianus Temple, and
brought together all the world to be taxed. His natalitiall hymn was sung not
by a regiment of soldiers, but by a Chore of Angels. The Dity of that hymn,
or Caroll, Peace on earth. The tidings of his birth brought not to cavalliers,
but to quiet and simple Shepherds: The time of the revelation of it, in the
night season, a time of silence and rest. His style, A Prince of Peace Isay 9.6.
. His Baptismall Laver awaited by a Dove, the most peaceable of birds. S. John's
testimony of him, Behold the Lamb of God; A Lamb, the most peaceable of
beasts. His Gospel an Euangelium; that is, Glad tidings of peace. His
Ministers, Messengers of peace and reconciliation. His Salve, or Present, when
he came to his Disciples, Peace be with you. His Vale, or Legacy, when he went
from them, My peace I leave with you. His threefold office, all concurring to
peace; As a Prophet, he did foretell, and proclaim peace; As a Priest, he did
earne, and purchase peace; As a King, he did settle and confirm peace. And
lastly, all this so luculently foretold by this our Prophet Esaias, that he
seems rather De prae^eri^o historiam t^xere, quam de futuro vaticinari.
to write an history of a thing past, then a prophecy of a thing to come, and
is rather an Po^ius Euangelista quam Propheta.
Evangelist then a Prophet, as S. Jerome most excellently speaks of him. And
though this Prophecy shine as the Sun in the Firmament, yet is there one every
whit as bright as this in the second Chapter of this Prophecy, at the fourth
verse. The words are these: He shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke
many people, and they shall beat their swords into plough shares, and their
spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more. A Prophecy so trapped with the
ornaments of speech, that two of the Latin Poets Pax me certa ducis placidos
co^flavit in usus, Agricolae nunc sum, militis ante sui. Martial. lib. 14.
Epigr. 34.
Martial, and Aspera nunc positis mi^^scunt secula bellis, Claudentur belli
portae. Virg. Egl.
Virgil, like bold biards, have plumed it, to imp their own train; just as
before the Sibylls had done by my Text; but to Application.

Application.
IN applying, and making use of this point, it will not be amiss to hold to
the former method, of showing how to elicite and fetch out of it the five-fold
profit of 1 Doctrine, 2 Redargution, 3 Correction, 4 Instruction, and 5
Consolation; and having so do^e, to commit both the text, and Sermons on it, to
the blessing of Gods Spirit, which must incubate, and brood both, to make them
fruitful.

The Use of Doctrine. Doctrina.

ANd first this point is profitable to bring forth this Doctrine, that
Christianity is a sociable Religion. The end of Christ's coming was to be a
Mediator, not only to unite man to God, but even man to man; that Christians
might dwell together; in one house, both Ecclesiastical, the Church; and
oeconomicall, the family; and Political, the Commonwealth; lie down
together, in the undefiled bed of holy and chaste wedlock, if they either need
it, or will it; and in any other noble, and lawful familiarities of intimacie,
and deerenesse; eat together, both the Eucharisticall Bread of the Lords
Table, and the daily bread of their own boards. Lastly, play together, in
those honest and warrantable recreations, which are of good report among the
Saints, to fit them better for both their general, and particular callings.

What is the Church but a Communion of Saints? the Church Militant a Communion
of Saints on earth, and the Church Triumphant, a Communion of Saints in Heaven.
Coetus fidelium, A company or knot of the faithful, is a short and received
definition of the Church. The Religion of the Jews was all for distinction, and
separation of both persons, and things; the Jew from the Gentile, the holy from
the profane, the clean from the unclean. But Christ did so demolish and
break down that partition wall, that it is like the Picts wall in
Northumberland, scarce one stone to be found upon another.

Christian Society is like a Faggot, one stick keeps another glowing; like
stones in an arch, one holds and fastens another, Christ himself being the
key-stone. Solitary persons as they have (indeed) the fewest provocations unto
evil, so have they the fewest incitations unto good.

Divine Oracles still point at loneliness and solitude as at an abyss of
misery. Begin at the beginning: it is observed to my hand, that in the second
days work of the Creation, God gave no commendation of, nor blessing unto it,
as to the rest, because it was a days work of division. Genesis 1.7.
And after that a little, when he played his own Critic, it was the only
quarrel he picked with his workmanship, that man was alone; all was good, and
very good Genesis 1.31.
, but this was not good Genesis 2.18.
. Go on; Elias, a great Prophet, yet he complains of it, I only am left
alone 1 Kings 14.14.
. Jobs sorrowful Messengers make it their under song of sad tidings, I am
escaped alone to tell thee Job 1.
. Martha murmures at it, Master carest thou not my sister has left me to
serve alone Luke 10.40.
. Jeremy makes his threnes take their hint, and rise from it, how does the
popular City sit solitary Lam. 1.1
? S. Paul bemones, himself for it, 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas has forsaken me, yea, Ver. 16.
all forsook me. Ruth. 1.13. and 20.
Ruth bewailes it, The hand of the Lord is gone out against me, the Almighty
has imbittered my soul; Yea it is every widows case, as well as Ruths to be 1 Timothy 5.5. (...).
desolate, and alone. But what say I of Elias, or Job, or the like, men of like
passions with our selves; Christ himself groaned under the burden of it, when
all his Disciples forsook him and fled; which thing the Evangelist notes as
one of the critical passages of his Passion, and the Prophet sets it out, as
an heightning and advancing of his sufferings, that he trod the Wine Press
alone Esa. 63.3
. So as this is the sum, if a man be alone, he shall be in misery; and
again, if a man be in any misery he shall be left alone Tempora si fuerint
nubila, solus eris.
: Solitude and misery being like water, and ice, the one mutually producing the
other. Woe, and alone go together, Eccles. 4.10. Hence it comes about that S.
John Baptist sent two of his Disciples to Christ Mat. 11.2.
. Yea a greater then the Baptist did so: Christ did it, in the Mission first of
his Twelve Mar. 6.7.
, and after of his Seventy Luke 10.1. and Mat. 20.30.
, both of which sacred Colleges he sent forth by two, and two. So of old, two
were of the Embassy to Pharaoh, Moses and Aaron; two into Canaan, Joshua and
Caleb; two to restore the Temple, and worship of God, after the Captivity of
Babylon, Joshua and Zorobabel. So likewise in the New Testament we have Christ,
and John his Precursor; two are sent to Jerusalem to prepare the last Supper,
Peter and John; two Witnesses, Apoc. 11.3. So farther, John Husse, and Jerome
of Prague, in the Council of Constance; Luther and Melancthon in Saxony;
Zwinglius and Oec^lampadius in Helvetia; Bucer and Capito at Argentine; Calvin
and Farell at Geneva. Binarii omnes, all by couples, and twoes, That if the one
fall, his fellow may lift him up, Eccles. 4.10. He that separates man from
man, does as much as in him lies separate man from God. For what is poor, and
silly man alone, but a very scrich-owle, and satyr, a melancholic and
hypochondriack creature, growing pensive and thought-sick? turn him into his
Oratory, and let him shut the Chamber door, and does he not often fall a
telling the panes of glass, as fast as a Papist does his Beads? Is he not
often so pursued by the bloodhounds of his own Conceits, as he is forced to
cry out with Anthony in Ecclesiastical Story Domine cupio servari, sed haud
permittunt saepe cogitationes meae: has reprime, o bone Jesus, et serva me.
: Lord, quoth he, I thirst for salvation, but my thoughts scarce will allow me
the hope of it; O Lord, repress them, and save me. And if they grow (as often
they do) so immodest and importunate, as they can neither be prevented by
divine meditation, nor ejected by fervent prayer, nor corrected by serious
repentance, then man grows a sorry and miserable creature indeed. For they
jangle all out of tune the sweet Bells of reason and judgment, and makes him at
the best mopish, if not frantic. This of the first use: the second follows
which is

The Use of improofe or Redargution. Redargutio.

ANd the Elench here lies directly, and point-blanck against the Papists. For
bring both Religions (ours and theirs) unto this test, and see whether is more
pacifique and charitable, and by consequent whether is the more Evangelical,
and Gospell-like. For so far as my interest in Religion goes (and surely
that is a very aerie soul, whose chief rest and stay is not his Religion) I
shall willingly put it wholly upon this issue.

But let us a little set out the bounder-stones of this disquisition upon which
we are fallen, and stretch the scrutiny to that Angelical birth-Caroll of our
blessed Lord, Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace: and from thence
take out this safe, and grand rule of enquiry: That Religion which gives most
glory to God, and nourishes most peace with man, let a Crown be set upon the
head of her, and let all other Sects bow the knee, and cry abrech before her.

And for the first of these two Touch-stones, without any unjust scandalizing
of the Papist, or any undeserved justifying of the Protestant, the terms
betwixt us, and them stand just thus. For the original of our salvation, we
place it wholly in the grace of God; for the middle of it, we put it wholly in
the merits, and righteousness of Christ; and for the end of it, we refer it
wholly to the glory of God. Thus making God the Proram et puppim salutis.
Rainold. in These.
Alpha, and Omega, the front, and the rear, the beginning, middle, and end of
our salvation. On the other hand, the Papist cries in the language of Solomon's
Harlot, dividatur, let it be divided. For the original of salvation they make
to be partly Grace, and partly Free Will; the middle they put partly in man's
merits, and partly in Gods mercy; the end they refer partly to the glory of
God, and partly to the honor of the creature, in their Idolatrous worshipping
of Saints, etc. So giving that to the Creature, which is proper to the Creator,
to whom be praise for ever, and ever, Amen.

But bring them both to the second touchstone, which is indeed the touchstone of
the Text, and that Religion which is more turbulent, seditious, and stormy, let
it be thrown overboard to lighten the ship of the Church, that it miscarry
not before it thrust into the Acts 27.8.
fair Havens: And that which is more calm, quiet, peaceable, charitable,
less rampant, and more couchant, which both teaches, and practices the lying
down, and dwelling together of the Wolf and Lamb, let it be received, and
the other refused. And here I doubt not but the day will be ours.

It is true, we have separated our selves from the Church of Rome, and that by
right: for it was after a thousand Complaints, Disputations, Protestations
against their Errors; after many meek Colloquies, and Conferences, nervous and
sinewy Arguments, humble Petitions, plain Declarations, grievous sufferings,
and Martyrdomes; and all we got was scorn, and laughter; no pity to our side;
no redress to theirs. So as, though the time of our ignorance God passed by,
yet when he had opened our eyes to see the truth, we could not but fall off
from them, except we should have proculcated and trampled under foot most
fair hopes of immortality unto glory. We durst not partake any longer of her
sins, lest we should be made also to partake of her plagues. But yet this
our falling off is only from their doctrine, not from their civil society,
this Arminius in These.
defection is from them only in point of faith, not of charity. Though the
Scepter be departed from them, and I hope shall ever so continue, yet have they
had all fair usage from Caesar, all convenient connivences, and compliances
from the State, and Church, all freedom and immunities with other subjects, in
civil matters: yet is there so much of the Wolf and Lion in them, that they
will not dwell peaceably with us, nor eat, and lie down with us; I mean not
only in our Churches to serve God with us, but not in our Commonwealth, in our
Cities, Towns, Villages. They are goads and pricks in our sides, Prove. 3. v.
29.30.
they intend evil against us, when we dwell without fear by them. They strive
with us causlesly, when we do them no harm. Their cou^tenances fall upon us,
as Cains upon his brother. They deride our worship, and zeal, as Michall did
David's. They revile, and word-beate our persons, as Shimei. They plot treason
to our State, like Athalia.

And because we will not seek far for instances, here will come about, in the
anniversary observation thereof, within these three or four days* a day which
stands in our Almanacks like a pillar of salt; a day which God made Ex nigro et
infausto, candidum etfelicem populo Romano. Plut. in vit. Lucul.
of a black and unlucky one, a most white and happy one to people of England,
as Lucullus spoke in alike case; a day which, me thinks, they should speak
of, as Job of his birthday, Job 3. v. 4. etc.
Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon, it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, and let
a cloud remain upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, nor
let it come into the count of the months. Yea desolate be that night, and let
no joy be in it. Let the stars of the twilight be dim, let it look for
light but have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day: because it shut
not up the doors of their mothers wombs, that no such miscreants, and
deperdite wretches as they proved, should ever have stepped into the world; a
day which we would forget, if they would remember it with such shame, and
sorrow, as would well become them; but whereas some of them justify it, others
excuse it, and some begin to deny it, we must be as a thread, or gimmall ring
about their finger to put them in mind of their sin. A plot hatched out of
Plutoes brain, as Minerva out of Jupiters; invented, one would imagine, not by
men, but by Cacodaemons; a hyperbolicall, diabolical, nay hyperdiabolicall
plot, molded in the depths of satanicall contrivances* in the acting of which
what did they mean to antedate the resurrection of all those whose bodies lie
at Westminster, with Kings, and Counselors of the earth, who have there made
themselves desolate places? as Job opened his mouth, Chap. 3. verse. 14.

And to second this, whilst I am transcribing these Schedules, and while these
Sermons were between the Pulpit, and the Press, lo what happened in the same
place on Saturday, being the 21. of this instant November 1640. John James a
Popish Recusant with a rusty dagger came into Westminster Hall, and there did
stab into the breast Peter Heywood Esquire, one of the Kings Justices of the
Peace within the limits of Westminster, as he was going up to the Committee
for Religion, to give up a book of the names of all the Papists which
inhabited, or sojourned within the said limits, being thereunto required by
Parliament. An attempt so daring, and bold, as nothing could be more: for if
circumstances, which individuate an action, be considered, it will easily so
appear, without any flow of words to greaten it.

The Gentleman being venerable for age, and white and blooming as an
Almond-tree; in the very seats of secular justice; the great Court of
Parliament being convened, and the Committees then sitting; upon the person of
a Justice of Peace, being employed about that business by the Parliament; upon
the very day before the House was to receive the holy Communion, and which by
that sudden and barbarous act was so unframed, as that they were forced (...)
adjourne that holy business, etc.

I hold mine own Religion so good, as it needs not fetch luster from the
disgrace of another: It is a poor Religion that must ascend, and climb up to
its own glory by another dishonor, and shame; but these things are so
palpable, and apparent, as if we should hold our peace, the very stones out of
the wall, and the timber out of the roof of that structure would speak; But to
the third Use, which is

The Use of Correction. Correctio.

ANd the last Use of redargution did not lie more direct against the whole bulk
of Popery, then the Use of Correction does here against those public
Incendiaries, and Conflagrators of the world, who are all for the sword, and
war: Videant qui bella movent. Muscul. in loc.
Let them see to it, who are such movers, and stirrers up of war, says
Musculus upon this Text. And let them look to it indeed, who know only how to
ride the red horse of war, and take peace from the earth, and kill one
another, Apoc. 6.4. who cry till they be hoarse again, as they, Judges 7.20.
The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon: who have ever in their mouths that of
Peter, Master shall I smite? Like Caesar's soldier, Does the Senate deny my
Master the Consulship? but Hic enfis dabit.
this sword shall give it him. But when shall you hear them speak in that
phrase of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 47. ver. 6. O thou sword of the Lord, how
long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and
be still. They are not for Esayes Prophecy of turning swords into plowshares,
etc. but all for Ioels, Chap. 3. of turning plowshares into swords, etc. These
know not what spirit themselves are of; I am sure far from an Evangelical
spirit, and temper: The way of peace they have not known. So far from
kennelling the Wolf and the Lamb together, or from stalling the Ox and Lion
together, as they foment, and add fuel to their inimicitious qualities.

I am not slipped into that Anabaptisticall conceit and tenet, whereinto they say
both Erasmus and Ferus, two Beaucle^^s fell, that all wars were utterly
unlawful under the Gospel. Holiness to the Lord is found written upon Zach.
14.20.
the bridles of horses, which is a warlike beast, as well as upon the high
Priests frontlet, which is a man of peace. I will not now enter upon the point
my self, but refer only him that is scrupulous herein, unto a most learned,
and satisfactory Author, Grotius, in the first Book and second Chapter, De
jure belli and pacis, wherein he proves just wars to be lawful, both by the
law of nature, and by the law of Nations, and by Divine Law before the Gospel,
and lastly, by the verdict even of the Gospel it self.

Nevertheless, the most can be said for war, is this, that it may be
necessary, it cannot be good of it self; even the same that was said of
Aurelian, a severe man, A man rather necessary then good. The best plea it has
in Divinity, is either permission, as Moses suffered divorce in small cases, by
reason of the hardness of men's hearts: or necessity, as David ate the
Shewbread, and the Disciples plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath day,
being driven thereto by hunger.

The direful effects, and sad consequences of War are so many, and great, as
they may seem to require a just Volume. I will bestow this one Paragraph in
pointing at them. And I will begin with two notable emblemes of the misery that
is in War: The one the Hawk and the Bitturn lying upon the ground, with this
word, Nulla salus bello.
No safety at all in War. The Hawk has struck down the Bitturn, and seized
upon it, and the Bitturne lying under, strikes his bill upward through the
Hawks gorge. The other is two pots floting upon a pond, or surface of a water
with this word, Si collidimur, frangimur.
If we knock together, we sink together. In War, any one may begin, but it is
in the power of the Conqueror when to end: In War, even the Conqueror is
commonly a loser: In War Fathers bury children, whereas in peace children
bury Fathers, as Croesus Apophthegmatized, when he was captivated by Cyrus. In
War, holy things are projected to dogs; witness that illustrious Temple of
Jerusalem, which was forty six years in building, but scarce as many hours in
demolishing. In War, every man is a Gadarene, respecting a swine more then a
man; witness Titus Vespasian, who in the sacking of Jerusalem sold thirty Jews
for a penny, to be a tulio to them, who had sold Christ for thirty pence. In
War, old men bow themselves at the feet of their enemy, with as many tears and
prayers, as a dry brain, and a faltring tongue can afford: Women are distracted
between care for the fruit of their bodies to preserve their children from
sword, and the sin of their souls, to preserve their chastity from lust.
Lastly, to say no more, in War, the barbarous Soldier ransacks houses,
breaks open locks, rifles chests, ravisheth wives, and daughters, blunts his
sword with the blood of Fathers and sons, and like Sampsons Foxes, set on fire
whole fields of corn. These and such like things have occasioned many fair and
goodly Proverbs, and Apophthegmes, whereinto a great deal of wisdom is
abridged, beside the character of Antiquity, that is now stamped upon them: As
that of Probus the Emperor for one, Brevi spero milites non habebimus
necessarios. Vopiscus.
I hope shortly Soldiers shall not be so much as necessary; That of Antonius
Pius, taken up from Scipio, That he had rather save one Citizen, then destroy a
thousand enemies; That of Cicero, Attic. l. 7. Ep. 14.
A most unjust peace is more profitable then a most unjust war. And lastly,
that of Livy, which seems to be more warrantable, That Live. lib. 30.
a certain peace is both better and safer, then an hoped-for victory.

And the encomiums, and blessings of peace will challenge one other Paragraph,
before we shut up this Use, still allowing to Kings and their Senates, and
Counsels, right of drawing or sheathing the sword, when a desperate disease
requires so sharp a cure. Vespasian the Emperor expressed upon his coins the
felicities of peace, by the device of fair and full ears of corn, growing out
of two hands conjoined together. Julius Caesar had another Cadu^eum cum
cor^ucopia.
not unlike it. Peace makes small things great, and great things impregnable;
it is the very supporter of Individualls, Families, Churches, Commonwealths.
Take a Church, or a Polity newly come out of the Mint of Gods Providence, and
give it but the milk of peace to drink, and it shall grow up fast to all
strength and greatness. In peace, Kings are nursing Fathers, and Queens are
nursing Mothers; the Magistrate is a Custos utriusque tabulae.
Keeper of both Tables; The Merchant brings home wine, and oil; The Husbandman
sowes in hope, and reaps in joy; Widows are comforted, and Maids are given in
marriage; The Land flows with milk and honey; The lands stand thick with corn*
that they do laugh and sing; Jacobs blessing falls upon men, the dew of
heaven, and the fatness of the earth; There is no leading into to Captivity,
no complaining in the streets; Rachel weeps not for her children, and will not
be comforted; Old men go to their graves in peace; There is not a shield or a
sword found amongst ten thousand of Israel Judges 5.8.
. Thus much in prosecution of the Use of Correction. The fourth now follows,
which is

The Use of Instruction. Instructio.

NOw the Use of Instruction cannot better be issued forth, then as the holy
Ghost does it in those diverse, and weighty Texts, which are all exhortations
unto the dwelling together, and lying down together, and feeding together, and
playing together, of Wolves, and Lambs. Seek peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34.14.
Pursue it? how is that? the (...) a Persequi, Prosequi.
root shows the nature of the branch: If it fly from thee as swift as a Roe
or Hind, yet follow the chase still, pursue and hunt it to thine own home, and
to thy dwelling. S. Peter has the same exhortation, for he alleges the same
Text, 1 Epist. 3. Chap. ver. 11. Seek peace and (...)
ensue it. Those more then forty learned Translators which King James employed
in that Ptolome-like work of the last Translation, put no more difference
betwixt their rendering of David's Hebrew word, and S. Peter's Greek word, but
pursue, and ensue: The Hebrew word of the Old Testament signifies a strong
pursuit, and the Greek word of the New signifies a swift pursuit. S. Paul
concurres with S. Peter, both in the same exhortation, and same (...).
word, Romans 14.19. Let us (...).
follow after the things which make for peace. So does the Penman of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 12. v. 14. (...).
follow peace.

But not to follow this following indistinctly, and inconfusedly let us here
propound the hedge, and limits of our speech. Follow it then, pursue it, ens^e
it first in the several kinds of it; secondly, according to the several
degrees of it; thirdly, according to the right order and method of it; and
lastly, by the surest and safest rule of it; of which four, briefly, and in
order.

First, pursue it, I say, in the several kinds of it, which are three; 1.
Oeconomicall, or household peace, in all those three several relations which
do constitute a perfect family; the Matrimonial relation betwixt husband and
wife; the Parentall knot, betwixt Parents and children; and the servile one,
betwixt Masters and servants. Now in each of these relations, commonly the
superior is the Wolf, and Leopard, and Lion, and the inferior the Lamb, Kid,
and Calfe, while husbands are bitter to their wives, while Parents provoke
their children to wrath, and whilst Masters threaten their servants; and too
often by a reversed order, the inferior plays the Wolf, and superior must be
the Lamb, when there are such wives as Vashti, such children as Absalom, such
servants as Gehezi, or Ziba; but whether of the two ways the fault has been,
let us henceforth follow peace, and let the Wolf go and dwell with the Lamb,
and Leopard lie down with the Kid. The second is Ecclesiastical, or
Church-peace, which must be pursued too, both swiftly, and strongly. If the
Shepherds have played the Lords, more then the Fathers over Gods heritage; or
if the flock have played the Church rebels rather then obedient children let
them convert, and repent, and henceforth dwell and lie down, etc. together. The
third is Political, or Common-wealth-peace, which we had need to follow too;
as the King is toward the Subject in protection, and just government, so the
Subject toward the King in loyalty and allegiance, and Subject toward Subject
in love, and concord.

Secondly, we must pursue it according to the several degrees of it, which are
four: 1. Interior peace with a man's self, both with his affections, and with
his conscience; and this is the basis, and ground of all other peace, for if
there be storms within, there will hardly be a calm without. 2. Exterior peace,
both with beasts figurative, and beasts proper; that is, both betwixt man and
man, and betwixt man and beast; for even that is taken in, as a branch of the
covenant* Job 5.23. 3. Superior peace with celestial powers, both betwixt
Romans 51
God and man, and betwixt Ps 91.11 Mat. 4.6.
Angels and man. 4. Eternal peace, which is that sweet harmony and concent
which passes all understanding, when the Lambs and Kid shall ^e down safely,
and securely in the fold of the Church Triumphant, by those who have been
Wolves, and Leopards; yea, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of God.

Thirdly, we must pursue it according to the right method and order, which is
this; first righteousness, and then peace: Melchisedech was first King of
Righteousness, as his name signifies, and then King of Salem, or peace, as his
title imports. This is the method observed in the Nuptials, and embracements
of these two, Psalm. 85.11. Righteousness and peace have kissed each other; and
it is the very method of this place and Text: for ver. 5. of this Chapter,
which is the immediate pro-text, it is prophesied, Righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins, etc. and then in the very next verse of all begins this
grand Prophecy of peace, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. Internal
peace without righteousness is but security; external peace without it, is
but servitude and slavery; supernall is but presumption; and eternal is but
fancy. Look to it therefore, that we do in this work (...), Go the right way
to work, lay a good foundation, and then the superstructure is like to stand.

Lastly, let peace be prosecuted, and followed, by the safest and surest rule
of this pursuit: which (certainly) is that of Solomon, Prove. 16.7. When a man's
ways please the Lord* he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Here is a short cut; Please one, and please all, as we say: for house-peace in
the family, where, it may be, the Mistress is a good Huswife, but of shrewish
condition. To go about to work out true peace by our applications, and
compliances with men, is an endless work, and to go about by the bow, but to
attain both peace with others, and peace within our selves, by this one most
compendious way, of being reconciled to God, in the face of his son, is to go
straight by the string. And now the fifth and last use calls on us, to take
notice of it, to wit

Consolatio.
The Use of Consolation.
LAstly now, the comfort redounding from hence unto us is this, that God in his
infinite mercy unto this poor, sinful, unworthy Nation of ours, has so long,
and for so many years together rained and showred down upon us, this great
Evangelical blessing, the blessing of peace, the very badge and cognizance of
our profession, and the foote-steps, I hope, of Christ's being amongst us; that
as our Nation was the first Christian Kingdom in the world, as ^ol. Virg. l. 2.
Polydore Virgil testifies, and our King Lucius, the first Christian King in
the world, as venerable Bede l. 1. c. 4.
Bid testifyeth: so it has been the most peaceable Kingdom, for many last
past years. First under our Deborah, that ruled and judged this Israel forty
years: and then under King James, that peaceable Augustus, who chose it for
his Motto* out of all the eight beatitudes, Beati pacifici. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the peacemakers; and now under a meek, and sweet natured Prince,
that sits upon his Fathers Throne; and it is Machivels observation, that a
succession of three good Princes together does notably contribute to
establishment, and felicity of a Kingdom.

These are blessings which as our selves have enjoyed, so all our friends have
congratulated unto us, and our enemies have envyed unto us, and pined away, and
grown lean at our prosperity. It is true; there has been of late an
intercision, and interruption herein. Our peace both of Church and
Commonwealth has been a little plundered and perplexed* God has cast a fly
into our precious ointment, and shred an handful of wild Gourds into our pot:
but I hope it is but as a foil, the better to set off so long and great a
peace; It is but as our Savior dealt with the Emauitane Disciples Luke 24.28.
when he made as though he would have gone farther, that they might grow the
more importune with him to stay: and I should not at all doubt of it, if I
could but see us once all of us as if all England were but one man, to
prosecute, and pursue this peace according to that most safe, and sure Touched
before in the Use of Instruction.
rule; of making up our peace with God, in and through his Son, by breaking off
our sins by repentance, and new obedience.

And the rather because I find our very enemies Prophets to foretell, and
Heralds to declare it, for us. Cornelius ^ Lapide, a very famous Jesuit, and
great Commentatour upon holy Scripture; whose volumes are swelled to that
proportion that they take up half a Class^^ in our public Libraries; and to
that repute, as he is crept into most private Studies of those who affect
learning, and have money to buy so many Volumes: He, I say, Commenting to that
text of Scripture, Esaias, chap. 2. verse 4. They shall beat their sword^ into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-ho^ks: Nation shall not lift up
sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more; Thus he writes:
Christ, says he, by the Evangelical Law of charity, modesty, justice,
meekness, and patience, shall agree, and compound the jars, and discords of
all Nations, shall pluck up by the roots their antipathies, and hatreds, shall
bridle the fierce and quarrelsome, and shall cause, that in one, and the same
Church, there do friendly converse together, as brethren, Romans and Greeks,
etc. ENGLISH and SCOTS; and so shall be fulfilled that of Esaias 11.6. See the
words in Latin, in the Title Page of these Sermons.
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc.

What, is Saul among the Prophets? must a very Papist, a Jesuit, who do so
labor to disturb our peace, be a Trumpet, and Prophet of our peace? we
thank him for it, whether it procee^ded from his ingenuity or from necessity,
(...) the spirit of vaticinatio^ was on him, as it was u^^on Balaam, and the
High Priest when Christ suffered. We cannot say to him, as the King of M^chaia,
Thou never prophesied (...) good unto me, but ^^^waies evil. But we will
speak to him, as to (...) Ahimaaz, in this thing he is a good man and brings
good tidings.

God of his goodness, who is the Author of peace, send us all sorts, all
degrees of peace, through Christ Jesus, who is the Prince of peace, that every
one of us both by our affections, and prayers, and endeavors may bring
tribute, and offerings unto this (...), and so be the children of peace. Amen.

FINIS.
November. 27. 1640.

Imprimatur, ^oh^ (...)


