IANUARIES ACCOUNT, Giving a full and true Relation of all the remarkable
passages of that Month, this present Year, 1645. 1644
Drawn up together to give a general satisfaction to the whole Kingdom, of
the just and legal proceedings of that High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT.
THe first day of the Year, according to the season of the time, it being good
all the month to take off superfluous branches from Fruit Trees: The
Commonwealth had a young twig cut from it, proceeding from as bad a body or
stock, Sir John Hotham, father to Captain Hotham, who about eleven of the
clock the same day, was brought to the Seaffold on Tower Hill, where he
prayed, but confessed nothing (so difficult a thing it is for great men to
deal plainly with their consciences even at the instant of death) but he
justified his actions, and so lying down on the block, his head being cut often
at one blow. Straight boughs may grow from a crooked Tree but it is worthy to
be remembered that the Son being lopt off by the Axe of Justice, the same
week the Father, who like an old Oak had stood the shaking tempests of many
Winters should now come to so sad a fall. This Sir John Hotham may be a lecture
unto all great persons, to instruct them to keep a true and sound heart, in
which part he being rotten, was by the hand of Justice cut down for his
treacherous carriage in many businesses, as his denying my Lord Fairfax
necessaries to fight against the Earl of Newcastle; he several times had in
his custody the Lord George, who coming to England alone, has been the death
of many thousand men, and a million of prejudices to the Kingdom in the
estates of men, besides his intent of delivering up Hull, for which the State
saw it just and necessary that he should dye; these two executions it is to be
hoped, will not only fright those at Oxford from farther tampering with any of
our party, but also make all ours interested, to forbear the least thoughts of
compliance with the Enemy, for treachery is a stain never got out.

These two, the fatherand the son, being gone out of the world, and which is
the greatest misery of all unpitied, the Scripture, now was in a man that
should have advanced Religion, and Gods word, fulfilled, The Axe is now laid to
the root of the tree, and every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall
be hewn down and cast into the fire: for the first part it was well enough
known that this Tree being first planted in St. John College in Oxford,
flourished there a long time, until he was removed to grow in the fat soil of
an Episcopal dignity, being made Archbishop of Canterbury, and now being firmly
rooted in that high Grace, he having little grace, did not as the text says,
Bring forth good fruit, unless the endeavoring to bring in Popery instead of
the Protestant Religion, his persecuting the members of Christ by imprisonment
and cutting off ears, his cruelty in the high Commission Court, his silencing
of faithful Ministers, his desiring to be made a Cardinal from Rome, and his
opposing of Parliaments, and therein his subverting the Laws of the Kingdom,
to bring in the Romish Hierarchy, and many other wicked plots; unless I say
these were good fruits, he brought forth none else; so that this Tree being by
the judicious censure of Parliament known and proved to bring forth nothing
but malice, Popery, malignancy, and treason against the Kingdom and State; he
was as the Scripture says, condemned to have the Axe not only laid unto him
(though he hoped for mercy) but to be hewn down: And so on January the tenth,
he came from the Tower to the place of Execution, where on the Scaffold heo had
many spectators who came to see this old Popish Oak cut down, who there on
the Scaffold on Tower Hill preached his Funeral Sermon, upon Heb. 12.1.2.

Let us run with patience that race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God. His Sermon may be thus epitomized in these brief heads:
First, an application of the words unto himself, I have been long in my race,
and how I have looked unto Jesus the author and finisher of my faith, is best
known to him: Then he begins to mock the people in these words: The
Israelites, would not worship the Image which the King had set up: Nor shall I
the Imaginations which the people are setting up, nor will I forsake the Temple
and the Truth of God to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calves in Dan and
Bethel. Then he blessed the people, and prayed God to open their eyes, that
they might see the right way (meaning to Popery.) Then he said that Simon
Sudbury a Bishop lost his head in the fury of Wat Tiler, as if he were put to
death by Rebels, and in a time of Rebellion: Then he prays for the King, and
professed himself to dye in the Protestant Religion; but who ever saw a
Protestant Bishop desire a Cardinals Cap. But you may read his Sermon at large,
which being ended, he plucked off his doublet, and after some prayers, laid his
head on the block; and at one blow his policy and Popery were both out off.

Monday the 13. after debate, it was resolved by the Commons, that the number
of the new Army now raised, should be 21000 Horse and Foot.

This day Col. Jepson the Governor of Plimmoth set upon Colonel Gorings
Quarters, took some Horse and diverse Prisoners.

Colonel Mitton also with a party from his Garrison at Oswestree, fell upon
three Troops of Sir John Birons Horse, and took two Captains of Horse, one
Lieutenant, one Quartermaster, nineteen Troopers, twenty case of Pistols,
twelve Carbines, four Muskets, and routed all the rest.

Ian. 14. The Lord Inchequin was by Commission made President of Munster. The
House passed a Vote to this effect: That many Congregations may be under one
Presbyteriall Government.

Abington was attempted to be stormed by P. Rupert, Maurice, Colonel Gage
Governor of Oxford, and others, with a party of about 1000. Horse, and 800.
foot, but they were soon beaten from Cullam bridge, our men marching through
the overflowing waters. In this Service we lost of note only Major Bradbury
slain upon the bridge, and seven or eight common Soldiers: of the Enemies
there were slain Sir Henry Gage Governor of Oxford, the Major of the Princes
Regiment with his Lieutenant; and the Enemy carried away three cart load of
dead men.

The Town and Castle of Cardigan in Wales is taken by Major General
Laughorne, the Town with little difficulty, but the Castle held out
obstinately, wherein were taken an hundred Commanders and Soldiers.

The States of Holland have desired a pass from the Parliament to go to
Oxford.

It is voted by the Commons, that Pasters, Doctors, Teachers, Elders, and
Deacons, should be the Officers of the Church.

Plimmouth has had great success against Grenvils Forces, who having then one
great Work, were beaten off, with the lost of 75 men left dead on the place.

An Order was made by the Commons for the trial of one Dobson a Stationer, by
a Council of War, for Printing scandalous books. There is order taken also for
the suppressing of Oxford Aulicasses, Printed at London, or conveyed hither.

An Ordinance was made for the assessement of the Counties for raising of the
sum set on them for the maintenance of the twenty one thousand Horse and
Foot, according to the new moddell of an Army.

After the defeat at Abington, they were much distracted at Oxford, whither Sir
Henry Gage killed at Abington, was brought and buried there. The Lord Savil,
the L. Piercy, and the L. Andover, were confined to their chambers; some say
for mocking Prince Rupert, and asking him, if he had brought Abington in his
pocket? others say, for giving intelligence.

Three hundred Horse and Prisoners were taken by Colonel Holborne, who also
forced the Enemy to Bristol, and since has taken Sydenham house, with a
hundred Prisoners, one Captain, a Lieutenant, many other officers, with store
of Arms and Ammunition.

Sir Thomas Fairfax is made Commander in chief of the Forces according to the
new moddell of the Army: And Major Skippon is made Sergeant-Major-Generall of
the same; and several other Officers are voted by the House.

There is an Appendix to the Directory presented to the Commons, and by them
transmitted to the Lords, for the abolishing of Holidayes, and holiness
attributed to places, and a Committee is appointed to consider of certain
days for the recreations of Apprentices and servants in a civil orderly way,
so that there will be no more drunken Saint-dayes now.

Sir Peter Killigrew returned from Oxford on Wednesday last, January 22. with
His Majesty's Answer concerning the Treaty, which was sealed up in a Letter of
Ruperts to the Lord General. The contents of the conduct run to this effect:
That our Commissioners, namely, Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Earl of
Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Denbigh, of the House of Lords. And the
Lord Waiman, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Pierpoint, Mr. Whitlock, Sir Henry Vane junior,
Mr. Solliciter, Mr. Crew, and Mr. Prideaux, of the House of Commons in
Parliament assembled at Westminster. And the Marquess of Argile, the Lord
Louthian, the Lord Muitland, Sir Charles Erskin, Mr. Kereday, Mr. Berkley, Mr.
Henderson, and othere, Commissioners from the Parliament of Scotland, with
their attendants, not exceeding the number of a 108. with their Horse,
Carriages, and other necessaries, are to pass between London and Vxbridge,
when and so often as they shall think fit, during the time of the Treaty,
without any let or molestation whatsoever.

The Propositions from the King are these.
THat His Majesty's Revenues, Magazins, Towns, Forts, and Ships, that have been
taken or kept from him may be restored. That whatsoever has been done or
published contrary to the known Laws of the Land, or derogatory to His
Majesty's legal and known Rights be renounced and recalled, that no seed may
remain of the like to spring out for the future.

That whatsoever illegal power has been claimed or exercised over His
Majesty's Subjects, as imprisoning and putting to death their persons without
Law, stopping Habeas Corpus, and putting Impositions upon their estates,
(without Act of Parliament) either by one or both Houses, or by any Committee
of both or either Houses, be disclaimed, and the persons committed be forthwith
discharged.

That His Majesty will consent to make a Law to establish and to maintain the
Protestant Religion: and for the firmer establishing thereof, desires there may
be a Bill drawn up for the continuance of the Book of Common Prayer, and to
maintain it from all soonne and violence.

That there be a Bill also for the e^se of tender Consciences, in such
particulars as shall be agreed upon: and that (as to the best expedient
thereunto* there be a National Synod called legally, with all convenient
speed.

That all persons which shall be excepted and agreed upon on either side to be
excepted out of the General Pardon, be tried per Pares, according to the
usual custom, and known Laws of the Land to be either acquitted or condemned.

And to the intent that Trade may not suffer, nor any interruption to the
Treaty, and that there may be a Cessation of Arms, and a free Trade with all
possible speed concluded on.

And as to what shall be debated, His Majesty gives power to his Commissioners,
or any ten of them, to agree and conclude upon them.

In the new Army of 21000 the chief Commanders nominated are Sir Thomas
Fairfax to command in chief, and Major Skippon to be Serjeant-Major-Generall,
the four Colonels of Horse and Foot are, Col. Holborn. Col. Middleton. Col.
Fortescue. Col. Barkley.


And honors are by the Parliament to be conferred on the Earl of Essex and
Sir William Belfore, for their valiant and faithful services for the
Commonwealth.

It is certain Colonel Holborn has taken Sydenham house, and therein a 100
prisoners, with the high Sheriff of Summersetshire, and ten Commissioners of
Array. That he has taken some hundreds of Hoptons forces, and driven the rest
toward Bristol; that Plimmouth is in a good condition: That the King has
assigned Prince Maurice to be General of Worcester, Hereford, and Shropshire.

The Kings Commissioners are the Duke of Richmond, Marquess* Hartford, Earl
of Southampton, Earl of Kingston, Earl of Chichester, Lord Seymor, Lord
Hatton, L Capel, L. Culpepper, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir
Ed. Hide, Sir Richard Lane, Sir Thomas Gardiners, Mr. John Ashburnham, and Mr.
Jeffery Palmer, with Doctor Stewart, Dr. Laney, Dr. Shelden, and their
attendants to the number of 108. But some of their Commissioners at Oxford must
leave their new Titles behind them, for the Houses will not allow the new made
Lords their Titles, the rest that have gotten new honors since Littleton went
away, upon such terms. And on Saturday Sir Peter Killigrew posted to signify
so much unto them, and also to carry them a safe conduct upon the same
conditions. This Treaty is the great expectation of the Kingdom, and this
eclipse may signify Peace; and that Eclipsed Religion losing now her light,
Yet once shine out again most fair and bright.


This Treaty brings Englands weal or woe, and therefore worthy to be prayed
for; happy were it to see the King as the Sun does coming toward us, for
then our joy would begin to spring.

Sir William Breretons Forces have taken Prisoners near Chester, Colonel
Woiden, Col. Wen, Lieutenant Colonel Gray, Lieutenant Colonel Gough, Captain
Rorey, Capt. Oneal, an Irishman, with thirteen other Commanders, 200 common
Soldiers, as many Horse, store of Arms, and killed and wounded many of them.

Instructions are agreed upon what particulars shall be treated off the first
nine days, namely, on the settling of Religion, the Militia, and the affairs
of Ireland.

Sir Richard Greenvil has in the West slain the two Champernoons, in this
manner, Colonel Champernoon provoked by him, fired his Pistol upon him without
effect, then Greenvil pistoled the Colonel and slew him: his brother fired his
Pistol upon Greenvil, which missing, Greenvil drew his sword and run him
through, and so killed both the brothers.

Cornwall begins to rise up in Arms, being weary of the cruelty of this
insolent and bloody Commander Greenvil.

Chester is at this present besieged round; and an hundred and twenty Demi
Canon shot were made in one day against Pomfract Castle, against which a new
mount is raised, and many breaches are made.

An India Ship was carried into Bristol by the treacherous master thereof. Sir
Thomas Middleton keeps the Welsh in obedience, and maintains div^rs Garrisons
there.

Thus have you a true account of the passages of this Month of January, happy
in the beginning of the Treary of Peace, unto which God send a blessed issue.

Seen and allowed.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smithfield, 1645. 1644


