EKTENE'STEPON. OR The Degrees of Ardency IN CHRIST'S PRAYER Reconciled with His
fullness OF HABITVAL GRACE.

In Reply to the Author of a Book, entitled, A mixture of Scholastical
Divinity with Practical.

By H. HAMMOND. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1656.

The Degrees of ardency in Christ's Prayer, etc.
seasonable advice of many, and to wholly withdraw my self a foro contentioso,
to some more pleasing and profitable employment; but discerning it to be the
desire of the Author of the Book, Entitled, A mixture of Scholastical and
Practical Divinity, that I should reply to his examination of one passage of
mine against Mr. Cawdrey, I shall make no scruple immediately to obey him, not
only because it may be done in very few words, but especially because the
doctrine, which he affixeth to me, seems (and not without some reason) to be
contrary to the truth of Scripture, which I am to look on with all reverent
submission and acquiesce in, with captivation of understanding, and so not
assert any thing from my own conceptions, which is but seemingly contrary to it.

affixes to me, is Of the fullness of Christ. p. 258.
this; That Christ's love of God was capable of farther degrees, and that he
refutes, as being contrary to that point (a truth of Scripture) which he had in
hand, viz. The dwelling of all fullness of habitual grace in Christ.

Christ's love of God (meaning thereby that habitual grace of divine Charity)
to have been capable of further degrees, so as that capacity of further
degrees, is the denial of all fullness of that habitual grace already in him.

expressed my self, or let fall any words, which might have been thus
interpretable, I acknowledge I had been very injurious not only to the verity
of God, but also to my own conceptions, and even to the cause which I had in
hand, which had not been supported, but betrayed by any such apprehension of
the imperfection of Christ's habitual graces.

cautiously and expressly it was fore-stall'd by me; But to the matter in hand,
it is sufficient, that I profess I never thought it; but deem it a contrariety
to express words of Scripture in any man who shall think it, and in short,
that I never gave occasion to any man to believe it my opinion, having never
said it in those words which he sets up to refute in me, never in any other
that may be reasonably interpretable to that sense.

First, I said it not in those words, which he undertakes to refute; These are
p. 258. of his Book thus set down by him.

This point may serve for confutation of a passage in Dr. H. against Mr. C. to
wit, That Christ's love of God was capable of farther degrees]. Passage, which
he sets down from me, and whereon he grounds them; which, says he, is this:

Dr. H. p. 222. In the next place he passes to the inforcement of my argument,
from what we read concerning Christ himself, that he was more intense in Prayer
at one time than another, when yet the lower degree was sure no sin, and
prepares to make answer to it. viz. That Christ was above the Law, and did more
then the Law required, but men fall short by many degrees of what is required.
But sure this answer is nothing to the matter now in hand, for the evidencing
of which, that example of Christ was brought by me, viz. That sincere Love is
capable of degrees. This was first showed in several men, and in the same man
at several times, in the several ranks of Angels, and at last in Christ
himself, more ardent in one act of Prayer than in another. Reader finds not
the words [ Christ's love of God is capable of further degrees] and when by
deduction he endeavors to conclude them from these words, his conclusion falls
short in one word viz. [further] and it is but this,

That the example of Christ will never prove D. H. his conclusion, unless it
infer, that Christ's love of God was capable of degrees.] slight charge
indeed, yet may be worthy to be taken notice of in the entrance (though the
principal weight of my answer be not laid on it) and suggest this seasonable
advertisment, that he which undertakes to refute any saying of another, must
oblige himself to an exact recital of it to a word, and syllable; Otherwise he
may himself become the only Author of the Proposition, which he refutes.

difference is no more than by the addition of the word [ further.] But that
addition may possibly beger in the Readers understanding, a very considerable
difference.

Christ's love of God was capable of further degrees] is readily interpretable
to this dangerous sense, that Christ's love of God was not full, but so far
imperfect, as to be capable of some further degrees than yet it had; And thus
sure the Author I have now before me, acknowledges to have understood the
words; and accordingly proposes to refute them from the consideration of the
all-fulness of habitual grace in Christ, which he could not do, unless he
deemed them a prejudice to it.

other words, which though he finds not in my papers, he yet not illogically
inferres from them [ that Christ's love of God was capable of degrees, more
intense at one time than at another] are not so liable to be thus interpreted,
but only import that Christ's love of God had in its latitude or amplitude
several degrees, one differing from another. See magis and minus, all of them
comprehended in that all-full perfect love of God, which was always in Christ
so full, and so perfect, as not to want, and so not to be capable of further
degrees.

degrees of which Christ's love of God is capable, are by me thus expressed, that
his love was more intense at one time than at another; but still the higher of
those degrees of intensness, was as truly acknowledged to be in Christ's love,
at some time, viz. in his agony, as the lower was at (...); and so all the
degrees, which are supposed to be mentioned of his love, are also supposed, and
expressly affirmed to have been in him at some time or other; whereas a supposed
capacity of further degrees, seems at least (and so is resolved by that Author)
to infer, that these degrees were not in Christ (the direct contradictorie to
the former Proposition) and so that they were wanting in him, and the but
seeming asserting of that want is justly censured, as prejudicial to Christ's
fullness. Here then was one misadventure in his proceeding.

proaemial, part of my Reply, there is another more material branch of it still
behind, which may yet seem necessary to be added, viz. to mind him of (what he
well knows) the distinction between habits and acts of virtues, or graces; and
that love the Genus does equally comprehend both these species, and that his
discourse of all fullness belonging to the habitual grace of Christ, I speak
distinctly of another matter, viz. of the degrees of that grace discernable in
the several acts of it.

distinction I thought legible enough before, both in the Tract of
Will Worship, and in the Answer to Mr. Caw.

p. 259.
Refuter confesses to find it, reciting these words of mine, It is possible
for the same person constantly to love God above all, and yet to have higher
expressions of that love at one time than another. Where the expressions at one
time, and at another, must needs refer to the several acts of the same,
all-full habitual love. Only I guess not what temptation he had to choose
that expression, which he there makes use of, viz.

[That there D. H. minceth the matter, and speaks more cautelously] adding
[that what he there says is nothing to the matter now in hand] Whereas 1.
those of Will Worship being the First papers written on that subject, are sure
very pertinent to ascertain him of the meaning of the latter, written in
defense of them; and secondly the early cautelous speaking there, might have
made further later caution unnecessary: and 3ly, I could not be said to mince
(which to vulgar ears signifies to retract in some degree what I had said
before,) and again, speak more cautiously, when that was the first time of my
speaking of it.

manifest, and his own confession, that there these were my words, and those so
cautious, that this sense of the words which he undertakes to refute, could not
be affixt on them. And this I should have thought sufficient to have preserved
my innocence, and forstalled his Use of Confutation.

answer to Mr. C. which occasioned it was, I think, as cautious also, 1. In the
words recited by the Refuter, viz. that Christ himself was more ardent in one
act of prayer then in another. 2. In the words following in that answer, but
not recited by him, viz. that the sincerity of this or that virtue expressed in
this or that performance, is it we speak of when we say it consists in a
latitude and has degrees; where the [this or that performance] are certainly
Acts of the virtue, consisting in a latitude and the having degrees (viz in
that latitude) no way implies him that has that virtue in that latitude (viz.
Christ) to want at present; and in that sense to be capable of farther degrees.

jealously as I can on any passage of my own, which falls under any man's
censure; and therefore finding nothing in the words set down by him as the
ground of the Refutation) which is any way capable of it, I have reviewed the
whole section, and weighed every period, as suspiciously as I could; to observe
whether I could draw or wrest that consequence from any other passage, not
recited by him.

any degree liable, except it should be this in the p. 221. n. 1.
beginning of the Sect. Where setting down the argument, as it lay in the Tr.
of Will-wor. I say it is possible for the same person which so loves God (i.e.
with all the heart) to love him, and express that love more intensely at one
time than another, as appeared by the example of Christ.

capable of misapprehension, by reason of the [and] disjoyning love from the
expressions of it, and so the expressions belonging to the acts, the love be
deemed to denote the habitual love; I must only say; that this is a
misapprehension, for that by loving with all the heart, in the first place, I
certainly meant the sincere habit of Love, by love in the latter place, the
inward acts of love, and by the expressions of love, the outward expressions of
those inward acts, and of those acts only I speak, and of those expressions,
when I say they are more intense at one time then another.

love, as I said, is a genus, equally comprehending the two species, habitual
and actual love, and equally applicable to either of the species, to the acts
as well as habit of love. And so when I say love is capable of degrees, the
meaning is clear, The generical word love restrained to the later species, i.
e. considered in respect of the acts of love, gradually differenced one from
the other, is that respect, capable of degrees, both inwardly and in outward
expressions, that act of love, that poured out, and expressed it self in the more
ardent prayer, was a more intense act of love, then another act of the same
habitual love, which did not so ardently express it self.

Refuters own Confession. The death of Christ, p. 259.
says he, was an higher expression of Christ's love of us, then his poverty,
hunger, or thirst. To this I subjoyn that such as the expression was, such was
the act of inward love, of which that was an expression, it being certain that
each of these expressions had an act of internal love, of which they were so
many proportionably different expressions; And from hence I suppose it
unavoidably consequent, that that act of internal love, expressed by his dying
for us, was superior to those former acts, which only expressed themselves in
his poverty, and so the same person that loved sincerely, did also love, and
express that love more intensly at one time then at another, which was the
very thing I had said in another instance. But this I have added ex abundanti
more then the Refuters discourse required of me.

Refuter have in the process of his discourse added any thing, wherein I may be
any whit concerned.

the falsehood of such an assertion is evident from the point there handled and
confirmed, the absolute fullness of Christ's grace, which by the general consent
of the Fathers and Schoolmen was such, as that it excluded all intensive
growth.

reply will be easily foreseen, from the premises, that as the point by him
handled and confirmed was distinctly the all-fulness of habitual grace in
Christ, so his proofs of it by the consent of Fathers and Schoolmen belong
still to that fullness of habitual grace.

Aquin. is Ser. 3. qu. 7. art. 12. ad secundum, licet virtus divina possit
facere aliquid majus and melius quam sit habitualis gratia Christi, non tamen
-- though the divine power may make somewhat greater and better, than is the
habitual grace of Christ, yet -- so it is plain he speaks of the fullness of the
habitual grace. And ad tertium. In sapientia and gratia aliquis proficere
potest dupliciter; uno modo secundum ipsos habitus sapientiae and gratiae
augmentatos, and sic Christus in eis non proficiebat. Alio modo secundum
effectus, in quantum aliquis sapientora and virtuosiora opera facit, and sic
Christus proficiebat sapientia and gratia, sicut and atate, quia secundum
processum aetatis perfectiora opera faciebat, -- et in his quae sunt ad Deum,
et in his quae sunt ad homines. One may increase in wisdom and grace two
ways, one way according to the habits of them increased, and so Christ
increased not; another way, according to the effects; when any does more wise
and virtuous works; and so Christ increased in Wisdom and grace, as he did
in age, because according to the process of his age, he did more perfect
works, and that both in things belonging to God, and men also.

Schoolmen understood by the Refuter himself, in his producing their
testimonies, as appears by the express words [ habitual grace p. 260. lin.
penult. and holiness, and the Image of God in him] p. 261. lin. 13. And so it is
most clear, their consent belongs not, even in his own opinion, to the matter
I had, and have in hand, no way denying but asserting a capacity of degrees
among the acts of Christ's love of God, and the expressions of it.

Secondly, he will hear the Doctors objection, and consider of what weight it
is.

Objection? against what? against the fullness of habitual grace* in Christ?
sure never any was by me urged againstit. And he cannot now think there was.
The degrees of intenseness observable in the several acts of Christ's love, his
praying more ardently at one time then another, was all that I concluded from
that text, Luke 22. 44. and that is nothing to his habitual love.

answers (though I hope his doctrine of the fullness of Christ's habitual grace
be no way concerned in it) and to these I shall briefly attend him, as my last
stage in this no very long voyage.

And 1. says he, the vulgar translation renders (...), prolixius; and if this
version be good, then there is no place for the Doctors objection.

But though I seek no advantage by that vulgar reading, yet thinking it a duty
of reverence to that version, to take leave civilly, whenever I depart from
it (wherein I shall have the suffrage of Protestants as learned in both the
Languages Paulus Fagius, Praf. in Verse. Chal. Paraph. in Pentat.
Hebrew and Joh. Boys Eliens. vet, Interpr. cum. Beza-collat.
Greek, as any) and that I may to the utmost observe the Refuters steps, I
shall not utterly reject it.

extension, and that properly belongs to length, and so the comparative (...)
to a greater degree of that length. And if it be granted, that it so signify
here, there will yet be place equally for my conclusion.

act of Prayer, be it but the shortest ejaculation, sent out by Christ, I
suppose (and my Refuter must not doubt of it) there was some degree of ardency
or intension; And then sure according to the multiplying of those acts,
lengthening that prayer, there must still in Christ (I say not in every one of
us) be a proportionable multiplication of those degrees, and so parallel to a
greater length; a greater intension.

clear, and I need not add (what else I might) that the very multiplication
of more acts of any virtue, supposing it equally sincere in the habit (and such
is the length of Prayer, when it is in Christ) is more valuable in the sight of
God (and that argues it more excellent) than the smaller number of those acts
would be, and proportionably more abundantly rewarded by him, who rewards
every man not only according to the sincerity of his heart, but also secundum
opera, according to the multiplied acts or works, the more abundant labor
proceeding from this sincerity. And so that will suffice for his first Answer.

But then 2. Says he, suppose we stick unto our own translation, yet the place
may fairly be so interpreted, as that it may no ways advantage the purpose of
the Doctor. For (...), more earnestly, may be considered in reference unto
either the object unto whom he prayed, God; or the matter, against which he
prayed, the evils with which he conflicted in his agony.

1. Then, says he, he did not in his agony pray more earnestly then at other
times, if we consider his prayer in reference unto the object, unto whom it
was, God. The Religion, and inward worship of his prayer, was for degrees
always alike equal. His trust and dependence upon God, love of zeal and
devotion toward God, from which all his prayers slowed, were not at one time
more intense then at another.

But now 2. He prayed more earnestly in his agony then at other times, in
regard of the matter, against which he prayed, the evils which he encountered
with, which if they were not greater, then those that he deprecated in the
former prayer, v. 42. yet at least they made a greater impression upon his
humane nature; for they put him into a bloody sweat. Being in an agony, he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood,
falling down to the ground.

second answer, and they are in the second part, the very distinct confession
of all that I pretend in this matter (and therefore I need not make any
reflections on the first part of them) For whatsoever, or how great soever the
occasion of the increase of his intension was (which I am willing to believe
proportionable to the degree of the intension, a very weighty occasion that
thus inflamed his ardency) yet still, it is confessed, that on this occasion, he
now prayed more earnestly then at other times, that which now approached made a
greater impression on his humane nature; which what is it but a proof of the
point by me asserted, that Christ himself was more ardent in one act of prayer
(this in his agony) then in another.

greatness of the occasion, so confest^ly great as to cast him into that
prodigious sweat, falling (...), as it were drops of blood, that may testify,
but it cannot prejudge the ardency, which was occasioned thereby.

Christ (he will easily suppose with me) as it is often discernable in many of
us, that those which have really no sincerity of love or zeal to God, can yet
like the Mariners in the tempest, by some pressing fear or danger be awaked to
but formal, and, be they never so loud, but hypocritically zealous prayers.

ardency in Christ was sincere ardency, accompanied with acts of love and trust
of the same temper; and the heightning it (...), was an addition of degrees to
that act of ardency, and so of prayer, and proportionably of love and trust in
God, above either what there was, or what there was, occasion for, at other
times.

possible to find some instances among men (of whose graces it can be no
blasphemy to affirm, that they are capable of degrees) suppose we a sincerely
pious man, a true lover of God, and no despiser of his poor persecuted Church,
and suppose we, as it is very supposeable, that at some time the seas roar, the
tempest be at its hight, and the waves boat violently upon this frailbrittle
vessel, may it not* be a season for that pious man's ardency to receive some
growth? for his zeal to be emulous of those, waves, and pour it self out more
profusely at such, then at a calmer season? I hope there be some at this time
among us, in whom this point is really exemplified, if it be not, it is an
effect of want, not fullness of love. But I need not thus to enlarge; It is not
by this Refuter denied of the person of Christ, and that is my intyre (...) in
reference either to Mr. C. or to him, the utmost that I undertook to
demonstrate then, or to justify now.

hasty paper, hoping that he which invited, and promised it a welcome, in case
it were given him in a fair and Scholastical way, having nothing to accuse in
it, as to the first Epithet, will abate somewhat in reference to the second,
and allow it a friendly, though being unqualified, it pretend not to a more
hospitable reception.

The end.
YSNOS KA KATA TXIN* OR, THE GROUNDS OF UNIFORMITY From 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Vindicated from Mr JEANES'S exceptions to One passage in the View of the
DIRECTORY.

By H. Hammond D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy. Lane,
M.DC.LVII.

1 Cor. 14. 40. (...). Decently, and according to appointment.
Answer to Mr J. concerning the degrees of ardency in Christ's prayer, I am
advertised of another passage in that volume, in which I am concerned, relating
to some words of mine in the view of the Directory page 19. on the head of
Uniformity in Gods service, and particularly respecting my rendering of the
Apostle 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done (...).

decently, and according to order, or appointment] and affirmed the importance
of that place to be, that all be done in the Church according to custom, and
appointment, rendering this reason of the former, because it was implied in
(...) decently ( custom being the only rule of decency etc.) and of the
latter, because the words do literally import this, (...), i. e. according to
order or appointment.

first exception, thus, [He dares not affirm that this is the immediate sense
of the place, but only that it is implied; It cannot be denied but that
decency does imply such customs, the omission of which necessarily infer
indecency, but that the omission of such ceremonies as ours, does infer
undecency, the Doctor and all his party can never make good; What undecency can
the Doctor prove to be in the administration of Baptism without the Cross, as
also in public prayers and preaching without a Surplice? But of this see
farther in Ames in the places but now quoted; The Doctor may perhaps look upon
him as an inconsiderable adversary. But we shall think his Arguments
considerable, until the Doctor, or some other of his party give a satisfactory
answer unto them. In the mean while let us examine the proof that the Doctor
brings for this sense: and it is, because custom is the only rule of decency.

This prop^sition, though very strange* is prooflesse; and therefore we might
as well reject it, as the Doctor dictates it. But I shall add a confutation of
it from these following arguments.

1. If custom be the only rule of decency, then nothing else can be a rule
thereof besides custom; but this is false, for the light and law of nature, is
also a rule thereof, and that infallible.

2. Nothing can be undecent, that is agreeable unto the only rule of dicency.
But diverse things are undicent, which yet can plead custom: and this is so
evident, as that. I will not so much undervalue the Doctors judgment as to
endeavor any proofs thereof. It is impossible that the only rule of decency
should be undecent: But yet it is very possible that many customs should be
undecent, and therefore I shall conclude that custom is not the only rule of
decency.

3. Lastly, unto custom, as you may see in both Aristotle and Aquinas, the
frequent usage of a thing is required. But now there may be decency or
handsomeness in the first usage of a thing; and of this decency custom is not
the rule, and therefore it is not the only rule of decency.

first thing here charged on me is timidity, that I dare not say, what I said
not, and this attended with a concession (in a limited sense) of the truth of
what I did say; the second, is the impertinence, or unsufficiency of that, in
that limited sense, to prove what he conceives I would have from it, viz. that
the omission of our ceremonies does infer indecency; And the proof of this
charge twofold, 1. by way of question, founded in two instances, the Cross in
Baptism, and the Surplice in public prayer and preaching; 2. by reference to
Ames, and resolving to think his arguments considerable, till a satisfactory
answer be given them. And his third charge is, my using an unsufficient proof
to prove my interpretation, viz. this because custom is the only rule of
decency] which he confutes by three argument.

three charges I shall now very briefly examine, and if I mistake not, clearly
evacuate. the first by assuring him, 1. that I did dare to say, and indeed said
(as I then thought, perspicucusly) the full of what I meant, but that it was no
way incumbent on me, to say either what I did not mean, or what Mr J. or any
other should be justly able to charge of want of truth in the least degree. And
2. if what I said cannot, as he confesses, be denied, to have truth in it in
one sense, I demand why must it be a not daring (which is wont to signify
timidity, or cowardice) that I affirmed it not in another sense, wherein be
does not consent to it?

possibility of his, or any man's farther mistaking my words, I shall hasten to
tell him the full of my meaning in that passage, that [(...) decently] implies
[ according to custome] viz. that in such things as these, of which then I
spoke, gestures, habites and the like circumstances of Gods public service,
wherein the Apostle prescribes care of decency, it is necessary to observe the
customs of the place wherein we live: This I then thought sufficiently
explicated by exemplifying in men's wearing long hair, which the Apostle proved
indecent by its being against (...) i. e. says Suidas, (...), a custom of
some continuance in that place (which yet in women there, and in men in other
places, where that custom prevailed not, had nothing indecent in it.)

exemplification of my meaning he thought fit to conceal from the Reader, and
supply that vacuity only with an etc. yet reciting at length, to a word, what
was immediately before, and after it. His design in so doing I judge not, but
shall endeavor to undeceive the Reader for the future, by farther enlarging on
it.

outward significations, and expressions of Reverence, but all have not the
same, but according to Topical customs some different, some contrary to
others. We of this, and all our neighbor Nations express reverence by
uncovering the head, the Turks do the contrary. Again among Christians, it is
customary for men so to express their Reverence, but for women, says the
Apostle, it is not, but the contrary; and so still it is among us. Nay it was
once among some hethens (that worshipped Mercury) in act of the highest
reverence, even of adoration, to throw stones at their God, among others to cut
themselves with lances, when they were a praying to him. And it can be no news
to Mr J. that these customs were not observed by other countries; the Jews
that threw stones at Christ, and the Damoniack that cut himself with them, were
neither of them interpretable to worship him.

dark, but visible foundation of what I said; In affigning any rite or ceremony
for the service of God, decency, says the Apostle, was to be observed, the
only rule to judge of that, is, say I, to consider the customs of that
particular place, of which we consult. Where bowing the knee, or kneeling on
the ground, is customarily used as a token of reverence, where putting off or
keeping off the hat, there the choice of ceremonies must be made with respect
to those particular customs; Here it is evident that I mean not the frequent
usage of that ceremony, in opposition to a first usage of it, as Mr J. is
willing to mistake me, and sound one of his arguments on that mistake, but the
standing custom of the place, by which, as by an argument or evidence, such a
ceremony is demonstrated to be a reverential respect, and so (for the service
of God to whom all reverence is due) decent in that place, though in Nature, or
in the estimation of all other men, it be not so.

evident in it self, and so undeniably the importance of my words, that there
can be no need farther to enlarge on it, much less to examine the weight, or
meaning of his concession, that it cannot be denied but that decency does imply
such customs, the omission of which necessarily infers indecency.]

Readers may look on with Reverence, as not readily comprehending the
importance of it, others may chance to despise it under the appearance of a
tautologie. But upon pondering, it will appear that the Author had a meaning
in it, which he designed should bring in some advantage to his cause, and
without which he was not likely to advance far, or succeed in it.

customs we know there are, which are so highly decent, as that the omission
of them necessarily infers indecency; But what are they? why, such as the law
of (at least Lapst) nature prescribes, covering of nakedness, and the like; of
which it is evident among all that have not learnt of Carneades industriously to
raze out all natural measures of honest and dishonest, that the omission of
them inferres indecency, yea and necessarily inferres it, this sort of decency
being natural to all men, that ever were, or shall be in the world, born and
educated in what nation, or inured to what customs soever, and this the very
first hour after our first parents fall, before any custom had been
contracted which might recommend it to them.

Rule is true, that the omission of these necessarily inferres undecency, so it
is in a manner proper to these, and belongs not to any other sort of things,
whose decency flows but from some positive command though it be of God, or
custom or command of men. To such things whose decency flows from any command
either of God or man, this rule cannot be fully applied, for that command might
have been not given, or there might be a space before it was given, or a people
to whom it was not given, and then in any of those cases, the omission would
not be indecent to whom the law was not given; and so it does not necessarily
and absolutely, but only dependently on that law, and conditionally, infer
indecency; so in like manner the Rule holds not in those things, whose decency
is introduced only by custom, for that, as Mr. I. truly says, arising from
frequency of actions, it must again be granted, that there was a time when that
which now is custom, was new, and so not custom, and again there are, or may
be nations, with whom that custom (whatsoever can be inflanced in) has not
prevailed, which prejudges still the necessity spoken of, that such omission
should infer indecency.

sum of Mr I. his liberal concession, viz: that decency implies natural
decency, or such customs, which are naturally decent, and so the omission of
them naturally indecent; and if the Dr. or his party do not prove, or make
good, that the administration of baptism without the cross, is against the
law of nature, that the preaching without the surplice bears analogy to the
disclosing of Nakedness, he is utterly refuted by Mr I. in his interpretation
of (...), or notion of decency.

meaning (though somewhat darkened in that his expression) will appear but
consequent to the two things, which he has premised in this matter, from
Amesius his notion of decency, p. 64. in Marg: 1. that decency requires not
that any sacred things be instituted de novo, but only that those things which
are instituted by God, be used in that manner which is agreeable to the dignity
of them, 2. that as order so decency belongs to civil offices, as well as
sacred things, in which indecorum est vitium oppositum debito illi modo, qui
requiritur ad eorum justum finem et usum consequendum, indecency is a vice
opposed to that due manner, which is required to the obtaining the just end and
use of those things. Now if in the former of these, the mode, he speaks of, as
agreeable to the dignity of those things which are instituted, be it self
supposed by him to be instituted by men, then must he acknowledge humane power
of instituting ceremonies, which being so contrary to his design, I must
resolve not to be intended by him; but rather that as the sacred things are
instituted by God, so the mode, which is consentaneous to their dignity is
instituted by God also, and that nothing is decent in sacris, which is not so
instituted. And so likewise on the second head, that of civil offices. For that
indecency, which is a vice or sin, must be contrary to some law of Gods, and so
also that which is opposed to the due manner which is required, and so is
necessary either necessitate medii, or praecepts also, to obteining a just end,
this sure is more than the omission of an indifferent custom, which may or may
not be continued without any offense against nature, even the omission of
strict universal duty, either natural decency, or somewhat that bears
proportion with it.

Mr I. and mind him, what he cannot but know, that the decency which I said
implied custom, is certainly another thing from natural decency, and has
place only in those things, the omitting of which does not necessarily infer
indecency. That omission which necessarily inferres indecency, inferres it in
all that eever did, or shall omit it; we know in logic, that no proposition is
necessary, which is not (...), true in the whole species, of all, and every
one, and I leave it to his judgment, whether he think the Dr. and his party
(i. e. Praelatists, I suppose,) do conceive, that Adam (whether in, or out of
paradise) Noah in, or out of the Arc, etc. were obliged to pray in Surplices,
under pain of Indecency? And so (in his other instance) that John Baptist, that
Christ, or (because the text says that he baptized not but his disciples) that
those disciples, even before the death of Christ, might not baptize any without
the sign of the Cross, but under the same penalty?

question, that Mr I. in his first argument against my dictate (as he calls it)
says, that the light and law of Nature is also a rule of decency, and so not
only custom: And if so, then custom is a rule of decency also, and not only
the Law and light of Nature, and where custom, and not the light of Nature is
the rule, there the omission of that does not necessarily infer indecency.
And of such decency alone it is evident that I spoke, on the head of
Uniformity, (and could not speak sense, if I spoke, either of any other, or of
the General notion of Decency, which is competible to any other) and from
thence it follows demonstratively, that of that Decency of which I spoke,
(though not of that, of which it is certain I spoke not) still Custom is the
only rule of decency.

This therefore I hope may serve in answer to his first charge, that of my
timidity, that I dared not say, what I said not; together with a view of his
concession of the truth of what I did say, and the wary limitation of that
concession.

Secondly then to his second charge, the unsufficiency of that limited truth
(which is the utmost he will yield my proposition) to prove what I would have
from it] It will soon appear of how little force it is, when 1. my meaning was
quite another thing from what he affixt to my words, or yielded me in his
limited concession, as has already been largely manifested; and 2. my
conclusion is regularly consequent to that which was alone my meaning. This
latter the addition of a few words will clear also.

conclusion designed in that Section, was the justifying of Vnformity of
ceremonies in the service of God, and one of the grounds to support that, the
decency of those ceremonies, wherein all should join, and that decency ruled,
and judged of by the custom of the place, in which such or such a ceremony was
an usual indication, and expression of that reverence, which being due from all
inferiors to their superious, is much more due from all Christians to God.

custom is the rule and the only rule of decency; Neither Nature nor Gods Law
obliges all mankind to this, or that expression of reverence. Several Nations
have their several manners of doing it; Only Nature tells us, that the most
reverened manner of treating is best becoming God, and that it cannot be
decent, to treat God in that manner as we would not do any superior beside, and
Gods own expostulation about the offering polluted bread upon his altar, and of
sacrificing the lame and the sick, Mal. 1. 8. is a confirmation of that, Offer
it now, says God, unto thy governor, will he be pleased with thee?

particular case, to a Nation, where it is customary to address to Kings,
kneeling, and there the Analogy will hold exactly, (but not where that is not
custom.) Among such I may say, Did ever any man that had his limbs and health,
offer a petition to his Prince in the gesture of sitting, or lying along upon a
table? and if he did not, then I must, I suppose, regularly conclude from
custom, the one rule of decency in such matters, that according to Gods
arguing it cannot be decently done in his service, which is the tendering our
petitions or requests to that infinite Majesty. And so proportionably in other
things.

Cross in Baptism, and the Ministers using of the Surplice, as being not
pertinent to that place. Another head was set apart for those, and proceeded
to. 28. the Cross expressly named, and the Surplice implied under the title of
other ceremonies, of which it may there be seen, what my conclusion was, not
what is here deemed incumbent on me to prove, that the omission of them infers
indecency, but that standing on those grounds, whereon they are known stand,
Conscience duly instructed cannot think it necessary or tending to edification
to cast them causlesly out of this Church, or the whole Liturgy for their
sakes.]

J. shall now desire to know what the grounds of those two Ecclesiastical rites
are, which alone he is pleased to name, on persuasion, I suppose, that they
were as fit, if not fitter then any others, for the disproving my position, of
[ custom being the only rule of decency] I shall now render him a brief account
of them, such as may in some degree confirm the truth of it.

first for the Cross in Baptism. 1. It Is known to all that our Christian
course is a spiritual warfare under Christ our Great General; Now it is, and
always has been customary over the world, that in a Militia there should be
some banner, or Insigne, to which every one should resort and fight under it.
This has custom made decent among all, and supposing that custom, the
omission of it in an army is indecent, yet not so, as things dishonest, or
breaches of the Law of Nature, are indecent.

And the Cross on which Christ was crucified, the Emblem also of that state
that every Christian enters into, a constant courageous patience for all
afflictions was by the primitive Christians thus used, as their Sign^ crucis
actio Christiana describitur. Aug. de Doctr. Chr. l. 4.
symbol or Insigne, and every man that is enrolled in the Christian Militia, is
by him that inrols him, signed with it; and this practice being thus founded,
and received in the Church, Saint Augustines words are worth remembering, and
cannot be denied to have truth in them, In Joh. Tr. 118.
Signum crucis nisi adhibeatur, sive frontibus credentium, sive ipsi aquae qua
regeneramur etc. nihil rite perficitur, unless the sign of the cross be used
either to the foreheads of the believers ( who are Baptized) or to the water it
self by which we are regenerate, it is not duly performed, i. e. with such
ceremonies, as by custom of the Church the Rule of decency, belong to it; and,
Crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post signandus es, omnesque Christiani
signantur (de Catechiz. rud. c. 20. tom. 4. page 915.) thou must be signed now
in the forehead with the sign of the Cross, as the Israelites on their
door-posts, and so must all Christians. In the forehead head particularly Tom.
10 p. 289. B.
in front figat ubi seeds pudoris) because the seat of shame is there, which
we render in token that the baptized shall rot be ashamed --.

Secondly, the usage of this ceremony of signing with the Cross, was we also
know, frequent in the Church (while the gifts of healing continued) in See Aug.
de Civ. D^il. 22. c. 8.
curing diseases, and casting out Devils, so that Athanasius frequently
affirms of it, De Incarnat. Tom. 1. page 84. So page 101. D. (...). And page
102. 6. (...). And contr. Arian. Or. 1. page 285. A. (...). And Praesente signo
crucis obmutescit Paganitas. Aug. T. 4. 229. B. And 832 B. Daemonia nominata
cruce Christi terrentur, si impensius fiat, fugantur. Dii Paganprum metu crucis
responsa dare non possunt.
(...), by the sign of the cross all magic and witchcraft is brought to
naught, all the Idol Temples laid waste and empty.

Baptism being the exorcising of Devils (the ancient Catechists we know were
called exorcists) the rescuing a person from the power of Satan into Gods
sonship and family, what can be more proper, or agreeable, or exactly
symbolical, then the use of this in Baptism, according to that of Tertullian,
de Resurr. Carn. Caro signature ut anima muniatur, the flesh or body is signed,
that the soul may be defended or fortified.

Ad omnem progressum frantem crucis signaculo terimus. Tertul. de Cor. Mil. c.
3.
frequent use of it among the ancients, even Vide Narrat^. Hippolyti
Apostolorum (...), apud Pallad. Hist. Laus. page 1049. (...).
before the cumbersome weight of ce emonies came in ((...), says the Author of
the Quest. and Resp. ascribed to Justin Martyr, Qu. (...) page 364. in time of
prayer we sign those that have any need of it, those that are any way ill
affected) we in this our Church retein it, only in our solemn entrance into
Christ's camp, in token that we mean valiantly to fight under his banners, and
in confidence that he that thus signed to Constantine victory from heaven
((...), in this overcome) will thus give grace, and seal to us victory over our
ghostly enemies. What question can there ever be of the perfect decency of this
usage among us?

Surplice: It is no news I hope for several sorts of men to have solemn
garments for solemn actions, which they do not use at other times. The Judges
upon the Bench, or the Lords at their coming to Parliament, are a sufficient
evidence of this, who wear not those robes in common occasions which there
they do, as betokening their quality and the employments they are about. And
then what is thus customarie in civil matters (viz: to difference persons and
employments, yea and days by distinction of garments) and is allowed to be
decent therein, this by analogy undeniable, is as fitly and decently from
thence derived to solemn sacred actions also, such are the public offices of
the Priest; and the commands of our Superiors being added to this decency of
the matter, (...) to (...), it is, I am sure, more than undecent for inferiors
to be obstinate, and deny obedience to them. In the choice of the garment there
has been also, as near as may be, a resemblance observed of those garments,
which in Scripture are mentioned for the like solemnities, long, shining, i. e.
white robes, or garments; And if the constant usage of other Churches beside
this of ours, Eastern as well as Western, for so many centuries together, be
considered, it will be competently able to establish an Ecclesiastical cust me
also, which, in things of this nature, were external ornaments, and
formalities, is a more rational ground, and rule or measure of decency, then
any Mr J. (or Amesius to boot) will readily be able to produce for the
rejecting of them, or breaking, and casting away those bands, which tied no
harder a yoke than this upon their shoulders.

garments themselves) there is place for that decency, the omission of which
necessarily inferres indecency, and for such order the breaking of which must
soon end in (...) (which Mr I. says, St. Paul opposes to (...)) viz: down
right confusion.

Having sa'd thus much ex abundanti, above what was incumbert on me, I shall
flatter my self, that I may now spare any larger pains, in survey of Amesius's
arguments, which Mr J. is resolved to think considerable, and to speak very
magnificently of them, as proving that the text is 1 Cor. xiv. 40. rightly
understood does not only not authorize any humane institution of ceremonies,
but on the contrary plainly condemns them, and this, says he, was so well
managed by him, that he has quite beaten out of the field Bishop Morton and
his second, Dr J. Burges:

triumph indeed. And I suppose the Reader already discernes, what are the
grounds of it, viz. that Amesius acknowledges nothing decent, but that, the
omission of which necessarily inferres indecency, i. e. as has been showed,
nothing but natural decency, the omission of which is a vice contrary to that,
by consequence, that there is no such thing, as an indifferent gesture or
garment, which either civil, or Ecclesiastical custom, or obedience to our
lawful superiors may render decent; that whatsoever some eternal Law of Nature
commands not, the doing of that, if it be but wearing such a garment, which the
Canons of any Church prescribe, nay, by parity of reason, a cloak or a buttond
doublet, is absolutely unlawful by force of 1 Cor. xiv. 40.

bottom of those arguments of Amesius, I may safely tell Mr J. that they could
no otherwise beat either Bishop Morton, or Dr J. Burgess out of the field,
than that they thought them utterly unworthy their making replies to; He that
thinks there is nothing indifferent, nothing lawful, the omission of which is
not sin, does certainly use other dictonaries than we do; discernes no
difference betwixt lawful, and necessary, and as the Assertors of Fatal
production of all things will not allow a cause to be sufficient to produce any
effect which it does not produce, and so produce, that it cannot not produce
it, which is to tell me that I sit, and walk at the very time, when I stand
still, it being certain, that I am equally able to do both those, when yet I
really do the third only, so he will not allow any thing morally possible,
which is not morally necessary, which is certainly the giving new laws to
words (making the word [ lawful or possible] which was wont to be interpreted
that which may or may not be done, to signify only that which must be done,
and may not be emitted) and not new reasons to confirm old paradexes.

argument of Amesius against things indifferent, that learned Bishop was well
acquainted with, by his familiar conferences with Mr. Lapthorne a vehement
disputer against ceremonies, and whom the Bishop thought fitter to refute by
trifling instances, of unbuttoning, and buttoning his cass^ck; than by more
serious attempts of conviction, i.e. in plain terms to despise and smile at,
than to dread; and if Mr J. have really read Mr Hooker, whom he somwhere
intitles our Patron of ceremonies, he may in him remember a discourse of
laws, which will supersede all necessity, or benefit of my farther enlarging
on it.

reproach of my great stupidity, I willingly acknowledge, that it cannot enter
into my understanding, what sense that text is capable of, which with the best
(possible) managery can be taught plainly to condemn all institution of
ceremonies in the Church, i. e. by what prosyllogismes, or supplies or
advantages of art this Enthymeme shall be rendered concludent. The Apostle
commands that all things be done decently and in order. Ergo, He condemns all
institution of Ceremonies for Gods worship. He that can maintain this
consequence not only to be true, but (as Mr J. affirms of him) plain and
evident, will be a formidable adversary indeed, much better deserving that
title, than one whom he knows not, and therefore honors with it.

third and last impression now remains, wherein he undertakes to prove by 3.
arguments that custom is not the only rule of decency; and his first argument
is, because the light and law of nature is also a rule of decency. To this I
answer, that in those things, whereof alone he knows I there speak, in the.
concerning Uniformity, i.e. in things indifferent, gestures and other
ceremonies in Gods service, the Law of Nature is no rule at all, and, I
suppose, he cannot think; I am sure, he pretends not to prove, or so much as
affirm, it is, and therefore though not simply in all sorts of things, of
which I spoke not, nor can by any rules of discourse be supposed to have
spoken, yet as to the matters then before me, wherein Ecclesiastic Conformity
consisted, custom and only custom was the rule of Decency.

second argument is wholly deceitful, and must be discovered to be so by
reducing it to rules of art. It Is by him variously formed into two several
Syllogismes. The first is this.

Nothing can be undecent, which is agreeable to the only rule of Decency.

But diverse things are undecent, which yet can plead custom. The conclusion
now must be, Therefore custom is not the only rule of decency.

regular Syllogism, it is in no mood or figure, nor readily reducible to any,
and therefore it was his only way to presume it evident, and never to endeavor
any proof thereof.

vary this syllogism, and give it in other terms, and then one might hope it
would be exactly formed. It Is thus, It is impossible that the only rule of
decency should be undecent.
But yet it is very possible that many customs should be indecent.
Therefore he shall conclude that custom is not the only rule of decency.


syllogism neither, being far removed from the measure that Logicians exact,
and such as by which I will prove any thing true, that is the most distant from
it. For example, it is a granted truth, that Law is the only rule of Justice,
yet this I shall disprove by a syllogism exactly formed by Mr J. his model,
Thus, It is impossible that the only rule of justice should be unjust.
But yet it is very possible that many Laws should be unjust.
Therefore I shall conclude that Law is not the only rule of justice.


deceit then, the syllogism which is now no syllogism must be somewhat better
formed, according to the rules of Logic, and reduced, as near as it can, into
a true syllogism. Thus, Whatsoever is it self undecent, cannot be the only
rule of decency.
But custom is it self undecent.
Therefore custom cannot be the only rule of decency.


Here before it can be defined whether this be a regular syllogism, or no, it
must be demanded, quanta est minor, is the assumption Universal or particular?
If it be particular, then either the conclusion must be particular also, or
else it is a false syllogism. And if the conclusion be particular, then it infers
no more then that some undecent custom cannot be the only rule of decency,
which is willingly granted by me, who do not at all affirm it of undecent
customs; But if the minor be Universal, then it is a false proposition, for
certainly all customs are not indecent. The short is, Nature may be the rule
of one sort of decency, and custom the only rule of another; yet if the custom
be in it self indecent, then of such indecent custom it is not pretended, that
it is either only, or at all the rule of decency. And so still my proposition
may stand good, which as it belonged not to natural decency, so much less to
what is by Nature, or in it self undecent, never imagining it reasonable, that
what gestures were against those Laws of Nature, or Scripture, or any other Law
of decency, or rather of natural comeliness and honesty, should by pretense of
any custom whatever, be introduced into Gods worship; It Is sufficient that
some customs may be decent, or in themselves not indecent, and that all
decency in the service of God, is to be regulated and judged of by conformity
with them: For I said not that all customs were the rule of decency, but that
some were, and that there was no other rule, but custom. This, I hope, has
discovered the invalidity of his second argument.

last argument [ because there is dicency in the first usage of some things]
falls upon that mistake of my words, which I discoursed of, and cleared at the
beginning, for I never said, that a thing must be customary, before it is
decent in any kind; (knowing unquestionably that there is a natural decency)
but that the decency of any ceremony in Gods service, wherein God and Nature
have prescribed nothing particularly, must be regulated according to those
measures, which the customs of any place do allow to be reverential among
them; Or, in yet plainer words, the civil customs of any Nation, by which this
or that sort of gesture is rendered a token of reverence, are the only rule, by
which the decency of indifferent gestures, etc. is to be judged of, in order to
God's service. And so much for the last argument also, and consequently for the
first part of his exception, that against my interpretation of (...) decently.

second charge behind against my rendering of (...), according to appointment]
which he has managed in these words.

As for the other part of the words, let all things be done in order, Ames in
the place forementioned shows that order requires not such ceremonies as
ours, and he gives this reason, because order requires not the institution of
any new thing but only the right placing and disposing of things which are
formerly instituted: and this he makes good from the notation of the word, from
the definitions of order, which are given by Philosophers and Divines etc. from
the context of the chapter, and from the usage of the word elsewhere. But the
Doctor, that the words may give some countenance unto our ceremonies,
adventureth upon a new interpretation of them.

The words (...) (says he,) literally import according unto appointment, (...)
sometimes signifies to appoint, as Mat. 28. 16. Act. 22. 10. and 28. 23. And we
may here upon argue a conjugatis, that (...) may be sometimes rendered
appointment. But because it may sometimes be rendered appointment, will it
therefore follow that it must be so rendered in this place?

We may say as will as the Dr. that the words (...) literally import according
unto order, as order is taken strictly for the right placing or ranking of
things one before, another after, and this we have confessed even by Dr John.
Burgess in his rejoinder unto Ames p. 78. a book published by the special
command of the late King. Moreover this sense is favored by the coherence,
for. v. 31. we have a particular instance of order in this acception of the
word, ye may all prophecy one by one etc. and not all or many speak at once.
2. We have the opposite of order taken in this sense. 1. v. 33. confusion. Let
all things be done in order, then is as much as, let all things be done without
confusion. And I hope confusion may be avoided in the worship of God without
such ceremonies as ours.

But we will for once suppose, though not grant, that the clear importance of
the words, is, that all be done in the Church according to custom and
appointment. Yet the Dr has a hard task to perform, before he can come nigh
his conclusion, that the words of Paul are a proof of the more than
lawfulness of prescription of such ceremonies as ours in a Church: For he must
prove that custom and order here are taken in such a latitude, as that they
include not only the customs and appointments of the Apostolical Churches*
but also of all the Churches of God in succeeding ages: and the performance of
this he will find not to be so easy, as he may imagine.

I am sensible that I have by this discourse provoked a very learned and
formidable adversary, but it is only love of the truth has engaged me in so
unequal an encounter, and therefore I hope the Dr will pardon and excuse my
boldness. If he can by dint of argument prove the truth to be on his side, I
shall not be sorry or ashamed to be overcome by him.

answer will be very brief, 1. by giving the reason of my rendering, 2. by
evidencing, that if the vulgar were acknowledged the righter rendering, yet my
conclusion would very regularly, follow thence, and that therefore I have no
need to contend with any gainsayer, about my rendering.

first, it is manifest to any that knows but the elements of Greek, that
(...) literally and properly signifies [ according to ordination or
appointment] (...) signifies [ according to] not [ in] and (...) or (...) [ an
ordinance or constitution] millions of times in authors, and (...) orderly, or
in order] lying more consonant with (...), no reason can be rendered, why if
that had been the designed meaning, that word should not have been used there.

J. acknowledges, and so I have obtained all I seek in my first proposal, which
was not, that it must necessarily thus signify, but that this being the
literal regular rendering of it, I had sufficient reason to render it thus.

second thing, that if what he pretends to be possible also, were indeed the
only possible, or (by way of supposition, but not concession) if (...)] did
really import no more than [ in order] as that is opposed to disorder or
confusion, yet I say, it will soon appear, that the Apostles commanding such
order or orderlynesse, and forbidding all confusion in ecclesiastical affairs,
must by consequence be interpreted to command the instituting and observing
uniformity of ceremonies in a Church. This I thus deduce.

First there is no possibility of worshipping God externally and publicly,
without use of some ceremonies or circumstances of time, place, and gesture,
etc. Secondly there is no possibility of order in a multitude, without
uniformity in the same circumstances, Thirdly, there is as little possibility
of Uniformity among many, without either agreement one with another, or
direction of some superior to them all, what shall by all be uniformely
performed. Fourthly the agreement one with another, if it be only voluntary,
and such, as by which none are obliged, no way secures the end; but if it be
such an agreement, that every single person is obliged to observe, then still
is that a law of that body, as of a Council, etc. and as truly so, as the
constitution of a single Praelate can be thought to be. And so the conclusion
regularly follows, that to the preserving but of order, or orderlynesse in a
Church, it is necessary, there be appointment, what shall by all be uniformely
performed; confusion unavoidably coming in, where no certain rules are
prescribed for Uniformity.

denied in this process, I fore see not, yet when it is granted, one reserve Mr
J. has still left him. For says he, if it were granted that (...) signifies
appointment or ordination, yet still it will be incumbent on the Dr. to prove,
that this extends not only to the customs and appointments of the Apostolic
Churches, but also to the Churches of succeeding ages. And my answer to this
will conclude this whole debate.

First then I acknowledge, that, it is not here necessarily ordained by the
Apostle, that all the Churches of God in succeeding ages should institute
ceremonies in worship, for, provided those ceremonies were once instituted, all
that this text inforces, is uniforme obedience to them.

circumstances of Gods worship, there is no order particularly taken by Christ
and his Apostles, as in what gesture public supplication shall be addressed, in
what, lauds and hymns, and confession of the faith, etc. and yet the rule is
given by them, that all shall be done according to appointment, and moreover in
other places that obedience be paid to those superiors which watch over our
souls; and when those rules are not given only to the persons that then lived
in the Church of Corinth, etc. but to all that should ever live in that, and
all other Churches, it cannot then be deemed, either that there were no
superiors designed to succeed Christ, and his Apostles in the ordering of his
Church, or that they should not (...) set in order the things that were
wanting, such as the Apostles had left undisposed of, or that inferiors should
not be bound to obey them uniformely when they thus gave orders to them.

commanded to obey our parents, civil as well as natural, by a law given by God
to Moses, or by Christ to his disciples, can it be strange, that we that lived
not in either of those ages, should thereby be obliged, when God in his
providence has given us fathers of both kinds (as well as them) regularly
presiding over us, and making use of that liberty that is presumed in all
parents, viz: to give commands, and expect obedience from their children?
Certainly it cannot, and as little can it be doubted, either whether our
ecclesiastical parents have power to institute in things omitted, and thereby
remitted to their care by the Apostles, or whether we their obedient children,
that are commanded to act (...) according to appointment, should from time to
time be disobliged, and free to disobey them in whatsoever they appoint us.

granted him, if he please, that what Christ, and his Apostles have already
prescribed, should not be repealed by those that thus succeed them; should they
rashly assume that power, they would not in so doing act (...), whether
regularly or according to appointment; but for the (...) in which they have
made no rules, but left order to Titus, etc. (i.e. by parity of reason, to the
Bishops in every Isl^nd) to make them, here what power is left them, may
certainly with perfect safety be exercised by them, and that necessarily
inferres our obligation to yield obedience to their exercises of them.

J. seems to expect of me at this time, unless his intimation to all admirers
of Mr. Hooker, p. 144.
that they should vindicate their great Patron of Ceremonies, may pass for an
admonition to me, who acknowledge my self a thankful adorer of Gods graces in
that Godly learned man, and so exact a few lines more above the regular account.

Reader that in a discourse of the ben^fits which we receive from Christ in the
Sacrament, Eccl. Pal. l. 5. Sect. 55.
and otherwise, Mr Hooker undertakes to set down how Christ in his human nature
is communicated to us, and so present with us; To this end 3. things he shows
at large, 1. that as nothing created can be unlimited, or receive any such
accident from any as may really make it infinite, so neither the soul nor body
of Christ, nor Christ as man, nor according to his humane nature, can possibly
be every where present, no nor the substance of the body of Christ, which
neither has nor can have any presence but only local. 2. That this cannot be
rendered possible either by the grace of union with Deity, nor by any other
possible means, as he at large excellently deduceth it, page 300, 301, 302. 3.
That it may peradventure be well enough granted in some sense, and after a
sort, that Christ is every where present, as man, viz. 1. in respect of the
conjunction of the humane nature with the Deity, which conjunction is extended
as far as the Deity, the actual position being restrained and tied to a certain
place, and 2. by cooperation with Deity, and that in all things.

third head, p. 139.
(without reflecting on the two former, which assure us of the authors meaning
in it) two passages Mr J. p. 140.
takes hold of, which, if he know any thing in either philosophy or
scholastical divinity, are both guilty of a gross mistake, and cannot be
sufficiently wondered at by him, that they should fall from so learned a pen.

either of those learned faculties, required, to distinguish betwixt that which
truly and properly is, and that which may in some sense, and after a sort, and
in two respects only (neither of which belong to the propriety of being) be
well enough granted, and that with a [ peradventure] also, to have influence on
all these.

severity is this, to require of every learned man, that has most largely
refuted an adversary, to be so averse from all thoughts of peace and
reconcilation with him, that he may not allow him to speak truth, or but
perhaps to speak truth in a sort, and in some sense, and in two only respects?
all which are still more than intimations, that he thinks him to be absolutely
(and in simplicity and propriety of speaking) in a gross error, impossible
even to the power of God to have truth in it.

eloquent man, that you might hear an Angel speak in him, and I should reply,
that it might peradventure be well enough granted in a sort, or in some sense,
that when he spoke you might hear an Angel, assuring you at large of my
opinion, that no bare man can truly be an Angel, nay that it was impossible for
God himself to bring to pass, that at the same time he should be an Angel, and
not an Angel, a man, and not a man, or which is all one, a bare man, and yet an
Angel, or (in fewer words) when Christ says he is a door, and a vine, if I
should say, that in a sort and in some sense, and that in two respects, each of
these had truth in them, would Mr J. think fit to leave his subject, and let
loose for three leaves together, and pawn all his Philosophy and scholastical
(not considering what the consequence also may be to his practical) divinity,
to accuse and wonder at, and never to give over wondering, and withal solemnly
to refute this or that improper figurative speech, so perfectly acknowledged by
the speakers to be such?

great leisure, and any prevalent temptation thus to lay it out, I shall only
assure him, that I have not so much of either, as to attend these his motions,
nor any other lover or admirer of Mr Hooker, that I know of, and therefore
beseech him contentedly to rest in this general return to his charge of that
learned man, without expecting any more explicit^ or particular survey of it.
And so much for Mr H. also.

obligation, than what my desire to undeceive the Author and his Readers, laid
upon me, paid him now this my second observance; And may be allowed to think it
time, that he who has been so liberal of his uses of public refutation of
others words, should find some vacancy for one use of more private (if not
reprehension, yet) examination of his own actions; And then I shall offer to
his consideration, how much more agreeable to the laws of brotherly kindness
or candor it had been, to have proposed his exceptions in such a manner of
friendly address, as might have brought him home the same satisfaction, and
saved others the importunity of these useless, because personal debates. When
he has sincerely observed in himself the motive of his other distant choice, I
have obtained the end of my charity in mentioning it to him, and have no more
to return to him at this time.

THE END.
Errata in the first Reply to Mr Jeanes.
Page 1. l. 2. dele to. p. 3. l. 4. r. change. l. 28. r. another, see* magli.
p. 6. l. 11, r. is in that. p. 10. l. 30. r. (...).

Errata in the second Reply to Mr Jeanes.
Page 11. l. 1. r. known to stand. p. 13. l. 28. r. mere external. p. 15. l. 6.
r. Mr Hynde, and Mr Glapthorne two vthement disputers. p. 16. l. 23. r.
measures.


