A DEBATE CONCERNING THE English Liturgy, BOTH As Established in and As
Abolished out of the Worship of GOD. DRAWN OUT IN Two English and two Latin
Epistles, Written betwixt Edward Hyde Doctor in Divinity, AND John Ley Rector
of the Church of Solyhull in Warwickshire.

Aug. Epist. 174. Pascentio, p. 910. Veritas vincat nec esse est sive negantem,
sive confutantem. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Edward Brewster, at the Sign of
the the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Highly Honored HENRY SCOBEL Esquire Clerk to the Right Honorable THE
COUNCIL of STATE.
SIR,
THe good offices you have often done, for many godly Ministers, and (by them)
to the Church of God in this Nation, Done, not by the importunity of
Petitioners (spurred on by necessity) but with the alacrity of your ingenious
and generous spirit, nor with any, either expectation or desire of a Fee
beforehand, or a gratuity afterward, have deeply engaged them, highly to
honor you, and heartily to pray for you, so much the more, as they have the
less manifested their thankfulness by any real returns: and that by your
Antipathy to them, not by their oblivion of them, or unwillingness to tender
them to your acceptance; for (on my Knowledge) diverse of them had a
consultation to present you with a joint testimony of their gratitude, though
not answerable, either to your merit, or their own minds, but I diverted them
from that intention, by telling them, (which I had in effect though not in
terminis, from your own mouth) that the success and satisfaction of your
endeavors was sufficient content to you, and that you were resolute not to
receive any thing, which looked like a Reward for what you had done; and by
that little acquaintance and conference I had with your Colleague Mr I, I had
cause to account him your Brother Benevolence toward objects of charity in the
like kind. I will add one observation more, of a subordinate Officer to you
both, who notwithstanding his great pains, and quick dispatch of a business of
much concernment to the peace and comfort of the Ministry, when a just salary
of his service was offered, shut his hands as close against it, and more
seriously then any Capochin Friar would do, against an oblation of white or
yellow Mammon, tendered unto him. This especially, as compared with the contrary
disposition in others, gave me occasion, for a time, to pause upon the
comparison of the precedent and present times. 2. To praise God for our happy
change for the better, in that particular; and ^. To give this public
Testimony to your Charity and Integrity, in the name of my self and of many of
my Brethren, whose Benefactor you have been, as the Right Honorable Senators
of the Court our Patrons, and his Highness our Protector, of whose favor, some
of us happly would not be found altogether unworthy, if what we have done and
suffered for the Service and Safety of the Public, were as well known, as the
benefit and countenance we have received from our Superiors, either while the
long Parliament sat, or since (as too long) it was put to a Nonplus. But the
relation of this will neither sort with our modesty to write, nor with your
many and p^nderous ^mployments to read, who have fewer spare minutes, then
most others have spare hours or days; therefore (leaving these Polemicall
Papers to your best leisure for perusal) I will only take leave of you, with
the application of the prayer of Nehemiah for himself, to your condition and
ours, The Lord your God and ours remember you, and wipe not out your good deeds
which you have done for the House of your God, and the Offices thereof: This is
the sincere and hearty Prayer of,

Solyhull, June 18, 1656. Sir, Your most faithful, affectionate and humble
servant, JOHN LEY.

THE PREFACE TO THE Prudent and Impartial READER; Showing the Causes of
Penning and Publishing the English and Latin Letters following, reciprocally
written betwixt Dr E. H. and my Self.
TO the Reader, who is so prudent, as not to judge before he well understand
the cause before him, and when he does understand it, will be so just, as not
partially to sway his sentence on the wrong side, I shall give an account both
of the writing, and of the publication of these Papers, betwixt Dr H. and me:
And my account is this;

When I received his calumniatory Of that Letter see the end of the Preface.
Letter, bearing date November. 14. 1649. I presently penned an Answer to it; not
resolved (at first) to make any other use of it, then to ease my mind, and to
spread his accusation, and my clearing before the Lord, with my prayers to him,
to take my Innocence into his protection, and to rebuke my adversary, that the
sense of his sin might so affect him with sorrow and shame, as to move his
heart to heal me, with the same hand wherewith he had wounded me. But when I
perceived he was rather animated by my forbearance of a refutation of him, to
continue his contumelies against me, (as I was informed by such as well knew
it) than any whit mollified toward any hope of amendment, (for which I had
waited a competent time) I thought it requisite to make him such a return,
(though but private) as might tend to the conviction of him, in his unchristian
dealing toward me, though I had little hope of his conversion to any Christian
accommodation with me.

Yet, having other business in mine hands, of greater moment than a monomachy
betwixt the Doctor and me, I found my self not at leisure to review, (with due
advisedness) what I had written, and to transcribe a corrected Copy for his
reading, until I saw my silence brought upon me such prejudices as were too
many, too weighty, too public to be remedied by a private Apology: For

First, I was told, by a man of note, (an immediate ear witness of his words)
that at W. (in the presence of himself, and some other Mr. B. Mr. V.
Learned men) the Doctor bragged that he had publicly offered me Disputation,
and I durst not undertake it, and that he had written a Latin Letter to me,
and I answered him not, at which time yet he confessed, that I read a Paper to
him in Latin, but he heard no more of it.

Secondly, That both ways, by his Tongue and Pen he had provoked me to a
Scholasticall encounter (though I could not hear about what) and that I durst
not undertake him, whereas the truth is,

1. That though he put forth now and then, some passionate flashes, showing his
dislike of the Directory, and his desire that the Service Book might be
restored to the honor it formerly had in the Service of God throughout the
Churches of England, yet in a deliberate and regular way of debate, I began
with him, not he with me, as my Letter to him, and his Letter to me will
manifest, which I have set down word for word at the end of this Preface, and
upon his Letter I have made such and so many Animadversions as it requires.

2. That he never made me any such offer of Dispute in Latin, nor do I think
the Gent. that heard him, and knew my daily Office in the Assembly for
examination of Ministers in that Tongue, did either believe that he was so
indiscreet as to dare me in that sort, or if he were, that I was so faint
hearted, that I durst not answer his challenge with the weapon he had chosen.

3. When having heard of this Thrasonicall Bravado, I told him of it, he
utterly denied it, yet I feared, though he belied me but once (for that
particular) he belied himself twice: first in saying of me what he said not,
and then in unsaying that to me, which he said to others before: for I rather
think he would vent a vain brag of himself against me, so far out of my
hearing, then that he who related it would mis-inform me of him, having no
temptation at all thereunto: and therefore I conceive this self contradiction
came from hence, he was so immodest as to fain a challenge (where there was
none to gainsay him) but not so impudent, as with an iron sinew, or brow of
brass (as the Prophet Isaiah says of some, Isa. 48. 4.) to stand to a falsehood
before his face, that was able to confute him.

4. For his writing to me in Latin it is true he did so twice; but it was in
such sort, that no man of judgment (who had read both his Papers) would think
either of them in themselves worthy of an answer, especially the later, it
being a mere extravagant excursion from the matter of debate betwixt us: and
for the former, because it contained somewhat concerning the Question wherein
we were opposite* though but little, for most part of it was taken up with
bitter invectives (wherein I had my share of suffering with my Letters) I made
an Answer to it for their Apology, as well as for mine own, in the same
Language wherein it was penned, and brought it with me to Wall where we met,
and read a good part of it unto him, to which he said nothing but this; I see
you can write in Latin: and I had left the Copy with him (at that time) but
discovering diverse gross errors of the transcriber, in that I read, and
fearing there might be many more in that I read not, I took it back with me to
have it corrected by the same hand that wrote it, but mine Amanuensis leaving
me ^^^er then I looked for, I laid it aside, having no purpose to proceed any
further in it, unles^ some new occasion invited me to it, as of late it did,
when diverse of my Religious and Lear^ed friends pressed me (with much
importunity) to publish what I had penned, as a necessary remedy against the
Doctors reproaches of me, which they conceived were most current among them
which knew me least, yet some also, who were well acquainted with me, and
professed much respect unto me, (before these unhappy times of great defection
of friends and exasperation of adversaries) estranged themselves from me, and
sided with him in misapprehensions of me, because he was so obstreperous and I
so silent. Notwithstanding, had he confined his defamations to an Exotic
tongue, as most would have taken the less notice of them, so I should have
taken the less offense at them, nor should I have had so urgent an inducement
(as now I have) in this manner to make mine Apology against them; or could he
have seen any time to take up and give over his malevolent mis-representations
of me, I should have exercised the patience of mine ear, toward the petulancy
of his tongue for a longer time; but as David complained of some such
adversaries, Psalm. 35. 15. He cease not to tear me, with such traducements as
he conceives may render me most odious to good and ingenuous men, as I have
been informed by diverse, who had no ill mind or end toward him, and were
doubtful what to do concerning what they had heard (fearing concealment of the
truth might further wrong me, and the telling of it would not a little grieve
me) and I had the more cause to believe them, because a very little while ago
he set upon me with that stale unsavory calumny, T^^ I snatched his Living
from him before he was outed, though as often as I heard it (which was too often
for a good man to have spoken, had it been but once, because it was notoriously
false, too often for a wise man to have uttered, had it been true.)

And it is not to be doubted but he was more forward, and more frequent in his
false accusations of me behind my back, than in my presence, especially in
places where he had a design to promote his own profit, (as at the Committee of
the County of B. sitting at R. he had) where by his misreport of me to a Gent.
of the Committee, he so far incensed him against me, that in stead of
understanding my cause, and doing me Right, he would not vouchsafe to hear it,
but dealt with me rather as a professed enemy, than an equitable Judge, loading
me with reproaches, which if they had been true, did not put me out of a
capacity of an upright hearing of what I had to say for my self, nor of
receiving an award (as the merit of it did require) from him as well as from
others, who as joint Commissioners, were authorized to hear and determine the
difference betwixt the Doctor and me. To that passionate and partial man I
made such a reply (when he was in Office) as mine innocence needed, and his
injustice deserved.

This was it which (together with the forementioned persuasion of my prudent
and well-affected friends) turned the scale of my doubtful deliberations, for
what I was to do in mine own defense; which put me upon a firm resolution, to
publish a true and just Vindication of my self, both against the Doctor and the
Gent. (whom he misguided, to such harsh and injurious dealing with me) though
principally against the Doctor (as the Author and mover of such misconceipts
and reproaches as the Gent. poured out upon me, both in public and private:
And so I shall first take the Doctor to task for his traducements of me,
especially such as he cannot deny, since I have them under his own hand in the
Letter forementioned, which I have resolved into the several parts thereof,
and refuted them particularly; that done I endeavored so to undeceive the
Gent. so far, as to make the Doctor and my self better known unto him, then
yet either of us are, and I hope (upon the rectifying his judgment) he will
take more offense at his own credulity toward him, and contumely against me,
than at my Apology for my self against them both, whereto I am necessitated,
unless I will betray my Innocence by the implicit guilt of consenting silence,
and so lie patiently under an open scandal, from which my conscience, my
Calling, and my engagement to the public service of the Church and State, do
jointly both allow me and oblige me, to acquit my self, which now is the
business I have in hand, and I shall begin it with my first Letter to the
Doctor, and his answer thereto, upon which I have made Animadversions, and
subjoyned them to it: But for the Refutation of his calumniatory Letter, dated
November. 14. 1649. and noted at the beginning of this Preface, and for mine
Apology against the reproaches of the choleric Committee-man forementioned
(though they be both ready for the Press) I shall upon an especial reason
suspend their publication until another opportunity.

The Contents of the Book.
THe Preface, showing the Causes of Penning and Publishing the English and
Latin Letters following, reciprocally written betwixt Dr E. H. and my self. My
first Letter to Dr H. concerning his immoderate Zeal for the Service Book, with
a motion to debate our difference about it. Dr H. his Answer to that, declining
the Debate, with Cautions and Concessions. Necessary Animadversions upon his
Letter, divided into several Sections. SECT. I. Three Reasons referring
chiefly to the Doctor, why his English Letter was not presently answered: His
mistake about the word Seraphicall, the sense, rise, and use of it. SECT. II.
His Error (in calling Bonaventure a Seraphicall zealot, because he castigated
the Greek Church) refuted, and the right Reason showed, why he was so called
SECT. III. The Doctor justly termed a Seraphicall Zealot for the Service book,
his absurd Elogium of it, and Calvin's Censure upon it. SECT. IV. The
Service Book served not for distinction of the Reformed Churches from the
unreformed, as the Doctor says: Too much conformity in it to the Romish
Breviary, yet it passed in the first Parliament of Q. Elizabeth, and why it did
so. SECT. V. The Service Book not cast out by the Parliament or Assembly as a
menstruous cloth, as the Doctor insinuates, but laid aside with honorable
remembrance of the composers of it, and with approbation of the Book it self in
diverse respects. SECT. VI. The Doctor allows the laying aside of the Service
book, so far as justifies the Parliaments and Assemblies removal of it, by
the example of Hezekiah's breaking of the Brazen Serpent; yet with some mistake
of that story. SECT. VII. The constancy and ingenuity which the Doctor assumeth
to himself (if he had been an Assembly man) acted by those who were chosen in
that service. SECT. VIII. The removal of the Service Book, as before showed,
is neither Sacrilege, nor just cause of Scandal, as the Doctor suggesteth.
SECT. IX. A set or composed form of Prayer, how far lawful or needful: The
ridiculous Devotion of a mere Reading Curate. SECT. X. The Doctors pretended
moderation and modesty concerning the Service Book, and his denied seeking to
defraud me of the peoples favor, Confuted. SECT. XI. He desires no intercourse
by Letter with me, until he be removed out of the County, upon pretenses false
and frivolous. SECT. XII. How the Doctor will take me for his Oracle, and have
more free approach to me, when he is gotten farther from me: How preposterously
he prefereth temporal interests before spiritual: Mistakes velitations for
less then differences: His Epiphonema flat and feeble like the premises.
Additions and Corrections.
I. THe Catalogue of the Authors published Dictates, b^^ing made without his
knowledge is defective, in four^ Particulars. So that to the
12. forementioned should be added. 13. An after reckoning with Mr Saltmarsh,
being an answer to his last Paper, which he calls the end of our
Controversies, in 4to. 14. A comparison of the Oath of the sixth Cannon of the
last Synod of Bishops, and the protestation set forth by the Parliament, in
answer to a Letter of Mr Pediett Harlow, in 4to. 15. An attestation of the
Ministers of Cheshire, to the testimony of the Ministers of the Province of
London, against Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies, in 4to. 16. A complete
account concerning the proceedings of the fourth Classis London, with Mr
Symonds touching his admission, to a public Lecture within that Classis, in
4to. All penned by Mr Ley, though Seven of them without Name, or with other
Names then his.
II. In the Epistle Dedicatory.
p. 2. l. 8. after the word Brother, add in.
III. In the Preface to the Reader.
p. 3. l. 17. for my Letters, read many others. p. 3. l. 20. for Wall, read
Wallinford.
IV. In the first English Letter.
p. 1. l. 10. for Tuesday, read Thursday.
V. In the Animadversions.
p. 11. Sect. 3. l. 8. for that, read it, and within 6 lines of the end of the
same Page, for that, read it. p. 12. l. 10. after Clemens, blot out the word
then. p. 21. the last line, for words, read Prayers. p. 28. Sect. 11. l. 8. for
you, read me. p. 33. Dr Hydes Latin Letter begins. p. 38. Mr Leys answer to
it in Latin begins. Though neither of them have the Title of the Writer set
before it.
VI. In Mr Leys Latin answer.
p. 40. l. 9. 10 he promises to note with Arithmeticall Figures the lines of
the Doctors Letters, when he takes any thing out of them, (which though he did
it in his own Manuscript it could not be so well done in the Printed Copy,) nor
was i^ very needful, since the Letters cited are so short. p. 40. l. 18. for
Putici, read Publici. p. 44. l. 3. blot out ejusmodi. p. 48. l. 6. co, read Ea.
p. 51. l. 14. ante finem, for hujusmodi, read Vnius modi. and l. 16. for
recipis, read recipie. p. 53. l. 7. for Coiellus, read Cowellus. p. 55. l. 21.
after the word illis, add diabolus. and l. 23. after the word Caucius, add and.
p. 62. to the Superscription, after the words fecisse scio adds.



JOHANNES LEY.
My first Letter to Dr H. concerning his immoderate zeal for the Service Book,
laid aside by the Parliament.
SIR,
YOu have (often in my hearing) expressed your self a Seraphicall zealot for the
Service Book, and sometimes (especially at our last meeting Tuesday evening,
Feb. 26.) professed your self a resolute Champion for it, and a stout Antagonist
against the Assembly of Divines at Westminster for advising the Parliament to
put it out of Office in the solemn administration of Divine duties; in whose
defense if I had not been your Johannes ad oppositum, I had by my silence
betrayed the truth and trust reposed in me, though then I lacked leisure (being
to make preparation for the Fast on Tuesday following) to draw out the debate
toward a desirable issue.

That business now over, my thoughts have returned to the Theme (which then we
had in hand) and called to mind our light velitation about it, and induced me
to desire that (passing by the eruptions of your passion) I may fix upon
somewhat which you will own (as the dictate of your Reason) in the difference
betwixt us.

You then touched upon two Heads, which seemed to me to be your summa genera,
under which you intimated many subordinate and particular Arguments, those two
were Sacrilege and Scandal, in Excommunicating that Book from the service of
the Sanctuary, which you took upon you to prove, and that rather in Latin then
in English, as if you were loath to let the common people know, either the
weakness of their judgments, or the wickedness of their hearts, who have so
much opposed that excellent piece (as you take it) of public Devotion: And yet
I cannot but think, by what I have heard from your mouth at first, and from
others (at the second hand) that you endeavor (all you can) to ingratiate your
self and your Ministry with the people, especially of Br. and to expose me and
mine to mis-conceipt and contempt by your Religious observation of it, and my
sacrilegious (as you would have it thought) aversion from it.

For which cause, I thought it my part so far to appear in a way of
Justification of the Parliament, the Assembly and my self, as to tell you, that
if you would (in writing) either make an Apology for that Liturgy, as no way
faulty, and always necessary to be continued in the Church of England, or an
Antilogy against all conceived prayer without a set form (which I took to be
your Tenet when I last talked with you) I would return you a modest and
ingenuous answer (under my hand) in the same language you pleased to use,
whether Latin or English, and whereas you pretended some peril (in that
undertaking) by opposing the Parliament; I proposed unto you a secure course
for your self, by confining your contestation personally to me, and setting
down your exceptions (whether with your name or without it) rather as an
inquisitive Sceptick, then as a definitive Dogmatist, which now I entreat you
to do, and if therein I may prevail with you, you may perhaps take me off mine
intendment for a public vindication of my submission to Authority in the
dis-use of that form of Prayer, or may occasion a more full satisfaction in
performance thereof; for either of which I shall remain,

Your respective and thankful friend, JOHN LEY.
Friday March 1. 1649.
Dr H. his Answer to my first Letter.
Sir,
VVHiles I was reading yours to me, to see if it required an Answer, your
messenger went away, or else I had sent my respects to you presently, though
not my Answer till another time: I say then, that the Title of Seraphicall
belongs to those new Bonaventures, who took upon them to castigate all other
Churches, as he does the Greek (in lib. 1. sent. did. 11.) and with less
Reason, though with greater Insolency; but a zealot I am, and desire to be for
that public worship of God, which I conceive most for his glory, and for his
peoples good: And truly Sir, such was that of our Service Book, once thought to
be (by the consent of our selves and all other Protestants) so that in our late
Discourse I might very well say, It would very much have troubled my conscience
(as it has since troubled the Church) to have been an instrument of casting
that away (as a menstrous cloth) which was for many years the Church of
Englands chiefest Robe, both for Ornament among the Reformed, and for
Distinction against the unreformed Churches: And if any Divines of the Church
of England ever gave their advice for its opprobrious ejection, they must show
a good reason, why they altered their own judgment, before they may hope to
have any powerful influence upon mine: If I had (in the use of that form)
served God without my conscience, I had been an hypocrite; and how can I then
now scorn and revile it against my conscience, and not be an Apostate. To lay
it aside is one thing, to revile it another: That a godly Hezekiah may do, if
he think it a Nahushtan, but this befits only a Rabshekah: That may be out of
obedience, this only out of peevishness, or some worse principles. Surely Sir,
I must needs still say (but now it is too late to say it, save only to your
self) that had I been of the Assembly, I should have showed so much constancy
to my self, as not to have easily changed my judgment, and so much ingenuity
toward others, as not to have subdolously concealed it: I should have
propounded some considerations before they had determined, though now I
propound no Objections after their determination: And my Considerations would
have been specially those (which you do intimate) of Sacrilege and Scandal,
for it could not but have seemed to me sacrilegious, to rob God of his worship,
and it could not but have seemed scandalous to r^b him of that worship which he
had once solemnly devoted to his Sanctuary, and as solemnly practiced in it.

These I might say would then have been my Considerations, but I do not say
they are now my Objections, yet happily they may be so to your self in private
hereafter, if you will faithfully promise me first your privacy, then your
satisfaction, I shall then follow your advice, and propound only my doubts
depending upon you only for their solutions, whereby you shall have this
privilege over me, to make me your servant, if not your convert, and I shall
have this privilege over my self, to see my errors ill maintained if not
amended; I shall likewise desire to have no gall in my ink, and I hope to find
none in yours; yet must crave leave to say, That your making me a candidate of
the peoples applause (by endeavoring to expose you and your performances to
their dislike) savours of too much bitterness, if you do not believe, and of
too much credulity, if you do, for which cause I shall not desire any such
enterchange of Letters, whiles you are among those who have sworn themselves
into an antipathy against me, or I among them who seem to have a sympathy with
my Religion: for the first may increase more jealousies in you, the later may
raise more imputations on me: But after my removal out of the County (which at
this instant takes up much of my thoughts and time) I shall be glad I may have
free approach to such an oracle as your self, and will not want good advice for
want of asking it: Only first let temporal interests be fully settled betwixt
us, then our spiritual velitations (for I will not call them differences) will
begin with the greater freedom continue with the lesser prejudice and conclude
with the least inconvenience; which must be a special proviso and care of,

SIR, Your humble servant, E. H.

NECESSARY ANIMADVERSIONS Upon the precedent Letter of the Doctor.
SECT. I.
Three Reasons referring chiefly to the Doctor, why his English Letter was not
presently answered: His mistake about the word Seraphicall, the sense, rise,
and use of it.
TO this Letter I made the less have to return an Answer for three reasons.
Sect. 1.


1. Because the Doctor professed an unwillingness to hold an intercourse with
me by Letter while he remained in this County.

2. Because a good part of it was a kind of retractation of what he had said,
and for that (within a while after) I expected to speak with him again, to know
where his mind would settle, for (comparing his precedent speeches and
writings together) he seemed to me to fluctuate very much, not only in his
passion, but in his opinion.

3. Because (notwithstanding his negative resolution forementioned) (about
fourteen days after remaining yet where he was before) he sent me a Latin
letter, to which I made answer in the same language, and in that I brought as
much of the English Letter, (having translated the matter of it into Latin) as
I took to deserve either Censure or Answer.

I had not then a thought of publishing any thing of either, yet since now I
find cause to do so, I conceive it also convenient, to make some
Animadversions upon the most material parts of his English Letter, in English
(as I have done to his Latin Letter in Latin) which I shall now apply to the
Doctor in the second person, as directly written to him as my first Letter was,
in these words, Sir, you have often in my hearing expressed your self a S^raphicall
zealot for the Service Book: D. H.
To which you Answer. That the title of Seraphicall belongs to those new
Bonaventures, who took upon them to castigate all other Churches, as he does
the Greek (in lib. 1. did. 11.)

By that you say Sir, Animadv. 1.
you seem not to understand, or not duly to consider the sense and use of the
word Seraphicall, which arises from an Saraph incendit, accendit, succendit,
ussit, adussit, combussit, cremavit igne. Schindl. Pentaglot. Col. 1948.
Hebrew Root, signifying an height of heat, even to burning: It was given per
Antonomasiam to The life of the Seraphicall Father St Francis, Vol. 2. Part. 2.
Of the lives of the Saints written by Alphons. villeg. p. 169, 171, 178, 186,
187.
St Francis of Assisum (the Founder of the Minorite Friars.) There was another
Vol. 1. Of the Lives, etc. gathered out of P. Ribadineirae and Alphons. Villeg.
Part. 2. p. 361.
St Francis of Paula, (who had not the honor of that Angelical appellation)
and he of Assisum was called Seraphicall, for the zeal and fervency of his
spirit and actings: as Vbi sup. ad lit. b. p. 178.
when he renounced all his right of inheritance, stripped himself of all his
clothes, unto his shirt, and gave them to his father, saying, Until this time
I have called thee father, but from hence forth I will acknowledge no other
father, but our Father in heaven: Ibid. p. 186, 187.
And when in zeal he went to preach in France, Spain, Egypt, and Syria, among
the Infidels, that he might obtain the Crown of Martyrdom: And he was so called
for the Seraphicall vision they write he had, of the likeness of the Ibid. p.
190.
six winged Seraphim burning with fire, and casting beams glittering
exceedingly, which descended with great swiftness, and drew near to the place
where he was, and between the said wings appeared the figure of a man
crucified, whereupon he straitwaies, (as the Friars tell the tale) fell into an
Ecstasy, as usually he accustomed in the meditation of the passion of Christ,
to which he was devoted more then can be expressed: Ibid.
And at this time (Ovid like) they fain a metamorphosis, telling of a
transformation of him into the similitude of Christ, the figure of his blessed
wounds remaining imprinted in his flesh: Of him the Friars Minorites were
called Seraphicall Brethren, or Friars of the Seraphicall Order. Thence is it
that Erasm. Colloq. a p. 702. ad p. 729. edit. meae.
Erasmus puts the title of Exequiae Seraphi^ae, upon one of his Dialogues,
wherein he discovers the pretended zeal and real hypocrisy of the Franciscan
Friars.

SECT. II.
His Error (in calling Bonaventure a Seraphicall zealot, because he castigated
the Greek Church) refuted, and the right Reason showed, why he was so called.
NOw for your Bonaventure, Sect. 2.
whom you would have to be entitled a Seraphicall zealot, because he did
castigate the Greek Church, if you mean by castigating the Greek Church, 1. The
opposing or refuting of the errors of the Greek Church, especially in respect
of their opinion of the Procession of the holy Ghost (whereof the Schoolmen
dispute in the first Book of Sent. did. 11.) he should not more be called a
Seraphicall zealot for that, then Pet. Lomb. ^. 1. did. 11. p. 66. Aquin.
part. 1. q. 35. art 2. ad prim. and 2d and q. 36. art. 2. corp. artic. Scot. l.
1. did. 11. q. 1. vol. 1. p. 209. Dom Bannes in prim. part. Ib. art. 1. q. 2.
Tom. 1 p. 376, 377. Estius in 1. Sent. did. 11. sect. 2. p. 57. and p. 59.
Bell. l. 2. de Christo c. 22. Tom. 1. p. 135. col. 2. and p. 139. col 1.
many others who did the like, as well as he. 2. If you mean that Bonaventure
did chastise the Greek Church with more vehemence and fierceness of spirit than
other Writers did: I answer,

1. That cannot be proved, for though he accounted the Greeks in his time more
erroneous then their Ancestors, from Non dicit (scil Damasc.) quod spiritus non
sit a filio sed dicit non dioimus a filio quia Grae^i ^on confitebantur nec
tamen negabant. Bonav. in 1. Sent. did. 11. q. 1. Tom. 5. Operum Romae Excus.
An. 1588. Ex typogr. Vatican. Damascen. docet spirit sanct. non procedere ex
filio sed per filium Damasc. de Orthod. fide l. 1. c. 11.
Damascen (who flourished in An. 730.) downward, called them an Sed modo eorum
maledicta progenies addidit ad paternam dement^am and dicit quod non procedit a
filio nisi temporaliter. Ibid.
accursed offspring of their progenitors, adding to their parents madness (who
were wavering, neither confessing nor denying the Procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son) but holding, That the holy Ghost had only a
temporal procession from the Son; and for Id^o tanquam bareticos and
schismaticos Romana damnat eos Ecclesia. Ib.
this (says he) the Church of Rome do^ms them heretics and schismatics. Yet
the worst he says of them he says not in his own Name, but in the Name of the
Roman Church.

So that he should be called a Seraphicall zealot, for that, no more than the
Pope or any Cardinal, or Bishop, or Doctor of the Church of Rome, who gives
his consent to the Popes Excommunication of them, and they were Excommunicated
by Pope Martin, as is remembered against them in the Council. Lugd. 2d Anno 1274.
Fr. Long. Sum. Council p. 842. col. 1.
second Council of Lions. The truth is, as the Greek Nation had but an ill
name of old among the ancient Romans, so since Damascens time the Greek Church
was much distasted by the Latins, and they by them again. For 1. The Roman
Orator (many hundred years before Benaventure was born) taxed them for Odium
levium Graecorum, Cicer Orat. pro ligar. fol. 225.
levity, Fidem nunquam ista Natio coluit. -- Vnde illud d^ mi^i testimonium
mut^um, Cicer. Orat. pro Flacco fol. 141. b.
unfaithfulness, Invitatio ut Graecorum more biberetur -- poscunt majoribus
poculis. Cicer. act. 3. in verrem fol. 29. a.
drunkenness. 2. That levity and unfaithfulness is charged upon the Greek
Church, by the Roman Church; for in the 3d Council of Latera^ An. 1215. under
Innocent the 3d, the Greeks (after Council. Lateran. 3. c. 4. Tom. 7. Council
edit. Bin. part. 2. p. 808.
reconciliation with the Latins) In tantum Graeci caeperunt abominari Latinos
ut si quando Sacerdotes Latini super eorum celebrasse^t altaria non prius ipsi
sacrificare volebant in illis quam ca tanquam per haec inquinata lavissent.
Ibid. c. 4.
became so adverse to them, that they would not consecrate upon their own
Altars, after the Latins had used them, until they had washed them.

And the children which the Baptizatus etiam a Latinis and ipsi Graeci
rebaptizare aus^ temerario praesum^bant. Ibid.
Latins had baptized, they baptized again. And in the second Council of Lions,
Anno 1274. (to which Alph. Villeg. the Life of Bonav. Vol. 2. of the lives of
Saints, part. 2. page 47.
Bonaventure was sent by Pope Greg. 10.) though the Council. Ludg. 2. Fr. Long.
Sum. Council. page 841. Col. 1.
Emperor Paleologus brought his Greeks to the Council, and they therein
consented to the Latins (in the Article, touching the procession of the holy
Ghost, from the Father and the Son) and submitted themselves to the Roman
Church: yet as they had been so fickle and false (in what they undertook before
that time) as to turn and revolt from what they had professed, no fewer then
thirteen Tertia decima vice Graecos deficientes -- Council. Lugd. 2d Fr. Long.
Sum. Council. p. 842.
times, so it is not unlikely but that after this Council (when Bonav. was
dead) even to the Council of Council Florent. Tom. 8. Council. Bin. ap. 553. ad
p. 1038.
Florence, An. 1438. (when the Latins and Greeks were again reconciled) there
were many breaches betwixt them, which might make many Romanists as great
Seraphicall zealots against the Greeks, as ever Bonaventure was, yea or as
those before his time, Ni^^t. Choniates lib. de Isaac and fill. ejus Alex.
who used the Greeks more inhumanely at the taking of Constantinople, then the
Saracens did the Christians at their taking Jerusalem: Therefore you have no
reason from Bonaventures zeal against the Greek Church, to call him a
Seraphicall zealot, as by a special Title, yet a zealot he was, and
Seraphicall too, and might well be called a Seraphicall zealot, (not as you
mistake the reason of title) but for such as these: Because,

1. He was of the Order of the In the Life of Bonav. by Villeg. Vol. 1. part.
1. p. 42.
Seraphicall Father St Francis, to whom that denomination was principally
appropriated.

2. He was not only of this Order, but devoted to it by especial vow of his
mother, confirmed by miracle, for being sick (when he was a child) she vowed
(if he recovered) to give him up to be a Franciscan Friar; God heard her prayer
to the Ibid.
admiration of the Physicians (as the writer of his Legend records) and she
made good her vow.

3. He was when he came out of his minority (though still a Minorite Friar) a
great zealot for the honor of his Founder St Francis (and of his Order) For,

1. The Life of St Francis by Villeg. vol. 2. part. 2. p. 182.
He wrote his Life.

2. Tom. 7 operum Bonav par. 3.
He wrote of the six wings of the Seraph.

3. Ibid. Tom* 8. operum part. 4. ^pusc.
A declaration of the rule of the Minorites.

4. Ibid.
Two Apologies against the calumniators of the Fransc. rule.

4. Because, as Seraphicall St Francis himself, The Life of St Fr. by Villeg.
ubi supra at c.
preached not with eloquent words, and worldly wisdom, but with much fervor of
spirit, (as the Romanists write of him (so did Bonav. utter not instant,
earnest words, but Flammantia non instantia verba profe^eb^t. Possev. Apparat.
Sac. Vol. 1. p. 233.
flaming words, as Possevi^ notes out of Abbot Tritemius.

SECT. III.
The Doctor justly termed a Seraphicall Zealot for the Service Book, his absurd
Elogium of it, and Calvin's Censure upon it.
ANd in this sense I might (as I did) well call you a Seraphicall zealot for
the Service Book, Sect. 3.
for your discourse of it, and pleading for it, with me, has been fierce and
fie^y, (as when Not many days distant from the date of your letter, and in the
Parsonage Hall, M. R. W. and my self being present.
you said, If I preached against the Service Book in the forenoon, you would
preach for it in the afternoon, if I would lend you my Pulpit) and your
Letters, both this in English, and the other in Latin, show rather how fondly,
then how devoutly you are addicted to that: You say in this Letter, How it was
for many years the Church of Englands chiefest robe, both for ornament among
the Reformed, D. H.
and for distinction against the unreformed Churches: And in your Latin Letter
you call it, The most glorious household stuff of your father.

1. Robe, Animadv. 2.
Ornament and Distinction: Three brave words, very meanly and impertinently
brought in, as I believe any man of ordinary apprehension will easily judge:
The word Robe you know signifies a garment, Has the Service Book any
resemblance to that? If you had called the Surplice a Robe, you might have gone
away with that word, without exception, though you might have met with a check
at the next word Ornament, from such as with much contempt and scorn used to
call that a ragge: But (to let pass that gross (...) of calling the
Service Book a robe) How was the Service Book an Ornament among the Reformed
Churches? What Reformed Church out of England and Ireland (except the exiles in
Queen Mary's days, and not all of them neither) ever took it for an Ornament?
If they had they would sure have adorned their Divine service with it, and have
spoken of it rather as Honorable, then but tolerable, and that for a time; as
In Anglica^^ qualem describitis multas video fuisse tolarabiles ineptias. Calv
Epist. Anglis Frankford, p. 158.
Calvin did of the English Liturgy (says he, writing to the exiles at
Frankford) as you describe it, I see many tolerable toies, trifles, follies,
unfitnesses; take which word you will to express his Latin word ineptiae, you
will have as much ado to gloss or dress it up into an Ornament, as to make a
Silver Pen of a Goose quill; unless you add guilding unto it, or some other
decking of the Artificer upon the leaves and cover.

But to save you that needless labor, Calvin presently expresses what he
means by these two words tolerabiles ineptiae, viz. His duobus verbis exprimo
non fuisse ^am puritatem quae opta^da fuerat quae tamen primo statim die
corrigi non poterant vitia cum nulla su^^sset manifesta impietas ferenda ad
tempus fuisse. Ibid.
That the Liturgy was not so pure as was to be wished, yet what faults could
not be corrected the first day, (since they contain no manifest impiety) they
were to be tolerated for a time, yet so, that it Doctos tamen probosque and
graves Christi ministros ultra eniti and aliquid limatius and purius quaerer^
consentancum foret. Calv. Ibid.
meet (says he) that the Learned, good and grave Ministers of Christ do
endeavor beyond it, to find out somewhat more refined, more pure, Nunc cum
vobis fit Ecclesia instituenda and liberum fit formam qua^ad usum and
edificationem Ecclesiae maxim apta videbitur de integro componere quid sibi
velin^ ^escio quos faecis papisticae reliquiae tantopere delectant. Calv.
Epist. Anglis Frankford. p. 158.
free to compose a new form of prayer, which may be most apt or fit for the use
and edification of the Church: and says, he knows not what to think of them to
whom the dregs of Popery are so delightful, as not to be pleased with a change
for the better: Nor have they any other Nam quae illis rixandi caus^ nifi quia
pudet melioribus cedere. Ibid.
cause of quarrel (says he) but because they are ashamed to yield to better
men, and better things.

SECT. IV.
The Service Book served, not for distinction of the Reformed Churches from the
unreformed, as the Doctor says: Too much conformity in it to the Romish
Breviary, yet passed in the first Parliament of Q. Elizabeth, and why so.
FOr your third word, Sect. 4.
distinction, that is as ill applied to the Service Book, as the two former,
for how serves that for a distinction of the Reformed against the unreformed
Churches? If you call those unreformed Churches that have it not, you speak a
new Dialect of your own, and as naught as new; wherein all Orthodox Protestants
will be against you: If you mean by unreformed, those who are most unreformed,
viz. the Roman Churches, the distinction was not so great, either in K Henry
the 8th his time, or K. Edw. the 6th his time, or Q. Elizab. time, as it should
have been: Not in K. Henry the 8th his time, for then Praefat. ad Paul* tert.
in Brev. Roman.
Card. Quignonius at the request of Pope Cl^^ 7. then made the Popish Missall
liker the English for a great part, then it was to the Roman Breviary: Not in
King ^ox Martyr. Vol. 2. p. 667. Col. 2. n. 20.
Edw. the 6th his time, for when the Rebels were up in Devonshire, for the
restitution of the Mass and other Popish matters comprised in several
Articles: To that of the Service Book, (which was one of them) the Kings answer
was, As for the Service (in the English tongue) it has manifest reasons for
it, and yet (perchance) it seems to you a new Service, and is indeed none
other but the old, the self same words in English, which were in Latin, saving
a few things taken out, which were so fond, that it had been a shame to have
heard them in English, as all can judge that do report the truth. Not in Q
Elizab. time, for Pope B^ Andr. Tort. torti. p. 142. and B. Mort. in his
Protest. Appeal. l. 5. c. 28. Sect. 4. p. 680.
Paul the 4th would have allowed of the Service and Liturgy, set out by her, if
she would have received it by his authority: And for the English Service, as it
first passed in Parliament, it was not such as was desired by the best, but
such as could be obtained of the worst sort of Protestants, who made the major
part in the first Parliament of Q Elizab. and who were so superstitiously
devoted to that form of Service, that the Book would not have passed, if it had
been so Reformed as it should have been: We have just ground for this
conjecture out of the The first days conference at Hampton Court p. 14.
Conference at Hampton Court; where (upon, the debate betwixt King James and
others, about the women's Baptism by warrant thereof) the King urging and
pressing the words of the Book, said, they could not but intend a permission of
women s^ to do, the Bishop of Worcester said, that (indeed) the words are
doubtful, because otherwise, perhaps the Book would not have passed in the
Parliament; and for this he cited the testimony of the Archbishop of York.

Why then should those who have power to Reform what is amiss, be confined to
such a form of service as this? which had i^ been a perfect masculine issue,
they who should (as Midwives) have helped to bring it forth, would have been
ready to strangle it in its birth.

Yet such as it was, with all its faults and defects, they gave their Vote unto
it: but those who were truly wise and godly, never meant to set up their rest
with such a Reformation: For it was both irreligious and unreasonable which
some Prelates projected, viz. instead of proficiency toward perfection, to
make us retrograde, to the state and stature of our Churches minority, and they
might as well put down preaching, and bring up Homiles, and mere reading
Ministers again, as make that form of prayer a standard to our public
devotion.

Now for that you say in your Latin Letter, where you call the Service Book
you lent me (before my Library was brought to Br.) the Patris mei quoadam
gloriosissimam supellectilem quam prae occulis me charum habuisse semper and
habiturum.
most glorious household-stuff of your father, which you say is precious in
your sight, and so shall be for ever. Methinks you honor that Book so much, as
you must imply no little dishonor to your father, as if he had not a Bible in
his house, and no less dishonor to the Bible, if he had it, and yet that were
not in your eye a more glorious piece of household stuff, then the Service Book
was.

But though neither the Parliament, nor the Assembly did either admire or adore
it, as you did* it should not have been so contemptuously used as it was, to
use your own words.

SECT. V.
The Service Book not cast out by the Parliament or Assembly as a menstruous
cloth, as the Doctor insinuates, but laid aside with honorable remembrance of
the composers of it, and with approbation of the Book it self in diverse
respects.
IT would have troubled my conscience, Sect. 5.
to have been an instrument of casting it away as a menstruous cloth (...): Dr
H.
And if any Divines of the Church of England gave their advice for its
opp^brious ejection, they must show a good reason why they altered their own
judgment, before they may hope to have any powerful influence upon mine.

Who they be (if any Divines at all of the Church of England) who cast away the
Service Book as a menstruous cloth, Animadv. 3.
or gave advice for its opprobrious ejection, I know not, sure I am that I am
none of them: and for my Brethren of the Assembly, they have at large, with
much candor and fair dealing (though for that they have not been fairly dealt
withal by some) expressed their sense, both of the Compilers, and of the Book
it self: Of them they speak very honorably, for they say, In the beginning of
the blessed Reformation, In the Preface before the Directory. p. 11
our wise and pious Ancestors took care to set forth an order, etc. Afterward
their words are, That what they did in laying aside the Service Book, was not
from any love to novelty, or intention to disparage our first Reformers; of
whom we are persuaded, (were they now alive) they would join with us in this
work, and whom we acknowledge, as excellent instruments raised by God, to begin
the purging and building of his House; and we desire that they may be had of
us, and of posterity in everlasting remembrance, with thankefulness and Honor.
Ibid. p. 6.

And of the Book it self, they say, That it occasioned many godly and learned
men to rejoice much in it at that time it was set forth, because the Mass and
the rest of the Latin Service, being removed, the public worship was
celebrated in our own tongue: many of the common people also received benefit
by hearing the Scriptures read in their own language, which formerly were to
them as a book that is sealed. So Preface p. 1, 2* the worst they say of it
comes from the abuse, and the worst abuse is, That it was made no better then
an Idol, by many ignorant and superstitious people, who pleasing themselves in
their presence at that service, and their lip-labor in bearing a part in it,
have thereby hardened themselves in their ignorance and carelessness of saving
knowledge and true piety, p. 4. whereof I find too much proof by sad
experience in some of those who have learned of you to mistake erroneous
superstition for religious devotion. But suppose that some of them had cast it
away as a menstruous cloth, for the defects and errors in it, and the
Idolatrous doting of many, if not of most upon it, is it any better then the
best humane righteousness? and did they think worse of it than the Prophet
Isaiah speaks of that, where he says, We are all of us an unclean thing, and
all our righteousness are as filthy rags? Isa. 64. 6.

If I had served God in the use of that form without any conscience, Dr H.
I had been an hypocrite, and how can I now scorn and revile that against my
conscience, and not be an Apostata?

It is true Sir, Animadv. 4.
not only of you, but of any one else, and not of that form of Prayer only, but
of any other, that he who formally worships God, either without his conscience,
or against it, is an hypocrite, and to revile and scorn that (of which a man
has formerly thought honorably and spoken reverently) against his conscience,
is to play the hypocrite also, and to add to his hypocrisy the sin of
Apostasy: While you say this in your own name, if you mean it of others,
particularly of the Ministers of the Assembly, or at least of some of them (as
perhaps you do) you have answer to that calumniatory conceit already: If of
your self, your words imply that some have solicited you to scorn and revile
the Service Book against your conscience, if you know any such (as for my part
I do not) I doubt not but you will be more ready to scorn and revile them, then
therein to be persuaded by them: for you are so far from all compliance in
that kind, that you charge such as without scorn or reviling have laid it
aside, with sacrilege and scandal, touching which I shall answer you, when
the order of your words bring me to that charge.

SECT. VI.
The Doctor allows the laying aside of the Service Book, so far as
justifies the Parliaments and Assemblies removal of it, by the example of
Hezekiah's breaking of the Brazen Serpent; yet with some mistake of that story.
TO lay it aside is one thing, Sect. 6.
to revile it another; that a godly Hezekiah may do, Dr H.
if he think it a Nehushtan, but this befits only a Rabshekah; that may be out
of obedience, this only out of peevishness or a worse principle.

To the reproach^r reviling of the Service Book I have answered already:
Animadv. 5.
that which I shall now observe, is your concession, that he that lays the
Service Book aside, if he be a Governor, may for all that be an holy Hezekiah,
and an inferior employed in preparing for, and conforming to such a
Reformation as that, may do it in obedience; which you seem rather to approve
of, then disallow: If so, you have yet no just exception against the Assembly
upon that account: for you may read in the forecited place, what they did in
their own words: Praeface in Direct. p. 7.
We have after earnest and frequent calling upon the Name of God, and after
much consultations, not with flesh and blood, but with his holy Word, resolved
to lay aside (mark your own words, to lay it aside) the former Liturgy, with
the many Rites and Ceremonies formerly used in the worship of God; And they
laid it aside, not as you mistaking say, Hezekiah did the Brazen Serpent,
because it was Nahushtan, (i.e. brass or brazen) for that was not all, nor the
chief cause, for which he brake it in pieces, for it was no better then brass
(for the matter of it) when by Gods appointment it was first set up by Moses,
Numb. 21. 8. but because (even to those days) the children of Israel did burn
incense unto it, 2 King. 18. 4. so the Service Book was laid aside, not so much
for the matter of it, (though what was erroneous in it, and some error
certainly there was, which was worse then pure brass, as bad as the rust or
dross of that and other metals.)

But because (as the brazen Serpent) it was made an Idol, as has been showed,
so was the Service Book, and so is it by many to this day; which is not so much
the fault of the Book, as the folly of those who so much doted on it, and so
many dote on it, and so much, that (if it be not taken from them) the next
generation is more like to be more infected with, then the present to be cured
of their superstition toward it: and as Hezekiah called it Nahushtan, i.e.
brass or brazen (by this Name giving the people to understand, that being (when
it was the best) but a creature, now but a mere brazen figure of a Serpent, and
not so much (when he had broken it in pieces, having no virtue of healing, as
formerly it had) there neither was nor could be any deity in it, no not when it
had a miraculous operation annexed unto it; and therefore, neither sacrifice
was to be offered, nor incense to be burnt unto it (as then they did) so we may
say (to such as Idolize the Service Book) that for the materials of it, being
but Ink and Paper, visible letters, and legible words, and being not infallibly
indicted by the Spirit of God, as the sacred Scriptures are, it should not be
made such an object of worship, as by many it is: and now Sir, you have by this
comparison degraded the Service Book so low as a piece of brass; How can you
set so high price upon it, as to make it the most See Sect. 4. at the letter f.
glorious household stuff your father had? If the Inventory of his goods were
but ratably prized to this particular, you would not take your Childs portion
after that rate, but would require an higher valuation to be set upon them.

SECT. VI.
The constancy and ingenuity which the Doctor assumeth to himself (if he had
been an Assembly man) acted by those who were chosen in that service.
HAd I been of the Assembly, Sect. 7.
I should have showed so much constancy to my self, Dr H.
as not to have easily changed my judgment; and so much ingenuity toward
others, as not to have subdolously concealed it.

Had those (whose Office it was to make choice of men for that service (thought
you a fit man to be called to it, Animadv. 6.
I wish you had made one of that number, then your own experience would have
showed you, many who changed not their judgment, when they changed their
practice, in the dis-use of that Book, which they had formerly used, rather in
a way of toleration, until the time of further Reformation came, then of
approbation for perpetual use (as by an immutable Law of the Medes and
Persians) who were (in that particular) of Calvin's mind (as is At the letters
I, K, L, M, N, in the 2d Alphabet.
before mentioned) suffering what they could not then amend, and amending their
own condition, by removal of it, as soon as the Divine providence offered a
fit opportunity for that purpose; and who were so far from a subdolous
concealment of what they thought of it, that (when it was most magnified by
such as were Masters of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and would have Lorded it
over our faith, if we would have been so tame as to submit our necks to such
oppressive yokes, they did not forbear (before such) plainly to speak their
opinions against it: and when the times were so far changed, as not only to
cry it down, but all other set forms of prayer, they both disputed and preached
for the lawfulness (though not for the universal convenience, much less the
absolute necessity of a set form of prayer) of this (for both parts of it) I
can bring fair evidence of his sincere carriage in that cause, whom it may be
you meant (at least obliquely) to tax for fickleness, in forsaking his first
love, or for fallacy in sitting silent, when he should have freely spoken his
mind and conscience on that behalf.

SECT. VIII.
The removal of the Service Book, as before showed, is neither Sacrilege, nor
just cause of Scandal, as the Doctor suggesteth.
I Should have propounded some Considerations, Sect. 8.
before they had determined, Dr H.
though now I propound no Objections, after their determination: And my
Considerations would have been specially these, which you do intimate of
Sacrilege and Scandal, for it could not but have seemed unto me Sacrilege,
to rob God of his worship, and it could not but have seemed Scandalous, to rob
him of that worship which he had once solemnly devoted to his Sanctuary.

The former part of your speech seems so modest, Animadv. 7.
that had you still contained your spirit in such moderation, as those terms
imply, See Sect. 3.
but you did not, the breaches betwixt us had never been so wide, nor so loud,
as they have been, and as the sequel will show: for the present, to the
Objection of sacrilege and scandal, I shall say little now, having in
expectation a fitter occasion to speak to them more fully: Now it may be enough
to say, First, Whereas you say, To take away the Service Book, is to rob God of
his worship, which be had once solemnly devoted to his Sanctuary, may imply,
either actively, that God himself devoted them to his Sanctuary, or passively,
that they were devoted by others: the former I suppose you do not mean, though
your words may bear such a sense; and for the latter, if you think that an
outward particular form of worship so devoted, as that was, may not be taken
away without Sacrilege, it is your error, for Christ has prescribed no
particular form of worship for his Church in the new Testament, as he did in
the Old; if he had, all Christian Churches should have been bound to that, but
since he has therein left them free (except for the general rule of decency
and order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.) and the short form of Prayer, commonly called the
Lords Prayer, but is not a prayer, say some, but only a pattern of prayer (but
the Directory of the Assembly says it is both) they are at liberty to frame
diversity of forms (so they be consonant to the sound doctrine of the
Scripture) and what they frame themselves, ^age 38.
they may correct or change, take away the old, and substitute a new Form, as
they conceive may be most convenient for the honor of God, and the furtherance
of godliness. Secondly, To call the taking away of an humane form of Divine
worship, Sacrilege, is ^o reproach not only the present Reformation, but the
precedent in the days of King Edward, for then there was one form of Service
at Salisbury, another at Hereford, another at Bangor, another at York, another
at Lincoln, but So in the Preface of King Edwards Service Book. p 2. Printed
^n. 1549.
King Edward abolisht them all, and established another form, which was to be
the form of worship to the whole Realm. Thirdly, The Translations of the Bible,
and singing Psalms turned into Meeter, were with the Service Book, devoted to
the Service of God in his Sanctuary, so were the Books of Homilies; Was it
sacrilege in King James (upon exceptions taken at Translators of Scriptures in
the Service, out of the corrupt Editions of the English Bible, published in the
reign of, Hen. 8. and Edward. the 6.) said he could never yet see a Bible well
translated in English, but the worst of all his Majesty thought the Geneva to
be: So Dr Barl. then D^an of Chester, in his relation of the Conference at
Hampton Court, p. 47. he had a spleen against the Genev for their Government
sake, as Presbyteriall and not Episcopal: this Bib^e, for some Notes, which he
said were very partial, untrue, seditious and savouring too much of dangerous
and traitorous con^eipts, he disallowed, Ibid. But an unprejudiced Reader will
find no such matter in them; howsoever, for the disgrace of both, a new
Translation must be made (and so it was) that they might be shut out of the
Church, both the Geneva Translation and the Annotations upon it.
King James to take away all precedent Translations, the Geneva especially,
which was most in use before since his coming to the Crown of England, and had
been Printed above 30 times by Queen Elizab. and his privileged Printers
Christopher and Robert Barker, and making a new one to put the old out of use
and office; or was it Sacrilege in King Charles to cashire the old Psalm-book,
made partly by Balaei Cent 9. Vol. 1. p. 728.
Thomas Sternhold, Groom of King Edw. the 6th his Bedchamber, and the rest, by
men of the same relation and Religion, by authorizing his Fathers Edition of
the singing Psalms to be published in the Churches of his Dominion.

Or were you guilty of Sacrilege, when you left off the Homilies Where there
are a multitude of Sermons, there he would have Homilies read diverse times.
Confer. at Hampt. Court. p. 57.
which King James would have allowed, not only as Sermons deputies, but as
their fellows in joint Commission with them?

Obj. But you will say, Change is no robbery, to take away a silver Chalice
from the Communion Table, and to put a golden one in its place, or to bring a
more perfect Translation of the Bible (for one less perfect) a more exact Psalm
book, then that which has been formed in ruder times, and to preach a Sermon,
in stead of reading an Homily is no Sacrilege, but Religious Beneficence, but
the new Reformation has taken away the old Service, and has not set up a new
one, nor any other in the room thereof.

Sol. There has been done so much in effect in the Directory, that there will
be no defect in the public worship, if the Minister be but competently
qualified, both for praying and preaching, as he should be; for by following
the direction there given, he may as well make his own Prayer, as his own
Sermon, especially if he give himself to both (as the Apostles did) Act. 6. 4.
and make use of such Among diverse others, the most copious, perspicuous, and
the most exact for matter and method yet extant that I have seen, is Dr. Wilk.
Warden of Wadd Col. in Oxford his Book.
helps, as God has been pleased to furnish this age withal, above many of the
former; and I doubt not but as at the first setting up of the English Liturgy,
there was necessity to make use of many illiterate, yet well meaning
upright-hearted Protestants to take the cure of many Parish Churches, for want
of a competent supply of Learned-men, as Cambd. Hist. Eliz. l. 1. An. 1550. p.
30.
Cambden observes in his Hist. of Qu. Eliz. and in the Preface of the Homilies
of the first Edition (to my best remembrance, for I have not the Book by me) it
is said, There was scarce to be found, for every County, a well qualified
Preacher, who without a Prayer book, and an Homil^e, could not pray to God for,
nor Preach from God to the people: But now there will be, by Gods blessing on
means and helps (more then heretofore) a sociableness of proficiency, both for
Praying and Preaching, so that Ministers shall have no more need to have their
Prayers made for them, than their Sermons; and why should they not be able to
make their own words in the reading Pew, as well as in the Pulpit; or why (as
the manner of some is) may not all be done in one place.

For your second exception of Scandal, you know the usual distinction of
Scandalum datum and acceptum, he that gives the Scandal is the offender, that
is, he that does any thing he should not do, whereby another may justly be
offended, but he that takes offense at a warrantable act, not he that acts
warrantably, is the offender: No doubt when Hezekiah brake the brazen Serpent,
those who did so Idolize i^, as to burn Incense to it, were offended with his
severity in breaking it, but that was their fault, not his, whose purpose was
by that Reformation to remove a great occasion of Scandal from the eyes of the
people, and that was their meaning who laid aside the Service Book, at which
many godly persons took offense, because it was,

1. So conformable to the Popish Mass Book, as See Sect. 4.
before has been observed, whereof I can make more particular proof, and happily
shall do in time convenient.

2. Because the Scriptures brought into it were taken out of corrupt
Translations, even since there was a better set forth by King James his
procurement.

3. Because Apocryphal writings were prescribed to be read, and much of the
Canonical Scripture left out.

4. Because there were many particulars in it very liable to suspicion of an
erroneous sense.

5. Because by it many of the best Christians, who durst not use the gesture of
kneeling at the Sacrament, were excluded from the Sacrament, all which gave
great occasion to the schism of the Brownists.

6. Because it was so strictly urged,

1. That by the 14 Canon it might not be lawful for a Minister to omit any
part of it, though besides his Preaching, he had both Sacraments to be
administered, and Catechism to be performed.

2. Ministers were enjoined to make it their Diurnall of Devotion, when Dr
Easdall Chancellor of York, Dr Cousens and Dr Wickam were Visitors at Chest.
for Archbishop Neale, they required the reading of the Service book every day,
and when it was objected the people would not come to partake with the
Ministers; What of that, said Dr Cousens to him that made the objection, do you
come and do your duty; There be rivers in the wilderness where no man dwells,
alleging Psalm 104. 10. but he forgot the following verse, They give drink to
the beast of the field, the wild Asses quench their thirst.

7. Because diverse godly and learned Ministers, who scrupled subscription and
conformity to the Service Book (not without apparent reason) were in the year
1605, to the The Survey of the Book of Common Prayer, p. 161.
number of 277, called in question about it, 260 were under censure, some of
Admonition, some of Suspension, some of Deprivation.

And it was matter of Scandal to the weak and wicked, as the brazen Serpent
was; for as the Jews did by that, so do most ignorant and profane people do by
this, Idolizing it so much* that they prefer a piece of Service Book at the
grave, before Preaching of a Sermon in the Pulpit: I speak what I know by
experience of some, who were so much offended at my refusal of the one, that
they would not give me thanks for my pains in the other, and some are constant
recu^ants from their Parish Church, though they dwell very near it, because I
am not constant to a set form of prayer, particularly to that of the
Service Book.

I will conclude mine Answer to this Objection, with the conclusion of a debate
betwixt Dr Edw. Maynw. the last Chancellor of Chester, and my self (as I have
observed in my Latin Answer to your Latin Letter) which we had many years
before the beginning of the last Parliament, which was this, I having showed
him what offense was given and taken by urging of the Service Book, such as it
was, and how little appearance of just cause of exception there would be, if it
were laid aside, he confessed at last and said, We shall never have peace and
true charity in the Church, until it be taken away.

SECT. IX.
A set or composed form of Prayer, how far lawful or needful.
Obj. BUt the want of that, Sect. 9.
or of some other new composed form in stead of it, causes much scandal by
many men's un-premeditated and extemporary utterance, whereby they speak that
many times, which tends rather to the debasing of that holy Office, and to the
offense of a prudent and pious hearer, then to the honor of God.

Sol. It may be so, yet 1. That must not prejudice the gift of God by the
Spirit of grace and of supplication, Zech. 12. 10. which diverse doubtless have,
and give evident proof of it by their practice. I have heard it, and In the 2d
Sermon of my Monitor of Mortality. p. 23
once before published it in Print (which I may here pertinently repeat) from a
very faithful M. St. G.
witness, that a man of high place in the Church, and of eminent parts and
proficiency in all kind of knowledge, especially of Divinity, acknowledged,
that he has heard a layman in a leathern jacket pray by heart, without art or
book, and with such an evidence and domonstration of the Spirit, as has made
him much ashamed of his own defects and disabilities to perform that duty of
devotion in such a manner and measure as he had done.

2. For those that have not the gif^t, they may by premeditation and study
compose a set form of prayer for themselves and their people, which may prevent
the precipitation of any unfit or offensive expression.

3. Because most are loath to own their own wants, and to seem less able for
their calling than other men are, who need not tie themselves to any set form
of words, it might I conceive be expedient, as an help to such as are more weak
in parts or spirit (for some have rather too much bashfulness, than too little
ability for the service) and for a prevention of their errors, who are too
presumptuous in boasting themselves in a false gift, Prove. 25. 14. pretending
to have that they have not, and so undertaking beyond their power, as it is in
the note upon the place, in the first Volume of the late large Annotations, as
also to prevent presumption in some, and for evidence of consent of Churches in
the service of God; and lastly, for a supply to the defects of the common
people (who commonly are acquainted with no prayers, but those they hear in the
Congregation) that a set form were composed in stead of the old Service Book
(but not so imperiously imposed, as that was) which might be so much better
done in the present age (by the best gifted in that kind) as when the people
are well acquainted with it, might give them better content than the
Service Book did:

For as the Translations of the Bible are more perfect now, than in King
Edwards reign they were, and Preaching more solid, more methodicall and
eloquent than in his days, (as will appear by comparing Latimer's Sermons
before that King, with others before Q. Elizab. the two late Kings, the long
Parliament, which last amount to many Volumes now they are Printed;) And the
singing Psalms are more exactly rendered in Meeter by diverse in old England, and
lately by our Brethren in new England, than those Thom. Sternhold, Will. Hopk
and Rob. Wisd. so no doubt, if we compare Printed Prayer-books as old as the
first English Liturgy, with those which have been set forth in our own time,
we shall find as much pre-eminence as difference in the latter above the
former, and if such a design should be so far taken to heart, as to proceed
to effect, because most of the Reformed Churches of Christendom have found
cause to frame a set form of prayer for themselves, yet I should never desire
to have it so rigorously urged, as Quod ad formulam precu^ and rituum
Ecclesiesticorum valde probo, ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus discedere in
functione sua non liceat. Calv. Epist. Protectori Angliae, p. 69. edit. meae
Genev. Excus. 1575.
Calvin advised, nor so premptorily pressed to practice, as some Prelates have
done, but that it were rather commended to the use of all (for the reasons
before alleged) than strictly commanded to any, for many would act in a way
of freedom, who would not come under a servile obedience, especially for that
which is neither expressly prescribed nor prohibited in Scripture. By this
proposal and plea for a set form of Prayer, I intend not to take off or cool
any man's desires or endeavors to be able to walk without such a crutch: But
for Preachers especially I would have them give themselves to the doubt duty,
wherein the Apostles exercised themselves, viz. Prayer and the Word of God,
Act. 6. 4. as well that as this, that by Gods blessing they may prove good
proficients in them both. It was the great error and the mother in gross
ignorance in former times, that Ministers pinioned their devotion to the
Service Book, when many who were but reading Levites, were so word-bound with
it, that upon any occasion which they met not with in that road, they were at a
stand, and as mute as fishes; which calls to my remembrance Sr Thomas Holcrofts
Curate, at the Vale-royall in Cheshire, to whom he went his house was on fire,
desiring him to pray, the Curate betook himself with much have to his
Service Book, and finding out the prayer for Rain if time require, prayed
according to the form thereof, That God would send such moderate showers, etc.
Moderate showers Sir Humnet (so was the Curate called) said the Knight, that
will do no good, it is a great fire, a very great fire: howsoever he had none
other holy water to quench it: Thus he exposed two things (besides himself) to
derision (which should be entertained with gravity and reverence) Calamity and
Devotion.

SECT. X.
The Doctors pretended moderation and modesty (concerning the Service Book, and
his seeking to defraud me of the peoples favor,) Confuted.
THese (I might say) would then have been my Considerations, Sect. 10. Dr H.
but I do not say they are now my Objections; yet happily they may be so to your
self in private hereafter, if you will faithfully promise me first your
privacy, then your satisfaction.

Your choice of Considerations, Animadv. 8.
before Objections, is prudent and methodicall; I would it had been your manner
to keep your self in that good order, I should not then have had so much to
object against your inconsiderateness both of speech and writing as now I have,
nor should you have need to capitulate with me for a promise of privacy, your
own discretion would have been your protection, if I had either not promised
(as I never did, though in your Both in this, and one in Latin.
Letters you impose a promise upon me) or had not kept your counsel, which
upon a lawful promise no provocation should have made me violate, but you were
commonly so confident in your high conceit of the Service Book See Sect. 3.
, that (notwithstanding all that was said or done by the superior powers
against it) you were willing to have appeared a public Champion for it in the
Pulpit, so far were you from any need of my secrecy for your security in that
matter, unless you counterfeited a courage then, as it may be you do a fear
now: Howsoever to require me to give you satisfaction in what you shall object,
is as unreasonable, as if I should condition with you to rest satisfied with
whatsoever answer I should make to what you objected.

I shall desire to have no gall in my ink, Dr H.
and I hope to find none in yours, yet must crave leave to say that your
making me a candidate of the peoples applause, by endeavors to expose you and
your performance to their dislike, savours of too much bitterness, if you do
not believe it, and of too much credulity, if you do.

In this passage you deliver your own desire for your self, Animadv. 9.
and your hope of me, with a Dilemma against me; your desire you say, is to
have no gall in your ink, and you hope to find none in mine; (that is a
figure, for I know you would not be understood according to the letter.) Your
mind is, that our writings might not be imbittered with uncharitable
expressions, if you had stopped there, I might have thought that you had a
better conceit of me than of your self, because of your self you say, but that
it is your desire, and we may desire the Reformation of the lewdest, of whom
there is least hope; but of me you say you hope, and hope is not without some
appearance or ground of good, yet sure your desire of such a Christian temper
is very faint, or comes upon you very seldom, since a very small occasion
easily puts you into a passion, and your passion usually vents it self with
much virulence, whether you write or speak, and your hope of me seems very
light, since your Dilemma in the next words, tends to convince me of too much
bitterness, if I believe not that you desire the applause of the people, to the
prejudice of mine acceptance of too much credulity if I do.

To the first part of it I answer, 1. That if I should say you desired to be
the peoples Canditate, etc. and not believe it, this were hypocrisy, rather
than bitterness, for if I were disposed to speak bitterly against you, I would
not deal so mildly with you, as to lay so small a matter to your charge, as
that you desire to be gracious in the peoples eyes, whose Pastor you were, and
that therein I may not be your Jacob to supplant you, which if you confess,
more will be ready to excuse you, than to condemn you for it. To the other
part, that it is too much credulity, if I do believe it, I say it were gross
stupidity in me, if I did not believe it, having had abundant evidence of it,
of several sorts ever since I first saw you.

SECT. XI.
The Doctor desires no intercourse by Letter with me, until he be removed out
of the County, upon pretenses false and frivolous.
FOr which cause I shall not desire any such intercourse of Letters whiles you
are among those who have sworn themselves into an Antipathy against me, Sect.
11.
or I among them who seem to have a Sympathy with my Religion. Dr H.


Of this passage I have observed somewhat, Animad. 10.
but that was only as a supersedeas to our enterchange of Letters for a time,
and that time must be (say you) 1. While I am among those who have sworn
themselves into an Antipathy against you, etc. Have you so soon forgotten your
caution of bitterness, as to write thus bitterly of them (who upon their Oaths)
did but discharge their consciences in matters criminal against you? and how
can you say they swore themselves into an Antipathy against you? Was not their
Antipathy as you term it, of an Ante-date (of three or four years time) before
their swearing? Truly, Sir, for those whom you chiefly mean in this heinous
charge (so far as I can judge of them, and I have had opportunity to know them
better then you) they are so far from being too forward to swear falsely that
in a cause of mine, they were very loath to take a true Oath, if otherwise they
might be freed from it. 2. While you are among them who seem to have a Sympathy
with your Religion. Your Religion Sir? I had thought you and your friends, and
I and my friends had been all of us of one Religion; but if we be not, we
differ (sure) chiefly in this, that we hold the Bible the best furniture of our
houses and closets, and you the Service Book: If so Sir, we would not change
our spiritual Birthright, or double Legacy in our Lords Will and Testament,
Old and New, for your Mess of red Pottage, your Rubric and Service Book, if we
might have a world to boot.

For the first may increase more jealousy in you, Dr H.
the latter may raise more imputations on me.

However your Dichotomy of reason, Animad. 12.
for our not writing to each other, be made; I am sure it is misapplied, for
imputations are the effects of the former, viz. swearing Antipathy, which you
apply to the latter; and jealousy proceeds from the latter, viz. the Sympathy
of your friends, which you apply to the former: And so you place them as
improperly and impertinently, as if you should put a glove on the face, and a
mask on the hand.

SECT. XII.
The Doctors contradicting of himself, calling me an Oracle, to whom he will
have free approach, not when we are nearest together, but when we are farther
asunder: How preposterously he preferres temporal interests before spiritual,
and mistakes velitations as less then differences: His Epiphonema flat and
feeble like the premises.
But after my removal out of the County (which at this instant takes up much
of my thoughts and time) I shall be glad I may have free approach to such an
Oracle, Sect. 12.
as your self, Dr H.
and will not want good advice for want of asking it.

Of your removal out of the Country, Animad. 12.
you give me occasion to speak in another place, but wherever you be, I shall
never look you should, nor do I believe you ever meant to take me for your
Oracle, or as you write (before) to depend upon me for solution of your doubts,
but if ever you had so high thoughts of me, so humble an estimation of your
self, by what Circean charm have you changed me from an Oracle of truth into a
teacher of Heresy, by whom the people under my charge may be rather poisoned
then nourished (as in your often recited and refuted, and ever to be abhorred
slanderous Of this Letter, see the conclusion of the Preface.
Letter you do) for that you say, you will not want good counsel for want of
asking: I can truly answer you, that you have been often offered good counsel,
yet were not so ready to take it, as to take offense at him, who freely gave it
you without asking: But how can you promise such free approach to your Oracle,
when by removing your self out of the County, you put your self at further
distance from him? it is not so easy for you to act contradictions, as to
speak them.

Only first let temporal interests be fully settled betwixt us, Dr H.
then our spiritual velitations (for I will not call them differences, etc.)

First let temporal interest be fully settled. Animad. 13.
What temporal interests settled, first settled, fully settled, before we meddle
with spiritual? This is the method not of Christians, but of worldlings,
directly contrary to the counsel of our Savior, Matthew. 6. 33. Then say you,
our spiritual velitations (I will not call them differences.) Why so Sir, do
you think difference imports more opposition then velitation does? If you do,
you are much mistaken for two may differ diverse ways, and yet abstain from all
strife and contention, but velitation is a striving or contentious difference,
for Velati v^citati sunt milites qui vestiti and inermes exercitum sequibantur
and in mortuorum locum substitui solebant by postea mutatis literis Velites
appellati sunt and velitaris pugna dicta quae fundis ac lapidibus interdum
eti^m bastis fieri ab in^rmibus solet. Perot^i cornucop col. 31. nu. 30, etc.
Velites (from whom that word is derived) were soldiers, who followed the
wars, and were substituted in the room of such as were dead, and they fought
with slings and stones, and sometimes with spears, but without any defensive
armor: Thus a man may say (without any cause of offense) that you and your
wife do differ Grammatically in gender, and Logically in number, as you are a
man, she a woman, as individuals do; and morally in qualities, for in mine
observation you are more passionate, she more patient; she more silent, you
more talkative: but it would be liable to just exception, (in a true
understanding of the word) if he should say you had velitations betwixt you,
when you live lovingly and peaceably together.

But were the word velitation a weaker word, I see no reason why you should
wave the word difference in our case, and make choice of it as more remiss and
moderate, since you make no less matter than of sacrilege and scandal to take
away the Service Book, whereas I deny, and (I think) have already disproved
both, and is not this ground enough to call our dissenting opinions and
contestations, differences. But you that now seem so disposed to peace, as not
to admit of a word of difference betwixt us, how is your calmer aequor, rufled
up into a boisterous fretum at other times? How often for one diminishing Meiosis
of this kind, do you take up an aggravating Auxesis, and therein are so
rampant, as if you meant to make me so afraid of your fury, as tamely to
sacrifice mine innocence, to your tempestuous violence.

Then our spiritual velitations will begin with more freedom, Dr H.
continue with less prejudice, and conclude with the least inconvenience, which
must be a special proviso and care of, etc.

Though you should not begin at wrong end (as you do) in giving precedence to
matters temporal, Animad. 14.
before spiritual, the Epiphonema of your Le^ter may not pass without some
Animadversions upon it. 1. Whereas you say, Our velitations will begin with
more freedom, I suppose you mean freedom of speech, and that truly is a
necessary condition of Scholasticall debate, and cannot in justice be denied,
while it keeps close to the matter and order of Dispute, and digresseth not
from the dictates of reason to deviations of passion. But such a regulated
freedom would be to you as Phocion to Demosthenes, (...), an hatchet to cut off
the superfluity of his luxuriant Oratory. For I have observed, not only in your
pleading for the Service Book, but in your ordinary discourse (in which
observation, such as you know are able to judge, have concurred with me) that
you are so tongue-free, as that you use to speak, as soldiers measure plunder,
by the long Ell, that is, by the Pike, as Phil. Commin. has it, and will not
allow others an inch of room or time to word it with you, though they be able
to speak as wisely, and in their wisdom do rather choose to hold their peace,
then to weary others with multiplicity of words, as you use to do.

2. For continuing with less prejudice that might be expected, if prejudice did
not make a great forestalment of judgment, and prepare the mind and will for
obstinacy, at the beginning as in your self, (I am confident) it did; so that
(as I said in mine answer to your Latin Letter) to labor to turn you from
your pre-conceived opinion, is all one with the labor of the Popish Novice,
who (at the command of his superior) watered a Ignatius Epist. de obed. joined
with the rules of the society of Jesus.
logge of wood a whole year together, as if it had been some lively plant, with
hope of fruit.

3. For that you say of concluding with less inconvenience, it is like a feeble
conclusion of a Syllogism from infirm premises, for there is no vigor in
either of the precedent particulars, to invite to a spiritual velitation,
after the settling of temporal interests, much less in this last; for who will
undertake a matter of this moment, (upon such a poor and dull inducement) as
the avoiding of some inconveniences, or abating them from a higher to a lower
degree, when by a total forbearance he may totally shun them: Wise men will
expect, that the managing of such a controversy should produce some good
success or benefit, answerable to the pains bestowed upon it: and in your
concluding Consideration, you should have sharpened your motive, that it might
have been, as a goad and nail fastened by a Master of the Assembly, Eccl. 12.
11. but it falls flat like a bolt, or an arrow shot without an head, and so this
Letter ends, and a worse should follow, with the refutation of it, but I hope
to reserve them both to be divulged at a fitter season.

EJa age, Vir Doctissime, ex compromisso fi^t, ut quae inter nos est opinionum
discordia (and opinionum ta^^um sit monebit me charitas, qui amisi^ea, monebit
te multo magis justitia, qui possides) Latino idiomate agitetur.

Aequum enim est ut quae sunt propriae Scholasticorum discep^ationes,
Scholasticorum more discuriantur. Quorsum autem Regina ac Domina Scientiarum
Theologia utatur lingua servili and vernacula? Quorsum loquela sua Populum
appellet, quae sensibus suis etiam literatissimorum captum transcendit? Quin
etiam hoc peregrinum idioma aut me a metu Crucis liberabit, quia sedi^ionis
accusationem (pene dixeram suspicionem) non patitur, aut saltem perducet ad
Crucem Christi, quae linguam Latinam non minus quam ipsam Hebraeam olim
sanctificavit. Ubi contemplari potero (proh dolor) jesum meum rursus Crucifixum
per Judaizantes Christianos; and Inscriptionem illam Hic est Rex Judaeorum, non
atramento sed sanguine delineatam ab iis qui dicentes Hic est, derident; dum
ostentant Christum, Crucifigunt. Hunc ego Regem, Hunc ego Caesarem Appello, qui
potest and seipsum and M^ indignum Peccatorem, salvum facere. Populum Appellari
in in hac cau^a, ab aliis, moleste fero; a me non Patior. Et proinde Intima^
omnium Veritates, exorica (ut it a dicam) dialecto disserendas tibi offero; Ne
vel Ego ad Faciendum Populum scripsisse videar, vel Tu ad Inficiendum; Ego ad
faciendum Populum, dum pro antiquo Religionis Exercitio atque Ritu disputo,
quae Populi est spiritualis Haereditas; Tu ad inficiendum Populum, dum
extemporaneam Colocynthidis farraginem, licite Ecclesiae obtrudi asseras in
Cultu Publico, Animo licet detestandi Schisma, and Apostasiam, Calamo tamen
Schismatica and Apostatica quaelibet Enthusiastarum figmenta defensuro; Utpote
quae ex hac spirituali sive Licentia sive Lascivia, sive Intemperantia sive
Insania (nescio enim quod dicam, nam and ipsi nesciunt quod dicant) tanquam ex
impurissimo font emanabunt.

Et jam Liturgiam Anglicanam (in meo Libello, (...)
Patris mei (...), gloriosissima quondam supellectile) p^ae oculis expansam
habes, quam ego prae oculis charum semper habui, and habere cupio. Expande
ulterius, introspice, imo intimius specta, nihil invenies quod Idolum aut menti
objiciat, aut oculis repraesentet; nisi forsan ipsa sculptura Literarum, pro
superstitione Babylonica reputanda sit; and illud, Non facies tibi Sculptile,
Attem Typographicam eliminare debuat e seculo, vetetque nos figuras and
imagines Literarum exarare: (Quod metuo brevi Homunciones a solo spiritu edocti
pro sua autoritate determinabunt.)

Hookerum itidem habes, mea manu notatum, tua indagine perlustrandum, Judicii
paene Divine, at Modestiae plusquam Humanae Hookerum, in cujus Judicio mill
Theologos, Scholasticos mill mill reperies; in cujus Modestia unum paene
Hominem desideres. Judicium ille suum Patribus nostris reliquit, O si and
modestiam nobis Filiis reliquisset, non tam praepropero studio scripturientium.
Theologastrorum Cacoethes dementati ^epuli frontes Impudentia, Linguas
blasphemia* Animos Apostasia obduxisset. Non tam Praepropera Audacia ipsi
Paties suos, Religionem Patriam, Deum Patrium, imo suum, imo semetipses
Abjecissent. Infandum s^clus, sed (ut a^^ Propheta Jeremias* cap. 5* v. 30,
31.) Res stupenda and horrenda fit in teria hac Prophet^e ipsi propheratum
salto, and sacerdotes dominatum exercent horum ope^a, and Populus meus ita
amant^ Inspiciamus Tremellium, Sacerdotes dominatum exercent horum ^pera. i^
Dominos agunt in Hereditatem D^mini (ait ille) ut dicitur 1* Pet 5. 3. ideque
Ministerio I seudoprophetarum, quos Sacerdotes ad conciliandam sibi Autoritatem
submittebant. Putasses Interpretem ipsum, non tantum* Propheram, Prophetasse de
nostris his^^ temporibus, quae ut: ultima, ita pessima sunt and vilissima
degeneris and malignantis seculi. Sacerdotes (privati, puta, sacerdote*)
Dominos agunt in Haereditatem Domini, i. in Cierum, ut lequitur S. Petrus, in
universos, ut loqui amant sancti Populates. Loquamur and nos cum vulgo, ut ut
sentiamus cum Apostolo and saplentibus, and dicamus, Dominos agunt in univers^m
Haereditatem Domini, aut certo certius Ageren, idque ministerio
Pseudoprophetatum quos ad conciliandam sibi autoritatem submittebant, nisi quod
Pseudoprophetae, qui a^^is poterunt ^ut^ritatem conciliare, non tantum
autoritatem sed etiam Dominium-sibimetips^^ and faciliu^ concilisre poterunt,
and melius conservare. Sed reveta utrique and Sacerdores and Pieudoprophetae
conspirant in Haereditatem Domini, acsi ^a^um staret, Populum Christianum
candenti zelo (ut Ulysses Polyphemum candenti vecte) occaecare.

Interea temporis delusum monstrum (nam and populus, Christianus lice^, est
monstrum horrendum inform, ingens, si lumen ademptum) docent passim eboare,
(...). O amici nemo me interficit dolo neque viribus. (nam and vim and do^os
adhibuerunt, quae sunt arma Schismaticorum, ut ^^eces and Lacrymas, quae sunt
Arma Christianorum, ex Ecclesia Christi amolitentur.) Ridente, i^idem
spirituali Ithaco, (qui multo magis (...), and mare terramque circuit quaerens
quem devoret.) quod non nomen suum, sed nomen Derad stupendam hanc fallaciam
adhibuerit. Adeo ut quum Ulysses dixerit apud Poetam, -- (...). Hostis ille
humani generis (and nostri puto nunc plusquam omnis humani generis) possit
verba ista sic mutare. (...). (...). 1.
Sed quo ferar mente and calamo? Videar enim non tam extra Comitatum Familia
mea obambulatoria, quam extra Comitatem Ferocia, non mea, decursoria brevi
peragraturus* si hac morositatis via diutius incedam. Sed idem ipse qui venit
pertare infirmitates nostras, noluit pati hanc Impietatem nostram. Idem ipse
cujus Verberibus nos sanati sumus, facto flagello e funiculis istos fortiter
verberavit, qui vendebant and emebant in domo Patris sui, Jo^ 2. Quum tamen
illi columbas and boves and oves vendebant, quae Deo accep^a erant in
sacrificiis: Nos autem serpents and aspidas and dracones in Domo Dei
venditamus. Unde qui illis ^^ellum construxit ex funiculis, certe nobis
construeret ex scorplonibus. Christi factum^^: exemplum^ mihi est, ita etiam
apologia. Lubens agnesco quod zelus Domus tuae devoravit me, ^oque lubentius,
Quod zelus meus devoravit Domum tuam. Zelus inquam meus, quia ipse maxima sum
pars eorum qu^s perstringo, ut nemo mihi jure succenseat, quod mihimet ipsi
displiceam in istac impierate (impieta^ autem isthaec est (...)) qua sibi alii
nimio nimis placent. Hinc est quod non i^a aegre ejectus e me^ ^entorio, inique
tamen fero Deum meum ejici e suo Tabernaculo. Indigne tulit Salvator meus Domum
Patris sui profanari, qui suam ipsius minime curavi^. Caeterum ut in causa Dei
ex ipso verbo (...); S^ ipse Verbum Deus lequendi mihi norma, qui debet esse
and ^^quendi and (...) finis. Sit ipse Lapis ^ngularis pro fundamento
Aedifici^, ne ista (...) tu jure Canonic^, prep^ie de me dici videatur,
Aedifici^, ne ista Catacir(...). Nullam au^em Voc^m emis^: Verbum (quantum
memini) (...) propositum nostrum, quam illam quae huic historiae de (...)
Marcus Evangelista, cap. 11. v. 17. Et docebat (...) est qui^ ^omus mea domus
Orationis vocabitur omnibus Gentibus? vos (...) c^m spelun^am latro^^^. Quae
verba mihi vide^ ^^^^nia fere quae ad exerci^^um cultus publici spectant in
recto ejusdem usu (...), in profane vel perverso ejusdem abusu (...)
audientibus inculcare. Sed mihi forsan vix licet dogmatice quicquam statuere,
nec in ista^ aetat^^ quae (...) doct^^nam non feret, quod dolendum; nec in hac
Veritate quae ad sanitatem and Doctrinae and Vitae plurimum conducit, quod and
pudendum and dolendum. Esto igitur, pro tuis menitis sceptice dicam omnia;
utque in defensione Religionis Eccl^siae Anglicanae eo modo progrediar, qu^a
^^^am evertendam process^^um, Quaerendo scilicet. Non dico Novam R^^igionem,
novum Christum, sed Quaerendo certe and investigando. Deus (...) avertat*
Inquisitio verbo tenus j^xta est, sed reipsa (inquis) long (...) si
Inquisitive loquar non definitive. Et quidem ipse Christus in hisce Verbis,
Quae^endi methodum mihi suggerit, dum ai^S, Nonne Scriptum est? Q^^m enim ille
per Interrogationes docere voluerit, quidni ego pet (...) velim?

Primum igitu^ Quaer^ us, Qui^ hi^ dicitur Domus Dei? An quilibet locus in
propatu^^^ (...) Domum. An quaelibe^ domus privata? a^ hoc nihil ad D^um. (...)
hominis, non Dei. An Templum deniqu^ (...) aliq^id ad domum Dei, sed nihil ad
omnes Gentes.

I^^que subinde quaer^.
Annon omnibus Gentibus necessarium sit erigere publica Oratoria ad cultum Dei?

Annon erecta, and conservare, and frequentare, and revereri.

Secundo quae^^^ur. (...) spectu dicitur Domus Orationis? an respectu Orationis
privat^^? at sic fidelium familiae, imo corpora sunt Domus orationis. An
respectu Orationis publicae? ita quidem videtur, propter vocem omnium Gentium.

Itaque subinde quaero.
An illa sit Oration publica, quae non est vox totius Gentis?

An vox totius Gentis dici possit, quae non habeat formam loquendi publicam?

Tertio quaeritur, Quo sensu dixit, Vocabitur (demus Orationis) omnibus
Gentibus? An quia lici^e possint Gentes (in Domo Dei) orare cum forma publica?
Hoc lentum nimis, nam cadem ratione possunt licite non orare cum for^a publi^
a. It^ que Domus Dei and vocabitur Domus Orationis (pura Publicae) and non
vocabitur: i. erit, and non erit, si Episcopi antiqui (Criticorum certe, licet
non Theologorum, facile Principis) observationem amplectamur. Nam ille ait,
(...) pro (...) saepe accipi, and instantiam facit in illis Junonis verbis apud
Homcrum, (...), proinde vocor tua uxor. (...)* i. sum. interpret E^stathio.

An potius quia necessario debeant Gentes, in Domo Dei, orare cum forma
publica? sic quidem videtur, non enim universale esse potest, quod non est
necessarium. At hec universale est, utpote quod omnibus Gentibus incumbat.

Itaque subinde quaero.
Annon omnibus Gentibus necessarium sit instituere formam Orationis publicae.

An forma Orationis publicae rite instituta possit omnino exterminari sine
scandalo and sacrilegio.

Nullus dubito quin multa alia ejusmodi sub hisce contineantur, quae aeque ac
proposita problemata semel discutientu^ statim se prodent. Multae sunt sive
dispurentur in Thesi de Liturgia stata in communi, sive in H^pothesi de
Liturgia Anglicana in particulari. Ego autem haec paucula, eadem paene
temeritate and incogitantia tibi proposul, qua alii nunc die^um suas
Precationes Deo effutiunt. Ut ut, ductum tuum sequuturus sum in su^utis de
Oratoriis and Oratione disputationibus, qui in ipia Oratione ut sequar, nondum
a me impetto. Etenim and Liturgiam in genere ad Religionem Christianam, and
Liturgiam hanc in specie ad exercitium ejusdem* Religionis in qualibet natione
Christiana esse necessariam, videtur posse colligi ex verbis Christi. Proinde
L^urgiam excommunicare a Communione Sanctorum, nihil aliud esse quam contrahere
reatum Scandali propter emnes Gentes quibus necessario sic orandum est; and
Sacrilegii, prop^e^ Domum Dei, quae est Domus Orationis.

Haec qualia quantula fuerint, utrumque nest^um diu exe^tcebun: in Charitate,
si tu promissam tacituraitatis fidem servaveris; in judicio, si violaveris. Me
enim Homines rapere poterunt ad Tribunal suum, ego te accusare potero ad
Tribunal Christi. Quorsum enim scribat Theologus, nisi ut in Foro Conscientiae
lis and commoveatur and dirimatur? Forum Civil res suas tracter, res hujus
mundi vanas and evanidas. Forum Conscientiae non descendit ad Carnalem Judicem,
sed spiritualem and ^xpecta^ and reformidat. Haec ego (Vir Ornatissime) aut
insomnium noctium vigilias, aut inquietarum dierum insomnia (nam somniare me
cogunt clamorque virum, clang^rque Penatum, quae nunc aures opplent, licet
dormire non sinant) Haec ego (inquam) aut insomnium noctium vigilias, aut
inquietarum dierum Insomnia praecipitanti and animo and calamo a me projeci.
(...) est quem vides Embryo, and maximam sui partem duarum nectium (sed parum
A^^ica^um) s^entio debet. Ego enim interdiu Scytham imitari coactus
Transferendo La^tes, (olim immobiles, unde nec sine strepitu (usque dum)
tanquam inviti, moventur.) Noctu non potui non contemplari felicitatem
Israelis, Qui in stabili demo Dei sui immotus habitat. Siquidem Beati qui
habitant in Demo tra Domine, in secula seculorum laudabunt te. Nec mirus Beati
qui non habitant in demo s^a, si ideo non habitant in domo sua quia in t^a
habitant. Ii enim and in seculo vere laudant, and in secula seculorum laudsbunt
te. Illud sibi opus reputantes; hoc, sibi reportantes mercedem operis Deus
faxit ut in mercede operis conveniamus, qui in ipso opere non c^nvenimus; ut in
beneficio ac felicitate Laudum communicemus qui in Officio ac Ministerio
Laudandi non communicamus. Id quod ex animo precatur qui ex animo est.

Tuus in Christo Frater (licet haud usq ad Aras) ED. HYDE.
Martii 15o 1649.
ACcepi non ita pridem abs te (vir egregie) post Literas Anglicanas primo
Martii ad me datas, alias 15to ejusdem mensis Latin exaratas, quae mihi
priorum memoriam refricuerunt, ansamque praesentem praebuerunt priores Anglicas
relegendi, and (quoad per varias occasiones licuit) utrasque accuratius
pensitandi. Post studiosam ambarum collationem subiit animum mirari, unde tanta
tamque repentina mentis tuae and styli (and non tantum ut tu vis, idiomatis aut
dialecti) immutatio. Nam

1. In Anglicis, Literarum commercium (quale ante habuimus) comperendinari
voluisti, donec in alium Comitatum te transtuleris, (ubi ^ec antipathia meorum,
nec sympathia tuorum amicorum, suspiciones in me, aut imputationes adversum te
ciere poterant,) and quae inter nos de temporalibus in ambiguo versantur
agitationes comp^^^^tur.

In Latinis autem (cum res and rations nostrae in eodem plane statu essent quo
prius) en quaeso tu quantum mutatus ab illo, qui ea nunc arripis and anticipas
quae in aliud tempus antea distuleras, and Saulum refers retrogradum, comitatem
cum ferocia commutando.

2. In Anglicis enim videbaris pro Liturgia Anglicana sedato animo (ut pium
Christianum and prudentem Theologum decuit) modestum Antagonistam agere; in
Latinis Romani potius pugilis pre Missali suo impetuose decertantis personam
geris. Nec tamen antea non eras zelotes Scraphicus, (quem a te titulum conaris
amoliri.) Saepius enim priusquam calamum ad scribendum arripu^sti, lingua
praefervida pro Rituali Anglico Anglice depugnasti. Neque veram rationem reddis
cur B^^aventura dicatur Doctor S^rap^^cus. Non enim (ut tu male ^ariolaris)
illud ei indebatur cog^omentum, quod alias Ecclesias, praecipue Graecam (lib.
1. Sent. did. 11.) castigaret, sed quod in devotionibus verba flammantia
proferre consueverat, ut refert Tritemius apud Anton. Possevin. Apparat. Sac.
Vol. 2. p. 232. and 233.

3. In Anglicis timide and circumspecte omnia profers, quae Magistratum
publicum qu^que ^edo atti^gunt. In Latinis temere and audacter venenata
spicula, (co^^umelias and calumnias atrocissimas) jacularis, quae nemo sani
cerebri alio (ex tua sententia) spectare sentiet, quam ut supremam hujus
nationis autoritatem con^odiant, and populo reddant despicabilem, si Anglice
(ut fama fert) perinde probre^e loquaris ac Latin scribis.

4. In Anglicis me non tantum adeo civiliter sed and honorifice (long supra
meritum meum fateor) excipis, ut pro Oraculo habeas, quod subinde consulas. In
Latinis, quasi scripturientem Theologastrum, and extemporancae (...) farragini^
assertorem vellicas? quae verba tam a^^arulenta sun^ ut colocynthidem omnino
saptant expuendam.

His and aliis (haud modic^ momenti (...)) ^aepius apud me reputatis, valde
dubious aninu per debt (...), eum ^^^ere omnino consultius esset, an
Responsionem ((...) possulabant Literae) adornare: qua ver^bar ne aut (...)
verbis quam natura and officium ferunt, aut lenioribus quam causa exigit, uti
coge^er. Ludov. Vives do Adol^sc. Institut p. 5^9.
E contra etiani si taccrem metuendum mihi erat, ne gloriandi occasionem tibi
darem, qui (qu^ntum ex dictis and dictatis tuis conjectare possum) eam avid^us
quam prudentius aucupatis, ^ristotle alone has performed more very near in all
parts of knowledge, then in anyone part thereof the whole world has done.
inaniter ossentando lingua^um perit^^m, quasi Anglice scribendo^ on pessis
ex^^e videri eruditus; cum Graeci, a quibus omnium disciplinarum fontes, may
arunt, materno sermon eas tradiderint discendas: and inter eos Aristoteles,
communi omnium suffragio and Hookeri judicio singulari, totius mundi
Philosophorum Imperator, Graece sua varia velumina evulgaverit: and Lutherus
Aphorismum suum de Linguis, cum comparatione inter Augustinum and Hieronymum,
Hooker de Eccl. Pol. l. 1. p. 13.
sic concludat: Non idio quisquam est vere sapiens (sic nec vere doctus) quia
Graecus est, Luther Tom. 1. ad Joh. Langium. fol. 52.
vel Hebraeus, quandoquidem B. Hieronymus, quinque linguis monoglossum
Augustinum non adaequavit.

Hinc ut and labes eluam quas calamus tuus (bile tirctus) iis aspersit, qui de
Religione and Republica be^e meriti sunt, deliberatum est mihi saepius, and
nunc stat sententia, in binis Literarum exemplaribus praenotatis, ea obelo meo
conflgere, quae animadversione mea and retractatione tua dignissima esse
judicavi: and hoc, hisce cancellis mihi circundatis.

1. De occasion and causis disseram, quas mutationi sermonis Anglici pro
Latino praetexis. 2. De modo tuo tractandi controversiam Liturgicam. 3. De
materia quae est 1. Parergon 2. Ad propositum in Literis tuis, praecipue
Latinis.

4. De fine and effectu hujusmodi concertationem secuturo.
De quibus quoties tibi quicquam objicio vel respondeo, lineis Literarum tuarum
(unde tua depromo verba) figuris Arithmeticis notabo.

I. De Occasion and causis, etc.
Primum ais ex compromisso fieri ut quae inter nos est opinionum discrepantia
Latino idiomate agitetur. Alucinaris, Domine; Nam, ut rem, seu potius reculam
istam, a primordio repetam, sic habet. 1649.
Vicessimo sexto die Februarii, cum tu Liturgiam encomiis supra modum pro more
tuo eveheres, ego monui ut quod affectu immodico, (uti rebar) assereres,
momentis rationum tentares astruere, id te facturum spondebas, sed Latino
idiomate, respondi statim, si formulam istam cultus pulici, adeo formosam esse
vendites, quasi nullibi lentiginosa aut naevina conspiciatur, and rationibus
fulcire nitereris, non posse (quod dixisti) sine insigni sacrilegio in Deum,
and gravi animorum periculo a Sacris eliminari, Anglice scribere^ne an Latin
me pro Parliamento (cui geminum illud crimen intentas) compariturum
hyperaspisten. Sed nunquam existimavi expedire (multo minus ex condicto statui)
ut quaestiones quae ad populi praxin spectant, de illorum haereditate
spirituali (ut tuis verbis utar) quorum conscientiis solutionibus consulendum,
ignoto popularibus idiomate ventilentur. Et eadem certe men's fuit eorum, qui
hanc Serram reciprocarunt long priusquam tu and ego litigare caepimus. Non
poslunt te latere libri de Disciplina and Liturgia polemici inter Doctorem
Whitgiftum and Magistrum Cartwrightum; inter hunc and Magistrum Hookerum; inter
Ministros Lincolnienses and Huttenum; inter Doctorem Mortonum, (tunc Cest
riensem postea Dunelmensem Episcopum) and Diaeceseos suae aliquot Ministros;
and inter Doctores Amesium and Burgesium: quibus accenseri possunt multi alii:
qui omnes istis controversiis agitandis linguam illam crediderunt aliis
commodiorem, quam tu consulto profiteris in hac nostra controversia declinare.

1. Quia (inquis) aequum est, ut quae sunt propriae Scholasticorum
disceptationes Scholasticorum more discutiantur.

2. Quia non est aequum, ut Regina and Domina Theologia utatur lingua servili
and vernacula.

3. Quia Christus in Cruce non minus sanctificavit Linguam Latinam, quam
Hebraeam.

4. Quia hoc peregrinum idioma liberabit te a metu crucis, i e seditionis
accusatione.

Quod ad primam causam attinet, docui antea, and ratione and exemplis
comprobavi dubia de Liturgia Anglicana non esse Scholasticorum propria
problemata, sed documenta potius, ubi resolvuntur, quae ad instructionem populi
summopere conducunt.

Secunda causa pla^e Pontificia est, quae, siquid omnino valeat, valet ad
arcendum Laicos (quo verbo mori loquendi potius quam proprio judicio morem
gero) a Sacrae Scripturae lectione, juxta Papae interdictum, sed contra Christi
edictum, Joh. 5. 39. and Apostoli Pauti ad Colossenses 3. 16. Et quare quaeso
in hac tua ratione per contemptum vocas cujusque Gentis linguam vulgarem
Servilem and vernaculam, etc. Certe, ante and post confusionem Babylonieam
lingui Hebraea in Veteri Testamento servis perinde ac Dominis Israelitis
materna fuit and communis: and nunc ipsi Judaeis Antichristianis, ubique
gentium degentibus, est erudita, and non sine disciplina tradita and edocta.
Number ideo Theologia minus dominabatur aut regnabat primaevis illis temporibus
Hebraicts literis conscripta and vocibus pronunciata quam s^quioribus post
dispersionem Judaeorum seculis, quia Hebraea lingua servis juxta ac dominis
vulgaris erat? ideoque secundum te, Servilis ac vernacula?

Tertia causa secundae est adeo cognata ut Papismi rancidum odorem spiret
cuibbet emunctae naris Protestanti. Nam ut prior contra Scripture versiones in
linguam cujusque Gentis propriam, sic haec pro Precibus Latinis, u^unque a
populo non intellectis, militat, impotentior licet, ut and pleraque omnia
Pontificiorum argumenta. At velim a te doceri, Domine, unde sit, and qualis
linguae Latinae sanctificatio. Christus, inquis, in cruce non minus
sanctificavit linguam Latinam quam Hebraeam. Esto, and hoc etiam, non magis
sanctificavit Hebraeam, quam Latinam, aequales ergo, quoad istam
sanctificationem, sunto: and inde sequetur, neutram esse sanctificatam, aeque
ac utramque: and si alterutra sancta lingua dici mereatur, erit non Latina sed
Hebraea; and illa sanctificatio non est a cruce Christi arcessenda, sed ab usu
illius linguae in colloquiis inter Deum and populum suum, ab Adamo ad Mosen,
and in scribendis sacrosanctis Dei Oraculis, a Mose ad Malschiam. Quod autem ad
sanctificationem ternionis istius linguarum attinet, ex inscriptione tituli
Crucis Christi Hebraice, Graece, ac Latin, Joh. 1920. Luc. 23. 38. Si ex
relatione ad Christum sanctitatem aliquam contraxerit, quidni and ipsa Crux,
cui Christi corpus affixum erat? Si and hoc, number existimas sanctius te de
patibulo pendentem, quam in lecto jacentem, moriturum? Consimilis quaestio
moveri potest de clavis manus and pedes Servatoris perforantibus, Nil obstat
quo minus aliquis sincera fide and recta intention, affectum and animum in
solum Christum intendens, labis Judae, and alia quae injuste Christum
tetigerunt, reverenter oseuletur. Gab.
de lancea latus ejus vulnerante, de corona spinea and flagello caput and
corpus Christi sanguine ipsius pretiosissimo cruentantibus. Nec minus apposite
quaeri potest de sputo in factem formosissimam projecto, and de manibus eorum
qui colaphos ei inflixerunt, number contactu violento sanctificationem aliquam
extuderint. Nec non de Judae labiis, number osculo proditorio aliquam virtutem ^
Christi gena elicuerint, unde and ipsa reverenter osculentur, ut Gabrieli
Vasquez Jesuitae comminisci placuit, and, quod est aeque stultum etsi specie
minus impium, Asinum cui Christus insidebat recte potuisse adwari: quod est
ejusdem cerebri febricitantis somnium. Vasqu. de Aderatione, l. 3. disp. 2. c.
6. number. 76. p. 504.


Ad quartam rationem respondeo, multo tutius potuisse te argumentis pro
Liturgia Anglice modeste dimicare, quam in eos quos teneris revereri tot
aculeata convitia projicere, Vasqu. ibid. p. 504. and 505.
quod in Latinis Literis affatim fecisti. Nam nonne Latin sciunt qui te
possunt ad civil Tribunal fistere and ad poenas maledictorum poscere? Haec de
occasion and causis quae te ab Anglico ad Latinum idioma transtulerunt.

II. De Doctoris modo tractandi controversiam Liturgicam.
Ad secundam partem transeo, quae est de modo tuo tractandi controversiam
Liturgicam. Et is certe neque Theologiam sapit, neque Logicam. Cum enim Literae
tuae Latinae 133 lineis constent, supra 100 impendis affectibus indulgendis,
reliquas fere omnes Socratice interrogando, vel dictatorie definiendo potius
quam dubitandi aut asserendi rations assignando. Diog. Laert. in vita Pyrrbox.
p. 675.
Dicis (non ut Pyrrhonius Zeteticus, sed ut dogmatistes Pythagoricus) Liturgiam
excommunicare a communione sanctorum, nihil aliud est quam scandali and
sacrilegii reatum contrahere. Sed dicis tantummodo, non probas. Nam Textus ex
Marci 11. ante a te citatus, non eo sponte tendit, sed tu per vim eum trahere
conaris, ut suo loco docebitur. Praeterea, quantum tota serie and contextu
orationis ab illa charitate desciveris, quam in front Literarum profitebaris,
and quae veritati indagandae plurimum conducit, patebit opinor ipsi tibi, ubi
deferbuit i^a, relegenti.

III. De Materia.
Tertium quod mihi proposui in Literis tuis, praecipue Latinis, perpendendum,
est Materia, and ea quidem multifaria, quam ego ante distinxi in parerga and ad
propositum spectantia.

I. De Parergis, quae sunt partim Devotiones Invectivae.

1. Devotiones tuae erga Crucem and Crucifixum, loco non suo fusae, ejusmodi
sunt, ut alius fortasse si eas legeret, te Franciscum, gregis fraterculorum sui
nominis fundatorem, in iis refer diceret, me tacente. 1. Invectivae, quae
sunt variae. 1. In Judaizantes Christianos, qui Jesum rursum, ut tu vis,
crucifigunt, and inscriptionem illam, Hic est Rex Judaeorum nou atramento sed
sanguine delineant, qui derident, and dum ostentant crucifigunt. Qui, quaeso,
sunt isti Judaizantes Christiani? ubi loci agunt, ostentant, derident, and
Christum crucifigunt? Causam Christi, seu potius Gentis Anglicanae jura, and
privilegia Parliamenti inter nostrates ad sanguinis Christiani effusionem
devenisse nemo est qui non novit, nemo bonus qui non luget. Sed utri parti
Bellatorum dabis inscriptionis istius ex atramento in cruorem transmutationem?
Poteram hic citra injuriam, ductum orationis tuae sequendo, te dilemmate
bicorni petere, and eo te adigere, ut vel in commilitium, cui omnia salva and
gloriosa cupiebas, tam diram accusationem (quod prae amore non velis) vel in
Parliamentarium Exercitum, (quod prae timore non audes) vibrasse pateat. Aug.
contra Petil. Donatist. lib. 1. c. 29. Tom. 7. par. 1. p. 104.
Sed malim, quemadmodum ait Augustinus, ut sine superbia de veritate
praesumer^, sic sine saevitta pro veritate certare.

2. Fervide inveheris in ejusmodi hujus aetatis Ministros, and non est
difficile divinare, te illos maxim intelligere, qui minime sustinent praeduro
quorundam Praelatorum jugo colla subdere; quibus competere putas gravissimam
Prophetae Jeremiae increpationem, Jer. 5. 30, 31. Res stupenda and horrenda fit
in terra has Prophetae ipsi prophetant falo, and sacerdotes dominatum exercent
horam opera, and populus meus ita amant; quid autem sacturi essetis tandem? ac
si (...) tantum iis liccat quibus ne (...) quidem licet. Quae verba (quantum
temporum diversa ratio patitur; Prophetas enim, quales Jeremias habuit sibi
(...) and aemulos, non habemus) facile fuerit in been multos insulatos
Praesules and little praelaturientes Sacellanos retorquere. Nonne enim Domini
Episcopi non in plebem modo sed in Clerum Domini (pro nihilo ducentes, (...))
(...) satagebant? Retrospice precor, revolve annos proxime ante inchoatum hoc
Parliamentum elapsos, quibus quam elato spiritu, quam targido fastu, quam
superciltoso and severo Dominatu quidam imperitarint alus, praecipue fratribus
compresbyteris, nec te clam est, neque quenquam alium esse potest, qui vel
ultimae Synodi Episcopalis canonem sextum pensiculatius perlegerit. Mihi certe
non semel observanti quam imperior^e quidam Episcopi superpelliceum Pastoribus
and Praelectoribus Theologicis ingererent, visi sunt Judices Judaicos albis
inequitantes asinis aemulari. Quorum (etsi praegravi) jugo non me sentio sic
exacerbatum ut d^ffitear multos fuisse olim imo and etiamnum superesse aliquot
Episcopos, ut eruditione and pietate, sic humilitate and mansuetudine
spectabiles. Qui si Minstri totos ipsorum arbitratui sese dederent, non ut
magistri rigidi aut Aegyptii exactores duriter tractarent, sed ut fratres comi
familiaritate excipere dignarentur. Hujusmodi nolim quenquam penna mea fieri
vel uno pilo nig^^orem.

Tertia Invectiva in Eccl^siam fertur: in qua causaris non licere tibi quicquam
dogmatice statuere, in istac aetate, quae sanam doctrinam non ferat, quod
pudendum, nec in hac Eccle^ia, quae nullam non sanam ferat, quod dolendum. Sed
haec, ut arena sine calce, minime cohaerent. Nam aequipollentiae regulis ita
respondet Antithesis, inter sanam doctrinam non ferat, and nullam non sanam
ferat, ut menti tuae omnino dissideat. Verba enim posteriora innuunt Ecclesiam,
nullam praeter sanam doctrinam probaturam, vel passuram. Sed de hoc, nisi
devius aequi, non diceres dolendum; cum dolendum esset potius de contrario,
scilicet si Ecclesia quamlibet non sanam seu falsam doctrinam ferret Et si
Ecclesiam nostram hujus adeo nefandi adiaphorismi ausus es incusare, ad
resipiscentiam and palinodiam vocandus es; cum aperte constet Magistratum and
Ministerium Anglicanum, sociatis consiliis and conatribus, erroribus,
haeresibus and blasphemiis obstitisse Et little certe maxim interest Religionis
puritatem ab omni doctrinae corruptricis labe (quoad poterunt) usquequaque
sartam tectam conservare. In Apologia pro magistratibus, p^aesertim pro summis,
in quos ni metus aliquatenus te cohiberet, genumum vehementissime defigeres,
duo te docebo. Alterum, ut a ce ^^ique similibus (iniquissimis supremi Senatus
aes^imatoribus) in ^aeresibus censendis and haereticis coercendis dissideant.
Alterum quoutque in occursum inverint, re tales qui sint in animarum perniciem
aut periculum amplius proficerent.

Quod ad prius spectat, vobis (non illis) haeresis est Episcoporum regimen
Tyrannicum, Liturgiae cuitum, (si non subjective, certe objective)
superstitiosum, and ^aeremonias cassas and evanidas aversari. Far non sanam
doctrinam vobis (non illis) est, non ferire Anathemate, aut custodiae non
tradere, and ad capitale Tribunal non rapere, circa sanam doctrinam haesitantes
Christianos; and errorem, aliqua necessitate cogente, ad tempus tolerare, (cum
salva pace publica adhuc tollere non possint) vobis (non illis) est perfide
Religionem prodere, and haeresi fancire patrocinium.

Sed alia men's est, alius animus eorum, (uti ex dictis and mox dicendis
constabit) qui Reipublicae sacrae and civili praesunt, nimirum nolunt, and
forte prae timore Dei non audent, in Religionis negotio, Anglicani sum:
Consistorii, sive Curiae supremae clerolaicae, aut Scoticani Presbyterii
Independentis (Independentis inquam, quatenus superiorem potestatem in terris
agnoscit nullam) asperitatem imitari, re veritati luculentius illustrandae and
ulterius propagandae januam clanderent, and pessulum ei obderent, aut in
conscientias (adhuc tenellas) pro cha^^tate fraterna autoritatem plane
despoticam exercere viderentur.

Posterius quod attinet, de Magistratibus probatur, eos non prob^re aut
quamlibet non sanam doctrinam far, ex variis edictis Parliamenti. Ut

1. Edicto de solenni Jejunio (die Jovis, Febr. 4. 1646) ad placandum Deum, ne
ob istam causam, (scilicet ob haereses and blasphemias, sceleratissima audacia
passim sparsas) ira Dei in Gentem-nostram exardesceret ad vindictam.

2. Edicto Maii 2o, 1648. in quo paena statuitur in illos qui haereticam
pravitatem profitentur.

3. Edicto de Jejunio Febr. 28. 1649. ob causam priori parilem.

4. Edicto de stricte inquirendo in librum blasphemum, dictum Volumen volans,
Angli^. Titul. erat. The flying Roll.
Zechar. 5. 2. and in alium adversus mutationem Sabbati Judaici in diem
Dominicum, and in libri autorem, and Typographum, and de omnibus exemplaribus
igni tradendis, and hoc nuperrime, non ante duas plane septimanas.

De Ministris idem patet ex multis and instantibus eorum Petitionibus,
Declarationibus, and Querimoniis, contra errores, haereses and blasphemias,
complurium subscriptionibus attestatis, and (per prelum) publici juris factis:
quibus ante sesquiannum Ecclesiae Scoticanae Presbyteris de Religione nostrate
ita satisfactum est, ut inde Parliamento suo consilium dederint, ne bellum
moverent aut arma capesserent, sub praetextu haereseos extirpandae, ad nostram
Angliam invadendam.

Quartam invectivam stringis in eos, qui serpents, aspides, and dracones in
domo Dei venditant, and ex co insers, si Christus. Joh. 2. 15. flagello e
funiculis facto fortiter verber^^verit eos qui (...) domo Patris sui columbas
and boves and oves vendebant, quae Deo accepta erant in sacrificiis, certe
nobis construxerit flagellum ex scorpionibus. Quos hic intelligas sacrilegos
caupones me quidem latet. Si (uti puto) haereticos concionatores, qui populo
lethifera opinionum portenta propinant, Responsionem habes in modo a me dictis:
quibus hoc tantum adjicio, Istiusmodi Africanis mercatoribus, qui semper
aliquid apportant monstri, Templorum valvas (quae tuo sensu magis mechanico
quam Theologico, domus Dei sunt) non communiter patere, sed ut plurimum occludi
and obserari. Quinetiam been norunt ipsi, qui serpents, aspides and dracones
alunt, antra, speluncas and latibula, potius iis quaerenda esse, quam loca
publico cultui dicata; qualia non modo fugiunt, sed and per improperium ex odio
and contemptu turritas aut pyramidatas domos vocitant. Steeple Houses.
Sub hoc titulo Invectivarum, multa alia ex eodem spineto desumpta tela
praeterire prudentius esse duxi quam repugnando retundere. Et revera me jam
caepit taedium tam fupervacanei laboris ulteri^s proferendi.

Quinta Invectiva, diversi generis est a praenotatis, quam, ut morbum [Noli me
tangere] intactam relinquerem, nisi in Literis non semel, and in colloquio
saepe and importune prodidisses.

Estque de amissis facultatibus, and ejectione e tentorio tuo, ac si omnino
praeter meritum tuum, imo and propter zelum domus Dei te domo tua Judices a
Parliamento designati exegissent! Beati, inquis, qui habitant in domo tua, ne^
minus beati qui non habitant in domo sua. si ideo non habitant in domo sua*
quia in demo tua habitant. Equibus verbis quis sanus sensus erui potest, qui
non in illorum autoritatem and integritatem irruat, and injustitiam
impietatemque iis nefariam exprobret, qui quantumvis invisi tibi sunt, adeo
justi audiunt ut nullo corruptorio mun^re, vel latum unguem, a semita justitiae
dimoveri possint: and adeo pii, ut nihil habeant antiquius quam ut domo Dei
fideles dispensatores praeficiant, qui dent samiliae fidei dimensum suum
tempore praestituto, Luc. 12. 42? Et cum me facias illorum in te latae
sententiae (adeoque ex tuo sensu, sceleris) participem, tui saltem, juris,
praeproperae prensationis reum: isthac calumnia in veritatemne, an in
charitatem turpius peccaveris ^aud facile suerit dijudicare. Dememinisse namque
non debes, and ut meus fert animus non potes, te saepius hanc mihi injuriam
stomachabunde objecisse in colloquiis nostris, and toties me meam innocentiam
sic asseruisse ut omnem istiusmodi suspicionem ex animo tuo penitus
averruncarem. Sed adhuc s^rdo me cecinisse video, cum identidem recurrat, quasi
sub cineribus (ut redaccendi posset) recondita non restincta. Fortasse non
tanti me facis ut tibi curae sit Apologiam meam meminisse. Sed, ut ut apud te
vilescat aestimatio mea, tua tamen interest judicium tuum errori, charitatem
livori aut invidiae nequaquam prodere. Quod ne deincepe fiat ^^mae tuae and
famae meae, hisce scriptis assertionibus ((...) D^um omniscium and omnipotentem
testem appoli^,) consultum capio: q^a^ ^^memoriae tuae subsidium, and ad
sapiendum inter ^os eo (...) dissidium ^n fu^urum, tibi cairographo meo
consignatas mitto. Verba enim avolant, voce prolata, dum Litera scripta manet.

Primum, assero and assevero, me nunquam, quod memini, de Rectoria B quicquam
cogitas^e, vel audivisse, multo minus ambivisse, priu^quam vacantis Ecclesiae
praefectura mihi ab illis proponebatur quorum maxim intererat curae animarum
vigilantissime prospicere.

2. Cum de^ega^orum judicum confessus, pro spoliatis Ministris Westmonast^rii
agentium, me tibi succenturiare designarent, non ante ab illis conclusum erat,
neque a me officium aut beneficium acceptum, quam a delegatis judicibus hujus
Comitatus (qui te mulctarunt Rectoria) certiores facti eramus per Testimonium
trina subscriptione illorum ratum, te fuisse 4to Septembris ante exauctoratum.

3. Octobris 13. Autoritate, quae summa rer^m potitur, missus and munitus, ad
curam pastoralem suscipiendam, huc me contuli, illud enim and Religio monebat,
and mandabant ii qui me tibi successorem dabant.

4. Ad omnem injuriae praetextum amoliendum adduxi mecum Decretum
Exauctorationis tuae Apographum, and Amanuensem ipsum, qui ex officio
transcripsit, ut siquid dubitationis de causae cognitione, discussione, aut
conclusione oriretur, ille, qui omnibus interfuit, responderet, and respondendo
tibi plene satisfaceret, qui (...) justissimo processu fuisse peracta
testabatur, idque ex Decreto pro q^nta part, partim nunc agnoscis. Qualiter
antem (...) dum contradicenti in os tibi obstitir, M. C. Delegatorum Com. Berk.
Commentariens.
^^e Sabb. (...) a te habitam, exceperis, convenit (...) ^entiam recorderis,
and ut ille ad charitatem and indulge (...).

5. Cum tu, per Petition^^ (...) Westmonasterienses Delegatos, moveres ut su^^
de and pro me Decretum, per alquot dies suspenderent, praetensa spe judices
Redingi sedentes Causam recognituros, and sententiam suam in te latem
rescissuros, me istius sollicitationis prorsus inscio, ideoque in contrarium
nihil moliente, Responsum ab amico, uti scribis, honorando accepisti, id nullo
modo ab iis concessum iri.

6. Hoc nuncio accepto per. Literas a me petiisti (and ego assensum statim
praebui) in aedibus Rectoriae commorandi spatium ad 25 Martii, aut primum
Aprilis. Et in iis professus es, quandoquidem tibi Beneficio frui non liceret
mihi libentius te ^^ssurum quam alii cuiquam. Veruntamen alias ita te geris,
quasi ludum exerceres tuo nomini cognatum, Apodidrascindam, Anglice, Hide and
Se^k. Junius autem sic describ^t. Apo^idrascinda pu^ritae lu^us quo obstrictis
ei qui in medio sedet oculis caeteri in latebras sese abdunt. Mox d^^o signo
dum ille latentes vestigat, ii ad sedem ejus tanquam ad metam recipientes se
praevertere illum saiagunt. Jun Nomenclat. de lusor. p. 218.
alcernatim occultando quod prodideras, and prodendo quod occultaveras. Nam tum
ante tum ex eo tempore, conquestus es meam qua polleo apud Parliamentum gratiam
te jure tuo and facultatibus spoliasse, aut jam spoliato spem restituendi omnem
praecidisse; contra quam vel expectabas vel metuebas si alii cuipiam pastori
populum de Br. concredidissent. Putabas enim, ut ex variis tuis dictis
intellexi, adversariorum erga te animos emollitos, aut adversum te eorum
potestatem euervatam, and judicum favorem tibi conciliandum fore, si cum alio
athleta tibi-colluctandum esset: cum luculentissime mihi constet (and
quandocunque cupis testatissimum tibi faciam) nisi ego ante 16^m Octobris huc
appulissem, eodem ipso die redintegratam fuisse in te querelam coram iis
judicibus qui sententiis ferendis and fi^mandis robora refer malunt quam
arundines: quod utique scivisses infeliciter si contigisset novato examine
experiri, seu (ut verbo utar quod eventui magis congruat) periclitari. At si,
ex sententia tua recognitio causae concederetur, non ilico voti compos fieres,
nisi and Deleg^ti Westmonasterienses rescissionem sui ordinis definitivi
recensioni deliberativae (iterum fortasse recensendae) sic accommodassent ut
suae autoritati prudentiae and constantiae non constarent; quod tibi, (i
rationem non affectum consulas) non erat vel expectandum vel expetendum: cum
quod multo minus est and tempestivius quam deinceps fieri potuit, ubi ab amicis
tui gratia petebatur, pernegarint: tempestivius inquam multo tum quam
impraesentiarum, quia mihi chirographo and facto Rectoriae possessionem
(undecim legis titulos sive puncta, ut paraemia censet) tradidisti: and ego
cautione sub gravi multa teneor grandem pecuniae sulmmam pro bonis, valde care
divenditis, tibi die praefinito pendere.

Coronidis loco hoc unum ex ante dictis consectarium addam, viz. me nullam tibi
injuriam intulisse, illum occupando (non aucupando) locum quem possidere
diutius non potuisti: quia superior potestas quae te officio and beneficio
privavit, (quantillicunque tu facis) de autoritate liberate, bonis, fundis,
vitis, omnium utriusque regni Angliae and Hiberniae subditorum decernit, in me
utrumque contulit. Utrumque inquam, idque summa aequitate, sive populus
spectetur sive minister. Quod ad populum, Servator Christus, Marc. 6. 34.
Commiseratione intima commotus est super iis qui erant ut oves non habentes
pastores. Ergo cum tibi non permissum sit docere populum, pietatis and
charitatis erat eos aliis docendos tradere. Et quod ad Ministrum, dignus est
operarius mercede sua, Luc. 10. 7. inquit idem summus and solus doctor
infallibilis. Nota, mercede sua, qua operarius est, ne dicas mercede tua, qui
non operaris. Proinde dato sed non concesso, aliquid injustum in hoc negotio
gestum esse, hoc equidem esset, mihi laboranti quintam decidi partem fructuum,
and tibi, tanquam Pharaoni non laboranti, Genesis 47. 24, 26. eandem assignari.
Sed instas te Rectorem hujus Ecclesiae etiamnum esse, me autem Curionem tibi
suffectum and annuo ducentarum librarum censu a te donatum. Sic qui tibi
admodum favebat ex tuo ipsius ore in prandio funebri ante paucos dies prodidit.
Respondeo, Si istius tituli (Rectoris scilicet typhus arrideat, tituli sine re,
mihi quidem non displicebit, quandoquidem

1. Multi sunt Reges mere titulares, qui dominio potiri nunquam expectant quod
titulo sibi quotidie vendicant.

2. Quia adeo benignum habeo Dominum qui domo discedit sua ut mihi de idoneo
habitaculo accommodet, and adeo munificum ut amplissimum salarium laboris (si
non verborum pleonasmo magis quam revera, quod verendum est) largiatur.

3. Quia eo humilitatis se demisit, ut coccinatus Doctor cum sit, and linguarum
peritia (quam in Literis ostentat) multis antiquorum Patrum eruditior, non
dedignetur sub pullato Presbytero Curione suo Curionem agere; quod superiore
septimana and alias dixit, etsi mihi soli, sine arbitris.

Hisce innocentiae meae and calumniae tuae liquidissimis indiciis (aliis, quae
Anglica tua petulentia importuna and petulca magis quam ut ferri debeat,
Anglice fortassis extorquebit, in aliam occasionem reservatis) Parerga
dimittam. De quibus jam satis, imo multo nimis nisi tibi, cujus vestigiis mihi
erat insistendum, long nimium in iis expatiari libuisset.

II. De Materia Causae conjunctiore.
1. De vituperio tuo Precum conceptarum. 2. De Hookeri laud. 3. De laud
Liturgiae.

Jam ad ea quae sunt Causae affiniora, gradu quamlibet diverso, descendam.
Quaedam enim eminus eam aspiciunt, quaedam cominus. Prioris generis sunt 1.
Vituperium Enthusiasmi, seu extemporaneae colocynthidis (ut vocas) in Precibus
fundendis. 2. Laus Hookeri, totius aeconomiae caeremoniarum assertoris
studiosissimi. 3. Ipsius Liturgiae Anglicanae encomium.

Quod ad Primum attinet: videris dicterium illud acerbum in Preces conceptas,
nulli verborum formulae astrictas, de quibus inter nos est discrepans opinio,
sic intorquere, quasi nihil interesset inter formulae istius verborum
servitutem and enthusiasmum, quem satis catachrestice, extemporaneae vocas
colocynthidis farraginem. Nam colocynthis hujusmodi res est, farrago plurium
and diversorum, praecipue granorum frumenti, compositio aut mistura. Et illud
sancti Prophetae praxis religiosa probat, Cor meum bonam materiam meditatur,
and lingua mea est graphium expediti scriptoris, Psalm. 45. 1. Verbaque poe^ae
and prophetae ethnici (nam tales eodem titulo nonnunquam insigniuntur, Horat.
de Art. Poetic.
Tit. 1. 12.) recta ratio dictat, Verbaque praevi am r^m non invita sequentur,
non minus precibus ad Deum quam concionibus ad populum competere. Et de
Enthusiasmo, utcunque sint qui immediatum and sine omni cogitatione praevia
praesentaneum Spiritus afflatum jactent quem non habent: quos Sapiens assimilat
nubibus and ventis sine pluvia, Prove. 25. 14. velim tamen ut ne superciliose
nimis de Precibus conceptis praecipites sententiam, ne forte contumeliose
adeoque periculose impingas in prophetiam de Spiritus effusione inter orandum
spiritubus nostris adminiculo, Zich. 12. 10. Joel 2. 28. Act. 2 14. Rom 8. 26.

2. Hookerum effusionis laudibus sic evehis. Habes Hookerum judicii paene
divini and modestiae plusquam humanae, in cujus judi i^ mill Theoleges, mill
mill Scholastices reperies. Judicium ille suum patribus nostris reliquit: O si
and modestiam nobis filiis reliquissit. Si Hookerus-tanti aestimandus sit, ob
nihil fere aliud quam quod de and pro Regimine Ecclesiae and Liturgia scripsit,
tibi quidem praesti^isset hac controversia omnino supersedere and me ad illum
ablegare informandum quam hoc tibi and mihi negotium tam inutiliter facessere.
Sed ignoscas mihi, Domine Doctor, si phantasiam tuam de judicio Hookeri non
agnoscam. Et fortesse tua tam immodica de illo praedicatio sic excipietur ut
meiosis de illo tuae auxesi par, quasi lege talionis, referatur: secundum illud
Solomonis, Qui benedicit amico suo voce magna mare surgendo maledicto
imputabitur ei, Pro. 27. 14. Ego quidem perlectis ejus quinque libris politiae
Ecclesiasticae cum aliis opusculis, and accurate notatis, ante annos viginti,
existimavi Autorem virum doctum, disertum, Richard Hooker, a Divine to be imi
ated for his modesty, temperance, meekness, and other virtues: and famous for
his manifold commendation in learning, as his Books of Ecclesiastical Polity
set forth in English, and most worthy to be turned into Latin, may a^undantly
restifie. So Camd. Hist. of Queen Elisab. Ann. 1599. and 1600. p. 514.
and modestum. Nec invidebo illi Camdeni ercomium, nec gravabor ermarginalem
sedem assignare, (etiamsi sint qui exuberantiam in illius verbis observert
minime probandam) ex tertia editione Anglica, utpote omnibus aliis
locupletiore. Attamen hoc inter legendum me saepius male habuit quod multoties
pro nervis and lacertis sive confirmationis causae suae sive confutationis
alienae verborum phaleras and sententiarum apophoreta lectoribus proponat, and
quod aliquando profiteatur se nolle rationibus ab adversario adductis
respondere. Dr Mor^^n.
Est and aliud quod in illo causatus est vir ob varia and perdocta ipsius
dictata Anglica and Latina typis mandata apud exteros juxta and nostrates
celebris, scil. nimis operosa and circumducta illius est obscuritas plerisque
in locis, quam affectatam ideoque putidiusculam putabat; quamque adeo offense
tulit ut non potuerit suae patientiae imperare aut a genio suo impetrare ut vel
primum Ecclesiasticae Politiae librum perlegere sustireret: qu^m hac censui a
perstrictum subiracunde seposuit, Si non vis intelligi debes negligi. Idem
vitium and multa alia in illo autore nigro carbone notantur ab aliis,
praesertim a quibusdam Protestantibus generosis in Anglicis Literis ad ipsum
Hookerum adhuc viventem datis, Your books be so long and tedious, as we verily
think the like hard to be found, fair differing from the holy Scripture, and
nothing after the frame of the Writings of the Reverend and Learned Writers o^
our Church. Your I refaces and Disc^urses before you come to the question, are
so long and mingled with all kind of matters, that we may ask whether your
m^aning be not to show your self some extraordinary Rabbi, or some great
Pythagoras, that injoin your Schol^rs, or your adversaries to five years
silence before they can be perfect in your meaning. So in an English Letter of
certain Gentlemen directed to Mr Hooker, and printed Ann. 1599. p. 44.
quibus dum Dr Coivellus pro libris Hookeri se vindicem opposuit non ita
seliciter eo functus est officio ut non suam a stimationem magis laeserit quam
illius est opitulatus. Sed haec misla facio, cum mihi non sit cordi raevis
doctorum immorari, and tibi forte cordolio fuerit refricare memoriam eorum quae
tuae de Hookero ce^sioni sic ex diametro repugnant. Hec autem non esse
omittendum, sed and dicendum and pressius in te urgendum judico, Si modestiam
Hookeri ita suspiciendam ducis, quare quaeso tam segniter and tot parasangis
illum a tergo sequeris sine ulla aemulatione aut imitatione illius virtutis
quem sic encomiis effers? quam immodeste abs te dictum est, mill Theologos
mill mill ^^holesticos in illo reperiri! Number tu tot Theologos, tot
Schola^^icos legisti, and tam accurate ad comparationis trutinam exegisti ut
possis sine arrogantia insigni talem sententiam far? Pra^terca quam long
abes ab illius modestia quem ita luxuriose laudas, cum in unis tuis Literis
Latinis plura profuderis maledicta in eos quos pro adversariis habes quam
Hookerus in qui^que suis libris praenotatis! I desire to have no gall in my
ink, and I hope to find no gall in yours.
q^^bus quantum ab ea lege cha^itatis and candoris declinaveris quam inter nos
in Literis materno idiomate dictatis sanc^^^ cupiebas, aut cupere fingebas,
tuum erit has cum illis conserendo verecunde recensere.

De Liturgia Anglicana.
3. Liturgiam Anglicaram cumula^e laudas tum in Anglicis Literis tum in
Latinis. In Anglicis, ais Liturgiam Anglicanam maxim conducere ad gloriam Dei
and populi salutare ^onum promovendum non modo nostratium sed and Protestantium
omnium consensu. Deinde dicis fuisse multis annis Ecclesiae Anglican^e stolam
seu pallam praecipuam ad ornamentum Ecclesiis reformatis and ad distinctionem
earum a non-reformatis. In Latinis vocas codicem Liturgicum (mihi a te
commodatum) Patris tui quondam gloriosissimam supellectilem, quam prae oculis
te charam habuisse semper and habitarum profiteris. Et proximis verbis me mones
ut expandam ulterius, introspiciam, and intimius spectem nihil me inventurum
polliceris quod idolum aut menti objiciat aut oculis repraesentet, nisi forsan
ipsa sculptura literarum pro superstitiont Babylonica reputanda sit, and illud,
Non facies tibi sculptile artem Typographicam eliminare debet. In his verbis
quam multa sunt quae censoriam virgam justissime merentur.

1. Quod dicis istam cultus divini formam (prae aliis) finibus praecipuis Dei
gloriae and populi salutari bono inservire: cujus contrarium solidissimis
argumentis and luculentissimis exemplis alias evictum iri in me recipis,
quandoquidem nequeunt in hujus loci angustias sine notabili veritatis
praejudicio coarctari.

2. Quia hoc ex consensu omnium Protestantium in communi asseris: quod nunquam
legitimis testimoniis probatum dabis, cum nequeas opinor exemplum vel unius
Ecclesiae reformatae extra nostram Anglicam and Hyberniam (Ecclesia profugorum
ex Anglia tempore persecutionis Marianae excepta) proferre, quae juxta illud
praescriptum Deum public coluerit: quod proculdubio fecissent si tanti, ut tu
refers, Liturgiam Anglicanam aestimassent.

3. Ubi Liturgiam stolam vel pallam ornamentum vocas Ecclesiarum reformatarum
and distinctionem earum ab Ecclesiis non-reformatis, duriuscula sane catachresi
uteris: cum stola seu palla sit indumentum personale superpelliceo and epomidi
potius quam Liturgiae (mere reali) applicandum.

4. Commonitorium de expandendo, introspiciendo, intimius spectando Liturgiam
importune and inopportune mihi obtrudis, tanquam adhuc id mihi faciendum esset
quod fortasse antequam tu ex ephebis excessist^ and dudum feci saepius and
forsitan intimius attentius and accuratius, quam tu qui formam istam deperis,
i.e. ut Lexicographi exponunt, perdite amas and quasi ad periculum pereundi.

5. Quod eam ab omni periculo Idololatriae vindicare conaris hac ratione, quia
nullum Idolum menti objicit aut oculis repraesentat, perinde est ac si sol and
luna and stellae non fuerint Idola gentium, Angeli and Sancti Idola Papistarum
quia neque menti objiciunt neque oculis Idolum repraesentant. Consule quaeso B.
Apostolum Paulum, ubi docet Idolum nihil esse in mundo, 1 Cor. 8. 4. and ex eo
disce Idolum nihil esse quod Idololatriae reatum habet extra mentem hominis
cujus merum est figmentum: ideoque si a scripto codice aut sculpta effigy
solis and in Idolum transeat, peccatum non est in scriptura aut sculptura, sed
in iis qui non honorant tantum sed etiam adorant, cujus tu culpae mihi videris
arguendus sicut alter Micha Judic. 18. 24. eos queribunde prosequens, qui Deos,
quos ipse fecit, abstulerant. Dicis enim inique te far Deum tuum ejicie suo
Tabernaculo: ex quibus verbis cum antecedentibus and consequentibus rite
collatis promptum est colligere Liturgiam Anglicanam tibi Deum aut te
Parliamento (...) esse. Sic Graecus Textus haber, 2 Timothy 3. 3. quem Latinus
reddit per calumniatorem. Tibi Deus est, si Deum dicis ejectum fuisse quando
ejiciebatur Liturgia. Tu illis calumniator es, si, ut verba sonant,
perditissimae apostasiae a Deo and amolitionis omnis Religionis e Templo crimen
illis inferas. Quanto cautius moderatius in Anglicis Literis ea de re
scripseris recognosce: To lay the Liturgy aside is one thing, to revile it
another; that a godly Hezekiah may do, if he think it a Nehushtan: but this
befits only a Rabsh^keh: that may be out of obedience, this can be only out of
pe^vishness, or some worse principle.
quod tu margin notatum probas hoc consuluit Synodus Parlamento, ut in
Praefatione Directorii clare constat: quod improbas nec fratres in Synodum
coacti fecimus, neque ego feci aut facturus sum unquam. Possunt ex tua
sententia citra culpam defectus and errata Liturgiae modeste declarari: quod
ego facere institui, illorum praecipue causa qui sic adamant ut omnem cultum
publicum absque illa confidenter juxta ac impotenter damnent: quasi illa demta
nihil aliud restaret quo Deus possit honorari, Calv Institut. l. 2 c. 8. 9. 29.
quod de violatione Sabbati celeberrimus Ecclesiae Genevensis doctor and pastor
pie and pathetice pronunciavit. Sed in ista tua concessione sentire viderls
(quod mihi verum non videtur) Hezekiam scil. serpentem aeneum contudisse quia
Nehushtan erat: cum illud secerit, ut apertissime patet ex contextu, quia usque
ad dies illos Israelitae adolebant ei, 2 R^g. 18. 4. non quia Nehushtan: Nam
illud verbum Nehushtan materiam aeneam significat ex qua conflatus erat ab
initio: and Rex pius etsi sic vocavit quia tunc temporis nihil erat nisi
Nehushtan, i e. aenea serpentis imago, omni virtute salvifica (quam antea
relatione ad Christum habuit, Number. 21. 9 Joh. 3. 14.) spoliata, ideo tamen
comminuebat quia majestatem Dei minuebat, Idololatris thus ei adolentibus, quod
Deo soli debuit offerri.

His quae a te confusim in Literis tuis fundebantur ad methodum a me redactis
and jam, prout merebantur, expensis and responsis, tandem ad reliqua deveniam:
quae duplici nomine mihi gratius obveniunt. Primo quia sunt causae magis
homogenea. 2. Quia brevitate sua prolixitatem parergorum aliqua ex part
compensabunt.

Haec ad duo capita revocabo: alterum est Testimonium Scripturae, alterum
argumentum artificiale ex eo deductum. Testimonium Scripturae pro Liturgia
Anglicana profers ex Marci 11. 14. ubi Christus severam objurgationem in
vendentes and ementes in Templo stringit, his verbis, Nonne scriptum est, domus
mea domus orationis vocabitur omnibus gentibus? vos autem fecistis speluncam
latronum: quibus consona sunt quae habentur Matthew. 21. 3. Luc. 19 46. Isaiae
56. 7. Jerem. 17. 11. Caeterum ex verbis Christi secundum Marcum extorques
verius quam elicis 14. quaesita, quorum pleraque sunt nodi in scirpo a te
astricti, quibus commode aptari possu^t verba Ciceronis, Cicer. de natura
Deorum, l. 3. p. 243.
Rem mea sententia minime dubiam argumentando (seu potus quaerendo) dubiam
facis. Ex istis quatuordecim duo tantum sunt eaque postrema, quae non ita long
petita nec a causa aliena, Responsione (sed ea quidem brevissima) dignabor, hac
tamen praemissa praemonitione. Cum ex Literarum tuarum Anglicarum ac Latialium
collatione compertum habeam, in his rationis tuae ductum verbis and phrasibus
(undecunque corrasis) mancipari; in illis verba potius rationi subservire: in
his te iracundiae aestu abripi and in devia and praecipitia ferri; in illis
mente sedatiore duci, ideoque magis caute prudenterque procedere: and cum
superius rationibus and exemplis comprobaverim multo convenientius and
fructuosius hanc de Anglica Liturgia controversiam Anglice quam Latin
disceptari posse: Institutum esse meum profiteor meas parts congruenter agere
tam in oppugnanda superstitione, vel servitute potius, istius Liturgicae
precandi formulae, quam in pietate and liberate precum conceptarum, quas tu
sannis plane Lucianicis excipere soles, propugnandis. E duobus istis quaesitis
(reliquis 12. in alium locum sive censendis sive respondendis commodiorem,
rejectis) alterum, mihique prius, est

Annon omnibus gentibus necessarium sit instituere formam orationis publicae?
Respondeo

Si de omnibus gentibus omni tempore in quaesito quaeras, necessarium esse
nego, qui enim materiam habet substratam, quemadmodum in directorio exhibetur,
si habilis and idoneus sit Minister ad ministerium Evangelicum obeundum, formam
ei addere, haud difficile fuerit: ut in concionibus formandis, quarum materiam
non formam ex sacra Scriptura depromere debent and solent concionatores
orthodoxi omnes: qui tenentur precationi aeque ac praedicationi sese jugiter
dedere, quemadmodum Apostoli in concilium cum multitudine discipulorum
congregati sanciebant, Act. 6. 2, 4. ideoque non est necessarium ut qui ad
ministerium Spiritus Evangelice vocantur and ad illud officium been gerendum
and exequendum dotibus a Deo instruuntur orando magis quam concionando and
perorando ad verborum fascias and serperastra redigantur.

Alterum Quaesitum est, An forma Orationis publicae rite instituta possit
omnino exterminari fine scandale and sacrilegio?

Huic ipse tu respondes postea Aristotelice definiendo quod Socratice prae te
tulisti tantum quaerendo indagare. Sic enim exerte concludis argumentum ex
Christi verbis, quod alterum est e duobus quibus tibi a me respondendum esse
duxi and dixi. Proinde, inquis, Liturgiam excommunicare ex communione Sanctorum
nihil aliud est quam contrahere reatum scandali propter omnes gentes quibus
necessario sic orandum est, and sacrilegii propter domum Dei quae est domus
Orationis, Respondeo

1. Ubi quaeris de forma orationis publicae rite instituta praesupponis, quod
ego quidem non concedam, Liturgiam Anglicanam sic fuisse institutam,

2. Si pro temporum ratione and necessitate rite fuisset instituta, non
continuo sequitur r^e fuisse observatam, multo minus perpetuo observandam.
Camd. Histor. Elisab. Regin. l. 1. Ann. 1559. p. 30.
Nam in prima Reforma^ione, ut commemorat Camdenus, ob inopiam Doctorum
Protestantium multi Mechanici, non minus Literarum ^udes quam crassissimi
Pontificii sacrificuli, Beneficiis, Dignitatibus, and Praebendis donati erant,
Hieronym. ad Demetriad. tom. 1. p. 71.
and ab officina ad animarum curam vocati: in quos Hieronymi censura stringi
potuit: Erant prius imperitorum Magistri quam doctorum discipuli: quorum
ignorantiae non Liturgia tantum sed and Homiliis consultum erat, materia and
verbis aliunde suppeditatis quae proprio Mart ipsi non poterant exhibere, sive
populo ad Deum prece^ fundendae essent, sive a Deo ad populum verbum ipsius
esset annunciandum. Number ideo convenit aetate nostra, Doctorum orthodoxorum
copia beatiore, ejusmodi caecis ducibus gregem Domini ducendum, and adeo mutis
magistris docendum committere, and ut Homiliis injunctis conciones cedere
cogerentur? quod idem esset ac si validi and vegeti grahis, cum infirmis and
mancis, uti tenerentur.

3. Quando Liturgia Anglicana, ut publici cultus forma esset primum
decernebatur, The King excepted, urging and pressing the words of the book,
that said they could not but intend a permission and suffering of women to
baptize. Here the Bish. of Worcester said, that indeed the words are doubtful
because otherwise perhaps the book would not have passed in the Parl. and for
this he cited the testimony of my Lord Archbishop of York. So in the sum of
the Conference at Hampton Court. p. 4, 15.
talis erat non qualem optabant optimi, sed potius qualem admittebant pessimi
eorum quibus, in Parlamento confidentibus, vota definitiva competebant: in quo
plurimi erant qui veteris superstitionis fermento adhuc inficiebantur: quorum
five infirmitati sive pervicaciae partim me^u partim astu mos gerebatur: quod
non obscure innuitur in colloquio Aula Regia Hamptoniensi habito, Anno 1603.

4. Ubi in conclusione Pyrrhonistae personam exuis and Peripatetici induis
audacter inferendo and asserendo Liturgiam excommunicare e communione
Sanctorum, etc. Vide quam multa pecces.

1. In eo quod Liturgiam a communione Sanctorum excommunicari statuis: quasi
sanctiores essent ii, qui superstitione occaecati communionem istius cultus,
omni alio, ac si pannus esset menstruus, spreto, mordicus nituntur retinere,
quam alii qui puriorem and pleniorem reformationem suspirantes eam aversantur.

2. Quia dicis omnibus gentibus necessariam esse istam Liturgiam, quam
excommunicatam quereris: cum maxima pars gentium Christianarum non agnovit, imo
ne novit quidem. Et sicut Symbolorum Fidei (quoad confessionis formam) fuit and
adhuc est copiosa varietas, Perkins. Vol. 2. p. 585.
quam notat Perkinsus in sua Demonstratione Problematis and alibi dinumerat
supra 60 Symbola: sic Liturgiarum est adeo numerosa diversitas ut ad tria satis
grandia volumina accreverint, Perk. Vol. 2. p. 263.
edita Duaci apud Bellerum, Anno 1605. Et in nostra Anglia quando illi ad
clavum Ecclesiae sedebant qui maxim unitate fidei and cultus gloriebantur,
diversae erant precandi formulae: scil. Sarisburiensis, Herefordensis,
Bangorensis, Eboracensis, Lincolniensis; tot enim recensentur in Praefatione
Precum ab Edvardo sexto editarum. Anno 1549.

3. Quia eos scandali reos arguit qui Liturgiam istam ab Ecclesia amoverunt:
cum si scandalum omnino sit non est certe datum ab iis sed ab aliis acceptum,
qui eam ut Idolum potius quam per eam Dominum colere consueverunt. Et si
melioris parti: potius quam majoris ratio sit habenda, dici verius potest
auferri quam dari scandalum, istud Eridis pomum e Templo ejiciendo. Et revera
quidam qui ex officio tenebantur Liturgiae illius aestimationem inviolatam
quoad poterant tueri, vi veritatis tandem victi, fassi sunt nunquam cum ista
formula communium Precum Ecclesiae communem pacem coalituram: quod mihi ante
annos duodecim contra Liturgiam sicut nunc disputanti, non dubitavit agnoscere
Dr Edmundus Mainwaring, vir doctus and ingenuus, Cestriensium Cancellariorum
ultimus.

4. Quia gravissimum Sacrilegii crimen Reformatoribus Ecclesiae, insigni tua
temeritate impactum, quatuor tantum verbis, Domus mea Domus orationis,
plenissime a reprobatum reris: quod sine dilucida and nervosa confirmatione
objicere non debuisti. Et, ut tecum tuo more agam Socratice s^scit^^do, nonne
Liturgia dictatum est humanum? and number eodem loco erit apud nos quo eloquia
divina, quae sunt infallibilia? nonne in 39 Articulis fidei unus est, viz.
vicesimus primus, qui docet generalia Concilia errare posse, imo and aliquando
errasse in rebus ad Deum spectantibus? quidni de illis Theologis idem dici
possit, qui infra Concilium nationale aut provinciale constituti, Liturgiam
composuerunt Anglicanam?

Mihi certe compertissimum est and illos nonnunquam errasse, imo and in hoc
opere, quo de inter nos praesens controversia vertitur, emendanda admisisse.
Proinde Possessio quam in Ecclesia obtinuit, licet plurium annorum
praescriptione confirmata, ad eam orandi formulam perpetuo stabiliendum parum
valet, Tertull. de veland. virg. tom. 2. p. 57.
si justae exceptioni sit obnoxia. Nam ut Tertullianus statuit, Quicquid
adversum veritatem sapit id haeresis est, etiam vetus consuetudo. Et si tibi
sacrilegi fint omnes qui quippiam tollunt quo Ecclesia donabatur, quid
existimas de Rege Jacobo, veterem Bibliorum Sacrorum versionem cum
Annotationibus Genevensibus auferente? aut de Rege Carolo, Psalmos metrice a
Patre suo compositos, cantandos Ecclesiae commendante? qui si quemadmodum
proposuit obtinuissent, prior si non venustior multo proculdubio vetustior
canendi forma protinus a Templo exulasset. Et quid de teipsa statues? Number tu
tibi sacrilegus es, Colloq. Hampt. colloq. 2. dici. p. 57.
qui Homilias in Ecclesia legendas, etiam ubi non desunt conciones, quemadmodum
Regi Jacobo placuit in Colloquio Hamptoniensi, diutino silentio sepelivisti?

Dices forsan Reges illos non tam abstulisse quam in melius mutasse sacra
Ecclesiae; ut qui calicem stanneum a mensa Dominica submovit and argenteum
substituit: and teipsum consimili ratione sacrilegii crimine purgabis, quia pro
Homiliis populum concionibus instituisti. Si ea tibi men's sit, mente saltem
concedis nos nulla necessitate teneri priorem orandi formulam retinendi. Sed
ilico replicabis eos qui Liturgiam sustulerunt nullam aliam, quae ejus vicem
vel defectum suppleat, suffecisse. Fateor, ita tamen ut hanc objectionem me
ante praevenisse putem in r^sponsione ad prius quaesitum; quam tibi facilius
erit ibi relegere, quam mihi, denuo scribendo, commemorare.

IV. De Fine and effectu, etc.
Quarta pars responsio^is superest de fine and effectu dissertationis nostrae:
quae est tua satisfactio mea solutione dubiorum: and ut in foro conscientiae
lis commoveatur and dirimatur. Sed in Literis tuis, praesertim Latinis, ita
mihi videris obstinavisse animum, ut tibi satisfacere, hac in re, idem esse
sentiam ac annum integrum truncum aridum irrigare: quod praefectus quidam
Pontificius tironi suo dedit in mandatis, obedientiae coecae exercendae cau^a,
ut habetur in Epistola Ignatii Loiolae Jesuitarum Patriarchae de obedientia cum
regulis istius Societatis excusa. Habetur eadom historia apud Johannem
Cassianum. l. 4 c. 24.
Id^oque mihi decretissimum est bonas horas uti nunc in hac causa, posthac non
prodigere. Nihilominus si tibi animus est tuam ostentandi facundiam Latinam,
and meam in eadem lingua, sive infantiam sive facultatem ulterius pertentandi,
non detrectabo privatum inter nos congressum, nec apertum coram arbitris,
communi consensu nostro deligendis: etiamsi existimem hujusmodi logomachiam
pueris potius, sub ferula tirocinium agentibus, aut neotericis rhetorculis ad
pluteum declamantibus quam nobis, Theologis veteranis, convenire.

Ut tandem manum de tabula tollam, hoe tantum ad culpam tuam elevandam non in
totum cluendam, attexam; viz. quod teipsum revocas ferocientem mente and
calamo, and morositatis incusas, imo and (...) domum Domini deverantis; and
agnoscis te maximam esse partem eorum quos perstringis, ut nemo tibi succenseat
quod tibi ipsi in is it ac impietate displiceas.

Qua tua, Frater fur, frater lupe, frater afine! Sedulius apol. pro lib.
conformit. l. 1. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 28.
verbo tenus, (...), ut antea superstitiosa devotione, Franciscum sancta
hypocrisi refer videris, furem, lupum, asinum, fratris nomine salutantem: de
qua, ut obiter annotem, Vincentius Belvacensis caput unum inscribit, cujus
titulus est, De Sancta Hypocrisi Francisci. Quod hypocrisin monacho monachorum
fundatori tribuit, Vincent. Belvacensi^ Episcopus. spec hist l 19. c. 105.
satis id quidem convenienter; at quod hypocrisin Sanctam nominavit, cum
hypocrisis and sanctitas asystata sint, discordem prorsus facit (...), Petrus
Dam. l. 1 Epist. 16. Alexan. 2. scripfit.
qualis est Petri Damiani, ubi Heldebrandum Gardinalem, postea Papam Gregorium
septimum, sanctum suum Satanam appellat. Qui enim credam, ut ad te de brevi
diverticulo redeam, haec tam probrosa sincere and ex animo te confessum esse?
Proculdubio si quisquam serio dicam tibi scriberet, and tanti criminis reum
deferret, modo tueri posses innocentiam loquendo ^acendo nolles infamiae
litare. Neque quenquam opinor, nisi plane cerebrosum, criminationem tuam, adeo
scelestam, ideo patienter laturum, quod tu in societatem sceleris ultroneus
concedas.

Una restat ratio eos placandi quos calumniosa dicacitate irritare poterant
Literae Latinae: nempe quod eas ais fuisse insomnium noctium vigilias, aut
inquiet orum dierum insomnia, praecipitante animo and calamo projectas. At quis
tibi tam acres stimulos admovit, aut eo necessitatis te adegit, ut quemadmodum
dicit Erasmus, abortire malles quam parere?

Sed tempus jam appetit extremam scriptionis periodum parturiendi, quod,
obstetricante hac cautione, confestim fiet.

Non inique feres, Tertul. in Prol. E^nuchi.
spero, haec a me, ut habet Poeta Comicus, non dicta tibi sed responsa esse. Et
si culpa est respondisse, major est ut ait Augustinus provocasse: Aug. Epist.
inter opera Hieronym. Tom. 2. p. 357.
and provocasti saepius ante primas Literas tibi a me missas: non tamen me sie
commotum sentio ex tuis sive dictis sive scriptis, ut non sim patatus in
quacunque disceptatione cum Oratore and refellere sine pentinacia and sine
iracundia refelli. Cicer. Tuscul. Quaest. l. 2. p. 137.


Faxit Deus ita veritati indagnadae studeamus, ut ne concertationibus nostris
Charitatem, gratiosae illius triados coryphaeum, 1 Cor. 13. ult. amittamus. Sic
precatur, and subscribit verbis tuis, sensu tamen suo

Tuus in Christo Frater, licet haud usque ad aras: quia te saepe iis
adgeniculatum esse non sine causa suspicor: quod me nunquam fecisse scio.

Sectio 1. SCriptionis ansa. Literarum Anglicarum and Latina^um quas D. H.
scripsit comparatio and contradictio. Rations utrisque respondendi

Sectio 2. Synopsis brevis totius R^sponsionis: and I. De occasion and causis
quas Dr mutationi sermon^s Anglici pro Latin^ praetexit: ubi quaeri^ur,
Consul^^u^e ^t vent la^e quaestiones de Caeremon Anglic Anglice an Latin.

Sectio 3. De Doctor is modo tractandi Controversiam Liturgicam. De parerg is,
praecipue^ o ^e invectivis. 1. In Exe^citum. 2. In Parlam^ntum. 3 In Ministros.
4 In haereticos concionato es.

Sectio 4. Quinta Doctor is invectiva; qua invehitur in Judices delegat^s, de
Rectoria de Br. sibi ademta and in me collata, ubi processus legitimus
ostenditur, and possesso is int^oitus ab injusta and praepropera pr^nsatione
vindicatur.

Sectio 5. De materia causae conjunct ore.

1. De Precibus conceptis false perstrictis.

2. De Hookero hyperbolice laudato a Doctore.

Sectio 6. De Liturg a Anglicana quam multa peccet Doctor.

Sectio 7. De variis Quaesitis Doctoris; praecipue duobus; quorum alterum est,
Annon omnibus Gentibus necessarium sit instituere formam Orationis publicae.

Alterum, An forma Orationis publicae rite instituta possit omnino exterminari
sine scandalo and sacrilegio.

Sectio 8. De fine and effectus dissertationis de Liturgia: and de confessione
Doctor is fucata and frivola.

Imprimatur, Joseph Caryl.


