A LETTER TO Dr. Sherlock, In Vindication of that part of Iosephus*s History*
Which gives an Account of Iaddus the High-Priest's submitting to Alexander the
Great while Darius was living.

Against the ANSWER To the Piece Entitled, Obedience and Submission to the
Present Government.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones at the VVhite-Horse without Temple Bar. M DC
XCI.

A LETTER TO DR. SHERLOCK, In Vindication of his late Book, Entitled, The CASE
of ALLEGIANCE.

A LETTER TO Dr. Sherlock, etc*
SIR,
YOu desire to know what I have to say to the Objections that are made by a
late Writer against the Authority of Josephus, in what he says concerning the
Submission that was made to Alexander the Great by Jaddus the High Priest of
the Jews, and against the use that is made of it by some that have written in
Defense of the Oath of Allegiance to Their Majesty's.

First, Against the Story it self; the Objector says, It is very suspicious,
on two accounts: First, That no Author besides Josephus and his Followers,
mention any such thing. Secondly, He sets forth the difficulty of reconciling
it with Chronology: To which he adds, That there are several Inconsistences in
the Story it self.

Secondly, The Objector says, That if the Story were true, yet it would not
prove the Point for which it is alleged.

To consider what he brings under these Heads, we shall begin with what he
says of the suspiciousness of the Story. To prove this charge, his first
Argument is, because no Author besides Josephus, and those that had it from
him, mentions or takes notice of any such thing.

This Argument lies against all that Josephus has written of the Jewish
Affairs, within the Historical time of the Heathens, except what he takes out
of Scripture, or out of the Books of the Maccabees; for we have no other
Ancient Jewish History. If there had been any other Jewish Historian that had
written the things of Alexander's time, and said nothing of this Story of
Jaddus, nor of Jaddus himself, (for his living then is questioned by our
Objector,) then indeed there had been great occasion to say, that their silence
had made this Story suspicious. But when there is no Jewish Writer that
pretends to write a History of those Times, in this case to argue against the
Authority of Josephus, only from the silence of Heathen Historians; this seems
to be very unjust and unreasonable. Who knows not that the Heathens generally
contemned and hated the Jews, as being not only Revilers of their Gods, but
Enemies to all the rest of Mankind? Hence it came to pass, that those Writers
he mentions, have scarce ever named the Jews in their Histories. But Josephus
designed nothing more than to give us a History of the Jews. How then should
his Credit be impeacht by the silence of Heathen Writers? Especially in a
Matter which they would be sure to conceal, for that very reason that he had to
mention it, namely, because it made for the honor of his Nation.

It was the same reason, that they had to pass by all the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles. Should we therefore grant the Story of these to be
suspicious, because the Heathen Writers of those times take no notice of any
such thing? We ought to take heed of such Arguments as an Adversary may make
use of against the Gospel it self.

But if it were true that our Objector here says, that those Heathens tell us
the clean contrary to that which we have from Josephus, there might be
something in this contradiction, tho not in the silence of Heathen Writers. But
perhaps the Objector might mean, that the Account of those Historians is
contrary to that of the Author, against whom he writes. For this Author, as he
cites him, (I know not how truly,) says, That from Tire Alexander came
directly to Jerusalem. That indeed does not agree with the account that is
given us by the Historians he mentions. But Josephus does not say this: He
tells us, That Alexander having besieged Tire seven months, and then taken it,
came forward to Gaza, and took it after a Siege of two months; and then
hastened to Jerusalem, which submitted to him, as also did the Neighboring
Cities. This consists very well with what we read in those Historians. For tho
they agree, that from Tire he went directly to Gaza, yet after the taking of
that City, they do not say that he went presently into Egypt; He might stay
long enough to go to Jerusalem, which was about Fifty miles distant, and
receive the Submission of that and the Neighboring Cities, before he went into
Egypt. I say he might well do this, according to Diodor's Account, who says,
Diodor. Sic. Edit. 1559. p. 566. (...).
That having settled things about Gaza, afterward he sent away Amyntas with
ten Ships for Macedonia, and then went with his Army into Egypt. This being not
contrary, but very consistent with the Account that we have from Josephus,
there is no farther cause of suspicion on this head.

The next is the difficulty of reconciling it with Chronology; Nay, this is not
all the Objector tells us, for he says afterward, there are difficulties that
have perplexed all Chronologers: And at last, p. 11.
There are insuperable difficulties in this Story. Where are they? For I
confess I do not see any difficulty. He tells us, in the Ages of the persons,
page 9. Mighty Ages, not in the least mentioned by any Historian: Namely, that
Sanballat lived to above 145, and Jaddus to above 124, years of age.

But does Josephus say this? Not in words, nothing like it. But it must come to
this, if the Objector reckon true. And if he misreckons for Josephus, he deals
as ill with the Scripture, only he does not charge it with suspicion on this
account. But according to the Scripture, as he understands it, Ezra must have
lived to a much greater Age than either of those before mentioned.

The Objector p. 17.
will have Ezra born about six years before the Babylonian Captivity, and to
have seen the first Temple yet standing; and 59 Years after this, viz. in the
first year of Cyrus, to have returned from the Captivity. So that then Ezra was
65 years of Age by his reckoning: From thence to the seventh year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, are seventy nine years; so that then Ezra must have been One
hundred and forty four years of age, according to our Objectors account. And
yet it is certain, that in that year of Artaxerxes, Ezra made a Journey from
Babylon to Jerusalem Ezr. 7.
; and it is as certain, that he lived 13 years after that, namely till the
20th. of Artaxerxes; and then, according to our Objector, he must have been 157
years of age; and yet, as old as he was, that very year Neh. 12. 36, 37.
he led the Procession up Stairs and down Stairs about the Wall of Jerusalem.
He might live many Years after this, as we may judge by his strength of Body in
that Exercise. But if he dyed that year, being 157 years old, as he must be by
the Objectors reckoning; he that finds no difficulty in this, or takes no
notice of it, for fear of reflecting upon Scripture, ought not to call that
Story in Josephus Suspicious, because of the difficulty of reconciling it with
Chronology.

But in vain do Men talk of reconciling Differences, where there are none but
of their own making. They that take Ezra to have been born before the
Captivity, judge so for this p. 8.
reason; because it is said, That he was the Son of Seraia the High Priest,
that was killed before the Captivity: But in like manner, Seraia is there made
Ezr. 7. 1. etc.
the 17th. from Aaron, that lived near a thousand years before. The meaning of
these words is, that Seraia was descended from Aaron, (and so Ezra was from
Seraia,) not immediately, but with others between, that are not mentioned. And
so Johanan the High Priest is called Neh. 12. 23.
the Son of Eliashib, who indeed was his Grandfather, and his Father was 12.
10.
Jehoiada, that is not there mentioned. This is a common way of shortning
Pedegrees, which if the Objector had considered, he would not have run himself
into that difficulty of Ezra's Age, which, tho he takes no notice of it, is
much greater than those are of which he complains.

And yet these that he complains of are Difficulties of his own making, and
proceed only from an eager desire to find faults in that Story in Josephus. If
this had not blinded his Eyes, he might have seen, that, admitting that Story
to be true, yet there was no necessity of making either Jaddus or Sanballat
live to so great an Age.

First for Jaddus, who (as he says) must have been 124 years old at the taking
of Tire, the Objector proves his Age by these steps.

First he takes it for granted, that Jaddus was High Priest at the time when
the Book of Nehemiah was written; but he takes this only as p. 7*
probable, and therefore by his own confession, all can be but probable that he
builds on it.

Next for the time when that Book was written, it must have been before
Nehemiah dyed; that is certain. But when did he dye? The Objector tells us from
Briet, that he died the last year of Longimanus, who reigned 41 Years. But to
what end does he tell us this? For he himself could not believe it, as appears
by his Words. For says he, I think the least we can allow for the time of
Nehemiah's p. 7.
living after he ended his Book, is 30 Years; and it is very probable it was
much more. Well, say but 30 Years, and account that upward from the time of his
death according to Briet; and then Nehemiah's Writing of his Book will be in
the 11th. Year of Artaxerxes, that is, his Book was written 9 Years before any
of those things happened that are written in it. Now this I think the Objector
could not mean, and therefore he does but amuse us with that idle Quotation.

Howsoever, as if he had proved something by this, he infers from it (I know
not how) that Jaddus was High Priest the last Year of Artaxerxes. Grant him
this, and he has no more to ask. For then, Jaddus being 30 years old, to this
add 94 (which is the time from the death of Artaxerxes, till Alexander's coming
to Jerusalem,) and then Jaddus, at that time Josephus fastens this Story, must
have been 124 years old. Q. E. D.

But tho I do not see which way he proves this, I see very clear Reasons to the
contrary, which I think are unanswerable.

First, That the Book of Nehemiah was not written, till after the death of
Artaxerxes Longimanus: Secondly, That Jaddus was not High Priest at the Death
of Artaxerxes; nor probably born then, nor long after, till the end of Darius
Nothus.

First, That Nehemiah did not write in any part of Artaxerxes's Reign, but
either in or after the time of Darius his immediate Successor: This is certain;
For in his Book he mentions Neh. 12. 22.
the Reign of Darius the Persian. I think none will say he did this by the
Spirit of Prophecy. But to come nearer the point, I insist upon it, that he
writ after the Reign of Darius. So the Hebrew words show, that he writ when
that Reign was expired; for there it is said, That the Heads of the Levites,
and also the Priests, were recorded, (...) over or throughout the Reign of
Darius. It appears, that the words are so to be understood, by what follows
in the next Verse, where it is said, that the Heads of the Levites were
recorded in the Book of the Chronicles (...) till the days of Johanan, that is,
till he came to be High Priest. I take Nehemiah's meaning in those two v. 22,
23*
Verses, to be thus in short: Having given account Neh. 12. 1, 7.
of the Heads of the Priests that were in the time of Jeshua the High Priest,
and afterward v. 12. 21.
of them that were in the time of his Son Joiakim; having also given account v.
8, 9. and 24, 25, 26.
of the Heads of the Levites that were in Joiakim's time; he thought some
account would be expected of them that were in the days of the following
Highpriests: Therefore he inserted these v. 22, 23.
two Verses, wherein he tells us, That as for the Levites that were in the days
of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the Heads of those Levites, and also
the Priests, all that were in the Reign of Darius Nothus* were recorded in the
Book of Chronicles; but afterward the Priests were not recorded, but only the
Heads of the Levites; and those, only during the High Priesthood of Eliashib
and Joiada who were then dead, but not of Johanan, who it seems was then newly
come to be High Priest, when this Book was written. As for Jaddua, he is
mentioned, both v. 22.
here, and before v. 10.
in this Chapter, not as being High Priest then, (how could he in his Fathers
days?) but only as being then living, and Heir apparent of the High Priesthood;
so the words are understood by the most Learned Vsser. Ann. A. M. 3589.
Primate, who was as well a great Chronologer, as a good Textuary.

It may be said, that if this Interpretation be true, Nehemiah must have lived
to a very great Age. No doubt he did so; for he was Cup Bearer to King
Artaxerxes, in the 20th. year of his Reign. We may suppose Nehemiah to have
been then about 25 years of Age; after that, he lived to see the High
Priesthood pass from Father to Son for four Generations: And he saw a fifth
coming in view, namely Jaddua, whom we suppose to have been then about 30 years
old. All this might very well be, if Nehemiah were born 470 years before
Christ, and writ in the year 347 before Christ. Then he was about 104 years old
according to our reckoning, which is not so incredible an Age, as that of
Ezra's being 157 years old when he went in that clambering Procession according
to the account of our Objector.

Secondly, For Jaddus his being High Priest at the time of Artaxerxes's Death,
which our Objector makes the ground of his Calculation, I have shown he has no
ground for his affirming of this, and that might suffice for an Answer. But
besides, that it is groundless, it is also highly improbable. For if this had
been true, there must have been living and dying no less than 5 High Priests in
one direct Line, from Father to Son, in the space of two and twenty years.

First, His Grandfathers Grandfather Joiakim, was High Priest within the time
while Nehemiah Neh. 12. 28.
was Governor; that is certain. But his Government began in the twentieth year
of Artaxerxes. It appears, that Joiakim dyed the same year; for his Son
Eliashib Neh. 13. 1.
was High Priest at the time when the Wall of Jerusalem was building. And he
was High Priest Neh. 13. 28.
in the 32d. year of Artaxerxes. Eliashib continued much longer, as I
understand it; but suppose he dyed that very year, there must be some time
allowed for his Son Joiada after him, and then for his Grandchild Johanan; for
both these were Highpriests, as has been already shown. But after the 32d. of
Artaxerxes, there were but eight years more before the end of his Reign. We
have scarce known a Change of five Popes in the time that this Objector allows
for so many to come and go in a Hereditary Succession: And then the Age of
Jaddus being considered, (of which our Objector says when he came to be
High Priest, The least we can allow is 30 years, and it is very probable it was
much more:) If it was but 30 years, then the Age of Joiakim when he dyed, must
have been at least 90 years; his Son Eliashib at least 62; his Son Joiada near
70; his Son Johanan near 60; and each of these, as the Objector says, it is
very probable much more; and four of these must have been born when their
Fathers were but 20 years old. If any one of these things did not happen, then
our Objectors groundwork fails; but that all things happened thus, I think
there is no probability.

But on the other hand, there is nothing improbable in that Account which I
offered before: Jaddus might have been born any year before his Father Johanan
came to be High Priest, (at which time I conceive with very good ground the
Book of Nehemiah was written;) and yet Jaddus might have been mentioned as he
is in that Book. But I supposed him born 30 years before, in compliance with
the most Learned Primate, who Vsser. Annal. A. M. 3602
reckons that Jaddus might be about 83 years old at his Death. So he judged by
comparing the Scripture together with Josephus's Antiquities. I attribute very
much to his judgment in these Matters: But not to rest upon that only, I have
also considered the years of the Highpriests abovementioned. They are
recorded in the Chronicon Paschale; but I think better in Georgius Syncellus;
who tho he does not quote his Author, yet is reasonably presumed to have
transcribed them from Julius Africanus; an Author that lived little more than
100 years after Josephus, and living in the same Country, might have his
Information from them that knew as well as Josephus himself. In placing the
years of these Priests, I begin from the Death of Jaddus, who is said Jos. Ant.
x^. ending.
to have died about the same time with Alexander the Great: Reckoning from
thence upwards, the Death of Joiakim will fall in the 20th. year of Artaxerxes;
which exactly agrees with the Account of his Death that I have given from
Scripture. And indeed there is nothing said of any of these Priests, either in
the Holy Scripture, or in Josephus, but what very well consists with the
Account of their years that is given us in this Catalogue. That you may the
better judge of this, I have given you a short view of their Years, compared
with those of the Kings of Persia, as they are in Ptolomy's Canon.

Yaars before Christ. Beginnings of Persian Kings, and of Jewish Highpriests.
445 -- In Nisan Nehemia came from Susa for Jerusalem* After his coming thither
Joiakim dies. 444 -- His Son Eliashib High Priest, 34 y. 424 -- DARIUS Nothus,
19 y. 410 -- Ioiada, 36 y. 405 -- Iaddus born. ARTAXERXES Mnemon, 46 y. 374 --
Iohanan 32 y. Nehemiah writ his Book. In Iohanan's time Bagoses was Governor.
359 -- OCHUS, 21 y. 342 -- Iaddus, 20 y. 338 -- ARSES, 2 y. 336 -- DARIUS
Codomannus, 4 y. He sent Sanballat to Samaria. 332 -- ALEXANDER takes Tire and
Gaza. Jerusalem yields to him. 330 -- Darius dies. 323 -- Alexander dies, and
Iaddus.

Having shown that the Age of Iaddus has no difficulty in it, we are next to
consider what there is in the Ages of Sanballat and Manasses.

For the first of these, he is spoken of by Josephus, with that care which one
would have thought might have prevented this Objection. For whereas the
Objector proceeds upon a supposition, that the Sanballat in Josephus, is the
same that was the Adversary of the Jews in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes;
and if that were true, then indeed he must have been (as the Objector would
have him,) much above 120 years old in Alexander's time; to prevent all
suspicion of this, Josephus described him by those Characters by which we may
be sure he was not the same Sanballat. However, the Objector is pleased to p. 9.
say, That Josephus does not intimate any such thing; he does more than
intimate, he tells us plainly in his Description; First, That this was a
Chuthaean, of that Race from which the Samaritanes came, that Jos. An. 9. 7.
is, from Chutha beyond the river Euphrates; and farther, Jos. An. 9. 14.
that this Man was sent to be Governor of Samaria by the last Darius, who was
driven out by Alexander the Great. Now who would have thought that this Ib. 9.
7.
Chuthaean should have been mistaken, for the Moabite of Es. 19. 5 Jer. 48. 3,
5, 34.
Horonaim, whom Nehemiah found there in Palestine 100 years before in
Artaxerxes his time? I call Nehemiah's Sanballat a Moabite, for he is joined
with Tobia the Ammonite Neh. 11 10, 19. etc.
almos^(...) often as he is mentioned: And as Nehemiah observes, Neh. 13. 1, 23.
Th^^ the Israelites were particularly forbidden to marry with Moab and Ammon;
so he Ib. 4. 28.
gives instances of the breach of this command in the Priests marrying into the
Families of Tobia and Sanballat. That Horonaim was in Moab, I have shown above
in the (see e) Margent.

For the strangeness of it, that there should be two of a Name; that would not
have stuck with the Objector, if he had considered that there were two
Artaxerxeses, and three Dariuses in his view. But those were Kings, and they
might take Names from one another: To go lower therefore, he might have found
two Ezra's and two Nehemiahs* in those times; one of each Neh. 13. 1. ^^* 11. 2.
came up from Captivity with Zorobabel; and again one of each was in the
Government almost One hundred years after. There is no strangeness in this, but
that any Man should be so senseless to think these two Pairs were but one Ezra
and one Nehemiah.

Lastly, For Manasses Brother of Iaddus, Josephus says, That he married a
Heathen Woman, Nicaso the Daughter of Sanballat the Chuthaean, which occasioned
a Breach between the Brothers, and thereupon a Schism in the Church: This
Manasses setting up another Temple at Mount Garizim in opposition to that at
Jerusalem. The Objector, to find a fault in this Story, makes many. For, First,
He confounds this Brother of Iaddus, with his Uncle that is mentioned by
Nehemiah, chapter 13. 28.
in the end of his Book. Nehemia there calls him, one of the Sons of Ioiada
the Son of Eliashib the High Priest, which is plain enough to show, that he was
younger Brother of Iohanan the Father of Iaddus: But no matter for that. The
Objector to make Josephus a Liar, makes bold with the Scripture it self: He is
pleased to p. 6.
give this Uncle of Iaddus the Name of Manasses, which ^^^hemiah never thought
of: And he will have this Man to be Brother of Iaddus; he calls him so as often
as he mentions him. And the Wife that he married, who was Daughter of Sanballat
the Horonite, must be the same with Nicaso the Daughter of Sanballat the
Chuthaean. And in consequence of all this Josephus must be a Liar, who writes
of things as done in the time of Darius Codomannus, which were done long before
(as our Objector says,) in the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

But with his leave, Josephus knew what he writ, as it appears by his fixing
the time of this Story: There was no date of time better known among the Jews,
than that of the building of their Temple at Jerusalem; nor among the
Samaritans, than that of the building of the Temple of Garizim. They remembered
nothing more, than the destruction of their Temples: It was a thing in every
ones mouth, Our Fathers worshipped in this Mount, said John iv. 20.
the Woman of Samaria to our Savior. And no doubt, if they had any Records or
any Histories, the times of these things were chiefly remembered in them: But it
was within 200 years of Josephus his time, that the Temple at Mount Garizim was
destroyed by Johannes Hyrcanus. It happened at a memorable time, being soon
after the Death of Antiochus Pius, (which was in the year before Christ 130*)
then that Temple was destroyed, says Josephus, p. 10.
200 years after the building of it. How long that Temple stood, and when it
was destroyed, none knew better than the Samaritans themselves. And as they
were Enemies to the Jews, so they must be particularly to that Author, who
provokes them as often as he mentions them. How then durst he have put it in
their power to disprove him, as they certainly would, if this had not been
true? I take it therefore for certain, by their account as well as his,
(accounting 200 years upward from the destruction,) that their Temple was built
in the year before Christ 430, which falls in the time of Alexander the Great,
and not as the Objector would have it, in the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

What says the Objector to this? He Ios. Ant. xiii. 17.
tells us from David Ganz, That the Jewish Chronologers do affirm, That the
Temple on Mount Garizim was built long before the times of Alexander; and that
all the time of Alexander, Simeon Justus was High Priest; which Simeon was the
Grandson of Iaddus. The Objector tells us afterward, That Calvisius, and not
only he, but all Chronologers, find Iosephus' s Errors and Mistakes concerning
those times so many and gross, as would make any Man that acted upon Principles
of Sincerity, very fearful to use an Example taken out of him in Matters of
Practice.

I believe the Objector acts upon Principles of Sincerity in other things;
notwithstanding that he seems to forget them in his Quotations. In these I must
needs say, he gives great suspicion of the contrary, by omitting those words
that make against him in his own Authors: Of which I shall give a clear proof
by and by, and I doubt not you will find the like in other places of his Book.

But whereas he brings all Chronologers on his side against Josephus, he
should have excepted all the Best, both Ancient and Modern; and among them
particularly our excellent Primate, who follows Josephus in every part of
this Story. I allow him indeed the Jewish Chronologers, who are as much the
Enemies of Josephus as he is himself; for they have the like quarrel against
him, because he breaks all their Measures.

But yet the Jewish Chronologers will not help the Objector in his Cause. They
will not make Iaddus live to 124 years of Age, and Sanballat to 145. They are
so far from that, that they scarce allow either of them any Age. For they make
Ganz. p. 57. and 64
the whole time of the second Temple at Jerusalem, 'till the sixth year of
Alexander the Great, to be but 34 years. And in that sixth year of Alexander,
they say that he came up against Jerusalem; and that Iaddus the High Priest,
and all the Elders of Israel came forth to him; and that they made a Covenant
with Alexander (though Darius was then living.) This Story fills up most of that
p. 59.
very page, that our Obiector quotes in his Margent. Only there the High Priest
is called Simeon the just. But that this makes no difference in the Story, he
might have seen in the passage Ganz. p. 58.
next before, where Ganz tells us of this Simeon the just, that his name was
Iaddua. And for the building of the Temple at Mount Garizim, which as the
Objector says, p. 10.
The Jewish Chronologers affirm to have been built long before Alexander' s
time: His Ganz tells us, p. 60, 6.
that some of their Writers have said so; but he disproves them, and affirms of
a certainty, that it was built in Alexander's time, and by his permission. He
does indeed confound the two Sanballats, the Chuthaean and the Horonite, and
makes Manasses to be the Priest that was deposed in Nehemiah's time. This might
be excused in a Jew, that Ganz. p. 56, 57*
reckons that Act of Nehemiah but 4 years before the Reign of Alexander the
Great: But is not to be allowed one that reckons one hundred years between, and
takes upon him to correct Josephus by Christian Chronology.

But besides these difficulties in Chronology, which I have proved to be none;
the Objector says, there are several Inconsistencies in the story it self,
noted by Salian.

That Jesuit was an Enemy to the very name of Josephus, for Scaliger's sake.
But without engaging in the quarrel between them, I take the Inconsistencies as
they ly here before me.

Object. The first is, that Josephus says, the Phoenicians and Chaldaeans, who
followed Alexander, when he came against Jerusalem, thought to have plundered
the City. Now says the Objector, How should he have Chaldaeans in his Army,
when as yet he had not taken Babylon, nor come near to Chaldaea?

Answer. He might have Chaldaeans in his Army, of those whom he had taken at
Issus, many of whom turned over to Alexander, and served him, as he Arrian* de
exp. Alex. ii.
told Darius in his Epistle. But I confess I know not why these Chaldaeans
should be named together with the Phoenicians, as if these two Nations should
be eager for the spoils of Jerusalem, above all the rest that were in
Alexander's Army. There must be some particular reason for this eagerness in
these two Nations above others: And that probably either for their own especial
gain, or for some National spite against the Jews. And indeed for the
Phoenicians, the first of these Reasons is plain, because they had the chief
Seaports, and the Trade of that part of the World. Therefore Tyrus said of old
Ezekiel. 26. 2.
against Jerusalem in the time of Nebuchadnezzar. Aha! she is broken, -- -- she
is turned unto me: I shall be replenisht, when she is laid waste. The same hope
they might have now again. But this being a reason peculiar to the Phoenicians;
no other Nation could be so intent upon the spoils of Jerusalem, but only for
spite, and that was not to be imagined in the Chaldaeans; who after so long
acquaintance as they had with the Jews in their Captivity, were kinder to them
than any other People, and have continued so ever since. But these here spoken
of must be Enemies of the Jews; and who should they be of all the Nations that
Alexander had in his Army? Of all the Nations in the World none so likely as
the Samaritans. And of them Josephus told us lately before, there were 8000
sent by Sanballat, that were now in the Army. But when Josephus speaks of these
People in anger, he commonly calls them Chuthaei; which is so near the word
Chaldaei, that I cannot forbear offering this as an Emendation of the Text: For
(...) write (...), and then there is no Inconsistency.

The next thing might very well have been spared; for there is no Inconsistency
in it: That the Jews when they had found favor with Alexander, should ask the
like favor for their Brethren that were in Babylon and Media. Those Countries,
tho Alexander had not yet conquered, yet it could not be doubted, that they
would be shortly in his hands. And that Iaddus asked favor for them, and that
Alexander granted it, or rather that he promised it, (for so the Greek word
signifies;) They are much to seek for (...).
Faults* that can find them in so clear a passage as this.

But such another is that which next follows, viz. That the Army was
astonished to see Alexander worship Jaddus. Well they might: Though it was but
Civil Worship; it was a wonderful thing, that so great a King should give it to
a Priest, or to any other humane Being.

But the fault is, that Josephus should put it in Parmenio's Mouth to ask
Alexander, wherefore he should adore another, that was himself adored by all.
It is judged by Salian, and the Objector, an inconsistency, to say that
Alexander was adored, or that he believed himself the Son of Jupiter, before
his coming into Egypt, etc. Yet those Learned Men could not but know that
adoration was paid to Eastern Princes, that did not believe themselves the Sons
of Jupiter. It was so far from this that it was not confined to Crown*d Heads.
Josephus Jos. Ant. xi. 6.
tells us in this Book, that Haman, being the King's Favorite, as often as he
came to Court, had adoration paid him by all, as well Strangers as Persians.
How much more should it be paid to Alexander himself by them of the conquered
Nations? No less than the Mother of Darius, when she was taken Prisoner at
Issus, and Alexander came to give her a Visit, received him Pl^t. in Alex.
with this Ceremony. She performed it indeed, by mistake, to Hephaestion that
came with him, because he made a better figure, and when she understood her
mistake, was much out of Countenance, till the King himself told her it is no
mistake, he is Alexander. But I have not read that he told her he would not be
treated with that Ceremony. It seems therefore he did suffer himself to be
adored, even before his going into Egypt: And therefore what Josephus tells us,
of Parmenio's saying those Words, might be true for ought we know; howsoever he
might have said them without any Inconsistency.

The things in these two last Answers are so plain, that I cannot think how it
came to pass that the Objector did not see them: unless it be that Josephus had
offended him so much, that he was too greedy of Objections against him, and did
not regard what might be said in his vindication.

In this angry humor he runs on in the next page. And there he calls in
Calvisius to be his second.

He could not have found a fitter Man to take his part. For he had a quarrel of
his own against Josephus, for writing such things as would not consist with his
Chronology. But that was Scaliger's fault, that had crampt that part of his
Chronology, by beginning Daniel's 70 Weeks in Darius Nothus his time. In
consequence of that, he must make Nehemia's Artaxerxes to be Mnemon instead of
Longimanus: And the Darius that he mentions must not be Nothus, but Codomannns:
And if Nehemiah lived till Codomannus his time, so might his Sanballat as well:
And then why should not the Priest that Nehemiah deprived, be Manasses, the
same that is mentioned in Josephus? All this both Scaliger and Calvisius are
for; and our Objector if he pleased might have quoted them for these things.
But then his Arithmetic would have been of no use: For Sanballat's 145 years
would have been but fourscore, Manasses* might have been a young Man, and
Jaddus of middle Age; and so there had been an end of all his Insuperable
difficulties. Those two learned Men were so far from seeing any difficulty in
the Story of Jaddus, as Josephus tells it, that they take it for unquestionable
History. But why then does the Objector bring in Calvisius, as if he were of
his side in this Argument? He will say he does not, here is no mention of
Jaddus. Very well, but here are hard Censures on Josephus, which being brought
in in this place, though they do not belong to it, may serve as well as if they
did: Though Calvisius intended them for things wherein Josephus differed from
him, yet the Reader may apply them to that Story wherein he agreed with him.

If the Objector dealt heartily in this, he does not so always. We have a great
instance of the contrary in his shuffling and cutting with the
Convocation-Book. He against whom he writes had urged the Example of Jaddus,
for something which the Objector does not like; and to give the more Credit to
it, he says (as here he is quoted) that whether the story be true or no, the
Convocation seems to believe it. He gives very good reason to judge so, because
they have inserted part of it into the Convocation-Book. They have indeed taken
in all that the Objector throws out, concerning Sanballat, and Manasses, and
Jaddus; And they Conv^^. chap. 30. p. 63.
expressly quote Josephus for it as their Author; though by making his Sanballat
the same with Nehemiah's, it appears that they follow Scaliger and Calvisius in
their Chronology. But for the Story, which is so much contested by our
Objector, they not only take it for an undoubted Truth, but they Reason upon it
as to matter of Practice. Our Objector says well, that Men that have any care
of their Souls will hardly venture to act upon one single Example, and that
also voucht but by a single and suspicious Author. They may do well to think of
this, that go in untrodden ways, and yet damn all them that will not follow
them. But it is upon the single Example of Jaddus having sworn to Darius, that
the Convocation says, that the Jewish Highpriests were bound to the Kings of
Persia by an Oath, when they were made Highpriests. And they add this Conv^^.
can. 30. p. 65.
judgment upon it, that if any Man affirm -- that Jaddus the High Priest did
amiss in binding his Allegiance to King Darius by an Oath, or that he had not
sinned if he had refused (being thereunto required) so to have sworn -- he does
greatly err. It is plain that they affirm this upon one single Example, and
that also voucht but by a single Authority. They do indeed profess they do not
chap ^^* p. 64.
hold it Canonical no more than the Books of the Maccabees and other ancient
Historiographers; but neither did they judge it (as our Objector does) to be of
Suspicious Authority.

He was aware how much their judgment would be preferred before his, where he
differs from them. And therefore finding them against him in all he has said
of the suspiciousness of this Story, he is now for compounding the Matter. As
far as this Story will make on his side, he is content they should believe it;
provided they will give up that part of it for which he has rejected the
whole. That is, he is content they should take Josephus for a good Author, only
as far as his Authority makes for the not-swearers. An easy Reader may be
persuaded to this; but not without some show of proof. And therefore he tells
you, they of the Convocation mention, and thereby approve, Jaddus his Answer to
Alexander, That he had sworn Allegigiance to Darius, and therefore could not
violate his Oath so long as Darius lived. From hence the Objector infers, that
their sense is, That an Oath of Allegiance was binding to a Prince so long as
he lived, and had not given up his right, tho he was beaten in the Field, and
fled before his Enemies. This is what the Objector would have. But the sense of
the Convocation will best appear by their own words; and thus they go on
Convo^. chap. 31. beginni^g.
with the Story: Alexander by Gods Providence having vanquished the Persians;
(that is, having Ib. chapter 29.
overthrown Darius the King of the Persians, upon which the Monarchy of the
Graecians began,) the Jews amongst many other Nations became HIS SUBJECTS. He
dealt favorably with them, releast them of some Payments, viz. from paying
Tribute on the Sabbatical years, and granted them liberty to live according to
their own Laws.

These last are the words of Josephus in that very Chapter which was quoted
before in the Convocation Book; and the things here spoken, were done by
Alexander then when he was at erusalem, two years before the Death of Darius.
In consequence hereof, the Convocation declare their Can. 31. p. 67.
Canon, That if any Man shall affirm, -- That the Jews generally, both Priests
and People, were not the Subjects of Alexander after his Authority was settled
among them, as they had been before the Subjects of the Kings of Babylon and
Persia, -- he does greatly Err. What the Convocation did mean by the settling of
an Authority, they show Convo^. c. 31. p. 67.
in these words, viz. when it is either generally received by Subjects, or
settled by continuance. The Disjunctive is as plain in these words, as it is in
those of Bishop Buckeridge's, which are fairly quoted by the Objector, p. 27.
but not fairly repeated in the bottom of that page. It was plainly their
Judgment, that both these were not necessary, but that either of the two might
suffice, for the settling of an Authority. But Alexander had one of the two,
that is, the general subjection of the People; whereupon, without the other,
they were his Subjects according to the Convocation-Book, as much as they had
been before the Subjects of Darius, though he was yet living.

But this will not go down with the Objector. He says, For the other part of
the Story, of Jaddus submitting to Alexander while Darius was living, the
Convocation take no notice of it. They do not name Jaddus indeed. But what
says he to these Can. 31. beginning.
words, that the Jews generally both Priests and People were the Subjects of
ALEXANDER? Those words seem to be intended chiefly of Jaddus, at least they
take him in among the Priests and People. But then says the Objector, it does
not any where appear, That they (the Convocation,) thought Darius was then
living. No: Does it appear, that they thought what they writ? Their Book says,
He by flight escaped, when his Army was discomfited. And tho they do not say,
he was living when Alexander came to Jerusalem, yet no Learned Man can be
ignorant, That he lived two years after this. But the Convocation were not
concerned whether he were living or no, any longer than while the People of God
were under his Dominion* The Changes of Governments over the Jews, was the
thing which the Convocation were to consider. And now upon this Change of
Government, they tell us, That the Jews, both Priests and People, being
Subjects of Alexander, (whether Darius was living or dead,) they were bound to
pray for the long life and prosperity both of Alexander and his Empire, as they
had been bound before to pray for the long life and prosperity of the other
Kings and their Kingdoms, while they lived under their Subjection. Therefore
when they were no longer in subjection to Darius, it was all one to them
whether he were living or dead.

From what has been said, the Answer is plain to his Question, concerning
Submission to a Possessor of Power, notwithstanding an Oath to a lawful King,
who is alive, and insists upon his right, whether it be argued from the Story
or from the Convocation-Book? It may be from either or both, for ought that he
has said to the contrary: The Story has been cleared from all suspicion of
Falsehood, That he has endeavored to fasten upon it. The Convocation-Book has
spoken for it self, and has much more to say; but this little is enough to
show our Objector, that he might better have let it alone than brought it into
this Controversy.

After all he comes to this, that grant the Story true, it is not to the
purpose it is urged for. How so? Because this of Jaddus is a singular and
exempt Case. What he did was by especial Revelation from God; who, as Josephus
says, appeared to him in a Dream, and warned him to submit to Alexander, and to
meet him in that solemn manner as he did.

He is aware, that there is a prejudice against this; namely, That Prophecy was
then departed from the Jewish Church. This is certainly true: Malachi having
given them Mal. iv. 3.
warning, that the next Prophet that should come, would be Elias. But the
Objector shifts off this, by telling us, That when there were no more Prophets,
yet still there was an inferior degree of Prophecy, which lasted for a long
time, as the Bath Kol, and probably some other way, as by Dreams, etc.

To make way for these, he tells us, it was always the Custom in the Jewish
Church, in cases of great Extremity, to have recourse to God for some express
Revelation what they should do. This is more than the Jews knew, or they did
not think of it, at that time 1 Macc. ix. 27.
when Judas Maccabaeus being slain, there was a great affliction in Israel, the
like whereof was not since the time that a Prophet was not seen among them* For
then they took mere humane Counsels, without looking for any express
Revelation. That in such Distresses, they used Fasting and Prayer, was to seek
God for Deliverance, as has been used in all Ages. And thus Josephus tells us,
the Jews did at this time when Alexander was coming against them. They fasted
and prayed for a Deliverance. Thus far there is nothing strange in the History.

But then mark what follows. The next night God appeared to Jaddus, and ordered
him so to do; that is, so as he told us before, namely, to submit to Alexander,
and to meet him as he did. Here he would make us believe we have a Wolf by the
Ears, for whether we admit this, or deny it, we are in his danger either way.
If we deny this part of the Story, why may not the Objector as well deny all
the rest? But if we admit it, then it is wholly beside the purpose: For says
he (with his usual civility) if these Gentlemen will show us any express
Revelation for what they do, as Jaddus had, then they say something: But 'till
they can show that, this Example, if true, will do them no service. He has
obliged me so much with this Complement, that I cannot choose but admit, that
here was an express Revelation. But I cannot grant him his Consequence, till I
see how it follows from the Premises. In order to this, he should have told us
what Revelation it was that Jaddus had, and what use it was for: And then have
showed that we have the like occasion, before he had required us to show the
like Revelation. But since he is so short in his account of these things, I
must be the longer in considering them more particularly.

First, Take every thing as the Objector would have it, namely, that Jaddus had
a Revelation from God, that he should SUBMIT to Alexander, though Darius was
living; and notwithstanding his Oath by which, as Jaddus formerly thought, he
was bound to the contrary. If Jaddus was then in the right concerning the
Obligation of his Oath to Darius, the thing that he was now put upon was the
horrible sin of Rebellion, aggravated with perjury, and whatsoever else the
Objector thinks fit to load his Brethren with: only this of Jaddus he tells us
was a singular and exempt Case, for he was put upon it by Divine Revelation.
But even in this case, there would have been something else necessary to engage
the people to go along with him in this submission. For since now they were to
look for no Prophet more, till the coming of Elias, as Malachi Mal. iv. 3.
told them, but were left under a strict charge to remember the Law of Moses
with the Statutes and Judgments; this change of their Allegiance from Darius to
Alexander, being as the Objector will have it, Rebellion and Perjury, than
which nothing can be more contrary to the Law of God; how could Jaddus hope to
bring them to this, by telling them only that he had a Revelation from God? He
could not pretend to it, without making himself as great a Prophet as those
were by whom those Precepts were given. And then he must prove it, by showing
such signs as those former Prophets did: Otherwise the Jews were so far from
being bound to believe him, that they were to look upon him as a false Prophet,
and as such to put him to death. We see how ready the Jews were to Execute this
upon our Savior, as often as he seemed to teach any thing contrary to their Law,
though he did prove himself a Prophet by the working of Miracles. But Josephus
does not tell us, that Jaddus did any Miracle; (if he had, we ought not to have
believed him;) and yet the Jewish Church at that time, was so far from stoning
Jaddus for pretending this Revelation, that they all joined with him in
submitting to Alexander, even while Darius was living. And therefore we may be
sure, that this Revelation was not against their common and standing Rules, as
our Objector would have it.

It was so very agreeable to them, that if the Matter of the Revelation were as
he reports it, there could be no reason given why Jaddus should have a
Revelation, but this, that God saw it necessary for the correcting of that
former Error of Jaddus, by which, if he had run on it, and stood out
pertinaciously against Alexander, (as some do against Their present Majesty's,)
it had been a certain way to have destroyed the Jewish Church. Blessed be God,
that has preserved our Church, by letting us see, that our Submission is so
agreeable to the Rules of our Religion and to the Practice of his Church in all
Ages, that there is no need of proving it to be our Duty that way which the
Objector requires, namely, by an express Revelation.

But what if there was nothing of Submission to Alexander in the Revelation
that was made to Jaddus? Then those words upon which all his Argument moves,
namely, the words TO SUBMIT, were thrust in by the Objector. If he did this by
mistake, he may easily correct it, by reading the place in Josephus. There he
will find nothing of any Revelation that Iaddus had to submit and to meet
Alexander: There was no occasion for it. For thus far he had determined
already, before the Prayer and Fasting, upon which he had this Revelation.
These are Josephus his words; Alexander having taken Gaza, made haste to go up
to Jerusalem. The High Priest Jaddus upon the hearing of this, was in an Agony
of fear; being at his wits end to think how he should MEET the Macedons; the
King being angry at his Disobedience formerly. It seems he was resolved to have
no more anger on that account, but to make his Peace by an humble Submission:
And therefore he was in care how to meet the Macedons, says Josephus. Who thus
goes on, having therefore ordered the People to make Supplications, and himself
with them offering Sacrifice to God, he besought him to protect the Nation, and
to deliver them from the imminent dangers. It is plain, that these were Prayers
for Deliverance, and not for a Revelation, as the Objector is pleased to say.
But was there not a Revelation after this? Yes, it follows, That after the
Sacrifice, when he was gone to bed, in his sleep, God bad him be of good
courage; and let them Crown the City, and open their Gates; and for their
MEETING, (which they had resolved before, but were in care how to do it, so as
might move the Kings favor or compassion,) Let them go, (says he,) the rest
in White Garments, but he with the Priests in those Vestments which the Law
has prescribed, and be confident they shall suffer no evil, for that God will
provide for them: Here is every word of the Revelation; in which, God that best
knew what a Dream he had sent to Alexander before his coming out of Macedonia,
now orders Iaddus to put himself into that Dress in which Alexander had seen
him in that Dream. This was a likely way indeed to strike an awe into the
Conqueror, and to make him reverence the Priest of that God by whose Conduct he
had gotten those Victories. And it had that effect, as Josephus tells us.
Alexander did acknowledge this was he that first invited him over into Asia. I
saw him then (says he,) in the same habit: -- I never saw any other in such a
Robe: And now seeing him, and remembering my Dream, I am satisfied it was God
that sent me on this Expedition, etc.

It appears that Jaddus had a direction from God in what manner he should meet
Alexander, so as not only to pacify his wrath, but to recommend himself into
his favor. For the Command of Submission, which is not in Josephus, there was
no need of that, for the People had determined to submit, being not able to
resist. But if it had been as the Objector imagins, yet it would do him no
Service, as I have sufficiently shown: And therefore after all that he has
said, this Story of Iaddus affords us a very good unquestionable instance of
the judgment of the Jewish Church in his Age; that it is lawful to submit to a
Prince that comes in by Conquest, and that it is our Duty to pay Allegiance to
him as his Subjects, when he is settled by the general consent of the People*
notwithstanding an Oath to a former King who is yet living.

One thing the Objector has to say against this, which I think was put out of
it is place, and ought to come in here for a Reserve. In case it appeared that
the Story of Iaddus was not only true, but to our purpose, then it had been
time for him to tell us, that all this is nothing to him and his party. They
care not what Iaddus did, they know what they will do. He says this in effect,
in the following p. 11.
words, The Practice of the High Priest in that corrupt State of the Jewish
Church, will not signify much to us, and no more in this, than in their other
Immoralities. This was frankly said, but I think not very ingenuously.

First, He speaks as if Iaddus were single in this Act of Submission; when it
is evident, that the whole Church of God at that time, went along with him: And
the Jews generally, both Priests and People were Subjects to Alexander, in the
words of the Convocation Book.

He tells us of that corrupt state of the Jewish Church in Jaddus's time: This
is news. All Ancient Writers speak of those times as the best that ever were
under the second Temple. The Church was much reformed by those excellent Men
that flourished in the Age next before; namely by Nehemiah the Governor, Ezra
Priest and Scribe, and Malachi the last of the Prophets. At this very time,
beside Iaddus himself, whom the Jews Ganz. p. 58.
make the last of the Men of the great Synagogue; there was also B^nsira, as
Ganz. p. 66.
they tell us, a shining Light to the Israelites, and one that much advanced
the honor of our God. After them was Onias the High Priest, and his Son Simon,
whose praise swells a Eccl. 50.
Chapter in Ecclesiasticus. His branding of those excellent Men, and the Church
of God in those times, may teach us to bear the Characters he gives us the more
patiently. So likewise, when he says their Practice will signify no more to
us in this, than in their other Immoralities. The meaning is, there must be
other Immoralities in them that differ from him in his point. So here we have a
Test, to try who are* and who are not honest Men.

Yet I dare be bold to say, he never found Iaddus charged with any Immorality
whatsoever. Nor we have not found him in any Error but this, that he thought
himself bound to Darius while he was living. This was an Error indeed, if he
meant as the Words strictly signify. For an Oath of Allegiance to any King,
can bind one no longer than while he is that King's Subject. It does not bind,
says the p. 19. 20, 21.
Objector, in case of Cession or Submission. Nor, say other Divines, in Case of
Conquest: And Iaddus, when he became subject to Alexander, was plainly of this
later Opinion, by which he explained or corrected what he said formerly.

Now Iaddus being a Man of that high place in the Church, of so clear a Repute
ever since in all Ages; what should make the Objector and his Party (which I
hope is not great) make so light of such an eminent and venerable Example? He
tells us Iaddus becoming a Subject to Alexander contrary to his Oath, is no
more a Pattern for us to follow, than Eliashib' s building a Chamber in the
Temple for Tobia, is an Argument for us to act contrary to the express Laws of
God. This is home to the purpose, and being said at the first, might have saved
him and me all this trouble.

Now all the Question is, whether Jaddus acted contrary to his Oath to Darius,
in becoming a Subject to Alexander. To judge aright of this Question, we must
consider what Circumstances he was in at the taking of this Oath, and how they
were changed at the time of his submitting to Alexander.

First, He was a Subject to Darius before the taking of this Oath: and by it he
gave no other right to Darius, than what he had before, he gave him only a
greater assurance.

Secondly, The right that Darius had over the Jews, was no other than what
descended to him from Cyrus: And that was by his Conquest over the Babylonians,
that were their former Lords.

Thirdly, That right of Conquest being descended to this Darius, was won from
him by Alexander, that had overcome him in War, and so made himself Lord of
that Country, and so Alexander now had the same right to their Allegiance which
Darius had before.

Fourthly, His right to their Allegiance being ceased, their Oath to him was of
no Obligation: But they were as free, and had as much reason to pay their
Allegiance now to Alexander, as they had formerly to Darius or Cyrus.

This seems to be the ground that Iaddus went upon. And if it was, he had
reason to think he did not contrary to his Oath. For he kept it to the last,
till there was no such King as he had sworn to: And then, having no Revelation
to Guide him, he yielded to the Providence of God, in submitting to him that
had won the Kingdom from Darius.

The Objector having said, because he will have it so, that this Submission of
Iaddus was contrary to his Oath; goes on, and compares it with that Fact of
Elashib, which the Scripture it self says, was contrary to express Laws of
God. And therefore he would have us take heed of following Iaddus for our
Pattern; as if we were as well assured of what he says, as we are of what we
read in the Scripture.

He values his own Opinion too much, that would impose it upon others at this
rate.

And yet he that will not submit to it, falls under all the heavy Censures of
his Book. They must be Deserters of Principles, and guilty of Rebellion and
Perjury; and why not? Should we think to come off better than Iaddus who is
condemned already, and with him all the Jewish Church of that Age. But all
other Churches of God have done like them, as often as they have come into their
Circumstances.

I do not except that which he fills his Book with namely the Jewish Church in
Iehoiada's time; for they were in much different Circumstances, as I doubt not
you will show. He cannot pretend to show, that any other Church has done
otherwise then that under Iaddus, which he has condemned already. He will
shortly see, that they are all against him in this Cause; and then we are to
expect the like Judgment upon all Churches, Jewish and Christian; unless the
Objector think better, and change his mind, or at least forbear such unjust and
uncharitable Censures, which I wish he may both for his own and for the
Churches sake.

This I hope will be the Fruit of your Answer to his Postscript, which is
earnestly expected by

SIR, Your Friend and Servant. F

A Catalogue of Books sold by Thomas Jones at the White-Horse without
Temple-Barr.
I. SIR John Chardins Travels into Persia, etc. Folio.

II. A Moral Essay upon the Soul of Man: Containing, 1. The Preference due to
the Soul above the Body, from the reason of it is Spiritual and Immortal Nature.
2. Of our Duties of Religion and of Morality, whether toward God, whether
toward our selves, whether toward Man, and of our Duty of all Gospel
Self-denial; which result from the manner how our Souls Are and Operate in our
Bodies under the Visible Empire of God. 3. Concerning our Duties of Time and
Eternity, of the present Life and of the Life to come, of the present World and
of the World to come; which result from the manner how our Souls ought to be
out of our Bodies, first of all; and then in our Spiritualized Bodies after the
Universal Resurrection. Octavo.

III. A Pious Office for sick and weak Persons; wherein many Directions and
useful Instructions are given them; with Supplications, Prayers, and
Meditations, proper for their Condition* Octavo.

IV. Weeks-Exercise. Twelves.

V. In the Press, A choice Collection of Lessons for 2 and 3 Flutes. With an
Addition of Aires, in Three Parts, for Violins, etc.


