A TREATISE OF THE EPISCOPACY, LITURGIES, AND ECCLESIASTICAL CEREMONIES OF THE
PRIMITIVE TIMES, AND Of the mutations which happened to them in the fucceeding
Ages: GATHERED Out of the Works of the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Church.

By John Lloyd B. D. Presbyter of the Church of North-Mimmes in Hertfordshire.

Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.

Phil. 4.5. Multum sacerdotalis officii meritum splendescit, ubi sic summorum
servatur auctoritas, ut in nu^^ inferiorum putatur imminuta libertas.

Leonis Epist. 61. Episcopi sacerdotes se esse noverint, non Dominos; honorent
clericos quafi clericos, ut and ipsis a clericis, quasi Episcopis honor
deferatur.

Hierom. ad Nepotianum De vita clericorum. LONDON, Printed by W. G. for John
Sherley at the Sign of the Pelican, and Robert Littlebury at the Sign of the
Unicorn in Little Britain. M.DC.LX.

TO The Right Reverend Father in God JOHN LORD BISHOP OF EXCESTER.
MY LORD,
WHen the dark night of our confusions was by Gods wonderful mercy, (never to
be forgotten) well nigh at an end, by the near approaching of our Sun, the
breath of our nostrils, our dread Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, unto the
horizon of his paenitent and loyal Subjects in his hereditary Kingdoms and
Dominions, whereby all began to be revived, and to be prepared for the
receiving all good impressions: in this beginning of our happiness,
(considering with my self by what best means men of different apprehensions
concerning Ecclesiastical things might be brought unto godly unity and meet
uniformity therein;) I thought that the knowledge of the state of the Church of
Christ in the Apostles days, and in the four Centuries following their times,
(as to the form of Ecclesiastical Government, Discipline, Liturgy and Rites,
used in them) would very much conduce to the attainment of that blessed end.
For in those days many thousands of holy Confessors and Martyrs flourished; in
those times lived the most reverend Fathers of the first four general Councils,
of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, celebrated over all the
Christian world; of whose wisdom and godly care, to do nothing in those
particulars against the institutions of Christ and his Apostles, but rather to
do all things as might be most pleasing to God, and most conducing to the
edification of the Church, no prudent and charitable man can entertain the
least doubt: Men they were, and might err; but that so many men of
extraordinary holiness and wisdom, compared to the best men of these latter
Centuries, should unanimously agree for the space of two, three or four hundred
years in setting up and practicing superstition, is incredible to them who
believe that God has promised to teach the humble his way, and show his
covenant to them that fear him, and not to forsake them which have not first
forsaken him. Having therefore reason and religion to assure me, that all
understanding and sober men, if they could once see the form of
Church Government, with the Liturgies and Rites used by those Primitive
Churches, demonstrated by undeniable testimonies of pure antiquity, would
easily be induced to embrace them so far as they should appear to be convenient
for Christian unity and edification, in the present circumstances of time,
place, and persons, (whereof not private men, but the Governors Civil and
Ecclesiastical are the only Judges on earth) I made what inquiry I could, if
any book were extant in the English tongue containing a brief, full, and plain
demonstration of all the said Ecclesiastical things, which might be had at a
cheap rate, soon read over, and easily understood by all men of indifferent
capacity, whereby the knowledge of those things might be the more divulged:
But, after diligent inquiry, finding none, I resolved (being the work was
within the limits of my vocation, and in reading the ancient writers, I had
with no small diligence noted the passages conducing thereto) invocato Dei Opt.
Max. Nomine, to use my poor talent with my best endeavor to write such a little
book, which should comprehend in it the sum and substance of all the matters
above specified, as briefly, fully and plainly as I could. And this was the
beginning of this small Treatise; which, being ended in convenient time, was
offered to worthy men of excellent indowments to be perused by them, in hope
that one or other of them (knowing the usefulness of the matter treated of, and
observing the too plain, low, and uneven manner of writing) would be moved to
put forth a work upon that subject; which (being replenished with good variety
of well ordered matters, adorned with convenient eloquence, and commended by
the worthy name of an Author famous for his learning, eloquence, and virtues)
would be by all readily entertained, greedily read, and would sweetly convey
the things desired to be published, to the knowledge of all men. But herein my
hope failed me: For those worthy persons were so employed in the high and
weighty affairs of the Church, that they had no leisure to go about this,
(although an useful work, yet) of less profit to the Church and less
proportionable to their great abilities, then the sublime employment, wherein
their time was spent. What remained then, but that either that needful work
must be altogether wanting, or this poor treatise so void of due ornaments must
be suffered to go abroad. I had indeed once in a manner resolved to bury it in
my study, but an occasion bringing the matterr into a new debate, I suffered
some reasons to prevail with me to give it leave to present it self to the
view of the world; yet not without some honorable Patron the glorious luster
of whose great learning, Excellent Virtues and precious name might both
illumminate it, and conciliate for the mean and obscure author some room in the
good esteem and affection of learned and good men. For which end I thought it
most convenient to make choice of one of those very bright stars, which his
Majesty's wisdom and goodness had been pleased to set in the firmament of our
Church: among whom your Lordship was first presented to my thoughts in your
very learned, elegant and eloquent works, especially both in your testification
of your great and very remarkable zeal for the now most blessed and glorious
Saint and Martyr our late glorious King CHARLES the first, and in your no less
zealous fidelity to our most dear and dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the
second, manifested in times of greatest peril, and also in your sighs, groans,
complaints and prayers for and of the Church of England in her deep distress,
in your prudent and indefatigable endeavors for her restoration, in those
parts of your Lordships most learned writings, wherein, as in exceeding fair
monuments more lasting then brass, you consecrate the blessed Memories of many
very precious names, viz. of the right reverend Fathers, Bishop Andrews, Bishop
Morton, Bishop Potter, Bishop Hall, Bishop Brownrigg, and other honorable
persons, never to be remembered without due acknowledgement of their
transcendent worth: and especially, of the most reverend Father in God, Dr.
James Usher late Archbishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of all Ireland; who,
in an exact knowledge of all good learning, in depth of judgment, in the due
stating and well clearing controversies of Religion, and in sanctity of life,
was not much (if at all) inferior to any the best of Bishops since the Apostles
days; And lasty, in an acceptable taste which I have had of the sweetness of
your virtue in a particular favor, for which I present my humble thanks to
your Lordship.

May it please you, right reverend father, to take this small work into your
honorable patronage and protection, and, pardoning my boldness in this attempt,
to take in good part the very humble and hearty tender of my best service to
your Lordship. God Almighty long continue your life and prosperous Estate, and
make you a happy instrument of much good to his Church.

Your Lordships in all Duty John Lloyd Praesb.

The PREFACE.
THis short treatise contains the sum and substance of what the reverend
Doctors of the Primitive Churches for the first four hundred years after the
birth of our blessed Savior have practiced and written, and thereby
transmitted to our times, concerning Episcopacy, Presbytery, Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Liturgy and Ceremonies, omitting only those which appear to be
impertinent to the state and condition of the present times. Every material
point herein is proved out of authors received by all sides (which caused the
omission of the testimony of Ignatius, etc.) and such authors against whom it
cannot be reasonably presumed, that they were deceived or erred in their
relation of matters of fact and practice, done or used in the times, wherein
they themselves or those with whom they conversed, did live. The authorities
were not collected by the help of tables, or received from second hands (whence
mistakes do easily and usually arise) but were taken from the authors own work
read and duly considered. Because the Holy Scripture by reason of humane
infirmities in all, and perverseness in many, is in many parts
thereof-diversely understood, it is very needful (says Vincentius Lirinensis)
that the line of Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation be directed
according to the rule of Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. And also in the
very Catholic Church great care must be had, Adversus haeres. c. 2.
(says the same ancient author) that we hold that which has been believed
every where, always, and by all. Which direction of this discreet Writer, In
ipsa item Catholica Ecclesia magnopre curandum est, ut id teneamus quod ubique,
quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. c. 3.
rightly understood and applied, is very good, and is and has been of singular
use, especially against Schismatics and Heretics. For when the consent of the
Catholic Church in her principal members in all the parts of the world, and in
all ages, beginning in, and proceeding from the Apostolical times, unto any
other set or proposed age, does clearly appear to be in any Divine Doctrine,
Discipline, Liturgy, Rites, or any Ecclesiastical usage, who can gainsay that
unanimous judgment of all the Saints of God, which is a far better interpreter
of the word of God, then any general council can be? who dare refuse to
embrace the sentence of that just and impartial Judge, except in decrees about
things in their nature and morally mutable, which may by the good leave of that
Judge be with honor laid aside, when they become unprofitable or
dissentaneous to the edification and peace of the Church? The Ecclesiastical
institutions which want sufficient evidence to prove their approbation by the
Church flourishing in the Apostles days, and are found to have the general
approbation of the Churches between the times of the Apostles, and about the
year of our Lord 500, although they be of less esteem and regard then the
institutions known to be received by the Apostolical Church, yet are they
Venerable and worthy of very great regard: partly, because of the propinquity
of those Churches, to the time of the Apostles, from whom some of them might be
probably thought to be derived, although a certain proof of their derivation
appeared not to succeeding ages: partly because of the eminent wisdom of the
Fathers, and exemplary sanctity of the Churches in those times, in comparison
of the Churches in the following Generations. The Churches of this space of
time; that is, between the Apostles decease and the year 500. wanted the
extraordinary Apostolical Spirit, which so guided the Church, planted by them
in all public resolutions, that she would make no Ordinance without the
Apostles approbation, and having it, she could not err in her determinations.
All other Churches therefore might easily err, and they that upon good
occasion given them would modesty affirm, that they did err in some
constitutions and usages generally approved by them, and also in some remote
conclusions of the Divine Doctrine, are not to be thought to disparage them,
seeing upon the matter they say no more, then that they were men which wanted
the guide of the holy Spirit to lead them infallibly to truth and goodness in
all things of Ecclesiastical concernment; but that those Churches within the
first 500 years erred in any public constitutions or customs unto Idolatry,
or, which is less, unto apparent superstition, is a thing improbable and
incredible to them, who rightly consider the public doctrine and
Ecclesiastical Ordinances of those times, and take due notice of the great
prudence and holiness of many of the chief Governors and Pillars of those
Churches; Heretics, Idolaters and superstitious persons were in many of the
Churches, but that the Churches themselves in any part of that time became
Haereticall, Idolatrous, or Superstitious, is very untrue and unworthy the
thought of a prudent and charitable man. And here by the way, concerning the
Church of England, if we compare her in her legal constitution with any other
Church after the year of our Lord 180. it will be found that they who charge
her with Antichristianisme, Idolatry, or Superstition in her constitution,
established by Law, do by clear consequence pass the sentence of the same
condemnation upon every of those Churches, especially them of the 4th and 5th
century: the rashness and injustice of which censure is very worthy of a very
severe censure. The Apostle, indeed, says that the mystery of iniquity began
to work in his time: 2 These. 2.7. Revel. 2.24.
but did he mean thereby that the mysterious iniquity and depth of Satan,
began to work in the public constitutions of the Catholic Church in his
days, and that they were parts of the constitutions? no surely, neither can
any Christian be so simple or so injurious to the Ministry of the Apostles,
and the purity of that Church, as to think that the Apostle had any such
meaning. The mystery of Iniquity was indeed in the Church in some dead
branches, in some wicked livers and Haereticks, but it was not of the Church,
it was no part of the constitution of the Church, although it did labor to
insinuate and work it self into it: it may be granted as very probable, that
the mystery of iniquity in particular, and those dead members, and by them
working upon the Churches, might more vitiate the Churches of the second
century then the Churches in the first century, and the Churches in the third
century, more then the Churches of the second and so of the rest to the end of
the fifth century; but that in any part of that time it prevailed so far, as to
become a part of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine, Discipline, Liturgy or
Ceremonies universally received and used, is rather a surmise of an excess of
jealousy, then an opinion grounded upon probable reasons, it is so far from
being an approved truth. After the year 500. and the division of the Empire,
and establishment of the Kings, 2 These. 2.3. Revel. 17.12, 13.16.
which were to give their power and strength to the Beast, and which in due
time were to burn the Whore of Babylon, the Churches grew generally more and
more corrupt; the civil and Ecclesiastical confusions attending the Wars in
the several Provinces, giving advantage to the mystery of Iniquity, to mingle
it self, first with the Discipline and Ceremonies, and after with the public
Doctrine; whereby, first superstition, then Idolatry, and lastly, Heresies took
place in the public profession of the Churches; so that in persons who
knowingly swallowed the good and bad together, the infection of the mystery of
Iniquity hindered the operation of the good portion of the whole lump, and
working the effect of its poison into their vital parts, corrupted and
destroyed them. And therefore these latter Churches were not by the first
reformers of our Church proposed, for patterns, as the former were, which
preserved the purity of Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremonies without the
addition of any thing causing Superstition, much less Idolatry or Haeresy. Our
Church has separated the Precious from the Vile, the good of Doctrine,
Discipline, and Rites from the pestiferous and noxious additions; and now if
either the abuse of prosperity, or the iniquity of the late times has added
any evil quality to any of our Ecclesiastical things, or made us incapable of
good by some Rite or particle of the Discipline or Liturgy, or if any defect
appear to be in our former reformations, and especially if any of these have
happened in any Rite of adoration (wherein is the greatest danger;) it is not
to be doubted, but that all these things will be carefully looked into; and
whether by omission, explanation or otherwise, the Discipline and Rites, by the
help and blessing of God, shall be reformed according to the best patterns, and
as shall most conduce to the godly unity and peace of the Church and Kingdom.
What do I speak only of future Reformation? seeing the deep Wisdom, and the
most sincere piety of his Sacred Majesty has by the blessing of God upon his
Royal endeavors, found out the best temperament for the healing of the present
distempers, and by his gracious Declaration has established a most happy
Interim, the fittest that could be devised for the preparing different
apprehensions and affections unto an unity, meet to entertain the best form of
a Christian Church, which the infirmities of these last days of the last time
can well bear. The Regicides of late had proceeded far in breaking down this
our House of God, Psalm. 74. 1 King. 6.7.
with their iron tools, their Axes and Hammers, but as it is said of King
Solomon's Temple, that there was neither Hammer nor Axe nor any tool of iron
heard while it was in building, so our blessed Solomon in reedifying this
decayed house of God, does the work without all iron instruments, without all
unpleasing sounds, it goes on sensim sine sensu, and it is and will be the
glorious effect of his Majesty's incomparable providence, guided by the most
gracious direction of God, cunctando restituisse rem. But some of them which
will read this small tractate, may therein observe some passages, which suppose
the Church of England without the benefit of any proceedings of his Majesty
toward her restoration, and may therefore be ready to censure the Author as
he well deserved, if he had not this just Apology, namely, That he can make it
good by many witnesses of worthy persons of known integrity that this treatise
was ready written five months agon at the least, at which time the Author could
only write of the state and condition of things as they were then, and not as
they would be in times to come. If any object, It had been better, if ever, to
have published this at that time, for which it seems more convenient; to which
I say, That the Conscience of mine own infirmities retarded and had almost
hindered the publication thereof.

But partly my desire to contribute my poor mite toward the restoration of
Gods House prevailed with me, partly believing the truth of that saying of
Clemens of Alexandria, that the science of preaching is in a manner Angelical,
and whether it be exercised by the tongue or hand (writing) profits either
way, and knowing my self to be not far from the time when the strength of voice
may decrease, I thought it not amiss to put it to the trial by this beginning;
whether I might hereafter with any hope of acceptance and profit, attempt to
recompense the defect which (if I live) may likely happen in my voice, with the
labor and pains of preaching by the pen. Some may think that I have made no
good choice in preferring the judgment of St. Hierome a Presbyter, and not well
affected, (as many think) to Episcopacy, before the opinion of Epiphanius a
Bishop, and the elder of the two. Aerius maintained that neither the Apostles
were, nor the Churches could lawfully be the authors of the preferment of a
Bishop above the Presbyters, and therefore he departed from the Communion of
the Catholic Church, and became an Independent Presbyter of an independent
Congregation.
First, I must deny that Hierome was disaffected to good Bishops, or to the
Episcopal dignity. His works do abundantly testify, that he bad in singular
honor, both the one and the other: only he often reproves, and that sharply
the Ambition, Covetuousness, and other vices of many Bishops, which not he
only, but others before him, and in his time, even Bishops themselves did
perform with no less sharpness and severity. See one among others, Gregory,
who was created Bishop of Sasimis, executed his function in Nazianzum, and
after was advanced to the Archbishopric of Constantinople, this Archbishop
wishes there were no prerogative of the Throne, nor Prelacy, which (says he)
had indeed in former times been desired of good and prudent men, but which now
to shun, is counted an act of singular prudence. What? is this wise and holy
Archbishop for the abrogation of Episcopacy root and branch? no; no, he only
taxes the exorbitancy, the abuse, the ambition, and not the holy function: he
expounds himself, when in the same place he expresses the prelacy which he
wishes outed, to be the Tyranny of Authority, and pre-eminence; it is that
which caused many wife men to shun the function, because in had company it is
difficult to rule well, which at all times is the work of an excelling faculty,
Greg. Niz. in Apolog, 1. In orat. ad patrem, Basilia praesente.
and it many times happens (says the same Father) that grace it self begets
Pride, and then we know that the corruption of the best is the worst. Secondly,
Hierome was not inferior in learning, eloquence and piety to any of the
Ancients, neither did any excel him in the knowledge of the antiquities of the
Church. And he, that does not look very narrowly into the works of Epiphanius,
may find him defective in this last. Hierome's testimony concerning the
original of Episcopacy, although in formal expressions it differs from
Epiphanius's, yet perhaps by the distinction of extraordinary and ordinary
Episcopacy, the difference in words may be brought into an unity in sense; and
if there be a difference in the sense between them: Yet Hierome affords a more
immediate, direct, and efficacious argument for Episcopacy and its contiruance
then the other. I am much deceived, and have Crossed mine own resolution, if I
have not delivered the truth impartially, as I found it in the holy old
Doctors. And although a lover of the Presbytery may dislike some passage of
this little book singly considered, and a lover of Episcopacy dislike some
other passage in like sort apprehended; yet I have good hope that, when both
have read the whole, and laid before them the entire series of the discourse,
they may see good reason to like well in the whole, what they disliked apart,
and by it self considered, and will heartily acknowledge that every thing
therein tends to the same good end which both profess to aim at.

A Treatise of the Primitive Episcopacy, Liturgies, Rights, etc.
IT having pleased God to choose for himself out of sinful men a peculiar
people to set forth his glorious praises, he never left the world destitute of
heavenly institutions and Laws, whereby men might be translated from the state
of sin and misery, to the state of holiness and Salvation, and be made and
preserved answerable in conversation to the blessed condition of their
translation and change.

These willing and obedient people addicted to the Service of Almighty God,
were, are, and will be by him reputed, his house, Family, and Kingdom, which
therefore cannot be imagined to be without order and rule, without some certain
persons set apart to teach the Divine Laws, and execute other Divine
institutions, and with consent of the concerned, to make Ecclesiastical
Ordinances, which times, places, and other circumstances require, agreeable to
the Divine, and subservient to the due and most decent execution of them.

Of the number of these teachers and rulers of Gods house were, Adam, Noah,
Abraham, and other heads of numerous Families unto the time of the giving of
the Law by Moses; after the Law, partly fit persons of the tribe of Levi,
partly the Prophets, partly men bred in the Schools of the Prophets, and John
the Baptist, performed the Divine and Ecclesiastical functions unto the time of
our Saviors Baptism: after which time he himself the Builder and Master of the
house and Family, (whose servants and underofficers all other rulets
acknowledge themselves to be, deriving from him not only their authority, but
also all their abilities, whereby they are made able in any measure to fulfill
the holy offices) he (I say) in his own person and in our nature, was pleased
to execute such parts of his own institutions as he saw convenient for himself
to perform, and to choose, besides seventy Disciples, twelve other men to be
his Apostles and Ministers of the heavenly doctrine, and annexed ceremonies.

It appears, that it was the intention of our Savior, that the number of
twelve Apostles should be his primary instruments in founding the Original
Churches of Christ, the Mothers of all other Churches to succeed unto the end
of the world; It was also his purpose to make them parents of all other
Ministers which should succeed in an ordinary course; which is hereby manifest,
because Christ promised to be with them unto the worlds end, which cannot be
verified of their persons, and therefore is to be understood of them in the
persons of their successors, proceeding from them by successive ordination,
Basil. constit. Monast. c. 22. and Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Coloss. hom. 3.
and represented in their persons; wherefore the ordination of the Apostles,
was in some sort the ordination of their successors, and their mission to teach
and baptize, was a virtual or legal mission of the other.

There were three Editions of the covenant of grace, the one from Adam to
Abraham, the second from him to our Savior, the third from our Savior unto
the end of the world. In every of these, the substance and kernel of the
Covenant was, and is the same, the difference is in remarkable accidents and
circumstances; the Ministers of the heavenly Doctrine in the first and second,
preached Christ to come, and had the Spirit accompanying the word, and seals of
the Covenant ministered by them, as an incident annexed by Almighty God to their
ordination: but yet so, as the spirit was ordinarily given in a lesser measure
to the ministry of the first, then or the second Edition; The Apostles were in
their call to the Apostleship before the death of our Savior ordained
ministers of the third Edition of the Covenant, because Christ was now come in
the flesh, and had begun to publish the great Salvation, and therefore they had
a proportionable increase of the spirit added to their ministry, for the
working of repentance, faith, and holiness in men above the ordinary measure
granted to the ministry of the second Edition.

Notwithstanding that the Ministers of the first and second Edition of the
Covenant of grace, Sect. 2.
had a power of binding and loosing, in having the spirit accompanying their
office and service, and that the Apostles in the mortal life of our Savior,
had the same in a higher degree; yet the promise made to the confession of St.
Peter, of giving unto him a power of binding and loosing with the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven was not in vain, as of a thing which he had already
received; for he had received the same only in the measure and degree meet to
be dispensed at that time, and not in the ordinary fullness promised to the
ministers of the new Testament, fully confirmed by the death and resurrection
of Christ: and therefore our Savior after his rising again from the dead,
bestowed upon them that promised fullness of the Spirit, which was in ordinary
to accompany their ministry of the word, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 6. Conc.
Forojuliens. an. 791. c. 13. Athanas. dicta and interpret. parabol. S. Script.
sacraments and censures, etc. breathing upon them and saying, receive ye the
Holy Ghost, whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained; hence it is, that the ministry of
the new Testament fully confirmed, is in an eminent way the ministry of the
spirit, and so called; and hence it is that the Apostle says, that the weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down reasonings and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ.

This measure of the Spirit going along and operating in the ministerial
preaching, prayer, baptising, blessing, absolving, etc. was now very necessary,
as in other respects, so in this, that the world that had been so long
captivated by Satan, and mightily habituated in all sinful ways, Semen
Sermonis Christi cum in animam audientis inciderit per gradus suos crescit-tam
diu in ancipiti est, quamdiu pariat quod concepit. Hierom. in Epist. ad Gal. c.
4.
might be converted unto God, and preserved in his grace.

Some will say, why are not all hearers of the Gospel converted? to which it is
soon answered, that the Holy Spirit works in all them that hear the Gospel
preached to them, yet gradually; first, that they may co-work, and then that
they may continue co-working, until the work of saving faith be perfected in
them. He gives an eat able to hear, to the hearers he gives ability to
understand, and gives ability in some degree to will the good, and where the
good is willed, he has given the will and the deed; and where the Good we are
enabled to understand and Will, is not understood or Willed, that comes from
the natural corrupted freedom of man's will, which the spirit does not take
away against our will, because he will not destrey his own work; namely, that
good natural freedom of will, conferred upon man in his creation, capable of
being a subject of good or evil.

A person not ordained to the holy ministry may in time and place teach and
exhort with a speech no less Orthodox, wholesome and persuasive, then any
ordained minister of the Cospel can use, and yet it must be acknowledged to be
far inferior in its operation tending to true edification, then the speech of a
minister seeming less persuasive; because this is always accompanied with the
spirit, the other is not, but supposes some grace in the hearer which it
stirs: or if it be accompanied with a quickening or healing grace, it is of
Gods mere indulgence, and not by virtue of Gods ordinary constitution and
promise; and therefore the spirit going with the exhortation of the minister
does always edify or is resisted; and so the word preached by him is a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one
the favor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life.

The Apostles all this while had not received the gradual complement of the
gifts ordained to be bestowed upon the ministers of the new Testament; Sect. 3.
it was meet that Christ should in our entire nature open heaven and enter into
it, before the fullness of the ordinary or extraordinary gifts subservient for
the right using of the Keys of Heaven, should be granted to his Vicegerents
upon earth.

Wherefore after his opening and possession of Heaven, he gave those gifts unto
men, both extraordinary in the Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, and
ordinary, in the Pastors and Doctors.

The first ordinary Pastors, received their ordination from the Apostles; of
the Apostles we know no other ordination then Christ's immediate calling of them
to that office, in which they were by the foresaid degrees perfected; the
Pastors received in the Apostles ordination their seminal or virtual ordination
(as was said) to their function, which received its perfection of degrees in
the effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.

The Author of the Comments upon St. Paul's Epistles attributed to St. Ambrose
says, that it was lawful at the first for Laics and Deacons to preach in the
Assemblies and Baptize; yet of that his assertion he brings no sound proof;
Philip was ordained a Deacon, and he baptized the Eunuch; Ananias a Disciple
baptized Saul, after called Paul; did Ananias do so only in the capacity of a
Disciple, and the other only in the capacity of a Deacon? No surely; for it
appears that they had an immediate mission from God to teach and baptize, which
is equivalent to an ordination, to the office of a Pastor, either as to those
acts only, and for that time only, or as to the whole pastoral function to be
constantly exercised. If any examples be found in the Acts of the Apostles of
any Laics or Deacons performing pastoral offices, whose ordination ordinary or
extraordinary is not mentioned, its meeter to judge and believe, that they had
either the ordinary call or the extraordinary, according to the examples of
Ananias and Philip (when the contrary cannot be proved) then to affirm that any
layman might then at his pleasure exercise the acts of that sacred vocation.

Paul was no sooner a Christian, but he was instantly by Christ's immediate
appointment made an Apostle ( Act. 9.15, 20. cum Gal. 1.16, 17, 23.) and
without any other ordination preached the Gospel of Christ; 1 Timothy 2.7.
yet some years after he together with Barnabas were by the express command of
the Holy Ghost ordained by certain Prophets and Doctors which then were at
Antioch. In which ordination two things are observable. First, that the
Apostles were ordained by their inferiors in office; but the extraordinary
commission whereby this was done, makes an exception confirming the rule, which
is, that without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater. Heb.
7.7.
The second thing to be considered in that ordination are the sacred ceremonies
used in the ordination of Pastors, to wit, prayer, which is the principal;
fasting to commend the prayer, and imposition of hands, as a visible
demonstration of Gods blessing them and their ministry with the gift of the
spirit to accompany their service to the loosing of men from the guilt and
power of sin, and setting of them at liberty, to walk in the ways of Gods
commandments.

An ordination of Pastors celebrated without any one of these ceremonies,
cannot be accounted right and regular: St. Paul with other who were Presbyters
ordained Timothy by the joint imposition of his and their hands; we find
imposition of hands placed by the Apostle among the fundamentals of Christian
Religion; 1 Timothy 4.14. cum 2 Timothy 1.6. Heb. 6.1, 2.
and there, although it follows the immersions in the names of the blessed
Trinity, and therefore may seem to import confirmation; yet it need not denote
confirmation alone, but any other perpetual ordinance of God, wherein this
ceremony was to be used, by the authority of the Apostles exampled and practice.

They which say that this ceremony was to last no longer in use then God was
pleased to continue the miraculous operations usual in the Apostolic times,
seem to impute inconsiderateness to the Apostle, in reckoning that one of the
fundamentals of Religion, which was not to be perpetually continued in the
militant Church: but we are assured, that the Apostle being moved by the Holy
Ghost, could not speak inconsiderately, and that every fundamental of Christian
Religion, shall continue in Christ's Church unto the end of the world, as this
ceremony both in confirmation and in ordinations of Pastors has hitherto been
always used in the universal Church, and without doubt will so continue unto
the end of time.

Pastors are called in the Apostolical Epistles by two other names, Sect. 4.
that is, Bishops and Presbyters; the Apostleship contained in it self the
pastoral offices, and therefore an Apostle was also called a Bishop and
Presbyter. The first mention of Pastors by the name of Presbyters of Elders, is
in Acts 11.30. where the Church of Antioch is said to have sent relief by
Barnabas and Saul unto the Elders of the Churches in Judaea, in the time of the
great dearth, which was in the days of Claudius Caesar; in the 15 Chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles, we find the controversy concerning the necessity of
circumcision and keeping of the Law of Moses, brought by Paul and Barnabas
before the Apostles and Elders or Presbyters in the Church of Jerusalem to be
by them determined: We see in the chapter of the Acts, how that Paul with some
of the brethren, went in unto James and all the elders were present; whence we
may observe, that the Apostles did not discuss and end the controversy
concerning circumcision and keeping of the Law without the presence of the
Presbyters of the Church where they then were; nor did James alone heat Paul,
but together with his Presbyters did both hear him, and give him that
seasonable Council, to purify himself for the avoiding the offense of the
beleiving Jews, which were numerous in Jerusalem.

Here arises a question, Sect. 5.
whether St. James was head of the Presbyters of the Church of Jerusalem only
as he was an Apostle, having his ordinary residence in that Church, or also as
having an ordinary authority over the Presbyters, which was to be continued to
successors over the succeding Presbyters; it is certain, that as an Apostle he
was the head of the Presbyters, having a superiority over them; but as the
Apostleship was not to pass to successors, so neither was his authority to be
conveyed to any in succession; but to be terminated with his life: it is more
then probable, that at that time he was their superior, only as an Apostle
settled in that Church, neither had we need to conceive him in any subsequent
times to become their head in any other sense then this, if the unanimous
testimony of the ancient Doctors of the Church did not constrain us to be of
another judgment, unless we will reject the witness of the Catholic Church
constantly persevered in from the beginining of the second Centuary after our
Saviors birth unto this day. For the Fathers do constantly affirm that St.
James was (for some time before his decease) Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem,
not only in the sense of the word [Bishop] common to an Apostle and every
Presbyter, but in the sense which soon after the time of Clemens Romanus was
appropriated to it, that is, signifying such a Presbyter, as had a superiority
over all the rest of the Presbyters of the same Church, to continue in him
during life, and to be transferred to some other after him.

Hegesippus an Historian, Apud Eusebius. hiss. l. 4. c. 21. Ibid. l. 3. c. 29.
who flourished about the year 170, relates that after the death of St. James,
Simon Cleopa being chosen Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem, one Thebulis began
to corrupt the Church with vain Doctrine, because he was not made Bishop there.
And the same Historian writes, that Simon Cleopa lived Bishop of that place,
until the times of Trajane the Emperor, under whose government Simon suffered
Martyrdom, and John the Apostle died; by which testimony of an historian who
lived within 60 years after the death of the Apostle St. John, it plainly
appears, that Simon was not (after the death of St. James brother of our
Lord) constituted only a single Presbyter of that Church, nor James before him
head thereof only as an Apostle or an extraordinary governor, but that both
were ordinary rulers of the whole Church, as well Presbyters as the other
members thereof.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedagog. l. 3. c. ult. Strom. 6.
who lived before the year of our Lord 200, makes a clear distinction between a
Bishop and a Presbyter, saying, that in the Scriptures some precepts pertain to
Bishops, some to Presbyters, and some to Deacons; and in another place, that a
Presbyter doing and teaching according to Gods will, although he be not on
earth honored with the first chair, shall sit on the 24 thrones judging the
people: and a little after he says, that here in the Church the provections or
proficiencies of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, be imitations of the angelical
glory. Tertullian, who flourished in the year of our Lord 200, De Monogamia c.
11.
mentions an use in his time of asking leave of the Bishop, of the Presbyters,
and of the Deacons to marry: Elsewhere he calls upon the Heretics to show the
beginnings of their Churches, and so to reckon the order of their Bishops,
running from the beginning by successions, that the first (Bishop) have an
Apostle or an Apostolical man for his auctor or antecessor, as the Church of
Smyrna relates Polycarpus to be placed there Bishop by John (the Apostle;) and
the Church of Rome reports Clement to have been ordained there by Peter (the
Apostle. Adversus Valentin. c. 4.
) In another place the same author says, that Valentinus because he was
ingenious and eloquent had hoped an Episcopacy, De Baptismo. c. 17.
and being angry that another by prerogative of Martyrdom had obtained it, he
departed from the Church. In another place he has this observation, viz. the
emulation of Episcopacy is the mother of Schisms. Adversus haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
and apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18.
I must not forget the testimony of Ireaaeus, who affirms of himself, that he
was a hearer of Polycarpus, who was not only taught by the Apostles, and
conversed with many of them which saw the Lord, but was also by the Apostles in
Asia, Advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3. Edit. Paris. 1567.
(in which is the Church of Smyrna) constituted a Bishop: the same Irenaeus
does enumerate the Bishops of Rome which succeeded one another from Peter unto
Eleutherius, who was the twelfth successor of Peter. Polycrates (who was 65
years in the Lord when he wrote his Epistle unto Victor Bishop of Rome,
concerning the time of the celebration of the Pasche, which was about the year
of our Lord 197, whereby it appears, that he began to flourish about 50 years
after the death of John the Apostle, if not much sooner (if he was come to
years of discretion before his Baptism;) Polycrates (I say) who was so near the
times of the Apostles says, that he was the eighth Bishop of Ephesus. Now it
is acknowledged by all, that in the time of Victor, a Bishop had the
pre-eminence over the Presbyters in every Church; and therefore it is
consequent, that Polycrates by the seven Bishops preceding him in Ephesus,
means not single Presbyters, but such Bishops as were in the Church at the
time of his writing that Epistle to Victor.

If the principality of the Ecclesiastical regiment had been in the College of
Presbyters; until the death of the Apostles, and after their decease the
principality of that government was committed to one, and not before; surely
Polycrates, Irenaeus, and Hegesippus had egregiously prevaticated in
attributing the principality of one to some part of the time of the Apostles,
which (they living with thousands who must have seen and consented to that
change made after the Apostles decease, if any such had been then first made,)
could not be ignorant of. But that these holy men were not unfaithful in their
relation, does evidently appear by this; namely, that all the Fathers, none
contradicting, agree with them, affirming Bishops having in an ordinary way a
superiority over Presbyters, to have been ordained in the times of the Apostles.

Concerning Archbishops, Sect 6.
(omitting the guesses of some ancient Doctors concerning the Archiepiscopacy
of Mark, Timothy, and Titus,) we may find some intimation of their being in the
end of the second century, partly, by the act of Victor Bishop of Rome, in his
attempt to excommunicate the Churches of the East, and partly by a passage in
Tertullian, where he says, the Bishop of Bishops has made a decree, etc. but
certain it is, that before the year of our Lord 250, wherein Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage flourished, l. de pudicitia c. 1.
Archbishops were ordained in the Church: For Cyprian writes, that there were
many years and a long age since many Bishops convening under Agryppinus (Bishop
of Carthage) decreed, Epist. ad Jub^in. ad Cornel. l. 4. Epist. 8.
etc. and in one of his Epistles to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, he says, that
his adversaries boasted, saying, that twenty five Bishops of Numidia would come
to Carthage, who would make unto themselves a Bishop there.

Among these Archbishops, (who were such indeed, but not yet in name, that we
can find in any approved auctor of that age) were some more eminent then other;
each of which had some Archbishops subordinate to them, which in following
times were called primates: for in a province was one chief City, under which
were diverse mother Cities, which had lesser Cities under them; In these were
the Bishops, in the Mother-cities were the Metropolitans or Archbishops, in
the first, the Primates; privileges made some variations.

Of Primates and Metropolitans, the Council of Nice says, it is manifest,
that, if any be ordained without the will and conscience of the Metropolitan
Bishop, this great and holy Council has decreed, he ought not to be a Bishop.
And in another Canon, the ancient manner (or custom) does last in Egypt, Lybia
and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria have the power of all these; for
the Bishop of Rome has a like custom, in like manner also at Antioch and
other provinces: let the due honor proper to every Church be preserved to it.
These Primates and Archbishops had no power in things proper to the cognizance
of a Bishop in his own Diocese, but only in those things whereof the Canons of
the Church had committed to them the hearing and Judgment, or which were of
concernment to many Diocesses: And this is it which Cyprian means, where he
says, Epist. ad Quintium.
none of us (Bishops) does constitute himself to be a Bishop of Bishops, or
does compel this College by tyrannical terror to the necessity of obeying,
seeing every Bishop has according to his own liberty and free will, that he
may not be judged by another. Adrian the Emperor, Apud Vopisum in Saturnino.
who reigned from the year of our Lord 117, to the year 135, writes in a
certain Epistle horrible untruths against Christians; as that there was never a
Presbyter of the Christians which was not a Mathematician, a Southsayer, etc.
that the very Patriarch, when he came to Egypt, was by some compelled to adore
Serapis, by others to adore Christ; that they, which said themselves to be
Bishops of Christ, were devoted to Serapis. It seems this Emperor had taken
notice, that Christians had Ecclesiastical officers, whereof some were-called
Presbyters, some called Bishops, and (perhaps) that the Bishop of Alexandria
was over all Egypt, etc. and Bishops thereof; and therefore calls him by the
name of a like civil Magistrate, (Patriarch,) which was afterward used by
Christians in a like sense: but too much has been said to show that it was
ordained in the times of the Apostles, that the principal authority in every
Church should be in one Presbyter advanced above and over the rest, unto whom
in a short time after, the name of (Bishop) was made proper. This truth is so
clear and written, as it were, with capital or uncial letters in the writings
of all the ancients, that he that runs may read it in them.

In the next place it should be considered, whether that Ordinance constituting
Episcopacy made in the Apostolical times, was not, in proper sense, an
Apostolical constitution; Sect. 7.
and if so, whether therefore it be unalterable? But that this matter may be
better understood, it is convenient first to speak of the Authority and Power
given to the Bishop, what it was, and how ample in those times. De baptism. c.
17.
Tertullian gives us some information in this point, when he says, that the
chief Priest which is the (Bishop) has the right (or power) of giving Baptism;
then the Presbyters and Deacons, but not without the authority of the Bishop,
for the preservation of the honor of the Church, which remaining safe, peace
is safe maintained. For the understanding of this, we must consider, that,
where the exercise of the power of preaching, baptising, etc. in such place and
among such persons was not by some ordinance of the Church determined to this
or that particular Presbyter, there it pertained to the Bishop to do it, and
not to any other without his leave; yea the very Ordinances and Canons could
not be made without his consent and authority, as their principal author under
Christ. In Epist. ad Titum. c. 1.
For as Hierom says, the whole care of the Church belongs unto the Bishop; and
therefore he was to see that all the Presbyters did their duties assigned to
them, and that the ministerial acts not allotted to any special Presbyter, were
to be done by the Bishop himself, or by him whom he would appoint to do them.

Hierom mentions one thing proper to a Bishop; Epist. ad Evagri^m.
what does a Bishop says he (excepting Ordination,) which a Presbyter does not
do? where he makes ordination of Presbytery to be the proper work of a Bishop,
which the Presbyters were not to perform (except perhaps in the Bishops place,
and by his commission in some cases of necessity) as shall be showed hereafter;
not that the Presbyters had no hand in Ordination, but that the principal act
in it, Can. 3.
was only the Bishops. For the fourth Council of Carthage says, Sed sola
propter auctoritatem summo sacerdot o Clericorum ordinatio and consecratio
reservata est, ne a multis Ecclesiae Disciplina vendicata concordiam solveret,
Scandala geneventur. Isid. de Eccl. offic. c. 7. Can. 5. circa an. 656.
when a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop blessing him and holding his hand
upon his head, let the Presbyters also which be present, lay their hands by the
hand of the Bishop upon his head. And it follows in the fourth Canon: when a
Deacon is ordained, let the Bishop alone which blesses him, lay his hand upon
his head, because he is not consecrated to the Priesthood, but to a Service.
Where we are to observe, that the imposition of the hands of the Presbyters, is
a condition antecedent requisite to the consecration of a Presbyter, and so
proper to it, that it may not be used in the ordination of a Deacon, much less
of any other inferior officer; the blessing is the act in o^dination, which is
appropriated to the Bishop. And therefore in the second Council of Hisp^lis,
the Presbyters and Deacons consecrated by a Bishop, who having sore eyes could
not read, were deposed from the degrees which they had ill gotten; a presbyter
having contrary to the order of the Church read the benediction.

The Bishop performed in the Church the chief offices of preaching and
administration of the Communion, if he pleased, none other being to do either
in his presence, but by his call: sometime to show his power, or out of envy,
idleness, or disdain, he neither would himself exhort the people, nor require a
presbyter to do it. ad Nepotianum de vita clericorum.
Which great fault Hierom reproves; in some Churches (says he) is a bad
custom, that the Bishop being present, the presbyters hold their peace, as
though the Bishop envied or disdained to hear them.

Some other things were in some sort appropriated to the Bishop, but were not
made so peculiar to him as ordination was; nor were they all of them so ancient
privileges, nor of that weight; for confirmation was the chiefest of them,
Greg. Epist. l. 3. Ep. 26. Conc. Carth. 3. c. 32. Pseudambros. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
c. 4.
which in some cases and places presbyters might and did usually perform: The
making of the Chrism, the signing of the baptized in the forehead with the sign
of the Cross, consecration of Virgins, of the altar, etc. were ceremonies of
less moment, and some of them of a latter institution.

But notwithstanding that the Bishop had in some things a propriety, and in all
things Ecclesiastical a principality, yet the presbyters had a subordinate
power ordinary or extraordinary in the one, and in the other; for the Bishop
could ordain no presbyter without the consent of the presbyters, and the
im^osition of their hands. Cyprian affirms, that the Clergy of Rome presided
with Cornelius their Bishop. Cyprian Ep. ad Cornelium.
The fourth Council of Carthage prohibits the Bishop to hear any man's cause
without the presence of his Clergy, and forbids him to give, Can. 22. Can. 23.
sell or change any thing belonging to the Church, without consent and
subscription of the Clergy. And that there was not so great a distance between
the Bishop and presbyters, as has of latter times been kept, nor as is between
a presbyter and a Deacon, Can. 34. Can. 35.
does appear by some Canons of the same ancient Council, which ordain that the
Bishop sitting in any place, suffer not a presbyter to stand: and that the
Bishop in the Church sit among the presbyters in a higher seat, but in the
house must know himself to be a College (or companion) of the presbyters.
Concerning the distance between a presbyter and Deacon, the Canons of the Synod
say, that a Deacon is minister as well of the presbyter, Vide Conc. Nicenum. c.
14. and Arelat. 1. c. 21.
as of the Bishop; that a Deacon in the convention of the presbyters may speak
only when he is asked, and that he is not to sit but when he is commanded by
the presbyter. Can. 37. Can. 39. Can. 40.
Therefore it may seem, that if after 300 years since the decease of the
Apostles, (at which time the power of Bishops was much enlarged) there was no
more difference between a Bishop and a presbyter, the difference was far less
at that time between the Bishop and the College of presbyters, then the birth
of popery has made between them. Esai. c. 3.
Hierom calls the College of presbyters the Bishops Senate; intimating
thereby, that the Bishop ought to hear and determine Ecclesiastical causes, in
the presence, and with the advice and consent of his presbyters. Hence it was,
that, l. 3. Epist. 22.
long before the time of St. Hierome, the holy Martyr Cyprian (having with
consent of the Clergy of the place where he then was (being absent from his own
City and presbyters) ordained one a reader, and another a subdeacon, he)
excuses himself by his Letters to the Presbyters of his own Cathedral, saying,
that nothing new was done by him in their absence, but what was begun in their
Common Council, was promoted by urgent necessity; their Council therefore that
was requisite in so small a matter, was much more necessary in matters of
greatest weight.

It is opportune here to consider the famous question, Sect. 8.
whether in the first twenty years of the Apostles preaching (something more or
less) the whole care of the Church did in common belong to the College of
presbyters of every Church where no Apostle was present, nor Evangelist, nor
any supplying the place of an Apostle; or did the care and government of every
Church (except where some invincible hindrance withstood) belong unto one as
principal and head, and to the presbyters only as his Senate and Counselors?

The Ancients vary in this point: Contra haeres. Aerii.
Epiphanius and some others affirm, that the office of a Bishop was instituted
by the Apostles, distinct from the offices of the Apostles, Evangelists,
prophets, and presbyters; Ultra sacerdotium non est gradus ordinis and tamen
intra hunc gradum and ordmem contingit esse distinctionem dignitatum and
officiorum, quae tamen novum gradum vel ordinem non constituunt, ut
Archipresbyter, Episcopus, Archiepiscopus, Patriarcha, pontifex summus, qui
ultra sacerdotium non addunt ordinem nec gradum novum sed solum dignitatem and
officium, and ita Episcopatus prout concernit ordinem sacer dotti been potest
dici ordo, sed prout distinguitur contra sacerdotium dicitur dignitatem quandam
vel officium Episeopi annexum, and non est proprie nomen ordinis, nec no vus
character imprimitur, nec nova potestas datur, sed potestas data ampliatur;
unde sicut non recipit alias claves sic nec alium ordinem: and hoc sensit
magister Hugo (de S. Victore) and Magister sententiarum. Bonavent. in 4. did.
24. q. 3. Et postea -- non ita proprie dicitur aliquis ordinari cum promovetur
in Episcopum, sicut cum promovetur in sacerdotem, sed magis proprie dicitur
consecrari, and postea -- non datur ibi nova potestas sed solum potestas
ligandi and solvendi ampliatur. Solis sacerdotibus datur and in ordine
sacerdotali potestas clavium, scilicet quantum ad solvendum and ligandum quasi
mediatoribus inter Deum and subditos. Si objiciatur quod magis couvenit
potestatem clavium dart Episcopo in consecratione Episcopi, dicendum quod
nequaquam, quia Episcopus non dicitur novum ordinem, nec in consecrationem
Episcopi datur novus ordo sed tantum ampliatur potestas. Alex. Halens. to. 4.
de potest. clavium. q. 20. m. 8. a.

Probatum est (scilicet disp. 140. c. 1.) inquit Vasques quod Hieronymus nullam
constituat differentiam jure Divino inter Episcopatum and Presbyterium, sed
censeat jure tantum ecclesiastico discrimen fuisse introductum. In 3. p. disp.
142. c. 8.

Ego sane (inquit Vasques) suspicor vehementer S. Thomam existimasse
consecrationem cum qua confertur potestas Episcopajis jure humano esse
introductam. In 3. p. disp. 143. c. 2.


and that in all Churches where fit men for that office were found, they were
ordained and set over the presbyters, and that the Senate of presbyters did
alone govern only in some Churches where no man was found fit to be made a
Bishop.

Hierom and some other taught, Episcopes solae ordinatione superiores esse
Presbyteris. Chrysostom. in 1. Ep. ad Timoth. hom. 11. Postea unus est gradus S.
Hierom in 1. Ep. ad Tim. c. 3.
that the Apostles left at the first the whole care of every Church, (where
none of them or their Vicegerents, or Evangelists resided) unto the body of the
presbyters of each Church, which exercised all Ecclesiastical powers in common,
until the presbyters began to divide the flock, and to make of one Church many
Independent Congregations: For the avoiding of which inconvenience, the
Churches unanimously agreed to commit the principal care of every Church unto
one presbyter, without whose consent the rest of the presbyters were not
allowed to exercise any part of their Ecclesiastical function; In Ep. ad Tit.
c. 1. vide gloss. did. 23. c. legimus.
and to that advanced presbyter some ministerial acts, and also the name of
Bishop were after some time appropriated. Before Sidings in Religion (says
Hierom) were made by the instinct of the Devil; and that it was said among the
people, El Amalarium de Eccles. offic. l. 2. c. 13. Et Steph. Eduens. Episcopum
de sacramento altaris. c. 9.
I am of Paul, I of Apollos, etc. the Churches were governed by the Common
Council of the Presbyters: but after that every Presbyter thought those whom he
baptized to be his and not Christ's, it was decreed in all the world, that one
chosen out of the Presbyters should be set over the rest, unto whom all the
care of the Church should appertain; and so the seeds of Schisms should be
taken away. A little after he affirms, that at the first the care of the
Church was equally divided among many; and yet a little further (having cited
out of 1. Epist. to Tim. and the Epist. to Titus, and the Epist. to the
Philipp. etc.) these (says he) were said that we might show, that the ancient
Presbyters were the same with Bishops; but by little and little, that the
plants of dissension might be plucked up, -- In quos (delinquentes) nonnunquam
Episcoporum and Presbyterorum censura desaevit. Hier. ad Demetriad.
all the solicitude was delated to one. Therefore as the Presbyters know
themselves by the custom of the Church to be subject to him who is set over
them, so let Bishops know themselves to be greater then Presbyters, more by
custom then by the truth of Divine dispotision, and ought in common to rule
the Church, imitating Moses, who when he might have alone ruled the people, yet
chose other with whom he would judge them.

The words of this ancient Father need no explication; for they say plainly
that every Church (meaning wherein no extraordinary minister resided, Apostle,
or his Vicegerent) was at the first governed by the College of Presbyters, and
that their dividing one Church into many Independent Congregations, Quare in
Ecclesia baptizatus nisi per manus Episcopi accipiat Spiritum Sanctum? id
factum reperimus ad honorem potius sacerdotii qua^ ad legis necessitatem.
Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate ac veneratione consistit, cui si
non exors quaedam and ab hominibus [omnibus] eminens detur potestas, tot in
Ecclesiis efficientur schismata quot sacerdotes. Inde venit, ut sine chrismate
and Episcopi jussione neque Presbyter neque Diaconus jus habeat baptizandi,
quod frequenter (si tamen necessitas cogit) scimus licere laicis. Hier. contra
Lucifer.
first (that we can find) in Corinth, after, in many other places, put a
necessity upon the Churches to provide a convenient remedy against so dangerous
a disease; which remedy was the committing of every Church to one chief
minister, to whom the rest were to be subordinate in the manner before
specified.

Here observe, 1. that, according to St. Hierom, every Bishop ought to rule the
Church in common with the presbyters. 2. that Hierom says, that the decree of
making one chief in every Church was in all the world; whereby he intimates
this institution of Bishops to have its beginning after the planting of the
Churches in most parts of the then known world. 3. that he affirms, that
Paulatim (by little and little, or by degrees) the care of every Church was
committed to one; which does insinuate, that the decree instituting a Bishop
was not in a Synod of the Apostles or Churches; but enacted in every Church,
first in some, then in other, and in a short time in all, over all the world,
in such manner as a general custom is created; and therefore he says, that
the Presbyters are subject to the Bishop by the custom of the Church, and the
Bishop greater then they, rather by custom then by the Lords disposition. So
Augustine writing to Hierome; although (says he) according to the names of
honor, which the use (or custom) of the Church has kept, a Bishop be greater
then a presbyter, yet Augustine (a Bishop) is in many things inferior to
Hierome (a presbyter:) So modestly and humbly does the most pious and wise
Bishop Augustine write unto the holy presbyter Hierome, his elder in years, and
his inferior in dignity. They that affirm Episcopacy to be instituted by a
Council, do not mean a Council taken in a proper sense, but for the unanimous
votes of the Churches decreeing the same thing upon the same grounds and
reasons, which are the principal things respected in a Council: and it is
truly said, illud unumquodque dicitur quod est principalius in eo. Fourthly,
it seems consequent to Hierom's above cited discourse, that it is not certain,
which some affirm, that Bishops were set over the Churches before the time
wherein St. Paul wrote his first Epistle to Timothy, or his Epistle to Titus,
etc. out of which Hierome proves the identity of Bishops and presbyters, and
the government of the Church by the College of presbyters. But of the exact
time of the institution of Bishops it is not much material to know, seeing all
agree, it was made in the time of the Apostles. By some of those places cited
by him, it is likely he intended only to prove the name Bishop to be common at
that time as well to presbyters as to their superior Ecclesiastical officers.

But it might be thought that Hierome in this matter contradicts himself, In
cataloge Scriptorum Eccles. in Jacobe.
because elsewhere he says, that James the brother of our Lord was statim
(quickly) after our Lords passion ordained by the Apostles Bishop of Jerusalem,
and that he ruled that Church for 30 years, until the seventh year of Nero:
unto this difficulty another may be added, showing a seeming contrariety in
this learned Father's speeches concerning the institution of Bishops; which is,
that here he affirms the Episcopacy to be an Ecclesiastical and so an humane
constitution, and in another place that it is an Apostolical tradition. It is
not hard to reconcile these seeming contrary expressions: Epist. ad Evagrium.
for first, we must consider Episcopacy or government by one as chief among the
presbyters, to have been either extraordinary, (managed by one extraordinary
person, which was not by any ordinary rule of the Church to have a successor,)
or ordinary, in the hand of one person, which, by a Canon of the Church, was to
have a successor: an Apostle present in any Church had power over the
presbyters, and the pre-eminence in all sacerdotal duties above them in that
Church. Of Apostles some were primary, as the twelve, other secondary; and
these were either indeed (as well as in name) A postles, or only because they
were conversant with the Apostles and their helpers, and many times left by
them in some Churches, or sent to them as their Vicegerents, such were Timothy,
Titus, Linus, Clemens, etc. all these by their Apostolical function, or by
virtue of their Vicegerency, had the principal rule in the Churches wherein
they abode, even then, when in all other Churches, the College of the
presbyters took the care of all, having no Superior constantly resident over
them. Afterward, when upon occasion of the presbyters abusing their power by
reason of the Apostles absence, to the be getting of Schisms, the Churches by
Apostolical consent agreed to give in every Church a principality to one
presbyter above the rest (which in some time after had the name of (Bishop)
made proper to him, and was made an ordinary officer in all Churches;) then the
Apostles and their Vicegerents in the Churches of their residence had the power
over the College of presbyters, not only by their Apostleship or Vicegerency,
but also by the new decree, and institution of an ordinary Episcopacy. Now,
because it was thought fit by the Apostles that James should reside at
Jerusalem, (and that not long after the ascension of our Savior) it might
truly be said, that he was then ordained, that is, constituted Bishop
(extraordinary) in that place for some particular reasons taken from
consideration of some particular condition of that place, whose Episcopacy
afterward was continued for the general reason of preventing Schisms; and
consequently of an extraordinary Episcopacy was made an ordinary Episcopacy,
which was to pass to successors. The same proportionably must be said of the
Episcopacy of St. Peter in Rome and Antioch, of Timothy in Ephesus, of Titus in
Crete, of Linus and Clemens in Rome, and so of others: all of which were first
Bishops extraordinary, and after the general decree they were also made as
ordinary Bishops in the Churches where the decree found them extraordinary
Bishops. Hierom does in many places speak as one that supposed Bishops to be
above Presbyters before the making of that decree; but his meaning was not,
that ordinary Bishops were before it (for then he had contradicted himself) but
the extraordinary.

If the rest of the Fathers be so understood (as it is not very improbable but
that many of them may) the seeming difference between him and some of them may
be perhaps in the main reconciled. Theodoret says, that Bishops in the life
time of the Apostles were called Apostles, the name of the extraordinary
Bishops being also communicated to the ordinary Bishops, who also had some
appearance of being Vicegerents unto those twelve general Pastors of the
universal Church while they lived, as they were counted their successors after
their decease.

As to the other seeming contrariety in St. Hierom's writings affirming the
ordinary Episcopacy to be of Ecclesiastical and humane institution and also of
Apostolical tradition, it is easily answered.

First, That the ordinary Episcopacy is not a primary tradition of the Apostles
but of the Churches; to whose decree the Apostolical approbation added no new
sanction, but ratified the authority of the Churches as prudently exercised in
making that constitution.

Secondly, that decree may be said to be of Apostolical tradition, because
their extraordinary Episcopacy and the extraordinary Episcopacy of their
Vicegerents established by them, were patterns, which the Churches had an eye
unto for their direction and encouragement in the framing of that decree;
hoping that the good of peace, preserved where the extraordinary Episcopacy was
placed, would be best maintained in all Churches when the like government
should be settled in all to continue by succession. 3.
Thirdly, the ancient Fathers affirm many ecclesiastical observances to be of
divine or Apostolical institution or tradition, upon other grounds then may
beget a certain belief of their being truly divine or Apostolical. Augustine
says, that whatsoever the universal Church holds, and is not found in
following Councils constituted, but always retained, is most rightly believed
to be delivered by the Apostolic authority. De bapt. contra Donatist. l. 2. c.
7. and l. 4. c. ult.
Hierom affirms, that many things, which are by tradition observed in the
Churches, have usurped to themselves the authority of a Divine law; as in
baptism, to immerge the head thrice, and then to taste the concord of milk and
honey, Adversus Luciferianos.
to signify infancy: and on the Lords day, and in all the Pentecost not to
pray kneeling nor to fast. Constantine the great exhorts all to embrace the
decree of the Nicene Council concerning the set time of the celebration of the
Feast of Easter, as a gift of God, and a Commandment sent down from heaven:
Eusebius. de vita Constantini. l. 3. c. 18. Edit. Basil. 1570.
for whatsoever is decreed in the holy Councils of Bishops, that ought to be
ascribed to the divine will. Hierom in another place says, let every one judge
the precepts of the ancients to be Apostolical laws. Hierom. Ep. 28.
It is not to be doubted (says Leo Bishop of Rome) but that every Christian
observance is of divine erudition; and that whatsoever is received by the
Church into a custom of devotion, Sermon. 2. de jejun. Pentecost.
proceeded from the Apostolic tradition, and the Doctrine of the holy Spirit.
The Fathers use very frequently to affirm some institutions or rites to be
divine or Apostolical, because they seemed a greeable to, and their lawfulness
demonstrable by, the old Testament, the Gospels, or Apostolic Epistles: So the
Lent Fast is by them said to be of Apostolical and Divine tradition, because it
seems an imitation of the Fast of Elias and of Christ; and Monachism is
affirmed to be Apostolic, because it has an appearance of being an imitation
of John the Baptist, Amalar. Alcuin. Pontifical. Damas.
etc. yet many ancient writers make Pope Telesphorus (who flourished Forty
years after the decease of St. John the Apostle) to be the author of the
Quadragesimal Fast (although indeed it had a much later beginning,) and affirm
Paul and Anthony to be the Fathers of Monachism. So that many institutes were
counted Apostolic, because some example or reason of the Scripture did seem to
warrant them. Whence Hierom and others intimate, Hierom. in vita Pauli.
that Episcopacy was instituted in imitation of Aaron and his Sons, or of the
Apostles and 70 Disciples, affirming Bishops to be successors of aaron, and the
Apostles and Presbyters the successors of the Sons of Aaron and of the 70
Disciples.

Fourthly, it is a certain truth, acknowledged by all the learned, that the
Apostles were authors as well of local and temporary or universal and temporary
ordinances, rites, or ceremonies, as of universal and perpetual: for they were
inspired by the Holy Ghost infallibly to discern both what the present
condition (although variable) of some or all the Churches required, and what
upon reasons arising from unvariable grounds and circumstances was needful to
be observed in all the Churches of Christ: Polycarpus (a hearer of the
Apostles, and by St. John made Bishop of Smyrna) celebrated the Pasche in the
fourteenth moon, and so did the rest of Asia and some of the East: observing it
the same time with the Jews, moved thereto by the countenance and example of
St. John the Apostle; but Anicetus Bishop of Rome, (who flourished in the life
time of Polycarpus) and generally the Churches of the West; kept the Feast at
another time, and on the Lords day, induced thereto as they affirmed by the
tradition and example of St. Peter the Apostle. We cannot with reason and
charity think that either Polycarpus with the Asians and East, or Anicetus with
the Western Churches, Apud Eusebius. and Iren.
could be ignorant of the time when Peter in the West or John in Asia observed
that Feast, Polycarpus being an eye witness of what the Apostle St. John did,
and Anicetus being a hearer of the hearers of Clemens, who was contemporary
with the Apostle St. Peter; or that they would considerately speak, and
perseveringly maintain an untruth, imputing a fact to either Apostle which he
had not done, especially, seeing the untruth, on either side, might have been
confuted by a thousand witnesses: wherefore we must judge this to be an evident
example of a variable apostolic institution. I might instance in part of the
Apostles decree in the 15 chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, of things
strangled, and blood; but least I move scruples in weak consciences, which they
cannot easily be rid of, I will only commend to the consideration of the
judicious the judgment of some ancient writers quoted in the margent. August
contra Faustum l. 32. c. 13. Et tractcti contra graecos in biblioth. patr. to
4. page 1308. et 1318.1319.1320.
There be many rites which the Fathers held to be Apostolical, which in the
times of the same Fathers, were in many places altered or neglected; as the
three immersions in baptism; the repairing of neighbor Bishops to the people
where a Bishop was wanting, there to ordain one in the presence of the people;
not to fast in the days of Pentecost, and some other; which prove that
according to the judgment of those Fathers, the Apostles, (guided by divine
inspiration) made some decrees alterable, and which were upon just reasons
accordingly changed or disused: and therefore if it were proved, that the
Apostles by divine motion were the primary Auctors of Episcopacy and not the
Church; yet if it cannot appear to be a constitution built upon perpetual
reason, and in its nature independing upon variable circumstances, it may
possibly be changed by the Church.

Here it may be demanded by what members of it self did the universal Church
abrogate the Presbyterian and institute Episcopal Government; and what power
was taken from the Presbyters by that abrogation? For answer to these demands,
we must distingnish between the power given to ministers, to do some things;
as to preach, baptize, ordain Pastors, excomunicate, absolve, etc. and
secondly, the free exercise of those acts, and thirdly, the regulation of the
exercise of them, as to the persons about whom, time when, the place where, the
manner, decency, etc. To the regulation belong, 1. The making of laws
concerning the due exercise of the power, agreeable to the divine laws, and
secondly the superintendents of the execution, and thirdly the executors of
them. As for the power, it does not appear, that any of that was taken from the
Presbyters or their College by the institution of Episcopacy, if they were
deprived of any part of it, can. 13.
that must be the ordaining of Presbyters; but the Council of Ancyra seems to
demonstrate, that the power of ordaining Pastors did and does remain in them,
which they did exercise by the leave, Et Synod Antioch c. 16. vide Vasque. in
3. p. Disp. 143. c. 4.
and in the place of the Bishop which Could not at his pleasure give them, but
supposed the power continuing in them. The words of the Council be these
(according to the Greek Original and not their vulgar translation) it is not
lawful (say the Fathers of that Synod) for the Choropiscopi (Country, or
Village Bishops) not for the Presbyters of the City to ordain Presbyters or
Deacons, unless that be committed to them by the Bishop (being absent in
another Diocese) by his letters. And therefore the Churches decree constituting
Episcopacy, abridged the Presbyters whether dividedly, or conjunctly
considered, but only in the exercise of their power. Surely it must be
believed, that no ordination would be made by the Apostles excelling the
ordination which our Savior celebrated, breathing upon his Apostles etc. and
giving them a commission to teach, etc. with promise to be with them unto the
worlds end, whereby the Presbyters were virtually ordained and comissionated
astruly as the Bishops, and therefore received thereby as much power as they in
respect of the kind and nature; which hinders not, but that the exercise of
some part of it might be taken from many of the persons ordained. But some
perhaps may say, that Christ in that ordination ordained in the Apostles some
as elder Brethren, and others as the younger, yet hence it will follow, that
the kind and nature of the ordination is the same in all, (as the nature of the
Father is in all his Sons) and that only a principallity in the having and
exercise of it belongs to the Bishops; which is granted. Others may say
farther, that Christ in ordaining the Apostles did virtually ordain some as the
Sons of the Sons of the Apostles, and others as their grandchildren; if this
can be well proved, it will indeed evince, that the power of ordination, as
well as the exercise of it, is proper to the Bishops; but until it be made
clear, that this was the primary meaning and intention of Christ in that Act of
ordination, and not an effect only of a consequent occasional providence of
the Apostles and Churches, it is probable that the power of ordination
remains still in the presbyters restrained in the use by the canon of the
Churches and Apostles. The members of the Church, which made the decree of
Episcopacy and limited the use of the Eclesiastical power, in the presbyters,
were the greater number of the presbyters themselves which remained in the
unity of the mystical body with the greater part of the people; and the Authors
of it by way of approbation and confirmation were the holy Apostles. The
Apostles and Presbyters, in the effecting of it, exercised the ordinary, Vicary
Authority, Basil. constit. mona. c. 22.
which they had as being by their ordination made the Vicegerents of the
blessed Mediator Christ Jesus (considered only as Mediator) according to his
own saying, he that hears you, hears me and he that despises you despises
me, and the saying of the Apostle, we are Emb^ssadors for Christ and we pray
you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. 2. Cor. 5.20.
That authority when it is duly exercised ought to be obeyed. And because
presbyters may err in the using of it, a spirit of discerning noxious
doctrines and constitutions is given to Christians to examine and try, Bas. l.
reg. 72. c. 1.
with command to reject the evil and receive the good: which good, if the major
part refuse, being by their Pastors propounded to them, Aug. de temp. sermon. 143.
they may do it upon their peril, and as they will answer it to God; unity and
peace interceding and forbidding that no Ecclesiastical constraint or censure
proceed against the civil higher power, or the major part of the people. It is
therefore requisite, that constitutions to be made laws in the Church, be, by
the leave of the supreme magistrate, if he be a Christian, propounded to the
people, that their consent being given, the ministerial authority may make them
laws Ecclesiastically obliging, if no higher authority hinder. Before these
Lawmakers constituted Episcopacy, every singular Presbyter was to act
according to the directions and rules of the Presbyterian College, which was
the Church Lawgiver, and superintendent of the execution, having the supreme
dignity under the Mediator, and pre-eminence in all things properly
Ecclesiastical. What is spoken concerning the College of Presbyters must be
applied proportionably to the several bodies of them in the Diocesan,
provincial, imperial, or universal Church. The decree constituting Episcopacy,
took from the College its high dignity and pre-eminence, and conferred it upon
one, and so divided the exercise of the Legislative power among the Bishop and
the College, that the one might not duly use it without the other. For
although the dignity and precedence of the Bishop may give more weight to his
vote, yet is the Vicary authority (which cannot be separated from Presbyters as
long as they be Presbyters) as truly exercised in their votes, whether in
deciding controversies of faith, or making of Canons, etc. as it is in the
Bishops vote: Which is manifest, as by many testimonies of antiquity, so by the
practice of our English Synods, which are conformable, in the substance, to the
best and most ancient constitution of Councils. The superintendency, which the
College had over the execution of all Ecclesiastical duties and ordinances,
was chiefly in the Bishop, yet so as without his Presbyters he could not
regularly hear and determine Ecclesiastical causes, as before was showed out of
the fourth Council of Carthage, and might be further demonstrated out of St.
Cyprian and other ancient writers.

Every suprem civil power on earth, as Gods Vicegerent, Sect. 10.
is bound to advance, and preserve the true Religion, so far as the light of
nature can manifest it, or divine revelation does make it known unto him: so
that a King, which has embraced Christian Religion (which alone is the true
Religion) is obliged to maintain it, and to cause that the Christian duties be
by all in their several stations and charges duly performed; and therefore a
Christian King is a lawgiver above the Ecclesiastical Lawmakers; but so, that
he ought not to hinder the due exercise of their legislative power, and make
laws purely or properly Ecclesiastical, without their concurrence in Counsel
and consent: but by his Laws and power, partly to cause them to meet for the
due exercise of their duty, partly to maintain and strengthen their right
proceedings in performance of their office, and lastly (if their Edicts be
cosistant with the peace of the commonwealth, and meet for the edification of
the Church) to perfect and make them full and complete laws, by putting the
hand and seal of his highest Vicary authority, as Gods Vicegerent, to the
resolves of the subordinate Vicary, authority of the Vicegerents of our blessed
Mediator, as Mediator God and man, the Lord Jesus Christ. God is a God of
order, and has ordained that this unity and harmony between these two
authorities should be firmly kept, otherwise by a supine neglect of duty or by
an exorbitant usurpation on either side, the unity and peace, both of Kingdom
and Church are equally in danger of being broken. The propounding of the true
doctrine in decision of controversies, or of constitutions of expedient or
necessary to aedification are acts of religion most proper to the Bishops, and
presbyters; the first an act of the praedication of the gospel; the other an
act of ecclesiastical Government. The embracing of the truth and ordinances
seen to be profitable together with the confirming of them by his decree and
sanction, or addition (where he sees it needful) of a reward or mulct, is the
part of a Christian Prince discerning upon due search, the truth and the
usefulness, of the ordinances propounded unto him; whose embracing is his act
of subjection to Christ; and confirmation and sanction, an act of his Vicary
authority. To make laws bestowing civil gifts or privileges on the Church, and
ordaining civil punishments for offenses committed against Christian religion
and Ecclesiastical Canons, and constituting Courts for the cognizance of such
causes, and the execution of those Laws, is the peculiar and proper work of a
Christian King, which he may well do without the authority of Bishops and
presbyters; but which he may best do with their grave advice and counsel.

In the unanimous Votes of the Kings Majesty, the honorable Houses of
Parliament, and the venerable convocation, all Powers and interests are fully
satisfied, whether in decision of controversies in religion, Chrysostom. in 2.
Cor. hom. 18, etc. Sect. 11.
or making Ecclesiastical Canons, or any the like Ecclesiastical matters,
because they are the conjunct Votes of all the concerned.

Before the civil Magistrate became Christian, the Clergy and people according
to their several rights, concurred personally in the elections of Bishops and
Presbyters; and this remained in use under many Christian Emperors and Kings,
until for the avoiding of contention and schisms and many abuses (which
became familiar to popular elections in a corrupted state of the Church) and
for the encouragement of Princes, Nobles and others to erect and endow
Churches, it seemed good to Kings in their Parliaments, and with the
convocation or Synod of the Bishops and Clergy, to ordain, that Kings should
present to the College of Presbyters, meet persons to be chosen and made
Bishops, and meet Presbyters to the Bishop for such Churches as they had built
and endowed; and that all other persons should in like manner present to the
Bishop a fit person for the Church which they had endowed. Patrons did indeed
in some places put in whom they pleased without the Bishops consent, Vide
Epist. Alexandr. 3. ad Episcopos Angliae.
and for some time of public confusion this was very usually done in England;
but this custom was no law, as some would have it, because it was an
unreasonable custom, and destructive to the Church, and therefore always
contradicted in all Councils where occasion was given to mention it.

All humane laws have their mixture of some bad with many good: And certain it
is, that our Ecclesiastical laws have many imperfections; and their ambiguous
halting between the papal Canon Law, (whence their interpretation has been
wont to be fetched) and the laws of the Realm, is not the least; which has
been one of the principal occasions of some actings, which made the Clergy much
abhorred by many, and brought infinite calamities upon the Civil and
Ecclesiastical state.

The ancient pure Episcopal government is much changed, and the beginning of
its change was not of late days: Sect. 12.
for in the fourth Century the Bishops and Presbyters began to advance
Arch-presbyters and Archdeacons to some part of the exercise of the
Ecclesiastical government. Optat. advers. Parmenian. l. 1.
The first Archdeacon we read of was Caecilianus, who reproved Lucilla a rich
and proud woman, which being thereat vexed, became afterward a zealous
promotrix of the Schism of the Donatists. The first Arch-presbyter, Greg.
Nazianz. in land. Basil. crat.
that I can remember to be mentioned by the ancients, was Basile; who being
made Bishop, offered that honor to his old friend Gregory, after the Bishop of
Nazianzum. But these were at that time but in some Churches, and acted only in
place of the Bishops and Presbyters and at their pleasure; whereas their power
in time increased, and after some hundreds of years, the Canons gave them an
ordinary jurisdiction, erected their Courts, added new names of Ecclesiastical
judges, as Deans, Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. and filled them with numerous
attendants, which were mostly to live by the sins of the people. If these had
been Officers only of the civil magistrate, to execute the power which is
proper to him over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastical, the Church
could not in reason have been charged with their miscariages: but because they
exercised with the former, acts of the power proper to Bishops and Presbyters,
and in which the civil magistrate had only a superintendency over them, all
their misdoings were ascribed to the Bishops and the Clergy: their Courts heard
the causes of excommunication, adjudg'd a person to excommunication, and caused
a Presbyter, no judge in the cause, to excommunicate the party: whereas Christ
by his Apostles made them judges in his place as well to hear the causes of the
spiritual censures, as to execute the same by the sentence of excommunication.
The spiritual censures are spiritual remedies, and the Pastors of the Church,
are under Christ the Physicians; how then can it be congruous, to employ one
that is no Physician to search and take knowledge of the diseases of the Soul,
and leave or^y the application of the remedies to the Physicians? in the
hearing of the causes of spiritual censures, pastoral acts are to be exercised,
as of teaching, of redargution of sin, and conviction, which prepare the
offender for the due and profitable receiving of the spiritual Physic; which
acts are all wanting where a person that is no Pastor condemns a sinner to be
excommunicated by a Pastor.

There is another mischief that accompanies the mixture in one and the same
person of the exercise of acts purely ministerial and acts proper to the civil
magistrate in spiritual causes (as it is in Archdeacons and the like) that is,
commutation of paenance (as to take so much money, a Cow, a Horse, and the
like, as it has been used) be it in pretense of giving it to the poor, where
suspension or excommunication was by the Apostolical ordinances to have been
exercised. If the power proper to the ministers, and the power proper to the
magistrate were in distinct persons, this too frequent abuse would be well
avoided; For the sole spiritual power is not to meddle with body or purse:
Cudgelling, whipping, imprisoning fining scandalous sinners were not at all in
use before the times of Christian Emperors. And as to the redemption of the
wholesome severities, which the paenitents were enjoined willingly to exercise
upon themselves, it was not used until about the end of the fifth Century.

I might mention other mischiefs, as the intolerable abuse of excommunication
for very small offenses (of old condemned in the Canons of the Church) under
pretense of contumacy, or the like: But I am weary of raking in this puddle,
Council. Aurelian. 5. c. 2. and Leo. Epist. 87.
where the many dependences upon those Courts seemed to require exorbitances,
that every one might have a tolerable livelihood. If the excrescencies, which
the corruptions of the times made to adhere to the primitive Episcopacy, were
cut off, and the spiritual jurisdiction restored to the Bishop and Presbyters,
it is not to be doubted, (...)(i.e. munus baptizandi) (...), etc. (...), etc.
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 3.
but that our brethren who dislike the Episcopacy in its present constitution,
and the more, because they took an oath (whether well or ill I let go) to
endeavor the abrogation of it, would be abundantly satisfied with the
Apostolical Episcopacy, where one was ordained for the union and strengthening
of the jurisdiction of Presbyters: for the defense of which Episcopacy, they
had taken a former oath in the solemn Protestation, which, as taken lawfully
and in lawful things, makes all contrary oaths unlawful to be after either
taken or kept.

Although the Apostles ordained no governing Elders besides the Bishop and
preaching Elders, yet the primitive Episcopacy will well bear, that some lay
Elders be joined to the Presbytery, and in every parish, (where fit persons may
be had,) to help the Bishop and Presbyters in the inspection of manners, in the
instruction of the ignorant, in brotherly admonitions and teproofs, and in
giving notice to the Bishops and Presbyters of the scandalous offenses, to be
proceeded against in an Ecclesiastical order, and also to represent the people
and vote for them; where their consent is requisite.

Here I desire it may be noted, that when I spoke of Presbyters which were the
Senate of the ancient Bishops, Conc. Neocaesar. cum Ep. 7. Zachariae papae ad
Bonifac. c. 4. etc. 15. Et Council. Meldens. an. 845. c. 54.
I understood not all and every one subject unto the Bishop, but the more
ancient, grave, pious, learned, discreet and moderate of them; for such were
the City Presbyters in the old times which alone usually and mostly were the
Bishops assessors in the spiritual judicature, and which therefore in some
places and specially in Rome obtained the name of Cardinal Presbyters.

Some dislike the civil honor wherewith godly Kings have dignified our
reverend Prelates: Sect. 13.
truly, if the taking of it had made them less able to fulfill the office of
preaching the Gospel, or did widen the distance between them and the
Presbyters, or made them less accessible by or condescending to their flock, or
ecclipsed the veneration due to their Co^-presbyters, or involved them in civil
affairs, which all the ancient Canons forbid, the addition of that honor were
not to be liked: but it is evident enough to the eye of every impartial
judgment, and the lives of many most holy Bishops have made it good, that if
any of these evils happened from the receiving of that dignity, as too often
has been seen, it proceeded from the evil of the person, and not from the
innocent honor, which was conferred upon them by pious Princes out of their
love to Ch^^^^ and his Ambassadors, the better to preserve them from the
contempt of the wicked, (who regard no goodness besides the civil and worldly)
and to enable the better to maintain the great interest which in civil things
belongs to the Ecclesiastical estate, and that the great Council of a Christian
Kingdom should not sit without giving the Ambassadors of Christ an honorable
place and privilege among them, that in them Christ might be seen to be the
more present, and their ready spiritual Council might prevent some proceedings
not well agreeing with the interest of religion and the laws of Christ, which
without them might more easily happen. But what was done in a heat, may be
undone in a milder temper. Irenaeus who was born within very few years after
the decease of the Apostles says, that the Church nourished such presbyters,
of whom the Prophet says, I will give thy Princes in peace and thy Bishops in
righteousness, where this ancient Father does show that Bishops be princes. And
so does Hierom upon the place, the prophet (says he) calls the future
princes of the Church Bishops. Esa. 60.17. Secund. 70. interpret.
It is then very congruous that the Christian Kings set over these
Ecclesiastical princes, and by their ministry made partakers of the caelestial
dignities, should in a certain way of retribution dignifie them with some
eminent degree of civil honor, which cannot be well supported without some
proportionable revenue.

The Holy Scripture tells us, that it is a more blessed thing to give, then to
receive: Surely God would have every of the presbyters of the Church enabled
for that blessed work of giving, over and above a convenient maintenance for
Wife and Children, which the Apostle supposes to be in their families, for
whom they are bound to provide, or in the judgment of the same Apostle to be
deemed to have denied the faith, and to be worse then infidels. And if every
Presbyter ought to be thus provided for (if possible) then the elder Brethren
should have a double portion, besides the proportion which their civil dignity
does require; and where any of the rest are endued with more excellent
ministerial gifts, it is very convenient they should have a larger measure of
the matter and instruments requisite for the fu^l exercise of their more
excelling virtues. What the revenue of the reverend Bishops is, I do not know,
but I have good reasons to assure me that it is not excessive, at which any
would grudg or envy, except the sacrilegious truckers, which would have the
reverend Clergy live upon their leavings and scraps. Certain it is that the
maintenance of many hundreds of P^^sbyters is so small that they can scarce
feed and cloth their Families, so that when they die, many Hospitals might be
filled with their poor Wives and Children. And if no better provision be made
for the poor Cures and Vicarages, it were an eminent work of charity to erect
and endow Hospitals proper to poor Ministers Wives and Children. This starving
of Christ's Ambassadors is the shame and great sin of the Kingdom: But now it
is the hope and expectation of all good men, that his sacred Majesty and the
most honorable houses of parliament will provide a remedy for this miserable
disease of the Church, for it is only an act of parliament that can surely,
sweetly, and fully cure it.

There be not a few who complain against the canonical oath: Sect. 14.
concerning which I can find no mention until about the year 813. wherein the
Fathers of the second Council of Cabilon say, it is spoken of certain of our
brethren that they compel them whom they are to ordain to swear that they will
do nothing against the Canons, and that they will be obedient to the Bishop,
etc. which oath because it is dangerous; we do all with one consent ordain,
that it be prohibited. A Canon of a Council celebrated an. 1355, comes to my
mind, which says, lest the faithful (who^ the divine piety was mercifully
pleased to put under a light burden and a sweet yoke) should be burdened with
the weight of sin, by reason of their transgressions against the Canons; we
ordain that the provincial constitutions of our predecessors, and those which
shall be hereafter made, oblige not the trangressors to sin (ad culpam) but
only to punishment (ad paenam.) Whether the moderation of these Synods be
worthy of imitation, I leave to others to judge.

Many have entertained a great fear, Sect. 15.
which has alienated their minds from all Episcopacy; namely, that an
innumerable company of unnecessary and burdensome ceremonies be inseparable
concomitants of Episcopal government. Indeed the fear is not vain and without
ground, if we respect the degenerated Episcopacy, as it is, if we regard the
primitive, which has and will be contented with very few, if need be. Witness
Gregory the great, who says, that it was the custom of the Apostles, Greg.
Epist. l. T. Ep. 63.
to consecrate the Eucharist, using only the Lords prayer; with him agrees
Walifridus Strabus; it is the relation of our Ancestors (says he) that the
Mass was wont to be made in the first times as now in the Good Friday, De rebus
Eccl. c. 22.
i. e. after the Lords Prayer, and the commemoration of Christ's passion, as
himself has taught us, the communion of the body and blood of our Lord was
given to all that were prepared. About forty years after the death of St. John
the Apostle, Justin Martyr relates, In Apolog. ad Auton.
that when the people of the City and Country adjacent met together on the
Lords day, the Reader read out of the Apostles and Prophets, and then the
President made a Sermon upon the Scripture then read; which ended, all stood up
to prayer; which done they kissed one another: then bread and wine and water
were offered to the President; which he having received prayed again, and gave
thanks as he was able; which ended, the people said, amen. Then the Deacons
gave the consecrated bread and wine and water to every one present to receive,
and they carried the same to the absent. Here we have the substance of the
ancient Liturgy of the Church in use at that time, short and sweet: Where the
Lords prayer was not alone used in the consecration, as in the Apostles time,
but also the Bishops prayer, whereof the words [as he was able] may imply,
either that he prayed as well as his memory would serve him to utter a
premeditated prayer without book, or that he prayed as devoutly as he could,
which is the best construction of them. So that hence it may not appear whether
it was a read, or a premeditated and memorially delivered prayer. The same old
author says concerning Baptism; as many as believe those things to be true
which have been told and taught them by us, and promise to live accordingly,
are instructed to pray fasting for the pardon of their sins, we fasting and
praying with them; and then they are by us brought to the water and
regenerated, as we our selves were, in the name of the Father and our Savior
Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, being washed in the water: Then we bring
them to the Brethren who are met together making common prayers for themselves,
the baptized, and all other wheresoever, etc.

We are to note that he mentions a Reader, which whether he were a Presbyter or
a Deacon, or a distinct degree instituted by the Church, cannot be gathered
from his writings which are now extant. In the end of the second Century the
Reader appears to be a distinct degree; the ordinations of Haereticks (says
Tertull.) are rash, light, unconstant, therefore one is with them to day a
Bishop, and another to morrow, De praescript. haeret. c. 41.
he is to day a Deacon which shall be the next day a Reader, he is to day a
presbyter which is the next day a Laick. And it is to be seen in Cyprian about
the year 250, 2. Epist. 5. and l. 3. Ep. 22.
that he ordained Aurelius and Saturus Readers in his Church, and Optatus a
subdeacon. At the same time Cornelius Bishop of Rome (writing to Fabius) says,
Apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 42.
that in the Church of Rome, there were of Presbyters forty six, of Deacons
seven, of subdeacons seven, of Acolythes 42, of Exorcists, Readers, and
Porters 52, of Widows and Poor above 1500, all which the Church fed.

Here we find Exorcists and Readers (both which were in Justin Martyrs time
about the year 150) to be reckoned among the Clergy of the Church of Rome, and
the Reader distinguished from the Presbyter and Deacons. After this, about the
year 400, the distinct ordinations of Bishops, of Presbyters, of Deacons, of
Subdeacons, of Acolythes, of Exorcists, or Readers, and of Porters or
Dore-keepers, and of Singers, are set down in the fourth Council of Carthage.
Conc. Carth. 4. c. 1. ad 10.
It must not be imagined that any of these, besides a Presbyter and
Dore-keeper, was in every Parochial Church, but only in the Cathedral or mother
Church of the Diocese, and in some such parochial Churches as were able to
maintain a greater or lesser number of them. And therefore it seems hard to lay
upon one minister in the parish Church the burden of all the offices, to be
born by himself alone, which in the Cathedral were executed by many. As to read
every Lords day all the service first and second, being a thing above the
strength of most, if the Sermon be not omitted; as the Bishops and Presbyters
bordering upon the times of the Apostles, with the peoples consent, committed
the office of reading the holy Scriptures in the Churches to men of an inferior
ordination, so their successors shortly after committed the office of teaching
the Catechumens to the like persons, but more learned and apt to teach. Both
these (as also some others) were separated from the Laics and destinated for
the Presbytery: They were the Bishops and Presbyters Scholars, bred up by them
for the high and sacred ministry, and advanced thereto, if they became
capable, and the Church had need of them. So that Readers and Catechisers were
incomplete preachers of the Gospel, until by the higher and divine ordination
Christ breathed upon them, giving them the Holy Ghost, which made them complete
preachers; who do not perform a complete act of preaching, unless with the
publishing of the text, wherein the Readers help them; they also publish an
exposition and exhortation thereupon; as Justin Martyr did, and the succeeding
ancient Fathers; who grounded their Homilies, or Sermons upon a portion of the
Scriptures then read before them. One ordinance of God is not to be made to
thrust another out of the Church, but reading and prayers, and preaching, etc.
ought to be so proportioned to the time appointed for them, and the strength of
them that officiate, that no necessity, that may be prevented, may compel to
the omission of any divine ordinance that ought to be performed. In the sixth
Council of Constantinople (at which time much corruption was crept into the
Churches) the Fathers present in it commanded, that the Bishops and Presbyters
should daily preach, Began. 19.
especially on the Lords day. It is commanded by another Council, that if a
Presbyter cannot preach by reason of sickness, Conc. Vasens. Can. 4. sub Leone.
1.
that a homily or sermon of one of the ancient Fathers be read by the Deacon.
In another Council, its thus decreed; that if the Bishop be not at home, or is
infirm, or is not able for some other cause, yet never let on the Lords days or
Festivals any want to be of one which may preach the Word of God, so as the
vulgar people may understand. Council. Maguntiac. c. 25. circa an. 813.
The Primitive Bishops were preaching Bishops, and usually preached every Lords
day (as we see in Justine Martyr,) and in Festival days in the principal
fasting days in Lent, as we find in Ambrose, Chrysostom. Augustine and others.

But I must return to speak of the Ceremonies of the Church. The Ceremony of
standing and not kneeling in prayer on the Lords days, and the days between
Easter and Whitsontide, was in use in the Apostles days, and instituted by
them; Apud anthorem Christian. resp. resp. 115.
as Irenaeus the hearer of Polycarpus Auditor of the Apostle John does
testify. In the time of Tertullian about the year 200, many other Ceremonies
are mentioned by him, (which we find not in any approved Author before him
spoken of) and are affirmed by him to descend from the Apostles; as the signing
of the forehead of the baptized with the sign of the Cross, besides, Tertull.
de corona militis c. 3.
the usual signing with the same sign upon sundry occasions, the tasting after
Baptism of milk and honey, the use of having Suerties for Infants to be
baptized, De Bapt. c. 7. and 18.
the anointing of the baptized with oil, Offering for the faithful deceased,
which was thus: the friends of the deceased offered bread and wine in their
behalf for the use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the Priest by
faith in prayer, in the celebration of the Eucharist, presented to God the
Father the sacrifice of Christ once offered by him, and which was in some
manner present in the Sacrament, beseeching him for that most holy and perfect
sacrifice sake to take away the remainder of sin from the soul departed (which
was not taken away in this life) both as to the guilt and inhaerency of it, and
to grant to the soul the promised present blessed rest, and in the day of
judgment, to make the person partaker of the public justification and
possession of full faelicity. Before the receiving of the Lords Supper they
kissed one another with the holy kiss, the sign of true love and peace; which
we are sure was used in the Apostles days, and seems to argue strongly for the
use of significant Ceremonies. The Easter and Pentecost were the set and solemn
times of the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism. de bapt. c. 18.
I need not speak of Confirmation, of the observation of the Feasts of Easter
and Pentecost, of the fast in the days of our Savior's death and burial, of
the less perfect and voluntary fasts of Friday and Wednesday, Tert. de jejun.
c. 2.
which be in part before touched; for my purpose is not to make an exact
collection of the ancient rites, but of such as may give some light to see,
whence those Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, which have been and partly are used in
our Church, took their beginnings.

As concerning the gesture of the body used in the prayers of the Church, de
Orat. c. 12.
it was kneeling or standing; this last on the Lords days, Tertul. l. 2. ad
uxor. c. 9. de Monogam. 6.10
and in all the Pentecost: For as Tertullian says, it is a most irreligious
fact to pray to God sitting before him, unless we upbraid Him that prayer has
wearied us.

Concerning Matrimony; De Veland. Virg. c. 11. de pudicitia. c. 9. Ambros. Ep.
70. Nazianz. Epist. 57.
in Tertullian's time, they defired of the Bishops, presbyters, Deacons and
Widows, leave to marry; they were married by a Bishop or presbyter, the woman
used a Veil, they joined their right hands, kissed; and Tertullian does also
seem to intimate the use of a ring, it is certain it was in use in Isidors time
and before: Isidor. de Eccl. offic. l. 2. c. 19.
the Bridegroom (says he) gave a Ring to the Bride, which was put upon her
fourth Finger.

We may gather from Tertullian, De bapt. c. 9. Apolog. contagent. c. 30.
that the Lords prayer was commonly used in the public prayers of the Church;
for he calls it the legitime and ordinary prayer, which (says he) being laid
as a foundation, we may build upon it the petitions which our particular cases
require. He shows, that our private prayers, wherein we express to God our
particular wants and desires, must not be loud, not altogether set forms, but
prompted to us, without such monitor, by our own hearts, which alone can tell
us our particular necessities. When we pray (says Cyprian) let the Father
acknowledge the words of his Son: Cypr. de orat. Dom.
And we do (says he) the more effectually obtain what we ask in Christ's name,
if we ask using his own prayer. Hom. 42. ex 50.
The Lords prayer (says Augustine) is daily said at the Altar of God in his
Church. The fourth Council of Tolet. Can. 9.
called it a Quotidian, a daily prayer, and commanded it to be said by the
Clergy, not only on the Lords days, but every day both in the public and
private duty. Concerning prayer, de orat. dom.
Cyprian has these remarkable words; when we stand to prayer (says he) our
mind must be only upon that it prays, and therefore the Priest, premising a
preface before the prayer, prepares the minds of the Brethren; saying, Lift up
your hearts; that the people answering, We have unto the Lord, may be
admonished they ought to think on nothing but the Lord: By which words we learn
two things; First, that in Cyprian's time (which was 250 years after our
Savior's birth) set forms of public prayers were used in the Churches.
Secondly, that the people had other answers besides [Amen] to make to the
minister in the solemn prayers of the Church. De bono perseverantiae. c. 13.
and de Spir. and lit. c. 11.
Augustine discovers what follows those words of the public prayers
mentioned by Cyprian; the Priest said (says St. Augustine) let us give thanks
to our Lord God, to which the people answered, it is meet and right so to do;
and then the Priest went no saying, it is very meet, right, etc.

Out of Authors now extant, who flourished in the three first Centuties, no
more (that I can remember) concerning the divine service of the Church and the
Ceremonies, pertinent to our purpose, is mentioned, then what has been already
touched. But the holy writers of the fourth Century and downward do affirm,
both that many other rites have been used in the three first Centuries, whereof
some were instituted by the Apostles (as they write) others by some Bishops of
Rome, and that many more were added in the fourth Century. One reason why the
Ceremonies increased in the fourth Century may be this; because then the Church
more flourished in prosperity, then any time before, and it might be thought
convenient that the external glory of the Church should be proportioned to the
glory of the Empite now made Christian.

The use of singing Psalms and Hymns in the Churches, Epist. 119.
may (as St. Augustine says) be defended out of Scripture, seeing of this we
have so profitable instructions, examples and precepts of Christ and his
Apostles: But the manner of singing was various. l. ^. c. 8. hist.
Socrates relates that Ignatius, having in a vision seen Angels singing Hymns
Anthemewise unto the praise of the Holy Trinity, delivered that manner of
singing Psalms unto his own Church in Antioch, which was generally received
thence by the Greek Churches, and then by the Latins and West, first by
Ambrose in the fourth Century, and after by the rest of the Western Bishops.
The Rubric in our Common Prayer Book before Te Deum laudamus (we praise thee O
God) has these words; that the people may the better hear, in such places
where they do sing, there shall the Lessons be sung in a plain tune after the
manner of distinct reading, and likewise the Epistle and Gospel. This Rubric
puts me in mind of a place in St. Augustine's Confessions, l. 10. c. 33.
where he says, that it was often told him, that Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria made the reader of the Psalm to sound with so mean bending or
turning of the Voice, that he might be nearer a pronouncer then a singer:
Epist. 119.
And in another place he says; when the Brethren are met in the Church, when
is it not time of singing holy songs, unless it be the time of reading, or
preaching, or of prayer? etc. By which words it seems that the Chapters,
Epistle and Gospel were not sung in those days. And in truth any manner of
singing them seems incongruous. The Fathers use to reprove the abuses which
were too often found in singing Psalms in the Churches, especially, that they
were many times more pleased with the sweetness of the voice then the divine
matter, or when only a few of the Church did sing, that they so sung that few
understood what they sung. In Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 5.
Let the servant of the Lord (says Hierome) so sing that the words which he
reads may more please then the voice of him singing. It is no perfect singing
nor pleasing to God, when men's hearts do not sing unto the Lord as well as
their voices. I will not speak of singing with Organs in the Churches (not that
I think that God refuses to be heartily praised in and with the use of them,
but) because they were not brought into the Churches until much later times.

The Doxology, Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, for
ever, etc. is by St. Basile proved to be used from the Apostles times, both out
of Clemens, Romans Irenaeus, Orig. Gregor. Thaumaturg. Dionysius Romans Dionysius
Alex. (...), etc. Basil. de Sp. S. c. 29. (...). Ibid.
and the Evening-candle light thanksgiving which had been used time out of mind
of man, wherein they said, We praise the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Spirit of God. But this Doxology with the addition, as it was in the beginning,
etc. was first Epist. Hier. ad Damasum. Conc. Vasens. c. 7.
ordained to be said in the Divine Service of the Church after the Psalms, by
Damasus Bishop of Rome, about the year of our Lord 370. He first commanded
Greg. l. 7. Epist. 63. and inter Ep. Hier. Aug. de temp. sermon. 151. de can.
observant. praeposit. 23. Gregor. l. 7. Epist. 63. Conc. Vasens. c. 5. Radulfs
Vigres. de can. observant. praeposit. 23.
Alleluia to be used in the Roman Church, following therein the Liturgy of the
Hierosolymitane and Greek Churches. Kyrie eleison and Christ eleison, Lord
have mercy and Christ have mercy often repeated were in imitation of some greek
Liturgies received into the Roman Divine Service Book by the authority of Pope
Sylvester (about the year 330) says Radulphus Tugr which many years after were
omitted, and at last restored by Gregory the great.

The collection of the Episties and Gospels for the whole year into the form
like that in present use is attributed to Hierom, and by Pope Damasus commanded
to be read in the Churches.

The Symbol or Creed composed in the first Council of Constantinople was by
the same Pope Damasus ordained to be said or sung after the Gospel. Rupert. l.
2. c. 21. Strab. c. 22.
It was received into the ^ivine Service in Spain, by the command of the third
Syno^ of Tolet. The reasons brought to prove the Apostles or the Nicene Creed
to have been said in the Liturgies of the fourth Century or before are of small
weight, and therefore I omit them. How Damasus can truly be said to have
enjoined the singing or saying of the Creed, and yet that it was not sung at
Rome, until about the year 1014 is easily answered, if we conceive his command
to be directed unto all other Churches subject unto him, Berno de offic. myssae
c. 1. Vide Conc. tolet. 3. c. 2.
excepting Rome, for that special reason which Berno relates.

Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in the time of the celebration of the Lords
Supper, Hierom. l. 1. dial. contra Pelag. Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 83. Conc.
Carthag. 4. c. 41. Et vide respenss. Leonis 3. ad missos caroli M. sub Conc.
aquisgranens
, used the white garment, which we call the Surplice; whether it was in use
before the fourth Century is not related by any approved author living in those
times. Prayers composed after the manner of our Litany are to be seen in the
Liturgies of Chrysostom and Basile. In their time, Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Ephesians. hom.
14, and 24.
glory be to God on high, etc. and Idem in Epist. ad Coloss. hom. 3.
holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, were wont to be said in the Divine
Service. Chrysostom says, that the Bishop was wont often in the time of the
publik worship of God, to say to the people, in 2 Cor. hom. 18. and in Ep. ad
Coloss. hom. 3.
Peace be unto you, and that the people answered, And with thy spirit. The same
author relating how the people did in another part of the Service answer the
minister; saying, Let us give thanks to our Lord God, it is meet and right (say
the people) so to do, adds, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 18. in 2. Epist. ad
Corinth, hom. 2.
why should any marvel that the people should (thus in the public prayers)
speak with the Priest, seeing they send up unto Heaven with the Cherubims and
Caelestial powers those holy Hymns? one reason of this is in the same place
intimated by Chrysostom, which is, to manifest unto the people, that the
prayers of the Church are not proper to the minister, but theirs also by
joining with him in them; which is more fully testified by their proper
prolation of some part of them, then only by their presence and saying Amen.
Another reason may be the same which the same Father gives, of the Deacons
exciting the people saying, Let us pray, and let us pray more fervently, and
the reason is, because the Soul is wont to slumber in a long prayer. T^^
Fathers of the Council of Bracar require the Bishop or Pr^^^yter to salute the
people in due place in the Divine service; saying, the Lord be with you; to
which the people should answer, and with thy Spirit: which ceremony (says the
Council) all the East retained as delivered by the Apostles. The Song of the
three Children was generally received into the Liturgies of the Churches in
this fourth Century. Conc. toletam. Ep. c. 13.
It is a tradition that the Hymn Te Deum landamus, etc. (We praise thee O God
We acknowledge thee to be the Lord, etc.) was comdosed by Ambrose, and sung by
Ambrose, and Augustine after his Baptism. Anastasius Bishop of Rome enjoined
all to stand at the reading of the Gospel; after which followed the custom of
standing at the reading of the Creed.

Hierome writing against Vigilantius affirms, that in all the Churches of the
East, when the Gospel was to be read, candles were lighted the sun shining; not
surely to drive away darkness, but for a sign of gladness.

In the time of these last named Doctors, the Feasts of Saints were more in
number, and celebrated with more solemnity then in former times. Therein the
Feast of our Saviors Nativity was generally observed, and in the ancient
Fathers sense, said to be instituted by the Apostles; whereas no approved
Author of the former Centuries make mention of it. Chrysostom, in a sermon of
his preached by him not long before the year 400, affirms, Chrysostom. sermon. in
natalem.
that Feast not to have come to the knowledge of the Churches among which he
lived, but ten within years before the preaching of that Sermon. Tert. de
idololatria. c. 14. Vide Georgium in locum and alios.
And many Learned men collect from Tertullian, that in his time no other Feasts
were commanded to be celebrated in the Churches (that he knew of) save only
the Lords day, Easter and Pentecost.

I say not this out of any dislike of this holy Feast, Ubi multorum strages
jacet subtrahendum est aliquid severitati, ut addatur amplius charitati, vide
conc. Romans 3. an. 1099.
or any other, which we receive from those ancient times, (which without the
adherent abuses, I do heartily wish to be celebrated with due solemnity) but by
this example to show, that every thing had not a beginning in the Apostles
time, which is affirmed to be thence derived and descended by the testimony of
some Fathers, who were both in this matter and other things deceived by the
counterfeited Canons and constitutions and other writings bearing the names of
the Apostles (...) Clemens Romanus, or Dionysius Areopag. whereof none ^^re
written before the year 300, yet being not well examined were received as
genuine by Epiphanius, and some other old Doctors of the Church.

We read in this fourth Century of diverse consecrations and benedictions which
we do not read to be used in the former times, Sect. 16.
as of consecrated Churches, Altars, Paschal. Wax-candles, etc. and we find
therein more regard and honor given to Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans hom. 32.
relics of Saints, to the sign of the Cross, to the Nazianz in laudem
Gorgoniae and in laudem Basilii.
Altar or Communion Table, the Bible, and the Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 3. In
Epist. ad Orthodox. and in apoleg. 2.
Vessels used in the Divine Service and the like, then we can see to be given
them in former ages; yet piously without passing the bounds which in those
things Christian religion had determined, excepting perhaps in some particulars
which humane frailty might extort from them. Willingly to break the holy
Communion Cup, who can say but that it is a very great offense? it was (as it
was said in Athanasius) to do impiously against Christ, to commit a sin then
which none was greater.

Against the Carelesseness of these times in the administration of the Lords
Supper, August. hom. 26. ex 50. Et Cyrill. Gatech. Mystagog. 5.
the faying of Augustine is worthy of observation: with what care or solicitude
(says he) do we observe, when the body of Christ is ministered unto us that
nothing of it fall to the ground from our hands. It is likely that Tertullian
spoke before him to the same purpose: we take it heavily (says he) that any of
our Cup or Bread fall to the ground. Gregory Nazianz. (treating of the Birth of
our blessed Savior) says, Adore the Manger (wherein he was laid. (...)
Nazianz. orat. in Christi nativitatem. Hieron. ad Marcellam ut commigret
Hieros. idem in Epitaph. Paulae.
) The cross and the sign were had in no less honor: Without the sign of the
Cross (says Augustine) neither Baptism, nor Confirmation, nor the Lords Supper
can be rightly (as to the customs and Canons of the Church in those times)
performed. The Cross was kissed, people fell down before it, Paulinus l. 2.
Epist. 3. and Chrysostom. in act. hom. 12.
adored it: yet Ambrose says of Helene the mother of Constantine the great,
that she found the title (of the Cross) and adored the King (Christ) surely not
the wood; that is the error of the Gentiles. Minutius long before Ambrose said
in the name of all Christians, we do not worship the Cross.

We see then, that in those days the Cross was adored by Christians, and yet
that it was not adored by them: It was adored by an Ecclesiastical adoration,
which was wont to be exhibited to things or persons accounted excellent, by
reason of some dignity and notable usefulness, in being occasions, causes or
instruments of some very singular benefit; it was not adored by an adoration
proper to God, Aug contra Faustum Manich. l. 20. c. 21. Super Genes. quoest. 60.
nor was it made either improperly or analogically or by accident partaker
thereof. Augustine, mentioning Abraham's adoring the Ancients of the people of
the Land where he sojourned, says, that therein he did not transgress Gods
command; who did only forbid men to serve the creature with the service and
adoration called Latreia. So Augustine. Latreia is when the Divine excellencies
are the objects of the adoration, and the outward acts of adoration, are
symboles of the submission of the heart to them. The ancient Fathers did not of
their own heads make a creature to supply the place of any Divine person, (as
men do, and may make a fellow creature to supply the place of another, and
perform such acts of veneration to it as are due to the person represented,
such be the statues of Emperors, and perhaps images and relics of friends and
benefactors) Nor did the Fathers offer so to couple any creature unto the
Divine person of our Savior to partake in some sort of his adoration, as his
apparel, when he lived on earth, was by conjunction with his body made near to
his person, even, (as many judge) to an accidental participation of his Divine
adoration. It cannot be proved that it was the intention of the Church in those
times, to exhibit the external acts of divine adoration unto God, in, by, or
through any created thing as co-subjects or co-objects of them: in all which
cases the inward adoration proper to God is in some sort rendered to the
co-adored creature. The intention of those holy men was to adore the cross
only with an ecclesiastical adoration, and so adore it for the sake of Christ,
and for the benefits sake redounding from the cross of Christ. They adored its
excellency, Council. Constantinop. quintesext, Can. 73.
which consisted in being an instrument of the meritorious triumph of Christ,
and in adoring, they professed a service convenient to it, in order to the
commending and maintenance of that its excellency: only a created excellency
was the object of this adoration. When Christian subjects exhibit to the King
acts of civil worship or adoration, as kneeling, etc. they do this from a
dutiful affection to God, and a like affection of love to their prince, which
is Gods Vicegerent; yet they do not perform those individual acts of adoration
to God, in, by, or through him, that is, they do not perform them to God and
the King, as two distinct objects of one and the same external, and of two
diverse inward adorations, but terminate them only in the King. It is true,
that the Fathers many times seemed to present the same individual acts both to
God as symbols of their inward adoration of him, that is, of their affection of
submission to the divine excellencies, and also to the cross as symbols of
their inward adoration of it, that is, of their affection of service to its
excellency, so uniting two inward coordinate adorations in one and the same
external adoration: but whether so near a conjunction between the Divine and
Ecclesiastical adoration, (if used indeed by them) proceeded from humane
frailty, or may be defended by the Holy Scriptures, or be not dissonant to
them, I refer to better consideration.

What has been said of the adoration of the cross, may be easily applied to
the like adoration of the relics of Saints, of the Altar or Communion Table by
bowing, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. bom. 20. Et Basil, Liturg.
etc. of the book of the Evangels by kissing, etc. and the like, which were
used in the same time. It may be easily discerned that these adorations of the
Cross, Altars, Evangels, Relics, and the like Ecclesiastical worshipings were
very lubrick, Liturg. Chrysostom.
so that it was a difficult matter to stand upright in them, and not to fall to
superstition or idolatry, as too many Churches did in after times. Chrysostom. in
2 Cor. hom. 20.
The bowing to the Altar, which was done for the sake of the Sacrament (which
was much more to be partaker of the same adoration) when it became idolatrous,
it easily advanced the Heresy of Transubstantiation. The degeneration likewise
of the adoration of the Cross and Relics added to the former brought in, in
subsequent times, the idolatrous adoration of images.

And all these idolatrous adorations brought in the idolatrous adoration of the
name of Jesus, either prolated or written; but not before about the year 1300.
Conc. Lugdunens. an. 1374
Our Church admitted this last adoration of the name of Jesus purged as much as
might be from idolatry and superstition, restraining also the bowing to the
naming of that comfortable name in the Divine Service. Yet it is a slippery
Ceremony, and made the more slippery by the gloss of some of our own Divines
upon Philip. 2. Whence they would prove the bowing of our knee due to that
blessed name Jesus, affirming the Fathers so to expound that Text. To speak in
sober sadness and truth, there is not one Father that so expounds it, although
you produce the Catalogue of the Fathers to sweet and holy Bernard. There is
not one Orthodox Author in all the length of that Catalogue of Fathers, who
speaks of any adoration given or to be given or exhibited to that most sweet
name Jesus. The places produced by some late Schoolmen out of the Fathers to
make good their novel exposition of that place in the Epistle of the
Philippians, (which our men believed, and were thereby deceived) have in them
very small appearance of proof, and nothing truth, as the inspection of the
places themselves, (and especially if compared with other plainer places of the
same authors) will manifestly discover. All the latter Schoolmen maintain that
adoration of the good name Jesus, whether spoken or written but all have not the
brazen Foreheads to produce the ancient Fathers as Patrons of it, or to expound
the foresaid text to prove it a duty. Let Vasques a Learned Jesuit be heard;
In p. 3. q. 25. disp. 111. c. 11.
where it is said (says he) in the name of Jesus let every knee be bowed, (so
many Ancients read the text) etc. by name, not the word [Jesus] but the thing
it self, that is, [Christ] is understood. And a little after he faith, out of
this place it is not sufficiently proved, that any honor (no not by accident)
is to be exhibited to the word [Jesus] written or spoken, as to an image with
its prototype. Therefore although there may be an innocence in those adorations
used in the right manner and sense, yet it is hardly preserved, (I had almost
said morally impossible) by the vulgar: it is so easy a lapse from the use of
one of them to fall to the use of the rest, and then to the abuse of every of
them: For those Ecclesiastical adorations of the altar, Evangels and the name
Jesus are used mostly in the time of divine service, when the like external
acts of adoration are exhibited to God, which near conjunction in time and
place, between the one adoration and the other, and the beholding the same acts
of worship to be done to God and a sacred thing, does puzzle the ignorant and
unwary that either his zeal is as much to the creatures adoration, as to the
Creators; or mingles in his mind both the adorations, whereby the best is
debased and corrupted.

Some may say, may we not bow to God, and kneel to him at the altar, without
danger? It is soon answered; That without doubt we may, and must do so, and in
so doing, our mind does not intend the altar, as the object of our bowing: The
danger is in bowing to the altar, for then we make it the object to which we
bow.

It may be demanded if the Magistrate make the naming of the name Jesus, the
name of the Savior of the world, to be a sign when, in the divine service, we
must bow to the person of the Lord Jesus, God and man, and not to the name
Jesus, may we not without danger so do? I answer, first, That it is our duty to
bow our hearts, and also in convenient time and place, to bow our bodies to the
man Jesus Christ, in the unity of the divine person. And this is intended in
Philip. 2. Secondly, to bow our bodies at the naming of the name of Jesus is no
duty that we are bound unto. It is indifferent then to bow or not to bow, as it
is at the naming of the name of Christ. Thirdly, if the magistrate command us
either at the naming of the name Jesus, or at the naming of the name Christ in
the divine service, to worship Christ, God and man, by bowing unto him, and not
intending the name [Jesus] or [Christ] as an object of our bowing, it is our
duty to obey our Superiors command. Fourthly, from the bowing [at] the name
the vulgar easily fall to the bowing [to] the name.

These adorations of the Cross, etc. inward and outward may not be counted
divine or properly and of their own nature, religious, because no rule of true
religion does require them, but they are properly Ecclesiastical, because the
Churches did sometime create them; and as things Ecclesiastical, and things any
way made pertinent to religion, are counted religious things, so may these
adorations be accidentally called religious. There is not that kind and degree
of excellency in the Cross, Communion Table, or name Jesus, or in any such
sacred thing, which may in proper sense merit and require that mental regard
from us, which should of right be testified by those acts of worship. Neither
do we find that the Churches acknowledged any obligation upon them, to make any
Canon requiring those adorations, but only, as circumstances then were, a
congruity to command their use: under which command and judgment of the
Church, individual persons were to acknowledge those sacred things worthy those
honors. Wherefore if it please our Superiors to continue the use of these
Ceremonies, which are so easily abused, it will be very necessary to state and
determine the right use of them, and to point at the dangers to be avoided, and
to command that the cautions be at set times read in the Churches, that none
may err for want of knowledge, or by forgetfulness.

The discreet followers of the holy ancient Fathers of the Church are worthy
commendation, but their apes are ridiculous. To sow the foul rags of some late
slovenly Schoolmen to the comely garment of our Church (as the misinterpreters
of the text in Philip. 2. have attempted) is an act disgraceful to the authors,
derogating from the honor and dignity of our dear Mother and introductory of
unwarrantable adorations, being pretended to be commanded by Almighty God. For,
if it be once obtained that the adoration used to the name Jesus is of divine
institution, it will by the necessity of like reason follow, that the bowing to
the cross and the Communion Table, and especially, to the holy bread and wine,
is a duty which of divine right does belong unto them.

But it is time to proceed to speak of some other Ecclesiastical Customs of
the fourth Century, Sect. 17.
whereof one was derived from former times, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 2.
that in the Churches no Our Father was said in the prayers, so long as the
Catechumen and Penicents (for whom special prayers were made) were permitted to
stay in the Church. Council. Leodicen. can. 19. Et Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 3.
Aug. de temp. ser. 38. Amalar. de Offic. missae c. 19. Vide council. Valentin.
c. 1.
After their departure out of the Church began the second divine Service and
prayers proper to the faithful, among which was the Lords Prayer, most of the
rest were subservient to the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. When that
Sacrament was to be administered (which was then usually every Lords day) they
offered bread and wine for the use of the Sacrament (instead of which we have
offerings for the poor) and the Bishop or Presbyter went from the Pulpit or
place where he prayed for the penitents or his seat, to the Communion Table;
where it is to be noted, that he had not so long and difficult a journey to go,
as in most parochial Churches the minister has, to pass from his reading Pew
or Pulpit through a throng of people to the holy Table, and therefore there is
good reason to spare him that labor in the days wherein is no Communion.

Persons excommunicated were nor received into Communion of any Prayers in the
Church, Conc. Ancyram. can. 6. and 25. Conc. Nicen. 6.11.
no not with the Catechumens, until they had humbled themselves before the
Bishop, and earnestly besought that they might be made partakers of his
council, concerning what was needful to be done by them, to the perfecting of
meet repentance in them, and whereby they might give sufficient proof thereof,
for the satisfaction of the Church offended by their transgressions, promising
to follow his counsel, and to perform the enjoined penance. Upon this serious
petition and promise the Bishops and Presbyters enjoined such works of unfeigned
humiliation to be done by them, as they thought most agreeable for their case
and condition, and praying for them admitted them to the number and order of
the Penitents. When these had fulfilled the enjoined works of humiliation to be
performed by them in that order, then they were admitted to the Communion of
the prayers proper to the faithful, and after the works of repentance, which
were commanded to be done by them in that rank, they were admitted to the Lords
Supper, wherein was the perfection of Communion. Conc. Nicen. c. 12.
If any Penitent in the course of humiliation was in an eminent and iminent
danger of death, it was always provided by the Fathers of the Church that
perfect Communion with the Church of God (without which Church is no salvation)
should be granted him in the participation of the body and blood of our blessed
Savior, except the governors of the Church had observed in him a very
notorious defect in fulfilling his duty; of which yet if there was any the
least probable appearance of repentance, he was not denied the necessary
viaticum (as the Council of Nice calls it.) The best men ready to depart to a
better life desired and took this caelestial meat for their comfort and
refreshment in their passage to God.

Some ministers are so strict and parsimonious in giving the Holy Sacrament,
that they deny the same unto a considerable part (yea often, to most part) of
their parish, which before had been admitted to it, without using the method
prescribed by our Savior in Matthew. chap. 18. verse. 15*16, 17. Which text
requires public accusation and proof in the presence of the governors of the
Church, and their public condemnation before the public execution of so high
a censure. They are also so hard hearted to dying men, earnestly desiring that
soul-confirming and most refreshing viaticum, that although they cannot truly
before God and men, (if put to it,) assure it, that they remain in a state of
sin inconsistent with any degree of saving grace, (as in case of denial, they
should be upon good grounds assured) yet they can be so uncharitable and
unmerciful, as to deny it unto them. These extremes on the one hand, and on the
other hand, partly the not forgotten great abuse of the holy censures by
Chancellors and Commissaries, partly the late ejecting of the set public
forms of prayers out of the Churches, and partly the general contempt of all
the holy ordinances spread over the Kingdoms by the several Sects brought in
and maintained by the Regicides, to strengthen and perpetuate themselves, (if
they could) in their most impious usurpation and tyranny, these (I say) have
made the Communion of Saints in the public prayers, and the holy Sacraments,
to be of very small esteem with most; insomuch, that very many are brought to
believe, they may go to heaven, notwithstanding the neglect of them; for which
most pestilent disease, if seasonable and convenient medicine be not found out
and wifely applied, the Church of England will be incapable of receiving any
benefit by the mere Ecclesiastical Discipline; and the only restraint under
God against the growing sad effects of irreligious profaness will lie in the
sole power of the Regal auctority.

What gesture of body was used in those ancient times in receiving the holy
Communion, Sect. 17.
whether standing, or kneeling, or at some times the one, and at other times
the other, is not very clearly and expressly set down by the writers of that
age, that I can remember. This only is certain, that they did not kneel in the
receiving of it on the Lords days, because it was against a Canon of the
Church, to adore God by bowing of the knee on those days: It is probable, that
on other days (except in the Pentecost) they received kneeling, Hieron. in Esa.
c. 45.
for St. Hierom says, that it was an Ecclesiastical Custom to bow the knee to
Christ, Idem in Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 3.
which we may understand to be in the receiving of that holy Sacrament, as well
as in the public prayers; notwithstanding that this holy Doctor says in
another place, that every one that is subject unto Christ, is said to bend his
knee unto him; and citing the words of St. Paul [at the name of Jesus every
knee shall be bowed] adds, that the words do not pertain to the knees of the
body, but to the subjection of the mind, and inclination of the soul, and
obsequiousness of the heart to God: Which this most learned Father would never
have said or written, if the Custom of the Church had been in his time to
kneel not only unto Christ himself, but also to his name Jesus, or if he had
thought that this place of the Apostle did signify it to be every man's duty to
make the name Jesus a co-object with Christ of his adoration by the bowing of
the knee, as some of the latter Schoolmen have taught. In the time of St.
Hierom and before, the standing in receiving the Eucharist on the Lords day was
accompanied with a low bowing of the body even nigh to a prostration; for St.
Augustine writing upon the 98 Psalm faith, August. in Ps. 98.
none eats that flesh, unless he first has adored it. And in the words
following he speaks of inclination and prostration to that earth, that is,
the flesh of our Savior (not considered as apart from, but as in, and with the
most blessed Divine person.) Cyrill. Hierosol. Catech. Mystagog. 5.
Cyrill of Jerusalem speaking of the Holy Communion, says, take the body of
Christ saying Amen: and a little after, come (says he) to the Cup of his
blood, not extending thy hands, but incurving them ((...)) and in manner of
adoring and worshipping, saying, Amen. But now, that the more urgent reasons,
which moved the Fathers of the Primitive Church not to use kneeling in adoring
God on the Lords days, are ceased, it seems most convenient to kneel in taking
the Holy Sacrament, upon what day soever we receive it; for the nearer Christ
comes to us, and the more he does descend and condescend in coming to us, yea,
and into us, mystically in those external weak Elements, the more should we
descend, humble, and debase our selves by the inward bowing of our souls, and
the external bending of our knees in the receiving of him, thereby testifying
our own unworthiness of that Grace, and commending the exceeding freeness of
it. In the Kingdom of Prester John they stand when they receive the holy
Communion. In giving the Sacrament the Bishop or Presbyter said, Francisc.
Alvarus apud Cassandri liturg. De Sacrament. l. 4. c. 6.
the body of the Lord, and the receive said, Amen, says Ambrose. About the
year 600, in the Sacramentary of Gregory the great, it is said, while the
priest gives the Lords body, let him say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
preserve thee to eternal life, Amen. And in giving the Cup let him say, The
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thee to eternal life. In the mass of
some Armenians in Russia, the priest communicating faith, Apud Cassand. liturg.
By faith I believe in the most holy Trinity the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. By
faith I eat thy quickening and saving body, O Lord Jesus Christ; let it be unto
me to the absolution and remission of my sins. And in drinking the Cup, I
drink by faith thy holy unmixed blood, blotting out sins, Apud Eundem.
O Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of my sins, and of my Parents and of
all the world. Every Communicant of the Armernians in India goes before the
foot of the altar to receive. It is provided in the Council of Laodic. before
the year 400, Can. 19.
that only the ministers might go in to the altar, and there take the
Communion. Can. 17.
In the fourth Council of Tolet. it was appointed that the priests and deacons
should communicate before the altar, the subordinate Clergy in the Quire, the
people without the Quire. This Council drove the people far off from the railes
of the altar.

Many more Rites and Ceremonies were used in the fourth Century, which do not
pertain to our purpose, and very many more were afterward added; especially in
the Roman Church.

From what has been said, we may perceive, that the Composers of our Divine
Service book made choice of the best things out of the most ancient Liturgies
of the Churches, Sect. 18.
which flourished long before the birth of Antichrist, leaving many Ceremonies
used in the primitive times, not very convenient to the present state of our
Churches, retaining other, that the garment of Christian religion with us might
not altogether vary from the ancient form so far as it could without prejudice
to the body of religion be fitted to us.

Tertullian says, that the solemnities and mysteries of Idols gained credit
and reputation with men, by the sumptuous rites and rich ornaments, whereby
they were set forth and adorned. It is likely that the ancient Fathers, when
miracles began to cease, saw it expedient (for the removing of some of the
obstructions to Christian faith) to add to the divine Solemnities some
agreeable Rites, whereby the Christian Doctrine might be commended to the
rectitude of humane judgment, as not incredible or contemptible, and, it may
be, thereby be commended as credible and worthy of good regard. The
Schismatics in Tertullian's time, Tertull. de prescript. baeret. c. 41.
(as he says) named the decent Ceremonious Discipline of the Churches, a bawd,
and counted the prostration of that Discipline by themselves to be Christian
simplicity: Whereas in very deed that prostration of edifying order and
Ceremonies, caused the confusion of the holy ordinances among them, and
sluttishness in the celebrations of the divine institutions; as Tertullian
noted in those Schismatics, and we see now a days in ours. But on the other
side we must remember, that we may err (as in the defect, so) in the excess of
Ceremonies, or in the choice, or in accounting and compelling others to own
them for unchangeable Apostolic institutes, or by too rigid pressing the use
of every of them, especially upon people of weak capacity, humble, peaceable,
and of a scrupulous conscience. August. Epist. 119. Placuit Spiritui S. nihil
aliud oneris imponere praeterquam quae necessario servare oportet. At quidam,
haec nihil curantes, omnem quidem fornicationem pro nihilo habent: De Diebus
autem and feriis and institutis, perinde atque de anima ipsa, decertant, Dei
mandata invertentes, and sibi ipsis leges ferentes, per Socrat. hist. l. 5. c.
21. Edit. Basil. 1570.
Augustine was grieved to see the transgression of a Ceremony to be more
severely reprehended then the transgression of Gods law: his judgment was, that
the Ceremonies should not be many, so as by them to press with servile burdens
the Church of Christ, which God would preserve free in the use only of few
Rites commended by manifest reasons. Antiquity is venerable, yet it may not,
ought not continue a Rite or Ceremony in any Church with whose edification and
peace it is become inconsistent. There be but few ordinances merely
Ecclesiastical, which have not in some Churches become noxious, or at least
useless. And there is a vicissitude of profit or detriment growing from them
many times in the same Churches, arising from notable changes in persons and
circumstances.

Augustine thought that those observances which the whole Church kept, and no
diversity of manners had varied, were ordained by the Apostle St. Paul. Epist.
110.
This his thought holds forth a probability and no demonstration, for he
himself in some place grants, that such universal (and de facto unvaried) rites
might have been made by a general Council, and we may add by custom. Many
Ceremonies were universal (as many then believed) and unvaried in Augustine's
time, which were in following times, either altered, or altogether disused.
Wherefore? surely because they ceased to be useful, or became hurtful. And
therefore if St. Paul was the author of them, he gave them with consent of the
Churches to be used so long as they saw them to continue serviceable, or at
least not hurtful to Christian religion. It was difficult in the ancient times
to know which rites descended from the Apostles, and which not, or which were
universal in such an age by them that lived therein: They many times said some
Rites to be universal, which were so only in the part of the Christian world
where they lived, as in the Eastern or Western Churches. Socrat. hist. l. 5. c.
21. Et Sozom. l. 7. c. 18, 19.
It was before showed, that many things were said by the Fathers to be of
divine or Apostolical institution, which were not so indeed, if we speak of
divine or Apostolic institutes in a proper sense: Sometime what was by one of
the Fathers affirmed to be so, was by some other ancient writers referred to a
more recent author, De offic. Eccl. l. 1. c. 15.
as to one Pope or other. So some ascribe the Roman Liturgy to St. Peter, as
Isidore, every part whereof is assigned to other authors by Gregory the great,
or Amalarius, or Alcuinus, or Strabus, or some other which have written of the
Roman Service. I find none to determine in particular what part of that Service
was made by St. Peter, Duran. rationale div. offic. pricip. l. 4.
but only a few affirming that he composed three prayers of it. But if he had
been the author of it as Isidore relates, it is not to be doubted, but that the
Western Churches or most of them, had used only that Liturgy. But the Church
of Millaine had a proper Liturgy, the Churches of Spain had another proper to
them, Council. Milevit. Can. 12. Et Carth. 3. Can. 23. Cur cum una sit fides,
fint Ecclesiarum consuetudines diversae? and altera consuetudo missarum in
Romana Ecclesia, atque altera in Galliarum Ecclesiis teneatur? huic
interrogationi Augustini Anglorum Episcopi sic resp. Gregoriu^ Papa. 1.
and the Africans had diverse in diverse Churches; some of which had unawares put
into their Liturgy some prayers composed by Heretics; which caused some
African Councils to ordain, that no prayers should be received into the
Liturgy, but such as were examined by Learned men or approved by a Council.
Novit fraternitas tua Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudinem in qua se meminit
eruditam; Sed mihi placet, ut sive in Romana, sive in Gallicana seu in qualibet
Ecclesia aliquid invenisti quod plus emnipotenti Deo possit placere, solicit
eligas and in Anglorum Ecclesia, quae adhuc ad fidem nova est, institutione
praecipua, quae de multis Ecclesiis colligere potuisii, infundas. Non enim pro
locis res sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda sunt. Ex quibusque ergo Ecclesiis,
quae pia, quae religiosa, quae recta sunt, elige; and haec quasi in fasciculum
collecta apud Anglorum mentes in consuetudinem depone.


Every Church, at least every Provincial Church, composed their prayers, or
other parts of their divine Service, as seemed most conducible to their
edification and after altered the same, or made a new form, Vide Bern. Augiens.
de quibud. rebus ad missam pertinent. c. 2. Vide Sozom. hist. l. 7. c. 19.
or received a form used in another Church, as they pleased: Spain or some part
of it received the Roman Liturgy. And therefore if it should seem good to the
Church of England to mend their Liturgy, or compose a new one (if need be) more
agreeable to the present time, they should do therein no more then the most
famous Churches have done before, and which can be no disparaging of the
wisdom and piety of the Composers of it, which intended only to make it as
fit as could be for the state of the Church in their time (which I believe they
performed very exactly) and not to frame and impose an unchangeable form which
could never prove incongruous to any possible variety in the state of the
Church; for this is not in the power of any persons or Churches. Howsoever
Ceremonies and a form of Liturgy, are no more necessary for Episcopal, then a
Presbyterian Government, which may equally err in defect or excess, or quality
of the rites and divine Service.

Now although both the forms of government and all Ecclesiastical rites be in
their nature changeable, Sect. 19.
because of their dependence upon variable circumstances, yet some have been
less subject to change or abrogation then other, either because they be of small
efficacy to hurt or profit, or because the hurt done by them is hardly
discerned, or because the circumstances, which are apt to make them noxious,
seldom happen, or because they are believed to have the Apostles for their
authors or approvers.

Of all other, Episcopacy seems least subject to abrogation. First, because the
Churches in all parts of the world, were always firmly persuaded, that the
institution of Episcopacy, had the Apostles hand and seal joined with the
mother Churches for the confirmation of it. Secondly, because many believed
that the Apostles never permitted the College of Presbyters to ordain
Presbyters in the time that they ruled in the Churches, this they received by
tradition, to which they easily gave their assent, because they found not in
the Acts of the Apostles, or the Apostolical Epistles, that sole Presbyters
ordained any (except perhaps by an immediate command of the Holy Ghost, which
is extraordinary) but with a President either an Apostle or an Evangelist, or a
Vicegerent of an Apostle, as Timothy, Titus, etc. whence they thought it might
be very probably collected, that the Apostles would have given a principality
of the exercise of the power of ordination unto one Presbytet only in every
Church, so as without him the whole College could not ordain, and would have
left the government to be exercised in common, equally by all, if the College
had not so grossly abused their ruling power, whereby it was seen that the
College had need of a President both in the Government, and the Ordination,
which was accordingly given them by the decree of the Church, approved by the
Apostles. St. Hierome himself has some passages, which seem to favor this
opinion, ^i passim omnibus (Presh.) esses concessum (ordinare,) tot
admitterentur ad ordines, quod non servaretur ordo; immo potius generaretur
confusi^: and ideo dispositum est Dei consilie, quod solis Episcopis ordinum
dispensatio and aliorum officiorum, ut consecratio abbatum, monialium and
ecclesiarum and consimilium concedatur. Bonevent. in 4. d. 25. q. 1.
and therefore the Churches never suffered a Presbyter, or Chor^piscope, to
ordain, except he supplied the place of a Bishop, when he could not be
present, and the Ordination could not be delayed; Thirdly, The Presbyterian
Government was in use in the purest purity of the Churches, beginning to spread
abroad over the world by the preaching of the Apostles, and yet in less then
twenty years space Schisms grew out of it, which caused the Churches to out
it, and to establish Episcopacy as the best antidote against Schism, and for
the restoration and maintenance of the Churches peace.

Now if the Presbyterian Government was uneffectuall for the preserving of
peace among the most godly, and consequently the most addicted to peace, who
can expect it should be effectual to restore union and peace, and to preserve
it in Churches too full of pollutions and stains, very much degenerated from
the holiness of the Apostolical times? It seems a desperate and preposterous
course, to use that as a sovereign Antidote in our time, which had the effect
of a Poison upon the Churches in the Aposties time. A hurnt Child dreads the
fire; and should not the weaker members of the body dread the fire, that burnt
the strongest and best able to resist its force? Seeing the remainder of
natural corruption in the most holy Churches drew the Poison of Scisme from
the Presbyterian form of government, we cannot, without high presumption,
think that the far higher degrees of sin remaining in us, will be idle, and
suffer grace to make of it an Antidote against Schism. Mountebanks are seen
sometime to heal by improper Medicines, where the strength of nature, and the
concurrence of some other secret causes do perform the cure, and not the
nature of the Physic. So may the Presbyterian government have in some place
the credit of healing Schisms and maintaining peace, when in very truth those
good effects proceed from the confluence of other causes, and not from the
aptness of that government to effect them: For it seems incredible that it
should have in it an aptness to keep us in peace, that had in it an ineptitude
to keep the most peaceably disposed Apostolic Christians in unity and peace.
Whence we may conclude, that although the ancient Episcopacy be in its nature
changeable, as being of the Churches, and by consequence of humane
constitution, yet morally and practically it may not be abrogated without
damage to the Church; which will assuredly follow, if some accidental benign
influences of some other causes do not for some time hinder its birth.

I am very apt to believe, that the Churches, which seem to use the
Presbyterian government, never intended by any Law, deserving the proper name
of a Law, to settle the primitive Presbytery in their Churches, whence the sad
Schisms arose in the primitive times; much less to abrogate the ancient
Episcopacy, which in the judgment of the best Christians, and of the Apostles,
is the healer of Schisms, and the preserver of peace: But that they intended
(as they had good reason) to abrogate the corrupted Hierarchy, with the
multitude of its oppressing attendants, and (as necessity compelled them)
seemingly to suspend their reception of the ancient Episcopacy, but in very
deed receiving in some hidden sort the substance of it, secretly giving that
Authority to the moderator of the College of Presbyters, which tantamounts the
Authority of the ancient Bishops. This was done by them in their Emergency, out
of the Gulf of the Babylonish Idolatry and Haeresies, when the state of
persons and Circumstances would not permit them directly and manifestly to set
up the ancient Episcopacy, but covertly and clothed with the apparel of
Presbytery; Because the appearing of it in its native clothing seemed to
threaten an extreme danger of returning again to Idolatrous Babylon. Thus when
two duties became inconsistent, the keeping out of Idolatry, and the open and
manifest use of an Ordinance inferior to the maintenance of the purity of Gods
worship; they did, as it was their duty, so far forbear the open use of
Episcopacy as seemed needful, that they might preserve the truth and sincerity
of the worship of God. I know many writers are of another mind, but the
intentions of Churches are better seen in the causes of their actions, and the
managing of them, then in the letter of a Law, or in the speculative opinions
of private persons.

Some think the present condition of our Church, to be almost the same with the
state of those Churches, when they first began their Reformation, and therefore
that we stand in need of the same cure under the habit of the Presbyterian
Government. Surely these are much deceived; first, in their opinion of our
present state; secondly, in the sequel, if our case were like theirs: for,
when we were like them in departing from Babylon, we were unlike them in many
other respects, and needed not the habit of Presbyters, but fall to purge the
ancient Episcopacy from as many of the foul excrescencies which the sins of men
made to grow to it, as the condition of that time would permit, whereby our
Church kept more uniformity with the primitive Churches, and by the blessing of
God upon our endeavor, obtained more measure of the Heavenly light, and of the
power of Godliness in peace, and that for a longer time, then any part of those
Churches attained unto, which were necessitated to shroud themselves under
another habit of Government. This I say not any way to disparage any other
Church of Christ, (whom I honor and pray for from my heart) or to ascribe any
thing to our own wisdom and providence, but to honor and glorify the grace
of God for his great mercies to our Church, and to defend her honor against
the mistakes of some.

But now our condition is changed our sins have brought us to misery, the light
and glory of our Church is turned to darkness, confusion, and contempt; from
which (notwithstanding our unworthiness) Gods infinite mercy (which has most
graciously restored our Sovereign Lord the King unto his Kingdoms and
Subjects) will be pleased, I trust, to deliver us, and to beautify our Church
with the primitive Apostolical Episcopacy, attended by his assessors and
Senate, the reverend, grave, wise, learned and pious College of Presbyters, to
govern the house of God, after the best pattern of the primitive holy orders
and discipline, for the obtaining whereof, God would have us assisted by His
grace to contribute our endeavors, improved to the uttermost of Christian
Wisdom and moderation, to be crowned with his rich blessing. And because this
business is about things for the most part spiritual, tending to the
edification of Gods house, it will, no doubt, please our gracious King and his
great Council not to proceed in this work without the advice and counsel of
them, whom Christ has ordained under Himself Minister all builders of His
House; least the neglect of His Ordinance and Ministers cause the Lord to blast
all other Counsels and endeavors, how probable soever they may seem to be in
the eye of the world. Give unto Casar the things which are Caesar's, and let the
Vicegerents of Christ enjoy the things belonging to them, let all interests
have their due part in this weighty work; and then whatsoever Government be
settled, what form soever of Divine service, what Rites soever and Ceremonies
shall be established, they will with all readiness and due submission be
received and embraced by all the people, and all the obedient Sons and
Daughters of our dearest Mother the Church of England: among whom if there
shall be some whose judgments cannot acquiesce in some determinations of the
higher powers, they will wisely consider; first, that in the remote conclusions
of Divine maxims, all good men in this our infirmity will never agree, and
that nature teaches us that in controversies the resolution of the major part
must be obeyed, without which debates would never be ended, and St. Paul says,
let the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets. Secondly, That God
has appointed the powers civil and Ecclesiastical in his stead to determine
Ecclesiastical controversies, and to make Ecclesiastical Ordinances, from
whose judgment there is no appeal but only to God by prayer. Thirdly, That to
preserve the peace of the Church and Charity the bond of perfectness, is a duty
to be preferred before the duty of public teaching, divulging, or preaching
many of those Divine Truths, whose ignorance (if not voluntary) does not
exclude from Heaven, when that teaching or publishing does disturb the public
peace, and consequently the keeping of the peace requires abstinence in that
case from such divulging or preaching.

And from these considerations good men will infer that it is good for them,
and that it is their duty both for the sake of Gods Authority, for good order
sake, and for Charity and peace sake, and out of a Conscientious regard to the
higher powers, to acquiesce in their determinations, and to desist from
opposing their private opinion to the public judgment, and pursuing their
private interest to the prejudice of public peace and Charity. For which
Wisdom and moderation, that they may be in all, let all good men pray to the
only wise and most merciful God, the Author of Truth and peace.

An APENDIX.
THe manner of the Ordination of Bishops (forgotten to be showed by me in due
place) is declared by the fourth Council of Carthage in these words; Can. 2.
When a Bishop is ordained, lay and hold the book of the Evangelists upon his
head and neck, and one Bishop pronouncing the Benediction over him, let the
rest of the Bishops present touch his head with their hands. The Church never
accounted any to be capable of this Episcopal Ordination that was not first
ordained a Presbyter, the manner of whose Ordination, was that the Bishop
blessing him (saying, receive the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins you shall remitt,
Council earth. Can 3.
etc.) and laying his hand upon his head, the Presbyters present lay their
hands upon his head by the hand of the Bishop.

There was a Tert. de praescript. c. 41. Cyprian. Epist. ad Antonianum Hier. ad
Heliodorum Conc. Sardicens. c. 13.
Canon in use in the second Century (when it was made it is not known) which
required that every one that would be an Ecclesiastical Officer should begin
with; and for some set time officiate in the lowest Office, and so by degrees
ascend to the Episcopacy, if the Church did desire his advancement. Yet we find
that some laics, yea some unbaptised persons have been by the Clergy and
people chosen Bishops, as Ambrose, Nectarius, and other, Paulinus in vita
Ambrosij. Niceph. Callist. Eccl. hist. l. 12. c. 12.
who leaping over the inferior offices, and the time wherein they should have
given proof of their faithfulness and industry in the order of Presbytery,
have been Baptized, made Presbyters, and then Bishops within few days, and
some (it may be) took these two last orders in the same hour. But this was
very rare, and by dispensation, or was liable to an Ecclesiastical censure.

When any under the degree of a Presbyter, was by the ignorance or perverseness
of some Bishops, ordained a Bishop, nothing done by him was esteemed valid, but
what his former degree did warrant, or a Laick might in necessity do, until he
was made a Presbyter. Bellarmine says truly, that it is impossible that one
should be ordained a Bishop (fit to officiate) which was not before a
Presbyter, or did not take both orders together. For (says he) Episcopacy
includes Presbytery in its essence, and a Bishop, no Presbyter, is a figment,
De Sacramento Ordinis. l. 1. c. 5.
a Bishop being nothing else but the first or chief Presbyter. Whence he does
rightly infer that the Ordination of a Bishop, compared with the Ordination of
a Presbyter, is (being in it self precisely considered) inferior to it, as
being of no efficacy as to acts merely Ecclesiastical, and which the civil
Magistrate cannot execute.

Here some doubts are raised which by diverse are diversely resolved. As whether
Christ did ordain the Apostles in the first place Presbyters, and after that
Bishops? and if so, when was this done? or if it be said that Christ made them
Apostles, Presbyters and Bishops, in one and the same Ordination, how can it be
proved that Christ gave the Apostles the powers now proper to Bishops, not only
as they were extraordinary Officers, but also as they were to have successors;
and not rather that Christ reserved those powers as they were to be conveyed by
succession to be given in a more convenient time? it is generally acknowledged
that Presbyters were vertually ordained when the Apostles were ordained. If
Christ made the Apostles both Presbyters and Bishops in one Ordination, how
durst the Church alter our Saviors Ordinance, as to ordain them by two actual
Ordinations whom He Himself had ordained in one virtuall Ordination? to say
that our blessed Savior ordained the Apostles first Presbyters, and afterward
Bishops, is to affirm that which the Evangelists do not mention. To Preach,
Baptize, administer the Lords Supper, to feed the Sheep, to bind and loose, all
these offices appear by clear Testimonies of the holy Scriptures, and the
consent of the Catholic Church to belong to Presbyters; and therefore it may
not be reasonably thought that any of those places of the Evangelists which
promise those powers, or intimate them to be given, or require the execution of
them, conveigh an Episcopacy to the Apostles supposed before ordained
Presbyters. Some say, that St. Cyprian and some other of the Fathers affirm
Christ in ordaining the Apostles to have ordained Bishops, and that Bishops are
the Apostles successors, and Presbyters the successors of the 70 Disciples. To
these Objections the answers are ready and easy. Ad Dr^^contiam in Ps. 44.
First, Athanasius says, that Christ by his Apostles constituted and ordained
Bishops, and Augustine says, that the Church conceived Bishops, neither of
them writes that Bishops were vertually ordained in the Apostles Ordination,
neither is this expressly said in any ancient Author. In Epist. 1. ad Timoth, c.
3.
Secondly, Ambrose the contemporary or elder then the true Ambrose says, that
the Ordination of a Presbyter and Bishop is one and the same, this may seem
strange, for in his and the preceding times, they were distinct, but his
following words declare his meaning when he gives this reason, namely, Cyprian
ad florentium, etc. Epist.
because both Presbyter and Bishop are Sacerdotes, Priests, which shows that in
saying, that the Ordination of a Presbyter and Bishop is the same, he meant
quatenus Sacerdotes, as they were Priests or Presbyters, their ordination was
the same.

So the other ancient Doctors which say that Christ in speaking some things to
the Apostles, as, He that hears you, hears me, Basil. constit. monast. c.
22.
etc. (...) spoke in and by them to Bishops, or that in them Christ ordained
Bishops, did mean, That our Savior spoke in and by the Apostles to Bishops,
(not as Bishops) but as they were Sacerdotes, Priests, and Presbyters, and only
consequently and remotely, by the means of a subsequent Ordinance, as they were
Bishops, that is, Presbyters, having a presidency over their Brethren, when the
Pastors of that primitive Church say, that Bishops are Successors of the
Apostles, and Presbyters successors of the 70 Disciples, their meaning was,
That having respect to the Distinction which the Apostles made, between one
Presbyter and the rest, by exalting one in every Church to a presidency over
the rest: The President Presbyter, which is the Bishop, succeeds the Apostles,
whose Successors, and the subject Presbyters succeeded the 70 Disciples, in
some likeness of superiority and inferiority.

The Fathers could not mean, That the Presbyters were ordained in the
Ordination of the 70. For

First, None of them had any good ground to affirm, That the 70 either had so
ample an ordinary power (if they had any ordinary power) as the Presbytery
have; or that the power they received was rather the power of an Office to
continue in them, Ad Rodolphum Archiepiscopum Senonens. in apparandarum rerum
addend. post tom. 7. Council.
then a power only to do some acts for a certain time after, which the power
was to leave them, although Pope Nicholas the first affirms, That the 70
Disciples had the Offices of Bishops, and could ordain Presbyters.

Secondly, The Form of Ordination, both in our Church, and in the Roman
pontificial, does manifestly show, That Presbyters were virtually ordained in
the Ordination of the Apostles, after our Saviors Resurrection, when he said,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Whosesoever sins ye remit, etc. the which entire
words are used in Presbyters Ordination, and only one member of the words are
used in the ordination of bishops, that is, Receive the Holy Ghost, which words
do not serve to conveigh unto them all power to remit, etc. which they had
received in their Ordination, to Presbytery, but they serve to give them the
power of Presidency, whereby the Bishop is constituted: and therefore
Presbyters and Bishops, as they be Presbyters, are the primary Successors of
the Apostles, and Bishops, as Bishops, that is, as to their presidency are
only secondary Successors of the Apostles.

There is no great cause of doubt whether those words abovesaid, used at this
time in the ordination of Bishops or Presbyters, Cum Ecclesia in ordinatione
sacerdotum Christum imitata ritu perpetuo eisd. verbis and forma illa, Accipite
Spiritum Sanctum quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Semper usa fuerit, quis
ambigat idem omnino quod Christum facere, etc. Vasq. in 3. p. disp. 239. c. 4.
were together with imposition of hands therein used in and from the Primitive
times, because they are not expressly mentioned in any ancient Author, for a
thousand years and above (for any thing I could learn) for first the Fathers do
often say, that imposition of hands was used in those ordinations (and ought to
be used) as also a benediction and prayers: which prayers (no question) were
accommodated in each ordination to the distinction made by the Apostles between
Presbyters and Bishops, and therefore the words [ Receive the Holy Ghost,
whosoevers sins ye remit, etc.] might be used in the prayers of the Bishops
ordination, for an increase of the grace and power received by them in their
Presbyterial ordination, and omitted in the prayers of Presbyters ordination
(wherein they constitute the benediction,) because the fullness of the exercise
of the power given by the ministry of those words, and other parts of their
ordination is something restrained by the constitution of Episcopacy.

The reason why those holy men did not set down in their writings the very
words of benediction spoken at the imposition of hands, In 2 Cor. hom. 6.
and the particular forms of prayers then used is declared by Chrysostom;
Nota, patres and concilia non consuevisse explicare totum ritum Sacramentorum
(non enim scribebant libros rituales) sed solum attigisse unam partem
essentialem ex qua caetera omnia intelligerentur. Bellarm. de Sacram. Ord. l.
1. c. 9.
who, speaking of Bishops beginning the Act of ordination, says, That such and
such words were spoken which the initiated knew, for it is not lawful (says
he) to detect all before the profane.

As for the forms of Ordination which were written between the years 700 and
1000 and the forms in Clements constitutions, besides that they are of small
credit, they are imperfect and disagree among themselves. In one form of
Bishops consecration the book is not remembered to be held over the head of the
person to be ordained; in another form there is no mention of the imposition of
hands. In a form of the ordination of a Presbyter, the Bishop and Presbyters
holding their hands on the head of the ordained, it is said, and det orationem
super eum, and let the Bishop pray above him, then many sorts of prayers
follow. Whence we may gather, that the prayer to be made over him differs from
the other prayers, and that under the word [Prayer] the words of benediction,
which are, Receive the Holy Ghost, Whosoever sins ye remit, etc. are
comprehended. For those words pronounced by the Bishop as the mouth of the
Church are a virtual prayer; the heavenly gift signified by them, Manus
impositiones verba sunt mystica quibus confirmatur ad opus electus accipiens
auctoritatem test conscientia sua, ut audeat vice Domini sacrificium Deo
offerre. Ambros. in Epist. 2. ad Timoth. c. 4. Homo imponit. manus, Deus
largitur gratiam, homo imponit supplicem dexteram, and Deus benedicit potenti
dextera. Ambros. de dignitate sacerd. a Greg. Epist. l. 7. Epist. 63.
and to be given in the use of them, being begged of God in the preceding, and
also in the subsequent prayers. And as they are pronounced by the Bishop
supplying the place and instead of Christ, they are Christ's benediction, and a
signification of his operative will in giving the Holy Ghost unto some (that is
Presbyters in their ordination) to authorize them to do the external acts of
binding and loosing, etc. and to accompany those acts duly exercised in the
union and communion of the truly Catholic Church; and unto others (that is,
Bishops, in their ordination) to authorize and enable them for the eminent,
universal, and presidential use and administration of the power of binding and
loosing before received in their Presbyterial ordination, and for the sole
exercise of the power of ordination, and to accompany their service duly
performed in the union and communion of the true Church of Christ. So the words
of the institution of the Lords Supper are in themselves no prayers, but
considered as a part of the prayer preceding them (called by Gregory the great,
the Canon, which is not reputed to be ended before those words be prolated)
they are a virtual prayer being presented unto God in the supplication of the
Church for the obtaining of an heavenly effect in the imitation of the act of
Christ like unto that effect which was granted at the act of prolation of them
by Christ himself.

Major and Angel. affirm, that they saw some Pontificals which were both
without the words [ Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.] and also without imposition
of hands. Therefore those omissions are no sufficient arguments to prove that
the foresaid words of benediction were not used in the Primitive times. We may
further prove them to be then in use by this, that of all the integral parts of
Presbyters ordination, we find nothing proper to the Bishop, (...). Basil. ad
Amphilock. Can. ^1.
but only those words of benediction; for the Presbyters impose their hands as
well as the Bishops, the Presbyters and people fast and pray with the Bishop,
there is nothing left but the prolation of the words of benediction, in the name
and place of Christ. This is confirmed by the story of the purblind Bishop, who
having laid his hand to ordain a Presbyter, and the Presbyters their hands,
used the eyes and mouth of a Presbyter to read and pronounce the benediction.
Cone. Hispal. 2. c. 5.
Its not said that the Presbyter read the prayers (although its most likely he
read them) but the benediction. And why? surely because the prayers were the
common prayers of the whole Church, and the benediction only proper to the
Bishop, and therefore that ordination was rejected as unlawful and invalid, a
Presbyter and not a Bishop having prolated the benediction: and the Bishops
commission was of no value, because prohibited by the Canons in force at that
time. Above 300 years before this Bishop, in the time of Athanasius, all the
Presbyters (and Ischyras among them) which were ordained by Colythus a
pretended Bishop, were refused to be received by the Church in that degree,
Athanas. in apolog. 2.
because Colythus was proved to be only a Presbyter, whose ordination, in the
judgment of the Church, the constitution of the Apostles had made invalid.
Sermon. de extellent. sacrorum Ord.
Ivo Carnotensis speaking of the ordination of Presbyters, and having said,
that the Bishop and Presbyters had laid their hands, he adds, and they invocate
the Holy Ghost upon them which are ordained; where he leaves nothing proper for
the Bishop but the words of benediction prolated by him, and only by him as in
the place of Christ. The Bishop invocated in the name of the whole
congregation, and blessed in the name and place of our Savior. St. Ambrose
writing to a Bishop whom he had ordained, Epist. l. 1. Epist. 3. ad Episcopum
Comensem.
says, the ordination which thou have received by the imposition of my hands,
and benediction in the name of the Lord Jesus is not reprehended. in Esa. c. 58.
Hierome says that ordination is not fulfilled only by imprecation of the
voice, but also by imposition of hand. Now because the benediction was and
ought to be said, while the Bishop and Presbyters (in the ordination of these)
impose and hold their hands on the head of the person to be ordained (the
formal prayer going before the imposition and following after it,) and because
it is the principal part of the ordination, to which the imposition of hand is
subservient, as it is a vertual prayer, St. August. says, De baptis. contra
Donatist. l. 3. c. 16.
what is imposition of hand, but a prayer over a man? And as it is spoken by
the Bishop in Christ's stead, delivering the Ecclesiastical power in Christ's
name, Ambrose says, In Epist. 1. ad Timoth. c. 4.
that the imposition of hands are mystical words whereby the elect (to the
office of the sacred ministry) receiving authority is confirmed for his work,
that he may be bold to offer Sacrifice to God in Christ's steed. Whereby we see
that imposition of hand, and the benediction, are distinct parts of ordination,
yet so conjunct, and the benediction so excelling the imposition of hand, that
the whole is reckoned nothing else but a benediction or prayer.

I confess that I did sometime begin to suspect, that when the Roman Court had
determined ordination to be a Sacrament properly so called, as baptism, and
instituted by our Savior, they put in those words in the solemnity of
ordination, for the better confirmation and propagation of their new opinion;
but considering the reasons aforesaid, and especially that the blessed
Reformers of our Church have retained the same words, and nothing doubting but
that in so doing they did not favor the popish opinion, but were persuaded
they did therein follow their pattern, which was the usage of the Primitive
Church, I rejected that conceit and suspicion.

The first Author that I can remember to have read, more expressly intimating
the said words of benediction to be used in the ordination of Presbyters, is
our Countryman Alexander of Hale, in these words; Sum. part. 4. q. 21. membr.
4.
the Keys (says he) are given with the sacerdotal order, when it is said,
whose fins you remit, etc. and when a Bishop is consecrated, another Key is not
conferred upon him, but the use of that first Key is extended. Thus far he, who
flourished about the year 1240.

In the words [ Whose sins ye remit, etc.] remission must not be taken
precisely for the taking away the guilt of sin, or the reconciling of
paenitents upon their private or public repentance for sins committed after
baptism, but also for the taking away the power and reign of sin, which is done
by infused grace, which having removed the spiritual darkness and death,
illuminates the soul, and makes it alive to God. Every part of the Presbyterial
function, tends to this last effect as well as to the former, although one
pastoral office may be more especially directed to the former, and another in a
more special manner to the latter effect.

The Fathers do often apply those words in St. John now frequently remembered,
and the like in Matthew. chapter 16. and chap. 18. to the act of reconciling
Paenitents to God and the Church, and much oftener then they do to any other
kind of the ministerial loosing or remission, and they had good reasons moving
them so to do. For, first, Haereticks began in the second Century to deny that
Christ left any ministerial power in his Church for the remission of any great
sin committed after baptism; and this Heresy was revived by Novatian and
Novatus in the third Century, and quickened by the Donatists in the fourth
Century. Against which, the Orthodox Pastors of the Church used those places of
Scripture, to prove that the power of reconciling such Penitents was given to
the Church of Christ. Secondly, the zeal of the people in the Primitive Times,
and the encouragements of the Ministers, and after, the Canons of the Church
inclined the people to make confession of their secret enormities to the Church
or Pastors (not because necessary to salvation, but because it was found very
profitable as the times and persons were then qualified,) and public offenders
were brought to public repentance, and (this being duly performed) were
publicly reconciled to God and his Church. These things being so frequent and
solemn, yet very irksome and grievous to flesh and blood, it was very necessary
for the Fathers of the Church to put the people daily in mind of the benefit of
those confessions and penitence, and the necessity of both as to scandalous
offenses in order to a public reconciliation, which they could not otherwise
do better then by making use of those places of Scripture for the Demonstration
and proof of the peoples Duty, and the certainty and comfort of their
reconciliation.

None of those holy Pastors denied the ministerial power of remission or
loossing to be exercised in the other ministerial offices, instituted as the
means which God would bless (if not abused) for the begetting and increasing of
saving grace. Yea some of them have expressly taught, that the preaching of
the word, baptism, and consequently the Lords Supper are Keys which open
Heaven to some, and shut Heaven against others, and are the instruments of Gods
power to loose some from the bonds of the guilt and power of sin, and to bind
those that refuse to be loosed by them. For, does not the Lords Supper bind the
unworthy receivers, who eat and drink their own damnation! and does it not set
at liberty and open Heaven to them, who in eating and drinking according to the
will of Christ eat and drink their own salvation? but lets hear what holy
Hierome says, the Apostles do loose men (says he) by the words of God, In
Esa. c. 14.
the testimony of the Scriptures and exhortation of virtues. Epist. ad Hedib.
q. 9.
And again in another place, the Apostles (says he) in the first day of
Christ's resurrection received the grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby they might
remit sins and baptize and make sons of God, and give the spirit of adoption to
believers, our Savior himself saying, Whosoevers sins ye remit, they shall be
remitted. Thus far Hierome.

The powers promised unto St. Peter in Matthew. chapter 16. and the powers given unto
the Apostles, when our Savior breathed upon them and said, Receive the Holy
Ghost, etc. and the powers mentioned in the 18 chap. of St. Matthew, supposed
before given, or to be in a special manner given in time to come, are one and
the same powers, Chrysostom. de sacerdotio. l. 3. Ambros. l. 1. de^^aenit. c. 1.
and 6. Hier. ad Heliod. de vita solit. Athanas. sermon. in illud [p^^ofecti in
pagum, etc.] Cypr. de simplicit Praelat.
and so taken to be by the Doctors of the Primitive Church, which they do
unanimously acknowledge to be given unto the Apostles both in right and
possession (as to the essential parts of the powers) before Christ's death:
although there is some seeming variety among them concerning the punct of time
before his death, wherein Christ gave them declaratively unto them, and the
immediate subject to whom they were given.

Considering their sayings concerning this matter, and comparing them together,
and so expounding them that they may agree with the Scriptures and among
themselves, these following assertions may be gathered from them. First, They
do not deny the said powers to have been given (as to their essentials) unto
the Apostles when he called them to the Apostleship, and gave them the name of
Apostles; For they could not think, that Christ gave them the name of the
office, without the office it self: And it appears that the Apostles preached
and baptized before the promise of them was made unto Peter. They received with
the name of Apostles the powers to minister all the doctrine and means of
salvation which Christ intended in due time to deliver unto them. Act. 1.24,
25. Act. 26.16.
And therefore when the Sacrament of the Eucharist was instituted, they needed
not a new ordination, but only a signification of Christ's pleasure, that they
should use the power before given them in the administration of this ordinance,
which is but an extention of the power to a new object. Secondly, they agree,
Chrysostom. in Joh. hom. 85. Cyprian. de simplicit. Praelatoruus. Aug. de
Trinitate, and civitate Dei c. 4. and quaest. ex vet. and Novi Testam. c. 93.
that all the Apostles received those powers when our Savior breathed upon
them, etc. and that this was a solemn ordination of them, giving them more
grace to accompany their ministry then they had in their first call and less
solemn ordination, or in the subsequent manifestation thereof before his death.
This is the more proper ordination of the ministers of the new testament, the
full original and seminal tradition of the ministerial powers, whereby all
future ordinations of the like kind are sanctified: and for these causes our
Savior iterated their ordination to the pastoral extraordinary and ordinary
offices, and the rather least his death might be thought to have made void
their first more secret and covert ordination. Some late writers think, that
Christ, lest his ascension into heaven might seem to have nullified the second
ordination, did ordain the Apostles the third time in the day of Pentecost;
Hier. epist. ad Hedib. q. 9.
but its more likely that he did then only complete their ordination in the
measure of extraordinary and ordinary gifts of the spirit, enabling them, and
in them the succeeding Pastors for the better execution of their pastoral
functions. Thirdly, the fathers agree also in this, that Christ gave equal
power and authority unto all the Apostles and made them all ministerial rocks
and fundations, Cyprian. de simplicit. Praelat.
gave unto them the Keys of the heavenly Kingdom, and gave them with the
Keys in their hands unto the Church, Aug. de verbis Domini sermon. 11. and de
doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 18.
for whose aedification only they and their successors were to use them. The
eyes are not more the bodies, then Pastors and their Keys are the Churches;
and as the body cannot see but by the eyes, so the Church cannot enter into
heaven by any other member (under Christ) of the mystical body, without the
service of the Pastors opening with their Keys the gates of heaven for her. As
the Apostles were ministerial rocks, so was Peter's confession an instrumental
rock: and in a second place, the confession and preaching of the rest of the
Apostles were so too; by the means of which rocks the Church is built upon the
foundation of foundations, the principal rock our Lord Jesus Christ. Hilar. in
Math. Can. 11. Matthew. 16.
Yet Peter's confession was not without a great reward: He had the first promise
of the Keys to be given unto him after Christ's resurrection, with the more
abundant measure of the grace of the Holy Ghost, which he then received with
the rest of the Apostles; yet so that he was the first in order which received
them before the rest. He had a name given him by our Savior from the principal
rock. Ambros. sermon. 89. Cyprian. de habiiu virgin.
He was made the first in order and head of the Apostles: the first ministerial
rock: and his preaching was made the first instrumental rock. He was made the
first preacher to, and convertor of the Jews and Gentiles; Joh. 10. and Ambros.
ser. 47. De Petro vide Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 21. Ambros. de incarn. Dom.
sacramento Cypr. nbi sup. and ad Antonianum.
the Apostle and Pastor of the first Christian Church after Christ's ascension,
which was the mother of all other Churches. And because it was believed that he
had his choycest and longest residence in Rome, wherein by his ministry the
Gospel was first planted, that Church was counted the Princess of Churches, the
mother of Churches, as he was accounted and called the Prince of the Apostles.
All these privileges did serve to show the unity of the Church, and the unity
of the holy ministry and ministers thereof, and to commend unto all the sons
of the Church, the preservation of unity in doctrine, worship, Discipline and
charity. There be many particular Churches of Christ, yet all but one Church,
as Peter's Church was one, there be many Bishops and Presbyters, yet as Peter
was alone the Apostle of the first Church which represented all the succeeding
Churches, Basil. constitut. Monast. c. 22.
so the many ministers of the Gospel are one in Peter, and the ministry one in
him. And as the Churches and ministers were one in their fountains and roots,
so they ought to preserve the like unity among themselves, the ministers
imitating the faithfulness of Peter, and the flock imitating the obedience and
holiness of the Church of Peter. If Rome had persisted in, and contented her
self with the doctrine of St. Peter, and not added thereto Idolatry,
superstitions and haeresies, we would gladly have owned and honored her
Bishops as the prime successors of Peter, and the Church of Rome, as the like
successor of Peter's Church: but, to our hearts unspeakable grief we speak it,
the gold is become dim, the most fine gold is changed, the holy City is
become an harlot. O that she would return to her first husband that we might
return to her! There Is Peter's chair where Peter's preaching is sincerely
imitated, that is Peter's Church which imitates her faith and holiness, which
when Rome shall do, she shall recover her precedence of succession.

Thus Peter had a primacy among the Apostles, but no superiority of command
over them: All pastors were in him first and secondarily in the rest of the
Apostles. De dignitate Sacerd. c. 2. Jo. 21.
Peter (says Ambrose) did not alone receive the sheep, but received them with
us, and we received them with him. Christ in the Apostles gave unto all Pastors
the power of ordaining Pastors; because he gave them the Keys to be conveyed
to successors. But the power of appointing who among the Presbyters should
exercise them, and how, and who among them should be governors of the use of
the Keys, was not conveyed with the Keys to all Pastors in the Apostolical
ordination; because it was peculiar to the extraordinary office of the
Apostles, either to leave that to the wisdom of the Church and ordinary
Pastors to order, or to settle it in one Presbyter assisted with the College
of Presbyters, or otherwise, as the Holy Ghost should guide them. We may not
think that our Savior did give unto every Presbyter power to ordain, preach,
administer the Sacraments, excommunicate, or absolve, at his own will and
pleasure, without any appointment of a flock, or calling him to account of his
Stewardship, etc. for this is against the light of nature, unless God had given
unto every Presbyter wisdom and a will which could not err in the orderly use
of the Keys, as he gave unto the Apostles; without which extraordinary grace
the house of God in that case had been full of disorder and confusion, which
Christ would not permit.

If the power of disposing and governing the act of ordination, and the
exercise of the acts of binding and loosing had been given to the body of the
Presbyters by our Savior, the Apostles and universal Church had never deprived
the College of that authority: Wherefore as the first planting of the
Christian Churches was proper to the Apostles, so the constituting of the form
of government, and the governors of the exercise of the acts of ordination, and
the Keys was committed only to their trust. And it was very congruous that
Christ would not determine the form of the government of his Church and Pastors
thereof before his ascension into heaven, and the taking full possession of his
government and Kingdom at the right hand of his Father.

The Apostles planted the Churches after this manner: When God had blessed
their ministry in Cities and considerable Towns, and in the Country adjacent,
in the conversion of many to God, they constituted one congregation or Church
of all the converts in that City or good Town and the Country about it, So
ordering Ecclesiastical Corporations as might, as much as could be, best agree
with the civil corporations and their division. For the feeding of which Church
they ordained Pastors, and those many in every City-Church, Ubi est Ecclesia
nisi ubi virga and gratia floret sacerdotalis. Ambros. de Isaac and anima c. 7.
Es Hier. contra Lucifer. Ecclesia non est quoenon habet Sacerdotem.
in which they left the College of Presbyters governors both of the Pastors
individually considered, and the whole flock, yet with and under themselves or
their vicegerents as presidents, when either of them were present. But within a
short time, when Christianity was much spread in several Nations, and many
City-Churches were grown populous, so that they had many lesser Churches under
them; and the Apostles and their Vicegerents could be present but in very few
in comparison of the far greater number which wanted their society, the
Colleges in these began to be divided among themselves, and to divide the
Churches, which caused the Apostles guided thereto by the Spirit of Christ to
consent to a change of the government which was by the Colleges (bodies
without a head, and so apt to swerve in ruling populous Churches) into a
president in every Church chosen out of the Pastors, together with the College
of the City and best Presbyters as his Senate and Counselors. And then both
the Apostles and Evangelists, or Apostolical helpers, which were extraordinary
Bishops, become ordinary Bishops to be succeeded by others. And these last were
like our Archbishops, having many Bishops under them, as Titus in Creet, etc.
and the Apostles were like our Primates but of higher authority, and having
more Archbishops under them. Here we may observe, that the original occasion
of Episcopacy does very much commend it, it being introduced to heal the evil
of Schism, and, by preventing it for time to come, to secure the peace of the
Church: And it has and will be the more acceptable to the Churches, because it
was instituted or confirmed by the Apostles at their desire.

Unto the imposition of hands, benediction and prayers (which were of the
essence of the ordinations of Bishops and Presbyters) many Ceremonies were in
time added, some sooner, some later, which served to make a clearer
manifestation of the Ecclesiastical powers received in and by them; which
additional Ceremonies in time became occasions of foul mistakes: Some making
the additions to be the essence of the ordinations, or part thereof; other
multiplying the ordination of the Apostles according to the diversity of kinds
of the powers, which they in very deed received, but in one ordination,
although iterated for some special reasons.

When the Schoolmen began to write, they found the Roman Court full of corrupt
doctrine, which they thought themselves bound to maintain, mistaking and
miscalling the evil good, and the good evil. They found in the ordination of a
Presbyter the Patene with Bread, and the Cup with the Wine (both unconsecrated)
to be delivered unto the party to be ordained, with these words spoken by the
Bishop, Cont. Florent. Sotus in 4. d. 24. and Major and Tho. in 4. d. 24.
viz. Take power to offer, etc. which Ceremony added to that ordination about
the year 700 (as is probable,) some Schoolmen, and also Pope Eugenius the
fourth, affirm to be the matter and form of the consecration of a Presbyter,
making the imposition of hands with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. to
belong only to the solemnity thereof, and not to be essential to it; against
the judgment of all antiquity.

Other maintain the delivery of the Patene with Bread, Scotus in 4. d. 24.
Vasq. in 3. disp. 239. Bellar. de sacramento ord. i. 1. c. 9.
and the Cup with wine in it, together with the said words spoken by the
Bishop, to be one part of the ordination; and the imposition of hands with the
words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. to be an other part thereof; and both these
parts to constitute the whole essence of the ordination: As if our Savior had
made the Apostles Presbyters by two distinct ordinations, the one before his
death, and the other after his resurrection, whereof the first (if we will
without reason believe them) made them Priests, the second gave them the power
of binding and loosing, and made them complete Presbyters.

As concerning the ordination of Bishops, Divines (says Vasq.) do not well
agree at what time they were ordained, In 3. p. d. 242. c. 7.
Some think that Christ ordained them, when he said, Receive the Holy Ghost,
Whose sins ye remit, etc. this opinion is justly rejected by Vasques; unless it
may be made good, that Bishops and Presbyters had one and the same ordination;
for all grant that Presbyters were ordained by those words. Other imagine Peter
alone to have been imediately ordained by our Savior, and the rest of the
Apostles by Peter, etc. so Bellarmine and others: but this assertion does not
please Vasques and we cannot be pleased with such figments. Others do conceive
our Savior to have ordained them Priests and Bishops, when he said, Do this in
remembrance of me; This opinion is as false as the last. Some think them
ordained in the day of Pentecost; and Vasques himself thinks them to have been
ordained, when Christ said unto them, Go teach all nations, etc. which is as
groundless an opinion as any of the rest: Whereas in truth when they were
ordained Apostles, they were made Presbyters, having the pastoral powers which
were to be transmitted to successors, and were also made extraordinary Bishops,
having as essential to their extraordinary function of Apostleship, an
extraordinary presidency and superintendency over the use and exercise of all
the pastoral offices, but were not made Bishops, which were to be succeeded,
until they themselves, by confirming the prudent choice of the Churches, had
instituted Episcopacy.

The Schoolmen found the Laics empowered by commission from Rome, etc. to
excommunicate: Hence they distinguish between the power of the Order and the
power of jurisdiction. We gather from the holy Scriptures and the practice of
the Primitive Church, that excommunication was ordained to be a mean to bring a
person, guilty of some scandalous sin committed after Baptism, to the degree of
repentance and humiliation; meet first, to receive pardon of sin through faith
in Christ's blood. Secondly, to satisfy and edify the Church by good example
in proportion to the offense given and harm done by his bad example. Thirdly,
to take away the evil propensity, the skars and blots made in the Soul by the
sin committed, and to restore the offender to the degree of purity of Soul, and
consequently of communion with God, and of Gods love to him which he enjoyed
before his fall; which are obtained when God is glorified and pleased by the
humiliation in proportion to the dishonor done to God, and the divine
displeasure incurred by sin. Fourthly, to receive more strength to make the
penitent able to stand, and avoid the like fall in time to come. In the first
four Centuries after our Saviors birth, a full absolution was not granted to
any Penitent (except in case of necessity) until the Bishop and Presbyters
judged his repentance and humiliation to have restored him to Gods grace and
favor, Cyprian. ad clerum. De Presbyteris qui temere pacem lapsis dederant.
the good opinion of the Church, and to his former spiritual strength in grace.
And therefore we may be assured, that no man was excommunicated from the Church
militant, but in order to receive grace to restore him to and fit him for the
Church triumphant; and that it was the same Key which did shut the doors of
both Churches against the offender, and was to open the doors unto him, having
given sufficient testimony of a due humiliation. The Catholic Church in the
Primitive times did not divide excommunication into two distinct kinds, that
is, into excommunication from the Church triumphant, and excommunication from
the Church militant, the first proper to the Bishop and Presbyter; and the
other peculiar to the Bishops and his Committees, Presbyters or lay; this to be
exercised by the power of Jurisdiction the former to be exercised by the power
of order, that is, the power which Bishops and Presbyters received from Christ
by their ordination. Whereby we understand the power of jurisdiction, in this
sense as opposed to the power of order, to be the gift neither of Christ nor of
his Apostles. If the Church gave this power, it was a corrupt Church that gave
it, for by this ordinance of man the ordinance of Christ is made void; The
ordinance of man, is exalted above the ordinance of Christ; for the
excommunication which is Christ's ordinance may be executed by the Presbyter (in
subordination to the Bishop, but) without his Commission; the humane
excommunication is made peculiar to the Bishop the chief officer in the Church,
to be executed by himself or some other by his commission. Much good do it to
the Roman Bishops whose chief Bishop first invented it: our Bishops like it
not, it has been too importunate to stick (in part) unto them, but they will
perfectly shake it off, as soon as they can.

The excommunication which is Christ's ordinance has parts or members, whereby
it may be more or less full, greater or lesser; but it ought not to be coupled
with a mate, a brat of man's invention. De paenitentia l. 1. c. 2. Munus Spiritu
Sancti est officium Sacerdotis, jus autem Spiritus Sarcti in solvend
ligandisque criminibusest. Ibi
Deus par jus (says Ambrose) and solvendi esse voluit and ligandi: God would
that there should be equally, as a right of loosing, so a right of binding. And
therefore he that has not the right of loosing (says he) neither has he the
right of binding. And a little after, he that has (says he) a right to loose,
he has a right to bind. And a little after, the same Father says, that this
right (or power) of loosing and binding, is permitted only to Priests (that
is, Bishops and Presbyters) and thence concludes that Heretics which had no
Priests could not challenge this power. Then this Holy man shows the spring
of the same power, he that receives the Holy Ghost (says he) receives the
power both of loosing and of binding, as it is written, Receive the Holy Ghost,
Jo. 20.
whose sius ye remit, etc. Therefore he that cannot loose sin has not the Holy
Ghost (that is, Si fictus est (Praesbyter aut Episcopus) Spiritus Sanctus
Disciplinae effugiet fictum, deest saluti ejus, ministerium tamen ejus non
deserit, quo per eum salutem operatur aliorum. Aug. contra epist. Parmen. l. 2.
c. 11.
as making him an able minister of the New Testament, and of the spirit for the
remission of sins.) Thus far Ambrose. Whereby we see that the Holy Ghost gives
unto Bishops and Presbyters the power of binding by excommunication, and of
loosing by absolution, and that the Holy Ghost does accompany their service to
cure them that will not refuse to be healed. Away then with the excommunication
that has not the Holy Spirit to warrant it, nor the operation of the Holy
Ghost to make it effectual to man's salvation. Away with the lay excommunication
that makes the Holy Ghost a servant to denounce it. Away with Jeroboams Priests
made of the lowest of the people, which are not of the sons of Levi, which have
not received the Holy Ghost to make them able ministers of the new Testament,
not of the letter but of the Spirit.

It is the duty of the lay Christian magistrate to oversee, facilitate and
corroborate the due execution of the spiritual censure of excommunication
performed by Bishops principally and Presbyters subordinately: but if any ask,
whether he may not excommunicate either by himself or by a substitute? although
the answer is already given in the premises, yet I say, he may do so, and if he
have the gift, may preach in public, and minister the holy Sacraments as
lawfully as the 250 persons spoken of in the sixteenth chap. of Numbers, took
censer and offered incense, 2 Chronicles. c. 27.
and as lawfully as King Uzziah did the like: And as to the curing of the
Leprosy of the soul, he may expect the like success as Naaman would have had as
to the healing of the Leprosy of his body, 2 King. c. 5.
if he had washed himself in any other river then Jordan, wherein the Prophet
commanded him to wash himself in order to his cleansing.

The Kings Proclamation prevails more with many to leave their scandalous
vices and to live soberly, then the Sermons of the best Bishops and Presbyters
usually do with most men: Will any therefore conclude that the Proclamation of
the King, is an effectual means for the infusion of Gods saving grace, as well
as the preaching of the Gospel by them that are lawfully called to that sacred
work? the Christian Magistrates power is versed about the externals of
Christian virtues, and reaches only accidentally and by Gods indulgence
sometime to the souls of men, and the life of virtues; Whereas the ministerial
power of the Gospel, is primarily ordained to be a means always effectual for
the infusion of the soul and life of all saving Christian virtues, if the
operation of the Holy Ghost, which does constantly work with the ministry of
the Gospel (in all the offices thereof,) be not deliberately resisted. Men are
saved by means instituted and sanctified by the wisdom and power of God, and
not by means which only the wisdom of man judges to be most probable to
effect our eternal salvation. We live by faith, and not by sense.

The Independent congregations blame the reverend Bishops for some miscarriages
about the heavy censure of excommunication, and exclaim both against them, and
against Presbyters for being more zealous for ceremonies, then for the due
execution of our function in the maine offices thereof, and for the power of
godliness. As for the abuse of excommunication, the blame was to have been
imputed unto others, and not to the Bishops. And to say the very truth, in this
matter of excommunication, the Canons of our Church are defective and require
amendment, which perhaps some invincible hindrances would not permit to be
done in times past. As for the misplacing of the intention of our zeal; First,
as being my self a Presbyter, although one of the meanest, I must answer for my
self, that although (it may be) no man will or can condemn me, yet truly I
cannot justify my self before the judgment seat of Almighty God, but must make
my earnest supplication for mercy to my judge. I fear least any soul miscarry,
or miscarried through my default, that his blood should be required at my
hands; And therefore I tremble when I consider what account I am to give of my
Stewardship. And now having knowledge and experience of the most heavy weight
of this sacred vocation, and the great propensity of our nature, strengthened
by manifold temptations, unto unfaithfulness therein, if I were now to enter
into it, the conscience of my weakness and fear of miscarriage would cause me
to decline it, but being long since entered, woe unto me if I preach not the
Gospel; and I will not be discouraged having the power and mercy of God in whom
I trust to be my strength and comfort. I desire all good men, as charitably to
censure us, so to pray earnestly to God for us, that the great afflictions
which we have suffered may be sanctified to us, that remembering the afflictions
and miseries, the Wormwood and the Gall, our souls may be humbled in us, and
that the extraordinary deliverance and blessings may entirely engage our hearts
to serve the Lord with all diligence and faithfulness in the holy ministry,
and to feed the flock of God, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint
but willingly, not for filthy Lucre (a pestilence in the Church) but of a ready
mind, neither being Lords over Gods Heritage (so unbecoming the messengers of
the Lamb of God, who washed his Disciples feet,) but being examples to the
flock of sobriety, humility, meekness, Christian bounty to the poor, etc. it
becomes not good men to censure us for using those Rites and Ceremonies, which
we are persuaded not to be prohibited by Gods Law, and both they and we do
surely know to be commanded to be used by man's Law duly made, which is Gods
ordinance, to which we must be subject for conscience sake. We pity the tender
conscience which cannot without offense either obey or disobey that ordinance.
And where any of a good life is seen to have that tenderness without the
malignity of pride, and labor to propagate it and divide the Church, the piety
and discretion of the Bishop will use him gently, instruct him, pray for him,
wait patiently for his amendment, and, unless the example of the party is
seen to corrupt the sound, will hardly be drawn to go beyond a threatening,
because punishment to a man of that temper, seems rather to be an addition of
misery to him, then wholesome Physic meet to cure him.

If any will attempt to be Authors of Combinations, to extort, by show of
multitudes and by tumults, the alteration or abrogation of any part of the
established laws Civil or Ecclesiastical, they will thereby evidently manifest
themselves to be but mere pretenders to a tender conscience and power of
godliness; for they that labor to extort a part, if they prevail, must have
the whole in their power. And can they that attempt so great robbery love God,
and the power of Godliness? By this cursed fruit we know these to be most vile
Hypocrites. Let no good people be deceived by their sheeps clothing; look upon
this bitter fruit, and you see that they are within but greedy and ravening
Wolves: Contra epist. Parmen. l. 2.13. c. 15. apud Theod. balsam. c. 5. Vide
Baron annal. an. 389. sect. 74. and conc. African. temp. Bonifac. and
caelestin. c. 15. Conc. earth. 5. c. 6. Greg. 3. epist. 5.
God deliver us from them, and deliver them from the wickedness of their hearts
and ways: but leaving these I proceed. It is very pertinent to the matter in
hand to speak of reordination; but because this subject is two large, I will
only say thus much, that St. Aug. and the Council of Carthage, and generally
all antiquity are against reordination, as well as against rebaptization, both
truly so called. In cases of doubt whether one were truly baptized or truly
ordained, it was never accounted a rebaptization to baptize the one, or
reordination to ordain the other. The ordination of a Presbyter by Presbyters
without Commission from a Bishop; was always judged of dubious validity at the
least. Some so ordained in foreine Churches were not rejected by the Bishops of
the Church of England; I believe, because they thought that to judge of the
fact of another Church in matter of no greater moment would not tend to
strengthen unity between the Churches, but rather to diminish and weaken it;
Or, it may be, they did not admit them, as certainly knowing them to be so
ordained, but as charitably believing they had been ordained by a Bishop, for
charity covers the multitude of sins: a doubtful ordination established in
all the parts of it, by the public consent and authority of a Church is far
more tolerable, then the like ordination celebrated in all the parts of it,
without and against the legal consent and authority of the Church. For in this
last case, many are doubtful of the validity of Baptism, and the other divine
ordinances administered by them that were so ordained. But the Higher power
partly has, and in convenient time will remove all such doubts to the full
satisfaction of all good men. I have already exceeded my intended brevity. I
will say no more, but desire the candid reader to believe that I have not
maintained Episcopacy to be an institution of Christ by the Apostles, and not
an institution of Christ in the Apostles (as some hold, induced by many fair
probabilities) out of a spirit of contradiction; but because the sentence
chosen by me seems to be subject to less difficulties, and more agreeable to
the ancient pastoral and Episcopal ordinations which be received and used in
the Church of England, and especially because it does more incline and conduce
to moderation. Whatsoever I have herein written, I humbly submit to the
judgment and correction of my Superiors.

Neque enim Episcopi propter nos sumus, sed propter eos quibus verbum and
Sacramentum Dominicum ministramus; ac per hoc ut eorum sine scandalo
gubernandorum sese necessitas tulerit, ita vel esse vel non esse debemus, quod
non propter nos sed propter alios sumus. Aug contra Crescon. Grammatic. l. 2.
c. 11.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4. line penult. after [of the Apostles] add [before our Saviors death]
p. 10. marg. r. Jubain. p. 14. marg. r. in Esai. p. 15. l. 12. r. dicit. l. 22.
r. dicit. ib. r. consecratione. l. 36. r. postea. p. 26. l. 10. dele [of]
exped. p. 30. l. penult. r. says. l. 27. r. enable [them] the. p 32. l. 13. r.
whom. l. 31. r. Walafridus. p. 39. l. 31. r. Tungrens. so in marg. pro Vigrens.
r. Tungrens. p, 41. l. 27. r. within ten. in marg. r. natalem Domini Toletan.
the quotation ubi multorum is misplaced. p. 42. l. 9, 10. r. Paschal Wax.
candle. p. 46. over against l. 24. r. in marg. Greg. Nyssen. contra Hunom.
Orat. 16. p. 47. ult. r. Catechumens. p. 51. in marg. dele [ Paulinus in vita
Ambros.] l. 10. marg. r. c. 5. p. 53. in marg. dele [per] Socrat. p. 54. in
marg. pro praecip. r. princip. p. 56. l. 8. r. Chorepiscope. p. 59. for
Minister, all, r. Ministerial. p. 62. l. 20. r. 70 discip. in marg. r.
Dracontium. Aug. in Psalm. 44. l. ult. dele (and.) p. 63. l. 6. r. Brethren [.]
-- of [the] l. 13. dele [whose Successors] l. 14. r. succeed. p. 69. marg. r.
paenit: after r. [profecti] in pagum.

It may be, that, by reason of the Authors absence and some obscurity in the
Copy, a few other faults may have escaped undiscerned, as misplacing some
Authors cited in the Margent, or in the Figures, or in Pointing, and the like,
which being small, the goodness of the Reader will easily pardon.


