THE GREAT PREROGATIVE OF A Private Life: By way of DIALOGUE.

Written by the learned HORATIVS TVBERO, OR The Sieur Moth. le. Vayer.

Omnis enim per se Divum natura, necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur;
-- Cura semota, metuque,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus.
LONDON: Printed by J. C. for L. C. and sold by Charles Blount, at the black
Raven near Worcester-house in the Strand. 1678.

TO The Honorable Sir James Langham, KNIGHT and BARONET.
SIR,
EVER since I had the honor to make one in the number of your Vast
Acquaintance, I have had an extreme ambi^ion to publish to the world my
happiness of it, in paying you my grateful acknowledgments for so high a
favor: and indeed I should have done it sooner, had (...) found any thing that
deserved so great a name a yours to be prefixed to it; (...) name that is
equally revered and loved by all degrees of men who know it even by the lowest,
who generally are prone to defac^ the Scutcheon, and sullie the fame of such as
are abov^ them.

I KNOW not wha^ Judgment you will pass upon me for the unbecomin^ liberty I
take to desire you^ Patronage and Protection for this small Treatise; but I am
sure, the deceased Au^hor (were he capable of ^eturning) would think it an
unpardonable Injury done to his Memory, if I ^ad not made choice of a person of
your great Learning and Abilities to be the Defender of it.

BE pleased then, SIR, ^o give it a kind reception, ^nce I present you with a
Subject which is so much your Darling, and so con^orming to your own particular
temper, Praeferens (a^ the learned Doctor says of you) honestan^ quietem, L. D.
M. in Jugulo causae, Ep. 19. f. 76.
studia que literarum i^ seducto, vitae actuosae sed habitae inter celsissimas
regni dignitates and munera, quo te tua virtu^ proveheret. A Subjec^ which you
sufficiently knew the advantages of, and therefore made your timely retreat
from the thronging varieties of troublesom^ business, that you might the more
freely enjoy the sublimer felicities of undisturbed and pleasant solitude. In
societate and frequentia animum undique arietari ad varia negotia: and dum
partem nostri temporis, quod solidum Deo debetur, amicus, sodalis, procurator,
uxor, liberi fibi quisque rapit, tempus vitae nostrae quasi in frusta concidi,
and Deo subtrahi.

AND certainly (as the most Ingenious Mr. In his Essay of Solitude, fol. 91.
Abraham Cowley remarques) the meaning of that Sentence, Nunquam minus solus
quam cum solus, spoken by the excellent Scipio, was, That he found more
satisfaction to his mind, and more improvement of it by solitude, than by
company; or else he would never, after he had made Rome Mistress of almost the
whole world, have retired himself from it by a voluntary exile, and at a
private house in the middle of a Wood near Linternum, passed the remainder of
his glorious life no less gloriously.

ARISTOTLE positively concludes, that the love of a solitary and private life,
in a man of Letters and Cogitation, proceeds from an heroical virtue, which
raises him above the level of ordinary mankind, to place him in some kind of
equality with the Gods themselves; whilst the others, that are run down with
the torrent of public affairs, (whatever their conditions and eminencies may
be) are but as golden Slaves and Vassals to them: they are constantly employed
in the vexatious drudgeries of Humane state, when those are in a continual
serenitie and peacefulness of mind, under the more refined and exalted
Contemplations.

VIRGIL very well understood what he did, when he desired but to have two
Wishes granted him, that so he might be completely happy as to this world; and
the first was, to be a good Philosopher; the second, a good Husbandman: the
one obliging him to retire from the City; the other, to become a Recluse to
the world; to have the large Campaign of Heaven for his mind to walk in, and
all the works of Nature to consider on, without being justled on the one hand
by the buzzing disturbances of the ambitious flattering Court, or on the other,
by the noisie hummings of the giddie Multitude: Philosophi debent aversari
aulas Regum, Marsil.ficinus
quia ibi nec veritas, nec tranquillitas, sed simulatio, says my Author of the
former; and which methinks Juvenal does very elegantly express to us in his
Quid Romae faciam? Sat. 3.
mentiri nescio: For the wise man's tongue is always, and cannot but be, the
Interpreter of his heart. And as for the latter, Seneca says, Inimica est
multorum conversatio, nemo aliquod nobis vitium non commendat, aut imprimit.
Epist. 70.
We shall not be able to communicate with them in any civil complaisance, but
we must commend their Vices, and so bring wounds and blemishes on our own
Innocence: but when we are under the glorious liberty of a shadie solitude, we
are in an incapacitie then of feeling the strong appulses of defiling vice,
meeting there with no temptations from gaudy Honor to dazzle our eyes, and
steal our best part from us.

SIR, this is a Subject so agreeable to dilate upon, that I should not be
weary, if I were voluminous in it; but I must not, to please my self, forget
that deference I owe to you; nor must I be unmindful that I am now on the
Author's behalf an humble suppliant for your kindness and favor, and therefore
it does not become me to be tedious: I shall only say this, That the world is
so sensible of your great Learning and Judgment, that it will not dare to
disprove of any thing which you shall seem to give countenance to, and like.

AND as your value and esteem of it will much advance its Credit and Reputation
in our Language, (which in some respect I cannot greatly doubt you will deny
me, it having had the general approbation of the Learned who have read it, for
the most insinuating piece of its kind) so your easy readiness to forgive the
presumption of this bold Address, will be a forcible obligation upon me to be
all my life,

Sir, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant.

The PREROGATIVE OF A Private Life: By way of Dialogue BETWEEN Philoponus and
Hesychius.
Philoponus. IS it possible, Hesychius, that neither point of Honor, nor the
consideration of Profit, nor the respect of Pleasure, which are things that are
so advantageous in the Charges and diverse Employments of a Civil life, are
capable to divert you from this sluggish idleness, and make you quit a course
of life so retired and private, that I question whether you ought to be put in
the number of the Living; your house serving already as a Sepulture, before
which I never pass, but I have a strong impulse in me to set upon it this
Inscription:

Here lies the poor Hesychius. Much what the same that Seneca said always as he
went to Cumes, Vates hic situs est Sen. Epist. 55.
, before the house of a man who lived much after the dull rate as you do. This
is merely to be drunk with a Liquor which ought not to be taken, but with the
greatest sobriety. Philosophy is a sweet and pleasant Honey, but it ought only
to be tasted with the tip of the finger; otherwise it will make your head
disordered, and give you very dangerous Vertigoes. Cato had great reason, when
he said to his Son, speaking of the Philosophers of his time, under the name of
the Greeks, who were then the Professors of it, Satis est ingenia Graecorum
inspicere, Plin. l. 24. c. 1.
non perdiscere: Prophesying to him great disgraces, if they would penetrate
and search too far into them; Quandocunque ista Gens, suas literas dabit omnia
corrumpet, hoc puta vatem dixisse. 'Twas upon this consideration, that the
Romans burnt the Books of Numa, and afterward several times drove the
Philosophers out of their Cities, after the example of the most sage Republics
of Greece, who have so often persecuted them. This Attractive Philosophy, which
they taught the world, may well be compared to the fabulous Scylla that our
Poets describe to us.

Prima hominis facies, and pulchro pectore virgo
Pube tenus, postrema, immani pectore pistrix,
Delphinum caudas. utero commissa luporum.
Vir. 1. Aeneid There is nothing more charming at first sight; they are only
the Discourses of Humane. Felicity; and all those Treatises are as so many ways
that conduct you to it: but if once you come too close, and would be searching
into the most secret Mysteries, you will find your self straight in a gulf and
precipice, in the midst of its absurd Questions and its extravagant Maxims;
which, like wild beasts, will afflict your mind, and persecute it on every
side. Therefore it is not without reason that Philostratus represents to us the
Soul of Palamedes, De vita Apoll. l. 3. c. 6.
an abstracted Philosopher, as you may be; which being transmitted into another
body, is so enraged against, and wishes so great an evil to Philosophy, as to
that which had never been of any service to him, and which with all his
Learning that he had also increased, had not the power to keep him from falling
under the good conduct of Ulysses, his Enemy, a Patron of humane prudence in
the active life: as for my part, I have always esteemed, and taken for a Rule
in my Studies, the Saying of Neoptolemus, Philosophandum est paucis, Emen, apud
Agell. l. 5. c. 15.
nam omnino haud placet. It is good to study Philosophy, provided it be at
certain hours: We are permitted to think highly of things, so that it be
without extravagance. Contemplation is not forbidden us, if it does but give
place, and leave us any time for good actions: for there is nothing so
excellent in the world, but its extremities are vicious; Intemperance being had
in Learning it self, and in Philosophy: You do not perceive that instead of
making any profitable service of its Maxims, you cause your selves servilely
to be its slaves; instead of governing it according to your occasions, it
exercises a tyrannical Empire over you in its way; instead of possessing it as
a thing of your own, it possesses and agitates you, as if some bad Demon had
you in his power.


Hesychius. There only wants a good Exorcism to deliver us from this unclean
and evil Spirit. Goodness, Philoponus! how greatly I pity you upon one
consideration, and how heartily you make me laugh upon another: I have an
extreme compassion for you, to see you thus utter your injurious Calumnies
against so venerable and sacred a thing, which are, I believe, as so many
Ejections of your venom against Heaven it self, and which will fall down again
upon your own face. But I am not any whit less pleased with the consideration
of that gentile judgment you make of me, in esteeming me a Philosopher, and
seeing in what a Predicament you range all those, who truly may deserve that
title, at present too much filled with envy and calumny, by me to be avowed,
if I shall ingenuously confess to you, that it is from them I have learnt to
give my self that satisfaction of you, and those that resemble you, at whose
contempt they chiefly glory, and derive from it an extraordinary advantage,
apprehending nothing so much as your Approbation, and never are more
mistrustful of their failings, than when it happens that they have pleased you.
What crime can I have committed, did then Antisthenes ask, that those men do so
much esteem and applaud me?

Si vis beatus esse, cogita hoc primum, contemnere and contemni; nondum es
faelix, si te turba non deriserit. This is the Sentence that Epictetus does so
often repeat.


Philop. I never did expect from you this Reparty, which cannot well be given
but only to the Populace, and not to men of our condition: but in every Case
and Circumstance, remember that there are not any worse maladies in the world,
either as to the body, or to the mind, than those that seize upon, and yet do
not make us sensible of the distemper.


Hesych. Then, Philoponus, you believe that your Office has greatly
distinguished you from the common rank of men, and you are still ignorant of
the little difference that those of whom you speak do put between your Purple
and the coursest Stuff that covers the meanest Mechanic.

Vulgus tam chlamydatos, quam coronam voco.

Senec. de vit. beat. cap. 2. Know, that neither the highest Dignities of a
State, nor the first Charges and Offices of a Court, nor the most important and
eminent places of a Palace, do keep and hinder a man, as they consider him,
from being of the number of the people: Togis isti non judiciis distant, say
they, those are all weakly vulgar spirits, which they place also in the same
Categorie. But not to put you into an ill humor, since that otherwise our
ancient Acquaintance will not permit us to treat one another with so much
rigor and severitie, I would gladly examine with you the Course of my life,
and consider seriously, now we are together, if my manner of procedure and
actings will be found as criminal and blameable as you have strenuously
reproached me for them, after you have in a few words discoursed and said upon
the subject of Philosophy, that all the Persecutions which it has ever
suffered, and all that has most calumniously been imposed upon it, cannot
proceed but either From Ignorance or Envy, except you will take for
Philosophers, I know not what kind of half-learned Gentlemen, or I know not
what contentious Pedants, who after they have spent their whole age upon Books,
do find that they have only (as it were) run the gantlet through all the
Sciences, without ever having stayed to penetrate into the true and essential
Philosophy; therein much-what like to your Ulysses, Diog Laerr. in Aristipp.
whom so mightily just now you insisted on, who went down into the infernal
shades, took notice of all those persons of that Country, excepting the Queen
Proserpina, who was the most notorious and remarkable Object that he could see
there. But now let us consider whether those three powerful Demons of Humane
life, Honesty, Vtility, and that which is delectable, do so abandon me, or are
so extremely contrary to me, as you have most violently presupposed to me at
the beginning of your Discourse: and what will you say if I discover to you,
that I receive from them more favor and kindness in one day, than those have
had in all their lives, whom you believe are the most advanced and blessed in
their good graces?


Philop. As for the first point, who is he that has this honesty or honor?

Est enim honestas honoris status, ( says Isidore) unde idem honestum, quod
honor dignum.

10 Ethym. cap. 9. You will confess with me, that this is the greatest of
exterior good things, even in the judgment of Aristotle, Eth^ad Nic. l. 1. c.
5. and l. 4. c. 3.
as he who is most sollicitously courted and sought by those in whom the other
good things are found, and of whom even the very Gods themselves seem to be
ambitious. Now if this honor be nothing else but an eminent and splendid
Respect, and a glorious testimony of Esteem and Reverence which we bear to
persons of a great and shining Virtue, and of Illustrious Merit, how then can
you possibly pretend that the least Ray of this Glory can shine upon you, who
make a Profession of living in the deepest obscurity of your house? and how is
it likely that you should receive the recompense of good and virtuous actions.

(Chi semina virtu, fama raccoglie) you who renounce all the Functions and
Offices of the civil life, to enjoy a lazy and sluggish repose, or to say
better, a shameful idleness? for all Esteem and Reputation proceeds from some
knowledge; and this knowledge cannot come but from our own carriages and
actions, when they are evident and conspicuous, and that by the Work the
Workman is known; and so long as Cada uno es hijo de sus obras, and as the
School says, Vt se habet unumquodque ad esse, ita and ad operandum. how then,
annihilating the cause, can the effect follow? and by what means, living alone
by your self, and from the commerce of all Mankind, will you obtain from them
the recompense of an unknown Virtue, and of a Merit which does not appear?


Hesych. I do easily perceive the Error that makes you to argue after this
manner; and it is, that you seeing us to be out of Employment, out of the
troublesome hurrie and agitation of Business, leading a most Retired life, and
as much out of the noise as possible, you straight conclude we are without
action, and by consequence without Virtue, and without Honor, since that
Virtue consists in Action; and Honor ought to be the price and recompense of
Virtue only: but I would have you know, there are not greater and more
important actions, than those of a Soul truly Philosophical, when it is deepest
in Contemplation. Depone hoc apud te, nunquam plus agere sapientem, quam cum in
conspectu ejus divina atque humana venerunt.

Sen. Epist. 69. says the Roman Philosopher: for as it is visible in Mechanical
Arts, that there are none more active than those which have the Conduct and
Command, although they appear often without motion; the same may be said of
Philosophers, as Aristotle reports,

Quorum (...), contemplationes, and (...), ratiocinationes, actiones, and
quidem long caeteris perfectiores, vocat. Otherwise, says he, 7 Polit. cap. 3.
we should be forced to think very ill of Nature, and of the World, who do not
produce any actions out of themselves:

Parum pulchre esset Naturae, and toti Mundo, quibus non sunt externae
actiones, neque ullae aliae praeterquam eorum propriae. Which reason made that
Ancient speak so gentily and so well, Satius est otiosum esse quam nihil agere.
Attil. apud Plin. lib. 1. Epist. 9.
And truly, if we are not called Men but from that superior part which is
within us, and our Mind being our Form, is that which gives us our Being, we
may very well say, that those Functions and Operations are our principal and
most important Actions; and therefore they ought to be followed with the most
solid glory, and with the honor of the best allay that is possible to be
found here below.


Philop. But since we are a Composition made up of two parts, and it is the
union of the Soul and Body which makes us Men, wherefore should we deny one of
these two Moieties its Functions? for by your own Maxims, Vnumquodque est
propter suam operationem; therefore when your Philosophy becomes so airie and
spiritual, that it only actuates this principal and superior part, you do not
perceive that instead of making your self a Man, you raise your self to a
Phantom; and that to give it a more perfect being, you take from it the Real,
or at least the Reasonable for the Chimerical. But moreover, the most notable
and eminent among you, as the greatest part of the Stoics, are not so much
against the Occupations of the life Politic. For those say, that there are
three kinds or ways of living, whereof they call the one Speculative, the other
Active, and the third a Compound of the two other reasonable, which was that
which ought to be chosen and preferred by men of good discourse, since that
Nature has seemed to have formed us expressly capable of those two Exercises,
and that for this reason we were called Reasonable Animals; As Diogenes
Laertius has very well observed in diverse places of the life of Zenon.
Epictetus, Arrian. lib. 4. cap. 4.
one of the Principal of that Sect, equally laughs at those who make it all
their business and concern to seek out Charges and Employments, as he does at
the others, who have them in the greatest aversion, and who fly them so as you
do; comparing the former to dropsical persons, who are never satisfied with
drinking; and the latter to those who are mad, and cannot so much as perceive
they are so: and also that they being things which are equally independent on
us, it is not reasonable to fasten our affections on them.

(...) Extra te autem est non modo magistratus, sed etiam privatae vitae
status; non modo negotium, verum etiam otium. What great esteem ought we then
to have of this sweet Repose, which not only Caesar can take away from us when
he pleases, but the least troublesome croaking of a Raven, the noise of a Drum,
a Fever, and a thousand other Accidents of life? It is very difficult, says he,
to have a Disposition accommodated to them all, and to be able to say at any
time with a good heart, that Verse which Cleantes has made famous:

(...) Quocumque voles Jupiter me ducito, tuque necessitas. And what say you of
Pythagoras, who was so named, Quod veritatem perinde, atque Pythius loqueretur?
do we not see by the Letter that he writ to Anaximenes, how much he invited him
to leave off a while the contemplation of the Stars, and the rest of
Philosophy, to be at leisure for the public affairs of his Country?

Nam neque ego semper meis vaco fabulis, verum and de aliis interdum quibus
inter se Itali dissident. Socrates, whom you so mightily esteem, practiced the
same, and thought that there were none but the most melancholic sort of
persons, as those Admirers or Heraclitus, a Myson, an Apemantus, a Timon, and
other such Misanthropes, who have agreed with you in your opinion.


Hesych. I will instantly tell you, that loving Truth above all things, as the
most pleasureable food of our Souls; with affection I seek it, wheresoever it
is likely to be found; which hinders me from being particularly engaged to any
one Heresy, or Sect of Philosophy,

Nulli addictus juravi in verba magistri; But if I were forced to give my Vote
and Suffrage in favor of some one, I should more peculiarly esteem that, to
which Potamon of Alexandria gave the name of (...), or Elective, because it
makes choice of whatsoever pleases him in all the others, whereof it composes
its Systeme apart, as a most pleasant and agreeable Honey drawn out of many
different flowers. But to answer the authority of all those greatly eminent
persons, which you place on your side, (and of whom, I must confess, one cannot
speak with too much veneration, since they seem only to have been sent down
from Heaven, for the institution of humane kind) we ought to believe that they
have with much reason exhorted the men of their times to virtuous actions,
which are practicable in humane Society; and that not being contented only with
their words and precepts, they were also willing to give them the Examples of
their own carriages and behavior. Also I have never pretended that the active
life of man, by the exercise of many virtues, had not a great deal of Merit and
Recommendation: but because Virtues are different, there being some of them far
more eminent than others, the natural and acquired, the moral and intellectual,
methinks that since the more heroic and divine accompany the contemplative
life, and than that kind of life, as I have already discovered to you, produces
the most worthy and most important actions; I ought to be pardoned, if in the
constraint you have given me, I prefer it not only to the active life of the
Populace, but also to that which you were pleased to name reasonable, and which
is mixed with action and contemplation. And thus in my opinion is Empedocles to
be understood, when he despised the Government of the estate which was
presented to him, that so his Philosophical Speculations might not be
interrupted.

Anaxagoras had the same sentiment, when he abandoned a most ample patrimony,
not to be obliged to be troubled about its conservation. The same conception
made Democritus to retire within the tombs, and drove Pyrrhus into deserts.
And as for Heraclitus, who resigned his Scepter into the hands of his Brother,
you have been pleased to make him already pass for a man of Bedlam; and
peradventure you put into the same Predicament all those whom I might allege
to you, except you have some higher value and respect for the Prince of Lyceum,
who also in my opinion has not yet been taken for an Hypocondriaque: and if his
Reasons may seem of any weight with you, and his Authority of any reverence,
pray let me persuade you to see that excellent Exhortation he has made to a
life purely contemplative, in the latter end of his Ethics. Anichomacus
saying, cap. 7. That it has the same advantages over the other kinds of life,
as things simple have over compound, divine over frail and mortal; laughing at
all others, who, like you, will needs have a mixture, and a blending of Action
and Meditation: We must, says he, abandon the body, and whatsoever is
corruptible, as much as possibly we can, to live principally by the spirit;
thus it is that we do, as it were, come near to the Divinity, and thus may we
make our selves immortal.

(...), Neque vero oportet nos humana sapere, ac sentire, ut quidam monent, cum
simus homines, neque mortalia cum mortales, sed nos ipsos quod fieri potest a
mortalitate vindicare, atque omnia facere, ut ei nostrae parti, quae in nobis
est optima, convenienter vivamus. The Latin Philosopher, Senec. Epist. 73.
though otherwise a Stoic, did not fail to give us the same precepts.

Non cum vocaveris Philosophandum est omnia alia negligenda, ut huic
assideamus, cui nullum tempus satis magnum est, etiam si a pueritia usque ad
longissimos humani aevi terminos vita protenditur, non multum resert, utrum
omittas philosophiam, an intermittas. And in another Letter, where he invites
his friend not to think of any thing but the cultivating of his mind, if he
desires to get any fruit from it.

Omnia impedimenta dimitte, and vaea bonae menti, nunquam ad illam pervenit
occupatus, exercet philosophia regnum suum, dat tempus, non accipit, non est
res subcisciva, ordinaria est, domina est, adest and jubet.

Senec. Epist. 64. In truth, as for the common sort of men, who do not go by
the name of Learned and Well-read, taking up only some trivial Discourses of
Philosophy to pass away the time withal, and to serve them as a divertisement
in those Occupations which keep them subject the rest of the time; it is not
any wonder if it does not exercise over them that powerful Empire: but as for
those, who ply it seriously, and who have once earnestly engaged their
affections to it, it cannot be thought that they are capable of dividing them,
and of giving themselves to other matters.

Non possunt simul Thersitem, and Agamemnonem agere; for as the Gentile Lucius
has well observed, great Spirits, and elevated Souls, who have had a better
share of the theft of Prometheus than others, are much more easily smitten, and
more violently transported than the Populace, with the love of Sciences, and of
Philosophy; just as the Indians, by reason of their natural heat, were by the
power of Wine struck quite with another kind of fury than that of other men. It
is true, in Philosophy, as he adds very notably, that Drunkenness and Fury
ought to be named Sobriety and Temperance: for of that divine Nectar
communicated unto men by Tantalus, as Philostratus interprets it, men can never
be said to drink to excess. Do not then any more affirm that a life purely
contemplative is reprehensible of excess; and do not any farther dispute the
preference of that glory and honor which so many signalized persons have so
justly attributed to it: for if it be by that, that the true Philosophers are
called Pares, and Socii Deorum, non supplices.

Senec. Epist. 31. since we do really believe that the Gods justly deserve
Worship and Veneration, we cannot deny Honor and Respect to those who come so
near to them; and if it be true, Philoponus, that Vtility is to be found
wheresoever Honesty is to be met with, Quippe bonum ex honesto fluit, you will
run a great hazard not to get any more advantage from the second point of our
Conference, than you have had in the first.


Philop. And who do you think will any further contest with you after so rare
an Apotheosis? for if only the Gods may come in compare, and be equal with
you, it is impiety for men to contradict you, and folly to resist you: Yet
never theless, because Jupiter himself has not always disdained the Commerce
and Conversation of Mankind, and since moreover, as Phaedrus says,

Nisi utile est quod facimus, stulta est gloria.

Lib. 3 Fab. 56. I would most willingly learn of you where are those great
Blessings which come in to you from your continual Speculations, and to what
use you employ them: for to my thinking, I never yet have seen any one among
you, who was not very much in want and necessity, provided that the actions and
labors of their Predecessors have not secured them from it beforehand. Now
that so we may understand one another, because you make three kinds of good, or
utility; Bonum enim est utilitas, aut non aliud ab utilitate, say the Stoics:
Know, that I do not here mean to speak of the goods of the body or the mind,
of which that is not the question now; but I intend by goods, those which are
named the goods of fortune, which give us, and furnish us with the necessities
of this life, Lo que se usano se escusa, and without which it cannot be but
very miserable.

Turpis enim fama, and contemptus, and acris egestas,
Semota ab dulci vita stabilique videntur,
Et quasi jam Lethi portas cunct arier ante.
Lucret. lib. 3. Which has given occasion to the Proverb,

(...), Divitiae vir, A rich man, because without Wealth a man is not of any
consideration in the civil life; the time not being any more so, as it was in
that when they made an esteem of men though naked, as was Ulysses, who, as the
honest Homer relates of him, did not want being respected and honored by the
Pheacians, even in that very condition; but now

-- Dat census honores.
Census amicitias, pauper ubique jacet.
Lucian in Catap. Insomuch as the poor Gobler Mycillus is contemptuously left
shivering all alone by himself upon the Bank by Charon, as if Poverty carried
its Infamy along with it even to the other world; whereas on the contrary, the
golden Bow is all-powerful, and full of veneration. Which makes me to remember
the Opinion of the Chinese, who hold men's poverty for an infallible Mark of
their sins: The Bonzi, or the Divines of Japan, their neighbors, teaching also
in public, that neither poor folks nor women can ever be saved. For which
reason, Riches are very much called Means and Faculties, inasmuch as by their
means alone all is done; and Effects, because therewith they effect and
accomplish all manner of Enterprises. Our Ancients have also given to it the
name of Chevisance, because without it they could never put a chief period to
any thing they undertook: They also make it a part of the Sovereign good, Luc.
dial. Diog. and Alex.
as Aristotle says, though Diogenes reproaches him there for it, in that he had
not thus writ, but only to give himself an occasion and boldness to demand and
to receive some of Alexander: But what good face soever the most austere among
you put upon the matter,

Divitias and opes facilius invenies qui vituperet, quam fastidiat.

Phil. de vit. Apoll. lib. 1. cap. 22. And it is in their consideration that
the Court of Dionysius was so filled with Grecian Philosophers. Plato, among
others, with all his Divinity, having even to the third time contemned the so
dreadful dangers of the implacable Carybdis, to have his share in the
liberalities of that King. It would be also an overgreat niceness in them, not
to say weakness, not to dare to take it, for fear they should take it; not to
dare to possess it, for fear they should possess it; not to dare to use it, for
fear they should abuse it.

Infirmi animi est pati non posse divitias. The Sect of Apollonius Tyaneus was
stifled in its very birth, for professing that pitiful and shameful poverty,

Malesuada Fames, and turpis egestas
Terribiles visu formae.
Virg. 6. Aeneid. Now you cannot deny but that it is only action which is
capable to preserve you from it; that Estates and the good Commodities of life,
are not got, at least are not preserved, but by labor.

Chi ha art ha part, chi non corre non ha il pallio. Aesop's Fisher not being
able to catch any fish by his playing upon the Flute, was constrained to cast
his Nets and his Tackling into the River. The Cyclop (...), Antonay du uvray
Amor. c. 10. and Strabo Geog. l. 8.
manuventer, represented upon the gate of the City of Argos, with his hands
seeming to come out of his belly, learns us that we cannot preserve and uphold
our Being, but by the work and labor of our hands. How then is it possible for
you, in the midst of your so abstracted Contemplations, and your Olympic
Entertainments, to find, I will not say, great affluence and riches, but only
the common necessities of life? for as the Judiciaries have very well observed,
Jupiter the distributer of Wealth, is opposite to Mercury, in as much as he
that has the one of them Ascendant upon the Earth at his Nativitie, has the
other Descendant. Now Mercury is the Commander of that of learned men and
Philosophers, but yet always with some regard to that lazy, dreaming Saturn,
which makes you to be of that good humor, and which imprints in you such
commendable Complexions. One ought not therefore to wonder, if men of Learning
and profound Speculation are most ordinarily seen to be in want and necessity;
and for my part, I cannot imagine what wealth you are able to discover to me,
that does accompany your Hyperphysical Meditations, unless you would fain
arrive at the Philosophers stone, or unless the Demons do give you a share of
their hidden treasures; for I remember that Socrates had one of them for his
ordinary Companion.


Hesych. Why do you send us back to those Metallic Spirits? we who have all
the Gods of Heaven for our most faithful and particular friends, who are able
to give us all things, since that Deorum sunt omnia.

Diog. Laert. in vit. Diog. and there is no good thing but what comes from
them; and if the Proverb be true, That all things are common among Friends,
(...), cannot you yet perceive, Philoponus, the immense greatness of our
Riches, and how much we possess beyond all that you can imagine?


Philop. You have very good reason to call up, and awaken my imagination, since
that your Riches as well as the Viands of the Banquet of witches, are all
things fantastical, and which are not in the least perceptible to all the
world; as it is said that the Philosophers have their imagination much stronger
than the other common sort of men: but since when I pray, have they contracted
this strict friendship with the Gods? which I believe cannot subsist but in
Equality and Resemblance.


Hesych. Since the time that they gave themselves, more than any others, the
trouble and pains to be conformable to them, and to love the Truth, to cherish
Innocence, and to conserve pure and undefiled that part of the Soul, by which
they hold an affinity with them. For I agree with you, that Friendship being
Egality.

(...).

6. Eth. ad Nis. cap. 5. Now it cannot be your purple Role which makes you to
resemble them, for the Gods are all naked; nor your Magistracy, Neque Deus
negotium habet, neque aliis exhibet.

Sen. Epist. 3. nor your great Reputation and good Renown; none knows God, and
many speak evil of him, and yet are unpunished: Nor is it the manner whereby
you are carried in a Litter, or drawn in a Coach; for God carries all things,
being the Center and foundation of the Universe: Nor that active life, of which
you so much brag; for God, as the first mover, is necessarily immovable: Nor
yet your good mien; God is invisible: nor your strength; that is perishing, and
God is immortal: nor your sumptuous feasts; for the Gods eat not: nor your
Tapistry-lodgings, and gilded Furniture; God inhabits not in any particular
place, but fills all equally:

Jupiter est quodcumque vides, quodcumque moveris. Nor, to conclude, are the
treasures and riches you so much boast of; for the Gods have no esteem and
value for them.

Cogita Deos cum propitii essent futiles fuisse. But if I am formed a Spirit
that despises all these things, if I have a Soul assured and steadfast against
all that makes the Populace to tremble, if my Felicity be independent of all
things which are acquired by Fortune,

Ingens intervallum inter me and caeteros factum est, omnes mortales multo
antecedo, non multum me Dii antecedunt.

Senec. Epist. 54. Now am I in affinity with the Gods, I possess their (...),
and full affluence of all things; I desire nothing more, I have all the Riches
of Heaven.

Sapiens tam aequo animo omnia apud alios videt, contemnitque quam Jupiter. O
rare Resemblance! O rare Apotheosis! You will possibly tell me that the Gods,
by the advantage and excellence of their nature, have no need of any thing;
whereas ours, to maintain and uphold its being, requires the assistance of many
external things, which are a part of the goods and means we speak of, or they
cannot be possessed without them. And here now I would demand of you, Philoponus,
since thereby you avow to me that the sole use of things necessary to life
ought to recommend Riches to us, that if your great Occupations had permitted
you to make any convenient Reflections upon this Subject, to make a good
judgment of it, you would not have reproached in us a Purity that is
preferable to all manner of the largest opulencie.

Magnae divitiae sunt, lege naturae composita paupertas. Lex autem Naturae,
scis quos nobis terminos statuit? non esurire, non sitire, non algere.

Sen. Epist. 4. cap. 27. and 120. Thus did that generous Soul understand it,
who pronounced so boldly,

Habeamus aquam, habeamus polentam, Jovi ipsi de foelicitate controversiam
faciamus.

Senec. Epist. III. And in truth, the more things are excellent and divine, the
less are they of necessity, and of dependancie on any other. Children and women
have need of a thousand things, which men can make a shift well enough if they
want them; and so likewise sick people, in comparison of those who have their
health. Hercules, though he was quite naked, save only his Lions skin and his
Club, walked over all the World, of which he was adored. Take away the
preventions of your mind, efface out of it what the tyranny of an evil Custom
may have imprinted in it, renounce those sottish and idle opinions of a
distracted multitude, examining by the Rules of Right Reason the natural
necessities, and you will find your self not only to be free from contemptuous
indigence, but also enjoying an affluence of good things, not only beyond the
sense, but likewise above the fear of Poverty.

Divitiae grandes homini sunt vivere parce,
Aequo animo, neque enim est penuria parvi.
Lucret. l. 5. The pompous Palaces, sumptuous Habits, a numerous retinue of
Servants, are things very attractive, and full of a dazzling splendor; but
apply the Canon and the Rule which we just now were mentioning, Apposita
intortos ostendet regula mores.

Pers. Sat. 3. and you will find nothing in them of what we seek: nothing
which has its foundation in Nature: but if you will conform your life to what
Nature demands, you will never be poor; if you will regulate it according to
the opinions which are contrary to it, you then will never be rich nor
accommodated. Would you now become more than you are? retrench your desires,
instead of increasing your substance, Nihil interest utrum non desideres, an
habeas, for the thing comes all to one; you will gain more moderation in your
mind, than you can possibly hope for from the liberality of Fortune.

Animus facit sibi parem nihil timendo, facit sibi divitias nihil concupiscendo.

Senec. Epist. 88. It is the shortest and readiest way that you can take to
come to this end. Brevissima ad divitias, per contemptum divitiarum via est.
but if once you open the gate to Covetousness, if you once suffer the desire of
superfluous things to enter, there are no longer any bounds and limits to
conclude your desires.

Post Darium, and Indos, pauper est Alexander: inventus est qui concupisceret
aliquid post omnia.

Senec. Epist. 126. If you once but fall into this Dropsy, there is nothing
then capable to quench your thirst: new Acquisitions will seem to you as so
many means and ways whereby you may still get fresh supplies; and you will
find, besides this disgrace, that by this depravation these vain and
unprofitable things will then become as necessary. It is the Lesson that Zenon
made after his shipwreck, when he said,

Tunc secundis ventis navigavi, cum naufragium feci.

D. Laert. This was it that made Crates the Theban throw his money into the
Sea, by the counsel and persuasion of Diogenes; which made Xenocrates send back
again the thirty Talents of gold to Alexander; and which invited Democritus
(the first, says Pliny, who found out and made known the Society of Heaven and
Earth) not to retain any thing of the profit which the contemplation of Heaven
had caused him to make on the Olive Trees; having been since imitated by Sextus
the Roman Philosopher: For it is here that the Paradox holds true,

Dimidium plus toto, Mediocritie is more valuable by far than abundance:
because Multis eget, qui multa habet; magnaque indigentia non ex inopia magna,
sed ex copia magna nascitur; jactura opus est non questa, and minus habendum
est ut minus desit.

Agell. l. 9. c. 8.

The foot, says Epictetus, ought to give shape and proportion to the shoe, and
the necessities of the body to rule our possessions. Whatever goes beyond that
measure, is rather a hindrance than any convenience: Too long and too weighty
Vestments, do only serve to load and trouble us: The fifth wheel added to the
Chariot, like a third eye to the face, will only disfigure it, and besides
make it to go with the greater uneasiness. How happy was Socrates to be able
to cry out in the midst of a well-stockt Fair,

Quam multis non indigeo! And what a wonderful pleasure is it for me to see
Carmides in the midst of Xenophon's Feast, to place his greatest cause of
boasting in his poverty! for certainly it is in this apparent poverty that the
true and essential Riches are found: it is the nourishing Mother of Sciences,
the Couzen-germain of good Understanding, the great Friend of all Liberty, the
inseparable Companion of solid Repose. But to be made really sensible of these
things, we ought to be raised far above the common level of mankind; we ought
to leave equally distant below our selves, the Prince, the Magistrate, and the
handicraft Artist:

Magno animo de rebus magnis judicandum est, alioqui videbitur illarum vitium
esse, quod nostrum est. Purify your Soul, and free your mind from all
anticipation, and you will then soon think otherwise than you have done
hitherto.

Aude hospes contemnere opes; and te quoque dignum
Finge Deo, rebusque veni non asper egenis.
Evand. 8. Aeneid. Instead of flying poverty, you will seek and court it, as
that which gives our Souls a seasoning temper of resolution and force; so as
the rigor of a pinching Winter shall make our bodies to be more robust and
prepared with fortitude: Si vis vacare animo, aut pauper sis oportet, aut
pauperi similis.

You will then observe that with great respect, and not without reason, the
Poet has named it to us terrible but in appearance, and only to the eye,
Terribilis visu formae, as if he was resolved to let us understand thereby,
that in effect, and if we took it rightly as we ought, it was a pure deception:
It was that which made Cleanthes to bear the surname of (...), exhauriens
puteos.

Diog. Laert. in Clean. because, that he might set to his studies in the day,
he got his Livelihood in the night by drawing of water; but it rendered him the
worthy Successor of Zenon. It was that which compelled one of the two Friends
Hephestion Proaeresius to keep the house, whilst that the other appeared in
public, having but one only Garment between them; but it likewise did put them
in the Rank of the most Illustrious Sophisters of their time. Now if the
extremity of indigence was accounted so tolerable by those virtuous men, and
that so many others, as we could here name, why should we then complain, and
exert our laments, being in a middle fortune? why should we esteem our selves
to be more pure, because we do not possess superfluous things, or rather
because we are not possessed by them? As we are said to have a Fever, when it
is that which holds and possesses us: But why do not we vaunt it, and make our
boasts with Antisthenes, Xenoph. in Symp.
for having found out in this honest Poverty the greatest and the only true
Riches that are in the world? They are those which Socrates had taught him, to
contemplate at leisure all nature, to meditate with full liberty of mind its
true effects; to enjoy an entire and absolute repose, and a real tranquillity;
(the most estimable thing in the world, as he said, (...), the most delicate)
to pass his days without interruption and disturbance, with Socrates; to
hearken to his charming Discourses; to consider his excellent actions; to draw
important Lessons from his least Movements. Supernatural Goods are those
incorruptible Riches that are independent on Fortune; this wealth which is
easy to conserve, and which not all the world can ever dispoil us of! Here,
Philoponus, here is a Summary delineation of Good and Vtility; which may
proceed from an obscure and particular life, such as ours is: There only
remains the pleasure and contentment of it to be examined, if notwithstanding
any may doubt whether the Goods which we have now described be most pure and
perfect; which cannot be so named, if they were not accompanied with
delectation and pleasures.

Vbi non est (...) gratum, ne (...) bonum quidem esse potest.
Philop. If you will affirm to me, that Aristotle, Cato, and several others, to
prove that Man is the most sociable of all Animals, do observe that there are
none who would possess all these good things together, if they must enjoy them
singly and alone, because in that solitude they cannot have any satisfaction
nor contentment: That if at any time we are pleased with tormenting our selves,
as it were, in a stolen privacie, as Ajax did in Homer, and that our humor
persuades us to retire our selves from the rest of mankind, there alone like
the Toad, to cowre over our venom; these are the effects of a profound
Melancholy, which at that time bears too much Empire over us.

Sunt mala mentis gaudia. It Is a false and a deceitful satisfaction and
complaisance, which proceeds from a too hot and corrupted temperament, having
no other foundation than our ill Complexion, which depraves and alters the
functions of our Soul, giving to it the illusions of a false and imaginary
pleasure. It was that made one of the Ancients say, that among the perils and
dangers of life, that of Solitude was none of the least; and which might think,
that under an austere mien, and the retired visage of a Philosopher, Nec visu
facilis, nec dictu affabilis ulli.

De Polyph. Virg. 9. Aeneid. there might be found a true briskness and gayety
of spirit. As for my part, I am of opinion that the Poets have not expressed to
us the torments of Prometheus, but only to figure out the pains that such as
you are, do give your selves every day. Mount Caucasus represents to us the
solitude that you profess; the Eagle which knaws upon his still-renewing heart,
is the contemplation wherewith you incessantly afflict your mind, in the narrow
scrutiny of Causes, and of Reasons that arise one from the other, and so grow
on ad infinitum. I would advise you, Hesychius, to follow the counsel which the
good Tyresias gave to Menippus, Lucius in Necyth.
for the best that you possibly can embrace, when he advertised him softly in
his ear, that if he desired to receive any contentment in his life, he should
leave off seeking with so extraordinary a care and study, the beginnings and
ends of all things; Hoc tibi puta vatem dixisse, for otherwise that excellent
Wit will be more prejudicial than of advantage to you; you will only be
ingenious to deceive your self, and to create your self a great deal of
trouble. But, say you, otherwise this sweet and tranquil repose which is your
sovereign good, is not to be found but in solitude: And pray, let me know, what
have been the Charms which so powerfully bewitched you, that you place Felicity
in a thing that will make those men who are fast locked up in sleep, to be far
more happy than when they are never so much awake? the Bears, and the other
stupid Animals, the greatest part of the year, would have a great advantage
over you, Quid est otiosius verme?

Senec. Epist. 88. as Seneca himself affirm. Do not you see on the contrary,
that an overgreat idleness and leisure is that which harrasses us most?

(...), ex otio negotium. It is then that we are most agitated, we are beating
the bush, and that in hopes of giving our minds some pleasurable employment,
we are only creating a deal of trouble to our selves. Incerte errat Animus,
praeter propter vitam vivitur, as old Ennius speaks, it consumes it self, being
of a fiery nature, when we ever deny to give it nourishment. Is it not true,
that the most free and metalsom Horses are soonest spoilt in the stable? that
the delicatest Gold straight rusts, if it be not used? that the most Oriental
Pearls lose their grace and beauty, if they be not often rubbed and handled?
that the most ravishing and subtle Perfumes of Arabia are corrupted and good
for little, if they be not frequently stirred? And yet you place your greatest
Contentment in being without Action, your last Felicity in the enjoyment of an
half-dead Idleness. Remember, Hesychius, that the most miserable of all the
damned, are the most idle, and who most contemplate at their ease.

-- Sedet, aeternumque sedebit Infaelix Theseus, phlegyesque miserrimus omnes
Admonet.

Virg. 6. Aeneid. You see that the Poet gives us to know and understand his
torment only by the perpetual Repose to which he is condemned.


Hesych. If we ought to make this principal use of Philosophy, as Aristippus
said, of speaking boldly to any whomsoever, you will not think it strange, if
in the confidence of our ancient Acquaintance, I answer you with briskness and
freedom. It Is an ordinary thing among all those, who, like you, spend their
lives in the diverse occupations and troublesome concerns of a tumultuous life,
to have very bad conceptions of those, who smoothly roll away their years in
the soft repose and silence of a private life, which proceeds not only from
that natural inelination whereby every particular thing bears an affection for
its like, and has an utter abhorrence for all that is contrary to it; but also
from a pleasure, and an ambition which gets the mastery over the greatest part
of mankind, and makes them passionately to desire to be esteemed prudent, and
gravely considerate in the conduct of their fortune, and by consequence happy
in that kind of life whereof they make profession. Now when they see persons,
who by actions that are very different from theirs, show that they have
inclinations and sentiments in all things contrary, they do believe that in
them they have found out so many confessors of their Felicity and of their
Judgment; from whence at last proceeds that picque and animosity against them.
This is it which has invited so many great persons to keep themselves as much
retired and concealed as possibly they could, and to leave to us the Laws and
Precepts of doing the like, upon penalty of running the hazard of that malice
and hatred which we are now speaking of. Epictetus continually is proposing to
us the ways of acting, and the comportments of Socrates, who scarcely, if ever,
took upon him the state of a Philosopher: and all his Successors have agreed
pretty well in this point,

Been vixit, qui been latuit. But because this public Envy pursues men of
good Sense and Judgment even into their most particular Retirements, one ought,
says Seneca, to imitate those Animals, who efface the marks of their
Lurking-places, spoiling the tracts, and confounding the footsteps by which
they get to them. So do you keep, adds he, your leisure and idle time, the most
reserved and hid as possibly you can; but especially take heed of deriving any
advantage from it; and thereby seeming to covet the title of a Philosopher,
impute it rather to an indisposition which constrains you to repose; say that
your Imbecility makes you, whether you will or no, to keep from action; or that
your ill fortune does spitefully, and to your regret, call you off from those
Charges and Employs. To conclude, accuse your self rather of carelessness, and
of an unconcerned humor, than suffer them to penetrate into your secret
inclinations. This, Philoponus, is a Lesson that I have always esteemed to be
most necessary and important, and under the Rules of which I intended to be
conducted for ever; but I see clearly that I have not yet been capable
absolutely to shelter my self from your anger and indignation, which transports
you even to a reproaching of us. Your chagrin and perverse mien, say you, is
insufferable, since it makes us to resemble the Polyphemi, and the savage
Wolves. Pray, give me your permission to answer you, even by way of repartee
and raillery, what the common Father of Philosophers did on the like occasion,
That it is much better for a man to bear the injurious word of dumping,
melancholy thinker, (...), meditator.

Xenoph. in Symp. than that of a senseless, brainless no-wit.

(...), incogitans. You are not less angry, when you compare us to the
miserable wretches that are damned in Hell, to the punishments of which I might
with a much greater resemblance reduce and equal the calamitous labors of a
life without any quiet and repose, such as yours is: for if the unfortunate
Tantalus does not endure a more cruel torment than that of being near those
Goods which he sees, and yet cannot possess; how much more miserable is that
man, who feels himself disrobed of himself, knows the contentment of the mind,
and the solid substantial pleasures wherewith that may be delighted, and yet he
cannot satisfy himself with any of them, nor enjoy so much as one poor small
moment of rest and tranquillity? Now this is that which the men of action and
business, like you, do prove, and are sensible of daily; this (...) of the
Greeks, which cannot be well translated into Latin or English, Agell lib 8.
cap. 16.
having in it such an I know not what peculiarity and properness, that it
absolutely ravishes a man without leaving him the least possession of himself,
to say that he must partage and share out his life in such a manner, that there
are only some certain days, and a few swift hours, for him to bestow upon such
and such Occupations; and to those too he must only lend, and not give up
himself entirely: I should account you far less unjust, if you absolutely
condemned our Philosophy, than when you are resolved to moderate and limit them
so untowardly.

Jure enim eo meliore quo major est, mediocritatem desideras.

Luc. de Faceb. Besides, this is voluntarily to make the half of your time for
certain miserable, and so indeed for the rest which you think does belong to
you. I desire no other testimony than that of your own Resentment, which, I am
sure, will make you confess, that your mind was never capable of receiving
this division, without the perplexing remembrances of your various affairs come
in to thwart it, to give you insufferable wracks and tortures, the enemies of
contentment; and truly now if you can have your mind worthily stayed, and in a
Philosophical calm, amidst the inquietudes of a Court, and the agitations of a
Palace, I would permit you willingly then to play the Philosopher with us: but
yet in the mean time you dare to reproach us that we have not any faithful and
real pleafures. Alas, we should be a great deal beside the cushion, if we
should assure Gaudium nisi Sapienti non contingere.

Senec. Epist. 65. or if we should say, Sapientem illum esse qui plenus gaudio,
hilaris and placidus inconcussus, cum Diis ex pari vivit.

And truly if we had found that the Stoics had rightly called Joy an
accessory, and as it were a dependence upon Virtue, Gaudium and laetitiam esse
virtutis accessionem (...).

Diog. Laert. in Zenone. it would then follow, that the most eminent and
exalted Virtues, which are the Intellectual, by reason of their object, should
be still attended with the most perfect contentment, in as much as effects do
ever result from the nature of their causes, and are commensurate thereto; and
so by consequence the Contemplations of Philosophers would meet with
satisfactions that are more pure, and pleasures more exquisite, than can be
those of an active life: but would you know what it is that makes you pass such
a prejudicial judgment upon our way of living so solitary and retired? it is
because you cannot tell how to pass away the time, nor entertain your selves
without company; and therefore you imagine that you are never in a worse
posture, nor more desolate, than when it is your evil fortune to be alone. Now
(according to the ancient and plain Proverb) you measure other peoples Corn by
your own bushel, and think their humors resemble your own, when (alas!) it is
quite contrary with them; for they are never more brisk or jolly, than when
they are conversing with themselves; for they find that within which is
unknown to you, and which gives them the greatest satisfaction and contentment
imaginable.

Talis Sapientis est animus, qualis mundi status super Lunam semper illic
serenum est.

Senec. Epist. 60. This is the great advantage which Philosophers have over the
rest of mankind. Antisthenes being demanded wherein principally his Philosophy
was serviceable to him, gave this answer, (...), Mecum colloqui posse.

Diog. Laert. in Antisth.

It is the Prerogative of men of good sense, who, being alone, know how to
enjoy a virtuous and an innocent Complaisance with themselves.

Nisi sapienti sua non placent: omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui.

Senec. Epist. 9. Those elevated Souls that are freed from the sottish fancies
of the Populace, never suffer any disgusts from themselves; solitude does not
astonish them; they have not any of that gnawing of a criminal Conscience;
their Genius does not persecute them: but in a full enjoyment of their
Integrity and Innocence, they converse with Intelligences, contemplate the
immense greatness and power of Nature; they consider the causes and effects of
Heaven and Earth, meditate on the beginnings and ends of all things.

Ex superiore loco homines vident, ex aequo Deos. They do not there languish in
a discontented and froward idleness; such a solitude is not capable of
saddening a soul that is divinely transported: Do not we see the Eagle, which
prefers the deserts, where, from the supremest Region of the Air, it
contemplates the Sun at the nearest approach, far before the company of all
other Birds? Imagine so it is with a Spirit truly philosophical, which being
exercised in the Art of mental Discourse and Meditation, voluntarily separates
from the multitude, which it leaves beneath it, that it may come nearer to the
Divinity it contemplates. This was it which made Aristotle to conclude, Eth. ad
Nic. l. ult. c. 8.
at the end of his Morals, that the more a man is contemplative, the more he is
happy, and assimilated to the Divine Essences, which have not received this
denomination from God, Plut. de Plu. ph. l. 1. c. 9.
but from the word (...), that is to say, to contemplate, because it is their
business, and ordinary exercise. And moreover, because that every thing is
naturally carried out to its good, all men have an inclination and a
Philosophical desire of being learned and knowing. Now Science is not attained
but by Contemplation. Oportet Intelligentem speculari phantasmata,

7 Phy. c. 4. and that cannot be possessed but in a grand repose and
tranquillity.

Quievisse ac stetisse Dianaeam, id vocamus scire ac prudentem esse, says the
Master of the School. We have all then from Nature a propension to rest and
contemplation, as to our greatest felicity. And if it be true that all the
accomplishment of the natural desire is accompanied with real pleasures, and
with volupty; The Philosopher, who in the enjoyment of a profound repose,
contemplates and knows the natural truths, and the essences of all things, as
much as they are humanely perceptible, shall questionless receive a most
accomplished Joy, and a most perfect Contentment.

O Meliboee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit!

Virg. Eclog. 1. This, Philoponus, this is the certain estate and true
condition of him who is without any falsehood, pretense, or disguise
Philosophical. And if any, perchance, have appeared to you to be such as you
were pleased but just even now to decipher them, pray believe that it was their
beard and their chin have made you take for Philosophers those who only have a
vain cover and show of it, and are only Rams puffed up, such as those of
Apuleius, which seemed to you to be real men. We have so many wrangling
Pedants, so many contentious Grammarians, so many fluttering and extravagant
Humanists, all who do make a Profession of courtship to Philosophy, and are
mightily enamored with it, that it is no marvel if many persons make such
disadvantagious Judgments of it, and so much contemn it; though it be a very
unjust and wicked thing to make that only responsible for the defaults of its
Professors. All Arts and Sciences being herein in a much better condition than
that; for one does not impute to Architecture, if any person makes an ill use
of the Rule or the Compass; nor to Music, if he strikes not pleasantly and
with a delicate touch the Lute or Harp; but straight it is concluded that such
a one is by no means a good Architect or Musician. Diog. Laert. in Aristip.
Why therefore do you asperse Philosophy, for all the fooleries and
impertinences of such Followers, or rather of such Impostors, like to those
heedless and inconsiderate lovers of Penelope, who took for her, Melantha and
Polidora, her servants? Certainly whosoever have been capable of knowing it
best, and of deserving its good graces, they are those who make it least to
appear, who have more discretion in their happy fortune, and who keep its
favors the most reserved and secret.

Fugit multitudinem, fugit paucitatem, fugit etiam unum. Seneca verily thought
that his friend Lucilius was become his favorite, when he writ to him.

Epist. 11. and 32.

Quaeris quid me, maxim ex his quae de te audio delectu? quod nihil audio,
quod plerique ex his quos interrogo nesciunt, quid agas. Those proud
Sophisters, as the learned Thrasons, who only swear by the name of that
Mistress, who have only Axioms in their mouths, who only speak Assertions and
Physical Conclusions, are those who least of all know the beauty which they so
much boast of and pretend to serve, as also they have least share in her
affections. The true Professors and sincere Lovers of that fair and divine
Penelope, are those whom Aristotle describes to us in the third Treatise of his
Politics, as being Intelligences invested with our humane form; or, to say
better with him, as even Gods conversing with Men. And here it is that I would
desire you to observe, with how little reason you have been desirous to subject
them to the ordinary Rules of others lives, and to the common manner of acting
with the multitude. Such persons, says he, do not make any part of the
Republic, which is an Assembly of those who live in Equality, because their
Eminence puts them above their Peers, and distinguishes them too much: The Laws
do not respect them, because they are themselves the living and animated Laws,
which rule and govern all others; none have any right and power to command
them, because they are Kings and perpetual Dictators, whom Reason will have all
the world to obey: If then you will be so rash and full of temerity, to
prescribe to them Statutes and Ordinances, know that you would fain likewise
impose them upon Jupiter himself. I have nothing to do, says also that great
Epictetus, with the Laws of Cassius, or of Masurius, since I am obedient to
those of the Author of Nature; and the Stoic of Cicero, in the fourth of his
Academical Questions, laughs at the Laws of Lycurgus, of Solon, and of the
twelve Tables, protesting that there are no true and real Laws, but those of
his Sage Master. Such was, adds Aristotle, Hercules among the Argonauts, whom,
for that very reason, the Ill-smelling ship Arga would not receive among the
other persons, because he surpassed them all with too much Excellence and
Disparity. If this description seems strange to you, observe, the better to
comprehend it, that there are two sorts of Republic, the small and particular
one, and the great one, which is that of the Universe. It is of the first that
Apollonius Tyaneon must be understood to speak, when he said

(...), Ego quidem de nulla rep. sum sollicitus, vivo enim sub Diis. And it is
in respect of the last, that the Philosophers, of whom we speak, are called
Cosmopolites, or Citizens of the World. They cannot, because of their
disproportioned greatness, make a part of the bodies of particular Estates, as
we have just now said: but considering them in this great City of the Universe,
Terminos civitatis suae in solo metientes.

Sen. de vit. beat. cap. 31. they make of it the most beautiful, the most
important, and the most considerable Members after the Gods, if you will
comprehend them in it, so as Epictetus did, and the other Philosophers of his
Sect.

Now if you would further demand of me what is their Employment here, and to
what purpose they serve, I will tell you: They keep us from being ignorant of
the mavelous things of the Almighty, and of Nature, being the witnesses,
interpreters, and admirers of them. Pythagoras compares them very gentily to
the spectators of the Olympic games, who leaving to others the Courses, the
Combats, the Bargains, the Sales, Arrianus, l. 2. c. 14.
and the other various Occupations, content themselves with contemplating all
these things in repose, though the Merchants make a wry mouth at them, or laugh
them to scorn. Others likewise have very appositely considered this world as a
magnificent Theater, upon which so many kinds of life, as there are diversity
of personages, are represented. The Philosophers are found sitting, considering
the Universe with an extreme pleasure, whilst that Kings, Princes, and great
Monarchs are as so many Actors of the Comedy, who seem only to play for the
content and satisfaction of those worthy spectators. Diogenes understood it so
perfectly, when he was pleasant with Alexander, and told him in way of raillery
and contempt, that he was master of his dispositions, and he wanted but a very
small matter not to be inferior to him. And truly, since that the King was
like so many other persons, a slave to his passions, Diogenes, who commanded
them, making them to truckle and be subject to Reason, might very well boast of
his mastering the Masters of Alexander; and what had he in that pre-eminence,
but that which we give to Philosophers above the greatest Kings upon Earth,
which are conformed to the order and disposition of all the Universe? where we
believe that the Intelligences of Sciences, and of Illumination, are to be
preferred and exalted far beyond those of Powers and Dominions. But
notwithstanding I do not doubt but that you will think these thoughts to be
very strange, as being so extremely different from the ordinary Sentiments, and
received Opinions: but you know that there are no Arts nor Professions without
their Paradoxes; as when the Physician orders the Eye to be catarackt to have
its sight restored, Arrianus, lib. 1. c. 25.
or to break the Leg to make the person walk upright: why then should we wonder
that Philosophy, the sovereign Physician of our Souls, has also hers, and that
it is very necessary for her to give us Paradoxes, provided that, as Cleanthes
said, they be not Paralogues, Arrianus, lib. 9 cap. 1.
or absurd and unreasonable.

Now that we may rightly know and comprehend them, we ought to be initiated
into its sacred Mysteries: That we may appropriate them, and profit by them, we
ought to have the Spirit of understanding and the Philosophical genius. A weak
stomach, and which is not accustomed to such solid viands, will reject them,
instead of digesting them, and of being nourished by them. We need not
therefore wonder if those persons, who feed upon that Aliment which is so
different from ours, have also the Taste and the Appetite to be as much
disresembling.

Non idem sapere possunt, qui aquam and vinum bibunt. Do you think, Philoponus,
in the perpetual agitations of your various affairs, and in the servile
distractions of your eminent charges, to possess the same even pulse of mind,
and to have the same cogitations with those who are only taken up in the
Culture of Philosophy, are only exercised and busied in Contemplation, have no
other greater pleasure than in this solution and separation of the soul and
body, as Philosophers only? For as Action consists in the movement, Arist. 1.
de Any. cap. 3.
so does Speculation, as we have set it forth, consist all in repose and
leisurely idleness, Intellectio similis est cuidam quieti and statui. which are
things diametrically contrary and opposite, and which also produce fruits of a
very different nature. But since I have as yet declined revealing to you the
most secret Articles of the Philosophical Profession, I will not any longer
make it a difficulty to trust to your loyalty and faithfulness the most inward
Reserve of my Soul, and make you to see quite naked, in what terms I saw my
self formerly, and also in what condition and quality of mind I find my self
now at present to be. I have been no less than you affected with an haughty
ambition of appearing in the world; there was nothing I left unattempted to
satisfy that passion; I would have had recourse to Pennyroyal, and to the
other Herbs, if I had believed, as Pliny reports, Lib. 25. cap. 10.
that they would any ways have contributed to my glory and reputation. As for
Riches, although that passion was never much in me, but in a very weak and
languishing degree, if it were that which I accord in with the Spaniard,

El sennor dinero por un gran Cavallero: Methinks Hesiod had very great reason,
when he said that money was another Soul which made us to live, and subsist.

(...). As to those pleasures which accompany Honors and Riches, my complexion
did not render me incapable of any of them; and I had natural inclinations as
strong and powerful it may be as any other to make me seek and court the
enjoyment of them; and I was also very extremely engaged in their pursuit, as
you may, if you please, well remember, if you have still any memory of our
first acquaintance; when that my good Genius carried me to the knowledge of
some persons of sound Sense and Judgment, which gave to mine the first
illuminations, and made me to discern the first glimmering and beams of true
Philosophy, their manner of living being absolutely different from mine, their
Ratiocinations and their Sentiments opposite to those which I had till that
time retained, with what zeal and propension I have always perceived in me to
the study and love of the truth in all things, and indeed above all things; and
yet notwithstanding the efforts of first intelligences and apprehensions, the
violence of evil habits, the tyranny of customs, the torrent of the multitude,
had easily carried me away in my first course.

De me, facile enim transitu ad plures Socrati, Latoni, and Coelio excutere
mentem suam dissimilis multitudo optuisset. I was then in the greatest hazard
imaginable to fall, if that Socraetical Demon, which had a care of my
conservation, had not remedied it, ordering me that little Voyage which I made
through the principal parts of Europe, just as good Physicians do frequently
prescribe the change of Air to those whom they would fain preserve. And
certainly that transplantation is no less profitable to Men than to Plants,
which we see do thrive and grow much better by that means.

Et jam aquarum suavioris sunt quas errant. And we may observe, that in Heaven
the moving Planets are of much greater consideration than those that are fixed,
and do not stir at all; so likewise may we take notice how exceedingly those
ancient famous men of Greece did value Peregrination, such as were the lives of
Thales, Solon, Cleobulus, Pythagoras, Plato, Democritus, and several others,
who gave sufficient and assured testimonies of it: and if you will give me
leave, I will tell you upon this subject, what I always thought of the long
sleep of Epimenides of fifty seven years, having left his Fathers Sheep to
stray whither they would, whilst he took that profound sleep. For what can that
Fable signify, but a long Voyage, during all the time that we do frequently
let our domestic affairs, as it were, sleep? The Paternal sheep, that is, the
goods which our Parents have left us, then running a great hazard of being lost
and gone: But so it was, that after this long night, D. Laert. in Epimenid.
or to say better, absence, he returned most illustriously to his own home, and
most beloved of the Gods,(...), which is preferable to all other
considerations. I will not say that my Voyages have been attended with so happy
a success; but I can assure you, that this is the time of my life, which in my
esteem I have the best employed, since which I have given my self the liberty
to form it, and to regulate the course of it, according as Reason has made me
see it was most for my interest and advantage. The Gods had given me the being
of it, but it was Philosophy that has procured me its well-being.

Deorum munus vivere, Philosophiae been vivere. The wishes of my Parents had
destined me to a thousand Servitudes, Philosophy has brought me off from them,
and put me into a full and true liberty: The Laws and Customs seemed to oblige
me to actions that are shamefully laborious; Philosophy has given me an
exemption therefrom, and has blessed me with a sweet Repose and Felicity.

Summa beatae vitae solido tranquillitas, and ejus inconcussa, fiducia. And yet
you think strangely of my ways of living, you believe my solitude to be
blameworthy, you fancy my retreat to be shameful, my condition poor and
beggarly, my tranquillity idle and reproachable, and my pleasures imaginary
even to extravagance. But will you please to make use of a little of your
natural Reason, and I will desire no other Judge than your self to determine
our difference. Is it not true, (I Will submit to your Conscience to tell me)
that although the eminent dignity of your Office renders you never so much
respected in this Country, yet notwithstanding because there still remains
something thing superior to you, your ambition is not satisfied, and your
desires set you upon the wrack, as often as you exalt your eyes on high? Is it
not true, that although you possess great Riches and a vast Estate, yet if
there be any thing wanting which yoy esteem and passionately aspire to, your
mind is far more troubled at your missing of them, than the enjoyment of all
the other things you have can give you contentment? Is it not true, that
although you give up your self to all the pleasures and indulgences you
possibly can, you cannot forbear desiring and wishing for more, and imagining
to your self a great many others, whose privation most extremely afflicts you?
Have you ever been sensible of any joy which has not been attended with an
affection more powerful and pressing, in the midst, and as it were from the
very source of your most delicious pastimes and recreations? Has there not
risen some inward disgust, and some disagreeable bitterness, which has
surpassed all that has been most sweet and pleasing to you? But on the
contrary, if I think and find my self so much advanced above all your Honors
and Adorations, as that I can despise and scorn them without doing any violence
to my self, and knowing the evil consequence of them,

Contentus eo usque crevisse, quo manum fortuna non porrigit. If I do not
consider all your Riches and Wealth, but only as pretty little fooleries, and
nuts which Fortune throws out to men, just as we do to little children,
pleasing my self with tasting now and then one which some accident has flung
even to me too, according as Epictetus permits it, Arian. l. 4. c. 7.
whilst that others are struggling and contending who shall get the most. If I,
acknowledging your greatest pleasures to be but ridiculous and simple, aye, and
ruinous too, am satisfied with my own enjoyments, and know them to be pure,
solid, and true, which all the world is not capable to make them be in the
least troublesome to me, nor can hinder me of; and if they be such as I have
made demonstrable to you in my precedent discourse; if all those things are
true, and if this be justly the posture and condition of both; tell me, if
there remains yet any ingenuity in you, and tell me heartily, which of the two
seems to be most happy? to which will you adjudge the advantage? which is that
which you would prefer? O, Philoponus! can you be able to hesitate upon this is
the pronouncing of your Judgment? And if, as I could easily have done it, I
had made you see more nakedly and plainly the ravishing Beauties of our Divine
Philosophy, Ennapius in Maxio.
ha! what extreme passions, and what admirable transports of love would you
have for her! If this Caelestial Deity had but once touched you to the quick,
what an unquenchable thirst of Discipline and Learning would have ever been
upon you for the future, and make you spend the rest of your life in another
guess manner than hitherto you have done! If you had but ever so little tasted
the sweetness and pleasurableness of a solitary Conversation, and your mind
had taken any repast of the Nectar and Ambrosia* of its charming
Contemplations, how would you presently have quitted all manner of other food
than that, with the greatest contempt in the world! and how would you cherish
the repast of a private and particular life, to enjoy its entertainment without
any trouble, and how would you prefer our deserts and solitudes to the most
eminent and indearing companies, and to the most important actions of your
politic life! It is not for that, that we leave the Towns, to dwell in Woods
and savage Mountains; our mind finds its Hermitage every where; and in the
most numerous Assemblies of men in the greatest Towns and Cities in the world,
I very frequently find my self in a Desert.

Magna Civitas magna mihi solitudo. And I am commonly as much alone as could be
Orpheus in Sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion. provided that my Soul may conserve
its liberty, and that its functions are not oppressed under the weight and
burden of your importune and troublesome affairs, exempt from passion and
trouble, it will find every where Gods with whom to converse, it will go out
through all the extent of Nature, and by the means of a strong and a vigorous
Contemplation, will make Voyages to the furthest parts of the World; and
spiritual Navigations, where it will discover the Americans, and the new
Worlds, full of Riches and Rarities until now unknown.

Diffugiunt Animi terrores, moenia mundi
Discedunt, totum video per inane geri res,
Apparet Divum numen, sedesque quietas.
And do you think that there are not every day found out in the Intellectual
Globe, places which are not yet broke up nor cultivated (as we see every year
almost are discovered by some or other) which have not belonged to you, nor
been inhabited as yet by any, as ever it can be known? Now this is one of the
Correspondences, and one of the Reports which is most truly made from the great
to the little World. Now if the discovery be not made by one as well as by
another, it is only the defect of Courage or Address; the Art of Speculation
and Meditation, which is the certain spiritual Navigation, being either
despised, or else absolutely left off; and every one contenting himself with
the knowledge and science of their Fathers, as we do of the Lands of this
Country, without troubling our selves about those of Canada. But when there are
any Heroic Souls, as the Tiphi or Coulombes in this spiritual Ocean, they
find out ways that are wholly novel, and make a descent into deeps unknown,
full of rarity and admiration. But I fancy you do not much care what is done
or passes in other Hemispheres: nor would I have made so long an Harangue, but
for my justification, and in some manner to satisfy the good will and
affection you have always testified to me.


Philop. It is not without good reason that your Aristotle has said, that by
solitude men became

(...), aut Fera, aut Deus: For I must confess sincerely to you, that if you
are not something more than ordinary and humane, you have such sallies of
mind, and extravagances so bizarre and particular, as cannot be lodged under
any reasonable Figure, without making it to run up and down the streets like a
Bedlam.


Adieu.
Illi Mors gravis incubat
Qui nimis nonus omnibus:
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Sen. ex Thyeste.
FINIS.

