THE Last SPEECH OF Mr. David Lewis, Priest of the Society of Jesus, who was
Executed as a Priest only, at Vske in Monmouth-shire, on the 27th day of
August, Anno Domini 1679.
HEre is a numerous Assembly, I see, the Great Savior of the World save every
Soul of you all; I believe you are here met not only to see a Fellow-native
die, but also with expectation to hear a dying Fellow-native speak. If you
expected it not, at least I intended it, I hope the favor will not be denied
me, it being a favor so freely granted to several late dying persons in London
it self; I shall endeavor to speak inoffensively; I hope the same favor will
not be denied me.

Let none of you suffer as a Murderer or a Thief, but if as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed; St. Peter's words in his 1. Ep. Chap. 4. Ver. 15, 16. I hope
by Gods Holy Spirit now whispered to my memory, and that to my abundant
Consolation; for I suffer not as a Murderer, Thief, or such like Malefactor,
but as a Christian, and therefore am not ashamed.

I distinguish two sorts of Life on Earth, Life-moral, and Life-natural;
Life-moral is that by which we live with good Repute in the Esteem of other Men
of Integrity; Life-natural is that by which we breath; in the first sort or
kind, I thank God I have suffered lately, and exceedingly, when maliciously,
falsely, and most injuriously, I was branded for a public Cheat, Vid. Epilogue
to Caesar Borgia, a Tragedy written by Not. Lee.
in Pamphlet, in Ballad, on Stage, and that in the Head City of the Kingdom,
yea and over the whole Nation, to the huge and great detriment of my good Name,
which I always was as tender of, as the other I am now quitting.

The Pamphletical Story (believe my dying words) had no truth in it, neither to
Substance nor Circumstance of the thing, a Story so false, that I could have
easily defied the Face that had attempted to justify it to my Face; so sordid
a Business, a Story so ridiculous, that I wonder how any sober Christian, at
least who knew me, could as much as incline to believe so open an
Improbability; who that Protestant young Man there mentioned was, I know not;
who that Popish young Woman, who the Father dead a year and a half before, what
County, what Parish, where all transacted, I know not, none of all these there
particularized; and when in the face of the Country at last Lent Assizes, I
vindicated my Innocence herein, to the satisfaction of the then Judge himself,
why appeared not there then some one to make good the Charge, and disable my
Defense? but none of this offered, a plain demonstration to all Candid Minds,
the whole was a mere fiction of some malicious person against me: God forgive
them or him, I heartily do. How forward my Endeavors always have been to my
power to relieve the Poor, and not directly to defraud them, Impartial
Neighbors that know me can tell you; besides this, during my nine months
Imprisonment, several foul and false Aspersions were cast out against me, and
that by those unto whom, for full thirty years, I had been charitably
serviceable: God forgive them, I heartily do; yet notwithstanding all these
Calumniations, I hope I still retain the Character of an Honest Man amongst
Gentlemen of Worth, with whom I conversed, and with all Neighbors of Honesly,
with and amongst whom I lived.

And now I am parting with the other Life by which I breath, behold, that
within these few Moments of Time is to unbreath me; but why thus sledg'd to
this Country- Tyburne? why this so untimely Death of mine? have patience and
I Will tell you, not for any plotting I assure you, and what I shall now say as
to that, God is my Witness, I shall speak without any Equivocation, Mental
Reservation, or Palliation of Truth whatsoever.

By all that is Sacred in Heaven and Earth, I here solemnly protest, that I am
as innocent from any Plot whatever against His Majesty's Person or Government,
as the Infant that left the Mothers Womb but yesterday; neither did I ever hear
or know any thing directly or indirectly of any such Plot, till public fame
had spread it over the Country between Michaelmas and All Saints day last: This
is true, as God shall judge and save my Soul; neither was there any guilt of
any such black Crime found in me by Mr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, Mr. Dugdale, and Mr.
Prance, when by them I was strictly examined on that Point last May in Newgate,
London; nay, had I had the least knowledge or hint of such Plot, I had been as
zealously nimble in the discovery of it, as any the most Loyal Subject His
Majesty has in His three Kingdoms; wherefore when I am dead and gone, if some
malevolent give out I lose my Life for Plotting, by Charity strive to disingage
him of his mistake, do that Right to my dead Ashes.

I was never taught that Doctrine of King-killing, from my Soul I detest and
abhor it as execrable, and directly opposite to the Principles of the Religion
I profess, what that is you shall know by and by; it being the positive
definition of the Council of Constance, That it is damnable for any Subject or
private person, or any Subjects in Council joined, to murder his or their
Lawful King or Prince, or use any public or clandestine Conspiration against
Him, though the said King or Prince were a Turk, Apostate, Persecutor, yea or a
Tyrant in Government: Never tell me of Clement the Murderer of Henry the 3d of
France; never tell me of Ravilliacke, Murderer of Henry the 4th of France; they
did so, but wickedly they did so, and for it they were punished to severity, as
Malefactors; and for it to this very day are stigmatized by all Roman
Catholics for very Miscreants and Villains: I hope you will not charge the
whole Roman Catholic Body with the Villainies of some few Desperadoes? by that
Rule all Christianity must be answerable for the Treason of Judas; for my part,
I always loved my King, I always honored His Person, and I daily prayed for
His Prosperty; and now, with all unfeigned Cordiality, I say it, God bless my
Gracious King and Lawful Prince, Charles the Second, King of England, and
Prince of Wales, God bless Him Temporally and Eternally, God preserve Him from
all His real Enemies, God direct Him in all His Councils, that may tend to the
greater Glory of the same Great God; and whatever late Plot has been, or is,
the Father of Lights bring it to light, the Contrivers of it, and the Actors in
it, that such may be brought to their condign punishment, and Innocence
preserved.

But why again this untimely Death? my Religion is the Roman Catholic
Religion, in it I have lived above these forty years, in it I now die, and so
fixedly die, that if all the good things in this World were offered me to
renounce it, all should not move me one hairs breadth from my Roman Catholic
Faith, a Roman Catholic I am, a Roman Catholic Priest I am, a Roman Catholic
Priest of that Religious Order called the Society of Jesus I am, and I bless
God who first called me, and I bless the hour in which I was first called both
unto Faith and Function.

Please now to observe, I was condemned for reading Mass, hearing Confessions,
Administering the Sacraments, Anointing the Sick, Christening, Marrying,
Preaching: As for reading the Mass, it was the old, and still is, the
Accustomed and Laudable Liturgy of the Holy Church, and all the other Acts,
which are Acts of Religion, tending to the Worship of God; and for this dying,
I dye for Religion: Moreover know, that when last May I was in London under
examination concerning the Plot, a prime Examinant told me, That to save my
Life, and increase my Fortunes, I must make some discovery of the Plot, or
Conform; discover Plot I could not, for I knew of none; Conform I would not,
because it was against my Conscience, then by consequence I must dye, and so
now dying, I dye for Conscience and Religion; and dying upon such good scores,
as far as humane frailty permits, I dye with Alacrity Interior and Exterior;
from the abundance of the Heart, let not only Mouths, but Faces also speak.

Here methinks I feel Flesh and Blood ready to burst into loud Cries, Tooth for
Tooth, Eye for Eye, Blood for Blood, Life for Life; No, cries Holy Gospel,
Forgive and you shall be forgiven; Pray for those that persecute you; Love your
Enemies; and I profess my self a Child of the Gospel, and the Gospel I obey.

Whomever, present or absent, I have ever offended, I humbly desire them to
forgive me; as for my Enemies, had I as many Hearts as I have Fingers, with all
those Hearts would I forgive my Enemies, at leastwise with all that single
Heart I have, I freely forgive them all, my Neighbors that betrayed me, the
Persons that took me, the Justices that Committed me, the Witnesses that proved
against me, the Jury that found me, the Judge that Condemned me, and others who
ever, that out of malice or zeal, covertly or openly, have been contributive to
my Condemnation; but singularly and especially I forgive my Capital Persecutor,
who has been so long thirsting after my Blood, from my Soul I forgive him, and
wish his Soul so well, that were it in my power, I would seat him a Seraphim in
Heaven, and I pray for them in the Language of Glorious St. Stephen the
Protomartyr; Lord, lay not this sin unto them; or better yet, in the Style of
our Great Master Christ himself, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do.

And with Reason I love them also; for though they have done themselves a vast
Soul-prejudice, yet they have done me an incomparable favor, which I shall
eternally acknowledge; but chiefly I love them for his sake, who said, Love
your Enemies; and in Testimony of my Love, I wish them, and it is the best of
Wishes, from the Center of my Soul, I wish them a good Eternity: O Eternity!
Eternity! How momentanean are the Glories, Riches, and Pleasures of this World?
and how desirable art thou Endless Eternity?

And for my said Enemies attaining thereunto, I humbly beseech God to give them
the Grace of true Repentance before they and this World part.

Next to my Enemies, give me leave to lift up my Eyes, Hands, and Heart to
Heaven, and drop some few Words of Advice unto, and for my Friends, as well
those present as absent. Friends, Fear God, Honor your King, be firm in your
Faith, avoid Mortal Sin, by frequenting the Sacraments of Holy Church,
patiently bear your Persecutions and Afflictions, Forgive your Enemies, your
Sufferings are great, I say be firm in your Faith to the end, yea even to
Death, then shall you heap unto your selves Celestial Treasures in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, where no Thief Robs, no Moth Eats, and no Rust
Consumes; and have that Blessed Saying of the Blessed St. Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, always in your memory, which I heartily recommend unto you, viz. Let
none of you suffer as a Murderer or Thief, but if as a Christian, let him not
be ashamed, but glorify God in his Name.

Now it is high time I make my Addresses to Heaven, and supplicate the Divine
Goodness in my own behalf, by some few short and Cordial Ejaculations of
Prayers.

Sovereign Lord God, Eternal Father of Heaven, Creator of all, Conserver of
all, sole Author of Grace and Glory, with prostrate Heart I Adore thee, and
thee only I Adore as God, the Giving of Divine Honor to any Creature of
highest degree, I abhor and detest as damnable Idolatry.

Incarnate Son of God, True God, Thou have purchased a Church here upon Earth
with thy Sacred Blood, and planted it with thy Sacred Labors, a Church, One,
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic, a Church to continue to the Consummation of
the World: Whatever that Church of thine has by Revelation from thee, whatever
that Church of thine has taught me, and commanded me to believe, I belive it
to an Jota.

God Holy Ghost, who makes thy Sun to shine on Good and Bad, thy Rain to fall
on the Just and Unjust, I praise thy Holy Name, and thank thee for the
Innumerable Benefits thou have been pleased to bestow and confer upon me, thy
unworthy Servant, the threescore and three years I now have lived on Earth.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Charity of God, and the
Communication of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13. Chap. 14.
Verse.

The Peace of God that passes all understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds in
the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and the
Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be among you, and remain
with you all, and always, Amen.

O Holy Trinity, three Persons, and one God, from the bottom of my Heart, I am
sorry that ever I have offended thee my Good God, even to an Idle Word; yet
through the Mercy of thee, my God, and Merits of my Redeemer, I strongly hope
for an Eternal Salvation.

Sweet Jesus Receive my Soul.

And so was Executed.

FINIS.

