A Short ANSWER TO A WHOLE LITTER OF LIBELS.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Hen. Brom at the Gun at the West End of S.
Paul's, 1680.

A Short Answer, etc.
FOr a matter of Two Months last past, I have been pelted with Libells, at the
rate of two or three Libells a Week, one with another: But Who, What, or Where
the Libellers are, is only known to their Own Good Lord, the Father of Lies and
Calumnies, that sets them a work. For they ly lurking in the Dark, like
Poisonous Serpents, stinging what falls within their Reach, and blowing about
their Venom, but there is no finding of their Holes. So that where there
appears no Adversary, (unless a man will contend with a Phantome) there is no
Place for a Competent Reply: Neither, in Truth, is there any great Need of it,
where the Infamy of the Practice does suffieiently discredit the Lewdness of
the Pretense. Beside that He has a very mean Opinion of himself, that consults
the Vomit of a Libell, for the State of his own Value and Repose. For what is a
Libeller; but only a baser sort of Bravo, that does more mischief, with Less
Hazard; and is consequently the more Unmanly Prostitute of the Two?

No sooner is there a Pique taken up against the Government, or against Any man
that according to his Duty, Endeavors to support it; but presently That
Malevolence yields matter for a Libell, and is popp'd into the world by
stealth, (as an Authority to the Rabble) by some Little Mercenary Scribler that
spunges for his very Bread, and commonly cousens the Printer too, into the
Bargain. I knew a Quack, once that being resolved to Cure all Diseases went to
Riverius's Index to supply and fill up his Bill. This Case holds a Good way
with a Libeller; he charges as many Desamations into his Paper as he can well
crowd in: (for there is nothing so Rank, but some Fools or other will believe
it.) Only he has this advantage of the Quack, that he needs not go out of
himself for Villainy, to fill up his Roll. How far the Government will find it
Convenient to suffer these Scandalls to Christianity, Public Order, Good
Manners; (Nay to the Peace, and Common Duties of Human Society) to pass
unpunish't, I shall submit to my Superiors: And after this brief Reflection upon
Libells in General, proceed to what concerns my self in Particular.

THe very Catalogue of the Pamphlets that have been written against me would
take up more Room then at This time I can well afford them: So that I shall
only run over the Heads of them (so far as to my Purpose,) without Referring to
This, or That Paper, where I do not know the Author; and fairly distinguish
the Defamation from the Argument. For the Opposing of Reason to Reason, or of
One Color to Another, is a Course agreeable to the Rules, and Methods of all
Candid disputes: But when I find Unnatural Violences put upon my Words, or
Periods, fraudulent Additions, or Suppressions, to make me speak more, or less
then I intended, and to pervert my Meaning: Together with Insolence of
Language; Opprobrious and Virulent Aggravations; Malicious Reports; and no
better then direct Fargery in the matter of Fact; and all This, Printed and
Published, without either the Booksellers, or the Authors Name; Under these
Circumstances, I shall be bold to pronounce any Pamphlet that Touches me, to be
a Libell.

The Common Clamor which This Infernal Band of Libellers (for they are not to
be heard of above-Ground) Advances against Me, is, the Vilifying of the Kings
Evidence; the turning of the Plot, into Ridicule; and being Popishly Affected:
And This, for want of Proofs against me, out of my Conversation, and Actions,
they take great pains to prove from my Writings: But with so barbarous a
Torture of the very Syntax, and Sentences; and so Illogical a Train of
Inconsequent Deductions; that they might as well have taken the Elevation of my
Religion, and Opinions, from the Length of my Nose. Within This compass they
contented themselves, till they found their Design would never work That way:
And Then they had Recourse to History, and Invention; and brought matters at
length to This Issue, that because Pool the Jesuit is a great Master of the
Viol, and Harmony stands in Opposition to Discord; Therefore under the very
Quality of a Fiddler, L'Estrange is made a Ridiculer of the Plot. Nay they will
have an Old Fellows Marrying of a young Less, to be a Vilifying of the Kings
Witnesses; for That Is one point of my Charge too; and under the Rose that I ran
away with her, which is yet worse; And That, without a Portion too, which is
worst of all. This is very True; and I do not at all repent me of my Bargain,
and I had very good reason for so doing; though not so proper to be told, out of
a respect to some Other persons. There Is one of these Whifflers that would
insinuate to the World that I Am afraid of my Flesh; but as he belies the
Circumstance, so he is not Positive upon the Main. The truth of it is, I was
knocked down at my door, One Morning, Undrest; and not being at all aware of the
Person that did it, as my Enemy: It is as true again that the Gentleman after
this exploit, went his way; and that I presently dressed my self, and sent a
Friend to him to Demand Satisfaction: And it is likewise as True, that I never
received any Affront in my Life, without calling the Person that offered it to
an Account. I do not speak as if it were a Great thing, not to be a Rascal,
but to give This Individuum Vagum the Lie; and to tell him moreover, that even
I my self, had the Courage to choose rather to be Hanged, then to take the
Covenant: Which does not (I must confess) come up to the Courage of Those
Heroes that will rather be Damm'd, then Renounce it.

They often cast it in my Teeth, that I was a Newgate-Bird, but I have this
Comfort, however, to my Calamity, that I suffered for my Prince, and my
Conscience, and that my Father did not pass the hand of the Common-Hangman at
the Gallows, for Treason.

There is one of them says, that the Print called the Committee, or Popery in
Masquerade, is not so much a Dumb Narrative of What Is past, as a Scheme of what
I would intimate, is, at present, Designed: which he inferrs, because the
Muggletonians, Quakers, and especially James Nayler were not so much as heard
of, when John Presbyter was Chairman. Now in Common Justice he should rather
Allow it to be the History of the Late Times, for Pennington's Sake, then Deny
it, for Muggleton's; And though their Names possibly were not in Those days,
yet their Principles were. And the intent of showing That Rabble of Sects in
Consult, with John Presbyter, their Chairman, was, First, to Suggest the
Schisms that flow from Presbytery; Secondly, to represent the Impossibility of
Uniting these Schisms, and Thirdly, the Danger of Permitting them: Which is all
expounded in the four last Verses of the Explanation, Viz.

Presbytry breeds Worms: This Maggot-Fry
Is but the Spawn of Lawless Liberty.
License is like a Sea-breach to your Grounds:
Suffer but One Flaw, the whole Country Drowns.
Now to show it manifestly to be a Piece Historical, and only recommended by
way of Caution, read the Five first Verses, and the two Last, of the First
Stanza.

Behold Here, in This Piece, the Plague, the Fate
Of a Seditious Schism in Church, and State:
Its Rise, and Progress; with the Dire Event
Of a Blind Zeal, and a Packt Parliament.
It WAS This Medly that confounded All, etc.
Think on it, my Masters: and if ere you see
This Game played over again, then Think of ME.
There Is Another Observation upon Swash, and the Elders Maid, the Colchester
Quaker and the Mare, Petitioning against Bishops, Service Book, Popish Lords,
and Evil Counselors etc. Now these kind of Bestialityes were never charged,
(says he) which the Well-Natur'd Author would intimate, ought to be, upon the
Decryed Party. pray'e take notice Here, of the Faith and Honesty of This man;
and in the eight Lines that referr to those four Figures under the Letter E,
you will find the Author So far from Charging those Bestialityes upon the
Decryed Party, that he does expressly acquit them. Viz,

Take a View, next, of the Petitioners.
But why, (you will Say) like Beasts to the Ark, in Pairs?
Not to expose the Quaker, and the Maid,
(By Lust to those Brutalityes betrayed.)
As if Those Two Sects more Addicted Stood
To Mares and Whelps, then Other stesh and Blood:
No; But they are Coupl'd, Here, only to tell
The Harmony of their Reforming Zeal.
The Scope (you see) of This passage was only to intimate that they understood
the matters in hand all alike.

He is Scandalized too at the Colchester Bridegrooms Petitioning against Popish
Lords; when there is now an Act of State to take away all Legislative power
from them, As if That Solemn Act which has been graciously granted at the
Petition of the Three Estates, was to be run into Ridicule, by every Bussoon at
Pleasure. But I Suppose (says he) he Stands Candidate to Sncceed his Friend B.
H. in his late Eminency. This Magisterial Fop, because he sits Dictator perhaps
at some Coffee-house, or Rhenish-wine Club, Sets up for a Privileged Fool, with
as much Confidence, as if Old Archees Patent had been to Himself, and his Heirs
forever. Now where is the Buffoonery of our Quakers I'etitioning? When the
wildest of Schismatiques, and the meanest of Mechaniques,, thronged the Lobbyes
of Both Houses of Parliament, with the Same Outcry in their Mouths of NO POPISH
LORDS, NO POPISH LORDS; which came in Convenient time, to be NO BISHOPS too; No
House of Lords at all; No House of Commons: And in the Conclusion, No King.
This is not only a Wilful, and a Silly Mistake, past upon the Author of That
Design, but a most Audacious Indignity upon the Government: Asif, by exposing
the Outrages of a Tumult to Contempt for casting out the Popish Lords, Without,
and Against Authority, a man must be concluded to make sport with the same
thing done according to the Regular steps and Motions of Law and Government.
His conceit of the Authors standing Candidate to succeed his Friend B.H. in
his late Eminency, is Grave, and also Incomprehensible, unless (by a singular
Faculty of Allusion upon the Double meaning of the word Eminency) he would
erect the Libeller into a Cardinal. He comes now to be almost as Squeamish as
the Great-ear'd Knave (that he takes notice of) Spewing of Canons and
Common Prayer. He calls the Inscription of a Verse out of Jeremiah upon the
Table of the Solemn League and Covenant, a Scurrilous way of Citing a Piece of
Holy Writ; Whereas there is nothing said upon it, nor any other Use made of it,
but only to notify the Text whereupon the Conspiratours founded their Project,
and authorized the Rebellion. The words are These. Come and let us join Our
selves unto the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten,
Jer. 50. 5.

There are Two Verses that the Libeller does the Author the honor to remarque
upon; as now very well Timed and Tinctured with Jesuits Loyalty. He makes
(says he) a Company of Fellows say Thus.

Our Designe's This; to Change the Government,
Set up our Selves, and do it by a Parliament.
Thus far he delivers my very Thoughts; for it is the Close Caball of Forty and
Forty One that speaks the Words; in Confirmation of Dr. Oats's Testimony, that
the Jesuits Insluence and Lead the Councils of the Schismatiques: But see how
he turns it now. A very excellent Argument (says he) for the sitting of that
Court; but suitable enough, I suppose, for the Authors Design. Where was the
Moon I wonder when the Gentleman wrote This? To draw an Argument, For, or
Against the Parliaments sitting in 1680. from the Roguery of a Club of
Conspirators, that were laying their Heads together for the packing of a
Parliament in 1641.

But his Good Nature, I perceive, is now coming upon him, and I take it for a
singular favor, that He, being a Person (as you may perceive) of most notable
Government and Circumspection, should vouchsafe now to give the world so fair a
Testimony of my Good Breeding: And to say Truth (says he) the Gentleman had, in
his youthful days, as many Remedies against hanging himself for Love, as
Leukeners-Lane, the Old Cherry-garden, or Madam Bear her Damsels (a Lady as
famous in her Generation for Those Intrigues, as either Mother Gifford or Betty
Beuly, of Late and Happy Memory) could afford. I have not (really) read of a
more Historical Whoremaster: And then the Prescription strikes so directly at
the Distemper, that nothing but a Codpieee-Doctor could ever have hit upon it.
But in good Faith, Mr. Libeller I never had any thing to do either with these
Women or any of your Relations there, that I know of: And yet let me tell you
(for you know I wedded Late) I could have given a shrewd Guess before I was
married, at the difference betwixt a Woman, and a Weathercock. He falls now
upon his Decorums; and talks so like a Poetaster, that there is no enduring of
it. Only there is one thing I would beg of him. He Phansies that if any man
should but so much as write against sitting up whole Nights, at Cards, I would
call it a Libell; Now the Truth of it is; I have given over Cards above this
Twelvemonth: And my Request should be This, that he would do me the favor not
to put forth his Parts against Card-play; for his Reasonings lie so cursedly
Kim Kam, that I Am afraid if he should set pen to paper against Playing, I
should go near to take it up again.

This same LIBELLER is a boisterous, unruly word, and will not couch so well in
a Period; and therefore hereafter for want of a better name we shall now and
then call him Dogrill. He says that Citt and Bumpkin is a very Scoffing
Scurrilous Pamphlet, without either Truth, or Good Manners; for it bespatters
many of the Nobility, the most Eminent Gentry, and Citizens, with the basest,
and meanest Practices of Forgery, imaginable; and that the Author of it is
within the Equity of the Pillory, referring the Reader to Page 3. But in that
whole Page I cannot find so much as One of those Dismal Syllables: Only a
Couple of Officious Busy Knaves, discoursing the Roguy Contrivances that were
made use of for the gaining of Subscriptions to a Petition. And it is certainly
True, that Masters did set hands for their Children, and Servants; Women for
their Husbands, at a great Distance, and without Commission, Pedagogues for
their Schoolboys, Dissenting Ministers for their Congregations, and Generally,
the Heads of the Non-Conformists stickled might and main for the carrying of it
on. It is True also, that a World of Names were Subscribed, and the Persons not
to be found; and that upon several Rolls there were Thirty Names sometimes
together all of the same hand. And it is likewise True, that the Faction had
their Clubs, and Committees both in Town and Country, to promote This Affair.

Doggrill will not allow that This was to amuse the Nation with Numbers, as if
they meant to do something further: Notwithstanding that the Refusers were
menaced in many places, and people forc^d in, by Importunity, Aw, and Terror.
Insomuch that in Speeches, and Pamphlets, those men were exposed to have a Mark
set upon them as Disaffected to the Public, that would not Subscribe the
Petition.

In the next Page, Doggrill Pronounces the Author to be either a Sot, or a
Knave, in plain English: Never considering that the rude and Censorious Coxcom
himself shows himself every step he sets, to be Both; And a little after,
whatever he is in his Religion, he is sure (he says) that he is a Papist, in
Faction. And again a little lower; what Jesuit (says he) could lessen the Drs.
Testimony, or Narrative of the Plot, more then He has done, by saying; I
believe the Plot, and as much of it, as every good Subject ought to believe;
Nay, I do so absolutely believe it, that in my Conscience, you your self Dr. do
not believe more of it then I do. How can he pretend to call That a Lessening
of the Drs. Credit, to say that a man believes as much of it as the Dr. himself
does, unless Doggril will have it that the Dr. does not believe it at all? And
then he abuses L'Estrange most abominably, two lines after, in saying that he
compares the whole thing to the raining of Buttered Turnips; whereas This is
not said of the whole thing, but of some Cases, which are not as yet given in
Evidence, and remain doubtful. This Comment might have been spared, after so
much said upon it in a Former Reply.

Doggrill goes on, P. 4. still like himself. L'Estrange (he says) was as
mutinous in Print as any body, before he came to the Preferment of his Half
Crown Books, and Ballads; because he could get nothing. The Government, Then,
lay under a Maladministration; the rest is, (to meet him in his own way)
Infandum renovare dolorem; and so we will say nothing on it. But to the Books and
Ballads; Is it not more Honorable to get a little Money by Stifling, and
preventing Sedition, then by Composing, and vending it. And then for the Mutiny
he speaks of, it was my Caveat to the Cavaliers in 1661. and whoever reads that
Pamphlet, will find I was not so much a Libeller, as a Prophet.

Doggrell was even now upon his Equity; and then one would have suspected him
for a Chancery-man: But now he sets up Physician again; and very Courtcously
advises the Author of Citt and Bumpkin, to make a step from Newgate, to
Bedlam. The man's a Civil man; and I am consident, has a mind I should give
him a visit there: For surely nothing but a man in Bedlam would behave himself
at his Inperious rate. Do you not think it a very flagitious thing (says he)
for a little unknown fellow to comprehend all the States, Orders, and Divisions
of men; Both Lords, Citizens, and Commons of England, under the Opprobrious
names of Citt and Bumpkin? Now do but observe what a Couple of Rascals, this
Citt and Bumpkin are in the very Dialogue, represented to be. Page 26. You
(says Trueman) are the Representative (forsooth) of the City; and You of the
Country; Two of the Pillars of the Nation, with a Horse-pox. A man would not
let down his Breeches in a House of Office, that had but Two such Supporters.
Do not I know You, Citt, to be a little Grubstreet Insect that but the other day,
scribled Handy-dandy for some Eighteen pence a Job, Pro and Con, and glad on it
too? And now (as it pleases the stars) you are advanced from the Obort, the
Miscarriage, I mean, of a Cause-splitter, ta a Drawer up of Articles; and from
your skill in Counterfeiting Hands, preferred to be a Solicitor for Fobb'd
Petitions.

The Intent of This Reprehension is only to show what pittyfull Knaves there
are, that in the name of the Nation, impose upon the People; and to distinguish
by these Opprobrious Names, Rascals, from men of Honesty, and Honor. Toward
the Bottom of Page 7. Doggrill denies that the King was twitt d with his
Coronation Oath; the calling for Delinquents to be brought to punishment; and
that the Parliament might sit as long as they pleased; Though scarce a Porter but
knows that it was the daily Clamor of the Press, and the Clubbs are known too
that supplied Those Pamphlets. Possibly (says he) there might be something of
Trying the Lords in the Tower, which might give the Protestantish Author
occasion of that flourish, as if Their Case were Parallel to those worthy Lords
and Gentlemen, Then called Delinquents; then which nothing can be more vilely
insinuated, To this, it is answered, that the Question is not Here, of the
Parliament, but of the Petitioners, who did more then insinuate the Particulars
by Him denied, and it is no less True (in despite of the most Impudent
Contradiction) that several of the Models of Petitions exposed in Print,
insisted upon the Parliaments sitting as long as they pleased.

He proceeds now, to another detracting passage, (as he calls it) to wit; that
it would be never the worse, if the men of Estates were out of favor at Court;
for an honest Revenge (you know) goes a great way with a Tender Conscience, Pa.
7. This is spoken now by a Rascal, and as a Rascal, with a very good Decorum;
and the Drift of it is to show that Revenge goes a great way even with those
that are the highest Pretenders to Conscience.

By his Tenth Page a man would swear him not only to be in Bedlam still, but in
his Fit too; for he is at his Rascally Politiques, Rascally Pick-Thanks; and
runs so damnable upon the Pox, and the Rascal, and then Sycophantly Knave, in
the next Page, that there is no coming near him. And yet upon the Top of the
same Page, he takes a little Breath; and patiently Hears an Account of five
Petitions more that were upon the Anvill. One against the Lords in the Tower,
Another, for the Setting of the Parliament, till they had gone through with
what they had to do; a Third for taking away Bishops Votes; a Fourth, for the
Remove of Evil Councillors; a Fifth, for putting the Militia into Safe Hands.
And then his fit of Raving takes him again. The Ranging (says he) of these
Petitions, Together, looks as if to Petition for the Trial of the Lords, were
equally Criminal with the rest. Bless me! what Juggling is this? First, here is
no Charge, or Intimation of a Crime, upon any of these Petitions, Secondly, his
Ranging of them Together, is a kind of a Doggrilism; for they are Ranged one
after another. But suppose the matter as he intends it. Must the Ranging of
them in Order, be understood as if it implied them to be all of a Quality? This
is a Reach very extraordinary, that the sequence of one, two, three, four and
five, should operate upon the Condition or Morality of Things or Actions that
are Ranged under the Order of These Numbers. Here follows, now, one of the
Bloudiest Consequences of all. Those Heads (says Cit. P. 10.) will find hands,
if there be occasion. And This (says he) is to tell us what dangerous Rogues
the Citizens are; and to asperse, by Intimation, the City of London, with
Contrivances against the Government. We must mind this man of Decorum, once
again, of the Person that speaks it, and the Occasion whereupon it is spoken.
Citt and Bumkin are laying their heads together to make a Party of Mutineers
against the Magistrates and the Body of the City, and Dogril will needs engage
the Citizens of London (contrary to all sense and Reason) to be reflected upon
here as the Mutineers. I cannot but wonder how This good man comes now to be
such a Zealot all on a sudden for the honor of the City: And yet when this
very City of London (the Body, I mean, and the Governors of it) was affronted
by that Seditious Libell called, An Appeal from the Country to the City, he had
not so much as a word to cast at a Dog upon the Subject. But he is even with me
for my passing by the Rebellion In Ireland, Page 14. which is just such another
Case, as if he should Quarrel a man that is intent upon the Theme of
Conventicles, for not writing the History of Japan.

In his 15th Page he is Fumbling at the Kings being one of the Three Estates;
but it is either too hot, or too heavy, and so he lets it fall again. And in
the same Page, he is very Angry with Cit, for calling the Protestant Religion
the Religion of the Dissenters from the Church. And why should not Citt that
Personates a Fanatique, Talk like a Fanatique? and we know very well, that so
soon as ever the Sehismatiques got the Power, they called the English Clergy,
Popelins, and themselves the only I rotestants.

And then he goes on, (says he) as if the Plot was only a Blind, to enrage
People; and that there was a real Design to destroy the Hierarchy; and all the
Sons of the Church, by the name of Papists in Masquerade, and get all the
places of Profit to themselves. All This (I say) has in the Memory of man, been
contrived, set a foot, and accomplished: And we are at this day told to our
faces the precise number of our Protestant Bishops; (which runs very Low) and
that there are not above four Protestant Clergy men, of the Church of England,
in London. But I shall refer Him that has a mind to be better resolved in This
point, to the Schismatiques Behavior toward the Clergy in Essex, upon the last
Election of Knights of the Shire there.

He follows his Kindness to That Party, page 18. in saying that they asserted
the Kings Cause in the Lowest Ebb, and that they were the Second Cause of his
Majestyes Restitution. Now I Will go farther with him: They were the very Prime
Cause it self; For if the King had not been Driven out, he could not have been
Restored. Methinks he might have afforded the Poor Cavalieres a good word or
two upon This Occasion. But he has forgotten the Indefatigable Endeavors of
That Party; and their prodigious Constancy thorough all hazzards, and
Extremities; which still kept the Rebels waking, and in such Apprehensions;
that they could never bring matters to a Steady and Secure Settlement, thorough
the whole Course of their Usurpations, He has forgotten how they were hanged
and cut to picces like Dogs, Smothered in Iayles, Plundered, Transported etc.
and for what; and who they were that did the Execution; And All This, forsooth,
the Mealy-mouth Libeller covers under the Gentle Term of a DEVIATION. The Brute
can open his Mouth, and out-rail Billingsgate, at a man that does his Duty to
This King; but the murder of the Last, and the Total Dissolution of the
Government comes off in a Soft way, only for a DEVIATION. He has forgotten the
Two Votes that his worthy Friends passed, as previous to the calling of That
Parliament which Actually finished the work of his Majestyes Restoration: The
Former, that no man should have any Office in the Militia, without Declaring
that the War Undertaken by Both Houses of Parliament in their DEFENSE against
the Forces raised in the Name of the Late King, was Just, and Lawful. The
Second, was for the Exclusion of all that had ever Served his Majesty; and
their Sons, from Serving as Members of the next Parliament.

In dissecting the Former Vote, we shall effectually Dissect the Libeller, and
judge of his Affections by the Party he Stickles for. There is First a Sentence
past upon the King, as the Aggressor, when the world Knows how he was forced
and Hunted from his Royal Palace by Affronts, and Tumults. Secondly, In
justifying the War of the Two Houses (though a Notorious Rebellion:) for the
First Complement they put upon the Son, was to Declare his Royal Father a
Traitor. Thirdly, If That War was Just, and Lawful (as They Suggested) the
Late King, was Lawfully put to Death: Which was very fairly to tell his
Majesty, what, in the like Case, he was to trust to Himself. This was one of
the Last Visible Acts, that carried any Countenance of Authority, which
Doggrills Friends appeared in, toward the restoring of the King, which plainly
be-spake Their Implacable Malice to the Government; where they had but the
least hope of a Power to exercise it. As for Those that Frankly, and generously
Struggled to Restore his Majesty, without any By-regards to the setting up of
Themselves; I shall agree, in Attributing to them all the Honor they deserve.

Let any man judge now with what Front, (as Mr. Formality has it) this Libeller
can Talk of an Act of Oblivion, when he himself puts a man upon the Necessity
of either Recriminating upon his Fellow-Rascalls, (to pay him in his own Coin)
or otherwise, tacitly to reproach so many Honorable Instances of Loyalty and
Resolution; and to bury their Names and Services, in Common Dust and Rubbish.

Doggerill has another fling at me, P. 19. for Licensing Humane Reason. I
cannot deny but that the Copy coming to my hand at past Midnight; and being
engaged out of Town at four a Clock that day, by the morning-Tide, and finding
that it had been Overlookt by an Authority which I thought sufficient to
support it, I put a License to it, Vnrend; which I should not have done upon a
Perusal. But I do not remember that there fell any Fire and Brimstone upon the
Printing of it; and at my Return, I found Whitehall just in the same place
where I left it. But it is a Damned ly (Conversing with this Bear has made me
Foul-mouthed) that ever I excused my self, by saying (as he pretends) that I
would License an Answer to it. And it is Another, his saying that I had a hand
in the Ballad of Now is the Time, p. 20. And it is yet a Third, that I had any
sort of concern in the Loyal Intelligence; as he would have the World believe
I had. Pa. 26. But what do I talk of This or That Falsehood; when the Entire
Pamphlet is but one great Blot of Forgery, and Gall? In his 20. and 21. Pages,
in proof of his Infinite Tenderness and Veneration for the Life, and Authority
of his Sacred Majesty, he rakes up Instances of Several Princes that have been
Stabbed, Assaulted, Strangled, Deposed, set aside and Emprison'd by their own
Subjects. And though, to palliate the discourse for the saving of his own skin,
he tells you, that it is the Subjects Duty to suffer Patiently, yet Nature (he
says) in some Cases, is very strong, and Princes had best have a Care what they
do; with a hint to the people, that there may be such provoking Circumstances,
that a body does not know what may come on it: As who should say it is one thing
what people should do, and another thing what they are able to do, under such
and such Provocations: For Men are but Men. And there he leaves it.

Now if you would see what point it is he drives at, read his following
Citation out of Denhams Sophy, and the First Scene of the Fourth Act. It is a
discourse betwixt Abdal, and Morat (Two Lords of the Princes Party) in
Confederacy against the King. It begins at -- [Poor Princes! How are they
misled? etc. Page 44. and ends with Morats speech pa. 46. Now see the Result
they come to, pa. 47.

Morat: Farewell unhappy Prince, while we thy Friends
Are Strangers to Our Country and Our selves;
Seek out our safety, and expect with patience
Heavens Justice.

Abdal. Let Us rather Act it then Expect it
The Princes Injuries at our hands require
More then our Tears and Patience!
His Army is not yet dishanded,
And only wants a Head; Thither we will fly
And all who Love the Prince or Hate the Tyrant
Will follow us.

Mor. Nobly Resolved; and either weel restore
The Prince, or perish in the brave attempt.

There Is a Mystery in his Meaning, and we shall leave him to expound it himself.

I have here bestowed more pains upon him then I intended when I first took him
in hand; for finding This piece of his, upon Second Thoughts, to be the Venom
and Malice of Several other Libells drawn into One, with Lies, Sawcynesse, and
Ribaldry, in abundance, of his Own, I thought it better to make One work of
All, and to lay open the Libeller, tho I cannot find the Man. Upon the Reason,
and Truth of the whole, I ask no favor, either from the Reader, or the
Government. He makes me one of Olivers Minstrells: So that while He and I Live,
the State shall never want a Fool and a Fiddler. And he will have me to be a
Papist two and a Pensioner. I wish he had as much Reason for the Latter, as he
has Little for the Former. I could have prevented the Publishing of his
Pamphlet; but upon my Own account, I did not think it worth the while; for my
Conscience, and (I hope) my Character in the World, with all Honest men, is
proof against much more then This amounts to. So that I shall Jog on still,
just at my old rate, without any more concern at the Barking of a Two-legg'd
Puppy, then if the Curr went upon all Four, and Bawled for Porridge.

I shall however try a point of Law, in time Convenient, with some of the
Publishers and Dispersers of it; and I do not doubt but at the same time to
make it appear, that they are as bold with the King himself, as they are with
his Subjects* And yet notwithstanding the Contempt that I have for these
sneaking and Insidiary Hirelings, the Practice is never the less of so Bloody
and Dangerous a Consequence, that it is Impossible to preserve the Peace either
of Communities, or Private Families, where This License is permitted: Nay, it
takes away the Taste and Comfort of Humane Society, by Disseminating, Base
Suspicions, Blowing up of Animosities, and Fewds, even to the Dividing of the
Nearest Relations, and Friends. For all people are not fortified alike against
the Force of Evil Impressions: But variously Transported, (according to the
Diversity of their Tempers) either to Revenge themselves upon their Enemies, or
to mistake their Friends. So that in effect, the best of Princes, of
Governments, and of Men ly equally at the mercy of the most Profligate of
Villains. They make Tyrants of what Princes they please; Model Governments
after their Own Humor, and set forth Public Ministers, and affairs of State
in what Colors they think fit. These are the Arbitrators of War and Peace, and
their Domini^o reaches from the Top of Mankind to the Bottom. Pimps and Bawds;
Cuckolds and Whores, Pensioners and Papists, are all of them, Honors of Their
Creation.

The Common Objections that these Incendiaries make use of against Me, are
these; That my Writings Raise unnecessary Disputes, Create Misunderstandings,
Inflame Animosi ies, and tend to the Embroyling of the Kingdom. Now This is
all so False, and Groundless, that I Defy all the Legions of the Faction to
produce any one Paper that I have published, since I entered upon this Hurry of
Scribbling, to which I was not obliged, either by my Duty to the Public, or by
Common Prudence in my Own Particular, upon some Occasion, or Provocation of
Antecedent Libells against the Government, or against my self. And all this
Virulence against me, arises only from the Malice of my Adversaries, to the
Interest which I have Constantly Asserted. For after all these Rogues, and
Rascals, they have not answered any one of my Arguments. Doggrell will needs
have it, that I write out of an Itch of Scribbling, and not out of any Noble end
to my Prince. p. 25. And the Wizzard gathers it from my Translations. What was
my End of Scribbling at the same rate, in the Late Rebellion? When I had no
other Reward to expect but the Satisfaction of my Conscience, the One way, and
a Halter, (over and above) the Other. ^f he gathers my Itch of Scribbling from
my Translations, it is an Itch I perceive that he is in no Danger of: There Is
Tully and Seneca; a Couple of Pagans that will stand Fairer before the Great
Tribunal then a Million of Calumniating, and truly Diabolical Christians.
There Is Bona's Guide to Eternity, (a Manual, of Pious, and Excellent Morality)
why should That trouble him either? For his Conscience is laid fast enough, for
flying in his Face; and Sleeps as comfortably in the High way to Hell, as if it
were no more then Truckling into his Own Kennell. As for Erasmus's Colloquies,
and Quevedo's Visions, They are not Tart enough perhaps for His Palate, for
it is not the Strength, or Moral of a Satyr that pleases Him; but the Spite, and
Venom of it. and in Truth I have heard (if I do not miss my Mark) that he is
much Happier too in his Libells that Pass only in Manuscript; then in his
Printed ones: For being infinitely Familiar with the Seven Deadly Sins, he will
put you a Set of the Honestest Lords and Ladies that you can lay your hand on,
into so lewd a Dress, that they shall all look like Rogues, and Jades in a
Trice; and without running the Risque too of a Reply. It Is a notable Lad (they
say) at a Lampoon.

The Reader has hitherto had only my Own Word for the Grounds of So many
Pamphlets as I have lately exposed to the Public; I shall now come nearer the
matter, and deliver a just Report of the Inducements that led me to it.

Finding not only the Entire Frame of the English Government torn to Pieces, by
the Audacious Insolence of Licentious Libells, but the Dignity of Government it
self exposed to Popular Contempt, and made Cheap in the Eyes of the Multitude:
finding these Outrages, (I say) in a manner Authorized,, by passing Unpunished;
and the Cause it self half yielded up for want of Advocates, and Arguments to
Defend it; I thrust my Self into the Controversy; not (as I hope to be Saved)
out of Passion, and Bitterness against any sort of People whatsoever: but out
of an Impulse of Conscience, and a Sense of Duty, This Officious Zeal of mine
has made me as many Enemies as there are Ill-willers to the Government; and to
deal Freely, I cannot but take it for an Honor to be Reviled by Those Lips
that Speak Evil of my Master. But So it is however, that whether I made good
my Post, or not, it was a thing of absolute necessity that Something should be
done, toward the putting of a Check to So Impetuous a Course of Calumny, and
Sedition. And This Necessity will better appear, upon a due Consideration of
the Bold Discourses, and Positions that were daily vented from the Press, to
the Weakening, and Wounding of the Government, in the Head, and in every Part
of it.

As to the KING himself, the Late Case of Sebastian King of Portugal is offered
to the English as a President.

The Doctrine of Co-ordination, and the Kings being Singulis Major, Universis
Minor, is Common

It is positively affirmed, that in many Cases a King may be Deposed.

Also, that in some Cases the Subject may take up Arms against both his Person
and Authority.

That he Derives his Power, and Authority from the Consent of the People.

That God himself approves of the Removal of Evil Kings.

That the Two Houses may Levy Men, Money and Arms; Without, or Against the Kings
consent.

They have already Erected a Vote of the House of Commons into the Equivalence
of a Law.

His Majesty is Charged with Raising a Mercenary Popish Army to have joined
with the French, Besides Oblique Reflections Innumerable.

Now for the PARLIAMENT; the Late Long Parliament is called a Treacherous and a
Lewd Parliament. And 197. of the Members of That Parliament Scandalously
exposed, by Names, in a Libell.

As to the CLERGY, beside the Daily Reflections upon the Bishops, and
Episcopacy it self; they, are expressly called the Sons of Belial; Whom (says
the Libeller) if the whole World were now to make their Wills, all but Fools
and Knaves would leave them a Curse for a Legacy.

The People are called upon to Destroy Episcopacy, Root and Branch.

The Courts of JUSTICE, escape no better; for not only their Proceedings, but
the Persons of Several of his Majestyes Judges are Libelled by Name.

The Juryes are exposed in Several Libells also. And in one Libell, in These
Words.

-- Wakeman's, or a Gascoyne-Jury,
Picked, Bribed, Instructed how to murder Truth,
From, etc.
The Justices of the Peace are Served with the same Sauce too: For upon Sir W.
Wallers being put out, it was presently hinted to the World in a Libell, as if
the rest of the Middlesex Bench were all Papists. And so much for Public; But
the Personal Libells are not to be Numbered.

I have Published These Instances in Hope, and Expectation of receiving a
Command to make them out, and to Trace them: For I have the Libells in my
Possession. If this Liberty holds, every man that honestly serves his Prince,
and his Conntry becomes a Sacrifice to the Multitude, and the Rabble gives Laws
to the Government, It is no wonder now after these bold attaques upon the
Constitution of the Government, if they let fly their Malice at it, in
Piecemeal too. And if some Pamphlet-Pedler, or Hedg-Printer happen to be taken
in the Manner he has his Plea at his Fingers End. He has served out his Time,
and is not to be put by the Exercise of his Trade. Has not a Cutler, or a
Gunsmith the same Plea too, for the very Pistol, or Dagger which he knows
beforehand is Designed for the Murder of the King?

In fine; whether it be Impudence, or Opennesse of Nature, I know not; But
(upon my soul) if my whole Life were ripped up, and all my Actions exposed (other
Persons excepted out of the History) I would make no more scruple of owning the
Truth, then of acknowledging my self to be Flesh and Blood: For I do not set up
for a Saint, but for a Loyal Subject, a True Friend, and (as the world goes) a
very Honest Fellow.

The End.

