Look About You.

The Plot of Contzen, the Moguntine Jesuit, to cheat a Church of the Religion
Established therein, and to serve in Popery by Art, without noise or tumult.

Plin. Sec. ad Vocon. Nam stultissimum credo, ad imitandum non optima quaque
proponere.

Imprinted in the year, 1641.

Reader; Hem.
TRead softly; peep under these Curtains, and view the most lively Pictures
of these Times, for Innovation of Religion, that ever thine eyes or the Sun
himself beheld. A subtle Jesuit, like a crafty Cat, lustily plays on his
Fidle: Iesuited Statesmen like so many silly Rats and Mice full a dancing
after him, as if they were mad. The Jesuit lays his plot (with no small
cunning) how to reduce a State to Romish superstition, from the true Religion
established therein by law, and that without any noise, under pretense of
bringing back the true Relig on. By the true Religion (so often by our Author
mentioned) he means that Devilish fardel of Popish Idolatry* which never
accounts it self in its proper element, till it swim in blood; nor ever set
foot in any State once purged of it, but it certainly overwhelmed (if not the
whole Commonwealth, yet) the person and progeny of the Prince that gave it any
entertainment or harbor, with a dreadful ruin. The use which, at the
present, some Ecclesiastics in some Countries improve it too is to lead in
Arminianisme. With this, the Politic Heads of the Popish faction are well
content; as holding those men the fittest Ministers, and Arminianisme the best
Engine to bring the Grand Plot to the wished perfection with most safety and
speed. How exactly these have kept their measures in dancing after our Jesuits
Fidle, and how punctually they have observed his Rules and with what success,
thou need not go far for proof; scarce any State professing and
maintaining the reformed Religion, but can produce evidences enough and too
many of their unwearied attempts in accomplishing the devilish design of this
Roman Machivell, by whose Rules here laid down they have most accuratly
walked.

Viderit Vitilitas
Look about you.
The plot of Contzen, the Moguntine Jesuit, to cheat a Church of the Religion
established therein, and to serve in Popery by Art, without noise or tumult.

As it is by him drawn out in his 18. and 19. Chapters of his second Book of
Politickes.

Translated by a Catholic Spy.
CHAP. XVIII.
The way to bring back the true Religion.
MOst of the things before spoken Cap. 17.
touching the Conservation of Truth and Religion, are profitable to reduce such
as wander into the way. Notwithstanding, they must be diversely applied by
Politic men. Hardly is the Truth found out: but much more difficult is it, to
persuade him that erreth. It is nevertheless the duty of a Prince, even in
this, earnestly to bestir him, that wicked opinions be taken out of the way,
Gods honor restored, and care had of perishing souls.

The 1. Rule. Begin gently.
The first means. What Musicians observe in tuning their Instruments, gently
setting up the strings by little and little; and what, in curing diseases,
Physicians practice, abating noxious humors by degrees, and pauses: the same
must be done in a Commonwealth, laboring under the Malady of Errors and
Superstitions* I approve not lingering and bootlesse proceedings, since they
often beget a desisting from the design. What ever means can be used, my
counsel is that they be attempted* but in a soft and sure pace, for fear of a
precipice* Here, mild commands and monitions do very much further the work.

The second Rule. To press the examples of men's daily returns to Popery, a
good means to till on the rest.
The second, this. It is no difficult piece, for any Prince in Europe to call
back men's minds to the ancient rites of our Predecessors, if he list. A
matter heretofore held impossible to be effected. But now men begin again to
love the old Religion. Nor can they be so held on by their Ministers, but that
many do every year, return to the Catholic unity.

Such force has Gray Antiquity
To turn from beardlesse Novelty.
The just punishment of all that receive not the love of the truth. 2 These. 2.
10. 11. 12.
What once they most greedily lusted after, they now cast aside with disdain;
yea, they abhor it. That levity of the Vulgar, to admire new things, and
contemn old, is fatal. Heresy, therefore, which while it was in the first
carrire, could by no force be stayed; nor by Art restrained* afterward growing
weary and faint, goes on more leasurely: and being in it self divided and
bruised, the violence of it abates, and so at last it comes back to the same
point from whence first it departed. Many Provinces of Germany have endured
many Religions: now they retain none at all, being more intent to the will of
their Lords. One cause of this is, as I said but now, Levity, and ignorance of
the Truth. Another the impossibility of holding the people long ignorant of the
lewdness of Heresies, and Heretics: and that they find those men to shift
their opinions almost every year. Of their own accord they depart asunder
into diverse fractions, so that they cannot stand long. It is as if you should
set out a company of blind men to run a race: sooner would they all miss,
then any one get to the mark. This Argument, if a prudent Magistrate please to
take up his people, loathing so many intricate mazes into which they have been
led, and having made trial of the sraudes of ungratious Apostates, will
readily suffer themselves to be reduced into the way.

With this lenity must the first proceedings be laid: unless the Heresies be
of that nature, that (without peril) they admit no delays, Such are those of
the Muncerians, A Caution. Thomas Muncer, the first ring leader of the
Anabaptists, he began at Alstet in Tharing, belonging to the Duke of Saxony.
Sleiden. Co^. lib. 5. The 3. Rule. Root out the Teachers as fast as may be.
Anabaptists and of them that rise up against the Magistrate. For these, like
sharp diseases, deny place and opportunity to a slow course of Physic, and
therefore must be repressed with a swift and dangerous remedy.

Thirdly, Arch-hereticks, and Teachers of Heresies, are to be banished the
Commonwealth, at once, if it may safely be done, but if not, then do it
leasurely and by degrees. There needs no proof to make this course appear
needful. For turbulent and boisterous winds being sent packing, that Sea whose
very bottom they seemed to lay bare, will of it self again become calm and
still: and that Error which has lost its Protector, will without opposition,
put it self under ruin. Never therefore can those Emperors be praised
enough, who with banishment punished Arius, Nestorius, Nigilantius, and other
Heretics. But yet the Vandals deserve execration, who having gotten together
all the Priests and Bishops in Africa, ran upon them with their Horses, or
else utterly banished them unto desert places. There are many fair reasons of
expelling such as (being private men) attempt alteration in matters of
Religion, albeit the people should hug them whiles they scatter their
poisons. But a Prince may undertake such an enterprise lawfully, and justly,
having means enough, not to suffer himself to come under reproach for so
doing. Three mighty Princes of Germany; to wit, the Platine Elector, the
Landgrave of Hessen, and the Marquis of Brandenburg, an Elector also, effected
a change of the Lutheran Religion, into that of Calvin, or as themselves term
it, the Reformed Religion. And albeit almost all their Subjects hated
Zuinglianisme, yet did these Princes without any tumult (save only that
Berline took upon him the boldness to be angry) full accomplish that
commutation.

In these alterations, these things for the most part, out of the History of
the change of Religion in the Palatinate, the Act of Marpurg, and the Edict of
Brandenburg, I have observed. First, they conceal their purpose of altering
Religion, and rooting out of Lutheranisme: not in such manner that the wiser
sort could be kept hood-winkt, but that the multitude might not tumult.
Scondly, by the Art of the Zuinglians, some were suborned who should crave the
exercise of the Reformed Religion, and that with many and sugered words, that
the Prince might not be thought to be of his own accord inclined to odious
novelty, but only graciously indulgent to their consciences, and to love and
cherish the liberty thereof. Facility in a Prince to the prayer of the People
uses to be extolled, when even in those things which were fitter to be
denied, he shows himself exorable. Thirdly, one Church, or so, (and not
above) was craved by them, that this suite might not seem harsh to the
multitude, which in the mean time were still to hold many more, not being over
sollicitous of any. Fourthly, here, notwithstanding, the jealousy of the
Lutherans opposed it self, because they could not but perceive that, with the
Church, the profits and maintenance would be withdrawn together. Nor was the
quick eyed providence of the Statesmen ignorant that this would happen.
Therefore now they begin to devise of a Conference, and of a Pacification.
They assemble in the Court, the matter is debated before the Princes Council:
all notaries and witnesses are denied them. But this course is by no means to
be approved: for if a Conference be once appointed, each part ought to have its
liberty and all advantages allowed entire, because, if men shall be borne down
by the power of the stronger side, the Victors shall ever be esteemed to have
had the worst cause. This was the case of the Arminians in Holland: whereas
they, who had the odds of the Princes favor, if they did indeed believe the
goodness of their cause, ought to have entered the lists upon equal terms,
and weapons. Fifthly, an Edict was published, that none should cast aspersions
upon, or contentiously brawle with one another, nor condemn one another of
error; but, by all means cherish peace and concord. This Edict of the Princes
proved an effectual Engine to further the intended mutation. For by this
means it was brought to pass, that no man durst to contradict the Calvinists,
Zuinglians, Sacramentarians; no, nor so much as to name them. And now had error
made a large step, when it so wrought, that none might dare to discover, and
lay it open to view. Notwithstanding, all this, even then did not any man make
any stir, because many of them, who are otherwise more temperate, would
easily hold quarrelling and contumelious Sermons in detestation. And for this
reason the Prince was not traduced as a Patron of Heresies, but applauded as a
lover of peace, especially for that he still permitted the bare and naked
Position of the one, and the opposite Tenent of the other, to be freely taught
by each party. Sixthly, a Disputation in the University was appointed, a
Calvinist constituted Moderator, who was afterward ordained Ordinary
Professor. Seventhly, in all these proceedings there was no open appearance of
carrying in them any design, of making Zuinglianisme Heir to Lutheranisme;
but only this, that peace might be settled: for at that time nothing was
desired, but that the Lutherans, reteining all their dignities and revenewes,
would vouchsafe to sit in Consistory with the Reformed, and consult together
with them, as Brethren, of Church affairs: which when they refused, they were
accused as proud, contumacious, and disobedient to authority, and seemed to
deserve a dismission from all, because they despised their colleagues and peace.

All these things were hitherto thus carried, that trial might be made what the
people would bear. For if any tumult should have been raised, if the Gardians
of John Casimire, set about him for this very end that he might not alter
Religion, should stir themselves, there was a fair excuse of all these doings
at hand. Eighthly, when the people of Heidelberg petitioned for the continuance
of the Lutheran Preachers, the matter was passed over in silence without
answer: and in the mean space, care taken that those particular men which the
people petitioned for, should be traduced as too furious and heady. The people
therefore easily let that suite fall, only requesting that, if those they
supplicated for, gave distaste, yet at least they might obtain others more
temperate and apt unto peace. For they supposed the denial to spring only
from some offense taken at the men, not out of hatred of Lutheranisme. Wherefore
they still fed themselves with hope: and whiles hope of obteining liberty by
prayers remained, they abstained from arms, till at length they laid aside all
care of Lutheranisme, and hope together. Ninthly, when all things now seemed
ripe and safe, the Lutherans were commanded to depart from their Parochial
charge; and all the Churches bestowed on the Calvinists. Nor durst they
complain; for, they that did, were banished. But now turning themselves to
domesticke cares, they only sued for a posthumian and honorary pension,
immunity from Taxes and the like: the Calvinists in the mean time excessively
laughing in their sleeves, to see a matter of so great bulk and height brought
so humble, as to put up such mean and abject Petitions. Tenthly, whereas the
Auditors (or younger Scholars) of the University were Lutheran, upon them they
also practiced with diverse Arts. To Stipendaries such as wete maintained at the
Electors charge, Calvinisme was offered or a dismission presented. For the
Catechism of Luter, the Zuinglian was obtruded upon all: so as even in a
moment an exceeding great alteration happened, as it were without any motion:
for the Preachers of the Country changed their opinions with the Prince, in a
trice. Eleventhly, in the Hussian change, I observed this also, that when the
Lutherans, as well Professors in the University, as Country Preachers, refused
to yield up their Offices and Dignities, the Prince told them he wondered at
them, seeing he had never taken them into his protection, nor given them any
new possession of their places: for there, the Prince dying, all places and
Offices become void, and the power of bestowing them anew, is in the surviver,
Twelfely, in Hassia they went on very slowly, and by little and little. Nor was
all Calvinisme offered them at once; but only a small pittance thereof: as
namely, the reviving of the precepts of the Decalogue, and the breaking of the
bread at the Communion. Therefore, although at the beginning those of Marpurg
zealously flockt to the Lutheran Preachers (who, as they had heard, were to
leave them) that they might receive the Supper: nevertheless afterward they
stirred nothing, but by degrees fell off to Calvinisme. And the people much
more willingly come on, if at the same time they be whistled another way: as,
to Arminianisme, This short touch is enough to discover who set the Arminians
on work, who foment the quarrel, and whether they tend: not that they hope
thereby to fetch over the Ministers, but only to breed a distraction among the
people, who will hereby be more easily molded to their designs upon them.
or some other Sect that may seem more odious. Thirteenthly, both sides fell
to writing: but that party which was most favored at Court, quickly prevailed.
Also the wickedness of the Lutherans in their conversation being upon all
occasions made known did much advance the cause of their Adversaries.
Wherefore they exautorated some of them with great disgrace, even under the
Gallows it self.

The 4. Rule. Strip the Followers of Heretics, of all their dignities.
The fourth means, which I have seen put in execution heretofore, and still
kept on foot, is this: namely, that such as are adverse to the true Religion,
be put by their honors, dignities, and public Offices. Nor is this unequal,
that he who gives impediment to the welfare of the Commonwealth should not be
allowed the honors and commodities of it. Men guilty of great crimes are thrust
from their dignities: why then should blasphemers and contemners of Truth be
admitted thereto?

Such a Law, made Theodosius; and before him, the 3. Sons of Constantine.
They stripped Heretics of all privileges granted to Professors of the true
Religion. De Haeret. l. Privilegia. Frederick condemned, not only Heretics
themselves, but all their receivers and abettors: and unles within the space of
a year, they tendered satisfaction, he commanded them to be convicted as
infamous. He further enjoynes that they neither be admitted to any public
Offices or consultations, nor allowed any voice in the election of others. He
also ads other penalties, as heretofore has bin observed in the Law it self.
The benefits of this device are many and great. For if adversaries to Religion
be suffered in places of honor, they will have many pretenses always ready to
thwart the Prince: they will, without his privity, vex the subjects. For no man
that is a Patron of another Religion, is so faithful to his Prince, as he is
to others that concur with himself in Religion. Besides, the Subjects come on
to the truth more slowly, when they shall behold their disloialty honored in
their companies in error. Thirdly, only the true and Catholic faith gets
ground by persecution, because that alone can erect an expectation of future
felicity: but superstitions, unless in their first eruptions, do diminish and
vanish by withdrawing the profits of those that embrace them, of how great
import this course is, some German Princes, in the last Diet at Ratisbone well
apprehended. For they moved that Caesar might choose an equal number of
Counselors, in this Court, of either Religion: when as yet themselves,
notwithstanding, employ no Catholics, in theirs; no, nor do such as are
Lutherans admit of Calvinists, nor these, of those.

The 5. Rule.
A Fifth means. When the whole body of an Heresy is to be plucked up by the
roots, and that not by mere power, but by moderation and Art; first of all,
let those particular Tenants which hear ill of the Vulgar, and in their very
first aspect carry absurdity in them, even to the rude and ignorant, be pulled
out; and load laid on them. Cull out the most odious Tenants, and aggravate
them daily in the ears of the people.
The Calvinists may serve for instance, who to the end they might more easily
grind to powder the credit of the Lutheran faction, often made honorable
mention of Luther himself: and those particulars which they grappled with,
they christened by another name, terming them Flaccians; From Flaccius
^lliricus a Lutheran; but in somethings grossly erring and extremely dissenting
from the rest of Luthers disciples, if their accusations be just.
Vltrajectenses.
a Sect which even by the Lutherans themselves were accounted the most doltish
and frantique men that drew breath. So Pareus, who in his heart wishes all
Lutherans had but one neck, professes notwithstanding, that he medles with
none but those violent enemies of truth, the Vbiquitaries. When those of
Vtrecht practiced, in Synods, to grub up rigid Calvinisme, they carefully
prohibited that which was the chief point in it: viz. That all should beware
not to teach those things whereby God may be thought the author of sin. Wherefore
an Orthodox Magistrate, if he would reduce the ancient Religion of a long time
given up for dead, to the intent that the naughtiness even of their opinions,
in whom there may seem to be some more modesty, may be laid open to the
bottom, let him especially take order that they may be daily rackt, and
carped. For some of them do with good words cunningly raise and overshadow
many things, which, if we consider in the very substance of the matter, admit
no pardon. These are to be drawn out to their full length, aggravated to the
utmost, that so, by just hatred, they may be discarded. By this sluice all the
credit of false Teachers, thus taken in the very Act of a manifest fault, will
soon empty it self. For the very bare discovery of such superstitions is
confutation enough.

The 6. Rule.
The Sixth means of reducing piety, and of abolishing error is, to make profit
of the quarrels of erring men.

Let the Prince take part with that side which is most likely to further this
purpose.
For what Prince might not reduce the Puritanes of England into order if he
would (by force sufficient) extort from the^ an approbation of the Bishops? And
who could not work as great a Cure upon the Puritans in the Netherlands, if he
would declare himself for the milder party, Arminians, those mild Cattle to
the Roman Wolves.
in the controversies yet flaming amongst them? For the variableness of the
Princes belief, makes those that erewhile took themselves to be cocksure of
the right, now to grow doubtful which way to take. So that when the consent of
the Prince goes over to the other sides of them that contend, he overturnes the
other part with case, and puts the whole into his power to do with them as he
list. Of this the Apostles example is instead of all, who in that Council
which he found to be made up of different Sects, adhering to the opinion of
the stronger faction, was by it held worthy of the white stone of absolution.
And he so brought it about, that they hindered by his setting on foot their
own particular dissents, could not join to make head against the truth. This
course I would, above all other commend to an Orthodox Prince: for by this
means he shall be able to make as much advantage of the brawles of those that
do err, as he may expect from the agreement of such as hold the truth, for
the supplantting of error. It is in this, as in managing of Battles, wherein
not only the skill, and stoutnesse of the General in Marshall affairs, but
even the oversights and errors of the enemy do put many fair occasions of
victory into his hands: provided that he have his eyes awake, and do attend
the very moments of opportunity, and be able to apply not only convenient, but
seasonable physic to every disease. Good Diet, and gentle Pyhsicke cures
many. When Rigid Calvinisme was heretofore set upon by the Lutherans, in the
very heat of the fit, the evil was but exasperated and rendered more fierce, so
that the violent forcing of it in that paroxisme, brought much cause of
repentance to the Assailants. Now, the Arminians have of their own accord
abated of that first rigor, and disbanded the most rigid part of that leaven:
Jesuits and Arminians hold good intelligence.
they condemn the Calvinists as impious, and in the very University it self,
raise persecution against them. In some towns they compel them to accept of
banishment, being ready to attempt more, and more outragions prankes, were they
not held in awe by the strenth of the other side. Verily, if the generous
prowess of Maurice alone, Maurice of Nassaw was alone when the Jesuits Book
first saw the light.
would but join it selfeto the mollified faction, the rigidnesse of the
Contraremonstrants would soon wax more gentle, or be broken to pieces.

The 7. Rule. Suffer no meetings either private or public upon any occasion.
The seventh means is, that all secret conventicles and public meetings also
be strictly forbidden. So Arcadius denied the Temple of Gayna unto the Arrian
false hood. Leo and Anthemius the Emperors, forbade the Pagan assemblings for
performance of their impious rites. C. t. 11. Let none presume to adventure to
those things so often interdicted to men of the Pagan superstition: Knowing
that who ever shall dare so to do, commits a public offense: that is, if I
understand him, treason against the weale-publique. And so far is it our
pleasure that such impieties should be clean taken away, that albeit the
wickedness be committed in another man's possessions or private house, the
owners being privy to it, yet let those possessions or houses be by the most
sacred Laws of the public Treasury, proscribed. The Masters or Owners,
because they wittingly consented to the defiling of their rooms with such
outrageous wickedness, for this alone let them, if they be dignified with any
title, or office in the wars, punished with loss of their place in the
wars, and of their dignity; with proscription also of their estates: if they
be private men, and of mean condition, after tortures inflicted on their
bodies, let them be assigned to the Mines; or to perpetual banishment. And
before him, Valentinian and Marcianus; Let no man dare, again to open those
Idol-houses now of along time shut up with any intent to worship or adore them:
far be it from this age that the honor anciently yielded to abominable and
execrable Images should be revived; that any impious strangers should be decked
with the Garlands of those Temples, or think it equal that even common fires,
which might profane those altars, should be kept off from thence. For incense
to be burnt in those places, sacrifices to be slain, wine offered up in goblets
there, with any opinion of Religion or devotion, let it be accounted sacrilege.

The 8. Rule. Such as are obstinate, to be compelled by force.
The eighth means is, by the severity of Laws and punishments, to compel the
obstinate to duty. The punishment of violators of Religion is diverse in diverse
places; yet in every place some is inflicted. And that deservedly and justly:
because what is committed against divine Religion redounds to the wronging of
al: that which is hurtful to all, hurts with peril to the Commonwealth it
self, and therefore ought by the Commonwealth to be repelled. But when those
things are dangerously taught among them whose consciences will not permit them
to be quiet, I choose rather to cite and propound that great Doctor of the
Church touching this whole matter, then to utter mine own opinion. August.
Bonifacio Comiti de moderate coercendis haereticis.
First, he shows that by this course many have been reformed. Epist. 50. For
this, says he, has happened to the Donatists that of old did unto Daniels
accusers; for as upon those, the Lions by which they sought to oppress the
innocent; so upon these, the Laws were turned loose: unless that, through
mercy of Christ, those laws which seem to be so severe against them, do, in
truth, rather make for their good; because by those laws many have been, and
daily are made better. Afterward, being freed from that furious phrensy, they
be thankful for the chastisment. Whom before they hated, now they love;
acknowledging that those laws, how sharp soever, were to them most wholesome:
and by how much in their former madness, they did detest them, so much the
more thankful they become upon their recovery. Now they are provoked against
the rest; and with the same love together with us, are instant that we should
in like manner proceed jointly, to save others from destruction, with whom
themselves were like to have perished. Both the Physician to his frantic
Patient, the Father to his untamed child seem grievous; the one in that he
binds him; the other, in that he beats him, although both do all out of love.
And if they should neglect them, and so suffer them to perish, that were rather
a false and cruel pity, then gentleness truly so called. For if an Horse and
a Mule that have no understanding, with their biting and kicking lay about them
to beat off men, by whom, for their cure, their wounds are more roughly hanled:
yet these men, albeit they be often put into danger by their teeth and heels,
and sometime wounded, give not over those bruit beasts, till by medicinal
tortures and pains they have made them whole: how much more ought not, a man
of a man, a brother of a brother, to prevent his eternal destruction, be given
over, till the corrected party be taught to aprehend how great a benefit was
done him, even then when he most cried out of persecution!

But here, let that law ever take place; that he compel out of love, not, out
of sury: let him chastise that he may reform; not take revenge that he may
destroy.

He further goes on: Why therefore should not the Church compellher lost sons,
seeing they have compelled others to perish? Although even those whom they have
not forced, but only succeeded, if they be by terrifying, yet wholesome laws
brought back again into her bosom, our pious Mother imbraceth with more
tender affection, and rejoices over them more then over these which she never
lost. Pertaines it not to pastoral diligence, to call back, even with the
terrors of stripes and tortures, those sheep, who being not violently snatched
from the fold, but by smooth intisements seduced, have strayed from the flock,
and began to be under the possession of strangers; if, being favored they will
needs resist him that seeks to bring them again to the Fold of Christ?

Thus, Augustine, who notwithstanding, was sometimes of opinion that the
Pastors ought not to petition the Emperors, by compulsory commands to choose
the Heresy of the Donatist to cease to be. But afterward he changed his mind:
for to perverse, frozen, and obdurate minds he came to think medicinal
sharpness to be needful. Hence therefore, says he, it is brought to pass,
that a religious and pious Emperor whensuch causes are brought to his
knowledge, should chose rather by his most godly laws altogether to redress
the error of that impiety, and by terrifying and compulsion to subdue to the
unity of the Church those who against Christ bore the Ensign of Christ; then
only to take away all liberty of outrageous breakings out, yet still leaving
them loose to error and ruin. Even at this time, when the laws come into
Africa, they especially who desired an occasion; or were before, put into fear
of the cruelty of those furious Heretics, or ashamed to offend their own
disciples, presently came over to the Church. Many also, who only by custom
drawn down from their fathes, had been held in error, never tell now took it
into their thoughts, nor would they take pains to enquire or consider how
weak a cause that Heresy had to maintain. But so soon as they began to
look into this, and that they could find nothing in it worth the enduring so
much as now they were like to suffer for it, they became Catholics with out
any difficulty. For now carefullnesse did well become them whom security had
made so careless. Many also who were less able to discern the difference of
Donatisticall errors from Catholic verity, followed the persuasion and
authority of all those precedents thus easily given them: yet so, that when the
true Church received into her bosom with joy great troopos of people, an
obstinate rabble, with an unhappy stoutnesse of mind, still stuck fast in that
plague. And yet even of these, many faining a conversion, communicated: others
lay skulking by small companies in corners. But yet the greater part of these,
who at first were but counterfeits, by little and little growing better
acquainted with the truth, and hearing the word preached, but especially after
conference and disputation by us had with their Bishop at Carthage, truly
reformed. But in those places where the tumultuous rout, Whom the smaller
number, that conceived a better opinion of joining themselves to the true
believers, could not withstand, prevailed; or, were the multitude, being held
under the power of a few of the mightier sort, yielded conformity to the wrong
side, the labor of reducing them proved somewhat the longer.

The same father again, to the letters of Petilian. Petilian said; But if it
had been lawful to compel any man by law, even to those things which are good,
you your selves, miserable men that you are, ought to have been by us
compelled to the purest faith. But, far be it, far be it from our
consciences, that we should force any man to our faith. Austin makes answer. No
man indeed, is to be compelled to the faith against his will: yet obstinacy is
used to be chastised with severity; yea through the mercy of God with the
scourgings of tribulations. What? because good manners are chosen freely, shall
not therefore wicked manners be punished with the severity of Law? Howbeit,
revenging discipline of ill conversation is preposterous, where the precedent
doctrine of good life is not contemned. If therefore any laws be framed against
you, ye are not thereby compelled to weldoing, but only prohibited the doing of
evil. For no man can do well, but he that comes to it with freedom and love,
which is only found there where the will comes off freely, and maks choice of
the action without constraint. And the fear of punishments, although it know
not the comfort of a good conscience; yet at last it restrains evil desire
within the cloister of thoughts. Notwithstanding, who are they that have
ordained laws for repressing your rashness? Be they not they of whom the
Apostle says, they bear not the sword in vain, for they are the Ministers of
God, Revengers to execute wrath upon those that do evil?

What then? should a Prince proceeded against all, by power and law; and,
compel them to the faith? Let him proceed, not against all: but yet, for the
good of all. If they be few, if without tumult it may be effected, let him by
power to take off Heresies, Sorcerers, and Idolators from being at all. But let
the rigor of the laws be slowly drawn out, unless where there is danger of
contagion. Let such as be most dangerous be taken away; the rest, the
authority of the Prince will soon lead home. For, of these, shame hold back
many; fear, many: but vain assurance that no better way can be showed them,
prevails with most to stave them off from the truth. Within a few years an
hundred thousands have been converted to the truth in France: in Germany, more.
Not one of the German Princes that have assayed to draw his Subjects on to
unity with the Catholics, has ever met with any power resisting his decrees
in that behalf made and executed. Only the Netherlanders broke out into
rebellion. But the cause thereof was not Religion alone: nor was that
pretended. Their Privileges and liberty was made the cloak. The Dominion of a
foreign Nation over them, (a thing ever abhorred of ingenious men) and the
exaction of tenths stirred up that people to that sedition. Mark this passage
from the pen of a Jesuit himself.


The received opinion of Politicians otherwise minded, namely, That men are not
to be compelled, yet remains. The ground of their opinion is this; because by
that means men will still continue as impious in heart as before, add
hypocrisy to their former impiety, and spread their wickedness the further
abroad. So may you make them worshippers of the purple robe, indeed: but never
of God. But these men are far from the mark, and give counsel against, not
the safety of Religion alone, but even the peace of the Common wealth. For
first, by a wholesome Law they are overruled that they shall not do evil, not
sacrifice to the Devil, not spoil Churches, not contemn holy things, not
entitle God to their lewd practices, not oppugn the truth. And albeit they
obey against their wills, yet safer is it that men, so compelled, should offend
only in heart: then break out into villainies, in deed as well as in will, by
being permitted to do as they list, without coactive restraint. It would be in
this, as in other cases, wherein the secular laws deterreth many (who in heart
and consent of will are guilty,) from attempting their purposes and enjoying
their lewdness projected.

Nor does a law only take men off from evil; but, brings them, usually, within
the School and Chapel of virtue. For it enjoynes things honest and pious,
and prohibites the contrary. It commands, I say, things pious; and to do them
in a pious manner, not fained manner. If any man shall play the counterfeit,
let him impute that hypocrisy to his own wicked heart; not to the law.
Contumacious offenders are compelled by law to honor the Magistrate; and
rightly is it so ordained. Nor is the law therefore not to command things
honest, because an Hypocrite mar^es them in the doing; but to admonish them to
perform willingly what their duty calls upon them to do. And for the most
part, when they are brought on leasurely by power, they set about good things
in a good manner; and apply their minds to virtue, as well as their bodies,
when they see that they must needs lay their hands to the work. If it so fall
out that the obstinacy of some particulars shall at first, make resistance: yet
even those men, by time will be wrought more pliable. As for those who being of
tender years, are either not at all, or but newly tainted with evil, a good
Law will soon cause that their riper age shall yield a sweet savor of
goodness. Verily, I have known many Children Authors of their Parents
conversion, who also when they are grown up, and changing the cloak for the
gown, have undertaken either a tribe, or a place of judgment, approve
themselves excellent servants to the Commonwealth. This we find many
thousands in Germany, especially in Bavaria, Stiria, Carinthia, the
Netherlands, to make good before our eyes. If therefore compulsory reformation
should do no good upon old standards in error, yet it renders the younger sort
a Catholic Fry.

The 9. Rule. Let the Prelates and Clergy, be eminently austere and blameless
in life.
The Ninth means, and of all the rest most effectual, is, that such as are in
authority do religiously practice and maintain integrity of life, and purity
of manners. I promised something of the manner of all sorts of men, at the
beginning. Now I add this advertisment in particular, that the Reformation of
Religion will prove very difficult, and go on slowly; unless the Prelates and
Doctors shall outshine the whole Commonwealth not only in eminent innocence,
but in reputation also and same of integrity. For, whereas superstition is so
maglignant and slandering-ripe, that it will detract from the virtue and
esteem of the holiest men; with forged crimes traduce the most blameless
Athanasiusses, by the mouth of calumniating wretches; and with purchased
perjuries knights of the Post, draw them before Tribunalls as if other men's
fault were reason sufficient why they should not finally shake hands with their
heresies: who can doubt, but that the wicked prankes of Priests made public,
cannot be tolerated without infinite damage to Religion? The filthy life of
Clerks, of Clerks; I say it again, of Clerks; I mean evil ones, made,
augmented, and still does uphold the heresies that are. I have often entered
disputation with Heretics, or their disciples: and, after that with a very
little labor their Arguments have bin answered and retorted upon themselves,
they betake themselves to accusations of our Clergy, and object such things as
can neither be denied, nor defended. What therefore shall a Commonwealth do
in this case? First, let it labor earnestly that such Bishops and Prelates be
chosen as are chaste, liberal, sober, courageous, faithful dispencers of Gods
law, and such as will do their utmost for reformation of manners. Let the
Princes themselves also bring all the power they can to the work, and so the
cure will not be difficult. Let a Regular who is either a drunkard, or a
whoremonger; let a scandalous Parish Priest, be opposed in his wickedness: let
another capable of the same place and dignity, be set up in his room: he that
is convicted, let him be cashiered, and his Bishopric let another man take. If
the Prelates seek to cloak and dissemble their vices, and not reform the
sins of their Clergy, let the Vicar of Christ grant full power and authority
to Kings and Princes to reform the Clergy it self, as of late he has done,
to a certain renowned Prince to the great benefit of his Country. But because
I have spoken enough of this matter, to wit, the peace of Germany, before: and
that this place requires the same things to be repeated, I choose rather to
transfer hither the things there spoken, then in other words, here, to say over
the same things again.

In the first place, I put down the restitution of Eccleasticall Discipline
where it is decayed, and the keeping it still on foot where it is in vigor, as
the most necessary thing, without which, peace can neither be at all procured,
nor continue long, if it were recovered. The almost only cause of all heresies
and persecutions both ancient and modern, has been, the dissolutnesse of the
Christian Clergy and people. An old soar in the Church, and still so much
breaking out afresh, that in the whole world it could never yet be any where
found to wax so decrepit as to die away, nor will ever be perfectly cured. Our
Lord says St. Cyprian, would that his family should be tried, when he suffered
persecution to break in upon it. (he speaks of that, which was under Decius,
when a peace of 38. years in Africa had gone before.) And because a long peace
had corrupted that discipline which was given us of God, a punishment from
heaven rouzed again that faith which had grown sluggish, and, I had almost
said, which slept the sleep of death. And yet whereas we by our sins deserved
to suffer far greater evils, the most merciful Lord so moderated all, that
all that was done against us seemed but a trial, rather then a persecution.
Now every man turned his studies only to the increasing of his possessions; and
men, forgetting their faith, their former zeal and good works which in the
Apostles times so eminently shined, and what constantly they should have
continued to do, with unsatiable covetousnes gave themselves wholly up to the
enlarging of wordly pelf. In the Priests there was no devout relion; in
inferiors, no sound faith; in men's actions no mercy; in their manners no
discipline. In men might be seen a disguised beard; in women, a painted
beauty: The eyes, adulterated from what Gods hand had made them; the hair,
colored into a lying hue. To deceive the simple* cunning frauds abounded; and
treacherous hearts, to circumvent their brethren. They joining in marriage with
Infidels, and prostituted the members of Christ to Pagans. They took liberty
not only to swear rashly; but, which is yet more, to break out into perjury:
with proud swellings of heart, to contemn those that were set over them; with
venomed mouths, to speak evil of them; and with endless hatreds, to rend
themselves in pieces one from another. Many of the Bishops whom it would have
well became to reclaim others by earnest exhortation, and example, despising
the administration of holy things, took upon them the ordering of secular
affairs: leaving the chair forsakeing the people committed to their charge,
and roameing about in other men's Provinces, they hunted after opportunities of
gainefull merchandise: the hungry brethren of the Church they supplied not, but
got as much silver into their hands as they could; they plucked from others
their fields by deceitful baits, and sought by usury upon usury to augment
their banks. These things uttered that holy Martyr, touching such as had
fallen, even in an age of Martyrs. The causes of our calamities have been yet
more grievous: to wit, a greater decay of discipline, a mightier domineering of
sins, which at length brake out into heresy, and rebellion. Nor is it to be
wondered at: for, without care to keep discipline on foot, not only not the
peace of religion, but even religion it self cannot be held fast. Discipline
is the guardian of hope, the stay of faith, the leader of the way to life, the
nourisher and feeder of towardly disposition, the mistress of virtue; it
causes a man to abide in Christ, to live unto God, and brings to the
possession of all celestial promises and rewards. Cyp. De Discrip. and hab.
virg. Nothing in these days keeps back the most from returning to the ancient
religion more then the wicked examples of such as are already in it. For the
common people esteem of Doctrine by the conversation of such as profess it,
nor can they be brought to believe it possible to learn the doctrine of
liberality, chastity, modesty, from them whom they perceive to be slaves to
their riches, burning in lusts, and even bursting with pride. Do thou wonder
why straying scules be not brought home? Do thou marvel why thou labourest
therein without success? It is thy manner of living that makes them to doubt.
Thy faith (if thou have any) is mewed up in thy breast: but thy sins are laid
open to the view of all, and these prevail more to draw them into hatred of
religion; then thy uncertain faith, to bring them into love with it. Thou
promisest the food of Gods Word to such as are hungry, but reachest it out unto
them with an unclean and festred hand: and so thou causest them to grow
jealous: and enemies, to blaspheme Gods name* Thy sin, certainly, is
exceeding great before the Lord because thou hold men back from the
sacrifice of the Lord: from the sacrifice not of Rams and Bullocks; but, of
prayers, of faith, of piety. They are turned away from that God whose Ministers
they discern to be desiled with so many abominations. By nothing in the world
do Heresies increase more, then by the lewd practices of the Clergy, and the
sins of the Laity, who do so infect their children with their own vices,
that they know not how to turn their hands to any thing that is good. This,
very Heretics themselves may confirm; who, being convinced by Scriptures and
reasons, betake themselves to accusations of the Court of Rome, and of the
whole Ecclesiastical State. To them I shall give answer in another place. In
the mean time, let them know* that themselves are no more to be excused
hereby, then the children of Israel, who withdrawing themselves from the
sacrifice of the Lord by occasion of the wickedness of Hophni and Phinehas,
fell to worshipping of Baalim and Ashtaroth. Now, I apply my admonit on only to
those, who, while they live of the Church, are made fat with the Patrimony of
Christ, and receive large allowances out of the maintenance of our Lord and
General, do yet by their slothfullnesse, ignorance, drunkenness, filthiness,
be tray his Tents to the enemy; never being any whit affected with the ruin of
the souls of them that are ready to perish, but placing all peace of the
Church in the wealth of it, and in the quiet enjoying of Prebends. O Good God!
If it be beter for him that offends but one of these little ones which
believe in thee, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the bottom of the sea: What mountains or stones may be sufficient
to hang about the necks of so many, for the drowning of them, who so often
scandalize not a few little ones alone, but even the whole world; great, and
small: little ones that do believe in thee; great ones that they may cast off,
beleeveing: and unbeleevers, that they might not believe at all. To all
Christians is that spoken; Be ye blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom, shine
ye as lights of the world, holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice
in the day of Christ. Phil. 2. But to the Bishops and Prelates it is said: Be
thou an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in
faith, in purity. 1 Timothy 4. And, in all things show thy self a pattern of good
works, in doctrine, in integrity, in gravity, sound words that cannot be
condemned. Tit. 2. And why so? he adds the reason: That he that is of the
contrary part many be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you. The
Apostles themselves converted the world, not by the Word alone, but chiefly by
their example. And by examples it is that it now falls back again unto
infidelity: for while men put away conscience, they make shipwreck of faith.
Because* in that they live wicked in the sight of the people, they do as much
as in them lies, murder those of whom they are observed to lead such a life.
Every one that lives ill in the presence of them over whom he is set, does what
he can to destroy them.

What then? will you (may some say,) proclaim an everlasting war against all
those parts of the Church where the discipline of it is cast aside? Either
war, or bondage, or utter destruction. If men's manners be reformed, abuses
taken away, scandalls removed, the war will be very short, and a solid peace
shall give us entertainment. But if God shall be further provoked by our
sins, such as err shall be confirmed in their heresy, those that yet are
but wavering and doubtful shall be altogether turned away from the faith, and
God will certainly drive out that licentiousness and lasciviousness (ere he
leave us) as in many places he has already done. If the Bishops and Prelates,
through the wickedness of some, be grown peerless, the jealous God will
lend the stronger Revenger upon them; whereby he may cut off both the wicked
and his wickedness together. So the Turks usurped Asia, Egypt, Greece, while
the inferior Clergy refused to obey the Bishops, and while the Bishops fell off
from the chief Pastor, and their manners exceeded the wickedness of the very
Barbarians themselves. And so we see it for the most part to come to pass,
that when sins have once attained to the height, all things ruin together:
and then are they to be accounted to have come to the height, when they be
committed by a public law, custom, and approbation; or if they come to
break through all power and force of law, and the authority of the Magistrate.
Religion will perish in Europe, unless integrity of conversation become
correspondent to the purity of the Religion. What then may some one that both
fears and needs a reformation, say unto me, do you think needful to be
reformed? Generally, what ever is deformed, and whatsoever may, by any
circumstances, become a cause of deformation, although it be not in its own
nature such.

CHAP. XIX.
Other inferior helps to reduce the true Religion.
THere are very many things which according to the variety of times and places,
wisdom and ingenious love to godliness will suggest, as meet to be applied
to men in danger of perishing, that they may be saved. Without admiration of
the Mathematical Sciences, those of Iapan are caught: for they delight rather
in a prudent unfolding of Morals: many of the Indians, in benificence: The
Americans, in Ceremonies and Music. All means therefore, are to be
attempted for the salvation of men. Since that vigilant Dragon turns every
stone to draw them into destruction. For that Commonwealth is in miserable
condition, which abounds with people; but such as are running the way of
ruin.

The first means. Melodious Music.
In the first place I rang religious and solemn Music; because that does not
only by the sweet modulation and harmony inchant the ear, but much more by
the clear light of the words and sentences tuned to it, instruct the mind, and
affect the will with holiness. The truth, by that sweetness making way for
it, is most easily gotten and kept. This appears by the example of
Arch-Hereticks and teachers of lies. Paulus Samosatenus turned certain
Ecclefiasticall hymns into obscene and enticing times. The Arrians also and
the Pelagians, by this shooing-horne of errors, destroyed the Faith and
Discipline of the Church. And so far the audaciousnesse of some proceeded,
that they brought Soradicall So called either from a Poet who was Author of a
most filthy Poem, in which he reckons up all the kinds of Beastly lust; or
else from the piperly and Pidlerlike setting of them, fitter for a Stage or
Alehouse, then for a Church*
songs into the Church. Nor are our Times made so infamous by the multitude and
puddle of Sects by any other means so much, as by songs that with sweet
modulation insinuate heresies, and sound forth the disgrace of the Truth. Thus
the Hymns of Luther and Beza have slain more souls, then all their writings
and declamations. Why then should not an Orthodox Prince make use of that for
curing, which impostors have found out to be a means of destroying? These
things moved Austine of old. lib. 10. Confess. cap* 33. Oh how much have I wept
in hearing of thine hymns and songs! being vehemently moved by the voices of
thy Church sweetly chaunting, thy words did flow in at my ears, and thy truth
was even melted upon mine heart; and from thence, desires after piety burst out
into a flame, my tears trickled down, and then was it well with me by means
of them. And afterward. I flote up and down between the danger of the
pleasure, and the experiment of the profit of Music. And yet am I rather
inclined, not as one uttering an irrevocable conclusion, to approve the custom
of singing in the Church, that the more feeble soul may rise up to affect
piety by things which recreate and delight the ear.

Aristotle in his Books De Republica, gives many rules about Music; which
yet some have censured as idle, or at least dissentaneous to the gravity of the
matter he had in hand. But certes, Plato, the Father of his Commonwealth, and
in Government a most skillful Artist, concurs with Aristotle. Tully also, lib.
2. de Legib. speaks to the same effect. I assent, says he, to Plato, that
nothing does so much work upon soft and tender minds, as the variety of notes
in singing: of whom it is hard to express how great force they have upon
dispositions differently affected* for it pluckes up the spirit of them that be
ready to sink, and enseebleth them that be jovially disposed: it both
unlooseth and shuts up the minds of men. The keeping to the ancient manner of
singing was of great use to many Cities in Greece. They whose manners were
slipped into effeminate wantonness, became altered answerable to the alteration
of their Music: either as one thinks, they grew depraved by this enchanting
sweetness, and corrupting Engine; or rather, when for other their vices, their
ancient gravity in their Music decayed, there was then way made in their
degenerated ears and minds for this unhappy change to enter: Wherefore that
most prudent and incomparable learned Statesman of Greece dreaded much this
corrupting of Music* for he denies that the laws of Music can receive
alteration, without a change of the very laws of the Commonwealth. Germany
and France have taught us as much. For when they perceived men's minds to
begin to flag and to hang in suspense to whether side they should join
themselves, in stead of the ancient Music which was sweetly grave and a
promoter of virtue, a new kind of Music somewhat more loose and joviall
stepped in, and by the ^ntiseing sweetness of it, put those embroidered heresies
into the hands of uncautious minds to quaffe them off with delight. It is
therefore now the part of a prudent Physician to give such a relish and
pleasing taste to the truth and holiness by sweetness of harmony excelling
that of the other side, lest those notes which are more harsh and unpleasant,
should light upon minds given over to dissolute delicacy, and receive a
refusal. For this cause many learned men have after the example of David,
Asaph, Idithon, adornedmany hymns with Musical measures; and Bishops have
brought into their Churches holy songs to be sung in the mother tongue. The
second help. Let Persons before matriage, be tied to yield an account of their
faith.


This remedy is pleasing, yet not unwholesome. That which follows is more
severe, yet neither injust nor difficult: viz. that before the Bannes of
Matrimony be publicly denounced, both the contracted Spouse and his Bride be
ordered and compelled to yield an account of their faith. This course produces
not a few commodities: for, first, they may by this occasion be instructed and
trained up in the truth. By this means, besides, some care of Religion is
injected into all; and so, while they promise to continue in the Church, and
ever to hold fast the ancient faith, they are by degrees fastened to the truth,
and cannot but love it. Moreover, Heretics are to be hunted and taken with
their own Arts. It being once mine hap to hear certain Lutheraine Youths to
vant of terrible designs upon the Calvinists, whose Prince notwithstanding
having thrust, out Luther commanded Zuinglians to be taken into his room; I
was cast into a wonder that these daring spirits had not yet driven not all
other into that net. And when I had demanded the reason, how they came so to
fall off from Lutheranisme in plain field, the Zuinglian reformation still
gayning ground: they returned answer that now those Youngsters did frolic
themselves in the liberty of youth, not much setting by the threats of a raging
Minister; but there would come a time wherein they should find themselves
under yoke. For when once they begin to aspire the married estate, they must
then give place to the Consistorian violence, and, together with a wife, be
content to accept of a shameless Concubine; to wit, Calvinisme. So hard is the
condition of those that marry and are given in marriage among the Heretics,
that still a new infection and spreading pestilence (in hope to beget a new
brood of the same kind) must be led into the marriage bed. How then can an
Orthodox Prince excuse himself to God, if he do not plot a more effectual
means of saveing souls? and, by a public law, command, that men together
with the sanctity of that Sacrament and individual nuptial knot, join also
the truth of sincere and undefiled religion: especially consi, dering that the
marriage Covenant is contracted without blemish of sin, only among those of
the Orthodox faith.

The third means contains many particulars.
To this of Marriage, other things may be adjoined. Let no Ceremonies, but those
of the Catholic Church, approach the Laver of Regeneration. Let none have the
honor to be Godfathers; unless they, the sincerity of whose faith has given
good proof of it self* Let no man have the honor of Christian burial;
unless, together with them, he has been a partaker of the Sacraments of the
Church.

The fourth means. Get the bestowing of preferments, of which give some to
unworthy men.
If it fall out that wandering souls must be leasurely, and by Art, reclaimed;
and, that the Propagators of perverse opinions cannot be put from the places
they once enjoy; then, let an Orthodox Magistrate bring to pass that the
instituting, presenting, confirming, and examining of such men be committed to
him. For so they may soon chase away every one that is most apt to do
mischief. Some wrangling companions, careless of the controversies on foot,
that study only their own private affairs, or* the Prince, he may (safely,
now and then) set over those Churches: so shall he be able to abate the rage of
heresy, and yet not be troubled to remove the unlearned: for by that means
error will grow into contempt; and for as much as unskilful men are want to
err often, all constancy in errors will be taken away.

The fifth means. Foments the quarrels between them that err.
Likewise let him nourish the differences of the Teachers of errors: and let him
so work that they may often confer, and peale upon one another. For, by this
means, when all shall understand that there is nothing settled and certain
among them, they will easily join hands with the truth. For if any man list
but to read those scolding Books of the Lutherans against the Calvinists; or
of the Calvinists against the others, he will verily persuade himself that
those be not the invectives of one man against another; but rather, the rages
and bellowings of Devils against Devils. From these practices, just occasion of
alteration, as also of enquiring into the original of so great disorders, will
be offered to the Prince: that so, if he find the acculations true, he may
chastise the guilty; if false, the accusers. For the truth of errors will show
it self in the public.

The last means. Let the Prince study popularity.
Many other means there be, which prudent love and ear of a neighbor will
dictate to a Prince of its own accord. All those things which draw love and
honorable esteem to the Prince, are of use to fetch over* the people easily
to embrace his opinion in matter of Religion. And of this sort are, his casing
of their shoulders of taxes and charges, speedy supplies yielded to any part of
his Country spoiled by fire or other decaies: provision of victuals and other
necessaries. For hereby* it will come to pass that what ever they suppose to
be distastefull to the Prince, they also will hold in detestation. These
things, together with the grace of God and fervent pralers, if a Prince shall
put into execution, he may, in a very short space wholly root out heresies,
although at the beginning they should seem to overpower the very Laws and
the Prince himself.

FINIS.

