Imprimatur,

August 20th, 1685. Norfolk and Marshal.

THE ORDER OF THE INSTALLATION OF Henry Duke of Norfolk, HENRY Earl of
PETERBOROW, AND LAVRENCE Earl of ROCHESTER. KNIGHTS and COMPANIONS Of the Most
Noble Order OF THE GARTER.

In the Royal Chapel of St. GEORGE AT WINDSOR, JULY 22. 1685.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

The Order of the Installation of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, and Laurence Earl of Rochester, Knights and Companions of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, at Windsor on Wednesday 22 July, 1685.
CHAP. I. Of the Election and Investiture of the Three New Knights at Whitehall.
UPon the Decease of His late Majesty King Charles the Second of ever Glorious
Memory, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, on the 6th of
February, 1684/5. without Lawful Issue, his Royal Highness James Duke of York,
only Brother to His said late Majesty, and Knight of the said Most Noble
Order, coming thereupon by right of Succession to be King of this Realm and
Sovereign of the said Most Noble Order; by which means His Stall as Duke of
York became vacant. At a Chapter of the said most Noble Order held at
Whitehall, in the Presence of the Sovereign, on the Sixth day of May, 1685. and
the First Year of His Majesty's Reign; the High and Mighty Prince Henry Duke of
Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, was Elected a Knight Companion of the said
Most Noble Order, being first Knighted by His Majesty with the Sword of State,
and then Invested with the two Principal Ensigns of the said Order, scil. the
George and Garter; the usual Admonitions or Significations upon the said
Investiture being pronounced by the Chancellor of the said Order.

First, upon His Majesty's putting on the George Pendant at a Sky-colored
Ribband about his Neck, the Admonition ensuing was read to him.

Wear this Ribband about thy Neck, adorned with the Image of the Blessed Martyr
and Soldier of Christ St. George; by whose imitation provoked, thou may so
over-pass both prosperous and adverse Encounters, that having stoutly
vanquished thy Enemies, both of Body and Soul, thou may not only receive the
praise of this transient Combat, but be Crowned with the Palm of Eternal
Victory. Secondly, upon Buckling on the Garter about the said Dukes Leg by the
Duke of Ormond and Earl of Oxford, Knights and Companions of the said Order,
this following Admonition was read unto him by the foresaid Chancellor.

To the Honor of God Omnipotent, and in memorial of the Blessed Martyr St.
George. tie about thy Leg for thy Renown this Noble Garter: Wear it as the
Symbol of the most Illustrious Order, never to be forgotten or laid aside; that
thereby thou may be admonished to be Courageous, and having undertaken a just
War, into which only thou shall be engaged, thou may stand firm, Valiantly
fight, and Successfully conquer. Shortly after which another Stall being vacant
by the Death of the Illustrious. Prince Charles the Second Prince Elector
Palitine of the Rhyne, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, which
happened at Heidelberg 16 May, 1685. And at a Chapter of the said Order held at
Whitehall the 18th day of June then next following, it being concluded that the
late Duke of Monmouth, one of the Knights of the said Order, who then stood
Attainted of High Treason by Act of Parliament, for Invading this Realm in an
Hostile manner, and raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, should be
discarded of that Most Noble Order, and his Achievements pulled down and kicked
into the Castle Ditch, (which was accordingly performed by the Officers of Arms
the day following) whereby another Stall became also vacant, the Companions
assembled proceeded to the choice of a new Knight for filling up one of the two
vacant Stalls, and the most Noble Lord Henry Earl of Peterborow, First
Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber being Elected, was at the same time
Invested by the Sovereign with the lesser George, and by Prince George of
Denmark with the Garter; the forementioned Significations or Admonitions being
then likewise pronounced and read unto him by the Chancellor of the said Order.

And at another Chapter of the said Noble Order held at Whitehall the 29th day
of the said Month of June, the most Noble Lord Laurence Earl of Rochester Lord
High Treasurer of England was Elected into the other vacant Stall, being first
Knighted by the Sovereign with the Sword of State, and afterward Invested in
like manner with the lesser George by His Majesty, and with the Garter by the
Earl of Bedford, the usual Admonitions being read to him by the foresaid
Chancellor.

CHAP. II. Of the Installation of the said Three Knights at the Castle of
Windsor. And first of their Proceeding to the Chapter House.
THe three Knights Elect together with the Dukes of Ormond and Beaufort, who
were the two Knights Companions of the said Order, Commissioned by His Majesty
to perform the said Installation, being arrived at Windsor on Wednesday the 22.
of July 1685. accompanied with the Duke of Somerset, another Knight Companion
of the said most Noble Order; and being all Six Habited after the usual manner
in their Doublets and Trunk-hose of Cloth of Silver, with white Gloves, Shoes
and Stockings, Garters and Roses, etc. and the two Commissioners, and Duke and
Somerset being in their full Habit, they met about Ten of the clock in the
morning at the Lodgings of the Dean of Windsor, Register of the said most Noble
Order, being a little to the Eastward of the Chapel of St. George: and the
Poor Knights and Prebends belonging to the said College of Windsor, being in
their proper Habits, [ viz. the Poor Knights in Gowns of Blew Cloth, with an
Escocheon of the Arms of St. George, viz. a Red Cross in a White Field on the
Shoulder, and the Prebends in Mantles of Crimson Silk with a little Cross in a
Circle] and having placed themselves in order in the Cloisters, between the
said Deans Lodgings and the Chapel of St. George: And the Provincial Kings,
Heralds, and Pursivants of Arms having Habited themselves in the Deans Hall
with His Majesty's Coats of Arms richly Imbroidered, according to their several
degrees, and placed themselves at the foot of the stairs leading to the Deans
great Chamber; the proceeding to the said Chapel (in order to conduct the said
Duke of Somerset to his Stall, that he might be ready at the Offering, he not
being otherwise concerned in the Ceremony) was as follows.

First the Poor Knights Two and Two, the Junior first.

Next the Prebends Two and Two, the Junior first.

Then the Officers of Arms Two and Two, the Pursivants first. Then the Duke of
Somerset in his full Habit, with his Cap and Feathers on his head.

Thus passing through the Cloisters, and down the North Isle of the said
Chapel, they entered the Quire at the West-door; and the Poor Knights, Prebends
and Officers of Arms, having made their double Reverences, first to the Altar,
and then to the Sovereigns Stall, and passed up toward the steps of the Altar,
the said Duke of Somerset putting off his Cap, came also into the Quire, and
having made the like double obeysances, entered at the lower end of the Stalls
on the Princes side, and so passed up to his own Stall, being the Eleventh on
that side, and there seated himself.

Then the poor Knights, Prebends, and Officers of Arms having again made their
due Reverences, returned toward the Deans Lodgings to Conduct the Knights
Commissioners and Knights Elect to the Chapter House, and placed themselves in
order as before.

In the the mean while the Robes and other things to be used at the
Installation of the said Three Knights, being laid in readiness upon Cushions
of Crimson Velvet toward the lower end of the Table in the Chapter House, by
Sir William Dugdale Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, viz. for each of
them a Surcoat of Crimson Velvet lined with white, with a Crimson Velvet Hood
thereto belonging; a Sword and Belt; a Mantle of Sky colored Velvet lined with
white; a great Collar and George consisting of Twenty six Garters of Gold,
Enamelled, and Interlaced with as many Knots, with the figure of St. George
appendant thereat, enricht with Diamonds; a Velvet Cap, the Band enriched with
Diamonds, and adorned with a great Jewel before, and a large plume of White
Feathers, with one black Tuft in the middle; and lastly a Book of the Statutes
of the said most Noble Order richly bound. The Knights Elect having sent for
their Caps and Feathers, and the Officers of the Order having Robed themselves,
the Proceedings began as follows.

First the poor Knights Two and Two, as before.

Next the Prebends.

Then the Officers of Arms.

Then the Knights Elect Habited only in their Doublets and Trunkhose of Cloth
of Silver, as before is said, single one after another, the Junior first, viz.

The Earl of Rochester, With their Caps and Feathers in their hands. The Earl
of Peterborow, With their Caps and Feathers in their hands. The Duke of
Norfolk. With their Caps and Feathers in their hands.
Then the Officers of the Order, habited in their Mantles of Crimson Satin,
Lined with White, viz. Dr. Haskard, Dean of Windsor, Register of the Order,
wearing the Badge of his Office, viz. a Book embellisht, with a Garter, and two
Pens across.

Sir William Dugdale, Garter King of Arms, bearing the Commission for the
Installation, and wearing the Badge of his Office, hanging in a Gold Chain.

Sir Thomas Duppa, Usher of the said Order, wearing the peculiar Badge of his
Office, hanging likewise in a Gold Chain.

Then the Duke of Ormond, and the Duke of Beaufort, Commissioners for the said
Installation, in their under Suits of Cloth of Silver, and Mantles of Blew
Velvet, with their Caps and Feathers on their Heads.

Being entered the Chapel, the three Knights Elect, turning to the left Hand,
reposed themselves on three Chairs, placed at the Back of the Quire, the Duke
of Norfolk on the left Hand next to the Chapter-House-Door, the Earl of
Peterborow in the middle, and the Earl of Rochester on the right Hand, while
the two Knights Commissioners went into the Chapter House, which is just at the
entering the Chapel on the right Hand; the Officers of the Order going in
before them.

CHAP. III. The Ceremonies in the Chapter House.
THE two Knights Commissioners, and the three Officers of the Order being thus
entered into the Chapter House, Garter, King of Arms, with three Reverences
presented the Sovereign's Commission for the Installing of the said three Elect
Knights, to the Senior Knight Commissioner, who delivering it to the Register,
the Register forthwith read the same, and then returned it to the said Knight
Commissioner, who thereupon delivered it again to the said Register, to be
entered on Record in the Register-book of the said Order.

Then Garter, King of Arms, and the Usher of the Black Rod, being commanded by
the Knights Commissioners, to bring in the Duke of Norfolk, came out of the
Chapter House, and having made their Obeysances to the said Duke (who sat all
this while at the Back of the Quire) conducted him into the said Chapter House,
where the said Duke having made his Reverence, the Senior Knight Commissioner
declared the Sovereign's great Favor toward him, in a full Admittance into
this Honorable Society; which the Duke humbly acknowledging, the said
Commissioners, with Garter's Assistance, invested him with the Surcoat
beforementioned, and girt the Sword about him over his Surcoat, while the
Register pronounced the Admonition following.

Take this Robe of Purple to the Increase of your Honor, and in Token or Sign
of the most Honorable Order you have received; wherewith you being defended,
may be bold, not only strongly to fight, but also to offer your self to shed
your Blood for Christ 's Faith, the Liberties of the Church, and the just and
necessary Defense of them that be oppressed and needy. The said Duke being thus
Invested with the Surcoat, and girt with the Sword, remained in the
Chapter House with the Knights Commissioners, whilst Garter and the Usher
having received the like Command to bring in the next Elect Knight, viz. the
Earl of Peterborow, introduced him into the Chapter House ^n like manner; where
being invested, and all other Ceremonies performed, as they were to the Duke of
Norfolk, they were sent out again for the youngest Knight Elect, scil. the Earl
of Rochester; to whom all things were performed in like manner.

CHAP. IV. The Proceeding into the Quire.
THE three Knights Elect being thus invested with part of the Habit of the said
Noble Order, reposed themselves in the Chapter House, whilst the Knights
Commissioners, and Officers of the Order, etc. proceeded into the Choire from
the said Chapter House, through the North Isle, and in at the West door of the
Choire (under the Organ) in this manner.

First the poor Knights two and two, the Junior first.

Next the Prebends, two and two, the Junior first.

Then the Officers of Arms, two and two, the Pursivants first.

Then the three Officers of the Order beforementioned, the Register in the
Middle.

Then the Knights Commissioners with their Caps and Feathers on their Heads
until they came to the Quire.

Being entered the Choire, the Poor Knights (making their Obeysances in the
middle of the Quire, first toward the Altar, and then to the Sovereign's
Stall) ascended to the Steps before the Altar, and there divided themselves to
the right and left.

Next the Prebends (having made the like Obeysances) took their Seats or
Stalls, only two of them were conducted up by a Virger to the Altar, to receive
the Achievements, etc.

Then the Officers of Arms (having made the like Obeysances) ascended likewise
to the Steps before the Altar, and dividing themselves to the right and left,
stood before the poor Knights.

Then the three Officers of the Order, having made the like Obeysances, came
and stood before their own Seat or Form, on the Right Hand the Quire, a little
before the Sovereign's Stall.

Lastly, the two Knights Commissioners, (after the like Obeysances) came and
stood in the Choire, under their respective Banners or Achievements, which
Achievements, by the Sovereign's particular Warrant had been removed higher
into their proper places the day before, to the end the Achievements of the
New Elect Knights might be set up over the three lowest Stalls.

CHAP. V. The Offering of the Achievements of the defunct Knights.
THE Achievements of the late Sovereign and Prince Elector Palatine being
taken down and made clean, and placed in readiness, directly under their
respective Stalls, Garter came from his Seat, and (having made his usual
Obeysances toward the Altar and Sovereign's Stall, and also to the Knights
Commissioners) conducted them to the place where the Achievements of the late
Sovereign were laid.

Then the Provincial King of Arms, Clarenceux and Norroy, came down from the
Steps of the Altar to the Body of the Choire, and having made their usual
Reverences toward the Altar, and Sovereign's Stall, and also to the Knights
Commissioners, disposed themselves a little before the said Knights
Commissioners on either side.

Which done, the two Knights Commissioners having received from Garter the
Banner of the late Sovereign half rolled up, made their double Obeysances; and
(being preceded by the said Kings of Arms who also made their due Reverences)
passed up toward the Altar, bearing the lower end of the Staff foremost; and
making another double Reverence at the first Haut pas, the two Kings of Arms,
after an humble Obeisance divided themselves, to make way for the Knights
Commissioners, who being come to the upper Haut pas, made a single Reverence to
the Altar, and raising the point of the Banner upwards, presented it with a Bow
to the two Canons or Prebends beforementioned, who deposited it upon Cushions
laid before the Altar.

Which done, the said Kings of Arms having conducted the aforesaid Knights
Commissioners back into the Choire, returned unto their places; whereupon the
two Senior Heralds came down, and making their double Reverences, as also to
the said Knights Commissioners, to whom Garter delivered the Sword of the late
Sovereign, with the Pommel or Hilt upwards, conducted them up to the Altar,
where, after the usual Reverences, it was offered as aforesaid. Then returning
again, Garter delivered them the Helm and Crest, which they offered in like
manner, the two next Heralds conducting them.

In like sort the Achievements, viz. the Banner, Sword, and Helm and Crest of
the late Prince Elector Palatine were offered up by the said Knights
Commissioners, conducted by two Officers of Arms.

Which being performed, the Knights Commissioners making their usual
Obeysances, returned, and stood under their respective Banners, and the
Officers of Arms returned to their stations at the Steps before the Altar.

CHAP. VI. The Installation of the Three Elect Knights; and first the
introducing the Senior Knight Elect to his Stall.
THe Achievements thus offered, the poor Knights came down from the Steps
before the Altar (the Junior first) into the middle of the Choire; where making
their double Reverences, they proceeded out of the Chapel toward the
Chapter House; and next to them, the Officers of Arms in like Order, as also
the three Officers of the Order, and the two Knights Commissioners.

Being come into the North Isle, the Poor Knights divided themselves to the
Right and Left, and the Officers of Arms passing between them, nearer to the
Chapter-House-Door, divided themselves in like manner, while the Officers of
the Order and Knights Commissioners passing through them, entered the
Chapter House, where the three Knights Elect still remained.

Whence after a short stay, the Knights Commissioners bringing the Senior
Knight Elect ( scil. the Duke of Norfolk) they proceeded toward the Quire in
form aforesaid, that is to say, first, the Poor Knights, next, the Officers of
Arms; then the three Officers of the Order ( Garter going in the middle,
betwixt the Register and Usher of the Order) bearing on a Crimson Velvet
Cushon, the Mantle, Hood, great Collar, and Book of Statutes before him. Then
the said Duke, or Senior Knight Elect, in his Surcoat bare-headed, with his Cap
and Feather in his Hand, betwixt the two Knights Commissioners, who wore their
Caps and Feathers till the entrance into the Quire.

Thus entering the Quire, the Poor Knights and Officers of Arms, making their
usual Obeysances, went up to their former Station at the Steps before the
Altar; while the Officers of the Order making the like Reverences, came before
the Stall designed for the Senior Knight Elect, being the Twelfth Stall on the
side called the Prince's Side. And Garter having orderly disposed the Mantle,
Hood, Collar, etc. before the Stall designed for the said Duke, came and stood
in the Quire, with the other two Officers just before the said Stall.

Then the Knights Commissioners making the like Reverences, came into the lower
or middle Row of Stalls, directly under the designed Stall of the said Senior
Knight Elect, whom they introduced between them into the said lower Space or
Row opposite to his Stall, where being placed, the Register of the said Order
standing in the Quire before him, read his Oath to him, Garter holding the
Book, whereon the said Knight Elect laid his hand; the Form of which Oath is
as follows:

You being chosen to be one of the Honorable Company of this most Noble Order
of the Garter, shall promise and swear by the Holy Evangelists, by you here
touched, that wittingly or willingly you shall not break any Statute of the
said Order, or any Articles in them contained; the same being agreeable and not
repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as far forth
as to you belongs and appertains; so God help you and his Holy Word. The
Oath being thus administered, and the said Elect Knight having kissed the Book,
he was led by the Knights Commissioners up to the Stall appointed for him,
through the middle Entrance, and by them placed before it.

CHAP. VII. The Installation of the Duke of Norfolk, being the Senior Knight
Elect.
THe Duke thus standing in his Stall (which, as is said before, was the
Twelfth, of lowest but one on the Princes Side) Garter advanced into the lower
Row or Stalls to the place where the Knight Elect took his Oath, and with an
Obeisance to the Knights Commissioners, presented to them the Mantle wherewith
they invested the said Duke, and put on the Hood upon his Right Shoulder over
the Mantle, bringing the Tippet athwart his Breast, and tucking it under his
Belt or Girdle, in the doing whereof, the Register read unto him the Admonition
following.

Receive this Robe of Heavenly Color, the Livery of this Most Excellent Order,
in augmentation of thy Honor, Ennobled with the Shield and Red Cross of Our
Lord; by whose Power thou may safely pierce Troops of thine Enemies, and be
over them ever Victorious: And being in this Temporal Warfare Glorious, in
Egregious and Heroic Actions, thou may obtain Eternal and Triumphant Joy.
Then the Knights Commissioners put on the great Collar of the Order about his
Shoulders, tying it at each Shoulder over his Mantle and Hood, while the
Register read to him the Admonition ensuing.

Wear this Collar about thy Neck, adorned with the Image of the Blessed Martyr
and Soldier of Christ St. George; by whose imitation provoked, thou may so
over-pass both prosperous and adverse Encounters, that having stoutly
vanquished thy Enemies, both of Body and Soul, thou may not only receive the
praise of this transient Combat, but be Crowned with the Palm of Eternal
Victory. After this the said Knights Commissioners presented the new Invested
Knight with the Book of Statutes; and having put the black Velvet Cap, adorned
with Plumes of white Feathers upon his Head, and placed him in his Stall, the
Knight so Installed rose up, and putting off his Cap and Feathers, made his
double Obeysances, first toward the Altar, and then toward the Sovereign's
Stall, whereupon the Knights Commissioners embracing him as their Fellow and
Companion, he sat down again uncovered in his assigned Stall.

Which done, the Knights Commissioners (making their Obeysances) came down into
the Quire, and stood under their respective Banners.

CHAP. VIII. The Installation of the Earls of Peterborow and Rochester.
THE Earl of Peterborow being next to be Installed, the poor Knights and
Officers of Arms, came down from the Steps before the Altar, and making their
usual Obeysances, proceeded out of the Quire, the Officers of the Order, and
Knights Commissioners following them, and thence to the Chapter House again, as
they did when they went to fetch in the Duke of Norfolk, Chap. 6. whence they
conducted the next Elect Knight, scil. the Earl of Peterborow, in the same
Order as before, into the lower Space before his designed Stall, being the
lowest Stall on the Sovereign's Side; where having taken the Oath before
recited, the Knights Commissioners conducted him up to his proper Stall, and
invested him with the Mantle, Hood, and Great Collar, the Register reading unto
him the several Admonitions before recited; after which they presented him with
the Book of Statutes; and having put on his Velvet Cap with Feathers, placed
him in his Stall, all things being performed in the same manner, as before for
the Duke of Norfolk.

Lastly, The Poor Knights, Officers of Arms, and Officers of the Order,
conducted the Knights Commissioners out of the Quire again to the
Chapter House, in the same manner as before, whence they brought betwixt them
the third, or youngest Knight Elect, scil. the Earl of Rochester, and Installed
him in the lowest Stall on the Prince's Side; performing all things as before
for the first and second Knights.

All the three Knights being thus Installed, the Officers of the Order
conducted the Knights Commissioners to their respective Stalls, and (making
their usual Obeysances) went to their own Seat.

Then the Officers of Arms came down from the Altar into the Choire, to hear
divine Service; the Kings of Arms first, and after them the Poor Knights to
their Seats, the Eldest first.

CHAP. IX. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
THen Divine Service began, and the Communion, or Second Service being
performed, and the Creed Sung, at the Words, Let your light so shine before
men, etc. The Poor Knights making their Obeysances, ascended to their Station
at the Steps before the Altar, the Junior first, and after them the Officers of
Arms in like manner, flanking the said Poor Knights.

Then Garter came from his Form to the middle of the Choire, where making his
usual Obeysances, he summoned down from their Stalls the two Junior new
Installed Knights, viz. the Earls of Rochester and Peterborow, who made their
double Reverences in the Quire, and then placed themselves under their
respective Banners.

Next he summoned down the Senior new Installed Knight, scil. the Duke of
Norfolk, then the Duke of Somerset, then the Junior Knight Commissioner, the
Duke of Beaufort, and after him the Senior Knight Commissioner, the Duke of
Ormond; who severally making their Obeysances, placed themselves in like
manner, under their respective Banners.

The Six Knights standing thus under their several Banners, the two Kings of
Arms, Clarenceux and Norroy came down into the Choire, and having made their
double Reverences, as also their Obeisance to the Eldest Knight Commissioner,
scil. the Duke of Ormond, they conducted him up toward the Altar, and he
having made his usual Reverences, both at the Quire and at the first Step, or
Haut-pas, kneeled down on one Knee at the upper Step (a Velvet Cushion being
laid for that purpose) and offered Gold and Silver, two of the Prepends holding
a large gilt Basin, in which they received it, making their Reverence to the
said Knight Companion.

Having Offered, the said Kings of Arms, making their usual Obeysances,
conducted him to the East end, or Passage into the Companions Stalls, of the
Sovereign's side, where he made his Obeysances, and so passing through the
Stalls, went up to his proper Seat or Stall, being the Fourth Stall on that
side, where he repeated the usual Obeysances and rested himself.

Then the two Senior Heralds conducted up the Junior Knight Commissioner, the
Duke of Beaufort, who Offered in like manner, and returned to his Stall, being
the Sixth Stall on the Prince's side, by the lowest passage or entrance into
the said Stalls.

Then the two next Heralds conducted up the Duke of Somerset, who Offered Gold
and Silver in like manner, and returned to his Stall, being the Eleventh Stall
on the Prince's side, by the East passage or entrance on that side, making the
like Reverences. Then two other Heralds conducted up the Senior Installed
Knight to the Altar, who Offered, and returned to his Stall in like manner.

Lastly, Two other Officers of Arms making their accustomed Reve^ences,
conducted up the two Junior Installed Knights together (being Pairs or Fellows
to each other, which the other Knights were not) who making their usual
Obeysances, Offered Gold and Silver in manner aforesaid, and returned to their
respective Stalls, the Earl of Peterborow to the Thirteenth, or lowest Stall on
the Sovereign's side, and the Earl of Rochester to the Thirteenth, or lowest
Stall on the Prince's side; each being conducted thither by one Officer of Arms.

CHAP. X. The Recess.
THe Offering thus performed, and the Knights remaining in their respective
Stalls, the Officers of the Order at their peculiar Seat or Form, and the
Officers of Arms and Poor Knights at the Steps before the Altar, flanking on
each side: Divine Service proceeded, and ending with particular Prayers for the
Sovereign and Knights Companions, the Benediction was pronounced.

Whereupon a Virger reverently conducted down the two Prebends from the Altar
to their own Seats among their Fellows in the Quire. Which done, Garter coming
from his Form, and making his Reverences in the Choire, summoned down all the
six Knights, viz. the two Junior first, and then the other four, one after
another, who (after their accustomed Reverences) came and stood in the Quire
under their respective Banners. Then the Officers of the Order made their due
Reverences, and stood before their own Seat.

Then the Poor Knights descended from the Steps before the Altar, by two and
two, the Junior first, and (making their joint double Reverences in the middle
of the Quire) proceeded out of the Chapel; then the Prebends descending from
their Seats or Stalls into the middle of the Choire, made the like double
Reverences jointly, and going out two by two, the Junior first, followed the
two Poor Knights; Next to them the Officers of Arms descended from the Steps
before the Altar, and making the like double Reverences jointly in the middle
of the Quire, followed the Prebends by two and two, the Pursivants first, then
the three Officers of the Order (making the like Reverences) followed the
Officers of Arms; the Register in the middle, Garter on the right hand, and the
Usher on the left: Lastly, the Six Knights Companions in order followed the
said Officers after having made their respective Obeysances, viz. the Earls of
Rochester and Peterborow together, being Fellows; Next the Duke of Norfolk,
then the Duke of Somerset, then the Duke of Beaufort, and lastly, the Duke of
Ormond.

Thus passing out of the Quire at the West-Door under the Organ, they went out
of the Chapel at the South-Door, and so proceeded in Order to the Upper Ward
of the Castle, the Soldiers of the Castle being drawn up in a Line as they
passed along.

Being come to the great Iron-gate, at the entrance into the Royal Lodgings;
the Poor Knights and Prebends opened to the right and left, and the Officers of
Arms and Officers of the Order conducted the Knights into the Queen's
Presence Chamber, their Trains being held up all the way by the Quiristers:
Where the new Installed Knights returning their thanks to the Commissioners,
they took leave of one another for the present, and retired to their several
Apartments to disrobe themselves; and about an hour after met again in the
Kings great Guard-Chamber, where a noble Feast of hot and cold Meats, with a
Banquet by way of an Ambigue, being prepared at the joint charges of the new
Installed Knights, by Mr. Lamb His Majesty's Master Cook; they sat down to
Dinner, accompanied with diverse Noblemen and Persons of Quality; other Tables
being also provided for the Noblewomen and their Attendants, and for the
Officers at Arms and others.

CHAP. XI. The Styles of the Three new Installed Knights, as they are Engraven
in French on their Plates, set up at the back of their respective Stalls.
DV tres-haut, puissant, and tres-noble Prince HENRY Duc de Norfolc, and Conte
Marescal d' Angleterre, Conte d' Arundel, Surrey, Norfolc and Norwich, Baron
Mowbray, Howard, Segrave, Bruise (de Gower) Fitz-Alan, Warren, Clun,
Oswaldestre, Maltravers, Greystock, Furnival, Verdon, Lovetot, Strange (de
Blackmere) and Howard (de Castle Rising): Primier Duc, Comte, and Baron d'
Angleterre, Conestable and Governeur du Chasteau and Honeur, and Guardian de la
Forest de Windsor; Lieutenant des Provinces de Norfolc, Surrey and Berkshire,
Citte de Norwich and Province de la ditte Citte, and Chevalier du tres-noble
Order de la Jartiere: Enstalle au Chasteau de Windsor le XXII jour de Juliet
l'an M. D. C. LXXX. V.

In the Banner are eight Quarterings, scil. Howard, Brotherton, Warren,
Moubray, Fitz-Alan, Clun, Maltravers, Talbot; but the Plate has only the first
four.

2. Du Tres-Noble and Puissant Seigneur Henry Comte de Peterborow, Peir d'
Angleterre, Seigneur Mordaunt, Seigneur Baron de Turvey, Primier Gentilhomme de
la Chamber du Roy, Seigneur Lieutenant de la Comte de Northampton, un des
Seigneurs du Conseil d' Estat and Prive du Roy, and Chevalier du Tres-Noble
Order de la Jartiere Enstalle au Chasteau de Windsor, le 22 jour de Juillet,
1685.

The Banner and Plate consist of Twelve Coats, First two single Coats, viz. 1.
Mordaunt, 2. Alnetto, Then 4 Coats Quarterly, viz. 3. Vere de Adington, 4.
Vere. 5. Manduit. 6. Drayton. Then Four other Coats Quarterly, viz. 7 Howard
with a * 8 Brotherton, 9 Warren, 10 Moubray, then Two single Coats again, viz.
11. Latimer, and 12. Fitz-Lewis.


3. Du Tres-Noble and Puissant Seigneur Laurens, Comte de Rochester, Vicomte
Hyde, de Kenelworth, and Baron de Wotton Basset; Grand Tresorier d' Angleterre;
Conseiller d' Estat and Prive, and Chevalier du Tres-Noble Order de la
Jartiere. Installe, au Chasteau de Windsor, le 22 jour de Juillet, l'an
M.DC.LXXX.V.

The Banner and Plate consist of Six Quarterings, viz. 1. Hyde, with a 2
Langford, 3 Ailesbury, 4 Brandeston, 5 Beaufitz, and 6 Denman.


A Scheme of the Stalls at Windsor as they stood before the present
Installation.
1. The Sovereign. 2. The King of Denmark. 3. The Prince of Orange. 4. The
Prince Elector Palatine. 5. The Duke of Ormond. 6. The Earl of Oxford. 7. The
Duke of Monmouth. 8. The Duke of Beaufort. 9. The Earl of Arlington. 10. The
Earl of Mulgrave. 11. The Earl of Danby. 12. The Duke of Richmond. 13. The Duke
of Somerset.
A Scheme of the Stalls at Windsor as they stood before the present
Installation.
1. The King of Sweden. 2. The D. of York. 3. The Prince Elect. of
Brandenburgh. 4. Prince George of Denmark. 5. The Duke of Buckingham. 6. The
Earl of Strafford. 7. The Duke of Albemarle. 8. The Earl of Bedford. 9. The
Duke of Southampton. 10. The Duke of Newcastle. 11. The Duke of Grafton. 12.
The Duke of Hamilton. 13. The Duke of Northumberland.
A Scheme of the Stalls at Windsor as they now stand filled up 22 July, 1685.
1. The Sovereign. 2. The King of Denmark. 3. The Prince Elect. of
Brandenburgh. 4. The Duke of Ormond. 5. The Earl of Oxford. 6. The Duke of
Albemarle. 7. The Earl of Bedford. 8. The Duke of Southampton. 9. The Duke of
Newcastle. 10. The Duke of Grafton. 11. The Duke of Hamilton. 12. The Duke of
Northumberland. 13. The Earl of Peterborow.
A Scheme of the Stalls at Windsor as they now stand filled up 22 July, 1685.
1. The K. of Sweden. 2. The P. of Orange. 3. Prince George of Denmark. 4. The
Duke of Buckingham. 5. The Earl of Strafford. 6. The Duke of Beaufort. 7. The
Earl of Arlington. 8. The Earl of Mulgrave. 9. The Earl of Danby. 10. The Duke
of Richmond. 11. The Duke of Somerset. 12. The Duke of Norfolk. 13. The Earl of
Rochester.
FINIS.

