FOR HIS EXCELLENCY GEN: MONCK.
My Lord,
YOu are too Wise, and Noble, to need either a Direction, or a Spur, where your
Judgment, or Honor lies at Stake: And to tell you, that to make your self the
Happiest Person in Nature, you must Deliver us from being the most Miserable
People, is but to speak your own Thoughts, and Purposes. Yet, such is the
Passion I have for your Personal, and for the public Good, that a Burden
lies upon my Soul, till I have given some Testimony of my Respects, and
Tenderness both for the One, and the Other, how-superfluous-soever, toward a
Judgment, and Inclination, so well Qualified for the Knowledge, and Practice,
of what is Honorable.

My Lord, We are a wretched People, and Providence has put it in your power,
to finish all our Troubles. The Eyes of Men, and Angels are upon You, and the
whole Nation courts You as their Tutelarie Spirit. Never was any Action so
easy, and so Glorious at once, as our Deliverance. It Is wrought without the
hazard, or expense either of Blood, Time, or Treasure. The Hearts, the Hands,
and Fortunes of the People, are all at Your Devotion. Nay, lest You should
submit to be misled by Popular Applause, Ambition, or any other Frailty;
Heaven has annexed Your Interest to Your Duty, (forgive the Language) You must
be Mad too, to be Wicked, and Quit all other Principles of Beneficial Prudence,
with those of commune Honesty, and Conscience. Balance (my Lord) the main
Account. Heaven and Hell, are the Difference. One way, You are sure to be as
Great, and Safe, as Love, and Gratitude can make You; whereas all other
Acquisitions are deceitful. A word now of the means to effect our Quiet; and
that with all due respect to better Reason.

First, In the Case of differing Persuasions, be pleased to form such an
Expedient, that all may quietly enjoy, and exercise their opinions, so far as
they Consist with the word of God, and with the public Peace.

Secondly, Appoint an Act of Oblivion to be drawn ( if you please) as
Comprehensive of all Interests, as care, and skill can make it; and after this,
let a Free Parliament be called (with this previous Engagement imposed upon
them) That they shall first secure these two Particulars, of Conscience, and
Property, according to the true Intention of the Parties therein Concerned, ere
they proceed further; and that they may then apply themselves to other Debates
at Liberty, and settle what Government that shall think fit. This I presume not
to deliver as the Arrogant Imposition of a single Person; but I do offer it
humbly, as the sense of a Numerous, and Sober party. Some Mutinous, and
Peevish Spirits there are, whom nothing can please, but what displeases all the
World beside. It were pity, to alter the whole Frame of the Law, to gratify
the humor of so Inconsiderable a part of the People. Changes are Slow and
Dangerous; God and Truth, are Invariable; We were well, till We shifted, and
never since; having tried all other Postures in vain; were it not better to
attempt That once again, than thus expose our selves to be Restless for ever?

My Lord, the Author of this is very much Your EXCELLENCIE's Servant.

Printed at Oxford for N. O. 1660.


