THE HARMONY OF THE Four Evangelists:

Among themselves, and with the Old Testament.

THE FIRST PART:

From the beginning of the Gospels to the Baptism of our Savior.

With an explanation of the chiefest difficulties both in Language and Sense.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOTE, Staffordiens. A Member of the Reverend Assembly of
Divines. Imprimatur,

John White.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE Most Renowned and Illustrious Knight and Champion of the Gospel HIS
EXCELLENCY ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX, etc.
Lord General of all the Forces raised by the Honorable Houses of Parliament
for the defense of Laws, Liberties, and Religion.
SIR,
THis whole undertaking was vowed to your great name, and this piece of it in
writing presented to your Noble hands, before the Lord, and the State had
placed you in that high Station in which you now stand: And as I cannot but
applaud the happy Prognostic of mine own thoughts, which found out such a
Patron for The Harmony of the Evangelists, as the high Court of heaven, and of
England have since called out to be the Patron of the Gospel it self: So can
I not but bewail the unhappy condition of mine own disabilities; which can
neither present any thing better, then what I now publish, to so great a
person: nor yet could publish any whit sooner, that which I then presented,
though it had been better. Your Excellencies candor will help to excuse both
the one failing and the other, [give me leave to presage it] since I know such
nobleness as yours, accepts according to what a man has, and expects not
according to what he has not. Mine address in this kind unto your Self, I
shall not go about to excuse, but must rather justify, and though it be
exceeding bold, yet to me it seems exceeding reasonable. For to whom should a
Staffordshire student devote his studies, but to the glory of Staffordshire?
and whither should a Treatise upon the Gospels refuge for patronage, but to the
great Patron of the Gospel? I know mine own unsufficiency for such a work, and
am conscious to my self of my many failings in the managing of it, yet could I
not but undertake it, in hope of some profit to the Reader; nor could I but
address it to such a Patron, in hope of some intertainment with your
Excellency.

The Harmony of the Evangelists in our English tongue is rare to find,
especially with that proof of the order of the story, and that illustration of
the Text and Language, that a thing of that nature does require, and that it
has found in other tongues. Mine own heart did tell me, that I of all others
was most unfit and unable for such an undertaking in regard of want of parts,
means, and opportunity; yet could I not desist from such an attempt, but must
needs try what I could do in this kind, partly that I might bring something
toward the building of the Tabernacle, though it were never so small, and
chiefly that I might stir up some pen of a greater ability, to set to a work
of so brave import.

An assay and trial of some of my progress in such an undertaking, I do here
most humbly lay at your Excellencies feet, and that not only as an Oblation
tendered to your nobleness this once, but also as an earnest of a future
tribute of this kind, till the whole work be finished, and the Harmony
completed, if God vouchsafe health, strength, and opportunity, and your
Excellency acceptance, countenance, and encouragement: There is nothing in the
workman, or the workmanship, that can ground any hope for any such thing, from
you, but there is enough in your own known worth, goodness, and noble
disposition, to make me confident, that you will not only not reject the work,
but that you will also accept the workman for the works sake, because the
subject of it is the Evangelists. It is now become your honorable profession
to be the Champion of the Gospel, and the Lord has installed you in an Order,
of which, to a Constantine, a Sweden, and an Essex, I know not what Histories
can add a fourth, that has been the Evangelicall Knight, or the Knight of the
Gospel. How you have honored this your Order, by your great achievements, and
how the great trust reposed in you, has met with as great trustiness, it is
the happiness of the Nation to have tried, and to remember, and it cannot but
be the rejoicing and comfort of your poor suppliant to think of, and to
consider: For to have to deal with so constant worthiness, nobleness, and
candor, with so great piety, zeal, religiousnes, and honor, with so much
accomplishment, excellency, and splendour, cannot but promise a comfortable
access, a cheerful entertainment, and a desired issue. I have no more to say
[for short speech best agrees with your great imployments] but only this, to
beg of your Excellency, that among the serious cares and thoughts of your noble
heart, you would remember our poor wronged Staffordshire for good: and labor
her delivery, not only from her open enemies, but also from her seeming friends
which do worse devour her.

And to the Throne of grace it must be my continual suite and petition, that
the Lord would Crown all your great engagements with happy success, make you
still a blessing, and rejoicing to the English Nation, preserve your Person,
increase your Honor, support your Heart, direct your steps, immortalize your
name here, and lade your Excellency with the most excellent weight of glory
hereafter. So ever prays, and so ever must pray,

Your Excellencies most humble and most devoted servant, and poor Countriman,
JOHN LIGHTFOOT.
From my Study in Little Britain, Sep. 30. 1644.
The Epistle to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THe veil of the Sanctuary was supported by four Pillars, Exodus 36. 31, 32.
and wrought with great variety of works and colors: So is the Story of the
veil of Christ's flesh by the four Evangelists, and the Texture of it of like
variety. For one relates what another has omitted, one more largely, what
another more brief, one more plain, what another less, one before what
another after, one after one manner, and another after another: And so they
bring their several pieces of Imbroidery, differing in colors, but not in
substance, various in workmanship, but not in the groundwork, to constitute
and make up a perfect and sacred Tapestry and Furniture in the House of the
Lord: And carrying several faces in the manner of their writing and composall,
like those living Creatures in Ezekiel and the Revelation, yet they sweetly and
Harmoniously meet together in the one body and compacture of a perfect Story.

To sew these parcels together into one piece, and so to dispose and place them
in their proper order, as the continuance and Chronicall method of the History
does require, is, hic labor hoc opus, a thing of no small pains and
difficulty, and yet a thing that with pains and industry may be brought to
pass: For in many passages and dislocations the Text has showed the proper
place of such dislocated parcels, and the proper way and manner to join them
where they should be joined, so plainly; and in all places it has hinted
this so surely, though sometimes more obscurely, that serious study and mature
deliberation, may certainly fix and settle them. Diverse great and learned Pens
have labored in this work, both Ancient and Modern, both Romish and
Protestant, but hardly any, if any at all, in our own mother Tongue, so fully
and largely as a Work of this nature does require: this has incited me,
though the unfittest of all others, for a task of so much Learning, Judgment,
and Seriousness, to attempt this work; and if possibly my dimnesse might, to
give some light and facility to the History of the Gospel, and if my poorness
could, some contribution toward the building of Sion.

The Method that I prescribed to my self in this undertaking [some glimpse
whereof thou may see in this present Parcell] was, 1. To lay the Text of the
Evangelists in that order, which the nature and progress of the Story does
necessarily require. 2. To give a Reason of this Order, why the Text is so
laid, more largely or more briefly, according as the plainness, or difficulty
of the connection does call for it. 3. To give some account of the difficulties
in the language of the Original, as any came to hand, either being naturally
so in the Greek it self, or being made difficulties when they were not so, by
the curiosity, misconstruction, or self-end-seeking of some Expositors. 4. And
lastly, to clear and open the sense and meaning of the Text all along as it
went, especially where it was of more abstrusenesse and obscurity.

These two last things did I assay and go on withal a great way in the work,
with much largeness and copiousnesse, both concerning the language, and the
manner. For, for the first, I did not only poise the Greek in the balance of
its own Country, and of the Septuagint, but I also examined translations in
diverse languages, produced their sense, and showed cause of adhering to* or
refusing of their sense, as I conceived cause.

And for the second, I alleged the various Expositions and interpretations of
Commentators, both ancient and modern, and others that spoke to such and such
places occasionally, I examined their Expositions, and gave the Reader reason
to refuse or embrace them as cause required. When seeing the Work in this way
likely to rise to va^^nes of bulk it self, and of trouble to the Reader, I
chose to abridg this first part for a trial, and therein having expressed only
those things which were most material for the understanding of the Text where
it is less plain [for where ^t is pla^ne enough, why should I spend time and
labor about it?] And spoken mine own thoughts upon it, and omitted [unlesse
it be for a taste of what I had done] the glosses and thoughts of others: I now
wa^te for the direction and advice of my learned and loving Friends and
Readers, whether to exhibit the other parts that are to follow [by Gods good
blessing and assistance] in that large and voluminous method that at the first
I prescribed to my self, or in that succisenesse that this present parcel
holds out.

I have partly chosen, and have partly been constrained, to tender this work to
public view by pieces, whereof only this, and this but a small one neither
appears at this time. I have chosen so to do, partly that I might give the
world my th^ughts upon the Evangelists as the Lord gives time: for who would
defer to do any thing of such a work, till he have done all, since our
lives are so short and uncertain, and the work so long and difficult? And
partly that I might be in an annual tribute to that great name, and to that
glory of mine own Country, yea, of this our Nation, our Renowned Lord General,
to whom this undertaking was devoted from the very first thought of such an
undertaking: And I have been constrained thus to do, partly because of mine
other occasions, many an lurgent, which deny me opportunity to follow that
business as such a bulk would require: and partly because of the straits of
the times, which have straightened our Presses, that they Print but rarely any
thing volumino^. Every year by Gods permission and good assistance, shall yield
its piece, till all be finished, if the Lord spare life, health and liberty
thereunto.

Diverse things were fitting to have been premised to a work of this nature; but
because, (...) should all be set before this small piece that we now exhib^^^^
(...) ^reface or Prolegomena would be larger then the Book it self: therefore
have I reserved to every piece that shall come forth, its own share and
portion. And the things that I have thought upon, and hewed out unto this
purpose are these.

1. To fix the certain year of our Saviors birth, as a thing very fit to be
looked after, and to show the certaing ounds whereupon to go, that our fixing
upon such a year may be warranted and without wavering: This have I premis^d
to this first part, wherein comes the Story and Treat^ se of our Saviors birth.

2. To give account of all the dislocations of texts and Stories in the Old
Testament, which are exceeding many, to show where is their proper place and
order, and to give the reason of their dislocation: And this being so copious
and frequent in the Old Testament, the like will be thought the less strange
and uncouth in the New.

3. To make a Chor graphicall description of the Land of Canaan, and those
adjoining places that we have occasion to look upon as ^e read the Gospel, a
thing of no small necessity, for the cleerer understanding of the Story.

4. To make a Topographicall description of Jerusalem, and of the Fabric of
the Temple, which will facilitate diverse passages in the Gospel, which are of
no small obscurity.

5. To give some account and Story of the State and Customs of the Jews in
these times when the Gospel began, and was first preached a^ong them, out of
the^r own and other Writers, which things the Evangelists mention not, and yet
which conduce not a little to the understanding o^ the Evangelists.

These as things very necessary for the matter in hand, shall wait severally
upon the several parts that shall follow, as the Lord shall please to
vouchsa^e ability, time, health and safety.

From my Chamber in (...), October. 1. 1644.
PROLEGOM. I.
The age of the world a^^n^ Saviour^ birth fixd: the account proved: the
chiefest difficulties in the Scripture Chronicle resolved.
IN the Stories of times, the times of the stories do challenge special notice
and observation; and of all other, that of our Saviors birth, being the
fullness of time, may best, as best worthy, make such a challenge. A time, to
which all the holy ones that went before it, did bend their eyes and
expectation, and a time from which all the Christians that have lived since,
have dated their Chronicall accounts and computation. And yet how unfixed is
this time and age of the world, in which so great a mys^ery came to pass, and
upon which so general accounting does depend, in the various reckonings of
learned and industrious men? It is not only to be seen in their writings,
wondered at in regard of the great difference at which they count, but the
fixed time is the more to be studied for, upon this very reason, because such
men do so greatly differ among themselves. The only way to settle in such
variety, is to take the plain and clear account and reckoning of the
Scripture, which has taken a peculiar care to give an exact and most certain
Chronicle to this time, and not to rely upon the computation of Olympiade^,
Consuls, or any other humane calculation, which it cannot be doubted, must of
necessity leave the deepest student of them in doubting and uncertainty. Now
the Scripture carrying on a most faithful reckoning of the times, from the
beginning of time to this fullness of it, has laid this great, wondrous, and
happy occurrence of the birth of the Redeemer in the year of the world, three
thousand nine hundred twenty and eight. Which that we may make good, and fixed
among so much variety and difference, may the Reader gently have the patience
to see and to examine the particular sums by which the Scripture accounts
to make up this total, and to study upon those scruples in the several
parcells where they come that make the account intricate and doubtful, and to
judge upon those resolutions and satisfactions that shall be tendered for the
clearing and untying of those scruples.

And, surely, though the business may be something long and difficult, which
we shall propose and lay before him, yet doubt I not, but the profit will
fully countervaile his labor, when he shall not only be resolved of the
certainty of the time, which we now have occasion, and every Christian has
cause to look after, but when he shall also see, and that, I suppose, not
without admiration, the wondrous and mysterious, and yet always instructive
style, and manner of accounting used by the Holy Ghost, in most sacred
Majesticknesse, and challenging all serious study and reverence; And though
also this business may seem to be something too Parergon, and excentrick to
the main work that we have before us, the Harmonizing of the Evangelists, yet
since a prime thing that we are to inquire after in the very entrance of this
story of our Saviors life, is, the fixed and certain time of his birth, the
Reader will be pleased to excuse a fault on the right hand, rather then on the
left, and to dispense with too much desire to give satisfaction, rather then
too little, or with none at all.

Sect. I. From the Creation to the Flood were 1656. years, as appears, Genesis
5. and 6. and 7. by these parcels.
Adam at 130 years old has Seth, ver. 3. Seth at 105 years old has Enosh,
ver. 6. Enosh at 90 years old has Cainan, ver. 9. Cainan at 70 years old
has Mahalaleel, ver. 12. Mahalaleel at 65 years old has Jared, ver. 15.
Jared at 162 years old has Enoch, ver. 18. Enoch at 65 years old has
Methuselah, ver. 21. Methuselah at 187 years old has Lamech, ver. 25. Lamech
at 182 years old has Noah, ver. 28. 29. Noah at 600 years old sees the
Flood, Genesis 7. 11.
Total 1656. which whole year of the world, was taken up with the Flood, viz.
from the 17 day of the second Month, or Marheshvan, Genesis 7. 11, to the 27 day
of the same month come twelve-moneth, Genesis 8* 14.

Sect. II. From the Flood to Terahs death, and the Promise then given to Abram,
were 427 years, as appears Genesis 11. by these particulars.
Sem at 2 years after the Flood begat Arphaxad, ver. 10. Arphaxad at 35 years
old begat Salah, ver. 12. Salah at 30 years old begat Eber, ver. 14. Eber at
34 years old begat Peleg, ver. 16. Peleg at 30 years old begat Reu, ver. 18.
Reu at 32 years old begat Serug, ver. 20. Serug at 30 years old begat Nachor,
ver. 22. Nachor at 29 years old begat Terah, ver. 24. Terah at 130 years old
begat Abram. Abram at 75 years old has the Promise, Genesis 12. 4.
Total 427. Which sum being added to 1656, which was the age of the world at
the Flood, The promise given to Abram Genesis 12. 1. etc. Anno mundi, 2083.
amounts to 2083. and it resulteth, that the promise was given to Abram in
the year of the world two thousand eighty three.

But here is the great question moved, Whether Abram were the eldest son of
Terah, yea or no? If he were, then was he born when Terah was 70 years of
age, Genesis 11. 26. and not as this Table lays it, at his 130. And if he were
not his eldest son, why has Moses named him first of all his sons?

Answer. First, He was not his eldest Son: for, 1. He married his brother
Harans daughter [for so all men hold Sarah to have been] and she was but ten
years younger then himself, Genesis 17. 17. which was impossible, if her Father
were younger then he. 2. He is said to be but 75 years old, when he
departed out of Hanan, Genesis 12. 4. And this was after his Fathers death, Act.
7. ^. Now had he been born at Terahs 70, he had been 135 years old when his
Father dyed: We must therefore compute and reckon backward thus, that since
he was but 75 years old when his Father dyed, it must needs be concluded
that he was born when Terah was 130. as is laid down in the Table.

Answer. Secondly, He is reckoned first of Terahs sons, as Sem is of Noah's,
not because he was the first in time, but the first in dignity. For that Sem
was not the eldest son of Noah, is clear by comparing these places, Genesis 5.
32. Noah was 500 years old when he begat his first son, and Genesis 7. 11.
when Noah was fix hundred years old, was the Flood of waters upon the earth,
and then was one of his sons an hundred years old: But Sem was not so till
two years after, Genesis 11. 10. And yet is he ever named the fi^^t of his
sons, Genesis 5. 32. and 6. 10. and 7. 13. and 9. 18. and 10.

There are some, that not content with this plain, necessary, and undeniable
explication of the difficulty, do hold that Abram took two journeys into
Canaan, one before his Fathers death, and another after: whereas Moses and
Steven well compared together, do plainly show the contrary, and fully, and
sufficiently clear the matter under scruple: That which has made men to fall
into the mistake of his two journies into Canaan has been this, that they have
taken the words of God in Act. 7. 3. Get thee out of thy Country, etc. and his
words in Genesis 12. 1. Get thee out of thy Country, etc. to be of the same
time, and spoken in the same place, whereas there is a vast difference in the
words themselves, and so was there of the time and place where they were
spoken. Steven tells, that while Abraham was in Mesopotamia or Chaldea, as
ver. 4. before he dwelt in Haran, God appeared to him, and said unto him, Get
thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, but not a word of departing from
his Fathers house, for he took his Father and his whole household along with
him, and dwelt with them a good while in Haran, Genesis 11. 31. And Terah dyed in
Haran, ver. 32. Then the Lord said unto Abram, for so should Genesis 12. 1. be
translated, and not, Now the Lord had said: And his saying was this, Get thee
out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house too, for
that also he now left behind him, namely Nahor and all his Fathers Family, but
only Let and Sarah, that were fatherless children: And this difference
considered, as necessarily it must, it does make this difficulty which has
cost so much canvasing so easy, as a thing needs not to be more.

Sect. III. From the promise given to Abram upon his Father Terahs death to the
delivery of the people of Israel out of Egypt, and to the giving of the Law,
were 430 years, Exodus 12. 40. Gal. 3. 17.
This sum being joined to that before of 2083. it makes the world to be in
the two thousand five hundred and thirteenth year of her age, The delivery out
of Egypt, Anno mundi, 2513.
when Israel was delivered and the Law given.

This space of time of 430 years betwixt the promise and the Law, the divine
wisdom and providence cast into two equal portions, of 215 years before the
peoples going down into Egypt, and 215 years of their being there.

The former moiety was taken up in these parcells:

Five and twenty years betwixt the giving of the promise and the birth of
Isaac, compare Genesis 12. 4. with Genesis 21. 5.

Sixty years betwixt the birth of Isaac, and the birth of Jacoh, Genesis 25. 26*

An hundred and thirty years betwixt the birth of Jacob and Isreal's going into
Egypt, Genesis 27. 9.

The latter in these:

Ninety five years from their going into Egypt, to the death of Levi.

Forty years from the death of Levi to the birth of Moses.

Eighty years from the birth of Moses to their delivery.

Sect. IV. From the coming of Israel out of Egypt, to the laying of the
foundation of Solomon's Temple, were 480 years, 1 King. 6. 1. and seven years
was it in building, ver. 38.
So that join these 487 that passed from the coming out of Egypt to the
finishing of the Temple, to the 2513. years, of which age the world was when
they came out of Egypt, and it will appear that Solomon's Temple was finished
exactly in the three thousandth ye^r of the world. Solomon's Temple finished,
Anno mundi, 300^


This sum is made up of these many parcells. Israel in the wilderness 40
years. Joshua ruled 17 years. Othniel judged 40 years, Judge. 3. 11. ^hud
judged 80 years, Judge. 3. 30. Deborah, etc. 40 years, Judge. 5. 31. Gideon, 40
years, Judge. 8. 28. Abimelech, 3 years, Judge. 9. 22. Tolah, 23 years, Judge.
10. 2. Jair, 22 years, Judge. 10. 3. Jephtah, 6 years, Judge. 12. 7. Ibsan, 7
years, Judge. 12. 9. Elon Judged 10 years, Judge. 12. 11. Abdon, 8 years,
Judge. 12. 14* Sampson, 20 years, Jud. 15. 20. and 16. 31. Eli, 40 years, 1 Samuel 4. 18. Samuel and Saul, 40 years, Acts 13. 21. David, 40 years, 1 Kings
2. 11. Solomon, 4 years, 1 Kings 6. 1.
Total 480. Now among all these parcels, there is no number that has not a
text to warrant it, but only the date of the Government of Joshua, which yet
cannot be doubted of to have been seventeen years; seeing that so many years
only are not specified by express Text of all the 480 mentioned, 1 King. 6.
1. And here also may the reader observe that the years that are mentioned in
the book of Judges, for years of Isreal's oppression, as Judge. 3. 8. 14. etc.
are not to be taken for a space of time distinct from the time of the Judges,
but included in the sum of their times.

Now it thus falling out, as it is more then apparent, that Solomon's Temple was
finished and perfected in the year of the world 3000* this belike has helped
to strengthen that Opinion that has been taken up by some, That as the World
was six days in creating, so shall it be six thousand years in continuance,
and then shall come the everlasting Sabbath. And indeed the observation could
not but please those that were pleased with this opinion: for when they found
that the first three thousand years of the World did end, in the perfecting of
the earthly Temple, it would make them to conclude the bolder, that the other
three thousand should conclude in the consummation of the spiritual.

Sect. V. From the finishing of Solomon's Temple, to the falling away of the ten
Tribes, were 30 years.
For Solomon reigned 40 years, The falling away of the ten Tribes, Anno mundi
3030.
1 King. 11. 42. and in the eleventh year of his reign was the Temple
finished, 1 King. 6. 38. And so count from that year to the expiration of his
reign, and the beginning of his son Rehoboam, and it will appear easily, that
the falling away of the ten Tribes was 30 years after the Temple was finished,
and in the year of the world 3030.

Sect. VI. From the falling away of the ten Tribes under Jeroboam, to the
captivity of Judah into Babylon, were 390.
These are thus reckoned in a gross sum by Ezekiel, chap. 4, 5. I have laid
upon thee the years of their iniquity according to the number of days, three
hundred and ninety days. So shall thou bear the iniquity of the house of
Israel, verse. 6. And when thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy right
side, and thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, I
have appointed thee each day for a year.

Now these are not to be taken for two different and distinct sums, as if it
were 390 years from the falling away of the ten Tribes, to the captiving of
the ten Tribes, and 40 years from thence to the captiving of Judah, for it was
but 200 years and a little above an half, between the two first periods, and
above an hundred years between the two last: but the forty years are to be
reputed and counted within the 390, as the last years of them; and marked out
so singularly because of Judahs rebellion in and under so clear and powerful
preaching of Jeremy, who-prophefied so long a time among them.

Now for the casting of these 390 years into parcels as the Books of Kings and
Chronicles have done them, the surest and clearest way, is to make a Chronicall
table of the collateral Kingdoms of Judah and Israel while they last
together, from year to year, as they will offer themselves to parallel one
another. In which course some considerable scruples will arise before the
Student as he goes along, which unless he see and resolve, he will never
be able to make the account right, and which unless he frame to himself such
a Chronicall table as is mentioned, he will never see nor find out. He will
by the very Table, as he goes along see, that sometimes the years are
reckoned complete, as Reboboams seventeen are counted, 1 Kings 15. 1. Sometimes
current, as Ahijams three, 1 Kings 15. 1, 2, 9. and Elahs two, 1 Kings 16. 8.
But this will breed no difficulty, since it is ordinary in Scripture thus
variously to compute, and since the drawing of his Table will every where show
him readily this variety: But these things will he find of more obscurity, and
challenging more serious study and consideration.

First, it is said that Jeroboam reigned two and twenty yeeres' 1. Kings 14.
20. and Nadab his Son two years, chap. 15. 25. yet that Nadab began to
reign in the second year of Asa, which was in the one and twentieth year of
Jeroboam, and so Nadabs two years fall within the sum of his fathers two and
twenty.

Now the reason of this accounting is this: It is said in 2 Chronicles. 13. 20. that
the Lord stroke Jeroboam and he died: that is, with some ill and languishing
disease, that he could not administer nor rule the Kingdom, therefore was he
forced to substitute his Son Nadab in his life time, and in one and the same
year both Father and Son died.

Secondly, it is said that Baasha began to reign in the third year of Asa, 1
King. 13. 28. and reigned four and twenty years, ver. 33. then it follows
that he died in the six and twentyeth year of Asa, as the text reckons the
years current, 1 King. 16. 8. And yet in the fix and thirtieth year of Asa,
Baasha came up and made war against Judah, 2 Chronicles. 16. 1. So that this war
will seem to be made by ^im nine or ten years after he is dead.

But the resolution of this from the original is easy: For that text in the
Chronicles means not that Baasha made war against Judah in the six and
thirtieth year of Asaes reign, but in the six and thirtieth year of Asaes
kingdom: that is, six and thirty years from the division of the Tribes under
Rehoboam: For Re^oboam reigned seventeen years, Abijam his son three years,
and in the sixteenth year of Asa was this war made: thirty six years in all
from the first division. The word (...) therefore should there be rendered the
Kingdom, and not the Reign, and the thing were clear. Now the text dateth this
war, not from the time of Asaes reign, but from the time of the division of
the Tribes: because that though they were divided hitherto in regard of their
Kings, yet not totally in regard of their converse and affection, for some of
the revolted ones affected still the house of David: but Baasha to make the
division sure: builds Ramah, that none might go in or out to Asa King of
Judah, and this was as a second division; and therefore the Text reckons from
the first.

Thirdly, it is said, 1 King. 16. 23. that in the one and thirtieth year of
Asa King of Judah, began Omri to reign over Israel twelve years, six years
reigned be in Tirzah: And yet in verse 29. it is said, that In the eight and
thirtyeth year of Asa, began Ahab the son of Omri to reign.

Now how can there possibly be twelve years reign betwixt Asaes thirty first
and thirty eight?

Answer. Omri began to reign as soon as ever he had slain Zimri, which was in
the twenty seventh of Asa: but he was not sole and entire King till his thirty
first: For Tibni his competitor and corrivall for the Crown, held him in
agitation and wars till Asaes thirty first. And then was he overcome, and
Omri acknowledged absolute King by Tibnies soldiers, and so from thence
forward he reigned sole King in Tirzah.

But yet the doubt remains how Omri beginning his monarchy in the thirty
first of Asa, and ending it in his thirty eight, can be said to have reigned
but six years, whereas it was eight current.

Answer. The six complete years only are reckoned: for the thirty first of Asa
was even ending when Tibni was conquered, and the thirty eight but newly begun
when Omri died: Such another kind of reckoning may be observed in casting up
the age of Abraham and Ismael at their Circumcision, compared with the age of
Abraham at Ismaels death.

Fourthly, the beginning of the reign of Joram the son of Jehoshaphat has
three dates. The first in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat his father,
compare 2 Kings 22. 51. and 2 King. 1. 17. and 2 King. 3. 1.

The second in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab, 2 King. 8* 16. This
was the in the two and twentyeth year of his father Jehoshaphat.

And the third at his father Jehoshaphats death, 2 Chronicles. 21. 1.

Now the resolution of this Ambiguity is thus. The first time he was made
Viceroy, when his father went out of the Land for the recovery of Ramoth
Gilead: and because Ahab the King of Israel, went with him, Ahaziah his Son is
made Viceroy in that Kingdom also.

The second time he was Viceroy again in his Father Jehoshaphats absence upon
his voyage into Moah with Jehoram, 2 Kings 3. and from this time does the Text
date the fixed beginning of his reign, as is plain, ^ Kings 8. 17. 2 Chronicles. 21.
20. For Jehoshaphat after this ^^me was little at home, but abroad, either in
his own Land, pera^bulating it, to reduce the people to true Religion, or in
Moah, to reduce that to subjection, 2 Chronicles. 19. 20.

Fifthly, but a greater doubt meets you by far when you come to cast up the
times of his son Ahaziah. For whereas Joram was thirty and two years old when
he began to reign, and reigned eight years in Jerusalem, 2 King. 6. 17. 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. and so died when he was forty years old; and instantly the
inhabitants of Jerusalem set Ahaziah upon his throne, who was his youngest Son,
yet was this Ahaziah forty two years old when he began to reign, 2 Chronicles.
22. 1. and so will prove to be two years older then his father.

Answer. The book of Chronicles in this place means not that Ahaziah was so
old when he began to reign; for the book of Kings tells plainly that he was
but two and twenty, 2 King. 8. 26. but these two and forty years have relation
to another thing; namly, to the kingdom of the house of Omri, and not to the
age of Ahaziah. For count from the beginning of the reign of Omri, and you find
Ahaziah to enter his reign in the two and fortieth year from thence; as he will
readily see, that shall make such a Chronicall Table as is mentioned.

The Original words therefore, Ben arbaguim ushethajim shana^, are not to be
translated as they be, Ahaziah was two and forty years old, but Ahaziah was
the Son of the two and forty years, as Seder Ol^m has acutely observed long
ago.

Now the reason why his reign is thus dated differently from all others the
Kings of Judah, is, because he in a kind was an impe of the house of Omri: for
Athaliah his mother, was Ahabs daughter, 2 King. 8. 18. And she both perverted
her husband Joram, and brought up this her son Ahaziah in the Idolatry of the
house of Ahab; therefore is not Ahaziah fit to be reckoned by the line of the
Kings of Judah, but by the house of Omri and Ahab: see the Evangelist Matthew
setting a special mark upon the house of Joram, at the notes on Mat. 1. 8.

Sixthly, there is yet one scruple more arising concerning the beginning of the
reign of this Ahaziah. For the same book of Kings says, that he began to
reign in the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab, 2 King. 8. 25. and in the
eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab, 2 Kings 9. 29.

Answer. The resolution of this doubt will be easy to him that has such a
Chronicall Table as we have spoken of before his eyes. For there will he see
that Jehoram reigned one year before his Father Ahabs death: For in the
twentyeth year of Ahab, which was the seventeenth of Jehoshaphat, did Ahaziah
the son of Ahab, begin to reign, 1 King. 22. 51. being made Viceroy, when
his Father went to Ramoth Gilead.

He reigning but that year, Jehoram his son was Viceroy or began to rule in
his stead, the next year, namely in Ahabs one and twentyeth. Ahab in his two
and twentyeth dyed: and so Jehoram became absolute and entire King, and reigned
so eleven years: So that his reign has a double reckoning, he reigned as
Viceroy twelve years, but as entire King but eleven.

7. Amaziah began to reign in the second year of Joash King of Israel, 2
King. 14. 1. this was the eight and thirtyeth year of his Father Joash King of
Judah, three years current before his death: And the reason was, because his
Father had cast himself into so much misery and mischief, through his
Apostasy and murder of Zacharies, 2 King. 12. 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 24. 23, 24, 25.
that he was become unfit and unable to manage the Kingdom.

8. Vzziah or Azariah the son of this Amaziah, being but sixteen years of
age in the seven and twentyeth year of the reign of Jeroboam the second, 2
King. 15. 1, 2. it appears that he was but four years old at his Fathers
death: Therefore was the Throne empty for eleven years, and the rule managed by
some as Protectors in the Kings minority.

9. There is also an interregnum or vacancy of 22 years in the kingdom of
Israel, between Jeroboam the second, and Zachariah: whereof what the reason
should be, is not easy to determine: whether through wars from abroad,
which Jeroboam might have provoked against his house by the conquest of Hamath
and Damascus, 2 King. 14. 28. or through war at home, as appears by the end
of Zachariah, 2 King. 15. 10. or through what else it was, it is uncertain, but
most sure it was that the Throne was so long without a King, since Jeroboam
beginning to reign in the fifteenth year of Amaziah, and reigning forty one
years, 1 King. 14. 23. dyed in the fifteenth of Vzziah; and Zachariah began
not to Reign till the eight and thirtyeth, 2 King. 15. 8.

10. Hoshea is said to slay Pekah in the twentyeth year of Jotham the Son of
Vzziah, 2 King. 15. 30. whereas Jotham reigned but sixteen years in all, 2
King. 15. 33. But the reason of this accounting is because of the wickedness
of Achaz, in whose reign this occurrence was, and the Holy Ghost chooses
rather to reckon by holy Jotham in the dust, then by wicked Ahaz alive: For in
the slaughter of Pekah, the Lord avenged upon Pekah the bloodshed and misery
he had caused in Judah, for he had slain of the men thereof 120000 in one
day, 2 Chronicles. 28. 6. Now Ahaz had caused this wrath upon the people in
withdrawing them from the ways of the Lord, therefore when the Lord avengeth
this injury of his people upon Pekah, the time of it is computed from Jotham
who was holy and upright, and not from Ahaz who had caused the mischief.

11. There is a scruple of no small difficulty about the reckoning of this
twentyeth year of Jotham, if it once be spyed out: And that is this; If Pekah
began to reign in the two and fiftyeth or last year of Vzziah, and reigned
twenty years, as 2 King. 15. 27. and if Jotham began to reign in the second
year of Pekah, 2 King. 15. 33. then certainly the twentyeth year of Pekah,
the year when Hoshea slew him, was but the nineteenth year of Jotham, and not
the twentyeth.

Answer. In this very difficulty, has the Text fixed the time of Vzziahs
becoming leprous, which elsewhere is not determined: and it shows that it
was in the last year of his reign, when he assayed to offer incense in the
Temple, and was struck with the leprosy, a disease with which the Priests who
were to be the Judges of it, could not be touched nor insected, and his son
Jotham was over the house judging the land, 2 King. 15. 5. till the day of his
death. Now that last year of Vzziah is counted for the first of Jotham, in
this reckoning that we have in hand, and although he began to reign as
absolute and sole King in the second year of the Reign of Pekah, yet began
he to reign as Viceroy, in the diseasednesse of his Father, the year before.

12. It is said that Hoshea the son of Elah, began to reign in the twelfth
year of Ahaz, 2 King. 17. 1. whereas he had slain Pekah in the fourth of
Ahaz, or the twentyeth of Jotham: which shows that he obtained not the Crown
immediately upon Pekahs death, but was seven or eight years before he could
settle it quietly upon his head. It is like that Ahaz in this time did disquiet
Israel, when his potent enemy Pekah was dead, in revenge of that slaughter that
he had made in Judah, and that he kept Hoshea out of the Throne, and for this
is called the King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28. 19. as well as for walking in the
ways of those Kings.

13. It is said that Hezekiah began to reign in the third year of Hoshea the
son of Elah, 2 King. 18. 1. Now Hoshea beginning in the twelfth of Ahaz, 2
King. 17. 1. it is apparent that Hezekiah began in the foureteenth, and so
reigned two or three years with his Father Ahaz, who Reigned sixteen years, 2
King. 16. 2.

The reason of this was, because of the wickedness of Ahaz, and because of the
miseries and intanglements that his wickedness had brought him into, as 2 Chronicles. 28. 16, 17, 18. and chap. 29. 7, 8, 9. And this shows the zeal of
Hezekiah, in the work of Reformation, the more, in that he assayed and
perfected it so much in the very time of his wicked Father.

14. But yet there arises another doubt in the computation of the times of
Hezekiah, parallel with the times of Hoshea; For whereas he began to reign
in the third year of Hoshea, as is clear before, then the seventh year of
Hoshea should be counted his fifth year, and yet it is called but his fourth,
2 King. 18. 9.

Answer. The beginning of Hezekiahs reign, is of a double date: He began
indeed to be Viceroy, and to bear the rule in the third of Hoshea, which was
the fourteenth year of his Father Ahaz, but the time of that year was but
short, that he was in the royalty, and he did but little or nothing of note
that year, but the next year, which was the fifteenth of Ahaz, and the fourth
of Hoshea, on the very first day of the year, or the first of Nisan, he
began the Reformation, and stirred bravely in the restoring of Religion, 2 Chronicles. 29. 3. and therefore that is owned as the most remarkable and renowned
beginning of his dominion: And so the seventh of Hoshea, and his fourth year
fall in together. In his sixth year the ten Tribes are captived, 2 King. 18.
10. And so the parallelling of the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel in their
Chronicall Annals is at an end, and now the times of the kingdom of Judah lie
in an easy and continued Chronicle, to the captivity in Babel, without any
great scruple: Only about those turbulent times of Jehoachaz and Jehoiakim,
there is a little difficulty: For there passed some years between the death of
Josiah, and the Reign of Jehoiakim, in troubles and distempers, though the Text
has mentioned the three months only of Jehoachaz: The gross sum of 390.
between the division and the burning of the Temple, keeps all right, and
shows how much space this was, when all the other particulars are taken up,
as the 480 between the delivery out of Egypt, and building of Solomon's Temple
do, by the time of the rule of Joshua, though the Text expressly has not
determined it.

So that now add these 390 years mentioned by Ezekiel, which was the exact
space between the falling away of the ten Tribes, and the destruction of
Jerusalem, to the 3030 years, of which age the world was when the ten Tribes
fell away, and we find that Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar,
Jerusalem destroyed, Anno mundi, 3420.
and the Babylonians, in the year of the world 3420.

Sect. VII. From the burning of the Temple by Nebuzaradan, 2 King. 25. Jer. 52.
to the return from Babel, 2 Chro. 36. 22. Ezra 1. 1. were fifty years.
It has been no small controversy among the learned, that have handled the
current of these times that we are about, where to begin the seventy years of
the captivity in Babel, so renowned in Scripture, Jer. 25. 11, 12. and 29. 10.
2 Chronicles. 36. 21. Zech. 1. 12. For since there were three captivities of
Jerusalem by the Babylonian, namely in the third year of Jehoiakim, 2 Chronicles.
36. 6. Dan. 1. 1. In the year of Jehoiachin, 2 Chronicles. 36. 9, 10. and in the
eleventh of Zedekiah, 2 King. 25. 2, 3. Jer. 52. 4, 5. it may very well be
questioned, where those seventy years of captivity did begin, and where
those 390 years from the falling away of the ten Tribes should terminate.

To omit varieties of opinions and reasons that fix these periods, some here,
some there; these reasons do plainly and sufficiently demonstrate, that the
seventy years of Judahs captivity in Babel, did begin from the third year of
Jehoiakim.

First, Because Daniel that measured out the whole space of that captivity, and
that gives account of the state of the people that time, begins from
thence, Dan. 1.

Secondly, Because it is most proper to begin the seventy years captivity by
Babel from the very first time that any captivity by Babel began.

Thirdly, It is prophesied by Jeremy, chap. 25. 11. that not onl the Jews, but
also all Nations round about them should serve the King of Babel 70 years. So
that those seventy years are to be counted the time and space of the absolute
Monarchy of Babel, and they are to begin from the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar
the first Monarch.

Now the beginning of his Monarchy is easy to settle, viz. in the third of
Jehoiakim, from these Texts: Jer. 32. 1. and 52. 12. It is true indeed that in
Jer. 25. 1. the fourth of Jehoiakim is called his first, and so it might be
very well: for the first of Nebuchadnezzar might take up part of two years of
his Reign, as any one year of the King takes up much time of two Lord Majors,
he entering his year in the Spring, and they in Autumn. Thus do the seventy
years begin from the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar, but the 390 that we have
been so long upon do not there end, but they end at his nineteenth, or at the
eleventh of Zedekiah, when the City and Temple was utterly ruined, and the
captivity entirely consummate, as the chain of the year drawn out to the
length, do really fix it; and as the very intent and style of the Prophet does
the like, who in that sum does comprehend the whole time of the peoples being
in their own Land, after the r^volt under Jeroboam: So that nineteen years
complete out of the seventy, must we take into that sum, and so there are but
fifty years of that captivity to the time of their delivery under Cyrus
remaining; The Jews return to Babel Ezra 1. 1. Anno mundi 3470.
which sum being added to the age of the world, at the burning of the Temple
3420. does make the world to be 3470 years old at the first of Cyrus, when
the captivity did return.

Sect. VIII. From the return of the Jews out of Babel, to the death of Christ
490 years.
This is so plain in Dan. 9. in the seventy weeks, or seventy time seven
years there mentioned, from the Commandment going forth from Cyrus to restore
and build Jerusalem, to the cutting off of the Messiah, that it needs as
little to confirm it, as to tell that seventy times seven is four hundred and
ninety. For if the Angel speak not of a fixed and certain time in this sum,
he names this sum to no purpose in the world, but he does so clearly fix
the time, the two termini of its extent, and some particular linkes of it as it
passed, that nothing can be more clear, evident, and perspicuous. Now add
these 490 years, which reach to the death of Christ, to the age of the world
3470. at the time when they began, and it resulteth, that our Savior dyed in
the year of the world 3960. Out of which subduct the two and thirty years of
our Saviors life, and it appears that he was borne in the year of the
world 3928. that year being then but newly begun, stilo veteri, or according
to the account used from the beginning of the world, from Tisri or September:
Christ born, Anno mundi, 3928.
so that that year was his first year, and 3929. his second year, at the
which the wise men came to visit him; 3930. his third year, and so 3960. half
passed, or at Easter, his two and thirtyeth and an half, at which age he dyed.

And now he that desires to know the year of the world, which is now passing
over us this year 1644. will find it to be 5572. years just now finished
since the Creation; and the year 5573 of the worlds age, now newly begun
this September at the Aequinox.

THE HARMONY OF THE FOUR EVANGELISTS.
SECTION I.
S. LVKE. CHAP. I.
The Preface or Epistle Dedicatory. The occasion and warranty of Lukes writing
the Gospel.
FORASMVCH as many (...) used for a lawful undertaking, and a successeful
progress in it, in Plat. in Phaedro concerning Isocrates, and in Isocr.
himself ad Demonic.
have taken in hand To compile a narration, Sir. Erasm. Bruciol. etc.
to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are (...): It
signifies in Scripture style, not only the certainty of the things done, but
also the certain belief that they were so done. See Romans 4 21. and 14. 5. Col.
22 1 These. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Heb. 6. 11. The Lxx: once use it in a bad sense,
Eccles. 8. 11. for settlement in evil.
most surely believed among us,

2 Even as they (...). Here were traditions of the highest form that ever were
any, Delivered by Christ's own Disciples, and generally believed and
entertained, yea, and committed to writing, and yet made nothing worth in
comparison of Scripture.
delivered them unto us which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and
Ministers of the Word:

3 It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things
Or From above.
from the very first, to write unto thee In Order, either in order to those
that have written before; As they have done, so it seemed good to me to do
also after them, as (...) is used, Act. 3. 24. or in order of story, for the
general, as to lay down Christ's Conception, Circumcision, Baptism, Preaching,
Death, Resurrection, methodically, and as one followed another; but for the
particulars, of Christ's Journies, Miracles, Speeches, etc. we shall find in
the progress of the story, that he does not so precisely observe the very
order. So that the former sense does seem to be the better.
in order most excellent Theophilus.

4 That 1 Luke held it not unlawful, nor unfit for a Layman to read the
Scriptures. 2 He held not ignorance to be the mother of Devotion, nor an
implicit faith sufficient for salvation.
thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have been
instructed.

Reason of the Order.
FOrasmuch as none of the Evangelists have made a Preface to their story, but
only Luke, this of his may serve as a general one for all the rest. And like
the beautiful gate of the Temple, may be as an entrance, or inlet into the
glorious and royal Fabric of the Gospels.

Harmony and Explanation.
Ver. 1. Many have taken in hand. Psalm. 68. 11.

HE condemns not the undertakings of these men, as very many Expositors hold
he does; for first, he says, they had taken in hand a declaration of those
things which were most surely believed. Secondly, He says, they had done it
even as the eyewitnesses and Ministers had delivered it. Thirdly, He makes
his own undertaking of the like nature with theirs, when he says, It seemed
good to me also: But he mentions these their writings as only humane
Authorities [undertaken without the injunction of the Holy Ghost] which his
divine one was to exclude: So the Books of Jasher, of Gad, of Iddo, of the
wars of the Lord, etc. are cited by the Old Testament, neither as altogether
disapprooved, nor yet approoved above humane: In the loss of them there
perished none of the Canonical Scriptures, but only the works of men; no more
did there in the loss of these.

Verse. 2. Eyewitnesses] these were the twelve Apostles. Ministers] these were
the 70 Disciples. From their Sermons and Relations, many undertook to write
Gospels, of a godly intention and holy zeal. Of which the Evangelist here
speaking aims neither at the Gospel of Matthew nor Mark, though they were
written when he thus speaks; for the first was an eyewitness, and one of
the twelve, and the other [it is like] a Minister or one of the 70^ and so
wrote not from the intelligence of others, as those did of whom the Evangelist
speaks, but by their own.

Verse. 3. It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all
things from above:] For so might (...) be best translated; And so it
signifies John 3. 3. 31. and 19. 11. James 1. 17. etc. And thus taken, it
shows Lukes inspiration from heaven, and stands in opposition to the many
Gospels mentioned, ver. 1. which were written from the mouths and dictating of
men, ver. 2. but his intelligence for what he writes was from above.

[Most excellent (...) an Epithe^ for men of rank as Act. 24. 3. and 26. 25.
Theophilus] In most probability, a Nobleman of Antioch, and fellow Citizen
with Luke converted by Paul at his Preaching there, Act. 11. 26. Luke adhered
to his Master, and forsook him not, 2 Timothy 4. 11. but Theophilus staying at
Antioch after Paul's departure, what he wanted in verbal instructions from the
mouth of his Master, when he went away, Luke does in this his Gospel supply by
writing, that so he might know the certainty of these things wherein he had
been (...) See Act. 18. 25. and 21. 2. Romans 2 18. 1 Cor 14. 19. Col. 6. 6.
Catechized.

Theophilus in Greek is the same in signification with Jedidiah in Hebrew, the
name of Solomon, the Lords Beloved, or with glorious title of Abraham, the
Friend of God.

And thus was that Prophecy most sweetly fulfilled, Esai. 60. 14. The sons of
the afflicters shall come bending to thee, etc. when in that Town, which had
been the residence, and bare the name of Antiochus, [the sharpest enemy that
ever Israel groaned under] the professors of the Gospel were first named
Christians, and such an Evangelist has his Original.

SECT. II.
S. JOHN. CHAP. 1.
The fitness and necessity of the second Person in the Trinity, his being
incarnate, and his being the Redeemer, rather then either of the other,
asserted and prooved, by his being the Creator, the given of the promise, and
substance and tenor of the types and Prophecies of the Old Testament.
IN the beginning was the Not pronounced, but substantial, not the voice of an
articulate speech, but the begotten substance of the divine efficacy. Ignat.
Martyr. in epist. ad Magnes. So Clem. Alex. strom. 5.
Word, and the Word was with God, and the (...) The Article joined to (...)
shows that that is the Subject, and (...) that wants it the Predicate.
Word was God. 2 The same was in the beginning with God. 3 All things were made
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made Some end the
sentence here, and some but begin it, and some neither, but bring it a step
further: Some point thus: All things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made. That which was made in him was life. A reading which Chrysostom.
Hom. 5. in Joh. says was used by Heretics, whereby to prove the Holy Ghost to
be a Creature. And this is the very reading of the vulgar Latin. Others have
read it thus: All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made
which was made in him. And then they began a new sentence, He was life, etc A
reading conceived to have been used by the Manichees, whereby to prove duo
principia, a good, and a bad.
. 4 In him was life, and the life was the light of men. 5 And the light shined
in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. 6 There From Mal. 3. 1.
and 4. 5. And thus do the two Testaments join together,
was a man sent from God, whose name was John. 7 The same came for a witness,
to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. 8 He
The Baptist was a light, John 5. 35. but not that light that was to come: as
the light of the three first days of the Creation, without the Sun.
was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that light. 9 That was
the true Light, It may be either read, which coming into the world, lights
every man, or as our English has it; which latter is approved the true. 1. By
the very place where the word coming, or (...) lies, for it follows not
immediately the word (...), but (...), and so being joined with it, reason and
the custom of Grammar tell, that it should be construed with it. 2 It is
ordinary among the Jews to call men by this Per^phrasis (...) such as come into
the world, which Idio^ of the Hebrews the Evangelist follows here. The Syriak
reads as we do.
which lights every man that comes into the world. 10 He was in the world,
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. 11 He came unto As
it were into his own house, or among his own people, as Joh. 16. 32. and 19 27.
Act. 4. 23. and 21. 6.
his own, and his own In ver. 11. it is (...) in v. 12. it is (...), which
though they signify the same thing, yet might some distinction of sense be
observed in the distinction of words: For Christ came among the Jews bodily,
yet they would not so much as receive him bodily, nor acknowledge him for
Messiah at all; but coming among the Gentiles by his word and spirit, they
received him spiritually.
received him not. 12 But as many as In ver. 11. it is (...) in v. 12. it is
(...), which though they signify the same thing, yet might some distinction of
sense be observed in the distinction of words: For Christ came among the Jews
bodily, yet they would not so much as receive him bodily, nor acknowledge him
for Messiah at all; but coming among the Gentiles by his word and spirit, they
received him spiritually.
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. 13 Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. 14 And the word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us, [and we beheld his glory, the glory As: (...) Kimchi in
Miclol: as Numb. 11. 1. The people became as murmurers, Prove. 10. 20. The heart
in the wicked is as little worth: that is very murmurers; very little worth: so
here, The very glory of the only begotten.
as of the only begotten of the Father] full of grace and truth.
Reason of the Order.
THe Preface being made, the story is to begin, and that it does here from
Christ's Divinity, most Divinely. For whereas the other Evangelists begin their
relations no further back, then from the birth or conception of our Savior, or
at the furthest, of his forerunner; John draws the Reader back to behold him in
the Old Testament, in the Creation of the world, and in the promises to the
Fathers. And therefore this portion is first to be begun withal, and of it
self will justify its own order. Especially it being considered, that the
person of Christ is first to be treated of, before his actions, and in his
person, the divine nature, [which John here handleth] before the humane.

Harmony and Explanation.
FRom Genesis 1. 1. the Evangelist shows that the redemption was to be wrought
by him by whom the Creation was, namely, by the Word, or the second Person in
the Trinity, as being fittest for that great work: as whereby confusion, both
in the external works of the Trinity, as also in the term of Sonship might
be avoided: In the external works of the Trinity, when the Creator of man
became his Redeemer, and in the term of Sonship, when the Son of God, and the
Son of Man were but one and the same person.

Ver. 1. [The Word] He is so called in the Old Testament. 2 Samuel 7. 2. For thy
words sake, which in 1 Chr. 17. 19. is expressed, For thy servants sake, the
title of Christ, Psalm 4^. 2.
First, as the Author of the Creation, Psalm. 33. 6. Secondly, as the Author
of the promise, 2 Samuel 7. 2. compared with 1 Chronicles. 17. 19. Thirdly, as the
very Subject of the Covenant and promise it self, Hag. 2. 5. Deuteronomy. 30. 12.
compared with Romans 10. 6, 7. So that these things being laid together and well
considered, they show why John calls the Son of God the Word, rather then by
any other name. First, because he would show that as the world was created by
the Son, so it was most fit it should be redeemed. Secondly, that as in him
the promise was given, so in him was fit should be the performance. Thirdly,
that as he was the Subject of the Covenant in the Old Testament, so also was
he the Substance of it in the New.

From such places as these forenamed, where the Son of God is called the Word
in the Old Testament, it became most familiar and ordinary among the Jews to
use this title personally for him. And this may be a second reason deduced
from that that was named before, why the Evangelist here uses it, namely as a
name most familiarly and commonly known amongst his own people. Examples hereof
might be alleged out of the Chaldee Paraphrasts, even by hundreds: It will
suffice to allege some few, Genesis 28. 20, 21. If the word of the Lord will be
my help, etc. The word of the Lord shall be my God, Exodus 19. 17. Moses
brought forth the people to meet the word of the Lord, Esai. 1. 14. Your
appointed Feasts my word abominateth, and ver. 16. Put away the evil of your
doings from before my word, and Chap. 45. 2. My word shall go before thee,
etc. So Esaias 48. 11. and 49. 5. 15. and 51. 5. Jer. 24. 6. and 27. 5. 18. and
29. 14. 23. Hos. 1. 7. 9. Zach. 2. 5. and in hundreds of other places: And so
likewise in some of the writings of the Talmudists, and Philo Judaeus in lib.
De mundi opificio, explaineth this title.

This term, and in this sense also, was got even among the Heathen; for so
Mercury Trismegistus uses it often in Pimandro: as, The will of God contained
his word. And, God with his word produced another intellect, which is a fiery
God, and a Divine Spirit. And again, The word of God compacted the pure
workmanship of nature. And, The working intellect together with the Word.

So likewise Orpheus, I adjure thee by the Heaven, etc. I adjure thee by the
word of the Father.
as he is alleged by Justin Martyr.

(...),
(...), etc.
But Mahomet, in his Alcaron goes yet further. Eise or Jesus (says he) is
the word of God, and this being the word of God, is reputed among the Saracens
as the proper name of Jesus Christ, so that no other man is called by this
name, but Jesus only, whom in Arabic they call Eise. Sam. Maroch. lib. de
advent. Messiae. cap. 27. Drus. in praeter. in loc.

Prove. 8, 27. 30.
And the word was with God, etc.] The Evangelist goes not about so much,
immediately to show the eternity of the word, or of the second Person in the
Trinity, as he does to declare how requisite it was that that Person should
be incarnate rather then the first or the third, because by him the Creation
was wrought, and answerably by him it was fittest should be the redemption,
etc. Therefore the words in the beginning, have not reference to the words
eternal being, but to his giving of being to the Creature: For as they are
Moses his own phrase, Genesis 1. 1. so are they to be taken in his sense, and
further back then the Creation it is not possible to bring his words, and by
those of his must these be understood. They trace not therefore his Divinity
beyond the Creation, nor yet do they find it to have begun there, but this
they say only, that then the word, was, and by him were all things made. And
this was enough for the answering of Ebion and Cerinthus, which held that
Christ was not before the Virgin Mary: And this being concluded, that the word
was in the beginning, and created all things, his eternal being before the
Creation will readily infer it self.

The Evangelist uses this manner of speech, The word with God.

First, to show the subsistence of the Son of himself, and his co-existence
with the Father; his subsistence, he was, his co-existence, He was with God.
Secondly, the distinction of the persons, He was with God, and the unity of
Essence, he was God. Thirdly, the relation between the Father and the Son; The
Son is said to be with the Father, as children are apud Patrem, but not e
contra. Fourthly, the Phrase, He was with God, is in Antithesis, or opposition
to that that is said afterward, The word dwelt among us; And this does
illustrate the doctrine and benefit of the incarnation the more, when it shall
be observed, that he that in the beginning was the word, and was with God,
and was the Creator, did in the fullness of time, become flesh, and dwell with
men, and became their Redeemer.

[And the word was God] God in the clause next preceding is taken personally
for God the Father, but here essentially for the Godhead.

Moses all along the Story of the Creation called God Elohim, by a word
plural, to denote the distinction of Persons; but at last, in Genesis 2. 4. he
calls him Jehovah Elohim, to signify also the unity of Essence. So David
when he had spoken of the Lord and his word, 2 Samuel 7. 21. amd the Lord, and
his Servant, 1 Chronicles. 17. 19. He presently concludes, that there is but one
God, though those titles might seem to make them more. There is none like thee,
neither is there any God besides thee, ver. 22. So the Evangelist here, when
he has named The Word, and God, and the word being with God, as two persons
distinct one from another, lest this distinction should breed the supposall of
difference, and the mention of more persons, the surmisall of more Gods, he
preventeth betimes, and stops all such misconstructions by saying, The word
was God.

Ver. 2. [The same was in the beginning with God] He had said, the same thing
immediately before, but not in the same respect. For there he spoke of the
words co-existency with the Father, as he explaineth himself after it, The
word was God; but here he speaks of the words co-working with the Father in
the works of the Creation, and accordingly explaineth himself after also, By
him were all things made.

Ver. 3. [By him were all things made] Not as an isntrumental cause only, as
the Arians pleaded, but as the efficient; For so the word By often imports. 1
Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 24. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Prove. 8. 15, 16. Ephesians. 1, 1. Col. 1. 1.
And so may i^ be understood, Col. 1. 16.

[And without him was nothing made that was made.] In this place there has
been great difference of readings, as was observed before, as see Chrysostom. in
loc. Vulg. lat. Alcum. in loc. etc. but Ignatius Martyr, Epist. ad Antioch.
Tatianus in Harmon: Chrysostom in loc. and other of the ancients, and the
Arbick, Syriack, Italian, Spanish, French, Dutch, and all Latin^ translations
that are not wedded to the vulgar, read as we do; and so the very sense of
the place requires to read: And so some of the Romanists themselves read,
forsaking their own vulgar: as the Rhemists in margin: Maldon it. etc. For how
crabbed, harsh and strained a sense the best is, that can be made of their
reading; see in Alcuin: in loc. Victorin: adversus Arium. lib. 3. Aquin. par.
1. quaest. 18. art. 4.

Concerning the repetition of this, it being the same in effect with that
before, All things were made by him; observe, that first, it is to heighten the
expression, or to enforce the sense: for so the Hebrews usually do by an
affirmative and negative in the same sentence, as 2 King. 20. 15. Jer. 38. 25.
Lam. 3. 2. Secondly, that the two distinct clauses may seem to distinguish of
the Creatures, and in the affirmative to understand the visible Creatures,
which Moses had taught evidently were made by the Word; and in the negative,
the invisible, of which there might be the more doubt, whether they were made
by him or no, because Moses has made no such plain expression. Or, thirdly,
that the affirmative may mean the Words creating of all things, and the
negative his disposal and ordering of all things; (...), without him was
nothing that has been; either created, or disposed, as Joh. 5. 17.

Ver. 4. [ In him was Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Ps. 66. 9. Prove. 4. 13. Joh 5. 24 and 6.
35. and 20. 31. Col. 3. 3, 4. 1 John, 5. 12.
life,] This has allusion to Adams naming his wife Eve, or life, upon the
apprehension of the promise given him after his fall, Genesis 3. 15.

And the Evangelist having considered the Word in the former verse, as the
Author of Nature, he comes now to treat of him as the Author of Grace:
there, as the Creator; here, as the Redeemer. For having related there, that by
him all things were made, and amongst all things man received his natural life
and being: he goes on now to show, that by the same Word also, man when he
was fallen and perished, and had incurred the penalty of dying the death, he
re-obtained a new and a better life, namely by faith, and laying hold upon him
in the promise, as Heb. 2. 4.

[ And the life was the light Ephesians. 5. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 John 2 8.
of men] The life of the promise was the light that shone in the world, and to
which all the Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the holy Men of God, that lived
before the fulfilling of it, had an eye and respect as to a light shining in a
dark place, and whereby they guided all their devotione, and whereto they
aimed all their actions: (...)
And this light then shone, and yet shines in all the types, shadows,
figures, and predictions of the Law, and of the Prophets, as we daily read
them, and that darkness See Isa. 25. 7. and 32. 3. and 9. 30. 2 Cor. 3. 13.
Heb. 12. 18.
and mystical cloudinesse which lay over them, did not comprehend it, but that
it gave some shine in that obscurenesse; And yet did they not reach to that
brightness of revealing of Christ, but that it was necessary that the Gospel
should be Preached: the beginning of which is mentioned in the very next
verse, namely the Preaching of John.

Ver. 6. [There was a man sent, etc.] Here may the Reader look back, and see
the method and intention of the Evangelist, and the reason why he calls him
by this name the Word, rather then any other. For first, he was the Word by
whom all things, and among them man, were created. Secondly, The Word, by which
man, being fallen, was recovered and obtained life. Thirdly, The Word of light,
direction, and consolation to the holy Patriarchs. Fourthly, The Word of
promise, in the darkness of the Law and Prophets: And he is now come to be
the Word incarnate, and the publisher of the Gospel, which began from John,
Mark. 1. 1. And thus has the Evangelist made the whole Old Testament, no other
then availed Gospel, speaking of Christ, though somewhat obscurely, from the
beginning to the end. As in the Creation, ver. 3. In the promise, ver. 4. In
the expectation of the Fathers, ibid. Fifthly, In the darkness of the Law and
Prophets, ver. 5. And sixthly, in the necessity of a clearer revelation of him
by his own coming, ibid.

Ver. 7. To bear witness of the light, etc.] The light in this verse, and
those that follow, is taken personally for Christ himself, whereas in ver. 4,
5. it was taken vertually only there, for the light that flowed from Christ,
and therefore it is said that light was in him: here for Christ the light it
self, for so is he called, ver. 9. See Isai. 10. 17. and 42. 6. and 49. 6.
Mic. 7. 6. Number. 24. 17. Psalm. 84. 1. Mal. 4. 2. etc. For first, Christ
reveals the Father and his will, Joh. 1. 18. and 16. 25. and whatsoever
makes manifest is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. Secondly, He is the brightness of the
glory, and express image of the Father, Heb. 1. 3. who is a light without any
darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5. Thirdly, He inlightneth the hearts of his by
Faith, Ephesians. 5. 14. Fourthly, Christ held out in the Gospel, filled the world
full of the light of knowledge, in comparison of what it was under the Law,
Isai. 11. 9. Psalm. 19. 3.

[That all might beleeve] The word All joyneth the Gentiles with the Jews,
which hitherto had been secluded: And in the same sense is Christ's Lightning of
every one that comes into the world, (...) ver. 9. to be understood for his
general and universal inlightning of the world, with the shining of the
Gospel: For there is a comparison made here by the Evangelist, betwixt the
light of the promise under the Law, and the light of the Gospel and Christ in
it.

Ver* 10. [Hee was in the world.] Not vertually and invisibly only, in his
power and providence, but even visibly, sensibly, and apparently, in audible
voice and conspicuous shape, before he came in humane nature, as Genesis 15. and
18. and 32. Exodus 3. Josh. 6. yea, even to the sight and hearing of wicked and
heathen men, (...). 4. and 20. and 21. and 31. Dan. 3. 24, 25. Exodus 14.

Ver. 11. [Hee came among his (...).] This speaks of his incarnation, and of
his own Nation the Jews, amongst whom he came and conversed in humane flesh,
yet they refused him. They were his (...) by choice, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. by purchase,
Exodus 19. 4* 5. by Covenant, Deuteronomy. 26. 18. and by kindred, Heb. 2. 16.

Ver. 12. [ or Privilege, dignity, or license, as (...) i^ used 1 Cor. 8. 9.
and 9. 5, 6. (...) 5. 4. Mat. 7. 29. (...); Arist. E^h. 8.
Power to become the Sons of God] The people of the Church, are called the Sons
of God, Genesis 6. 2. And after the dispersion at Babel [where the Heathen became
the Sons of men, Genesis 11. 5.] this title was appropriated only to the Jews,
Exodus 4. 22. Ho^. 11. 1. But now when the Jews, Christ's own people, should
not receive him when he so came amongst them, this privilege should be
conferred upon what Heathen or Gentiles so ever should receive him, that they
should be henceforward, as the Jews had been hitherto, the Sons of God, or
the Church of Christ.

[That believe on his Name.] That is, In, or On him: For the Name of God in
Scripture, does often stand for God himself, as Psalm. 71. 1. Mic, 6. 9. Act.
3. 16. etc. For God is without any (...) or composition on, but a most pure and
simple essence, and therefore his name and himself are not two several
things, as they be in the creatures, but one and the same, R. Menahem^ on
Exodus 6^.

Ver. 13. [Which are born, Not of God.] Greek: Not of bl^^d^ in the plural
number. That is not of the kindred, descent, or continued Pedigree from the
Patriarchall line, or the blood of Abrah^m, Isaac, Jacob, and successively! For
John the Evangelist speaks much to the same tenor here, that John the Baptist
does, Mat. 3. 9. That Christ would adopt the Heathen for the Sons of God, as
the Jews had been, though they had no relation at all to the Jewish blood or
stock.

[Nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man.] The Evangelist has
traced Moses all along from the beginning of the Chapter, and so he does here.
He used the phrase of the Sons of God, in the Verse preceding, from Genesis 6. 2.
And this Clause that we have in hand, he seems to take from the very next
Ver. after; My Spirit shall no more strive with man, because he also is flesh:
Where, as Moses by flesh, understands the brood of Cain, men that followed
the swinge of lust, sensuality, and their own corruption: and by Man, the
Family of Seth, (...) Adam, that was regulated by Religion and reason, till
that Family grew also fleshly like the other: so does John here the like. For
having in the next foregoing words, excluded one maine thing [that was much
stood upon] from any claim or challenge, toward the adopting of the Sons of
God, or forwarding of the new birth, and that is descent from Abraham, and from
those holy men successively, that had the promise: So does he here as much for
two other, which only can put in for title to the same; and those are,
Apollinaris from this clause, the word became flesh, would wickedly conclude,
that the word assumed not an humane soul, but only humane flesh, and that the
Godhead served that flesh instead of a reasonable soul. Confuted, Luke 5. 52.
Mat. 26. 38.
first, the will of the flesh, or ability of nature; Secondly, the will of man,
or power of morality.

Verse 14. [And the word became Flesh,] Now has the Evangelist brought us to
the great Mystery of the Incarnation, in the description of which may be
observed; First, the two terms, the word, and Flesh, expressing Christ's two
natures; and the word was made, or became, their hypostaticall union. Secondly,
the word flesh is rather used by the Evangelist, then the word man; though
oftentimes they signify but the same thing, as Genesis 6. 12. Psalm. 65. 2. Isa.
40. 5, 6.

First to make the difference and distinction of the two natures in Christ, the
more conspicuous; and that according to the common speech of the Jews, who set
flesh and blood in opposition to God, as Matthew. 16. 17. Gal. 1. 16.

Secondly, to magnify the mercy of God in Christ's incarnation, the more, in
that flesh being in its own nature, so far distant from the nature of God;
yet that he thus brought these two natures together, as of them to make but
one person for the reconcilling of man and himself together.

Thirdly, to confirm the truth of Christ's humanity, against future Heresies,
which have held that he had not a true and real humane body, but only
Fantastical, or of the air.

Fourthly, to explain what he said before, that Peleevers became the Sons of
God; that is, not by any change of their bodily substances, but by
participation of divine grace: for Christ on the contrary, became the Son of
Man, by assuming of flesh, and not by changing into it.

Fifthly, to show the Plaster fitly applied unto the Sore, and the Physic to
the Disease; for whereas in us, that is, in our flesh, there dwells no good,
but sin, death, and corruption; he took upon him this very nature, which we
have so corrupted, sequestring only the corruption from it, that in the nature
he might heal the corruption.

Sixthly, he says, he was made or became flesh, and not he was made man, lest
it should be conceived that Christ assumed a person; for he took not the
person of any man in particular, but the nature of man in general.

[Was made flesh,] Not by alteration, but assumption; not by turning of the
Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the Manhood into God; not by leaving
what he was before, that is, to be God, but by taking on him what he was not
before; that is, to be man.

And the Evangelist says rather, He was made flesh, then he assumed it. i. e.
that he might set out the truth and mystery of the incarnation to the life,
both for the hypostaticall union of the two natures, and their inseparability,
being so united. For, first, whereas Nestorius said, that the word was not that
man that was conceived and born of the Virgin Mary; but that the Virgin indeed
brought forth a man, and he having obtained grace in all kind of virtue, had
the word of God united unto him, which gave him power against unclean Spirits;
And so he made two several Sons, and two several persons of the two natures:
his Heresy is plainly and strongly confuted by this phrase, he was made flesh,
which by the other, he consumed it, might have had more pretext and color.
Secondly, whereas E^tyches, Valenti^us, and other^ averred, that Christ had not
a true humane body, but only a body in appearance: This also confuteth them
home, and takes away all probability of any such thing, which the word assumed
might have left more doubtful; since we know that Angels assumed bodies, and
those bodies were no^ truly humane: So that in this manner of speech, The word
was made flesh, is evidently taught: First, that there are two distinct natures
in Christ, the God head, and the Manhood; for he says not, the Word was
turned into, but was made, or became flesh. Secondly, that these two natures
do not constitute two persons, but only one Christ, for he says, he was
made flesh, and not assumed it. Thirdly, that this union is hypostaticall, or
personal; for he says, the Word was made flesh, and not joined to it. And
lastly, that this union is indissoluble and never to be separated: For Angels
in assumed bodies laid them by again, and were parted from them, but the the
word being made flesh, the union is personal, and not to be dissolved.

[And dwelt (...) us, etc.] That is, among us his Disciples: for so the next
clause, we saw his glory, imports: And this Evangelist speaks the same
thing more at large, 1 John 1. 1.

[Full of grace and truth.] For these words follow next in Grammatical
construction and connection; lying thus. And the Word became flesh, and dwelt
among us, full of grace and truth. The reason of the Parenthesis, and we saw
his glory. may seem to be: First, because he would explain what he meant by
Us, before he left it, viz. us Disciples, that saw his glory, Secondly, because
the Apostles be held not the very fullness of his grace and truth, till they
had beheld the fullness of that glory, which he showed on earth.

[Grace and truth.] As the Soul has two noble faculties, the understanding
and the will, the objects of which are, ver^^^ and (...), [truth and
goodnesse^] so the whole tenor of Scripture does run upon these two, and they
are indeed the sum of all, as Psalm. 25. 10. and 40. 12. and 36. 5. and 138.
2. Hos. 2. 19. etc. Now Christ being the substance of the promises, which had
their original from grace, and their performance in truth; they being in him
yea, and in him Amen; the Evangelist saying, that he dwe: among us, full of
grace and truth; holds out that he was the performance and accomplishment of
all the promises of grace, and the truth of all the types and prophecies before
the Law, and under it, that tended to such a purpose; and in him was the
fullness of that mercy and truth, that the Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy men
looked after, and he the whole tenor, scope, and subject of the Scriptures.

SECT. III.
S. LUKE. CHAP. I.
The Conception and Birth of John the Baptist, and of Christ, foretold by the
Angel Gabriel, etc.
Ver. 5. THere was in the days of Herod written with Cheth in the beginning,
signifies fear or trembling, as the trembling cowardice of Gedeons soldiers,
named the well Harod, Judge. 7. 1. etc. But the Sir and Arab. write this with He.
Herod the King of Judea, a certain Priest named Zacharias, of the course of
Abia, and his wife was of John Baptist of the Priestly line, both by Father and
Mother.
the Daughters of Aaron, and her name was The Seventy call the wife of Aaron,
the first Priest by the same Name, Exodus 6. 23.
Elisabeth. 6 And they were Such couples were Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and
Rebeccah, Elk^nah and Hannah; both righteous, and a long time childlesse.
both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless. 7 And they had no child, because that Throughout the
Scripture, want of Children is ascribed to the woman.
Elisabeth was barren, and they were both now An Hebraisme, as Genesis 18. 11. 1
Kings 1. 1. etc.
well stricken in years. 8 And it came to pass that while He executed the
Priests office The Worship of God in the Temple was said to He before him,
Exodus 23. 17. Lev. 1. 3. 11. And the Arc being the representation of Christ, is
called his face, Psalm 105. 4. yea, even God himself, Psalm 132. 5.
before God in the order of his course, 9 According to the custom of the
Priests office, his lot was to burn Incense, when he went into the Temple of
the Lord. 10 And the whole multitude of the people were praying without, at the
time of Incense. 11 And there appeared unto him an Compare the appearing of the
Angel Gabriel to Daniel, about the time of Incense, Dan. 9. 21.
Angel of the Lord, standing on the right side of the Altar of Incense. 12 And
when Zacharias saw him (...), used by the Lxx. to express Pharaohs trouble
upon his dream, Genesis 41. ^. and his Servants upon theirs, Genesis 40. 6. Compare
Judge. 6. 22. and 13. 22. Dan. 8. 17. Job. 4. 14.
he was troubled As Genesis 15. 12.
and fear fell upon him. 13 But the Angel said unto him, fear not Zacharias,
for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall hear thee a Son, and
thou shall call his nams John, the same with Jochanan, so frequent in the Old
Testament, (...) Chron. 3. 19. and 6 9. and 12. 12. and 26. 3. and 2 Chronicles, 17.
15. and 23. 1. and 28. 12. Jer. 40. 8.
John. 14 And thou shall have As (...) Job 3. 12. The Arab. adds thou shall
have great joy.
joy, and gladness; and As Genesis 21. 6. (...): of the Hebr. (...): used by the
Lxx. for it, Lev. 10. 9. Numb 6. 3. Esa. 5. 11. and 28 7. etc. which sometimes
signifies Wine; as Number 28. 7. but most commonly any thing that will cause
drunkenness. Wine of forty days old, is called Shikar; says, R. Menehem. on
Lev. 10. and so the Chaldee paraphraseth it, Numb. 6. 3. and: 8. 7. Judge. 13.
4. But, any thing that will make one drunk, is called Shekar, whether it be
made of Corn Honey, or Fruits. Ab. Ezr. on Lev 10. P. K^^nch, in Miclol.
Brucioli his Italian, and the French, express it by Cerevisia; Ale, or Beer.
many shall rejoice at his birth. 15 For he shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and shall drink neither wine, nor (l) strong drink; and he shall be
filled with the Holy Ghost, (...); as Moses, Act. 7. 20. Jer. 1. 5.
even from his Mothers womb. 16 And many of the Children of Israel, shall be
turn to the Lord their God. 17 And he shall go before in the spirit and power
of Heb. Elijahu: 1 King. 17. etc. and there turned by the Lxx Eli^n: but in Mal
4. 5. the Hebr. has it Eliah, and the Lxx. Elias.
Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient
(...): In, or by the wisdom.
to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people, prepared for the Lord. 18
And Zacharias said unto the Angel, whereby shall I know this for As Genesis 18. 1.
I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. 19. And the Angel
answering, said unto him, I am Dan. 8. 2. and 9. 21.
Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God: and This ^elateth to his assuming
a visible shape
am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. 20 And So a
sign is given to (...) with a Behold! Isa. 7. 14. compare Ezekiel. 3. 26.
behold thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these
things shall he performed; because thou believe not my words, which shall be
fulfilled (...): Mat. 2. 23. (...), Acts 8* 23.
in their season. 21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that
he tarryed so long in the Temple. 22 And when he came out At the fist burning
of Incense, the Priests miscarried, Lev. 10. and thus that rite which the Jews
value for the highest of all legal offerings, begins with ignorance, and
concludes with unbelief. Prophecy was struck dumb a great while ago, and
now is the Priesthood so, as well as it.
he could not speak unto them; and they perceived that he had seen a vision
in the Temple: for he beckened unto them, and remained speechless. 23 And it
came to pass, that as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished,
he departed to his own house. 24 And after those days, his Wife Elisabeth
conceived, and hid her self Observe the same space Genesis 7. 24. if cast into
months, and Rev. 9. 5.
five months; saying, 25 Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein
he looked So read also the Syrian and Arab. though the words on me, be not
expressed in the original unles included in the preposition, in (...).
on me, to take away my reproach among men. 26 And IN THE SIXTH MONTH, the
Angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto a City of See 1 King. 9. 11. Isa. 9. 1.
and in the Lxx: in Joel 3. 4. Ezekiel 47. 8.
Galilee, named Nazareth, 27 To a Virgin spoused to a Man, whose Name was This
dalleth to remembrance the old renowned Patriarch Joseph. Genesis 37. both of them
were sent into Egypt and both by dreams; and there the one nourished his
Father, and the other his redeemer: There were also of this name Joseph of
Arimath^^, and Joseph surnamed Justus.
Joseph, of the house of David: and the Virgins Name was Gr Marriam; by which
word the Lxx render the name of Moses sister, Exodus 15. etc. The name plainly
and properly signifies both their rebellion, and their bitter affliction; for
the wickedness of Israel in Egypt had brought them into great misery, when
Miriam was so named.
Mary. 28 And the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly
favored; the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. 29 And when saw
him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind, what manner of
Salutation this should be. 30 And the Angel said unto her, Fear not Mary, for
thou have Genesis 6. 9.
found favor with God. 31 And behold He uses the common manner of speech
among the Hebrews, as Genesis 4. 1. etc. to show the true conception, and real
birth of our Savior; Confuting that Heresy, That he came through the Virgins
womb, as through a Conduit Pipe, without partaking of her nature: And that,
That he was not really borne, but fanastically only, and in appearance. These
words refer to Isa. 7. 14.
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his
name Jesus. 32 He shall be great, and Shall be called the Son of the Highest;
that is, shall be his Son, as Isa. 1. 2. and 4. 3. and shall be so confessed.
shall be called the Son of Genesis 14. 19.
the most Highest; and the Jehovah Elohim
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. 33. And he shall
reign over Isa. 2. 5.
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his Kingdom Isa. 9 7. Dan. 7. 14. Mic. 4.
7. Psalm. 145. 14. Heb. 7. 17.
there shall be no end. 34 Then said Mary unto the Angel, How, in Scripture is
sometime a strong asseveration, or negation, Lam. 1. 1. Genesis 39. 9. and 44. 34.
sometime a question of doubting, as Job. 6. 52. and 3. 5. And sometime a
question of ignorance only, without diffidence; or a question desiring
information, or resolution, as Joh. 7. 15. Luke 20. 44. And so is it here; for
the Virgin believes the thing, Verse 45. but desired to be satisfied of the
manner, for she ^^ith not, How can, (...) How shall this be?
How shall this be, seeing 1 A modest phrase for carnal copulation. First
used of Adam, presently after the relation of his eating of the ^ee of
knowledge, Genesis 4. 1. as if it would show, that all the knowledge he gained by
that, was but carnal, he knew his wife, and experimental of misery, they knew
they were naked.
know not a man. 35. And the Angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost
shall come upon thee; and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee.
Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne Borne of thee; so read the
Sir. Arab. Justin Martyr, in Dial. Nazianz. Orat. 59 Aponius in Cantic. Titus
in Loc. etc. but some copies dangerously want it; as the Text of Theophylact,
H. Steven, 1604. of Amsterdam, 1632, Erasmus, etc.
of thee, shall be called the Son of God. 36 And behold, thy The certain bond
of their kindred cannot be determined: but Elisabeth or her mother might be
sister to Mary's father or mother, or Mary's mothers might be so to hers, or to
Zachary or his. However it shows, that Christ and John the Baptist were
nearly allied according to the flesh; yet John knew him not, till he was
revealed to him by the Spirit.
Cosen Elisabeth, she has also conceived a Son in her old age; and this is
the sixth month with her who was called barren. 37 Genesis 18. 11.
For with God nothing is impossible. 38 And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of
the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word; and the Angel departed from her.
39 And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill Country with haste,
into a City of Juda. 40 And entered into the house of Zacharias, The division of
Judea, is famous and frequent, into the mountains, the plain, and the South;
Numb. 13. 30. Jer. 32. 44. etc. The South lay toward Seir, and Amalek, from
the inlets into the Land, at the utmost part or the dead Sea; having the
Philistines upon the west. This part reached to the rising of the mountains,
not far below Hebron: and there the mountains began, and ran along Northward
to, and beyond Jerusalem, having the flat or the plain of Jordan skirting up
all along upon their Eastside, till Samaria and Galilee brought in another
denomination.
and saluted Elisabeth. 41 And it came to pass that when Elisabeth heard the
salutation of Mary, the babe Greek (...): The same to some with (...); which
with Physicians imports the child's stirring in the womb, as every live child
does, more or less: but this is a word of an higher activity and motion. Plato
in Pol. 9. uses it to express the ^^ascivious fancies of men or women in
their dreams; when that part of the soul, says he, which is rational,
gentle, and master of reason, is laid asleep; then the other, which is bestiall
and brutish, being puffed up with meats and drinks (...), leapeth, or frisketh,
and putting away sleep from it, does seek to satisfy its own desires.
leaped in her womb, and Elisabeth was filled with the holy Ghost. 42 And she
spoke out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and The
Messiah shall be blessed with six blessings, viz. with the spirit of wisdom,
understanding, counsel, strength, knowledge, and fear of the Lord; R. Solom
on Ruth 3. 15. and the Chaldee Paraph. there.
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 43 And whence is this to me, that the
mother of (...); this here translates, not (...), but (...), as Psalm. 110. 1.
my Lord should come to me? 44 For lo, so soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in mine ears, the Babe leaped in my womb for joy. 45 And blessed is
Vulg. lat. Blessed art thou that did believe mistaking as lansenius
conceives, the Grammatical spirit in (...), and reading it, (...).
she that believed Or, That there shall be a performance; for so does the
Hebrew (...) also signify, as Job 3. 12. (...) That I might suck; so Psalm.
11. 3. The wicked bend their bow, etc. That the foundations may be destroyed,
which the righteous has made.
for there shall be (...) sometimes is used for setting apart to holy use, as
in the Lxx, Exodus 29. and christian Writers use it sometimes for Baptism and
Martyrdom; because they consecrate men to God. It is used of Christ, Heb. 2.
10.
a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. 46 And
Ludolphius upon this place, observes to little purpose, that the Virgin is
found in Scripture speaking but seven times.
Mary said, My soul does magnify the Lord; 47 And my spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior: 48 For he has regarded the low estate of his hand-maiden: for
behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 49 For he that is
(...), The mighty one. A full and proper sense of the word Elohim; which the
Lxx indeed, and the New Testament after them have constantly expressed by
(...), because of the mystery of the Trinity included in it. Gibbor applied to
God, is (...) in the Lxx; Psalm. 24. 8.
mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his name. 50 And his mercy is
on them that fear him, from generation to generation Psalm. 103. 17.
. 51 He has showed strength with Psalm. 8. 10. 13. and 98. 1. and 136. 12.
Esa. 53. 1.
his arm, he has scattered the proud (...): Job. 5. 13. 1 Cor 3. 10. Genesis
11. 8.
in the imagination of their hearts. 52 He has put down the mighty from their
seats, and exalted them of low degree. 53 He has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away. 54 He (...), used by the Lxx,
Isa 41. 9. from which verse this seems to be taken. (...), is an Arm, Psalm.
83. 9. and a Shield, Psalm. 89. 18.
has helped his servant Israel Greek; To remember. Sir. and Arab. And
remembered his mercy.
in remembrance of his mercy; 55 As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and to
his seed This has so good dependence upon several words, that it is hard to
fix it. First, as he spoke for ever, or in all ages to our Fathers. Secondly,
to the seed of Abraham, which shall last for ever. Thirdly, He has for ever
remembered his mercy. Fourthly, that mercy which is for ever. Fifthly, which is
to be showed to Abraham, and to his Seed for ever, and this last, or the two
last together, are most proper.
for ever. 56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her
own house.
Reason of the Order.
THe Order of this Section requires not much confirmation, for it will plead
for it self.

After the Divine Nature of Christ is handled, as in the Section preceding, his
humane is to be considered next: and so is it here: And first the manner of
his conception, but the conception of his, forerunner John the Baptist, orderly
described and declared before.

Harmony and Explanation.
Ver. 5. In the days of Herod.
THe Scepter shall not depart from Judah, or the Lawgiver from between his
sect, until Shiloh come, Genesis 49. 10.

The words are to be read discretively, Or rather then And, showing that when
the Scepter ceased, the Lawgiver succeeded, and when both were gone, then
Messiah should appear.

The Scepter continued in the hand of Judah, till the captivity into Babylon,
and then it departed, and being once fallen, it was never recovered, till he
came to whom it belonged. This Jeremy told expressly even at the very time,
when it was in failing, Jer. 22. 30. Write Coniah childlesse, for no man of his
seed shall prosper, sitting upon the Throne of David, and ruling any more in
Judah. And so did Ezekiel even just then, when Nebuchadnezzar was setting
himself to fetch it away, Ezekiel. 22. 21. etc. Remove the Diadem, and take off
the Crown, etc. I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no
more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him.

After their return out of that captivity; the Lawgiver, or the high Court of
the Seventy Elders, sat at the Helm and ruled the State, till the usurpation
of the Asmenean or Maccabean family distempered all. Their Ambition brought in
a Crown, and that, civil wars, and those the Romans, who subdued the
nation, and set Herod King over them. He was the Son of Antipater, of the
race of Edom, or of the seed of Esau, a generation that had been an enemy to
the Jews continually, but never ruled over them till now, so that now were
fulfilled the words of Isaac to his Son Esau. Thou shall serve thy brother.
Jacob, but it shall come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, thou shall
break his yoke from off thy neck. Genesis 27. 40.

Herod was bloody, like the root of which he came, which persecuted his
Brother, even in the womb, and among other his cruelties, which were very
horrible and very many, he slew the Sanhedrin, or the bench of the Lxx Judges.
And then was the Lawgiver departed from between Judahs feet, as the Scepter
was out of his hand long before: And then might the Jews cry out, as it is
recorded they did, though upon another occasion. Woe unto us, for the Scepter
is departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from between his feet, and yet is not
the Son of David come.

There was a certain Priest named Zacharias.
Of this name, there had been a famous Priest and a famous Prophet in old time
before. Zacharias the Son of Jehojada, before the captivity, 2 Chronicles. 24. And
Zacharias the Son of Barachias after, Zac. 1. 1. And consonant it was, that
he in whom Priesthood, and Prophecy should be struck dumb, and even have
their period, because the great Priest and Prophet was so near at hand, should
bear the same name with them, in whom Priesthood and Prophecy had in some
manner ceased before.

SS. Of (...) used by the Lxx, 1 Chro. 9. 33. to translate. (...) the chambers
of the Temple, if it be not mis-written.
the course of Abia.
The Priests were divided by David into four and twenty courses, 1 Chronicles. 24.
Not, but that there had been courses before of them, but because there had not
been so many. For reason it self will tell us, that since they were all bound
to the service of the Sanctuary, and withal were so very many in number, they
could not serve there mixedly and confusedly, but must need have some
distinction and order: some of the Jews say they were divided into eight
courses by Moses, four of Eleazar, and four of Ithamar: But for this they
have no ground to show at all. Others that they were divided into sixteen by
him, namely, eight and eight of either family. And of the division it self,
there seems to be some probability in the Text, but not of the divider. For
speaking of David's distinguishing them, because they were grown more numerous,
it says, 1 Chro. 24. 6.

(...), which imports thus much, that there was one principal household added
to every course of Eleazar more than was before, and so they became sixteen,
but of Ithamar were only taken those which were used before, which were only
eight, and thus did they rise to 24. See R. Solomon. and Dav. Kimehi in loc.

These courses thus newly increased by David for number, and thus newly ranked
by lot for order, and both for the service of the Temple, when it should be
built; it is but little to be doubted, but that they began their round, when
the service of the Temple did first begin; which round began on the Sabbath,
next after the Feast of Tabernacles, about the two and twentieth day of the
month Tisri, 2 Chronicles. 7. For on the 23 day, Solomon dismissed all the people
to their own houses, ver. 10. after he had kept the Feast of Tabernacles
seven days before according to the Law, beginning on the fifteenth day of the
month, and concluding on the one and twentieth day, Lev. 23. and the next day
after, or the two and twentieth day, was a solemn assembly, and that year [as
it may be conceived] the Sabbath day. Now in the week of the Feast, so great
was the company of the Congregation, and so many the multitude of the
Sacrifices, that no single course was able to undergo the service, but then
[as also at the other two great Feastivals] all the courses served
indifferently, [and so had they done at the Temples dedication, 2 Chronicles. 5.
11.] and on the next Sabbath, the course of Jehojarib or the first began.

They changed every week, coming in on the Sabbath, and on the next going
out, 2 King. 11. 7. 2 Chronicles. 23. 4. So that by the time of the passover, they
were just gone about; and from thence they began their second round again: In
the eight course of which second round; [for so was the course of Abia, 1 Chronicles. 24. 10.] Zacharias hears the glad tidings of the birth of Christ's
forerunner; just about the same time of the year, that Sarab did of the fixed
time of the birth of Isaac, toward the middle of Summer, Genesis 18.

But that the Reader may have a full and perfect view of the revolution of
these courses: and because he will have frequent occasion in his reading of the
Evangelists, to have his eye upon the passing of the year of the Jews; let it
not be tedious to interpose a Calendar, or Almanac of it, here at the very
entrance; with an account of the courses of the Priests used every week at the
Temple, the Lessons out of the Law and the Prophets, used every Sabbath in the
Synagogues; and their Festivals great and lesser, as they lighted in their
seasons; that whenever hereafter in his Progress in this sacred History of
the Gospel, he shall have occasion to look after any of these, they may be
here ready before his eyes.

The Jews reckoned their year by Lunary months, as is more then apparent; by
the words that signified a month amongst them, as (...) and (...), and by
several Stories in the Scripture; and in this their reckoning, says, On Genesis
7.
Rabbi Solomon, one month was full, and another wanting; that is, one
consisting of thirty days, and another only of nine and twenty: This
computation made their years to fall eleven days short of the year of the
Sun. And this the holy Ghost seems to hint and to hit upon, when in reckoning
the time of Noah's being in his Arc, he brings him in on the seventeenth day
of the second month, Genesis 7. 11. and brings him out on the seven and
twentieth day of the same month on the next year, Genesis 8. 14. and yet
intends him there but an exact and complete year of the Sun, but reckoned
only by Lunary months.

Now these eleven days, which the year of the Sun outstretched the year of
the Moon, on every third year made up a month of three and thirty days;
which the Jews laid after the month Adar, or the last month; and called it
Veadar, or Adar, over again.

But not to insist upon any curious inquiry into their embolimism, or
intercalation, nor how the twelve Stewards of Solomon, and the four and twenty
course of the Priests, made out their Service, those in the Court, and these in
the Temple, on that additionall month of the leap year; which is not a
discourse for the present purpose: we will take up the year in its common and
ordinary course and circle; and suppose [A] the Dominicall, or Sabbath day
Letter, and trace the courses of the Priests, and the lessons of the Law and
Prophets, according thereunto.

Now these lessons of the law and Prophets began their round, one Sabbath
before the courses of the Priests; the first Parashah, or Section of Genesis,
being read at the Feast of Tabernacles: and by the next Feast of Tabernacles,
or the next year, all the Law was read over, be the year Leap year, or no:
For if it were the ordinary year, the Sections in the latter end of
Deuteronomy, were made fewer and longer; but if the Intercalary, or Bissextile,
then were they broke into more, according to the number of the Sabbaths of that
year; that by the Feast of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy might be finished, and
Genesis might be begun on again.

Whether these Lessons or Sections of the Law were appointed and set out by
Moses, or by Ezra, or by some other; and how the like in the Prophets came to
be paralleled with them; or to be read instead of them; when the persecution
of Antiorhus forbad the reading of the Law; is not a time and place to dispute
here; only if the Reader shall observe the Harmony between the two portions
that were read at one time, he will see that the choice of them was of more
then ordinary and common discretion: And sometimes the taking notice of the
portions themselves, will help to clear and satisfy some obscurities, which
otherwise it were not possible to clear and satisfy, as some examples will
be given in their places.

TISRI or ETHANIM, The first Month.
1 King. 8. 2. 2 Chronicles. 5. 3. MARHESHUAN. The second Month.
1 A Delaiah: From the middle of our September, to the middle of October.
the three and twentieth course. Feast of Trumpets. Lessons 1 C 2 B 2 D 3 C
Deuteronomy. chap. 26. from ver. 1. to chap. 29. ver. 10. 3 E 4 D 4 F 5 E Isa. chap.
60. from ver. 1. to the end of the chapter. 5 G 6 F 6 A Harim: Part of October
and part of November.
The third course begins. 7 G 7 B Lessons 8 A Maaziah: the four and
twentieth course. Lessons 8 C Genesis chap. 18. 1. to chap. 23. 1. 2 King 4. from
the beginning of the chapter to ver. 38. 9 B Deuteronomy. chap. 29. ver. 10. to cha.
31 9 D 10 C 1. when there were more weeks in the years, otherwise to the end of
the book. Isa. chap 61. 10. to chap. 63. 10. The tenth day of this month was
the solemn and mysterious Feast of expiation, Lev. 16. 29. 10 E 11 D 11 F 12 E
12 G 13 F 13 A Seorim: The fourth course begins. 14 G 14 B Lessons 15 A The
Feast of Tabernacles, All the Priests are present and serve. The Law is begun
to be read. 15 C Genesis chap. 23. 1. to chap. 25. 19. 16 B 16 D 1 King. chap. 1.
from ver. 1. to ver. 32. 17 C Lessons 17 E 18 D Genesis chap. 1. 1. to chap. 6.
ver. 9. Isa. chap. 42. ver. 5. to ver. 11. of chap. 43. 18 F 19 E 19 G 20 F 20
A Malchijah: The fifth course begins. 21 G 21 B Lessons 22 A Jehoiarib: The
first course begins. 22 C Genesis chap. 25. 19. to chap. 28. 10 Malachi chap.
1. from the beginning to ver. 8. of chap. 2. 23 B Lessons 23 D 24 C Gen chap 6.
from ver 9. to chap. 12. ver. 1. 24 E 25 D Isa. 54. 1. to ver. 5. of chap. 55.
25 F 26 E 26 G 27 F 27 A Mijamim: The sixth course begins. 28 G Jedaiah: The
second course begins. Lessons 28 B Lessons 29 A 29 C Genesis chap. 28. 10. to
chap. 32. 3. Hosea chap. 11. from ver. 7. to ver. 2. of chap. 14. 30 B Genesis
chap. 12. ver. 1. to chap. 18. 1. Isa. 40. from ver. 27. to ver. 17 of chap.
41. CISLEU. The third Month
TEBETH Esth. 2. 16. The (...) Month
1 D 1 F 2 E 2 G 3 F 3 A Eliashih: Part of December and part of January.
The eleventh course begins. 4 G 4 B Lessons 5 A Hakkez: Part of November
and part of December.
The seventh course begins. 5 C Genesis chap. 47. from ver. 27. to the end of the
book. 1 King chap. 2 from the beginning to ver. 13. 6 B Lessons 6 D 7 C Genesis
chap. 32. from ver. 3. to cha. 37. 1. Obadiah all the chapter, or Hos. chap.
12. from ver. 12. to the end of the book. 7 E 8 D 8 F 9 E 9 G 10 F 10 A Jakim:
The twelfth course begins. 11 G 11 B Lessons 12 A Abijah or Abia: the eighth
course begins. 12 C Exodus chap. 1. from beginning to chap. 6. ver 2 Isa.
chap. 27. from ver 6. to chap. 28. ver. 14. Or Jer. chap 1. ver. 1. to chap. 2.
ver. 4. 13 B Lessons 13 D 14 C Gen chap. 37. 1. to chap. 41. 1. Amos chap. 2.
from ver. 6. to ver. 9. of chap. 3. 14 E 15 D 15 F 16 E 16 G 17 F 17 A Huppah:
The thirteenth course begins. 18 G 18 B Lessons 19 A Jeshuah: The ninth
course begins. 19 C Exodus chap. 6 2. to chap. 10. 1. 20 B Lessons 20 D Ezekiel.
chap. 28 from ver. 25. to the end of chap. 29. 21 C Gen chap. 41. 1. to chap.
44. 18. 21 E 22 D 1 King. chap. 3. from ver. 15. to the end of the chapter. 22
F 23 E 23 G 24 F Feast of Dedication eight days, 24 A Jeshe^ea^: The
fourteenth course begins 25 G 1 Mac. 4. 59. Joh. 10. 22. 25 B Lessons 26 A
Shechaniah: The tenth course begins. 26 C Exodus chap. 10. 1. to chap. 13. v.
17. Jerem. chap 46. from v. 13. to the end of the chapter. 2^ B Lessons 27 D 28
C Genesis chap. 44. from ver. 18. to ver. 27. of chap. 47. Ezekiel. chap. 37. from
ver. 15. to the end of the chapter. 28 E 29 D 29 F 30 E SHEBET. Zechar. 1. 7.
The fifth Month.
ADAR. Ezra 6. 15. The (...) Month
1 G 1 B Ezekiel: Part of February and part of March.
chap. 43 from ver. 10. to the end of the chapter. 2 A Bilgah: Part of January,
and part of February.
The fifteenth course begins. 2 C 3 B Lessons 3 D 4 C Exodus chap. 13 from.
ver. 17. to chap. 18. 1. Judge. chap. 4. from ver. 4. to chap. 6. 1. 4 E 5 D 5 F
6 E 6 G 7 F 7 A Jehez^kel: The twentieth course Lessons 8 G 8 B Exodus chap 30.
from ver. 11. to chap. 35. 1. 1 King. 18. 1. to v. 39. 9 A Immer: The sixteenth
course begins 9 C 10 B Lessons 10 D 11 C Exodus chap. 18. 1. to chap. 21. 1.
11 E 12 D Isa. 6. all the chapter. 12 F 13 E 13 G 14 F 14 A Jachin: The one and
twentyeth course begins. 15 G 15 B Lessons 16 A Hezir: The seventeenth
course begins. 16 C Exodus chap. 35. 1. to chap. 38. 21 17 B Lessons 17 D 1
King chap. 7. from ver. 13. to v. 26. The 14 and 15 days of this month, were
the Feast of Purim 18 C Exodus chap. 21. 1. to chap. 25. 1. Jerem. chap 34. from
v. 8. to the end of the chapter. 18 E 19 D 19 F 20 E 20 G 21 F 21 A Gamul: The
two and twentyeth course begins. 22 G 22 B Lessons 23 A Aphses: The
eighteenth course begins. 23 C Exodus chap. 38. from v. 21. to the end of the
book. 1 King, chap. 7. from ver. 50. to ver. 21. of the 8. chapter. 24 B
Lessons 24 D 25 C Exodus chap. 25. 1 to chap. 27. 20. 25 E 26 D 1 King. chap. 5.
from ver. 12. to ver. 14 of chap. 6. 26 F 27 E 27 G 28 F 28 A Delajah: the
three and twentieth course begins. 29 G Pethahiah: The nineteenth course
begins. 29 B L^^sons 30 A Lessons Exodus chap. 27. from ver. 20. to chap. 30.
ver. 11. Levit. chap. 1. 1. to chap. 6. 1. Isa. chap. 43. 21. to v. 24. of cha.
44. ABIB. T^^ first Month stilo novo.
Exodus 12. or NISAN. Neh. 2. 1. IJAR. The (...) Month stilo (...)
1 C 1 E 2 D 2 F 3 E 3 G 4 F 4 A Harim: Part of April and (...) of May.
The third course. Lessons 5 G 5 B Levit. chap. 16. 1. to chap 19. 1. 6 A
Maaziah: Part of March, and part of April.
The four and twentieth course begins. 6 C Ezekiel. chap. 22. 1. to ver. 17. 7
B Lessons 7 D 8 C Levit. chap. 6. 1. to chap. 9. 1. 8 E 9 D Jerem. chap. 7.
from ver. 21. to the 4. ver. of chap. 8. 9 F 10 E 10 G 11 F 11 A Seorim: The
fourth course. Lessons. 12 G 12 B Levit. chap. 19. 1. to chap. 21. 1. 13 A The
Preparation. 13 C Amos chap. 9. ver. 7. to the end of the book: or Ezekiel. chap.
20. from ver. 2. to ver. 21. 14 B The Passover day, Exodus 12. 14 D 15 C This
week there was no distinct course that served, but all the courses
indifferently and together. 15 E 16 D Lessons 16 F 17 E Lev. chap. 9. 1. to
cha. 12. 1. 2 Samuel 17 G 18 F chap. 6. 1. to ver. 17. of chap. 7. 18 A
Malchijah: The fifth course. Lessons 19 G 19 B Levit. chap. 21. 1. to chap. 25.
1. 20 A Jehoiarib: The first course begins the round again. 20 C Ezekiel. chap.
44. from ver. 15. to the end. 21 B Lessons 21 D 22 C Lev. 12. 1. to chap. 14,
1. 2 King. 22 E 23 D 4. from v. 42. to ver. 20. of cha. 5. 23 F 24 E 24 G 25 F
25 A Mijamim: The sixth course. Lessons 26 G 26 B Levit. chap. 25 1. to chap.
26. 3. 27 A Jedaiah: The second course. Lessons 27 C Jerem. chap. 32. from ver.
6. to v. 28. 28 B Levit. chap. 14. 1. to chap. 16. 1. 28 D 29 C 2 King. chap.
7. from ver 3. to the end of the Chapter. 29 E 30 D SIVAN. The third Month
stilo nov^.
Esth. 8. 9. TAMMVZ. The fourth Month stilo nov^.
1 F 1 A Shechaniah: Part of June and part of July.
The tenth course. Lessons 2 G 2 B Numb. chap. 13. 1. to chap. 16. 1. 3 A No
single course because of Pentecost week: Part of May and part of June.
but all served indifferently. 3 C Joshua chap. 2. all the Chapter. 4 B 4 D 5 C
Lessons 5 E 6 D Lev it. chap. 26. 3. to the end of the book. Jerem. 16. 19. to
ver. 15. of chap. 17. 6 F 7 E 7 G 8 F 8 A Eliashi^: The eleventh course.
Lessons 9 G 9 B Numb. chap. 16. 1. to chap. 19. 1. 10 A Hakkoz: The seventh
course. Lessons 10 C 1 Samuel chap. 11. 14. to chap. 12. ver. 23. 11 B Numb.
chap. 1. 1. to chap. 4. v. 21. 11 D 12 C Hosea chap. 1. from ver. 10. to v. 21.
of chap. 2. 12 E 13 D 13 F 14 F 14 G 15 F 15 A Jakim: The twelfth course.
Lessons 16 G 16 B Numb. chap. 19. 1. to chap. ^2. 2. 17 A Abijah or Abia: the
eighth course Now it was, that Zacharias had the tidings of the birth of John
the Baptist. 17 C Judge. chap. 11. 1. to ver. 34. 18 B 18 D 19 C Lessons 19 E 20
D Number* chap. 4. v. 21. to chap. 8. 1. 20 F 21 E Judge chap. 13. 2. to the end of
the Chapter. 21 G 22 F 22 A Huppah: The thirteenth course. Lessons 23 G 23 B
Numb. chap. 22. 2. to chap. 25. 10 24 A Jeshuah: The ninth course. Lessons 24 C
Micah chap. 5. from ver. 7. to the 9. verse of chap. 6. 25 B Numb. chap. 8. 1.
to chap 13. 1. 25 D 26 C (...). chap. 2. 10. to to chap. 4. 8. 26 E 27 D 27 F
28 E 28 G 29 F 29 A Jeshehe^^: The fourteenth course Lessons 30 G Numb. chap.
25. 10. to chap. 30. 2 1 King. chap. 18. from ver. 46. to A B. The fifth Month
stilo novo.
ELUL. The sixth Month stilo novo.
1 B 1 D 2 C 2 E 3 D 3 F 4 E 4 G 5 F 5 A Pethahiah: Part of August and part of
September.
The nineteenth course Lessons 6 G 6 B Deuteronomy. chap 7 ver. 12 to chap. 11. ver.
26. Isa. chap. 49. from ver. 14 to chap. 51. ver. 4. 7 A Bilgah: Part of July,
and part of August.
The fifteenth course. Lessons 7 C 8 B Number. chap 30. 2. to chap. 33 1. (...)
the ^ast of the fifth month, (...). 7. 5. Jerem. chap. 1. from the beginning to
chap. 2 ver. 4. 8 D 9 C 9 E 10 D 10 F 11 E 11 E 12 F 12 A Jehezekel: The
twentieth course. Lessons 13 G 13 B Deuteronomy. chpa. 11. 26 to chap. 16. 18 14 A
Immer: The sixteenth course. Lessons 14 C Isa. chap. ^4. from ver. 11. to chap
55. ver. 4. 15 B 15 D 16 C Number. chap. 33. 1. to the end of the book. Jer. chap.
2. from ver. 4. to ver. 29. 16 E 17 D 17 F 18 E 18 G 19 F 19 A Jachin: The one
and twentieth course. Lessons. 20 G 20 B 21 A Hezir: The seventeenth course.
Lessons 21 C Deuteronomy. chap. 16. 18. to cha. 21. 10. 22 B Deuteronomy. chap. 1. 1. to
chap. 3. ver. 23 22 D Isa. Chap. 51. 12. to chap. 52. 13. 23 C Isa. chap. l. 1.
to ver 28. 23 E 24 D 24 F 25 E 25 G 26 F 26 A Gamul: The two and twentieth
course. 27 G 27 B Lessons 28 A Aphses: The eighteenth course. Lessons 28 C
Deuteronomy. chap. 21. 10. to chap. ^6. 1. 29 B Deuteronomy. chap. 3. from v. 23. to chap. 7.
ver. 12. Isa. chap. 40. from ver. 1. to ver. 27. 29 D Isa. chap. 54. from the
beginning to ver. 11. 30 C

Thus, or not far from this form, went the Jewish year, and the courses of
the Priests in it: And thus the Lections of the Law and Prophets, along with
both: and hence may be collected in some reasonable measure, the time of the
year when John Baptist was born, which has been so long not a little mistaken.

Verse. 6. Walking in all the commandments and ordinances.
In all the commandments of the moral Law, and ordinances of the Ceremonial:
and the word (...) used by the Lxx for (...) Genesis 7. 1 and for (...) Job. 1. 1.
blameless, expresses their behavior in the Judicial: And thus the Text
shows us a man, as accomplished for the righteousness according to the Law,
as a man could be; and yet that we might see, that a man is not justified by
that, but by Faith; the same man is presently after checked and struck dumb,
because he did not believe.

SS. Ordinances.
Greek, (...): which the Romanists translate, Justifications: and of the word
would make no small advantage.

Whereas, first, the Lxx most commonly translate the Hebrew word (...) and
(...) by it, as above twenty times, in Psalm. 119. and this Hebrew word we know
signifies no such thing as Justifications. Rab. Solomon on Numb. 19. gives a
notation of it unto another sense. Because (says he) Satan and the people of
the World would be questioning with Israel, what is this, or that Commandment,
and what reason is there in it? Why? it is (...), a statute or an ordinance
decreed by God; and it is not for thee to question it: See also Rab. Menahem on
the same place: And to what sense the Chaldee renders it in Psalm. 119. and
elsewhere.

Secondly, the common Greek uses it most commonly in the sense of our
Translation: as might be showed out of Aristotle Ethic. 5. Dion Cassius Romans
Hist. lib. 58. and 61* and other Authors.

Thirdly, as the Lxx render (...) or (...), by this Greek word; so the Arabic
does this Greek word by that again: making them to sound to one and the same
sense, and that (...) imports Ordinances, none can deny.

Fourthly, it will be very hard to produce any Heathen Author, or any place in
all the Lxx, that use the word (...) for Justification. In Deuteronomy. 24. 13. a
place as likely to have found it in as any, if they would have taken it in that
sense, they have so far refused it, that they use a word, no kin at all unto
it.

Verse. 9. According to the Custom.
This may be taken two ways, either for the custom of burning Incense; or for
that, that these courses used, in choosing out of their company to burn it,
which was by lot; And this latter is more proper: for it needs not to tell,
that it was the custom of the Priests, to burn Incense; for this was known
well enough from the Law, to be an essential part of their function; but the
text would tell us how Zachary came to do this piece of service; namely, by
the customary lot. So that by the custom of the Priesthood, is properly meant
the custom of the Priests. The High Priest burnt Incense when he would, the
other Priests by lot; and one and the same Priest burnt not Incense twice in
all his days, Abarbin in Penteteuch. fol. 241.

SS. His lot was to burn Incense.
Sense and reason does more bind us to understand casting of Lots for this
purpose, then the Grammatical construction, or literal strictness of the
word; for though it signify, obtaining a thing by lot, yet not always by lot
only, but even by any other means, as Act. 1. 17. Judas (...), obtained the
lot of his ministration. And so Julian in Mesopogone. Anacreon, (...), sortitus
est ludere, vel deliciari, etc. But undeniable reason tells, that it must of
necessity be understood of obtaining by lot in this place.

For the Priests, in every one of the twenty four courses, were exceeding
many. For Josephus relates, that they were thousands in every course. And this
are we sure of from evident Scripture, that at the crowning of Joash, when an
insurrection by Athaliah was feared. The Priests of two courses only are
reputed as a Guard sufficient for the King, and about the Temple, 2 King. 11.
5, 6, 7. And when Vzziah would have burned Incense, there were eighty Priests
ready to withold him, 2 Chronicles. 26. 17. So that among so great a multitude,
there in but one man being only permitted to burn incense, it was necessary
that he should be chosen from among them by lot, and the lot at this time fell
to Za^harias.

SS. To burn Incense entering into the Temple of the Lord.
This his entering into the Temple, was not going into the most holy place; nor
was this his burning of Incense, upon the day of expiation, but it was
according to the daily Service of the Temple, which required that incense
should be burned, every morning and evening in the Holy place without the
veil, Exodus 30. 6, 7, 8. The High Priest indeed once every year offered
Incense within the veil, on the day of expiation, Lev. 16. 29, 30. but neither
was Zacharias High Priest, nor was this any such service. For, first, Luke when
he speaks of the High Priest, he uses to call him by that title, as Chap.
3. 2. Acts 4. 6. etc. but in all this large Story of Zacharias, he never
terms him other then an ordinary Priest. Secondly, Zachary was of one of the
twenty four courses: but the High Priest was of no course at all; and if he
had, doubtless he had been of the first: But Zachary was of the eight.
Zacharias at this time came to burn Incense by lot: but the High Priest came
to do it in the most Holy place, by succession. Fourthly, there was no Altar
of Incense in the most Holy place, but there was one where Zacharias ministered.
Fifthly, if these courses began their round, either with the beginning of the
Service of the Temple; or with the beginning of the year Ecclesiastical, or
with the beginning of the year Civil, or from any of the three Festivals;
then was it not possible that the eighth course should light any whit near the
Feast of expiation: And where to begin them but from some of these, who can
imagine? Sixthly, it was not so very consonant that John the Baptist should be
borne a High Priest, which bare the fullest resemblance of the Office of our
Savior; but a Priest of an inferior rank, because a servant to the High. The
mis-construction of Zacharies offering of Incense, gave first occasion to the
general and long continued mistake of the time of our Saviors Birth.

Verse. 10. And the whole multitude of the people.
There were constantly in the Temple at the hour^ of prayer, First, the Priests
of that course that then served. Secondly, the Levites that served under the
Priests. Thirdly, the men of the Station, as the Rabins call them; that is,
certain men that were to represent the whole Congregation, in putting their
hands upon the heads of the Sacrifices. Fourthly, those whom devotion moved to
leave their other employments, for that time, and to be present at the service
of God. All these might amount to a great number indeed; but the Text in naming
the whole multitude of people, seems to have some further meaning; as if it
would intimate, that this was not upon an ordinary day of the week, but upon
the Sabbath day, when the Congregation was full: Not only of the Priests of
the seventh course, that went that day out of their service; but also of all
the multitude of the City, which were tied that day in a more special manner,
to the public worship.

Upon this day, [if we might conclude it to be a Sabbath] the portions of the
Law and the Prophets, which were read in the Synagogues, were excellently
agreeable to the thing was now in hand; namely, the Law of the Nazarites, Numb.
6. and the conception of Sampson, like this of the Baptist, Judge. 13.

SS. Were praying without.
When the burnt Offering began in the Temple, the Trumpeters and Singers began
to sound and sing, and the whole Congregation to pray and worship: and all this
continued until the burnt Offering was finished, 2 Chronicles. 29. 27, 28. Then the
Priest took a Censer full of coals from off the Altar, Lev. 16. 12. [for by
the custom of that day, may be guessed the custom of the rest in this
ordinary circumstance] and went into the holy place, and burnt it upon the
Altar, Exodus 30. 7. In the mean time the people in the outer Court were
employed in prayer, 2 Chronicles. 29. 29. And on the day of expiation they were in
fear while the High Priest was within, till he came out in peace, and then
there was great joy among them, because they were accepted. R. Tanchum on Ex.
33.

Ver. 11. [And there appeared an Angel, etc.] As there were two great mysteries
to be showed in the birth of Christ; First, that God should become a man; And
secondly, that a Virgin should become a Mother: So the Lord to make way for the
belief of these two, when they should be exhibited, did use two Harbingers or
preparatives, as if it were of old and of long time before. First, apparition
of Angels in humane shape. Secondly, Women's bearing children, that were old and
barren. For it would be the easier believed, that the invisible God might
converse visibly among men, in humane flesh, when it was so ordinarily seen,
that the invisible Angels did so in humane shapes. And it would not be so very
incredible, that a Virgin might bear a child, though she were not come to it
by the course of nature, and though she had not known a man; when it had been
so often known that old women had done the same, though they were past
childbearing by nature, and even past the knowledge of man. And this was the
maine reason why want of children, is always in Scripture imputed to the
defect of the women, that the miracle appearing the more visible in them, it
might prepare belief the better for this.

As these two types and forerunners of those two great mysteries, were
exhibited so often in the Old Testament, that they might prepare credit, and
entertainment for the other when they should be exhibited in the birth of
Christ: so was it most fit, that they should be declared in the birth of him
that was to be Christ's forerunner indeed, and when the mysteries they aimed at
were so near to be revealed.

[On the right side of the Altar of Incense.] On the north side of it. On
Zacharies right hand, and on the right side of the house: as Ezekiel. 10. 3.
compare Zach. 3. 1. Psalm. 109. 6. 31. and 142. 4. The appearing of an Angel in
the Sanctuary, with a message from God, was a thing ever hardly seen or heard
of before: and it shows how Vrim and Thummim, the ordinary way of Gods
revealing his mind in that place, was now ceased. For God used to reveal his
will to the Priest by a soft voice from off the Arc, but now both Arc and
Oracle were quite gone, and the loss the lesser, when the true Arc of the
Covenant and the Oracle of the will of God, our Savior Christ, was so near at
hand. The second Temple wanted five things which were in the first, as the
Jews observe upon the want of the Letter (...) in the word (...); Hag. 1. 8.
namely, First, The Arc. Secondly, Vrim and Thummim. Thirdly, the (...) from
Heaven. Fourthly, the divine presence, or cloud of glory. And fifthly, the holy
Ghost, or the spirit of Prophecy and power of miracles, Masse^. I^m. Yet was
the glory of that house to be greater then the glory of the first, because of
the presence of Christ in it.

Verse. 13. [Thy prayer is heard, etc.] Not that he was now praying for a
child; [for his age made him incredulous of having a child, when the Angel told
him of one, and then it is not like he would pray for one] and in this place,
and at this time he was a person representative of the whole people, and
therefore was not to make a private prayer for himself: but either the prayers
which he had before made to that purpose, were now come into remembrance, or
rather he was now praying for the delivery of Israel, the remission of their
sins, and the coming of Christ, in which they without were joining with him;
and this his prayer, the Angel tells him, is so ready to be answered, that
his wife should presently conceive a Son that should preach remission,
convert the people, and go before the face of Christ. And now O ye Priests,
beseech God that he will be gracious unto you, Mal. 1. 9. And so was
Zacharias the Priest at this time doing. And the Angel said unto him, Thy
prayer is heard, and thy wife shall bear a Son, and thou shall call his name
John: this Name being interpreted, imports gracious, as Esa. 30. 18, 19.

Verse. 16. [And many of the Children of Israel shall be turn.] Many of Israel
shall return when they shall see signs of redemption. Whereupon it is said,
He saw that there was no man, etc. Esa. 59. 16. D. Kimchin loc.

Verse. 17. [In the power and spirit of Elias.] John the Baptist did so nearly
represent Elias, that he bears his very name, Mal. 4. Mat. 11. 14.

First, they both came when Religion was even perished and decaying. Secondly,
they both restored it, in an excellent measure. Thirdly, they were both
persecuted for it. Elias by Ahab and Jezabel: John by Herod and Herodias.
Fourthly, they both conversed much in the Wilderness. Fifthly, they agreed in
austerity of life. Sixthly, in the wearing of a hairy garment, and a Leatherne
girdle, 2 King. 1. 8. Mat. 3. 4. Seventhly, both of them had Heaven opened to
them near Jordan. To which two parallels more might be added, if these two
opinions of the Jews concerning Elias might be believed.

First, that he was of the Tribe of Levi [for they take him to be Phin^has;
as see R. Lev. Gersh. on 1 King. 17.] Secondly, That he restored circumcision
when it was decayed; from those words in 1 King. 19. 14. They have forsaken thy
Covenant.

[To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children.] That is, The hearts of
the Jews to the Gentiles.

For, first, the hatred of a Jew against a Gentile was deadly; and it was a
special work of the Gospel, and consequently of John, that began to Preach
it, to bring both these to embrace Christ, and for, and in him to embrace one
another.

Secondly, Experience it self confirms this exposition; for, as the Gospel
belonged to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, and as John came for a witness
that all through him might believe, so did he convert and baptize Roman
Soldiers as well as Jewish Pharisees.

Thirdly, Baptism, at its first institution, was the Sacrament for admission
of Heathens only, to the Church and true Religion: when therefore, the Jews
also begin to desire it, and to consent to the Heathens in the undertaking of
it, then was the heart of the fathers turned to the children.

Fourthly, It is the common and constant use of the Prophets, to style the
Church of the Gentiles by the name of children to the Church of the Jews, as
Isa. 54. 5, 6. 13. and 60. 4. 9. and 62. 5. and 66. 12, 13.

Fifthly, the Talmud expounding these words in Malachi, seems to understand
them of such a communion or reconciliation, as is spoken of, Vid. R. Sol. in
lo^. Malach. Herod, says Josephus Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 7. slew John the
Baptist being a good man, and injoyning the Jews that exercising virtue, and
using right dealing one toward another, and piety toward God, they should
(...), convene or knit together in Baptism.

[And the disobedient, etc.] In Malachi it is, And the hearts of the children
to the fathers. But, first, the Holy Ghost is not so punctual to cite the very
letter of the Prophet, as to give the sense. Secondly, it was not very long
after the Baptizing and Preaching of John, that the Jews ceased to be a
Church and Nation; nay, even in the time of John himself, they showed
themselves enemies to the Gospel and the professors of it, [as concerning the
general or the greatest part of them] therefore he says not, that the heart
of the children the Gentiles, should be turned to their Fathers the Jews,
which should cease to be fathers, and should cease to be a people, but to the
wisdom of the righteous ones.

[The disobedient] As in this clause he refuses to use the term of Fathers
for the reason mentioned, so does he also of the correlative children, because
of his refusing that. And yet he coucheth the sense of that title under the
word disobedient, which word in its most proper and natural signification
reflecteth upon untowardly children, disobedient to their parents. As therefore
by his omitting to call the Jews fathers, he insinuates their opposition
against the Gospel, so by terming the Gentiles disobedient in stead of
children, he shows what they were before they embraced it.

[In the wisdom of the righteous.] For so is it in the Greek, (...) in, and
not to. Wisdom in Scripture, is often taken for Religion: As Psalm. 111. 10.
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. etc. and so is it to be understood here. And this Wisdom is not
to be held the terminus ad quem, or the ultimate end to which these disobedient
Gentiles were to be converted; but in this wisdom, or religion, unto God.
For, first, let the two clauses of this speech be laid in Antithesis, or
opposition one to another [as naturally indeed they lie, the one aiming at the
Jews as the proper subject, and the other at the Gentiles] and it appears
plainly that two several acts were to be performed by the Baptist, as
concerning the Jews and their conversion; First, that he should turn their
hearts or affections to God, as in the verse preceding, He shall turn many of
the children of Israel to the Lord their God: And secondly, that he should
turn their hearts and affections also to the Gentiles, whom they hated before,
as here, He shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children.

Secondly, According therefore to this double work of John upon the Jews in
that part of the Angels speech, must the like duplicity be looked for in this
that concerns the Gentiles, and to be understood, though it be not
expressed. For the Angel in this part purposely changes his style, and neither
calls the Gentiles children, but disobedient, because they were generally so
before the coming of Christ, nor the Jews Fathers, because they ceased to be
so shortly after: nor mentions he the Gentiles turning to God, but includes
it, partly because he had set that as the chiefest work and bent of the
Baptist of all, to go before the Lord, and turn men to him; and partly he
includes it in this phrase, In the wisdom of the righteous.

Thirdly, It is not without divine reason that the hearts of the Gentiles are
not said to be turned to the Jews, as on the contrary it was said of the
Jews to the Gentiles, but that they should be turned in the wisdom of the
righteous; For the enmity, fe^d, and detestation that was betwixt Jew and
Gentile, and Gentile and Jew, proceeded not from the same cause and Original.
The Jew abhorred the Gentile, not of ignorance, but of scorn and jealousy,
partly because they stood upon their own dignity of being the people of God,
which the other were not, and partly because they were provoked with suspicion,
that the other should be the people of God when they should not. And
therefore, when the reconciliation is to be wrought between them, it is said
that their hearts or affections should be turned to them, for they were
pointblanke or diametrically against them before. But a Gentile abhorred a Jew
out of ignorance, because of his Religion: hating him as a man separate from
and contrary to all men: and accounting that to be singular and senseless
superstition, which was indeed the divine command and wisdom of God; and not
so much detesting his person for it self, as for his religion and profession.
Therefore when the Gentiles must be brought to affect and to unite to the
Jews, it must be in the wisdom of the righteous, or in the understanding,
knowledge, and embracing of that religion, which the righteous ones professed,
which the Gentiles till they knew and understood what it meant, accounted but
vanity, singularity, and foolishness.

Ver. 18. [Whereby shall I know this?] The Jew requires a sign, 1 Cor. 1. 22.
And his so doing in these times when miracles had been ceased so long a time,
shows his doubting to be the more: and the appearing of an Angel, when such
apparitions were as rare as Miracles, should have made it to have been the
less. For after the death of Zachary and Malachi, and those latter Prophets,
the Holy Ghost departed from Israel and went up: and ceased to exhibit his
familiarity among them, in Vision, Prophecy, and the work of Miracles; So that
this apparition of the Angel, and this sign given to Zachary, and wonders done
in the birth of the Baptist, were as the very entrance and beginning of the
restoring of those gifts, and the very dawning to that glorious day of such
things as was now to follow.

[For I am old] The very same was the doubt of Sarah, Ge^ 18. 12. And here,
first, the distrust of Zachary does show the more, in that he that was a
Priest and should have instructed others, was himself to seek in one of the
first elements, and Catechisticall principles of Religion, concerning the
Almighty power, and All Sufficiency of God. Secondly, the very place where the
message came to him, being the place of Gods immediate Oracles, and the time,
being the time of his praying, and who could have wished for a better return
of his prayers? do aggravate his unbelief.

Ver. 19. [I am Gabriel] It signifies, A man of God: being taken in the same
form of construction with Malchizedek. He breaks out to utter his name,
which Angels at other times [and it may be himselfe] and refused to do,
because he would recall Zacharies thoughts to the book of Daniel, and convince
his hesitation by that very Scripture, Dan. 9.

[That stand before God:] That is, that minister to him, as Dan. 7. 10. 1 Samuel
16. 22. 2 King. 5. 25. etc. Therefore those that from this phrase would collect
that Gabriel is an Archangel, or one of the prime order of Angels, do build
but upon a very sandy foundation.

Ver. 20. [Behold thou shall be dumb] The sign given, is in Zachary himself,
and not in any thing without him: partly, because his doubting arose from the
consideration of himself, and partly, that he might carry about him a
punishment for his diffidence, as well as a sign for his confirmation.

Now his punishment was twofold, deafness and dumbness both; for because he
had not hearkened to the Angels speech, he was struck deaf; and because he had
gaine-said it, he was made dumb. For, first, the Greek (...), ver. 22. and the
word (...) by which the Syrian renders it, do signify both deaf and dumb.
And secondly, in ver. 62. it is said, They made signs to him, which had not
needed, if he could have heard.

(...): This latter clause of the verse might not unfitly be rendered thus.
Thou shall be dumb, etc. until the day that these things for which thou have
not believed my words, shall be performed: And thus is his dumbness limited
or extended, the cleerer, till the accomplishing of the things of which he
doubted.

Ver. 22. [Hee could not speak to them] The Priest at the dismission of the
people, when the service of the Temple was finished, was to pronounce the
blessing in Number. 6. 24, 25, 26. Which when Zachary is now to do, he is
speechless, and cannot perform it: for the Leviticall Priesthood is now
growing dumb, and he that was to bless indeed, namely Christ, is near at hand.

Ver. 23. [Assoon as the days of his Ministration were accomplished.] The dumb
and deaf Priest officiateth in that service which the lot had cast upon him, a
certain time, either more or less, after he was fallen under this double
imperfection.

For, first, neither of these a^e named among those defects and blemishes that
secluded from the service in the Sanctuary.

Secondly, the Priesthood of the Law consisted mainely and chiefly of manual
actions or offices for the hands; as offering, sprinkling, waving, and such
others [to which sense the Targums expound The works of Levies hands, Deuteronomy.
33. 11.] and so it might the better be speech less: But the Ministry of the
Gospel cannot admit of dumbness, because it consists of Preaching, and for
that purpose was furnished and endowed at the beginning and entrance of it,
with the gift of tongues.

Ver. 24. [Elisabeth hid her self, saying, etc.] This her retiredness and
hiding of her self, proceeded partly from devotion, and partly from respect of
the child that she had conceived: For, the words, or thoughts that proceed
from her at this her retiring, must needs show the reason why she did it: Now,
she said, Because the Lord has done thus to me, when he looked upon me to
take away my reproach: where two distinct things are plainly remarkable:

First, Gods taking away her reproach, by giving her a child after so long
barrenness: this is not the thing that she hides for, but,

Secondly, Thus, Emphaticall, and gives a clear resolution of this place,
which has scrupled many into strange and harsh expositions, for not observing
it: as that she should hide her self for fear that she should not prove with
childe^ Other^* that she did it for shame, lest she should be reputed
lascivious, for being with child, etc. Judicet lector.
His dealing thus with her when he would take that reproach away, as to give
her such a child, that was to be of so eminent a calling, and so great a
Prophet: And for this it was that the betook her self to this retiring and
reclusivenesse, partly that she might ply her devotion so much the closer upon
so great a benefit, and chiefly that she might sequester from all occasions of
uncleanness, or defiling, since she carried one in her womb, that was to be
so strict a Nazarite. As see the like, Judge. 13. 14.

Verse. 26. [And in the sixth moneth] This sixth month from the conception of
the Baptist, was the tenth month of the months of the year, or the month
Tebeth, which answers to part of our December; the time at which a long error
has laid the nativity: At the very same time of the year, Esther another
Virgin had been promoted to honor and royalty by Abashuerus, Esth. 16. 17.

[Vnto a City of Galilee] Out of Galilee arises no Prophet, the Jews said
once in the scorn of our Savior, slanderously and very falsely, Joh. 7. 52.
For out of Galilee arose the renowned Prophet Jona^: of Gath Hepher, 2 King.
14. 25. in the Tribe of Zebulon, Josh. 19. 13. And in Galilee was much of the
converse of Elias, but especially of Elisha at Shunem, 2 King. 4. 8. in the
tribe of Issachar, Josh. 19. 18. and all these three famous Prophets of the
Gentiles. And no place could be fitter for the bringing forth of Christ and his
Apostles, that were to be the Converters of the Gentiles, then Galilee of the
Gentiles.

[Nazaret] See 2 King. 17. 9. the tower of Nozarim: which if Chorography would
suffer, might be understood of this City, which was built like a watchtower
on the top of a steep hill, Luke 4. 29. Nazaret, in the Arabic tongue,
signifies Help; in the Hebr. a Branch, by which name our Savior is called,
Esa. 11. 1.

Verse. 27. [To a Virgin] Rabbi Oshua the Son of Levi said, Israel was
comforted in a Virgin; as says Jeremy, The Lord creates a new thing in the
earth; A Virgin shall compass a Man, Jer. 31. 21. Beresh. Rabb. See also Lyra
and Gloss. interlin. in loc.

Verse. 28. [Highly favoured] (...): This word is used by the Greek Scholiast,
in Psalm. 18. 26. (...); and the word from which it is derived, in Ephesians. 1. 6.
(...), etc. which let the indifferent Reader view, and judge of the propriety
of our English translation here, in comparison of the vulgar Latin. The Virgin
had obtained the highest earthly favor that ever mortal did or must do, to
be the mother of the Redeemer; and the Holy Ghost uses a singular word to
express so much.

Superstition is ever too officious; but it has showed it self, more so to
the Virgin Mary, then to any other. For as it has de^^ed her now she is in
heaven; so has it magnified her in all her actions, while she was upon the
earth. So that no relation, or story that concerns her, but it has strained
it to the utmost extremity, to wring out of it her praises, though very often
to a senseless, and too often to a blasphemous issue: As in this story of the
annuntiation, there is not a word nor tittle that it thinks will with all its
shaping serve for such a purpose, but it takes advantage to patch up her
Encomions, where there is no use nor need, nor indeed any truth of, and in such
a thing. This word that is under hand (...) bears the bell that ringeth
lowdest with them to such a tune. For having translated it in their vulgar
Latin, Gratia plena, or full of grace; they hence infer, that she had all
the seven gifts of the Spirit, and all the Theological and moral virtues, and
such a fullness of the graces of the Holy Ghost, as none ever had the like.

Whereas, first, the use of Scripture is, when it speaks of fullness of
grace, to express it by another phrase, as, Job. 1. 14. Act. 6. 5. etc.

Secondly, the Angel himself explaineth this word, in the sense of our
translation, for favor received, and not for grace inherent, Verse. 30. Thou
have found favor with God.

Thirdly, and so does the Virgin her self also desca^t upon the same thing,
throughout her Song.

Fourthly, Joseph her husband suspected her for an adulteress, Mat. 1. 18.
which he could never have done, if he had ever seen so infinite fullness of
grace in her, as the R^manists have spied, and he was the likelier to have
espied it of the two.

Fifthly, compare her with other renowed women, and what difference, but only
this great favor of being the mother of the Messiah? They had the spirit of
Prophecy as well as she; they had the spirit of sanctification as well as she:
and she no more immunity from sin and death then they.

Sixthly, she was one of the number of those, that would have taken off Christ
from preaching; Mark. 3. and this argued not such a fullness of grace.

Seventhly, See Jansenius, one of their own side, expounding this word
according to our reading of it: in loc.

[The Lord is with thee] Many understand this of the Incarnation it self, or
of the Lords being in her womb. Whereas, first, this is to take a common
manner of speech, out of the common manner of interpreting it. Secondly, the
Lord was not at this very instant, come in that manner into her womb. But the
words only mean, the Lords being with her in regard of that favor and
respect, which he was about to show her, as Judge. 6. 12. And this among other
things shows how senseless Popery is in its Ave M^aries, using these words
for a Prayer, and if occasion serve for it, for a charm: As first, turning a
Salutation into a Prayer: Secondly, in fitting these words of an Angel, that
was sent, and that spoke them upon a special message, to the mouth of every
person, and for every occasion. Thirdly, in applying these words to her now
she is in Heaven, which suited with her only while she was upon earth. As
first, to say, full of grace, to her that is full of glory: And secondly, to
say, The Lord is with thee, to her that is with the Lord.

[Blessed art thou among wom^n.] Not above, but among them. See Genesis 30. 13.
Judge. 5. 24.

Verse. 29. [And when she saw him] So reads the Syrian, Arabic; and
generally all other translations, but only the vulgar Latin; that swarving,
as it is to be suspected, wilfully, from the truth of the Original, that
hereby there might be the greater plea and color for the Virgins familiarity
with Angels: Whereas indeed apparition of Angels, till this very occasion to
Zachary and the Virgin, was either exceeding rare, or just none at all.

What manner of salutation, etc. Judge how Superstition straineth the text to
the Virgin Mary's praises, when it inferres from hence, that she had never been
saluted by a man in all her life before: An opinion and gloss not worth the
examining.

Verse 31. [Behold thou shall conceive, etc.] From Esa. 7. 14. the Angel
gives her to understand, that she is the Virgin spoken of in that place: and
of her apprehension of this, arises her question, Verse. 4.

[And shall call his Name] This follows the same Prophecy still, and is one
of the significations of the word (...); for it has more then one.

For, first, it denotes the third person feminine, as Deuteronomy. 31. 29. (...), and
so it is to be taken in that Prophecy. And she shall call his Name Immanuel.

Secondly, it betokens also the second person, as the Chaldee, the Lxx, and
the other two Greek translations render it, and the Angel here; And thou shall
call.

Thirdly, it is also applied to the third person plural, as in the Greek Mat.
1. 23. and in the Chaldee, Esa. 60. 18.

[Jesus] The same with Jehoshua in Hebrew, as Act. 7. 45. Heb. 4. 8. and Jeshua
in Chaldee, Ezra. 2. 2. These were two renowned ones before; the one whereof
brought the people into Canaan, after the death of Moses; and the other, that
brought them thither out of Babel, and so were both lively figures of our
Jesus, that brings his people to the heavenly Canaan.

Verse. 32. [The Son of the Highest] From 2 Samuel 7. 14. as it is explained,
Heb. 1. 5. the Angel now draws the Virgin to remember that glorious promise
made to David, as the words following, concerning an eternal Throne and
Kingdom, do evince; and upon the rumination upon that to reflect upon her
self, and to consider that she was of the seed of David* and so he leads
her on by degrees to believe and entertain what he was relating to her.

[Shall give unto him the Throne] Psalm. 2. 7, 8, 9. Ezekiel. 21. 27. Dan. 7. 14.
etc.

Verse. 33. [Hee shall reign over the house of Jacob] This term, the house of
Jacob includes; First, all the twelve tribes, which the word Israel could not
have done. Secondly, the Heathens and Gentiles also, for of such the house and
family of Jacob was full.

Verse. 34. [Seeing I know not a man] These words, say the Rhemists, declare
that she had now vowed Virginity to God: For if she might have known a man,
and so have had a child, she would never have asked how shall this be done:
And Jansemus goes yet further: From these words, says he, it does not only
follow that she had vowed, but this seems also to follow from them, that her
vow was approved of God: See also Aquin. part. 3. quaest. 28. art. 4. Baron. in
apparatu ad Annal. etc.

Answ. First, among the Jews, marriage was not held a thing indifferent, or at
their own liberty to choose or refuse, but a binding command; and the first of
the 613. as it is found ranked in the Benteteuch, with the threefold Targum, at
Genesis 1. 28. and Paul seems to allude to that opinion of theirs, when speaking
of this subject, he says, Praeceptum non habeo, 1 Cor. 7. 6.

Secondly, among the vows that they made to God, Virginity never came in the
number. Jephtha's was heedlesse, and might have been revoked, as the Chaldee
Paraphrast, and Rabbi Solomen well conceive; and David Kimchi is of a mind,
that he was punished for not redeeming it according to Lev. 27.

Thirdly, to die childlesse, was a reproach among men, Luke 1. 25. and to live
unmarried, was a shame to women, Psalm. 78. 63. Their Virgins were not praised;
that is, were not married. Now what a gulf is there between vowing perpetual
Virginity, and accounting it a shame, dishonor, and reproach?

Fourthly, if Mary had vowed Virginity, why should she marry? Or when she was
married, why should she vow Virginity? For some hold that her vow was made
before her espousalls, and some after.

Fifthly, it was utterly unnecessary that she should be any such a votall, it
was enough that she was a Virgin.

Sixthly, it is a most improper phrase, to say, I know not a man, and to mean,
I never must know him: and in every place where it is used concerning Virgins,
why may it not be so understood, as well as here?

Seventhly, while the Romanist goes about, with this gloss to extol her
Virginity, he abaseth her judgment and belief: For if she meant thus, she
infers, that either this child must be begotten by the mixture of man, which
shows her ignorance; or that he could not be begotten without, which shows
her unbelief.

Eighthly, she utters not these words in diffidence, as Zachary had done,
when he said, how shall I know this; but in desire to be satisfied in the
mystery, or the manner, as she was in the matter. She understood that the
Angel spoke of the birth of the Messiah; she knew that he should be borne of
a Virgin; she perceived that she was pointed out for that Virgin; and
believing all this she desires to be resolved how so great a thing should
come to pass.

Verse. 35. [The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, etc.] The Angel satisfies the
Virgins question, with a threefold answer. First; instructing her in the manner
of the performance. Secondly, furnishing her with an example of much like
nature in her Cousin Elisabeth. Thirdly, confirming her from the power of God,
to which nothing is impossible. Now, whereas, this unrestrained power of God
was the only cause of such examples, as the childing of Elisabeth, and other
barren women; in this birth of the Virgin, something more, and of more
extraordinarinesse is to be looked after. In it therefore two actions are
expressed to concur, First, The Holy Ghost his coming upon the Virgin;
Secondly, The power of the most High overshadowing her: and two fruits or
consequents of these two actions, answerable to them: First, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, therefore that that is borne of thee shall be holy.
Secondly, The power of the most High shall overshadow thee, therefore that that
is borne of thee shall be called the Son of God.

The coming of the Holy Ghost upon her, was, First, In the gift of Prophecy,
whereby she was both informed of the very instant, when the conception was
wrought, and also more fully of the mystery of the Incarnation then before.

Secondly, He did prepare and sanctify so much of her flesh and blood or
seed, as to constitu^^ the body of our Savior: The work was the work of the
whole Trinity, but ascribed more singularly to the Holy Ghost: first, because
of the sanctifying of that seed, and clearing it of original taint; for
sanctification is the work of the Holy Ghost: Secondly, for the avoiding of
that dangerous consequence, which might have followed among men of corrupt
minds, who might have opinionated, if the conception of the Mess^as in the
womb had been ascribed to the Father, that the Son had had no other manner
of generation of him.

[The power of the most High] His operating power supplying the want of the
vigor and embraces of the masculine Parent. For to that the word overshadow
seems to have aliusion: being a modest phrase whereby the Hebrews expressed
the embraces of the man in the act of generation, as Ruth 3. 9. Spread the
skirt of thy garment over thine handmaid.

[Therefore that holy thing] This title and Epithet, first, not only shows
the purity and immaculatenesse of the humane nature of Christ; but also,
secondly, it being applied to the preceding part by way of consequence, as was
touched before, it shows that none ever was borne thus immaculate, but Christ
alone, because none had ever such a way means of conception, but only he.

Ver. 36. [Thy Cousin Elisabeth has conceived a Son.] As he had informed the
Virgin of the birth of the M^ssi^^ of her self, so does he also of the birth
of his forerunner, of her Cousin Elisabeth. For that he intended not barely
to inform her only that her Cousin had conceived a Child, but that he
heightens her thoughts, to think of him as Christ's forerunner, may be
supposed upon these observations: First, that he says A Son, and not a
Child. Second, that such strangely borne Sons were ever of some remarkable
and renowned eminency. Thirdly, that if he had purposed only to show her the
possibility of her conceiving by the example of the power of God in other
women, he might have mentioned Sarah, Hannah, and others of those ancient
ones, and it had been enough.

Ver. 39. [And Mary arose, etc. And went with haste into the hill Country, into
a City of Juda.] This City was Hebron. For unto the sons of Aaron, Joshua gave
the City of A^ba, which is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah. Josh. 21. 11.
And Zacharias being a son of Aaron, and dwelling in the hill Country of
Jud^^^ it were senseless to seek for his house in any other place then Hebron.
This place had been excellently renowned in ancient time: Here was the promise
given of Isaac: here was the institution of Circumcision: here Abraham had his
first land, and David his first Crown: and here lay interred the three
couples, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah: and as antiquity
has held, Adam and Eve. Now there are many reasons given by Expositors, of
Mary's hasting hither after the Message of the Angel: As, either to know the
truth of what was told her about Elisabeth, or to congratulate and rejoice with
her, or to minister to her in her great bellyednesse, or that the Baptist in
Elisabeths womb might be sanctified by the presence of Christ in hers, etc.

But I cannot but conceive this to be the very reason indeed, That she might
there conceive the Messiah, where so many types, figures, and things relating
to him, had g^^e before, namely in Hebron. For, First, this suited singularly
with the Harmony and Consent, which God uses in his works, that the promise
should begin to take place by the conception of Messiah, even among those
Patriarchs to whom the promise was first given. Secondly, A kind of necessity
seems to lie upon it, that this Shiloh of the Tribe of Juda, and the seed of
David, should be conceived in a City of Juda, and of David, as he was to be
borne in another City that belonged to them both. Thirdly, the Evangelists so
punctually describing this City, seems rather to refer to Christ then John,
who being of the Priests might indifferently have been born in any of the
Tribes whatsoever. Only the Holy Ghost gives us to observe this which may not
be passed, That John that should bring in Baptism in stead of Circumcision,
was borne in that very place where Circumcision was first ordained, in the City
Hebron. It is generally held indeed that the Virgin conceived in Nazaret, and
in the very instant of the Angels talking with her, but whether there be not
as much probability for this opinion, as for that, I refer to the equal and
judicious Reader.

Ver. 40. [And saluted Elisabeth] This seems to have been at some distance,
and a wall or floor between: as consider seriously on ver. 42. 44.

Ver. 41. [The babe leaped.] (...): This word is used by the Lxx. for Jacobs
and Esaus stirring in the womb, Genesis 25. 22. And the leaping of the mountains
at the giving of the Law.

Elisabeth in ver. 44. adds, The babe leaped (...): Not that he knew what
he did when he leaped, any more then they, but that either this was the first
time, or this time was extraordinary. The word (...) signifies outward
gesticulation or exultation as well as inward joy, yea, though there be no
inward joy at all: as Psalm. 65. 13. (...), the little hills shall be girded
with exultation: And so is it to be understood here: The babe in my womb
leaped with extraordinary gesticulation or ex^ltation: and (...) to signify
the manner of the thing done, and not the cause of the doing.

Ver. 45. [And blessed is she that believed.] Elisabeth in this clause seems
to have an eye to her own husbands unbeleefe, and the punishment that befell
him for the same. He, a Man, a Priest, aged, learned, eminent, and the message
to him of more appearing possibility: and Mary, a Woman, mean, unlearned, and
of a private condition, and the tidings to her most incredible, both to nature,
and reason, and yet she believed, and he did not.

Ver. 48. [Hee has regarded the low estate] (...): is used by the Lxx, 2 Samuel
9. 8. and Psalm. 25. ^6. and imports a look of pity and compassion, and not
of observation of desert, as the Papists would have it here: For some of them
render this clause thus, He has looked on mine humility with approbation; and
others give this gloss upon it: Because of her humility, she deserved to be
exalted, and by it she was primely disposed to conceive and bear the only
begotten Son of God* But first, the word E (...), as it is said before, in the
LXX, who must best help us to interpret, it signifies a look of another
nature. Secondly, (...) signifies not the virtue of humility or the lowliness
of mind, but the state of a low and poor condition, and so is it rendered here
by the Syrian, Arabicke, Spanish, French, Deodates Italian, Dutch, and all
Latins that are not wedded to the vulgar: And so is it used by the Lxx, Genesis
16. 1^ and 41. 52* 1 Samuel 1. 11. and so again by the New Testament, Act. 8.
33. compared with the Original in Isa. 53. 8. And so profane and heathen
Authors distinguish betwixt (...) and (...), by the former understanding as
we do here, and by the latter the virtue of humility. Thirdly, The same word
in a manner, or one of the same root, in ver. 52. is opposed to (...), and
inevitably bears the sense we follow. Fourthly, if the Virgin spoke in the
sense the Romanists would have her, He has looked upon my lowliness to give
it its desert, she would prove to be intolerably proud in the valuing of her
humility.

[All generations shall call me blessed] As Genesis 30. 13. Not only thou oh
Cousin Elisabeth, and the Jewish nation that expect the Messiah, but even all
the world, and all successions of ages among the heathen, shall come to the
knowledge and confession of Christ, and account me blessed in the favor that
I have received.

Ver. 51. [Her has scattered the proud, etc.] If the Virgin aim these words,
and those of the same tenor that follow, at any particular persons, as some
conceive she does, and means the Devils, or the Pharisees, or the Jews, it
might as well be conceived, that she has respect to the four tyrannous and
persecuting Monarchies in the Book of Daniel, which were now destroyed, as much
as to any thing else: But since the very same words in a manner, are to be
found in the song of Hannab, 1 Samuel, 2. they warrant us to interpret them not so
restrictively, as to any one particular example, but of the general and
ordinary dealing of God in the world, with the wicked.

SECT. III.
S. MATTHEW, CHAP. I.
THe Gen ^. 1.
Book It might be understood, The Book of the History, as ge^^neration is
taken, Genesis 2. 4. and 37. 2. and so it might be^ the title, not of this Chapt^^
only, but o^ the whole book. But since the Evangelists intention is to set
down Christ's alliance to the Royal line by his Father Iyseph, the phrase must
be understood accordingly: and so the Chaldee uses the very Grecke word to
translate (...), The Family of R^m. Job. 32. 2. See a third sense of (...) in
Jam. 1. 23. and 3. 6.
of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham. 2
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas, for (...) in
Hebrew: For the Greek cannot utter. [^] before a vowest in the middle of a
word, nor after one in the end* therefore in the middle, it leaves i^ our, as
in Jofapha^, Joram, and th^s word Jud^ and in the end it changes it in [^] as
in this, and many other words in this Chapter.
Judas, and his brethren. 3 And Judas begat Phares, and Zara of Tamar; and
Phares^ begat Esrom, and Esrome begat Aram. 4 And Or Ram. 1 Chronicles. 2. 8^ Ruth
4. 19.
Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminad ab begat Naasson, and Naasson, begat called
Salma, Ruth 4. 20.
Salmon. 5 And Salmon begat He is h^ld by the ^ewes to be Ipsan, Judge. 12. 8.
Boos of Rachab, and Boos begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse. 6 And Jesse
begat David, in the Arabic, signifies a worm: to which he may seem to
allude, Psalm. 22. 6.
David the King, and David the King begat Solomon, of her that had been the
wife of Vrias. 7 And Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam begat Rehob^am, in naming
this his Son Abi-jah, which signifies, God is my father, seems to have had
his eye upon the promise to David, I will be his father, 2 Sa^. 7. 14. which
Because he embraced not (...) lively faith, but challenged only by a
p^esumptuous (...) patio^, for he walked not in the ways of David; therefore
does the re^^ elsewhere conceal the name of God, in the name of his Son, and
calle^^ him Ab^^^^, My father is a Sea; For so unconstant in good was Re^ob^am,
as Jam. 1. 6. being a child at forty years old* 2 Chronicles. 13. 17.
Abia, and Abia begat The Arabic rea^eth ^ Asaph.
Asa. 8 And Asa begat Josaphat, and Josaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat
Ozias. 9 And Ozias begat Joatham, and Joatham begat Achas, and Achas begat
Eze^ias. 10 And Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Am^n begat
Josias. 11 And Josias begat Called Conias, Jer. 22. 24. For God by taking away
the first syllable of his name, shows that he will notestablish the throne,
or race of Solomon any more upon it: as his Father lehojakim belike is so
naming him had presumed. The Jews delighted to join the name Jehovah, to their
own Names, but somewhat sho^med. For in the beginning of the name, it was but
Jeho; as Jeho-shaphat, Jeho-ram, etc. And in the end, it was Jahu; as
Mica-jahu, Eli-jahu. And sometime in the very same name it was set before, or
after indifferently, as Jeho-achaz, 2 Chronicles. 21. 17. is Ahazjahu, 2 Chronicles. 22.
1. So Jehojachin, 2 King. 24. 8. is Jecho^-jahu, ^ Chron. 3. 16.
Jechoni^^ and his brethren, about the time they were carried away into
Babylon. 12 And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel,
and Salathiel begat Zorobabel. 13 And Zorobabel begat Abi^d, and Abi^d begat
Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor. 14 And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat
Achim, and Achim begat Eliud. 15 And Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat
Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob. 16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of
Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 17 So all the generations
from Abraham to David, are fourteen generations: and from David until the The
Captivity of the Jews into Babel, was but (...), a ^^ining of their Families:
[As Aristeas says of Prel. Lagus his captiving them, (...).] for they returned
ere long to their own home again; But the ten Tribes captivated by
Shalmanezer, are said to be, (...) A (...) in the Lxx, 2 King. 18. 11. in a
perpetual departure from their own houses; And they, and all the rest of the
Nation, are at this day (...), in a dispersion, without any home of their own
at all, Joh. 7. 35. Jam. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 1.
carrying away into Babylon, are fourteen generations: and from the carrying
away unto Babylon unto Christ, are fourteen generations. 18 Now the birth of
Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph
(before they came together) she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 19 Then
Joseph her Husband being a just man, and not willing (...). It has been
thought (says Gellius) that there ought to be three causes in punishing of
offenses. The first, [(...)] is when punishment is used for castigation, or
amendment of him that ha^h offended. The second [called (...)] is, when
punishment is used, that the dignity, and honor of him that has been
wronged, may be maintained. The third [which is called (...).] is when
punishment is inflicted for examples sake, that others be the fear of the
known punishment may be deterred from the like offenses. Noct. At. lib. 6.
cap. 14.
to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily. 20 But
while he thought on these things, the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a
dream, saying, Joseph thou Son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
Wise; for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost. 21 And she
shall bring forth a S^ and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save
his people from their sinues. 22 Now all this was done, that it might be
fulfilled, which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, 23 Behold, a
Virgin shall be with child; and shall bring forth a Son, and shall call his
Name Emmanuel, which being interpre^d, is, God with us. 24 Then Joseph being
raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord ^ad hidden him, and took unto
him his wife. 25 And knew ^er not until she had brought forth her first borne
Son, and he called his name Jesus.
Reason of the Order.
AFter Mary has been three months absent from Joseph [as in the last vers^
of the Section preceding] upon her return he perceives her to be with
child, for which he intends secretly to put her away; as Tamar after three
months, is descried to be in the same case, and Judah resolves, publicly to
put her to death, Genesis 38. 24.

This being considered, it is plain to see how properly the eighteenth verse
of this chapter follows in order of time, after the last verse of the Section
next going before.

Now since the Evangelist has begun with the genealogy, that also must here
be taken in; and that the rather, because he has placed it in the forefront
of his Gospel, for special reason. First, that he might make way for the
understanding of those words of the Angel, Joseph thou Son of David, Verse 20.
Secondly, that the title which the wisemen give to our Savior might be
cleared, when they call him King of the Jews, Chap. 2. 2. Thirdly, that his
being the true and right Messiah might be approved, by showing that according
to the promises and Prophecies made before concerning him, he was descended of
the seed of Abraham, and the stock^ of David. For the two first and maine
things that the Jews would inquire after concerning our Savior, to try
whether he were the true Messiah, or no, would be these. First, whether he were
of the house of David. Secondly, whether he were borne in Bethlehem; and so
we find them questioning about him, Joh. 7. 42. In this regard it was
necessary, that Matthew an^^Jebrew, writing his Gospel for the Hebrews, should
at the very first entrance of it, give them satisfaction in these two
particulars: which he does accordingly, showing his descent from David in this
Chapter, and his birth in Bethlehem, in the next Chapter following.

The last verse of this Section and chapter, He knew her not, till she had
brought forth her firstborn Son, etc. may seem to interrupt the right
order of the story, and to bring in Christ's birth before its time, if we lay
it here. But since the Evangelist will say no more of it, but only this; and
because we desire to break the text into as few pieces as possible, this shall
be let to lie where it does, without any transposition, and we will imagine
the two next Sections to be expositions at large, upon what this verse does but
speak in brief.

Harmony and Explanation.
Public Registers of the Tribe of Judah, and of the other Tribes that adhered
to it, were reserved even in the captivity and forward; as may be collected by
the books of Ezra and N^h migh: And from Lukes telling that Anna was of the
tribe of Aser, and Paul's, that himself was of the tribe of Benjamin.

From one of these does Matthew fetch the latter end of his genealogy, and Luke
from another the beginning of his, having then the civil records to avouch for
them, if they should be questioned, which the Jews now wanting, do unjustly
cavil.

[The Son of David, the Son of Abraham] Jesus Christ is to be applied unto
both, thus: Jesus Christ the Son of David, Jesus Christ the Son of Abraham:
as see the like phrase Genesis 36. 3. Aholibamah the Daughter of Ana^, the
Daughter of Zibeon: that is thus to be understood, Aholibamah the Daughter of
Anab, Aholibamah the Daughter of Zibeon: as that chapter makes it most clear.
And there is the like, and far more largely, Luke. 3 23. etc.

Now Abraham and David are named, rather then any other, First, because one of
them was father of the Jewish Nation, and the other the first in the Kingdom,
of which Nation and Kingdom, all Prophecies had told that Christ should come.
Secondly, because the promise of Christ was made to these two in plaine^
terms, then to and other.

David i^ first named, first, because the promise to him was freshes in memory,
plainer, and more explicit: secondly, because the de^^^n^ of the Messiah from
David, was the maine thing the Jews looked after in him? thirdly, the Holy
Ghost does hereby, as it were beforehand, answer the impious distinction, so
frequent among the Rabbines, of Messiah ben Joseph, and Messiah ben David.

Ver. 2. [Judas and his brethren.] His brethren are added from Genesis 49. 8. to
comfort the dispersed Tribes that were not yet returned out of Captivity as
Judah was, in their equal interest in Christ as well as he, as Hos. 1. 11.

Ver. 3. [Phares and Zara.] He names Zara, because he would bring in their
Mother Tam^r. Ismael and Esau, the one a brother to Isaac, the other a twin to
Jacob, are not named, because they were both wicked, but the brethren of Juda,
and the twin to P^arts are named, because they are both good. At the birth of
Jacob and Esau it is said (...) twins, with the letter N wanting, because Esau
one of them was evil: But as the birth of Phares and Zarait is said (...) with
that letter supplied, because both of them were good, R. Sollin Genesis 25. and 38*

[Of Thamar] Four women are named in this Genealogy, women once of notorious
infamy, Tamar incestuous, Rahab an ha^lot, Ruth an Heathen, and Bathsheba an
Adulteress: To show that Christ came to heal all sores, when he recured such
sinners, and that he despised not our shame, when he shamed not to descend of
such Parents.

Ver. 5. [Rahab] It can little be doubted but that he means her, mentioned
Josh. 2. Now the Jews, [belike to deface the truth of Matthew, who from
ancient Records, averreth her for the wife of Salmon] have broached this tenet,
that she was married unto Joshua, vid. Kimchi in loc.

Ver. 8. [Joram begat Ozid^] Here The seed of the wicked shall be cut off,
Psalm. 37. 28. See the letter (...), which is the last letter of (...) the seed,
and of (...) the wicked, cut out of that Acrosticall, and alphabeticall Psalm,
at that very place.
three descents are omitted, namely, [Ahaziah, I^ash, and Ambziah] as compare 2 Chronicles. 3. 2 King. 8. But it is most divinely done, from the threatening of the
second Commandment, Thou shall not commit Idolatry, for I visit the sins of
the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth Generation. Joram
committed Idolatry like the house of Ahab, for the daughter of Ahab was his
wife, 2 King. 8. 18. Therefore it is just with God to visit that sin upon his
children: in sign of which he blotteth them out of this line to the fourth
generation: So is it the manner of Scripture, very often to leave out men's
names out of certain stories and Records, to show a distaste at some evil in
them. So all Cains posterity is blotted out of the Book of the Chronicles, as
it was out of the world by the Flood. So Simeon is omitted in Moses blessing,
Deuteronomy. 33. for his cruelty at Shechem, and to Joseph. So Dan, at the sealing of
the Lords people, Rev. 7. because of Idolatry begun in his Tribe, Judge. 18. and
so Joab, from among David's Worthies, 2 Samuel 23. because of his bloodinesse to
Amasa and Abner. Such another close intimation of Gods displeasure at this
wickedness of Joram; is to be seen, 2 Chronicles. 22. 1, 2. where the reign of
his Son Ahaziah is not dated according to the custom and manner of the other
Kings of Judah, but by the style of the continuance of the house of Omri, into
which Family his Father had married, and was become so profane as to worship
their Idols. The Son of the two and forty years was Ahaziah when he began to
reign. That is, of the last of the two and forty, of the house of Omri, in
which it fell, and Ahaziah with it.

Ver. 11. [Josias begat Jechonias.] So reads the Syrian, Arabicke, and the
most and best Greek Copies: And so the Evang^list himself requires that it
be read, to make just fourteen generations from David to the Captivity into
Babel. And so reads D. Kimchi, on 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. Josias indeed begat
Joachim, and Joachim begat Jechonias; but he that was neither fit to be
lamented, nor to be buried like one of the Kings of Judah, Jerem. 22. 18, 19.
was much more unfit to come into the Line of the Kings of Judah, that leads
to Christ.

Ver. 12. [Jechonias begat Salathiel.] Jechonias was Father to Salat^^, as
Baasha was to Ahab, 1 King. 20. 34. not by generation, but by predecession. For
Jechonias in very deed was childlesse, Jer. 22. 30. and the natural Father of
Salathiel was Neri, Luke 3. 27. yet he is said to beget him, because he
declared and owned him for his next heir and Successor; As God is said to
beget Christ on the day of his Resurrection, Psalm. 2. 7. Act. 13. 33. that is,
declared him thereby to be his Son, Romans 1. 4.

The Scripture affects to speak short in relating of Stories, that are well
known before: as to spare more, you may find an example far harsher than
this, in 1 Chronicles. 1. 36. where Tinna the Concubine of Eliphaz is named as
Eliphaz his Son.

And in 1 Chronicles. 3. 16. Zedekiah the Uncle of Jechoniah is called his Son,
because he succeeded him in the Roialty.

The Jews in their Talmud, give this rule for a fundamental point: That there
is no King to be for Israel, but of the house of David, and of the seed of
Solomon only: And he that separateth against this Family, denies the Name of
the blessed God, and the words of his Prophets that are spoken in truth.
Sanhedr. Perek. 10. and R. Samuel in Ner. Mitsvah. fol. 153.

With which opinion, although Matthew seem to comply at the first appearance,
in that he deriveth our Savior from Solomon, because of the Hebrews for whom
he wrote, which looked for him from thence, yet the carnal sense of it, which
aims only at the earthly Kingdom of the Messiah, and at the exact descent
from Solomon, he closely confuteth to the eyes of the intelligent Reader by
these two things. First, in that he brings the Line along to Jechonias, in
whom the seed of Solomon and the regal dignity also with it failed. Secondly,
in that he deriveth the interest of Christ in that dignity, if it were any,
only by Joseph, which according to the flesh, had no relation at all to him,
save the marriage of his Mother.

The Jews to disgrace the Gospel of S. Luke, do hold that Jechonias was the
natural Father of Salathiel, and that upon his repentance in Babel God gave
him children, as Assir and Salathiel. D. Kimchi on 1 Chronicles. 3. But God had
sworn, Jer. 22. 28. and he will not repent, Psalm. 110. 4. that he should die
childlesse to the Throne, and his repentance could no more repeal this Oath of
God, then the prayer of Moses did the decree of his not entering into the Land.

[A^d Salathiel begat Zorobabel.] Salathiel begat Pedaiah, and Pedaiah begat
Zorobabel, 1 Chronicles. 3. 18, 19. But because, when the masculine Line of Solomon's
house failed in Jechonias, the dignity turning over to the Line of Nathin,
first settled upon Salathiel, but first showed it self eminent in Zorobabel,
therefore constantly, when mention is made of Zorobabel, he is not called the
Son of Pedaiah a man of no action but obscure, but the Son of Salathiel, in
whom the honor of that Family began. For Jechonias was as a signs plucked
off, Jer. 22. 24. and Zorobabel was set on again in his stead, Hag. 2. 23.

Ver. 13. [And Zorobabel begat Abind] Among the children of Zorobabel mentioned
1 Chronicles. 3. 19, 20. there is no memorial either of Abiud, his Son named here,
or of R^b^s^ his Son named by St. Luke. But as in Scripture it is ordinary for
one man to have several names, so is it to be understood of these. The eldest
Son then of Zorobabel, to whom the honor lately fallen upon that house was to
descend, was called Mesullam. Either in memorial of Solomon, the glory of
whose house was transferred to him [and so he also calls a daughter of his
Shelomith, the name by which the wife of Solomon is called, Cant. 6. 13. as
being but the feminine of Shelomoh.] Or from the significancy of the word which
imports requited. For whereas Jechonias was also called Shallum, that is,
finished, because the race and line of Solomon did end in him, when a
recompense of the failing of that, is made by the succession of Salathiel in
its stead, well might Zorobabel in whom it first showed, call his Son Meshullam
or requited. Or from their peaceable building and inhabiting Jerusalem, after
their return from Babel. This Son Meshullam was called also Abiud, in
remembrance of this his Fathers glory: And his second brother Hananiah, was
also called Rhesa, that is, The chief, or principal, because of Christ's
descending from him. These things we have now but by conjecture, but that we
may take the bolder, because the Text in the place alleged in the Chronicles,
has set these two Sons of Zorobabel apart and distinct from the rest of
their Brethren, as if for some special thing more remarkable then they. But
there is no doubt but the Evangelists in naming them by these names, had
warranty from known and common Records to justify them in it.

Ver. 17. [Foureteen generations] In every one of these several foureteens,
they were under a several and distinct manner of Government, and the end of
each foureteen produced some alteration in their state. In the first, they were
under Prophets: in the second, under Kings: and in the third, under Hasmonean
Priests. The first foureteen brought their state to glory in the Kingdom of
David: The second, to misery in the Captivity of Babylon: And the third, to
glory again in the Kingdom of Christ.

The first begins with Abraham that received the promise, and ends in David,
that received it again with greater clearenesse. The second begins with the
building of the Temple, and ends in the destruction of it. The third begins
with their peeping out of misery in Babel, and ends in the accomplished
delivery by Christ.

The second, that terminateth in the peoples captiving into Babel, fixes not
on Jehoiakim, in whom the captivity began; nor in Zedekiah, in whom it was
consummate; but in Jechonias, who was in the middle space between. And from
the same da^e does Ezekiel count and reckon the captivity through all his
book, as Chap. 8. 1. and 20. 1. and 26. 1. and 29. 1. and 31. 1. and 32. 1.
and 40. 1.

The wholesum of the three fourteenes, is the renowned number of two and forty:
the number of the knops, and flowers, and branches of the Candlestick; of the
journeys and stations of Israel betwixt Egypt and Canaan, Numb. 33. of the
children of Bethel, 2 King. 2. 24. And see Rev. 11. 2. and 13. 5.

Verse. 18. [Before they came together, etc.] That is, to dwell together in the
same house. Nay, it is very probable, that as yet they dwelt not in the same
Town, but Joseph in Caper^^^^, and Mary in Naz^^e^.

Verse 19. [To make her a public example] (...): A word used by the Lxx, Number.
25. 4. Ezekiel: 28. 17. etc. And by the New Testament, Heb. 6. 6. And ever, says
Erasmus, in an evil sense. (...) has strangely translated this clause, Non lo
volendo Publicare: and diverse of the Papi^^s have more strangely expounded it,
a (...) volens trad^cere, not willing to taker her to himself, or to his o^ne
house: and why? Because he thought himself unworthy of her society: and
because the brightness of her face was such, that he could not look upon it:
And he thought it more possible for a woman to conceive without a man, then for
Mary to sin.

And thus will they make Joseph to divorce his wife, or at least to use
unkindly, for her too great excellencies.

A'(...) to divorce her: as Mat. 5. 31. and 19. 7. Mark. 10. 4. Luke 16. 18.
Erasm. Voluit cl^^culum ab ea diver tere; And so Brucioli, La v^lse
occultamente lasciare: making Joseph a patient in the divorce, rather then an
agent, or rather divorcing himself, then her.
[To put her away privily] The Law bound him not to bring her, either to shame
by trial before the Priest, Numb. 6. or to punishment by the sentence of the
Judges. The adulteress indeed was to be put to death, if she were accused,
prosecuted, and convicted; but to accuse and prosecute her, the Law bound not,
but upon deprehension in the very act, Joh. 8. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. Numb. 25. 8.
If a man took a wife, and hated her, Deuteronomy. 22. 1^. he might bring her to
trial, and upon conviction to punishment: but it he love her for all his
suspicion, and will connive at her fault, and not seek her death, he is at
liberty to connive and tol^^ated by the Law so to do, and blameless if he
did it, as Judge. 19. 2, 3. But if a couple were deprehended in the act of
adultery, then must there be no connivence, Deuteronomy. 22. 22. explaining Levit.
20. 10. And the case of the unbetrothed Damsel, Deuteronomy. 22. 28. explaining the
case of the betrothed.

And thus is that question easily answered, which has so toiled many
Expositors: How Joseph can be said to be just when in this very matter that is
now in hand he violateth: It is answered by denying that he violated the Law:
For that tolerated him thus to do.

Verse. 21. [Jesus, for he shall save] Rabenn haccadesh says, Because M^ssias
shall save men, he shall be called Joshua. But the Heathens of another Nation,
which shall embrace the belief of him, shall call ^is name Jesus: And this is
intimated, in Genesis 49. Chi jabho shilob: until Shil^h come. Vid. Galatin. lib.
3. cap. 20.

Verse. 23. [Behold, a Virgin] The Jews seek to elude this Prophecy of Isaiah
by expounding it, either of the Prophets wife, as Isa. 8. 3. or of the Kings
wife; and from Prove. 30. 19. they plead that Almah does not strictly signify a
virgin, but a woman that has known a man.

Answ. 1. There are three words in the Hebrew, that signify and betoken
Virginity, but this most properly: First, (...) signifies a Virgin, but not
always: for it properly denotes a young woman; yea* though she be not a
virgin, but has been touched. Secondly, Bethulah is the common word used to
denote Virginity; yet as Galatine observes out of Prove. 30. it seems
sometime to be taken otherwise. But thirdly, Almah properly imports a young
Virgin, and not at all one touched: So that Naarah signifies any young Woman,
though she be not a Virgin: Bethulah, a Virgin though she be not young: but
Almah imports youth and virginity both.

Secondly, the Lxx in the place of Isaiah cited, translate the word (...):
which denotes no otherwise then a Virgin.

Thirdly, it is given for a sign to Ahaz, that Almah should bear a Son: now
for one that had known a man to do so, were no sign at all. See Galatine.
lib. 7. cap. 15.

[They shall ca^l his Name Emmanuel] Nomen naturae, not impositionis, they
shall own him for God in our nature, and not denominate him Emmanuel for his
imposed name: See the like Phrase, Esa. 60. 18. Ezekiel. 4. 35.

[Which is being interpreted] First, this, and other passages of the same
nature in this Evangelist, argue strongly, that Matthew wrote not his Gospel in
the Hebrew tongue, as is very commonly held: For, first, then had this word
needed no interpretation, and it had been very hard to have interpreted it, but
by the same word again. Secondly, the Jews in those times that Matthew wrote,
understood not the Hebrew tongue in its purity, but had degenerated into the
use and speech of the Syrian. Thirdly, Jonathan Ben Vzziel translated the
Prophets out of Hebrew into Chaldee, a little before the coming of Christ; and
Onkelos did as much by the Law a little after, and both did so, because the
Jews could not at that time understand or read the Bible in its own Hebrew
tongue: and how improper then was it for Matthew to write his Gospel in that
language? Fourthly, all the world that used the Old Testament at those times,
unless it were such as had gained the Hebrew tongue by study, used it in the
translation of the Lxx, or the Greek, and it was requisite that the Penmen of
the New Testament should write in that language, and according to their style
[as Paul writing for, and to Romans, and Matthew and he to Hebrewes] that
their quotations out of the Old Testament might be examined by the Greek Bible.
Fifthly, let those that hold the opinion we are confuting, but seriously
consider that Christ calls himself by the name of two Greek letters, and
why; Rev. 1. 8.

Verse 25. [He knew her not till she had brought forth] This properly falls
in order at Luke 2. 7. and there shall it be taken up again.

SECTION V.
S. LVKE. CHAP. 1.
The Birth and Circumcision of John the Baptist, and the tongue of his father
restored, etc.
Verse. 57. NOw Elisabeths Though the conceived her child above the course of
nature, yet his time in the womb was according to it.
full time came that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a Son. 58
And Hebron was inhabited by Aaronites: but the fields and villages about with
children of Juda, Josh. 21. 11. These two are Elisabeths neighbors and cousins.
her neighbors, and her cousins heard how the Lord had Greek, Had magnified
mercy; (...) as in Psalm. 18. 50. the Hebr. and Lxx and Psalm. 1^6. 2.
showed great mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her. 59 And it came to
pass on the eighth day, they came to circumcise the child, and they called
him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 60 And his mother answered and
said, Not so, but he shall be called John. 61 And they said unto her, There
is none of thy kindred that is called by this name. 62 And they made signs to
his father, how he would have him called. 63 And he asked for Vulg. Pugillarem.
of which see Plin. lib. 13. cap. 11. E'(...). Batrachom.
a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John, and they marvailed all.
64 And his mouth was (...) in Hebrew signifies both to ^p^n and to unloose,
and so the loosing of his tongue, which is not expre^sed in the Greek, toidem
verbis, is implied in the word A'(...), by an Hebraisme.
opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, and praised God. 65
And fear came on all that dwelt round about them, and all these sayings were
noised abroad throughout all the hill Country of Judea. 66 And all they that
had heard them, See Genesis 37. 11. Prove. 2. 1. and 3. 1. and 7. 1.
laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be?
Vulg, For the hand of the Lord was with him: contrary to the orig. Arab. and
Sir.
and the hand of the Lord was with him. 67 And his Father Zacharias was filled
with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying, 68 Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people: 69 And has raised up a
horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant David. 70 As he spoke
by the [By the m^uth] that is by the m^^^s one number for another, as tree for
trees, Genesis 3. 1. frog for frogs, Exodus, 9. 2. etc. yet is the observation of
Albertus magnus, ingenuous and true. All the Prophets spoke of Christ, un^ ore,
things so ^^greeable, as if they had all sp^^ken with one mouth.
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the World beg^n. 71 In the
Orig it is only (...), Salvation or deliverance, and so in the Arab. and Vulg
Lat. now it may be read either in apposition to (...), in verse. 69. He has
raised up an h^rne of Salvation, namely, salvation from cur enemies, or in
subsequence to the verb he spoke, verse 70. He spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets of Salvation: and this is the more genuine and proper, Bez^.
That we should be delivered from our enemies, and from the hands of Two
phrases used to heighten the sense, 2 Samuel 2^. 18. 41. Psalm 44. 10. and 68. 1.
and 19. 23. and 106. 16.
them that hate us. 72 (...), as Josh. 2. 12. 2 Samuel 9. 1. etc. The Sir. reads
conjunctively, And he has showed mercy; and so does the Arab. the other
clause, And he has remembered.
To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant, 73 ^p^or: In the accusative case, either in apposition to Cor^u
Sa^^is, verse. 69. as Tollet, or (...) understood, as Calvin^ or following the
verb To perform in verse. 72. As the Sir. and an old English. or that the
verb (...) governs two cases, (...) and (...).
The oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, 74 (...). This clause stands
in the Orig. and in all translations in the end of the verse. preceding. See
Sir. Arab. Vulg. France, Spain, Dutch, D^^date, V^^ab* Erasin. Beza, etc.
That he would grant unto (...), that we being delivered out of the hands of
our enemies, might serve him without fear, 75 In holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. 76 And thou child shall be called the
Prophet of the ^most Highest, for thou shall go^ before the face of the Lord,
to prepare his ways. 77 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the
remission of their sins. 78 Through Greek: The Bowels of mercy.
the tender ^mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from an high has visited
as. 79 To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death;
to guide our feet into the way of peace. 80 And the child grew, and waved
strong in Spirit, and was in the desert, till the day of his showing unto
Israel.
Reason of the Order.
THe order of this Section may be briefly contrived, and illustrated, thus.
Elisabeth when Mary comes to her, wa^ about sermoneths gone with child, Luke
1. 26. 36. and about nine months when she departed from her, verse. 56. She
coming to her own house, is suspected by Joseph to have played the harlot;
and is in danger of a secret divorce: while these things are thus passing
betwixt them two at Nazaret, the time of Elisabeths delivery is fully come.

Harmony and Explanation.
Verse 59. They came to circumcise the Child.
IN Hebron, and about the time of Easter, was Circumcision first ordained, Genesis
17. And in the same place, and at the same time of the year, was John Baptist
borne and cicumcised; who was to bring in Baptism in stead of Circumcision: as
may be apparent by observing the time of the Angel Gabriels appearing, and
message to his father Zacharias, in the preceding Calendar, and it shall be to
the full explained and proved hereafter, when we come to treat of the time of
our Saviors birth.

And they called his name Zacharias.
A thing hardly to be paralleled again in all the Scripture, that a child
should be named by the name of his father: an extraordinary action, in an
extraordinary case.

Because Abraham and Sarah had their new names given them at the giving of
circumcision; therefore did aftertimes reserve this custom to name their
children at their circumcising.

The name was sometime given to the child by the mother, but that was ever at
the birth, and it was upon some weighty and special reason, as Genesis 29. 32,
33, 34, 35. and 30. 6, 7. etc. 1 Samuel 4. 21. 1 Chronicles. 4. 29. and sometimes by
the standers by at the birth, as Genesis 38. 29. and 25. 25. Ruth 4. 18. but the
father at the Circumcision, had still the casting voice, whether the name
should be so, or no; as appears by Jacobs changing Ben-oni, into Benjamin.
Now Zachary being dumb, and the mother having given it no name at the birth,
the persons present undertake to call it by the name of the Father.

And now is he in circumcising, that is the man appointed to be the first
overthrow of Circumcision, by bringing in Baptism instead of it.

R. Solomon from the Talmud in Sanbedrin, expounds Jerem. 25. 10. I will take
from them the sound of the milstones, and the light of the candle, to this
sense. The sound of the milstones, signifies the Feast at a Circumcision;
because they ground or bruised Spices, for the healing of the sore; and the
light of the Candle, signifies the Feast it self. Thus do they confess a
decay of Circumcision to be foretold by the Prophet, and yet they stick not to
deny most stiffely, that Circumcision must ever decay.

Verse. 63. [Hee wrote saying] That is, expressing, or To this purpose, as Exodus
18. 6. And Jethro said to Moses, I Jethro come to thee: That is, he signified
so much by Letter; as the serious viewing of the story will necessarily evince.
And so 2 King. 5. 6. And be brought the Letter to the King of Israel, saying;
not that Naaman that brought the Letter, spoke the words that follow, but the
Letter it self spoke them.

[John] The Lord has been gracious. A name most fit for him that was to be
the first Preacher of the Kingdom of grace, and to point out him that was
grace it self. Rabbi Jochanan said, what is the name of the Messiah? Some said
Haninah, Grace, as it is said, I will not give you Haninah, that is, the
Messiah, who shall be called gracious, Jer. 16. 13. Talmud bab. in Pesach.
cap. 4.

Verse. 64. [And his mouth was opened] Infidelity had closed his mouth, and now
faith or believing does open it again. And herein, may this case of Zachary be
fitly compared with the like of Moses, Exodus 4. For he for distrust is in
danger of his life, as Zachary for the same fault is struck dumb: but upon
the circumcising of his child, and recovery of his faith, the danger is
removed* as Zacharies dumbness is at such a time and occasion; as Psalm. 116.
10. He believes, and therefore does he speak. And the tongue of the dumb does
sing, Esaias. 35. 6.

[And his tongue] Out English has added loosed for illustration, as also has
the French; and some say it is found in some Copies* (...). But first, no such
word is expressed either in the Syrian, Arabic, Vulgar Latin, Italian,
Erasmus, or other Translators. Nor secondly, needs there any such word to
make a perfect sense, but it may well help the simple and vulgar capacity, what
our English has added.

Verse. 66. [Laid them up in their hearts] It could not but affect all that
heard of this strange birth of the Baptist with wonder and amazement, and
singular observation, both in regard that so many and great miracles were
wrought in this time, when miracles were so much abated and decayed: as also in
consideration, that there was never birth before that had so many concomitants
of wonder and miraculousnesse, as the birth of this child. Not of Isaac the
glorious Patriarch, not of Moses the great Prophet, nor of any other
whatsoever, that had been in former times.

[And the hand of the Lord was with him] Either the special favor and
assistance of the Lord, as Ezra 7. 6. and 8. 22, etc. or the gift of Prophecy
at capable years, as 1 Samuel 3. 19. for so the hand of the Lord does signify,
Ezekiel. 1. 3. and 37. 1. and 40. 1. Psalm. 80. 17. 1 Chronicles. 28. 19.

Verse. 68. [Redeemed] Greek, (...), He has made or* wrought redemption: In
the very phrase implying a price paid, for so the word (...) imports. It is
used again, Chapt. 2. 38. and by the Lxx, Psalm. 111. 9. and 130. 7. and by
Theodotion for satisfaction, Prove. 6. 35.

Verse. 69. [An horn of salvation] Psalm. 18. 1. 2 Samuel 22. 3.

Verse. 70. [Which have been since the world began] Adams calling his wives name
Eve, or life, in apprehension of the promise of the seed of the woman, that
should break the head of the Serpent: Eves calling her Sons name Cain, a
purchase; because she had obtained a man, even the Lord, or the Lord to become
a man; and her naming her other Son Sheth, or settled, etc. these were
Prophecies that spoke of Christ, from the beginning of the world.

Verse. 71. [That we should be saved from our enemies] This has sweet
reference to the promise given at the beginning of the World; from which time
he had traced Prophecies in the verse preceding. I will put enmity betwixt thee
and the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed: He shall break thine
head, Genesis 3. 15. Where, in the former words of the verse, I will set enmity,
etc. there is an expression who are our enemies; namely, the Serpent and his
seed: and in the latter, he shall break thine head; there is an intimation
how we shall be saved; namely, by Christ's breaking the head and power of
Satan. So that the former verse and this being laid together, they arise unto
this sense, that all the Prophets from Adam and upward, had their eye upon the
promise in that garden, and spoke of salvation and delivery by Christ, by his
breaking the head, and destroying the kingdom of the devil.

Verse. 76. [The Prophet of the Highest] As Aaron to Moses, Exodus 7. 1. Prophecy
had been now very long decayed, and but little thereof had been under the second
Temple: it is now reviving in an extraordinary manner: and this child is to be
the first of this race of Prophets that is in rising, and to be the Harbinger
of Christ himself.

Verse. 77. [To give knowledge of salvation by remission, etc.] The knowledge of
salvation that the Law held forth at the first view, was by legal
righteousness, and absolute performance of what was commanded: but John who
was to begin the Gospel, brought in another Doctrine, and gave the people
knowledge of salvation by another way; namely, by the remission of sins, as
Romans 4. 6, 7. And this is the tenor of the Gospel.

Verse. 78. [The dayspring from an high] Greek: A (...), used by the Lxx to
translate (...), The branch, Esa. 4. 2. Jer. 23. 5. Zech. 3. 9. and 6. 12. the
name of Christ, and so it may be understood of Christ's personal coming and
appearance amongst men: as God is said to have visited Sarah, Genesis 21. 1. that
is, not only in merciful dealing with her, as to give her a child, but also
in personally coming unto her in visible appearance, as Chapter 18. 14. At the
time appointed I will return, etc. Or it may be taken in connection to the
sense of the Verses preceding: That after the defect of Prophecy, the dawning
of that gift, and after the darkness of the doctrine of salvation, as it was
in the law, the dayspring of it from an high came now to visit us, in the
brightness of the Gospel.

Verse. 80. [And was in the deserts] Of Ziph and Maon, 1 Samuel 23. 14. 25. which
were places not far from Hebron, where John was borne; Josh. 15. 54, 55. His
education was not in the Schools at Jerusalem, but in these plain Country
Towns and Villages in the Wilderness.

[Till the day of his showing unto Israel] That is, when at thirty years of
age he was to be brought to the Sanctuary service; Number. 4. 3. to which he did
not apply himself as the custom was, but betook himself to another course.

SECT. VI.
S. LUKE, CHAP. II.
CHRIST borne; published to the Shepherds; rejoiced in by Angels; circumcised;
presented in the Temple; confessed by Simeon and Anna.
AND it cam^ to pass in those days, that there went out [(...)] in the Greek:
in Dan. 6. 8. 12.
a decree from Caesar, the common name of the Roman Emperors; as Abimelech of
the Philistims Kings, Ols. 34. in tit. and Pharaoh of the Egyptians: from
Julius the first Emperor, who was of this name; but the name Caesar was long
before him, see Plin. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Caesar Augustus, that As Ezr 12.
all the World should be taxed. 2 And this taxing was first made, when In the
Roman Historians he is called Quirinus.
Cyrenius was Governor of Syria. 3 And all went to be taxed every one into his
own City. 4 And Joseph also Taking a journey in Scripture, be it whither
soever it will; is called indifferently, a going up, or going down, as Numb.
16. 12. 14. Jer. 21. 2. Judge. 16. 18. Genesis 42. 3. Judge. 15. 8. 1 Samuel 2. 10.
went up from Galilee out of the City of Nazareth into Judea, unto the City of
David, which is called Bethlehem; because he was of the flock and lineage of
David; 5 To be This word here, and in verse. 1. 3. has various translations.
That they might be enrolled. Sir. Arab. Rhem. That they might profess, Vulg.
Erasm. That they might be taxed, Erasm. again, and our English: All these
laid together, make up a complete description of the manner of their taxing.
First, they were taken notice of, who were in every Town and City, and were
enrolled, upon their inrolling they professed subjection to the Roman State;
and upon this profession they paid some money, at which they were assessed.
taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with Child. 6 And so it was,
that while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be
delivered. 7 And she brought forth her firstborn Son, and (...): See the
Gr. in Job 38. 6. and Ezekiel. 1. 4. some deriving the word from (...), To rend,
conceive that, is meant, that his swaddles were poor and ragged, and that this
is expressed as a particular of his abasement.
wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was
no room for him in the Inn. 8 And there were in the same Country, Shepherds
abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock Christ borne by night,
for if he were borne by day, why should the revealing of it be forborne till
night?
by night. 9 And ^o, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. 10 And the Angel said
This message of the Angel, as it was full of comfort, so also was it of
plainness, according to the condition of the men to whom he spoke.
Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people. 11 For unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord. 12 And this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find
the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. 13 And suddenly there
was with the Angel, Or the multi^ude,
a multitude of the Heavenly host, praising God, and saying, 14 Or the good
will of God toward men, is glory to God in the Highest, and peace on the earth.
Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. 15 And
it came to pass, as the Angels were gone away from them into Heaven, the It
has bin held that these Shepherds were about the Tower of Ed^r, Genesis 35. 21.
and that this was about a mile from Bethlehem.
Shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see
this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. 16
And they came with have, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the
manger. 17 And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which
was told them concerning this Child. 18 And all they that heard it, wondered at
those things which were told them by the Shepherds. 19 But Mary kept all these
things, and pondred them in her heart. 20 And the Shepherds returned,
glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen,
as it was told unto them. 21 And when eight days were accomplished for the
circumcising of the child, his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the
Angel, before he was conceived in the womb. 22 And when the days of her
purification Levit. 12.
according to the Law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to
Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord. 23 As it is written in the Law of the
Lord, Exodus 13. 1.
every male that openet^ the womb, shall be called holy to the Lord. 24 And
to offer a Sacrifice according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord,
Mary's poverty in that her hand could not reach to a lamb, which was the
proper offering that the Law required, Levit.
a pair of Turtle Doves, and two young Pigeons. 25 And behold, there was a man
in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and the same Man was just and devout,
waiting for the consolation of Israel, and The spirit of Prophecy. It had bin
long a stranger among the nation, even ever since the death of Zachary and
Malachi, but is now begun to be restored, to speak of the great Prophet near
at hand.
the holy Ghost was upon him. 26 And (...). This word is used again in this
sense, Mat. 2. 12 22. Act. 10 22. Heb. 11. 7. and by the Lxx, 1 Kin. 18. 27.
and in another sense, Act 11. 26.
it was revealed to him by the holy Ghost that he should not see death before
he had seen the Lord Christ. 27 And he came by the Spirit into the Temple,
and when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus to do for him after the
custom of the Law. 28 Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and
said: 29 Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
word. 30 For mine eyes have seen * thy salvation, 31 Which thou have prepared
before the face of all people. 32 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of thy people Israel. 33 And Joseph and his Mother marvelled, at those
things which were spoken of him. 34 And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary
his Mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many
in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against. 35 (Yea, a sword
shall pierce through thy own soul also) that the thoughts of many hearts may
be revealed. 36 And there was one Compare 1 Samuel 1 and 2.
Anna a Prophetess, the daughter of In Hebrew it would be written Penuel, as
Genesis 32.
Phanuel, of the Tribe of Aser, she was of a great age, and had lived with an
husband seven years from her Virginity. 37 And she was a Widow of about
fourscore and four years, which departed not from the Temple, but served God
with fasting and prayer night and day. 38 And she coming in at that instant,
gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all them that looked
for redemption in Jerusalem. 39 And when they had performed all things
according to the Law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own
City Nazareth.
Reason of the Order.
THe dependence of the beginning of this Section upon the end of that that went
before, does even prove and confirm it self. For after the story of the birth
of Christ's forerunner, and the relation of what happened and befell at that
time, what could be expected to come next in order, but the birth of Christ
himself? Especially, since none of the Evangelists mention any thing that came
between.

Harmony and Explanation.
Ships shall come from the coasts of Chittim, and shall afflict Ashur, and
shall afflict Heber, Number. 24. 24.
THat by Chittim is meant Italy, or the Romans, it is not only the general
opinion of the Jews, as may be seen in their Targums, and in other writers,
but of the most Christians also, yea of the Romanists themselves, whom the
latter part of the verse does so nearly pinch: As see their vulgar Latin, and
Lyranus upon the place.

This Prophecy was fulfilled when the power of Rome first set her foot upon
the neck of the Hebrews by the conquest of Pompey: but especially when she
tyrannized over Christ, the chief child of Eber, even before, and at his
birth, as in this story, but chiefly in condemning him to death, as in the
story of his passion.

As Jacob had before told that the Jews at Messiah his coming should be
under the Subjection of a Foraine Nation, so does Balaam in this Prophecy show
who that Nation should be. And this the more ancient and more honest Jews
took notice of, and resolved that Christ should come in the time of the Roman
Empire, and near to the destruction of the Temple by it: So in the Talmud they
question What is the name of Messiah? Some answer, Hhevara Leprous, and he
sits among the poor in the gates of Rome carrying their sicknesses,
Sanhedrin.

The Chaldee Paraphrast likewise on Esa. 11. 4. reads thus, With the speech
of his lips shall Messiah slay Romylus the wicked one: or the wicked Roman,
showing at once his opinion of Christ's coming in the time of the Romans, and
also of the Romans being (...), the wicked one, after a singular manner.
Augustus was the second Emperor of the Romans, or rather, the first that was
entire Monarch: for Julius Caesar his Uncle and Predecessor, had hardly enjoyed
any Monarchical government at all, nor did Augustus of many years neither:
till he had outed Lepidus, and overcome Anthony, which were copartners with
him in the dominion.

His name Augustus was given to him for his worthy administration of the
Commonwealth: For before-time he was called Dion.
C^pias, and Sueton.
Thurinus, and Octavianus, and had like to have been named Romulus, as a second
founder of the City, but by the advice of Munacius Planous he was named
Augustus, which imports Sacredness and reverence.

SS. That all the world should be taxed.
To so^vast an extent was the Roman Empire now grown, from Parthia to England,
and they two also included, that it was a world rather then one dominion: And
so did their own Authors boast it in those times: as, Caesar Regit omnia
terris: Divisum imperium cum Jove: Totum circumspicit orbem: Virgil, Ovid,
Florus.
Terrarum orbis imperium, and such like speeches usual among them, both in
Poesy and Prose. This huge and unweldy body, of so large and spacious a
dominion, Augustus had now reduced to the healthful temper of peace and
quietness: which is the more remarkable, by how much the more wars had been
more frequent, and more bloody but a little before. For never had that Empire
felt so great distemper within it self, as it had done of latter times, in the
civil wars betwixt Sylla and Marius, betwixt Julius and Pompey, betwixt
Augustus and Antony: not to mention the continual wars that it had abroad.
It had not been very long before this time that the Evangelist speaks of,
when both Rome it self, and the rest of the world was at that pitiful plight
that Polybius speaks of, (...), cap. 2.
That the Romans were forced to send to Prolomy, King of Egypt, for a supply of
corn, because there was a great scarcity and dearth among them. For in Italy
all their corn was destrayed even to the gates of Rome, by the Soldiers, and
abroad there was no help nor supply to be had, there being wars in all
parts of the world. But now is there an universal Peace, not only in the
Roman Empire [so that the Temple of Janus was shut up, which it never used to
be when any wars at all were stirring,] but if we will believe Crantzius,
even in those parts and Countries, where the Roman power had not yet set her
foot; as Denmark, Norway, and those Northern Climates, there was so great a
peace, that in some places there, Money and Jewels were hung up by the high
way, and there was neither Thief nor Enemy to take them away. Such times
became the coming of Shilob the Peaceable one, Isa. 6. 9. And such a beginning
was befitting the Gospel of Peace.

Augustus having brought the Empire under this quiet obedience, like a
politic Prince will have it all taxed, and brought into the Subsidy Book,
that he might know the extent of his command, of his strength and of his
revenues.

And thus we see and may observe Rome come to its entire and absolute Monarchy
but at this time, and the state and power that should persecute Christ in his
Members to the end of the world, beginning and borne as it were, at the very
same time when Christ himself.

Augustus, as Annal. (...). 1.
Tacitus records of him, did cause an account to be taken of all the Empire,
and himself had a Book and Record of it written out with his own hand. Opes
publieae continebantur: quantum civium sociorumque in armis: quot classes,
regna, Provinciae, tributa aut vectigalia, and necessitates ac largitiones,
quae cuncta, suae manu perscripserat Augustus: which contained the public
revenue, the number of Citizens or confederates in the Armies: what Shipping:
Kingdoms: Provinces: Tributes or Subsidies: and relief money, and
beneficences. Dion also in the life of Augustus, and much also about this time,
mentions a tax laid by him upon those that dwelt in Italy, whose estates
were not less then five thousand Sesterces: and poorer then these he taxed
not.

Ver. 2. This taxing was first made when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria.
The Tax is dated by the time of Cyrenius his Governing of Syria: First,
because Judea was annexed to Syria, as a member of it: and in naming the one,
the other is included. Secondly, hereby the loss and want of the Scepter and
Lawgiver in the Tribe of Judah is the better seen, for the subjection of the
Jews by this is showed to be in the third degree. They subject to Herod,
Herod to Cyrenius, and Cyrenius to Augustus. Thirdly, from Syria had Israel had
their greatest afflictions, that ever they had in their own Land; as by Gog and
Magog, Ezekiel. 38. or the house of the North, Dan. 11. And Luke deriving the
taxing of the Jews from Syria, calls those things to mind: and says as it
were the last verse of Dan. 11. and the first of Dan. 12. together.

The taxing is said first to be made in his time: As first, denying, that ever
there was such an universal taxation in the Empire before, for the Empire was
never in that case of universal quietness to be taxed before: And secondly,
importing the taxes of that Country that followed after: [Augustus at this very
time laying the platform subjection and submission of the Empire for succeeding
posterities:] And here, [let it be said againe] in exact propriety begins
the Roman Monarchy: and is far from being any of the four, Mentioned Dan.
2. or 7.

Josephus Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 1.
mentions Cyrenius his coming into Syria, after Archelaus his death, To do
justice and to assesse and tax every man's goods, and he came into Judea,
which was now annexed to Syria, and did so there: Now Archelaus reigned after
Herod, Mat. 2. and reigned till Christ was about ten years old, forten years
he reigned, as says the same Josephus Anttq. lib. 17. cap. 15.
: and therefore either Cyrenius came twice into Syria to lay taxations, as
Funccius concludes, or else Josephus fails here, as he does not seldom
elsewhere in Chronology.

Ver. 3. And all went to be taxed.
This taxing was first by Kingdoms and Countries, then by Cities and Towns,
and then by poll: First, Kingdoms and Provinces were divided one from another.
Secondly, Cities and Towns in every Kingdom and Province, were also
particularized, and notice given that every one should repair to the place to
which by stock and descent they did belong. Thirdly, the people being thus
convened in their several Cities, their names were taken and enrolled, and so
the Greek word here used does signify in the nearest propriety. Then did they
make profession of Subjection to the Roman Empire, either by some set form of
words, or at least by payment of some certain sum of money which was laid
upon every poll.

And now, first, are the Jews entering under the yoke of that subjection which
they never cast off again, but it pressed them into a final desolation even to
this day. Secondly, They had voluntarily brought this misery upon themselves in
calling in the Romans in their civil wars. Thirdly, No spark of their
former freedom and authority is left among them for their King and Lawgiver
is clean gone. Fourthly, they are now to be enrolled, and registered for
vassals to all succeeding generations. Fifthly, they must now leave their own
occasions, and many of them their own houses to attend their own bondage and
misery: And thus It is in the words of our Rabbis, if thou see a generation
that has many afflictions, then look for the Redeemer: from Isa. 59. 17, 18.
Jer. 30. 6, 7. etc. D. Kimch: in Isa. 59.

Ver. 4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, etc.
Whether it were for the fear of Herod that had a murderous spite at the stock
of David, or for the more commodiousnesse for his trade, or for whatsoever else
it was that Josoph a Bethlehemite became a resident in Galilee, surely it was
the wondrous disposal of the Lord that a decree from Rome should bring him now
from Galilee to Bethlehem, that the Prophecy of Christ's being borne in that
place might take effect.

Ver. 7. She brought forth her firstborn.
This is to be understood according to the propriety and Phrase of the Law,
agreeable to which it speaks. Now the Law speaking of the firstborn,
regards not whether any were borne after or no, but only that none was borne
before. As Hur is called the firstborn of Ephr^^^, 1 Chronicles. 2. 5. and yet no
mention of any child that she had after: So Christ is here called the
firstborn, not as though she had any children besides, but to show that in
him was fulfilled what was typifyed by the firstborn under the Law, who was
as King, Priest, and Prophet, in the Family, and holy to the Lord.

And so likewise in that sp^^ch of Matthew, chap. 1. 25. He knew her not till
she had brought, f^rth her firstborn: It implies not that (...) knew her
after, for the word till inforceth no such thing, as see the Geneva notes upon
the place; but the Evangelists intention is to clear the birth and generation
of Christ from any carnal mixture of Joseph and Mary, before he was borne.

And here it is not unseasonable to look a little narrowly into the time of
our Saviors birth, namely, the time of the year, ^^ which he was borne, as
we have done into the year it self, or the time of the world, heretofore.

The year of the world, as we observed then, was, 3928.

The year of Augustus is neither so necessary to seek, nor so ease to find:
partly, because there is some difference among Historians about the number of
the years of his Reign, and partly because there may be some about the year
of Tiberius, in which Christ was Baptized, from which we should count
backward: For though it be said that John came Baptizing in his fifteenth
year, Luke 31. yet may it be questionable, whether he Baptized Christ in
that year or no: But not to swarve from the most common consent of Roman
Historians, that say that Augustus Reigned six and fifty years, and of
Christians that hold that Christ was baptized in the fifteenth of Tiberius,
then may it be readily concluded that he was borne in the forty second of
Augustus.

The time of the year at which he was borne, has been much mistaken, being
concluded upon, at the latter end of December: This mistake did first arise by
another: for it being misunderstood that Zacharias was the High Priest, and
that he was in Sancto Sanctorum, on the expiation day, when the Angel Gabriel
appeared unto him, they could do no less then conclude, that John was borne
in the middle of Summer, and Christ in the middle of Winter. A time very unfit
for people to travail to their several Cities to be taxed, but far more unfit
for Shepherds to lie abroad in the fields all night.

For finding out therefore the true and right time of his Nativity, these
things are to be taken into consideration.

First, That the time that Christ lived here upon the earth, was two and thirty
years and a half, exactly: And so long did David Reign in Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
5. 4, 5.

This time was divided into two unequal parts: twenty nine years complete he
spent as a private man before he was baptized, for it is said, he began to
be thirty, or was entering upon his thirtieth at his Baptism, Luke 3. 23. And
three years and an half from his Baptism to his death: This sum was
precisely told of by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9. 27. In half that week shall
he cause sacrifice and oblation to cease: And is plainly parcelled out by
Passeovers and other circumstances of time, Mat. 4. 2. Job. 1. 29. 35. 44. and
2. 1. 13. and 5. 1. and 6. 4. and 13. 1.

Secondly, That the time of Christ's death was at Easter, or their Passover, as
is most plain by all the Evangelists.

Thirdly, That he living just two and thirty years and a half, and dying at
Easter; it must needs follow that he was borne about the middle of the month
Tisri, which answers to part of our September; And it is not only probable,
but also necessary, if he lived thirty two years and a half exactly; that
then as he died upon the fiftheenth day of the month Abib, or at the
Passover; so that he was borne about the fifteenth day of Tisri, at the Feast
of Tabernanacles: a month and a Feast, that had been exceedingly renowned in
ancient times. In this month the World had begun, and sin had entered into it.
In this month were all the Father born before the Flood, as the Jews aver,
and reason confirms it. From this month began the circle of the year from
the Creation, to the redemption out of Egypt. From this month began the
typical year of Jubilee in the ages after. And in this month were the three
famous Feasts of Trumpets, of Expiation, and of Tabernacles. And like glorious
things may be observed upon the Feast of Tabernacles it self: At that very
time did Israel fall upon the making of the Tabernacle in the wilderness,
Exodus 35. At this very time was the consecration of the Temple, 1 King. 1. 8.
2. And at this very time, was our Savior borne, and began to carry the
Tabernacle of his flesh; and at this very time was he Baptized, and began the
Ministry of the Gospel. So that here appears one addition more to the
present misery and subjection of the Jews at the time of this tax; that not
only they must leave all their occasions, to wait upon their own taxing, and
promote their own bondage, but that they must neglect a maine part of the
service of God, the Feast of Expiation, and the Feast of Tabernacles, as Zech.
14. 16, 17. to attend the Conqueror, and their own thraldom.

And now, it being considered that John the Baptist was but half a year older
then our Savior, it will be observable how the four points of the year, as it
may be so said, were renowned with their conception and nativity. John
conceived at the Summer Solstice, and our Savior at the Winter, John born at
the vernall Equinox, and our Savior at the Autumnall.

SS. And wrapped him in swaddling clothes.
This passage is one groundwork whereupon Expositors conclude that Christ was
borne without pain to his mother: for that she performed the Midwives p^t her
self, and none to help her. A second is this: That he was borne without his
Mothers pain, because he was conceived without her pleasure. A third Argument
may be fetched from the blessing of propagation given to our first Parents in
the Garden. And a fourth from the example of the delivery of the Hebrew women
in Egypt: For first, when God gave this blessing to Adam and Eve in their
innocence, increase and multiply, Genesis 1. 28. it enabled them to beget children
agreeable to their own perfection; that is, holy, righteous, and without any
symptoms or consequents of sin, either in themselves, or in the mothers. But
they never begat any child thus, because of their sudden fall. What, did this
first blessing then utterly fail, and never take effect, in its proper sense
and full extent? Could such emphaticall words of God to man in innocence, fall
to the ground without performance? No, they took place in the second Adam, who
was borne according to the full extent and intent of that blessing to our
innocent parents; in perfect holiness and righteousness, and without pain to
his mother. Secondly, if the Hebrew wonien in Egypt had so quick and easy a
delivery, as that they were not like to other women: much more may we think
the travail and delivery of the Virgin to have been quick, lively, miraculous
and painlesse, as Esa. 66. 7. Before her pain came, she was delivered of a man
child.

SS. Because there was no room for them in the Inn.
At the return out of Babylon, the Children of Bethlehem were a hundred twenty
three persons, Ezra 2. 21. Now that being four hundred and fifty years past,
and somewhat above; to what a multitude might the stock or breed of that City
be grown by this time of Christ's birth? This multitude pressing together to
their own City, according to the Emperors edict, the weakest go to the walls,
and Joseph and Mary are excluded out of the Inn: and thus the freewoman and
her Son, are cast out of doors, as the bondwoman and her Son had been, Genesis
2.

Verse. 8. And there were Shepherds, etc.
The Patriarchs to whom Christ was more especially promised, were of this
vocation, Genesis 47. 3. especially Abraham and David, to whom the promise was
more clearly made; peculiarly David who was feeding Sheep near to Bethlehem,
when he was taken a Father and type of Christ, 1 Samuel 16. 11, 12. And it does
illustrate the exactness of the performance the more, and does Harmonize with
the giving of it the better, when to Shepherds it is first revealed, is to
Shepherds it was first promised. Compare this with the Visions of Jacob and
Moses with their flocks, Genesis 31. 10. Exodus 3. 3. and of Sampsons mother in the
field.

SS. Keeping watch over the flock by night.
Greek, [Keeping the watches of the night] For the night was divided by the
Jews into four watches of three hours a piece. The first, or beginning of
watches, is mentioned, (...), 8, 19. The second, and third, Luke 12. 38. The
fourth, Mat. 14. 25. this was called, also the morning watch, Exodus 14. 24.
Howbeit, the Tal^^ud, from Judge. 7. 19. divides it only into three Be it the
one or the other, these Shepherds it seems observed such an order, as that
they watched by course, while others slept: or not to take it so very strictly,
they lay now in the fields, and watched their flocks all night, which had been
in a manner impossible to have done, in the deep of winter, at which time our
Calendar has placed Christ's Nativity.

Verse. 9. The glory of the Lord (...), etc.
That is an exceeding great glory, for so do the Hebrews heighten their
expressions, as Cedars of the Lord, that is, goodly Cadars: Such an exceeding
great glory shone about Paul, Act. 26. 13. That at noone day, this in the dead
of the night.

Verse. 13. A multitude of the Heavenly best, etc.
It might not unproperly be rendered, The multitude; as importing that all the
Quire of Angels, or the whole multitude of that ^^lestiall Militia, was now
knit together in a consort, for the praises and acknowledgment of Christ:
according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in the
first-begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship
him. And thus as all the Angels sang at the beginning of the old world, of at
the Creation, Job 38. 7. So do they at the beginning of the new, and of the
redemption.

Angels are called the Heavenly host, 1 King. 22. 19. Job. 25. 3. And in this
sense, Rab. Menahem understands, Genesis 2. 1. Thus were the Heavens and the
Earth finished, and all their Host, that is, faith he, the Angels whose
Creation Moses names not elsewhere.

Verse. 14. Glory to God in the Highest, etc.
The last words of this verse, the Vulgar Latin reads, to men of good will;
contrary to the Syrian, Arabicke, and to the ancient Greek Copies, as appears
by Greg. Nazi^nzen, Orat. 42. Andreas Jerusolomitanus, in Orat. de Salutatione
Angeli, etc.

The whole Verse is but one Proposition or Axiom, in which the last clause of
all is the subject, and the two former are predicated of it. And it lies in
this sense, The good will of God to men showed in the Incarnation of our
Savior, when God himself disdained not to take the nature of man, is glory to
him in the highest, and is peace upon the earth: And that this is the genuine
and proper meaning and posture of the words, may be observed; First, by the
conjunction (...), And, put between, Glory to God, and peace on earth, and
none between them, and good will. And secondly, the very sense and matter it
self inforceth this construction: For first, (...) bears the same sense here,
that (...) does, Mat. 3. 17. and 17. 5. of Gods good will, or will-pleasednesse
with men. Now, secondly, this well-pleased nesse of his, with men, was
expressed and evidenced at this time, in the birth of our Savior, in that God
had assumed the nature of men, and it had never been so cleared and
demonstrated before. So that, thirdly, the birth of Christ being the occasion
of the Angels singing this song, the good will of God toward men revealed, in
this his birth, must needs be the subject of their Song. And then fourthly,
the other two things expressed in the two other clauses, glory on High, and
peace on Earth, must needs be understood as Predicates; seeing that, being
laid, to this expression of God of his good will toward men, they are but as
fruits and consequences of it. And this reading and construction, how facil and
plain is it, in comparison of these intricacies and obscurities, that those
readings bring with them, that either break the verse into three distinct
axioms, or into two, or that read (...), in the Genitive case, or (...), in
the Dative, as may be seen in Expositors.

Now how the good will, and well-pleasednesse of God toward men, exhibited and
showed in the incarnation and birth of our Savior, did glorify God in the
highest, in all his attributes, of wisdom, truth, justice, power, mercy, etc.
And how it wrought peace on earth, betwixt man and himself, and man and
Angels, and man and man, and man and his own co^^cience, might be showed at
large, if we were common placing in stead of commenting.

Ver. 21. And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising, etc.
It was necessary that Christ should be circumcised, that he might both bear
the badge of a child of Abraham, and have upon him an obligation to the
keeping of the Law: For he that was circumcised was a debtor to the whole Law,
Gal. 5. 3.

Ver. 22. And when the days of her purification, etc.
At forty days old, Levit. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. the Lord comes to his own
Temple: and by an old man, and an old woman, is proclaimed both to young and
old, that expected redemption. Herod had heard no tidings of him as yet, by the
Wisemen, for otherwise this had been an opportunity for him to have put in
practice his bloody and malicious intent. Mary is purified according to the
custom of the Law, although she had contracted no pollution, by her childing
and bringing forth; partly, that Christ in nothing might be wanting to the
Law, and partly, that this might be an occasion, for the first public
declaration of him, by Simeon and Anna.

Ver. 25. A man whose name was Simeon.
This Simeon seems to be he whom the Jewish Authors name for the son of
Hillel: and who was the first that bare the title of Rabban, the highest title
that was given to their Doctors, and which was given but to seven of them.

Hillel was the famous head or principal of that School that is so renowned
in the Jewish Authors by the name of Beth Hillel. Out of which [as they
relate] there came thousands of Scholars, but fourscore especially of most
renown. Hillel the old (they are the words of the Talmud) had fourscore
Scholars. Thirty of them were fit, on whom the divine Majesty should rest, as
it did on Moses: Thirty of them were worthy for whom the Sun should stand
still, as it did for Joshua: and twenty were of a middle r^^^e between. The
greatest of them all, was Jonathan ben Uzziel, that Paraphrased the Prophets in
the Chaldee tongue, and the lowest of them was Johanan the son of Zaccai.

Such a Father had this our Simeon, and so renowned, but himself infinitely
were renowned, in the thing that is now in hand, and in his having the Savior
of the world in his arms and heart: Now this is the Genealogy of this man, as
it is Recorded by the Jews themselves: Hillel begat Simeon, who was first
titled Rabban. Rabban Simeon begat Rabban Gamaliel, the Tutor of Paul. Rabban
Gamaliel begat Rabban Simeon the second. Rabban Simeon the second, begat
Rabban Gamaliel the second. Rabban Gamaliel begat Rabban Simeon the third.
Rabban Simeon the third, begat Rabbi Juda the holy. Rabbi Juda begat Rabban
Gamaliel the third.

These six Rabbans were of the line of Hillel, besides whom there was a
seventh, that bare the same title, of another stock, Rabban Jobanan be^ Zaccai.

But it may be justly questioned, if Simeon were the man we suppose, namely
the Son of Hillel, and the Father of Gamaliel, and if he were so holy and
devout a man, and confessed Christ, as this Evangelist relates of him, how
came it to pass that his Son Gamaliel was so far contrary, as appears by
the education of Paul, in Pharisaicall righteousness, and persecution of the
Truth?

Answ. First, it is no strange thing for holy Fathers to have wicked Children:
witness Eli, David, Josaphat, and common experience.

Secondly, it was thirty years from Simeons acknowledging of Christ, to
Gamaliels education of Paul, or little less, and so much time might wear out
the notice of his Fathers action, if he had taken any notice of it:
especially, his Father dying shortly after he had made so glorious a confession.

SS. Waiting for the consolation of Israel.
It is an Article of the Jewish Creed, To believe the coming of the Messiah,
and to wait and wait for his coming, although he defer it: which foolishly
they do even to this day, after sixteen hundred years expired since he
came. But Simeons expectation is neither so vain nor so uncertain: For,
besides the general expectation of the whole Nation, that the Messiah should
appear about that time, Luke 19. 11. he had it by a special and assured
revelation, ver. 26.

The coming of Christ, is called The con^^^ation of Israel, from Isa. 49. 13.
and 52. 9. and 66. 13. Jer. 31. 13. Zech. 1. 17. and such like places, which
the Jews do not only apply to the coming of the Messiah, but also in their
Talmud, questioning what his name should be when as he came, some conclude it
to be Menahem, The Comforter, from Lam. 1. 16, In Sanbedr.

Ver. 26. That he should not see As Psalm. 89. 48. and to see corruption. Psalm.
16. 10.
death before he had seen the Lords Christ.
This was the time when the Nation expected that Messiah should appear, Luke
19. 11. and began to look for redemption near at hand, Luke 2. 38. The Angel
Gabriel to Daniel, and he to the people had so determinately pointed out the
time, Dan. 9. 26, 27. that not only Jews of all Nations are gathered to
Jerusalem, against the expiring of that Prophecy, Act. 2. but also all the East
was possessed with an opinion of a Prince to rise about these times, of
supereminent honor, glory, and dominion. Baron. in Appar. etc. Sueton. Virgil,
etc.

Simeon having learned the time with the rest of the studious of the Nation,
out of the Scripture, has the certainty of it sealed up to him by the spirit
of Prophecy, which assured him that the time of so great expectation was so
near at hand, that he, though he were old, yet should not dye, till he had
seen what he desired: And thus Prophecy, that was departed from Israel so
long ago, is returning and dawning to it again, to be as the morning star,
to tell that the Sun of righteousness would rise ere long.

Ver. 35. Yea a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also.
These words seem to be of the same tenor and intent with those of our
Savior to Peter, Joh. 21. 18. and to tell. Mary of her suffering martyrdom
for Christ and the Gospel, as those do of his. For Simeon having in the
preceding verse related, how Christ both in his person and in the Gospel,
should be as a sign to be spoken against, persecuted, and opposed, yea,
says he, and thou his Mother also, for his and the Gospels sake, shall drink
of the same cup, and partake of the same lot, for the sword of persecution
shall go through thy life ^lso (for so the word (...) does often signify.)

SS. That the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
This clause is linked to the latter end of the verse preceding, and reaches
beyond the Parenthesis that lies before it, and in conjuncture with the clause
before that, it makes this sense, that Christ's being set up for a sign to be
spoken against, or persecution for the Gospels sake, should detect many men's
tempers and affections, which were not descryed nor revealed before, and
discover what malignity, or sincerity to him and to his cause, is in their
hearts, as Mat. 13. 21. and as it is at this day.

Ver. 36. The daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe of Aser.
Hannah a Widow indeed, as 1 Timothy 5. 3. 5. that is, not by divorce, but by the
death of her husband, and now of above an hundred years of age, is chosen
also, and actuated by the Holy Ghost, to give testimony of Christ as Simeon had
done, that out of the mouth of two such witnesses, of either sex one, the thing
might be established, and the party witnessed unto, might be the more taken
notice of. Her Father Phanuel is named, as either being a noted and well known
man in those times, or for the significancy of his name, made good in her, in
that she now beholds the Lord face to face, as Genesis 32. 30. 31. And thus the
New Testament does by this Prophetess, as the Old Testament does by diverse of
the Prophets, in naming her and her Father with her, as Isa. 1. 1. Jer. 1. 1.
Joel 1. 1. etc. Phanuel her Father was a Galilean, for in Galilee lay the Tribe
of Aser, and from thence comes a Prophetess now, to declare and publish the
great Prophet, that must once appear thence to the wonder of the Nation.

Ver. 37. Which departed not from the Temple.
Her constant continuance there might be, either because she was a poor
Widow, and so maintained upon the foundation, or because she was a
Prophetess, and so lodged in some of the buildings or chambers belonging to
the Temple. For so might women do, as 2 Chronicles. 22. 11, 12.

SECTION VII.
S. MATTHEW. CHAP. II.
Christ at two years old is visited and honored by the Wisemen: The children
of Bethlehem murdered. Herod dies soon after. Christ returns out of Egypt.
NOw when Jesus was borne in Bethlehem of Vulg. of Juda: and this is conceived
by Jerome to be the better reading; because it is so written, ver. 6. But in
this verse the Evangelist tells, it was in Bethlehem of Judea, to distinguish
it from Bethlehem in Galilee, Josh. 19. 15. and in ver. 6. he says, it was in
the land of Judah, to distinguish it from the lot of Benjamin.
Judea, in the days of Herod the King, behold there came [Wise men] Gr. (...),
which word is reserved by the Sir. Arab. Ital. and generally by all Latins,
the Fr. reads it Sages, in the sense of our English.
wise men from the East to Jerusalem. 2 Saying, where is he that is borne King
of the Jews? For we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship
him. 3 When Herod the King had heard these things, he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him. 4 And when he had gathered all the chief Priests and
(...), in the Lxx, Exodus 5. 6. Josh. 1. 10. 2 Samuel 8. 17* Jer. 36. 10. Ezr. 4.
8. and 7. 12. And (...), Deuteronomy. 1. 15.
Scriber of the people together, be demanded of them, where Christ should be
borne. 5 They said unto him, in Bethlehem of Judea: For thus is it written by
the Prophet, 6 And thou Bethlehem (...): for (...), as Joh. 1. 4. the
Preposition is understood.
in the Land of Juda, art not the the Lxx, in Mic. 5. use (...), speaking of
smalnesse of number; but Matthew, (...), speaking of smallness of bulk, or
dignity.
least among the Princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that
shall rule my people Israel. 7 Then Herod, when he had privily called the
Wisemen, enquired dililigently of them, what time the Star appeared. 8 And he
sent them to Bethlehem distant from Jerusalem, 35 furlongs, Just. Mart. Apol.
2. Four miles, and almost an half.
Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child, and when ye
have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also. 9
When they had heard the King, they departed, and lo the Star which they saw
in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was. 10 When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with As (...) Isa. 61. 10.
exceeding great joy. 11 And when they were come into the house, they saw the
young child with Mary his Mother, and fell down and worshipped him: and when
they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts Gold and
Frankincense they shall bring in Merchandise and also for a present to the King
Messiah, and for the ^^use of the Lord, D. Kimc. on Esa. 60. 6.
Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh. 12 And being warned of God in a dream,
that they should not return to Herod; they departed into their own Country
another way. 13 And when they were departed, behold, the Angel of the Lord
appears to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise and take the young child, and
his mother, and flee into Egypt; and be thou there until I bring thee word:
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. 14 When he arose, he
took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt. 15 And
was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.
16 Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently inquired of the Wisemen. 17 Then was fulfilled that
which was spoken by Jeremie the Prophet, saying, 18 In Rama was the birth place
of Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 19. etc.
Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning;
Rahel mourning for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not. 19 But when Herod was dead, behold, an Angel of the Lord appears in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt. 20 Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his
mother, and go into the Land of Israel: for Compare Exo. 4. 19.
they are dead which sought the young child's life. 21 And he arose, and took
the young child and his mother, and came into the Land of Israel. 22 But when
he heard that Archelaus did Reign in Judea, in the room of his Father Herod;
he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream,
he turned aside into the parts of Galilee. 23 And he came and dwelt in a City
called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophets;
He shall be called a Nazarite.
Reason of the Order.
TO confirm and prove the Order of this Section and Story, requires some
labor, because of an opinion ancient, and current among men, that crosses the
laying of it in this place. It has been generally held, and believed, almost
of every one, that the Wisemen came to Christ when he was but thirteen days
old, and it is written in red Letters in the Calendar, as if it were a golden
truth, by the title of Epiphany, at the sixth of January. An opinion which if
it were as true as it is common, it were readily known where to place this
Story of the Wisemens coming; namely, between the Circumcision of our Savior,
and his Presentation in the Temple, betwixt Ver. 2. and 22. of Luke 2.

But upon serious and impartial examination of this opinion, these rubs and
unlikelyhoods lie in the way, and make it as incredible for the improbability,
as it seems venerable for its antiquity.

First, to omit the length of their journey from their own Country to
Bethlehem, their preparation for so long a journey before they set out, and
their stay at Jerusalem by the way [for I cannot think that all that passed
there while they were there, was done in an instant.]

Secondly, how utterly improbable is it, that after all this hubbub at.
Jerusalem upon the wisemens question, where is the King of the Jews? And after
Herod's curious scrutiny and inquiry where the child should be, and after his
implacable indignation upon the Wisemens deluding or mocking of him as he did
conceive, that the child that he had thus eagerly hunted after, should after
all this stirring and searching come to Jerusalem, as it were into his very
mouth, and there be publicly proclaimed by Simeon and An^^ in the Temple, to
be the very same that the Wisemen and Herod, though with different intentions,
looked after; For first, it is to be observed, that it was seven and twenty
days from the time that this opinion brings the wisemen to Bethlehem, to the
time that Joseph and Mary brought Jesus to the Temple; now it is not
imaginable, but that in all this time Joseph, that was but at so few miles
distance, should hear what was done at Jerusalem upon the Wisemens coming
thither [if so be they told him not themselves] and how Herod took the
matter, when he missed of their unexpected return. Secondly, for ought that
can be found in the text to the contrary, it may be well supposed that they
had their divine warning not to return again to Herod, while they were at
Bethlehem, and Joseph might well be acquainted by them with it. Thirdly, it is
not to be doubted but they had dispatched what they did at Bethlehem in far
less time then seven and twenty days: [and surely of all men they will not
deny this, that will bring them out either of Arabia, or Persia, to Bethlehem
in half the time] And as little to be doubted that Herod in the compass of
so much time, saw the disappointment of his expectation of the Wisemens
return, and breaks out into choler against the poor Infants of Bethlehem.
Fourthly, now all these things being laid together, how senseless a thing will
it be, to make Joseph to bring the child for whom all this business was, under
the Tyrants nose? Fifthly, or if Joseph did not know of all these things,
[which is almost impossible] yet how is it imaginable that Christ should have
escaped the Tyrant, being at Jerusalem, and so publicly acknowledged and
spoken of? It is true indeed that he might have been sheltered by the divine
power, but we see by his flight into Egypt, that it was not the will of God to
use that miraculous means of his preservation as yet, but another.

Thirdly, and which is the reason that has moved me to lay this Story after
our Saviors presentation in the Temple: yea, and to suppose him to be two
years old, or thereabout, when the Wisemen came; because the text says in
plain terms, That Herod sem and slew the children from two years old and
under, according to the time that he had diligently inquired of the Wisemen:
Now his inquiry was of the time of the Stars appearing, Verse. 7. and he slew
from two years old and under, according to the time that he had inquired, and
therefore how can it be thought otherwise, then that it was two yee^es or
thereabout since the star appeared, and consequently so long since Christ was
borne? But that this may appear past all exception, and that the opinions that
bring the wisemen to Christ before his presentation in the Temple [for there
are two several ones to that purpose, that of the thirteenth day mentioned
before; and another of some that hold they came not so soon as on that day,
but yet within the forty days of Mary's lying in, or before her Purification]
let it not be too tedious to the Reader, to take a view of all the Arguments
that are, or can be used, for ought I yet understand; either for the
confirmation of the two opinions, which we refuse, viz. of the Wisemens coming
before Christ was forty days old, or for the overthrow of this which we
embrace, that he was two years old, or thereabout.

Object. 1. The very word (...) in Verse. 1. does import that his birth was but
newly past, being of that nature, as to signify a thing but very lately done,
or even in doing.

Answ. This Grammatical observation is not constantly and currently true. For
(...), Mat. 1. 18. a word of the very same tense and form, yet signifies it a
thing done above a quarter of a year before, and the word it self (...), in
our daily Creed, and (...), etc. speak of things past sixteen hundred years
ago.

Object. 2. The Star appeared two years before our Saviors birth, but the
Wisemen came not to him, till thirteen days after.

Answ. This Argument is used by some, but those but a few; not considering how
impossible it was, that the Wisemen should know the exact time of his birth,
but by the time of the Stars appearing. And it is not only the general
opinion even of all, but also dictated by reason it self, that the Star was not
the Harbinger of his birth, much less so long before; but the concomitant and
attendant upon it.

Object. 3. The Wisemen came, while Mary lay in at Bethlehem, but Herod, either
in policy, or for some other occasion, deferred the murder of the children till
two years after.

Answ. This both the Text and common sense contradicts. For first, in Reason:
what policy could there be in deferring, when the longer he forbear, the harder
it would be for him to find him, for whom he sought? Secondly, the Text
tells, that as soon as he saw himself mocked by the Wisemen, he fell to the
murdering of the children: and he might see whether he were mocked by them, or
not, within a short space after their departure from him at Jerusalem.

Object. 4. In that speech of the Evangelist, Herod slew all the male children,
from two years old and under, according to the time that he had inquired of
the Wisemen: the latter words, according to the time that he had inquired,
have relation to the words, and under; and to the words from two years old.
For this seems to be added by the Evangelist to this purpose, that he might
signify, that all under two years old were not slain; but only those that
were there-about, and which were borne before the Stars appearing, and not
after. For he thought not that this royal child was borne after it appeared.
But all that were about two years old he slew; lest if happily Christ had
been borne before it appeared, or miraculously grown, above the quality of
such an age, he might have escaped out of his hands. And therefore as he
dilated his murder for place, comprehending the coasts of Bethlehem under the
cruelty, as well as the Town it self; so also did he it for a time, slaying
those that were borne, before the Stars appearing, as well as at it.

Answ. This, as Baronius confesses, is a new found gloss upon that Text, and
he took himself for the inventor of it, till he met with it in Jansenius,
who like a great wit had jumped with him: Both straining the utmost of their
invention to gild over their Calendar tenet, of the Wisemens coming on the
thirteenth day. But first, to omit the strange shape and uncouthnesse of this
Exposition, which easily shows it self to any eye that is not bleered with
prejudice and partiality: As also, secondly, their confident scrutiny and
knowledge of Herod's thoughts: Let it but, thirdly, be weighed in the balance
of indifferency; what color of sense, or equality of policy can be seen in
this carriage of Herod, to slay all that were born two years before the
Star, and none of a day after, or very few? For might he not suspect th^^
^he Star was a forerunner of the birth, as well as a consequent; and that
Christ might be borne a week or fortnight after it, as well as before? Judge
therefore how these men that hold, and that truly, that it appeared but just at
Christ's birth, can handsomely stitch that opinion and this together.

Object. 5. But the wisemen found Christ at Bethlehem, and what should he do
there at two years old? For S. Luke also says, Chap. 2. 29. that when Joseph
and Mary had performed all things according to the Law, [he means at the time
of her purification, when Christ was now but forty days old] they departed to
Nazareth. So that if the wisemen came after these forty days, they must have
found Christ at Nazareth, and not at Bethlehem.

Answ. And first, to the question, How came he to be at Behelehem at two years
old? An answer has been framed to this long ago, by some few that have been
of this opinion that we embrace; namely, that some of the three festivals in
which every male was to appear before the Lord, drew his Parents, and him with
them to Jerusalem, and they took Bethlehem in the way, and there the wisemen
find him. A resolution with which if there were no other to be had, one might
rest satisfied reasonably well; yet a more serious searching into the Text,
will give a more warrantable reason, and better assurance then this, which is
but men's supposall. And that is this, that as the parents of Jesus knew that it
was necessary that he should be born in Bethlehem, because of the Prophecy that
had told of it before; so also did they think it as necessary that he should
live and be brought up there, because of his alliance to the house of David:
And from thence they durst not remove him, till they had special warrant, and
warrant they had none, till the Angel dismiss them into Egypt. This is not a
groping of their thoughts, only by surmisall, as was theirs of Herod's
mentioned before, but there is plain and evident demonstration for it in the
text: for when Joseph in Egypt was commanded by an Angel after the death of
Herod, to return to the Land of Israel, it is said, He was afraid to go into
Judea, when he heard that Archelaus reigned in stead of Herod. Now what should
he do in Judea? Or why should he rather think of going thither, then into
his own Country Galilee? But that he thought of returning to Bethlehem
again, from whence he had come; supposing that the education of the Messiah
had been confined thither, as well as his birth: But being warned and
warranted by an Angel in a dream, he then departed into Nazareth, verse 22.
By which words it is apparent, not only that he durst not go to his own home
till he had divine commission; but also that he had never been in Nazareth
since Christ was borne, till this his coming out of Egypt, otherwise he would
have addressed his thoughts thither, and not to Judea.

And by this are we to expound the text of Luke alleged, when they had
performed all things according to the Law, they departed to their own City
Nazareth: namely, that he speaks briefly, in what he saw Matthew had handled
at large before: and not so much intending to show Christ's quick departure
into Galilee, after his presentation in the Temple, as to draw you to look for
him in Galilee, at the next story following, which fell out very many years
after. And that such brief transitions are no strange thing in Scripture,
might be showed at large, but more especially in the Evangelist S. Luke, that
we have in hand: as to spare more; in Chap. 4. 14. He brings our Savior, as
it were, from the Pinnacle of the Temple, into Galilee; as if his journey
thither, had been the first thing he did: whereas he returned with the Devil
into the Wilderness again; and from thence came to John at Jordan, before he
set for Galilee. And Act. 9. 18, 19. etc. where under these few words, Saul was
converted and baptized, preached in Damascus a good season, was laid in wait
for, and escaped over the wall, and went to Jerusalem; he has comprehended a
story of him of three years, and has omitted his journey from Damascus into
Arabia, and to Damascus again, before he set for Jerusalem; as Paul himself
has parcelled it out, Gal. 1.

Object. 6. But why should the Wiseman stay so long after they had seen the
Star, as not to come to Jerusalem, and to Christ of two years after?

Answ. So did Moses lie within a days journey or little more of his wife and
children, Exodus 18. etc. a whole twelve month together within a few days, and
yet they came not at all together, not for the distance of the places where
they were, but because of the divine disposal of the Lord, for a special
reason.

And so was it with these men: It was not the distance of their Country from
Judea, were it either Arabia or Persia; nay, had it ben the utmost Judia, that
kept them away so long; for they might have traveled it in half the time; bu^
it was the divine dispensation of the Lord, that detained them back for so
long a time, partly that Christ's stay in Bethlehem may leave no excuse behind,
if they would not know him, but chiefly that the child and Mother might
gather some competent strength against their flight, which God foresaw would
follow upon the wisemens coming.

Harmony and Explanation.
Ver. 1. In the days of Herod the King.
THis Herod was the Son of Antipater an Edomite or of the seed of Esau, as was
said before, although Nicolas Damascen (for which Josephus corrects him)
aver that he was of the race of the chief of the Jews that came up out of
Babylon. His Father Antipater growing into acquaintance and favor with Julius
Caesar, had the government of Judea committed to him. And he again
substituteth his son Phasaelus in the rule of Jerusalem, and of the Country
thereabout; and his other Son Herod, who is here spoken of, in the ruling of
Galilee. Herod by his prowess and policy indear'd himself to the succeeding
Rulers of the Roman State* but more especially [by observance and promises] to
Antonius, and by his means to Augustus, whilst they two kept correspondency
in the swaying of the Empire: These two by the consent of the Senate make him
King of Judea, a man composed, as if they were his four elements, of fawning,
policy, cruelty, and unconscionablenesse. Of whose life and actions Josephus,
Egesippus, and others have discoursed at large, and it is not seasonable to
insist upon them here. This only is not impertinent to inquire after, what
year it was of the reign of Herod, when this story of the Wisemens coming to
Bethlehem, and the butchery upon the children there fell out, that it may be
seen how long our Savior was in Egypt, before his return upon the tyrants
death: and how soon it was that the Lord overtook this and the other cruelties
of the tyrant with deserved vengeance.

Josephus Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 26. has placed the beginning of Herod's reign,
under the hundredth eighty and fourth Olympiad, and under the Consulship of C.
Domitius Calvinus II. and C. Asinius Pollio, and has summed the length of it
to four and thirty years from the death of Antigonus his competitor, and
seven and thirty from the Romans first declaring of him King. Antiq. lib. 17.
cap. 10. And with this reckoning of the years of his reign, agrees Egesippus
de Excid. Jerosol. lib. 1. cap. 45. and so does Eusebius in his Chronicle for
the latter sum of seven and thirty, but differs far from the beginning of
his reign, placing it under the last year of Olympiad 186. eight years at
least after the time prefixed by Josephus. And reason he has indeed to differ
from his beginning. For if Herod began his Reign in the Consulship of the men
forenamed, and reigned but thirty and seven years from thence, it will result
in the conclusion, that he dyed the year before our Savior was borne, as may
be easily cast by the Catalogue or number of Consuls from Cn. Domitius and
Asinius Pollio, which was after the building of the City, Anno 71. to Cornelius
Lentulus and Valerius Messalinus, under whom our Savior was borne, which was
Anno urbis 751. So that this account of years that Josephus has given, though
it be true for the number, yet can it not be so from that beginning from
whence he has dated them. What shall we say then, by beginning the thirty
seven years of his Reign, from the time that he was King entire, and sans
corrivall in the kingdom, by the death of Antigonus, the last spark of the
Asmonean fire? Why, herein also I find Dion differing from Josephus, and
Eusebius from them both. For, whereas Josephus has related that the sacking of
Jerusalem by Socius, and the death of Antigonus, were under the Consulship of
M. Agrippa, and Canidius, or Caninius Gallus, which was Anno urbis conditae,
717. Dion in his Roman History, lib. 49. has placed the crucifying of
Antigonus, and the making of Herod King by Antony under the Consulship of
Claudius and Norbanus, which was Anno V. C. 716. or a year before. And Eusebius
has still laid Herod's beginning a year or two after.

Baronius has found out a date different from all these, namely, that Herod's
years of his Reign are to be begun from the time that he received his
Crown from the hands of Augustus, after his Victory of Antony, at the battle
at Actium; Caesar being then in Rhodes, of which story Josephus makes mention,
Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 10. Augustus being then a third time Consul, and Valerius
Messalla Corvinus his partner. By which account 't will follow that our Savior
was borne in the nine and twentieth year of Herod's Reign, and that Herod
lived till he was about nine years old. Which opinion though it best suiteth
to the salving of other passages of Josephus in Chronology about this time,
yet it seems to be something too corrasive an application, and a remedy very
harsh, upon these respects.

First, Because by this account of his, both about the wisemens coming and
Herod's death, he will have Christ to be nine years in Egypt, or thereabout,
or according to our reckoning, seven years or little under: Now, in his
banishment from his own Country, the means of his Parents and of his own
subsistence in a foraine Land for so long a time, is so hard to imagine, that
it will breed another and no less a scruple then that in hand.

Secondly, the transition of S. Luke from his presenting in the Temple, to his
coming into Nazareth will seem a great deal the more harsh, if eight or nine
years are to be taken in between, especially with such as Baronius himself,
who will have nothing to come between at all.

Thirdly, by this opinion must our Savior be nineteen years old and more, at
the death of Augustus, and then how could he be, but beginning to be thirty
in the fifteenth of Tiberius, Luk 3. For suppose with the Cardinal that he
was nine years old at the death of Herod, then was he nineteen at the
banishment of Archelaus, who reigned ten years, as appears by Josephus,
Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15. After Archelaus was removed from his kingdom, the
same Josephus names Cyrenius, and Coponius, as rulers and disposers of Judea
for a season. And after Coponius. Marcus Ambibuchus was Ruler, and after him
Annius Rufus, and then dyed Augustus. Now lay all these together, and it will
follow that our Savior could not be less then above twenty years old, at
the death of Augustus, whereas it is most plain by the Gospel that he was but
about fifteen. Let us therefore take these parcels backward, and as they
confute the opinion under question, so do they help to settle and resolve the
question in hand. For grant that Coponius, Ambibuchus, and Rufus ruled their
single years apeece, after the exile of Archelaus (as it is most like they
did, and more then years a piece they could not do, all things well laid
together) and take before them the ten years current of Archelaus, and we have
thirteen years backward o sour Saviors fifteen at the death of Augustus,
and this does bring us to his two years of age or thereabout; which was the
time when the Wisemen came to him. So that since Archelaus began to reign,
when Christ was not very much above two years old, for that he was something
above, [it may be some moneths] the time that Archelaus wanted of ten years
reign complete, will allow, and that he could not be more then such a space
above, the premises well ponderated will conclude, it will readily and plainly
follow, that our Saviors birth was in the five and thirtieth year of Herod;
and this murder of the children of Bethlehem, in his seven and thirtieth; but a
month or two, or such a space before his death. Now whereas some stick not to
say, that he was struck with the wound of death that very night that the
children were slain, and dyed not many days or hours after, in that we
cannot be so punctual; but that he lived not many months after, is more then
probable, by the collections and computations mentioned, well weighed, and laid
together.

SS. Wisemen.
That is, Sorcerers, or Magicians, and so might it not unfitly be translated.
For, first, though Magus and Magia, admit of a gentle construction, and be
often taken, not only in an harmless, but in a laudable sense in profane
Authors, yet are they never so in Scripture; and by the Idiom and propriety of
that, must the word be expounded; and not by Forain and Heathen language and
acceptance. It is true indeed, that among the Persians the Magi have been
renowned for men of excellent wisdom and skill in natural, and in other
things, and that none were admitted to reign among them, unless he were well
versed in the learning of the Magi; and that Plato, Tullie, Philo, Pliny and
others, do extol Magia, or Magic, to be the very height and perfection of
Philosophy: But the Scripture, who is ever the sure Expositor of it self, does
never take the word, but in the worse sense, for the Devilish and damnable
practice and practicers of sorcery and unlawful arts, as Act. 8. 9. Simon
(...): Act. 13. 8. Elymas (...).

And the Babylonian (...), or Wizzards, are so called by the Greek of Daniel,
whosoever translated it, whether the Lxx, or Theodotion, or who else soever,
Dan. 1. 20. and 2. 2. etc. Now it is against sense and reason to refuse the
sense of Scripture, for a Scripture word, and to fetch the interpretation of it
from Persia, Plato, Pliny, and I know not whence.

2. It does the more set forth the luster and glory of the birth of Christ, and
the power of himself and kingdom, by supposing that these men that had been
hitherto devoted to the arts, service, and converse of the Devil, should now
forsake them, and him, and their own delight, and their old profession, and
dedicate themselves, travailes and gifts, to a child unknown, far off, and
but poorly borne.

3. Nor is this opinion but newly minted, but it carries with it the passeport
and privilege of antiquity. For Ignatius Martyr in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, speaking concerning the Wisemens Star, says thus, (...). Then the
wisdom of this World grew foolish, Sorcery a toy, and Magic a derision:
personating the men in both their contrary professions and devotednesse,
Devilish and divine, to Satan and Christ. So likewise Just in Martyr in his
Dialogue with Trypho, speaking of these same men^, and how they were qualified
and affected before they came to Christ, he says, they were (...), captived
or led away as a prey by the Devil to all evil actions. And so Theophylact
the mouth of Chrysastome, They were, says he, adversaries or enemies to God,
and devoted to Devils in a more special manner: And to this sense does the
Gospel of Matthew in Hebrew render the word, whosoever translated it. But to
spare more, those fathers confess their opinion to be the same with these;
[and those neither mean ones, nor a few] which hold, some of them, that these
Magi had obtained their knowledge concerning the King of the Jews, from
Sibylla Erythraea, and others from Balaam, to whom they hold that they stood in
relation not only of Nation and kindred, but also of the same profession and
art of Wizardy and Magic.

SS* From the East.
This does something confirm the foregoing opinion of their being Magicians, if
it need any more confirmation. For that the East was infamous for Sorceries,
auguries and incantations is apparent by Esa. 2. 6. as it is understood by the
Lxx, by R. Solomon, David Kimchi, and even approved by the context it self:
But what Country of the east this was, whence these men came, is as hard to
determine, as it was what manner of men they were. Diverse have asserted that
they were of Chaldea, minding, it seems, rather the strictest and worst
sense, of both the words Chaldeus and Magus, which signify both one and the
same ungodly profession, then the letter of text, and of other Scriptures. For
it plainly tells that these came from the East, and all the Prophets that
have spoken of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, have fetched
those destroyers from the North, as Jer. 1.

Others therefore do hold them for Persians, and that chiefly because the word
Magus, is thought to be originally a Persian word.

But first, as was said before, the Scripture word is to be interpreted
according to the Scripture Idiom, and so it confineth them to Persia no more
then to any other Country. Secondly, if it should be averred, that the Persian
Magi grew renowned from a family of that name, or from some Ancestor that was
called Mag or Mago, rather then from any relation that the word has to the
depth of Learning, or any notation for a great Scholar: I suppose it would be
hard to prove the contrary; especially since in Babylonia, there was Jer. 39. 3.
Rab. Mag, or the great Mag, and in Carthage, Mago, two noblemen or Princes,
and yet for ought we know, no great Scholars neither, of the very same name.

More probable therefore and plausible is their opinion [though it leave the
Reader in a Bivium of irresolution] that holds these men either for Arabians,
or Mesopotamians about Haran: but their resolution the best of all, that bring
them from Arabia: and of this mind is Justin Martyr very confidently, in so
much that he applies a Prophecy thereto, namely, Esa. 8. 4. about the
breaking of the strength of Damascus.

For first, Arabia is full Eastward from Judea, and the inhabitants thereof are
constantly called men of the East, as Genesis 25. 6. Judge. 6. 3. Job. 1. 3.

Secondly, the gifts or presents that the wisemen offered Christ, were native
commodities of the Land of Arabia, as gold of Sheba, Psalm. 72. 15. Frankincense
from Seba, or Saba, as in the verse, Sua Thura Sabaei, and myrrh from
thereabouts, as appears in stories: and it is more probable to think that
they would bring the choice commodities of their own country, as Jacob sent
to Joseph, then of another.

Thirdly, to conceive these men for Arabians, does very well sort and harmonize
with some considerable things in Scripture: As 1. the first Proselyte to the
Jewish Church that we find mentioned in Scripture, was Jethro an Arabian, and
of the seed of Abraham: And so if we hold these first Proselytes to Christ, it
suiteth very fitly. 2. It agrees also with that Prophetic Psalm mentioned
before, namely, Psalm. 71. 3. With the rule, and dominion, and homage that David
and Solomon, types of Christ, had over and from that Country. For, 4. much of
Arabia was the Land of Canaan, as well as Judea* for the heedfull eye that
shall but seriously look upon the Nations, that planted there at the first,
will find that the whole Country was inhabited by the two Sons of Ham, Cush
and Canaan: and in after time that the seed of Abraham dispossessed them, and
dwelt in their steads, not by any usurpation or injustice, but upon the promise
made to Abraham of Canaans Land, and upon just title by his victory over the
four Kings, which having but lately subdued those lands, were subdued by him,
and with the conquest the right and challenge to that land fell to Abraham. And
hence it was that David and Solomon dilated their dominion over these Countries
even to Euphrates, and then was the promise to Abraham, Isaac, and Jaco^,
concerning their children possessing the Land of Canaan, fulfilled to the
utmost extent. Now it is more likely to bring these first fruits of the
Gentiles to do homage to the King of the Jews, from a Country which did as
much to David and Solomon who were types of him, then from a forain Nation: and
to conceive that they were of the seed of Abraham, rather then of another race.

Verse. 2. Saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? for we have
seen his Star in the East, etc.
The exposition of this Verse will be made up, by the resolution and answer of
these three question. 1. What was this Star that the Wisemen saw? 2. Where it
was that they saw it? And 3. how upon the sight of it they could conclude that
it did relate to a King of the Jews? To omit the various guesses and furnises
that are made, for the satisfaction of the first Quaere, it seems to me, that
this Star which these Magicians saw at the birth of Christ, was nothing else
but that glorious and miraculous light that shone about the Bethlehem
Shepherds, when the Angel came upon them with the tidings of the birth of a
Savior, Lu. 2. 9. And that these Wizzards being that night abroad [belike at
their study of Astrology] beheld it at distance, and to them it seemed, being
so far off, like a new and uncouth, and a wondrous Star: And the words in
the East, do mean the place of the men, and not of the Star, and are to
receive this construction, we being in the East have seen his Star: Not it
in the East part of Heaven, but they being in the East part of the Earth: And
their beholding it to be in the Land of Judea, might the more readily bring
them to think it betokened the birth of the King of the Jews.

And thus are the three questions resolved together, if the groundworke
whereupon all is built, be but firm and solid, viz, that the light or the
glory of the Lord that shone about the Shepherds, was that which the wisemen
then supposed and do now call a Star; Upon which let us look a little, and
see what probability there may be that it was so.

First, then it is past doubting, that the Shepherds saw the glory of the Lord
shine round about them, and the wisemen, the new Star shine at a distance from
them, at one and the same time, namely, at the time of our Saviors birth; For
since both these things were to both these parties as a messenger to impart
unto them the tidings of the birth of Christ, no reason can be given or
supposed why they should not appear to them both, to do this message to them
at the very time when he was borne: Now the Shepherds at Bethlehem, and the
Magicians in Arabia, seeing on the very same night, a light that was to tell
them of the very same thing, what reason have we to think that it was not one
and the same light?

Secondly, to conceive that the Wisemens Star appeared to them in the East
part of Heaven, makes the matter far more difficult to resolve, how they
came to know that it denoted a King of the Jews, then by supposing that they
saw it hanging over the very Center or middle of the Land of the Jews. For
though we cannot but acknowledge that the spirit of God was their chief
intelligen^er and instructor in this matter, and so could have taught them so
much wheresoever they had seen the Star appear, yet can we not but think,
that it was a likelier way to read this lesson to them, by setting this light
upon the very place where the King that it betokened was borne, rather then in
the East part of Heaven, where it might seem to denote something among the
Indians, rather then among the Jews.

Thirdly, we know it by experience, that a great light or fire that happens
in any place in the night, be it never so great in it self, or in the eyes of
those that are in the place where it is, yet to those that are a great distance
off, it seems but as a Star or such a thing. And that it might not be so
with the Wisemen in this matter, there is neither Analogy of faith, probability
in reason, evidence in Scripture, or any thing I know of will deny.

And lastly, it is not to be omitted without weighing, that as soon as the
Wisemen after their conference with Herod, were gone out of Jerusalem to set
for Bethlehem* the Star showed it self to them again. It appears now
nearer to them, to conduct them to the place where the Child now was, as it had
appeared at greater distance at his birth, to signify to them that he was
borne: Then they saw it over or in Judea, which directed them to hearken to
Jerusalem: now they see it at Jerusalem almost over their heads, to direct them
to Jerusalem.

Verse. 3. He was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
Herod for fear of the loss of his Kingdom, and Jerusalem* for fear of the
disturbance of their State. For he having been so long the King of Judea, as
seven and thiry years, and having laid the foundation of a successive royalty
to his family, in so much policy and cruelty as he had done, how would this
make him to startle, to hear of a King newly borne unto the Nation, whose
subjection his thoughts and endeavors had promised to his own children, and
to have the certainty of the thing confirmed from Heaven, by a wondrous and
miraculous light? And how must it needs perplexe the Jews also, to hear of a
new King over them, besides Herod who was set over them by their Lords the
Roman? For how i^ would the Romans take it that their determination and
decree of Herod's reigning over Judea, should be so affronted, as that a new
King should rise among them? and what could follow upon this, but the Roman^
Armies, and the Jews misery? Or if they understood this King to be Messiah
[as the Nation now looked for his comming] yet could it not choose but breed
some perplexity in them, partly to think of the rareness of the matter, and
chiefly of their being in subjection to so potent a Nation as the Romans, when
their delivered should appear.

Verse* 4. All the chief Priests.
Since there was properly but one High Priest at once among the Jews, by the
chief Priests so often mentioned in the Gospel some have understood those High
Priests that by the Roman Governors, or otherwise were turned out of their
Office, as about these times that matter was ordinary. So Josephus records
that Valerius Gra^us first made Ismael. High Priest in stead of Ananus: then
deposes him and makes Eleazar, Ananus his Son: him again he deposes, and
makes Simon Fitz Kamithus; and in his room again he sets Joseph,
surnamed Cai^phas: which Caiaph^s was also removed by Vitellius, and Jonathan
Fitz, Anan^^ placed in his stead. And these men thus turned out of Office, are
called (as they suppose) both here and elsewhere the chief Priests. But their
opinion is far more warrantable and agreeable to truth that by the chief
Priests understand the several heads of the families, or the chief of the
four and twenty courses, into which David had divided and ordered the Priests,
1 Chronicles. 24. which are therefore called chief Priests, not so much for Primacy
or Superiority that they had in their Ecclesiastical function above the rest
of the Clergy; as 1. because they were heads of their houses; And a because
they were of the great Council, and made a third part of the seventy Elders.

SS. And Scribes of the people.
He calls them Scribes of the people, to distinguish them from the
Secretaries or Clerks of particular men, as B^^uch (...) the Scribe of Jeremy*
and Seraiah the Scribe or Secretary of David, 2. Sa^. 8. 27. But these of whom
ment^on is here, and so very frequently in the Gospel elsewhere, were not such
private or peculiar Clerks, but they were the public Scribes or Clerks of
the people: and this their Office or function consisted in two particulars.

First, they were the men that took upon them to copy the Bible for those that
desired to have a copy. For so great and various is the accuracy and exactness
of the Scripture text in the mystical and profound significances of letters,
vowels and accents, that it was not fit that every one should offer to
transcribe the Original, or that every vulgar pen should copy things of so
sublime speculation: Therefore there was a peculiar and special order of learned
men among the Jews, whose Office it was to take care of the preservation of the
purity of the Text, in all Bibles that should be copied out, that no
corruption or error should creep into the Original of the Sacred Writ, and
these were called the Scribes of the people, or their Scriveners or Writers of
the copy of the Bible. And hence is it that there is so frequent mention in the
Rabbines of Tikkun Sopherim, The correction, or direction of the Scribes, or
their peculiar and special disposing of the text, which the Massoreth at the
beginning of the book of Numbers observes to have been in eighteen places,
which are reckoned there. These Scribes may be conceived to have been either
Priests or Levites, or both, the men of that Tribe being the chiefest Students
in the Scriptures; and being bound by their calling to be able to instruct the
people in the same, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Mal. 2. 7.

They had eight and forty Universities as it were, belonging to that tribe, for
the education of the Clergy in the knowledge of the Law and the Prophets, Josh.
21. and from among the learned of those Students, were some set apart for this
Office, which required profound Learning and skill; namely, to be the Copiers
of the Bible when any copy was to be taken, or at least to take care that all
copies that should be transcribed, should be pure and without corruption.

Secondly, these also were the public and common preachers of the people,
being more constant Pulpit men, then any other of the Clergy; taking on them,
not only to be the preservers and providers for the purity of the Text, but
also the most constant and common explainers and expounders of it in Sermons.
Therefore it is said of our Savior, that he taught as one that had authority,
and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7. 29. where the Scribes are rather mentioned then
any other order, because they were the greatest and most ordinary Preachers.
And our Savior himself, in Mark 12. 25. How say the Scribes, that Christ is
the Son of David? instancing in the Scribes only [whereas the Pharisees,
Sadduces, and even all the Nation of the Jews held the same opinion] because
the Scribes were the men that were oftest in the Pulpit, and preached more then
any other; and so this Doctrine was heard more from them then others.

And thus was Ezra a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, Ezr. 7. 6. both for the
copying and preserving pure the Text of the Scripture, and also for the
expounding of it by his Sermons. And such a one is the Scribe that our Savior
speaks of, that is instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, that brings out of
his treasure instructions out of the New Testament and Old, Mat. 13. 52. The
Chaldee Paraphrast on Jer. 6. 13. and 8. 10. and in other-places in stead of
The Prophet, reads the Scribe, taking as it seems the Prophet in the same
sense that Paul does Prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. 1 Cor. 14. 5. etc. for the
Preacher, and making the text speak in the same tenor that it does here, the
Priests and the Scribes.

In the Story of our Saviors arraignment, and elsewhere in the New Testament
there is mention of the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders, Mat. 26. 3.
Mark 15. 1. importing that the Great Council consisted of these three sorts
of men. The chief Priests of the seed of Aaron, the Scribes of the Tribe of
Levi, and the Elders of the people mere lay men: These were all deeply and
extraordinarily versed and learned in the Law, but the practice of this their
learning had some difference, as the civil, common and canon: 1. The Elders
judged the people and matters of debate and controversy, but instructed not
the people by way of preaching or ministry. The chief Priests judged and
instructed, but it was more by resolving questions and doubts that were
proposed to them, as our Savior asked them questions, Luke 2. 46. Hag. 2. 11.
Mal. 2. 7. then by common preaching Homilies or Sermons. The Scribes were they
that were the preachers or lecturers, and taught the people from the pulpit, as
well as determined upon doubts and debates: And to this triple division of the
great and Seraphicall Doctors of the Jews, St. Paul seems to allude, in 1
Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? where is the questionist,
or disputer of this world? By the first meaning the Elders of the people, and
by the last, the chief Priests.

SS. He demanded of them where Christ should be borne.
The High Priests were rightly consulted, say the Rhemists, in question of
their Law and Religion: for whom should Herod ask, but those that were most
likely to give him an answer? But the latter end of their note carries a snare
with it to entrap the simple: And (...) they never so ill, say they they are
often forced to say the truth by privilege of their function: They think they
have an undeniable ground work for this their Doctrine from the prophesying of
Caiaphas, Job. 11. 51. as their notes plead there, ascribing that his
prophesying to his Priesthood, and order, whereas the Text ascribes it to the
year and season. This he spoke not of himself, but being high Priest that
year he prophesied: where the emphasis lies not in the words being High
Priest, but in the words, that year, which was the year of sending down of the
gifts of the Spirit, in a measure and manner, never known before or after.

Ver. 6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, etc.
There is no small difference in this quotation of the Scribes or of the
Evangelist, or indeed of both, from the letter of the Text of the Prophet from
whom they cite it; nor does this difference rise by the Evangelists following
the translation of the Lxx a^ often there does, for it differs much from the
letter of the lxx also, but it is upon some special reason. Which disagreement
that we may reconcile, and the reason of which that we may see the better,
we will take up the verse verbatim, and the differences as they come to hand,
one by one.

First then, whereas Saint Matthew reads, Thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda,
the Hebrew has it only, Thou (...) without any mention of the land of Juda at
all, and so the Chaldee, and so the Lxx, but only with the addition of one
word, Thou Bethlehem the house of Ephrata, art the least, etc.

Answ. First, There are that give this general answer to all the differences
in this quotation, that the Scribes and the Evangelist tie not themselves to
the very words of the Prophet, but only think it enough to render his sense.
And this answer might be very well entertained, and give good satisfaction,
especially, si^^e that in allegations from the Old Testament, it is usual with
the New so to do, but that the difference between the Text and the quotation is
so great, that it is not only diverse, but even contrary. Some therefore,

Secondly, conceive, that the Scribes could allege the Text no better without
the book, and that the Evangelist has set it down in their own words, for
the just shame of those great Doctors, that were no better versed in the
Scripture, then to allege a place in words so very far different from the
Text. But he that has been any whit versed in the writings of the Jews, will
find their Rabbines or Doctors to be too nimble textualists to miss in a Text
of so great use and import: especially if he shall but consider to what an
height of learning they were now come, by the tutorage and pains of the two
great Doctors of the Chair, Shammai and Hillel, who had filled all the nation
with learned men the like had not been before.

Thirdly, Whereas some talk of a Syriacke Edition which the Jews used at that
time more then the Hebrew, and which had this Text of Micah as the Evangelist
has cited it, and that he cited it according to that Edition which was most
in use; here are two things presumed upon which it is impossible ever to make
good. For who ever read in any Jew of a Syrian Edition of the Prophets besides
the Chaldee Paraphrast? who we are sure reads not thus: or what Christian
ever saw such an Edition, that he could tell that it did so read? For this
particular therefore in hand, it is to be answered, that the Scribes or the
Evangelist, or both, did thus differently quote the Prophet, neither through
forgetfulness, nor through the misleading of an erroneous Edition, but
purposely, and upon a rational intent.

For, first, though Ephratah had been the surname of Bethlehem, in ancient
times, as Genesis 35. 19. Ruth 4. 11. and in the times of the Proph^t Micah, yet
it is no wonder if that title of it were now out of use, and especially out of
the knowledge of this irreligious King. For the seventy years captivity, and
the alterations of the State, did alter the face of the Country, and might
easily blot out of use and remembrance such an additionall title of a Town as
this.

Secondly, This surname of the Town was taken up in memorial of a woman, as
appears, 1 Chronicles. 2. 19. and when the discourse concerning Christ, and where
he should be born, was in hand and agitation, it was more pregnant to bring
his birthplace to have reference to Juda from whom Herod [though he were
ignorant in other particulars concerning his birth] knew he should descend,
then to a woman and a title which it is like that he had never heard of
before. So that this, that in the Scribes might at the first seem to be a
mis-allegation of the Prophet through some mistake, being pressely looked upon,
with respect had to the times when the Prophecy was given, and when it is now
cited, and to the several persons to whom, it will show to be so quoted upon
very sound wisdom and profound reason, these words, in the Land of Juda, being
used by them for necessary illustration, in stead of the word Ephrata, not as
proposing it for the purer Text of the Prophet, but as more suitable, by way of
Exposition, for the capacity and apprehension of Herod.

In Micahs time the name Ephratah was common, but in after times it may be it
was disused. Howsoever, Micah prophesied to the Jews, to whom this title
Ephratah was familiar, and it is like had the Scribes spoken to Jews too, they
would have retained that title, but to Herod who was not so punctually
acquainted with it, it was not proper to bring a phrase that he could not
understand, or that was uncouth to him, therefore they explain it by one that
was familiar both to him and the whole Nation, Bethlehem in the Land of Juda.

SS. Art not the least.
This clause is far further from Micahs Text then the other, for whereas here
is a very strong and Emphaticall negation (...), in the Prophet there is none
at all, either in the Hebrew, in the Lxx. or in the Chaldee Paraphrast. And
indeed the Text and the quotation are one clean contrary to another; in Micah,
Though thou be little, but in Matthew, Thou art not the least. Toward the
reconciling of which difference, it will be necessary in the first place, to
take a serious survey of the Prophets Text, and then upon the true
interpretation of it, to lay this allegation to it, and to see how they do
agree. The words in the Hebrew, whereupon the main doubt arises, are but these
two (...): which our English renders Though thou be little. The Septuagint,
Thou art the least to be among the thousands: but using a differing word to
signify the least, from that used here: Some books, says Nobilius, and the
other Scholiast upon the Lxx. read, Art not the least, as Hierome, Tertullian
and Cyprian: but this their reading I suspect rather to be taken from this
quotation of the Gospel, then found by them in the Text of Micah. The vulgar
Latin, Thou art little among the thousand, etc. The Italian of Brucioli, and
the French, Being little to be, or to be accounted. And much to the same
tenor with our English, Aben Ezra, and David Kimchi. Rabbi Solomon shows his
construction of it in this gloss, It were fit that thou should be the
least among the families of Juda, because of the profaneness of Ruth the
Moabitesse that was in thee, yet out of thee shall come, etc. Jansenius says,
a reconciliation might be made between the Prophet and the Evangelist, by
reading the Prophets Text by way of interrogation, And thou Bethlehem art thou
the least? which answers in sense to thou art not. But to all these
interpretations alleged, this one thing may be opposed, that the Hebrew word
(...) cannot properly agree with the word Bethlehem, according to the Syntaxe
of Substantive and Adjective; because they are of two different genders, as the
Grammarian will easily observe, and cannot but confess. For Bethlehem is of
the feminine gender, as are all the names of Cities, and (...) of another, as
it plainly appears by its termination. To construe them therefore together,
as Substantive and Adjective, as it is unwarrantable by the Grammar, so does it
make a sense utterly irreconciliable with this of the Evangelist. To which
might be added also, that these words being thus conjoined and construed
together, do make but an harsh sense and construction among themselves,
amounting to this, Thou Bethlehem in being little, out of thee shall come a
Ruler.

Their Interpretation therefore is rather to be embraced, that take (...) in
the Newter Gender, as it pleads it self to be, by its very termination [the
Masculine and Newter in the Hebrew being indifferently taken the one for the
other] and do read it thus: And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, it is a small thing to
be among the Princes of Juda, out of thee shall come a Ruler, etc. As meaning
this, That it is the least of thine honor that thou art reckoned among the
Princes of Juda, as equal with them, for thou have a dignity above this, and
above them all in that out of thee shall come a Ruler, which shall feed my
people. And to this sense and tenor should I interpret the Chaldee Paraphrase,
though I know indeed that it is generally construed another way: Chizgner
havetha leithmannaah: And thou Bethlehem Ephratah, art within a little to be
superior, or perfect, among the thovsands of Judah, etc. As let the learned in
the language judge whether the words in the Chaldee will not bear that sense:
especially the sense of the first word Chizgner, being looked into in the
Chaldee, in Psalm. 2. 12. and 73. 2. Hos. 1. 4. and in other places.

The Text of the Prophet then being rendered in this interpretation, this
allegation of the Evangelist, will be found, not to have any contrariety to it
at all, but to speak, though not in the very same words, yet to the very same
ten or and purpose: For while the one says, It is a small thing that thou art
among the Princes of Judah, and the other, Thou art not the least amng them,
they both fall into the same sense, or at least into no disagreement of sense
at all. For if it were to be reputed a small honor to Bethlehem, to be
reckoned in equality with the other Princes of Judah, in comparison of a
greater honor that she was to have, in the birth of the Messiah; it must
readily follow what this quotation of the Evangelist infers; namely, that
she was not the least among them. And thus does the Evangelist express the
Prophets mind, though he tie not his expression to his very words, alleging
his Text to its cleerest sense, and to the easier apprehension of the hearer.
It is a just exception indeed tha^ Jansenius takes at this interpretation,
because that the Scripture uses not to express this sense, It is a small
thing, by the word Tsagnir, but by Megnat, as Esa. 7. 13. Genesis 30. 15. and in
other places: But as it is true, that it often uses Megnat for that
expression; so it is most true, that (...) uses not that word alone, but
others also: As Tikton, in 2 Samuel 7. 19. and Nakel, in Esa. 49. 6. and why not
Tsagnir then as well here?

SS. Among the Princes of Juda.
In Micah it is, among the thousands of Juda: and so is it translated by the
Lxx, the Chaldee, the Vnlgar, and uninamously by all other Translators: so that
here is yet another difficulty and difference in this allegation, the
Evangelist still swerving from the Text he cites. By the thousands of Juda,
(...) understands the families, and Dav. Kimchi, the Cities: The word is once
used in the very propriety of that sense in which the Prophet takes it here,
Judge. 6. 15. My thousand, says Gedeon, is poor in Manasseh: which St. Austin,
and R. Esaiah expound that he was Captain of a thousand; Levi Gershom, that
his father was Captain; but the Chaldee, and other Rabbines understand it of
the thousand in which his amily was numbered and enrolled. Howsoever it is
understood, it is apparent by this and other places laid unto it, that the
several Tribes of the children of Israel were divided into their several
thousands, and that these thousands were enrolled to this or that City, to
which they had relation by habitation, or by inheritance: Villages that were
not so populous, were reduced into hundreds, but Cities into one or more
thousands, according as they were in bigness and multitude, Amos 5. 3. The
City that went out by a thousand, shall leave an hundred, and that which went
out by an hundred, shall leave ten: The Villages were justly reputed of an
inferior rank, but the Cities that afforded their thousands were accounted
Princes: and so may the Prophet be understood, and so the Evangelist
reconciled to him. Now the reason of their difference in words, though they
both redound to the same sense may be given these.

First, because the question in agitation was about the birth of a King, and
the place, where now in answer to such a Quaere, it was fitter to speak of
Princes then thousands, for where should a King be looked for but among
Princes?

Secondly the Hebrew word (...) used by the Prophet, does signify, both
thousands, and Princes indifferently, and so David Kimchi upon that place in
the book of Judges, cited even now alleges; There are, says he, that
interpret A^phi [which our English reads my thousand] as it were my Father,
even as the word Alluph, whose signification is a Prince or Lord.

The Evangelist therefore finding the word in the Prophet of this indifferency,
uses it in that sense which best suited with the present occasion, both in
regard of the question proposed, as also thirdly, in regard of the manner of
Christ's coming: For it was both the expectation of the Jews, and the fear of
Herod, that he would come with a conquering and victorious temporal Sword,
and restore them to a pompous Earthly State, and expel him out of his
Kingdom. Now for the Evangelist to have directed in this quotation, to look
for Christ among the thousands of Juda, had backed these Opinions, for the
term sounds of War, and it had been a direction where likelier to find an
earthly Warrier, then the Prince of Peace, among the thousands, or among the
Militia: And therefore he qualifieth the term to the best satisfaction of
Herod and the People; Among the Princes. There is that says it might be
construed, In Princes, and not among them, and the meaning to be this, Thou
Bethlehem art not the have in the Princes of Juda, that is, in breeding or
bringing them forth: but this relisheth more of wit then solidity, and agrees
better with the Latin, then with the Greek Original.

SS. For out of thee shall ^ome a Governor.
The Chaldee reads it in the Prophet, Out of thee shall come Messiah; and so
is it expounded by Rabbi Solomon, and David Kimchi. And therefore that is most
true which is inferred by Lyranus, that those Catholics that interpret it of
Ezekiah, do more judaize then the lews themselves. Some Jews indeed, says
Theephylact, do apply this to Zorobabel, but as he answers, it is like that
Zorobabel was born in Babel, and not in Bethlehem: And St. Matthew has plainly
taught both Jews and Gentiles to understand it in another sense. But here
again does he differ from the Letter of the Prophet, but comes so near the
sense, that the difference is as no difference at all.

Verse. 7. Herod privily called the Wisemen.
[Privily] For had the Jews heard of his pretenses [they had so long been
acquainted with his policy, tyranny, and ambition] they could readily have
descried his mischievousnesse, and spoiled his bloody contrivall, by better
information given to the wisemen.

SS. Enquired diligently of them the time when the Star appeared.
Had they taken their journey instantly upon the Stars appearing, Herod could
easily have computed the time by the length of their journey: but by this his
enquiry, it is apparent that they had told him of its appearance at some good
space before, which in ver. 16. is plainly resolved to be two years, by the
Wisemens own acknowledgement and resolution.

Verse. 11. Gold, and Frankiniense, and Myrrh.
The mysterious application of these presents, as Myrrham homini, uncto aurum,
etc. be left to them that delight and content themselves in such things: the
plain and easy interpretation of the matter is, that they tendered to Christ,
the chiefest and choicest commodities that their Country could afford: which
they carried in their treasures, as the text calls it, that is, in and among
those commodities that the men of those Nations used to carry with them when
they travailed, especially when they meant to present any one to whom they
went, as Genesis 24. 53. 1 Kings 10. 2.

Verse. 15. Out of Egypt have I called my Son.
The two allegations produced here out of the Old Testament, this and that out
of Jeremy, in Rama was a voice heard, are of that fullness that they speak of
two things a piece, and may very ^itly be applied unto them both; and show that
the one did resemble or prefigure the other: as this text of Hosea, aims both
at the bringing of the Church of Israel, in old time, and of the head of that
Church at this time out of Egypt. Then a Joseph nourished his father; now a
Joseph does so to his redeemer: then was Egypt deadly to every male child that
was borne; now is it a place of refuge and preservation to this child.

Ver. 18. In Rama was there a voice heard, etc.
Ramah stood not far from Bethlehem, though they were in two Tribes: and the
cry that the poor Parents and children made in Bethlehem, when this matchless
(...) was in hand, reached to Ramah, and was plainly heard thither. Now observe
the fullness of this Scripture as it is uttered by the Prophet, and as it is
applied by the Evangelist. It was fulfilled in one kind, in the time of Jeremy
him self and then was the lamentation and weeping in Ramah it self; for hither
did Nebuzaradan bring his Prisoners, after he had destroyed Jerusalem, and
there did he dispose of them, to the Sword, or to Captivity, as seemed good
unto himself. Jer. 40. 1. And imagine what lamentation and crying was then in
that City, when so many were doomed there, either to be slain in that place,
or to go to Babel, never to see their own Land again. Then was the cry in
Ramah, and it was heard no doubt to Bethlehem. But now the Prophecy is
fulfilled in another kind, when Harod destroys so many Children in Bethlehem,
and in the Suburbs and Borders belonging to it: And now the cry is in
Bethlehem, and it is heard to Ramah.

SS. Rachel weeping for her children, etc.
Rachels grave was betwixt Bethlehem and Ramah, or at least not far distant
from either of them, Genesis 35. 16. 20. 1 Samuel 10. 2. The holy Ghost therefore
does elegantly set forth this lamentation, by personating Rachel [who dyed in
the birth of her (...), the Son of her Sorrow] sorrowing for her Sons and
Children that were thus massacred: And this shows that the text in the
Prophet, aims in the first place and intention, at the matter of Nebuzaradan:
for in Bethlehem, Rachel properly had no children at all, that City being
inhabited by the children of Judah, which deseended of Leah: but in Ramah dwelt
Rachels children, that being a town of Ephramites descended from Joseph.
Howsoever, Rachel may be said to weep for the Babes of Bethlehem as her own
children, though they were not strictly and properly her seed, in regard of the
interest that she had in all the tribes of Israel, as being wife unto their
Father: as Joseph is often called the Father of Christ, being only husband to
his mother. And see such another phrase, Genesis 37. 10. Shall I, and thy mother
come to bow down before thee? whereas Jos^phs mother was dead already.

Verse. 19. But when Herod was dead, etc.
The end of Herod was not long after the massacre of these infants, and his
bloodinesse which he had used all his life long, and topped up in the murder of
these innocents, and in desire to have done as much to the Lord of life, the
Lord does now bring upon his own head. This matter with the children of
Bethlehem, we conceive to have been some three months more or less before
his end, in which space this was his behavior, as may be collected out of
Josephus.

He had slain long before this, his two Sons Alexander and Aristobulus, and
now was he about to do as much by his Son Antipater, a child too like the
Father, and one whom he left by will the Successor in his Kingdom: Him
suspected by him for some man chination against himself he had now shut up in
prison, and intended him presently for the execution, but that his sickness
whereof he died seizing on him gave some more space to the imprisoned, and some
hopes and possibilities of escaping. His disease was all these mixed together,
an inward burning and exulceration, an insatiable greediness and devouring,
the collicke, the gout and dropsy, his loins and secrets crawling with lice,
and a stink about him, not to be endured. These wringings and tortures of his
body, meeting with the peevishness of old age, for he was now seventy, and
with the natural cruelty which always had been in him, made him murderously
minded above all measure: insomuch that he put to death diverse that had taken
down a golden Eagle, which he had set up about the Temple: And when he grew
near to his end, and saw himself ready to die, he slew his Son Antipater,
and caused great multitudes of the Nobility and People to be closed up in a
sure place, giving command to slay them as soon as he was dead, for by that
means he said he should have the Jews truly and really to sorrow at his
death. Vid. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 8, 9, 10. and de Bell. lib. 1. c^p. 21.

Verse. 20. For they are dead that sought the young child's life.
The like saying is to Moses, Exodus 4. 19. where the word [they] may be
understood of Pharaoh and his servants, which jointly sought his life for the
Egyptians sake whom he had slain; and were now all dead and worn out in the
forty years of his being in Midian. But here [it is true indeed, that the
seeking of the child's life may well be applied to Herod's Servants, as well as
himselfe] but that all they died with him or about the time of his death; who
in flattery, or favor, or obedience to him, had promoted the slaughter at
Bethlehem, and had sought the child's life, I know not upon what ground it
should be conceived.

I should therefore by the [they] in this place understand Herod and his Son
Antipater jointly together: For if it be well considered how mischievous this
Antipater was against his own Brethren, and how he wrought their ruin and
misery, for fear they should get betwixt him and the throne, yea, how he
sought the destruction of his own Father, because he thought he kept him out
of the Throne too long, it may very well be believed that he would bloodily
stir against this new King of the Jews that the wisemen spoke of, for fear
of interception of the Crown, as well as his Father: He dyed but five days
before his fathers death, as it was touched before out of Josephus; and thus
God brought this bloodinesse of the Father and the Son, and the rest of their
cruelties to an end, and upon their own heads at once, and in a manner,
together; and thus may the words of the Angel be very fairly understood, Take
the child and return to the Land of Israel, for Herod and Antipater are dead,
that sought his life.

Ver. 22. Archelaus did reign in I^dea in the room of his Father Herod.
Herod had first named Antipater for his Successor in the Throne of Judea; but
upon detection of his conspiracy against him, he altered his mind and his
will, and nominated Antipas: and changing his mind yet again, he named
Archelaus, and he succeeded him; a man not likely to prosper in a Throne, that
was so bebloodyed: His conclusion was, that in the tenth year of his reign,
he was accused by the Nobles of Judea and Samaria, to Augustus, banished to
Vienna, and his estate confiscate. Jos. Ant. lib 17. cap. 15.

Ver. 23. He shall be called a Nazarene.
From Isai. 11. 1. where the Messiah is called by the title Nezer, which
indifferently signifies A branch, and the City Nazaret: one and the same word
denoting Christ, and the place where he should be borne.

SECT. VIII.
S. LUKE, CHAP. II.
Christ shows his wisdom at twelve years old.
Ver. 40. ANd Compare Exodus 2. 10. 1 Samuel 2 26. Jud 10. 24
the Child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the
grace of God was upon him. 41 Now his Parents went to Jerusalem Exodus 23. 15.
17.
every year at the Feast of the Passover. 42 And when he was twelve years
old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the Feast. 43 And when they
had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the Child Jesus tarryed behind in
Jerusalem, and Joseph and his mother knew not of it. 44 But they supposing him
to have been in the company, went a days journey, and they sought him among
their kinsfolks and acquaintance. 45 And when they found him not, they turned
back again to Jerusalem seeking him. 46 And it came to pass that after three
days they found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both
hearing them, and asking them questions. 47 And all that heard him were
astonished at his understanding and answers. 48 And when they saw him they were
amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son why have thou thus dealt with us?
Behold, thy father, and I have sought thee sorrowing. 49 And he said unto
them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must Or, In my Fathers
house.
be about my Fathers business? 50 And they understood not the saying which
he spoke unto them. 51 And he went down with them, and came to Narareth, and
was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart. 52
And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and men.
Reason of the Order.
THe Order of this Section depends so clearly upon the proper Order of that
preceding, that that being made good, to lie where it does, as in the proper
place, the subsequence of this to it can nothing at all be doubted of. For
whereas all the Evangelists have unanimously passed over in silence, all those
years of Christ's minority which intervened or passed, between his return out
of Egypt, and this passage of his at twelve years old, there is nothing
possible to be found in the Gospels, that can come between, to interpose this
order and connection. The carriage and demeanor of our Savior in the time
between, is only briefly comprised in the first verse of this portion, And
the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace
of God was upon him.

Harmony and Explanation.
Ver. 40. And the child grew, etc.
TWo years Old he was when he went into Egypt: and there he abode in his
Exile, a very small time, it may be some two or three months: about such a
space as Moses had been hid in Egypt in his Fathers house from the fury of
Pharaoh. When he returned to Narazeth his Mothers City, being now about two
years and a quarter old, he was not weaned [if in this he followed the use
and custom of the Jewish children, as it is like he did] but still sucked his
Mothers breasts: As he grew in body, he grew much more in mind; for so the
phrase, He waxed strong in Spirit, seems to be understood by the
Evangelist; taking Spirit, not so much for the Holy Ghost, though it is past
question, he was filled with that, as for his Soul or spiritual part of his
humane nature. And so he describes his growth in both parts, in the two
expressions, The child grew in body, and waxed strong in intellect and soul:
filled with wisdom, in an extraordinary manner above other children, and a
graciousnesse appeared in him both in person and actions.

Verse. 41. Now his Parents went to Jerusalem, etc.
Joseph is called the Parent of Christ, as Paul calls preaching foolishness,
1 Cor. 1. 21, 23. because he was so commonly reputed by men: And as for Women's
going up to this Festival, whereas the Law required only the Males appearance
before the Lord, three times in the year, we shall have occasion to speak of
it hereafter.

Ver. 42. And when he was twelve years old, etc.
At what age our Savior shows his admirable wisdom in the Temple among the
Doctors, in this Story; at the same age had Solomon showed his, in the matter
of the two Hostesses, about the dead and living child, 1 King. 3. 25. ^8. For
that he was twelve years old at that time, may be conceived upon these
collections.

First, Absalom began to rebel in the thirty seventh year of David's Reign,
or three years before his death, or thereabout; This is to be picked out of
that datelesse reckoning of years, 2 Samuel 15. 7. And after forty years
Absalom said, let me go pay my vow, etc. These forty years are counted from
the time that Israel asked a King: three of Saul's Reign, 1 Samuel 13. 1. and
seven and thirty of David's, and then began Absalom to challenge the Kingdom:
and the reckoning from that date gives this hint and intimation, that as their
asking a King then did sore displease the Lord, so now are they punished in the
proper kind for it, when they have so many Kings that they know not well which
to follow, and many of them perish in following the usurper.

Secondly, before his open rebellion, Absalom had been two years in Jerusalem,
and not seen the Kings face, 2 Samuel 14. 28.

Thirdly, before that time, he had been three years in deserved exile in
Geshur, 2 Samuel 13. 38.

Fourthly, and two years had passed betwixt the rape of Tamar and slaughter of
Amnon, which occasioned him into that exile, 2 Samuel 13. 23.

So that counting all these years together, they appear clearly to be ten at
the least, betwixt the rape of Tamar and David's death: and so are they so many
of Solomon's age at the same time.

Now that there was some good space that passed betwixt these sums of time
mentioned, as betwixt the birth of Solomon, and the rape of Tamar, betwixt
Absoloms seeing of the Kings face, and his breaking out after into that
rebellion, and other spaces, it cannot be denied upon serious and considerate
casting up of the Story: But to find out the exact space and measure of time is
hardly possible; and so is it to determine the age of our Savior at the time
of his disputing with the Doctors. For though the Evangelist say that he was
twelve years old, yet has he left it doubtful, whether current or
complete: and that it was a whole half year under or over, it cannot be
denied, seeing that he was borne about September, and this his disputing was
at the Passover, about March or April. So when we say Solomon was twelve
years old when he began to Reign, and when he determined the controversy
of the two Hossesses, it is not necessary, punctually to pick out and show that
space of time to all exactness, it suffices to show that the text brings
him near to that age under or over. See Ignat. Martyr in Epist. ad Magnes.

Verse. 43. The child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph and his
Mother knew not of it.
That morning that they were to depart to their own home, it was the custom
to go first to the Temple, and to worship the Lord, 1 Sa. 1. 19. Now the
multitudes that went together at these times were exceeding great and many, all
the males of the Nation, and very many of the females being constantly present
at these occasions.

When therefore Joseph and Mary, and the Galilean company that w^nt along with
them, departed from the Temple to go their Journey, it is likely that Christ
stayed behind them in the Temple Court, where also he haunted, till they found
him again. Now he having been absent from them, and in other companies
sometimes before in the Festival week, as it can hardly be doubted, it is
not to be wondered if they were not so punctually exact, as to be sure to
bring him with them in their sight out of the Temple and the City. For they
knew not, nor could they conceive, that he had any thing to do, or how he
could stay behind them when they were gone, and therefore though they saw him
not, yet doubted they not but he was with some of his acquaintance or other,
in that vast and numerous multitude: Yea, so confident they were of this, that
when after a while they missed him, yet did they not suspect his staying behind
them in Jerusalem, but went that days journey forward, searching and inquiring
for him among their kindred and acquaintance, that went along with them [for so
are those words to be understood] till they came to their lodging. And by that
time, not having found him, they resolve, and accordingly do, on the next
morning return for Jerusalem.

It is conceived by some, that the multitudes going to and from these
festivale, went, the men by themselves, and the women by themselves, and the
children indifferently with either parent, as they thought good, and so Mary
supposed that Jesus was with Joseph, and Joseph supposed that he was with
Mary, and by this mis-apprehension, they went their first days journey, till
they met at their lodging, before they mist him: But if that were certain,
which is very doubtful, that they thus travailed males and females apart; yet
it is clear by the text, that they jointly mist him in their first days
journey, and betimes in the journey, long before they came to their Inn; and
yet would not return to seek him at Jerusalem, where they could not so much
as suspect that he would stay behind, when he saw all the company setting
homewards; but they still go on their journey, and inquire up and down in the
company for him, till their not meeting him at night resolves them, that he was
not in the company at all.

Verse. 46. After three days they found him in the Temple.
That is, on the third day: for one they spent in journying homewards, though
they missed him, the other in returning that journey to Jerusalem, and on the
third day they find him in the Temple, where he had slipped from them in the
crowd when they came to do their farewell-Worship.

SS. In the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors. Compare Psalm. 82. 1.
Hag. 2. 7. Mal. 3. 1, 2.
The San^edrin, or great Bench of Judges and Doctors sat in the Court of the
Temple: This R. Solomon observes upon the conjuncture of the end of the
twentieth, and beginning of the one and twentieth Chapters of Exodus: for
whereas the twentieth ends with, An Altar of Earth shall thou make unto me,
etc. and the one and twentieth begins with, And these are the judgments, his
collection from hence is, that the Judges were to sit in the Sanctuary. And to
the same purpose, and far more largely speaks Maimonides; The Sanhedrin,
says he, sat in the Sanctuary, and their number was seventy one, as it is
said, Gather me seventy men of the Elders of Israel, and Moses was over them,
as it is said, and let them stand therewith thee, behold seventy one. The
chiefest in wisdom among them, they made head over them, and he was the head
of the Bench, and Wisemen constantly call him Nasi [the Prince,] and be stands
in stead of Moses: And him that is chief among the Lxx, they appoint second to
the head, and he sits on his right hand, and he is called Ab beth Din, or the
Father of the Court, and the rest of the Lxx sit before them two, according to
their Dignity, etc. And they, sit as it were in half the floor in a Circle,
that the Nasi, and the Ab beth Din may see them all. And they erected also two
other Courts of Judges, of twenty three men a piece, one by the Gate of the
Court, and one by the Gate of the mountain of the house: Maimonid. in S^nhedr.
per. 1. 5. That is, one at the gate of the outer Court, and another at the gate
of the inner. Now into which of these Societies our Savior was got at this
time, it is something hard to determine, since being in any of them he may be
said to be in the Temple.

SECT. IX.
St. Matthew. Chap. III. The Ministry of John the Baptist the beginning of the
Gospel. Multitudes baptized.
St. Mark. Chap. I. St Luke. Chap. III. THE beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ the Son of God.

2 As it is written in the Prophets: Behold, I send my Messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

3 The voice of one in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths straight.

NOW in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Called Claudius Tiberius Nero, and for
his vitiousnesse and intemperance, Caldius Biberius Mero, Suet. in Ti. c. 42.
Caesar, Pontius was a common praenome^ among the Romans, as Pontius Nigriu^s,
Dion. lib. 58. Pontius Fregel-lanus Tac. an. l 6* and Ponti^, Id. ib. lib. 13.
derived belike a ponte.
Pontius A Pilo, a Roman weapon or pila a pillar.
Pilate bein Governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his
brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Region of Trachonitis, and
Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abylene,

IN those days came John the Baptist preaching in the wilderness of Judea.

2 And saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

3. For this is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make bis paths
straight.

4 And the same John had his A rough garment, the garb of a Prophet, Zech. 13.
4
raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern See Elias so arrayed, 2 King. 1. 8.
girdle about his loins, and his meat was A clean meat, Lev. 11. 22.
Locusts, and wild Honey abroad in the fields, as Deuteronomy. 32. 13. Judge. 14. 8. ^
Sam. 14. 26.
honey.

4 John did baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins.

5 And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem,
and were all baptized of him, in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.

6 And John was clothed with Camels hair, and with a girdle of skin about his
loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey.

2 In Josephus called Ana^us
Annas and Caiaphas being the High Priests, the word of God came unto John the
Son of Zacharias in the wilderness.

3 And he came into all the Country about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of
repentance, for the remission of sins.

4 As it is written in the Book of the words of Esaias the Prophet, saying,
Not Christ the crier, and John his voice, as some would understand it, but John
the ^ryer, and his voice his preaching
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths straight.

5 Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round
about Jordan.

6 And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall
be made smooth.

6 And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

7 But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Saddne^s come to his baptism,
he said unto them, O generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from
the wrath to come?

7 Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O
generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come?

8 Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.

9 And think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father:
For I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up Children to
Abraham.

8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance: And begin not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: For I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham.

10 And now also The same word is used by the Lxx. Psalm. 74. 6. Judge 9. 48. 1 Samuel 13. 20* the word (...) which the Syrian has is used by the Chaldee Par.
Job. 14. 20. or in our English 29
is the Axe laid unto the root of the trees: Therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

9 And now also the Axe is laid unto the root of the trees; Every tree
therefore which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

10 And the people asked him saying, What shall we do then?

11 He answers and says unto them, He that has two (...), or Jonice, (...)
from the Hebr. (...): It properly signifies the upper garment, as in the Lxx,
Genesis 37. 3. Mat. 3. 40. Athen. de^pnos. lib. 1. Tellias gave to five hundred
horsemen, (...), A coat and a suite.
coats, let him impart to him that harb none, and he that has meat let him
do likewise.

12 Then came also Publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what
shall we do.

13 And he said unto them, Exact no more then that which is appointed you.

14 And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him saying, And what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither (...). Ister in At^^eis
sa^h, ^t is not lawful to carry Figs out of Attica which grew there, because
the Inhabitants may enjoy them themselves: And whereas many were found out,
that stole them forth of the Country, those that de^ected any such to the
Magistrates, were at first called Sycophants. Athen deipn. lib. 3. At the first
the honestest and best men of repute, we appointed to be Overseers in this
matter about Transpor^ation; but in time, the Office being abused, the name
came into utter disgrace, Id^n ibid. and so a Sycophant was no better then a
common Barretor. This is the custom of Sycophants, that they themselves will
begin to speak evil of a man, and to utter something against him as in secret,
that another hearing so much, may also be induced to speak the like, and so
become liable to be accused: For this they do without danger, because they do
it upon a Plot, etc. Dion. Cass. lib. 58.
accuse. any falsely, and be content with your The Greek here uses a Latin
word, Opsonium, as being spoken to the Roman Soldiers, and a word with which
they were best acquain^ed. Caius panaria cum opsonio (...) dedit, Suc^on. in
Caio. cap. 18. Vsed^againe, Romans 6. 2.
wages.

15 And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of
John, whether he were the Christ, or not;

11 I, indeed baptize you with water, unto repentance: but he that comes
after me, is mightier then I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

7 And preached saying, There comes one mightier then I after me, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

8 I indeed have baptized you with water; but he shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost.

16 John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water, but
one mightier then I comes, the latchet of whose shoes, I am not worthy to
unloose: he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

12 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into the garner: but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire.

17 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will
gather the wheat into his garner, but the chafe he will burn with fire
unquenchable.

18 And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.



Reason of the Order.
ALthough there be a very large space of time betwixt the Section last
preceding, and the beginning of this, yet because the Reader in his Bible can
see nothing mentioned in any of the four that may come between, he will
easily satisfy himself without any further discourse, that the order is
necessary, and the connection undeniable. But it may be, he may wonder why the
Evangelists have passed so much time in silence, without any mention at all of
our Savior Christ, or of any thing done or spoken by him: But when he shall
observe in the very first words of this Section, that the Preaching of John,
and his baptism was the beginning of the Gospel, then will he see that they
hasten to that and forward, as to the main aim, and chief intention of their
writing, but that the conception and birth of Christ and his forerunner were
necessarily to be related before.

In these collateral columns of the Text, and forward, where we shall have
occasion to use them so, the Readers eye must sometimes help to lay them
together, where the pen could not, without changing and transposing the
natural method of the Text; as in this Section now in hand, it had been both
as easy for me to have written the third verse of Mark, after the fourth and
fifth, as before them, and more agreeing to the columns on either side it; but
that I would not be so bold as to change verses without any reason, which Mark
not without good reason did dispose as they lie. And this ca^telousnesse have I
observed all along as I go, where occasion is offered; presuming rather to
trouble the Reader to rank them with his eye, then to tear the text in the
whole cloth, and then few it together at other edges. It will sometimes be
inevitable, but that we must invert and alter the order of one Evangelist or
other, from what he had laid it; but wheresoever that shall be so, there
shall be such a reason given for it, as I hope shall be to the Readers
satisfaction, and mine own excuse.

Harmony and Explanation.
MARK 1. Verse. 1.
The beginning of the Gospel.
THe beginning of that age of the world, which the Prophets so unanimously
pointed out for the time of good things to come; and which they expressed
sometimes by the term of The last days, Esa. 2. 2. Mich. 4. 1. Joel 2. 28.
Sometimes, of the acceptable year of the Lord, Esa. 61. 1. Sometimes, of the
kingdom of God, Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 14. and sometimes, of a New heaven, and a New
earth, Esa. 65. 17. And which the Gospel it self does begin from the beginning
of the Ministry and Preaching of John the Baptist, as in this verse, and
Matthew. 11. 13. Act. 1. 22. and 10. 37. So that though in our Chronicle account,
and computation, we begin to reckon from the birth of our Savior the second
Adam, as the age of the world before, was reckoned from the Creation of the
first; yet in strict and exact computing, the new world, as one may call it, or
the age of the Gospel, began not before the setting forth of John, to preach
and baptize; and this his Ministry is most fitly called the beginning of the
Gospel both in regard of his preaching, and of his baptizing.

For, first, the Doctrine and preaching of John, was of a differing strain,
and diverse tenor from the literal Doctrine of the Law: For that called all
for works and for exact performance, Do this and live; and, He that does not
all the words of this Law, is cursed; But John called for repentance, and for
renewing of the mind, and for belief in him that was coming after,
disclaiming all righteousness by the works and performance of the Law, but
proclaiming repentance for nonperformance, and righteousness only to be had
by Christ. So that here were new Heavens, and a new Earth begun to be created;
a new Commandment given, a new Church founded, justification by the works of
the Law cried down, and the glorious Doctrine of repentance and faith set up.

Secondly, whereas Baptism was used before among the Jews, only for
admission of Proselyte^ or Heathens to their Church and Religion, [as vid. Aben
Ezra, Genesis 35. Rombani in Asure Biah per. 13.] now it is published and proposed
to the Jews themselves to be received, and undergone, showing unto them; 1.
That they were now to be entered and transplanted into a new profession. And 2.
That the Gentiles and they were now to be knit into one Church and Body.

The Ministry of John being of so high concernment, as being thus the
beginning of the Gospel, and of a new World, it is no wonder, that St. Luke
does so exactly point out the year by the Reign of the Emperor, the rule of
Pilate, Herod, Philip, and Lysanias, the High Priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas,
that so remarkable a year might be fixed and known to all the World, and that
the condition and the state of the times might be observed when the Gospel
began. And here it might have been proper to have begun the second part of this
our task, and not to have driven over this Period of time, and to stop half a
year after it at the baptism of our Savior; but since his preaching and
appearing to the World, is the great and maine thing that the Evangelists look
after, and since the preaching of the Baptist was but a Preface and forerunner
unto that of his; it is not unproper, and may be very excusable to make that
our entrance to another part, and take this with us in our motion to our
lodging and resting there.

SS. Of Jesus Christ the Son of God.
This title of The Son of God, is proclaimed of Christ from Heaven, at his
baptism, when he is to begin to preach the Gospel, as it is said here to be
the Gospel of the Son of God. And it was necessary that so much should be
intimated and learned concerning him, as the author of the Gospel, Because 1.
The Gospel was the full revealing and opening of the will of the Father. 2. The
overthrow and ruin of the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses. 3. The admission of
heathen and strangers to be the Church and people of the Lord, whereas Israel
had been his peculiar before. 4. It was a Doctrine of trusting in another, and
not ones self for salvation, and now was fit for doing the three former, or
for being the object of the latter, but Jesus Christ the Son of God, who came
from the bosom of the Father, was the substance and body of those shadows and
Ceremonies, might raze that partition wall, which in the giving of the Law
himself had reared, and did not only preach the doctrine of the Gospel, but
also fully perform the Law.

Verse. 2. As it is written in the Prophets.
It seems by the Syrian, Arabicke, Vulgar Latin, Victor Antiochenus, Origin
cited by him, and others, that some Copies read, As it is written in Esaias the
Prophet: and so Jansenius thinks it was so written by Mark himself, but
purposely changed by the Doctors of the Church, as we read it now, to avoid the
difficulty which the other reading carried with it.

But, first, it were a very strange and impious, though an easy way of
resolving doubts, to add to, or diminish from the Text at pleasure, as the
Text shall seem easy or difficult: This is not to expound the Bible, but to
make a new one, or a Text of ones own head.

Secondly, in ancienter times then any of theirs that are produced, which read,
In Esaias the Prophet, it was read as we do, In the Prophets, as Jans^nius
himself shows out of Irenaeus, lib. 3. chap. 11.

Thirdly, the one half of the words alleged in the Text, are not in Esaias at
all, but in Malachi: and the first half also, for that is considerable. For
though sometime the New Testament in Allegations from the Old, do closely
couch two several places together under one quotation, as if they were but
one; yet makes it sure, that the first always is that very place, which it
takes on it to cite, though the second be another: as Acts 7. 7. S^^ven
alleges a speech of God, as if uttered to Abraham alone; whereas it is two
several quotations, and two several speeches tied up in one; the one spoken
to Abraham indeed, but the other to Moses, almost four hundred years after;
and that to Abraham is set the first, for he is the subject whereupon the
allegation is produced.

Fourthly, it is a manner of speech not used in the New Testament, to say, it
is written, or it is said in such or such a Prophet, but by him. We find
indeed, It is written in the Law, Luke 10. 26. And, It is written in the book
of Psalms, Acts 1. 20. Yea, It is written in the Prophets, Joh. 6. 45. but no
where that it is written in a single Prophet.

Fifthly, To read as we do, As it is written in the Prophets, agrees with the
ordinary and usual division of the Old Testament, by the Hebrews, into (...)
or Oraictha, Nebbyim Chetubhim, The Law, the Prophets, and the Holy writs;
approved and followed by our Savior, Luke 24. 44. and alluded to by the
Evangelist here.

[Before thy face, etc. Thy way before thee.] The former is neither in the
Hebrew, nor in the Lxx at all: the latter is in them both, but clean contrary,
for they both have it, The way before me.

But First, the Evangelists and Apostles, when they take on them to cite any
Text from the Old Testament, are not so punctual to observe the exact and
strict form of words, as the pith of them, or sense of the place; as might be
instanced in many particulars: so that the difference of the words would not
prejudice the agreement in sense, were there not so flat difference of person,
as me and thee.

Secondly, The Majesty of Scripture does often show it self in requoting of
places, in this, that it alleges them in difference of words and difference
of sense, yea, sometimes in contrariety, not to make one place to cross or
deny another, but by the variety one to explain and illustrate another, as in
corresponding places in the Old Testament might be showed at large, as Genesis
10. 22, 23. cited, 1 Chronicles. 1. 17. Genesis 36. 12. compared with 1 Chronicles. 1. 36. 1 Samuel 25. 44. paralleled, 2 Samuel 21. 8. 2 Chronicles. 3. 15. with Jer. 52. 21. and
very many other places of the like nature: wherein the Holy Ghost having penned
a thing in one place, does by variety of words and sense, enlarge and expound
himself in another. And the same divine authority and Majesty does he also
use in the New Testament, both in parallel places in it self, and in
citations in it, from the Old. So that this difference in hand, betwixt My
face, in Malachi; and thy face, in Mark, is not contradictory or crossing one
another, but explicatory or one explaining another, and both together do result
to the greater mystery. For Christ is the face or presence of the Father: and
so is he plainly called, Exodus 33. 14. and in Christ, the Father came and
revealed himself among men: and the words in both places, both in the Prophet
and in the Evangelist, are to be taken for the words of the Father; in the
one, spoken of the Son, and in the other, to him: In Malachi thus, Behold I
send my Messenger before me to prepare the way before my face; that is, before
the Son, as he is in his own nature, the very brightness of the glory of
the Father, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. and in Mark thus,
to prepare the way before thy face, that is, before thee, O Son, when thou
come to undertake the work of redemption, and to publish the Gospel. And
this change of persons in Grammatical construction is usual in the Hebrews
eloquence and Rhetorique; as 1 Samuel 2. 23. My heart rejoices in the Lord, I
rejoice in thy Salvation. There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none
beside thee, etc. Zech. 12. 10. They shall look upon me, whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him: and 14. 5. The Lord my God shall come,
and all the Saints with thee.

Luke 3. ver. 1. In the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar.
This Tiberius was the third Emperor of the Romans, the son of Livia, the
wife of Augustus, and by him adopted into the family of the Caesar's, and to the
Empire: A man of such subtilty, cruelty, avarice, and bestiality, that for all,
or indeed for any of these, few stories can show his parallel: And as if in
this very beginning of the Gospel, he were produced of such a constitution, to
teach us what to look for from that cruel and abominable City, in all ages and
successions.

Now Tiberius his fifteenth was the year of the world 3957. And the time of
the year that John began to Baptize in it, was about Easter, or the vernall
equinox, as may be concluded from the time of the Baptism of our Savior. For
if Jesus were baptized in Tisri or September, as is cleared hereafter, he
being then but just entering upon his thirtieth year, as the Law required,
Numb. 4. And if John being six months elder then our Savior, as it is plain
he was, did enter his Ministry at the very same age, according to the same
Law, it readily follows, that the time mentioned, was the time when he began
to Preach. It was indeed Tiberius his fifteenth when John began to baptize, but
it may very well be questioned, whether it were so when our Savior was
baptized by him: For the exact beginning of every year of Tiberius his reign,
was from the fourteenth of the Kalends of September, or the eighteenth of
August, at what time Augustus dyed: Sueton in Aug. cap. 100. That fifteenth of
the Emperor therefore, in the Spring time of which John began to baptize, was
expired before September, when our Savior was baptized, and so his baptism is
to be reputed in the year of the world 3958. which was then but newly
begun, and in the sixteenth year of Tiberius, but newly begun neither,
unless you will reckon the year of the Emperor, as the Romans did the year
of the Consuls, from January to January: But this we will not controvert, nor
cross the common and constant opinion of all times, that holds our Savior
to have been baptized in Tiberius his fifteenth.

SS. Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea.
He is called Procurator Judeae by Tacitus, Annal. lib. 15. and has this
brand set upon him by Egisippus, that he was Vir nequam and parvi facient
mendacium, De excid. Jeruf. l. 2. c. 5. A wicked man and one that made little
conscience of a lie; from which unconscionable disposition, those words of his,
What is truth, Joh. 18. 38. seem to proceed, in scorn of truth, and derision of
it. He succeeded Gratus, in the government of Judea: managed it with a great
deal of troublesomenesse and vexation to the nation: and at last was put out
of his rule by Vitellius, and sent to Rome, to answer for his misdemeanors.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. c. 3, 4, 5. Philo in legatione.

SS. Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee.
This was Antipas the son of Herod the great, and called also Herod after his
Father, a man that after a long and wicked misdemeanour, in his place, was at
last banished by Caius upon the accusation of his Nephew Herod Agrippa, and
Herodias his incestuous mate with him, as shall be showed in a more proper
place.

SS. Tetrarch.
Some tying themselves too strictly, to the signification of the Greek word,
understand by Tetrarch, him that governs the fourth part of a Kingdom, for
the Original word includes four: and accordingly have concluded, that the
Kingdom of Herod the great was divided by Augustus after his death into four
parts, and given to his four Sons, Archelaus [in whose room they say
succeeded Pontius Pilate] Herod Antipas, Philip, and Lysanias. In this
strictness has the Syrian Translator taken the word, rendering it thus, Herod
being the fourth Ruler in Galice, and Philip the fourth ruler in I^urea. And
the Arabic thus: Herod being head over a fourth part, even Galilee: and so in
the rest. But if the opinion be narrowly examined, these absurdities will be
found in it.

First, It makes a Tetrarchie to be nothing else, but exactly the fourth part
of a Kingdom, whereas Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 18. speaks of Tetrarchies that were
like Kingdoms, and compacted into kingdoms, and he names Trachonitis for
one. His words are these: Intercurrunt, cinguntque has Vrbes, Tetrarchiae
regnorum instar singulae, and in regna contribuuntur, Trachonitis, Paneas, in
qua Caesarea cum supradicto font Abila. And in chap. 23. he says, Caelosyria
had seventeene Tetrarchies, Tetrarchias in regna descriptas, barbaris nominibus
december and septem.

Secondly, It divides Herod's kingdom into four parts, whereas it was parted
only into three, to his three Sons, Joseph. Ant. lib. 17.

Thirdly, It makes Lysanias to be Herod's son, which he was not at all.

A Tetrarchie therefore seems rather to be one that was in the fourth rank
or degree of excellency and government in the Roman Empire: the Emperor that
was Lord of all the Empire being the first, the Proconsull that governed a
Province the second, a King the third, and a Tetrarch the fourth. So Mishuch,
and Shalish in the Hebrew, signify a man, second or third to the King.

SS, And his brother Philip being Tetrarch, etc.
Herod made Antipas [whom he had intended for King, but changing his mind,
he changed his last will] Tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea. And the Kingdom he
bestowed on Archelaus: And Gaulonitis and Trachonitus, and Batanaea, and Paneas
he bestowed on Philip who was his own son, and own brother to Archelaus, to
be a Tetrarchie, Josep. Ant. l. 17. c. 10.

SS. Of Iturea.
This Country seems to have taken its denomination from Jetur, one of the
Sons of Ismael, Genesis 25. 15. and it lay Stra. lib. 16
edging upon Arabia, but Plin. lib. 5. cap. 23.
reckoned to Syria, and upon that reference mentioned by the Evangelist here.
For he speaks of these Countries and Tetrarchies, becase Syria and Judea
were but one Province, and under one Proconsull. And therefore as he names
the government of Canaan, in the two Countries of Judea and Galilee, so does
he also the government of Syria, under three, Iturea, Trachonitis and Abilene:
And this is agreeable to what he had done in chap. 2. 1. when he spoke of the
time of our Saviors birth: for as he there dateth the tax that then was, by
the time of a governor of Syria, so does he now the beginning of the Gospel
by the time of the Rulers there, as well as in Judea. And this was also most
suitable to the Roman Records, where, seeing that Syria and Judea were joined
together into into one Province, it is not to be doubted, but their Governors
were named together, as members of one body.

SS. And the Region of Trachonitis.
The name of this Country, Strab. ubi supra. Plin. lib 5. c. 18.
as it seems by Strabo, was taken from two mountains, or Rocks, called
Trachones: and they very probably so called from the Hebrew word, (...), which
signifies wearisomnesse, in regard of the irksome and tedious difficulty of
passing over them: as Strabo instantly after them, speakeh of other mountains
toward Arabia and Iturea, which he titleth (...), hills hard to travel over.
Josephus supposes Vz the eldest son of Aram, to have been the first
Inhabiter of this Country, Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. but whether it were that
son of his or no, it is not so material to inquire, as it is to observe that
it was reputed a Country belonging to Aram, or within the compass of Syria:
very theevish in the time of Herod, and the Inhabitants living upon the robbery
of the Damascens, that lay near unto them: Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 13.

SS. Lysanias.
He was not a Son of Herod, as is supposed by some, nor an immediate Son of
Ptolomy Mennaeus, neither, as is held by others. [For though Josephus Antiq.
lib. 14. cap. 23. and de Bell. lib. cap. 11. tells that Lysanias succeeded his
Father Ptolomy Mennaeus, yet it cannot be the same man possibly, that St. Luke
here speaks of, for that Lysanias was slain by the means of Cleopatra, a
good space of time before our Savior was borne, Jos. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 4.]
But the Lysanias here mentioned, might be the great Grandchild of of Mennaeus
or some one of that house, that bare the same name with Menaeus his immediate
son and successor.

SS. Abilene.
This Country was so named from the City Abila, which Ptolomy, lib. 5. cap. 15.
has recko^ed for a City of Caelosyria, [or as some Copies have it, of
Decapolis] and with this title, (...), Abila surnamed from Lysanias: see also
Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 18, This word sounds so near to the word Havilah, Genesis
2. 11. and 10. 7. that it may very well be supposed to have descended from it,
and the name of the place from that Son of Chush, that planted with his
brethren mentioned with him, in Arabia and thereabouts.

Verse. 2. Annas and Caiaphas being the High Priests.
There could be but one Priest properly so called at one time: and that
Caiaphas was he at this time, it is most clear, both out of Josephus, and out
of the Scripture. Now Annas is said to be High Priest with him, because he was
the Nasi or head of the Sanhedrin, and so represented Moses, as Caiaphas did
Aaron, and he was of the seed of the Priests, as well as Caiaphos was. An
evidence of his being the head of the great Council, is, in that when our
Savior was apprehended, he was first led to Annas, Joh. 18. 13. and by him
bound and sent to Caiaphas, Ver. 24. and that Annas is first placed in the
Council, Act. 4. 6. We shall have more punctual occasion hereafter to look
after this man, and then will we see what we can find spoken of him by
Josephus.

SS. The Word of the Lord came to John.
Such was the commission of the Prophets, as Jer. 1. 2. Ezekiel. 6. 1. etc. And
this proclaims John a Prophet, as well as they. And here had he his warrant
for his Ministry, and this was the institution of the Sacrament Baptism. Now
whether the word of the Lord that came to John and to the Prophets, be to be
understood of his personal, and substantial word, as Joh. 1. 1. or of the
word of Prophecy suggested to them by the holy Ghost; and whether John had this
word imparted to him, by vision, or dream, or rapture, or what other way, it
is not so material to inquire, as it is difficult to resolve; only this is
not impertinent to observe, That whereas the race of the Prophets that were
sent to teach and to preach to the people by the word of the Lord, was expired
and extinguished long ago, in the death of Malachi the last of that race,
there is now another race of such preachers to be raised again, viz. John, and
the great Prophet, and the Apostles, and this is the entrance or beginning to
that glorious generation. For we are to distinguish, betwixt having the gift
and spirit of Prophecy, and betwixt being sent by that spirit for a constant
Preacher to the people. Deborah and Barak, and Huldah, and Hannah, and diverse
others both men and women had the spirit of Prophecy upon them, but never had
warrant to go and preach, and to be constant ministers to the Church. But
Esaias, and Jeremy, and Ezekiel, and the rest of that form, under the Old
Testament, and John and the Apostles under the New, had not only the spirit of
Prophecy upon them, to foretell things to come, but they had also the word of
the Lord came unto them, which gave them commission to be continual
preachers, and entered them into the function of a constant Ministry. As see
how the Baptist himself explaineth what is meant by this word of the Lord
coming to him, Joh. 1. 33. He sent me to baptize.

SS. To John the Son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
The Children of the Priests when they came to age, were to be installed and
enrolled into the service of the Temple; Vid. Suid. in voce. (...).
their names being entered there, and the name of their father. To this custom
the Evangelist seems to refer, when he calls John the Son of Zacharias in
this place, and at this time, when he was to enter upon his Ministerial
function: which though he did not at the Temple, as others used to do, but
had another kind of employment laid upon him, by the Word of the Lord coming
to him in the Wilderness in the place of his converse; yet [as had he been
there, he must have been enrolled and registered, thus, John the Son of
Zacharias began his Ministration at such a time, or to this purpose, so] does
the Holy Ghost inroll him here, at his entrance into this his Ministry of
another kind, the word of the Lord came to John the Son of Zacharias. And the
like passage we observe in the same Evangelist concerning our Savior at his
being baptized, and when he also entered upon his function.

Mat. 3. verse. 1. Preaching in the Wilderness of Judea.
That is, in the Cities and Towns in the wilderness, as Josh. 15. 61, 62. and
1 Samuel 23. 14. 24. some of which were probably within the territories, and
under the command of Hebron the place where John was born: for there is mention
of the Cities of Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. 3.

Mark 1. ver. 4. John did baptize in the Wilderness.
It is the most likely that John began to preach in the place where he was
borne, and from thence went to other places as he saw occasion, and the Spirit
moved him: And indeed Hebron it self was in a manner a City of the
Wilderness, as well as the others mentioned, though there be no such
expression concerning it, as is of them: and if those words, Luke 2. So He was
in the deserts, till the day of his showing unto Israel, were interpreted
concerning his being in Hebron; the interpretation might very well be
justified, though to avoid cavil and offense, we have expounded it of places,
which the Scripture calls Deserts, or Wildernesses in express terms.

However, be it in Hebron, or out of Hebron that John was educated, conversed,
and began to preach; certain it is, that he did the last of these in some
Cities of the Wilderness, not far from Hebron: and if it be said that he
baptized also in these Cities where he preached, and as yet was not gone down
to Jordan, till Jerusalem and all Judea heard of him, and came to be baptized,
and then he went thither for the convenience of water: I suppose it crosses
nothing, either in the History or Mystery, and it averreth no more concerning
John now, then we shall find him doing hereafter; namely, baptizing in other
waters beside Jordan. And indeed how can it rationally be understood otherwise,
then that John baptized first in these Cities and Towns, before multitude of
company drew him down unto the River?

For, first, it cannot be conceived that he walked or stood in the open fields
near Jordan, and there began to preach; but that he betook himself to
Towns or Cities where was concourse of people.

Secondly, it can as little be conceived, that when any people in this or that
City embraced his Doctrine, and desired to be baptized, that he should bring
them to the River, which was sometime far off, or delay them till all the
multitude should meet him there together; unless it could be showed that the
water of Jordan was only allowed to be baptized in, and no other; the contrary
to which we shall see anon.

The Story therefore and progress of his Ministry and baptizing, out of the
three Evangelists may be compiled thus: That first he came preaching in the
Wilderness of Judea, in the Towns and Cities that were there, about the place
of his education; That he baptized there those that were converted by his
preaching, and that desired to be baptized by him: That he went abroad from
thence, up and down all the Country round about Jordan, and when his converts,
and the concourse were now grown numerous, he baptized them in Jordan, because
there was water enough, as Joh. 3. 23.

SS. And preach the baptism of repentance.
The Evangelist uses this title or epithet, in opposition Circumcision, and
baptizing of Proselytes, which had been the way and door of admission into the
Church before. They might very fitly be called the Circum^ision and the
baptism of performance, as this the baptism of repentance. For whosoever
received circumcision was engaged by it to the performance of the whole Law,
Gal. 5. 2. And the like was every Proselyte engaged that received Baptism. But
this baptism of John, or the baptism in the Christian Church is clean of
another nature. For whereas those two challenged of every one that went through
those doo^es into the Church, that they should stand debtors to the whole Law,
and be obliged to a legal righteousness: our baptism requires a clean
contrary thing, namely, that we should be obliged to repentance, in regard
that the performance of the law is a thing that is to us impossible, and that
we should be buried with Christ in his death, and seek after his
righteousness, seeing that we have none of our own. Hence appears clearly,
first, a reason why the baptism of John is called the beginning of the Gospel,
for it opened a door, and gave an inlet into the Church upon other terms,
then had ever been before. And, secondly, that baptism belongs to Children,
though it be the baptism of repentance, and they know not what repentance
means: For it requires not their repentance at their receiving of the
Sacrament, when they stand but in the door or entry of the Church, but it
ingageth them to repentance for the time to come, or when they being now entered
into the Church, shall come to the use of reason, and knowledge of the
engagement: And so was it with the children that were circumcised: for they
when they underwent that Sacrament, undertook obedience to the whole Law, and
yet they knew not what, either obedience, or the Law meant: But that
undertaking was, what they were to do when they came to the years of
knowledge and apprehension.

Matthew. 3. Verse 2. And saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand.
The phrase, the kingdom of heaven, which is so frequently and commonly used
in the Gospel, is taken from, Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 14. And it means the
spiritual kingdom of Christ in and under the Gospel, as it is published and
preached unto all Nations. For though the phrase be generally and truly
understood to mean the preaching of the Gospel; yet does it most properly and
naturally signify the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, or among all
Nations; as might be showed, by the signification of the word Heaven, by the
manner of speech here used, that it is at hand, and so again, Mat. 4. 17. when
the Gospel was now Preached already: by the Text of Daniel, from whence the
phrase is taken, and by diverse places in the Gospel, where it is used; but the
full clearing of this, I have chosen to refer to that difficult place which
will call for it to be cleared, when the Lord shall bring us thither, Matthew.
16. 19. To thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven: where I
conceive Christ to have foretold to Peter; that he should be the first that
should Preach the Gospel, and open the door of Faith unto the Gentiles, as
Act. 15. 7. and 10.

Now, The Kingdom of heaven signifying thus, not barely and simply the
Preaching of the Gospel, but the preaching of it to the Gentiles and their
conversion, it shows how proper and pregnant an argument this was to enforce
the doctrine and practice of Repentance upon the Jews, because the calling of
the Gentiles was near at hand, which would prove their rejection and casting
off, if they did not repent, as Deuteronomy. 32. 21.

Before the coming of Christ, those four earthly kingdoms that are mentioned
by Daniel in the Chapters cited, bare all the sway, and domineered over all the
world with cruelty and tyranny: but when they were destroyed, at his coming
he set up a Kingdom of his own, and swayed the Scepter of Righteousness over
all Nations, and ruled them with his word and Spirit. And whereas before his
coming also, the Church consisted but of one Nation and Kingdom; and was
couched upon a small parcel of earth, the Land of Canaan, and had earthly
promises, and earthly rites; when he came and published the Gospel, he
gathered a Church of all Kingdoms and Nations, and Languages under Heaven; and
built it up with heavenly and spiritual promises and instructions, and thus
The Kingdom of heaven may fitly be understood in opposition to these two
earthly ones.

Luke 3. ver. 5. Every valley shall be filled, etc.
These borrowed phrases, intend the removing of obstacles and stumbling blocks
out of the way, and plaining and clearing the way for men to come to Christ,
and to the obedience of the Gospel. The Jews conceive that the cloud of glory
that led the people of Israel in the wilderness, did really and according to
the letter, do what is here spoken of, for facilitating of their march and
journey: as that it levelled Mountains, raised valleys, and laid all of a
flat, that it burnt up bushes and smoothed rocks, and made all plain, that
they might travail without trouble or offense.

And some of them also say, that when Jeroboam set up his golden calves and
Idolatry in Bethel, and Dan, that he and his wicked agents laid ambushments
and scouts in the ways to Jerusalem, to catch up every one that should go
thither to worship, and to this purpose they apply that saying of the Prophet,
Hos. 5. 1. O ye Priests and O ye house of the King, ye have been a snare on
Mizpah, and a net upon Tabor, And the revolters are profound to make slaughter,
etc. If either of these things were undoubtedly so, as they suppose, how
properly might this passage of the Prophet Esaias, and of the Evangelist from
him, be thought to refer thereunto; but since they be but surmisals, it is
safest to take the words for a borrowed speech, to express what was said
before, the removing of obstacles in the way to Christ.

Mat. 3. ver. 6. Confessing their sins.
Not to John, but to God: For neither was it possible for John to hear their
confessions, nor was it necessary. Not possible, because of the vast multitudes
that came to be baptized: nor necessary, for to tell him they had committed
such and such sins, what conduced it either to their baptism or forgiveness?

Nor was this their confession of their sins, before their being baptized,
but after: For first, if we should strictly take the Grammatical construction
of the word, that imports their confessing, it is not (...), which would have
denoted that they had confessed before they were baptized, but it is (...), in
both the Evangelists, that speak of that matter.

Secondly, It was far more agreeable to the end and doctrine of Baptism,
that their confession of sin should be after their baptizing then before, in
that they were baptized to repentance, ver. 11. and not e contra; the Sacrament
was more intentionally to enter them into repentance, then repentance to enter
them into the Sacrament: For, as was said before, it obliged them more properly
to repentance after the receiving of it then before.

Thirdly, the gesture of our Savior after his Baptism seems to have been
according to the common custom and gesture of the people, and as he coming
out of the water fell to prayer, so they when they came out, used to do, to
make their penitent confession to the Lord.

Mat. 3. ver. 7. When he saw many of the pharisees, and Sadduces coming to his
baptism.
The Pharisees, Sadduces, and Esseans, the three Sects of the Jews; Josep.
Antiq. lib. 13. c. 9. are those three shepherds spoken of Zech. 11. 8. whom our
Savior at his coming was to cut off.

The two former, whom we have now in hand, are very frequent in mention in the
Gospel: men of enmity one against another, yet both joint enemies to Christ and
to his Apostles.

The original of the Pharisees is not so easy to go back unto, as that of
the Sadduces, nor is the significancy of their name so readily determined and
fixed upon as the other; The Sadduces, it is well known were so called from
Sadoc, the first Author of their Sect, and he the Scholar of Antigonus; Rabbi
Nathan in his Aboth. Perek. 5. has thus clearly given us their original.
Antigonus of Socoh, says he, received his learning from Simeon the just: This
was his saying: Be not as servants that serve their Master, because of
receiving (...) a portion.
a reward, Vid Talm Bab. Basileae, tom. 6. in fine.
but be as servants that serve their Master, not for the receiving of a
reward, but let the fear of God be upon you. This Antigonus had two Scholars
which changed his words; they changed them to their Scholars, and their
Scholars to theirs: They stood up and taught after them, and said, what saw our
Fathers to say thus? is it possible that a workman may do his work all the
day, and not receive^ his wages at even? But if our Fathers had known that
their is a world to come, and that there shall be a resurrection of the dead,
they would never have said thus: They stood up and separated from the Law, and
from them broke out the two Sects, the Sadduces, and Baithusaeans: the Sadduces
after the name of Sadoc: and the Baithusaeans, after the name of Baithus. So
he. Now this Antigonus, whose good doctrine had this bad construction, was
Scholar to Simeon the just, whom we shall have occasion to look after by and
by.

But the time and occasion of the rising of the Pharisees, is of more
obscurity, and the reason of their name admits of more conjectures; As,
whether they were so called from Perush, which imports Exposition, for that
they took upon them to be the great Expositers of the Law by their
Traditions; or from Parush, which betokens separation, for that they
accounted and pretended themselves more holy then others of the people, and so
became Separatists from them, as despising them, Luke. 18. 9. Either of which
Etymologies carry with them a fair and plausible probability of their
notation, but the last most agreeable to what both the Scripture, and other
writings have said of them, in regard of their singularity; and as we shall
have further occasion to descry, when we come to meet with them in their
Doctrines, Practices or Opinions.

And the time of their first starting up, is yet obscurer: But to speak mine
own thoughts, I cannot but conceive them to have been somewhat more ancient
then the Sadduces, though but a little: And that that passage of the Prophet
Malachi, [when he and the Spirit of Prophecy with him was to leave this world]
Remember the Law of Moses, Mal. 4. 4. gave occasion to the rising of the
Pharisees, and to the confirming of the Sadduces in their opinion when they had
taken it up. For whereas the Spirit of Prophecy and revelation was now to
depart from Israel, God having revealed as much of himself, and of his will to
them, as he thought fit and necessary: He sends back the people in this
defect of prophetic guidance and direction, to the Law of Moses, to be their
study, and their rule of faith and of obedience. Hence did a certain
generation among them take occasion and opportunity, to vent and broach
traditions and glosses upon the Law, pretending them to have descended from
Moses himself, and to have been handed over to them, from hand to hand, and as
the Prophets while their race continued, expounded Moses, and instructed the
people in the knowledge of the Law, by the Spirit of God, so these men (now the
Prophets were gone) took on them to explain Moses, and the Law also, and by a
way which they pretended to be of equal authority with the words of the
Prophets, For that, say they, is Gods own gloss upon his own Law, and this he
taught Moses while he was with him in the Mount: And this, Moses taught
Joshua, and Joshua the Elders, and Eli received it from the Elders and from
Phinehas, and Samuel from Eli, and David from Samuel, and Ahijah the Shilonite
from David, and Elias from Ahijah, and Elisha from Elias, and Jehojada the
Priest from Elisha, and Zacharias from Jehojada, and Hosea from Zacharias, and
Amos from Hosea, and Esaias from Amos, and Micah from Esaias, and Joel from Micah,
and Nahum from Joel, and Habakkuk from Nahum, and Zephany from Habakkuk, and
Jeremie from Zephany, and Baruch from Jeremie, and Ezra and his School from
Baruch. The School of Ezra was called the men of the great Synagogue, and they
were Haggai, Zechary, Malachi, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, Azariah, Nehemiah,
Mordecai, Bilshan, Zerubbabel, and many wise men with them, to an hundred and
twenty: The last of them was Simeon the just, and he was in the number of the
hundred and twenty, and he was High Priest after Ezra. Vid. Rambam iu Mishu.
Tom. 1. statim sub initio.

This namelesse number that were between the time of Zerubbabel, Nebemiah,
Mordecai, and those holy men that we find mentioned in Scripture, and between
the times of Simeon the just, I suspect to be the Generation that afforded the
rise and original of Pharisaisme and Traditions: For there was a good large
space of time and distance between Ezra and Simeon the just, as might be
cleared by several particulars, if that were needful. And a preparative, if
not a groundwork, to Pharisaisme, and traditions seems to be that famous
speech of the great Synagogue mentioned in Pirk. Aboth. Per. 1. The men of the
great Synagogue said three things, Be deliberate in judgment, and raise up
Scholars in abundance, and make a bedge to the Law: Now the Lesson of making a
hedge to the Law, by a fixed and determinate exposition, was to bring on, and
into credit, those glosses and traditions which they would produce and bring
upon it. For that the Law should lie to the Commons without any sense about it,
to keep men off from breaking in upon it by their own interpretations and
expositions of it, they could soon persuade the People, was a thing not to be
tolerated or endured: and when they had wrought this lesson home upon their
hearts, then had they glosses ready of their own invention to put upon it, as
to hedge or fence in from private interpretations. These glosses or expositions
they had a twofold trick to bring into request.

First, To pretend strongly that they had descended traditionally from Moses,
and from God himself, as the pretended pedigree of them is showed before.

And secondly, to use a strict and severe preciseness in their own
conversation, and to pretend and show a holiness above other men, and to
withdraw from them as too profane for their society, that this might bring
their persons into admiration, and their traditions into repute. And thus they
came by their name of Separatists, and thus they laid the foundation for
traditions.

And as the Pharisees took this opportunity and occasion from those words of
the Prophet, Remember the Law of Moses, to vent their foolish and wicked
Expositions upon Moses, as seeming thereby to do the people a singular
benefit, and to make as singular a fence to Moses himself: So likewise did the
Sadduces make use of the same occasion to confirm themselves in the error they
had taken up, and to assert it unto others, in that in all the Law of Moses, to
the ^^udy of which the Holy Ghost had especially directed them in those times,
and which Scripture only they embraced, there is not mention nor hint at all
as they pretended, of the resurrection of the dead, or of a world to come.

SS. Coming to his Baptism.
These Pharisees and Sadduces were not repulsed by John, though he call them
by such a name as Vipers, but they were baptized by him: as it most apparent by
comparing the relation that Saint Luke makes of this Story and this together:
That saying therefore of Luke Chap. 7. 20. But the Pharisees rejected the
Counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him, is to be
understood of some of that Sect and not all.

SS. O generation of Vipers.
By Generation we are not to understand the present age, as when it is said,
shall rise up in judgment with this Generation; An adulterous generation
seeks a sign, etc. that is, the people of this age: It is not to be so
taken, as if the Baptist meant this present Generation are Vipers: for it is
not (...) in the Original, but (...): though he include no less in what he
speaks, and though, if ever generation were viperous, that was. But the
Baptist uses an expression, that hitteth and reflecteth upon their Fathers,
and predecessors as well as themselves, for he calls them a bro^d or
offspring of Vipers: intimating that they and their Fathers were Vipers both.
And this he does, that be might face and affront that fond and vain opinion
of theirs, which so much deluded them, and whereupon they built great hopes and
made great boasting, namely, of their being the children of Abraham: No, says
John, Say not within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, for yes are
not the seed of the promise, but the seed of the Serpent: And thus he
speaks, not only to the Pharisees and Sadduces, the heretics of the
Nation, but as Luke inlargeth it, to all the multitude that came to be
baptized: Commenting upon the first promise at this first preaching of the
Gospel, and as on the one hand proclaiming Jesus that was coming after him to
be the seed of the Woman, so on the other, declaring the Jews to be now
become the seed of the Serpent who should persecute and kill the seed of the
Woman, howsoever they boasted themselves for the holy seed of Abraham.

And the same lesson our Savior reads them, when he gives them the same
title, Mat. 12. 34. and 23. 33.

Vipers are the worst and most deadly of any Serpents; for they destroy and
kill suddenly, Act. 28. 4. 6. See Job 20. 16. Isai. 30. 6. and 59. 5. from
whence the Baptist and our Savior seem to have this phrase and Epithet: and
Isai. 41. 24. as the margin of our English, and an Expositor in Dev. Kimchi do
interpret it.

SS. To flee from the wrath to come.
In this speech, John seems to refer to the last words in all the Old
Testament: where Malachi prophesying of the Baptist, and of his beginning to
preach the Gospel, He shall turn, says he, the hearts of the Fathers to the
Children, and the hearts of the children to the Fathers, Lest I come and smite
the Land with a curse. This means, that wrath to come, which should surely
fall upon them, if they should disobey the Gospel, which was now the last
means offered them for their conversion, and so it came to pass with them,
when about forty four years after this, they were destroyed by the Romans.

Matthew. 3. Ver. 9. Say not, Woe have Abraham to our Father.
This was their common boasting: as Joh. 9. 33. the Chaldee Paraphrast, and R.
Sol. on Isai. 62. 6. And so does Rabbi Solomon conceive, that the Edomites were
proud of their descent from Abraham as well as the Jews: for thus he
expounds those words in the Prophecy of Obadiah, ver. 3. Which dwell in
the clefts of the Rock: He leans upon the staff of his Fathers, Abraham
and Isaac, and they will not profit him.

SS. Of the (...) to raise up children to Abraham.
Some take this figuratively, as Ignat. Mart. Epist. ad Magnestos. Clem. Alex.
Portrept. ad Graec. and others, of the Gentiles, who are stony-hearted toward
the Truth, and who worship stocks and stones, God is able to raise up children
to Abraham: But it is rather to be interpreted literally for the crying down
of their idle boasting: That it was but a vain prop whereupon they leaned, to
think that it was enough for them that they were descended of Abraham, for God
by his omnipotent power was able to make as good and towardly children to
Abraham as they were, even of stones.

Matthew. 3. verse 10. And now also is the Axe laid unto the root of the Trees.
Whether we read it rationally, as does the Vulgar Latin, For now the axe, or
conjunctively, as does our English, And now also; it plainly shows it self
to be an Argument or Reason used to (...) something that goes before. And
indeed it suiteth so very well with any of the three verses next preceding,
that it is hard to tell, to which most properly it should be applied. For
being said to the seventh verse, it does so strongly (...) that there was a
wrath to come, that it shows it to be hard by, and even close at hand, For
now the Axe is laid to the root of the trees. Join it to the eight verse and
it follows the metaphor that is used there, of bringing forth fruit, and
enforces the exhortation or Doctrine that is there given, from the danger that
may follow on unfruitful trees, For now the Axe is laid to the root of them.
Or apply it likewise to the verse next preceding, and it does argue against the
carnal confidence that the Jews had in their descending of the stock of
Abraham, paraphrastically thus: Ye have had warning of wrath that is to come,
and you think that you are out of the danger of it, because ye are the
children of Abraham, and descended lineally from his loins; a Prerogative so
little to be boasted of, that it may be common with you to stones, for God is
able of them to raise up children unto Abraham, and a shelter so little to be
trusted under, that look to your selves, the Axe is already laid to the root
of the trees.

Some by the Axe understand the word of God, and the preaching of the same, or
the publication of the Gospel: from Jerem. 23. 29. after the reading of the
Lxx: and from Hosea. 6. 5. Others, Christ himself, consisting say they of two
natures, divine and humane, as an Axe of two parts, the head and the handle.
But the current of the most, and the best Expositors understand it of the
judgments of God: and that it is so to be understood, may be strongly
concluded by these reasons.

First, because the context both before and after, speaks of Judgment and
vengeance to come upon the impenitent and unfruitful, as wrath to come, verse.
7. and casting into fire, and fire unquenchable, ver. 10. 12. and therefore it
is most proper to expound the Axe as an instrument destroying, for judgment or
destruction.

Secondly, this place seems plainly to have reference to Esai. 10. 33, 34.
Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts shall lop the bough with terror: and the
high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the b^ughty shall be humbled.
And be shall cut down the thickets of the Forests with iron, and Lebanon
shall fall by a mighty one: which how the more ancient Jews understood of the
destruction of their State and Kingdom, and that near upon the coming of
Christ, a testimony of their own in their Talmud, in the treatise Bera^hoth
may sufficiently evidence. There was a certain Jew, say they, was plowing, and
one of his Oxen lowed. The Ox lowing, told of the coming of the Lord A
certain Arabian passing by, heard the lowing of the Ox, and said unto the
Jew: O Jew! unyoke thine Oxen, and care not for thine implements, for your
Sanctuary is destroyed: And the Ox lowed again: and the Arabian says, O Jew!
yoke thine Oxen, and make sit thine implements, for your Messiah is borne, etc.
Rabbi Abuni said, And what need you to learn this of an Arabian? The text is
plain in Esaias which says, Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one: and it
follows, And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
branch shall grow out of his root.

SS. To the root of the tree^.
First, by the root of the trees, might be understood the root of Jesse, of
which mention was made before from Esaias 11. 1. For in all the crosses and
calamities, Wars, overthrowes, and captivities, that had befallen the Nation
of the Jews, the stock of Jesse, or line of David, could never be rooted
out, or extinguished, because the promise that Christ should come of it, did
preserve and keep it alive, in despite of all opposition, till he that was
promised did come indeed. But now, seeing that he was come, and that that line
had no more the shelter, and preservative of the promise, it also must come to
ruin and rooting out as well as others.

Secondly, the Axe is now laid to the very root of your confidence and
boasting: For whereas ye say within your selves, and stand upon it, that ye
have Abraham to your Father: the time is now come, that that distinction
betwixt who is, and who is not, of the Seed of Abraham, shall be no more
regarded, nor looked after: but every one of what Nation soever that fears
God shall be accepted of him, and the seed of Abraham for not fearing him
shall be rejected, and that privilege not respected at all.

Thirdly, Jerusalem was as the root of the whole Nation, from which they
derived the sap of religion and policy, but now the axe of destruction is laid
even to that.

Fourthly, this phrase may be understood, as comparing the ruin of the Jews
here threatened, with those desolations they had fe^t before: For then, as at
the captivity of Babylon for example, they were not utterly cut off from their
Land for ever, but had a promise of returning, and returned, and were planted
there again: but now the vengeance threatened must strike at the very root, and
quite destroy them from being a Nation for ever, and from all hope of returning
to their Country any more.

By the Axe being now laid to the root of the trees, may fitly be understood,
1. The certainty of their desolation. And 2, the neernes: in that the
instrument of their destruction was already prepared and brought close to them,
the Romans, that should ruin their City and Nation, being already Masters and
Rulers over them.

Luke 3. verse. 10. And the people asked him, etc.
Or, the multitude, as verse 7. which verse compared with this, shows, that
the question what shall we do then? proceeded from those to whom the Baptist
addressed his last speech, O ye generation of Vipers, etc. which were Pharisees
and Sadduces, as appears by Matthew, and other multitude mixed among, as by
Luke. Now whether this their question proceeded from the apprehension of the
danger threatened, or application of the exhortation urged, whether they desired
to learn how to avoid the evil of the wrath to come, or to do the good
works of repentance, when they ask, what shall we do? is neither so
material to search, nor easy to find, as it is fit to observe, how powerfully
the doctrine of the Baptist has wrought with them, when it has thus brought
them to look off the goodness of Abraham in which they trusted, and to think
after goodness of their own.

Verse. 11. He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, etc.
It appears by the Baptists answer, that their question demanded what were
those good fruits, that he called upon them to bring forth, verse. 8, 9. and
the (...) here may seem to have respect to the (...) and (...), in those
verses.

His answer is an exhortation to almesdeeds, or giving to the needy, rather
then any other lesson, not that thereby they might think to satisfy for their
sins, or merit for themselves, but for diverse other important and
considerable ends. For, 1. he seteth them this as an easy lesson, for yet they
were but very children in the Evangelicall school: To have put them at their
first entry into this school, to the hard lecture of self-denial,
mortification, patience and joy in persecution, and other such things as these,
had been too strong meat for such babes, too difficult a task for such infants
to take out, and therefore he sets them this easy Copy, and lays no
greater an imposition upon them, then what even the weakest of them might
follow and undergo, to impart of their abundance to the poor.

2. The tenor of the Gospel is mercy and not sacrifice, Hosea 6. 7. Mat. 12.
7. and therefore he puts not upon them the cost of oblations and offerings
which were required by the Law, nor the fasting and pining of the body, as did
many of his own Disciples, but the lovely works of charity and mercy, the
first and most visible of which is relief of the needy.

3. By this he puts them to trial, how they forsake the world, by parting
with their worldly goods, how they live by faith in not fearing poverty though
they give of their wealth away, how they love their neighbor as themselves, in
making him partner of what they have, and how their eyes are fixed on things to
come, by giving away here, and looking for reward thereof in heaven.

And, 4. it may be very well supposed that among the multitude that stood
before him, the Baptist saw some rich, and some poor, some in good clothing,
and some in mean, and that the present object that he beheld might be some
occasion to him to propose this lesson to be put presently in practice.

SS. That has two coats, etc.
He requires not wilful poverty, but almsdeeds of their superfluity, not
to give away their coat if they have but one, but if they have two, then to
give one of them; and to the same purpose he uses (...), Meats, in the
plural number; not to go naked themselves, that they may cloth others, nor
to prevent others begging by their alms, and to beg themselves, but what they
have above their own necessaries, to contribute to the necessities of the
needy, and first to love themselves, and then their neighbour^ as themselves.

Ver. 12. Publicans.
Publicans at the first were such as gathered the tributes and custom of the
Romans in those Countries and provinces that were under their dominion. And
this at that time was an honorable place and calling. Epist. lib. 13.
For Tullie commending M. Varro to Brutus gives these two reasons of the
strong tie of friendship betwixt them: The one is, says he, because he is
versed in my way of studies in which I am chiefly delighted. And the other,
because he betook himself maturely to the company of the publicans, which
indeed I would not have had him to have done, because he had suffered great
losses, and yet the cause of that common order, of me most highly esteemed,
made our friendship the stronger. And in his Oration for Pla^ciu^, he says,
That the flower of the Roman Knights, the ornament of the City, the strength
of the Commonwealth, is comprehended in the order of the Publicans. And so it
was an honorable memorial that was left, (...), To him that had played the
good Publican. Suetonius in vita Vespasiani statim sub initio.

But in after times the quality of the Office it self, and the conditions of
the Officers became very much altered. For now men of inferior rank farmed
those places, and took the Office upon an yearly rent, and quickly brought
the calling into disgrace. So that in the Gospel Publicans are branded with a
special note of infamy above other men, and still go hand in hand with the
most notorious sinners.

And this, first, generally every where, because of their coveteousuesse, and
racking exactions, which are the common fruits of buying or farming of Offices.
Annal. lib. 13.
Tacitus calls them immodestiam publicanorum, the immodesty of the Publicans,
and mentions a general complaint against them in the time of Nero, and some
reformation of their injuriousnesse. And Suidas gives them this character, The
life of the Publicanes, is open violence, unpunished rapine, an unseasonable
trade, and a shameless merchandise.

Secondly, More especially were men of this profession odious among the Jews;
because, whereas they held themselves to be a freeborne Nation, and that they
ought not to subject to any, nor pay tribute, but only their dues to God, and
homage to their own King, these wretches, as enemies to the common Liberty, did
help forward their subjection in exacting of custom, though they were of the
same Nation themselves, complying too much with the Romans company, contrary
to Jews punctualnesse of sequestration from the Heathen, and too too much with
their tyranny in augmenting those burdens of bondage which they had made heavy
enough before.

Ver. 13. Exact no more, etc.
By this answer is approved what is said immediately before, about their
extortion, that not only they sided with the Romans, in putting the Jews their
own Nation to tribute, but also did aggravate the burden themselves, by
exaction of more then was required by the Roman Governors. Now it is
observable, that of the Pharisees and Sadduces the Baptist requires
affirmatively some duties to be done, He that has two coats, etc. because
these people stood upon their own righteousness, and pleaded perfection:
therefore will he try them by the touchstone of action: but of the Soldiers
and Publicans, he requires only negatively, some enormities to be forgone:
for they being notoriously and scandalously wicked, it was necessary they
should first cease to do evil, before they (...) learn or be brought to do
good.

Ver. 14. The Soldiers.
These were Romans, or some of other Nations under the Roman pay; for no one
can think that the Romans would use the Jews for their garrisons in their own
Country, le^t they should rebel: and here do the Gentiles first hearken to
the Gospel.

SS. Dee violence to no man, etc.
The Baptist in his answer tyeth both hand, tongue, and heart, deed, word, and
thought from the injury of another, their profession especially tending so much
toward injuriousnesse.

First, he forbids them open violence in act, whether by blows, ravishing,
plunder, firing, or such like mischiefs as attend the wars, and go with
Soldiers.

Secondly, secret underminings, by false accusing, abusing the power of the
Superior to the wrong of another, when their own could not reach, and sewing
the Foxes skin to, when the Lions was too short. And,

Thirdly, discontentation and repining at their wages, which indeed was the
cause and original of both the other. And so is that a main argument used by
Percennius, which moved the great mutiny of the three legions in Pannonia, in
the very entry of the Reign of Tiberius, Denis in diem assibus corpus and
animam aestimari: How poor a thing it was that their lives and bodies were
rated and set to sale but at ten farthings a day. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.

It is observable in both the answers of the Baptist, to the Publicans and to
the Soldiers, that he gainsayeth not their professions, but their abuse of
them: to the one he forbids not to gather tribute, but to exact more: and
to the other not to exercise Soldiery, but to practice violence.

Ver. 15. As the people were in expectation, etc.
Diverse things there were that concurred, to make the Jews to think of
Christ, when they saw the Baptist, and to muse in heart whether he were he or
no.

First, the first and the prime one was the agreement of the time. For they had
learned by diverse pregnant evidences both in the Law and in the Prophets that
this was the time when Christ should come: for now was the Scepter departed
from Juda, now was the Lawgiver or Sanhedrin slain by Herod, now were the
Romans Lords of their Nation, and now were Daniels seventies expired, by which
they knew that this was the time, and now they looked that the Kingdom of
Heaven should appear, Luke 19. 11. and they gather together from all Nations
to Jerusalem to see its appearing, Act. 2. as was hinted before.

When therefore, secondly, in this time of their great expectation, they behold
the excellent sanctity, piety, and zeal; the admirable strictness, austerity
and Spirit; And,

Thirdly, the strange, unusual and powerful manner of the preaching of the
Baptist, it is no wonder if they entertained a doubtful and musing thought of
him, whether he were the Christ or no. And,

Fourthly, their longing desire and earnest wishing after Messiah his coming,
might something forward such a conceit, for facile credimus quod volumus; and
the Greek word does import a desire joined with their expectation. So Christ in
Genesis 49. 10. is (...) in the Lxx, the expectation of the Nations; and their
desire, Hagg. 2. 7. It is not unlike but the coming of the wise men, the words
of Simeon and Anna, and other testimonies of Christ then come, were dispersed
among very many, and notice taken of them, and this might be a strengthening
and helping forward of this surmise: but that the strangeness of the Baptists
birth, and of what befell his Father about it, should be any induction or
seconding thereunto, as some do hold, is hard to be believed, unless we can
think that either this people had forgot to look after the Tribe of Judah for
the Messiah, or that Elizabeth's alliance to that Tribe, for she was couzin to
the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 36. did satisfy them if they looked after it.

Ver. 16. John answered.
Whereas some hold that John knew the thoughts of their hearts, by the
Revelation of the Spirit, for it is said only before that they mused of the
matter in their heart, and put it not to question, it is far more probable,
that John came to know this their thought, by some outward expression of their
own. For among so great a multitude, when they were all in the same doubt and
hesitation, it was impossible, but there would break out some whisperings,
questions, arguings, or other token of the general conceit, that even a slow
and dull apprehension might in short time have found it out.

SS. I indeed baptize you, etc.
All the Evangelists have this answer of the Baptist, in regard of the
substance, but in some circumstances there is difference among them. As first,
whereas Luke says, that these words were occasioned from him by the thoughts
of the people, Matthew, that hitherto has joined with him in this story, even
to the very words, has no such thing as about the questions aforementioned,
nor about this supposall, but joyneth this as a continued speech to the
Pharisees and Sadduces: but this needs to breed no scruple, seeing that it is
not only usual, but also necessary among the four, one to relate what
another has omitted, and one to declare at large, what another has done in
brief.

Secondly, whereas both Luke and Matthew have set this testimony of the Baptist
after other speeches of his made before; Mark, as was mentioned before, has
set it the first of all his Preaching, and indeed has mentioned no speech
else: But this he has done, partly because he would hasten to the Baptism,
Preaching, and Miracles of Christ, partly because Matthew had set out the
matter at large before; but chiefly to give us to know that this witness went
along with John in all his Sermons, and to all companies that came to be
baptized.

Thirdly, whereas Luke has alleged this speech as an answer to the peoples
thoughts, John has brought it as an answer to an open question, Job. 1. 25,
26, 27. And here it may be questioned indeed, whether these two speak of one
and the same thing, and of the same time: But the resolution is easy, that
they do not. For as it is plain by Luke, that these words mentioned by him,
proceeded from John before the Baptism of Christ, so is it as plain by John,
that those in him came from him after: for in ver. 26. he intimates that
Christ himself had already stood among them, but they knew him not; No nor he
himself, but by the Holy Ghost, which he saw descend down upon him, ver. 3.
By which is confirmed what was said even now, that John made sure to bear this
witness to Christ, at all times, and before all companies. Now because the
eyes of the people upon himself, looked at the strangeness of his Baptism,
and the sanctity of his person, therefore does he apply this his testimony
accordingly, by comparing Christ and himself, and his baptism and his
together, and proclaiming his own inferiority in both, as far as baptism
with water only, is below baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and further then the
servant that unties his Masters shoes, below him that wears them.

SS. I baptize you.
Mark has it in another tence, I have baptized: which either may import the
continuednesse of John's baptizing, this being compared with Matthew and Luke as
Jansenius has conjoined them, I have baptized, and do baptize you. Or, rather
does it intimate that he still baptized the companies that came unto him, and
then gave this testimony to them concerning Christ. For his preaching was first
of repentance, and then having won the people to be baptized, he brought them
to the water and baptized them in the name of him that was to come after him,
Act. 19. 4. So that these seem to have been the words that he used in
sprinkling or applying the water. I baptize thee with water, but a mightyer
then I comes, who shall baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire.

SS. With water.
In the Greek it is indifferently, with or in, answerable to the signicancy of
Beth the Hebrew preposition, either local or isntrumental: And according to
both senses it may be taken here. For as it is undoubted that John brought
those that were to be baptized into the River, Mat. 3. 6. 16. So is it almost
as little to be doubted, that when they were there he threw and sprinkled the
water upon them, both to answer the types of sprinkling that had preceded in
the Law, and the predictions thereof that were given by the Prophets: Ezekiel. 36.
25. understood by Hierome of baptism, Epist. 83. So Act. 8. 38. The Eun^ch
first goes into the water, and then Philip baptizeth him.

SS. Water.
As the form of the Church was changed at the coming of Christ, from Jewish
to Christian, and from Legal to Evangelicall, so is it no wonder if the
Sacraments were changed therewithal. For if Christ were to give a new law, as
Moses did the old, which the Jews themselves confess that he must, and the
Prophets had foretold that he should do; it was also necessary that he should
give these new, as well as other things. But it is some wonder, that seeing he
instituted the Sacrament that should succeed the Passover, so near to the
nature of the Passover, as that it was a supper as well as it, that there
should such a main distance and difference be between Baptism and
Circumcision, the one of which should succeed the other; for what affinity
betwixt washing with water, and cutting off of the foreskin? For the better
viewing of the reason of which difference, it will be necessary to consider
the maine particulars of either Sacrament apart, and then may the Reader
compare them together in their variety.

First, then, Circumcision to Abraham was a seal of the promise, thou shall
be the father of many Nations: but to his seed, of the promise of the Land of
Canaan, I will give to thee, and to thy seed, all the Land of Canaan: therefore
thou and thy seed after thee, shall keep my Covenant, Genesis 17, 8, 9. And such
a different end may be observed in the administration of baptism to Christ
himself, and the administering of it unto Christians. The text alleged seals
the lease of the Land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham with the seal of
Circumcision, and confineth that Ceremony only to that Land, and only to
their continuance there. And upon this inference, [I will give thy seed the
Land of Canaan; therefore shall they keep my Covenant] it was that Joshua, as
soon as ever they had set foot upon that Land, was commanded to circumcise
them, Josh. 5. And from hence it will follow, first, that that Land must be
considered dilated, as far as Circumcision went with the seed of Abraham, in
Ishmaelites, Midianites, Edomites and others.

Secondly, hence they will be found to erect circumcision again in the Church
of Christ, that hold the called Jews shall have a temporal kingdom again in
the Land of Canaan.

And, thirdly, hence it may be resolved why that Sacrament was deferred so
long, and not given to the World before. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Eber, etc. were not
circumcised; because to them a fixed and settled place for the Church to reside
together was not designed, but when such a one is designed to Abraham, then
circumcision is given also.

The Land of Canaan was bequeathed to Sem by his father Noah, the occasion was,
because Cham, and his Son Canaan derided Noah's nakedness as he lay asleep
in the midst of his Tent: when therefore that Land is to be settled upon the
right heirs of Sem, to which God (...) the Prophetic spirit of Noah intended
it, a seal, and an assura^^e thereof is given in that member, which had been
derided by (...), to his loss of that Land, and to his perpetual slavery.
This was a maine reason* why Males alone were circumcised, and why in that
member; because a male alone, and that member in him was so derided. Other
reasons of the institution of the Ceremony, and only for masculines, and in
that part, might concur for instruction [such as are given by Lumbard,
Aquinas, Biel, Lyra and others] but that they were not of the nature or essence
of the Sacrament, and that this forementio^ed was the vigor and spirit of it,
may be concluded by these two things.

First, that Circumcision concerned not the children of Israel only, but the
whole seed of Abraham: For those children of his by his Concubines, that lived
in Arabia, as Ismaelites, Dedanites, Medanites, Midianites, Shuhites,
Amalekites, and the rest were circumcised as well as Israel in Palestina. Those
Countries whither Abraham had sent them to inhabit were once in the possession
of Canaanites, till he obtained them by conquest of the four Kings, Genesis 14.
and thither he sends them with the seal of Circumcision upon them, which
gave them interest in the Land there, as well as Isaac had elsewhere: Abraham
taught his children, and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord,
Genesis 18. 19. which though this offspring of his in Arabia did not long in
other things, yet in circumcision it did. So that from hence may result the
observation of another end, and reason of the institution of this Ceremony,
namely, for distinction, not of Israel from other Nations, as Lyranus would
have it, but of the seed of Abraham from all other people.

Secondly, howsoever all the Israelites dwelling before the coming of our
Savior out of the Land of Canaan, as both of the Babylonian and Grecian
dispersion, used Circumcision in Heathens Lands, and used it lawfully; yet it
was because their claim and interest to the Land of Canaan did still continue:
nay, this was one reason why it held up some store of years after Christ his
coming and ascension: but when Jerusalem was destroyed, and their lease of
that Land of promise, either expired or forfeited, or both; then did this seal
of it fall and come to ruin also, and might not lawfully be used ever after:
and when they must for ever relinquish the Land, they must for ever also
relinquish this seal or Ceremony that had assured it. This well con^idered,
will cause us also to observe:

First, that the interest of Israel in the holy Land began to shake, when
baptism came to shoulder out Circumcision. Secondly, that John most properly
preached much of the Kingdom of Heaven, for their earthly one began to cease
when baptism began to extinguish Circumcision.

As Circumcision it self had relation to the in^eritance of the Land of the
Canaanites; so the fixed time for the administration of it; namely, the eight
day seems also to have some aim and respect to the same thing. For seven
nations were in that Land, which the Children of Abraham were to subdue and
dwell in their stead, Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites,
Amorites, and Jebusites, Deuteronomy. 7. 1. Josh. 3. 10. In correspondency to this
number of seven Nations that were to be subdued, Jericho the first field
fought in that Land, is compassed seven days, and seven times the seventh day.
And in like answerablenesse, every child of Abraham^ for seven day^^ was like
the children of those seven Nations, but on the eight day he was to receive
circumcision the pledge of that interest and claim that he had in that Land,
which those seven Nations had usurped.

This then was the groundwork and Original of that Sacrament, that every
Son of Abraham might bear in his body the seal of the inheritance of the
Land of promise, and the badge of distinction from all other people, and that
this visible sign might make him strive after the invisible grace which it
sealed, the inheritance of heaven, and walking as the peculiar of the Lord*
From which appropriated and restrictive ends of the Rite, the necessity of the
changing of it at the coming of Christ does plainly appear: for when there
was to be no more distinction betwixt the children of Abraham, and other
people, and no one land more peculiarized then another, but of every Land and
Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted of him; that
badge of appropriation, and seal of singularity, must either clean come to
nothing, or become unnecessary.

Now that baptism did succeed in the stead thereof, some reasons may be given.
As, first, because the Sacraments of the New Testament were to be gentle and
easy, in stead of the smart and burdensome ones of the Law. Secondly, because
God would comply with men even in their own common custom, of washing
children when they are newly born, Ezekiel. 16. 4. 9. and turn the common to a
sacred use, thereby to catch and win them the more. But, thirdly, this one
maine reason may serve for all; namely, the near correspondency that is
between the Sacrament, and the thing signified, and the full significancy that
the element bears of the grace that it signeth forth. To which, fourthly,
might be added, that baptism took place in the Christian Church, to fulfill
the types and predictions that had gone before of it under Moses Law, and
before. As in the flood and Arc, 1 Pet. 3. 21. in the passage through the red
Sea and Jordan, 1 Cor. 10. 2. in the purifications and sprinklings at the
Sanctuary: But especially in four remarkable particulars, was this
fore-signified and typed out in a special manner.

First, in Jacobs admission of the preserved Sichemites to his family and
communion, Genesis 35. 2 And Jacob said to his household, and to all that were with
him, Put away the strange Gods that are among you, and be clean, and change
your garments. Wherein he injoyneth them three things for their admission to
his Church. 1. To relinquish their idolatry. 2. To wash or baptize their
bodies, for so must the (...) Make your selves clean, be understood, and so is
it well rendered by Aben Ezra. Especially, 3. since he gives order for the
changing of their garments: All three containing the cleansing of their minds,
bodies and clothes. And there observe, first, that when Circumcision in the
next chapter before had proved a Sacrament of death to the Sichemites; Jacob
uses baptism for admission of Proselytes in the stead thereof. Secondly, that
the company to be admitted are females, [unlesse there were some Syrian male
Idolaters] for all the males of Sechem were slain, Genesis 34. 25. or at the
least, the most of them, and therefore he uses a Sacrament which women also
might come under, for under circumcision they did not come.

Secondly, in the admission of the Israelites to the hearing of the Law, by
sanctification and washing, Exodus 19. 10. from which the Jews themselves did
ground the baptizing of Proselytes, as a special ground.

Thirdly, at the making of the Covenant at Sinai, the introduction of Israel to
the visible Church, was by baptism, or the sprinkling of water as well as of
blood, as says St. Paul, Heb. 9. 19. yea, and even the Jews themselves. Our
Rabbis teach, says Rabbi Solomon, that our Fathers entered into the Covenant,
and baptism, and sprinkling of blood: for there was no sprinkling of blood
without baptism. R. Sol. in loc. 4. In that in these times of David and
Solomon, when heathens converted to the Jews Religion by multitudes, their
admission to their Church was by baptism, and not by circumcision. And the
ground work of this their practice, was, because, Israel coming out of Egypt
washed their garments; and the Priests coming from their common employments,
to their function, washed their bodies: Let all be concluded in the words of
the Talmud, Rabbi Akiba said, O Israel you are blessed: Before whom are ye
justified or cleansed? Or who is he that cleanses you? It is your heavenly
Father, as it is said, I will power clean water upon you. In Kippurim.

Our Masters say, That bastards and Gibeonites, shall be all justified in time
to come. And this is the doctrine of Ezekiel, as it is written, I will power
clean water upon you. In Kiddushin.

Mat. 3. ver. 11. Unto repentance.
Here the Schools think they find a maine difference between the baptism of
John, and the baptism used in the Christian Church; because that was only the
baptism of repentance, and the other of grace, and remission of sins: but that
there was no essential or substantial difference between them, shall be seen
anon.

Luke 3. vee. 16. But one mightier then I comes.
Though by this mightiness of Christ above the Baptist, his omnipotency or
all-powerfulnesse as he is God, may well and truly be understood, is many
Expositors do take it, yet since John speaks of him, as he should show
himself among the people when he came, and in comparison with himself as
concerning preaching and baptizing, it cannot be but his words have respect to
some particular things, wherein Christ showed this mightiness above John, yea,
even conversing among men in his humane flesh, and in what respected his
preaching and ministerial Office. And these may be reduced unto these four
heads.

First, the power of miracles, which Christ had, but John had not: For John
wrought no miracle, Joh. 10. 41. Nor was it fit he should, since he in whom
that power rested as in its proper center, was so near to come, and so ready
to show it.

Secondly, in the different power of the Preaching of John, and of our Savior,
and their conversion of the people, John many, but Christ far more, as Joh.
3. 26.

Thirdly, in the seal and confirmation of their Doctrine and Ministry; for
whereas John sealed it with his death, our Savior did not only so, but also
with his resurrection.

Fourthly, in continuance and increase of their preaching, and Disciples, and
this difference John shows himself, Joh. 3. 30. To which may be annexed the
excellency of Christ's baptism above that of John's, which is the very thing
that is in comparison, I baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost.

SS. The latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose.
The sense is but strained which delights so many, namely, that John
confesses under this simile, that he is unable to resolve the great mystery
of the incarnation; Seeing Matthew gives this his speech in other words, and
Mark by adding one word more to these, makes it more necessary to take them
in their literal meaning. For Matthew has it thus, Whose shoes I am not
worthy to bear, and Mark, The latchet of whose shoes, I am not worthy to
stoop down and unloose. Both jointly showing, that the Baptist has no
mystical and figurative meaning in this his speech, but does in plain and
downright terms aver his inferiority to Christ, that was to come after
him, to be infinitely great, and more then a servants that ties his Masters
shoes, or carries them, is to his Master. For these meanest and basest of
offices of servant to Master, he instanceth in, that he might express the
infinite distance betwixt him and Christ, the more to the life, and to the
peoples apprehension.

SS. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.
Hence arises that opinion so mightily taken up in the Schools, and embraced,
concerning the great disparity and difference betwixt the Baptism used in the
Christian Church, and the Baptism of John; for this (say they) could not
confer grace, but the other does, and John's was but as a mean betwixt the
purifications of the Jews, and the baptism of Christians. In which, first, the
words of the Baptist are misconstrued, and secondly, there is a difference
pretended where there is none at all.

For, first, John compares not his own baptism with ours, but his own with
Christ's. For that he means not the baptism that Christ instituted to be
used by others, but that he practiced and exhibited personally himself, is
plain, In that he mentions not water in Christ's baptizing, which our
Savior himself does, when he speaks of the baptism that they mean, Joh.
3. 5. and in that he says personally that Christ should baptize, which with
water he never did, Joh. 4. 2.

Secondly, by the Holy Ghost, wherewith Christ should baptize, is not meant the
grace concomitant to our Christian baptism, as they suppose, but his sending
down the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as is plain by our Saviors own
exposition, Act. 1. 5. For John indeed baptized with water, but you shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. Where using the very same
words with these of the Baptist, and applying the baptizing with the Holy Ghost
plainly and undenyably to his sending down of the Holy Ghost on Pentecost day,
he has given a sure, plain and undoubted explanation of these words.

Thirdly, neither, if the baptism of John, and the baptism used in the
Christian Church be well compared together, will any such difference or
diversity be found betwixt them, nay, set the form of words aside, no
difference at all.

For, first, they both had the same institution from Christ, for he that sent
the Apostles to baptize, sent also the Baptist, John 1. 33.

Secondly, they both had the same element, water.

Thirdly, they had both the same end, repentance. For though our Christian
baptism is called the Baptism for remission of sins, Act. 2. 38. etc. and a
great deal of preeminence of this, above that of John, picked as is thought
out of that title, yet is it no more then what is said of the baptism of John,
Mark. 1. 4.

Fourthly, whereas it is commonly said, that one end of our Saviors being
baptized was, that he might sanctify our baptism, how can this be supposed,
if he received not our baptism, but one different from it?

Fifthly, the Disciples were baptized with no baptism but that of John, for
Christ baptized them not, and who other should do, it cannot be imagined, and
therefore if this of ours be more excelcent then John's, we have a better
baptism then the Apostles that first administered it.

Sixthly, and lastly, howsoever the Schools without any stumbling, do hold
rebaptization of those that had received the baptism of John, this crosses
their own tenet, that his was a degree above the washings under the Law, for
their imperfection was showed by their reiteration, and in this they make his
to differ nothing at all. And whereas it is said, Act. 19. 5. that some that
were baptized with the baptism of John upon Paul's instruction of them, were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: it was rather their renewing to their
baptism, then their baptism to them, and not that they took any other then
that of John, but that they now began to entertain and apply it to the right
intent. As it may be exemplified in circumcision in any heathen son of
Abraham: as in Jethro for an instance. He was circumcised while he was an
unbeleever, because he was a Midianite, a child of Abraham; now when he came
to be a convert, and embraced the true Religion, he was not to be
circumcised again, for that was to possible, but he then began to know and
apply the right use and meaning of his circumcision, and so was renewed to it,
and not it to him: Or those words, [When they heard this they were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus,] may be understood to be the words of Paul, and
not of Luke, as see Beza in loc.

This phrase of baptizing with the holy Ghost shows, first, the restoring of
the holy Ghost, which long ago was departed from Israel, and gone up.

Secondly, the abundance and plenteousnesse of that gift when it should be
exhibited, that it should be as water powered upon them, as the word is used,
Joel 2. 28.

Thirdly, it shows whither all the washings and purifyings of the Law aimed,
and had respect, namely to the washing and purging of men by the holy Ghost.

SS. You.
That is, some of you, as 1 Samuel 8. 11. He will take your sons, that is,
some of them: or You, that is, the people, as Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord shall
raise to thee a Prophet, that is, to thy people, and unto him you shall
hearken, that is, the Nation of your posterity.

SS. And with fire.
From Isai. 4. 4. The Lord shall wash the filthiness of the Daughter of Zion,
and purge the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of
Judgment, and by the spirit of burning. It is easily to be resolved what John
means here by fire, seeing our Savior himself has applied the other part
of his speech to the coming down of the Holy Ghost on Pentecost day, when we
know he appeared in the visible shape of tongues of fire, Act. 2. Now Christ's
baptizing in this manner with fire, was 1. That the giving of the holy Ghost
might fully answer the giving of the Law, both for time and manner, for both
were given at Pentecost, and both in fire. 2. To express the various
operations of the holy Ghost, which are fitly resembled and represented by the
effects of fire: As 1. To inlighten with knowledge; 2. To inflame with zeal;
3. To burn up corruption; 4. To purify the nature; 5. To turn the man to its
own qualification of sanctity, as fire makes all things that it seiseth like
it self. 3. To strike terror in the hearts of men, lest they should despise
the Gospel, and to win reverence to the holy Ghost, for fear of the fire. 4.
Hereby was clearly and fully showed, the life and significancy of the
sacrifices under the Law, upon whom there came a fire from heaven: intimating
that they are lively sacrifices, and accepted, who are inflamed by the holy
Ghost from above.

And thus the two elements that have and shall destroy the world, water and
fire, has God been pleased to use for the benefit and salvation of his chosen.

Ver. 17. Whose fan is n his hand.
By the fan in the hand of Christ, the most Expositors understand the power
of judgment that God the Father has committed to him, For the Father judges
no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5. 22. And thus
some take it for an argument against security to all: and others, against
Apostasy to those that have been baptized with the holy Ghost: and that as the
Baptist in the former words has told what Christ would do, at his first
coming and appearance, so in these, what he will do at his second: but I
rather adhere to the interpretation of them that by the Fan of Christ,
understand the Gospel, and his preaching and publication of the same; and that
upon these reasons:

First, because unless it be thus taken, we have not here any testimony at
all given by the Baptist to the people, concerning that part of the Office of
Christ. Now that being a matter of so great importance, as that the Prophets do
more insist upon the preaching of Christ, and his power in the Gospel, then
upon any other thing that concerned him in the work of redemption, and this
being in several respects more regardable then his baptizing with the holy
Ghost, it cannot be imagined that John should omit to bear witness of him
for such a thing, nay it had been to neglect to bear witness of him for the
chief thing of all.

Secondly, because the Gospel or the word of God is the proper touchstone that
tries and differenceth betwixt gold and dross, truth and falsehood, pure and
vile: and this is the instrument wherewith he confounds every strong hold
that exalts it self against himself, Isa. 11. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Revel. 1.
16. and 2 16. And,

Thirdly, because John speaks of Christ as he should presently show himself
among them, as it is apparent in the verse preceding, and not as he should
show himself at the end of the world.

SS. His floor.
If these words and those that follow, be applied to the whole Church in all
places, and at all times in general, the application may be very profitable
and pertinent, as giving warning to all men to bring forth the fruits of
repentance, for fear of the judgment to come, and so the end of this verse
may be of the same use with the end of the ninth to all men whatsoever; but
that by the floor of Christ in this place is meant the Church of Israel, or
the nation of the Jews alone, may be concluded upon these observations:

First, that the title given, His floor, is but the very Epithet of Isaiah,
that he gives to Israel, Isa. 21. 10. Oh my threshing, and the corn of my
floor: which though some Expositors both Jewish and Christian apply to Babel,
yet let the Reader upon common reason, and serious examination be the Judge.

Secondly, because the phrase of fanning of that Nation betokens their final
desolation, Jer. 15. 7. I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the
Land: and the Baptist seems in these expressions his fan and his floor, to
have reference to these two Prophets.

Thirdly, because the words being thus appropriated to Israel, they have the
more agreement with the verses preceding, which tell of the wrath to come upon
that Nation, and of the axe already laid to the root of that tree.

Fourthly, the phrase of thoroughly purging, which the Greek word imports,
[and the same word is used both by Luke and Marke] denotes a final separation
of the Wheat and chafe, and an utter consumption of the wicked, and this
being spoken only to the Jews, and to those Gentiles that were mingled with
them, they cannot so fitly be applied to any thing as to that Nation, and
their utter desolation; for God had often purged them before; but now their
thorough purging is near at hand, when Christ by the fa^ne of the Gospel shall
have sifted and tried them, and found them out, who was Wheat, and who was
chafe. And,

Fifthly, this Exposition is consented to, even by the Jews themselves, the
more ancient of whom have held, that the coming of Christ should be the
final desolation of their Nation. So does their whole Sanhedrin confess, Joh.
11. 48. This man does many miracles, and if we let him alone, all men will
believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and
Nation. And to the same tenor of confession is that collection of the Talmud
cited ere while from the last verse of the tenth Chapter of Isaiah, and the
first of the eleventh, where the fall of the forest and Lebanon, and the
coming of the branch out of the stem of Jesse, are laid together. And to the
same purpose does the Chaldee Paraphrast render Isa. 66. 7. Before her pains
came, she was redeemed, and before the pangs of her birth, Messiah her King
was revealed. A Text from which Rabbi Samuel bar Nachaman in Bereshith Rabba
concludes that the destruction of the Temple, and the birth of the Messiah
should be near together.

And lastly, that this verse, as it was spoken only, so also is to be applied
only to the Jews, may be somewhat inferred from the Titles given to the
parties spoken of, wheat and chafe, which both grow from one root, and come
up upon the same stal k: resembling fitly both the believing and unbeleeving
Jews, or the godly and wicked of them, both descended from the same national
Original. And to back this observation, it is observable, that whereas our
Savior makes his metaphor of Wheat and Tares, because he would only show
the difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, the Baptist does his of
Wheat and chafe, because he would not only show the same difference in
condition, but also their agreement and identity in Nation.

SS. The Wheat he will gather.
By Wheat and chafe, might very well be understood true and false doctrine,
and the rather because the Scripture elsewhere calls them by such terms,
Jer. 23. 28. and makes the fire of the Word of God, the tryer and touchstone
of them both, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13. 15. from Deuteronomy. 33. 2. and the rather still,
because the words are spoken to Pharisees and Sadduces, which were both very
erroneous in their tenets: but that it will be very harsh to apply the
gathering into the Garner, and the unquenchablenesse of the fire in re^erence
to doctrine: therefore the two different titles are severally and properly to
be understood of righteous and wicked men's persons, differenced in those their
several qualifications: and under this interpretation may the truth or falsity
of doctrine be also understood: Now the righteous or Saints of God, are fitly
compared to Wheat in diverse respects, as in goodness, usefulness, weight and
fullness, whereas the wicked on the contrary are like chafe, in being refuse,
vile, unprofitable, light, empty, and fittest for the fire.

SS. He will gather.
The observation is not far amiss, especially the significancy and force of
the Greek word regarded, that from hence infers, that the righteous lie
scatteredly and dispersedly among the wicked: but the word gathering does not
always necessarily import so much, for a Leper was said to be gathered when
he was cleansed, 2 King. 5. 3. which was not from amongst men, but unto them:
and the manner of speech here, seems to be taken from the gathering of
harvest or ripe fruits, Exodus 23. 16. or from the gathering of dying men unto
their rest as Genesis 25. 8. 17.

SS. Into the Garner.
Seeing that the maine intent of the verse is to show forth the destruction of
Jerusalem, as is proved before, by these words might well be understood the
care and charge that God took of his faithful ones in that ruin, when by the
warning of a voice in the Temple that said Migremus hinc, let us flit hence,
he removed them to Pella, a place far enough distant from the danger, but
that our Savior has taught us to understand it of the rest in Heaven, in his
parable of the Wheat and Tares, Mat. 13.

SECT. X.
Christ installed into his Ministry by baptism, and by the unction of the
Holy Ghost: his Pedigree by his Mother Mary.
St. Matthew. Chap. III. St. Mark. Chap. I. St. Luke. Chap. III. Ver. 13.

THen (...) Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.

ver. 9.

AND it came to pass in those dais, that Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee
--

14 But John forbad him, saying, I have ^^ed to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me?

15 And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for this it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.

16 And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and
lo the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

17 And l^e a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased.

-- and was baptized of John in Jordan.

10 And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the Heavens opened, and
the spirit like a Dove descending upon him.

11 And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased.

ver. 21.

NOw when all the people were baptized: And it came to pass that Jesus also
being baptized and praying, the heaven was opened.

22. And the holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, and a
voice came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well
pleased.

23 And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age being [as was
supposed] the Son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,

24 Which was the son of Matt^at, which was the son of Levi, which was the
son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph,

25 Which was the son of Matthias, which was the son of Amos, which was the
son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,

26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Matthias, which was
the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,

27 Which was the son of Joann^, which was the son of ^h^sa, which was the
son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Sal^thiel, which was the son of
Neri,

28 Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Ad^i, which was the
son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,

29 Which was the son of ^^se, which was the son of Eliez^^, which was the
son of Joram, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,

30 Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Judah, which was the
son of Joseph, which was the sonue of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim,

31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the
son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,

32 Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed, which was the
son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson,

33 Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the
son of Esrom, which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda,

34 Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the
son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,

35 Which was the son of Saruch* which was the son of Ragan, which was the
son of Phaleg, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,

36 Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was
the son of S^m, which was the son of Noah, which was the son of Lamech,

37 Which was the son of Methusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was
the son of Jared, which was the son of Malelee^, which was the son of
Cainan,

38 Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the
son of Adam, which was the Son of God.



Reason of the Order.
THere can be no doubt or scruple about the subsequency of the beginning of
this Section to that that was next before, for the three Evangelists have so
unanimously ranked them together, that the order needs no more confirmation.
But about this latter part or the genealogy of Christ there is something more
difficulty. For some Harmonists have brought this line of Luke, and that of
Matthew together, some bringing Matthews hither with Lukes to Christ's baptism,
and others this of Luke, to the time of Matthews to Christ's birth: But as the
Evangelists have laid them asunder, so are they to be kept asunder, and to be
disposed in the harmony according as they lie: for pregnant reasons may be
given why the two have laid them at times so far distant. Why Matthew at our
Saviors birth, the reasons were given there, in their proper place; and why
Luke at his baptism, may be the better seen by looking on the promise, Genesis 3.
15. The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent. Matthew wrote
his Gospel chiefly for the Jews; and therefore it was necessary for him to
show and approve Jesus for the Messiah by his Pedigree, which was the mainest
and the chiefest thing that that Nation looked after, for the judging of the
true Christ; this he does therefore, at the Story of his birth, and begins
it from Abraham, who was the ultima Analysis, or the furthest that they cared
to look after, as concerning his descent. But Luke a companion of the Doctor
of the Gentiles in all his travailes writes his Gospel for the Gentiles, as
well as for the Jews: and therefore he shows Christ's descent at the Story
of that time, at which he was first borne toward the Gentiles, that is, at his
revelation at his baptism, from whence he first began to preach the Gospel.
The first words of the promise, the seed of the woman, the Evangelist sweetly
expounds in this genealogy, showing through seventy five descents, that he
was the seed of the woman promised to Adam in the garden, and therefore he
draws his line from Adam, in whose loins the Gentiles were, for whom he
writes as well as the Jews, when the promise was made. The latter words,
Shall break the head of the Serpent, begin to take place from the baptism of
Christ and forward: and first in his victory against Satan's temptations, which
is the very next story that the Evangelist handles, and then in his preaching
of the Gospel, the power of which must destroy the kingdom of Satan, from that
time forward.

Harmony and Explanation.
Mat. 3. ver. 13. Then Jesus comes, etc.
THe Tabernacle in the wilderness was six months current in working and
preparing for, before it was finished and set up. For on the tenth day of the
month Tisri, which answers to part of our September, Moses comes down from
his third Fast of forty days, and brings with him the glad tidings of Gods
reconciliation to his People, and in sign thereof the renewed Tables, and the
welcome command to make the Tabernacle. From that time forward the working and
offerings for the making of the sanctuary began, and six months after it was
finished and erected, namely, in the month of Abib, Exodus 40. So long a time
was the Baptist conceived and borne before the conception and birth of our
Savior, Luke 1. 26. and so long a time did he preach and baptize, and prepare
for the great building of the Gospel before our Savior himself, came, and by
his own baptism and preaching reared it up. For as our Savior was baptized
and entered into his ministerial function, when he began to be thirty years
of age, and that according to a legal ordinance, as shall be showed ere long;
so likewise did the Baptist begin to preach when he began to be thirty, which
was six months current before. And this may be the better supposed if it be
but considered how great multitudes were baptized of John before the baptism
of Christ, and how far he travailed up and down to preach. Of the latter,
Luke witnesses thus, And he came into all the Region round about Jordan,
Preaching the baptism of repentance, Luke 3. 3. And Matthew of the former
thus, There went out unto hi^ Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan, and were baptized of him. A space of ground not to be
traveled over [with resting in many places by the way] and a number of people
not to be baptized in a short space of time.

Now the reasons why Christ that needed no cleansing, being purity it self,
would be baptized, are given diverse;

As, first, that by this Symbol he might enter himself into the society and
fraternity of the Christians, as by Circumcision he did of the Jews: like a
King, [it is Jansenius his comparison] that to unite and indeare himself to
any City of his subjects, condescendeth to be made a freeman of it, as are the
ordinary Citizens.

Secondly, that he might bear witness to the preaching and baptism of John,
and might receive testimony from him again.

Thirdly, that by his own baptism he might sanctify the waters of baptism
to his Church.

Fourthly, that he might give example himself, of the performance of that,
which he enjoined to others, and by his own coming to be baptized, teach
others not to refuse that Sacrament.

Fifthly, that he might receive testimony from heaven that he was the son of
God.

Sixthly, that he might occasion the revealing of the Trinity.

Seventhly, that he might show the descending of the holy Ghost on the waters
of baptism.

But, eighthly, the maine reason of all, and that which is equal to these all,
is that which is given by Christ hinselfe, namely, that he^ might fulfill all
righteousness; of which anon.

Ver. 14. But John forbad him.
So Peter forbad Christ to wash his feet, not in any surly forwardness, but in
an holy humility, having an eye upon his own unworthiness. This refusal of
John, being of the same nature, seems to have had respect to three things
according to the several persons there present, Christ, the people, and
himself.

First, in regard of Christ, because he needed no baptism, in that he needed
neither repentance nor remission of sins.

Secondly, in regard of the people, lest they might mistake, and seeing Christ
baptized as well as they, might judge him sinful as well as themselves.

Thirdly, in regard of the Baptist himself, who had told the people so often,
and so constantly of him that came after him, that he was greater then he:
and that his baptism was more excellent then his, and how would this cross
that testimony of his, in the eyes and hearts of the people, when they should
see him as an inferior, come to be baptized of John? But,

Fourthly, and chiefly this his reluctance proceeded from his true and right
comparing of Christ and himself together, the Majesty and purity of him, with
the baseness and sinfulness of himself, and therefore he says, I have need
to be baptized of thee, etc. Not refusing the s^rvice, nor crossing the will
of Christ, but confessing the unworthiness of himself, and ponderating the
inequality of the persons.

But it may not unfitly nor unseasonably be questioned here, how the Baptist
knew that this was Christ, seeing that he says himself, I knew him not, but
he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, on whomsoever
thou shall see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, the same is he that
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, Joh. 1. 33. Now the descending of the holy Ghost
was after he was baptized, and these words, I have need to be baptized of
thee, were spoken before. To this doubt and scruple many answers are given, but
not so many resolutions.

First, Some take the words I knew him not, etc. to be spoken by John, to make
his testimony to be without suspicion: For John and Jesus being a kin by
birth, [for their Mothers were Cozins, Luke 1. 36.] it might be surmised that
John gave so high and large a testimony of him for kindred and affections sake,
therefore he protests that he knew him not in any such a way, but only by
divine revelation. Thus Chrysostom and Theophylact. In which answer if there
be any satisfaction at all, which is but little, yet is it not to our whole
quaere, but only to the least part of it.

Secondly, some thus, that John before his baptism knew that he was the
Christ, but not that it was he that should baptize with the holy Ghost and
with fire, till he saw the Spirit descend upon him; and thus Theophylact
again, and upon this he fixes, as on the most genuine and proper resolution:
which is very hard to apprehend or collect out of the words of John, in his
whole Sermon: for this makes him to distinguish betwixt Christ, and him that
should baptize with the holy Ghost, and to make them two distinct persons in
his opinion, whereas both his own words, and no doubt the expectation of the
people did take him for one and the same, and that same to be Christ.

Thirdly, their opinion is yet far more strange, that think that the Baptist
took not Christ for Christ, when he gain-sayeth his being baptized by him, but
for some extraordinary holy man, and continued in this opinion till the
descending of the holy Ghost confirmed him in the Truth, that he was the
Messiah: For it is not imaginable that John having the peculiar Commission from
God to baptize all that should come unto him, should himself desire to be
baptized by another man. And again, his words, I have need to be baptized by
thee, show that he understood that it was he that Baptized with the holy
Ghost, as will appear by and by.

Fourthly, little less improper and equally strained is the Exposition of
Augustine, that John knew indeed that he was the Christ, and that it was he
that should baptize with the holy Ghost, but till he saw the descending of the
holy Ghost, he knew not that it was only be that should baptize with the
holy Ghost, or that he reserved the propriety of the power of baptizing to
himself alone, and did not communicate it to his Ministers. And this propriety
the Schools make to consist in these four particulars: 1. That he reserved
to himself the power of instituting baptism, though he communicated the
power of baptizing to others. 2. That he can confer the grace or effect of
Baptism, without the administration of the Sacrament, which the Ministers
cannot. 3. That he gives efficacy to baptism by his death. 4. That baptism
is administered and given in his name. Which gloss as the Father strained out
of the Text to retort upon the Donatists, that maintained that this Sacrament
administered by a wicked minister availed nothing, so is it but strained, and
that strangely too, for how can it possibly be collected, that John should
collect any such thing from the descending of the holy Ghost?

Fifthly, More plausible is their resolution that hold that John knew Christ
indeed in some measure before his baptism, but not so fully as after, when the
holy Ghost descended. But,

Sixthly, a plenary and sufficient satisfaction to the question may be had by
these three observations.

First, That John, though he knew the mystery of the incarnation of the
Messiah, and his excellent and divine graces, and that he was near at hand,
yet had he never seen his face till now, nor knew he him by sight till he
came to be baptized.

Secondly, That then he knew him by a present revelation, as Samuel knew Saul,
1 Samuel 9. 15. 17. For if in his Mothers womb he leaped at the approach of
Christ in the womb^ of his Mother, much more may it be conceived, that by the
revelation of the Spirit he knew him and acknowledged him now.

Thirdly, That the sign which was given him when he began to baptize, On
whomsoever thou shall see the holy Ghost descend, etc. was not given him for
his first knowledge of Christ, but for the confirmation of that knowledge that
he had of him before: and for his assurance and confidence to point him out
unto the people. And such a one was the sign given to Moses, Exodus 3. 12. not
for his first instruction that he was sent by God, but for his confirmation in
that wherein he was before instructed, nor that neither so much for himself
as for the people.

SS. I have need to be baptized of thee.
He means not, with the baptism of water, which he himself administered to
others, but with the baptism of the holy Ghost. For, first, Christ himself
baptized none with water at all, Joh. 4. 2. but referred the administration of
this Sacrament to others.

Secondly, the Baptism wherewith he baptized, was of the holy Ghost, ver. 11.
and it cannot be doubted that when John speaks of being baptized by Christ,
he means the proper baptism wherewith Christ baptized.

Thirdly, it is not consonant to reason, that John should complain of the want
of that which he so plentifully afforded unto others: but though he himself
were not baptized in water, yet his special deputation from God, to be the
first and chief batized, made that he needed it not.

Fourthly, be it granted that John speaks of baptizing with water, as some
Commentators would have it, yet are not his words to be understood simply of
any absolute necessity that he had of baptism, but comparatively betwixt him
and Christ, that it was fitter that he should be baptized by Christ, then
Christ by him. For so the phrase I have need, is used, not always to import
necessity, but sometimes convenience. And so does the Rabbin word (...)
indifferently signify, and diverse words that signify necessity in other
tongues.

Ver. 15. Suffer it to be so now.
The Emphasis of this clause is held to be in the word now: As showing that
howsoever Christ was the Son of God, and should in time reveal himself
mightily so to be, as Romans 1. 4. yet now the time required that that his glory
should be veiled under his humiliation, and his divinity concealed till its
proper season to be revealed. This exposition is as current as any among
Expositors, how substantial let the Reader judge. For,

First, the baptizing of Christ by John, was not so great a means to veil his
Divinity as it was to reveal it: for then he had the testimony from Heaven,
that he was the Son of God.

Secondly, there needs no other reason to be looked after why Christ says,
suffer it to be so now, then what he himself gives, in the very next words
following: For thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. The word
now, as it lies in the English, might be taken for the sense of (...) or
(...) so ordinary in the Hebrew, words of entreating or persuasion, and might
very well also suite with that sense here, if the Lxx translated them but by
the Greek word here used (...), but they do not: therefore may we the more
justly suppose the word to be emphaticall in some respect, and the respect
seems to be this. Whereas John had told the people before of Christ's
baptizing with the holy Ghost, and had told Christ in the verse preceding, that
he had need of that baptism, to that it is that our Savior gives this
answer, Suffer it to be so now, as meaning thus: That it was true indeed that
he was he that should come after him, and he that should baptize with the
holy Ghost, of which baptism John had more need from him then he of John's;
yet the time of that his baptizing was not yet come, for first must he fulfill
all the righteousness required of himself, before he was to power out or
bestow that baptism of the Spirit upon others: And therefore must John suffer
him to be baptized now with the baptism of water, for that baptism of his
with the Spirit was not yet to be exhibited.

SS. For thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.
The greatest doubt and difficulty in this clause is, what our Savior means
here by righteousness, which being resolved upon, the other smaller words, and
less scrupulous in it, will offer themselves the more readily to be
understood.

First, Hilary, though somewhat obscurely, seems to construe it of the
righteousness of the Law, for by him, says he, all righteousness was to be
fulfilled, by whom alone the Law could be fulfilled.

Secondly, but Hierome speaks it out more plainly and fully, and understands
it of all righteousness of the Law and of nature, either of which indeed were
not a^ unproper gloss to be applied unto Christ alone; but since the word us,
joyneth the Baptist also in the same fulfilling with him, it is not safe to
understand it of all the righteousness of the Law, because it is not pious to
hold John the accomplisher of it, as well as he.

Thirdly, Theophylact, and some others with him go the same way with these
Fathers named, but they go somewhat further, for they add, that Christ had
fulfilled all the Law already, but only in this one particular of being
baptized, and when he had performed that, he had completed all
righteousness. But the word us spoyleth this exposition, as well as it did
that before: and it will be some work to prove that baptism, taken in its
proper sense, or as John administered it, was any part of the Law that Christ
was to fulfill.

Fourthly, others descant upon the words literally, and take righteousness for
justice distributive, and baptism for a special part or act of it: For he
that is baptized, says Ludolphus, pleases God, pittieth his own soul, and
edifieth his neighbor by his example, and so fulfilleth all justice, in that
he does to God, himself, and his neighbor what he ought. An Encomion of
baptism, and a new invention of fulfilling the Law, which I suppose was never
dreamed of before.

Fifthly, to omit other expositions much like this, which some have given, not
near to the text, nor truth: Jansenius and some with him, but not so largely
as he, do paraphrase it thus. According as I by an humble submission desire
to be baptized by thee, so it becomes us, because we are sent of God the
Father, to call men away from all unrighteousness, and to teach the people, to
fulfill and perform in work whatsoever is right, omitting nothing, be it
never so little, which we know to be agreeable to the will of God. Therefore
he imports not, that by the receiving of baptism all righteousness is
fulfilled; but that by them that are Masters and Teachers of all
righteousness, nothing is to be passed over which is right, although they be
not bound thereto by necessity, and though the thing it self seem never so
small. Which exposition though it be good and sound in regard of the truth
contained in it, yet seems it not to be punctual and seasonable for this
place. For whereas the very marrow and pith of it lies in this, that Christ
and John being teachers of the people, must practice themselves what they teach
others to practice; and therefore must Christ be baptized for example to
others: let the Reader judge whether the inference be good by this, that John
himself was never baptized: and consequently whether the application of such a
sense to these words, be fitting and agreeable.

Sixthly, Chemnitius yet goes nearer the text and the mark, and brings the
word Righteousness to reflect upon men: explaining it thus: that since Christ
came to confer and apply righteousness to men, and accordingly to sanctify
every thing and means that might conduce to convey the same unto them,
therefore would he thus consecrate baptism by his own being baptized, and give
vigor to it to be a seal and strengthener of righteousness and grace begun:
and in this sense he says that it becomes him to fulfill all righteousness,
or every thing whereby the righteousness of man may be forwarded and promoted,
and because John was the Minister of Baptism; therefore in the word us, he
joyneth him also in the fulfilling with him. To this purpose he and far more
largely coming as close to the mark, as any we meet with, and yet [if I judge
aright] not so close as to hit it in these two respects.

First, in that he seems to hold, and so also do many others with him, that
Christ's performance of the several parts of righteousness, personally in
himself, was requisite to the sanctifying of such things to others, whereas
his very institution of any such a thing gives validity sufficient to it
without his own actual example: As in this very thing in hand concerning
baptism, if Christ instituted that in the hand of John for a Sacrament to
continue in his Church for ever, I cannot see what virtue, vigor, or efficacy
his being baptized by John added to it, more then his institution of it before
had done, save only for the more sensible reverence of it in the eyes of the
people.

Secondly, and chiefly, because it is harsh and bold, to conceive that Christ
in the performance of any thing that might tend to man's justification, should
take a man to be a sharer and co-worker in such equality as the words thus and
us do make the Baptist.

By righteousness therefore in this place may rather be understood the equity
and justice of the Law, and Christ's fulfilling of the same. Not the moral, for
that opinion we refused before, but the other parts of it which were either
Prophetical, or figurative and typical. Not denying his fulfilling the moral
Law neither, for that he performed to a tittle, being without the least taint
of finne, either in thought, word, or deed, but rather illustrating and setting
forth his performance of that the more, in that he was also so punctual to
fulfill the other parts of the Law which were less material. And to this
exposition of righteousness, namely, for the equity of the Ceremonial or
typical Law, not only the matter or thing in hand it self, but even every
word also that is in this clause do give their consent and confirmation.

For, first, if we look upon the Ceremonial law it self, and the reason why
it was given, we shall find that it was neither so exact and exquisite in
regard of it is injunctions, nor so strict or necessary to be performed in it
self according to the Letter, as it was in regard of its significancy of good
things to come; the force and virtue of it consisting not so much in its very
verbal precepts, and corporal observances, as in its representative and
typical predictions and fore-shewing of some better things to come thereafter.
And howsoever those Rites and Ceremonies had their obedience in the practices
of the Jews, yet their equity and very intent indeed they had not but in the
fulfilling of Christ.

Secondly, if we look also upon baptism which was the matter now in
agitation, and the baptism of Christ also, how they were both fully and
plainly prefigured under legal Rites and Ceremonious observances, was showed
before.

Thirdly, it was requisite that Christ should fulfill the Ceremonial Law, as
well as the moral, in some kind of necessity, though not as much for the one
as for the other. For as the Moral was a law of faith, so also was the
Ceremonial a Law of hope, as the judicial was also of charity. In the moral
law it was showed to man what he was to do, but withal he saw by the same Law
his own disability and impossibility of performing what was to be done. The
sight of this drives man to lay hold of Christ that performed that Law for
him; and thus the law, though it be according to the letter a message of death,
yet in the spirit is it a doctrine of faith unto life. The Jew being thus
entered by the moral law into the school of faith, then came in the
Ceremonial, and was as an usher of hope: for by those rites and legal
observations, the memory of Christ's coming was continually kept fresh, and in
the eye and expectation, and the fruit and application of his performance of
the moral law for the good of men daily read in those typical and shadowed
lectures: As therefore it was absolutely necessary that Christ should fulfill
the moral law in regard of all men, so was it respectively necessary that he
should answer and accomplish the Ceremonial, in regard of the Jew. For if the
outward observance thereof were for nothing so much, as to lead his eye and
expectation to Christ, and the very life and equity thereof were included in
him, how necessary was it, that for the sake of that people, and for
confirmation both to them and all others, that he was Christ that was to come,
that he should fulfill that part of the Law, as well as the other? At the least
how fitting? And so he says in the place in hand, Thus it becomes us to
fulfill all the equity of the Ceremonial law. Now the Ceremony to which our
Savior looks in these words, was the washing of the Priests in water, when
they entered into their function, Exodus 29. 4. Lev. 8. 6. the equity of which
appeared in him, when h^e was baptized at his entrance into his Ministry. And
this indeed was the mainest and properest end and reason of Christ being
baptized; namely, that by baptism he might be installed into his Ministerial
office.

Luke 3. ver. 21. Now when all the people were baptized, etc.
Not all that were to be baptized by John, for the contrary is evident, Joh. 3.
23. where John is baptizing a twelve month after this; but all those that were
reckoned by the Evangelist before, from Jerusalem and Judea, of Pharisees,
Sadduces, Publicanes, and Soldiers, which he now reckons up in this summa
totalis of All the people, to show what multitudes were baptized into Christ,
before Christ came to be revealed.

But it may be questioned among all this number, whether there were any women
baptized by John, or no. And the doubt may seem to be equally balanced, for as
the silence of the Text does seem to deny it, so reason on the other side does
strongly affirm it.

For, first, the baptism of John was such a thing as women might (...) as well
as men, in regard of possibility, which they could not possibly do by
Circumcision.

Secondly, it was such a thing as they might receive as well as men, in regard
of capability, for women were as ready to repent, as they.

But, thirdly, that which puts it out of all doubt, that women were baptized
by him, is the testimony of our Savior: Mat. 21. 32. John came unto you in the
way of righteousness, and ye believed him not, but Publicanes and the Harlots
believed him.

SS. Jesus also being baptized.
About the time, place, and manner of our Saviors baptism, the Evangelists
have been so silent in this place, that what is to be resolved upon them is to
be fetched from and by comparison of other texts, and collection from other
places, whcih about the first will give very full satisfaction, about the
second indifferent, and about the last, little or none at all. The time then of
his being baptized, that is, the time of the year, is only, or at least,
chiefly to be found, by computing the time or length of his preaching, and
thereby considering the time or season of his death. Now the length of his
preaching, or from his baptism to his death, was justly and exactly three
years and an half, as was touched before: And from that very thing or in
relation to it, that number is so very renowned in Scripture, being sometimes
expressed in the plain terms, of three years and six months, Luke 4. 25.
sometimes by half a week, Dan. 9. 27. sometimes, by a time, times, and half
a time, Dan. 12. 7. Rev. 12. 14. and sometimes, by a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, Rev. 11. 3. and 12. 6. and sometimes, by forty and two
months, Rev. 11. 2. To evidence which account of his Ministry, first may be
produced the Text of Daniel alleged instantly before, chap. 9. 27. where it is
said, that Messiah should confirm the Covenant for many for one week: or in
that one week rather, namely, which he reckons the last of the seventy: for
first, he names seven weeks by themselves, and then sixty two by themselves,
ver. 25. which every one knows make sixty nine; and then coming to speak of
the last week which was to make up the seventy, he says, that in that one
week, Christ shall confirm the Covenant for many: and then describing and
dec^^^ing the exact time of that his work, he says, And in half that week
shall be cause sacrifice and oblation to cease.

Now that by these weeks are meant weeks of years, or as many years as a week
has days, hardly any man ever denied, or su^^^cted the contrary; and that
then by half a week, is meant half seven years, or three years and an
half, there can be as little doubt or scruple: This then the Angel Gabriel
tells was the exact time in which the Messiah did confirm the Covenant, and
was bringing to an end Sacrificing and other Ceremonies, or the time of his
Preaching the Gospel, which was from his Baptism to his death.

Secondly, if not for proof, yet for better illustration of the same, may be
produced that place of the Gospel alleged so lately also before, namely, Luke
4. 25. where Elias is a glorious type and resemblance of Christ, in a sweet and
harmonious discord and difference: For as he shut up heaven by his prayer, and
there was no rain for three years and six months, so Christ opened heaven at
his baptism, as it is said in the verse in hand, and continued to distill the
divine dew and rain of his heavenly doctrine, as Deuteronomy. 32. 2. for the same
space of time.

And thirdly, as there is such evidence for the time averred, from a Prophecy,
and such illustration from a type, so is there a full confirmation of it in the
Evangelicall story. For John has plainly parcelled out the three years by
four Passeovers: as the first, chap. 2. 13. the second, chap. 5. 1. the third,
chap. 6. 4. and the fourth, chap. 13. 1. etc. and the odd half year [which
since he dyed at the last Passover must be laid before the first] was taken
up in these particulars, of his journey into the wilderness, and forty days
fast, Matthew. 4. 1. his return to Jordan, and abode thereabout, Joh. 1. 29. 35.
44. his voyage into Galilee, and miracle at Cana, Joh. 2. 1. his removal after
some space to Capernaum, and some abode in it, chap. 2. 12. and thence his
journey to Jerusalem, to the first Passover of the four, Joh. 2. 13. So that
it being thus apparent that the length or space of his Preaching was three
years and an half, from his baptizing to his suffering, it being withal
considered that he dyed at Easter, it will readily follow that he was
baptized half a year before that time of the year, namely in the month
Tisri, or September; And it being again considered that he was baptized, when
he was just entering upon a new year of his age, as shall be observed anon, it
will thence likewise follow that he was born at the same time of the year
also. And who is he that can imagine that the renownednesse and fame of this
month in the Old Testament, both before the Law and under it, was for any other
thing so much as in reference and prefiguration to, and of these glorious
things?

Now though there be these assured evidences of the time of the year when our
Savior was baptized, yet is there but conjecture of the time of the month:
And that may most consonantly be conceived to have been at the Feast of
Tabernacles, which began the fifteenth day of the month, Levit. 23. 33. upon
these probable and not altogether unsatisfactory reasons.

First, because he dyed on the fifteenth day of the month Abib or Nisan, the
day after the Passover, and to make the odd half year, spoken of before, an
exact and just half year indeed, his baptism must be fixed on the fifteenth
of Tisri.

Secondly, the two other of the three solemn Festivals, the Passover and
Pentecost, Christ accomplished, or fulfilled what they signified, by his death
at the one, and by the giving of the holy Ghost at the other, and there is no
reason to think the third, or the Feast of Tabernacles any less figurative,
or typical then the other, and as little to think that he should leave the
equity of that unsatisfyed more than the other, and if he answered not that in
his birth and baptism, he answered it in nothing at all.

Thirdly, the very nature of the Feast of Tabernacles, and the occasion and
reason of its institution have a forcible reference to such a thing. For though
Moses has given but this reason for one Custom and practice which they used
in the Feast, Ye shall dwell in boothes seven days, that your generations may
know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought
them out of the Land of Egypt, Levit. 23. 42, 43. Yet had the original and
institution of the Feast a great deal more in it. For the maine occasion was
this: Moses having after long fasting and prayer made the peace of Israel with
God about the golden Calfe, and having obtained the Tables renewed, which
himself had broken, and regained the commission to build the Tabernacle, which
had been suspended because of that sin; on the tenth day of the month Tisri,
[which according to our account was about the two or three and twentieth day of
our September] he coming down from the Mount, brings these glad tidings of
peace and reconciliation to the people, for which that day was observed for the
day of reconciliation or expiation ever after: and the people now hearing that
they must make the Tabernacle in which God would dwell among them, and that
they must not remove from the place where they were, viz. from Mount Sinai,
till that be finished, they then address themselves to pitch their tents, and
make them booths for their winter abode there, and instantly fall upon the
work of the Sanctuary, and this was it that was the occasion of that solemn
Feast in succeeding times. Now let the substance be laid unto the shadow, and
the Antitype and figure brought together, and the application is not only
sweet, but also somewhat evincing. For since the occasion of that feast was God
coming to dwell among the people in his Tabernacle and that now first begun or
exhibited, and this just half a year after their first delivery from Egypt;
observe how fully these are answered in Christ's showing himself to the world
at his baptism, in whom God dwells among men; and this the first revelation
of him to the world, and this just half a year since John began to publish the
deliv^ry of men from the bondage of Sin and Satan, by the preaching of the
Gospel.

Fourthly, the Consecration of the Temple of Solomon was at this very time,
namely, in the seventh month, or the month Ethanim, which is all one with
Tisri, and thence the service of it began, 2 Kings 8. 2. Now since Christ
himself averreth that the Temple was a figure of his body, John 2. we may
follow the Allegory with the more boldness, and apply the dedication of that,
and the time of the dedication, to his consecration by his baptism, to his
ministerial service, and parallel them both in the very same time.

Secondly, the certain and determinate place where our Savior was baptized,
cannot absolutely be fixed and resolved upon by any warrant of Scripture:
though many have been so confident as to point it out, and to show a cross set
in the very place of the River, and miraculous curing of Leper^ in the water.
The Evangelists have given no more settlement of it then this, that it was in
Judea, and that it was in Jordan: Two circumstances the more remarkable,

First, because that after that baptism of our Savior, we cannot certainly
find John baptizing either in the same Country, or in the same River ever
again. For whereas there is mention of his being about six weeks after this
in Bethabara, Joh. 1. 28. that was both on the other side Jordan, and it was a
water different from Jordan, Judge. 7. 24. and of his baptizing in Eno^, a whole
twelve-moneth after this, Joh. 3. 23. that was also out of the precincts of
Judea, and distant somewhat from the banks of Jordan, and the waters there, the
waters of the place it self and not of that river. And this shows the reason
more plainly, why Luke in the clause next before this that we have in hand,
summeth up the baptism of all the people, before he speak of our Saviors;
because that there were now collected out of Judea, all the harvest of
believers that might be gathered in by the preaching of John, and when Christ
was baptized, John was to remove to another place.

Secondly, from this, that Christ was baptized of John in Jordan, and in Judea,
it will almost inevitably follow, that he was baptized in the place, where the
river was dried up, and the Israelites first entered into the Land of Canaan.
For if it be considered, 1. That the Army marched through the channel in two
maine bodies the one on the one side of the Arc, and the other, on the other.
2. That ^ither of these maine bodies were two miles distant from the Arc on
either side, and consequently four miles from each other.

Thirdly, That these two great squadrons consisting either of them of so very
many thousands marched in an extraordinary breadth, because they were to pass
over in a reasonable time, it will follow hereupon, even past all denial, that
this their passage took up all the length of Jordan, that it had in Judea, or
very near it, so that the place we seek for, is within this compass: and by
this we may observe the substance sweetly answering to the figure, and way
made through the waters of Jordan, to the heavenly Canaan by baptism, in the
very same place where there was to the earthly, by its drying up.

Thirdly, The manner of his baptizing differed not from the common manner that
John used with others, save in one particular. For he went into the water, had
water sprinkled on him, and prayed as well as they, but whether John used the
same form of words in baptizing of him that he did to the other, or some
other, or none at all, is some question and scruple. The least is of the first,
for it may be readily resolved that he baptized not him in the same words,
that he did the others, because he then should have baptized him in his own
name, which who can imagine? and into him, or in his name which was to come,
which had been to have pointed out another Christ. Betwixt the two latter the
scales are ballancing, and they weigh so even, that it is not much material
which way your allowance does turn them, for the Quere it self is of far
more curiosity then necessity: For why might not John baptize him in varyed
words? As, I baptize thee with water to the Preaching of the Gospel; or why
might he not baptize him without any words at all, since he received
baptism, not so much for a Sacrament, as for satisfaction of the typical Law?
Let the Readers judgment weigh down the scale.

Mat. 3. Ver. 16. He went up straight out of the water.
The invention of Auricular confession has invented a strange Exposition of
this clause. For the rest of the people, say some, standing in the waters, I
know not how deep, after they were baptized, confessed their sins unto John
before they came out, being detained there by him, until they had so done, but
Christ, because he had no sin, needed no such confession, and therefore he
came suddenly out of the water after he was baptized. A gloss that includes
impossibilities. For neither was it possible that so great multitudes should
be baptized in so short a time, if every one made a singular confession of
their sins to John; nor was it possible that John should endure so long in
the water as this work would require, and never come out: for if they stood up
to the neck in the river, I cannot think but that he also stood some deepnesse
in the water. But this speedy coming of our Savior out of the water after he
was baptized, is expressed by the Evangelist, only to show how near and close
the opening of the heavens was to his baptizing, namely, that it was almost in
the very same instant, as Mark explaineth it; And straightway coming up out
of the water he saw the heavens opened, etc.

Luke 3. Ver. 21. And praying.
This it seems was the manner of those that were baptized, as soon as they
were baptized, to come up out of the water and pray, and this explaineth that
before, about confessing their sins, that it was not to John, but to God, as
soon as they came out of the water. Now since Christ had no sins to confess
of his own, the tenor of his prayer tended to another purpose. If we think
it was for the glory of God, for the conversion of many by his Ministry which
he was now beginning, for the preservation of the Elect, and the sanctifying
of the Church, and the like, we think not much amiss, since we find his
prayers in other places to be made and tendered to the same effect. But it
seems rather that his prayer at this time was for what followed upon his
prayer, the sending down of the holy Ghost, and the glorifying of him by a
testimony from Heaven. For first, the Text has laid his prayer, and the
opening of the Heavens so closely, and so consonantly withal together, Jesus
praying the Heavens were opened, as that it seems to point out what was the
tenor of his prayer by the consequ^nt upon it.

Secondly, In another place there is the like return upon the like prayer,
Joh. 12. 28. Father glorify thy name; there came therefore a voice from
heaven, etc.

Thirdly, it being considered that our Savior was to enter now upon the great
work of Redemption, and the preaching of the Gospel, it will be the less
strange to conceive that he prayed for the visible sealing of him to that work
and office by the Holy Ghost, and for a testimony of him that he was the
Messiah.

Mat. 3. Ver. 16. Lo the heavens were opened.
There is no material difference in the thing, though Luke has put the Heaven
in the singular number, and Matthew, the Heavens, in the plural, for one
follows the Idiome of the Hebrews, and the other of the Greeks. For the
Hebrews cannot call the Heaven by its proper name, but in the plural or duall
number (...), Heavens: but the Greeks can in the singular. And so little does
the Syriack make of this difference of number in the two Evangelists, that he
translateth it just cross, Matthews plural in the singular, and Lukes
singular in the plural.

About the opening of the Heavens or the manner of the same, as it is of far
more consequence to inquire, so is it of difficulty to resolve, because of
diversity of opinions, and probabilities several ways.

First, Some deny the opening of the heavens at all, but understand that Christ
saw them opened, and the Holy Ghost descending, intellectually only, or by
spiritual vision, as Ezekiel saw the Heavens opened, Ezekiel. 1. 2. But this
exposition is very improper, for John saw the same also, and the descending of
the Holy Ghost was in a bodily shape and not imaginary, and the voice was
articulate and Audible, and not visionary.

Secondly, Others deny also the opening of the Heavens, but with another manner
of evasion, and exposition. For there was, say they, no scissure or parting of
the Heavens asunder, because they are incorruptible, but a great, glorious, and
miraculous light shone round about Christ, as if the very highest heaven had
been open, and the light thereof imparted clearly to the earth: But this
opinion also is confuted by the word that Mark uses, differing from the other
two. For though the phrase, The Heavens were opened, would admit of such a
Metaphorical or comparative exposition, yet when Mark says expressly, that
the heavens were cloven, or parted asunder, for so is his word in the
Original, [the Syriack expresses it by the very same word that the Chaldee
Paraphrast uses in Lev. 11. for parting of the house] it inforceth us to look
for a literal interpretation in it, and not a tropicall.

Thirdly, Aquinas evadeth the real opening of them with this gloss stranger
then both the other, and by another intellectual vision then that that was
spoken of before: For it may also be understood, says he, of an
intellectual vision, namely, that Christ [baptisme being ^ow sanctifyed] saw
heaven open unto men. But this exposition the word of Saint Mark, newly
mentioned, confuteth much more then it did the other.

Fourthly, Mark therefore tying us to a literal sense, and to understand a
real and proper cleaving of the Heavens indeed, the doubt now only rests,
what heaven it was, whether the A^reall or Aethereall, for so are the heavens
properly distinguished, according to the significancy of the Hebrew word
Shamaiim, which imports a duality, or a thing doubled. Answer. It was only
the Aereall, for that is called Heaven, and the Firmament, Genesis 1. 8. 20. as
may be confirmed by these reasons:

First, Because there needed no further scissure in the Heavens, then the
renting of the clouds in the middle Region, either for the descending of the
Holy Ghost, or of the voice, or for the satisfying of the eyes and ears of the
spectators, and hearers, that they came from Heaven.

Secondly, Because the Scripture in other places speaking of things which came
but out of the clouds, yet uses the very same term to express the clouds by,
that is used here, namely Heaven: As, The Lord that gave the Law out of a
cloud, Exodus 19. 16. is said to have spoken from Heaven, Exodus 20. 22. So the
like voice to this here, that came out of a cloud, Luke 9. 35. yet is said to
come from heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 18. And Elias that by his prayer shut up the
clouds, that there was no rain, is said to have shut up heaven, Luke 4. 25. The
opening of the Heavens then was the renting of the clouds, as we see them
rent, when the lightning comes forth, and out of that rent came the Holy Ghost
in visible shape, and the heavenly voice. And thus did the Gospel or Preaching
of Christ begin with the opening of the Heavens which the Law had shut, and
thus were the heavens shaken, when the desire of all Nations came first to be
revealed openly, as Hag. 2. 6, 7. The very same difference of expression that
is betwixt Saint Mark and the other Evangelists, is betwixt the Hebrew, and
the Lxx. in Isa. 64. 1. for the Original reads (...), thou would or have
rent, but the Greek, (...), If thou open the Heavens, etc.

Mat. 3. Ver. 16. The Heavens were opened to him.
To him, to whom? to Christ, or to John? Why, to the eyes and beholding of them
both, for in that John says, he saw the Holy Ghost coming from or out of
Heaven like a dove, Joh. 1. 32. he makes it past denial, that he saw the
opening of the heavens; but the word to him in this place must be reserved and
referred in a singular peculiarity to Christ, and the opening of the Heavens to
him, imports a more emphaticall propriety then their opening to his sight.
For, the Syntax and Grammatical construction that Mark uses, makes it
impossible to fix the words to him, any other ways then upon Christ: And
straightway, says he, coming up out of the water, he saw the Heavens rent,
or cloven, etc. This then being the propriety of the words, that the heaven was
opened to our Savior, and yet since it was also opened to the sight of John,
it does necessarily enforce u^ to understand it otherwise then only to his
view or beholding, namely, to his prayer: as the phrase is used by him
himself, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For had the Evangelist
intended only to show how he saw this apertion in the Heaven, he might have
joined John with him in the same sight; but he would give us to understand by
the phrase that he has used singularly of Christ alone, that the heavens were
not only opened to his sight, but for his sake. And from hence may be
confirmed what was spoken before concerning his prayer, namely, that it aimed
at such a thing, as Elias prayed, and the heaven was opened and fire came down
upon his Sacrifice. Thus heaven that was shut to the first Adam, because of his
sin, is opened to the second, because of his righteousness, and to all that by
faith are partakers of it.

Mark. 1. Ver. 10. He saw the heavens cloven.
This is to be understood as that before, of Christ only, and after the same
sense, or to the same purport. But since it is certain that John saw this as
well as he, as is also observed before, and yet none of the three Evangelists
that record the Story, have given any undoubted or plain evidence of any such
a thing; it may likewise be questioned whether the rest of the people which
were there present did see this sight as well as Christ and John. Theophylact
is peremptory in the affirmative; For all of them, says he, saw the Spirit
coming upon Jesus, lest they should think that the voice, This is my beloved
Son, had been spoken concerning John; but upon the sight of the holy Ghost
they might believe that that voice was concerning Christ. And of this opinion
are very many others with him, and no marveile; for who could conceive any
other thing? And yet upon the weighing of these Reasons following, we may very
well be persuaded to believe the contrary, or that this Heavenly spectacle,
and divine voice was conspicuous and audible to none, but only to Christ and
John.

First, because John after this does himself tell those that were present at
this time, that there had stood one among them, but they knew him not, that
that was he that was to come after him. For the Greek word (...), Joh. 1. 26.
must of necessity be rendered in its preterperfect signification; for John
spoke not those words till after Christ was baptized and gone, for he was at
that time in his temptation in the wilderness.

Secondly, because Christ himself also tells the Jews, that they had never
heard his Fathers voice, Joh. 5. 37. and among those to whom he speaks, were
diverse that had embraced the doctrine and baptism of John, Ver. 35. and it may
very well be supposed, some that were present at his baptism at this very
time. The maintainers of the contrary Opinion have spied this scruple and
difficulty arising upon that Text, and have gone about to salve it, but with a
very improper and dangerous plaster: holding that though they heard this
voice, yet they heard not the voice of the Father, but of an Angel which spoke
in his name, which shall be examined by and by.

Thirdly, it is improbable that when Christ had such another testimony from
Heaven at his transfiguration, that he should conceal it from nine of his
Disciples, and charge the three silence that heard it, and saw what was done,
Matthew. 17. 9. and yet should let this voice and vision from Heaven be so
public, as to be heard and seen of all the people.

Fourthly, John himself tells that this Revelation was given chiefly, if not
only, for his sake, Joh. 1. 33.

Fifthly, the preaching of the Baptist was the means that God had ordained to
bring the people to the knowledge of Christ, John 1. 7. 31. and this
Revelation, to bring the Baptist to it.

Sixthly, had all the people been partakers of this sight and voice, John had
needed no more to have pointed Christ out, but the people would have known him
as well as he, nor could the opinion have ever prevailed, as it did, that
valued John above him.

Sixthly, when John showed him forth with the singer, with Behold the Lamb of
God, presently Disciples followeed him, which they would have done much more,
had they thus seen and heard him, pointed out from heaven; but it is plain
they did not the one, and thereupon it may be boldly concluded that they did
not the other.

Eighthly, to which may be added, that God ordained preaching, partly of John,
partly of Christ himself, and partly of his Disciples, the way to bring the
world acquainted that he was Messiah. And these divine revelations were for
the instruction and confirmation of them his preachers, who were chosen
witnesses for such a purpose, that they thereupon might the more confidently
confirm the people. And hereupon it is observable, that while the Baptist was
at liberty, our Savior contented himself with his testimony and preaching,
but when he was shut up, then instantly chose he others.

Now if any doubt of the possibility of this, and question how could John see
and hear these things, and the other company that was present not do so as
well as he: The answer may be readily given by example of Elishaes servant, 2
King. 6. 17. and the two men that went to Emmau^, Luke 24. For the mountain
was full of Horses, and Chariots of fire, and Elisha perceived them, but his
servant did not till his eyes were opened in a more special manner. And Christ
it is like was in the same shape and appearance upon the way when they knew him
not that he was in the house when they did, but til then their eyes were
holden. Yet if any one will suppose that the people saw the flashing of the
opened Heaven, and heard the noice of the voice that came from thence, and
took the one for lightening, and the other for thunder, as Joh. 12. 29. we
will not oppose it, for now was the season of the year fit for lightning and
thunder: but that either they saw the holy Ghost, or distinguished the words of
the voice, any more then Paul's companions did, Acts 9. 7. compared with Act.
22. 9. the reasons alleged do enforce to deny, till better information.

Mat. 3. verse. 16. And he saw the Spirit of God.
The syntax and construction of Mark, does tie and six these words [Hee saw]
only to our Savior, as it did those before; and both for the reason
mentioned; namely, to show the return and answer of his prayer. But these words
of Matthew are not so strict, but that they may equally be applied unto John.

For, first, there may be observed a distinction in the verse, and a kind of
difference of speech betwixt what goes before about the opening of the
heavens, and this fight of the holy Ghost. For of that he speaks thus. And
Jesus being baptized went straightway out of the water, and l^e the Heavens
were opened unto him. And then comes he on with a distinct clause concerning
the other, And be saw the Spirit of God descending, leaving it at the least in
an indifferency, whether to apply it to Christ or John.

But, secondly, it seems rather to be understood of John, because he says
himself that this descending of the holy Ghost was given to him for a sign,
and that he saw it; and if it be not to be so taken her^, none of the three
Evangelists have mentioned it in the story at all.

And, thirdly, the rather may it be taken of John's seeing it, because he
says, He saw him descending and coming, (...) upon on him. Had it been said,
(...) upon himself, it must needs have been understood of Christ upon whom the
Spirit came, that he saw the Spirit coming upon himself: but since it is
(...) him, without any reciprocation, it may be the better applied to John,
that he saw it. It is true indeed that (...) sometimes signifies reciprocally
himself, as our Lexicons do give examples, and as it is of force to be taken
in Saint Mark in this place, like as (...) sometimes does not signify
reciprocally, as in the Lxx, in Judge. 7. 24. But why should we take the word
out of its commonest and properest sense, unless there were necessity to do
it, which in Matthew there is not, though in Mark there be.

Fourthly, and lastly, these words he saw, being understood of John, it makes
that the three Evangelists being laid together, the relation arises out of
them the more full, and the story more plain. For Luke telling that the Heavens
were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended, Mark adds, that Jesus saw this,
and Matthew, that John.

Mat. 3. Ver. 16. The Spirit of God.
(...); Genesis 2. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters in the
beginning of the old world, and so does it here, of the new: It is needless to
instance, how often in Scripture the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of God, as
Genesis 41. 38. Exodus 31. 3. Numb. 24. 2. and very many other places; but it is
most necessary to observe that wheresoever he is so called, it is in the
Hebrew the Spirit of Elohim, in the plural number, and shows his proceeding
from more persons then one. Contrary to the opinion of the Greek Church that
holds, that the holy Ghost proceeds not from the Father and the Son, but
from the Father only.

Luke 3. Ver. 22. The Holy Ghost.
As he is called the Spirit, not so much in regard of his own nature, as in
regard of his manner of proceeding, so also is he called Holy, not so much in
respect of his person, for the Father and Son are Spirits, and are holy as
well as he, but in regard of his work and Office, which is to sanctify the
Church of God. And in this respect he is called by the Hebrews, not (...) The
Holy Spirit only, but (...) Ruah^ bakk^desh, the Spirit of Holiness, for this
phrase the Holy Ghost, is taken from the common speech of the Jews: And so is
he called by Paul, (...), Romans 1. 4. and so does the Syrian call him Ruh^a
dekudsha, in this place.

SS. The Holy Ghost descended.
This descending of the Holy Ghost was, first, partly for the sake of John, for
this token had been given him, when he first began to preach and baptize,
whereby to know Christ when he should come, Joh. 1. 33.

Secondly, partly for Christ, that he might thus receive his consecration and
institution for the Office that he was now to enter upon, the preaching of the
Gospel. This was as his anointing to install him into his function, as Aaron
and his Sons were with material oil to enter them into theirs, as Isa. 61.
1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore has he anointed me, he
has sent me to Preach the Gospel. And,

Thirdly, partly for the business and matter that was now to go in hand,
namely, Christ beginning to preach accordingly. For,

First, the Gospel is the Spiritual Kingdom and Scepter of Christ, in and by
which he was to rule all Nations for ever, and therefore it was agreeable that
the Spiritualnesse of that should be sealed and confirmed by the holy Spirits,
showing himself even in the beginning of it. The carnal rites of Moses were
now to vanish, and his corporal and ceremonial observances to be changed
into a spiritual worship: and neither at Jerusalem, nor at mount Gerizim, nor
elsewhere, must there be any more adoration, with fleshly and earthly
Ceremoniousnesse, but he that will worship God must worship him in spirit, as
Joh. 4. 21. Therefore it is no wonder, if the Holy Ghost do now reveal
himself, now when his sway of spirituality, and dominion, by sanctification is
to begin.

Secondly, The Holy Ghost was departed from Israel, after the death of the last
Prophets, as was observed before, and now he is to be restored again,
therefore himself comes visibly and apparently at this his restoring, and
lights upon him to whom it belonged to give and distribute the gifts of the
Spirit, to whom he pleased. For as John had told that Christ should baptize
with the Holy Ghost, so is that power and privilege now sealed unto him in the
sight of John, when the Holy Ghost comes down upon him and there abides.

SS. Descended in a bodily shape.
God is said to descend, not that he moves from place to place, or comes
where he was not before, for he is incircumscriptible, and every where, and
fills all places: but in that he shows this his presence upon earth, in
such or such a place, by some external sign, and visible appearance: And so he
is said to come down to see whether the wickedness of Sodom were according
to the cry that was come up unto him, because he revealed himself to Abraham,
Lot, and the Sodomites in the visible and conspicuous representation of men: So
is he said to have come down upon Mount Sinai, because of the outward
revealing and expression of his presence there. And so the Chaldee Paraphrast
understands the Trinities descending, Genesis 11. 5. for a conspicuous
appearance of it, for he translateth, The Lord revealed himself to take
vengeance, etc. And so is the Holy Ghost said to descend in this story, and in
that in Act. 2. not but that he was present in the same places before, by his
power and Godhead, but that he revealed and expressed his presence by so
sensible an evidence, and by, and in so revealed a work.

SS. In a bodily shape.
First, It was convenient that the Holy Ghost should reveal himself at this
time: First, for the sake of John, who was to have a sensible sign, whereby to
inform him which was the Messiah, as Joh. 1.

Secondly, In regard of the Holy Ghost himself, whose work in the Church was
now in a more special and frequent manner to be showed under the Gospel,
namely, that he might be expressed and revealed to be a personal substance,
and not an operation of the Godhead only, or qualitative virtue. For
qualities, operations and acts cannot assume bodily shapes, nor ought but what
is in it self substantial.

Thirdly, That a full and clear, yea, even a sensible demonstration of the
Trinity might be made at this beginning of the Gospel. For it may be observed
in Scripture, that the Holy Ghost has a special regard to express this
mystery upon singular occasions, that we might learn to acknowledge the three
Persons in one Godhead, as he also does the two natures of Christ, that we
might acknowledge them in one person. So the very first thing that is taught in
all the Bible, is this very mystery: For when Moses begins the story of the
creation, he begins also to teach that the three Persons in the Trinity
were co-workers in it. God Created, there is the Father. God said, there is the
Word, or the Son. And the Spirit of God moved, there is the Holy Ghost. And
the very same mystery is intimated by the Prophet, treating upon the very same
Subject, Isa. 42. 5. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and
they that stretched them out: That we might learn, that Of him, through him,
and to him, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are all things, Romans 11. 36. So
Moses also when he is to teach concerning the creation of man, he first
teaches that it was the Trinity that created him. Genesis 1. 26. And God said,
Let us make man after our Image. He says, Let us, to show the Trinity of
Persons: and he says, In our Image, not in our Images, to show the unity of
essence; That every man, even from the reading of the story of his Creation
might learn to remember his Creators in the days of his youth, as Solomon with
the word (...) Boraiecha, answers the same mystery, Eccles. 12. 1. So
likewise at the confusion of tongues the Trinity is expressed, Genesis 11. 7. Let
us go down and confound their language: as it is also at the gift of tongues,
I will send the Comforter from the Father, Joh. 15. 26. Act. 1. 4. Such a one
also was the blessing pronounced by the Priest upon the people, when he
dismissed them from the daily service of the Temple, in the name of the
Trinity, Number. 6. 24, 25, 26. the name Jehovah or the Lord, three times
repeated, for denotation of the three Persons, as Paul explaineth it, 2 Cor.
13. 13. When Moses also begins to rehearse the Law to Israel, and to
explain it, the first thing he teaches them is the Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord, our God, the Lord, is
one. Three words answering the three Persons, and the middle word our God,
deciphering fitly the second, who assumed our nature, as is well observed by
Galatinus. To these may be added, the entrance of Moses his revelation with
the name of the Lord, three times rehearsed, Exodus 34. 6. The Vision of Esaias
with three Holies, Isa. 6. 3. The beginning of Psalm. 50. and of Psalm. 136. and
many, again of the like nature, which the heedfull reader will observe himself.
How fitting then was it that at the beginning of the new world, and the new
Law, and the baptism of Christ, the three Persons should be revealed,
especially since he ordained baptism to be administered in their names Baptize
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Matthew.
28. 19.

SS. Lik^ a Dove.
It is thought by Austin, and after him by Aquinas, that this was a very living
Dove, not of the flock indeed of common Doves, but immediately created by God
for this purpose, but created as true a living Dove, as any of them: and the
reason they give for this their opinion is this. Because it is not to be said
that Christ alone had a true body, and that the Holy Ghost appeared deceiveably
to the eyes of men, but that both those are to be said to be true bodies: for
as it was not fit that the Son of God should deceive men, so was it not fit
that the Holy Ghost should deceive them neither. But it was no difficulty to
the Creator of all things, to make a true body of a Dove, without the help of
other Doves, as it was not hard for him to frame a true body in the womb of
the Virgin without the seed of man. So they, too punctual where there is no
necessity, nor indeed any great probability. For,

First, what needed there a real living Dove, when an apparent only would
serve the turn? For the descending of the Dove was, that there might be a
visible domonstration of the Holy Ghost his resting upon Christ, and anointing
him for his Ministration: so that the visibility of the Spirit was as much as
was required, and there needed no reality of a living body.

Secondly, The Text says expressly in all the Evangelists, that it was (...),
like or as it were a Dove; which plainly shows the similitude to such a
thing; and not the being of the very thing it self.

Thirdly, In apparitions of the like nature, when the furthest end of the body
appearing, was but for visibility, the bodies that were seen, were not of the
very existency and nature of those that they represented, but of another. As
the Angels that appeared in humane shapes, had not very living humane bodies,
but only bodies assumed and framed to such a representation: And so the fire
in the bush, on Sinai, and with the cloven tongues, was not very real fire,
but only a visible resemblance of it, and the like must be held of this Dove,
or else it will be such an apparition as never was before, nor since.

Fourthly, The parallel betwixt the appearing of our Savior, in humane flesh,
and the appearing of the Holy Ghost, in a living Dove, is not only very
improper, but also somewhat dangerous. For if they appeared alike, then may the
holy Ghost he said to be a very Dove [for Christ was a very man,] and that
were improper, and in its kind, to be incarna^e, [for Christ was incarnate,]
and that is dangerous. And,

Fifthly, as for fallacy or deceiving there could be none, no more then there
had been in all other apparitions since the world began, since in such things,
the veri^^ and reality of the ^ody that appeared, was not looked after, but
only the (...), and the spirit that lay hid under that body.

Now reasons why the holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove, rather then of
any other creature, are conceived, some to have concerned Christ, some to have
concerned the Holy Ghost himself, and some to have concerned man. As,

First, to show Christ's innocence, p^rity, simplicity, charity, and love, for
all these qualities are observable in a Dove.

Secondly, to show the like graces of the holy Ghost; and Aquinas and I^dolphus
do parallel the seven graces of the Spirit, Isa. 11. 2. 3. to seven properties
of a Dove; as if any be so curious as to see them, he may, in Lud in (...)
and Aquin. par. 3. quest. 39. Art. 6.

Thirdly; to show what innocence and harmlessensse should be in those that are
baptized.

Fourthly, to answer the figure in Noah's flood; for as a Dove did at that time
bring tidings of the abating of the waters, so does it now of the abating of
the wrath of God upon the preaching of the Gospel. These are the common and
most current reasons that are given by Expositors, to which may be added*

Fifthly, that since Christ was to have visible testimony from heaven, it was
fittest it should be by the likeness of a foul of Heaven* For it was not
fitting that five should have come thenc^ upon him, for he was to baptize, and
not to be baptized with fire: and for a cloud to come from thence upon him,
was reserved till another time, namely, as his transfiguration: and what then
can be imagined to descend upon him, but a bird* and what bird so fit as a
Dove which was the only foul that was clean, and allowed for sacrifice Lev. 1.
14.

Mat. 3. ver. 16. And lighting upon him.
In the strictness of the Greek, it is coming upon him, which is to the very
same signification: especially the addition of the Baptist himself being laid
unto it, viz. that it abode upon him, Joh. 1. 32. Some conceive and that not
improperly, that the Dove sat upon his head: which if it did, it was like the
inscription in the golden plate, that was on the forehead of the High Priest,
and declared him to be Koddesh Laihovah, The Holy one of the Lord, Exodus 28.
36. How long the Dove sat upon him, is not to be questioned, because not to
be answered, it is not unlike, that it did so, all the while he was in the
sight of John at this time, especially seeing that the Text says, that
straightway this Spirit drove him into the wilderness.

Ver. 17. And lo, a voice from heaven.
The testimony of two witnesses, is a confirmation past denial, and greater
witnesses then these two could not be produced, the Father and the Holy Ghost
because a testimony could not be given to a greater then to Christ. Nor could
these two witnesses have properly gone single, one without the other: the
descending of the Dove to point out to whom the voice was intended, and the
descending of the voice explaining what was meant by the descending of the Dove.

SS. A Voice.
Both the Talmudick, and the latter Rabbis make frequent mention of Bath Kol,
Filia vocis, or an Echoing voice, which served under the second Temple, for
their utmost refuge of revelation: For when Vrim and Thummim, the Oracle was
ceased, and Prophecy was decayed and gone, they had [as they say] certain
strange, and extraordinary voices upon extraordinary occasion, which were their
warnings, and advertisements in some special matters. Infinite instances of
this might be adduced, if they might be believed; one allegation in the
Talmud shall serve for all, concerning Jo^^athan the Chaldee Paraphrast. When
Jonathan the Son of Uzziel, say they, had composed the Targum of the
Prophets, there came Bath Kol, or a divine voice, and said, who has revealed
my secrets to the (...) of men? And when he went about to explain the (...),
or the booke^ of Holy Writ, there came a Bath Kol, or a divine voice again,
(...) said, It is enough. What is the reason? Because in them it revealed the
end of the Messiah. In Megillah.

Now here it may be doubly questioned: First, why they called it Bath Kol, The
Daughter of a voice, and not a voice it self? And secondly, whether this voice
that we have in hand, were such a voice as that or no? To the first, if the
strictness of the Hebrew word Bath be to be stood upon, which it always is
not, it may be answered, that it is called the Daughter of a voice, in
relation to the Oracle of Vrim and Thummim: for whereas that was a voice given
from off the Mercy Seat, within the veil, and this upon the decay of that
Oracle, came as it were in its place, it might not unfitly, nor unproperly be
called a Daughter, or successor of that voice. But to the second, and which is
more material and pertinent to the subject in hand, it may be answered, that
this voice was not of the nature of their Bath Kol, upon these two reasons.

First, because this voice came descendingly from heaven, but their Bath Kol
cannot be proved to have descended; or at least to have constantly come from
heaven. For the (...) hinc, which gave warning of the destruction of the City,
came not from above, but from the Temple, as Isa. 66. 6. And this can hardly
be denied to have been one of their Bath Kol voices: And if we will believe
the Jewish Authors in every place where they give examples of this their Bath
Kol, it will appear rather to be such a voice as came to Samuel, which was so
far from a perpendicular descending, that he could not distinguish whether
it were the call of ^li.

Secondly, because, whereas the Jews repute their Bath Kol, both the last and
the lowest kind of divine revelation among them, this kind of a voice from
heaven, was both ancient, as Genesis 21. 17. and 22. 11. and also most honorable,
Exodus 20. 22. Deuteronomy. 4. 33. 36,

SS. From Heaven.
The opinion that these words were spoken by an Angel, deputed by God for that
purpose, which some do hold, is not only improper, but also dangerous:
improper, because it crosses a plain and facile Text; and dangerous, because
it brings a created Angel into a kind of equality, and compartnership with
the sacred Trinity. For,

First, Why should there be any surmise of such an Angel* uttering these
words, unless it might be thought that God could not utter them himself?

Secondly, as Paul says, To which of the Angels said God at any time, Thou art
my Son? so may it be said much more, which of the Angels ever durst or might
call Christ his Son?

Thirdly, Peter speaking of the Parallel, or like voice to this, which was
uttered at our Saviors transfiguration, he says, it came from the excellent
glory, which doubtless shows more then from an Angel, 2 Pet. 1. 17.

Mat. 3. Ver. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
In Mark and Luke it is, Thou art my beloved Son, etc. whereas Matthew
expresses it, This is: which though it show some difference, yet is it not
material; nor does the difference breed so much difficulty, as it does
satisfaction to the Reader, and fullness to the story: For the two Evangelists
first named, relate it as spoken to Christ, for the sealing of his person, and
in answer to his prayer; but the other expresses it only as spoken of Christ,
and not to him, but pointing him out to the notice of John.

Now this whole speech is taken from 2 Samuel 7. 14. Psalm. 89. 26, 27. and Isa.
42. 1. and when it is uttered again from heaven, at our Saviors
transfiguration, this addition Hear him, is put to it, Mat. 17. 5. Luke 9. 35.
sealing him then for the great Prophet of his Church, whom all must hear,
Deuteronomy. 18. 15. as it seals him now for the high Priest of his Church, being
now to enter into his Ministry.

Luke 3. Ver. 23. And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age.
Agreeable to this age of Christ, when he began his Ministry, was the age
of the Priests, when they entered their Office, Numb. 4. 3. the age of Joseph,
when he came to promotion, Genesis 41. 46. and the age of David, when he began
to Reign, 2 Samuel 5. 4. Now how this is to be understood is some controversy:
Some there are that take it thus, that Jesus was now fully and perfectly
thirty: Others thus, that he now began or drew on to be full thirty, and so
preaching three years and six month, that he dyed at thirty three years old
and an half.

But this interpretation, the phrase used by the Evangelist, and the common and
ordinary manner of the Scriptures reckoning of the ages of men, and of other
things does sufficiently contradict: For,

First, in that Luke says, (...), he was baptized, beginning to be as it
were thirty: the word beginning to be, denies his being thirty complete; and
the word as it were, denies his drawing upon thirty complete likewise: For if
he were full thirty, then he began not to be so: and if he were drawing
on to full thirty, then was he not drawing to as it were thirty, but to thirty
indeed. By the phrase therefore, is to be understood, that he was now nine
and twenty years of age complete, and just now entering upon his thirtieth: and
this the Evangelist hinteth so clearly, that it needs not much confirmation:
For that he was in his thirty current and not completed, is plain by the
word (...), as it were thirty, that is, thirty years old, after a certain
reckoning: and that he was but now entering upon this his thirty current, is as
plain by the word (...), he began but to be so.

To which also, secondly, may be added the common and current use of Scripture
in reckoning of ages, either of men or beasts, to account the year which they
are now passing, for a year of their age, be it never so newly or lately
begun: Examples of this it is needless to give, the thing is so usual and
obvious to every eye.

So that now to take up the times of the world, and of our Savior, according
to this computation, they result to this.

First, That since he was borne in the year of the world 3928. stilo veteri,
but newly begun, he was baptized in the year of the world 3957. but newly
begun, by the same style likewise.

Secondly, That since he was borne in Tisri, he was also baptized in Tisri.

Thirdly, That since his last residence in Bethlehem, to his first appearing
publicly in the work of the Gospel, were full seven and twenty years: all
which time he had lived either in Nazareth, the Town of his Mother, or in
Capernaum, the Town of his supposed Father, and so his birth in Bethlehem, is
utterly grown out of the thoughts and observation of the people.

Fourthly, That he has now three years and a half to labor in the Gospel
from his Baptism to his crucifying, Rabbi Janna said, Three years and a half
the glory of God stood upon Mount Olivet, and preached, saying, Seek the Lord
while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Midr. Tillin.

Fifthly, That he lived but two and thirty years and an half: and that his
thirtyeth year was the first year of his preaching, and not the last year of
his private life. Compare the date of David's Reign in Jerusalem, 1 Chro. 29.
27. The time that David Reigned over Israel, was forty years: Seven years
reigned he in Hebron, and thirty three years reigned he in Jerusalem.
Exactly, Seven years and six months reigned h^e in Hebron, 2 Samuel 5. 5. and
then thirty and two years and six months reigned he in Jerusalem.

Sixthly, That if Jerusalem were destroyed exactly forty years after our
Saviors death, as it is apparent it was, both in Christian and Heathen
Stories, then that destruction of it befell just in the four thousandth year
of the world, and so as the Temple of Solomon had been finished Anno mundi
exactly 3000, so in Anno mundi exactly 4000. both the City and the Temple that
then was, was destroyed never to be repaired or rebuilt again. And from that
time most properly began the Kingdom of Heaven, and the new Jerusalem, when
that earthly Kingdom, and that old City were utterly ruined.

SS. Being [as was supposed] the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli.
At every descent in this Genealogy, the word Jesus is to be understood,
otherwise the first and last descents are improper, and different in style from
all the rest. For Joseph was not the Son of Heli, but only his Son in Law,
and Adam was no more the Son of God, then any of the other holy men, that were
named before. The supply therefore is thus to be made to make all proper,
Jesus, being as was supposed the Son of Joseph, Jesus the Son of Heli,
Jesus the Son of Matthat, etc. Jesus the Son of Seth, Jesus the Son of
Adam, Jesus the Son of God.

And the like style of Genealogy, Moses uses, Genesis 36. 2. Aholibamah the
daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, where Anah is not called the daughter
of Zibeon, for he was a man and not a woman: n^ more was Joseph the Son of
Heli, for he was only his son in Law, but the word Aholibamah is to ^ee
supplied thus, Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Aholibamah the daughter of
Zibeon.

Heli or Eli [for the name seems to be the same with his in 1 Samuel 1. 3.
etc.] was not the natural Father of Joseph, for Matthew told us plainly
before, that it was Jacob that begot Joseph, but Heli was the Father of Mary,
and Father-in-law of Joseph only: Now because it is not used in Scripture to
mention any women in a pedigree, or to run the line from the Mother, but from
the Father to the Son, therefore Mary is not here named at all, but intimated
or included, when the line begins from her Father, and calls her husband his
son, which he was only because of her.

So that Luke intending to show Christ the seed of the woman, must of necessity
reckon by Mary the daughter of Heli, as Matthew intending to show him the heir
of the Crown of David, does reckon by Joseph the heir male apparent. In
comparing and laying together these men that Matthew and Luke have named, in
the ancestry of Joseph and Mary, betwixt the returning out of the captivity,
and the times of our Savior, we find that every one man in the ^^ock of
Joseph, did almost outlive two of those in the line of Mary, the one line
affording twenty descents betwixt those two periods, and the other but one
above half so many: which easily and readily con^^teth that opinion that some
have strangely held, that the persons i^ the two Genealogies have been the same
men, only under different names: and it helps somewhat to settle the times
between those two periods, against the different miscountings of several men,
some stretching them longer then the eleven persons named in Matthew could
stretch to live, and some cutting them shorter then the twenty named in Luke
could be comprehended in.

Ver. 27. Which was the Son of Salathiel, which was the Son of Neri.
Neri was the natural father of Salathiel: he seems to have been so named
from the candle which the Lord reserved for David and his house, 2 Chronicles. 21. 7.

Ver. 31. Which was the Son of Nathan.
2 Samuel 5. 14. 1 Chronicles. 3. 5. It is like that he was named after Nathan the
Prophet, who brought David word of the promise, 2 Samuel 7. and of the
continuance of his house, which failed in the race of Solomon: but continued in
the race of this Nathan, till the King came that was to sit on David's Thron for
ever. Here again the number of persons in the Genealogy of Mary, betwixt David
and the captivity, exceed the number in the Genealogy of Joseph, in Mat. 1.

Ver. 36. Which was the Son of Cai^an, which was the Son of Arphaxad.
In Moses it is said Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber, Genesis 10.
24. and 11. 12. And so is it briefly reckoned, 1 Chronicles. 1. 24. Shem, Arphaxad,
Shelah, without any mention of Cainan at all, nor is there any memorial of
such a son of Arphaxad throughout all the old Testament, nor indeed was there
ever any such a man in the world at all. Here therefore is an extraordinary
scruple, and a question of no small difficulty meets us; where Luke found the
name of this man, which is not to be found elsewhere in all the Bible? and
whether it be not an error in the Text, and were not a miscarriage in the
Evangelist, to reckon a man for an ancestor of Christ, that the world never
saw, or that never was upon the earth.

Answer. It is (...) indeed to resolve, where Luke found this name of Cainan,
and from whence he took it, namely from the Greek Bible, or the Septuagint,
which has inserted it in those places of Moses that are alleged; but when
this is resolved, the greater scruple is yet behind, of his warrantablenesse so
to do, and of the purity of the Text, where it is so done.

The Seventy translatours indeed read Genesis 10. 24. thus, Arphaxad begat Cainan,
and Cainan begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber. And in Chap. 11. they say, Arphaxad
lived 135 years, and begat Cainan, And Cainan lived 130 years and begat Sala,
and Cainan lived after he begat Sala 330 years. And from hence has Saint
Luke without controversy taken in Cainan into this Genealogy, a man that never
was in the world, but the warrantablenesse of this insertion will require
diverse considerations to find it out. As let the Reader be pleased seriously
to ruminate upon these.

First, That the Seventy Translatours did that work unwillingly, and for
fear: For the Scripture was the treasure of the Jews, which made them more
glorious then any Nation under heaven. Therefore to communicate this their
riches to the Heathen, whom they abominated and detested, was as much against
their heart as what was most. So that had not the fear of the power of Ptolomy
brought them to the work of the Translation, more than their own good will,
there had been no such thing done. Ptolomy Lagus, the Father of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, for whom they translated, had carried away an hundred thousand
Jews captive into Egypt, as says Aristeas, so that the fear and dread of
that house lay upon them, that they durst deny it nothing, which otherwise they
would most vehemently have done such a thing as this, to have communicated
their Scriptures to the Heathen in a vulgar tongue.

Secondly, The Translation then being undertaken for fear, and with so ill a
will [that as Aristeas, who was present at the work, says, the Translatours
were very unwilling to go for Egypt, though he interpret it, because loath
to go from Eliazar the high Priest] and that the Jews kept a mournful fast
every year, sorrowing for that work of the Translation. It cannot be expected
that the Translation will be done with any more fidelity, then barely what
will keep the Translators out of danger.

Thirdly, Therefore they strive as much as they can, to conceal the Truth and
treasure of the Scripture from the Heathen, and as much as they dare to delude
them. Their chief means for this, is to use an unpricked Bible, in which the
words written without vowels, might be bended diverse ways, and into diverse
senses, and different from the meaning of the Original, and yet if the
translation were questioned, they might prick or vowell the word, so as to
agree to their translation. How they have dealt in this kind, there is none
that ever laid the Hebrew Bible, and the Septuagint together, but has observed.

Fourthly, Their differences from the Original which were innumerable, were
partly of ignorance, they themselves not being able to read the Text always true
in a Copy unvowelled. But this ignorance was also voluntary in them, they not
caring to mistake, so that they might do it with their own security.

Their general care was, that since of necessity they must translate the
Bible, as little of it might be imparted and revealed by the translation as
was possible.

Their particular and special heed was also, that those places of the Text,
which is translated Literally, or according to the true meaning, might prove
dangerous any ways to the Nation of the Jews, or bring them into distaste
with the potent King for whom they translated, should be so tempered and
qualifyed that no hazard might arise, nor any such matter might be seen.

Fifthly, It was a common speech among the Jews, and rang ordinarily in their
Schools, and Pulpits, That the seventy souls of Jacobs family, that went
down into Egypt, were equivalent, or answerable in worth to all the seventy
Nations of the world.

This was a dangerous doctrine for the Jews, if it should come to be known,
(as it could not choose but be) especially when their puissant enemies should
find the numbers agreeable, of seventy Souls, Genesis 46. and seventy Nations,
Genesis 10. To prevent any such danger, the Translators thought it a sure way, to
spoil the just number in both places, and so they did reckon seventy five
souls, and seventy two nations, both which accounts are followed by Saint
Luke, Act. 7. and in this place.

Sixthly, The several persons reckoned Genesis 10. Every one of which was the
Father and original of a several Nation, be just seventy. The Translators to
spoil the sum, which night prove perilous, have added two more, and both of
the same name, Cainan, the one the immediate son of Sem, the other his
Grandchilde, or the son of Arphaxad. For ver. 22 of that Chapter, they read
thus. The sons of Sem were Elam, and Ashur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram,
and Cainan. and ver. 24. thus, Arphaxad begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Sala.

In which additions, these two things are very observable.

First, The place where they have thrust in these two men: Namely, so close to
Sem, as could not possibly be closer, unless they would have had him to have
had two sons of the same name, Cainan.

Secondly, The name it self, that they have thus chosen twice over, namely
Cainan, which signifies mourning or lamenting. So Enosh called his son, Gen
5. 9. Because of the lamentable corruption of Religion in those times: And it
is without doubt, the translators in the iterated choice of this word, or heavy
and doleful name, intended to show some inward sorrow: the cause of which may
be best imagined, by laying the name, and the place of it together.

The blessing of Noah upon Japhet, God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall
dwell in the tents of Sem, Genesis 2. 27. The Jews themselves of old, understood,
to aim at the Greek tongue, viz. that God should use that as a means for the
admission of the Heathen to the secrets and mysteries of the Jews Religion.
This was their vexation at all times, to hear, or to think of the Gentiles
being called, as appears by Jonah, Chap. 4. 1. by the Nazarites, Luke 4. 28.
and by them of Jerusalem, Act. 22. 21, 22. For Moses had plainly told them,
that their calling in, should be the others casting off, Deuteronomy. 32. 21.

Therefore, it could not but be a most vehement sorrow, and maine vexation to
these Translators, that they, perforce, and so sore against their wills, must
be made the instruments, by translating the Bible into Greek, to let Japhet,
or the Heathen, into the tents of Sem.

This sorrow, as their Nation expressed by a mournful Fast, so did they
themselves among other things, by a lamenting and sorrowing name, Cainan twice
over, put in so close to Sem, as if they called on him to mourn with them,
because his tents were now unlocking for the entrance of the Gentiles.

Seventhly, God using the Septuagint, as the Key for admission of the Heathen,
and as an Harbinger to the New Testament, left it not there, but therein used
it also in allegations from the Old, yet oftentimes differing from the letter
of the same, but never without special reason.

Eighthly, Saint Luke, as he followed the Doctor of the Gentiles, Saint Paul,
so he wrote his Gospel for the Gentiles: therefore whereas Matthew writing
his for the Jews, deriveth the Genealogy, but from Abraham the first Father of
the Jews, This Evangelist writing for the Gentiles, fetches the Line from
Adam, the common Father of all, both Jews and Gentiles.

This is the aim and scope of this Genealogy, and the reason why it is set at
Christ's Baptism:

First, To show that there was no distinction of persons in the promise given
to Adam, for all Nations were then equally in his loins: for this, the holy
line runs down to him.

Secondly, That therefore all Nations have equal interest in the Messiah, and
that in the preaching of the Gospel, which Christ began from his Baptism,
there should be no difference of people made, as there was before. This being
the intent of the Pedegrees placing here, as the very placing of it does
inevitably evince, it is not only warrantable, but also admirably divine, that
Luke takes in Cainan from the Seventy.

For first, writing for Heathens, he must follow the heathens Bible in his
quotations.

Secondly, In Genealogies he was to be a Coppier, not a Corrector.

Thirdly, and chiefly, In following this insertion of the Lxx. he imbraceth
not their error, but divinely draws us to look at their intent.

When Jude mentions Michaels striving with Satan about the body of Moses, he
approves not the story as true, which he knew to be but a Talmudick Parable:
but from the Jews own Authors, he uses this as an argument against them, and
for their instruction.

So though Luke from the Lxx, the Bible of the Heathen, have alleged Cainan
the son of Arphaxad, he alleges it not as the truth more then the Hebrew,
but from the Septuagints own authority, or from the matter which they inserted
in distaste of the calling of the Heathen, he makes comfortable use and
instruction to the Heathen concerning their calling.

First, they put in two men, Genesis 10. that they might dissemble their
arrogating of singularity above all Nations, and to make Ptolomy believe, that
there was no such distinction of people held by them: [but they thought
otherwise.]

Luke reserves the one of these in his pedigree (for the other could not come
in it,) to teach the Gentiles really, what they did in dissimulation, that
there was no such distinction of Nations in the sight of God, even the Lxx.
themselves being witnesses.

Secondly, They used a mournful name for the men whom they inserted, in
detestation of the coming in of the Gentiles; Luke reserves this also for the
comfort of the Gentiles, which were now to be called in: To teach them from
the Jews own confession, that the divulging of the Gospel in vulgar
languages, should bring Japhet into the tents of Sem: which thing was now ready
to begin, when Christ at his baptism is anointed to preach the Gospel, and
to send it abroad to be preached both to Jew and Gentile. And what the Lxx. in
their Cainan sorrowed to see afar off, Luke in his Cainan calls to behold now
with comfort near at hand.

Thus are the Censers of Korah and his company though ordained for an evil end
by them, yet reserved in the Sanctuary for a good by the command of God.

Ver. 38. Which was the Son of Adam, which was the Son of God.
Thus has the Evangelist showed Christ to be the seed of the woman, promised
to Adam, and descended from him: And that, he that was proclaimed the seed of
the Woman to Adam, in the garden, was now pointed out and proclaimed the Son
of God, from heaven to John, at Jordan. And thus does the Evangelist conclude
this Genealogy with a clear expression of Christ's two natures, his humanity,
for he was the son of Adam, his divinity, for he was the Son of God: And
this lesser, of these two natures being knit and united in the person of our
Savior, the Evangelists all of them teach very frequently as they go along,
as a thing of chief and choice observation: which we shall take up and
observe, as we proceed.

The End of the first Part.
ERRATA.
Page 1, line 19. for form read fou^^e; p 3. in marg. l 8. r. ^ 21, 21. ibid.
l* 10. for Col. 1. Gal. p. 4. l. 14. for shined, r. (...) p. 6 l. 8. for 2 Samuel
7. 2. r. 2 Samuel 7. 21. and so in the marg. and in mar. l. 9. so^ ^1. 1. and in
l. 37. of the page after the word Piman (...), add if that Book be his; p 8.
l. 37. for Alcum, ^. Aleu^; p 10. l 24, 25. dele Fifthly and Sixthly, l. 30.
point at the word only, and read thus, Therefore the light, etc. l. 33 r. Mic.
7. 8. and Psalm. 84. 11. p. 11. l. 33 r. Psalm. 75. l. 37. r. Exodus 6, l. ^8
instead of, Not of God r. Not of blood; p. 12. in marg. l. 18 r. Luke 2. 52. p.
13. l. 27. omit i.e. l 36 for consumed, ^ assumed; p. 16 l. 11. r. And he shall
go before him, l. 35 r Dan. 8. 16, in mar. l. 6, 7. r. 1 Chronicles 3. 15. ibid: l.
1^. ^. (...) p. 17. l. 38. r. Joh. 6. 52. and 3. 4: p. 18. l. 26. r. Genesis 18.
14. l: 28. r. Number. 13. 29. l. 29. r. of the dead Sea; p. 19. l. 32. r: (...)
and 1* Cor. 3. 19. l: 33. r. Isa. 41. 1. l: 34. Psalm: 83. 8. p. 21. l 2^. SS
here and elsewhere should be Sect. In the Calendar in the month Tamnu^ at the
last line, read thus, 1 King: chap 18. from verse 46 to the end of the 20
Chapter. In the month Ab, against the 9 day, read (...) p. 25. l. 22. r:
Misopogone; l: 33. therein to be omitted; p: 42. l, 11. 1: Esth: 1. 16. 17. p:
44. l: 33. for verse 4. r: 34, p. 51. r: SECT: IIII: l: 22. for (...); p. 52.
l. 39. for be, r. by the fear; p. 53. l: 8. r. and they shall call; p: 59. l:
33. r: use her unkindly: p: 60 l: 13: r: he violateth the Law: p: 61. l: 7.
omit the word First; p: 62. l. 26. for (...) r. (...) p: 63. l: 3^. r. French,
Spanish p: 67. l. 3. r: upon that promise in the Garden; p. 68 l. 19. for him,
r: them; ibid: in marg: l: ^1. r: Psalm: 34. p: 69: in marg: l. ult: r: Levit.
12. p. 72 l. 35. r: Isa: 9. 6. p. 74. l 5. r. the platform of subjection and
submission to the Empire: p. 81. r. those intricacies; p: 89. l: 9. after,
before his presentation in the Temple, r. may be refuted; p: 90. l: 13. r. and
not to the words from two years old; p: 99. l: 2. r: Psalm: 72. p: 101. l: 24.
for Jerusalem, r: Bethlehem: p: 10^: l. 9. for delivered, r. deliverer. p. 104.
l. 3. for instancing, r: instanceth; ibid. l: 27. for, and matters, r. in
matters of debate; p. 109. l. 3. for perfect r. prefect, p. 114. is figured
110. in l. 4, 5. r. machination, p. 121. l. 13. for and wisemen r and the
wisemen. p. 122. Column 2 at verse 1. read The voice of one crying; Column 3.
ver. 1. r. Pilate being; p. 123. at ver. 12. for has r. has. p. 127. l. 2.
for Rambani r. Rambam; l. 34 for now, r. now was fit; p. 132. l. 25. for A
Tretarchy, r. A Tetrar^h, l. 24 r. Mishneh. l 34 r. Tracboni^is; p. 134. l. 21.
for one Priest, r. one High Priest, p. 135. l. 7. r. of the Sacrament of
Baptism; p. 136. l. 13. for we observe, r. we may observe; p. 146. l. 13.
instead of the stones, r. of these stones; p. 161. l. 12 instead of these
times, r. in the times; p. 164. l, 23. for that was to possible, r. that was
not possible; p. 171. l. 6. for Matthias, r. Mattathias; so also at l. 9; p.
174. is miswritten 154; at l. 29. r. frowardness for forwardness; p. 182. l.
19. r. And therefore as it was; p. 183. l. 33. for thereby, r. therewith; p.
185. l. 28. r. which began on the fifteenth; p. 194. l. 12. for Sixthly, r.
Seventhly; p. 199. l. 34. r. and many and many again; p 203. l. 29. r.
perpendicular descending voice; p. 210. l. 20. omit is, and r. which translated
literally; p. 214. l. 11. for lesser, r. lesson.


