Historical Antiquities, IN TWO BOOKS.

The First Treating in General OF GREAT-BRETTAIN AND IRELAND.

The Second Containing Particular Remarks CONCERNING CHESHIRE.

Faithfully Collected out of Authentic Histories, Old Deeds, Records, and
Evidences, BY Sir PETER LEYCESTER Baronet.

Whereunto is annexed A Transcript of DOOMSDAY-BOOK, so far as it concerns
CHESHIRE, taken out of the Original Record.

Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora. LONDON, Printed by W.
L. for Robert Clavell, in Cross-Key Court in Little-Britain. M.DC.LXXIII.

TO HIS Most Serene, and Most Excellent Majesty CHARLES II.

By the Grace of God, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND KING, DEFENDER of
the FAITH, etc.

THIS VOLUME OF Historical Antiquities Is with all Humility DEDICATED BY HIS
MAJESTY'S MOST LOYAL AND MOST OBEDIENT SUBJECT PETER LEYCESTER.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
I Have in this Volume presented to your view two Books: The first more
general, entitled, Historical Antiquities of GREAT BRETTAINE and IRELAND,
containing a Collection of the Chiefest Things Observable out of our most
Ancient and Authentic Historians, vouching my Authorities all along to every
Particular. And although it be but a Brief Abstract (which is ever best for
Memory) of what others have delivered more at large; yet the diligent Reader
may perhaps find some Remarkable Things, which otherwise he might not easily
meet withal.

The other more Particular, entitled, Some Antiquities touching CHESHIRE: And
this is divided into four Parts, whereof the three first concern that County in
general; but the fourth Part treats only of the Antiquities of Bucklow-Hundred.

Here is also added, in the Close of the Whole Work, A Transcript of
Doomsday-Book, so far as it concerns Cheshire, taken from the Record it self,
kept in the Tally-Office at Westminster: Which Book was begun and finished
between the Fourteenth and Twentieth Years of the Reign of William the
Conqueror: Which I doubt not but will be very acceptable to all the Gentry of
that County, and especially to such as love the Study of Antiquities: Wherein
every Man may see who held any Lands in any of the Towns of Cheshire at the
time of the Norman Conquest, and who enjoyed the same, by virtue of the
Conquest, in the Time of the Conqueror. Howbeit, many Towns are now Inhabited
in this County, which being at that time Waste, are not to be found in that
Record. And whereas some Gentlemen of Cheshire have been formerly at great
Charge in taking Copies of Part hereof out of the said Record, every Man may
now spare that Cost and Trouble, having here the Whole at large before him.

P. L.
January 1. 1673.
THE PREFACE.
BEcause I intend to search into the Beginning of Things, it will be necessary
to show in the Frontispiece the Original Plantation of Nations, as we find them
Recorded in Holy Scripture, the most Ancient, True, and Perfect History in the
World.

I. Adam, the first Monarch, and the first Man; who, with Eve his Wife, were
both Created by God in the Beginning of the World; to whom God gave Power of
Begetting their Like, and to multiply by Generation, as he did to other
Creatures.

This Adam lived 930 Years, and had several Sons and Daughters; but three have
their Names especially Recorded in the First Book of Moses, called Genesis,
Chapter v. 1. II. Cain, eldest Son of Adam, was a Tiller of Ground: He slew his
Brother Abel, and was therefore banished, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, on the
East of Eden, Genesis c. 4. He built a City, and called it (after the Name of his
Son) Enoch. III. Enoch, Son of Cain. IV. Irad, Son of Enoch. V. Mehujael, Son
of Irad. VI. Methusael, Son of Mehujael. VII. Lamech, Son of Methusael, had two
Wives, Genesis 4. Adah, Jabal, an Orderer of cattle; the first Heardsman. Jubal,
the first Inventour of Instrumental Music.
Zillah, Tubal-Cain, the first Artificer in Brass and Iron. Naamah, a Daughter.


2. Abel, or Hebel, the second Son of Adam, was a Feeder of Sheep; he was
killed by his Brother Cain, Genesis 4. v. 8. 3. II. Seth, born Anno Mundi and
Adami 130: He lived 912 Years, and died Anno Mundi, 1042. III. Enos, Son of
Seth, was born Anno Mundi 235, lived 905 Years, and died Anno Mundi 1140. IV.
Kenan, Son of Enos, born Anno Mundi 325, lived 910 Years, and died Anno Mundi
1235. V. Mahalaleel, Son of Kenan, born Anno Mundi 395, lived 895 Years, and
died Anno Mundi 1290. VI. Jared, Son of Mahalaleel, born Anno Mundi 460, lived
962 Years, and died Anno Mundi 1422. VII. Enoch, Son of Jared, born Anno Mundi
622, lived 365 Years, and was then translated into Heaven by God, Anno Mundi
987. VIII. Methusalah, Son of Enoch, born Anno Mundi 687, lived 969 Years, and
died Anno Mundi 1656, in the Year of the General Deluge. IX. Lamech, Son of
Methusalah, born Anno Mundi 874, lived 777 Years, and died Anno Mundi 1651.
vivente Patre ejus. X. Noah, Son of Lamech, born Anno Mundi 1056, lived 950
Years; to wit, 350 Years after the General Flood, and died Anno Mundi Conditi
2006.


* Hence it is (says Sir Walter Raleigh, in his History of the World, Lib. 1.
Cap. 6. Sect. 4.) that the Heathen Gods fetch their Original. Many Learned Men
conceive, that Adam was the first Saturn; Cain, the first and ancient Jupiter;
Jabal, the first Mercury; Jubal, the first Apollo; Tubal-Cain, the first
Vulcan, which has some resemblance in the Name: Lactantius, Lib. 4. Cap. 27.

Lamech, the seventh from Adam, had 77 Children, says Josephus, in his History
of the Jews: But those four abovenamed were very famous.

Of the Posterity of Sem after the Flood.
Noah was an Husbandman, and Planted a Vineyard, Genesis c. 19. In the six
hundredth Year of his Age, Anno Mundi Conditi 1656. happened the General Deluge,
wherein all the People of the old World were drowned, except Noah, and his
three Sons, and their Wives, Genesis c. 7. And from those three Sons was the whole
Earth again replenished.

Noah lived 950 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2006. Anno post Diluvium 350.

I. Sem, Son of Noah, had Issue five Sons; Elam, and Ashur, and Arphaxad, and
Lud, and Aram.

And the Children of Aram were Uz, and Hul; and Gether, and Mash, Genesis 10, ver.
22.

Sem was born 98 Years before the Flood, lived 600 Years, and died Anno Mundi
2158, and Anno post Diluvium 502.

Cham, or Ham, younger Son of Noah.

Japhet, Son of Noah: Some think he was the eldest Son.

II. Arphaxad, Son of Sem, was born the second Year after the Flood, lived 438
Years, and died Anno Mundi 2096. post Diluvium 440.

* Sem and his five Sons inhabited the Country of Asia, beginning at
Euphrates, and extending to the Indian Ocean.

Of Elam came the Elamites, whence proceeded the Persians. Ashur made his abode
in Nineveh, and called his People Assyrians. Of Arphaxad came the Chaldeans. Of
Aram came the Aramaei, called by the Greeks, Syrians: And of Lud came the
Lydians.

And Uz, Son of Aram, dwelt in Trachonita, and in Damasco, (a Country situate
between Palestine and Syria, named Coelen:) Otrus, called also Hul, (or else he
was the Son of Hul) inhabited Armenia. Gether had Bactria. From Masus came the
Masians, who dwelt in a Fort called Prasine. Josephus de Antiqu. Judaeorum,
lib. 1. cap. 7.

III. Salah, Son of Arphaxad, born in the thirty fifth Year of his Father's
age, post Diluvium 37, lived 433 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2126, post Diluvium
470.

IV. Eber, or Heber, Son of Salah, born in the thirtieth Year of his Father's
age, post Diluvium 67, lived 464 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2187, post Diluvium
531.

From him were his Posterity called Hebrews. He had two Sons, Peleg, and
Joktan, Genesis 10.

And the Children of Joktan were, Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazermaveth, and
Jerah, and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba, and
Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: And these inhabited from Mesha, to Sephar, a
Mount in the East, Genesis 10. ver. 30.

V. Peleg, Son of Eber, born in the thirty fourth Year of his Father's age,
post Diluvium 101, lived 239 Years, and died Anno Mundi 1996, post Diluvium
340. He died before Noah; and in his days was the Earth divided, Genesis 10.25.

VI. Reu, or Regeu, Son of Peleg, born in the thirtieth Year of his Father's
age, post Diluvium 131, lived 239 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2026, post
Diluvium 370.

VII. Serug, Son of Regeu, born in the thirty second Year of his Father's age,
post Diluvium 163, lived 230 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2050, post Diluvium 394.

VIII. Nahor, Son of Serug, born in the thirtieth Year of his Father's age,
post Diluvium 193, lived 148 Years, and died Anno Mundi 1997. post Diluvium
341. He died in the Lifetime of Noah.

IX. Terah, Son of Nahor, born in the twenty ninth Year of his Father's age,
post Diluvium 222. He lived 205 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2083, in Haran, post
Diluvium 427.

X. Abraham, Son of Terah, born in the seventieth Year of his Father's age,
post diluvium 292. He lived 175 Years, and died Anno Mundi 2123, post Diluvium
467. Genesis 25.7. Abraham had also by Hagar an Egyptian, the Handmaid of Sarah, a
Son called Ishmael, born An. Mundi 2034. and died Anno Mundi 2171.
Sarah, first Wife of Abraham; Daughter of Haran. Isaac, born Anno Mundi 2049,
and died Anno Mundi 2228. -- 1 Esau, the elder twin, born Anno Mund. 2108. He
was Father of the Edomites 2 Jacob, the younger Twin, Son of Isaac, born An.
Mund. 2108. called also Israel, Genesis 35.10. Jacob died aged 130 Years, An.
Mundi 2238. Genesis 47.9. Zilpah concubine to Jacob, and handmaid to Leah. Gad.
Asher.
Billah concubine of Jacob, and handmaid to Rachel. Dan. Nephtali.
Leah, elder Daughter of Laban, Wife of Jacob. 1 Reuben. 2 Simeon. 3 Levi. 4
Judah; of him David descended. 5 Issachar. 6 Zabulon. Dinah, a Daughter,
defiled by Sichem, Genesis 34.



Keturah, second Wife of Abraham. By Keturah he had Issue Zimran, Jerkshan,
Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah, Genesis 25.2.

Nachor, Son of Terah, had to wife Milcah Daughter of Haran. Reumah, Concubine
to Nachor, Genesis 22.24. Nachor had by Reuma these children, Tebah, and Gaham,
and Thaash, and Maachah, Genesis 22.
1 Huz. 2 Buz. 3 Kemuel, Father of Aram. 4 Chesed. 5 Hazo. 6 Pildash. Genesis
22.22. 7 Jidlaph. 8 Bethuel, a Syrian, Genesis 28.5. Rebekah, Wife of Isaac; she
was Married An. Mundi 2088. Laban; he lived in Padan Aram, Genesis 28.5. etc. 31.
Leah, elder Daughter of Laban, Wife of Jacob. Joseph.
Rachel, younger Daughter of Laban, Wife of Jacob. Benjamin.
And many Sons, Genesis c. 31.


Haran, Son of Terah. Lot. Milcah. Isca, called also Sarah, Joseph. de antiq.
Jud. lib. 1. ca. 7.



For the Children of all these, see Genesis, Chapter 46. See also Chap. 49. and
Lib. 1. Chronicorum, Cap. 1. ad Cap. 10.

So much touching the Posterity of Sem.

Of the Posterity of Cham, or Ham, younger Son of Noah, Genesis cap. 10.
CHam, or Ham, Son of Noah, with his Posterity, inhabited Egypt; Psalm 105.
ver. 2.3. 1 Cush. Seba. Havila. Sabta. Raamah. Sheba. Dedan.
Sabtecha.
2 Mizraim. 1 Ludim. 2 Ananim. 3 Lehabim. 4 Naphthuim. 5 Pathrusim. 6 Caslubim,
out of whom came Philistim. 7 Caphtorim.
3 Phut. 4 Canaan, from whom his Posterity were called Canaanites, and the Land
Canaan, afterward called Judaea.



These possessed all the Country from Gaza to Egypt. Ludim, Ananim, Lehabim,
only inhabited Lybia. Josephus de Antiqu. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 7.

Naphthuim, Pathrusim, Caslucim, and Caphtorim, the Ethiopian War overthrew
their Cities long time ago, so that their Country was not known to Josephus.

Cush begat That is, Of Cush descended Nimrod.
Nimrod, a mighty man in the Earth: And Nimrod settled the Confines of his
Colony about Babylon. The beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh, in the Land of Shinar. Out of that Land went forth Ashur,
who builded Nineveh, and Rehoboth, and Cala, and Resen a great City between
Nineveh and Cala: Genesis cap. 10. ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

* This Nimrod was also called Belus, as some conjecture. The Tower of Babel
was built, and the Confusion of Languages began, Anno Mundi Conditi 1787. says
Isaacson in his Chronology: but others refer it ad Annum 1757, being the Year
wherein Peleg was born, in whose days the Earth was divided.

And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the
Emorite, and the Girgasite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and
the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: And afterward were the
Families of the Canaanites spread abroad; and their Borders were from Sidon as
thou come to Gerar, unto Gaza, as thou go unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and
Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lashah, Genesis 10.15.

Joshuah overcame the Canaanites, Anno Mundi 2496; and post Diluvium 840, he
entered into the Land of Canaan.

Sidon, Son of Canaan, builded Sidon a City in Phoenicia.

Of the Hevaeans, Jebusaeans, Chettaeans, Girgasenes, Eudaeans, Semaeans,
Samarians, are nothing remaining, but their Names in Scripture; for the Hebrews
razed down their Cities.

Of the Posterity of Japhet, Genesis chap. 10.
JAphet, Son of Noah, and eldest Son, as most Men are of Opinion, had seven
Sons. 1 Gomer. 1 Ashkenaz. 2 Riphath. 3 Tagarma.
2 Magog. 3 Madai. 4 Javan. 1 Elishah. 2 Tarshish. 3 Kittim. 4 Dodanim.
5 Tubal. 6 Meshech. 7 Tiras.



By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their Lands, every one
after his Tongue, after their Families, in their Nations, Genesis 10.5. So reads
the Septuagint: But Junius reads, -- Ab his divisae sunt postea Regiones
Gentium; By these were afterward divided the Countries of the Nations.

Gomer was the Founder of the Gomarians, the Nations anciently being called
after the Names of their first Author originally: And from Magog were the
People of that Country called Magogaei, which the Greeks afterward named
Scythians: Madai gave name to the Madians, whom the Greeks called Medes: From
Javan, the Jonians and Greeks took their Original: From Thubal the Theobelians
took their Names, afterward called Iberians: Meshech gave name to the
Meschates, since called Cappadocians: And Tiras gave name to the Thirians, whom
the Greeks called Thracians.

So Ashkenaz gave name to the Ashkenarians, after named Rhegii by the Greeks:
Riphath propagated the Riphataeans, afterward called Paphlagonians: Togarmah
propagated the Tygranians, afterward by the Greeks called Phrygians.

Elishah, Son of Javan, whom Josephus calls Ebishah, gave name to the
Ebizaei, over whom he ruled, afterward called Aetolians: Tharshish propagated
the Tharsi, which was the ancient name of the Cilicians: Chittim obtained the
Island Kittim, now called Cyprus: Dodanim is omitted by Josephus, who mentions
but three Sons of Javan.

These Nations were inhabited by the Posterity of Japhet, who began to make
their abode from the Mountains of Taurus and Amanus, and entered Asia even to
Tanais, and Europe unto Gades, not before inhabited. Thus Josepus, lib. 1. de
Antiquitate Judaeorum, cap. 7.

Now because it is impossible to trace down exactly the Original of our Nation
from these so ancient Beginnings,, in regard no ancient Histories (which have
been hitherto preserved) have recorded any thing of these more ancient Ages
next following; and what Histories are now extant of the more ancient Times,
are all very Fabulous, and full of Uncertainties, except what is contained in
Holy Scripture, which principally touches the Affairs of the Jews; I shall
therefore begin from those Times wherein we find more certain Truths recorded
by the most Authentic Historians, and so trace them downwards to this day.

OF BRETTAINE.
CHAP. I.
Of the Island, and Name of Brettaine, which Originally comprehended England,
Wales, and Scotland.

I. THe Ancient Geographer writes thus concerning Islands; -- (...). Cambden's
Britannia, sub Titulo Hiberniae in ipso initio: That is, The Indian Taprobane
exceeds all Islands in Greatness and Glory: next after it, Brettaine: the
third, that other British Island, Ireland. And hence Ptolomy called Ireland,
Little-Bretaine.

Lipsius in his Book de Constantia, lib. 2. cap. 22. (who lived Anno Domini
1600.) gives the Title of Insularum maxima unto Cuba in America; where
immediately before speaking of America, I conceive he only means Cuba to be
the greatest among the American Isles; aliter errat. And the Oriental
Navigators ascribe that Title unto Sumatra, taken for Ptolomy's Taprobane; or
to Madagascar, called also the Island of Saint Laurence; both which are near to
the Equinoctial Line: So Speed on his Map of Great Brettaine and Ireland.

This Brettaine, commonly called Great Brettaine, has on the East the German
Ocean, dividing it from Belgium, Germany, and Denmark: On the West, Saint
Georges Channel, dividing it from Ireland: On the North, the Deucalidonian
Ocean: And on the South, the English Channel, dividing it from France. The
Length from North to South is reckoned 620 Miles: the greatest Breadth, from
East to West, in a Right Line, no more than 250 of the same Italian Miles; but
by the Crooks and Bendings of the Seacoast it extends to 320 Miles. It is
the greatest Island in the World, except Java, Borneo, Sumatra, and Madagascar;
the three first are among the Oriental Islands, Madagascar among the African.
It is situate under the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Climates;
so that the longest day at the Lizard-Point in Cornwall (which is the most
Southern part of it) contains 16 Hours and a Quarter; and at Barwick, which
is now the Border or Limit between England and Scotland, the longest Day is 17
Hours and three Quarters long, and one Hour more at Straith-by-head in the
North of Scotland. where some observe, that there is scarce any Night at all in
the Summer-Solstice, but a dark Twilight. Thus Dr. Heylyn in his Cosmography
put out by him in Anno Domini 1660. page 293.

Diodorus Siculus (who was Contemporary with Julius Caesar) says, Brettaine is
the greatest Island in Europe, lib. 5. page 300. which I think will not be
denied: And Henry Huntington calls it Insularum nobilissima, lib. 1. Histor.
sub initio.

There are also certain lesser Islands dispersed in several Parts of the
British Sea, adjacent and belonging to Great Brettaine, which were called
British Isles; as, 1. The Orcades, or Isles of Orkney. 2. Schetland. 3. The
Hebrides. 4. The Isle of Man. 5. The Isle of Anglesey. 6. The Islands of the
Severn-Sea. 7. The Sorlings, or Isles of Silley. 8, The Isle of Wight. 9. The
Isle of Thanat. 10. Sunderland. 11. Holy-Island.

The Isles of Orkney, Schetland, and the Hebrides, belonged to the Crown of
Scotland; the other, to the Crown of England: But were all united in King
James, who was the first Monarch of Great-Brettaine, being King of Scotland by
Descent, and next Heir of Blood to the Crown of England after the death of
Queen Elizabeth. He was proclaimed King of England the twenty fourth day of
March, which was the last day of the Year 1602, according to the Computation of
the Church of England; whose Style Imperial ran, -- Jacobus, Dei Gratia, Magnae
Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex.

II. Henry of Huntington says, it was first called Albion, and afterward
Brettaine: Haec autem Insularum nobilissima, cui quondam nomen Albion fuit,
postea vero Britannia. lib. 1. Hist. sub initio. He lived in the Reign of King
Stephen, Anno Christi 1148: So Pitseus, p. 211. And Bid (who died Anno Christi
734, according to Malmesbury) begins his History of England thus, -- Britannia
Oceani Insula, cui quondam Albion nomen fuit. Also Dr. Heylyn, in his
Cosmography, p. 295. says, The whole Island of Brettaine was first called
Albion, and afterward Brettaine: Which name of Brettaine was first found in
Athenaeus among the Greek Authors, and in Lucretius and Julius Caesar among the
Latins; and was retained by Strabo, Pliny, and all other ancient Writers,
except Ptolomy only, by whom it is called Albion, as at first: And the name of
Brettaine continued till the time of Egbert the first Saxon Monarch, who called
the Southern part of this Island by the name of England, from the Angli, who
with the Juits and Saxons had conquered the same.

But contrarily, Sir John Prise (of the race of the Bretans) in his Book de
Defensione Historiae Britannicae, Printed at London 1573. p. 55. says, -- Ego
sane Britanniam prius dictam esse quam Albion facile crediderim. And the reason
whereupon he grounds his Opinion, is the Authority of Caesar, who in his
Commentaries always calls it Britain, but never Albion; and that from this
more Noble Island, all the rest of the lesser Isles adjacent, as appurtenant
unto this, were also called Insulae Britannicae; which out of Pliny, Ptolomy,
and other Authors, is manifest: And then began this Brettaine to be called
Albion, in distinction from the rest. And he adds the Authority of Pliny,
(who lived about 80 Years after Christ) lib. 4. Naturalis Historiae, cap. 16.
in ipsissimis verbis; -- Albion ipsi nomen fuit, cum Britanniae vocarentur
omnes. And herewith agrees Learned Cambden in his Britannia, page 17. of the
Edition Printed at London 1607. with Maps at large; who conceives that the
Grecians gave it the name of Albion fabulously, from Albion Son of Neptune, for
distinction sake: For Neptune being the God of the Sea, and this an Island of
the Sea, they might term it by the name of Neptune's Son, in allusion. But
Buchanan, lib. 1. Hist. Scot. pa. 12, 13, says, That Alpum and Album were
anciently used for a Hill or Mountain; and that the Alps were so called ab
Altitudine, non Albedine; and that he thinks our Brettaine was called Albion
from the rising Shore and Hills, which on the Narrow Seas, between Ireland and
our Brettaine, do appear in sight; Ireland seeming low and level, and Brettaine
rising up into Mountains: Which word Album in that sense is common to many
Nations, whereof he alleges many Instances.

Neither does Bid say that it was called Albion before it was called
Brettaine; but that it was formerly called Albion: So that the name of Albion
may seem to have been left off in Bede's time.

And whereas Heylyn affirms in his Cosmography, in the Place before-quoted,
That the name of Brettaine was first found in Athenaeus among the Greek
Writers; It is certain, that we often find it mentioned in Diodorus Siculus,
lib. 4. Bibliothecae Historicae, pa. 300, 301. where he writes thus, -- (...),
(...) That is, There are many Islands [in Europe] in the Ocean, whereof the
greatest is called Brettaine: This anciently was untouched, without the
intermixture of any Foreign Force (for we never heard that either Bacchus, or
Hercules, or any other of the Worthies, ever warred or fought against it) but
our Caius Caesar, who for his Actions was termed a God, was the first (of all
we find mentioned) who subdued this Island, and fighting against it, compelled
the Brettans to pay Tribute.

So that we see Diodorus was Contemporary with Caius Julius Caesar, who first
attempted Brettain 55 Years before the Birth of Christ, according to the
Computation commonly received.

Now Athenaeus the Historian lived about Anno Christi 166, somewhat after
Ptolomy the Geographer; and both of them after Strabo, who died Anno Christi
25, as Helvicus computes in his Chronology: And therefore Athenaeus could not
be the first Greek Writer who mentioned Brettaine, unless there be some other
Athenaeus whom Heylyn means.

And if that Book de Mundo be Aristotle's, which is commonly bound up among the
Works of Aristotle, then have we the name of Brettaine, and Albion too, more
anciently than of any beforementioned: For Aristotle was Tutor to Alexander
the Great, and died the third Year of 114 Olympiad, 320 Years before Christ was
born, at the age of 63 Years.

In which Book de Mundo, cap. 3. we read, -- (...). i. e. In that Ocean are two
great Islands, called British Islands, Albion, and Ireland, greater than those
beforementioned, lying beyond the Celtae, People of Gallia. But this Book de
Mundo (says Learned Cambden in his Britannia, page 64.) is of much later stamp
than the Age wherein Aristotle lived, as the most Learned have judged. Indeed
Duvall, in his Synopsis on Aristotle, Tom. 1. page 171. In the beginning of the
first Tome before Aristotle.
tells us, That Justin Martyr Believed that Book to be Aristotle's: Yet (says
Duvall) it is not; as the Reason of the Doctrine, and the laxity of the Style
do demonstrate; being rather decked with Words of an Historian, or (...)
^^ratour, than a Philosopher.

III. Now this Brettaine was not known to the Ancient Romans before Julius
Caesar's time, says Bid de Historia Gentis Anglorum, lib. 1. cap. 2. and by
consequence never Invaded by any of them, before Caesar: And Caesar himself,
Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib. 5.
with his Powerful Army of the formidable Romans, was beaten back by the stout
Brettans upon his first Attempt of the Island, Cassibelaun being then General
of the Brettans, and Commander in Chief. And Caesar returning into Italy, and
recruiting his Army, coming again into Brettaine the second time, was in the
first Encounter beaten again by the Brettans; but in a second Battle the Romans
routed the Brettans, and the strong City of the Trinobantes (which is now
called London) yielded themselves and their City to Caesar, with Androgorius
their Governor; after which Example, many other Cities also submitted, and
yielded up their Towns to the Romans: But the Town of Cassibelaun, Caesar took
by Storm, Caesar, lib. 5. page 163, 164.
says Bid in the same Chapter; which Town is now called St. Albans: And
Caesar appointing what Tribute they should pay, returned back with his Army.

Wherefore since the name of Brettaine is nowhere to be found, either among the
Greek or Latin Writers, before Caesar, but was till that time unknown both to
the Grecians and Romans, as Learned Cambden is of Opinion, in his Britannia,
page 24, 25. and also Sheringham de Gentis Anglorum Origin, page 99. we can
expect no certain History of the Brettans, but from Caesar downwards: For
Gildas, surnamed Sapiens, is the first Brettan that I meet withal, who has
left us any mention in writing of the Affairs of Brettaine, and that but little
also: yet what he writ (as he confesses in his Prologue) was more by relation
of others from beyond Sea, than from any Writings or Records in his own
Country; for if any such were, they were either burnt by the Enemies rage, or
carried away by the Banished Natives; so that in his time none did appear: and
he was born in the forty fourth Year after the English-Saxons came into
Brettain, as he himself says in his Book de Excidio Britanniae, reprinted at
London 1568. fol. 23. and died in the Monastery of Bangor in Wales, aged 90
Years, buried the fourth of the Calends of February, about the Year of Christ
583. as Pitseus says in his Book de Illustribus Britanniae Scriptoribus.

IV. As to the name of Brettaine, the Ancient Greek Writers do constantly write
it (...), Brettania; not Britannia, as Caesar writes it: Howbeit Cambden thinks
it more truly writ by Caesar than by the Greeks; but of that I make great
doubt; for from the Grecians doubtless was the name of Brettaine first imposed.

(...) seems to be derived from the two Greek Words (...) signifying an Image
or Picture, and (...), in the old Glossary betokening a Region or Country: So
that Brettaine sounds as much as -- The Country of a People painting
themselves with Images and Pictures: For the Ancient Brettans used to paint
their Bodies with various Pictures of all manner of Living Creatures, as
appears by sundry good Authors Pomponius Mela, l. 3. c. 6. Caesar de Bello
Gall. lib. 5. page 159.
; and you may see them quoted by Cambden in his Britannia, page 19. Only let
me tell you here, how Cambden fetches the name from two Languages; (Brith)
which in the British Language (says he) signifies Painted Davyes his Welsh
Dictionary.
or Colored; and Tania, which with the Greeks signifies a Region, page 20.
Whereof there is no necessity, since the Greek Language does clearly bear both
the Words: and we may observe how their Druids (who were Learned Men, and
Philosophers) did anciently disciplinate the Brettans in the Greek Tongue
before Caesar's time, as Caesar himself does witness, lib. 6. de Bello Gallico,
p. 212. And many Greek words are retained in the ancient British Language, as
Sheringham, de Gentis Anglorum Origin, page 99. does show; and also Cambden,
in his Britannia, page 21. of the Edition Printed 1607. And so possibly the
Word (Brith) corruptly for Breath, might be by them retained from the Greeks.

Nor does it seem reasonable that the Brettans gave this Name to themselves;
neither at this day do they call themselves Brettans in their own Language, but
Kumeri: Wherefore the Grecians gave them the name of Brettans from their
Painted and Carved Bodies.

However, the Fabulous Story of Brute (which many Authors seek to defend, and
thence would fetch the name of the Brettans Originally) I conceive ought to be
utterly exploded: Nor can any wise and learned Man, who is versed in Antiquity,
ever believe for truth those many Kings mustered up by Geoffrey of Monmouth, in
so ancient Ages; who lived himself but in the days of King Henry the Second,
and was by William of Newbery, in the Preface of his Book, (a Man who lived in
that very Age with Geffrey) taxed for a fabulous lying Author; his words are
these: Porro ad ea, quae vel ante eum, vel in diebus ejus evenerunt, taliter
sua, quod utique facile poterat, temperavit figmenta, ut congruam possent
interpretationem recipere: Praeterea in libro suo, quem Britonum Historiam
vocat, quam petulanter and impudenter fere per omnia mentiatur, nemo nisi
veterum Historiarum ignarus, cum in librum illum incidit, ambigere sinitur:
That is, Moreover, as to those things which happened either before him, or in his
days, he so tempered his Lies, (which he knew very well how to do) that they
might receive a congruous Interpretation: And furthermore, in his Book which he
calls The History of the Britans, how frowardly and impudently he lies
almost in all things, none but he that is ignorant of the Ancient Histories,
when he falls upon that Book, may be suffered to doubt.

V. As to the ancient Inhabitants of Brettaine, Cambden conceives they were
originally sprung from Gomer the eldest Son of Japhet, Son of Noah, in his
Britannia, page 7. For ask we any of the Brettans of Wales (who are the Remnant
of our Ancient Brettans) how they call themselves, they tell us Kumero, or
Kumroh, and in the Plural Number Kumeri; a British Woman, Kumeraes; and the
British Tongue, Kumeraeg: as we should say, a Kumerite, or Gumerite, as sprung
from Gomer. For Josephus says, lib. 1. de Antiqu. Judaeorum, cap. 7. That the
Posterity of Gomer were called Gomari. And these (says Cambden) were formed
sometimes into Gomoraei, and Gomeritae, and afterward into Cymerii, then to
Cimbri, and afterward into Cambri; whence we call a Welshman,
Cambro-Britannus: And these Cimbri did not only plant Germany, but the ancient
Gallia likewise, and this part of the World: And from these Galli, or Gauls,
it is most probable our Brettaine was first planted, it being an Island next
adjacent to the Gauls: And from Galli, the French word Galls, and the Bretton
's Gales, and the Saxon Wales, are all derived: For our Saxon Ancestors did
usually in their Pronunciation and Dialect turn G into W, as we see in many
other of their Words, as War for Guerre, Ward for Guard, etc. And since these
Ancient Galls in France, who planted Brettaine, were originally called Cimbri,
and Cimmerii, they could have no better a Distinction than by the Painting and
Carving of their Bodies; whence this Island gained the name of Brettaine. So
Cambden, ibid. page 19.

But Sheringham, de Gentis Anglorum Origin, page 51. will not allow the
Cimmerii to come from Gomer; which he seems to prove by good Authorities; for
that the Grecians imposed that name on the People of Moeotia, long time after
the death of Gomer, yet very ancient too: For that Kimmerii, or Cimmerii,
Sheringham, page 425.
is a word framed out of the Greek Tongue, and not from the Hebrew, as the
ancient Greek Writers do affirm; and that the Kimmerians were Scythians
originally, and therefore should rather be descended from Magog (the second Son
of Japhet, and not from Gomer) who were anciently called Magogaei: Josephus
lib. 1. de Antiq. Jud. cap. 7. But the Getae (expelling those Scythians called
Magogaei originally, but at this day called Turks and Tartars) were also called
Scythians, after they had possessed themselves of Scythia: And that these
Getes, Sheringham, p. 42,, and 424.
after called Scythians, were the Progeny of Hul or Chul, Son of Aram, Son of
Sem, whom Pliny calls Aramaei originally, lib. 6. Nature. Hist. cap. 17. These
Getae-Scythici were called also Massagetae before they came into Scandia.

The name of Kimmerii was frequent in the time of Herodotus, who lived about
440 Years before Christ, Anno Mundi 3508. which name is very ancient. They were
called Cerberii, before Cimmerii; and their City called Cerberium, before it
was called Cimmerium: Pliny lib. 6. cap. 6. Sheringham page 50.

Afterward these Kimmerii, or Cimmerii, were called Cimbri, or Kimbri. Vide
Plutarchum, Tom. 2. (...), page 75^. Diod Siculus, lib 5. pa. 309. Cimmerii
were called Cimbri by the Graecians: Strabo, li. 7 p. 293. D.
The name of Cimbri was first known to the Romans, Anno Urbis Conditae 640.
ante Christum Natum 110. which in the Language of the Ancient Gauls (scilicet,
Lingua Gallica) signifies Robbers, or Stout Warriers: Thysius upon Justin, page
391. And all those People, whom the Romans generally called Cimbri, part of
them the Germans called Saxons, Sheringham, page 46. Quamvis enim Saxones ante
Ptolomaeum, solo Cimbrorum nomine a Graecis and Romany scriptoribus
appellantur; initio igitur Saxones pars tantum Cimbrorum fuerunt: Reliquis
autem Cimbris ab eisdem Caecis victisque, aut facta Deditione in amicitiam
receptis, Omnes mutato nomine Saxones dici coeperint: atque ita Cimbrorum nomen
paulatim exolevit. Sheringham, page 47.

So the Cambro-Brettan's name seems rather to savor of the Kimmerii, than of
the Gomari. The Town Cimmerium was situate in Taurica-Chersoneso, near the Sea
called Bosphorus.

After the Eruptions and Transmigrations of these Cimerii, afterward called
Cimbri, Diodorus Siculus tells us, lib. 5. page 308. (who lived in the time of
Julius Caesar, a little before the Birth of Christ) those who possessed the
inward parts above Massilia, and inhabited about the Alps, and on that side
the Pyrenaean Mountains, were called Celtae; and those who inhabited that
Celtica toward the South Parts, and the Sea, and the Hercynian Mountain, and
all those People scattered even to Scythia, were called (...), that is, Galli,
or Gauls: But the Romans called all these Nations by the name of Galli only.
See also Stephanus his Latin Dictionary, voces Celtae, and Galli. (...) graece;
(...) So Suidas, and Hesychius.

But I am of Opinion, That no Nation at this day is so entire, by reason of
continual Wars one with another since the first Plantation of the World after
the Flood, and the infinite intermingling one with another occasioned thereby,
and expelling one another out of their own ancient Countries over and over
again, in so long Tract of Time, can be properly said to be descended from any
one of the Sons of Noah entirely; but rather from them all, by reason of a
universal Commixture of their Posterities at this day.

CHAP. II.
Of the Time when the Romans first attempted Brettaine, and how long it
remained under the Roman Servitude,

I. Caesar's first Attempt upon Brettaine was 55 Years before the Birth of
Christ, according to the vulgar Computation, which falls in An. Mundi Conditi
3895. Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib. 4. and 5. tells us, His first Expedition
into Brettaine was when M. Crassus and Cneius Pompeius were Consuls; which was
Anno Urbis Conditae 699. and Anno Mundi 3895. and ante Christum 55. But Caesar
did not subdue Brettaine, so as to make it Tributary, till his second
Expedition into this Island, and that was the Year following; and at this
second coming, the strong City of the Trinobants (now called London) yielded
themselves, and submitted to the Romans, as not able to sustain their Force;
and soon after also many other Towns submitted: And so Caesar having received
Pledges from Cassibelan for his Submission to the Government of the Romans, and
appointed what Tribute yearly Brettain should pay, departed out of Brettaine.
Caesar lib. 5. page 164. The Tribute imposed on the Brettains was 3000 l.
yearly, if we may believe Speed in his History at large, page 187. a. also
Ponticus Virunnius, page 25. out of the Welsh History.

Now the City of Rome being taken by Alaricus King of the Goths, Anno Christi
410. the Roman Empire began to decline: Bid de Hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 11. So
as the Rule and Sovereignty of the Romans over Brettaine continued almost 470
Years from the first coming of Caius Julius Caesar into this Island, as Bede
himself computeth in the same Chapter: But Cambden says, it continued 476
Years, computing to the time of Valentinian the Third, in his Britannia Printed
1607. page 60.

The Division of Brettaine before and at the Time of the Romans, comprehending
the Places as they be now called. Ex Cambdeno.
Danmonii Cornwall. Devonshire.
Durotriges Dorsetshire.
Belgae Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hantshire. Isle of Wight.
Atrebatii Barkshire.
Regni Surrey. Sussex.
Cantium Kent.
Dobuni Glocestershire. Oxfordshire.
Cattieuclani Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire. Hartfordshire.
Trinobantes Middlesex. Essex.
Iceni Suffolk. Norfolk. Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire.
Coritani Northamptonshire. Leycestershire. Rutlandshire. Lincolnshire.
Nottinghamshire. Derbyshire.
Cornavii Warwickshire. Worcestershire. Staffordshire. Shropshire. Cheshire.
Brigantes Yorkshire. Bishopric of Durham. Lancashire. Westmorland. Cumberland.
Ottadini Northumberland.
Silures Herefordshire. Radnorshire. Brecknockshire. Monmouthshire.
Glamorganshire.
Dimetae Caermardenshire. Pembrookshire. Cardiganshire.
Ordovices Montgomeryshire. Merionethshire. Caernarvonshire. Isle of Anglesey.
Denbighshire. Flintshire.
Cangi Cambden supposes these to be seated about Chester, in his Britannia,
Tit. Cheshire.

Brettaine, being made a Member of the Roman Empire, was at first divided into
three Provinces only; viz.

1. Britannia Prima: So called, because it was first subdued; comprehending the
Counties on the South side of the River Thames, and those inhabited by the
Trinobantes, Iceni, and Cattieuchlani: The chief City, London.

2. Britannia Secunda; comprising all the Countries on the further side of the
River Severn; whose chief Seat was Caer-leon upon Usk in the County of Monmouth.

3. Maxima Caesariensis; including all the rest to the Northern Border; whereof
the Metropolis was York.

And in this state it stood till the time of Constantine, who made two more out
of the former; to wit,

4. Valentia; containing all the Country from the Frith of Solway, and the
Picts Wall in Cumberland, to the Friths of Edenburough and Dunbritton Northward.

5. Flavia Caesariensis; comprehending all between the Rivers of Thames and
Humber: The rest between Humber and the Bounds of Valentia, continuing under
the old name of Maxima Caesariensis, though now made less than any of the other
four: So Dr. Heylyn in his Cosmography, page 309. Maginus upon Ptolomy, Pars
secunda, page 39.

The Forces which the Romans kept in continual Pay in Brettaine, as well to
keep their Coasts and Frontiers against the Enemy, as to keep the Brettans in
obedience, amounted in all (if Pancirol be not mistaken in the Account) unto
23000 Foot, and 2000 Horse; three Legions keeping here their constant and
continual Residence: that is to say, The sixth Legion, Surnamed Victrix, at
York; the twentieth Legion, Victrix, at Westchester; the second Legion,
sometimes at Isca Dannioniorum, now called Exceter, and sometimes at Isca
Silurum, now Caer-leon, upon Usk: But this was about the time of Claudius the
Emperor, or later under Vespatian.

Romani in Britannia.
* Caius Julius Caesar landed his Army in Kent, at Dover: Montanus in his
Commentary on Caesar de Bello Gallico, li. 4. p. 135. This was about 55 Years
before Christ was born, according to our common Computation of his Birth.
Paulus Orosius, lib 6. c. 9.
In his first Encounter he was beaten by the Brettans, ibid. page 137. but
Landing more Men in Longboats, he put the Brettans to flight: Then the Brettans
sent Ambassadors for a Peace. Not long after, the Brettans fell upon the
Romans, and disordered them, understanding the Romans were distressed for want
of Provision; and after that, in another Battle, they were routed, and sore
pursued by the Romans: And after this, about September, Caesar in the night
having landed more Men, the Brettans gather together about six thousand Men,
and enclose the Enemy round, and worsted the Romans. Thus out of Caesar
himself, lib. 4. we find Fortune various in her Victories: Labienus being then
Chief Commander under Caesar, and Cassibelaun General of the Brettans. And this
was the effect of the first Expedition of Caesar, who settling the
Winter Quarters of his Soldiers in Belgis, that is, in Hantshire, Wiltshire,
and Somersetshire; and having received Pledges only from two Cities of
Brettaine, in order to a Peace, (for the rest would send no Pledges) Caesar
went into Italy: Lib. 4. de Bello Gallico, in ipso fine.

Caesar departed out of his Winter Quarters into Italy, Lucius Domitius and
Appian Claudius being Consuls, commanding his Deputies over his Legions in
Brettaine, that they make as many new Ships as they can that Winter, and repair
the old ones; Lib. 5. de Bello Gallico, in ipso initio. Now these were Consuls
of Rome, Anno Urbis Conditae 700, says Montanus: But Helvicus places their
Consulship Anno Urbis Romae Conditae 699, Annoque Mundi 3896, and ante Christum
Natum, quoad Vulgarem Computationem, 54.

The next Summer Caesar returned again into Brettaine: Mandubratius King of the
Trinobants (Son of Imanuentius) with their chief Town, now called London,
submitted to the Romans. Caesar demanded forty Pledges, and Corn for his Army,
which were forthwith sent him by the Trinobants: After which Example, many
others submitted also. Caesar assaulted the Town of Cassibelaun, now called St.
Albons, and takes it: The Brettans not enduring the Storm long, ran away out of
the Town at another part thereof, and many of them were taken and slain as they
fled. But the last great Battle between the Brettans and the Romans was a
little before, when the Romans were busied in fortifying of their Tents and
Holds, the Brettans entering forth of the Woods, (where they used to sculk) fell
upon them, and sharply assaulted the Romans; and that day was slain Q. Laberius
Durus Tribunus militum: And the day following the Brettans showing themselves
on Hills not far from the Roman Tents, provoked the Romans to Battle; but at
Noon, when Caesar had sent three Legions, and all his Horse, with Caius
Trebonius his Lieutenant, to bait, suddenly the Brettans fell upon them on all
sides as they baited; but the Romans killed a great number of them, so as the
Brettans could not get together, nor stand together, nor had liberty of leaping
out of their Chariots Ex Essedis.
to fight: And upon this Flight, their Auxilliaries (which were met on every
side) went away: Neither after this time did the Brettans ever encounter the
Romans with their chief Forces; Lib. 5. de Bello Gallico, page 160. and
deinceps ad page 165. And after the taking of St. Albons, as is
beforementioned, Cassibelaun, by means of Comius the Atrebatian, sends
Ambassadors to Caesar, concerning his submitting to the Romans. Caesar demands
Pledges, and appoints what Tribute should be paid yearly to the People of Rome
from Brettaine, and charge Cassibelaun that he do no harm to Mandubratius,
nor to the Trinobants: And so having received Pledges, Caesar carries back his
Army to the Sea, and departed out of Brettaine: Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib.
5. page 164. of the Edition Printed at Leyden, with Montanus Notes, 1651. Nor
do I read that Caesar came again into Brettaine ever after.

Divus Julius Caesar cum Exercitu Britanniam ingressus, Quanquam Prospera Pugna
terruerit incolas, ac littore potitus sit, potest videri [Britanniam]
ostendisse Posteris, non tradidisse. Cornelius Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap.
13. And by and by Civil Wars growing, and several Princes rebelling against the
Roman State, Brettaine remained in Peace, as forgotten by the Romans, (Schidius
upon Suetonius Tranquillus, Printed 1656. page 36.) until the time of the
Emperor Claudius.

Propraetores ceu Legati Romanorum in Brettania.
1. AUlus Plautius, Lieutenant of Brettaine under the Consuls of Rome, An. Chr.
nati. 43.
was in the time of Claudius the Emperor sent with Forces into Brettaine; and
soon after came Claudius himself into Brettaine, and took Maldon in Essex, the
Palace of Cunobelin. Plautius overcame Caratacus, and after Togodunus, in
Battle, two Sons of Cunobelin, after their Father's death: Cambden's Britannia,
page 30. Brettaine being attempted by none before, since Julius Caesar: So that
before the time of Claudius, Brettaine was not perfectly subdued. Vespatian the
Father (before he was Emperor) was sent by Claudius Legate of a Legion into
Germany, and thence translated into Brettaine, where he had thirty Conflicts or
Skirmishes with the Brettans, and subdued two strong Nations, and had above
twenty Towns, and the Isle of Wight surrendered to him, partly by the Conduct of
Aulus Plautius Consularis Legati, and partly by the Conduct of Claudius
himself: Suetonius with Schildius Comment, page 734.

2. Publius Ostorius Scapula, Propraetor, Lieutenant of Brettaine, Iceni,
Cangi, Brigantes, Silures, and Ordovices: Also he took Caractacus King of the
Silures Prisoner, with his Wife and Children.

Some Cities were given to Cogidunus, by an ancient Custom of the Romans, that
they might have even Kings Instruments of Servitude: Tacitus de Vita Agricolae,
cap. 14. and Annalium, lib. 12. cap. 33.

3. A. Didius Gallus, Propraetor, on the death of Ostorius, Brettaine: Tacitus
lib. 12. Annalium, cap. 39.

4. Verannius, Successor to Didius, died in Brettaine within a Year: Tacitus de
Vita Agricolae, cap. 14.

5. Paulinus Suetonius, Propraetor: He took the Isle of Anglesey in Wales:
Isaac son's Chronology: Cornelius Tacitus lib. 14. Annalium, cap. 29.
Prasutagus King of the Iceni dying, made Nero his Heir; but the Romans spoiled
the Iceni, and did beat Boadicia Widow of Prasutagus, and deflowred both her
and her Daughter: Tacitus ibidem, cap. 31. biennio res Prosperas habuit.
Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap. 14.

6. Petronius Turpilianus succeeded Suetonius: Tacitus lib. 14. Annal. cap. 39.
Nero the Emperor. The words of Tacitus are, -- Detentusque rebus gerundis
Suetonius tradere Exercitum Petronio Turpiliano, qui jam Consulatu abierat,
jubetur. Now Suetonius was Consul Anno Christi 66.

Et Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap. 16. -- Petronius Turpilianus, Compositis
Prioribus, nihil ultra ausus, Trebellio Maximo Provinciam tradidit.

7. Trebellius Maximus, Lieutenant of Brettaine in the time of Nero: Tacitus ut
supra.

8. Vectius Bolanus, Lieutenant in the time of Vitellius: Stow's Annals.

9. Petilius Cerialis, sub Vespatiano Imperatore, Brigantes in Brettaine, aut
Victoria aut Bello: Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap. 17. also Isaacson in his
Chronology.

10. Julius Frontinus, Vespatian subdued the valiant Nation of the Silures in
Brettaine by force of Arms: Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap. 17. also Isaacson.

11. Julius Agricola, in the time of Titus Vespasian and Domitian: North Wales
and Anglesey, Anno Christi 78. Isaacson's Chronology. Tacitus de Vita
Agricolae, cap. 18. and deinceps. The Brettans making Head under Galgacus (King
of the Caledonians in Brettaine, says Cambden's Britannia, page 702.) were
defeated by Agricola, and lost ten thousand Men, Anno Christi 86. Isaacson's
Chronology: also Tacitus de Vita Agricolae, cap. 27. and deinceps; and cap. 37,
and 38. and is rewarded by Domitian, who gave him the Province of Syria.
Tacitus ibidem, cap. 40.

* Sub Anno Christi 88. Brettaine was reduced into a Province, at the Emperor
Domitian's sole dispose, and not at the Senators, as other Provinces were.
Isaacson's Chronology.

12. Salustius Lucullus, sent Lieutenant into Brettaine, Anno Christi 92. was
put to death by Domitian, because he made new kind of Lances, and called them
Lucullians: Cambden's Britannia, page 43. About this time flourished Arviragus
in Brettaine; and also at Rome flourished Claudia Ruffina a British Woman, whom
some think to be the same with her whom the Apostle mentions, 2 Timothy 4. ver.
21. Cambden's Britannia, page 43.

An Chr. nati.
* What Lieutenants were under Nerva and Trajan, I find not.

Cneius Trebellius, sent into Brettaine under Adrian the Emperor, as Isaacson
places it in his Chronology. His Soldiers mutiny, and the Brettans rebel.

Julius Severus, Lieutenant of Brettaine under Adrian; Cambden's Britannia,
page 45. who being recalled to quell the rebellious Jews, Adrian went himself
into Brettaine, and erected a Turf-wall, or Mud-wall, from the River Eden in
Cumberland, to Tine in Northumberland, as a Limit of the Roman Confines, and
reduced the Brettans to Obedience, Anno Christi 124. as Cambden in his
Britannia places it, page 45. and Isaacson in his Chronology.

15. Cl. Priscus Licinius, Propraetor Brettaniae sub Adriano: He was with
Adrian in his Expedition against the Jews: Cambden's Britannia, page 46.

Lollius Urbicus, Propraetor sub Antonino Pio; and Sejus Saturnius was
Archigubernus ex Class Brettanica: Cambden's Britannia, page 46. Lollius
restrained the barbarous Scots and Picts, by making another Mud-wall further
upon them, called Murus Brettanicus.

Calphurnius Agricola, sub Antonino Philosopho Imperatore: And Helvius Pertinax
Warred then in Brettaine, sent hither from the Parthian War.

Ulpius Marcellus, Propraetor under Commodus the Emperor: But he being
recalled, Helvius Pertinax was sent Propraetor, who appeased the tumultuous
Soldiers in Brettaine, but was sore wounded: Cambden's Britannia, page 46, 47.

Helvius Pertinax sent into Brettaine by Commodus: His Soldiers mutiny.
Isaacson's Chronology.

Clodius Albinus: He received Brettaine quieted, under Commodus; and for his
brave Acts done in Brettaine, obtained the name of Caesar: But because he had
more freely impeached the Government of the Emperors in an Oration, Severus was
sent to succeed in Brettaine: Cambden's Britannia, page 47. and Isaacson's
Chronology.

Junius Severus succeeded Clodius Albinus: But Commodus the Emperor being slain
Anno Christi 193. Pertinax was made Emperor: And Pertinax, after he had reigned
87 days, was slain by the Soldiers: And then Didius Julianus was Emperor 66
days, slain also by the Soldiers: And then Pescennius Niger assumed the
Government in Syria, Clodius Albinus in Brettaine, and Septimius Severus in
Pannonia, all at a time: Cambden's Britannia, page 48. Helvici Chronologia, sub
Anno 193.

Clodius Albinus, sent back again into Brettaine by Pertinax: But Pertinax
being slain, Albinus assumes the Government of Brettaine.

Septimius Severus being now Emperor, and Albinus slain in Battle near Lions in
France, sends Heraclianus into Brettaine, sub Anno 198. Cambden's Britannia,
page 48. and Isaacson's Chronology.

Virius Lupus, Propraetor, or Lieutenant of Brettaine, succeeded Heraclianus,
Anno Christi 199: Isaacson's Chronology. He sends for Septimius Severus the
Emperor, who came into Brettaine above sixty Years old, with his two Sons, Anno
Christi 206. Isaacson's Chronology. The Brettans desire Peace, he refuses to
grant it: He cuts down Woods in Brettaine, which were a shelter to the
Brettans: He assumed the Surname of Brettanicus Maximus, and his Son Geta was
styled Brettanicus. He waged no War, yet lost 50000 Men by Treachery and
Diseases. He made a Wall in the North of England, cross the Island, from Sea to
Sea; and stamped Money, with these Words thereon, -- Victoria Britannica. He
died at York in Brettaine, 4 die Februarii, Anno Christi 210. Cambden's
Britannia, page 48, 49. and Helvicus in his Chronology: not so much by the
distemper of his Body, as of his Mind, for the dissolute Courses of his Son
Bassian, whom he called Antonine; and dying, is said to expire in these words,
-- Turbatam Rempublicam ubique accepi, Pacatam etiam Britannis relinquo.

25. Antoninus Bassianus, Son of Severus, and called Caracalla, An. Chr. nati.
211.
is said to prosecute the relics of the War in Brettaine a little while; but
he quickly made a Peace.

Here the Writers have passed over the Affairs of Brettaine with long silence.

26. Nonius Philippus was Lieutenant or Propraetor of Brettaine under Gordianus
the Younger, as appears by an Ancient Stone, says Cambden in his Britannia,
page 50.

Under Gallien the Emperor, who began his Reign Anno Christi 260, there arose
30 Tyrants, who in several Places assumed the Rule to themselves; among whom,
Marius usurped the Government in Brettaine, with Lollianus, Victorinus,
Posthumus, and Tetricus. Cambden's Britannia, page 50.

Under Aurelian, Bonosus the Great Drinker, by Descent a Brettan, invaded the
Empire with Proculus; but being overcome by Probus, was hanged. Cambden ibid.

27. Probus found new Troubles in Brettaine: Burgundians and Vandals, whom he
had subdued, and granted them Places to live in. At this time Brettaine is
called by Porphyrius, -- Fertilis Provincia Tyrannorum. One Laelianus a Tyrant
in Brettaine about this time stamped Money, which is found here, and no where
else. Cambden ibidem.

28. Carinus, Son of Carus the Emperor, Governor of Brettaine, France, Spain,
Illyricum. Cambden.

29. Carausius, a Man meanly born, of the City of Menapia, usurped in
Brettaine, Diocletian and Maximinian: Stowe says, he was Admiral of the
British Seas.

30. Alectus, the Principal Officer under Carausius, slew Carausius, Brettaine.
Cambden's Britannia, page 51. and Stowe, page 42. b. But Isaacson in his
Chronology places this sub Anno 222. which cannot be under Diocletian.

31. Asclepiodotus, whom Cambden styles Praefectus-Praetorio, Stowe calls
Lord Great Master of the Emperor's House, and Isaacson styles Duke of Cornwall:
He slew Alectus, as he fled from the Forces of Constantius now landed in
Brettaine. In this Encounter were slain a great number of Alectus his Soldiers;
and this Victory and Recovery of Brettaine was had after this Province had been
enjoyed seven Years by Carausius, and three Years by Alectus. Cambden's
Britannia, page 51.

St. Albon, the first Martyr of the Brettans, suffered Martyrdom in the Place
where now the Town of St. Albons is builded, Anno Domini 293. Stow, page 43. b.

32. Constantius Chlorus Emperor. Diocletian and Maximinian gave up their
Government, they designed Constantius the Title of Augustus, that is, Emperor;
who had Italy, Africa, Spain, France, and Brettaine; for before he Governed by
the name of Caesar, that is, King: But Africa and Italy yielded themselves to
Galerius.

About this time the Emperors assumed Caesar's to rule under them. Cambd. Brit.
p. 51.

Constantius (a Good Emperor) died at York in Brettaine, in an Expedition
against the Calidonians, and other Picts, Anno Domini 305. Cambden's Britannia,
page 52.

33. Constantine the Great, Son and Successor to Constantius, restored Peace
and Quiet to the Christians. He prosecuted his Father's War against the
Calidonians, Picts in Brettaine, and subdued them, and the lesser Islands.
Cambden.

34. Pacatianus was made Vicarius Britanniae under Constantine, Anno 13
Constantini Magni. Cambden in his Britannia, page 53. Brettaine were no more
called Legates or Propraetors, which, according to our English manner, we term
Lord Lieutenants; but in stead of that Title, they were now termed Vicarii
Brettaniae, that is, Lord Deputies.

* For the Form of Government was now changed: There were four Persons
constituted by Constantine, called Praefecti-Praetorio. One
Praefectus-Praetorio for the East, another of Illyricum, a third of Italy, and
a fourth Galliarum: And two Magistri Militum, or Masters of the Soldiers, one
of the Foot, another of the Horse of the West, which the Romans called
Praesentales.

As to the Civil Government of Brettaine, it was under the Praefectus-Praetorio
Galliarum; and under him Vicarius Brettaniae, or Deputy, honored with the
Title of Spectabilis, or Famous; to whom belonged two Provinciarum Consulares,
and three Praesides, who heard the Civil and Criminal Causes.

As to the Military Affairs, the Master of the Foot of the West Ruled; under
whose disposal there was a Comes Brettaniarum, a Comes Littoris Saxonici per
Brettaniam, and a Dux Brettaniarum, all styled Spectabiles. Comes Brettaniarum
was he that Commanded the inward Parts of the Island, and he had seven
Companies of Foot, and nine Colors of Horse. Comes Littoris Saxonici, was he
that defended the Seacoasts against the Saxons, by Ammianus styled Comes
Tractus Maritimi, and he had seven Companies of Foot, and two Colors of Horse,
and the second Legion, and unam Cohortem. Dux Brettaniarum, was he that
defended the Out-Borders against the Picts and Scots: He Commanded 38
Garrisons, in which were placed 14000 Foot, and 900 Horse; so as in that Age
(if Pancirol account right) Brettaine maintained 19200 Foot, and 1700 Horse,
encamped Soldiers. Besides Comes Sacrarum Largitionum, who had the Care of the
Gifts and Liberality of the Emperor, he had under him in Brettaine a Receiver
of the Revenues of Brettaine, a Treasurer of the Emperor in Brettaine, and an
Overseer of the Workhouses in Brettaine, wherein were woven the Clothes of the
Prince and Soldiers; and also Comes Rerum Privatarum, that is, one who had the
care of the Privy Purse; and he had also his Receiver in Brettaine: To say
nothing of the Overseer of the Fencing-Schools through Brettaine, whereof an
ancient Inscription makes mention; and other inferior Offices. Cambd. Brit.
page 53, 54.

Constantine the Great died Anno Domini 336. He made his two Sons, Constantine
and Crispus, and Licinius (Son of Licinius) Caesar's, Anno Domini 314. Isaacson
in his Chronology. An. Chr. nati.


Constantine the younger (Son of Constantine the Great) succeeded Emperor of
the West.

Constans, having killed his Brother Constantine, occupied Brettaine, and the
other Provinces: And after this Victory of his Soldiers against Constantine, he
and his Brother Constantius come into Brettaine.

Magnentius, qui and Taporus dicitur, General to Constans, being born apud
Laetos in Gallia, and his Father a Brettaine, was Comes Joviorum and
Herculeorum. He circumvented Constans as he went on Hunting, and slew him in a
Town called St. Hellens, and so usurped his Empire; and after three Years sharp
War with Constantius Emperor of the East, he killed himself upon a defeat of
his Army.

About this time was Gratianus, surnamed Funarius, Commander of the Military
Forces in Brettaine. He was Father of Valentinian the Emperor. Cambden's
Britannia, page 54.

Constantius Emperor of the East, and Brother to Constantine the younger, and
Constans, after the death of Magnentius was now sole Emperor both of the East
and West; unto whom Brettaine submitted. Constantius forthwith sends Paulus,
surnamed Catena, a Spaniard, into Brettaine, to fetch certain Soldiers to the
Emperor for daring to conspire against Magnentius; but Paulus falling upon the
Estates of many, and Imprisoning and Fettering of them, and other cruel usage,
Martinus then Deputy of Brettaine (wishing him not to be so cruel) was by
Paulus threatened to be brought also unto the Emperor: whereupon Martinus
drawing his Sword, smote at Paulus; but because he could not kill him,
presently he slew himself: And this Paulus was afterward burned alive in the
time of Julian. Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 14.

The Scots and Picts now making Excursions into Brettaine, Julian (whom
Constantius had declared Caesar, and Colleague in the Empire, Anno 355.) sent
Lupicinus, a great Solder, into Brettaine, for composing of things there.

Julian the Apostate made Emperor: He banished Palladius into Brettaine, and
sent Alipius (who had been as Governor in Brettaine) to repair Jerusalem.

This slothful Emperor was afraid to help the poor Bretans, whiles yet he
transported hence yearly great store of Corn to relieve the German Armies.
Cambden's Britannia, page 55

Jovinian was Emperor seven Months.

Valentinian became Emperor, and he made Gratianus his Son Caesar, 24 Augusti,
Anno 367. Helvicus. In this Emperors Reign, the Picts, Saxons, Scots, and
Attacotti, did with continual Spoils afflict the Brettans. Fraomarius King of
the Almains was sent hither with an Army of Almains, to restrain their
Invasions.

Nectaridius, Comes, or Chief Commander of the Seacoast, was slain; and
Belchobandes, a Captain, was circumvented by the Snares of the Enemy: Thereupon
Valentinian sent Severus, then Domesticorum Comes, or Steward of the Emperors
Household, to correct their Insolency; who being recalled, Jovinus was sent
thither; and lastly, Theodosius came hither with a brave Army.

At this time the Picts were divided into two Nations, Deucalidones and
Vecturiones. An. Chr. nati.


-- Theodosius landed at Richborow near Sandwich, and marching to the old
London, Romans called Augusta) set upon those Robbers by the way, and recovered
the Spoil, and so entered London Triumphantly; and the Year after went into the
North, and recovered the Province, repaired the Places of Defense, and restored
this Island; then returned to Rome, and for his famous Actings was honored
with the honor of an Equestris Statua. Cambden's Britannia, page 55, and 57.
He names Brettaine, Valentia. Isaacson's Chronology.

42. Gratianus, Son of Valentinian, is made Emperor; and he declared
Theodosius, Theodosius aforesaid, to be Emperor: which Maximus a Spaniard,
sprung from the Stock of Constantine the Great, took so ill, that he (being now
Governor of the British Army) takes upon him to be Emperor, and victoriously
conquered the Picts and Scots, and then went into Germany, with the Prime Youth
and Strength of all Brettaine almost, and so got all the German Forces on his
side.

43. Maximus usurpeth the Provinces of the West, and creates Victor his Son
Caesar. Triers, and possessed Spain, Africa, France, and Brettaine. He kills
Gratian treacherously at Lions, Anno 383. For having sent Andragathius in a
close Litter or Caroch, giving out that therein was Gratian's Wife brought out
of Brettaine, Gratian came to it, out of love to his Wife, and opening the
Litter, out leaped Andragathius with his Men, and forthwith slew Gratian.
Cambden's Britannia, page 57.

But Maximus by his own Soldiers was taken and brought to Theodosius, then
Emperor of the Eastern Provinces, who put him to death after he had worn the
Purple Robes five Years, Anno scilicet 388. And Andragathius (whose Condition
was now desperate) cast himself out of the Ship into the Sea: And Victor, the
Son of Maximus, was overcome in France by Valentinian, and there taken, and
slain.

But those Brettans whom Maximus carried out of Brettaine, forcibly invaded
Armorica in France, (as some Writers deliver) and there planted themselves.
Cambd. page 58.

44. Theodosius, upon the Victory over Maximus, restores to Valentinian II.
Valentinian the Emperor, what Maximus took from him: And Theodosius, and
Honorius his Son, enter Rome in Triumph.

45. Valentinian II. is strangled at Vienna by Arbogastes a great Courtier;
Eugenius, a base Fellow, who of a Schoolmaster became an Officer to the
Emperor.

46. Theodosius, Emperor of the East, defeateth Eugenius; Theodosius dies of a
Dropsy at Millaine, Anno 395. and Arcadius his eldest Son succeeds Emperor of
the East, and his Son Honorius succeeds Emperor of the West.

47. Honorius, Son of Theodosius, a Child of ten Years of age, Flavius Stilico,
who defended Brettaine (now called England) from the Invasions of the Picts,
Scots, and Saxons. Cambden's Britannia, page 58. and Claudian the Poet, lib. 2.
de Laudibus Stiliconis: etiam in Panegyri de quarto Consulatu Honorii; [Anno
398.]

The Roman Power now declining, and the Brettans finding a necessity of some
General or Commander to defend them from their Barbarous Neighbors, fall to
choosing of Emperors or Kings.

48. Marcus is elected Emperor, or Chief Ruler of Brettaine, about 405.

An. Chr. nati. 407.
49. Gratianus Municeps was elected Emperor, or Chief Governor of Brettaine;
whom after four Months they reject, and take away his Life, Anno 407. Bid de
Hist. Ang. cap. 11. Cambden's Britannia, page 59.

Constantine, a mean ordinary Soldier, after the death of Gratian, is chosen
Emperor or Chief Governor of Brettaine by the Army, for his Names sake; hoping
he would Rule happily, as Constantine the Great had done. Isaacson's
Chronology; and Cambden, page 59. Bid de Hist. Ang. cap. 11.

Honorius associates Constantine the Usurper in the Empire, Anno 409. Isaacson.

Gerontius, Constantine's General, creates Maximus (one of his Servants)
Emperor at Arragon, and kills Constans, Son of Constantine, at Vienna, where
he intercepted him, and Besieged Constantine himself at Arelate.

Constantius, one sent by Honorius, defeats Gerontius; who cowardly running
away, the Soldiers beset his House, and reduced him to such a strait, that
first he kills his faithful Friend Alanus, and then Nunnichia his Wife, who
desired to die with her Husband; and last of all he kills himself.

But Constantine, after four Months Siege, and the fourth Year of his Empire,
laying aside his Imperial Robes, was made Priest; and Arelate yielded up, he
was brought into Italy by Constantius, unto Honorius, who caused Constantine to
be Beheaded, with his two Sons, Julian whom he styled Nobilissimum, that is,
Most Noble Julian, and Sebastian the other Son, Anno 410.

And from this time Brettaine returned to the Government of Honorius. Cambden,
page 59.

Victorinus sent Governor into Brettaine by Honorius, did repress the
Excursions of the Picts and Scots with great Wisdom and Valor.

Honorius the Emperor dies of a Dropsy, Anno 423. and Valentinian the Third
was Emperor of the West.

But after that Rome was taken by Alaricus King of the Goths, and Victorinus
called back out of Brettaine by Honorius, presently the Brettans take up Arms,
and provide for their own safety; and also the Brettans of Armorica in France,
and other Provinces, set up Governors of their own, rejecting the Roman
Governors: And this was in the time of Constantine, by whose sloth the Picts
and Scots overran this Island: But a little after, the Brettans pray that
Honorius would send them Aid to defend their Cities; but sending no Forces, he
admonished them by Letters, that they should have a care to defend themselves.
The Brettans, upon these Letters, take up Arms; and finding themselves unable
to resist their Barbarous Enemies, they earnestly beseech Honorius to send a
Legion hither for their safety, and obtained it; which upon their coming
hither, overthrew a great multitude of their Enemies, and drove the rest out of
the Borders of their Province, and built a Mud-wall between Edenborough-Frith
and Cluid, which was of little use: For after that Legion was called back to
defend France, the Picts and Scots easily broke over the Bounds, and most
miserably spoiled the Brettans on every side. Again Messengers are sent, with
rent and torn Garments, and their Heads covered with Sand thereon, lamentably
craving Aid from the Romans: Whereupon Forces were assigned by the Command of
Valentinian the Third, under Gallio of Ravenna, who valiantly beat back the
Picts and Scots, and did a little revive their wasted Province. Miserable now
and deplorable was the Face of Things: The Roman Empire, as it were, expiring;
and the Church (by reason of the great Turmoil of Wars) much pestered with
Heretics. Pelagius now taught in our Brettaine, That we might attain to
Perfect Righteousness by our own Works: And one Timothy also impiously disputed
among our Brettans, against the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ. Cambden's
Britannia, page 59, 60.

Romans in Brettaine, being the four hundred seventy and sixth Year from
Caesar's entrance into Brettaine; so accounts Cambden: But I take it to be from
the first entrance of Caesar, to the time of Valentinian III. 479 Years at
least: when in the time of Valentinian, the Roman Forces under the Command of
Gallio were called back to defend France, and Brettaine left naked without
Arms, and deprived of their Prime Military Men, and their Treasure exhausted,
without any Defense against the Cruelty of the Picts and Scots.

Besides those Brettans (says Cambden) carried away by Maximus, and the last
Constantine; by Ancient Inscriptions, and the Book of the Provinces called
Notitia Provinciarum, it appears, that these underwritten did serve the Romans
in their Wars, dispersed through the Provinces, which also were from time to
time supplied out of Brettaine: Viz.

Ala Britannica Milliaria. Ala IV Britonum in Egypto. Cohors Prima Aelia
Britonum. Cohors III Britonum. Cohors VII Britonum. Cohors XXVI Britonum in
Armenia. Britanniciani sub Magistro Peditum. Invicti Juniores Britanniciani.
Inter Auxilia Palatina. Exculcatores Jun. Britan. Inter Auxilia Palatina.
Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum.
Thus have I briefly run through the Romans in Brettaine, with the Times when
they ruled there, as near as I can; but sometimes I cannot trace them so
exactly as I could wish, because the Ancient Authors are defective, especially
not exact in showing the Times punctually, and often times a great space omitted
in their Histories, is skipped over.

Of the State of the Brettans, after the Roman Yoke ceased, I shall speak when
I come to Wales.

CHAP. III.
Of the Time when the Saxons came into Brettaine, and how long their Power
continued there.

1. UPon the declination of the Roman Empire, Brettaine was left naked of Men
and Arms, as I have showed before; whereby the poor Brettans became a Prey to
the Picts and Scots, two cruel Nations, from beyond the Sea; the Scots from the
South, and the Picts from the North. Gildas, cap. 11. page 13.

Transmarinas dicimus has Gentes, non quod extra Bretanniam sunt Positae, sed
quia a part Britonum erant remotae; duobus finibus Mari interjacentibus,
quorum unus ab Orientali Mari, alter ab Occidentali, Britanniae terras long
lateque irrumpit, quamvis ad se invicem pertingere possint: Orientalis habet in
medio sui Urbem Guidi: Occidentalis supra se, hoc est, ad dextram sui habet
Urbem Alcluith; quod Lingua eorum significat [Petram Cluith:] Est enim juxta
Fluvium nominis illius: So Bid de Hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 12.

Who these Scots were, I shall speak of in Scotland, and whence they came. I
shall note here only, that they inhabited the North part of Scotland, Anno
Domini circiter 400.

The Pihts, or Picts, Cambden supposes to be very Brettans, who before the
coming of the Romans inhabited the Northern part of this Island; and also those
other Brettans who fled to them from this other part of Brettaine which the
Romans conquered, as refusing to submit to the Servitude of the Romans:
Cambden's Britannia, page 82. But Bid says, It is said that the Nation of the
Picts came out of Scythia into Ireland, and thence into the North of Brettaine:
Lib. 1. de Hist. Angl. cap. 1. But more of these hereafter in Scotland.

2. The time of the Saxons coming into England, upon the invitation of Vortiger
then King of Brettaine, is by Bid said to be in Anno Domini 449. Lib. 1. de
Hist. Ang. cap. 15. and had a Place appointed out by the Brettans for their
Habitation, conditionally that they would fight and defend them from the Picts
and Scots; and the Brettans also did promise them Pay: But Cambden says, The
first coming of the Saxons hither was Anno Domini 428. and thinks the Number
449 in Bid to be corrupted and misprinted; in his Britannia, page 95. see his
Reasons.

But these Saxons having expelled the Picts and Scots, did afterward by
degrees root out the Brettans also, and possessed themselves of all the South
part of Brettaine, now called England: But falling out among themselves, each
contending for Superiority one against another, as it commonly happens in such
Cases, England became a Heptarchy, and was divided into seven Kingdoms, as I
shall show by and by.

They had the Eastern part of this Island to Land in, appointed by Vortiger.
Those that came, were of the most Valiant People of Germany; that is to say,
Saxons, Angli or English, and Juites, called by Bid, Vitae: Lib. 1. de Hist.
Ang. cap. 15.

From these Juites (the ancient Inhabitants of Juitland, now belonging to the
King of Denmark) are planted the Kentish-men, and the People of the Isle of
Wight and Hantshire.

The English came out of Old England, which lies between Juitland and
Holsatia, and was anciently possessed by the Saxons, who being expulsed thence
by the Danes, it has ever since remained in the Danes possession. Of these
English, were planted the East Angles, Middle-Angles, Mercians, and all the
Nation of the Northumbrians, that is, all the North part from the River Humber
in Yorkshire.

The Saxons came out of Saxony (a Province and Dukedom in Germany, formerly
possessed by the Longobards, who being overcome by the Saxons, it became their
Country, and took their Name:) And from these Saxons were planted the
East Saxons, South Saxons, and West Saxons in England. Bid lib. 1. de Hist.
Ang. cap. 15. Verstegan, page 123. and Dr. Heylyn in his Cosmography, page 489.

But these being all generally called Saxons, contending for Superiority among
themselves, fell to Discords and Wars one with another, and set up seven
Kingdoms in that part of Brettaine which they obtained, at this day called
England: A short View whereof follows in the ensuing Table.

A Scheme of the Seven Kingdoms in England.
1. The Kingdom of Kent it began under Hengist, An. Dom. 455. Comprehended the
Counties of Kent. 2. The Kingdom of the South Saxons it began under Ella, Anno
Dom. 488. Sussex. Surrey. 3. The Kingdom of the West Saxons it began under
Cerdic, Anno 522. But Huntington says, Anno 519. lib. 2. Hist. page 313.
Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hantshire, alias
Southamptonshire. Barkshire. 4. The Kingdom of the East Saxons it began under
Erchenwin, about Anno 527. Essex. Middlesex. Hartfordshire Part. 5. The Kingdom
of the Northumbrians it began under Ida, Anno Dom. 547. Lancashire, Called
sometimes the Kingdom of the Deiri. Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Northumberland, and Part of Scotland, from the River Tine to Edenborough-Frith.
called sometimes Bernicia. 6. The Kingdom of the East Angles it began under
Uffa, Anno Dom. 575. But Stowe says, 492. Norfolk. Suffolk. Cambridgeshire.
Isle of Ely. 7. The Kingdom of Mercia it began under Creodda, An. Dom. 582.
Glocestershire. Herefordshire. Worcestershire. Warwickshire. Leycestershire.
Rutlandshire. Northamptonshire. Lincolnshire. Huntingdonshire. Bedfordshire.
Buckinghamshire. Oxfordshire. Staffordshire. Derbyshire. Shropshire.
Nottinghamshire. Cheshire. Hartfordshire, the other Part.

But that of the West Saxons at last prevailed over all the rest; and Egbert
King of the West Saxons was the first Sole Monarch of all England among the
Saxons. He was Crowned King of all England at Winchester, about Anno Domini
823. Polychronicon: and soon after commanded, That all that Part of Brettaine,
whereof he had now the Sovereignty, should be called England; and ever since it
has retained the name of England: Polychronicon, lib. 5. cap. 28. See also
Verstegan, page 148, 149. He was the first also, or his Son Ethelwolfe, who
divided England into Shires, as at this day they stand divided; the Names
whereof you have in the Table preceding: And King Alfred afterward divided
them into Hundreds and Tithings; so Malmesbury: Yet Ingulphus says, That
Alfred divided both the Shires and the Hundreds; but is mistaken, else
Malmesbury would not have left that out.

CHAP. IV.
How the Saxons derive their Pedigree from Sem, as I find it Registered by Asser
Menevensis, page 1. in the Pedigree of Alfred: Also by Ailredus Abbas
Rievallis, in his Pedigree of King Henry the Second: Also Florentius, page 294.
And also by Matthew Paris, in the Edition put out by Dr. Wats, Anno Christi
1640. page 94. as follows.

1. Beadwig, Son of Sem. 2. Wala. 3. Hathra. 4. Itermod. 5. Heremod. 6. Celdwa.
7. Beu. 8. Garwa, or Cetwa. 9. Geta, pro Deo habitus. 10. Fingondulf. 11.
Frederwolf. 12. Freolf. 13. Fredwald. 14. Woden. 15. Bealdag. 16. Brand. 17.
Freodgar. These three are omitted by Asser, as it is Printed from Cambden's
Copy, 1603. also by Simon Dunelmensis, page 119. 18. Frewin. These three are
omitted by Asser, as it is Printed from Cambden's Copy, 1603. also by Simon
Dunelmensis, page 119. 19. Wigg. These three are omitted by Asser, as it is
Printed from Cambden's Copy, 1603. also by Simon Dunelmensis, page 119. 20.
Gewis: Iste fuit Caput Gentis suae: a quo and tota Gens illa nomen accepit a
Britonibus: Gewissorum Gens fuit Hantshire, sive Regio Wintoniae: Ordericus
lib. 4. page 512. See also Bid de Hist. Ang. lib. 4. cap. 15.

Gewis is omitted in Mat. Paris Copy.

21. Edda: omitted by Asser, and called Egla by Mat. Paris. 22. Elesa. 23.
Ceordwic. He lived Anno 520. 24. Creoda. 25. Chenric, or Kenrick. 26. Cheulin.
27. Cuthwin. 28. Cutha, Son of Cuthwin. 29. Ceoldwald. 30. Ceonred. 31. Ingels:
cujus Frater fuit Ina Rex famosissimus Occidentalium Saxonum. 32. Eoppa. 33.
Offa, ceu Eafa. 34. Alcmund. 35. Egbert, or Egbricht, the first Saxon Monarch
of all England. Obiit Anno Christi 836. 36. Ethelwolf. Obiit Anno 856. 37.
Alfred. He Reigned not till 872. because his Brothers Reigned before him. Obiit
899. 38. Edward the Elder. Obiit Anno Christi 924. 39. Edmund. Obiit Anno
Christi 946. 40. Edgar the Peaceable. Obiit Anno Christi 975. 41. Ethelred. He
plotted to kill all the Danes in their Beds on the 12th of November at night,
An. 1012. Obiit Anno. Christi 1016. 42. Edmund Ironside. He died Anno Christi
1017. 43. Edward the Outlaw. He was never King, though Right Heir: Cnut the
Dane dispossessed him. 44. Margaret, Wife of Malcolme the third, King of
Scotland. Christian, a Nun at Ramsey in Huntington-shire, 1086. Si.
Dunelmensis. Edgar Atheling, Right Heir to the Crown, created Earl of Oxford
1065 Stowe and Cambden.
45. Maud, Wife of Henry the First, King of England. 46. Maud the Empress,
Daughter and Heir. She was after married to Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou
in France, 1127. 47. Henry the Second, King of England, Son of Geffrey and
Maud. etc.
* This Descent carries great uncertainty, both for the defect of time wherein
each lived, and also for want of Authority vouched; but chiefly, for that
Bedwig, the first here named, is made the Son of Sem: Howbeit the later part of
it is very true; but the making of Bedwig Son of Sem, is either foisted into
the Copy by some ignorant Person, or else is to be understood as descended from
Sem originally, not immediately; as Christ is called the Son of David, the Son
of Abraham, Matthew, cap. 1. ver. 1. For Sem the Son of Noah died Anno Mundi
2158. and Anno post Diluvium 502. which was 1790 Years before Christ was born:
And no Learned Man, versed in Antiquities, can imagine the Descents here
reckoned up to Bedwig from King Alfred, to exceed 1000 Years: So that reckoning
from Alfred's death, which was in Anno 899. it cannot be supposed that these
Descents can reach much above the time of Christ's Birth, if they reach so
high, admitting them to be exactly true so far as they reach; which would yet
fall short 1700 Years from the death of Sem.

Besides we find no such Son of Sem, as Bedwig, mentioned in the Sacred
Scriptures: And if we well observe the third Chapter of S. Luke, we shall find
66 Descents reckoned up between Sem and Christ, containing the Revolution of
2000 Years and more, if we account the Age wherein Sem lived: And S. Matthew
reckons up only 52 Descents to that time by another Line, besides three Kings
omitted by him between Joram and Ozias, for some Reasons best known to the Holy
Spirit of God; which will better appear by comparing S. Matthew. 1. ver. 8. with
1 Chronicles. cap. 3. ver. 11, 12. So as the whole Descents therein make up only
55. And although some Men's Lives are longer, and some shorter, yet the
Generations carry some proportion one with another, as we may easily observe in
others where the Descents are exactly put down.

But now between Sem and Alfred are only 37 Descents here reckoned up, which
cannot comprehend above 1000 Years; and between Sem and Alfred are effluxed
2690 Years, accounting from both their deaths: So that unless some Descents be
here skipped over in many places, it is impossible that any of these should
reach the Age of Sem; and then these cannot be exact and true Descents through.
Besides, those more ancient Descents between Bedwig and Gewis, not having been
proved by some good Authority, may yield them uncertain to rely upon.

So much for the Descent of the Saxons beforementioned.

CHAP. V.
Containing a Brief Catalogue of all the Saxon Kings in England from the first
beginning of the Heptarchy, and when they Reigned.

The Kings of Kent.
A.C. 455. 1. Hengist, with Horsa his Brother 32 Years. A.C. 488. 2. Esk, Son
of Hengist 24 Years. A.C. 512. 3. Otta 20 Years. A.C. 532. 4. Imirik 29 Years.
A.C. 561. 5. Ethelbert, the first Christian King of Kent 56 Years. A.C. 617. 6.
Eadbald 24 Years. A.C. 640. 7. Ercombert: He first caused Lent to be kept in
England, Anno 640. Bid 24 Years. A.C. 665. 8. Egbert 9 Years. A.C. 674. 9.
Lotharius 12 Years. A.C. 686. 10. Edrik 7 Years. A.C. 693. 11. Withtred 33
Years. A.C. 726. 12. Egbert, or Edbert 23 Years. A.C. 749. 13. Ethelbert II. 11
Years. A.C. 760. 14. Alric, slain by Offa 34 Years. A.C. 794. 15. Ethelbert
III. 3 Years. A.C. 797. 16. Cuthred 8 Years. A.C. 805. 17. Baldred, the last
King of Kent: He lost his Kingdom to Egbert King of the West Saxons, Anno
Domini 824. 19 Years.
The Kings of the East Angles.
A.C. 575. 1. Uffa, the first King. A.C. 582. 2. Titullus. A.C. 593. 3.
Redwald, a Potent King. A.C. 624. 4. Erpenwald. A.C. 636. 5. St. Sigebert. A.C.
638. 6. Egric. A.C. 642. 7. Anna. A.C. 654. 8. Ethelbert I. A.C. 656. 9.
Ethelwold. A.C. 664. 10. Aldulf. A.C. 683. 11. Elfwold. A.C. 690. 12. Beorn.
A.C. 714. 13. St. Ethelred. A.C. 749. 14. Ethelbert II. who being slain by Offa
King of Mercia, 793. this Kingdom was united to Mercia.
The Kings of the East Saxons.
A.C. 527. 1. Erchwin, the first King. A.C. 587. 2. Sledda. A.C. 596. 3. St.
Sebert. A.C. 617. 4. Sexred, Seward, and Sigibert, Fratres. A.C. 623. 5.
Sigebert the Little. A.C. 636. 6. Sigebert III. A.C. 638. 7. Egricus. A.C. 642.
8. Anna. A.C. 654. 9. Ethelbert. A.C. 656. 10. Ethelwald. A.C. 661. 11.
Swithelme. A.C. 664. 12. Sighbert, and Sebba. A.C. 694. 13. Sigehard, and
Senfrid. A.C. 701. 14. Offa. A.C. 709. 15. Selred. A.C. 747. 16. Suthred.
The Kings of the South Saxons.
A.C. 488. 1. Ella, the first King. 27 Yea. A.C. 515. 2. Cissa, Son of Ella,
who lost his Kingdom to Cerdic King of the West Saxons. Yea. A.C. 687. 3.
Edelwach, or Ethehwolfe, is the next King I meet with of the South Saxons, who
was slain in Battle by Cedwal King of the West Saxons, 688. Yea.
Before this time it remained in the Power of the West Saxons a good while; and
upon the death of Edelwach, Berthan and Authun, two Brothers, took upon them
the Government of the South Saxons with the Title of Dux, and held it for a
little while; but Ina, Successor of Cedwall, King of the West Saxons, subdued
it, and united it to that Crown.

The Kings of Mercia.
A.C. 582. 1. Criedda, the first King. A.C. 593. 2. Webba, Son of Criedda. A.C.
614. 3. Cheol, or Ceorl, Son of Wibba. A.C. 626. 4. Penda the Strong, Son of
Wibba, who, some say, was the first King. A.C. 656. 5. Peda, Son of Penda, a
Christian King. A.C. 659. 6. Wulfere, Father of St. Werburge, and Son of Penda.
A.C. 675. 7. Ethelred, Son of Penda. A.C. 704. 8. Kenred, Son of Wulfere's
Brother. A.C. 708. 9. Ceolred, Son of Ethelred. A.C. 716. 10. Ethelbald the
Proud, overcome by Cutbert, or Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, near Burford
in Oxfordshire: the place is still called Battellage-Hill. A.C. 757. 11.
Beornred, a Tyrant, slain by Offa. A.C. 758. 12. Offa the Great, King of
Mercia: Abnepos Pendae, says Malmesbury. He made a great Ditch in Wales, near
100 Miles long, dividing Wales and Mercia, called Offa's Dike. He subdued
Kinulf King of the West Saxons, and also the Northumbrians, and the Kentish-men
A.C. 796. 13. Egferd, Son of Offa. A.C. 797. 14. Kenulf. He took Egbert
Prisoner. A.C. 819. 15. Kenelm, Son of Kenulf, murdered by his Sister
Quendrid. A.C. 820. 16. Ceolwulfe, Brother to Kinulf. A.C. 821. 17. Bernulf,
overcome by Egbert. A.C. 824. 18. Ludecan. A.C. 826. 19. Witlaf, Tributary to
Egbert. A.C. 839. 20. Bertulfe. A.C. 852. 21. Beorred, a Substituted King by
the West Saxons; the last King of Mercia. A.C. 874. Celwulfe, sometimes Servant
to Beorred, Rebelled and Usurped. This Kingdom being tyrannized over by the
Danes, was united to the West Saxons by Alfred, Anno 886.
The Kings of the Northumbrians.
A.C. 547. 1. Ida, the first King. A.C. 560. 2. Ella, King of Deira. A.C. 589.
3. Edelric, Son of Ida, King of Bernicia. A.C. 593. 4. Ethelfrid. A.C. 617. 5.
Edwin, Son of Ella. A.C. 633. 6. Osric I. A.C. 634. 7. St. Oswald, slain at
Maserfelt by Penda King of Mercia, 5 die Augusti, Anno 642. Bid de Hist. Angl.
lib. 3. cap. 9. A.C. 643. 8. Oswy; who having slain Oswin King of Deira, was
the first Absolute King of Northumberland: He slew also Penda King of Mercia,
Anno 656. A.C. 671. 9. Egfrid. A.C. 686. 10. St. Alfrid. A.C. 705. 11. Osred I.
A.C. 716. 12. Kenred. A.C. 718. 13. Osric II. A.C. 729. 14. Ceolwolfe. A.C.
738. 15. Egbert. A.C. 758. 16. Eswulfe. A.C. 759. 17. Ethelwald. A.C. 765. 18.
Alred. A.C. 774. 19. Ethelred I. A.C. 778. 20. Afwold. A.C. 789. 21. Osred II.
A.C. 794. 22. Ethelred II. slain 3 Calend. Maii.
And after the Interregnum of 33 years, Egbert King of the West Saxons enjoyed
this Kingdom, Anno 827. In that Interregnum it was invaded on the one hand by
the Danes, and on the other by the Picts and Scots.

The Kings of the West Saxons.
A.C. 522. 1. Cerdic, the first King of the West Saxons Yea. 17 He killed 5000
Brettans, Anno 509. Hen. Huntington page 312. and routed Nazaleod the Great
King of the Brettans, at Certicsford. A.C. 539. 2. Kenric, Son of Cerdic Yea.
26 A.C. 565. 3. Ceaulin, Son of Cenric, with Cuthwin his Son Yea. 30 A.C. 595.
4. Celric, Son of Ceaulin Yea. 5 A.C. 600. 5. Ceolwolfe, Son of Cutha, Son of
Kenric, Son of Cerdic Yea. 14 A.C. 614. 6. Kingils, Son of Ceolric, Brother of
Ceolwolfe Yea. 31 A.C. 645. 7. Cenwald, or Kenwalchin, Son of Kingils Yea. 31
A.C. 676. 8. Sexburga, Wife of Cenwald Yea. 1 A.C. 677. 9. Escwine, Son of
Cenwald Yea. 2 A.C. 679. 10. Centwin, or Kentwin, Cousin of Escwin Yea. 9 A.C.
688. 11. Ceadwall, with Mull his Brother, took the Isle of Wight. Huntington.
Yea. 2 A.C. 690. 12. Ine, Son of Cenred, Son of Ceoldwold, Son of Cuthwin, Son
of Kenric. Anno Regni sui 21. he fought with Gerent king of Wales, and routed
him. Huntington, page 337. He first gave the Peter Pence to the Pope. Yea. 37
A.C. 727. 13. Ethelard Yea. 14 A.C. 741. 14. Cuthred Yea. 16 A.C. 757. 15.
Sigebert. He was deposed by the Pope Yea. 2 A.C. 759. 16. Kinulf, elected King
of the West-Sazons Yea. 26 A.C. 785. 17. Bithric, or Brichtric Yea. 16 A.C.
800. 18. Egbert, or Egbricht. He subdued the other Kings, and reduced the
Heptarchy into a Monarchy. Yea. 37
The Monarchs of England of the Saxon Blood.
Egbert, the First Saxon Monarch of England, was Crowned King of all England at
Winchester, about Anno Christi 823, and commanded that all that part of
Brettaine (whereof he had now the Sovereignty) should be called England; since
which time it has been called England. Polychronicon. He began his Reign over
the West Saxons, Anno Christi 800. But over England, in Anno 823. or
thereabouts. He Reigned 14 Years. Ethelwolfe, eldest Son of Egbert. He Reigned
20 Years. Ethelbald, eldest Son of Ethelwolfe. Huntington says he Reigned five
Years, p. 349. He Reigned one Year. Ethelbert, second Son of Ethelwolfe. He
Reigned five Years. Ethelred, third Son of Ethelwolfe. Huntington says, he
Reigned but five Years, page 349. He Reigned nine Years. Alfred, fourth Son of
Ethelwolfe, a Learned Prince. He totally united the Heptarchy into one Kingdom;
vanquished the Danes, and subdued them, though he could not quite expel them.
He divided the Shires of England into Hundreds and Tythings, as Egbert his
Grandfather had before divided England into Shires, as now they stand at this
day, some few having been new modelled since. He erected a University at
Oxford, and Reigned 29 Years. Edward, surnamed The Elder, Son of Alfred; he
recovered the Country of the East Angles from the Danes, whom he shut up in
Northumberland. He Reigned 24. years. Athelstan, Bastard-Son of Edward, subdued
the Brettans of Cumberland and Cornwall, and made the Danes to submit to his
Government. He Reigned 16 years. Edmund, legitimate Son of Edward, subdued the
Danes in Northumberland, and utterly subverted the Kingdom of the Brettans in
Cumberland. He Reigned 6 years. Ethelred, Brother of Edmund. He Reigned 9
years. Edwy, Son of Edmund. He Reigned 3 Years and 9 Months. Edgar, surnamed
The Peaceable, Brother to Edwyn, was the most absolute Monarch of England since
the time of the Saxons, by whom the Tribute-money, imposed on the Welsh by
Athelstan, was exchanged into a Tribute of Wolfs. This Edgar in the thirteenth
Year of his Reign, is said to have been Rowed on the River Dee at Chester by
eight Kings, who swore Fealty to him, Anno 972. their Names were Kunud or
Rynad, King of the Scots; Malcolme, King of Cumberland; Maccusius, the
Arch-Pyrat; and all the Kings of Wales, whose Names were Duswall, Griffith,
Huvall, Jacob, and Judethil, or Inchil. Malmesbury, page 56. Huntington, page
356. and Hoveden, page 426. He Reigned 16 Years. Edward II. surnamed The
Martyr, Son of Edgar, was treacherously murdered by his Stepmother, to make
way for her Son Ethelred to succeed. He Reigned 3 Years. Ethelred II. younger
Son of Edgar, was oppressed and broken by the Danes, and to buy his own Peace,
was forced to pay them a yearly Sum of 10000 l. which at last was enhanced to
48000 l. This Tax was imposed on his Subjects, and called Dane-geld; but weary
of this great Taxation, he Plotted warily with his Subjects, to kill all the
Danes in their Beds; which was put in Execution on the Eve of Saint Britius,
being the twelfth of November 1012, in the nightime: But soon after Swane,
King of Denmark, Landed Forces in England, and forced Ethelred to fly out of
England into Normandy. He Reigned 38 years.

Ethelredus iste baptismum stercore foedavit.

Edmund II. surnamed Ironside, Son of Ethelred, having in vain attempted to
recover the Kingdom, at last divided it with Cnut [or Canutus] the Dane, Son of
Swane; and not long after was this Edmund basely murdered 1017. This was the
common Fame, says Malmesbury; but Florentius and Hoveden tell us, that he died
at London about the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle. He Reigned nine Months.

By the Counsel of Edrick de Streon, Cnut banished Edwin, Brother to Edmund
Ironside, and also Edward and Edmund, Sons of King Edmund Ironside.

Edward, surnamed The Outlaw, Son of Edmund Ironside, had issue Edgar Atheling,
the right Heir of the Crown, and Margaret, Married to the third Malcolme, King
of Scotland, and Christian, a Nun of Ramsey in Huntingtonshire, 1086. Simeon
Dunelmensis.


Kings of England of the Danish Blood.
Canutus or Cnut, King of Denmark and Norway, after the death of Edmund
Ironside, was sole King of England: He Married Emme the Widow of King Ethelred,
and Daughter of Richard, Duke of Normandy. He Reigned 20 years. Harold, Bastard
Son of Cnut, surnamed Harfuger. He Reigned four years. Canutus II. commonly
called Hardy-Cnut, the lawful Son of Cnut. He Reigned two years.
The Saxon Blood restored.
Edward III. surnamed The Confessor, (Son of Ethelred II. by Emme, Daughter of
Richard; Duke of Normandy, and half Brother to Edmund Ironside, and to
Hardy-Cnut the Dane) was now advanced to the Throne of England, and the Danes
utterly expelled the Country, having tytannized here above 200 years, whereof
they Reigned only 26 years. He Reigned 24 years.

He was the first of the Kings of England who cured the Disease called The
Kings Evil, a Prerogative continuing hereditary to the Kings of England; and
after his Death he was Canonized for a Saint; Dr. Heylins Cosmography page 318.

Harold, Son of Godwin Earl of Kent, was chosen King of England, (in the Nonage
of Edgar Atheling, Grandchild to Edmund Ironside, and true Heir of the Kingdom)
he was Crowned the sixth of January 1065. He Reigned nine Months and eight days.

But before I pass farther, I would remember you of one thing mentioned by Dr.
Heylin, how in memory of the joyful clearing of the Country from the cruel
Danes in the time of Edward the Confessor, the English did institute the
Merriment of the annual Sports of Hock-Tide, and from their barbarous stabbing
of the English at the time of their Drinking; to avoid such villainy, the Party
who was to Drink requested some of the next to him to be his Pledge or Surety
whilst he was Drinking; and hence came our Custom of Pledging one another, a
Phrase used in time of Drinking even to this day.

Harold was slain in Battle the fourteenth of October 1066, by William Duke of
Normandy; upon which Victory William was Crowned King of England, and so ceased
the Rule of the Saxons.


Thus have I briefly run over the Saxon Kings of England out of the most
authentic Historians; so that putting all together, if we reckon the coming in
of the Saxons with Cambden, to be in Anno Domini 428, to the time of the Norman
Conquest, and including the small time of the Rule of the Danish Kings in the
Account, the whole time of the Saxons Rule in England was 638 years.

CHAP. VI.
Of the time of the Danes in England.

1. ANno Domini 800. the Danes first arrived in England, to wit, in the Isle of
Portland, which belongs to Dorsetshire, Brithric being then King of the
West Saxons; Stowe's Annals; but were after driven out of the Land. These Danes
did much infest England for a long space, burning Towns and Temples, and making
woeful destruction. Osbert and Ella, Kings of Northumberland, were slain at York
by the Danes, Anno 867. Matthew. of Westminster. And in Anno 870. the Danes,
under the Command of Hinguar and Hubba, slew Edmund, King of the East Angles,
and so possessed themselves of that Kingdom; Florentius Wigorniensis and Stowe.
And in Anno 874. the Danes forced Beorhred, King of Mercia, to fly out of
England; and after his Expulsion they possessed all the Kingdom of the
Mercians. Florentius. Infinite other Battles of them we meet with; so that now
they had the Kingdoms of the Mercians and of the East Angles, and a great part
of Northumberland: And in the time of Ethelred, King of England, Anno Domini
991. the Tribute called Danegeld was first Collected, to appease the fury of
the Danes and their Depopulations, which continued a long time after. See
Spelman's Glossary on the word Danegeldum. Anno Domini 1012. on the twelfth of
November at Night, Anno Regni Ethelredi 35. the English, to free themselves
from the great Oppression of the Tax called Danegeld, did by a general
Conspiracy strangle all the Danes in their Beds. Heylin's Cosmography page 317.
To revenge which Fact, Swane, King of Denmark, came into England with a Fleet
of 350 Ships, Anno 1013. and ceased not to spoil many parts of the Kingdom, and
at last so far prevailed, and subdued England, that Cnut his Son was made King
thereof, after the death of Edmund Ironside, to wit, Anno 1017. Cnut and his
Sons enjoyed the Crown 26 years, Saxon Blood restored to the Crown in Edward
the Confessor; but alas! soon after Edward's Death, were both the Danes and
Saxons conquered by William Duke of Normandy, to wit, Anno 1066.

So that we see the Justice of God, how he set the Danes as a Scourge to the
Saxons, who had so perfidiously and cruelly used the poor Brettans, and at last
were driven out of their Lands by the Normans, as they before had driven out
the Brettans.

2. The whole time that the Danes so miserably afflicted the Saxons in England,
was 266 years, if we reckon to the Norman Conquest, from the first coming of
them into England, Anno Domini 800. but if we reckon to the time of Edward the
Confessor, sub Anno 1043. then it contains only 242 years.

But Matthew. of Westminster computeth only from the beginning of King
Ethelwolfe's Reign to the Norman Conquest; which I wonder at, since the same
Author tells us, that in Anno 800. the Danes spoiled Tinmouth Church, and after
they had Robbed thereabouts, they returned with their Spoils; and besides, he
tells us of several Battles in England, between King Egbert and the Danes: But
his words are these, page 302. Misit ergo eis Deus Omnipotens Gentes Paganas
crudelissimas, velut Apum Examina, quae ne quidem Sexui muliebri, aut
Parvulorum parceret aetati, Danos scilicet, and Norwegenses, Gothos, Swathedos,
Vandalos, and Frisios, qui ab exordio Regis Ethelwolfi supradicti usque ad
Normannorum Adventum, per annos ferme 230, terram hanc peccatricem, a mari
usque ad mare, and ab homine usque ad Pecus, deleverunt, -- non eam possidere
and subjugare, sed praedari ac perdere satagebant: So that there was a long
time of intermixture, with various Nations and sorts of People.

Cambden says, That the Name of Danes was not known to the World before the
time of Justinian the Emperor, about the Year of Christ 570. Tunc enim Galliam
vastare caeperunt, and Rerum Anglicarum Latinis Historicis Wiccingi dicti sunt:
Wiccinga Saxonice Piratam denotat. Cambden's Britannia, page 101. And Dudo
Sancti Quinti Decanus says, That out of Scanza (that is, Scandia) the Danes,
Getes or Goths, Amarobii, Tragoditae, Alani, and Sarmatae, came out like
Swarms of Bees. Lib. 1. sub initio. Also Gemeticensis, lib. 1. cap. 2.

CHAP. VII.
Of the coming of the Normans into England, and whence they are descended.

1. THe Normans invaded England, Anno Domini 1066. when William, surnamed The
Bastard, Duke of Normandy, commonly called William the Conqueror, Pemsey near
Hastings in Sussex, and overcame Harold, King of England, in Battle, which was
fought the fourteenth day of October, being Saturday, Anno Domini 1066. about
nine Miles from Hastings in Sussex; upon which Victory the English submitted to
him.

And in the Race of the Norman Blood has the Kingdom of England since
continued to this day 1670. by Maude the Empress, Daughter and Heir to King
Henry I. and Wife of Geffrey Planagenet, Earl of Anjou in France, Married to
him Anno Domini 1127. Mother of King Henry the Second, from whom the succeeding
Kings are descended.

The English continued their native Language, notwithstanding the great and
long commixture with the Normans; but much altered since Chaucer's time, who
lived under King Richard the Second, especially since Henry the Eighth's time
downward, it is so intermingled with Latin, besides some old words, retained
from the Norman-French anciently, that it is now become a new Language, and
much of the ancient English Tongue quite lost and perished; and daily in our
Age creep in many Latin and French words, to the utter decay of the English
Tongue.

The Conqueror gave away the Lands of the English to his Friends and Soldiers,
who assisted him in the Conquest; some few he suffered to en^oy their own
Estates, and but very few. Most of the ancient Gentry now in England, of great
and ancient Estates, are Descended from the Normans, who came into England with
the Conqueror; yet doubtless are there many of the Saxon Blood now remaining;
and by reason of a long intermixture by intermarrying one with another, have
incorporated our Nation into a Hotchpot of several Nations: for the Normans
themselves were a People intermingled of Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes.

It is observed of the People of England, that they are so naturally given to
Faction and Rebellion, that since the Norman Conquest, we scarcely read of any
of our Kings to this day, who have not met with the disturbance of some
rebellious and treasonable Practices of their own Subjects, and that in open
Arms too, King James only excepted; and yet he wanted not a Gunpowder Treason,
miraculously discovered and prevented, Anno 1605. nor a Gowries Conspiracy in
Scotland, 1600. and his Son King Charles the First most miserably murdered in
our Days by his own Subjects, through the Puritan Factions in England, Anno
1648. the thirtieth day of January.

A short Table of the Norman Kings, and when they began their Reigns.
Anno Chr. 1066.
1. William the Conqueror, Bastard-Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, by one Arlet,
a Skinner's Daughter of Faloys in Normandy. He caused Domes-day Book to be
made, which was begun and finished between the fourteenth and twentieth Year of
his Reign. He died the ninth day of September, aged 64 Years, Anno Domini 1087.
He Reigned 20 Years, 10 Months, and 26 Days.

William, surnamed Rufus, third Son of William the Conqueror, succeeded in the
Kingdom of England. Robert the eldest Son was Duke of Normandy. William Rufus
died secundo die Augusti 1100. in the thirteenth Year of his Reign, being slain
with an Arrow, which was shot by Sir Walter Tirrel, a Frenchman, at a Deer in
New-Forrest in Hampshire, and hitting a Bough of a Tree, glanced aside and hit
the King. He Reigned 12 Years, 11 Months fere.

Henry, for his Learning surnamed Beauclerk, the fourth Son of the Conqueror,
(but the third Son that lived to be a Man) and younger Brother to William
Rufus, in the absence of Robert Duke of Normandy his eldest Brother, then in
the Holy Land, succeeded King of England, and afterward took from his Brother
Robert the Dukedom of Normandy also: he died primo die Decembris 1135. He
Reigned 35 Years and four Months.

Stephen, second Son of Stephen Earl of Blois, by Adela, Daughter of William
the Conqueror, usurped the Kingdom of England, and was in continual War with
Maude the Empress: he died the twenty fifth day of October, 1154. He Reigned 18
Years, 10 Months, and odd Days.

Henry II. Son of Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou in France, by Maude the
Empress, Daughter and sole Heir of Henry I. King of England: he added to the
English Empire, Anjou, Touraine, and Main, which were his Fathers, and also the
Duchy of Aquitain, and the Earldom of Poictu, by Elianor his Wife, and
conquered Ireland: he died the sixth day of July, 1189. aged 61 Years. He
Reigned 34 Years and 9 Months, wanting 18 Days.

Richard I. Son of Henry II. surnamed Ceur de Lion, Warred in the Holy Land,
and in his return was taken Prisoner in the Dominions of the Duke of Austria:
He was slain at the Siege of the Battle of Chaluz in the Province of Limoges in
France, and died of his Wound the sixth day of April, 1199. He Reigned 9 Years,
and 9 Months. Anno Chr. 1199.


7. John, Brother to Richard I. lost Normandy, Aquitaine, and Angeau, to the
French, 1204. He died the 19 of October, 1216. at the age of 51 Years. He
Reigned 17 Years, and 6 Months.

8. Henry III. Son of King John, was but nine Years old when he was Crowned.
November 1272. aged 65 Years. He reigned 56 Years and one Month.

9. Edward I. Son of Henry III. subdued Wales, and brought Scotland into
subjection. July, 1307. aged 68 Years. He Reigned 34 Years, 7 Months, and 22
Days.

10. Edward II. Son of Edward I. was Barbarously and Traitorously deposed
through a strong Faction raised against him by his Queen, and afterward
murdered in Barkley-Castle. He was deposed the 25 of January, 1326. and
murdered September 21. 1327. He Reigned 19 Years, 6 Months, and 18 Days.

11. Edward III. Son of Edward II. a Valorous Prince, French in two great
Battles, took Caliz, and many other Places in that Kingdom, and Quartered the
Arms of France in his Coat, which the succeeding Kings of England have ever
since imitated and retained. He died at Richmond the 21 day of June, 1377. in
the 56 Year of his Age. He Reigned 50 Years and almost 5 Months.

12. Richard II. Son of Prince Edward called The Black Prince, Edward III. was
Traitorously deposed by his Cousin Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, the 29
of September, 1399. and after murdered in Prison the 14 day of February
following, in Pomfret Castle. He Reigned 22 Years, 3 Months, and 8 Days.

The Lancastrian Line.
13. Henry IV. Duke of Lancaster, (Son of John of Gant, Edward the Third)
traitorously and villainously taking up Arms against his Prince, caused Richard
the Second to be deposed, and made himself King. He spent his whole Reign in
suppressing of homebred Rebellions. He died the 20 of March, 1412. in the 46
Year of his Age. He Reigned 13 Years, and 6 Months, wanting 10 Days.

14. Henry V. Son of Henry IV. the Mirror of Magnificence, New-College in
Oxford, under the Government of Henry de Beaufort his Uncle on the Fathers
side, then Chancellor of Oxford. He Conquered France, and died in the Castle of
Boys de Vincennes, not far from Paris, the last day of August, 1422. He Reigned
9 Years, 5 Months, and 10 Days.

15. Henry VI. Son of Henry V. an Infant of 8 Months old; France in Paris, 7
Decembris, 1431. which he held during the Life of his Uncle John Duke of
Bedford, Regent of France: But afterward, he did not only lose all France
again, but England also, to the Duke of York's Faction, who claimed the Crown
of England in right of Anne, Grandmother to Edward IV. and Daughter to Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, Son of Edmund Mortimer by Philippa Daughter and Heir of
Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son of Edward III. and Elder Brother of John of
Gant. He Reigned 38 Years, 6 Months, and 4 Days.

Kings of the Duke of York's Line.
16. Edward IV. Son of Richard Duke of York, challenged the Crown as aforesaid;
Henry VI. was Crowned King of England the fourth of March, 1460. Yet Henry VI.
was Crowned again, 13 die Octobris, 1470. But he enjoyed his Title of
Redemption but a while; for he died about six Months after, to wit, in Anno
1471. having lived 52 Years. He Reigned 22 Years, 1 Month, and odd Days.

This Edward the Fourth died the ninth of April, 1483. aged 41 Years. He was
the first of all the Norman Kings who married his own Subject. Anno Chr. 1483.


17. Edward V. Son of Edward IV. was never Crowned, but murdered by his Uncle
Richard Duke of Gloucester, Protector, in June, 1483. in the thirteenth Year of
his Age, in the Tower of London. He Reigned two Months.

Richard III. youngest Brother of King Edward IV. being Protector to the late
young King, and dispatching him and his Brother out of the way, usurpeth the
Crown. He was slain at Bosworth-field in Leycestershire, the 22 day of August,
1485. He Reigned 2 Years, and 2 Months.

The Union of the Two Families, Lancaster and York.
Henry VII. Earl of Richmond, next Heir to the House of Lancaster, (as Son of
Edmund That Edmund was called Edmund of Haddam, Son of Owen Tudor by Queen
Katharine, the Widow of Henry the Fifth.
Tudor by Margaret Daughter of John Duke of Somerset, descended of John of Gant
Duke of Lancaster) after the Overthrow given by him unto Richard the Third at
Bosworth, married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to King Edward the Fourth, and so
United the Families. He died at Richmond the 22 day of April, 1509. after he
had Reigned 23 Years, and 8 Months.

Henry VIII. Son of Henry VII. Heir to both Families. He shaked off the Pope's
Supremacy in this Nation, suppressed the Monasteries, and began the Reformation
of Religion in England. A Prince of great Vices, and of great Virtues. He wrote
a Book against Luther, for which Pope Leo X. gave him by Charter the Title of
[Defender of the Faith;] dated 1521. Herbert's Hist. of Hen. 8. page 95. Which
Title has ever since been used by his Successors. He died at Westminster the
28. of January, 1546. having Reigned 37 Years, 9 Months, and 6 Days.

Trussel's History, page 263. says, There perished in the Civil Wars between
the the Houses of Lancaster and York, Two Kings. One Prince. Ten Dukes. Two
Marquesses. Twenty one Earls. Twenty seven Lords. Two Viscounts. One Lord Prior
of St. John's of Jerusalem. One Judge. 139 Knights. 441 Esquires. 84998 Common
Persons.


Dr. Heylyn in his Cosmography, page 320. accounts thus: Seventeen Pitched
Fields. Eight Kings and Princes slain. Forty Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls.
200000 Common People. Besides Barons and Gentlemen.


Edward VI. Son of Henry VIII. by Jane Seymour; a Child. He died at Greenwich,
6 die Julii 1553. about 15 Years old. In his time Priests were allowed to
Marry. See Stat. 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 21. He Reigned 6 Years, 5 Months, and 8
days.

Mary, Daughter of Henry VIII. by Katherine of Spain, his Brother Arthur's
Widow, lost Caliz to the French, 1557. A Bloody Queen. She married Philip King
of Spain, 25 die Julii 1554. And she died at St. Jameses House in London, the
17 of November, 1558. She set up Popery, and Reigned 5 Years, 4 Months, and 11
Days.

Elizabeth, Daughter of Henry VIII. by the Lady Anne of Bullein his second
Wife: A most Gracious Heroic Princess. She perfected and refined the
Reformation of Religion begun by her Father; furnished the Royal Navy with all
Warlike Ammunitions; succored the Scots against the French, and the French
Protestants against the Papists; defended the Netherlands against the Attempts
of the Spaniards; commanded the Whole Ocean; entered League with the Muscovite;
and was most Famous in the Prudent Government of her Kingdom, assisted by most
Wise and Able Statesmen and Privy-Counsellors about her, as any Prince in
Christendom had; and (which is most rare) were all Faithful and Loyal to her.
She died the 24 day of March, 1602. which is the last Day of the Year,
according to the Computation of the Church of England, at Richmond in Surrey,
aged 70 Years. She reigned 44 Years, 4 Months, and 7 Days.

The Scotch Line, Kings and Monarchs of all Great-Brettaine and Ireland.
24. James VI. King of Scotland (Son of Mary Queen of Scots, Anno Chr. 1602.
Daughter and Heir of James V. Son of James IV. and of the Lady Margaret eldest
Daughter of Henry the Seventh, King of England) was Proclaimed King of England
in London, March 24. 1602. as the next undoubted Heir to the Crown of England.
A Learned and Religious Prince; of whom the Lord Bacon says, in his
Advancement of Learning, pa. 2. It is no Amplification, but a positive and
measured Truth, That there was not so Learned a Temporal Monarch since Christ
's time, in all Literature Divine and Humane, as this King James. Of whom see
more in Scotland. He died at Theobalds the 27 of March, 1625. aged 60 Years. He
was the first Monarch of all Great-Brettaine. He Reigned 22 Years and 3 Days.

25. Charles I. Son of James VI. of Scotland, England, confederate with the
Covenanters of Scotland, who began their Rebellion in England, Anno 1642. which
continued, by the Assistance of the Rebellious Parliament of England, until the
Year 1660. miserably ruinating both our Church and State. And these Rebels
murdered this Good King the 30 day of January 1648. in the 49 Year of his Age,
and banished his Children. He Reigned 23 Years, 10 Months, and 3 Days.

26. Charles II. Son of Charles I. Oliver Cromwell the Traitor, styled the
Protector; but was after Restored, and Returned to his Kingdoms the 29 day of
May, Anno Domini 1660. chiefly next under God (who disposes and orders the
Hearts of all Men) by the Assistance of Colonel George Monk, who then had the
Command of all the Forces in Scotland and England Principally, and was
afterward made Duke of Albemarle by this King, as well he deserved.

Of the Dukes of Normandy before William the Conqueror.
II. THe Dukes of Normandy (from whence our Norman Kings of England aforesaid
are descended) are the Progeny of Rollo the Dane, who invaded the Province of
Neustria in France with a great Army; which because they consisted of Men
brought out of the North part of the World, they were called Normans, and that
Province of France was called Normannia in Latin: For in the Saxon Language of
our Ancestors, Normans denotes as much as Populi Septentrionales in the Latin:
And were a People (as Cambden says) commixt of Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes.

1. This Rollo took Baieux in Normandy by Storm, and slew Berengarius Earl
thereof, and after married Popa Daughter of the said Berengarius, on whom he
begot William afterward Duke of Normandy, surnamed Longespee, because of the
long Sword he used to wear: And Rollo much perplexed the French by his daily
Rapines, overrunning almost all France to Burgundy: At last, for the Mediation
of a Peace, Charles the Simple, King of France, gave unto him all the Land of
Normandy, from the River Epta to the Sea, to be held by Homage from the Kings
of France, with Gista his Daughter in Marriage, ( Popa his former Wife being
now either dead or divorced:) Whereupon Rollo was Baptized by Franco Archbishop
of Roan, Anno Chr. 917.
Anno Domini 912. And he was the first Duke of Normandy, and died Anno Christi
nati 917. Ordericus Vitalis, lib. 3. ad initium. Will. Gemeticensis, lib. 2.
cap. 12, and 17.

2. William surnamed Longespee, Duke of Normandy, was Son of Rollo: Slain Anno
Christi 942.

Richard I. Duke of Normandy, Son of William, was but 10 Years old when his
Father was slain. He was Duke 54 Years.

Anno 996. Richard II. (Son of Richard I. by Gunnor, first his Concubine, and
after his Wife. Gemeticensis, lib. 8. cap. 36.) succeeded Duke of Normandy, and
was Duke 30 Years. He had two Sons, who succeeded Dukes one after another,
Richard, and Robert, besides other Children.

Anno 1026. Richard III. Son of Richard II. succeeded Duke of Normandy, and was
Duke scarce a Year and a half.

Anno 1028. Robert, Brother to Richard III. succeeded Duke; and after he had
been Duke seven Years and a half, he died at the City of Nice in Bithynia, Anno
1035.

William (Bastard Son of Robert by Arlet, or Herlue as some write her, a
Skinners Daughter of Faloys in Normandy. Chronicon Joh. Bromton, page 910.) a
Child of eight Years of Age, succeeded Duke of Normandy, and was Duke 53 Years:
Ordericus, lib. 3. in initio. In the 32 Year of his Dukedom, to wit, Anno 1066.
he Conquered England, and is commonly called William the Conqueror. Robert
Curthose, eldest Son of the Conqueror, was after his Father also Duke of
Normandy.

See the rest above, page 32. among the Norman Kings of England.

Normandy was lost to the French in the Reign of King John, Anno 1204. Mat.
Paris, page 212.

Normandy won again from the French by Henry V. Anno 1416.

Normandy lost again by Henry VI. Anno 1449.

And so much of England.
OF WALES.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name of Wales, and Description of the Country.

I. THe Name of Wales was imposed from our Saxon Ancestors: For the Ancient
Brettans being beaten out of England by the Saxons, fled into the West Parts of
Brettaine, being naturally fortified with great Mountains, and Overflowings of
the Sea; to wit, into that Part now called Wales, and into Cornwall: But the
Brettans of Cornwall, though they stoutly endeavored to defend their Country,
yet were they soon forced to leave it to the Saxons.

Cambden and Verstegan tell us, That the Saxons termed all Aliens and Strangers
Walsh. And hence they called these Inhabitants (because Strangers unto them) by
the name of Walsh-men, and their Country Wales.

But more probable it is, that forasmuch as they be descended from the ancient
Gauls, their Neighbors, in Latin termed Galli, by the French, Galls, which
the Saxons pronounce Walls, and from whence Walles-man, and now corruptly
Welsh-man; it seems to me to be thence called Wales, as one should say, The
Country of the Waules, or Walls: And in ancient Latin Authors it is many
times styled Guallia, and the Inhabitants thereof Gualli; and every Man knows
how the Saxons in most Words do use W for G; as War for Guerre, Ward for Guard,
and the like: And at this day the French style the eldest Son of the King of
England, Le Prince de Galls. The ancient Galli were called Cimbri, or Kimbri,
unde Cambro-Britannia is used for Wales, and Cambro-Britannus for a Welshman.
And ask these Cambro-Brittans, or Welsh-Brittans, how they call themselves,
they will presently tell you, Kimeri, or Kumeri; which sounds as much as
Kimbri, or Kymbry, now in Latin molded into Cambri.

Howsoever the Name came, the Inhabitants of Wales at this day are the Remnant
of the Ancient Brettans; but not without great commixture of the English their
Neighbors, which must needs follow in so long a Tract of time: And yet have
they preserved their Native Language, but with some corruption of various
Dialects.

For the Description of Wales, it was anciently bounded from England with the
Rivers of Dee and Severn; all the rest of it, almost, is bounded with the Irish
Seas: But Offa, the Puissant King of the Mercians in England, drove the
Brettans from the Rivers aforesaid, and forced them up to the Mountains of
Wales, where he caused them to be divided from England by a very great Ditch,
called by the English, Offa's Dike, at this day. This was about the Year since
Christ's Birth 760. and it began at the River Dee by Basing-werk, between
Chester and Ruthlan, and so ran along the sides of the Hills to the South Sea,
a little from Bristow, reaching near a hundred Miles in length, and is in many
places yet to be seen. The Country between it and England, is commonly called
by the Welsh,-Y Mars; though the greatest part of it be now inhabited with
Welshmen, namely in North Wales, which yet keeps the ancient Limits to the
River Dee, or Dwy, and in some Places over it. Powell on the Welsh History,
page 5.

According to Cambden, it was divided into these sorts of Inhabitants, in the
time of the Romans, and before.

But this was long before it had the Name of Wales.

Silures Herefordshire. Radnorshire. Brecknockshire. Monmouthshire.
Glamorganshire.
Dimetae Caermardenshire. Pembrokeshire. Cardiganshire.
Ordovices Montgomeryshire. Merionethshire. North Wales. Caernarvanshire.
North Wales. Isle of Anglesey. North Wales. Denbighshire. North Wales.
Flintshire. North Wales.

About the Year of Christ 870. Roderik the Great, then Prince of Wales, divided
it into three Parts or Territories, which they called Kingdoms.

North Wales.
1. Guinedh, in Latin, Venedotia, which the English call North Wales,
comprehending the Counties of Merioneth, Caernarvan, The Isle of Mon or
Anglesey, and the greatest parts of Denbighshire and Flintshire. This had, as
it were, the Sovereignty of the other two, whose Chief Seat was Aberfraw in
Anglesey, which little Island the Welsh call Yir-Mon, that is, The Land of Mon.
This Part Roderik gave to Anarawd his eldest Son.

Powys.
2. Mathraval, or Powys-land. This Territory contains all the Country of
Powys, and the Land between Wye and Severn; to wit the whole Counties (as they
be now called) of Montgomery, Radnor, and all Shropshire from Severn toward
Wales, and the rest of Denbighshire and Flintshire. The chiefest Towns herein
are St. Asaph, Shrewsbury, and Matraval. This Territory Roderik gave to Mervin
his third Son.

South Wales.
3. Deheubarth, in Latin, Dimetia, which the English call South Wales, contained
the Counties (as we now call them) of Monmouth, Glamorgan, Pembroke,
Caermarden, Cardigan, and Brecknock. The Chief Seat was Caermarden, after
removed to Denevowr-Castle: The Chief Towns thereof, Caermarden, Monmouth,
Landaff, and St. David's in Pembrokeshire, so called from St. David sometime
Archbishop thereof, the Metropolitan of Wales, who removed the Sea from
Caer-Leon upon Usk to this Place. St. David's is by the Welsh called Mynyw,
whence in Latin it is termed Menevia. And this Part Roderik gave to Cadelh his
second Son, who after the death of Mervin his Brother, took Powys-Land also to
himself.

Of these three Parts, Roderik had North Wales in right of his Mother Esylht;
and Powys, in right of his Grandmother Nest, Daughter of Cadelh Prince of
Powys; and South Wales he had (as some say) by his Wife, Daughter and Heir of
Meyric Prince of Cardigan. Powell on the Welsh History, page 35.

CHAP. II.
THe Counties of Wales (as they now stand divided) were apppointed out as
follows.

1 Glamoganshire. 2 Caermarthenshire. 3 Pembrokeshire. 4 Cardiganshire. 5
Flintshire. 6 Caernarvonshire. 7 Anglesey. 8 Merionethshire.
These Shires were newly appointed out Anno Domini 1283. 11 Edw. 1. says Stow.
In which Year Wales was totally subdued by Edw. 1. who built two strong Castles
there, one at Conwey, the other at Caernarvon; and then newly divided Wales
into Shires and Hundreds.

9 Monmouthshire. 10 Radnorshire. 11 Brecknockshire. 12 Montgomeryshire. 13
Denbighshire.
These five were appointed by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. ca. 26. and also diverse
Dominions and Lordships in the Marches of Wales, were then also annexed to
Shropshire, Herefordshire, and Glocestershire.

And by the Statute aforesaid of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. Anno Domini 1535. Wales is
from henceforth incorporated, united, and annexed to the Realm of England.

In the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. cap. 26. they are called The Twelve Shires of
Wales, Monmouth was by the other Statute of 27 H. 8. subjected to the Chancery
of England, and to the Kings Judges at Westminster, and therefore accounted
among the Counties of England, and not among the Counties of Wales.

And by the Statute of 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. there is a President and
Council appointed to the Principality of those 12 Shires of Wales.

And that the Judge of Chester for the time being, shall keep Sessions twice
every Year in the Shires of Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomery.

And that there be a Judge of North Wales, to keep Sessions twice every Year in
the several Shires of Caernarvan, Merioneth, and Anglesey.

And another Judge, in like manner, for the Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and
Glamorgan.

And another Judge, in like manner, for the Shires of Caermarthen, Pembroke,
and Cardigan.

It appears also by the same Statute, that the King had lately granted
Commissions out of the Chancery of England, for the Limitations of the Hundreds
lately made in the said Shires.

It is also to be remembered, That by the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 13. the
Honor of Hawarden-Castle, with its Members, to wit, certain Villages in the
Parish of Hawarden (which formerly belonged to Broxton-Hundred in Cheshire)
were now laid to Flintshire by that Act of Parliament.

CHAP. III.
THe Welshmen embraced the Reformation of Religion according to the Church of
England, in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; the Liturgy whereof was by Queen
Elizabeth's Command translated into the Welsh or British Tongue, as the BIBLE
also by an Act of Parliament, 5 Eliz. 1563. But because that Church-Bible then
set forth (the Care whereof was committed to the Bishop of Hereford, and the
four Bishops of Wales) was of a large Bulk, it was reduced into a more portable
Volume in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First, at the Charge
of Rowland Heylyn Alderman of London, who caused also a Welsh Dictionary to be
Printed. Dr. Heylyn's Cosmography, page 323.

CHAP. IV.
I Come now to the Ancient Descent of the Brettans and Welsh. I have before
spoken something hereunto, concerning the Ancient Inhabitants of Brettaine,
when I treated of England, cap. 1. sect. 5. Supra, page 10.


I have now to add, That in the first place I must crave leave to note the
ridiculous and fabulous Story and Descent of Brute, with the long Series of
Kings downwards from him to Cassibelaun, to the number of 70 in a direct Line:
Which Brute these Brettans would have to live when Eli Judged the People of
Israel, and the Ark of God was taken by the Philistines, about Anno Mundi
Conditi 2849. and ante Christum 1100 Years: And so Brettaine must have a King,
before the Jews had any. Where is to be observed, That this History of Brute
was rather devised to amaze and misguide Posterity, than possibly to be
believed; and that by an impudent lying Author, Geffrey of Monmouth, who lived
but about the Year of Christ 1160. and 2260 Years after Brute lived, as they
place the time, without so much as vouching any one Author for any thing
thereof; which Geffrey was taxed for a lying Author by William of Newbury, a
Man living in the same Age with him: The words of William concerning that
Geffrey see before in this Book, page 10.. Vide etiam Doctissimum Cambdenum in
Britannia sua, page 4, and 5.

And Sir John Prise, in his Book de Britannicae Historiae Defensione, Printed
first sub Anno Christi 1573. page 63. tells us, There were anciently various
Opinions concerning this Brute, whence he was originally descended; and that
there was an old Book found by him in Wales not long ago, with the name of
Gildas writ upon it, which mentioned two Opinions therein. One, which was the
common Opinion, That Brute was the fourth in Descent from Aeneas King of the
Latins, to wit, Son of Silvius Posthumus, Son of Ascanius, Son of Aeneas. The
other has his Descent up to Noah, in this sort: 1 Noah. 2 Japheth. 3 Javan. 4
Jabaath. 5 Joan. 6 Baath. 7 Isran. 8 Ezra. 9 Ra. 10 Abir. 11 Oath. 12 Ecthecht.
13 Aurthach. 14 Mair. 15 Simeon. 16 Boib. 17 Theor, or Thoi. 18 Ougomum. 19
Fethebir. 20 Alaunius. 21 Hessiscion. 22 Brutus.
So that we see Brute must be made a True Trojan, and to be descended from
Javan Son of Japhet, from whom the Ionians and Grecians (as Josephus says)
were propagated.

Here, by the way, observe, That St. Luke reckons up only 66 Descents between
Sem and Christ, cap. 3. Yet the Descent of Cassibelan (who lived a little
before the time of Christ's Birth) must be made to contain 70 Descents to
Brute, and 22 more to Noah, in all 92 Descents to Noah: So they will make sure
to give the Brettans Descents enough. But there is no Man well versed in
Histories and Antiquities, that does not plainly see a heap of great
Uncertainties and Falsities in the Descents touching Brute, which some obscure
Impostor has foisted in, to the delusion of meaner Capacities: So that I do
conceive they are meritoriously all to be exploded utterly.

CHAP. V.
BUt so far as good Authority of Approved Authors will direct me, I shall now
put down. First then, it is certain that the Brettans Inhabited this Island in
Julius Caesar's Age, and before; and it is probable they inhabited here some
hundreds of Years before: but when first inhabited, appears not by any good
Historian. It is agreed by the most Learned Men, that before Caesar we have no
certain History of Brettain left us; and that the Druids of the Brettans (who
were their most Learned Men) never committed any thing to writing.

I shall therefore begin with what Rulers of Brettaine I find recorded in
Caesar's time, and downwards; I mean, of the Brettans who Ruled, (for I have
already set down the Roman Rulers of Brettaine supra, page 13. and deinceps;
who indeed cashir'd the Brettans, and their Authority) beginning with
Cassibellaun, and vouching my Authors all along.

1. Cassivellaun: He was Chief Ruler of Brettaine, Anno ante Christum Natum 54.
Caesar says of him, Summa Imperii Bellique administrandi, Communi Concilio,
Permissa est Cassivellauno; Lib. 5. de Bello Gallico, page 154. of the Edition
with Montanus Notes, Printed 1651. So that it should seem he was not a King
born, but made. I find him not any where styled Rex Britanniae by Caesar. He is
also called Cassibeline; and by Dio, Suellan: So Montanus in his Notes upon
Caesar, page 154. Perhaps the Name Cassibelline is derived from Cassi, a People
of Hartfordshire: The Relics of their Name we have yet in Cashow-Hundred: And
so Cassibelin sounds as much as Cassorum Princeps, or Prince of the Cassians:
Cambden's Britannia, in his Preface before Buckinghamshire, speaking of the
Cattieuclani. The Town of Cassibelaun, mentioned by Caesar, was St. Albons in
Hartfordshire, called Verulamium by Tacitus: Cambden in Hartfordshire.

We find also four Kings of Kent mentioned by Caesar, all living at the same
time with Cassibelaun. Caesar lib. 5. page 64. Cingetorix. Carvilius.
Taximagulus. Segonax.


Also Mandubratius, Son of Imanuentius, King of the Trinobants, that is, of
Middlesex and Essex: Caesar, page 162. living also at the same time. He
submitted to Caesar.

Also Comius King of the Atrebatii, or Barkshire: Caesar, page 133. He
submitted to Caesar. Anno Chr. 30.


2. Cunobelin, or Cynbeline, King of the East part of Brettaine, whose Seat or
Palace was at Maldon in Essex, in Latin called Camalodunum: Cambden in Essex.
He had three Sons: Adminius, banished by his Father Anno Christi 38. in the
time of Caligula the Emperor of Rome; Cataratacus and Togodumnus, two other
Sons, overcome in Battle by Aulus Plautius the Roman Propraetor of Brettaine,
after Cunobelin was dead. Cambden's Britannia, page 29, 30. Vide etiam page
323. This was about Anno Christi 43. in the time of Claudius.

Maldon was taken by Ostorius, Propraetor Britanniae in the time of Claudius
the Emperor. It was made the first Colony of the Romans in Brettaine, Anno
Claudii 12. Annoque Christi 52. Cambden in Essex, page 323.

Caractacus, King of the Silures. He was taken Prisoner by Ostorius, with his
Wife, Daughter, and Brethren, and brought in Triumph to Rome, to Claudius the
Emperor. Tacitus, lib. 12. Annalium, cap. 35, 36.

Carthismandua was about the same time Queen of the Brigantes.

Cogidunus, another Petty King in Brettaine, living at the same time, to whom
certain Towns in Brettaine were assigned by the Romans; it being an ancient
Custom of the Romans long time ago (says Tacitus) to have even Kings
Instruments of Servitude. De Vita Agricolae, cap. 14.

Caractacus above mentioned, is by Dio called Cataracatus; by others,
Catacratus; by Zonaras, Caratacus; and by the Brettans, Caradoc. Lipsius in his
Comment on Tacitus, lib. 12. Annalium, page 196. Perhaps he was the Son of
Cunobeline.

4. Prasutagus, King of the Iceni in Brettaine, that is, of Suffolk, Norfolk,
Cambridgeshire, Anno Chr. 62.
and Huntingtonshire: He made Nero the Emperor, and his own two Daughters his
Heirs, thinking hereby to procure favor with Nero: But the Romans after his
Death did beat Boadicia his Wife, and Ravish her Daughters; whereupon the Iceni
and Trinobants rebelled. Tacitus, lib. 14. Annalium cap. 31.

5. Arviragus Bretannus Floret, in the time of Domitian Emperor of Rome. Camb.
Britann. page 43.

6. Lucius, King of the Brettans, received the Christian Faith. Bid de Hist.
lib. Angl. cap. 4. See the Epistle of Eleutherius, dated Anno Christi 169, in
the first Tome of Spelman's Counsels, page 34. with his Notes thereon, whereby
the Letter seems to be fictitious.

This Lucius, King of the Brettans, died Anno Gratiae 201, at Gloucester, says
Matthew. Westminster.

So much of the British Kings whom I find mentioned during the time of the Rule
of the Romans in Brettaine; now follow the British Kings whom I find mentioned
after the Rule of the Romans ceased in Brettaine, and after the coming in of
the Saxons.

Vortiger; he was King of the Brettans when the Saxons first came into
Brettaine; Anno Christi 425. Cambden's Britannia, page 95. Bid de Hist. Ang.
lib. 1. cap. 21. Spelman's Councels, Tom. 1. page 49. where he places the
Council against the incestuous Marriage of Vortiger with his own Daughter, in
Anno 449. somewhat too late I conceive. By the Wiles of this Vortiger was
Constantine slain; Homo nobilis and domi clarus; whom the Brettons made their
King, a Man of their own Stock, and fetched from Little Brettaine in France. So
Buchanan, Rerum Scoticarum, lib. 5. page 139.

Vortimer, Son of Vortiger, died Anno 463. with whom fell the hope of
Brettaine. Matthew. Westminster.

Aurelius Conanus. Vortipor. Maglocunus. Cuneglasus.
These Historians place to succeed one annother in their Rule, when it is plain
in Gildas (who speaks to every one of them) that they lived all at a time, and
tyrannized in diverse and several parts of Brettaine at once. Cambden's
Britannia, page 81. about the Year of Christ 550 or 560.

Nazaleod, the Great King of the Brettans, routed by Cerdic, West Saxons, at
Certicsford, and 5000 Brettans slain. Huntington page 312. which Country or
Place was before called Nazaleod, or (as some write it) Natanleod, after the
King's Name; but after the Victory of Certic here, it was called Certicsford,
now called contractedly Chartford, situate in Hantshire. Cambden's Britannia,
in Hantshire, page 187. Vide Florentium, page 206.

Arthur, Bellicosissimus Britonum Heroes, buried at Glassenbury. Cambden's
Britannia, Somersetshire; of whom the Welsh Bards in their Songs have recorded
such Fables, that they have cast a doubt, whether there were such a Man or no.
Huntington calls him Dux militum and Regum Britannia, duodecies Dux Belli fuit,
duodecies victor contra Saxones, page 313. This famous General lived about Anno
520. Cambden says he was called Mab-uter, id est, Filius horribilis; quia a
pueritia fuit horribilis; and Artur Britannice sonat, ursum horribilem. In
Britannia sua, page 167. He is called Inclitus Rex Arturius, as it is Inscribed
on his Stone found at Glassenbury.

Gerent, King of Wales, routed by Ina, King of the West Saxons. Huntington,
page 337. Anno Regni Inae 21, annoque Christi circiter 710. He is the first
that I find styled King of Wales in express terms.

Cadwallader, the last King of the Britons. Powel in his Notes upon the Welsh
History, Englished by Homfrey Lhoyd, Printed 1584, page 8. says, That some do
hold, that Cadwallader and Cedwall are all one, and that whom the Saxons call
Cedwall (who was King of the West Saxons, Anno 688 to 690.) the Brittons called
Cadwallader, and whom the English Chronicles call Ine, King of the West Saxons,
the same is called Ivor in the the British or Welsh History: And this Ivor the
Brettaines call the Son of Alan, King of Little-Brettaine-Armorik in France:
But the Saxons say he was the Son of Kentwyn, King of the West Saxons.

Cadwallader had a Son called Edwall Ywrch, that is, Edwall the Roe-Buck, says
the Welsh History, who was the Father of Roderic, Page 23.

So much of the petty Kings of the Britons, as I find them mentioned in more
substantial Authors, during the time of the Power of the Saxons in England. Now
follow the Kings of the British Race, since they were quite expelled out of
England by the Saxons, and driven into the Mountains of Wales, and began to get
Head again: and herein I chiefly follow the Welsh History, put out by Powel,
1584.

Anno Chr. 720.
1. Roderike or Roderi, Son of Edwall Ywrch, began his Reign over the Britons in
Wales, Anno 720. and obtained a Victory against Ethelred, King of Westsex in
Cornwall; obiit 750. He Reigned 30 Years.

Conan Tindaethwy, Son of Roderik, in the Year 817. chased his Brother Howel
out of the Isle of Mon or Anglesey, who fled into the Isle of Man, and shortly
after died Conan.

3. Mervin Vrych, and Esylht his Wife, Daughter of Conan.

Anno 841 died Idwalhon, a Nobleman of Wales; and Anno 843 Mervin was slain (as
some do write) in the Battle between Beorrhed, King of Mercia, and the
Brettaines at Kettell, leaving a Son called Roderi-Mawr, that is, Roderik the
Great.

Roderik Mawr, that is, Roderik the Great. He divided Wales into three parts;
Northwales, which he gave to Anarawd his eldest Son, as the chief Prince;
Southwales, which he gave to his second Son; and Powysland, which he gave to
his third Son. But Giraldus Cambrensis in his Descriptio Cambriae, cap. 3.
says, that Mervin was his eldest Son, and had Northwales; and Anarawd had
Powysland, who died without Issue.

Anarawd, Son of Roderik, Prince of Wales, Obiit 913.

Edwal Vowel, Son of Anarawd, King or Prince of Northwales. He and his Brother
Elise were slain in a Battle against the Danes and Englishmen. He was Tributary
to Athelstan King of England.

7. Howel Dha, Prince of Southwales and Powysland, after the death of Edwal
Vowel, took upon him the Rule of all Wales. He died Anno 948. and had four
Sons, Owen, Run, Roderik, and Edwyn.

Jevaf and Jago, second and third Sons of Edwal Vowel, Ruled Northwales; and
the Sons of Howel-Dha divided Southwales and Powyis betwixt them. Anno 966.
Jago imprisoned his Brother Jevaf. Howel, Son of Jevaf, raises an Army to set
his Father at liberty, and chased his Uncle Jago out of the Land. Howel had
three Brothers, Meyric, Jevaf, and Cadwalhon.

9. Howel, Son of Jevaf, having expelled his Uncle, took upon him the Rule of
Northwales, Anno 979. Edwal Vachan, Son of Edwal Vowel, was slain by this Howel
his Nephew: and Anno 984. Howel entering England with an Army, was slain in
Battle. He had no Son, but Cadwalhon his Brother Reigned in his place.

Cadwalhon, Brother of Howel, was Prince of Northwales; he first made War with
Jonaval his Cousin, the Son of Meyric, and right Heir to the Land, and slew him;
and the year following Meredith, Son of Owen, Prince of Southwales, slew
Cadwalhon in Fight, with Meyric, Brother of Cadwalhon also.

Meredyth ap Owen, now King of all Wales. Godfryd, Son of Harold, entered the
Isle of Anglesey the third time, and having taken Lhywarch, the Son of Owen,
with 2000 Prisoners, cruelly put out his Eyes; whereupon Meredyth the King,
with the rest, escaped to Cardigan.

Anno 987. died Jevaf Son of Edwal, who had many years led a private Life. also
the same year died Owen, Son of Howel Dha, Prince of Southwales. Anno 991. died
Cadwalhon, the only Son of Meredyth. Anno 992. the Welshmen chose Edwal, Son
of Meric, the right Heir of Northwales, for their Prince. At Langwm, in a
Battle between Edwal and Meredyth, was slain Theodor, or Tudor Mawr, the Nephew
of Meredyth, who lost two Sons, Rees and Rytherch, and Elen a Daughter. Anno
998. died Meredyth ap Owen, Prince of Wales, leaving one only Daughter, called
Angharad, Married to Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht; and after his Death she Married
Conuyn Herdref, or (as others think) Conuyn ap Gweristan.

12. Edwal ap Meyric, the Son of Meredith, Anno Chr. 992.
being now in possession of the Principality of Northwales, endeavored to keep
it; but soon after, Swane, the Son of Harold, destroyed the Isle of Man, and
entering into Northwales, slew Edwall the Prince thereof; which Edwall left
behind him a Son called Jago.

13. Aedan, the Son of Blegored, usurped Northwales, and killed Conan Son of
Howel, Anno 1003. in open Field. He was slain with his four Sons by Lewelin in
Battle, Anno 1015.

14. Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, Prince of Wales: He was slain by Howel and Meredith,
Edwin, Anno 1021. leaving a Son called Griffith ap Lhewelyn.

15. Jago or James, ap Edwal, ap Meyric, ap Edwal Voel, Northwales as right
Heir.

Rytherch, Son of Jestyn, usurped Southwales.

Jago was slain by Griffith ap Lhewelyn, 1037.

16. Griffith ap Lhewelin, ap Sitsylht, and Angharat. This Griffith was King of
all Wales, Howel and Edwin out of Southwales.

This Griffith Married Edgith This Edgith (after the Death of Griffith) Married
Harold King of England.
or Aldith, Daughter of Algar, Earl of Mercia in England, by whom he had Issue
Blethyn, Successor of his Dominion, and Nest a Daughter. Odericus Vitalis, lib.
3. page 492. and lib. 4. page 511. also Will. Gemeticensis, lib. 7. cap. 31. He
was a valiant Prince, and wasted a great part of Herefordshire, 1052. Sim.
Dunelmensis. Algar being banished Anno 1055. he went into Ireland, where having
got 18 Pyrate Ships, he came into Wales to King Griffith, who joining Forces,
routed the English about two Miles from Hereford, Nono Calendas Novembris. Sim.
Dunelmensis. Afterward were both reconciled to the King of England.

Griffith was slain by his own Men, Nonas Augusti 1064. and his Head being cut
off, was sent to Edward, surnamed The Confessor, King of England. See also
Ingulphus, page 899.

Anno 1070, William Fitz-Osborne, Earl of Hereford, with Walter Lacy and other
stout Champions, were placed as a Curb to the Welsh by William the Conqueror.
These first Invaded the People of Brecknock, and slew three Welsh Kings or
Princes, Rees, Cadogan, and Merydeth, and many other of the Welsh. Ordericus,
page 521. 522.

* This King Griffith had two Brothers, Blethyn and Ruthyn, to whom Edward the
Confessor Anno 1065, gave Wales to be held of the King of England, Pro servitio
debito, jurata Fidelitate. Ingulphus, page 899.

17. Blethyn, in Latin Blidenus, Son of Griffith, says Ordericus; Welsh
History put out by Powel, page 103, calls him Blethin Son of Conwin: He was
King of Northwales at least.

Meredyth ap Owen, ap Edwyn, was Prince of Southwales. But this Meredith was
slain by Caradoc, ap Griffith, ap Rytherch, ap Jestin, upon the River Rympyn,
Anno Dom. 1068.

* Blethyn was traitorously murdered by Rees, ap Owen, ap Edwyn, Anno Domini
1073. He joined with Edwyn and Morcar, his Uncles by the Mother, against the
Conqueror, Anno 1068. Ordericus, page 511. and in Anno 1069. the Welsh and
Cheshiremen Besieged the Conqueror's Garrison of Shrewsbury. See Ordericus,
page 515.

18. Trahaern ap Caradoc, after the death of Blethyn, Prince of Northwales: He
was Cosen-german to Blethyn; and Rees ap Owen was Prince of Southwales; which
Rees was slain and outed by Trahaern ap Caradoc, about 1076.

Anno 1077. Rees ap Theodor, ap Eneon, ap Owen, ap Howel Dha, as right
Inheritor to Southwales, claimed the same, and was received.

Anno Chr. 1078.
19. Griffith up Conan, Prince of North Wales, Rees ap Theodor, Prince of
South Wales:
These joining their Forces, slew Traherne and all his Cosins in Battle: 1078.

Anno 1079. William the Conqueror of England, entered Wales with an Army as far
as St. David's, and took Homage of the Princes of Wales.

Anno 1088. Griffith ap Conan, King of Wales, enters the Borders of England
about Rothelent with an Army, and made great destruction; where Robert of
Rothelent a Norman, Governor of Rothelent Castle under William the Conqueror,
was slain in a Skirmish; whose Head was cut off, and carried away with King
Griffith, who caused it to be hanged upon the Mast of his Ship. Ordericus, page
670. This Robert of Rothelent, and Robert de Malpas, (two of the Earl of
Chester's Barons) and other cruel Potentates, spilt much of the Welshmens
Blood. Ordericus, page 522.

Anno 1090. Robert Fitz-Hamon, with 12 other Knights, invade Glamorganshire
with an Army of Normans, and spoiled the Lands of Rees ap Theodor Prince of
South Wales, where Rees was slain in Battle near Brecknock, with whom fell and
decayed the Kingdom of South Wales. Those also slew Jestyn ap Gurgant Lord of
Glamorganshire, with a great number of his Men; whereby Robert Fitz-Hamon got
possession of Glamorganshire, and gave certain Castles and Manors there to his
12 Knights, and to other Gentlemen, who were the first Strangers that inhabited
Wales. Powel on the Welsh History, page 119, and 124. Cambden's Britannia, in
Glamorganshire, page 494.

Anno 1092. Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury, entered into Powys-land,
and did win the Castle and Town of Baldwine, which he fortified, and called it
Montgomery, after his own Name. Welsh History put out by Powel, page 152.

Anno 1094. William Rufus entered Wales at Montgomery, which Castle being lately
demolished by the Welshmen, he re-edified it again: But the Welsh keeping the
Straits of the Mountains, with the Woods and the Rivers, King William lost his
Labor, and a number of his Men, and so returned. Welsh History, page 153. Matt.
Paris, page 18.

Anno 1098. Hugh de Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury, called Hugh Gogh by the
Welsh, that is, Red Hugh, because of his Red Head; and Hugh Earl of Chester,
called Hugh Dirgane by the Welsh, that is, Gross Hugh, because of his Fat
Corpulent Body, enter Wales with an Army of Cheshire and Shropshire Men; but
Griffith ap Conan the Prince of North-VVales, and Cadogan ap Blethyn, fled into
the Mountains. Then the Earls entered the Isle of Anglesey, and by the way they
built the Castle of Abberlhiennawe over against it: They slew many of the
Welsh therein; but Griffith and Cadogan fled into Ireland. Hugh Earl of
Shrewsbury was slain with an Arrow by Magnus Son of Olave King of Norwey.
Ordericus, page 768. Roger Hoveden, page 467. also the Welsh History, page
155. which puts this in Anno 1096. for 1098.

Anno 1108. King Henry the Frst with sundry Expeditions brought under the
Welshman, and sent all the Flemmings (who came over into England when a great
part of Flanders was drowned) to inhabit in Ross in Wales, where Penbrooke,
Tenby, and Haverford are now built; where they remain to this day, as may
appear by their Speech and Conditions, far different from the rest of the
Country. Welsh Hist. page 163.

Anno 1132. died Meredyth ap Blethyn, Chief Ruler of Powys.

Anno 1137. died Griffith ap Rees ap Theodor Prince of South Wales, who had by
his Wife Gwenlhiam (Daughter of Griffith ap Conan) Rees, commonly called Lord
Rees, and others.

Anno 1137. toward the end of the Year, died Griffith ap Conan Prince of
North-VVales.

Owen surnamed Gwineth, Son of Griffith ap Conan, is made Prince of
North-VVales; and the Name of King is no further used in the British Book.
Welsh Hist. page 139. With Powel's Notes: Also page 6.
Owen died Anno Domini 1169. after he had Reigned 32 Years.

David ap Owen, Prince of North-VVales, assumed the Government, because the
eldest Son of Owen, called Jorwerth Drwyndwn, that is, Edward with the Broken
Nose, was counted unmeet for Government.

Anno 1190. died Griffith Maylor Lord of Bromfield, a Nobleman and a Wise man.
Welsh History, page 242. He was Lord of Bromfield, Yale, Hope-Dale, Nanhewdwy,
Mochnant is Rhayard, Chirke, Cynlhayth, and Glindoverdwy: Ibidem, page 211.
(This was part of Powys Vadoc. Powys before Offa's time reached Eastward to the
Rivers of Dee and Severn.) and had to Wife Angharat Daughter of Owen Guyneth
Prince of North-VVales, by whom he had a Son called Madoc, who died 1236.
leaving a Son called Griffith: Page 293. Anno Chr. 1194.


22. Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth peaceably received all North Wales to his Subjection.
He Married Joan base Daughter of John King of England, by Agatha Daughter of
William Ferrars Earl of Derby, Anno 1206. Vincent upon Brook. page 204.
Speed's History, page 518. calls her Daughter of Robert Ferrers; and had Issue
two Sons, Griffith and David; and for Daughters, he had Marret, married to John
de Bruise, 1219. Welsh Hist. page 279. and Gladys another Daughter, married to
Sir Rafe Mortimer: Ibid. page 298. And it is certain, he had another Daughter
called Hellen, married to John the Scot Earl of Huntington, and afterward Earl
of Chester: She was married about 1222. and this was for a Final Agreement and
Peace between Randle Earl of Chester, surnamed Blundevill, and this Lhewelyn
Prince of North Wales, who before-time had many Conflicts and Wars one against
the other. Knighton, page 2430. Matt. Paris, page 380. See also my Antiquities
touching Cheshire, in this Book. But Helen had no Issue by John Scot, who
(says Matt. Paris) was consenting to the Poisoning of her Husband. After she
married Robert de Quency, third Son of Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester.
Vincent upon Brooke's Catalogue of Nobility, page 260.

About the Reign of Henry the Second, Crogen.
when he made a Voyage against the Welsh to the Mountains of Berwin, as he lay
at Oswestrey, a number of his Men, who were sent to try the Passages, to have
passed Offa's Ditch at the Castle of Crogen, were met withal, and slain. The
Englishmen afterward used to cry Crogen to the Welsh, as much as to say,
Remember Crogen; that they should expect no favor from the English: But this
Word in process of time grew to be an opprobrious Word, when the English would
in disgrace call the Welsh -- Crogens. Welsh Hist. page 257, 258.

This Lhewelyn was a valiant Prince, and brought all Wales to subjection. He
died tertio Idus Aprilis, scilicet die Sancti Guthlaci, Anno Christi 1240.
Matt. Paris, page 525. And having tamed Griffith his Son, who rebelled against
him, he left the Principality of Wales unto David his younger Son. He died in
the 46 Year of his Reign, and was buried at Conwey. Welsh Hist. page 298.

23. David, younger Son of Lhewelyn, Prince of North Wales, Wales, did Homage
to King Henry the Third for all the Lands which they had in Wales. Hist. of
Wales, page 299.

This David imprisoned Griffith his elder Brother, alleging also that he was a
Bastard: Senana, the Wife of Griffith, Petitions the King of England for the
Release of Griffith her Husband, and Owen his Son, who was imprisoned with his
Father. Henry the Third makes an Agreement with Senana, dated 25 Hen. 3. 1241.
and Roger de Monte alto, High-Steward of Cheshire, was a Surety or Pledge for
Senana to observe the Agreement. David consents to deliver Griffith, and Owen
his Son, and to stand to the Judgment of King Henry's Court about Griffith's
part of the Land; and to restore to Roger de Monte alto all his Land of Moald
in Flintshire: And David acknowledges to hold his Lands of Wales of King Henry
in Capite. Matt. Paris, page 624, 625. Griffith is sent by David unto King
Henry, who imprisoned him in the Tower of London; but Griffith endeavoring to
make an Escape, fell down and broke his Neck, 1 die Martii, 1244. Matt. Paris,
page 617.

David Prince of Wales took the Castle of Mould by Storm, 1245. Matt. Paris,
page 655. And after it was taken and razed to the Ground by Griffith ap
Gwenwynwyn, 1268. Welsh Hist. page 326.

Anno Chr. 1246.
David died without Issue, 1246. Matt. Paris, page 695.

24. Lhewelyn ap Griffith ap Lhewelyn, was the last Prince of Wales of the
British Blood, who with his Brother Owen Gogh divided the Principality between
them. Lhewelyn ap Griffith married Elianour Daughter of Simon de Montfort Earl
of Leycester, Anno 1279. 6 Edw. 1. the Marriage being Solemnized at Worcester,
at the Charge of the King of England. Walsingham, page 48. Welsh Hist. page
336. Matthew of Westminster places it Anno 1278. I find mention of a Daughter
he had, for whom the King of England promises to provide honorably, and to
give Lhewelyn 1000 l. Sterling, and some Honorable County in England, if
Lhewelyn would upon his Submission put the King in possession of Snowdon. This
was Anno 1281. upon a Treaty to be had. Welsh History with Powel's Notes, page
365. But what became of this Daughter, I find not; but her Mother Elianour was
now dead. This Treaty took no effect.

Lhewelyn, it is variously reported by our Historians. Matt. of Westminster
says, He was slain in the Battle betwixt the English and the Welsh, Anno 1282.
when Edmund de Mortuo mari rushing with others into the Army of Lhewelyn, he
was slain among other Welshmen, and his Head cut off, which was carried to
London, and set upon the top of the Tower of London: With whom agrees
Walsingham, who places the time one Year later. The Welsh History, page 374.
says, That Lhewelyn retiring to a Grove near Buhelt, or Buelht, whiles some of
the Welsh were sent to defend the Bridge called Pont Orewyn, suddenly there
came Horsemen about the Grove; and as he would have escaped, one Adam Francton
pursued him, and ran him through, but knew him not; and when he came to see his
Face in the Spoil, he knew him well, and struck off his Head; sub Anno 1282.
Yet Stow says, That whiles Lhewelyn was speaking disgraceful Words against the
English at Buelht-Castle, where he was taken, Roger le Strange ran upon him,
and cut off his Head.

Anno 1283. King Edward the First subdued all Wales, and annexed it to the
Crown of England; and David the Brother of Lhewelyn was taken, with some of his
Sons and Daughters: And David was sent to the Castle of Chester, and after
convicted of Treason in the Parliament at Shrewsbury, and put to death, says
our Stowe.

Giraldus Cambrensis in his Description of Wales, cap. 3. has this Pedigree
of the Ancient Princes of Wales, which I thought good here to insert.

Roderik the Great, King of All Wales, who was slain Anno Christi 876.
Princes of North-VVales. 1. Mervin, Prince of North-VVales. 2. Anandhrec, Son
of Mervin. 3. Meyric, Son of Anandhrec. 4. Edwal, Son of Meyric. 5. Jago, Son
of Edwal. 6. Conan, Son of Jago. 7. Griffith, Son of Conan. 8. Owen, Son of
Griffith. 9. Jorwerth, Son of Owen. 10. Lhewelyn, Son of Jorwerth, who died
Anno 1240.
Princes of Powys. Anaraud, Son of Roderik, had no Issue; unde Principes
Powisiae suam habent per se Generationem: So Giraldus. But this agrees not with
the Welsh History, which makes Anaraud to be the Prince of North-VVales, and
Father of Edwal Vowel.
Princes of South Wales. Cadelh, Prince of South Wales, Son of Roderik. Howel
Dha, that is, Howel the Good, Son of Cadelh. Owen, Son of Howel. Aeneas, Son of
Owen. Theodor, Son of Aeneas, or Eneon. Rees, Son of Theodor, 1077. Griffith,
Son of Rees: Obiit 1137. Rees, Son of Griffith.

To conclude: We see how uncertain the Welsh History in the later Times is,
not so much as vouching any Author or Record, either to prove the Deaths, or
Marriages, or Children punctually, nor when; and therefore full of Errors, till
of late, since the Reign of William the Conqueror: And how should we believe
any thing of the long Pedigree of Brute, in the more ancient and dark Ages?

And so much concerning Wales.
OF SCOTLAND.
CHAP. I.
Of the Description of Scotland, and the Ancient Inhabitants thereof.

I. SCOTLAND is the Northern Part of Great-Brettaine, separated from England by
the Rivers Tweed and Solway, and the Cheviot-Hills, extending from the one to
the other.

It is of no great Breadth, there being no Place distant from the Sea above 60
Miles; and the Country ending like the sharp Point of a Wedge: And the length,
measuring in a strait Line from North to South, to wit, from Solway-Frith to
the Strait-by-Head, amounts but to 310 Italian Miles; and from Barwick to
Strait-by-Head, is a great deal shorter. Dr. Heylyn's Cosmography, page 330.

II. The whole North part of Brettaine, anciently inhabited by the Picts, was
divided into two Nations, the Dicalidonii, and the Vecturiones. But when the
Scots came into those Parts, and were seated there, then did seven Princes
divide it into seven Parts, as it is in an Ancient Book concerning the Division
of Scotland, in these words following. Cambden's Britannia, page 682.

Prima Pars continebat Enegas and Maern. Secunda, Atheol and Gouerin. Tertia,
Stratheern cum Meneted. Quarta, fuit Fortheuer. Quinta, Mar cum Bughen. Sexta,
Muref and Ros. Septima, Cathenesia, quam Mound Mons medius dividit; qui a Mari
Occidentali ad Mare Orientale procurrit.
According to the respect of the People, Scotland is divided into two Parts,
the High-land-men, and the Low-land-men. The Low-land-men are more civilized;
and use both the Tongue and Habit of the English. The Highlanders more
barbarous and cruel, like the Wild Irish. The Borderers I exclude out of this
Division, as to be reckoned among the British People.

According to respect of Places, Scotland is divided into two Parts also;
South-Scotland on this side the River Tai, and North-Scotland beyond the River
Tai; besides many circumjacent Islands.

South-Scotland has these Countries. Tiefidale. Merch. Lauden. Liddesdale.
Eskedale. Annandale. Niddesdale. Galloway. Carrick. Kyle. Cunningham. Arran.
Cluydsdale. Lennox. Stirling. Fife. Stratherne. Mentieth. Arguyle. Cantire.
Lorn.

North-Scotland has these Countries. Loquabria. Braid Albin. Perth. Athol.
Angus. Mern. Mar. Buquhan. Murray. Ross. Sutherland. Cathanes. Strathnavern.

And these are again divided, for Civil Government, into Sheriffdoms,
Stewarties, and Bayleries.

Sheriffdoms, or Counties. Edenborough. Lynthiquo. Selkirk. Roxburgh. Peblis.
Berwick. Lanark. Kenfrew. Dunfreis. Wighton. Air. Bute. Argile and Tarbet.
Dunbarton. Perth. Clackmannan. Kinros. Fife. Kincardin. Forfair. Aberdene.
Bamf. Elgyn. Forres. Narne. Innerness. Chromartie. Orkney. and Shetland.

Stewarties. Mentieth. Strathern. Kircudbricht. Annandale.

Bayleries. 1. Kile. 2. Carrik. 3. Cunningham.

Hadington, A Constableship.

III. The Ancient Inhabitants of this Country, dwelling within the Limits of
the Roman Province, about Anno Christi 100. according to Cambden de Scotia,
were, The Gadeni Tevidale. Twedale Merch. Lothaine, Latin Lodeneium: The Chief
City whereof was Castrum Alatum, now called Edenborough.
The Damnii Cluydsdale, Lennox, Sterling, Mentieth, Fife.
Whose Chief City was Randuara, now called Renfraw, in Cluydsdale. The Selgovae
Liddisdale, Eusedale, Eskdale, Annandsdale, Niddisdale.
Whose Chief Place was Carbantorigum, now Caerlaverok in Niddisdale. Lindum,
now Linlithquo. The Novantes Galloway, Carricht, Kyle, Cunningham,
Whose Principal Places were Leucopibia, now White-Herne; and Berigonium, now
Bargeny.


Without the Roman Province, among the Picts, or Barbarous Britons, were,
Caledonii Stratherne, Argile, Cantire, Albanie, Lorn, Perth, Angus, Fife,
These Regions the Picts held Anno 605. Cambden's Britannia, page 707. Cantae
Ross, Sutherland.
Cornabii -- Strathnavern. Epibii -- Cantirre. Vernicones, forsan Vecturiones,
a Marcellino. Mernis, Mar.
Taizali -- Buquhan. Catini -- Catness. The Principal Castle is Girnego.
Vacomagi Loqhaber, Murray.



IV. As the Bishops of other Parts of the World had no certain Diocesses,
before Dionysius Bishop of Rome, about Anno Christi 268. had distributed
Diocesses to Bishops; so the Bishops of Scotland executed their Office without
distinction, till about Anno 1070. in the time of Malcolme the Third, Diocesses
were circumscribed with theit Limits. Cambden's Britannia, page 683.

Afterward, in tract of time, Scotland had two Archbishops; one of St.
Andrews, who was Primate of Scotland; the other of Glasco.

To the Archbishop of St. Andrews are substituted these eight Bishoprics;
Dunkeld. Aberdene. Murray. Brichen. Dumblane. Ross. Cathness. Orkeney.


Under the Archbishop of Glasco are only three: 1. Candida Casa, or Galloway.
2. Lismore, or Argile. 3. Of the Isles.


Of the Isles, the Isle of Man was the first Cathedral Seat; but by the
Invasion of the Norwegians and the English, the same was translated to
Ilcomkill. In Man, Amphibalus was the first Bishop. After the Translation of
the Seat to Ilcomkill, I find only one Onacus mentioned about the Year 1289.
with another called Mauritius, whom Edward I. King of England, sent Prisoner to
London. So far to the time of the Reformation. Spotswood's History of the
Church of Scotland, page 116.

CHAP. II.
Of the Original of the Scots in Scotland.

I. FIrst, for the Etymology of the Name of Scots, it is (as of other Nations
round about) full of obscurity. Buchanan (a Man otherwise of deep Insight, an
excellent Latin Poet, but a bad Statesman) will have Scotland named from Scota
a counterfeit Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt, wedded, forsooth, to one
Gaithelus, Son of Cecrops, Founder of Athens; for which he is justly taxed by
Cambden in his Britannia, page 85. For no Man skilful in Antiquities can endure
such palpable Falsities and Fables. Matthew of Westminster (sub Anno Gratiae
77.) says, That from the Picts and the Irish, the Scots had their Original, as
it were compacted of diverse Nations: For Scot (says he) is a heap made up of
several things.

But Learned Cambden supposes, and proves, That the Scots inhabited Ireland,
and from thence came into Scotland; and that they were originally Scythians:
for as from Getae, Getici, Gothi, Gothici; so Scythae, Scythici, Scoti,
Scotici, take their derivation. Hibernia proprie Patria Scottorum est, says
Bid. And Henry of Huntington, lib. 1. Histor. page 301. says, It is certain
that the Scots came out of Spain into Ireland, and from Ireland part of them
came into Brettaine, and so added a third Nation in Brettaine to the Britons
and Picts: For the Part which remained in Ireland, did in Huntington's time use
the same Language, and were called Navarri.

II. But for the time when the Name of Scot was first known, there is some
question. Homfrey Lhuid says, The Name of Scots cannot be found in any Author
before the time of Constantine the Great, that is, till about 310 Years after
Christ's Birth. Cambden in his Observation tells us, The first mention of the
Scots was under Aurelian the Emperor; in his Britannia, page 90. And that must
be about the Year of Christ 270.

The Nation of the Scots prevailed in Ireland, and began to be famous toward
the declining of the Roman Empire. Orosius, lib. 1. cap. 2. page 19.
Orosius says, That in the time of Honorius and Arcadius, Emperors, Ireland
was Inhabited with the Scots, about the Year of Christ 400. Whence Claudian the
Poet, de Quarto Consulatu Honorii, which was in Anno 398. and lived in the same
Age, says, -- Scottorum cumulos flevit Glacialis Ierne. And again, in his
second Book de Laudibus Stiliconis, -- Totam cum Scotus Iernam
Movit.


There were Scoti Ierni, Irish Scots; and Scoti Albini, Scots of Albin in
Scotland. Buchanan, page 54. Historians called Ireland, Scotia major; and
Scotland in Brettaine, Scotia minor. Cambd. Brit. page 90.

III. For the time when these Scots came first out of Ireland into Brettaine,
it was about the time of Valentinian the Emperor; for they assisted the Picts
in their Wars against the Brettons, then under the Roman Yoke, in that part of
Brettaine which is now called England, about Anno Christi 366. So Cambden's
Britannia, page 55. ex Ammiano Marcellino. For at this time the Picts, Scots,
Saxons, and the Attacotti, did much infest the Brettans. And Claudian the Poet,
in his Panegyric of the fourth Consulship of Honorius the Emperor, which was
in the Year of Christ 398. says thus: -- Ille, Caledoniis posuit qui Castra
Pruinis,
Qui medio Libyae sub Casside pertulit aestus,
Terribilis Mauro, Debellatorque Britanni
Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator, and Austri;
Quid rigor aeternus, Coeli quid Sydera prosunt,
Ignotumque fretum? Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades; incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne.


And it should seem that the Romans had at this time an Officer called Comes
Littoris Saxonici, in Brettaine; who, with the Soldiers allotted him, were to
defend the Seacoast in Brettaine from the Invasion of the Saxons. And the Scots
and Picts were also beaten out of that Part of Brettaine now called England, by
Stilico the Chief Governor of Brettaine under Honorius, who also expelled the
Saxons: And the Scots returning back into Ireland, shortly after came again:
And the Picts then first, and afterward, continued in the Northern Parts of
Brettaine, yet ceased not to molest the Brettans. Thus Bid, lib. 1.
Ecclesiasticae Historiae Anglorum Gentis, cap. 14 -- Revertuntur ergo
impudentes Grassatores Hyberni domum: Post non longum tempus reversuri. Picti
in extrema part Insulae tunc primum, and deinceps, quieverunt: Praedas tamen
nonnunquam exinde, and Contritiones de Britonum Gente agere non cessarunt:
Which Bid takes verbatim out of Gildas, cap. 18. fol. 17. b. Now Gildas
places this after the Brettans had sent their lamentable Letter unto Aetius
the Consul, which was sent (says Bid) Anno Christi 446. Anno Theodosii
Secundi, vicesimo tertio: Lib. 1. Hist. cap. 13. Aetio ter Consuli Gemitus
Britannorum.

And so, post pauca, -- Repellunt Barbari ad Mare, repellit Mare ad Barbaros:
Inter haec duo genera funerum, aut jugulamur, aut mergimur.

Yet for all this, the Romans sent them no Aid at that time; for the Roman
Power was now declining.

Now the Computation of Bid is not right, unless we understand it of the 23
Year of Theodosius, after the death of Honorius: And so Bid expresses himself
in the beginning of the Chapter. For Aetius was Consul the first time with
Symmachus, Anno Christi 446. And thus the Scots must return about that time
into Ireland.

But Cambden says, Liber Pasletensis casts the Return of the Scots into the
North of Brettaine in Anno Christi 404. Giraldus says, That in the time of
Nellus Magnus, Ireland, six Sons of Mured King of Ulster possessed the North
Parts of Brettaine, whence that Nation was propagated, and called Scotland: And
therefore Cambden conceives, it must fall in the Reign of Honorius.

Bid makes mention of Reuda about this time, ( Lib. 1. de Hist. Ang. cap. 1.)
under whose Conduct the Scots out of Ireland seated themselves in Brettaine, on
the North side of the River Cluyd; which they possessed either by force or
friendship: from whom they were called Dal-Reudini, that is, The Part of Reuda:
And others think, That from this Reuda we gave them the Name of Red-Shanks,
says Cambden. And the Opinion is, That about this time flourished that Simon
Brechus, whom the Scots say was the Founder of their Nation. Sinbrech is the
true name of the Man: Sin signifies Pimples, or Freckles, ut apud Fordonum
legitur. Perhaps this was the Brichus who in the time of St. Patrick, with
Thuibaius, Macleius, and Auspacus, Scotchmen, vexed Brettaine, as we read in
the Life of St. Carantocus.

But why did the Scots call their Country in Brettaine, Alban, or Albin; and
the Irish call it Allabany? Cambden supposes from Banno, by which Name their
Poets call Ireland; as it were another Ireland. Buchanan says, That Alpum and
Album (from whence comes Albin) is an ancient word for a Hill; and that upon
the Sea between Ireland and Scotland, the Shore of Scotland seems to rise up
into Mountains, and so gained the Name of Albin. Hist. Scot. lib. 1. page 12,
13.

But when the Scots came unto the Picts in Brettaine, though they ever and anon
did make War and Excursions upon the Brettans, yet did they not advance very
soon, but lived in that Angle where they first arrived. They continually warred
against the Kings of Northumberland, for the space of 127 Years; till Edan King
of the Scots, and his Army, were totally routed by Ethelfrid King of
Northumberland, Anno Domini 603. Bid de Hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 34.

And when the Picts were almost rooted out, and the Kingdom of the
Northumbrians, through Civil Discords and Incursions of the Danes, About the
Year 800.
fell to decay; then was all the North part of Brettaine called Scotland, from
Cluyd and Edenborough-Frith: And on this side Cluyd and Edenborough-Frith, was
part of the Kingdom of Northumberland, and possessed by the Saxons, as every
man knows. But at this day Scotland is divided from England by the Rivers Tweed
and Solway: And hence it is, that all those who possess the East part of
Scotland, and are called Lowland-men, are descended of the English Saxons, and
speak the English Tongue; and those that inhabit the Western Coast of Scotland,
called Highlanders, be descended from the Scots, and speak Irish, and are
maliciously bent toward the Lowland-men who speak English.

II. The People of the Scots have been noted of their best Writers for some
barbarous Customs; one whereof was, If any two were displeased, they expected
no Law, but banged it out bravely, one, and his Kindred, against the other, and
his Kindred. This Fighting they called their Feids. These deadly Feids King
James the Sixth, in his Basilicon Doron, advises his Son to redress with all
care possible: But it pleased God to give this King so long a Life, as to see
it remedied in his own days: An Act indeed truly Royal, and worthy himself. Dr.
Heylyn's Cosmography, page 331.

Another Custom they had of a strange nature, never was the like heard of among
the Heathens; That the Kings of Scotland should have the Maidenhead, or first
Nights Lodging with every Woman, who was to be married to a Husband that held
Land immediately from the Crown; and the Lords and Gentlemen should have the
like of all those whose Husbands were their Tenants or Homagers: And this was
by a Law made by Eugenius a lascivious Prince of Scotland. But this Custom, in
the time of Malcolme the Third, surnamed Cammoir, was made redeemable for half
a Mark of Silver, Scots at this day call The Marchet of the Women. Buchanan,
lib. 7. page 214. The reason of the Name, Skene, in his Interpretation of Old
Words, thinks to come from March, which in the Ancient Scotch Language
signifies A Horse; and so metaphorically denotes a Pension for the Leaping of a
Woman, ascendere Mulierem. Spelman in his Glossary says, That Merch in the
ancient Language of the Brettans signifies a Daughter, or Woman-Sex; and so
denotes a Pension for a Woman's Marriage, to the Lord or King.

CHAP. III.
Of the Picts in Scotland.

THe Name of Pict was first introduced by the Romans, says Buchanan in his
History of Scotland, lib. 2. page 54. because these People painted their Bodies
with the Pictures of all manner of Living Creatures: It was not their ancient
Native Name. Herodian says, Neque vestis usum cognorunt; sed ventrem and
cervicem ferro cingunt, Ornamentum id esse, ac divitiarum argumentum
existimarunt, perinde ut aurum caeteri Barbari: They put Iron Plates about
their Bellies and Necks, which they reputed an Ornament, and an Argument of
Riches, (as other Foreign Nations esteemed Gold) and painted their Bodies with
the Forms of all manner of Living Creatures: Wherefore they put on no Clothes,
that they might not hide their Bodies so carved and painted.

Buchanan supposes them to be originally Scythians, or Getes, page 55. Hergust
their King dying about the time of Victorinus (Lord Deputy of Brettaine under
Honorius the Emperor, who reduced the Picts to the Roman Province about the
Year of Christ 412.) forbad them to make any new King, but what should be given
them by the Romans; and that it was prophesied of old, That the Picts should be
rooted out by the Scots. Buchanan, ibid. page 129. And at last Brudus, King of
the Picts, not able to compose the Differences already begun between the Picts
and the Scots, died for grief; and Drusken his Brother (who was the last King
of the Picts) was overthrown in Battle, Buchanan, li. 5. p. ^65, 166.
about the Year of Christ 838. by Kenneth the Second, King of the Scots, and
the Picts utterly subdued: Since which time, the Kings of the Scots have been
Lords of all Scotland, who before had only a Part of Scotland.

It is said, That the Nation of the Picts came first out of Scythia into
Ireland, and from thence into the North Parts of our Brettaine: So Bid de
Hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 1. And this (as many will have it) about Anno Christi
78.

Judicious Cambden thinks they were very Brettans, who before the coming of the
Romans were seated in the North part of our Island, with such other Brettans
who fled unto them, as unwilling to submit to the Roman Servitude: In his
Britannia, page 82.

For my part, I think the Brettans and the Picts do signify the same thing;
one being a Greek Name, and the other Latin: This of Latin being given by the
Romans in later Times, in distinction from our Brettans of England who
submitted to the Roman Government, and were styled as formerly, and perhaps
more civilized by the Romans. Those other more rude, and flying into Scotland,
and continually opposing the Romans, were by them called Picti, which Name
continued afterward, I find not the Name of Picti in any Author mentioned,
till 300 Years after Christ, and more: And that as well the Brettans, as the
Picts, were Peopled from the ancient Galls, and those originally descended
from the Scythians and Getes, as Sheringham de Anglorum Gentis Origin, does
probably demonstrate.

There were also two other sorts of People among the Picts in Scotland, in the
time of the Romans; the Maiatae, and the Attacotti, as they were styled by the
Romans: Of whom see Buchanan, lib. 2. page 57. and also Cambden's Britannia,
page 655. and page 91. These inhabited the Borders of Scotland.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Kings of Scotland.

* THe Kingdom of Scotland was never totally Conquered, either by the Romans or
Saxons; for which they may thank their great Barren Mountains, whether they
fled from the Enemy, as a Shelter.

It consisted (as you have already heard) of two sorts of People, Picts, and
Scots. It remains that I set down the Catalogue of their Kings, as far as truth
of History will bear: For the first 39 Kings of Scotland (which some Scotch
Historians do reckon up) are but vain and fabulous, as Dr. Heylyn truly
accounts them, in his Cosmography, page 335.

Kings of Scotland before the Conquest of the Picts, when the Scots had but one
Part of Scotland, and the Picts the other Part.
Fergus King of the Scots, and Durstus King of the Picts, slain in Battle
against the Romans and Brettans, Anno Christi 420. Buchanan.

Eugenius, or Euenus, eldest Son of Fergus.

Dongard, Brother of Eugenius.

Constantine, Brother of Dongard, and youngest Son of Fergus.

Congall, Son of Dongard.

Goran, Brother of Congall.

Eugenius II. Son of Congall.

Congall II. Brother to Eugenius.

Kinnatel: In his time Aidan, Son of Gorran, came into Scotland, who two Years
before came out of Ireland; and was now by St. Columba brought to Kinnatel, who
left the Kingdom to Aidan, having only Reigned 14 Months.

Aidan, Son of Gorran, had his Kingly Robes put on by Columba. Deadly Feuds
began between him and Brudeus Brudeus was Son of Meilocon: Ordericus, l 8. p.
702.
King of the Picts. Aidan was routed by Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, Anno
603. Bid, lib. 1. cap. 34. So that he never came again into Scotland.

Kenneth I. was elected King. He Reigned but 4 Months, or (ut alii) 12 Months.

Eugenius III. Son of Aidan.

Ferchard I. Son of Eugenius.

Donaldus, Brother of Ferchard.

Ferchard II. Son of Ferchard. He was wounded by a Wolf.

Maldwine, Son of Donwald. He was strangled by his Wife, upon suspicion he had
lain with a Whore; and she was burned for it.

Eugenius IV. Son of Dongard.

Eugenius V. Son of Ferchard.

Amberkeleth, Son of Findanus, Son of Eugenius IV.

Eugenius VI. He married Spondana Daughter of Garnard, and commanded the Acts
of Kings to be Registered in Abbeys.

Mordac, Son of Amberkeleth.

Etfin, Son of Eugenius VI. He forced Galloway to pay Tribute.

Eugenius VII. Son of Mordac, was murdered by his Nobles.

Fergus II. Son of Etfin, was strangled by his Wife when he was asleep.

Solvathius, Son of Eugenius VII. a good Prince.

Achaius, Son of Etfin, first entered into a League with France. Hungus King of
the Picts obtains 10000 Scots of him.

Congall III. Cousin to Achaius.

Dongall II. Son of Solvathius.

Alpin, Son of Achaius, slain in Battle by the Picts, who challenged that
Kingdom in right of his Mother, Sister to Hungus King of the Picts, and his
Heir also.

Kenneth II. Son of Alpin, utterly subdued and destroyed the Picts, and slew
Drusken their last King, extending thereby the Scottish Kingdom from one Sea to
the other, over all the Bounds of Modern Scotland.

Kings of Scotland after the Conquest of the Picts.
Kenneth II. the first sole King of all Scotland, conquered the Picts, Anno
838. He promoted his Kingdom from the Isles of the Orcades to Adrian's Wall.
Buchanan.

Donald II. Brother of Kenneth, died at Scone, Anno 858.

Constantine II. Son of Kenneth, slain by the Danes.

Ethus, Brother of Constantine, surnamed Alipes, a Pedum celeritate.

Gregorius, Son of Dongall, a stout Prince. He overcame the Danes, Brettans,
and English; subdued Cumberland and Westmorland; entered Ireland with an Army in
the time of Duncan, or Donat, or more truly Dunach, King of Ireland, a Child;
and overcame Brien, and Cornelius, General of the Irish Forces.

Donald III. Son of Constantine II.

Constantine III. Son of Ethus.

Malcolme I. styled Milcolumbus in Latin, Son of Donald III. had Cumberland and
Westmorland by the Gift of Edmund King of England, upon condition that every
succeeding King of Scotland should swear Fealty to the King of England, as the
Supreme Sovereign.

Indulf, an Intruder.

Duffe, Son of Malcolme, was murdered.

Culen, Son of Indulfe, murdered by one Rohard a Thane or Nobleman.

Kenneth III. Brother of Duffe.

Constantine IV. Son of Culen, surnamed Calvus, or The Bald; a Usurper of the
Crown.

Grime, Son of Duffe, was slain in Battle by Malcolme Prince of Cumberland.

Malcolme II. Son of Kinneth III. murdered by his Nobles in the Castle of
Glammis in Angus.

Duncan, Son of Grime, succeeded Malcolme II. Malcolme had no Issue Male, but
two Daughters; Beatrix, Married to one Crine a Nobleman, Thane of the
West-Islands, and Ruler or President over the rest of the Thanes, whom that Age
called A-Thane. Doaca the other Daughter married the Thane of Angus, of whom he
begat Macbeth: So Buchanan. And Duncan had by the Daughter of Siward the Great,
Earl of Northumberland, two Sons; Malcolme Cammoir, and Donald surnamed Ban,
that is, White.

Macbeth, Grandson to Malcolme II. by Doaca his Daughter.

18. Malcolme III. surnamed Cammoir, that is, Great-Head, Son of Duncan. He
enjoyed Cumberland and Westmorland, with the Dominion of Scotland; and married
Margaret the Sister of Edgar Atheling (Right Heir to the Crown of England, but
kept out by William the Conqueror) by whom he had Issue six Sons, Edward,
Edgar, Alexander, David, Edmund, and Ethelred. These two last were driven into
England by Donwald their Uncle, and died in Banishment, says Buchanan.
Malcolme had also two Daughters, Maud Wife to Henry the First, King of England,
and Mary another Daughter of Malcolme, married to Eustace Earl of Boloine.
Ordericus, page 702. Buchanan, page 215.

This Malcolme, with Edward his eldest Son, was slain by Morell, or Morkell, an
Officer under Robert de Moulbray Earl of Northumberland, the 13 day of
November, 1093. near the River Alne in Northumberland. Roger Hoveden, page 463,
464. as he was coming home peaceably toward Scotland. Ordericus vitalis, lib.
8. page 701, 702.

Donald IV. surnamed Ban, Brother to Malcolme, was beaten out of Scotland by
Duncan II. after that he had Reigned six Months.

Duncan II. base Son of Malcolme III. set up by the Scots, and murdered by
Macpendirus Earl of Merne. Buchanan.

Edgar, Son of Malcolme III. by the help of William Rufus King of England,
recovered Scotland; which Forces were procured by the Mediation of Edgar
Atheling his Uncle. Hoveden, page 466. He built an Abbey at Coldingham,
consecrated to Ebba the Virgin Anno 1102.
, afterward translated into the Name of Cutbert: But Edgar died without Issue,
Anno 1107. 6 Idus Januarii. Buchanan, page 216. Matt. Paris, page 63. Hoveden,
page 471. sub Anno 1108.

Alexander, Brother of Edgar, was surnamed Acer, or The Fierce. He built the
Temple of St. Michael at Scone, and also a Temple in honor of Columbus, in the
Isle of Aemona. He married Sibilla Daughter of William the Conqueror, but left
no Children by her: So Buchanan. But the Conqueror had no such Daughter, that I
can find, either in Ordericus or Stowe, who name all his Daughters. She was
base Daughter of Henry the First. Ordericus, page 702.

David, Brother of Alexander, married Maude Daughter of Waltheof Earl of
Northumberland, and Widow of Simon Seintliz Earl of Northampton and Huntington.
Vincent upon Brook, page 367. By which Marriage he had the Counties of
Northumberland and Huntington in England; and by her had Issue Henry a Son, who
married Ada Sister of William Warren Earl of Surrey in England, and half Sister
by the Mother to Walleran Earl of Mellent in France, and to Robert surnamed
Bossue, Earl of Leycester in England. Simon Dunelmensis, sub Anno 1139. page
265.

Henry had Issue by Ada, Malcolme, William Earl of Northumberland, David Earl
of Carricht in Scotland, and of Huntington in England; also Maude a Daughter:
But this Prince Henry died before his Father, Anno Domini 1152. and Maude his
Daughter also.

Anno Domini 1153. nono Calendas Junii, died David King of Scotland. Hoveden,
page 490.

Malcolme IV. Son of Henry, and Grandson to David, a Child of the Age of twelve
Years, succeeded King. He resigned Northumberland to King Henry the Second of
England; Cumberland and Huntington being left to Malcolme. Buchanan. He died
without Issue, nono die Decembris, 1165. in the 25 Year of his Age, and 12 Year
of his Reign, and a little more. Buchanan and Hoveden, page 496.

William, Brother to Malcolme, fetched Northumberland back again. He married
Ermengard Daughter of Richard Viscount de Beaumont, Cousin to Henry the Second,
King of England, scilicet Anno 1186. Hoveden. And in Anno 1174. this William
was taken Prisoner at Alnwick by Robert Stutevile Sheriff of York, William de
Vescy, Randle Glanvill, Bernard Baliol, and others. Hoveden, page 538, 539.
Henry King of England restored unto him the Earldom of Huntington, 1184. upon
the death of Simon de Seintliz then Earl thereof; and King William immediately
conferred it on David his younger Brother. Hoveden, page 622. William did
Homage to John King of England, for his Lands in England, at Lincoln, Anno
1200. Hoveden and Buchanan. Fecit homagium de omni Jure suo, and after swore
Fealty to him. Matthew. Paris, page 204.

King William died Anno 1214. aged 74 Years, Annoque Regni 49. Buchanan. He had
a Son by Ermengard, called Alexander, born Anno 1199. and another Son killed in
his Infancy, with his Nurse, by an Inundation. Buchanan, page 232. He had also
two Daughters, Margaret, and Isabel, promised to the two Sons of King John when
they should be marriageable. Hollinshed. But one of these Daughters afterward
married the Earl of Flanders, 1210. Knighton, page 2420.

Alexander II. Son of William, married Joan Sister to Henry the Third, King of
England, 1221. Matt. Paris, page 313. He demands Northumberland, which King
John promised him in Marriage with Joan his Daughter. Matt. Paris, page 432. He
denies that he holds any part of the Kingdom of Scotland from the Kings of
England; or that he either would, or ought so to hold it: This was Anno 1244.
Joan his Queen dying in England, Anno 1236. was buried in London: And soon
after (for yet he had no Children) he married Mary Daughter of Ingelram de
Cuscy a Frenchman, Anno 1239. by whom he had Issue Alexander a Son, who
succeeded his Father. Buchanan, and Matt. Paris, page 638.

Anno 1244. he makes a League with the King of England his Brother-in-Law,
wherein he acknowledges the King of England his Leige-Lord. See the Charter in
Matt. Paris, page 646.

This Alexander the Second died Anno 1249. Anno aetatis 51. Annoque Regni 35.
Buchanan, and Matt. Paris, page 771.

Alexander III. Son of Alexander II. Crowned at Scone; a Child not above eight
Years old. He was Knighted at York by Henry the Third, Anno 1251. on Christmas
day; and the day after he married Margaret Daughter of the said King Henry.
Mat. Paris, page 829. also Buchanan. He did Homage to the King of England at
that time, for the Lands which he had in England; but refused to do Homage for
Scotland, when it was tendered him according to the Custom of his Predecessors,
by the Testimony of Ancient Chronicles.

Robert Abbot of Fermelinodunum, Chancellor to the King of Scotland, was
accused for Legitimating the Wife of Alan Durovart, Bastard-daughter of
Alexander the Second, that so, if the King should now die without Issue, she
might succeed as Heir. Buchanan.

Henry King of England created this Alexander Earl of Huntington by Charter,
Anno 1256. to hold as freely, as any of his Predecessors ever held the same.
Matt. Paris, page 931.

This Alexander overcame Acho King of Norwey in Battle, 1263. and took the Isle
of Man, and all the Western Isles. Buchanan. He promised his Daughter Margaret,
yet but four Years old, to Hangonan (Son of Magnus) King of Norwey, to be his
Wife when she was marriageable; which it seems was performed afterward: for
she had Issue by him a Daughter, called also Margaret, who died young, about
Anno 1291.

Alexander in few Years being deprived of his Wife and all his Children, did
after marry Iolet Daughter of the Earl of Dreux [Comitis Druidum]; but I find
not that he had any Children by her: for soon after, within a Year, to wit, 14
Calendas Aprilis, Anno 1285. he was killed by a fall from his Horse, not far
from Kingorne, aged 45 Years, Annoque Regni 37. Buchanan.

* Now Walsingham tells us, Hist. Edw. 1. page 54. That Alexander (the Son of
this King Alexander the Third) died in his Father's life time: And Buchanan
says, That the young Alexander married the Earl of Flanders's Daughter; and
that Alexander the Third had another Son called David, and a Daughter called
Margaret; but all died before the King: So that now great strife did arise who
should succeed King of Scotland. Only give me leave to observe here, how
Walsingham says, That the Daughter of the Earl of Flanders was second Wife of
King Alexander the Third: Wherein I believe he is mistaken; for, according to
Buchanan, she was the Wife of young Alexander his Son, who died before his
Father.

Here was now an Interregnum of six Years and nine Months, in which time there
were twelve Competitors to the Crown of Scotland, who lay down their Claims in
the Competition-Roll in the Tower, mentioned by Vincent upon Brook, Title
Huntington, page 253, etc. Which, for brevity, I shall give you here, in a
short Pedigree of the Kings of Scotland.

Malcolme III. surnamed Cammoir, King of Scotland, slain 1093. See Malcolme's
Pedigree in Imag. Histor. by Radulphus de Di ceto. page 627.
-- Margaret Sister to Edgar Atheling. Ordericus,page 701, 702.
1 Edward, eldest Son, slain with his Father, 1093. 2 Edgar King of Scotland,
died without Issue, 1107. 3 Alexander, also King, 1107. Obiit sine prole, 1124.
Melcofus, a bastard. Ordericus, page 702.
4 David, also King, 1124 Obiit 1153 -- Maud, Daughter of Waltheof, Earl of
Northumberland. Another Son, the eldest, killed by a Varlet in his Nurses arms.
Ordericus, page 702. Henry Prince of Scotland, died before his Father, viz.
Anno 1152. -- Ada, Sister to the third William Earl Warren and Surrey, 1139.
Margaret, married to Conan Earl of Little-Brettain; after to Bohuis. She died
1201. Hoveden, p. 822. 1 Malcolme IV. Obiit sine prole, 1165. 2 William King of
Scotland, died 1214. -- Ermengard, Daughter of Richard Viscount Beaumont, 1186.
2 Henry. Patrick de Galightly, one of the Competitors.
1 Alexander II. King of Scotland. Obiit 1249. -- Joan, Sister to H 3. King of
England, 1221. Alexander III. King of Scotland, killed by a fall from his
Horse, A. 1285. -- Margaret, Daughter of Hen. 3. King of England, 1251. David
Son of Alexander III. died before his Father without Issue. Alexander married
the Daughter of the Earl of Flanders; but he died before his Father, leaving no
Issue. Margaret Wife of the King of Norwey. Margaret, a Daughter, died young,
without Issue, about 1291. Ericus King of Norwey became a Competitor for the
Crown of Scotland, on behalf of Margaret his Daughter, now deceased, as
Administrator to her, Anno 1292. Walsingham's Hist. page 58.



Isabel, Wife of Roger le Bigot Earl Marshal; no Issue: But she married Robert
Lord Roos, first Hus. William L. Roos, another Competitor.
Margaret Wife of Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, 1221. M. Paris. Margaret Wife
of Richard de Clare: No Issue.
Margerita Wife unto Eustace de Vescy William de Vescy 1 John sine prole. 2
William Vescy, another Competitor. 1291.

Ada, Wife of Patrick de Dunbarre. -- Patrick. Patric E. of Dunbar, another
Competitor. 1291.
Austrio, or Aufrica, Wife of William de Say of Vlster. A quo Roger de
Mandevil, another Competitor.

3 David Earl of Huntington, 1184. -- Maud, eldest Sister to Randle Blundevil
Earl of Chester, and a Coheir. 1 Margaret, eldest daughter of David Earl of
Huntington, was Second wife to Alan de Galloway, Constable of Scotland.
Dervergoile, married to John Baliol of Bernards Castle in the Bishopric of
Durham, the Founder of Baliol-College in Oxford. He died Anno 1269. aut paulo
ante. 1 Hugh Baliol, Son and Heir. Obiit sine prole. Balio-fergus, page 2. 2
Alan, second Son. Obiit sine prole. 3 Alexander, third Son. Obiit sine prole. 4
John Baliol, another Competitor, who was adjudged King of Scotland by the Award
of King Edward the First, Anno 1292.
Thomas died without Issue. Christian, eldest Daughter, died without Issue.
2 Isabel married Robert de Bruise. -- To. de Bruise Lord of Anandale, another
Competitor. 1291. 3 Maud died without Issue. 4 Ada married Henry Hastings.
Knighton, page 2431.
John Hastings Lord of Berguenny, another Competitor. 1291.
1 Henry died young. 2 David died young. 3 John Scot Earl of Chester, married
Hellen, Daughter of Lhewellyn Prince of North Wales. John died without Issue,
Anno 1237. Helen his Widow after married Robert Quency, third Son of Saher de
Quency Earl of Winchester.

Ada Wife of Florence Earl of Holland. She died 1208. Hist. of the Netherlands,
p. 16. Florence. William. Florence, a Competitor to the Crown of Scotland; An
Do. 1291. Pryn's Hist. p. 513.

1 Claricia. 2 Hodierna. Ordericus, pa. 702.

5 and 6 Edmund, and Ethelred, banished by their Uncle Donwald. 1 Edith, after
called Maude, uxor H. 1. Regis Angliae. 2 Mary, wife of Eustace, Comitis
Boloniae.

Quare, Whether Margaret Wife of Hubert de Burgo, were not the Widow of Eustace
Vescy; for Eustace died 1216. Mat Paris

* See the Claims of the Competitors to the Crown of Scotland, Anno Domini
1291. from the Record it self, set down in Pryn's History of King John, Hen. 3.
and Edw. 1. page 513, 514, etc.

* See the Record in Pryn's History of K. John, H. 3. and Edw. 1. Pa. 515, 516.

28. John Balioll, Son of John Balioll of Bernards-Castell in the Bishopric of
Durham, Interregnum of six Years and nine Months, was by Edward the First
adjudged right Heir to the Crown of Scotland, and was thereupon Crowned King at
Scone on St. Andrew's Day, being the last of November, in the Year of Christ
1292. and presently after he came to Newcastle upon Tyne, and did Homage to the
King of England there, and acknowledged King Edward to be his Liege Lord of all
the Kingdom of Scotland, to be held hereditarily of the Kings of England.
Walsingham's Hypodigma Neustriae, page 480.

For Edward the First, King of England, being appointed Judge of the Right to
the Crown of Scotland, by consent of all the Competitors (of whom only the
Question was moved between John Balioll and Robert Bruise, for all the rest of
the Competitors were excluded as inferior Titles) gave Sentence for John
Balioll by the common Assent, who was Descended from the eldest Daughter of
David Earl of Huntington, Brother of William King of Scotland, and Bruise from
the younger Daughter; where by the way I must note Walsingham's Book
misprinted, which calls David here mentioned King of Scotland, for Brother of
the King of Scotland.

Anno 1295. this John Balioll desired to Marry Edward Balioll his Son, unto
Joan, Daughter of Charles, Brother to the King of France, promising his Aid
against the King of England. And in Anno 1296. the Scots Besiege Carlisle; King
Edward subdues the Scots, and makes them swear Fealty to him, takes John
Balioll, King of Scotland, Prisoner, and leaves John Warren, Earl of Surrey,
Protector of Scotland, and Hugh Cressingham, Treasurer, and William de Ormesby,
Justice, and so returns to London. Walsingham.

29. Robert Bruise was Crowned King of Scotland at Scone, in April 1306. Robert
Bruise, Lord of Annansdale, Competitor with John Balioll, in Right of Isabell
his Mother, the second Daughter, though a Degree nearer than Balioll to the
deceased King, and Son of the second Daughter, whereas Balioll was Descended of
the eldest Sister, but of a Daughter of that Sister; which Robert Bruise the
Father, released his Title to this Robert Bruise his Son, then Earl of Carrick,
but now King of Scotland, Dated at Barwick, die Veneris in Crastino Sancti
Leonardi (the seventh of November) Anno Gratiae 1292. Vincent upon Brook, page
255. but it being adjudged to Balioll, he seeks to get it by force, and was
Crowned 1306. confirmed therein by the great Defeat given to Edward the
Second's Forces at Banocksburn, not far from Sterling.

* One Hamilton flying from the English Court to this King Robert (who gave him
Lands juxta Glottam Fluvium) his Postetity afterward came to be ranked among
the Nobility of Scotland, and the House and Land which the King gave him, was
called Hamilton. This was the original of the Hamiltons in Scotland. Buchanan,
lib. 8. page 271, 272.

Anno 1318. Edward Bruise, Brother to this King Robert, was taken Prisoner and
Beheaded at Dundalk: He had infested Ireland three Years, and caused himself to
be Crowned King thereof. Walsingham, page 111.

This King Robert Married to his first Wife, Isabel, Daughter of Donald, of
whom he begot Marjory, Mother of Robert Stewart, afterward King of Scotland.
Cambden's Britannia, page 713.

Robert Bruise died the ninth of July 1329. Anno Regni 24. Buchanan, page 280.
But Walsingham, page 129. says -- Anno 1328, Hoc anno Robertus Bruis Rex
Scotiae, lepra percussus obiit, 7 Idus Junii, not Julii. The Scots then chose
Thomas Randulf Earl of Murray, Protector of David Bruise (Son of Robert) a Child
about eight Years old. Randulf died 1331, 13 Calendas Augusti; and Duncan Earl
of Mar was then chosen Protector of Scotland.

30. Edward Balioll, Son of John Balioll, King, entered Scotland with an Army,
Scone, 8 Calendas Septembris 1332. Buchanan, page 285. But Walsingham says he
was Crowned 5 Calendas Octobris, that is the 27. of September.

31. David Bruise, Son of King Robert Bruise, called David II. Throne by the
Power of the Scots. He Married Jane, Sister to King Edward the Third, at
Barwick, 18 Julii 1329. She died in England 1357. and he died at Edenborough, 7
Maii 1370. anno aetatis 47, annoque Regni prope 39, leaving no Issue. Buchanan.
For he was Crowned 1330, 23 Novembris: So that this was a tumultuous Age in
Scotland.

Ann. Dom. 1370.
32. Robert II. of the Family of the Stewarts, King of Scotland, by Descent from
the eldest Sister of David Bruise. He Married Euphemia, Daughter of Hugh Earl of
Rosse, and by her had Issue Walter, Earl of Athol, and David, Comes Ierniae;
which David had only one Daughter, Married to Patrick Gramus. Buchanan, page
353. also Euphemia a Daughter, Married to James Duglas. Euphemia the Queen died
1373. Buchanan, page 307. Soon after he Married Elizabeth Moor, Daughter of Sir
Adam Moor, his old Concubine, of whom he had formerly begot three Sons, and two
Daughters, and had placed her to be kept with with one Giffard, a Nobleman of
Lothaine, whom he Married, to make those Children legitimate; John the eldest
he made Earl of Carrict, Robert he made Earl of Mentith and Fife, and Alexander
he made Earl of Buqhan, who had a Bastard called also Alexander, Earl of Mar.
Cambden's Britannia, page 713.

This Robert II. died Anno 1390. about the thirteenth of the Calends of May,
aged 74 Years, and having Reigned 19 Years and 24 Days. Buchanan, lib. 9. page
323.

Note.
Of the original of the Family of Stewart in Scotland there is a Fable mentioned
by Dr. Heylin, in his Cosmography, page 336, which you may read there at large:
The sum of the truth (if yet it be a Truth) is this: In the days of Malcolme
Cammoir, King of Scotland, about Anno 1090, one Walter (Son of Fleanch, Son of
Bancho) was sent by the King against the Gallowidians in Scotland, who slew
their Commander, and so quelled the Rebellion: The King upon his Return, for
his good Service made him Stewart of Scotland, an Office of Collecting all the
King's Revenues. In former Times such were called Thanes: And the Thanes of
Countries in many Places are now called Stewarts, the English Speech
overspreading that Country, Et qui illis erat ab Thanus, nunc Stuartus Scotiae
nominatur. And from this Walter the Family of the Stewarts took their Name and
Original, who have for a long time flourished in Scotland. Thus Buchanan, Rerum
Scoticarum, lib. 7. page 212.

But Powel on the Welsh History, page 97. tells us, That the said Fleanch, a
Nobleman of Scotland, fled for safety to Griffith ap Lhewellyn, Prince of
Wales, where he fell in Love with Griffith's Daughter (whose Name I find to be
Nest,) and got her with Child: whereupon Griffith caused Fleanch to be killed.
At last she was Delivered of a Son called Walter, who went into Scotland, and
at last became Stewart of Scotland, as is above rehearsed.

Robert III. Son of Robert II. whose right Name was John, but changed into
Robert after his coming to the Crown: He was Crowned the Ides of August 1390.
Buchanan, lib. 10. page 324. sub initio. He Married Annabill, Daughter of Sir
John Drommond of Stobhall, Knight, and had Issue two Sons, David and James;
David died in Falkland, famished (says Buchanan) by his perfidious Uncle,
Robert Earl of Fife, and Governor of Scotland, Anno 1401. This David had before
betrothed Elizabeth, Daughter of George Earl of Narne, Page 326.

Robert III. was buried the first of April 1406. annoque Regni 16. Buchanan,
lib. 10. page 333. He died for grief that James his young Son was taken and
kept Prisoner by the King of England. At a Parliament at Perth, Anno Dom. 1399.
this King Robert created his Son David (then aged 18 Years) Duke of Rothsay;
and Robert Earl of Fife was made Duke of Albany. These were the first Dukes of
Scotland.

James I. Son of Robert III. was taken upon the Seas going for France, and
brought to the King of England a little before his Father's death, where he was
kept Prisoner 18 Years, and then set free in February 1423. and Crowned in
Scotland the 21 of April following. He Married Jane, Daughter of John Beaufort,
Earl of Somerset in England, 1423. Stow; and had two Sons Twins, Alezander and
James; Alexander died young, and James succeeded King, born the fourteenth of
October 1430. Buchanan, page 347. also six Daughters; Margaret, one Daughter,
Contracted to Lewis, Son of Charles the Seventh, King of France, 1425.
Buchanan, page 342.

James the First died in the beginning of the Year 1437. aged 44 Years, and
Reigned 13 Years. Buchanan, page 361.

35. James II. Son of James the First, scarce seven Years old, Edenborough in
Caenobio Sanctae Crucis, about the sixth of the Calends of April, 1437.
Buchanan, page 362. Alexander Leviston made Protector, and William Crihton Lord
Chancellor.

He Married Mary, Daughter of Arnold Duke of Gelderland, Anno 1448. Hollinshed
calls her Margaret, page 248. and had Issue by her three Sons and two
Daughters; James the eldest. Alexander the second Son, Duke of Albany, Married
the Earl of Orkney's Daughter, and got on her Alexander Bishop of Murray; and
then parting with her, went into France, and Married the Countess of Boloigne,
by whom he had Sir John Steward, Duke of Albany, Governor of Scotland many
Years in the Minority of James the Fifth. The third Son was John Stewart, Earl
of Mar. Mary the elder Daughter Married the Lord Boyd, and after to James
Lord Hamilton. Buchanan, page 420. So was the Blood Royal mingled with the
Family of Hamilton. The younger Daughter Married the Lord Crihton. Hollinshed,
page 248.

James the Second was slain at the Siege of Roxborough Castle, 1460. Anno
aetatis 29, and Regni 23. Buchanan, lib. 11. ad finem page 399.

36. James III. Son of James the Second, Married Margaret, Daughter of
Christiern, Denmark, Anno 1470. Buchanan, lib. 12. page 420. of whom he begat a
Son called James, born in March, Anno 1473. Christern, King of Denmark,
released unto this James all his Right to the Isles of Orcades, in favor of
his Daughter.

James the Third was slain by his own rebellious Subjects in Battle, Anno
Christi 1488. Regni 28. aetatis 35. Buchanan, lib. 12. the last words, page 440.

37. James IV. Son of James the Third, Married Margaret, Henry the Seventh,
King of England, Anno 1501. Buchanan, page 454. But Stow says she was
Betrothed 1502. and Married at Edenborough the eighth of August, Anno 1503. and
had Issue James, Arthur, Alexander, and a Daughter, which last three died all
young. Speed's Hist. page 763.

James the Fourth was slain at the Battle of Floden-Field, fought between the
English and the Scotch on the ninth of September 1513. Anno Regni 25. aetatis
40. in the flower of his Youth, Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, being then
General of the English Forces.

Queen Margaret afterward Married Archibald Duglas, Earl of Angus, Anno 1514.
unto whom she bore Margaret a Daughter, afterward Married to Matthew Stewart,
Earl of Lennox.

In this King's Reign, about Anno 1490. was born in Scotland, a Man-child from
the Navel downward, and two Men upward; he lived 28 Years, and learned Music
and Languages; he had two distinct Wills, one part oftentimes falling out with
the other. Buchanan, Hist. Scot. lib. 13. page 444.

38. James V. Son of James the Fourth, Married Mary, Guise, and Duchess of
Longevil, then Widow to the Duke of Longevil, Married at St. Andrews, in July
1538. by whom he had Issue two Sons, who died Infants, and Mary a Daughter,
sole Heir to the Crown of Scotland. He had a former Wife named Magdalene,
Daughter to the King of France; but she had no Issue: for she was Married on
New-years-day 1536. and died the seventh of July 1537.

James the Fifth died the thirteenth of December 1542. aged 33 Years, and in
the thirtieth of his Reign. He had a base Son called James, commonly styled
Prior of St. Andrews; who was first made Earl of Mar, and after of Murray.
Cambden's Annals of Eliz. in Latin, page 112.

39. Mary, Queen of Scots, Daughter and sole Heir of James the Fifth, James
Hamilton, Earl of Arran, being made Protector. She was desired in Marriage for
Edward the Sixth, King of England; but the Faction of Lennox, supported by the
French King, prevailed so, that the Queen Mother sent her at six Years of Age
to the French King, and to the Duke of Guise, for Breeding. In the end she was
Married to Francis the Dolphin of France, whose Nuptials were celebrated at
Paris with great Pomp, the 28. of April, Anno 1558. Godwin's Annals: But the
Dolphin died Anno 1560. not fully 18 Years old, leaving no Issue by her.
Cambden's Annals.

Afterward Queen Mary Married Henry Stewart, Lord Darley, Son of Matthew
Stewart, Earl of Lennox, in Anno 1565. and by him had Issue her only Son, born
in June 1566. called James.

But this Henry Lord Darley, about a Month or two after the Christening of the
young Prince of Scotland, was Strangled in his Bed, in the dead time of the
Night, and thrown out into an Orchard (the House being blown up with Gunpowder)
Anno 1566. in the one and twentieth Year of his Age. The common Report was,
that this detestable Fact was caused by Morton and Murray. So Cambden in his
Annals.

Afterward the Queen Married the Earl Bothwel, now made Duke of Orkney, Anno
1567. whereunto the Lords implored the Queen. The Scots rebel; Bothwel and the
Queen were worsted; Bothwel flies, and the Queen is taken Prisoner. Queen Mary
is forced to resign her Crown to her young Son, scarce 13 Months old, Anno
1567. The Earl of Murray is made Regent the twentieth of August. The Queen
escapes out of Prison, and flies into England, and after 18 Years Imprisonment
in England, she is accused of High Treason against Queen Elizabeth, for
conspiring her Death, and inviting foreign Forces to Invade England; of which
she was Arraigned, Convicted, and Sentenced to die, and afterward Beheaded at
Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, on Wednesday the eighth of February,
Anno 1586. aged 46 Years, or rather in the 45. Year of her Age. Sanderson in
the Life of Queen Mary.

Bothwel wandering up and down, at last came to Naples, where he lived, and died
very poor about the Year 1624.

James VI. Son of Henry Stewart Lord Darley, and Queen Mary, was Crowned King
of Scotland, quarto Calendas Augusti 1567. Buchanan, page 669. and Cambden's
Annals. He Married Anne, Daughter of Frederick the Second, King of Denmark,
Anno 1589. by whom he had Issue Prince Henry, born at Sterling in Scotland the
nineteenth of February 1593. who died at St. James' House in London, the sixth
of November 1612. Charles the second Son, born at Dunferne in Scotland, the
nineteenth of November, Anno 1600. he was King of Great Britain after his
Father. The Lady Elizabeth, born the sixteenth of August 1596. She Married
Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine of Germany, in February 1612. afterward
King of Bohemia 1619. and also two other Daughters by Queen Anne, born in
England, the Lady Mary, and the Lady Sophia; but these both died young.

James the Sixth, upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, was Proclaimed the next
undoubted Heir to the Crown of England, in London, March 24. being Thursday,
which was the last Day of the Year 1602. according to the Computation of the
Church of England, as lineally Descended from Margaret, eldest Daughter of
Henry the Seventh, King of England; so that in the thirty sixth Year of his
Reign over Scotland, and the thirty seventh of his Age, he was now Proclaimed
King of Great Britain and Ireland. Thus were the Crowns of England and Scotland
united in this King James, whose continual Jars had spilt formerly an infinite
deal of Blood, both of the Scotch and English.

* He was the first Monarch of all Great Britain, and first used the Title of
King of Great Britain and Ireland, in all Instruments of State and Writings;
which his Successors have ever since retained, sometimes in Records mentioning
them in particular thus -- King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

Two great Deliverances had this King by the assistance of the King of Kings:
One from the treasonable Conspiracy of Earl Gowry, before he was King of
England; the principal Actors were John Ruthen, Earl of Gowry in Scotland, and
Alexander Ruthen his Brother, Andrew Henderson, and John Cranston, Plotted in
revenge of the Death of William Ruthen, Earl Gowry, Father of the said John;
which William for his Rebellion at Dundee, suffered deservedly at Sterling,
Anno 1584. John Earl Gowry sends Alexander his Brother, from his House at St.
Johnstons in Scotland, August the fourth, Anno 1600. to the King, then at
Falkland, to entice the King thither as privately as might be; he tells the
King, there was a Man taken with much Gold Coin and suspicious Letters, now at
his Brothers House at St. Johnstons, desiring the King to come thither to
Examine the Man with all speed and privacy. The King promises to be there the
next day at Noon, and to do it whiles his Noblemen and Train should be at
Dinner. Alexander sends Henderson to his Brother John Earl Gowry with all
speed, to advertise him of the King's coming. The next day, being the fifth of
August, the King came; and toward the end of his Dinner Alexander desires the
King to dispatch the Business: The King arising from the Table, Alexander leads
him through four or five Rooms, locking each Door after him, till he came into
the round Chamber, where Henderson stood Armed; Alexander plucking out
Henderson's Dagger, points it to the King's Breast, saying, You must die; for
my Father's Blood calls for vengeance. The King deals gently with his Fury, and
worked so upon him with words, that Alexander left him, and went to his
Brother, leaving Henderson with the King, who trembled at the Reverence of his
Sovereign. The King asked Henderson whether he would kill him? to whom
Henderson replied, Not for a World. By and by Alexander comes again with a
Garter in his Hand, swearing that the King should die; and then endeavoring to
bind the King, the King and Alexander struggling together, the King dragged him
to the Window, holding him fast, as he could not stir; the King cried out
Treason into a back Court; they hasten up, and John Ramsey (formerly the King's
Page) forced the Door at a back Way, and finding the King and Alexander panting
(for the King having closed with him, never let loose his hold) the King bid
Ramsey strike low; whereupon Ramsey wounds Alexander mortally in the Belly with
his Faucheon; then came others into the Room: They cast the King's Coat upon
the dead Body, advising the King to withdraw into another Room. Presently
enters John Earl Gowry with a Case of Rapiers ready drawn, with seven Servants;
then seeing the King's Coat on the dead Body, supposed the King was slain, and
let fall the Points of his Weapons; and suddenly Herres assails him with his
rusty Sword, and Ramsey stepping in, strikes the Earl to the Heart. Thus was
the King delivered by the Providence of God, August the fifth 1600, and Ramsey
was Knighted for his Service, and had an addition given him to his Coat of
Arms, to wit, of a Hand holding forth a Dagger, mounted proper, and piercing a
bloody Heart, with this Motto -- Haec Dextra vindex Principis and Patriae, and
after had other Honors conferred upon him.

The other miraculous Deliverance was from the most bloody Plot of the Papists,
commonly called The Gunpowder Treason, which should have been executed the
fifth day of November, Anno 1605. in the third Year after he was King of
England; in memory of which Deliverance we have now a Form of Thanksgiving in
our Common Prayer Book, to be used yearly on the fifth of November, and a
Statute made 3 Jacobi cap. 1. for keeping that Day Holy Day, to be set apart
yearly for a Thanksgiving to God for this great Deliverance, which ought never
to be forgotten, but to be Recorded to all Posterity; and the manner was thus:

A little before the beginning of that Parliament at Westminster, some
Welwiller to William Parker, Lord Monteagle, sends him a Letter, to advise him
to shift off his Attendance this Parliament, as he tendered his Life; -- For
though there be no appearance of any Stir, yet they shall receive a terrible
Blow this Parliament, and yet shall not see who hurts them, etc.

This Letter was given by an unknown Fellow, to a Footman of the Lord
Monteagles, with a charge to give it to his Lord's own Hands; which having
neither Date nor Subscription, the Lord Monteagle (not knowing what to make of
it) brings it to the Earl of Salisbury, then Secretary of State: But the King
not being then in Town, the Secretary shows it to the Earl of Suffolk, and
others; and upon the King's coming back on the Thursday following, Salisbury
shows it to the King, who, as it were by Divine Instinct, conceived the Letter
ought not to be contemned, and judged the words of the Letter to be meant of
Gunpowder: But upon the meeting of the Council, order was given for the
searching of all Rooms about the Parliament House by the Lord Chamberlain;
where a Vault was found under the Lords House stuffed with Wood and Coals;
which Room was hired by Mr. Thomas Percy, a violent Papist, Kinsman to the Earl
of Northumberland: But the care of a farther Search being committed to Sir
Thomas Knevet, a Justice of Peace for Westminster, who the Night before the
Parliament was to sit, about twelve of the Clock in the Night, with competent
Assistance with him, seized one Guido Faux, calling himself John Johnson, and
Percy's Man, at the Door of the Lodgings, ready Booted and Dressed so late; and
searching the Vault by removing some Billets, they found 36 Barrels of Powder,
and in Faux's Pockets three Matches, a dark Lantern, and other Implements, nay,
a Watch wherewith to tell the Minutes for Execution: All which he confessed
upon his Examination. There were other Contrivers of the Plot, Thomas Winter,
Robert Catesby, Thomas Percy, John Wright, Christopher Wright, and Robert
Winter. Concerning which Plot, and the Confessions of the Parties in their
Examinations before the Privy Council, King James himself took pains to note
it; which you may find amongst his Works in Print.

Anno Chr. 1625.
This King James (as my Lord Bacon observes in his Advancement of Learning, page
2.) was the most Learned Temporal Monarch since Christ's time, in all
Literature, Divine and Humane. He died at Theobalds on Sunday Morning the 27.
of March 1625. in the 59. Year of his Age, and in the 58. of his Reign over
Scotland, and having Reigned 22 Years complete over England: whose Son Charles
I. ascended his Father's Throne, and was the second Monarch of all Great
Britain and Ireland; whose Subjects, as well of England as Scotland, are the
most rebellious People in the World, ever Factious, and perfidious toward
their Prince. See the rest in England.

So much of Scotland, the Revenues of which Kingdom Boterus estimateth at
100000 Crowns, or 30000 l. Sterling. Dr. Heylin's Cosmography, page 338.

A Table of the chief Battles between the English and the Scots, since the
Norman Conquest.
Ann. Dom. 1139. 4 Steph.
AT Conton or Couton in Yorkshire, about four Miles from Alverton, August 22.
1139. where were slain above 10000 Scots, by Thurstan, Archbishop of York.
Stow. This is commonly called Standard-Field. Mat. Paris puts it Anno 1138. and
only among the Horsemen of the English of any note, the Brother of Gilbert
Lacy was found slain.

1174. 20 Hen. 2.
At Alnwick in Northumberland, July 7. 1174. where William King of Scotland was
taken Prisoner by Robert de Stotevil, Rafe Mandevil, Bernard Baliol, and
William Vescy.

1296. 24 Ed. 1.
At Barwick the English slew 25000 Scots, and did win Barwick and Dunbar, and
conquered Edenborough, where Edward the first found the Regal Ensigns of
Scotland. In his Return he called a Parliament at Barwick, where he received
the Homages and Fealty of the Nobility of Scotland. Stow.

1298. 26 Ed. 1.
At Flowkirk in Scotland, July 22. 1298. where were slain more than 20000 Scots.
Stow.

1313. 7 Edw. 2.
At Sterling in Scotland, June 24. 1313. where the English were beaten.
Walsingham and Stow. Buchanan, page 264, 265, says there fell 200 of the
Nobility of England, or thereabout, and near as many more of the Nobility taken
Prisoners, and 50000 common Soldiers were slain, as some Scots relate; and on
the part of the Scots were slain about 4000. and only two Knights; James
Duglas then General of the Scotch Forces.

At a Place by Barwick called Bothul, near Halydown, 1332. 6 Edw. 3.
where were slain on the part of the Scots, 8 Earls, 1300 Horse, and 35000
common Soldiers; and Turnebull the Scotch Champion was overcome in Combat by
Sir Robert Nenale, a Norfolk Gentleman. Stow. This is called The Battle of
Halydown Hill.

At Durham, the 27. of October 1346. 1346. 20 Ed. 3.
whiles King Edward the Third Besieged Calice in France, David Bruise, King of
Scotland, (by the procurement of Philip, King of France) entered Northumberland
with an Army of 60000 Men, and pitched near Durham, in a Park called Beverpeir;
where the Archbishop of York, the Lord Zouch, Percy, Mowbray, and other Lords,
and Sir Robert Bertram, Sheriff of Northumberland, with an Army of 30000 Men,
met the Scots at Durham, and did beat them. In which Battle John Coupeland took
David the King of Scotland Prisoner, with three Scotch Earls. So Walsingham.
This John Coupeland of Northumberland had 500 l. per annum given him during his
Life, for this Service, and was made a Banneret.

At Otterborn in Northumberland, the Scots under the Command of James Duglas,
1388. 12 Rich. 2.
took Henry Percy the younger, and Rafe his Brother, Prisoners, slew 1100
English, put to flight 30000 more. Stow. This was Fought about the 12. of the
Calends of August, 1388. Buchanan says the two Generals, Henry Percy of the
English, and James Duglas of the Scots, singled themselves out from the Army,
and Fought apart; and Percy was unhorsed, but the English relieved him; and
tells us, that there fell on the English side 1840, and about 1000 wounded, and
1040 taken Prisoners, page 319.

At Hallydown, near the Town of Wollar, Sept. 14. 1402. where the English,
1402. 3 Hen. 4.
conducted by Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, and Henry his Son, took Earl
Duglas, the Scotch General, Prisoner, with diverse others of the Flower of the
Scotch Chivalry. Stow.

At Flodden-Field in Northumberland, September 9. 1513. wherein James IV. 1513.
5. Hen. 8.
King of Scotland, was slain at Bramston on Piperd-Hill. Stow. Wherefore by
some this is called Bramston Field; by others, Flodden Field; and though the
Day fell to the English, yet there was taken and slain of the English 1500.
Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, being then General of the English.

At Solomosse beyond Carlisle, November 24. 1542. where 15000 Scots, 1542. 34
Hen. 8.
under the Command of the Lord Maxwell, were overthrown.

Muscleborough Field in Scotland, Fought September 10. 1547. where Edward
Seymour, 1547. 1 Edw. 6.
Duke of Somerset, and Lord Protector, was General of the English Forces: 14000
Scots slain, and 1500 taken Prisoners, and not above 60 English slain. Stow.

OF IRELAND.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name, Situation, and ancient Inhabitants of Ireland.

I. IRELAND is called by Orpheus, Aristotle, and Claudian, IERNE; by Juvenal
and Mela, IWERNA; by Diodorus Siculus, IRIS; by Martianus of Heracleota, (...)
by Eustathius, (...) and BEP'NIA; by the Natives, ERIN; by the Brettans,
YUERDON; and by the English, IRELAND; and Cambden most probably concludes, that
Hibernia, and Iwerna, and (...), flow from Aristotle's and Orpheus's Ierne, and
that Ierna, Iuerhdon, Iris, and Ireland, do all spring from Erin, as the
Inhabitants themselves do call it; which Cambden conjectureth to come from the
Irish word Hier, which in that Language signifies The West Point; so that Erin
denotes as much as The West Country, or Western Land.

The Irish Bards in their Songs called it Tirvolac, Toridanan, and Banno, as by
much the most ancient Names of that Island; but why (says Cambden) I cannot
tell, unless Banno be that Bannomanna which Pliny mentions out of Timaeus,
whiles he relates the utmost Parts of Europe, and the Shore of the North Ocean
on the left Hand, from Scythia even to the Gades. What that Bannomanna was, is
not yet known to Geographers: But Biaun in Irish, is Holy in English; and
Festus Avienus calls this of Ireland, The Holy Island.

If that Ogygia, which Plutarch places at the West of our Brettaine, be no
Dream, but a true Vision, he may seem to point out Ireland by that Name;
howbeit, the things which he speaks of are mere Poetical Fictions, and Milesian
Fables: nor can any tell why they named it Ogygia, unless perhaps from the
Antiquity; for the Grecians call nothing Ogygia, but what is very ancient.

II. It contains 300 Miles in length, and scarce 120 in breadth, and has
England on the East, from whence it is severed by a boisterous Sea, called The
Channel of St. George, or The Irish Sea. On the West part it is environed with
the vast Ocean, called The Western Ocean; on the North, with the Deucalidonian
Ocean; and on the South, with the Vergivian Ocean; situate under the eighth and
tenth Climates; the longest Day being 16 Hours and a half in the Southern
Parts, and 17 Hours and 3 quarters in the Northern.

III. It is observed among other things, that in this Island there is neither
Snake nor Toad, nor any venomous Creature, neither will any such live in that
Soil, if brought from other Places. And all living Creatures in Ireland are of
a lesser size in their Kind than those in England, except Women and Greyhounds,
and those are bigger than with us in England. It abounds with Sheep and Cattle,
but much infested with Wolves. The Kernes, or wild Irish, are extremely
barbarous.

IV. To omit the many Fables devised by the ancient Irish Historians, as that
Caesarea, the Niece of Noah, should inhabit here before the Flood, with many
other of the like stamp. It seems to be Peopled very anciently by the Brettans,
for that many ancient words in the Irish Language do savor of the British
Original; and that the Irish and the Brettans were not much different in their
Dispositions and Manners, as Tacitus says; and that by all ancient Writers, as
Diodorus Siculus, Ptolemy, and Strabo, it is reckoned among the British
Islands. And there is no Nation (by reason of the nearness) whence they may
pass more commodiously to Ireland, than out of our Brettain, from whence they
may be as soon wafted into Ireland, as out of France into Brettain.

We read not that ever the Romans subdued Ireland; but in the declining State
of the Roman Empire, the Nation of the Scots or Scythians (Celto Scythae, ut
habet Strabo, omnes olim ad occasum Populi dicti) waxed strong in Ireland.
Orosius writes, That in the time of Honorius and Arcadius, Emperors, Ireland
was inhabited by the Scots about Anno Christi 400.

These Scots came out of Spain into Ireland, and part of them going again out
of Ireland into the North of Brettain (sub Duce Reuda, a quo Dal-Reudini
vocantur; Bid de Hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 1.) Seated themselves there, and
added a third Nation in Brettaine to the Picts and Brettans, and afterward
from those Scots the whole North of Brettain was called Scotland even to this
day.

And from those Scots inhabitng Ireland, that Kingdom was by Isidore and Bid
called Scotia; Haec proprie Patria Scottorum est, says Bid of Ireland, l. 1.
de Hist. Ang. c. 1.

Anno Christi 684. Egfrid, King of Northumberland, wasted Ireland. Bid, ib. l.
4. c. 26.

Anno Christi 838. the Norwegians, under the Command of Turgesius, for 30 Years
miserably wasted Ireland; but he being slain by Treachery, the Inhabitants slew
all the Norwegians. Giraldus Topogram. Hiberniae, Distinct. 3. cap. 37. These
Norwegians without doubt were those Normans, who (as Rhegino says) in the
Times of Charles the Great setting upon Ireland, the Island of the Scots, were
put to flight by the Scots.

Afterward the Oustmanni, that is, The Eastern Men, came from the Seacoast of
Germany into Ireland, under pretense of Merchandise, and soon after raised a
great War.

About the same time almost, Edgar, King of England, overcame a great part of
Ireland, and subjected it under his Dominion. Cambden's Britannia, page 731.

But besides these, there arose great Dissension among the Irish themselves,
which made way to the conquering of Ireland: for the King of England, Hen. II.
taking notice of these Jars, Treated seriously with his Nobles of England,
about the Year 1155. concerning the conquering of Ireland, for the use of his
Brother William of Angeau; but by the Advice of his Mother Maude, the Empress,
the Matter was at that time deferred. Not many Years after, Dermot Mac Morrog,
King of Leinster, (being driven out of his Kingdom by Rodoric, King of
Connaught, and Monarch of Ireland) implores the Aid of Hen. II. who
condescending thereunto, Dermot prevailed with Richard de Clare, Earl of
Pembroke, surnamed Strongbow (Son of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Pembroke, which
Gilbert was a younger Son of Gilbert, Earl of Clare in Suffolk) to raise Forces
for his Assistance, Covenanting to make Strongbow his Successor in the Kingdom
of Leinster, and to give unto him Eva his Daughter in Marriage. Hereupon
Strongbow gathers an Army of select Soldiers in Wales and England, accompanied
with Fitzgerald, Fitz-Stephen, and other Gentlemen, and in few Years obtained
so great a part of Ireland, that Hen. II. fearing his Power, sends out his
Proclamation in Anno 1171. That Strongbow and other his Associates should
return back out of Ireland by Easter next, or else be utterly Disinherited for
ever. Strongbow returns into England; the King is pacified with him,
Conditionally, that he surrender Dublin to the King, with the Cantreds
adjoining, and also all the Maritime Towns and Castles; the residue of his
Conquest he must acknowledge to hold from the King of England and his Heirs. So
Giraldus.

CHAP. II.
Of the chief Persons in the Conquest of Ireland.

I. RIchard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, a Man much in Debt, had large
Possessions, but had much lesned his Estate by his profuseness, and therefore
more easily drawn in to the getting of new Territories. Chron. Joh. Brompton,
page 1069. Vir plus nominis hactenus habens, quam hominis: plus senii, quam
ingenii. Giraldus Hib. Expug. li. 1. cap. 12. Of a ruddy Complexion, Freckled,
great Eyes, a womanly Face, a small Voice, a short Neck, Bountiful, and of a
mild Nature; being fixed in Battle, was a Standard for his Forces to resort
unto; not puffed up with a Victory, nor dejected with a Defeat. Giraldus Hib.
Expug. lib. 1. cap. 27. He was surnamed Strongbow from the strong Bow which he
used to draw, having Arms of an extraordinary length; of whom it is reported,
that standing upright, he could touch his own Knees with the Palms of his
Hands. Brook in his Catalogue of Nobility, Title Pembroke. The King of
England, Hen. II. gave him what accrued unto him in Right of Eva his Wife, and
what he had got in War, and gave him the Counties of Weshford, Ossery,
Caterlogh, and Kildare, to hold of the Kings of England. Cambd. Britan. page
731. Ireland. He died An. Chr. 1176. and Dermot King of Leinster, his
Father-in-law, died at Fernys, about the Calends of May, Anno 1171. full of
Days. Annals Hiberniae, at the end of Camb. Britan.

II. Hugh Lacy was also very instrumental in the Conquest of Ireland; Hen. II.
gave all the Land of Mead in Ireland, with the Apurtenances, by Charter, to
hold of him and his Son John, for the Service of 100 Knights Fees: He gave him
also in custody, the City of Dublin, with its Apurtenances, and appointed these
following to belong to the Service of Dublin, -- all the Land of Offlan, with
its Apurtenances, and Wilkechelon with its Apurtenances, and the Service of
Mead, and the Service of four Knights Fees, which Robert Poer ought to do for
the Castle of Dunavet. Hoveden, page 528. and 566. He was Descended of Walter
Lacy, a great Baron, who Founded Lanthony-Abby in the Valley of Ewyas, in the
Borders of Monmouthshire; to which Walter, William Earl of Hereford gave great
Possessions in those Parts. Cambden in Monmouthshire. This Hugh was of a black
Complexion, hollow Eyes; the right side of his Face even to his Chin, was
disfigured by Burning, which happened in his Youth; a short Neck, a hairy Body,
strong Sinews, of a little Stature, and a deformed Shape; firm to his Trust,
intent on his own Business, and very vigilant in the Affairs of Government, a
good Soldier, much trusted by his Prince, who made him Lord Justice of Ireland,
1172. Hoveden, page 528. He Fortified Leinster and Mead, with many Castles;
and had his Head chopped off with a Hatchet by an Irishman treacherously, as he
stooped down, Anno 1186. at Dernath, where he intended to have built a Castle.
Hoveden, page 631. also Annals Hiberniae. He left two Sons of great eminency
in Ireland, Walter de Lacy, Lord of Mead, and Hugh Lacy, Earl of Ulster
afterward.

III. Robert Fitz-Stephen was the first of Strong-bow's Forces, who entered
Ireland with three Ships, containing about 130 Soldiers of his Friends and
Allies, Landing at Banvan about May, Anno 1167. besides 60 other Horse, and 300
Foot Archers, among whom Hervey de Mont-Morice: The Day after, Maurice de
Prendergest followed with two Ships of Soldiers more, raised out of
Cardiganshire, or thereabouts [De Rosensi Walliae Demetiae Provincia.] These
with 500 Soldiers more, sent by Dermot out of his own Country, under the
Command of his Bastard Son Donwald, Assaulted Weshford, but were beaten back,
and the next Day it was surrendered to Dermot, who gave Weshford with its
Apurtenances, to Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to Maurice, and to their Heirs,
according to his former Agreement; and to Hervey de Mont-Morice, he gave two
Cantreds of Land, lying after the Sea between Weshford and Waterford. Girald.
Hib. Exp. l. 1. c. 3.

The Annals of Ireland say, That Fitz-Stephen entered Ireland Anno 1168. and
that Strongbow followed 1169. with about 1200 Soldiers, Landing at Waterford
the 23. of August, and on the 25. of August he took Waterford; and there Eva,
the Daughter of Dermot, was Married to Strongbow, given by her Father. But
Roger Hoveden says, That Strongbow came into Ireland Anno 1168. and then
Fitz-Stephen, who went before him, entered Ireland 1167.

Thus Robert Fitz-Stephen prepared way for Earl Strongbow, and Strongbow for
the King of England, to the Dominion of Ireland. Weshford was the first Colony
Planted by this Fitz-Stephen with the English in Ireland, which to this day
retains the ancient English Attire, and much of their Language, as a Badge of
their Conquest, and which by the Natives there is yet known and called by the
Name of Weshford-Speach.

To Robert Fitz-Stephen and Milo Coggan, King Hen. II. gave the Kingdom of
Cork, for the Service of 60 Knights Fees, 1177. except the City of Cork, with
one Cantred, which the King retained to himself and his Heirs. Hoveden, page
567.

This Robert Fitz-Stephen was the only Example of Valor and Industry; one
that had often tasted the various turnings of Fortune, as well in Ireland as in
Wales; like Marius Secundus, if you look back upon his Felicity, none more
prosperous and happy; if upon his Misery, none more unfortunate and miserable:
A Man of a large and sound Body, of a comely Countenance, of little more than a
middle Stature, sumptuous and plentiful in his Diet, bountiful and pleasant,
but immoderately given to Wine and Women. Giraldus Hib. Expug. lib. 1. cap. 26.

About Anno Christi 1165, or 1164. Rees ap Griffin, Prince of Southwales,
Besieged Aber-Tivy Castle, and took it, and demolished the same; where Robert
Fitz-Stephen was taken Prisoner by Rees his Cosin-german, and after three Years
Imprisonment he was released by Rees, upon Condition that he would join with
Rees against the King of England: But he chose rather to go into Ireland with
Dermot, than to be perfidious to his Prince. Giraldus. But Cambden in
Cardiganshire says, he was released on Condition that he would relinquish his
Right to his Lands in Wales. He was the Son of Stephen, High Constable of
Southwales, and Governor of Aber-Tivy, that is Cardigan in Wales, Cambden;
called Constable of Aber-Tivy in the Welsh History put out by Powel.

This Stephen Married Nest, Daughter of Rees the Great, Prince of Southwales,
and the Widow of Gerald of Windsor. By Gerald she had Issue Maurice
Fitzgerald, a principal Assistant in the Conquest of Ireland. By Stephen she
had Issue this Robert Fitz-Stephen, who had no lawful Issue by his Wife, says
Giraldus, Hib. Expug. lib. 2. cap. 17. He then had a Bastard; for Giraldus in
another place, lib. 1. cap. 40. makes mention of Radulfus, Stephanidae filius,
who deserved very well for his Valor, when O-Roric, King of Mead was killed;
which O-Roric had like to have killed Hugh Lacy by Treachery.

This Rafe, Son of Robert Fitz-Stephen, was slain with his Father-in-law Milo
de Coggan, between Waterford and Lismore, Anno 1179. by one Machtyrus
treacherously. Annals Hiberniae. also Giraldus, Hib. Expug. lib. 2. cap. 18.
Robert Fitz-Stephen had also another Bastard Son called Mereducius. Giraldus
ibidem.

IV. Maurice Fitzgerald, another Assistant in the Conquest of Ireland, a Man
well modelled in Mind and Body, of an innate Goodness, of little Speech, but
full of weight, circumspect in Dangers, not rash, but resolute when once
resolved on by him; a sober, modest, and chaste Man; Valiant, and Faithful; not
altogether without Faults, yet without any notorious Crime. He died at Weshford
about August 1176. and had three Sons; William the eldest Married Ellen,
Daughter of Earl Strongbow. Giraldus another Son, Alexander another Son, and
Nest a Daughter, Married to Hervey. Giraldus, Hib. Expug. lib. 1. cap. 42. and
cap. 23. lib. 2. cap. 5. and cap. 15.

V. Reymund, another principal Person, was Son of William Fitzgerald, and
Nephew to Maurice Fitzgerald, and to Robert Fitz-Stephen, by the eldest
Brother. He Married Basilia, Sister of Earl Strongbow, about the Year 1174. but
had no Issue by her. He was Constable to Strongbow, to wit, Praefectus
Familiae, The Governor or Lord Marshal of his Household. Of a yellow Hair,
somewhat curling, great Eyes, gray and round, a high Nose, a cheerful
Countenance, and good Complexion; Provident and Prudent.

VI. John Curcy was a gallant Man at Arms. Ann. Dom. 1177.
He was the first of all the English who subdued Ulster in Ireland, Anno 1177,
not till then subdued. He Married Africa, the Daughter of Gotred, King of the
Isle of Man. It is observed of these four Props of Ireland, Fitz-Stephen,
Hervey, Reymund, and this Curcy, Girald. Hib. Expug. lib 2. cap. 17.
that they had no Issue by their Wives. Hoveden, page 561.

This John was the first Earl of Ulster, and of the Family of the Curcyes of
Stoke-Curcy in Somersetshire. Cambden. In the Year 1204. he had a great Battle
at Down in Ireland, with Hugh Lacy (Son of the first Hugh) and got the Day, but
afterward by Treachery was delivered to Hugh Lacy, who brought him to King
John; and the King gave the Earldom of Ulster, and the Dominion of Connaught,
to the said Hugh Lacy, Annals Hiberniae, and Curcy never got his Right again.

It is said of this John Curcy, that he should have fought a Duel for the King
against the King of France's Champion; but that Champion durst not meddle with
him. He struck his Sword through a Headpiece so deep into a Block, that none
could pull it out but himself. Annals Hiberniae, sub Anno 1204. put in the end
of Cambden's Britannia after Ireland.

There were also some others, as Robert le Poer, the King's Marshal in Ireland,
to whom Henry the Second gave Waterford Town in custody, with all the
Apurtenances. And he appointed all the Land between Waterford and the Water
beyond Lismores, and all the Land of Oiseric, with its Apurtenances, to belong
to the Service of Waterford. Hoveden, page 567.

And also afterward at Marleberge, Philip de Breos all the Kingdom of Limrick,
for the Service of 60 Knights Fees: for Herbert and William, Brothers of
Reginald Earl of Cornwall, and Joslan de la Pumerai their Nephew, would not have
that Kingdom (though given them before by the King) because it was not yet
gotten: for Monoderus, King of Limrick, being slain by the English, after he
had sworn Fealty to the King of England, there arose up another of his Progeny,
who would not submit, because of the infidelity of the English: also the King
of Cork, and diverse others of the better sort of the Irish rebelled against the
King of England. Hoveden, page 567. Joh. Bromton, page 1128.

The Princes of Ireland who submitted to the Rule of the King of England, Henry
the Second, Anno 1172. Chartis subsignatis, and Romam transmissis. Cambd.
Britan. page 731. ROtheric O-Conor-Dun, Fuscus Hiberniae Monarcha. Dermot
Mac-Carty, King of Cork. Donald O-Bren, King of Limrick. O-Carel, King of
Uriel. Mac-Shaglin, Rex Ophaliae. O-Roric, King of Mead. O-Nele, King of
Ulster; and the chief Noblemen of them all.

Now follows a Catalogue of all the Lord Deputies of Ireland

CHAP. III.
A Catalogue of the Chief Governors of Ireland, under the Sovereignty of the
Kings of England, since the Conquest thereof by Henry the Second, to the Year
1670. Styled sometimes Lord Justices, sometimes Lord Lieutenants, sometimes
Lord Deputies of Ireland.

HEnry the Second, King of England, landed at Croch in Ireland, eight Miles
from Waterford, the 17 of October, 1171. and staid there till Easter following:
In which space the Princes of Ireland submit, and swore Fealty to him; Roderik
King of Connaught being as it were the Chief Head and Monarch of Ireland.
Hoveden and Giraldus.

The Conquest of Ireland was before prepared for him, Anno 1168. by Richard
Strongbow, who then entered Ireland with his Forces, and very victoriously
winning one Place after another. Hoveden.

The King of Connaught agrees to hold all his Lands under the King of England,
-- Ut Rodericus sit Rex sub Henrico paratus ad Servitium suum; and to pay him
Tribute, as the words of the Deed run, which you may see at large in Hoveden's
History, or Annals, bearing date in the Octaves of St. Michael, 1175. made at
the Parliament at Windsor in England.

Hugh Lacy, Lord Justice of Ireland.

Richard Strongbow, Lord Justice. Obiit 1176. Hoveden.

William Fitz-Aldelme, Justice of Ireland. Hoveden.

But Giraldus, Hiber. Expug. lib. 2. cap. 15. says, Reymund was elected
Governor of Ireland, while Messengers were sent to the King of England to
certify him of Strongbow's death; who forthwith sent William Fitz-Aldelme
Procuratorem in Hiberniam, joining with him John Curcy, Robert Fitz-Stephen,
and Milo de Coggan, in Commission.

Hugh Lacy again, made Generalis Hiberniae Procurator; Robert le Poer the
King's Marshal, being joined as an Assistant to him: which Robert was then
Governor both of Waterford and Weshford. Giraldus.

John Lacy, Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, with Richard Peche
Bishop of Chester, were sent into Ireland about the Calends of May, 1181. and
made Governors of Dublin; for the King had sent for Hugh Lacy, as jealous of
his Strength and Power in Ireland, having now married the Daughter of Roderik
King of Connaught, without the King of England's License first obtained.
Hoveden.

Hugh Lacy again, in the Winter following, eodem Anno; Robert of Shrewsbury, a
Clergyman, being joined with him.

Philip of Worcester, vir Dapsilis and Militaris. Hib. Expug. lib. 2. cap. 24.
(called by Hoveden, Philip de Breos) sent Governor into Ireland about the
Calends of September.

John the King's Son (afterward King John) went into Ireland, but soon
returned, after he had appointed Justices, and settled the Garrisons there.
Hoveden. But who those Justices were, he mentions not.

Hoveden says, That Anno 1176. the King of England gave Ireland to his Son
John; and then after at a Parliament at Oxford, Anno 1177. the King did
constitute him Regem in Hibernia, Concessione and Confirmatione Alexandri summi
Pontificis: And Anno 1185. 31 Hen. 2. the King Knighted him at Windsor the last
day of March, and sends him forthwith into Ireland (where he staid not long)
and inde eum Regem constituit.

Certain it is, That this John (after he became King of England) assumed the
Title of Dominus Hiberniae to his other Titles; which also the succeeding Kings
of England ever since retained, until the Year 1542. 33 Hen. 8. at which time,
by a Parliament in Ireland, King Henry the Eighth was declared King of Ireland,
as a Title of greater Majesty; which Title of Rex Hiberniae, the Kings of
England have used ever since.

Probably when the King gave unto his Son John, Dominium Hiberniae, 1176, it
was as much as King of Ireland in effect, whereby the Supreme Power was
implied; and from thence we see he assumed the Title of Dominus Hiberniae
afterward: But it is not probable, that the King did create him Regem
Hiberniae by Charter (though possibly he might sometimes be so called) for then
he would have assumed the Title of Rex Hiberniae, and not of Dominus Hiberniae,
which afterward we find he assumed; but never Rex Hiberniae.

9. John Gray Bishop of Norwich, Lord Justice. Matt. Paris. King John went then
into Ireland.

10. Henry Londers Archbishop of Dublin, Lord Justice. Annals Hiberniae.

Sub Henrico Tertio.
1224. -- The same Archbishop of Dublin. Fuller's Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. page
58. 1230. 11. Geffrey de Maurice, Lord Justice. Matt. Paris. These following
are Collected out of the Annals of Ireland, apud Cambdenum in Britannia sua, to
the Year 1420. 1248. 12. Sir John Fitz-Geffrey, Lord Justice. 1255. 13. Alan de
la Zouch, Lord Justice. 1259. 14. Stephen de Longspee, Lord Justice. See
Vincent upon Brook, page 447. 1259. 15. William Dene, Lord Justice. Obiit 1261.
1261. 16. Sir Richard de Capell, Lord Justice. 1267. 17. Sir David de Barry,
Lord Justice. 1268. 18. Sir Robert de Ufford, Lord Justice. 1269. 19. Ricardus
de Exoniis, Lord Justice. 1270. 20. Sir James Audley, Lord Justice. He was
killed with a fall from his Horse in Toomond, 1272.

Sub Edwardo Primo.
1272. 21. Maurice Fitz-Maurice, Lord Justice. 1273. 22. Sir Geffrey de
Genevill, Lord Justice. 1276. 23. Sir Robert de Ufford, Lord Justice: But going
to England, Anno 1279. Robert de Fulborne Bishop of Waterford, was put in his
Place. Ufford returns 1280. and is Lord Justice. 1281. 24. Stephen de Fulborne,
Archiepiscopus Turonensis, Lord Justice eodem Anno. Ufford goes into England;
and Fulborne dies, Anno 1287. 1287. 25. John Sampford, Archbishop of Dublin,
Lord Justice ad Tempus. 1291. 26. William Vescy, Lord Justice. 1294. 27.
William D'oodyngzele, Lord Justice. Obiit 1298. 1295. 28. Sir Thomas
Fitz-Maurice, Lord Justice. Obiit 1298. 1295. 29. John Wogan, Lord Justice: Sir
Thomas Fitz-Maurice surrendering the Place to him.
Sub Edwardo Secundo.
Ann. Dom. 1312. 30. Sir Edmund le Butler is made Deputy to Sir John Wogan.
Both died 1321. 1314. 31. Sir Theobald de Verdon, Lord Justice. He came into
Ireland the 20 of June. 1314. 32. Sir Edmund le Butler, Lord Justice. He
received his Commission on Friday after St. Matthew's day. 1317. 33. Sir Roger
de Mortimer, Lord Justice; but going into England to the King, makes William
Archiepiscopum Cassiliensem, Custodem Hiberniae; who was Lord Justice,
Chancellor, and Archbishop, all at a time, 1318. And in Anno 1319. Sir Roger
returns, and is Lord Justice. 1320. 34. Thomas Fitz-John, Earl of Kildare, made
Lord Justice. This Year Dublin is made an University, Alexander Bicknor then
Archbishop of Dublin. 1321. 35. John Bermingham, Earl of Louth, Lord Justice.
1323. 36. John Darcy, Lord Justice.
Sub Edwardo Tertio.
1327. 37. Thomas Fitz-John, Earl of Kildare, again Lord Justice. Obiit 1328.
1328. 38. Roger Outlaw, Prior of Kilmaynan, Lord Justice. He was Prior of the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in Ireland, and Chancellor of Ireland:
Nicolas Fastoll, and Elias Ashburne, Justiciarrii de Banco. 1329. 39. John
Darcy, second time Lord Justice. Darcy going into England 1330. Roger Outlaw is
deputed Justice. 1331. 40. Sir Anthony Lucy comes Chief Justice, 3 die Junii.
1333. 41. Sir John Darcy, third time Justice. 1337. 42. Sir John Charleton
(Miles and Baro) came Lord Chief Justice, in Festo Calixti Papae. Thomas
Charleton Bishop of Hereford, Brother to Sir John, Chancellor of Ireland; and
John Rees Treasurer. 1338. 43. Thomas Charleton Bishop of Hereford, Lord
Justice and Governor, Anno 1340. The Bishop of Hereford called into England by
the King, Roger Outlaw again was made Lord Justice; who died Lord Justice, and
Chancellor of Ireland, 13 die Februarii. 1341. 44. Sir John Darcy, the fourth
time, now made Lord Justice for his Life. Sir John Morris comes into Ireland,
mense Maii, 1341. Deputy to John Darcy. 1343. 45. 13 die Julii, Sir Rafe
Ufford, with his Consort the Countess of Ulster, came into Ireland Lord Chief
Justice. He died on Palm Sunday, the 9 of April, 1346. 1346. 46. Sir Roger
Darcy, Lord Justice ad tempus, de assensu and Ordinatione Regalium and aliorum
in Hibernia: And Sir John Morris comes Lord Chief Justice May 15. 1346. who
being put out by the King, Sir Walter Bermingham was instituted; mense Junii he
came into Ireland. 1348. 47. John Archprior of Kilmaynan, Deputy to Sir Walter
in his absence; but Sir Walter returns out of England Lord Justice, as before;
to whom the King gave the Barony of Kenlys in Ossery, which belonged to Eustace
le Poer, who was attainted and hanged. Obiit Bermingham, quondam Optimus
Justiciarius Hiberniae, in Vigilia Margaretae Virginis, 1350. in Anglia. 1349.
48. Dominus de Carew, Miles and Baro, Lord Justice. 1350. 49. Sir Thomas
Rokesby, Lord Justice. 1355. 50. Sir Thomas went out of his Justice-ship July
26. and Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Desmond, is made Lord Justice. He
continued as long as he lived, which was not long; for he died in Dublin-Castle
die Conversionis Sancti Pauli following. 1356. 51. 31 Edw. 3. Sir Thomas
Rokesby again Lord Justice. Obiit eodem Anno. 1357. 52. Sir Almaric de Sancto
Amando, Lord Justice. 1359. 53. James Butler Earl of Ormond, Lord Chief
Justice. 1360. 54. 35 Edw. 3. the Earl of Ormond coming into England, Maurice
Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Kildare, is made Chief Justice, ut sequitur. OMnibus ad
quos hae Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis, quod Commisimus dilecto and
fideli nostro Mauritio Comiti de Kildare, Officium Justiciarii nostri Terrae
nostrae Hiberniae, and Terram nostram Hiberniam, cum Castris and omnibus
pertinentiis suis Custodiendam, Quamdiu nobis placuerit: Recipiendo ad
Scaccarium nostrum Dubliniae per Annum, quamdiu in Officio illo sic steterit,
quingentas Libras: Pro quibus Officium illud and terram Custodiet; and erit
vic^ simus de hominibus ad arma cum tot equis Coopertis continue durante
Commissione nostra supradicta. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc. Datum per manus
dilecti nostri in Christo Fratris Thomae de Burgey, Prioris Hospitalis Sancti
Johannis Jerusalem in Hibernia, Cancellarii nostri Hiberniae; apud Dubliniam,
30 die Martii, 35 Edw. 3. And after the Return of the Earl of Ormond into
Ireland, Ormond was Justice as before, and the Earl of Kildare surceased.

1361. 55. Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son of King Edward the Third, and
Earl of Ulster in Right of Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter and Heir of William de
Burgo Earl of Ulster, venit in Hiberniam Locumtenens Domini Regis, in Octavis
Nativitatis Beatae Mariae. Here was the first Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Anno
1364. April 22. Lionel went into England, leaving Ormond his Deputy of Ireland.
Lionel returned the eighth of December. He was sent for again into England,
1365. and then leaves Sir Thomas Dale, his Servant, Governor and Justice of
Ireland. Lionel died at Languvil in Italy, 1368. Cambden, apud Albam in
Piemont. 1367. 56. Gerald Fitz-Maurice, Earl of Desmond, Lord Justice. 1369.
57. Sir William de Windsore came into Ireland the 12 of July, Lord Lieutenant.
1372. 58. Sir Robert (alii Richard) de Ashton, Lord Justice of Ireland. 59.
Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, Lord Lieutenant. He died at Cork,
1381. 5 Rich. 2.
Sub Richardo Secundo.
1387. 60. Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, created Marquis of Dublin, 9 Rich. 2.
and after made Duke of Ireland, 10 Rich. 2. And after that, the King granted
him the Kingdom and Sovereignty of Ireland by Letters Patents, (says Brook the
York-Herald) and to bear for his Arms, Azure, three Crowns Gold, in a Border
Argent, to be quartered before his own Coat. Obiit in Lovania, 1392. 1397. 61.
Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. He was slain by the
Irishmen, 1399. 22 Rich. 2. Stow. Rex Anglia contra Juramentum, quod
praestiterat, revocavit de Hibernia Justiciarios, quos olim de Consensu suo
Proceres propter defectus eorum notabiles Constituerunt exulare: So Walsingham,
sub Anno 1397. 20 Rich. 2. page 353.
Sub Henrico Quarto.
1400. 62. Sir John Stanley, Lord Lieutenant. 1401. 63. In May Sir John went
into England, leaving Sir William Stanley in his Place: And on St.
Bartholomew's Eve, eodem Anno, Stephen Scroope entered Ireland, Deputy to Thomas
of Lancaster, the King's Son, Lord Lieutenant, who came into Ireland in die
Sancti Bricii (November 13.) eodem Anno.
Anno 1403. about the eleventh of November, Thomas the King's Son going into
England, left Stephen Scroope his Deputy; and Scroope going into England the
first day of Lent, the Noblemen of Ireland choose the Earl of Ormond Lord
Justice.

Anno 1405. Scroope (the Deputy of Thomas of Lancaster) returns into Ireland;
but going again into England, the Earl of Ormond is Justice.

Anno 1406. Scroope returning after Michaelmas into Ireland, is Deputy, as
before.

Anno 1407. Scroope going this Year also into England, James Butler Earl of
Ormond is elected Lord Justice.

Anno 1408. Thomas of Lancaster, Lord Lieutenant, lands at Carlingford in
Ireland, the second of August. In this Year died Stephen Scroope at
Tristel-Dermot, 16 die Januarii: And the third of the Ides of March following,
Sir Thomas de Lancaster, Lord Lieutenant, going for England, leaves the Prior
of Kilmaynan his Deputy in Ireland.

Thomas of Lancaster was slain at the Battle of Bangy by the Duke of Alanson,
22 Martii, being Easter Eve, Anno Domini 1421. 9 Hen. 5. Stow.

Sub Henrico Quinto.
Ann. Dom. 1413. The Prior of Kilmaynan continued Justice to 1413. 64. 7 die
Octobris, Sir John Stanley lands at Cloncarfe in Ireland, the second time Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland; and died the sixth of January following. 1413. 65. The
eleventh of February, Thomas Cranley, Archbishop of Dublin, is elected Lord
Justice of Ireland. 1414. 66. Sir John Talbot Lord Furnival lands at Dalkey in
Ireland, the tenth of November, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Anno 1419. July 22.
Sir John Talbot went into England, much in debt, and left the Archbishop of
Dublin his Deputy. This was the Famous John Talbot, Marshal of France under
Hen. 6. who was Earl of Shrewsbury, and also created Earl of Waterford in
Ireland, 1446. 24 Hen. 6. and also Seneschal or High Steward of Ireland, to him
and his Heirs, after the manner of the High Stewards of England in their
Office. He was killed at the Battle of Bordeaux in France, 1453. Vincent upon
Brook, Title Shrewsbury. 1420. 67. James Butler, Earl of Ormond, lands at
Waterford the fourth of April, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
So far out of the Annals of Ireland.

Sub Henrico Sexto.
Leiutenants of Ireland to H. 6. Stow. 68. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March. --
James Earl of Ormond his Deputy. 69. John Sutton Lord Dudley. -- Sir Thomas
Strange his Deputy. 70. Sir Thomas Stanley. -- Sir Christopher Plunket his
Deputy. 71. Lion Lord Wells. -- The Earl of Ormond his Deputy. 72. James Earl
of Ormond by himself. 73. John Earl of Shrewsbury. -- The Archbishop of Dublin
his Deputy. 1433. 74. Richard Plantagenet Duke of York (Father to King Edw. 4.)
made Lieutenant by Patent for 10 Years: whose Deputies at sundry times (as
appears by the Statutes of Ireland) were, The Baron of Delvin. Sir Richard
Fitz-Eustace. James Earl of Ormond. Tho. Fitz-Maurice Earl of Kildare.
75. Thomas Fitz-Maurice Earl of Kildare, Lord Justice to 3 Edw. 4.
Sub Edwardo Quarto.
Ann. Dom. 1463. 76. George Duke of Clarence, the Kings Brother, made
Lieutenant for his Life. His Deputies at sundry times were, The Earl of
Desmond. John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester. Thomas Earl of Kildare.
But falling afterward to discord with his Brother, the King made another
Lieutenant. This George is said to be drowned in a But of Malmsey, 1478. 18
Edw. 4. So Stow. 1470. 77. Henry Lord Gray of Ruthin, Lord Lieutenant. -- Sir
Rowland Eustace his Deputy. 1481. 78. Richard Duke of York, younger Son of King
Edw. 4. Lord Lieutenant.
Sub Ricardo Tertio.
1483. 79. Edward Son of King Rich. 3. Lord Lieutenant. -- Gerald Earl of
Kildare his Deputy. This Edward died 1484. 2 Rich. 3. Buck's Hist. of Rich. 3.
page 43.
1484. 80. John Earl of Lincoln, Lieutenant. -- The Earl of Kildare his Deputy.
Sub Henrico Septimo.
1491. 81. Jaspar Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Pembroke, Lord Lieutenant. --
Walter Archbishop of Dublin, his Deputy. Anno 1494. Sir Edward Poynings Deputy.
Jaspar died the 21 of December, 1495. 11 Hen. 7.
1501. 82. Henry Duke of York (afterward King Henry 8.) Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland. -- Gerald Earl of Kildare his Deputy.
Sub Henrico Octavo.
83. Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, Lieutenant. 1520. 84. Piers Butler (after
Earl of Ossery) Lord Deputy. 1522. 85. Gerald Earl of Kildare, again Lord
Deputy. 86. Nugent Baron of Delvin, Lord Deputy. 87. Piers Butler Earl of
Ossery, again Lord Deputy. 1529. 88. Sir William Skeffington, Lord Deputy.
1530. 89. Gerald Earl of Kildare, Lord Deputy. 1532. 90. Sir William
Skeffington again, October 4. 1534. 91. Leonard Lord Gray, 1 Januarii, Lord
Deputy. 1534. 92. Sir William Brereton, Lord Deputy. 1540. 93. Sir Anthony
Seintleger, 25 July, Lord Deputy. 1541. 94. Sir William Brabazon, 1 Aprilis,
Lord Deputy. 1546. 95. Sir Anthony Seintleger, August 4. again Lord Deputy.
1546.
Sub Edwardo Sexto.
96. Sir Edward Bellingham, in May, Lord Deputy. 1548. 97. Francis Bryan,
December 27. Lord Justice. 1549. 98. Sir William Brabazon, February 2. Lord
Justice. 1549. 99. Sir Anthony Seintleger, August 4. again Lord Deputy. 1550.
101. Sir Thomas Cosake, -- Sir Gerald Attlemore, December. 6. Lord Justices.
1552.
Sub Maria Regina.
102. Sir Anthony Seintleger, September 1. fourth time Lord Deputy. 1554. 103.
Thomas Lord Fitz-Walter, May 26. Lord Deputy. 1555. 104. Hugh Curren, Lord
Arcbishop, Lord Chancellor, Sir Henry Sidney Treasurer, -- December. 4. Lord
Justices. 1557. 105. Sir Henry Sidney alone, February 6. Lord Justice. 1557.
Sub Elizabetha Regina.
106. Thomas Earl of Sussex, April 27. Lord Deputy. He went into Scotland, and
left Sir Henry Sidney, September. 24. Lord Justice. The Earl came out of
Scotland, and went into England, leaving Sir Henry Sidney, December 13. Lord
Justice. 1558. 107. Thomas Earl of Sussex, August 27. Lord Deputy. 1559. 108.
Sir William Fitz-Williams, February 15. Lord Justice. 1559. 109. Thomas Earl of
Sussex, June 24. Lord Lieutenant. 1560. 110. Sir William Fitz-Williams,
February 2. Lord Justice. 1560. 111. Thomas Earl of Sussex, June 1. Lord
Lieutenant. 1561. 112. Sir William Fitz-Williams, January 22. Lord Justice.
1561. 113. Thomas Earl of Sussex, July 24. Lord Lieutenant. 1562. 114. Sir
Nicolas Arnold, May 25. Lord Justice. 1564. 115. Sir Henry Sidney, January 20.
Lord Deputy. 1565. 116. Dr. Weston, Lord Chancellor, Sir William Fitz-Williams,
-- October 14. Lord Justices. 1567. 117. Sir Henry Sidney, October 20. Lord
Deputy. 1568. 118. Sir William Fitz-Williams, March 26. Lord Justice. Idem,
January 13. 1570. Lord Deputy. 1570. 119. Sir Henry Sidney, September 18. Lord
Deputy. 1575. 120. Sir William Drury, September 14. Lord Deputy. 1578. 121. Sir
William Pellam, October 11. Lord Justice. 1579. 122. Arthur Lord Gray arrived
in Ireland, August 12. Lord Deputy. 1580. 123. Adam Lofties, Lord Archbishop,
Lord Chancellor, Sir Henry Wallop, Treasurer, -- September. Lord Justices. 1582.
124. Sir John Parrot, June 21. Lord Deputy. 1584. 125. Sir William
Fitz-Williams, June 30. Lord Deputy. 1588. 126. Sir William Russel, August 11.
Lord Deputy. 1594. 127. Thomas Lord Borough, May 22. Lord Deputy. 1597. 128.
Sir Thomas Norreys, October 30. Lord Justice. 1597. 129. Adam Lofties,
Archbishop, and Chancellor, Sir Robert Gardener, -- November 27. Lord Justices.
1597. 130. Robert Earl of Essex, April 15. Lord Lieutenant. 1598. 131. Adam
Lofties, Archbishop, Lord Chancellor, Sir George Carew, Treasurer, -- Lord
Justices. 1599. 132. Sir Charles Blunt Lord Mountjoy, October 24. Lord
Lieutenant. 1599.
Sub Jacobo Rege.
133. Sir George Carew, June 1. Lord Deputy. 1603. 134. Sir Arthur Chichester,
February 3. Lord Deputy. 1604. 135. Thomas Jones, Archbishop, Lord Chancellor,
Sir Richard Wingfield -- March 14. Lord Justices. 1613. 136. Sir Arthur
Chichester, Lord Belfast, July 27. Lord Deputy. 1614. 137. Thomas Jones,
Archbishop, Lord Chancellor, Sir John Denham, -- February 11. Lord Justices.
1615. 138. Sir Oliver Saint John, August 30. Lord Deputy. 1616. 139. Sir Adam
Lofties, Viscount Ely, Lord Chancellor, Sir Richard Wingfield, Viscount
Powerscourt, -- May 4. Lord Justices. 1622. 140. Henry Viscount Falkland,
September 8. Lord Deputy. 1622.
Sub Carolo Primo.
141. Sir Adam Lofties, Lord Chancellor, -- Sir Richard Boil, Earl of Cork,
Lord Treasurer, Lord Justices. 1629. 142. Thomas Viscount Wentworth, July 25.
Lord Deputy. 1633. 143. Sir Adam Lofties, Lord Chancellor, -- Christopher
Wansford, Master of the Rolls, June 2. Lord Justices. 1636. 144. Thomas
Viscount Wentworth, November 23. Lord Deputy. 1636. 145. Robert Lord Dillon of
Kilkenny-VVest, -- Christopher VVansford, Master of the Rolls, September 12.
Lord Justices. 1639. 146. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, Lord
Lieutenant. He was Beheaded May 12. 1641. very unjustly, by the Parliament of
England's Faction. 1640. Christopher VVansford was Deputy to Strafford. 147.
Robert Lord Dillon, -- Sir William Parsons, Master of the Court of Wards,
December. 30. Lord Justices. 1640. 148. Sir William Parsons, -- Sir John Borlace,
Master of the Ordnance, February 9. Lord Justices. 1640. 149. Sir John Borlace,
-- Sir Henry Tichborn, May 1. Lord Justices. 1643. 150. James Butler, Marquess
of Ormond, February 21. Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The Rebellion of the
Parliament of England was now broken out, by raising Arms and Forces against
the King; and great Troubles arose both in England and Ireland. 1643. Anno
1649. Oliver Cromwell Voted General of all the Forces sent against Ireland by
the Parliament of England, March 30. On the 20 of June following, Dublin was
Besieged by the Marquess of Ormond; and on August 2. he was defeated before
Dublin by Colonel Jones and his Party, who issued out of the Town; and Ireland
reduced by Cromwell soon after.
Sub Carolo Secundo.
151. King Charles the Second being restored to his Kingdoms, 1660. makes James
Butler (now Duke of Ormond) Lord Liutenant of Ireland, 1662. who landed in
Ireland 28 die Julii, eodem Anno. 1662. 152. The Duke of Ormond is desired by
the King to surrender his Commission; and the Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, is
made Lieutenant of Ireland in February. 1668. 153. Roberts is recalled, and
John Lord Barkley came Lord Lieutenant. 1670.
Finis Totius Operis. (...).
SOME ANTIQUITIES TOUCHING CHESHIRE.

Faithfully Collected out of Authentic Histories, Old Deeds, Records, and
Evidences.

BY Sir PETER LEYCESTER Baronet, A Member of the same County.

Nescio qua Natale Solum dulcedine cunctos
ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
LONDON, Printed Anno Domini M.DC.LXXII.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THe first Part treats of the Governors and Earls of Mercia, from the time of
King Alfred, to the time of the Norman Conquest.

The second Part comprehends the History of the Earls of Chester from the
Norman Conquest, till that Earldom was Invested in the Crown of England under
King Henry the Third; with a short Catalogue of all such Princes of England, as
have been created Princes of Wales and Earls of Chester, ever since to this day.

The third Part treats of the ancient Barons to the Earls of Chester, with
several Catalogues of all the Bishops, Deans, Chamberlains, Judges, Sheriffs,
and Escheatours of Cheshire, and also of the Recorders of the City of Chester.

The fourth and last Part comprehends the Antiquities of Bucklow Hundred in
Cheshire.

SOME ANTIQUITIES TOUCHING CHESHIRE.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
I. OUr Island of Great Brettaine was altogether unknown both to the ancient
Grecians and Romans, until the Days of Caius Julius Caesar. Bid de Historia
Gentis Anglorum, lib. 1. cap. 2. Learned Cambden, in his Britannia Printed
1607. page 24, 25. Also Sheringham de Gentis Anglorum Origin, page 99. For the
Name of Brettaine is not to be found in any Author, Greek or Latin, before
that time, as far forth as I have ever seen or heard of, Diodorus Siculus being
the first among the Greek Authors, and Lucretius among the Latins, who made
mention thereof; and both these lived about the same Age with Caesar, or a
little sooner.

Wherefore we have no certain History of this Island but from Caesar downwards.
The ancient Brettans were a barbarous People, and left no Writing or History of
their Country to Posterity. Gildas, called Sapiens, is the first among the
Brettans who has left us any mention in Writing hereof, and those very short
and imperfect. Now Gildas writ about the Year of Christ 540. and what he writ
(as he confesses in his Prologue) was by Relation from beyond Sea, more than
out of ancient Records and Writings of his own Country: for those (if any such
were at all) were either burned by the Enemy's rage, or carried away by the
banished Natives; so that in his time there was no such extant.

II. Now Julius Caesar, upon his second Expedition into Brettaine, Anno ante
Christum natum 54. or thereabout, subdued part of Brettain, and many Cities
submitted, and yielded up themselves to the Romans. Caesar de Bello Gallico,
lib. 5. in ipso initio. And the Rule of the Romans in Brettaine ceased upon the
declination of the Roman Empire, after that Alaric, King of the Goths, had
taken Rome, which happened in the Year of Christ 410. according to our vulgar
Computation. So Helvicus in his Chronology; also Bid de Hist. Ang. lib. 1.
cap. 11. So that the Rule or Sovereignty of the Romans over Brettaine continued
almost 470 Years, as Bede computeth in the same Chapter. But Cambden in his
Britannia, page 60. computing to Valentinian the Third, says 476 Years.

III. But now the poor Brettans, upon the Romans withdrawing of their Forces
out of Brettaine, to defend themselves, were miserably devoured by the Scots
and Picts: And therefore they called in, and invited the Saxons to aid them;
who came first into Brettaine Anno Christi 449. says Bid and Malmesbury. But
the Brettans (to use Gildas's own words) perceiving the Saxons, Quasi pro
patria pugnaturos, sed eam certius impugnaturos, defended themselves as well as
they could. But the Saxons, after they had expelled the Scots and Picts, did
also by degrees root out the Brettans also; and the Saxons at last solely
possessed themselves of all the South part of Brettaine, which we now call
England; but disagreeing among themselves, and contending for Superiority, each
Party would set up themselves (as it commonly falls out in such Cases,) and so
had a Heptarchy, or seven distinct Kingdoms in England, till at last they were
all swallowed up into one by that of the West Saxons, the poor Brettans being
driven into Wales and Cornwall.

IV. Egbert King of the West Saxons, being now sole Monarch of all England,
(for so Hoveden calls him, page 414.) and having routed Wilaf King of Mercia,
and made him Tributary, (which Kingdom of Mercia was the largest in compass of
all the seven, and the last of the six unsubdued) ordained, That this part of
Brettaine, whereof he had now the Sovereignty, should be called England; since
which time it has gained the Name of England. Verstegan's Saxon Antiquities,
p. 123. And this Edict, says Trevisa in his Translation of Polychronicon, was
when Egbert was Crowned King of all England at Winchester, after the Battle of
Ellindon, Fol. 275. Now the Battle of Ellindon is placed in Anno Christi 823.
by Florentius Wigorniensis and Stowe.

This Egbert also is said to have new modelled England into Shires; the word
Share we use at this day for a Part or Division. Huntington, lib. 1. Hist. page
298. Postquam Reges West-Sexe caeteris praevaluerunt, and Monarchiam
obtinuerunt, terras in 35 Provincias dividebant. This might be Ethelwolfe, Son
of Egbert: yet Egbert was the first Monarch. Ingulphus says, Alfred (the
fourth Son of Ethelwolfe) divided England into Counties, Hundreds, and
Tythings, page 870. But Seldom supposes Ingulphus is herein mistaken,
otherwise Malmesbury would have attributed the Division of Shires unto Alfred
as well as Hundreds and Tythings, which he omitteth altogether, page 44.
Therefore Shires were distinguished somewhat sooner, to wit, by Egbert;
Hundreds and Tythings by Alfred. This Alfred also ordained Judges and Sheriffs,
making two Officers for the Governing of a Shire, whereof before was but one
Officer, called Vice-Dominus.

This was but a new Model by Egbert and Alfred: for without doubt the ancient
Brettans had their Divisions of Counties, Cities and Towns, as Cook upon
Littleton well observes, Sect. 248.

V. As to this new Division of Shires, Huntington in the place cited, reckons
up 35. where he reckons Cornwall, Northumberland, and Cumberland, to make up
the Account. But Malmesbury De Gestis Regum, lib. 2. cap. 10. page 63. says,
That under King Ethelred, Anno Domini 1016. there were but 32 Shires in
England: and the Record of the two Doomsday Books has only 33 Shires under
William the Conqueror, Anno Christi 1086. unless we take the East-Ryding,
North-Ryding and West-Ryding, there mentioned, for Shires. See Splelman's
Glossary on the word Doomsday; which three do now make up but one Shire,
called Yorkshire, as it now stands divided.

Nor do we find in Doomsday Book any mention at all of Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmorland, Durham, or Lancashire; howbeit part of Lancashire, as
it now stands distinguished, is put under the Title of Cestershire in that
Book, to wit, all that part between the two Rivers of Ribbell and Mersey; and
the rest of it I conceive was put under Euruic-Scire: So that Lancashire seems
to have got and gained a distinct Name of a County or Shire since the Norman
Conquest; but of later time it was made a County Palatine by the King's Charter
to his Son John of Gaunt, Dated 28 die Februarii, 51 Edw. 3. 1376. with all
Privileges sicut Comes Cestriae infra Comitatum Cestriae dignoscitur habere:
Confirmed by Parliament, 13 Rich. 2. 1389. Durham also has not his Title in
Doomsday Book, but may seem there to be comprehended under Euric-Scire, or
Yorkshire. So likewise Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland, are either
there omitted, or comprehended under Yorkshire. But soon after these were all
accounted for distinct Counties or Shires; which six (as they now stand
divided) Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Durham, Yorkshire, and
Lancashire, were by the Romans, during their Rule in Brettaine, styled
Brigantes, that is, Robbers. In the first Age of the Saxons Rule in Brettaine,
these all made up the Kingdom of Deira, as it was then called; which afterward
the Saxons called The Kingdom of the Northumbrians, so called, because they
possessed all the North of England, from the River Humber in Yorkshire, to
Scotland. So Cambden's Britannia, in the Preface to Yorkshire.

Polychronicon, lib. 1. cap. 49. says thus: That if Northumberland be counted
for one Shire, which reached sometime from the River Humber to the River Twede,
then are in England but 32 Shires, over and above Cornwall: But if it be parted
into six Shires, that is to say, Evoric-shire, or Yorkshire, Durham-shire,
Northumberland, Carlisle-shire; or Cumberland, Appleby-shire, or Westmorland,
and Lancashire, then are there 36 Shires besides Cornwall.

In the Conqueror's time, who Described all the Provinces of England, were
found 36 Shires, and half a Shire, 52080 Towns, 45002 Parish Churches, 75000
Knights Fees, whereof Houses of Religion had 28015. But now are more Towns and
Villages enclosed and inhabited then were at that time; and whereas before it
was written, that Cornwall was not set in the Shires of England, it may stand
among them well enough; for it is not in Wales, nor in Scotland, but it is in
England; and so reckoning Cornwall, be 37 Shires in England. Thus the Monk of
Chester in his Polychronicon, who writ under Edward the Third.

But the Monk erreth in his Account; for there are 33 Shires named in Doomsday
Book, with Cornwall; and if Yorkshire in Doomsday Book have five other Shires
taken out of it, and be added to the rest, then there must be in all 38 Shires,
and not 37. as the Monk counts.

And if we add Rutlandshire (which was formerly part of Northamptonshire, but
since Edward Plantagenet, Son and Heir to Edmund of Langley Duke of York, was
made Earl of Rutland under King Richard the Second, it has been reckoned for a
County) and also Richmondshire, which is part of Yorkshire, being now also put
into the number of our Counties, then have we just 40 Counties in England at
this present.

VI. Wales was newly divided into Shires and Hundreds, Anno Domini 1283. 11
Edw. 3. says Stow in his Annals; in which Year Wales was totally subdued by
Edward the First, who then built two strong Castles there, one at Conway, the
other at Caernarvan.

Cambden says there were only six Shires in Wales in the Reign of Edward the
First, constituted; and the rest were ordained by Parliamentary Authority under
Henry the Eighth; in his Britannia Printed 1607. page 115. But the Statute of
34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. tells us, That eight Shires were of ancient and long
time, to wit, the Shires of Glamorgan, Caermarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, Flint,
Caernarvan, Anglesey, and Merioneth; but other four were made and appointed by
the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. besides Monmouthshire, to wit Radnor,
Brecknock, Montgomery, and Denbigh; and diverse Dominions and Lordships in the
Marches of Wales, were then also united and annexed to Shropshire,
Herefordshire, and Gloucestershire; so that there were five Shires newly made
under Henry the Eighth, and eight Shires under Edward the First, but some now
account Monmouth among the Shires of England, as Cambden and Speed, and so make
41 Counties in England, because in that Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. it is
made subject to the Chancery of England, and to the King's Judges of
Westminster, as all other the King's Subjects be within every Shire of the
Realm of England. By the same reason we may now account all the 13 Shires of
Wales for Counties of England, because by the same Statute of 27 Hen. 8. the
Dominion of Wales is from thenceforth incorporated, united, and annexed to the
Realm of England.

Yet it seems to me more proper, that Monmouth be placed among the Shires of
Wales, in regard it was formerly part of Wales, to preserve the memory thereof;
and so we have at this day 13 Shires in Wales.

CHAP. II.
Of the Kingdom of Mercia.

I. FOr my better method and clearer passage to the Earls of Chester, it will
not be amiss briefly to set down the Kings of Mercia, during the Heptarchy of
the Saxons in England, under which our County of Cheshire is comprised.

This Kingdom of Mercia began Anno Domini 626. under Penda surnamed The Strong,
Son of Wibba: Howbeit Huntington brings it somewhat higher, even to begin under
Crida, who died Anno Domini 596. lib. 2. page 315. whose Descent he also sets
down out of the ancient Saxons Chronicle to Woden, page 316. and the Descent of
Woden, Malmesbury reckons up, Also Matthew. Paris de H. 2. and Asser Menevensis
de Alfredo pa. 1.
( lib. 2. de Gestis Regum, cap. 2. ad initium) out of the English Chronicles,
to Noah. Also Hoved. Annal. pars prior, p. 414. brings it up to Adam: Which
Descent, although we may conceive it true, as far as is set down, yet it
carries great improbabilities along with it, in respect of the long Tract of
Time it contains: for Woden is but the tenth Ancestor from Crida inclusively,
and Noah but the sixteenth from Woden, according to Malmesbury: So all the
Generations from Noah to Crida are but 26. which in all probability cannot
contain much above 600 Years; and so Crida living after Christ 550 Years, as
Huntington clearly expresses, the Generation where Noah is placed cannot
exceed 100 Years before Christ, or thereabouts. Now Noah lived above 2000 Years
before Christ, as is evident by the Scripture: and the Generations from Noah to
Christ are reckoned up 68, Luke cap. 3. and according to Matthew, from Noah to
Christ are reckoned up 52 Generations, which far exceed the proportion and
number here set down by Malmesbury: Besides this, that Bedwegius should be the
Son of Sem (as Hoveden has it) is much to be suspected; or (as Malmesbury sets
it down) that he should be the Son of Stresaeus, and Stresaeus reported to be
the Son of Noah, seems likewise incredible, forasmuch as no such Son is
recorded in the Text, Genesis cap. 10. either to Noah or Sem. But to return.

II. The Kingdom of Mercia was otherwise called Midel-Engle, or Mediterranea
Anglia, Huntington, lib. 2. Histor. page 317. and was distinguished into the
Northern and Southern Mercians. The South-Mercians were 5000 Families, and were
severed by the River Trent from the North-Mercians, who contained 7000
Families: and this distinction was in the time of Peda, Son of Penda.
Huntington, lib. 3. page 332.

It was called Mercia, not from the River Mersey, running from the corner of
Wirral in Cheshire, because that River was the utmost Limit thereof Westward;
but I rather believe that River took Denomination from this Kingdom, which it
Bounded on that side; and was called Mercia, because it abutted or bordered
upon part of all or most of the other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy: for March in
the Saxon Tongue signifies A Border or Limit: Hence we call the parts of Wales
next bordering upon England, The Marches of Wales; and at this day we call the
utmost Border of a piece of Land, A Land-March, now pronounced Landmark, which
is as much as A Mere or Boundary.

III. I shall now briefly run over the Kings of Mercia since the Saxons first
set up their Rule here, with the Years of their several Reigns.

1. Crida died about the Year of Christ 596. He began his Reign Anno Domini
586. and Reigned ten Years.

2. VVibba, Son of Crida. He began his Reign Anno 596. and Reigned twenty Years.

3. Ceorlus, Son of VVibba. He began his Reign Anno 616. and Reigned ten Years.

4. Penda, surnamed The Strong, Son of VVibba, slew Edwin and Oswald, Bid de
Hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Kings of Northumberland, in several Battles. Oswald was slain the fifth day of
August, Anno Domini 642. Oswald was a holy Man, and many Churches and Chapels
were Consecrated and Founded in honor of him. This Penda was slain by Oswy,
Brother of Oswald in the Year 656. in Battle. He began his Reign Anno 626. and
Reigned thirty Years.

5. Peda, or Weda, Son of Penda, Married Alflede, Daughter of Oswy King of
Northumberland, and was the first King of Mercia that received the Christian
Faith. He received half of Mercia by the Gift of Oswy his Father-in-law, to
wit, South-Mercia. This Oswy Founded Lichfield Church, and made Dwina a
Scotchman Bishop thereof, Anno Domini 656. He was the first Bishop of Mercia.
Stow. page 67. This Peda began his Reign Anno 656. and Reigned three Years.

6. Wulfere, Son of Penda, after the Death of his Brother Peda, succeeded King
of Mercia: for the Nobility of Mercia, Jumin, Eaba, and Eadbert, did rebel
against Oswy, and set up Wulfere, who Married Ermenhild, Daughter of Erconbert
King of Kent, and had Issue by her, Kenred a Son, and Werburge a Daughter, that
holy Virgin, who died at Chester, and there buried. Will. de Malmesbury, lib.
1. de Gestis Regum, cap. 4. This Wulfere was the first of the English Kings who
committed Simony, and sold the Bishopric of London to one VVina. He killed two
of his own Sons, Ulfade and Rufin, because they went to be instructed in the
Christian Faith by St. Chad Bishop of Lichfield, whose Bodies Ermenhild the
Queen buried in a Sepulcher of Stone, where after she Founded a Priory, called
The Priory of Stones, in Staffordshire. Stow. page 69. He began his Reign Anno
659. and Reigned seventeen Years.

7. Ethelred, Brother to VVulfere, erected a Bishopric at Worcester. He began
his Reign Anno 675. and Reigned twenty nine Years.

8. Kenred, Son of VVulfere, in the fifth Year of his Reign went to Rome, and
became a Monk in St. Peter's Church in Rome, where he continued all his Life. He
began his Reign Anno 704. and Reigned five Years.

9. Ceolred, Son of Ethelred, Fought stoutly against Ina, King of the
West Saxons. Ceolred was buried at Lichfield. He began his Reign Anno 708. and
Reigned eight Years.

10. Ethelbald the Proud, whom Malmesbury styles Pronepos Pendae ex Alwio
fratre, Reigned peaceably one and forty Years. This Ethelbald, and almost all
the Nobility of Mercia, were much addicted to Adultery, rejecting their Wives,
as appears by the Letter of Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz and German Legate, to
Ethelbald, about Anno 747. He Founded the Abbey of Crowland, and was slain by
his own Subjects, by the procurement of Berared, at the Battle of Segiswold,
within three Miles of Tamworth, as he was Fighting against Cuthred King of the
West Saxons, Anno 757. Stow. and his Body was Interred at Ripedon or Ripon. He
was Son of Alwy, Son of Eoppa, Son of VVibba. Matthew. VVestminst. page 264. He
began his Reign Anno 716. and Reigned one and forty Years.

11. Berared, an Usurper, was slain by Offa, and had an end meet for a Traitor.
He began his Reign Anno 757. and Reigned one Year.

12. Offa was Cousin to Ethelbald, scilicet Son of Dingferth, Son of Eanulf, Son
of Osmod, Son of Eoppa, Son of VVibba. Florentius VVigorniensis, page 274. He
overcame in Battle Kinulf King of the West Saxons. He built the famous
Monastery of black Monks at St. Albans, Anno 793. in the three and thirtieth
Year of his Reign, and Endowed it with Lands, witnessed by himself, Egfrid his
Son, nine Kings, fifteen Bishops, ten Dukes, etc. He translated the
Archbishop's See from Canterbury to Lichfield, and Founded the Abbey of Bathe.
He made a great Dike or Ditch between Wales and the Kingdom of Mercia, which
is called Offa's Dike, and whereof part is yet to be seen. Stow. page 71. He
gave to the Pope a yearly Rent out of every House in his Kingdom, styled The
Charter of Peter Pence. Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 25. His Wifes Name was
Quendrida; whose Daughter she was, I find not: By whom he had Issue, Egfrid a
Son; Ethelburge a Daughter Married Brictric, King of the West Saxons, Anno
787. whom Florentius calls Eadburge, page 280. Elfled another Daughter, was
second Wife to Ethelred King of Northumberland. Speed's Hist. pa. 362. and
Elfrid another Daughter, betook her self to the Monastery of Croyland. He died
at Ofley, says Stow (Quaere if not mistaken for Ocley,) the twenty ninth day
of July, and was buried at a Chapel without the Town of Bedford. He began his
Reign Anno 758. and Reigned thirty nine Years.

13. Egfrid, Son of Offa, died young. He Reigned but 141 Days, says
Florentius, page 281. and was buried at St. Albans. He began to Reign Anno 796.

14. Kenulfe, an heroic and noble Prince, succeeded King of Mercia. He was Son
of Cuthbert, and Trinepos VVibba, that is, The Sixth in Descent from VVibbae,
says Matthew of Westminster, page 291. He took Eadbert, (or Egbert as others
call him) surnamed Pren, King of Kent, whom he carried away Prisoner
triumphantly, An. 798. and not long after, when he had built VVinchelcombe
Church, on the Day of the Dedication thereof, he set his Prisoner free at the
Altar of that Church, and made Cuthred King of Kent in his stead. So
Westminster and others. He also Founded the Church of St. Ethelbert in
Hereford, the Bishop's See; and by Elfride his Wife had Issue Kenelm a Son, and
two Daughters, Quendrede and Burgenhild. He died Anno Christi 819. says
Florentius; Anno 821. says Westminster, and buried at Winchelcome Abbey. He
began his Reign Anno 796. and Reigned twenty four Years.

15. Kenelm, Son of Kenulfe, a Boy of seven Years old, was murdered within few
Months after his Father's Death by one Ascebert his Governor, who taking him
into a Wood, cut off his Head, and buried him under a Thorn Tree. This was done
by the procurement of Quendrede his Sister; whereby Kenelm obtained the Name of
a Martyr. His Body being found, was buried at Winchelcombe. He began to Reign
Anno 819.

16. Ceolwulfe, Brother of Kenulfe, succeeded King. He was deposed by Bernulfe,
and driven out of the Kingdom, and had a Daughter called Cenedrith. Spelman's
Councels, page 333. He began to Reign Anno 820. and Reigned one Year.

17. Beornulfe, elected King Anno 821. who in the third Year of his Reign was
overcome in Battle at Ellandon, by Egbert King of the West Saxons, Anno 823.
but as Westminster puts it, Anno 825. and was slain in Battle against the
East Angles, Anno 824. He began his Reign Anno 821. and Reigned three Years.

18. Ludecan, Cousin to Bernulfe, waging War with the East Angles, in revenge of
Bernulfe, was himself killed, with five Captains of his Army, 826. He began to
Reign Anno 824. and Reigned two Years.

19. Wilafe, or Wiglafe, succeeded King; but was subdued by Egbert King of the
West Saxons, Anno 827. under whom he enjoyed his Kingdom, paying Tribute.
Wimund, Son of Wilafe, Married Elflede, Daughter of Ceolwulfe King of Mercia,
and had a Son called Wilstan. Ingulphus, page 858. slain by Berfert. This
Wilafe began his Reign Anno 826. and Reigned thirteen Years.

20. Berthulfe, Brother to Wilafe, was also Tributary to the King of the
West Saxons, till at last he was chased beyond the Seas, by the Sea-Rovers of
Denmark. He had a Son called Berfert, who killed his Cousin Wilstan, June 1.
Vigilia Pentecostes, Anno 850. Florentius, page 295. He began his Reign Anno
839. and Reigned thirteen Years.

21. Burdred, or Burhred, paying Tribute, enjoyed it twenty Years, and then
being driven out of his Country, fled to Rome. The Danes deliver his Kingdom
to Ceolwulfe, sometime Servant to Burhred, on Condition that he should resign
it whenever the Danes should demand it, Anno 874. but not long after King
Alfred got it. This Burdred began his Reign Anno 852. and Reigned twenty Years.

So that King Alfred prevailing over the Danes, united the Kingdom of Mercia
unto that of the West Saxons, inseparably from this time, and was absolute
Monarch of all England; and so the Kingdom of Mercia failed Anno Domini 875.
which, if we reckon from King Penda, had stood about 250 Years; but if we
reckon from Crida, about 290 Years.

CHAP. III.
Of the Governors of Mercia, Substituted by King Alfred and his Successors.

TO pass by those former Earls of Chester, namely Edol, or Edolfe, who lived in
the time of King Vortiger the Briton, about the Year of Christ 471. styled Earl
of Caerlegion, or Chester, by Fabian in his Chronicle, Part 5. cap. 89. and
also Curfale, or, as by some he is written, Sursalem Earl of Chester, in the
time of King Arthur, Anno Domini 616. as Geffrey Monmouth affirms, one of
Arthur's Knights of the Round Table; I shall now speak of those Earls, who are
more certainly recorded in our Histories of credit, but not yet Earls of
particular Places.

I find in Florentius, sub Anno Domini 800. that Ethelmundus Dux Merciorum,
coming out of Mercia, and passing Kimeresford with an Army, was met with by
Weolhstan Dax Wiltoniensium, and had a cruel Battle, Amboque Duces Tr^visa, the
Translator of Polychronicon, calls them Dukes, fol. 275.
occisi; but the Victory fell to the Wiltshiremen: by which words, I conceive,
the Author means no more than a General, expressed by the word Dux. The two
Generals of the Armies met and Fought, and were both slain.

I. I now proceed to the chief Governors of Mercia from the time of King
Alfred. The first I meet with (who under Alfred Governed Mercia) is styled
Ethered, or Ethelred, who Married Elflede, Daughter to King Alfred. His Title I
find variously delivered: by Higden, the Monk of Chester, he is styled
Ethelredus Dux and Subregulus Merciorum. So likewise by Matthew of Westminster.
Also by Hoveden and Huntington, sometimes Dux, sometimes Subregulus, sometimes
Dominus Merciorum. Malmesbury, De Gestis Regum, lib. 2. cap. 4. calls him Comes
Merciorum. The most usual Title in all those ancient Authors is Dux; which in
those Times seems to be all one with an Earl, or Comes. By all it is apparent,
that he was then the chief Governor of Mercia under the King; and he lived in
the Reigns of King Alfred and Edward the Elder. I desire I may have liberty to
render these Titles by the Name of Earl.

The Acts of Earl Ethelred, and of Elflede his Countess.
Ethelred and his Countess restored Caerleon, that is, Legecestria, now called
Chester, Anno Chr. 908.
after it was destroyed by the Danes, and enclosed it with new Walls, and made
it nigh such two as it was before; so that the Castle that was sometime by the
Water without the Walls, is now in the Town within the Walls. So Trevisa in his
Translation of Polychronicon, lib. 6. cap. 4. whereunto agrees Florentius and
Matthew of Westminster. But Hoveden places it in Anno 905. Which Town of
Chester remained in possession of the Britons or Welshmen, till it was taken by
Egbert, the Saxon Monarch of England, about the Year 824. Trevisa, lib. 5. cap.
28.

Ann. Chr. 910.
Also he and his Countess translated the Bones of St. Oswald, King and Martyr,
from Bardeny to Gloucester, where they built an Abbey in honor of St. Peter.
Polychronicon.

Danes breaking their Truce with King Edward and this Ethelred, wasted Mercia,
and were beaten by the English at Totenhale in Staffordshire; and afterward at
Wodenesfield, within a Mile of Wolverhampton in Staffordshire, was a great
Battle Fought on the fifth day of August in the same Year, wherein the Danes
were routed, and three of their Kings slain, Healfdene, Eywysle, and Igwar.
Stow. Ethelwerd in Chronico suo, lib. 4. cap. 4. and Trevisa, fol. 287.

Ethelred Eximiae vir Probitatis, Dux and Patricius, Dominus and Subregulus
Merciorum, decessit, Anno 912. So Florentius; whose Death is placed by Hoveden
sub Anno 908. He had only one Daughter, called Elfwine or Algiva; at whose
Birth Elflede her Mother was so much astonished with the pain, that ever after
she refrained the Embraces of her Husband for almost 40 Years, says Matthew.
Westminst. page 359. protesting often, That it was not fit for a King's Daughter
to be given to a Pleasure that brought so much pain along with it; and
thereupon grew an heroic Virago, like the ancient Amazons, as if she had
changed her Sex as well as her Mind. Ingulphus, page 871. Malmesbury, page 46.

Elflede is variously written by our ancient Historians, as Edelfled,
Ethelfled, Egelfled, and Elflede; and from the time of her Husbands Death she
Governed all Mercia excellently, except London and Oxford, which King Edward
her Brother retained to himself.

She built a Fort at Sceargete, and another at Bridge upon Severn, which I
conceive is now called Bridgenorth.

Tamworth nigh Lichfield, and built a Fort at Stafford.

Eadsbury in the Forest of Cheshire, whereof now nothing remains, but that we
now call The Chamber of the Forest. And the same Year she built Warwick.

Ciricbyrig, now called Monkes-Kirkby in Warwickshire, says Dugdale in his
Warwickshire, page 50. a. and another called Weadbirig; and a third called
Runcovan, but now called Runcorne, in Cheshire. This was long since demolished.
Polychronicon. Florentius.

Brecannemere, or Brecknock, and carried away the Queen of Wales, and 33 of her
Men, Prisoners into Mercia.

Darby from the Danes, and the whole Province thereof. In Storming of which
Town she lost four of her chiefest Officers, ante Calendas Augusti.

Elfled died at Tamworth the twelfth day of June, Anno 919. and was buried in
St. Peter's Church at Gloucester. Florentius, Westminster, Polychronicon, and
Huntington. But Hoveden places her Death sub Anno 915. And so Ethelwerd, lib.
4. cap. 4. So much do Writers vary for the time.

In the same Year wherein she died, King Edward built a Fort or Town at
Thelwall in Cheshire, and Garrisoned it; and also made another Garrison at
Manchester, which was then in the outmost Border of the Kingdom of
Northumberland this way; and took Mercia from his Niece Elfwin into his own
Hands. Florentius. Polychronicon.

I cannot here pass by Henry Huntington's, contradiction of himself, Lib.
quinto Histor. page 353. where he tells us, That Edred Dux Merciae died Anno 8
Edwardi Regis Angliae, which falls Anno Christi 908. And in the same Page a
little after he says, That Ethered Dux Merciae, Father of Edelfled, died in the
eighteenth Year of King Edward's Reign; which must needs be a mistake, unless
there were two Ethereds Governors of Mercia successively, and two Elfledes,
Mother and Daughter; of which I find no mention in other Authors.

The Countess Elflede was a prudent Woman, and of a manly Spirit. She much
assisted King Edward her Brother, as well by Council as by her Actions. She was
beloved of her Friends, and feared by her Enemies. Of whom Huntington has
these Verses, lib. 5. Hist. page 354.

O Elfleda Potens, O terror Virgo Virorum,
Victrix Naturae, nomine digna Viri!
Tu quo Splendidior fieres, Natura Puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri:
Te mutare decet sed solum nomina Sexus:
Tu Regina Potens, Rexque Trophaea parans.
Jam nec Caesarei tantum meruere Triumphi:
Caesare Splendidior Virgo, Virago, Vale.
II. Alfere is the next Governor of Mercia: He is also styled Dux Merciae. He
is Witness to a Charter of King Edgar's, made to the Abbey of Croyland, Anno
966. Ingulphus, page 882. and 888.

Anno 975. he destroyed many Abbeys, turning out the Abbots with their Monks,
and bringing in Clergymen with their Wives. Hoveden, page 427. Florentius,
page 361.

Anno 983. Alfere Dux Merciorum, and Cousin to King Edgar, died; and Alfric his
Son succeeded in that Government. Florentius, page 363. And if we may believe
Malmesbury, page 61. he was eaten to death with Lice. Ann. Dom. 983.


III. Alfric, Son of Alfere, succeeded his Father, and was Dux Merciae by
Succession, Anno 983. Huntington calls him Consul Alfricus, Earl Alfric, lib.
5. Hist. page 357. For Dux and Consul in these Ages were Synonima.

He was banished England, Anno 986. Florentius. and not long after was received
again into favor, contrary to the Rule of State Policy; for, Quem semel
graviter laeseris, non facile tibi fidelem credideris: Never think that Man
will be faithful to you, whom you have before greatly injured and distasted.

Wherefore, Anno 992. this Alfric being made Chief Governor of the Forces which
King Ethelred had collected, and preparing a great Navy against the Danes, gave
private Intelligence to the Enemy; and the Night before the Navy was to Engage,
he privily conveyed himself to the Danish Fleet, and fled away with the Enemy.
But the English Ships pursuing, slew many of the Danes, and took the Ship
wherein Alfric was, he himself by flight scarcely escaping. Florentius, page
365, 366.

Anno 993. King Ethelred commanded that the Eyes of Algar, Son of Alfric,
should be put out; which was effected. Florentius. Howbeit, Huntington says,
page 358. that Algar's Eyes were caused to be plucked out by one Edwyn; which
may stand with the other, as employed by the King to see it done.

Anno 1003. this Traitor Alfric feigned himself sick, when he should have
fought with the Danes.

Anno 1016. Alfricus Dux was slain in Battle against the Danes, with many other
Noblemen of England. Florentius, page 388.

IV. Edric, surnamed Streon, a most perfidious Man, Mercia by King Ethelred,
Anno 1007. in which Year the King of England agreed to pay thirty six thousand
Pounds Tribute-money to the Danes, so as they would desist from their Rapines.
Florentius, page 373. with whom also agrees Huntington, Hoveden, and
Polychronicon. Only Westminster says, he was made Duke of Mercia, Anno 1003.

He was the Son of Egelricus, of low Kindred, and to whom nevertheless his
eloquent Tongue and crafty Wit procured great Riches and Honor; and for Envy,
Florentius, page 373.
Falsehood, Pride, and Cruelty, exceeded all Men at that time.

He had to his Brothers, Brihtric, Alfric, Goda, Agelwin, Agelward, and
Agelmer, See Hoveden, page 450.
Father of Wulnoth, Father of Godwin Earl of the West Saxons.

He married Edgitha, Daughter of King Ethelred. Hoveden, page 430. Stow calls
her Edina, page 90. b.
and had Issue Wulfege, and Wegete, two Sons.

His unworthy Acts Historians Record thus.

Anno 1006. he murdered Duke Alfhelme (whom Westminster calls Ethelstane) by
a Wile; for having invited him to a Banquet at Shrewsbury, about the third or
fourth day of his Entertainment, he took him along with him on Hunting, and led
him into a Wood, where he had laid in ambush a Butcher of Shrewsbury, called
Godwin Porthund, whom he had hired to kill Alfhelme. This Godwin, spying his
opportunity, when all the rest of the Company were busied in Hunting, fell upon
Alfhelme, and murdered him: And shortly after, King Ethelred caused the Eyes
of Edric's two Sons, VVulfeage and VVegate, to be put out at Cocham, or Cosham,
where the King then lived. Florentius, page 372.

Anno 1015. he guilefully got Sigeferth and Morcar, Sons of Earngrime, into his
Chamber, where he caused them to be killed secretly; and also endeavored
secretly to have slain Edmund Prince of England: And not long after, having
gotten forty Ships well Manned with Danish Soldiers, he revolted to Canutus
King of the Danes. Florentius, page 382. Hoveden, page 433.

Sigeferth and Morcar are styled Earls of Northumberland by Westminster; whose
Lands the King seized, as forfeited by their Treason.

To omit many other of his Treacheries, Anno 1016. Edric most perfidiously
caused King Edmund, surnamed Ironside, to be murdered: for he caused his Son
to thrust a sharp Knife into the King's Fundament, as he was at the House of
Office exonerating himself: And this was done when the King lodged at Oxford,
on the last day of November. Matt. Westminster, page 401. But Malmesbury, page
72. says, Edric corrupted two of the King's Bedchamber to thrust an Iron Hook
into his Fundament, as he was exonerating himself; so was the common Fame,
says he. Howbeit, Florentius and Hoveden both tell us, That King Edmund died
at London, about the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle.

At last this Edric had a just Reward for all his Villainies; for Anno 1017.
Cnut, the Danish King, caused him to be Beheaded, after he had told him what he
had done to King Edmund, and set his Head upon the Tower of London; for he said
he would make him higher than all the Noblemen of England. Others say, That for
fear of Tumult, he was privately strangled, and his Body thrown into Thames: So
Westminster, page 402. Vide Ingulphum, page 892.

By Edric's Counsel, Cnut banished Edwine, Brother to Edmund Ironside; and also
Edward and Edmund, Sons to King Edmund Ironside.

Leofric is the next Governor of Mercia I meet with. He is the first that I
find styled Earl of Chester in express words. Henry Huntington, lib. 6. page
366. Leofricus Consul Nobilissimus Cestriae. He is also styled Earl of
Leycester by Ingulphus, page 891. Howbeit in truth he was now Earl of all
Mercia, whereof those Counties were Members or Branches; and was one of the
Primest Counselors among all the Nobles of England, and very gracious with his
Prince. He lived in the several Reigns of King Cnut, Harald surnamed Harefoot,
Hardy-Cnut, and Edward surnamed The Confessor.

But give me leave here, by way of Digression, to explain the Title of Earl,
which we give unto them; for hitherto, before this Leofric, they have most
usually by ancient Authors been styled Duces Merciae: But from Leofric
downwards, they are usually styled Comites Merciae.

Wherefore it is to be observed, That under the Saxons, the subordinate Titles
of Temporal Honor, were those of Ethelinge, Ealdorman, and Thane, or Theigne.
The Thanes were answerable to our Barons: The Ealdormen, usually styled
Aldermanni in the old Latin Translations of the Saxon Laws, were such as had
Provinces or Counties under their Government, and signifies as much as Senior,
or Senator, in Latin; expressed sometimes by Subregulus, Regulus, Patricius,
Princeps, Dux; and in Saxon, by Heretoga; sometimes by Comes, and Consul.
Selden's Tit. Hon. page 605. Ethelinge was a Title attributed to those of the
Blood Royal, Sons and Brothers to the King; and signifies as much as Nobly
Born: which, in the times of the Saxons, was in Latin expressed Clyto, from the
Greek Word (...), which signifies Famous, Noble, or Eminent.

About King Ethelstan's Reign, the Word Earl was received in England, as a
Syncnima to Etheling; and so denoted the Sons or Brothers of the King, and not
an Earl, as at this day it is used for a Special Dignity. Seldom, Tit. Hon.
page 604. The word Earl coming into England with the Danes, in whose Language
Erlig at this day signifies as much as Noble, or Honorable. And after the
Danish Power increased in England under King Cnut, the Name of Earl was fixed
on those who before were by the Saxons called Ealdormen; and the Saxon Title
Ethelinge, no more expressed by the word Earl. The Title of Ealdorman continued
until about the Year 1020. expressed by these words in Latin, Duces, Principes,
Comites, etc. Seldom, Tit. Hon. page 609. But from the Norman Conquest, Earl
and Comes, most usually have translated each other: And therefore because these
Governors of Mercia, first styled Duces, were also afterward styled Comites,
and Consules, I give them the Title of Earls.

Howbeit, in truth, the Titles of Dux and Comes, used by the ancient Historians
of our Nation, and also frequently found in old Latin Charters under our Saxon
Kings about 800 Years after Christ, did then signify with us no other than
Chief Governors of Provinces and Counties under the King, and promiscuously
used in that Age for the same Title. So were also Consul, and Subregulus.

But though Dux and Comes were promiscuously used by Florentius, Huntington,
Hoveden, and other old Authors; yet I find in Latin Chartes of those Ages, many
styled Duces, and others Comites, in the same Charters; as we find in
Ingulphus: Nay, you may observe in the Subscriptions of those Ages, this Order;
-- First Bishops, then Abbots, then Duces, then Comites, then Minister, which
in those Chartes denotes a Thane or Lord Baron, etc. And this, as it were, by a
constant Course and Order: So that by Duces, somewhat more than by Comites
seems to be understood. Comes sine dubio de Provinciarum Comitibus dicitur, qui
Populum and judiciaria Potestate gubernabant, and armata manu tuebantur, says
Spelman on the word Comes, which properly and commonly was of old time used for
A Governor; and such Provinces as were under the Jurisdiction of such Comes,
were called Comitatus, or Counties. The Comes had also his Vice-Comes, or
Sheriff, sometimes also called Vice-Dominus, which was substituted under the
Comes, for the Rule of his County, in those elder Ages.

Qua autem differebat munus Ducis and Comitis, qua Territorium, non habeo quod
asseram, says Spelman in his Glossary, on the word Dux, page 233. a. For the
opinion (as there he adds) of those Men who conceive the Title Dux to be
given to such as Governed many Shires or Counties, and that of Comes to be
attributed to such as Governed but one County, is not clearly proved, nor
allowed of; neither of those who make Dux to be meant only of such who were
Chief Commanders over such Provinces in Military Affairs, and Comes only of
the Chief Magistrate in the Civil and Judiciary Government, according to the
Laws within his County.

Certain it is, these Titles were Officiary in those Ages, and were sometimes
Feudal, and sometimes conferred at the Pleasure of the Prince. Seldom, Tit.
Hon. page 615. But the Title Dux, or Duke, became not a peculiar Title of Place
and Dignity with us in England, as it is now used, before 11 Edw. 3. 1337. when
the Black Prince was created Duke of Cornwall. And now to return to Leofric.

Concerning the Descent of this Earl Leofric, Cambden in his Britannia, at the
end of Leycestershire, reckons it up in this Order. -- Leofric Earl of
Leycester in the time of Ethelbald King of Mercia, Anno Salutis 716. to whom
succeeded in a direct Line, Algar the First, Algar the Second, Leofric the
Second, Leofstan or Leofwine, Leofric the Third (Earl of Mercia) of whom I now
speak: Which Descent Cambden there professes to have received from a great
Antiquary, Thomas Talbot, who had collected the same out of the King's Records.
See this Descent also in Monasticon, 1 Part, page 304. and in Burton's
Description of Leycestershire, page 167. The same followed by Dugdale in his
Warwickshire, page 87. So easily does Error spread, being once broached.

I will now show where that Descent is defective.

Leucitus, mis-writ for Leuricus, or Leofric, Comes Leycestriae, Anno Domini
716. tempore Ethelbaldi Regis Merciorum. This appears by the Charter of the
said Ethelbald made to the Abbey of Croyland, as you may find it at large in
the History of Ingulphus, page 852. But for this Leofric's Wife, Issue, or
Successor, no History or Record (which I have hitherto met withal) makes up the
wide breach of Descents to the time of Algar the First abovementioned,
containing the Revolution of 120 Years, or thereabouts: So that this Leofric
cannot be the Father of Algar the First there mentioned.

Vide Ingulphum, p. 857.
Algar the First, styled Algarus Comes Leycestriae Senior, sub Regno Wiglafi
Regis Merciorum. Ingulphus, page 860. about the Year 836. He was a great
Benefactor to the Abbey of Croyland.

Algar the Second, styled Algarus Comes Leycestriae Junior, Filius Algari
Comitis, lived in the time of Beorred King of Mercia, Anno Domini 860.
Ingulphus, page 863. He was slain by the Danes in Battle at Kesteven in
Lincolnshire, Anno Domini 870. Ingulphus, page 865, 866. Nor does Ingulphus
call them Earls of Leycester, though I suppose them so; but only Algarus Comes
Senior, and Junior: Of what Family, he mentions not.

Here likewise is another great Interruption, from Anno 870. to Anno 1000. when
Leofwine lived, containing about 120 Years more, which the Descent above fills
up very improbably, only one Descent of Leofric the Second, to fill up 120
Years.

* The Descents from Algar the Second, to Leofwine here, are much desired to be
filled up, and proved by good Authority.

Leofwine Earl of Leycester flourished under King Ethelred, about the Year of
Christ 1000. He was Son of (...) and Married (...) and had Issue Leofric Earl
of Mercia, and Normannus, one of the Prime Nobles to Edric Streon Ducis
Merciae, which Norman became Protector of Croyland Abbey by Covenant during his
Life; for which he had the Manor of Badby given him for 100 Years, Anno 1017.
Ingulphus, page 891, and 898. Hoveden, page 437, and 442. Also Edwine, another
Son, slain by Griffith King of Wales, Anno Domini 1039. Monasticon, 1 Pars,
page 134. And Godwin, another Son. Monasticon, 1 Pars, page 130.

Leofric, Son of Earl Leofwin, was the fifth Earl or Governor of Mercia: He is
sometimes styled Earl of Leycester, and sometimes Earl of Chester, as I have
before showed. He was Witness to a Charter made by King Cnut to the Abbey of
Croyland, Anno Domini 1032. when Cnut also gave to that Abbey a Golden Cup,
subscribed in these words, -- Ego Leofricus Comes Concessi. Ego Algarus Filius
Leofrici Comitis astiti, etc. Ingulphus, page 893. Hoveden tells us, pa. 437.
That in Anno Christi 1018. when the Traitor Edric Streon was put to death by
King Cnut, then also were put to death with him Dux Normannus Filius Leofwini
Ducis, Frater scilicet Leofrici Comitis, and Ethelwaudus Filius Agelmari Ducis,
Damnonia, id est, Cornwall and Devonshire. Alfegus was Earl of Devonshire and
Cornwall.
and Brictricus Filius Alfegi Damnoniensis Satrapae: Leofricum pro Normanno
Germano suo Rex Constituit Ducem, and cum post modum valde charum habuit. I
know not what he means here by Constituit Ducem, unless he means General or
Governor over all Mercia, or else, that he now had the Earldom of his Brother
Norman added, whom Ingulphus, page 912. styles Vice-Comes Edrice, id est,
Substitute of Mercia.

This Leofric is said to have a Sister called Ermenhild, Mother to Hugh Lupus
Earl of Chester: So the Record cited in Monasticon, 1 Pars, page 305. b. Sed
quaere: For that Record is most grossly mistaken in many Places of it.

This Leofric married Godiva Sister of Thorold de Bukenhale. Sheriff of
Lincolnshire. Ingulphus, page 913, 914. Possibly he was descended from that
Thorold whom Ingulphus styles Vice-Dominus Lincolniensis, sub Anno 851. page
861.

He and his Countess Godiva built or enriched these Monasteries, viz. Coventry,
Leon, Wenloke, Worcester, Evesham, and two Monasteries of St. John Baptist, and
St. Werburge in Chester, and the Church of St. Mary-Stow, which Eadnothus
Bishop of Lincoln built. Florentius, page 419. Hoveden, page 444.

The same Godiva, or, as Florentius writes her, Godgiva, freed the Town of
Coventry from all Toll, except the Toll of Horses, by riding naked through the
Town, without any thing to cover her but her Hair; which Condition performed,
Earl Leofric granted the Townsmen a Freedom by Charter. Polychronicon, lib. 6.
cap. 26. Westminster, page 424. which Charter Mr. Dugdale (in his Warwickshire,
page 86.) conceives rather a Freedom from Servile Tenure, than only Toll.

This Illustrious Leofric died at his own Town of Bromley, the last day of
August, Anno Domini 1057. So Florentius, and Hoveden, page 444. and also Matt.
Westminster; and was buried at Coventry, in the Monastery which he had built
there, the richest Monastery then in England.

VI. Algar, Son of Earl Leofric, succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Mercia,
Anno Domini 1057. Hoveden, page 444. and is styled Earl of Chester by
Huntington, page 366. and also Earl of Leycester by Ingulphus, page 898.

Anno Domini 1053. the Earldom of the East Saxons (which before Harold Son of
Earl Godwin held) was given to this Algar. And in the Year 1056. he was
banished by Edward the Confessor; but by the aid of Griffith King of Wales,
after the Slaughter of many, he was reconciled to his Prince, and received his
Earldom.

In the Year 1058. being the Year after his Father's death, he was again
banished for Treason; but by the help of King Griffith, and the Norwey Navy, he
recovered his Earldom by force.

He had to Wife the Sister of William Mallet, as Burton in his Antiquities of
Leycestershire affirms, page 168. and had two Sons, Edwine Earl of Mercia,
and Morcar Earl of Northumberland; and two Daughters, Aldith, first married to
Griffith King of Wales, and after to Harold King of England; and Lucio, who had
three Husbands, Ivo Talbois Earl of Angeau, the first Husband of Lucy; Roger de
Romara, Son of Gerold, the Second Husband of Lucy, by whom she had Issue
William de Romara Earl of Lincoln. Randle de Meschines Viscount Baieux in
Normandy, Lord of Cumberland in England, and afterward Earl of Chester, was
the third Husband of Lucy, by whom she had also Issue: But she survived all her
Husbands. Ingulphus, page 898. Hoveden, page 443, 444. Ingul. page 902, 903.
Ordericus vitalis, page 511. and 871. Cambden's Britannia in Leycestershire.

Anno Domini 1059. Algar died, and was buried at Coventry. Ingulphus, page 898.

VII. Edwine, Son of Algar, succeeded Earl of Mercia, Anno Domini 1059. He and
his Brother Morcar stoutly opposed William the Conqueror, Anno 1066. But the
Conqueror prevailing, he lost his Earldom.

He lived to the fourth Year of the Conqueror's Reign, Anno 1070. William the
Conqueror, and rebelled against him; and unable to withstand, he intended to
have gone to Malcolme then King of Scotland: but being betrayed by his own Men,
was slain by the way. Ordericus, page 521. Florentius, page 437, 438. Some say
Morcar was taken by the Conqueror, and died in Prison: Howbeit Ingulphus, page
901. says, Comites Edwinus and Morcarius ambo a suis per insidias trucidati.

I find no mention of any Issue, either of Edwine or Morcar.

Finis Primae Partis.
Of the Earls of CHESTER Since the Norman Conquest.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
I. AFter that William Duke of Normandy had vanquished King Harold in Battle,
and obtained the Crown of England, which happened Anno Christi 1066. as all our
Histories unanimously declare, he by degrees conferred many great Patrimonies
and large Possessions upon his more noble Barons, as just Rewards for their
Service, by whose assistance he had got a new Kingdom. So Ordericus Vitalis (a
Writer who lived near to those Times) lib. 4. Eccles. Hist. page 521, 522. as
it is set out with other Histories by Andrew du Chesne, and Printed at Paris
Anno Domini 1619. tells us in these words, -- Rex Guillielmus dejectis
Merciorum maximis consulibus, Edwino scilicet interfecto, and Morcaro in
vinculis constricto, Adjutoribus suis inclytas Angliae Regiones distribuit: and
ex infimit Normannorum Clientibus, Tribunos and Centuriones ditissimos erexit.
Amongst those of the meaner sort newly raised, the principal were Geffrey de
Clinton, Rafe Basset, with some others, which Ordericus expresses more at
large, page 805.

II. But concerning the distribution of his Counties in England to his greater
sort of Nobles and Barons who accompanied him in this Service, see Ordericus,
page 522. Among others, Anno 1070. the King gave to William Fitz-Ozberne
Dapifero Normanniae, that is, High Steward of Normandy, the Isle of Wight, and
the County of Hereford. Which William, with Walter Lacy and other tried
Champions, the King set as a Curb to the Welsh, whose boldness first Invaded
Brachavianos, or Brecknockshire, and slew Risen and Caducan, and Mariadoth,
three Welsh Kings, with many others. Chester and the County thereof the King
had but lately given to one Gherbod, Gherbod, first Earl of Chester after the
Norman Conquest.
a Nobleman of Flanders, who had gallantly behaved himself as well against the
English as Welsh, and afterward being sent for by his Friends, whom he had
left in Flanders, and to whom he had committed his hereditary Honor there, he
obtained liberty of King William the Conqueror to go thither, and to return
very quickly again; but by misfortune he fell into the Hands of his Enemies
when he came into Flanders, and there endured a long and tedious Imprisonment.
sub Anno Domini 1070. King William gave the Earldom of Chester to Hugh de
Auranges, Son of Richard surnamed Goz. This Hugh with Robert of Rothelent, and
Robert of Malpas, and other cruel Potentates, spilt much of the Welshmens
Blood. And the Castle of Stutesbury, now called Tutbury, in Staffordshire,
which Hugh de Auranges held before, was given to Henry Son of Walceline de
Ferrars. And diverse other Lands were conferred on other Persons, as you may see
more at large in Ordericus.

III. But before I proceed to our Norman Earls of Chester, it will not be amiss
to note out of Ordericus, who that Robert of Rothelent was, whom I mentioned
before with Earl Hugh; for both he and the above mentioned Robert of Malpas,
were of the prime of the Noblemen and Barons belonging to Hugh Earl of Chester.

This Robert of Rothelent, or Ruthelan, is described by Ordericus; page 669.
thus -- He was a valiant and an active Soldier, eloquent, Facundus and
formidabilis, but of a stern Countenance, liberal, and commendable for many
Virtues. Hic Edwardi Regis Armiger fuit. He was one of those who attended the
Person of King Edward the Confessor, from whom he received the Honor of
Knighthood. Touching his Descent, his Father was Umfrid de Telliolo, Son of
Amfrid of the Progeny of the Danes: His Mothers Name was Adeliza, Sister of
Hugh de Grentemaisnill, of the famous Family of the Geroians. He was Commander
in Chief at the Siege at Rochester, 1 Willielmi Rufi. At which time Griffith
King of Wales Invaded the Coasts of England, and had made a great Destruction
about Rothelent. For his Works of Piety, he gave to the Abbey of Utica in
Normandy (where his Brothers Ernald and Roger were Monks, and his Father and
Mother, aliique Parents ejus, were buried) the Church of Tellioles, and the
Tithe of his Mills, Lands, and Beer in his Cellar: And he gave in England two
Carucates of Land, and twenty Villanes, and the Church of Cumbivel, all the
Town, Tithe, and Church of Kirkby in Wirrall within the County of Cheshire, and
the Church of the Island, and the Church of St. Peter's in Chester City.

In the Charter of Confirmation of all the Lands given unto the Abbey of Utica
by many Noblemen in England, made by William the Conqueror, An. 1081. we read
among other things thus -- Robertus vero de Rodelento, Praefato Hugone
Cestrensi Comite Domino suo concedente, dedit Sancto Ebrulfo Cherchebiam cum
duabus Ecclesiis; unam scilicet quae in ipsa villa est, and aliam prope illum
Manerium in insula maris: and Ecclesiam Sancti Petri Apostoli, and quicquid ad
eam pertinebat, in Cestrensi urbe: and in Merestona (quae est in
Northamptonshire) Ecclesiam Sancti Laurentii and quicquid ad eam pertinet, and
in eadem Provincia Ecclesiam de Bivella cum duabus terrae Carucatis, etc. This
Charter is set down at large in Ordericus, page 602. So that Kirkby with the
two Churches, I conceive, is Kirkby in Wirrall within Cheshire, one Church then
standing in the said Town, and the other near thereunto in the Island of the
Sea, which I conceive is meant of the Island now called Ilbree.

Robert of Rothelent came very young into England with his Father, and Served
King Edward the Confessor both in his House and in his Wars, till at last the
King Knighted him; afterward, having been trained up in Arms here, he got
leave of King Edward to go see his Friends in his own Country of Normandy: and
after the Battle of Senlace he came again into England with his Cousin Hugh, Son
of Richard de Auranches, surnamed Goz, and was a very principal Man in all
Military Employments. And after many Conflicts, the said Hugh was made Earl of
Chester, and Robert of Rothelent was the chief Commander of all the Forces
under Earl Hugh, and made Governor of all Cheshire. And William the Conqueror
caused Rothelent Castle and Town to be built, and gave it to this Robert, that
he might make it a Defense to England, by curbing the Excursions of the Welsh:
And this stout Champion Seating on their Borders, had many Skirmishes with the
Welsh, and slew many of them, and enlarged his Territories; and on the Mount
Dagaunoth, close by the Sea, he built a strong Castle, and for fifteen years
sore afflicted the Britons or Welshmen. But at last Griffith King of Wales, on
the third day of July Anno Christi 1088. Hormaheva; and when he had pillaged
the Country, returned back to his Ships. But as soon as Robert had notice, he
calls his Soldiers together, and with a few Soldiers coming to the top of the
Hill, he saw them Shipping the Men and Cattle which the Welsh had taken; and
being incensed thereat, himself runs violently down the Steep Hill, attended
only with one Soldier, called Osberne de Orgiers, toward the Enemy; but they
perceiving him so slenderly Guarded, returned back upon him, and with their
Darts or Arrows mortally wounded him: yet whilst he stood and had his Buckler,
none durst approach so near as to Encounter him with a Sword; but as soon as he
fell, the Enemy rushed upon him and cut off his Head, which they hanged upon
the Mast of the Ship in triumph: Aftewards with great lamentation both of the
English and Normans, his Soldiers brought his Body to Chester, and it was
Interred in the Monastery of St. Werburge in that City: which Monastery Hugh
Earl of Chester had built, and had made Richard, a Monk of Beck in Normandy,
the first Abbot thereof. Thus Ordericus, page 670, 671. So much of Robert of
Rothelent; I shall now proceed to the the Earls of Chester.

IV. The Title of Earl of Chester, since the coming in of the Normans, is more
properly and peculiarly applied than before: for although in the time of the
Saxons, Leofric, Algar, and Edwine, who was Earl when the Conqueror invaded
England, had all of them successively that Appellation or Title; yet they were
not only Earls of Chester, but were sometimes denominated from other Places
also, as Leofric and Algar, both many times styled Earls of Leicester: And
indeed they were not so much Earls of either of those two Counties, as of all
Mercia, whereof those were but small Branches or Members.

But now more particularly, the Conqueror gives to Hugh surnamed Lupus, the
whole County and Earldom of Chester, to hold of him Tam libere ad gladium,
sicut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam, as the very words of the Charter do
run, says Cambden. Which words some Expound to be the Tenure of being
Sword Bearer of England, at the Coronations of the Kings of England: whence we
read in Matthew Paris, that when King Henry the Third Married Queen Elinour,
Anno Domini 1236. the Marriage was pompously solemnized, and all the great Men
of the Kingdom used those Offices and Places, which had of ancient Right
belonged to their Ancestors at the Coronation of the Kings. The Earl of Chester
then carried the Sword of St. Edward, which is called Curtein, before the King,
in token that he was an Earl Palatine, and had Power by Right to restrain the
King if he should do amiss, his Constable of Cheshire attending on him, and
beating back the People with a Rod or Staff when they pressed disorderly upon
him. This Paris voucheth, an Author who lived in that very Age, page 421.

But although this Office might have of ancient Right belonged to the Earls of
Chester ever since the time of Hugh Lupus, yet I believe there is something
more magnificent couched in those words of the first Charter or Donation;
namely, a Dignity inherent in the Sword, as purchased by it, and to be kept by
it also: For as in the Crown of England there is an inherent Right of Regality
annexed, so here is given an inherent Right of Dignity in the Sword. This is to
hold as freely by the Sword, as the King holds by the Crown, only inferior to
his King. Hence was it, that whatsoever we say concerning the Pleas of the
Crown, or to be done against the King's Crown and Dignity, the same is also
said (but in a more limited course) concerning the Pleas of the Sword of
Chester, or to be done against the Sword and Dignity of the Earl of Chester, as
is most evident out of the Records and Endictments of those Times.

V. I come now to Hugh surnamed Lupus, howbeit in truth he was not the first
Earl of Chester after the Norman Conquest: for I have before showed, that
Gherbod, a Nobleman of Flanders, had it first given to him by the Conqueror,
who enjoying it but a little while, is commonly omitted without any notice at
all. But this Hugh was the first Earl of Chester of the Norman Race since the
Conquest.

The Description of Earl Hugh out of Ordericus, Lib. 4. Eccles. Histor. page
522.

Hic non Dapsilis, sed prodigus, etc. He was not abundantly liberal, but
profusely prodigal, and carried not so much a Family as an Army still along
with him: He took no account either of his Receipts or Disbursements: He daily
wasted his Estate, and delighted more in Falconers and Huntsmen, than in the
Tillers of his Land, or Heavens Orators, the Ministers: He was given much to
his Belly, whereby in time he grew so fat that he could scarce crawle: He had
many Bastard Sons, and Bastard Daughters, but they were almost all swept away
by sundry Misfortunes.

Again Ordericus, Lib. 6. page 598. Ex his Hugo Abrincatensis, Richardi
cognomento Goz filius, inter caeteros Magnates effulsit: Cui, Postquam
Gherbodus Flandrensis ad suos recessit, Rex Comitatum Cestrensem consilio
Prudentum concessit: Hic nimirum Amator Saeculi Saeculariumque Pomparum fuit;
quas maximam beatitudinum putabat esse portionem humanarum: erat enim in
militia Promptus, in dando nimis prodigus, gaudens ludis and luxibus, mimis,
equis, and canibus, aliisque hujusmodi vanitatibus: Huic maxima semper
adhaerebat Familia, in quibus nobilium ignobiliumque puerorum numerosa
perstrepebat Copia: Cum eodem Consule commorabantur viri honorabiles, Clerici
and milites, quos tam laborum quam divitiarum gratulabatur esse suarum
Participes: In Capella ejus Serviebat Abrincatensis Clericus, nomine Geroldus,
religione and honestate peritiaque literarum praeditus.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, a Wolves Head erased Ar.
HUgh, surnamed Lupus, was created Earl of Chester, An. Dom. 1070. in the
fourth Year of the Reign of William the Conqueror over England. Ordericus, page
522. The Welshmen or Britons called him Hugh Vras, that is, Hugh the Fat.
Ordericus, page 768. calls him Hugh Dirgane, that signifies in the Welsh
Language, Hugh the Gross: for he was very gross and corpulent.

He had Land in twenty Counties in England: for in the Catalogue of the
Counties wherein certain Great Men held Lands in the twentieth Year of William
the Conqueror, as it is put in the Appendix to the ancient Norman Writers, set
out by Andrew du Chesne, and Printed at Paris, Ann. Dom. 1619. we read thus:

Comes Hugo, Hampshire, Berkshire, Dorset, Somerset, Devonshire, Buckingham,
Oxford, Gloucester, Huntington, Northampton, Warwick, Shropshire, Derbyshire,
Cheshire, Nottingham, Rutland, Yorkshire, Lincoln, Norfolk, and Suffolk.

Concerning certain Lands in Oxfordshire, which he gave to the Monastery of
Abbington, I find in an old Lieger Book of that Monastery remaining in Cotton
's Library (noted Claudius C. 9.) fol. 137. of the whole Book; but lib. 2. fol.
35. of that particular part of the History of the Church of Abbington, as
follows:

Viculus est Burgo Abendonensi contiguus, Scipena dictus: hunc de Abbatia
tempore Edwardi Regis quidam ipsius constabulus nomine Eadnotus, tenebat: Cujus
viri terrarum metas postea Hugo Cestrensis Comes adeptus, cum didicisset
praedictum viculum hujus Abbatiae Juri pertinere, commonitu Rainoldi Abbatis
and Baronum suorum consultu, tertio Regni Willielmi Junioris Regis anno, and
pridie Calendarum Aprilium, ipse Comes in Sanctuario Ecclesiae istius
consistens toto conventu Fratrum ibi praesidente, quicquid in illo loco posse
videbatur habere, Deo and Genetrici ejus id obtulit, manu cultellum Altari
supponendo: and ut in perpetuum ratum constet, verbis illud prosequendo:
Affuere illo cum Comite Engenulphus and Willielmus, uterque nepos ipsius,
Godardus etiam de Boiavilla cum Engerardo, and alii plures.

Charta de Scipena.
DE hac, ut dictum est, re determinata cum primo apud eundem Comitem oriretur
Sermo, literas Abbati inde direxit. Quarum hujusmodi extitit Textus.

Hugo Cestrensis Comes, Rainoldo Venerando Abbati and charissimo Amico suo,
Salutem. Mando tibi, quod de terra, quam erga me petiisti, locutus sum cum
uxore mea and cum meis Baronibus; and inveni in meo Consilio quod concedam eam
Deo and Sanctae Ecclesiae, de qua Pastoralis Cura super te imposita est: Tali
Pacto, quod dones mihi XXX. libras denariorum de tua Pecunia; and ut frater
vester sim, and uxor mea, and pater meus, and matter mea, in orationibus
vestris; and ita ut simus scripti omnes in Libro commemorationum, and ut sit
factum tale obsequium pro nobis (quale debet fieri pro uno fratre de Ecclesia)
ubicunque moriamur: Quicquid itaque pro illa terra exactum est, nil fieri
relictum: nam and pecunia data and caetera quaesita omnino impensa.

What Lands this Earl Hugh held in Demaine in Cheshire, appears in the Record
of Doomsday Book, Title Cestre-Scire; where in the beginning of the same after
the Laws of Chester it is said -- The Bishop of Chester holds of the King the
Lands in Cheshire which belong to his Bishopric [and those Lands are
immediately reckoned up and set down:] All the rest of the Lands of the County
Earl Hugh held of the King cum suis hominibus; where cum suis hominibus, I
conceive, is not there meant, that the Earl and his Tenants held their Lands of
the King, but that the Earl held all Cheshire of the King, with his Tenants
also; that is, and the Tenure and Services of all his Tenants in Cheshire he
holds of the King also: for every Person in Cheshire, except the Bishop, held
what Lands he was possessed of immediately from the Earl, and the Earl held all
from the King.

The Names of such Towns in Cheshire, as Earl Hugh held in Demaine at that
time, Anno Christi 1086.
WEverham. Kennardsly. Doneham on the Hill. Elton. Trafford. Manly. Hellesbye.
Frodshum. Alreton. Alderly Inferior. Done. Edesbery, nigh the Chamber in the
Forest. Eaton, in Broxton Hundred. Lay, in Broxton Hundred. Cotinton. Lay.
Rushton. Upton, juxta Rushton. Little Budworth. Olton. Over. Estham. Trafford.
Edlave. Macclesfield. Adlington. Gowesworth. Merton. Chelford. Hungerweniton.
Henbury. Capesthorne. Henshall. Tingtweezle, Hollinworth. Wernith. Ramiley.
Laiton. Alsacher. Sanbach. Clive. Sutton, nigh Middlewich. VVimboldsly. Weever.
Occleston. Upton in Wirrall. Stanney. Anterbus in Overwhitley.
In all forty eight.

The Descent of Earl Hugh.
Ansfrid or Amfrid, a Dane. Umfrid de Telliolo Governor of Hastings in England,
1068. Ordericus, page 512. Son of Amfred the Dane. Ordericus, page 669. Married
Adeliza, Sister of Hugh de Grentemaisnill, Governor of Leicester, and had Issue
Robert of Tothelent Castle in Wales; also Ernald and Roger, both Monks of Utica
in Normandy; and William Abbas Sanctae Euphemiae. Ordericus, page 671. Robert
of Rothelent, Son of Umfrid, whom Ordericus, page 670. calls Consobrinum
Hugonis Comitis Cestriae, Cousin to Earl Hugh. He was slain Anno 1088. Of whom
see more supra, page 24.
Turstine, surnamed Goz, Son of Amfrid, sometime Governor of Oxima, kept the
Castle of Faloys in Normandy, against Duke William, being yet a Child: But
Rodulfus Waceiensis, who Commanded the Forces for the young Duke, besieged him
therein. Turstine not able to hold out long, surrenders it, on Condition that
he may depart quietly; and so he was banished from his Country. Willielmus
Gemeticensis, lib. 7. cap. 6. Richard, surnamed Goz, Son of Turstine, was
Vice-Comes de Abrincis, that is, Auranches in Normandy. He reconciled his
Father to the Duke of Normandy by his good Carriage, and got far more than his
Father lost. Gemeticensis, ibid. lib. 7. cap. 6.


This Richard had Issue, Hugh Earl of Chester; Ordericus, page 522. also Judith
a Daughter, Married to Richard de Aquila, Son of Engenulfe; Ordericus, lib. 8.
page 703. and 649. of whom he begot Gilbert de Aquila, and Engenulfe, and
Maude, and many other Sons and Daughters. This Richard de Aquila was killed
with an Arrow, shot into his Eye by a Boy hid in a Bush, 14. Calendas
Decembris, Anno Christi 1085. Ordericus, page 649. Another Sister of Hugh Earl
of Chester Married William Earl of Ewe in Normandy, who being openly convicted
of Treason, had his Eyes put out, and his Stones cut off, by the command of
William Rufus, Anno 1093. This was done by the instigation of Hugh Earl of
Chester, whose Sister he had Married, but had broken his Faith with her: for he
had three Bastards by a common Strumpet. Ordericus, page 704. Maude, another
Sister to Earl Hugh, was Mother of Randle de Bricasard in Normandy, afterward
Earl of Chester, and Wife of Rafe de Micaenis, or Meschines. Ordericus, page
871. Milles and Brooks, two late Writers and Heralds, have foisted in the Name
of Margaret for this Maude, vouching no Authority.

The Acts of Earl Hugh.
HE made Robert (one of his Bastard Sons) a Monk of Utica in Normandy, An.
1081. Ordericus, lib. 6. page 602.

He Founded the Monastery of St. Werburge in Chester: In urbe (Cestriae
scilicet) fuit ex Antiquo Sanctimonialium Monasterium, nunc per Hugonem
Cestrensem Comitem Monachis repletum. Will. Malmesbury, lib. 4. de Gestis
Pontificum, page 288. And Learned Cambden thus -- Ecclesiam, ^quam Leofricus
Comes in honorem Werburgae Virginis posuerat, Hugo primus e Normannico Genere
Comes Cestriae restauravit, and Authore Anselmo Monachis Concessit: in
Britannia sua. Title Cheshire.

Anno Domini 1093. Anselm Abbot of Becci in Normandy, came into England at the
Entreaty of Hugh Earl of Chester, then sick; by whose help the Earl Founded a
Monastery at Chester, and wherein Anselm placed Richard his Chaplain the first
Abbot, and turned the Secular Canons into Regular Monk. Trevisa in his
Translation of Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 7. fol. 335. b.

And indeed this agrees in time with the Original Charter of the Foundation,
which I transcribed out about 1644. as follows, then remaining among the
Evidences of that Church, which were then kept in a certain Room within St.
Werburge Church in Chester.

Omnibus Christi Fidelibus praesens Transcriptum visuris vel audituris,
Guncelmus de Badelesmere Justiciarus Cestriae Salutem in Domino. Noveritis me
die Sabbati proxime post Festum Assumptionis Beatae Mariae, Anno Edwardi Primi
octavo, inspexisse, vidisse, and propriis manibus tractasse Chartas Abbatis and
Conventus Sanctae Werburgae Cestriae super Fundatione Monasterii sui, ac
juribus and libertatibus ipsius, and suo Monasterio a Comitibus Cestriae, and
aliis, Concessas, in plena Curia Comitatus Cestriae exhibitas, non Cancellatas,
non vitiatas, non in aliqua sua part abolitas aut deletas, in haec verba.

Charta Domini Hugonis Comitis, Fundatoris Monasterii Sanctae Werburgae
Virginis.
SAnctorum prisca Authoritate Patrum, qui in Nomine Patris. and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, in Sancta Ecclesia Regiminis Gubernacula hactenus tenuerunt,
quique suos Adjutores Sanctaeque Fundatores Ecclesiae sua nobis industria
suorumque scriptorum longa Traditione cognitos reddiderunt, Admoneri videmur,
ut ea quae a temporaneis nostris in Sanctae Ecclesiae matris exaltatione facta
sunt, praesentibus per nos manifestentur, Posterisque dinoscenda nobis
scribentibus reserventur: Nos igitur Majorum imitantes exempla, jam quaedam
Pietatis Opera referamus quae in Anglica Terra gesta sunt a Hugone Cestrensi
Comite, Anno ab Incarnatione Domini 1093. Regnante Potentissimo Rege Willielmo,
atque in Archiepiscopatu Cantuariensi Pontificante Anselmo, atque in Eboracensi
Pontificante Thoma, Volumus vero ut Religiosi atque fideles Christiani
cognoscant quia idcirco nobis ista describere placuit, ut qui ea relegerent vel
audirent, Deum supplicabiliori affectu pro Sanctae Ecclesiae Fundatoris salute
implorent, and ut praesentes ad Regna Coelestia tendentes, etiam inter aetatis
hujus Primates qui sequantur, inveniant. Igitur ad Honorem and Gloriam Sanctae
and Individuae Trinitatis, atque Incomprehensibilis Divinitatis, jam proferemus
quae nos dicere Spospondimus. Hugo Comes Cestrensis, atque Ermentrude
Comitissa, Devotioni Religiosae pia mente subditi, piilsimaque Dei visitatione
inspirati, in quadam Ecclesia quae Constructa est in Honorem Sanctae Werburgae
Virginis in Civitate Cestriae monachos religiose viventes posuerunt, Concedente
Rege Willielmo, qui Dominum assidue exorarent tam pro utilitate animae Regis
Willielmi, and Willielmi Patris ejus nobilissimi Regis, and Matris ejus
Matildis Reginae, Fratrumque and Sororum ejus, atque Regis Edwardi, quam pro
animarum suarum salute, and pro animabus Patrum, and Matrum, and Antecessorum,
Haeredumque, and Parentum, and Baronum suorum, omniumque Christianorum tam
vivorum quam defunctorum. Huic vero Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae, Hugo
supradictus Comes, and Ermentrude Comitissa, Possessiones Priores liberas in
perpetuum and quietas concesserunt, and de suis augmentaverunt: Habitationemque
Monachorum habilem reddiderunt: Eamque Abbatiam nulli omnino Abbatiae subditam
fecerunt: Postea in ea Monachos and Abbatem, Deo Donante and supradicto Rege
Willielmo concedente, constituerunt: Hanc etiam, and quicquid ad eam pertinet,
Abbati and Monachis dederunt; videlicet, Ince, Salhtonam, Suttonam, Cheveleiam,
Huntintonam, Boghtonam, Wervenam, Croghtonam, Trofford, Cliftonam, Estonam,
Wisdeleth, Hodesleiam, Wepram, and dimidium Rabie, and tertiam partem de
Neston, and tertiam partem de Salghale, and tertiam partem de Stanney, and
dimidiam pariem de Leech, and unam Carucam Terrae ad Pulford, and tertiam
partem de Berdwardsley, and Edenchale, and Shotowicam. Insuper etiam dederunt
huic Ecclesiae in ipsa Civitate de suo Dominico, Vicum a Porta de North usque
ad Ecclesiam; and locum unius Molendini ad Pontem Civitatis, and duo Maneria in
Anglesey; unum autem in Ros; and unum in Wirhalle, Erbeiam; and in Lindesei
terram december boum; and post obitum Comitis vel Comitissae, Westonam cum
appenditiis in Derbyshira; and ad praesens Decimam ipsius Manerii; and
Ecclesiam de Estona, and terram duarum Carucarum; and rectam decimam non solum
de Annona verum etiam de Pullis and Vitulis, de Porcis and Agnis, de Butyro and
Caseo, and de omnibus rebus de quibus Decima debeat dari in his meis Maneriis,
scilicet, Eltona, Frodsham, Weverham, Lech, Roecestra, Haurdina, Coleshull,
Bishopstreet, Uptuna, Campedena, Estham; Et Rectam Decimam Piscatoriam de
Frodesham, de Rodelent, and de Angleseia, non solum de Dominico suo, scd etiam
de Navibus ibi, and in omnibus aquis suis Piscantibus: and decimam de
Piscatoria Etone, and de omni Pisce qui accipitur in Dee, and unum Batellum ab
omni re liberum. Adhuc vero dederunt Ecclesiam, and Terram Ecclesiae, and
Decimam de Molendinis, and de omnibus rebus quae Decimari debent in Denefordia.
Quinetiam Baronibus suis Principalibus Concesserunt, quod unusquisque daret
praefata Abbatiae Centum solidatas Terrae; alii autem secundum Posse and Velle.
Insuper concesserunt, ut singuli Barons and Milites darent Deo and Sanctae
Werburgae, post obitum suum, sua Corpora and tertiam partem totius substantiae
suae: and non solum haec constituerunt de Baronibus and Militibus, sed etiam de
Burgensibus, and aliis hominibus liberis suis. Test Anselmo Archiepiscopo,
Herveio Episcopo, Baldwino Monacho, Heldebaldo Monacho, Eustachio Monacho,
Roberto Filio Hugonis, Willielmo Constabulario, Willielmo Malbedeng, Ranulfo
Dapifero, Hugone Normanni Filio, Radulfo Dapifero, Hugone Filio Osberni. Hamone
de Mascy, Gilberto de Venables, Ricardo de Vernon, Ricardo de Rullos, Bigot de
Loges, Ricardo Filio Nigelli, Roberto Filio Serli, Ranulpho Venatore, Erneiso
Venatore, aliisque quamplurimis.

Willielmus Malbedeng dedit huic Abbatiae Sanctae Werburgae, Witebiam, and
tertiam de Wepre, and Ecclesiam and Decimam de Tattenhale, and unam Salinam in
Which, and terram de duobus bobus, and decimam de Salchale, and de Claitona, and
de Yraduc. Test Comitissa, Ricardo Banaster, Hugone Osberni Filio, Bigod de
Loges, Ricardo Pincerna, and Suardo.

Robertus Filius Hugonis dedit Capellam de Christleton, and terram Capellae,
and terram cujusdam Rustici and ipsum Rusticum, and quoddam Molendinum
terramque ipsius Molendini, and Chotam Ordrici, ipsumque Ordricum, and quendam
Campum junctum huic Chotae and Cryn; and quandam Salinam in Fulewich, and duas
mansuras in Civitate, and paululum terrae juxta Botechetunestan; Hoc donum
concessit Hugo Comes. Test Willielmo Nigelli Filio, and Fratre ejus Ricardo,
Ranulfo Dapifero, Bigot, Hamone de Massy, Hugone Osberni Filio, Hugone Normanni
Filio, Fulcone de Baiunvilla, Unfrido de Castentyn, Willielmo de Berneres,
Acardo, multisque aliis.

Hugo Filius Normanni, and Radulfus Frater ejus, dederunt partem suam de
Lostocke, and Ecclesiam de Contintuna, and terram Ecclesiae, and decimam illius
Villae, and de Lay similiter. Test Willielmo Malbedeng, multisque aliis.

Ricardus de Vernon dedit Decimam de Eston and Picheton.

Ricardus de Rullos dedit Ecclesiam and Decimam de Waverton, and Hotone, and
Clotton, and Molendini Clotonae.

Item Billeheld, Uxor Baldrici, dedit Pecfortunam. Test Normanno de Arretio,
multisque aliis.

Radulfus Venator dedit terram trium Carucarum in Brochetuna.

Hugo de Mara dedit Redeclivam, concedente Comite. Test Comitissa, Willielmo
Nigelli Filio, Ranulfo Dapifero, Gilberto Venables, multisque aliis.

Item Hugo Comes, dum habuit in Dominico suo Calders, dedit inde Decimam de
omnibus quae Decimari debent, sicut antea dederat, quod etiam Concessit and
Confirmavit Robertus Filius Serlonis, quando Villa data est ei.

Item Comes Hugo, quando habuit in suo Dominico Stortonam and Graisby, dedit
inde Decimam de omnibus quae Decimari debent, sicut antea dederat in suis
propriis Maneriis; quae omnia confirmavit Nigellus de Burceio veniens in
Haereditatem, augens etiam ex sua part terram de octo Bobus in Gravesbiri.
Test Ranulfo, and Garacino Fratre ejus, multisque aliis.

Item Radulfus Ermiwini filius, and uxor ejus Claricia, dederunt terram ad octo
Boves in Wudechurch, and Decimam de Berlestona in Wirhale, and de Wervelestona
in Wyschesfeld, de equabus omnibus ubicunque sint, and de omnibus quae decimari
possint. Test Godfrido Mercatore, Roberto Anglico, Fulberto, multisque aliis.

Item Robertus de Fremouz dedit Fideleustan. Test Radulfo fratre suo, Roberto
Dapifero, Ricardo de Briceio.

Wacelinus, Nepos Walteri de Vernon, dedit quendam Agricolam, and Terram
quatuor Boum in Nessa, and decimam de omnibus rebus suis quae decimari possint
in Prestona, in Levedesham, and tertiam partem totius substantiae suae and
Uxoris ejus. Test Gilberto multisque aliis.

Seward dedit Capellam de Bebinton, and Terram quatuor Boum, and Decimam illius
Manerii, and Decimam de Bromhale, and de Walei, and de Maynes, and de Westona,
and de Willne, and post obitum suum omnis substantiae suae and suae Mulieris
tertiam partem, de Cesturstra, and de Maynes. Test Willielmo Constabulario,
Hugone Osberni filio, and Wimundo de Col.

Item Gilbertus de Venables dedit Deo and Sanctae Werburgae Ecclesiam de
Astbury cum medietate Bosci and plani, and omnium quae pertinent ad Neubold.

Gaufridus de Sartes dedit Decimam suam in Withtricheston. Test Willielmo
Filio Good, and ipso Domino suo Willielmo Malbeng.

Ricardus de Mesnilwaren dedit Decimam de Blachenot de Annona, de Piscaria, and
de omnibus de quibus Decima dari debet. Test Rogero fratre suo, and Ranulfo
Bruello, and Ranulfo de Walbruno.

Robertus Pultrel dedit Terram unius Carucae apud Masclesfeld. Test Waleranno
de Baro, and Nigello de Repentone, and multis aliis.

Walterus de Vernon dedit Decimam Equarum suarum.

Comes dedit Navem unam cum december Retibus ad Piscandum in Anglesei in perpetuum
liberam and quietam. Test Comitissa, Willielmo Pincerna, Hugone Camerario.

Item ad Festum Sanctae Werburgae in Aestate dedit Comes Hugo, Theoloneum
omnesque redditus and exitus Nundinarum trium dierum, praecipiens ut si aliquis
forisfecerit in Nundinis, omnia Placita pertractentur in Curia Sanctae
Werburgae ad opus Monachorum. Concessit etiam ad honorem Virginis, ut sive
latro, sive aliquis Malefactor venerit ad Solennitatem, habeat firmam Pacem dum
fuerit in Nundinis, ni si forte in illis aliquid forisfecerit. Haec sunt itaque
Dona data Abbatiae Sanctae Werburgae, quae omnia ego Comes Hugo, and Ricardus
filius meus, and Ermentrudis Comitissa, and mei Barons, and mei Homines,
Dedimus Abbatiae Sanctae Werburgae, and Concessimus ut haec omnia praedicta,
and Abbatia, and omnia ad eam pertinentia, essent libera, and pacata, and
quieta ab omni consuetudine, and ab omnire, nihil retinentes in his omnibus
nisi Orationes and beneficio Monachorum in hoc loco commanentium: and tam
liberum and quietum honorem Sanctae Werburgae dedimus and constituimus, pro
Salute Animae Regis Willielmi, and omnium nostrum, ut nullus post nos aliquid
libertatis vel quietis addere possit: Et quando nos hanc Chartam confirmavimus,
nullum opus, nullum servitium, nullam consuetudinem, nullam rem omnino praeter
Orationes in terra Sanctae Werburgae retinuimus praeter hoc solum, quod si
Abbas hujus loci superbia inflatus nollet facere rectum Vicinis suis, Comes
constringeret eum ad rectum faciendum, and hoc in Curia Sanctae Werburgae.
Ideoque volumus quod Sancta Werburga habeat per omnia Curiam suam, sicut Comes
suam. Et ut haec omnia rata essent and stabilia in perpetuum, Ego Comes Hugo,
and Barons mei, confirmavimuus ista omnia coram Anselmo Archiepiscopo, non
solum Sigillo meo, sed etiam Sigillo Dei Omnipotentis, id est, Signo Sanctae
Crucis: ita quod singuli nostrum propria manu in testimonium Posteris Signum in
modum Crucis facerent. Signum Hugonis Comitis. Signum Ricardi filii ejus.
Signum Hervei Episcopi. Signum Ranulfi Nepotis Comitis. Signum Rogeri Bigod.
Signum Alani de Percey. Signum Willielmi Constabularii. Signum Ranulfi
Dapiferi. Signum Willielmi Malbedeng. Signum Roberti filii Hugonis. Signum
Hugonis filii Normanni. Signum Hamonis de Massy. Signum Alii Bigot de Loges hic
legunt: Vide Monasticon, pars 1. page 200, and 202.
Roberti de Loges.

Anno Domini 1098. 11 Willielmi Rufi, this Hugh Earl of Chester, and Hugh de
Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury, took Anglesey. They slew many of the Welsh; some
they gelded, and put out their Eyes. Hoveden. also Brompton, page 994. The
Welshmen called Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury, Hugh Gogh, that is, Hugh the Red,
because of his red Head; and Hugh Earl of Chester they called Hugh Vras, that
is, Hugh the Fat. Powel's Notes on the History of Wales, page 155.

Some refer the Structure of the Castle and Walls of the City of Chester to
Hugh Lupus. Cambden in his Britannia, in Cheshire, says thus: Cum jam Templum
Conditum esset, Normannici Comites moenia (Cestriae scilicet) and Castrum
adjecerunt. But I see not how this agrees with Ordericus, page 516. for there
we find, that in Anno Christi 1069. (which was one Year before Hugh Lupus was
made Earl of Chester) the Cheshire Men and the Welsh Besieged Shrewsbury; at
which time William the Conqueror brings his Army to Chester, suppressing all
the Commotions through Mercia: He then built a Fort or Castle at Chester
[Munitionem condidit] and in his Return, another at Stafford, both which he
Garrisoned with store of Men and Victuals; unless by Munitionem we understand
only a Garrison of Men: But condere Munitionem signifies to erect a
Fortification, which must be either a Castle, or Walls, or both; for the
Garrisonning thereof with Men and Victuals, he speaks of afterward.

Again, we find that Elflede the Countess of Mercia, with Ethelred her Husband,
repaired the City of Chester, Anno 908. which the Danes had demolished; and
erected new Walls there, enlarging the Town very much; so that the Castle
situated near to the River, (which before stood without the old Walls) was now
within the compass of the new Walls. Polychronicon. So before this, there was a
Castle, and Walls: So that the Norman Earls did not first erect the Castle and
Walls of Chester. Probably the Conqueror might re-edifie the Castle, according
to Ordericus: And it is likely that Hugh Lupus, and the succeeding Earls, have
by degrees beautified, and added to the Structure both of the Walls and Castle.

The Wife and Issue of Hugh Lupus.
HE Married Ermentrude, Daughter of Hugh de Clarimont Earl of Beavoys in
France, by whom he had only one Child, called Richard, who succeeded Earl of
Chester after his Father's death. Ordericus, page 522. and page 787.

His Base Issue.
Robert, made Monk of Utica in Normandy, Anno Christi 1081. Ordericus, page
602. and afterward made Abbot of Edmundsbury in Suffolk in England, Anno 1100.
Ordericus, page 783.

Othuerus, or Ottiwell, Tutor to the King's Children; to wit, the Children of
Henry the First. Malmesbury calls him, Frater nutricius Richardi Comitis
Cestriae, page 165. that is, Bastard-Brother For that such were educated with
legitimate Children usually in those Ages.
; which Phrase I have often seen used in Old Deeds for the same. He was drowned
with his Brother Richard Earl of Chester, Anno 1119. says Ordericus; but most
other of our Historians do place that unfortunate Accident Anno 1120. When he
saw the Ship sinking, he clips the young Earl of Chester in his Arms, and so
both were drowned together. Ordericus, page 870.

Philip, another Base Son, whom Miles in his Catalogue of Honor affirms he has
seen mentioned as a Witness to a Charter of William the Conqueror.

Geva, a Base Daughter, married Geffrey Riddell; to whom Earl Hugh her Father
gave Drayton-Basset in Staffordshire, as appears by this Deed, taken out of a
Manuscript in Arundel-house in London, Anno 1638. wherein the old Deed
belonging to the Bassets of Drayton-Basset in Staffordshire, about the Reign of
King Richard the Second, were enrolled. Ibid. fol. 67. a.

RAnulphus Comes Cestriae, Willielmo Constabulario, and Roberto Dapifero, and
omnibus Baronibus suis, and Hominibus Francis and Anglicis totius Angliae,
Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Gevae Riddel, Filiae Comitis
Hughes, Draitunam, cum pertinentiis in libero Conjugio, sicut Comes Hughes ei
in libero Conjugio dedit and concessit; and teneat been and in pace, honorifice
and libere, ut melius and liberius tenuit tempore Hugonis Comitis, and aliorum
meorum Antecessorum, eisdem consuetudinibus and libertatibus. Testibus Gilberto
filio Ricardi, and Adeliza Sorore mea, and Willielmo Blundo, and Alexandro de
Tresgor, and Regero de Bello Campo, and Willielmo de Sais, and Roberto de Sais,
and Ricardo Filio Aluredi, and Hugone Filio Osberti, and Henrico de Chalder,
apud Saintonam.

She Founded the Monastery of Canwell in Staffordshire, within four Miles of
Lichfield, as appears by this Transcript, which I received from Mr. Dugdale:
The Original remained with Sir William Peshale of Suggenhill in Staffordshire,
Anno 1638. It is also in Monasticon, 1 Pars, page 439.

UNiversis Sanctae Dei Ecclesiae fidelibus, Geva Filia Hugonis Comitis
Cestriae, and Uxor Gaufridi Ridelli, Salutem. Noverint tam posteri quam
praesentes, quod ego Geva Concilio Religiosarum Personarum, and Authoritate
Rogeri Episcopi Cestriae, and Assensu Ranulfi Comitis Cestriae Cognati mei, pro
salute Animae meae and omnium Antecessorum and Parentum meorum, Fundavi quandam
Ecclesiam in honorem Sanctae Mariae and Sancti Egidii, and omnium Sanctorum, in
loco qui dicitur Canwell, ad opus Monachorum ibidem Deo Servientium: Et Concedo
eis in Elemosynam terram de Stichesleia, and unum pratum quod vocatur
Little-Mersi, and molendinum de Fareslei. Praeterea concedo eis in Duntona
Manerio meo quatuor Virgatas terrae, and unam Virgatam ex dono Osberti
Capellani mei, cum omnibus quae ad eas pertinent; and in eadem Villa unum
Molendinum quod dicitur Le Corre. Et volo and concedo, ut praedicti Monachi
teneant haec omnia been and in pace, libere and quiet ab omni Servitio
Seculari ad me, vel ad Haeredes meos pertinente. Et habeant omnes consuetudines
and libertates suas in nemore and plano, pratis and Pascuis, ita quod nullus
eis neque pro Pannagio, neque pro aliqua, occasion, molestiam vel injuriam
faciat. Hanc quoque Donationem feci concessione Haeredum meorum, scilicet
Gaufridi Ridelli and Radulfi Basset. Hujus Concessionis sunt Testes, Radulfus
Decanus de Blabi, Gaufridus Decanus de Butneswella, Gubertus Canonicus de
Legercestria, -- etc.

This Deed was made about the Year 1120. or soon after: And though she here
writes her self Uxor Gaufridi Ridel, yet truly was her Husband then lately
drowned: Ordericus, page 870. with many others of the Nobility: Neither could
she have made a Deed legally without her Husband, had he been alive.

And because of the Civility of those Ages, she was styled only Daughter of
Earl Hugh, not Base Daughter; whence some suppose her a Legitimate Daughter:
But if she had been Legitimate, then must her Issue have inherited the Earldom
of Chester, and not Earl Randle; for as much as a Sister is inheritable before
an Aunt. Besides, Ordericus tells us in express Words, That Earl Hugh had no
other Child by Ermentrude but only Richard; nor does it appear by any Record,
or Ancient Historian, that he ever had any other Wife, besides Ermentrude: But
Ordericus says, E Pellicibus plurimam sobolem utriusque Sexus genuit; quae
diversis infortuniis absorpta pene tota periit, page 522. But these
before-named are so many of them as I have hitherto collected, or met withal.

As for the usual Custom in ancient Times, of omitting that infamous Title of
Bastard, Robert Earl of Gloucester, Base Son of Henry the First, is termed only
Brother of Maud the Empress, by Hoveden, page 553. Also in a Charter made by
Maud the Empress her self, he is styled Brother, not Bastard-Brother. Seldom,
Tit. Hon. page 649. Reginald Earl of Cornwall, another Bastard of Hen. 1. is
called Uncle to Henry the Second, not Base Uncle, by Hoveden, page 536.
Infinite other such Examples we meet with.

The Death of Hugh Lupus.
THis Hugh Earl of Chester died the 27 day of July, Anno Christi 1101. Henry I.
almost expired. So Ordericus Vitalis, p. 787.

Anno 1101. -- Interea Hugo Comes Cestriae in lectum decidit, and post
diuturnum languorem Monachatum in Caenobio, quod idem Cestrae construxerat,
suscepit: atque post triduum sexto Calendas Augusti obiit.

Polychronicon thus: -- Anno 1102. Hugo Comes Cestrensis, Nepos Regis Willielmi
Conquestoris ex part Sororis, obiit. But for the most part the Year is very
uncertainly put down in the Margent, and many times omitted by him.

He was Earl of Chester one and thirty Years.

This Hugh had Whitby in Yorkshire given him by the Conqueror, and he gave the
same to William de Percy, who Founded an Abbey there. Monasticon, vol. 1. page
172. Earl Hugh gave also to the Prior of Whitby, the Church of St. Peter's of
Whitby, and also the Church of Flemesburgh. Monasticon. vol. 1. page 73.

This Earl also Founded the Abbey of St. Severus, in the Bishopric of
Constance in Normandy. Monasticon, vol. 2. page 950. He gave also to the Abbey
of Bek in Normandy, the Manor of Atherstone in England in Warwickshire. Ibid.
vol. 2. page 954.

Robert de Beaumont Earl of Mellent in France, and this Hugh Earl of Chester,
were the principal Supporters of Henry the First, in advancing him to the Crown
of England. Ordericus, page 783.

CHAP. II.
Of Richard Earl of Chester.

1101. 1 Hen. 1.
blazon or coat of arms G. Crusilly Or, a Wolfs Head erased Ar.
I. RIchard, the only Child of Earl Hugh by Ermentrude his Wife, succeeded his
Father in in the Earldom of Chester, Anno 1101. Ordericus, lib. 10. page 787.

He was but seven years old when his Father died, says the Monk of Chester in
his Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 13. with whom agrees Knighton the Monk of
Leycester, page 2376. And I find in an old Leiger Book of the Monastery of
Abbington, a Manuscript in Cotton's Library at Westminster in London, noted --
Claudius c. 9. fol. 147. of the whole Book; but lib. 2. fol. 45. of that
particular part De Historia Ecclesiae Abbendonensis, speaking of this Richard's
Grant of Wudmundsley to the said Abbey and Church of Abbington, -- Ipse Comes
benefactum extulit and suo descripto roboravit: quod descriptum Sigillo quidem
matris Signari constitit: nondum enim militari Baltheo cinctus, materno Sigillo
literae quaelibet ab eo directae includebantur: hac de re, quod eo annotatur,
Comitissae potius quam Comitis Sigillo Signatur. Cujus Forma haec fuit. --

Ricardus Cestrensis Comes, and Ermentrudis Comitissa matter ejus, Nigello de
Oilli, and Rogero filio Radulfi, and omnibus Baronibus de Oxenford Scira,
Salutem and Amicitiam. Sciatis quia pro amore Dei, and anima Patris mei, and
remissione nostrorum Peccatorum, Concedimus hidam illam, quam Droco de Andeleia
dedit Ecclesiae Abbendonensi, quae est in loco qui dicitur Wudemundeslai: Nos
eidem Ecclesiae Concedimus and auctorizamus perpetuo habendam, solidam and
quietam ab omni nostro servitio: Et Rogerus filius Radulfi and Successores ejus
sint quieti in nostro servitio, quantum ad illam hidam pertinet: Et defendimus,
ut nullo modo Rogerus, vel alius per eum, inquietet habitantes in terra illa:
Hoc autem fecimus and testimonio nostrorum Baronum; scilicet Willielmi filii
Nigelli, and Hugonis filii Normanni, and Ricardi Balaste, and Willielmi filii
Auskitilli, and Ricardi filii Nigelli, and Domini Goisfridi Capellani, and
aliorum. Hoc actum est in sexto Anno Regni Henrici Regis, in mense Maii, 6 Hen.
1. 1106.
in die Pentecostes. This was in May, Anno Christi 1106. Earl Richard being
then about twelve years old.

By the words [nondum militari Baltheo cinctus] I suppose the Monk means,
that the Earl was a Child, and under the Tuition of his Mother; and for that
reason used her Seal to this Charter, and also to other his Letters. Of which
opinion likewise is Seldom, in his Titles of Honor, page 786. The Law, says
he, being such, that whosoever was Knighted, though before the Age of one and
twenty, he was esteemed as of full Age in regard of any Wardship or other
Tuition: and the Use being, that such Great Lords were often Knighted before
they were of full Age. Now this Earl as yet not having received that Honor of
Knighthood, but being under Age, used the Seal of his Guardian to make the Act
more authentic and valid; and that he was but a Child when his Father died,
take the Authority of Ordericus, lib. 10. page 787. Richardus autem
pulcherrimus Puer, amabilis omnibus, Consulatum [Cestriae scilicet] tenuit.

II. He Married Maude, Daughter of Stephen Earl of Bloys in France, by his Wife
Adela, Daughter of William the Conqueror; and had no sooner tasted the
Pleasures of his Marriage Bed, but he with his young Countess were by the
churlish Waves, not only prohibited their mutual Love Embraces, and hopes of
future Posterity to succeed them, but were deprived of their Lives also, as
they were Sailing for England, Anno Domini 1119. Ordericus, page 787. So that
he was about the Age of twenty five years when he was drowned.

Milles in his Catalogue of Honor has clearly mistaken the Name of this
Earl's Wife, calling her Lucy in stead of Maude, vouching no Authority; a gross
Absurdity in a Herald.

III. But because this lamentable Accident is memorable for the destructive
influence it had upon many of the Nobility of England, I will collect the whole
Story out of Ordericus, and as briefly as I may, lib. 12. page 868, 869, 870.
The Master of the Ship was Thomas the Son of Stephen, who came to King Henry
the First, then in Normandy, and ready to take Shipping for England, and
offered him a Mark of Gold (in elder Ages valued at six Pound in Silver, Rot.
Mag. Pipae de Anno 1 Hen. 2. and as others say, ten Marks of Silver, 6 l. 13 s.
4 d.) desiring, that as Stephen his Father had Transported the Conqueror when
he Fought against King Harold in England, and was his constant Mariner in all
his Passages between England and Normandy, so that he himself likewise might
now have the Transportation of King Henry with all his Attendance, as it were
in Fee: for he had a very good Ship called Candida Navis, or The White Ship,
well furnished for that purpose. The King thanked him, but withal told him, he
had already made choice of another Ship, which he would not change; yet he
would commend him to his two Sons, William and Richard, with many others of his
Nobility: whereat the Mariners much rejoiced, and desired the Prince to bestow
some Wine upon them to drink: He gave them Tres Modios Vini, three Hogsheads of
Wine, wherewith they made themselves sufficiently Drunk. There were almost
three hundred in this unfortunate Ship: for there were fifty skilful Oars or
Galleymen, had they not been intoxicated with Wine, which belonged to the Ship,
besides the young Gallants which were to be Transported: but now being neither
able to govern themselves nor the Ship, they suffered it to be split on a Rock,
and so all were drowned, except one Be^olde, a Butcher of Roan in Normandy, who
was took up the next Morning by three Fishermen into their Boat, after a cold
frosty Nights Shipwreck, and with much ado recovered and lived twenty years
after.

There were, says Hoveden, in this Ship Militaris numeri 140. Nautarum 50. cum
tribus Gubernatoribus, with many Noblemen and Women.

The Names of the more eminent Persons who then perished [of whom Huntington
thus, -- Omnes, velfere Omnes, Sodomitica labe dicebantur irretiti,] I have
here collected out of Ordericus, viz. page 869. William and Richard, two Sons
of King Henry the First; Rafe Rufus, and Gilbert de Oximis; and page 870.
Maude, Daughter of Henry the First Wife of Rotron Earl of Morton; Richard Earl
of Chester juvenis multa probitate and benignitate laudabilis, with Maude his
Wife, Sister to Tedbald Earl Palatine of Blois; Othuerus also, Brother to
Richard, Hugonis Cestriae Comitis filius, Tutor Regiae Prolis and Paedagogus,
ut fertur, dum repentina fieret ratis Subversio, nobiliumque irreparabilis
dimersio; adolescentulum (meaning Richard Earl of Chester) illico amplexatus
est, and cum ipso in profundum irremeabiliter prolapsus est; also Theodoricus
Puer, Henrici Nepos Imperatoris Almannorum; also two brave Sons of Ivo de
Grentemaisnill, and William of Rothelent their Cousin, who by the King's Command
were coming to receive their Father's Inheritances in England; William surnamed
Bigod, with William de Prior the King's Steward; Geffrey Ridell, and Hugh de
Molinis; Robert Malconductus or Malduit, and Nequam Gisulfus Semba Regis:
aliique plures multae ingenuitatis. And in Page 649. he names two more,
Engenulfe and Goisfred, Sons of Gilbert de Aquila: And in Stowe we find named
Walter de Curcy, and Geffrey Archdeacon of Hereford; in all 160 Persons.

Of which Shipwreck an excellent Rhimer of those Times composed these Verses.
Ordericus, page 869.

Accidit Hora gravis, Thomaeque miserrima navis,
quam male rect aterit, rupe Soluta perit.
Flebilis Eventus, dum nobilis illa Juventus
est immersa mari Perditione pari.
Jactatur Pelago Regum Generosa Propago:
quosque Duces plorant, monstra marina vorant.
O Dolor immensus! nec Nobilitas, neque Census
ad vitam revocat, quos maris unda necat.
Purpura cum bysso liquido putrescit abysso,
Rex quoque quem genuit, Piscibus Esca fuit.
Sic sibi fidentes ludit fortuna Potentes:
nunc dat: nunc demit: hinc levat, inde premit.
Quid numerus Procerum, quia Opes, quid Gloria Rerum?
quid, Guillelme, tibi forma valebat ibi?
Marcuit ille Decor Regalis, and abstulit aequor
quod fact^s fueras, quodque futurus eras.
Inter Aquas istis instat Damnatio tristis,
ni Pietas gratis caelica parcat eis:
Corporibus mersis animae si dona Salutis
nactae gauderent, moesta procul fierent:
Certa salus animae verum dat tripudiare
his, been qui charos Commemorant Proprios.
Hinc Dolor est ingens, humana quod inscia fit men's,
An Requies sit eis, quos capit uda Thetis.
The Place or Haven where they took Shipping is called Barbaflat, that is,
Harefleet in Normandy; the time 7 Calend. December. 1119. So Ordericus. But
Hoveden, Huntington, Paris, and Judicious Cambden, do all place it in Anno
1120. Hoveden expresses the very Day of the Week, -- Anno 1120. in Scopulos,
dictos Chaterase, fracta est Navis 6 Calendas Decembris, feria quinta, noctis
initio apud Barbefleet: where he computes the Night to the Day following;
Ordericus, to the Day past.

IV. I cannot but take notice here of the Printer's Error in Ordericus, as it
is set out by Andrew du Chesne with other Authors, and Printed 1619. We read
Page 787. -- Ricardus autem pulcherrimus Puer, quem Solum ex Ermentrude filia
Hugonis de Claromonte genuit, Consulatum ejus fere 12 annis Amabilis omnibus
tenuit: where the number 12 should have been 19. for if this place be conferred
with Page 870. then Richard, by exact computation out of Ordericus, was Earl of
Chester just eighteen Years and four Months: But if you place the time of this
Shipwreck in Anno 1120. as most Authors do, then must he have held the Earldom
nineteen Years and four Months.

I shall close all concerning this Earl, with his Charter of Confirmation to
the Abbey of St. Werburge, which remained among the Evidences of that Church
Anno 1644. but were after removed thence in the late War, 1648.

ANno ab Incarnatione Domini, Millesimo centesimo decimo nono, Regnante
Potentissimo Rege Henrico, Ego Comes Ricardus meique homines Communi Concilio
confirmavimus Sigillo meo omnes Donationes, quae datae sunt a me vel a meis in
meo tempore Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae Cestriae: Ego itaque Comes Ricardus
post obitum Patris mei dedi, pro salute Animae meae and suae, terram quae fuit
Wulfrici Praepositi foris Portam de North, prius per unam Spicam frumenti,
deinde per unum Cultellum super Altar Sanctae Werburgae; and Molendinum de
Bache, and tres Mansuras quietas and ab omni re liberas, duas in Civitate, and
unam extra Portam de North. Testibus Willielmo Constabulario, Waltero de
Vernon, Radulfo Dapifero, and multis aliis. Willielmus Constabularius dedit
Neutonam simul cum Servitio Hugonis Filii Udardi de quatuor Bovatis; and
Servitium Wicelini de duabus Bovatis. Hugo Filius Normanni dedit Gostrey and
Lawton. Testibus Hugone de Lacy, and Radulfo and Rogero Filiis Normanni,
multisque aliis. Ricardus de Praers dedit Knoctirum. Testibus Willielmo and
Ada, Filiis ejus. Corbinus dedit unam Carucam Terrae in Werewel. Hamundus de
Mascy concessu Haeredum suorum, and Rosa Uxor Pigoti concessu Rogeri Fratris
ejus, dederunt Norwordinam and Ecclesiam, cum omnibus quae ad eam pertinent:
Concedentibus and Testibus Filiis eorum. Rogerus de Menilgarin dedit Plumleiam
cum Widone Filio suo quando factus est Monachus. Test Ranulfo and Willielmo
Filiis. Ranulfus Venator dedit Bresseford, and unam Salinam in Northwich,
concessu Ricardi Comitis, and Hugonis de Vernon Domini sui. Item Ricardus Comes
dedit Decimum Salmonem de Ponte, and locum unius Molendini citra Pontem, and
Decimam illius Molendini ultra Pontem. Burel dedit Ecclesiam de Haliwella, and
Decimam de Molendino suo, and de omnibus rebus suis. Herebertus Wambarsarius
dedit Terram quatuor Boum in Hole. Ricardus Pincerna dedit Ecclesiam Sancti
Olavi, and Terram juxta Ecclesiam, and duas Mansuras in foro. Rogerus de Sancto
Martino dedit Terram duorum Boum in Bebington. Willielmus de Punterling dedit
Buttanari, cum omnibus Appendiciis suis, id est, Ecclesiam and totum Manerium
solutum and quietum, and Silvam Lectone ad rogum faciendum and ad communem usum
Domestici Operis; Consensu and Testimonio Hereberti Filii sui, and Aluredi
Domini sui, and Ricardi Comitis. Hugo de Vernon concessu Ricardi Comitis dedit
unam Mansuram in Civitate solutam and quietam ab omni re and consuetudine. His
ita descriptis, Ego Comes Ricardus, meique Barons, and mei Homines,
Confirmavimus non solum ista, sed etiam illa omnia quae Comes Hugo Pater meus,
and Barons sui, confirmaverunt, etc. Ita libere ut nihil libertatis possit eis
addi ulterius; nihil enim retinemus praeter Orationes in rebus Sanctae
Werburgae. Concedimus etiam, ut Beata Virgo Werburga habeat suam Curiam de
cunctis placitis and forisfactis, sicut Comes habet suam. Ita vero quod Abbas
illius loci non exeat neque Placitet contra aliquem de aliquo Placito, vel de
aliqua re extra Curiam suam. Testibus Ranulfo de Meschines, and Willielmo
Fratre suo, Willielmo Constabulario, and Ricardo Fratre suo, Hugone Malbanck,
Osberno de Meschines, Hugone Filio Osberni, and Willielmo Fratre ejus,
multisque aliis: Apud Graham.

CHAP. III.
Of the First Randle, Earl of Chester.

1120. 20 Hen. 1.
blazon or coat of arms Or, a Lion Rampant Gules.
I. RAndle the First, surnamed de Micines, or Meschines, Viscount Bayeux in
Normandy, obtained the Earldom of Chester from King Henry the First, with all
the Patrimony thereof, as next Heir to Earl Richard; for he was Nephew to Hugh
Lupus, to wit, Son of Maude, Sister to Earl Hugh: Ordericus, lib. 12. page 871.
He restored to King Henry all the Land which he had by his Wife the Widow of
Roger de Romara, for the Earldom of Chester. Ordericus, page 876.

He is also styled Randle of Bricasard, who stuck faithfully to King Henry the
First, in the midst of a tumultuous Rebellion in Normandy, sub Anno 1119. with
others of the Nobility, scorning to be disgraced with the Name of a Traitor.
Ordericus, lib. 12. page 851, and 879.

In an ancient Roll of Knights Fees due to the Duke of Normandy, I find --

Comes Cestriae Servitium X Militum de S. Severio, and de Bricasart; and ad
suum servitium LI Milites, and dimidium, and quartam partem, and octavam unius
Militis: In the Appendix added by Andrew du Chesne to the Norman Writers, at
the end thereof, page 1045.

This Earl Randle was Lord of Cumberland and Carlisle by Descent from his
Father: For after the Normans had invaded England, Cumberland fell to the share
of Raufe de Meschines; Cujus Filius natu maximus Ranulfus fuit Cumbriae
Dominus; and materno jure, Principisque gratia etiam Cestriae Comes; says
Cambden in Cumberland.

II. But King Stephen willing to gain the Favor of the Scots, gave Cumberland
away to them again, to be held of the Kings of England as by a Right of
Protection: For the eldest Sons of the Kings of Scotland, before the Norman
Conquest, were Governors of Cumberland for a certain space. But King Henry the
Second brought back the Liberality of Stephen to himself, and took from the
Scots, Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland, as Cambden in the same
place adds.

III. Raufe de Meschines had by Maude his Wife, Sister of Hugh Lupus, two Sons:
Randle the Eldest, Earl of Chester; and William de Meschines, to whom King
Henry the First gave the Castle of Egremont in Cumberland, per Servitium unius
Militis, utque iret ad Praeceptum Regis in Exercitu Scotiae and Walliae, as
Cambden my Author informs me Geffrey, a third Son, to whom his brother Randle
gave Gillesland in Cumberland; and to William, Coupland in Cumberland. An old
Parchment Roll, in Custody of Henry Ferrars of Badsley in Warwickshire. See
also Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 400.
.

This William gave the Church of Dissart to the Abbey of St. Werburge in the
City of Chester, as appears by an ancient Charter among the Evidences of that
Church, and confirmed by this Randle Earl of Chester; which for better
satisfaction I think fit here to insert.

UNiversis Matris Ecclesiae Filiis Ranulfus Comes Cestriae, Salutem. Notum sit
vobis pariter me Concessisse, Quando feci transferri Corpus Hugonis Comitis mei
Avunculi a Coemeterio in Capitulum, ut in die mortis meae darem simul cum
Corpore meo Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae, Uptunam solutam and quietam ab omni
re, ut Elemosynam liberam, sicut ego ipse in illa die haberem eam, in Terris,
in Hominibus, in Planis, in Pascuis, in Pratis, in Placitis, and in omnibus
pertinentiis suis, pro Anima ipsius Hugonis Comitis, and pro salute Animae
meae, and Animarum omnium Parentum meorum. Item quia Comes Hugo concesserat
antea Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae Theoloneum, and omnes reditus Nundinarum
trium dierum, id est, a Nona Vigiliae Sanctae Werburgae usque ad vesperam
sequentis diei post Solennitatem: Ego Comes Ranulfus illud idem Concedo and
confirmo, constituens sicut ipse constituerat, ut sive latro, sive Robbator,
sive aliquis malefactor venerit ad solennitatem, habeat firmam pacem dum fuerit
in Nundinis, nisi forte forisfecit in illis: Et si forte aliquis forisfecerit
in Nundinis, omne Placitum and forisfactum and justitia, a Ministris Abbatis
and a Vice-Comite Civitatis, tractabuntur in Curia Sanctae Werburgae Virginis:
Et ut Vicecomes intentius and fidelius hoc agat, Computetur and Tallietur ei a
meis Camerariis in suam firmam, quicquid Monachi, ex his omnibus acceperunt.
Willielmus Meschines, Frater meus, dedit Deo and Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae
Ecclesiam de Dissard, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, Consensu Ranulphi Comitis,
and Ranulphi Filii sui. Test Willielmo Clerico de Roelent, Willielmo
Flandrensi, multisque aliis. Mattheus de Ruelent dedit Ecclesiam de
Turstaniston cum suis pertinentiis, quando Simon Frater ejus factus est
Monachus. Testibus Roberto de Petroponte, multisque aliis. Hugo Filius Osberni
dedit unam Mansuram in Cestria, and unum Pratum quod vocatur Kings-eye. Suuein
de Watenhale factus Monachus, dedit duas Bovatas in Watenhale, concedentibus
Filiis ejus. Ricardus de Cruce dedit unam Mansuram in Cestria in Vico apud
Pontem, and partem Terrae quam habuit in Morcetone and vellet Monachus fieri.
Test Normanno Filio suo, multisque aliis. Letitia de Malpas dedit Deo and
Sanctae Werburgae unam Mansuram versus Portam Clippe. Test and Concedente
Ricardo Domino suo, and Fratre suo Ricardo Mailard, Nigello Chaldell, multisque
aliis. Willielmus Filius Andreae dedit cum Filio suo Monacho facto unam magnam
Shoppam inter Domum Winebalt and Hamundi in foro. Haec sunt itaque Dona, quae
data sunt a me and a meis hominibus Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae in meo tempore:
Quapropter concedimus and confirmamus, tam ego quam homines mei, non solum haec
supradicta, sed and ea omnia, quae Comes Hugo meus Avunculus, vel Ricardus
Comes ejus Filius, aut eorum homines, dederunt Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae;
Deprecantes and praecipientes cunctis nostris amicis and hominibus, tam
praesentibus quam futuris, quatenus ea omnia sint stabilia, soluta, and quieta,
and ut Elemosyna ab omni re ita libera, ut nihil libertatis possit eis addi
ulterius, quia nihil retinemus in his exceptis Orationibus. Adhuc etiam
concedimus and confirmamus, sicut praedicti Comites and eorum homines antea
confirmaverunt, ut Beata Werburga habeat de cunctis rebus Curiam suam, ita quod
Abbas illius loci non placitet usquam contra aliquem de aliqua re ad Ecclesiam
pertinente extra Curiam suam.

Et ut ego Comes Ranulfus darem exemplum posteris, veni ipse propter unum
Placitum in Curiam Abbatis, audiens and suscipiens ibi meum judicium, non a
meis sed a judicibus Abbatis, ut in omnibus haberet Beata Werburga jus suae
dignitatis in perpetuum. Et ut igitur sic sint omnia, sicut praedictum est,
libera, confirmamus ea hinc Sanctae Crucis Signo,. hinc meo Sigillo, hinc horum
virorum testimonio; scilicet Willielmi Meschini, Willielmi Constabularii, and
Radulfi Dapiferi, Hugonis Malbanc, Ricardi Banaster, Hugonis Filii Osberni,
Osberni Filii Hugonis, Roberti de Mascy, Roberti Filii Bigot, Adae de Praers,
Gaufridi Capellani, Turgicii Doctoris, Ricardi Filii Nigelli. Signum Ranulfi
Comitis. Signum Willielmi Meschini. Signum Willielmi Constabularii. Signum
Roberti de Palmas. Signum Radulfi Dapiferi. Signum Hugonis Malbanc. Signum
Ricardi Banaster. Signum Hugonis Filii Osberni, Signum Osberni Filii Hugonis.
Signum Roberti de Mascy.

IV. The Wife of Randle the First.
HE Married Lucy, the Widow of Roger de Romara, Son of Geroldus. Ordericus,
page 871. She was the Daughter of Algar the Saxon, Earl of Mercia, and Sister
to the two great Earls, Edwine Earl of Mercia, and Morcar Earl of
Northumberland, who stoutly opposed William the Conqueror. This Lucy had three
Husbands, and survived them all: The first was Ivo de Talbois Earl of Angeau:
The second was Roger de Romara, Son of Gerold, by whom she had Issue William de
Romara Earl of Lincoln: The third was this Earl of Chester. Cambden in his
Britannia, at the end of Leycestershire.

This Lady Lucy, Countess of Chester and Lincoln, Founded the Priory of
Spalding in Lincolnshire, where in times past were Monks of Anjou in France. So
Leland, a Manuscript in Oxford Library, page 86. See Monasticon, Vol. 1. page
307, 308. and Vol. 2. page 871.

The same Lucy, with her two Sons, Randle Earl of Chester, and William de
Romara Earl of Lincoln, Founded a Priory of Nuns at Stikeswold, of the Order of
Cistertians, in the County of Lincoln. Idem Leland ibidem, page 87. See
Monasticon, Vol. 2. page 809.

V. The Issue of Randle the First, by Lucy.
THis Randle the First had Issue by Lucy, Randle the Second, who succeeded Earl
of Chester. Ordericus, page 871. William, another Son, Earl of Cambridge, who
was Witness, with his Brother Randle the Second, to a Charter of Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln, of the Island of Haferholm to the Nuns of St. Mary's, of the
Order of Cistercians, dated 1139. 4 Stephani. Also Agnes a Daughter, the first
Wife of Robert de Grentemaisnil. Ordericus, page 692. Afterward he married
Emme, Daughter of Robert de Stotevill; and his third Wife was Lucy, Daughter of
Savaricus Son of Canus.

Adeliza, another Daughter of this Randle, Married Richard Son of Gilbert de
Clare, of whom he begot three Sons; which Richard was slain by the Welsh. Will.
Gemeticensis, lib. 8. cap. 38. Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 118.

Matt. Westminster. sub Anno 1073. calls him Comes Ranulfus de Micenis.
Randle the First died Anno Domini 1128. after he had been Earl eight Years.
Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 17. He is called Comes Cumbriae, Monasticon, Vol.
1. page 397. but erroneously, and by mistake; for they were styled Domini
Cumbriae, not Comites, as Cambden observes. And I doubt whether in these elder
Ages there was any Earl of Cumberland at all, properly to be understood.

This Randle the First gave to the Abbey of St. Mary's at York, the Church of
St. Michael, and the Church of St. Laurence of his Castle of Apelby, with all
their Appurtenances, id est, which belonged to his Castle of Apelby in
Westmorland. Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 399. in the Reign of King Henry the First.

*
Randle Meschin gave also to the Abbey of Kaldra in Cumberland, that Land of
Kaldra wherein the Abbey was Founded, and Bemertone, and Holgate, and unam
Mansuram in Burgo de Egremunt, and duas Salinas de Withane, and Piscariam de
Derewent, and Piscariam de Egre, and Pascua ad omnia Animalia in Foresta ipsius
Ranulphi. Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 774. But quaere, whether this were not
Randle de Micenis, Son of William de Meschin Lord of Coupland, who Founded the
Cell of St. Beges in Cumberland, belonging to St. Mary's of York; see
Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 395, 396. and not our Earl of Chester here spoken of;
for that the Page 774. before-cited shows, that the Abbey of Kaldra was Founded
Anno Domini 1134. which was after the Death of this Randle Earl of Chester; and
it seems not to be meant of our second Randle Earl of Chester, because then he
would probably have been styled Earl, and not barely Randle Meschin, as there
he is styled.

Pipe-Roll. 5 Stephani. Lincolnshire.
Lucia, the Widow of this first Randle Earl of Chester, gave 266 l. 13 s. 4 d.
for Livery of her Father's Lands; and also 500 Marks Fine, that she might not
be compelled to Marry within five Years.

CHAP. IV.
Of Randle the Second.

I. RAndle the Second, surnamed Gernouns, 1128. 29 H. 1.
because blazon or coat of arms Gules, a Lion rampant, Ar.
he was born at Gernon-Castle in Normandy Powel's Notes on the Welsh Hist. pa.
295 Vernon-Castle; the Letters of G and V in the beginning of words being
promiscuously used.
, was Son and Successor to his Father Randle the First in the Earldom of
Chester, and in all his Patrimony both in England and Normandy, Anno 1128.
Ordericus, lib. 12. page 871. Gemeticensis, lib. 8. cap. 38. Polycronicon, lib.
7. cap. 17.

Anno Domini 1139. King Stephen made Henry, Son of David King of Scotland, Earl
of Northumberland, at Durham; and gave him Carlisle and Cumberland, upon a
Peace then concluded between Stephen and the King of Scotland: Which incensed
this Randle Earl of Chester more vehemently against Stephen; howbeit in respect
of his Alliance to Robert Earl of Gloucester, whose Daughter he had Married,
Randle was more apt to be drawn unto the Part of Maude the Empress: So that
John Prior of Hagulsted, in his Continuation of the History of Simon of Durham,
pa. 268. tells us, That in Anno 1140. Henry Son of the King of Scotland, with
his Wife, coming to visit King Stephen in England, this Earl of Chester was
much displeased at him; for Randle required Carlisle and Cumberland as his
rightful Patrimony, and would have fought the said Henry in his Return to
Scotland: But Stephen having notice of Randle's intentions, sent Henry back
into his Country safe from all danger; and afterward was the Earl of
Chester's indignation bent against King Stephen, and the Earl surprised the
Castle of Lincoln, and possessed himself of all the Strong Holds in
Lincolnshire.

II. This Randle was a gallant Man at Arms, and took King Stephen Prisoner at
the Battle near Lincoln, on Candlemas-day, Anno Domini 1141. Ordericus,
Huntington, and Hoveden. But Mat. Paris places this Battle in Anno 1140. The
Story is set down at large by Ordericus, lib. 13. Eccles. Hist. page 921, 922,
as follows.

Anno Domini 1141. Anno sexto Stephani Regis, Randle Earl of Chester, and
William de Romara his half-Brother by the Mother, Earl of Lincoln, rebelled
against Stephen, and fraudulently surprised the Castle of Lincoln, wherein King
Stephen had placed a Garrison of Soldiers for Defense of the Town; which Castle
was taken thus. Spying the Opportunity, when the Castle-Soldiers were dispersed
abroad, the Earl of Chester unarmed, and without a Cloak or Coat, (as if he
meant to fetch home his Wife, whom he had before sent thither, accompanied with
the Countess of Lincoln, Wife of the said William de Romara, as walking abroad
for their Recreation) enters the Castle with three Soldiers, which followed him
not far off, no Man suspecting any Treachery. They presently seized the Port or
Gate, and took all the Arms which they found, letting in William de Romara,
with a Company of armed Soldiers, who hasted after, according to the
contrivement of the Plot; and so turning all out that remained in the Castle,
which were of the King's part, the two Brothers possessed themselves both of
the Town and Castle.

Bishop Alexander, and the Townsmen, willing to insinuate themselves into the
favor of King Stephen, gave him notice of what had happened. The news much
incensed the King, and so much the more, by how much the Fact was committed by
those whom he took for his special Friends, and on whom he had conferred many
Favors. Stephen forthwith gathers an Army, and after Christmas Day, which was
in the seventh Year of Stephen's Reign, Anno 1141. marches toward Lincoln;
where by his sudden and unexpected coming in the Night, and the Intelligence of
some of the Townsmen, he surprised seventeen of the Earls Soldiers which were
in the Town.

The two Earls with their Wives and Friends were Besieged in the Castle, and
knew not how to escape this present Danger. At last Randle Earl of Chester (who
was the younger and more courageous Earl) adventures out by Night, attended
only with a few, and went to Cheshire as amongst his own Men: He makes known
his Condition to Robert Earl of Gloucester his Father-in-law, and to others of
his Friends: The Disinherited Welsh and many others he exasperates against the
King, and raises all the Forces he can, to help his Friends that were Besieged
in the Castle of Lincoln; especially he implores the Aid of Maude the Empress
and Countess of Anjou, swearing Fealty unto her, whose Favor he obtained.
Having now gathered a numerous Army, the two Earls, Robert Earl of Gloucester,
and Randle Earl of Chester, march speedily to Lincoln. The King hearing of
their approach, advises what is to be done: Some counsel him to leave a
competent Strength to defend the Town, and to go away himself, and raise a
potent Army through all the parts of the Kingdom, whereby in due time he might
be able to disperse them, if they should continue before that Town. Others
advise him to send a Parley to the Enemy, to put off the Battle, since that Day
(being Candlemas-day) was sacred, and to be set apart in commemoration of the
Purification of the Virgin Mary. But the obstinate King not willing to delay
the Matter, draws forth all his Forces immediately; both Armies meet near the
Town of Lincoln, and being put in order, join Battle. The King divides his Army
into three Bodies; so did the Earls likewise divide their Army on the contrary
part. In the Front of the King's Army were the Flemmings and the Britons,
Commanded by William de Ipro and Alan de Dinan. On the opposite part to them
stood a furious Company of the Welsh, Commanded by two Brothers, Mariadoth and
Kaladrius.

The Earl of Chester alights from his Horse, resolving to Fight on foot. The
stout Earl bravely encouraged his courageous Cheshire Regiment of Foot, and
made this short Speech to the Earl of Gloucester, and the rest of his Army --

This Speech is not in Ordericus; but is taken out of Huntington, page 390. It
is also in Hoveden and others.
I humbly thank you, most invincible General, and you the rest of my fellow
Soldiers, that you have so faithfully and courageously expressed your Affection
to me, even to the hazard of your own Lives: And since I have been the cause of
this your danger, it is but reason I should lead the Way, and give the first
Onset to the Army of the perfidious King, who has broken the Truce he made;
and only out of the confidence of your Valor, and the King's Injustice, I
doubt not to dissipate his Forces, and with my Sword to make way through the
midst of my Enemies: Methinks I see them run already.

Then Robert Earl of Gloucester, who Commanded in Chief, encouraged his
Soldiers, and told the Bassians and others who were Disinherited, That now they
should have one Bout for the recovery of their Right and Inheritance.

King Stephen on the other part alights from his Horse, and Fought on foot very
stoutly both for his Life and Kingdom; but having no audible Voice, commanded
Baldwin de Clare, a Man of great Honor and Prowess, to make known his mind to
the Army: Henry Huntington, li. 8.
who made an Oration to encourage the Soldiers; Impeaching the Earl of Chester,
as a Man audacious, but without Judgment; heady to plot a Treason, but still
wavering in the pursuit of it; ready to run into Battle, but uncircumspect of
any danger; aiming beyond his reach, and conceiting things merely impossible;
and therefore has but few with him that know him, leading only a Rout of
vagrant and tumultuous Pesants: So there is nothing in him to be feared; for
whatsoever he begins like a Man, he ends like a Woman; unfortunate in all his
Undertakings: In his Encounters he has either been vanquished, or if by chance
he rarely a obtain Victory, it is with greater loss on his part then the
Conquered.

But as soon as he had ended his Oration, the Fight began; which was very
fierce and terrible, many slain on both parts. In the Head of the King's Army
were very stout Soldiers; but his Enemies outvying him in number, prevailed.
William de Ipro with the Flemmings, and Alan with the Britons, first turn their
Backs; Huntington and Hoveden say they beat the Welsh, but the Earl of Chester
coming up with his Forces, quite routed them.
which much discouraged the King's Friends, but encouraged the Enemy. The King
was ill betrayed: for some of his Nobles accompanied him in Person, whiles they
sent whole Troops to the other side.

Waleran Earl of Mellent, and William de Warren his Brother, Gilbert de Clare,
and other famous Knights both of England and Normandy, ran away as soon as they
saw their own side shrink: But Baldwin de Clare, and Richard, Son of Ursi,
Engelram de Say, and Ildebert Lacy, stuck stoutly to the King, and Fought it to
the last Man: Stephen himself, like a noble Branch of an heroic Family, Fought
so gallantly, that when his Sword was broken, taking a Battel-Axe from a young
Gentleman which stood near him, he ceased not to Encounter with his
over-powerful Enemies; but at last was constrained to yield himself Prisoner to
Robert Earl of Gloucester, his Cousin, who sent him to Maude the Empress at
Bristow, where he was imprisoned. Baldwine de Clare likewise, and other
excellent Champions on the King's part, were taken Prisoners.

Thus by the voluble Wheel of Fortune was King Stephen taken Prisoner at the
Battle of Lincoln, on Candlemas-day, Anno Domini 1141. according to Ordericus,
who lived in that very Age; which was principally occasioned by the Valor and
Assistance of Randle Earl of Chester.

III. Alan Earl of Brettaine, a treacherous and cruel Man, Gesta Steph. page
953.
lying in Ambush for the Earl of Chester, to revenge the Dishonor of taking his
Lord and King Prisoner, was himself taken and imprisoned till he did Homage to
Randle Earl of Chester, and had delivered up his Castles unto him. Others say,
Alan Earl of Richmond and Little-Britain, was sent for by Randle to speak with
him, and so was Apprehended by him, Anno 1141. John Hagustaldensis, page 269.

Not long after this, Robert Earl of Gloucester was taken Prisoner in another
Battle, by some others of Stephen's Party; and so immediately King Stephen and
Earl Robert were exchanged each for other.

Anno 1143. Stephen being released out of Prison, Besieged Lincoln, and would
have built a Fort over against the Castle, which Randle Earl of Chester kept;
but the Earl killed almost eighty of his Workmen, and so he was forced to give
it off. Mat. Paris and Hen. Huntington. But Hoveden places this 1144. 9
Stephani.

Anno Domini 1145. King Stephen gathering a great Army, built a strong Castle
over against Wallingford; whither Randle Earl of Chester accompanied him with
great Forces, and was restored unto his Favor: But afterward the Earl coming
to the King's Court at Northampton, was surprised, little dreaming of any such
matter, and cast into Prison, until he restored the Castle of Lincoln, which
he had fraudulently taken, and all other Castles which he injuriously had taken
from the King. Chronica Normanniae, put out by Du Chesne with other Histories,
page 982. Also Polychronicon adds, That the Welshmen then wasted Cheshire,
but were intercepted at Nantwich, *
lib. 7. cap. 19. Monasticon, vol. 1. page 890.

But for the Reconcilement of Stephen and Randle, it is more fully set down in
Gesta Stephani, page 968. thus -- The Earl of Chester (who had got almost a
third part of the Kingdom by his Sword) comes to the King, and desires Pardon
for his Rebellion at Lincoln, and for the seizing of his Sovereign's
Possessions, and thereupon was received into Favor: And in farther testimony
of his Obedience, he helped the King's Forces, and gallantly Assaulted the Town
of Bedford, which had much weakened and shattered the King's Army; and having
taken it, delivers it into Stephen's Hands. After this he accompanied King
Stephen to Wallingford, attended with three hundred gallant Horse, till the
King had erected a stately Castle in prospect thereof, to stop the Incursions
of the Enemy, which were wont to issue out of Wallingford, and prey upon the
Country. But for all this Friendship, Randle was suspected of Stephen, because
he surrendered not the Castles and Rents which he had violently taken from him;
and because of the Earls wavering and unstable Mind, not having put in Pledges
of his Fidelity; so that neither the King nor his prime Counselors durst rely
upon him, unless he would surrender all the King's Possessions: and if he
refused this, then the King ought to clap him up at his best opportunity.
Ibidem, page 970, 971.

Randle Earl of Chester, seeing he was thus suspected, turns himself to his
wonted course of Treason, plotting how he might more easily without Infamy
deliver the King into the Hands of his Enemies: and coming to the Court with
some Attendance, whereby he might be the freer from suspicion, he complained
how he was beset with a barbarous multitude of Welsh, who made great spoil and
waste of his Lands; so that he and all his Tenants bordering on the Confines of
his County, would be quite extirpated, unless the King gave him speedy
Assistance; telling him, that his Presence would do more by the very Name of a
King, than many thousands of Soldiers without him. The King cheerfully
promises his Assistance; but the Council about his Royal Person would not
suffer it: for they wished the King to consider, least the Earl had a Design to
ensnare him, telling him, That it was not safe for him to bring his Army into
the midst of so barbarous a Country, through mountainous and steepy places,
where he might be entraped on every side: besides it were a very rash part, to
go into his Country who had taken from him the greatest part of his Kingdom:
for although he might seem to incline to the King, yet there was no certainty
of his Fidelity, nor Pledges of Assurance: And that if he would have the King's
Assistance, he should first deliver up what he had unjustly taken; which if he
refused, then presently he should be seized on as the King's Enemy, and be
imprisoned till he made Restitution. But Randle, when he heard the Conditions
which he was to perform before he could have the King's Aid, answered, That he
came not to the Court for that purpose, neither had he any notice of this
beforehand, whereby he might have advised thereon; and uttering many high
words, he was laid hold on by the King's Officers and imprisoned. The Nobles
who took part with Earl Randle, Petitioned the King for his Enlargement, and
offered Sureties, or any Security the King should demand, for the delivering up
of those Castles which were of Right belonging to the King, so that the Earl
might be released. And thereupon Randle Earl of Chester (having given Pledges,
and taken a solemn Oath, that he would never hereafter take up Arms against the
King) was restored to his Liberty.

But as soon as he was released, he violated his Oath, and raised an Army
against the King, prosecuting his wrathful indignation with revenge of Fire and
Sword wheresoever he came; and, as my Author says, In omnem aetatem, in omnem
Sexum, Herodianam Tyrannidem, Neronianam truculentiam exercebat. He came often
with a Party of Soldiers in view of the Town of Lincoln (where now the King had
placed the Flower of his Soldiery) and had many Skirmishes with them; sometimes
he was put to the worse, sometimes by the smiling Success of Fortune he
victoriously triumphed over the King's Party. He likewise blockt up the Castle
of Coventrey, (which also he had delivered up to the King) till Stephen came to
relieve it with Victuals, whereof it was in some distress; and that was done
with great difficulty to the King, by forcing his Passage through Randle's
Army; where by the Way he had many Conflicts. In the first Skirmish the King
having received some slight Wound, was forced to retreat; but as soon as he was
recovered, he fell upon the Earls Army, took many, wounded others, and the Earl
himself put to flight, and almost slain. The King then pulls down the Castle of
Coventrey, which had been delivered to him before, and victoriously proceeds to
other Castles in Randle's possession, sometimes blocking them up, sometimes
burning and destroying all about them, and ever after became a sore Enemy to
Randle and his Adherents. Thus much ex Gestis Stephani.

Anno Domini 1150. David King of Scotland, Entertained Henry, Son of Maude the
Empress, at Carlisle very magnificently about Whitsuntide, and Knighted him
there in the Presence of Henry, Son of King David, and Randle Earl of Chester;
which Randle was then appeased concerning his Claim of Carlisle and Cumberland
as his Patrimony, and did Homage to King David; for there was some Speech
amongst them, that for Carlisle, Randle should have the Honor of Lancaster,
and that Earl Randle's Son should Marry one of the Daughters of Henry Prince of
Scotland: And so King David, and Henry Duke of Normandy, and Earl Randle were
agreed to unite their Forces against King Stephen. And King David, with his Son
Henry, came to Lancaster with their Forces, where Earl Randle promised to meet
them with his; but Randle failing of his Promise, they returned back. Johannes
Prior Hagustaldensis, page 277, 278.

Anno 1151. Randle Earl of Chester having been imprisoned (which Imprisonment
Radulfus de Diceto, Chronica Gervasii, John Bromton, Chronica Normanniae, Mat.
Paris, and Mat. Westminster, do all place in Anno 1145. but Hoveden in Anno
1146.) and having given his Nephew Gilbert de Clare for his Hostage, was
released: But falsifying his Word, and endangering his Hostage, he sends for
Henry Duke of Normandy into England, promising him all Assistance. Whereupon
Henry came into England; to whom Robert Earl of Leycester, and many of the
wisest Noblemen of England then resorted. Idem Johannes, page 278.

What a tumultuous Age this was, and how the Great Men of the Kingdom divided
the Spoils, may appear by the Agreement made between this Randle Earl of
Chester, and Robert, surnamed Bossu, Earl of Leycester, about the Year 1151.
the Original whereof remains in Cotton's Library in Westminstsr.

Haec est Conventio inter Ranulfum Comitem Cestriae, and Robertum Comitem
Legrecestriae; and finalis Pax and Concordia quae fuit Concessa and divisa ab
eis, coram Secundo Roberto Episcopo Lincolniae, and hominibus eorum; ex part
Comitis Cestriae, Ricardo de Lovetot, Willielmo filio Nigelli, Ranulfo
Vice-Comite: Ex part Comitis Legrecestriae, Ernaldo de Bosco, Gaufrido Abbate,
Reginaldo de Bordineio: Scilicet, quod Comes Ranulfus dedit and Concessit
Roberto Comiti Legrecestriae castrum de Mountsorell, sibi and haeredibus suis.
Tenendum de eo and haeredibus suis haereditarie and sicut Charta ipsius Comitis
Ranulfi testatur: Et ita quod Comes Leycestriae receptare debet ipsum Comitem
Ranulfum and familiam suam in Burgo and Ball^s de Mountsorell, ad guerrandum
quemcunque voluerit ut de feodo suo: Et ita quod Comes Leycestriae non potest
inde forisfacere Comiti Ranulfo pro aliquo: Et si necesse sit Comiti Ranulfo,
corpus ipsius receptabitur in Dominico Castro de Mountsorell: Et ita quod Comes
Leycestriae portabit ei fidem, salva fide Ligei Domini sui: Et si oportuerit
Comitem Leycestriae ire super Comitem Cestriae cum Ligeo Domino suo, non potest
ducere secum plus quam viginti milites: Et si Comes Leycestriae, vel isti
viginti milites aliquid ceperint de rebus Comitis Cestriae, totum reddetur. Nec
Ligius Dominus, Comes Leycestriae, nec aliquis alius potest forisfacere Comiti
Cestriae, nec suis, de Castris ipsius Comitis Leycestriae, nec de terra sua: Et
ita quod Comes Leycestriae nec potest propter aliquam Causam, vel propter
aliquem Casum, impedire Corpus Comitis Cestriae, nisi eum desidaverit quindecem
dies antea: Et Comes Lycestriae debet juvare Comitem Cestriae contra omnes
homines, praeter Ligium Dominum ipsius Comitis Leycestriae, and Comitem
Simonem: Comitem Simonem potest juvare hoc modo, quod si Comes Ranulfus
forisfecerit Comiti Simoni, and ips^ Comes Ranulfus noluerit Corrigere
forisfactum propter Comitem Leycestriae, tunc potest eum juvare: Et si Comes
Simon forisfecerit Comiti Cestriae, and noluerit Corrigere se propter Comitem
Leycestriae, non juvabit eum Comes Leycestriae: Et Comes Leycestriae debet
custodire terras and res Comitis Cestriae, quae in potestate ipsius Comitis
Leycestriae sunt, sine malo ingenio. Et Comes Leycestriae pepigit Comiti
Ranulfo, quod Castrum de Ravenstona cadet, nisi concessu Comitis Ranulfi
remanserit: Et ita quod si aliquis vellet illud Castrum tenere contra Comitem
Leycestriae, Comes Ranulfus auxiliabitur absque malo ingenio ad diruendum
Castrum illud: Et si Comes Ranulfus fecerit clamorem de Willielmo de Alneto,
Comes Leycestriae in sua Curia habebit eum ad rectum quamdiu ipse Willielmus
manserit homo Comitis Leycestriae and terram tenebit de eo: Et ita quod si
Willielmus vel sui recesserint a fidelitate Comitis Leycestriae propter Castrum
Prostratum, vel quia rectum noluerit facere in Curia Comitis Leycestriae, non
receptabuntur in potestate Comitis Cestriae, neque Willielmus neque sui, ad
malum faciendum Comiti Leycestriae: In hac Conventione remanet Comiti
Leycestriae Castrum de Witewic firmatum cum caeteris Castris suis.

Et e Converso, Comes Ranulfus portabit fidem Comiti Leycestriae, salva fide
Ligii Domini sui: Et si oportuerit Comitem Cestriae ire super Comitem
Leycestriae, cum Ligio Domino suo, non potest ducere secum plus quam viginti
milites: Et si Comes Cestriae, vel isti viginti milites, aliquid ceperint de
rebus Comitis Leycestriae, totum reddetur: Nec Ligius Dominus, Comes Cestriae,
aut aliquis alius potest forisfacere Comiti Leycestriae nec suis, de Castris
ipsius Comitis Cestriae, nec de terra sua: Et ita quod Comes Cestriae non
potest propter aliquam Causam, vel aliquem Casum, impedire Corpus Comitis
Leycestriae, nisi eum defidaverit quindecem dies ante. Et Comes Cestriae debet
juvare Comitem Leycestriae contra omnes Homines, praeter Ligium Dominum ipsius
Comitis Cestriae, and Comitem Robertum de Ferrariis. Comitem Robertum potest
juvare hoc modo, si Comes Leycestriae forisfecerit Comiti de Ferrariis, and
ipse Comes Leycestriae noluerit corrigere forisfactum propter Comitem Cestriae,
tunc potest eum juvare Comes Cestriae: Et si Comes Robertus de Ferrariis
forisfecit Comiti Leycestriae, and noluerit se corrigere propter Comitem
Cestriae, non juvabit eum Comes Cestriae. Et Comes Cestriae debet custodire
terras and res Comitis Leycestriae, quae in potestate ipsius Comitis Cestriae
sunt, sine malo ingenio. Et Comes Cestriae pepigit Comiti Leycestriae, quod si
aliquis vellet Castrum de Ravestona tenere contra Comitem Leycestriae, Comes
Ranulfus auxiliabitur sine malo ingenio ad diruendum Castrum illud: Nec Comes
Cestriae, nec Comes Leycestriae debent firmare Castrum aliquod novum inter
Hinckley and Coventrey, nec inter Hinckley and Hardredeshellam, nec inter
Coventrey and Donintonam: nec inter Donintonam and Leycestriam, nec ad
Grataham, nec ad Cheneldestam, and Belvier, nec inter Belveer and Hocham, nec
inter Hocham and Rockingham, nec propius, nisi communi assensu utriusque: Et si
aliquis in praedictis locis, vel infra praedictos Terminos, firmaret Castrum,
uterque alteri erit auxilio sine malo ingenio donec Castrum diruatur. E^ hanc
Conventionem, sicut in hac Charta continetur, affidavit uterque Comes,
videlicet Cestrensis and Leycestrensis, in manu Roberti Secundi, Lincolniensis
Episcopi, Tenendam: Et posuerunt eundem Episcopum obsidem hujus Conventionis
super Christianitatem suam: Ita quod si aliquis exiret ab hac Conventione, and
nollet se corrigere infra 15 dies postquam inde requisitus fuerit sine malo
ingenio, tunc Episcopus Lincolniensis, and Episcopus Cestrensis facient
justitiam de eo tanquam de fide mentita. Et Episcopus Lincolniae, and Episcopus
Cestriae tradent obsides uterque duos, quos receperunt propter Conventiones
istas Tenendas, illi videlicet qui Conventiones istas praedictas tenebit.

How Randle Earl of Chester was rewarded for taking part with Henry
Fitz-Empress, being yet but Duke of Normandy, and Earl of Angeau, may appear by
this Deed following, which I conjecture was made about the Year 1152. when
Stephen and Henry made an Agreement: The Original hereof is in Cotton's
Library: It is also upon Record in one of the great Couchir Books in the Duchy
Office at Gray's-Inne in London, Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number.
7. page 498, 499.

HEnricus Dux Normanniae, and Comes Andegaviae, omnibus Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Vice-Comitibus and omnibus Amicis and
fidelibus suis, Normannis and Anglis, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and
concessisse Ranulfo Comiti Cestriae omnem haereditatem suam Normanniae and
Angliae, sicut unquam aliquis Antecessorum suorum eam melius and liberius
tenuit: and nominatim Castellum de Vira and Barbifluvium cum tali liberate,
quod per totam baleugam possit capere forisfactum suum: Et Brullium de fossis,
and Alebec, and hoc (unde erat Vice-Comes) de Abrinciis, and in Sancto Jacobo,
de hoc feci eum Comitem: and quicquid habui in Abrinches ei dedi praeter
Episcopatum, and Abbatiam de monte Sancti Michaelis, and quod eis pertinet:
Insuper Dedi and concessi ei totum honorem Comitis Rogeri Pictaviensis
ubicunque aliquid habet: and totum honorem de Eia, sicut Robertus Mallet,
avunculus Matris suae illum melius and before unquam tenuit: Insuper dedi ei
Stafford and Staffordshire, and Comitatum Staffordiae totum, quicquid ego ibi
habui in feodo and haereditate, Excepto feodo Episcopi Cestriae, and Comitis
Roberti de Ferrars, and Hugonis de Mortuo Mari, and Gervasii Pagani, and
excepta Foresta de Canok quam in manu mea retineo: Et feodum Alani de Lincoln
ei dedi, qui fuit Avunculus Matris suae: Et feodum Ernisii de Burun, sicut suam
haereditatem: Et feodum Hugonis de Scoteneio ei dedi, ubicunque sit e Et feodum
Roberti de Chalz, ubicunque sit: Et totum feodum Radulfi Filii Odonis: Et totum
feodum Normanni de Verdun: Et feodum Roberti de Stafford, ubicunque sit: Et
triginta libratas terrae, quas habui in Grimesbeia, King Stephen gave to Randle
Gernouns the Castle and City of Lincoln, till he should be restored to all his
Lands in Nomandy and his Castles there, and thereupon gave him liberty to
fortify one of the Towers of Lincoln Castle, to have Command thereof till the
King should deliver the Castle of Tickill, and then to deliver up Lincoln
Castle, excepting the Earls own Tower, which his Mother had fortified, and the
Constableship of that Castle, and the whole County, which was his ancient
Inheritance; and also the Castle of Belvoir, with all the Barony, and all the
Land of William de Albiney, then Lord of Belvoir; and Graham (vulgo Grantham)
with Sok: And if the Heirs of Graham should Compound with the King, yet the
Barony to remain till the King gave other Lands for it. By the same Charter the
King gave him New Castle in Staffordshire, and Socam de Roeley, Torksey, Derby,
Mansfield, Stoneley, the Wapentack of Orwardebek, and all the Lands of Roger de
Busley, with all the Honor of Blithe nigh Tickhill, and all the Lands of Roger
de Poictu from Northampton to Scotland, except what belongs to Roger de
Montbegon in Lincolnshire; also all the Lands between Ribbell and Mersey; and
the Land which the King had in Demaine in Grimsby in Lincolnshire, and all the
Land which the Earl of Gloucester had in Demaine in that Manor of Grimsby. And
also he restored, for Randle's sake, unto Adelize de Condy, all her Lands, viz.
Horncastle in Lincolnshire, when the Castle was demolished. And all his own
other Lands the King restored unto him. Ex Charta Originali nuper in Castro de
Pomfret. Which Note I had from Mr. Dugdale.
ei dedi: Et Nottingham Castle, and Burgum, and quicquid habui in Nottingham,
in feodo and haereditate sibi and haeredibus suis: Dedi and totum feodum
Willielmi Peverelli ubicunque sit, nisi poterit se dirationare in mea Curia de
scelere and Proditione, excepta Hecham: Et si Engelramus de Albemarle non
voluerit se capere mecum, neque Comes Simon, and illud vi capere potero,
praedictam Hecham reddo Comiti Ranulfo, si eam habere voluerit: Et Torcheseiam,
and Oswardebek Wapentack, and Derbeiam cum omnibus Pertinentiis: Et Maunsfield
cum Soca, and Roelay cum Soca, and Stanleiam juxta Coventreiam cum Soca, and de
Belvario tenebo ei rectum quam citius potero, sicut de sua haereditate: Et sex
Baronibus suis, quos elegerit, cuique centum libratas terrae dabo, de his quae
mihi ex hostibus meis adquisita acciderint, de me tenendas: Et omnibus
Parentibus suis suam reddo haereditatem unde potens sum, and de hoc unde ad
praesens potens non sum, rectum Plenarium tenebo ex quo potens ero. Testibus
Willielmo Cancellario, Reginaldo Comite Cornubiae, Rogero Comite Herdia,
Patricio Comite Salisburiae, Umfrido de Bohun Dapifero, J. Filio Gilberti, R.
de Hum. Constabulario, Guarino Filio Ger. Roberto de Curcy Dapifero, Manassero
Bysset Dapifero, Philippo de Columbe. Ex part Comitis Ranulfi, Willielmo
Comite Lincolniae, Hugone Wac. G. Castle de Fines, Simone Filio Willielmi,
Thurstano de Monteforti, Gaufrido de Costentyn, Willielmo de Verdon, Ricardo de
Pincerna, Rogero Wac. Simone Filio Osberti. Apud Divisas.

And here I cannot pass by Vincent's Error in the Review of the second Edition
of Brooks's Catalogue of Nobility, page 662. where he says thus: That the
Barons of the Earls of Chester were chosen in the time of Hugh Lupus, I doubt:
for what should move Henry the Second (when he was but yet Duke of Normandy and
Earl of Anjou) among diverse Grants that he made to Randle de Gernouns Earl of
Chester, to say in his Charter -- Et sex Baronibus suis, quos elegerit, cuique
centum libratas terrae dabo: That he would give to the six Barons, quos
elegerit, which he shall choose, not quos eligerit, which he has already,
chosen, a hundred pound Land apiece, etc. if they had been chose in Hugh
Lupus's time? Thus Vincent.

But to pass by his gross Distinction of Elegerit and Eligerit; for it is
Elegerit in both Tenses, Future and Preterperfect Tense: nor is Eligerit any
true Latin word at all. Methinks he reads not the English to a proper and
genuine Sense; for I conceive the meaning to be plainly thus, -- Et sex
Baronibus suis, quos elegerit, cuique centum libratas terrae, etc. that is, To
six of his Barons, whom he shall choose or appoint out, he will give to every
one of them a hundred Pounds-worth of Land apiece. So that there might be many
more Barons at that time for all this: And indeed the Charter of Hugh Lupus of
the Foundation of the Monastery of St. Werburge in Chester, Anno 1093. mentions
Barons at that time; which you may see at large supra, page 109, 110, 111. In
the Subscription whereof it is said -- Ego Comes Hugo and Barons mei
confirmavimus: And I pray you, how comes the Duke here to know Randle's mind to
elect Barons, if they were yet to be chosen?

But where he renders it -- And to the six Barons which he shall choose, I
should render it, And to six of his Barons whom he shall choose, or cull out:
For the Grant being made to Earl Randle, there was so much to be given to six
of his Barons, but left to the appointment and nomination of Earl Randle, which
six Barons he would have to be the Men to enjoy those Lands: for if we should
render it -- And to his six Barons, etc. implying only that set number, and no
more, the following words (quos elegerit) would be superfluous; for being given
to six Barons equally, there is no choice left at all to the Earl, where there
be no more Barons: unless we suppose six Barons to be made, and that there were
none before; which evidently appears to the contrary: Therefore indeed these
words, rightly understood, do imply, there were more Barons at that time, out
of which Randle had the nomination of the six here intended left unto him.

But of these Barons I shall speak more particularly in the third Part of this
Book.

Take here a Deed or two of this Randles, which are in one of the great
Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's Inn: The first being of certain
waste Lands in Leycestershire, which this Randle gave to Henry the Second, and
the King gave them to Robert Bossue Earl of Leycester.

Ibidem, Tom. 2. Comitatus Leycestriae* Number. 66.
HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Dux Normanniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
etc. Salutem. Sciatis, Quia Ranulfus Comes de Cestria dimisit and concessit
mihi habere in Dominio Cernelegam, and Cernewodam, and Aldremanchagam, in
Defenso sicut aliquod defensum charius habeo; and omnia nemora quae fuerunt de
Feodo Comitis de Cestra, quae attingunt Forestam Legrecestriae, praeter Parcum
suum, habere in Defenso, de Wasto, and de Bestia Salvagia. Sicut autem
praedictus Comes Ranulfus mihi haec dimisit and concessit, ita and Ego concedo
Roberto Comiti Legrecestrae, habere haereditabiliter cum alio Feodo suo. Et
volo and firmiter praecipio, ut been and quiet and honorifice teneat cum
omnibus consuetudinibus suis. Testibus Theobaldo Comite Blesense, and
Gualeranno Comite de Mellent, and Willielmo de Tano, and Nigello de Albiun, and
Willielmo de Luriaco, and Adam de Portu, and Pagano Filio Johannis, and
Gaufrido Filio Pagani, and Andrea de Baldement, and Roberto de Donestanvilla.
Apud Haveringas

Ibidem, Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke. Page 433. Number. 3.
RANULPHUS Comes Cestriae, Constabulario suo, and Dapifero, and cunctis
Baronibus suis, and Hominibus Francis and Anglis, and Amicis and Vicinis tam
Clericis quam Laicis, Salutem* Sciatis, me dedisse and concessisse Willielmo
Comiti Lincolniae Fratri meo, Watteleiam in Feudo and Haereditate sibi and
Haeredibus suis, etc. inde reddendo Servitium duorum Militum in singulis Annis:
Haec autem donatio facta est in Anno quo ipsemet Willielmus redivit de itinere
Sancti Jacobi Apostoli in Crastina die post Festum Sanctae Crucis quod
celebratur Mense Septembri. Et inde sunt Testes ex mea part Willielmus de
Colevill, Robertus Grainssac, Gaufridus Malab. Ex part vero Comitis Willielmi,
Hadewisa Comitissa Lincolniae, Wido de Pouilla.

These following Deeds concern the Abbey of St. Werburge.

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae, Constabulario, Dapifero, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Vicecomitibus Cestriae, tam praesentibus quam futuris, and omnibus hominibus
suis Francis and Anglis, Clericis and Laicis, Salutem. Universitati vestrae
notum facio, me dedisse in Elemosyna in perpetuum Deo and Sanctae Mariae, and
Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae, and Radulfo Abbati and Conventui praedictae
Ecclesiae, pro salute Animae Hugonis Comitis, Praefatae Ecclesiae Fundatoris,
ac pro salute Animae Ranulfi Comitis Patris mei and Antecessorum meorum, and
pro salute Animae meae, and Christianorum omnium, omnem Decimam integraliter
and plenarie omnium Reddituum meorum Civitatis Cestriae, etc. Si quis autem
vestrum infoelix hanc Elemosynam a me manu super Altar Sanctae Werburgae
oblatam forte disturbare vel minuere praesumpserit, Precor Episcopum Cestriae
and obnixe requiro, and Justiciarium meum Cestriae super amorem meum and meorum
Praecipio, quod illum justitiet donec ad dignam satisfactionem venerit. Test
Roberto Dapifero, Normanno de Verdon, Willielmo Capellano, Ricardo Capellano,
Ricardo Pincerna, Rogero Filio Ricardi de Aquila, Spilend Camerario, Hugone
Filio Oliveri, Dunun Filio Walmari, and multis aliis.

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae, Constabulario, Dapifero, Justiciario, Baronibus,
Vice-Comitibus, Ministris and Ballivis, and omnibus hominibus suis, Francis and
Anglis, Clericis and Laicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis me
confirmasse -- Omnes Donationes and Libertates, quas Comites Antecessores mei,
scilicet Hugo Comes, and Ricardus Filius ejus, and Ranulfus Pater meus, and
Barons mei, in tempore illorum vel in meo, dederunt, -- etc. Test Roberto
Dapifero, Normanno de Verdon, Ranulpho Vicecomite, Hugone Hostr. Ada de Praers,
Ricardo Pani, Willielmo Gridell. Apud Cestriam.

And by another Deed, he gave to the Church of St. Werburge, for the
Satisfaction of all the Evils done by him to that Church, Estham, and
Brunborough, in Wirrall. Test Waltero Episcopo, and aliis: Apud Gresel. This
was made about the Year, 1152.

The Wife and Issue of Randle the Second.
HE Married Maude, Daughter of Robert Earl of Gloucester, Bastard Son of King
Henry the First, by whom he had Issue Hugh Earl of Chester, and Richard.
Gemeticensis, lib. 8. cap. 38. Ordericus, page 921.

Powell in his Notes on the Welsh History, page 295. calls this Countess Alice,
for Maud; and so does Fern in his Lacy's Nobility, page 43. in his most absurd
Pedigree of the Earls of Chester there. Both these Authors are grossly mistaken
herein. See her Name proved by the Deed infra, page 130, and 131.

The Death of Randle the Second.
ANno Domini 1153. The 16 day of December. Monasticon, Vol. 2. pa. 280.
Ranulfus ille Nobilis and Famosus Comes Cestriae, Oblit 1153. 18 Stephani
Regis.
vir admodum Militaris, Per quendam Willielmum Peverellum (ut fama fuit) veneno
infectus post multos Agones Militaris Gloriae, vir insuperabilis audaciae vix
sola morte territus and devictus, vitam finivit temporalem. Chronica Gervasii.
Which John Prior of Hagustald places in Anno 1154. Chronica Normanniae say,
Anno 1152.

Anno 1155. Willielmum Peverell causa Veneficii, quod Ranulfo Comiti Cestriae
fuerat propinatum, Rex Anglorum Henricus exhaeredavit. In cujus Pestis
Consortio plures conscii extitisse dicuntur, says Matthew Paris.

He was Earl of Chester 25 Years, and founded the Nunnery in Chester City.
Monasticon, 1 Pars, page 507. He died Excommunicated by Walter Durdant Bishop
of Lichfield; for whose Absolution, Maud his Wife, and Hugh his Son, gave the
Town of Styshall near Coventry to the Bishop and his Successors: Ex vetusto
Exemplari in Baggo de diversis Inquisitionibus penes Thesaurarium and
Camerarium Scaccarii Westmonasteriensis, Londini.

Maud his Widow Founded the Priory of Holy Trinity at Ripendon in Derbyshire,
Anno Domini 1172. 18 Hen. 2. And she died the 29 day of July, 1189. Monasticon,
Vol. 2. page 280.

Randle the Second Founded the Priory of Trentham in Staffordshire, -- Sciatis
me dedisse centum Solidatas terrae meae Staffordiesire Deo, and Sanctae Mariae,
and omnibus Sanctis, ad restaurandam quandam Abbathiam Canonicorum in Ecclesia
de Trentham -- and eas assigno de Trenteham, unde Rex Henricus habuit centum
Solidos: So run the Words of the Grant. Monasticon, Vol. 2. page 260. He gave
also Cumbe to the Abbey of Bordesly in Worcestershire, which his Countess Maude
and Hugh his Son did afterward confirm, Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 805. And also
to the Abbey of Basingwerk in Flintshire, Holes, and half of Lecche, and five
Pound Rent in Chester. Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 720.

Also he Founded the Priory of Mentings in Lincolnshire, a Cell of the Abbey of
St. Benedict super Leyre. Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 592. He gave also the Town
of Canoc (vulgo Kank) to the Abbey of Stoneley in Warwickshire. Monasticon,
Vol. 1. page 820.

Also he gave liberty to the Monks of Coventry to have two Carts going to and
fro, twice every day, except Holy Days, unto his Woods there, for Fuel, and
other Necessaries. Char. 22 Edw. 3. per Inspeximus, Number. 6.

CHAP. V.
Of Hugh the Second, Surnamed Cyveliok, because he was born in the Commote or
Province of Cyveliok, situate in that part of Wales anciently called Powys.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, six Garbs Or, 3, 2, 1.
I. HUgh the Second, surnamed Cyveliok, succeeded his Father Randle the Second
in the Earldom of Chester, Anno Dom. 1153.

He performed many valiant Acts, and by his Sword made Purchase of the Land
called Bromfield, from the Welsh, his most harmful Neighbors.

Anno 1172. Hugh Earl of Chester, with the King of Scotland, and Robert Earl of
Leycester, rebelled against Henry the Second: These took part with the King's
Son against the King.

And in Anno 1173. 19 Hen. 2. Hugh Earl of Chester, and Rafe de Filgiers in
Normandy, had almost possessed themselves of all the Province of Little-Britain
in France, but were overcome in Battle by Henry the Second; at which time
these, with many others of the Nobility of Britain, were forced to retreat to
the Castle of Dole: But the Braibants, whereon King Henry relied, besieged them
on every side, the 13 of the Calends of September, being Tuesday. The King
hereof being certified, came to Dole on the Friday following: So the Earl of
Chester, and the rest that were in the Castle, seeing themselves unable to
defend it, surrendered both themselves and it to the King on the Sunday
following, being the 7 of the Calends of September, or the 26 of our August.
The Names of such as were taken Prisoners in that Castle, are more at large set
down by Hoveden, page 535, 536. So was Hugh Earl of Chester taken Prisoner,
1173.

But in Anno 1177. at a Parliament at Northampton, in January, both Robert Earl
of Leycester, and Hugh Earl of Chester, were restored to all their Lands by the
King. Hoveden, page 560.

II. This Hugh confirmed to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester, Granisby in
Wirrhall, which Richard de Rullos had given thereunto. Test Matilda Matre mea,
Ricardo de Rullos, and Roberto Fratre suo, Roberto Basset, R. Capellano, and
multis aliis. The Original hereof was among the Evidences of that Church at
Chester, Anno 1644.

He gave also the Church of Prestbury to the same Abbey, in these words.

HUGO Comes Cestriae, Constabulario, Dapifero, Justiciario, Baronibus,
Vicecomitibus, Ballivis, and omnibus Hominibus suis, Clericis and Laicis,
Francis and Anglis, tam presentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis, me dedisse
cum Corpore meo Deo and Sanctae Werburgae Ecclesiam de Prestbury cum omnibus
pertinentiis, -- etc. Deo test and omnibus Sanctis, Joh. Priore de Trentham,
Samsone Canonico, Radulfo Barba appellato, R. Clerico de Wicho, Ranulfo de
Wicho, Radulfo de Menilwaringe, Radulfo Filio Warini, Gilberto Filio Pincernae,
Roberto Fratre ejus, Frombaldo, Bertramo Camerario, G. Filio Eliae. Haec Charta
facta fuit coram Comitissa Matilda Matre Comitis, and Bertreia Comitissa Sponsa
ejus, and Ranulpho Haerede suo concedente.

Some other Chartes of this Hugh I have met withal, which I have also here
transcribed, as follows.

Charta Hugonis Cyveliok.
HUGO Comes Cestriae, Justiciario, Constabulario, Dapifero, Vice-Comiti, The
Original of this was in possession of Mr. Townsley of Carre in Lancashire, 1657.
and omnibus Baronibus suis, and omnibus Ministris suis, and omnibus Hominibus
suis, Francis and Anglicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis, me
dedisse -- in puram and perpetuam Elemosynam pro salute Animae meae, and pro
Anima Patris mei, and pro Animabus Antecessorum meorum, Abbatiae de Benedicto
loco de Stanlaw, and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, quietantiam Theolonei in
Villa mea Cestriae de omnibus, quae praefati Monachi ibi emerint ad opus suae
Dominicae Domus de Stanlaw. Testibus Abbate Cestriae, Johanne Constabulario,
Radulfo Filio Warini, Hugone de Dutton, Johanne Burd, Martino Angevin, Adam de
Dutton, and multis aliis. Apud Cestriam.

A very fair Seal: The Earl on Horseback.

UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis, Hugo Comes Cestriae Salutem. Ex
Libro signato (L) Penes Rogerum Dodsworth, Ehoracensem, fol. 24.
Sciatis me Concessisse, and hac praesenti Charta mea Confirmasse Deo and
Abbathiae Sanctae Mariae de Coventrey, and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus,
pro salute Animae meae, and Patris mei, and Ricardi Fratris mei, cujus Corpus
in praedicta Abbatia sepelitur, donationem illam quam Pater meus Ranulfus Comes
Cestriae eis fecit, and Charta sua confirmavit, scilicet Capellam Sancti
Michaelis de Coventrey, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, quae sita est in Feodo
meo; libere and quiet in perpetuum possidendam, sicut Charta mea eis testatur:
and ut concessio rata and firma permaneat, eam praesentis scripti Autoritate
and Sigilli mei testimonio confirmavi. Testibus Edmundo Archidiacono
Coventriae, Johanne Priore Trentham, Ricardo Avunculo meo Filio Comitis
Glocestriae, Rogero Malfylaste, etc.

HUGO Comes Cestriae, Constabulario suo, Dapifero, omnibus Baronibus suis,
omnibus Hominibus suis, Francis and Anglicis, tam futuris quam praesentibus,
The Original of this remained in possession of Sir Simon Dewes Baronet, 1649.
noted. EE. number. 6.
Salutem. Concedo Sanctimonialibus de Bolintona stagnum meum de Dunintona
firmum terrae meae, sicut fuit tempore Henrici Regis, in perpetuam Elemosynam
pro anima mea, and Patris mei, and meorum Antecessorum: Et praecipio omnibus
hominibus meis, quod habeant meam firmam pacem; ita quod nullus inde praedictis
Sanctimonialibus injuriam vel contumeliam faciat. Test Roberto Dapifero de
Monte alto, Filippo de Kima, Simone Filio Osberti, Willielmo Patric, Radulfo
Filio Warneri, Rogero de Maletot, Johanne Priore de Trentham, Orm ejus
Canonico, Rogero Monacho de Hambi, Willielmo Clerico Comitis qui Chartam
scripsit apud Beltesfort, and multis aliis.

A fair Seal, with the Impression of the Earl on Horseback, written about, --
Sigillum Hugonis Comitis Cestriae.

ROBERTO Dei Gratia Lincolniensi Episcopo, and Capitulo Sanctae Ecclesiae
Lincolniae, totique Clero illius Praesulatus, Hugo Comes Cestriae, Salutem.
Ibidem, EE. number. 4.
Nec non and Constabulario, and Dapifero, and Baronibus, and Ministris, and
Famulis, and Hominibus suis omnibus, tam Clericis quam Laicis, salutem
similiter. Vos scire volo, me concessisse and confirmasse Sanctimonialibus de
Grenefelt illam terram, quam Willielmus Filius Otuheri eis in Elemosynam
perpetuam dedit; quam vero Pater meus Comes Ranulphus eis Concessit Carta sua
confirmatam: Eapropter volo and praecipio, quod praefatae Sanctimoniales terram
illam perenniter been and quiet, and libere habeant and possideant. Testibus
Matilda Comitissa Matre mea, Simone Filio Willielmi, Rogero Capellano, Ricardo
Capellano, and aliis multis: Apud Beltesford. Valete.

A very fair Seal, with the Impression of the Earl on Horseback; and on the
back part of the Seal two lesser Impressions of a Man holding or setting
something on a Form or Stool, inscribed about -- Contra-Sigillum Comitis
Cestriae.

III. The Wife of Hugh Cyveliok.
HE Married Bertred, Daughter of Simon Earl of Evereux in Normandy. Vincent
upon Brook, page 105.

That her Name was Bertred, and that she survived her Husband, take this Deed
to prove it, in the Couchir Book in the Dutchy-office in Gray's Inn, London,
Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number. 7. page 112.

OMnibus hoc scriptum audituris and visuris, Bertreya Comitissa Cestriae,
Salutem. Noverit universitas vestra, me Concessisse and hac mea praesenti
Charta confirmasse Radulfo Carbunel de Haltuna and Haeredibus suis, pro Homugio
and Servitio suo, Feodum dimidii Militis quod tenet de me in Haltona Halton in
Lincolnshire.
, pro tribus Solidis annuatim mihi and Haeredibus meis ad duos terminos
reddendis, de illo and de Haeredibus suis, pro omni Servitio and Exactione;
scilicet ad Nativitatem Sancti Johannis Baptistae december and octo denarios, and
ad Natale december and octo denarios. In hujus autem rei Testimonium praesenti
scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis Testibus, Radulfo Filio Simonis, Simone de
Seis, Andrea Filio Willielmi, Willielmo de Maletoft, Willielmo de Haghe,
Ricardo de Bunington, Ricardo de Harderna, Alano Filio Ramgoti, and aliis.

The Issue of Hugh Cyveliok by Bertred.
The Legitimate Children of Hugh.
1. RAndle the Third, surnamed Blundevill: He died without Issue, and his four
Sisters shared his Inheritance.

2. Maude, eldest Daughter of Hugh, Married David Earl of Huntingdon, Brother
to William King of Scotland; of whom he begot John, surnamed The Scot, Earl of
Chester in his Mother's Right: She had the Earldom of Chester, and the Lands in
North Wales to her share.

3. Mabill, second Daughter of Hugh by Bertred, Married William d' Albiney Earl
of Arundel. She had the Manor of Barow, with 500 l. Lands. This was Barow in
Leycestershire.

4. Agnes, third Daughter of Earl Hugh by Bertred, Married William Ferrers Earl
of Derby. She had the Castle of Chartley Chartley in Staffordshire, with the
Castle and Manor of West-Derby, and all Earl Randle's Lands between the Rivers
of Ribbel and Mersey in Lancashire, Buckbroc in Northamptonshire, and Navenby
in Lincolnshire, Claus 17 Hen. 3. Memb. 1.
, and the Lands in that part of Wales anciently called Powys. She confirmed to
the Church of St. Mary at Mirival the Manor of Great-Hole, and part of the Wood
of Alteker, which William her Husband had before given. One of the Couchir
Books in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 1. fol. 133.

Claus. 17 He^. 3. memb. 17. Pipe-Rolls, 17 Hen. 3. Lincolnshire.
5. Hawise, fourth Daughter of Earl Hugh by Bertred, Married Robert Quency, Son
and Heir of Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester. She had the Earldom of Lincoln,
to wit, the Castle and Honor of Bolingbroke, and all the Lands of Earl Randle
in Lindsey and Holland in Lincolnshire; for which she gave 50 l. for Relief.

On Hawise was Estated for Jointure, Bukby, Grantesset, Bradeham, and Herdwick,
as appears by this Deed in the Couchir Book of the Dutchy-Office. Tom. 2. Honor
sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number. 26. page 508.

SAherus de Quency Comes Wintoniae, omnibus Hominibus and Amicis suis,
praesentibus and futuris, salutem. Sciatis, me concess^sse and dedisse and
praesenti Charta mea confirmasse Roberto de Quency Filio meo and Haeredi ad
dandum in liberum Donarium Hawisiae Sorori Comitis Cestriae, Uxori ejusdem
Roberti, Bucehebeiam, and Grantesset, and Bradeham, and Herdewich, cum omnibus
earundem terrarum pertinentiis, pro centum Libratis terrae: Et si hae
praedictae terrae non valiant per Annum centum Libras, Ego in aliis terris meis
de propria Haereditate mea in Anglia, ei tantum perficiam, quod plenarie habeat
centum Libratas terrae per visum and considerationem legalium Militum hominum,
videlicet, Comitis Cestriae and meorum. Et praeterea Dedi eidem Roberto Feoda
duorum Militum, scilicet Feedum Matthei Turpin in Winterslawa in Wilteshire,
pro servitio Feodi unius Militis, ad dandum simul cum terris nominatis
praedictae Hawisiae Uxori suae in liberum donarium. Testibus his, Comite
Davide, Willielmo Comite de Ferrars, Philippo de Orreby, Roberto de Basingham,
Ricardo de Lindeseia, Willielmo de Grumpington, Henrico de Braibroc, Willielmo
de Syelford, David Giffard, Willielmo Picot, Hugone and Thoma and Henrico
Dispensariis, Waltero de Coventrey, Waltero Daivilla, and multis aliis.

This Hawise had the County of Lincoln To wit, all the Lands of Earl Randle in
Lincolnshire.
given unto her by her Brother Randle, Hen. 3. 1232. in these words: which Deed
is transcribed in one of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 2. Honor
sive Soca de Bolingbroke, page 500. number. 11. It is also transcribed by Vincent,
in his Corrections upon Brook, page 317. which he affirms he took from the
Original it self in Cotton's Library, thus: --

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae, omnibus praesentibus and futuris,
praesentem Chartam inspecturis vel audituris, Salutem in Domino. Ad
universitatis vestrae notitiam volo pervenire, me dedisse, concessisse, and hac
praesenti Charta mea confirmasse, Dominae Hawisiae de Quency Sorori meae
Charissimae Comitatum Lincolniae, scilicet quantum ad me pertinuit, ut inde
Comitissa existat. Habendum and tenendum de Domino meo Rege Angliae, and
Haeredibus suis, libere, quiet, plene, pacifice, and integre jure
Haereditario, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, and cum omnibus libertatibus ad
praedictum Comitatum pertinentibus. Et ut praesens scriptum Perpetuitatis robur
obtineat, illud Sigilli mei appositione roborare dignum duxi. Hiis Testibus,
Venerabilibus Patribus P. Wintoniae, and Alexandro Coventriae and Lichfeldiae
Episcopis, R. Marescallo Comite Pembroke, Willielmo de Ferrars Comite Derbiae,
Stephano de Segrave Justiciario Angliae, Simone de Monteforti, Willielmo de
Ferrariis, Philippo de Abiniaco, Henrico de Aldith, Willielmo de Cantilupo, and
aliis.

Hawise transfers the Earldom of Lincoln to John Lacy, and the Heirs of his
Body which he shall beget on Margaret his Wife, Daughter of the same Hawise. 1
Patent, Anno 17 Hen. 3. memb. 9. number. 35. It is also in the Register of the
Duchy of Lancaster. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, page 500. number. 10.

HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae and
Aquitaniae, Comes Andegaviae, Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem. Sciatis, quod ad Instantiam Hawisiae de Quency dedimus, and
concessimus dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni de Lacy Constabulario Cestriae,
illas viginti Libras, quas Ranulphus quondam Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae
recepit pro tertio Denario Comitatus Lincolniae, nomine Comitis Lincolniae; and
quas praedictus Comes in vita sua dedit praedictae Hawisiae Sorori suae:
Habendas and tenendas, nomine Comitis Lincolniae, de nobis and Haeredibus
nostris, ipsi Johanni, and Haeredibus suis, qui exibunt de Margareta Uxore sua,
Filia praedictae Hawisiae, in perpetuum. Et in hujus rei Testimonium has
Literas nostras Patentes ei fieri fecimus. Test meipso apud Northampton, 23
die Novembris, Anno Regni nostri 17.

IV. The base Issue of Hugh Cyveliok.
PAganus, Dominus de Milton, whom I have seen Witness to a Deed, Subscribed
thus, -- Filius Bastardus Hugonis Comitis Cestriae.

Roger, Witness to a Deed of his Brother Randles, to the Abbey of St. Werburge,
whom I conceive was a Bastard.

Amicia, the Wife of Raufe Manwaring, sometime Judge of Chester; to whom Hugh
Cyveliok Earl of Chester, her Father, gave in libero maritagio servitium
Willielmi Filii Rogeri: scilicet servitium trium militum; faciendo sibi
servitium duorum militum, as the words of the original Deed do run, now in the
possession of Sir Thomas Manwaring of Over Pever, Baronet.

Also another base Daughter, as I conceive, Married one Bacun, and had Issue
Richard Bacun, Founder of the Priory of Roucester in Staffordshire, about the
Reign of King John, for the safety of his Soul, and the Soul of his Uncle,
Randle Earl of Chester. Monasticon, Part 2. page 267.

And here I cannot but mislike the boldness and ignorance of that Herald, who
gave to Manwaring of Pever the Quartering of the Earl of Chester's Coat of
Arms: which Device was never done before the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the
time of Sir Randle Manwaring, late of Pever, the elder, my Grandfather by the
Mother: for if he ought of right to Quarter that Coat, then must he be
Descended from a Coheir to the Earl of Chester; but that he was not: for the
Coheirs of Earl Hugh, as you see before, were Married to four of the greatest
Peers of the Kingdom, the Earl of Huntington, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of
Derby, and the Earl of Winchester's Son and Heir, who lived not to be Earl:
Neither was Manwaring then an equal Competitor, to have Married a Coheir to the
Earl of Chester. And it is plain, ex placitis 18 Hen. 3. Rot. 14. in the Tower
of London, where the Coheirs Implead John the Scot, Earl of Chester, for their
part, there is no mention of Amice claiming any part, or any from or under her,
in the Record. Besides, all ancient Authors of those Times, as Polychronicon,
Matthew Paris, Knighton, Stowe, and others, would not have omitted her among
the rest which they have set down, had she been a Coheir; which also she must
needs have been, had she been legitimate: for Hugh Cyvelioc never had any other
Wife but Bertred, and she survived him.

And though Amice in the Deed before mentioned is styled -- Filia Hugonis
Comitis, without the addition or note of Bastard, it was very usual in those
elder Ages so to do. The like we find of Geva, base Daughter of Hugh Lupus, and
several others.

V. Concerning this Bertred, the Wife of Hugh Cyveliok, I cannot omit the
Falsities and Absurdities of some Authors, as Powel on the Welsh History, page
295. and Fern in his Lacy's Nobility, page 53. both of them calling this
Bertred by the Name of Beatrix, and saying she was the Daughter of Richard
Lucy, Chief Justice of England; a most gross Falsity. I am very certain that
Hugh Cyvelioc's Wife was not Daughter of Lucy, nor ever called Beatrix in any
old Deed or Record; though I find by good Authority that there was a Woman
called Beatrix Lucy, but never Wife of Earl Hugh.

The Death of Hugh Cyveliok.
Hugh Earl of Chester, died at Leeke in Staffordshire, and was buried at
Chester, Anno Domini 1181. 27 Hen. 2. Hoveden, page 615. with whom Westminster,
Polychronicon, and Cambden inter Comites Cestriae, do all agree.

He was Earl of Chester 28 Years, and gave the Church of Bettesford to the
Prior and Canons of Trentham after the Death of William Barba, who at the time
of this Grant possessed the same; a Copy of which Deed I received from Sir
Simon Dewes, Baronet.

Now because I find that some are displeased at my placing of Amice, sometime
the Wife of Raufe Manwaring, Judge of Chester, among the base Issue of Hugh
Cyveliok Earl of Chester, and also that I am informed, that three eminent
Judges and four Heralds are of opinion that she was legitimate, and not a base
Daughter of Earl Hugh, it is very necessary that I put down here my Reasons why
I have so placed her, protesting withal, that I have not done it out of any
prejudicate Opinion or Calumny intended in the least, but only for the Truths
sake, according to the best of my Judgment, and that after a long and diligent
scrutiny made herein: for I must ever acknowledge my self to be Extracted out
of the Loins of this Amice by my own Mother; but you know the old Saying of
Aristotle, Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. Neither were
Bastards in those elder Ages of such Disrepute as now in our Days: Memini me
alicubi legisse (says Spelman in his Glossary on the word Bastardus) Priscos
Septentrionales Populos etiam Spurios admisisse in successionem: And where he
farther tells us, That King William the Conqueror began his Letter to Alan Earl
of Little Britain, as he did many other more, in these words, -- Ego Willielmus
cognomento Bastardus: of which Title it seems he was not ashamed, otherwise he
would never have used it himself.

And therefore the Question being no more than this, Whether Amice was a base
Daughter, or no? I will first answer those Reasons which seem to be the chief
ground of those worthy Persons abovesaid, who think Amice was no Bastard, and
then in order set down my own Reasons why I conceive her to be a Bastard,
submitting my self wholly to the Judgment of all Learned Persons herein.

The Reasons that she was no Bastard.
I. OUr Common Law allows not, that any Lands can pass in libero maritagio
with a Bastard Daughter, Coke upon Littleton, Fol. 21. b. and therefore Amice
having Land given with her, in libero maritagio, by the Deed, it must be
presumed that she was no Bastard.

Answ. To which I answer, That it is true, the Law is so taken at this day with
us, but that the Law was so taken in the elder Ages of Henry the Second, when
Hugh Cyveliok lived, and upwards, I very much doubt: And if we mark well this
Grant, it is the Grant of Earl Hugh to Rafe Manwaring, with Amice his Daughter,
in Frank-Marriage of the Service of Gilbert Son of Roger, to wit, the Service
of three Knights Fees, by doing the Service of two Knights Fees to the said
Earl and his Heirs; which is rather a Release of the Service of one Knights
Fee, than the Grant of any Land. But to pass by this. -- I say that the Common
Law in sundry things is altered at this day from what it was in former Ages
long after Henry II. Cook upon Littleton, fol. 34. Sect. 39. Cook, ibid. fol.
3. a. fol. 8. a. at the bottom of the Page, and on the other side (b) at the
bottom, fol. 26. b. Sect. 29. and infinite other Particulars may be cited. And
that in this Particular also of Passing Land in libero maritagio with Bastards,
the Law seems clearly to be altered herein since the Reign of Henry the Second:
for the common Practice I take to be the Common Law, and I shall give you here
one Precedent, made about the Reign of King Stephen, (and doubtless many others
might be mustered up from those elder Ages, if any curious Person would take
pains to search old Deeds and Records) which Deed I received from Sir Simon
Dewes, transcribed out of a Manuscript in Arundel-House in London, belonging
anciently to the Barons of Stafford, wherein the old Charts belonging to the
Bassets of Drayton-Basset in Staffordshire were Enrolled about Richard the
Second's time. Ibid. fol. 67. a.

Ranulfus Comes Cestriae Willielmo Constabulario, and Roberto Dapifero, and
omnibus Baronibus suis, and Hominibus Francis and Anglicis totius Angliae,
Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Gevae Ridell Filiae Comitis Hughes,
Draitunam cum Pertinentiis in libero Conjugio, Sicuti Comes Hughes et in libero
conjugio dedit and concessit: Et teneat been and in pace, honorifice and
libere, ut melius and liberius tenuit tempore Hugonis Comitis, and aliorum
meorum Antecessorum, eisdem consuetudinibus and libertatibus. Testibus Gilberto
Filio Ricardi, and Adeliza sorore mea, and Willielmo Blundo, and Alexandro de
Tresgor, and Rogero de Bello Campo, and Willielmo de Sais, and Roberto de Sais,
and Ricardo Filio Aluredi, and Hugone Filio Osberti, and Henrico de Chalder:
Apud Saintonam.

Wherein Geva is called Daughter of Earl Hugh Lupus, as Amice in that other
Deed is termed Daughter of Earl Hugh Cyveliok. Now that Geva was a Bastard, is
very plain out of Ordericus, a Man that lived in that very Age: He tells us,
lib. 10. page 787. speaking of Hugh Lupus his Death -- Ricardus pulcherrimus
puer quem solum ex Ermentrude Filia Hugonis de Claro-monte genuit, etc.
Richard, a brave Youth, whom only Hugh Lupus begot on Ermentrude, Daughter of
Hugh de Claremonte, etc. Nor can this be restrained to the only Son, for then
it must have been otherwise expressed: And if Hugh Lupus had any other Son or
Daughter by Ermentrude, then cannot Richard be said only to be begotten on her
by Earl Hugh; and so Geva was a Bastard, or else Ordericus lies. Also the same
Author tells us, lib. 4. page 522. that Hugh Lupus had also many base Sons and
Daughters by several Strumpets, who were almost all swept away by sundry
Misfortunes; and very probably, if Hugh Lupus had any more legitimate Children
by his Wife besides Earl Richard, either Son or Daughter, Ordericus would have
Recorded them as well as he has put down others in like nature, being indeed
his usual method through the whole course of his History: And had Geva been
legitimate, then her Issue ought rather to have succeeded into the Earldom of
Chester, than Randle de Meschines, after the Death of Richard Earl of Chester,
forasmuch as the Sister and her Heirs ought to Inherit before the Aunt and her
Heirs: And howbeit many Earldoms have Descended to the Heirs Males, and not to
the Heirs general; yet in this Case were no Heirs Male, but two Females, an
Aunt legitimate, who had it, and a Sister not legitimate: And show me a
Precedent wherever the Heirs of an Aunt Inherited before the Heirs of a
Sister, both legally born, and no Heirs Male left, unless in case of Forfeiture
by Treason, or some other great Cause to hinder the same.

Secondly, add to these the words of Glanvill, Chief Justice of England, who
lived under Hen. II. in that very Age with Amice, lib. 7. cap. 1. Quilibet
liber Homo quandam partem terrae suae cum Filia sua, vel cum aliqua alia
qualibet muliere, dare potest in maritagium, sive habuerit haeredem sive non,
velit haeres vel non, imo and eo contradicente: And if a Man might give Land
then in Free Marriage with any Woman whatsoever, then he might give it to his
Bastard; and then the Law is now changed: for now it must be of the Donors
Blood; and a Bastard is now said not to be of the Donors Blood quasi nullius
filius. And it seems to me, that in those elder Ages Bastards were reputed of
the Blood, by the frequent Appellation of them by the Names of Uncle, Brother,
Daughter, Son, and Cousin. Besides, our Laws were then imperfect, dark, and
obscure in most things, till Bracton under King Henry the Third compiled the
Body of our Laws, and brought them into a Method.

And now I have done concerning this chief Reason, whereupon those worthy
Judges grounded their Opinions; and we daily see Opinions of Lawyers follow the
putting of the Case, which many times upon mature deliberation, and hearing of
the Case well argued; may then be of another Opinion.

Now follow the Arguments of lesser moment, which I persuade my self were no
Grounds for the Judges aforesaid.

II The disparity of the Years between Hugh Cyveliok and Bertred his Wife, may
suppose he had a former Wife; for Bertred was but 26 Years old at the Death of
Earl Hugh 1181, as appears by the Inquisition taken 30 Hen. 2. 1183. after the
Death of Hugh Cyveliok, and Hugh was Earl of Chester 28 Years, which was one or
two Years before Bertred was horn, besides what Years were run up of his Age
before his Father Randle died, which may be supposed to be a competent term of
Years; and then it is probable he had a former Wife, and that he stayed not
unmarried so long as till Bertred was fit for Marriage.

Answ. Now let us examine the Matter a little, it will give us some light:
Robert Earl of Gloucester Married Mabill, Daughter and Heir of Robert
Fitz-Haimon, Anno Domini 1110. So Stowe in his Chronicle. See also Seldin's
Tit. Hon. page 647. By her he had Issue four Sons and two Daughters. Maude the
younger Daughter Married Randle de Gernoniis Earl of Chester, Father to Hugh
Cyveliok. Vincent upon Brook, page 216. Now suppose we Maude to be the fourth
Child: probably she was not born till about the Year 1117. or thereabout, and
that about the Year 1139. she was Married to Earl Randle, whereby Robert Earl
of Gloucester strengthened his Party for Maude the Empress. At that time she
cannot well be supposed to be above 22 Years old, if she were so much. Now Earl
Randle died 1153. So that Hugh Cyveliok could not possibly be above twelve
Years old at his Father's Death; he might be much less: but suppose we in a
middle way, that he was six Years old at his Father's Death, which is more than
can be well affirmed, then could not Earl Hugh be above seven or eight Years
older than Bertred his Wife: and what great matter is this? I my self was eight
years older than my Wife when I was Married; but it is much more probable that
he never had any other Wife, because he had many Bastard Sons and Daughters,
whose heat of Youth might by a very timely Marriage have been possibly
prevented, or at least assuaged in some measure.

III. Bertred, the Wife of Hugh Cyveliok was a Witness to the Deed in
Frank-Marriage with Amice; and Amice had a Daughter called Bertred, after the
Name of the Countess, ergo probably Amice was no Bastard.

Answ. Truly this is of so little weight, that it will need no Answer; for I
yet apprehend no Reason in it.

IV. Roger Manwaring, Son of Raufe Manwaring, calls Randle Blundevill Earl of
Chester and Lincoln, his Uncle in another Deed; wherefore it is to be supposed
that Amice was no Bastard, otherwise Roger durst not have presumed to have
called the Earl Uncle.

Answ. Histories, Deeds, and Records, are full of Examples in this nature,
where we find Bastards frequently called Cousin, Brother, Uncle, Son, and
Daughter: for example, Robert Earl of Gloucester, base Son of King Henry the
First, is frequently called in Histories, Brother to Maude the Empress.
Hoveden, page 553. He is also so styled in a Deed made by Maude Empress her
self. Selden's Tit. Hon. page 649. called also Cousin to King Stephen.
Ordericus, page 922. Reginald Earl of Cornwall, another base Son of Henry the
First, styled Avunculus Regis Henrici Secundi by Hoveden, page 536. Robert and
Ottiwell, two Bastard Sons of Hugh Lupus, frequently called Filii Hugonis
Comitis Cestriae; and Ottiwell styled Frater Ricardi Comitis Cestriae.
Ordericus, page 602 and 783. and 870. Geva, a base Daughter of Hugh Lupus,
styled in old Deeds Filia Hugonis Comitis; and there also she calls Earl Randle
her Cousin. Monasticon, par. 1. page 439. Also Richard Bacon, Son of another
base Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, calls Randle Blundevill Earl of Chester his
Uncle in another Deed, as Manwaring in like manner here styles him in this
Deed. Monasticon, par. 2. page 267. Every Man that is but the least versed in
Antiquities, knows these things to be very usual.

The Reasons that Amice was a Bastard.
I. IF Hugh Cyveliok had no other Wife but Bertred, then Amice must certainly
be a Bastard; for she was not a Daughter by Bertred, as is granted on all sides.

But Hugh Cyveliok never had any other Wife but Bertred; Ergo Amice was a
Bastard.

Now the Minor is to be proved by the Affirmer, Oportet affirmantem probare:
for as yet I never saw the least proof thereof, either by Deed, Record, or any
ancient Historian, nor yet any inducement of good Reason to incline my belief
of it: And till this be done, it is unreasonable to impose it upon any Man's
Belief, by supposing that he had another Wife: for Suppositions are no proof at
all. It is not enough to suppose Amice might be by a former Wife, but it must
be clearly proved, or strongly inferred from solid Reason, that it is so, and
that Hugh had a former Wife.

Neither is it a sufficient Answer hereunto to say, That it is unreasonable to
conclude all Children Bastards, whose Mothers cannot be proved; God forbid. But
in this Case we find a Wife certainly Recorded, and a Son and four Daughters
(who were afterward Coheirs, and carried away all Earl Hugh's Lands) clearly
proved by Records and ancient Historians. And also Earl Hugh is certainly known
to have had many Bastards, both Sons and Daughters; which gives occasion of
strong suspicion, that Amice was a Bastard, she being neither Recorded by any
Historian, nor ever had or claimed any Land as a Coheir; and therefore here is
a necessity of proving a former Wife, which for my part I believe firmly Earl
Hugh never had.

II. Whatsoever is given in Frank-Marriage, is given as a Portion: now the
Release of the Service of one Knights Fee in Frank-Marriage, seems not a
competent Portion for a legitimate Daughter of the Earl of Chester, especially
for the eldest Daughter: for so she must be, being of the first Venture, which
always is more worthy than the second, if she were at all legitimate; and we
find the other Daughters Married to four of the greatest Earls in England: all
which is a strong presumption that Amice was a Bastard, and no legitimate
Daughter.

To this it may be answered, That possibly Earl Hugh might give Amice a great
Portion in Money, though she had no Lands. And I say possibly too, he might
give her no Money, or at least nothing considerable; which great Portion in
Money, when it shall appear to be true, may take off the strength of this
Argument or second Reason, till then it must be very pressing.

III. The ancient Historians of our Nation, as Polychronicon, writ by the Monk
of Chester, Henry Knighton, the Monk of Leycester, and others; also Stowe and
Cambden have Recorded the lawful Daughters and Coheirs of Earl Hugh, and so the
Record of 18 Hen. 3. And had Amice been a legitimate Daughter, it is likely
that these Historians would not all have omitted her; but of her there is Altum
silentium among all the Historians and Records which I have yet seen; though
indeed I look upon this only as a probable, not as a sure evincing Argument.

These were the Reasons which inclined my Opinion to place Amice in that Order
as I have done: But since there are some Learned Men of another Opinion, I must
leave every Person to the dictate of his own Reason.

CHAP. VI.
Of Randle the Third, surnamed Blundevill.

RAndle the Third, surnamed Blundevill, succeeded his Father Hugh Cyveliok in
the Earldom of Chester, Anno Domini 1181. blazon or coat of arms Azure, 3 Garbs
Or, 2 and 1.


King Henry the second Knighted him, and gave him to Wife Constance, the Widow
of Geffrey his fourth Son, Daughter and Heir of Conan Duke of Little Britain,
and Earl of Richmond, Anno 1188. 34 Hen. 2. Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 24. But
Hoveden places it Anno 1187. 33 Hen. 2. for Geffrey died 1186. and left
Constance great with Child, who bore Arthur a Son eodem Anno. Hoveden.

This Randle confirms to the Abbey of St. Werburge, all the Grants of his
Predecessors, in these words:

RAnulfus Comes Cestriae, Constabulario, Dapifero, Justitiario, Baronibus,
Ministris and Ballivis, and omnibus Hominibus suis, Francis and Anglis,
Clericis and Laicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis me
concessisse -- Omnes donationes and libertates, quas Comites Antecessores mei,
scilicet Hugo Comes and Ricardus Filius ejus; and Ranulfus Comes, and alius
Ranulfus Avus meus, and Hugo Pater meus, and Barons tempore illorum, vel in
meo, eidem Ecclesiae Sanctae Werburgae dederunt, etc. Testibus Bertreya
Comitissa Matre mea, Radulfo de Mesnilwaringe, Hugone de Bosco-ale, Radulfo
Filio Simonis, Rogero Fratre Comitis, Rogero Constabulario, Gaufrido de
Buxeria, Stephano de longo Campo, Alano de Bosco-Ale, Bertramo Camerario,
Alexandro Filio Radulfi, Johanne Clerico, Bech Dispensatore, Petro Clerico, and
aliis multis: Apud Cestriam in Capitulo Monachorum in Anniversario die Hugonis
Comitis Patris mei.

II. I will begin first with the Acts of this Randle, then with his Titles,
then with his Wives.

For his Acts. Anno 1194. 5 Rich. 1. Earl David, Brother of the King of
Scotland, Randle Earl of Chester, and the Earl Ferrars; with a great Army
Besieged Nottingham Castle, which John the King's Brother had caused to be
Garrisoned against the King in his absence, whiles he was detained Prisoner by
the Roman Emperor. Hoveden, page 735. but the Castle was not taken till the
King came in Person to Assault it.

Anno 1216. after the Death of King John, on the Feast Day of Simon and Jude
the Apostles, the twenty eighth day of October, Henry the Third, being then but
nine Years old, eldest Son of King John, was Crowned at Gloucester, principally
by the Power of Walo the Pope's Legate, Peter Bishop of Winchester, Randle Earl
of Chester, and William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, and some others. Paris and
Polychronicon.

Anno Domini 1217. after Easter, Randle Earl of Chester, with many others, met
about the besieging of the Castle of Mountsorell, by the procurement of William
Marshall Regent of England for the young King, which they fiercely assaulted.
But Lewis King of France, and the Barons of England, sent Forces from London in
the very beginning of May, to raise the Siege. Randle Earl of Chester hearing
thereof, with others, came to Nottingham: The Barons march on and Besiege
Lincoln Castle. In the interim William Marshall, Guardian of the young King and
Kingdom, Commanded all the Forces out of his several Garrisons, to meet at
Newark on Tuesday in Whitsun-week, for the raising of the Siege at Lincoln;
among whom Randle Earl of Chester was the Prime Commander: and in the beginning
of the Week following they routed the Barons at Lincoln. Mat. Paris, page 294,
295. And the Monk of Chester in his Polychronicon says, That Randle Earl of
Chester slew many of the French; so that Lewis the French King seeing his Party
much weakened, for a Sum of Money surrenders up all his Garrisons, and returns
to France.

Anno 1158. the Abbey of Pulton in Cheshire was Founded.

Anno 1214. that Convent was removed to Deulacresse in Staffordshire, 10
Calendas Maii, by this Earl Randis. Monasticon, vol. 1. page 891.

Anno 1218. 2 Hen. 3. Randle Earl of Chester, after he was accorded with
Lhewellin Prince of Northwales, took a Voyage to Jerusalem. In which Year
Damieta was taken by the Christians. Mat Paris, page 303.

Anno 1220. 4 Hen. 3. Randle returning out of the Holy Land, built Beeston
Castle in Cheshire, and Chartley Castle in Staffordshire, and the Abbey of
Delacresse near Leeke in Staffordshire, of the Order of white Monks De ordine
Cisterciensi. To which Abbey he gave Leeke and Rudeyard in Staffordshire.
Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 891, 892. Bivelegh, vulgo Byley, near to Middlewich in
Cheshire, was a Grange belonging to the Monks of Delacresse. Monasticon, Vol.
2. page 919.
. Toward the Charge of the Castles he Levied a Tax through all his Lands and
Tenants. Polychronicon. Also Knighton, page 24. 30.

Nor can I here pass by the Mistake of Bale de Scriptoribus Britanniae, Cent.
3. number. 93. where he writes thus: --

Ranulfus de Glaunvyle Cestriae Comes, vir nobilissimi Generis and in utroque
jure eruditus, in Albo illustrium virorum a me merito ponendus venit, ita probe
omnes adolescentiae suae annos, Legibus tum humanis tum divinis consecravit: ut
non prius in hominem per aetatem evaserit, quam nomen decusque ab insigni
eruditione sibi comparaverit: Cum Profecti essent Francorum heroes Ptolemaidem,
inito cum Johanne Brenno Hierosolymorum Rege concilio, Damiatam Egypti urbem
obsidendam constituebant; Anno Salutis humanae 1218. misit illuc Henricus Rex,
ab Honorio tertio Romanorum Pontifice Rogatus, cum magna Armatorum manu
Ranulfum ad rem Christianam juvandam: Cujus virtus, Polydoro test, in eo bello
miris omnium laudibus celebrata fuit: Quo confecto negotio, Ranulfus in patriam
reversus scripsit unum librum de Legibus Angliae: Fertur praeterea and alia
quaedam scripsisse: sed tempus Edax rerum ea nobis abstulit. Anno 1230.
claruit, confectus Senio dum Henricus tertius sub Antichristi Tyrannide in
Anglia regnaret. So Bale; and from him Pitseus thus: --

Ranulfus Glanvillus ex Splendissima familia Cestriae Comitum in Anglia natus,
etc. in his Book De illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus.

These are both mistaken in the Name, confounding Randle Blundevill and Randle
Glaunvill together. Randle Glaunvill indeed was Chief Justice of England under
Henry II. and writ a Book De Legibus Angliae, yet extant amongst us. He died at
the Siege of Accon, Anno Christi 1190. Hoveden, page 685. But this Randle
Blundevill Earl of Chester is of later time a little, and died Anno Christi
1232. This Earl was at the Siege of Damiata, but writ no Book De Legibus:
Glaunvill writ the Book, but was neither Earl of Chester, nor of the Race of
the Earls of Chester. So much of Bale. See Spelman's Glossary, page 338. b.

Anno 1224. Randle Earl of Chester, John Constable of Cheshire, and others of
the Nobility were much displeased with Hubert de Burgo, Chief Justice of
England, alleging, that he did exasperate the King against them, and did not
well Execute the Laws; insomuch that the Earl of Chester with his Accomplices at
Leycester, in stead of surrendering up the Castles which the King demanded from
him, as belonging to the Crown, had thought to have sent threatening Messages
both against the King and his Chief Justice; but upon more deliberate Advice
surrendered them. Paris, page 318, 319, and 320.

Anno 1229. the King having gathered a great Army together at Portsmouth,
thought to Transport them beyond Sea, to recover those Lands which his Father
had lost; but not finding sufficient Shipping for half his Army, he imputed the
fault to the Treachery of Hubert de Burgo, that he should have been Bribed
thereunto by the Queen of France; and drawing his Sword to have killed Hubert,
Randle Earl of Chester interposed and saved him, that he got out of the King's
sight till his fury was past. Paris, page 363. And in the same Year Randle Earl
of Chester refuses to pay Tithes to the Pope. Paris ibidem.

Anno 1230. Randle Earl of Chester marched through Anjou, and took certain
Castles, and so returned into Little Britain, where the King had made him
Commander in Chief of his Forces, together with William Marshall and William
Albemarle. Paris, page 367.

Anno 1232. in the Parliament assembled at London, the King demanded Money for
the Discharge of his Debts occasioned by the Wars. The Earl of Chester
answering for the Nobility of the Kingdom, told him, That the Earls, Barons,
and Knights, which hold of him in Capite, were personally with him in the
Service, and had exhausted their own Money in that Service, and therefore ought
not to pay any thing, and so nothing was Granted. Paris, page 372.

In this Year Randle Earl of Chester did a second time save the Life of Hubert
de Burgo, when the King being exasperated with Hubert, sent to the Mayor of
London to send away all the Armed he could raise, immediately to put him to
Death; who in one Nights space were increased to 20000. willing of the
occasion: But the King by the persuasion of Randle Earl of Chester, telling how
dangerous it might be to raise such a seditious Tumult, which perhaps could not
be allayed when he would, and besides the rumor of the World for such a Fact
would be much to his prejudice, Messengers were sent to stop the fury of the
People; and so he escaped.

This Randle among the many Conflicts he had with the Welsh, *
as I find in an ancient Parchment Roll, written above two hundred Years ago,
wherein the Barons of Halton with their Issue were carefully collected, was
distressed by the Welsh, Lib. C. Fol. 85. b.
and forced to retreat to the Castle of Rothelent in Flintshire, about the
Reign of King John, where they Besieged him: He presently sent to his Constable
of Cheshire, Roger Lacy, surnamed Hell, for his fierce Spirit, that he would
come with all speed, and bring what Forces he could toward his Relief. Roger
having gathered a tumultuous Rout of Fiddlers, Players, Cobblers, debauched
persons, both Men and Women, out of the City of Chester (for 'twas then the
Fair-time in that City,) marches immediately toward the Earl. The Welsh
perceiving a great multitude coming, raised their Siege and fled. The Earl
coming back with his Constable to Chester, gave him Power over all the Fiddlers
and Shoemakers in Chester, in reward and memory of this Service. The Constable
retained to himself and his Heirs, the Authority and Donation of the
Shoemakers, but conferred the Authority of the Fiddlers and Players on his
Steward, which then was Dutton of Dutton; whose Heirs enjoy the same Power and
Authority over the Minstralcy of Cheshire even to this day; who in memory
hereof keep a yearly Court upon the Feast of St. John Baptist at Chester, where
all the Minstrels of the County and City are to attend and Play before the Lord
of Dutton: And none ought to use their Minstralcy but by Order and License of
that Court, under the Hand and Seal of the Lord Dutton or his Steward, either
within Cheshire or the City of Chester. And to this day the Heirs of Dutton, or
their Deputies, do in a solemn manner yearly upon Midsummer-day, being Chester
Fair, Ride attended through the City of Chester, with all the Minstralcy of
Cheshire playing before them on their several Instruments, to the Church of St.
John's, and at the Court renew their Licenses yearly.

I cannot here pass by the gross mistake of Powel on the Welsh History, page
296. whom Cambden in his Britania seems to follow; where Raufe de Dutton is
said to have gathered this Army, and to have rescued the Earl: whereupon he had
the Power over the Minstralcy granted immediately from the Earl.

For first, there was never any such an Heir of Dutton of Dutton, that was
called Rafe de Dutton. But I shall, for more satisfaction, transcribe the
Original Deed made to Dutton, remaining among the Evidences of that Family,
which now by a Daughter and Heir is devolved to the Lord Gerard of Gerards
Bromley in Staffordshire.

Lib. C. fol 139.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Johannes Constabularius Cestriae, dedi
and concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Hugoni de Dutton, and
Haeredibus suis, Magistratum omnium Leccatorum and Meretricum totius
Cestershiriae, sicut liberius illum Magistratum teneo de Comite; Salvo jure meo
mihi and Heredibus meis. Hiis Testibus, Hugone de Boidele, Alano Fratre ejus,
Petro de Goenet, Liulfo de Twamlow, Ada de Dutton, Gilberto de Aston, Radulfo
de Kingsley, Hamone de Bordington, Alano de Waleie, Alano de Mulinton,
Willielmo Filio Ricardi, Martino Angevin, Willielmo de Savill, Galfrido and
Roberto Filiis meis Bletheris It is either thus, as I have put it; or, Galfrido
and Roberto Filiis meis, Blethero Herberd de Waleton, etc. I leave it to the
Reader to judge.
, Herdberd de Waleton, Galfrido de Dutton.

In which Deed it is, John Constable of Cheshire (not the Earl of Chester)
grants to Hugh de Dutton (not to Raufe de Dutton) the Authority over all the
Letchers and Whores of all Cheshire; Salvo jure meo. So as the Right was the
Constables, which he held of the Earl; but now transfers it over to Hugh
Dutton, about the end of King John's Reign. By the ancient Roll it should seem
Roger Lacy rescued the Earl, and now John his Son transferrs this Power to
Dutton: Which Original Grant mentions nothing of the Rule of Fiddlers or
Minstrels; but ancient Custom has now brought it only to the Minstrelsie: For
anciently I suppose the Ro^t which the Constable brought to the Rescuing of the
Earl, were debauched Persons drinking with their Sweet-hearts in the Fair,
Fiddlers, and such loose kind of Persons as he could get; which tract of time
has reduced only to the Minstrels.

I find in the Records at Chester, inter Placita 14 Hen. 7. a Quo Warranto
brought against Laurence Dutton of Dutton; Esquire why he claimed all the Minstrels
of Cheshire, and in the City of Chester, to meet before him at Chester yearly,
at the Feast of Saint John Baptist, and to give unto him at the said Feast
quatuor Lagenas Vini, and unam Lanceam; that is, four Bottles of Wine, and a
Lance: and also every Minstrel to pay unto him at the said Feast four Pence
halfpenny: And why he claimed from every Whore in Cheshire, and in the City of
Chester, Officium suum exercente, four Pence to be paid yearly at the Feast
aforesaid, etc. Whereunto he pleaded Prescription.

And whereas by the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 4. Fiddlers are declared to be
Rogues; yet there is an especial Proviso in the Statute, for the exempting of
those in Cheshire, Licensed by Dutton of Dutton, as belonging to his ancient
Custom and Privilege: So that the Fiddlers of Cheshire, Licensed by the Heirs of
Dutton of Dutton, are no Rogues. But enough of this.

This Randle Earl of Chester purchased all the Lands of Roger de Meresey, which
he had between the Rivers of Ribble and Mersey in Lancashire, about the 15 Year
of the Reign of Henry the Third, 1230. as appears by the Deeds following.

Couchir Book of the Dutchy-Office at Gray's Inn, London: Tom. 1. Comitatus
Lancastriae, fol. 77. number. 70.
Haec est Conventio facta inter Dominum Ranulfum Comitem Cestriae and
Lincolniae, and Rogerum de Maresey: Videlicet, quod dicti Comes and Rogerus
tradiderunt Domino Radulfo de Bray in aequali manu quadraginta Marcas Argenti,
and Chartam quam dictus Rogerus fecit Domino Comiti de venditione and
dimissione omnium terrarum suarum, quas habuit vel habere potuit inter Ribble
and Mersey: Ita scilicet quod idem Rogerus sine dilatione iturus est inter
Ribbel and Mersey ad deponendum se de dicta terra, and ad faciendum omnes illos
(qui de ipso ibidem tenuerunt) Homagia sua facere dicto Domino Comiti, vel
fidelitatem ejus Ballivis loco suo Constitutis: and etiam ad Saisinam de
Boulton cum omnibus pertinentiis dicto Comiti faciendam: Quo facto dictus
Radulfus de Bray saepe-dicto Comiti Chartam jam dictam reddet, and eidem Rogero
dictas quadraginta Marcas: Et si contingat, quod Tenentes de dictis Tenuris ad
hoc, quod praedictum est, Domino Comiti faciendum per ipsum Rogerum adesse
noluerint, saepe-dictus Comes, vel Ballivi sui, ipsos compellent ad hoc
faciendum. Et dictus Rogerus ad sumptus Domini Comitis itinerabit una cum
Ballivis Comitis, quousque negotium istud, secundum quod praedictum est, fuerit
Consummatum. Et ad majorem hujus rei securitatem uterque illorum praesenti
scripto, more Cheirographi, Sigillum suum apposuit. Hiis Testibus, Domino
Waltero Abbate Cestriae, Domino Willielmo de Vernon Justiciario Cestriae,
Radulfo de Bray, Waltero Dayvill, Ricardo de Biron, Johanne de Lexington,
Simone and Johanne Clericis.

Charta Rogeri de Maresheia; ex eodem Libro. Comitatus Lancastriae, Number. 79.
OMnibus praesentibus and futuris, -- Rogerus Filius Ranulfi de Maresheya,
Salutem. Sciatis me vendidisse and in perpetuum de me and Haeredibus meis
dimisisse Domino Ranulpho Comiti Cestriae and Lincolniae, Manerium de Boulton,
cum omnibus pertinentiis suis: scilicet quicquid habui, 13. Hen. 3. the King
granted a Confirmation to Randle Earl of Chester, of all his Lands between the
Rivers of Ribbell and Mersey in Lancashire; to wit, the Town and Wapentake of
West-Derby, the Borough of Lever-pool, the Town and Wapentake of Salford, and
also the Wapentake of Leland, with all Forests and Appurtenances. Claus. 13
Hen. 3. memb. 2.
vel ad me vel ad Haeredes meos accidere potuit, in dicto Manerio de Bolton,
and in Parva Bolton, in Tongue, in Halghe, in Brethmete, in Ratecliffe, in
Ormeston, in Weffeleg, in Sharplis, in Haghe, in Fanedisch, in Longeere, in
Sevington, in Chernoc, and in Hedchernoc, in Dokesbury, in Adelvinton, in
Whitall, in Hirelton, in Skaresbreck, in Heton juxta Lancaster, in Melner, in
Derwente, and in Eccleshill, and in omnibus aliis locis ad dictas terras
pertinentibus: in Homagiis, Feodis, Servitiis, Consuetudinibus, Dominicis,
Custodiis, Releviis, Redditibus, Escaetis, Advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and in
omnibus aliis rebus --: Reddendo inde annuatim -- quasdam Cheirothecas albas,
vel unum Denarium, ad Pascha, pro omnibus Servitiis and demandis universis,
salvo forinseco Servitio. Et pro hac venditione and dimissione mihi dedit
praedictus Comes ducentas Marcas Argenti, etc. Hiis Testibus, Domino Waltero
Abbate Cestriae, Domino Willielmo Justiciario Cestriae, Radulfo de Bray,
Ricardo de Burun, Galfrido de Dutton, Galfrido de Appelby, Johanne de
Lexington, Magistro Gilberto de Weston, Rogero de Derbey, Simone and Johanne
Clericis, and multis aliis.

III. Now for his Titles. After that he Married with Constance the Widow of
Geffrey, fourth Son of King Henry the Second, and Daughter and Heir of Conan
Duke of Little-Britain and Earl of Richmond, which Marriage by the King's
Consent was Solemnized in Anno 1187. 33 Hen. 2. as Hoveden informs us, 637.
then did he also assume those Titles, and writ himself thus: -- Ranulphus Dux
Britanniae, and Comes Cestriae and Richmondiae.

A Deed or two I shall produce for Proof hereof: One from the Original, which I
saw in possession of Peter Daniel of Over-Tabley Esquire 10 die Junii, 1650. as
follows.

RANULPHUS Dux Britanniae, and Comes Cestriae and Richmondiae, Omnibus tam
praesentibus quam futuris qui Chartam istam viderint and audierint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod ego dedi and concessi Andreae Filio Mabiliae, and Haeredibus suis,
ut sint liberi and quieti de me and meis Haeredibus de Teloneo per totam terram
meam, and in aqua, and in terra, and in Civitate Cestriae and extra, and a
Brevibus portandis, and a Prisonibus capiendis and custodienis, and a Namis
capiendis, and a Vigiliis faciendis nocte vel die, and a caeteris hujusmodi
consuetudinibus and exactionibus, nec de querela aliqua in Civitate Cestriae,
vel extra, respondeant in praesentia mea, vel summi Justitiae mei: Et super
forisfacturam meam X Librarum prohibeo, ne aliquis eos de supradictis
libertatibus impediat vel inquietet, sed eas libere and quiet teneant,
Reddendo mihi and Haeredibus meis annuatim VI Denarios ad Festum Sancti
Michaelis. Hiis Testibus, Bertre Comitissa Cestrae, Radulfo de Meinewarin,
Radulfo Seneschallo, Hugone de Boidele, and Alano Fratre ejus, Roaldo, Roberto
Cam^, Roberto Saraceno, Ranulfo Dubeldai, Nicolao Filio Roberti, Thoma Fratre
suo, Willielmo Marmiun, Ricardo Poibel, Rogero Clerico, and multis aliis. Apud
Cestriam.

A large Seal of Paste, or kind of White Wax, with the Impression of the Earl
on Horseback on both sides.

Also another taken ex majori Libro de Whalley and Stanlaw, Penes Radulfum
Ashton Militem, 1649. Tit. Number. 8. fol. 33.

RANULFUS Dux Britanniae, Comes Cestriae and Richmondiae, Constabulario,
Dapifero, Camerario, and omnibus Ministris ejus, and omnibus Baronibus and
Militibus suis, and omnibus Hominibus suis, Francis and Anglicis, Clericis and
Laicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Notum sit vobis omnibus, me
concessisse and hac Charta mea confirmasse Deo and Abbatiae de loco benedicto
de Stanlaw, and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, omnes illas libertates and
donationes, quas eis fecit Comes Hugo Pater meus; and prout Charta sua, quam
habent Monachi praedicti, testatur. -- Testibus Johanne Constabulario Cestriae,
Petro Cancellario, Radulfo de Maynilwaringe, Hugone de Boidell, Ranulfo de
Praers, Apud Cestriam.

Constance, which happened Anno Domini 1200. he relinquished the Titles of Dux
Britanniae and Comes Richmondiae, having no Issue by her. She after her Divorce
Married Guy Viscount of Thouars, and she died 3 Johannis Regis 1201. Hoveden,
page 822. leaving Issue by Guy a Daughter called Alice, given afterward by the
King of France in Marriage to Peter Mauclere Militi suo cum Britannia. Vincent
upon Brook, page 62, 63. And howbeit Milles in his Catalogue of Honor tells
us, That this Randle had the Earldom of Richmond given him, with all the Fees
and Privileges belonging thereunto, the which Geffrey, sometimes Earl of
Britain, held in Richmondshire, except certain Knights Fees, which Roald
Constable of Richmond, and Henry Son of Harvey, held in the same: The Charter
dated at York, 6 die Martii, 6 Johannis Regis, 1204. Yet was he never styled
Comes Richmondiae after his Divorce, though perhaps he enjoyed the Profits
thereof for some space; but only Comes Cestriae was his Style, as appears by
these following Chartes.

The Originals of these two following Deeds were in the Possession of Mr.
Townelay of Carre in Lancashire, June 23. 1657. both of them made in the Reign
of King John, as appears by the Witnesses.

OMnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis, -- Ranulfus Comes Cestriae, Salutem.
Notum sit vobis me dedisse -- Deo and Beatae Mariae, and Monachis de Stanlaw,
quietantiam de Bestiis Sylvestribus occisis, vel attinctis in terra ipsorum
Monachorum, portandis usque ad Cestriam: and quod dicti Monachi and eorum
homines non ideo causentur propter aliquam Bestiam aliquo casu mortuam and
inventam in terra eorum, nisi fuerit aliquis Sakerbor qui de hoc loqui voluerit
adversus dictos Monachos, aut eorum homines: and quod sint quieti de
servientibus and Forestariis. Testibus hiis, Rogero Constabulario Cestriae,
Warino de Vernon, Hamone de Massy, Philippo de Orreby, Willielmo de Venables,
Ricardo de Aldford, Adam and Hugone de Dutton, Petro Clerico, Thoma
Dispensatore, Collino de Quatuor-Maris, Radulfo de Munfichet, Gaufrido de
Dutton, Adam de Byri, and multis aliis. Apud Frodsham.

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae, Constabulario suo, and Dapifero, Justitiae, and
Vicecomiti, Baronibus, and Ballivis suis, Salutem. Sciatis me pro Dei amore,
and pro salute Animae meae, dedisse -- in perpetuam and puram Elemosynam Deo,
and Sanctae Mariae, and Monachis loci Benedicti de Stanlaw, quietantiam de
Tolneio per totam terram meam, de Sale and de omnibus aliis rebus quas emerint
vel vendiderint ad usus suos proprios, tam per aquam quam per terram, -- etc.
Testibus hiis, Rogero Constabulario Cestriae, Philippo de Orreby tunc
Justiciario Cestriae, Warino de Vernon, Willielmo de Venables, Petro Clerico,
Adam and Hugone de Dutton, Liulpho Vicecomite, Alexandro Filio Radulfi,
Bertramo Camerario, Josceramo de Hellesby, and multis aliis. Apud Cestriam.

Both these Deeds aforesaid were Sealed with the Impression of a Lion in an
Escocheon, or rather a Triangular form, like a Heart.

Couchir Book in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke,
page 116. number. 17.
OMnibus tam futuris quam praesentibus, -- Petrus Cantor de Quarendona,
Salutem. Sciatis me remisisse and quietum clamasse de me and de Haeredibus meis
Domino meo Ranulfo Comiti Cestriae, totam terram meam quam habebam in Weinflet,
and aliam terram meam totam in Lindseia, quae pertinet ad terram praedictam de
Weinflet: Tenendas praedicto Comiti Cestriae, and Haeredibus suis, Haereditarie
in Dominico suo, etc. Hiis Testibus, Thoma Dispensario, Willielmo Picot,
Waltero de Coventreya, Juhello de Loningneio, Johanne de Pratell, Helya
Pincerna, Gaufrido de Sancto Bricio. Engeramo Pisce, Henrico Dispensario,
Willielmo Filio Hamonis, Henrico de Civil, and multis aliis. Apud Baronam.

But when Gilbert de Gant, Earl of Lincoln, was taken Prisoner, England, which
Title Lewis King of France conferred upon him a little before, to wit, Anno
1216. then was Randle Earl of Chester made Earl of Lincoln by King Henry third,
1217. 1 Hen. 3. for so was the Writ directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, dated
at Lincoln, 23 Maii, 1 Hen. 3. Claus. 1 Hen. 3. Memb. 17. commanding him quod
habere faciat Comiti Cestriae tertium Denarium de Comitatu Lincolniae, qui eum
contingit jure Haereditario ex part Ranulphi patris sui. Where, if Vincent
has not miswrit the Record, it should have been Avi sui, not Patris: For
Randle the Second, surnamed Gernons, Earl of Chester, was half-Brother by the
Mother to William de Romara Earl of Lincoln; as whose Heir, upon this
Forfeiture, Henry the Third now grants the Earldom of Lincoln to Randle
Blundevill.

Another Writ was dated at Worcester, 15 Martii, Claus. 2 Hen. 3. memb. 9.
2 Hen. 3. directed to the same Officer: -- Praecipimus tibi, quod recipias
Clericum illum, quem fidelis noster and dilectus Ranulphus Comes Cestriae and
Lincolniae ad te miserat per Literas suas, ad eundum tecum per Comitatum
Lincolniae, and ad recipiendum tertium Denarium de Placitis Comitatus ejusdem,
nomine Comitis Lincolniae, ad opus ipsius Comitis, sicut eidem illum tertium
Denarium concessimus. Vincent upon Brook, page 316. Mat. Paris, page 296.

And from this time, to the time of his death, he was usually styled in all his
Charters, -- Ranulphus Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae. Some Deeds I shall insert
here, proving the same.

Couchir Book in the Dutchy-Office, Tom 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, page
111. number. 5. of Lands in Lincolnshire.
OMnibus praesentibus, -- Gilbertus de Beningeworth, Salutem. Noverit
universitas vestra me dedisse -- Ranulpho Comiti Cestriae and Lincolniae, and
Haeredibus suis, -- totum Manerium meum de Halton, in Dominicis, in Hominibus,
etc. and homahomagium Radulfi de Gousle de Feodo unius Militis in Yreby, etc.
and totum Manerium meum de Kynthorp, etc. Pro hac vero donatione dedit mihi
praedictus Ranulphus Comes ducentas Libras Sterlingorum: Et adquietavit me
versus Elyam Filium Martrinae Judaeum Lincolniae de octies viginti and december
Marcis Argenti, etc. Hiis Testibus, Radulfo Filio Simonis, Gilberto Cusyn tunc
Seneschallo, etc.

Ibidem, page 111. number. 6.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Gilbertus de Beningworth quiet clamavi
-- Ranulpho Comiti Cestriae and Lincolniae and haeredibus suis, totum Manerium
de Stepinge, quod est de feodo ipsius Comitis, cum tota terra de Halton, and
cum Advocatione Ecclesiae de Stepinge, etc. Pro hac vero donatione and quieta
Clamatione dedit mihi praedictus Ranulfus Comes ducentas marcas Esterlingorum,
etc.

Many other of his Charters might be produced, but let these suffice.

IV. Now for his Wives. His first Wife, as you have already heard, was
Constance the Widow of Geffrey, fourth Son of King Henry the Second, and
Daughter and Heir of Conan, Duke of Little Britain and Earl of Richmond. She
was Married to Randle, Anno 1187. 33 Hen. 2. as is before proved.

But upon the Divorce of Constance, Anno scilicet Christi 1200. 2 Johannis
Regis, he Married Clemence, Sister of Geffrey de Filgiers in Normandy, and
Widow to Alan de Dinnam. Fern in his Lacy's Nobility, page 58. and Powel on
the Welsh History, page 296. most absurdly call her the Daughter of Ferrers
Earl of Derby: And the Translator of Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 32. calls her
Daughter of Rafe de Filgiers, who in truth was her Grandfather. But she was
Daughter of William de Filgiers, and Sister to Geffrey. See Monasticon, 2 Pars,
page 997. And for farther proof hereof take these two subsequent Deeds.

Couchir Book in the Duchy Office at Gray's Inn, Tom. 2. Comitatus
Northampton, number. 3.
OMnibus tam futuris quam praesentibus, ad quos literae praesentes pervenerint,
Gaufridus de Filgeriis Salutem. Notum sit vobis, me concess^sse and dedisse
Ranulfo Comiti Cestriae cum Clementia Sorore mea in liberum Maritagium, totum
Maritagium quod cum ipsa datum fuit Alano de Dinnamo priore marito suo:
Scilicet totam terram, quam Antecessores mei habuerunt in valle Moretoniae cum
omnibus pertinentiis and libertatibus ejusdem terrae: and unum Manerium in
Anglia, quod vocatur Belingtona cum omnibus pertinentiis and libertatibus suis,
tam libere and quiet and integre ut Willielmus de Sancto Johanne illud habuit
and tenuit Anno and die quo fuit vivus and mortuus: Qui scilicet Willielmus
Manerium illud habuit in Maritagio cum Oliva Matre Radulfi de Filgeriis Avi
mei: Et si aliqua occasion interveniente non possum ei terras praedictas
deliberare, in aliis terris meis de haereditate mea in Anglia and in Normannia
illi perficiam trecent as libratas terrae ad Monetam Andegaviae: Quod si facere
non possum, in aliis terris meis de haereditate mea, Competentem faciam Gratum
praedicti Comitis de trecentis libratis terrae ei Perficiendis. Praeterea Dedi
praenominato Comiti in liberum Maritagium cum praedicta Sorore mea totam dotem
Matris meae, habendam praedicto Comiti, post decessum Matris meae, integre and
plenarie cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, sicut Pater meus eam dedit Matri meae
in dotem: Et ut hoc ratum and inconcussum permaneat in posterum, praesenti
Scripto and Sigillo meo ad ipsum confirmavi: Et Willielmus de Humetto
Constabularius Normanniae juravit hoc legitime tenendum, and Sigillo suo
confirmavit. Hiis Testibus Willielmo Constantiae Episcopo, Johanne Abbate
Alneti, Angoto Abbate de Luserna, Willielmo Abbate Hambeiae. Testibus etiam and
juratis his, Fulcone Paganello, Willielmo Bac', Hugone de Colonc', Harstulpho
de Salingneio, Petro de Sancto Hilario, Henrico de Humetto, Jordano de Humet,
Thoma de Humetto, Petro Roaud, Rauno de Per', Juhello de Lavingneia, Juhello
Beringen, Johanne de Humetto, Bartholomaeo Abbate, Radulpho de Agnis, and
multis aliis.

Ex Originali Penes Simonem Dewes, Militem and Baronettum; Notato EE. number. 12.
Anno 1649.
SCiant omnes ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, quod contentio, This Deed
bears Date Anno 1200.
quae fuit inter Ranulfum Comitem Cestriae, and Willielmum de Filgeriis super
maritagio Clementiae de Filgeriis uxoris praedicti Comitis and Proneptis
praedicti Willielmi, hoc modo pacificata est: Scilicet, quod praedictus
Willielmus reddidit Gaufrido de Filgeriis Pronepoti suo, ad dandum in maritagio
cum Clementia sorore sua praedicto Comiti, totam terram quam Radulfus de
Filgeriis habuit in valle Moretonii, and sicut de ea Seisitus fuit anno and die
quo eam dedit Alano de Dinnam in maritagio cum praedicta Clementia, excepto
Dominio Abbatiae Savierguen, and exceptis LX solidis Andegavensium, quos idem
Radulfus dedit Aeliciae nepti suae (quae est Monialis apud Moreton) habendos
quamdiu ipsa vixerit per manum Servientis de Romei ergeneio; and post decessum
ipsius Monialis revertentur praedictae Clementiae, and haeredibus suis: Et
praeterea dabit praedictus Willielmus praedicto Comiti centum libras
Andegavenses annuatim a Natali Domini, quod est anno verbi incarnati 1201.
usque ad quinque annos, in nativitate Sancti Johannis Baptistae solvendas:
Praeterea concessit praedictus Willielmus praedicto Comiti unum maritagium in
denariis Par Tailliae de Augusto, habendum per totam terram Filgerii, excepta
villa Filgeria quae Combusta erat: Inter praedictum vero Willielmum de
Filgeriis and Gaufridum pronepotem suum haec est Conventio per Consilium
amicorum ejusdem Gaufridi facta: videlicet, quod praedictus Willielmus totam
terram de Filgiers, sicut Radulfus de Filgeriis eam illi commisit fideliter
custodiendam, tenebit a praedicto Natali usque in quinque annos: Et si quis ei
super hoc contraire aut eum vexare voluerit, praedictus Comes and Willielmus de
Humet and alii Amici Gaufridi and homines terrae Filgiers (qui hanc
Conventionem fideliter tenendam juraverunt) praedicto Willielmo erunt
auxiliantes and consulentes pro Posse suo* Completis autem quinque annis
praedictis, praefatus Willielmus reddet praedicto Gaufrido Pronepoti suo totam
terram Filgerii sine contradictione, sicut Radulfus de Filgeriis eam illi
commisit custodiendam fideliter: Quam cum reddiderit, idem Galfridus (qui a
praedicto Willielmo requisitus fuerit) de jure suo terrae Filgiers per
consilium Amicorum utriusque Partis, and hominum terrae Filgerii, faciet quod
facere debebit: Et si per consilium amicorum suorum, and hominum terrae, inter
se concordari non poterint, per judicium Guriae Domini Britanniae sine
dilatione illi faciet quod facere debebit. Et si alter uter illorum contra hoc
venire voluerit, tam homines terrae Filgerii quam Amici utriusque partis
auxiliantes erunt illi, qui hanc Conventionem tenere voluit; and nocentes ei,
qui eam tenere recusavit: Si autem contigerit, Clementiam uxorem praedicti
Comitis Cestriae decedere infra quinque annos praedictos, ipse Comes dicto
Willielmo de Filgeriis terram de valle Moritonii quiet reddet, si de Clementia
haeredem non habuerit: Et si Gaufridus de Filgeriis infra praedictos quinque
annos decesserit, idem Willielmus terram Filgerii integre and sine
contradictione aliqua, and absque termino, Clementia and haeredibus ejus
reddet: Et ipsa Clementia and Sponsus ejus tenebunt praedicto Willielmo
Conventionem, quam Gaufridus de Filgeriis and Amici sui ei tenere debebant:
Amplius Willielmus de Filgeriis de omnibus, quoscunque posuerit in Castello
Filgerii infra quinque annos, jurare faciet, quod si ipsum in fata quiescere
contigerit, ipsi (...) Gaufrido de Filgeriis, vel praedictae Clementiae sorori
suae si ipsa ei superstes fuerit: Et in hac Conventione remanserunt Willielmo
de Filgeriis praedicto Maneria in Anglia, soilicet Tuiford and Watkinton, quae
Radulfus de Filgeriis frater ejus illi dedit pro homagio suo and Servitio,
sicut Chartae dicti Radulfi legitime testantur: Et insuper eidem Willielmo
remanet Manerium de Belington, quod fuit maritagium (...) and eum contingit
jure haereditario ex part matris suae: Has Conventiones fecit Willielmus de
Filgeriis ad Scaccarium apud (...) cum Ranulfo Comite Cestriae and Clementia
uxore ejus, The Deed is torn out in these places.
and cum Willielmo de Humet quem idem Comes and Clementia uxor sua loco suo
assignaverunt (...) super hoc ageret ratum habituri; in praesentia Samsonis
Abbatis Cadomi, and Hugonis de Chaucumb, and (...) Guiterii de Motyr, and
Decani Sancti Juliani tunc Justitiariorum Domini Regis: Has Conventiones (...)
tam praedictus Comes Cestria, quam Willielmus de Filgeriis: Et ex part Comitis
Juraverunt isti, Hugo (...) Praer, Petrus de Sancto Hilario, Petrus Roaud: Ex
part Willielmi de Filgeriis juraverunt (...) Henricus de Viterio, Gaufridus de
Sancto Bricio, Willielmus de Sancto Bricio: Et hoc ipsum juraverunt (...)
Fontenai: ut autem hae Conventiones firmae and inconcussae permaneant, (...)
Sigillorum Comitis Cestriae, and Constabularii Normanniae, and Willielmi de
Filgeriis, and Alani filii Comitis, and Guidonis de Avall, confirmatae. Actum
est autem hoc Nonis Octobris, Anno Incarnationis Domini 1200.

Three large Seals of green Wax appendant.

Anno 1230. Ranulfus Comes Cestrensis munivit Castellum apud Sanctum Johannem
de Beverona, quod ad jus uxoris suae Comitissae jure haereditario pertinebat,
militibus, alimentis, and Armis: Reddiderat illi Castrum illud Comes Britanniae
Henricus quando confaederatus Regi Angliae omnia jura sua in Regno Angliae,
Rege Concedente, recepit. Mat. Paris. p. 367.

Some have added here a third Wife to Randle, namely Margaret, Daughter of
Humfrey Bohun Constable of England. So Fern and Powel, and Brooks in his
Catalogue of Nobility, who for this his Error is justly Corrected by Vincent.
These Persons are full of absolute Falsities.

It is plain, that Clemence Countess of Chester survived her Husband Randle
Blundevill; for she Sued out her Dower. In the Close Rolls, Claus. 16 Hen. 3.
memb. 1. A Writ is directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln -- Quod de Maneriis de
Beminton and de Luneberge, quae sunt maritagium Clementiae Comitissae Cestriae,
quae fuit uxor Ranulfi Comitis Cestriae, plenam Seisinam eidem Clementiae
habere faciat: faciat etiam eidem Clementiae plenam Seisinam habere de omnibus
terris, quas Bertreia quondam Comitissa Cestriae habuit nomine dotis in
Maneriis de Wadinton, Normanby, etc. quas quidem Rex assignavit eidem
Clementiae loco dotis ad sustinendum: eo tamen Salvo dictae Comitissae, quod
plus possit petere in dotem, si non fuerit sufficienter dotata.

How could Randle now have any Wife after Clemence, unless he could Marry when
he is dead? away with these Lies.

But Randle had no Issue by either of his Wives, leaving his whole Inheritance
to be shared by his four Sisters and Coheirs, as is before mentioned in Hugh
Cyveliok.

V. The Death of Randle the Third, surnamed Blundevill.
16 Hen. 3.
Anno 1232. Ranulfus Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae apud Wallingford diem
clausit extremum quinto Calendas Novembris [that is the 28. day of our October]
cujus Corpus delatum est apud Cestriam tumulandum, viscera apud Wallingford
tumulabantur. Mat. Paris, page 380.

The Book of Teuksbury thus -- Anno 1232. obiit Ranulphus Comes Cestriae 7
Calendas Novembris apud Wallingford, ubi posita sunt viscera sua: Cor apud
Delacres: Corpus apud Cestriam.

Agreeing herewith take this Deed, which I found transcribed in a Paper Book
belonging to Sir Thomas Delves of Dodington in Cheshire, Baronet, Anno 1668.
vouching the Original to have been in possession of Mr. Thomas Rudyard of
Rudyard; and to be Sealed with three Garbs or Wheatsheafs, as follows, made a
little before Randle's Death, about the 16 Hen. 3. 1232.

UNiversis -- Ranulfus Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae, Salutem. Sciatis me
dedisse Deo, and Sanctae Mariae de Delacres, and Monachis ibidem Deo
Servientibus, Cor meum post obitum meum ibi Sepeliendum, ubicunque Corpus meum
Sepeliri contigerit: Quare volo and firmiter praecipio, quod ubicunque vitam
meam finiri contigerit, aut ubicunque Corpus meum tumulatam fuerit, quod
haeredes mei and homines mei Cor meum ad Abbatiam meam de Delacres, quam ego
ipse fundavi, absque omni impedimento and contradictione asportent, Condendum
ibidem, -- etc. Testibus W. Abbate Cestriae, Willielmo de Vernon tunc
Justiciario Cestriae, -- etc.

The Monk of Chester in his Polychronicon thus: -- Anno 1232. Ranulphus Comes
Cestriae, Lincolniae, and Huntindoniae, obiit apud Wallingford, and sepultus
est apud Cestriam in Capitulo Monachorum, cum Progenitoribus suis.

Certainly the Monk is mistaken here in the Title of Huntindoniae; for Randle
was never Earl of Huntindon: John the Scot, who next succeeded Earl of Chester,
was also Earl of Huntindon.

I find that Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln, had the Earldom of Leycester
given him by Henry the Third, as Cambden in Leycestershire informs us.

For Simon Montfort, Earl of Leycester in Right of his Wife, took part with the
French King, and for his Rebellion was expelled England. He was slain at the
Siege of Toulouse in France, Anno 1219. Mat. Paris. After whose Death, Henry
the Third gave Simon Montfort's Lands in England to Randle Earl of Chester.
Howbeit, I find not that Randle ever assumed or used the Title of Earl of
Leycester at any time. But Almaric de Montfort, Son and Heir of the said Simon,
Petitions Henry the Third, thus, --

Couchir Book in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's Inn, Tom. 2. Comitatus Leycestriae,
number. 4.
EXcellentissimo Domino suo, Henrico Dei Gratia Illustri Anglorum Regi
Almaricus Comes Montisfortis and Leycestriae, Salutem, in eo qui dat salutem
Regibus; and cum omni subjectione tam debitum quam devotum ad obsequia
famulatum: Vestrae Regiae Majestati multoties supplicavi humiliter and devote,
ut mihi terram meam and jus meum, quod habeo and habere debeo in Anglia, quod
bonae memoriae Pater meus de vestro tenuit, and tenebat (dum decessit) pacifice
and quiet, mihi vestro Militi redderetis: Quod quia Dominationi vestrae non
placuit hucusque facere, adhuc vestrae Majestati supplico humilitate qua
possum, quatenus hac vice mihi vobis servire parato (sicut decuit) reddere
dignemini terram. Et si hoc vobis non placuerit, ego ad pedes Dominationis
vestrae transmitto Simonem Fratrem meum, qui de Domino Regae Franciae nihil
tenet, cui si eam reddideritis, me pro been pacato tenerem. Datum Parisiis
Mense Februario.

Whereupon King Henry, 6 Februarii, 14 Hen. 3. Anno 1229. engages himself to
restore all the Lands in England, which were parcel of the Honor of Leycester,
cum tertio Denario Comitatus Leycestriae, to this Simon younger Brother of
Almarick aforesaid, so soon as he could get them out of the Hands of Randle
Earl of Chester and Lincoln; for to him he had formerly granted them.

And afterward Almarick surrendered up his Right to his Brother Simon, 23 Hen.
3. in these words following.

Couchir Book in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 2. Com. Leycestriae, number. 5.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Almaricus Comes Montisfortis, Franciae
Constabularius, in praesentia Henrici Illustris Regis Angliae, Filii Regis
Johannis, apud Westmonasterium die Lunae proxime post Quindenam Paschae, Anno
Regni ipsius Henrici vicesimo tertio, recognovi, concessi, and quietum clamavi
de me and Haeredibus meis, dilecto Fratri meo Simoni de Monteforti, Comiti
Leycestriae, totam partem Honoris Leycestriae, cum omnibus pertinentiis in
Regno Angliae, adeo plene and integre sicut Comes Simon Pater noster, vel
Robertus Comes Leycestrensis, illam unquam melius, before, and liberius
tenuerunt. Habendum and tenendum eidem Simoni Fratri meo, and Haredibus suit de
Corpore suo procreatis, de praedicto Domino Henrico Rege, and Haeredibus suis
in perpetuum, -- etc. Actum apud Westmonasterium, Anno and Die praenominatis.
1239.

Which the King at that very instant confirmed unto him: But this was after the
death of Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln. Howbeit this Simon lost the same
again by his Rebellion, and was slain at the Battle of Evesham, 4 Augusti, 49
Hen. 3. 1265.

Randle, surnamed Blundevill, was Earl of Chester 51 Years.

These followidg Notes I received from Mr. Dugdale.
This Earl of Perch was slain at the Battle of Lincoln, 1217. Mat. Paris, page
296. of the Edition put out by Wats, A. Dom. 1640.
THis Earl Randle was but of low stature, as we may observe by the Earl of Perch
his words to him at Lincoln: What (said he) have we staid all this while for
such a Little Man, such a Dwarf? To whom Earl Randle replied, I vow to God and
our Lady (whose Church this is) that before to Morrow Evening I will seem to
thee to be higher than that Steeple. So Walter de Wittlesey a Monk of
Peterborough; a Manuscript now in possession of the Dean and Chapter of
Peterborough.

King John gave to this Randle, Newcastle-under-Lyme in Staffordshire, to hold
by the Service of one Knights Fee. Chart. 17 Johannis, number. 25. and also the
Custody of all Simon Montfort's Lands, with the Forests, to the use of the said
Simon. Ibidem, Membrane 19.

Pat. 1 Hen. 3. mem. 4 and mem. 7. Pat. 2 Hen. 3. mem 10.
1 Hen. 3. the King gave to this Randle the Custody of the Honor of Lancaster,
and the Castle of Montsorrel, which Randle demolished.

2 Hen. 3. the King gave him the Custody of the Honor of Brittany, in the
Counties of Cambridge, Norfolk, and Suffolk: And he executed the Office of
Sheriff by his Deputies in the Counties of Salop and Stafford, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7
Hen. 3. and in the County of Lancaster, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 Hen. 3. as by the
Pipe-Rolls of those Years appears.

Pat. 11. H. 3. mem. 6.
11 Hen. 3. the King gave him all that part of the Honor of Richmond, which he
formerly had of the Grant of King John, to hold for Randle's Life, upon
condition that he should make no Agreement with the Earl of Brittany to
surrender the same up to him, unless the Earl of Brittany could obtain those
Lands in Normandy which the Earl of Chester had lost in the Service of King
John.

CHAP. VII.
Of John surnamed The Scot, Earl of Chester.

blazon or coat of arms Or, three Piles Gules
I. JOhn surnamed The Scot, Son of David Earl of Huntington, succeeded Earl of
Chester, Anno 1232. 17 Hen. 3. in Right of Maude his Mother, eldest Sister and
Coheir to Randle the Third, surnamed Blundevill, Earl of Chester.

His Father David, Brother of William King of Scotland, was Knighted by King
Henry the Second, 1170. Hoveden, page 518. and made Earl of Huntington, 1184.
Hoveden, page 622. and David died about Anno 1219. So that John Scot was Earl
of Chester and Huntington.

Take here the Charte remaining among the Evidences of St. Werburge Church in
Chester, as follows.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus praesens scriptum visuris vel audituris, Johannes de
Scotia Comes Cestriae and Huntindoniae salutem in Domino. Sciatis me
concessisse and confirmasse Deo and Domni Sanctae Werburgae de Cestria, and
Abbati and Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, in puram and perpetuam Elemosynam
pro salute mea and Comitissae meae, and pro Anima Comitis Davidis Patris mei,
and Comitissae Matildae Matris meae, and pro Anima Ranulfi Comitis Avunculi
mei, and pro Animabus omnium Antecessorum meorum, omnes Donationes, and
Dignitates, and Libertates, quas Comites Antecessores mei and Barons eis
dederunt. Insuper ego ipse do, concedo, and praesenti scripto confirmo
praedictis Abbati and Monachis quietantiam de tribus Panibus, quos aliquando
solebant dare diurne ad Turrim Castelli mei de Cestria; and quietantiam de
Putura servientium in Villis suis, scilicet Huntington, Cheveley, Idinchale,
Wyrvin, tempore Pacis; and Prestbury and Gostrey in perpetuum, -- etc. Testibus
Domino Ricardo Phiton tunc Justiciario Cestriae, Domino Warino de Vernon,
Willielmo de Venables, Hamone de Massy, Hamone de Phitton, Willielmo de
Malo-passu, Willielmo de Boydell, Ricardo de Sonbach, Ricardo de Wibinberie
tunc Vice-Comite Cestershiriae, and aliis. This was made about 18 Hen. 3. 1233.

II. This John Earl of Chester and Huntington, conceiving that an Earl might
not lawfully be Summoned in any other County than that whereof he was Earl, did
except against the Summons in Northamptonshire upon a Writ De rationabili
part, brought against him there, by the other Coheirs to Randle Blundevill;
but was ordered to answer. The Record I have here transcribed, as it is cited
by Seldom in his Titles of Honor, page 643. ex Fragmentis tempore Hen. 3. quae
in Archivis Arcis Londinensis servantur: Orta est ista lis in 18 Hen. 3. quod
satis constat ex placitis 18 Hen. 3. Rot. 14.

NOrthampton -- Johannes Comes Cestriae and Huntingdoaiae, summonitus fuit ad
respondendum Hugoni de Albiniaco, Willielmo Comiti de Ferrariis, and Agneti
Uxori ejus, and Hawisiae Comitissae Lincolniae, quare deforciat eis
rationabilem partem suam, quae eos contingit de Haereditate Ranulfi quondam
Comitis Cestriae, and unde ipse obiit Seisitus in Comitatu Cestriae; computa
cum eisdem Hugone, Willielmo and Agnete, and Hawisia, part sua rationabili de
Terra quam nunc tenet alibi de eadem Haereditate. Et Comes alias respondit,
quod noluit respondere ad hoc Breve nisi Curia consideraverit, and
consideratione Parium suorum, per summonitionem factam in Comitatu
Northamptoniae de Terris and Tenementis in Comitatu Cestriae ubi Brevia Domini
Regis non currunt. Et quia usitatum est huc usque, quod Pares sui, and alii qui
libertates habent consimiles (sicut Episcopus Dunelmensis, and Comes
Mareschallus) respondent de Terris and Tenementis infra libertates suas per
summonitionem factam ad Terras and Tenementa extra libertates suas: Ideo
consideratum est, quod respondeat.

III. This John Scot Earl of Chester carried the Sword before King Henry the
Third at the Marriage of Queen Elianour, Anno Domini 1236. 20 Hen. 3. at which
time all the Great Men of this Kingdom used those Offices and Places which had
of ancient Right belonged to their Ancestors at the Coronation of the Kings;
and is mentioned by Matthew Paris in these words, sub Anno 1236. -- Comite
Cestriae Gladium Sancti Edwardi, qui Curtein dicitur, ante Regem baiulante in
signum quod Comes est Palatii, and Regem (si oberret) habeat de jure potestatem
cohibendi; suo sibi, scilicet Cestrensi, Constabulario ministrante, and Virga
Populum (cum se inordinate ingereret) subtrahente.

This is the first time, says Seldom in his Titles of Honor, page 641.
speaking of the Title of Earl-Palatine in England, that in express words he
found the Earl of Chester called Earl-Palatine; nor has he observed the word
Palatine to be applied so with us, before Henry the Second's time, or
thereabout.

For although the County of Chester be frequently called a County Palatine, as
well in our Laws, as in common Language, as Comitatus Palatinus, or Palantinus,
or Counter-Paleys, corruptly for County-Paleis, as sometimes it is in our
Law Books. And although indeed it be truly a County-Palatine, and has so
continued ever since the first Gift to Hugh Lupus, unless we except the short
time whiles it was a Principality, Statute 21 Rich. 2. cap. 9. which was
repealed 1 Hen. 4. cap. 3. Yet neither in their Summons to Parliament, nor in
any other Writ directed to them, were they styled Earl-Palatines: Neither do I
see testimony to persuade me, that when the first Grant was made to Hugh Lupus,
it was granted to him by the Name of Earl-Palatine.

But this Earldom being given him with such Liberties and kind of Regal
Jurisdiction, as Count Palatines of Territories in Foreign Parts had, it has
therefore since been called a County Palatine, and the Earls thereof Palatines.
Now to be Earl Palatine, was to have the Possession of a County or Earldom ad
Regalem potestatem in omnibus under the King, as Bracton well expresses the
same.

And to this day the County Palatine of Chester has had a Chamberlain, who
supplieth the Place of Chancellor; and also Justices, before whom the Causes,
which of their nature should otherwise belong respectively to the Kings Bench
and Common Pleas, are triable; a Baron of the Exchequer, a Sheriff, and other
Officers, proportionable to those of the Crown at Westminster. See more of this
County Palatine in my Lord Cook's Jurisdiction of Courts.

IV. The Wife of John Scot.
HE Married Helen Daughter of Lhewellin Prince of North Wales, about Anno
Domini 1222. 6 Hen. 3. This Marriage was concluded on, as a final Peace between
Lhewellin and Randle surnamed Blundevill, Earl of Chester. Knighton, page 2430.

Take here the Agreement about this Marriage, the original Deed whereof
remained in possession of Somerford Oldfield Esquire, at Somerford in Cheshire,
Anno Domini 1653. --

Haec est Conventio facta inter Dominum Ranulfum Comitem Cestriae and
Lincolniae, and Dominum Lhewellinum Principem Northwalliae; Quod Johannes do
Scotia, Nepos praedicti Comitis de Sorore sua primogenita, ducet in Uxorem
Helenam Filiam ipsius Lhewelini: ita quod dictus Lhewelinus dabit dicto Johanni
in libero Maritagio totum Manerium de Budeford in Warewica, and Manerium de
Suttehele in Comitatu Wigorniae cum omnibus pertinentiis, sicut Dominus
Johannes Rex ea illi dedit in libero Maritagio: Et totum Manerium de Welneton
in Comitatu Salopesburiae cum omnibus pertinentiis infra villam and extra.
Habendum dicto Johanni, and haeredibus suis ex dicta Helena provenientibus,
sicut idem Lhewelinus ea aliquo tempore melius and integrius tenuit. Et
praeterea dabit eidem Johanni mill marcas Argenti, etc. Testibus Domino
Reverendo Episcopo de Sancto Asaph, Domino H. Abbate Cestriae, Domino Hugone de
Lasci Comite Ultoniae, Philippo de Orreby tunc Justiciario Cestriae, H. de
Aldideley, Gualtero de Daivill, Ricardo Fitton, Edrevet Liagham, Edmundo Filio
Righerit, Goronon Filio Edrevet, Helin Idhit, Magistro Estruit, Magistro Ada,
Davide Clerico Lhewelini, Magistro H. and Clericis Domini Comitis Cestriae, and
multis aliis.

V. The Death of John Scot.
THis John Scot, Earl of Chester and Huntingdon, died without Issue, at the
Abbey of Dernhale in Cheshire, the seventh day of June, Anno Domini 1237. 21
Hen. 3. not without suspicion of being poisoned by the contrivance of Helene
his Wife, and was buried at Chester, having been Earl of Chester almost five
years: for Matthew Paris says, Anno 1237. 21 Hen. 3. Johannes Comes Cestriae,
Uxore sua Filia Leolini machinante, Potionatus diem clausit extremum circa
Pentecosten. With whom agrees Polychronicon, Walsingham, and Knighton, page
2431.

Helene, the Widow of this John, surnamed The Scot, did afterward Marry Robert
de Quincy, third Son of Saher de Quincy Earl of Winchester. See Vincent upon
Brook, page 260. Which Robert de Quincy died Anno Domini 1257. 41 Hen. 3. at
the Justs or Torneament at Blie. Matthew. Paris, put out by Wats 1640. page 942.
And I find that Saher de Quincy, Earl of Winchester, had two Sons called
Robert; Robert de Quincy, eldest Son, Married Hawise, fourth Sister and Coheir
to Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln, surnamed Blundevill, by whom he had a
Daughter called Margaret, Married to John Lacy, Constable of Cheshire and Baron
of Halton, and after Earl of Lincoln in his Wifes Right, as is before more
fully proved in the Issue of Hugh Cyveliok Earl of Chester. This Robert died in
the Lifetime of Saher his Father; which Saher died 1220. as Matthew Paris
records. Roger de Quincy, second Son of Saher, succeeded his Father in the
Earldom of Winchester; and this Robert, third Son of Saher, who Married the
Widow of John Scot.

VI. But this John the Scot having no Issue, King Henry the Third took the
Earldom of Chester into his own hands, and laid it to the Demaine of his Crown;
and gave unto the Sisters of John the Scot other Lands, unwilling that so great
an Inheritance as the Earldom of Chester was, should be divided (as the King
himself said) among Distaffs, Cambden's Britannia Printed 1607. page 464.

Now the Sisters were these; Margaret the eldest, was the second Wife of Alan
de Galloway, Constable of Scotland, of whom he begot Derbergoille, Married to
John Baliol of Bernards-Castle in the Bishopric of Durham, Founder of Baliol
College in Oxford, and died 1269. and was Father to John Baliol, sometime King
of Scotland, in the Reign of Edward the First, King of England. Isabel, second
Sister to John the Scot, Married Robert de Bruis. Maud, the third Sister, died
without Issue: and Alda or Ada, the fourth Sister, Married Henry Hastings.
Knighton, page 2431.

But the first Wife of Alan de Galloway aforesaid, was the Daughter of Hugh
Lacy of Ireland, by whom he had Issue three Daughters; Helen Married Roger de
Quincy Earl of Winchester, in whose Right he was afterward Constable of
Scotland, but had no Issue Male, only three Daughters; Christian, second
Daughter of Alan de Galloway by his first Wife, Married William de Fortibus
Earl of Albemarle; and Mary, third Daughter, died without Issue. Cambden's
Britannia Printed 1607* page 693. Matthew Paris, put out by Wats 1764. page
430. where also it appears, that in Anno 1236. Alan had a Brother named Thomas,
and also a Bastard Son called Thomas, who by the assistance of their great
Allies sought by force to possess themselves of Galloway in Scotland, which the
King of Scotland had distributed to the three Daughters and Heirs of Alan; but
these Rebels were beaten and dispersed by the King of Scotland, Anno 1236.

But to return to our Earls of Chester. The Line of the ancient Earls of
Chester now failing, this Earldom was by King Henry the Third taken into his
own hands, Anno Domini 1237. 21 Hen. 3. It remains that I now show the Earls of
Chester of the Royal Blood since this time, which in the next Chapter I shall
briefly reckon up.

And observe, that the County of Flint appertains to the Dignity of the Sword
of the Earls of Chester; and that the County Palatine of Chester is still
preserved in the Crown, as a County Palatine, if there be no Creation of the
Prince into the Title of Earl of Chester. If the King's eldest Son be created
Prince of Wales, then usually is the Title of Earl of Chester also conferred
with it; but upon the death of every Prince so created, these Titles are
preserved in the Crown till a new Creation.

These Notes following I had from Mr. Dugdale.
HElen, the Widow of John the Scot, held these Lands following, till a Dower
was assigned out, viz. Fotheringhay and Jarwell in Northamptonshire; Keweston,
in Bedfordshire; Totnam in Middlesex; Bramton, Conington, and Limpays, in
Huntingtonshire; Bado in Essex; and Exton in Rutlandshire Claus. 22 Hen. 3.
memb. 20.

The Sisters of John Scot had these Lands following.
Devergoil, Daughter of Margaret, eldest Sister of John, had the Manors of
Luddington and Torksey in Lincolnshire, with the Farm of Yarmouth in Norfolk.
Tower of London Pat. 22 Hen. 3. memb. 11.

Isabel had Writtell and Hathfield in Essex. Maude, the third Sister, died
without issue. Pat. 22 Hen. 3. mem. 4.

Ada, the fourth Sister, had Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, Bolsover in
Derbyshire, the Manor and Castle, Oswaldesbeck in Nottinghamshire. See Stat.
32 H 8. cap. 29.
the Manor and Sok of Maunsfield in Nottinghamshire, and Oswardbeck Wapentake;
and Wurfield, Stratton, and Cundover in Shropshire; Wigginton and Wolverhampton
in Staffordshire. Pat. 22 Hen. 3. memb. 4. Claus. 22 Hen. 3. mem. 12.

After this, to wit 31 Hen. 3. the Earldom of Chester, with the Castles of
Gannok and Disart Disart Castle is in Denhighshire.
, in the Borders of Wales, were annexed to the Crown for ever. Pat. 31 Hen. 3.
mem. 7.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Titles of Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, since they were invested
in the Crown of England, and who have been so created, with the time of their
Creation.

I. KIng Henry the Third brought Lhewellin, Prince of North Wales, into
Subjection, and made Peace with Lhewellin, Anno Domini 1228. 12 Hen. 3. upon
Condition that Lhewellin and his Successors should be called Princes, and do
Homage to the Kings of England: Whereupon King Henry received from him three
thousand Marks. Knighton, page 2436. And then King Henry made a Charter to
Lhewellin, which was confirmed by the Pope.

Anno 25 Hen. 3. 1241. David the Son of Lhewellin obliges himself to King
Henry, to hold all his Lands in Capite of the King, and to free his elder
Brother Griffith Stowe says Griffith was a Bastard Son of Lhewellin, page 185.
, and Owen the eldest Son of Griffith, out of Prison, whom he had unjustly
detained; and that the Land of Englesmere should remain to King Henry and his
Heirs. Mat. Paris, put out by Wats, page 625 and yet did this David acknowledge
to hold his Lands in Wales of the Pope, endeavoring to shake off the Yoke of
his Fealty to the Kings of England: and Griffith promised by Sureties, if he
obtained his portion of the Lands due unto him, to pay 300 Marks yearly to King
Henry and to his Heirs for ever.

Now David rebelled, and after much perplexity and destruction of his Lands in
Wales by King Henry, he died Anno 1246.

King Henry the Third, Anno Domini 1254. 38 Hen. 3. gave Wales to his eldest
Son Prince Edward, by the Name of -- una cum Conquestu nostro Walliae; as also
Gascony, Ireland, and some other Territories recited in the Charter: This was
upon the Marriage of Prince Edward with Elinour, Sister to Alphonso King of
Spain: Yet (says Seldom) notwithstanding the Grant of Wales, I find no warrant
that therefore the special Title of Prince of Wales, as it belongs to the Son
and Heir Apparent, began in this Prince Edward. Selden's Tit. Hon. page 594.
Matthew Westminster, sub Anno 1254. Also Matthew Paris, put out by Wats 1640.
page 890. Nor were the ancient Princes of Wales of the British Blood at this
time quite extinct: for Wales was not absolutely subdued till this Prince
Edward was King of England; Scilicet 1283. 11 Edw. 1. So Stowe. Neither did
this Edward, whiles he was Prince, ever assume the Title of Prince of Wales, as
far forth as I can find.

And for the Earldom of Chester, Cambden says it was given by Henry the Third
to this Prince Edward, who, being taken Prisoner by the Barons, surrendered it
up to Simon de Monifort Earl of Leycester, that he the Prince might be
redeemed; Sed Simone statim interfecto, ad Regiam Familiam cito rediit.
Cambden's Britannia, Tit. Cheshire, ad finem.

And indeed by the Charter of Maxfield, Dated 45 Hen. 3. 1261. This Prince
Edward seems to be possessed of the County of Chester. Howbeit, in this
Charter, and all others that I have seen, he uses only the Title of --
Edwardus illustris Regis Angliae Primogenitus, and not at all the Title of
Comes Cestriae,

The Charter made to Simon de Montfort of the Earldom of Chester, bears Date 24
die Decembris, 49 Hen. 3. 1264. at Woodstock. Vincent upon Brook, page 108.
whereunto the King was forced to make his Peace: for both the King, and Prince
Edward his Son, were then Prisoners to Simon, taken at the Battle of Lewis in
Sussex, 12 die Maii, 48 Hen. 3. 1264. See Stowe. Yet Simon enjoyed it but a
little space; for he was slain at the Battle of Evesham, the fourth day of
August, 49 Hen. 3. 1265. and then all Montfort's Estate was forfeited by his
Rebellion; and so the Earldom of Chester reverted back to Henry the Third: And
I have seen the Copy of the Deed whereby Prince Edward confirms to the Barons
of Cheshire, all the Liberties which Randle, sometime Earl of Chester, had
formerly granted unto them by his Charter; and in this he is only styled --
Edwardus illustris Regis Angliae Primogenitus, Dated 27 die Augusti, 49 Hen. 3.
which is but 23 Days after the Battle of Evesham: so that the Prince soon had
the Earldom again; but I find not that he ever used the Title of Earl of
Chester.

II. A Catalogue of all such Princes of England, as have been created Princes
of Wales and Earls of Chester, and used these Titles.
1. EDward of Caernarven, fourth Son of King Edward the First, born at
Caernarven in Wales, the twenly fifth of April 1284. was Summoned to the
Parliament, Anno 1303. 32 Edw. 1. being now the King's eldest Son living,
Edward Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, Our most dear Son. Selden's Tit.
Hon. page 594. and was afterward King of England, by the Name of King Edward
the Second.

2. Edward of Windsor, eldest Son of King Edward the Second, born at Windsor
Castle, 13 die Novembris 1312. 6 Edw. 2. had only the Title of Earl of Chester
and Flint in his Summons to the Parliament, 1322. 15 Edw. 2. being then scarce
ten years old. Cambden's Britannia, Edita 1607. page 118. He was also Duke of
Aquitain, and Earl of Pontive, created 19 Edw. 2. 1325. Selden's Tit. Hon. page
599. and Stowe; and was (after he had deposed his Father) King of England, by
the Name of King Edward the Third; Crowned February 1. 1326.

3. Edward of Woodstock, commonly called The Black Prince, eldest Son of King
Edward the Third, born 15 Junii, 1330. 4 Edw. 3. was made Earl of Chester 7
Edw. 3. Edwardus illustris Regis Angliae Filius, Comes Cestriae, in a Writ at
Chester, Dated 13 die Aprilis. 9 Edw. 3. 1335. R. number. 18.

He was created Duke of Cornwall by Patent, Dated 17 die Martii, 11 Edw. 3.
1336. Habendum sibi, and haeredum suorum Regum Angliae Filiis Primogenitis: Per
ipsum Regem, and totum Consilium in Parliamento. Selden's Tit. Hon. page 752.
And he was the first Duke in England, as that Title was now made a distinct
Dignity; and by this Creation, not only the firstborn Son of the Kings of
England, but the eldest living, are always Dukes of Cornwall, neither needed
any new Creation of this Title, although sometimes we find it joined with the
Creation of the Title of Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester. Selden's Tit.
Hon. qag. 754.

He was also created Prince of Wales by Patent, Dated 12 die Maii, 17 Edw. 3.
1343. Habendum sibi, and haeredibus suis Regibus Angliae in perpetuum: Per
ipsum Regem. Selden's Tit. Hon. page 595. And since this time the Title of Earl
of Chester has been usually joined with that of Prince of Wales in the Patent.
Seldom ibidem, page 598.

So that now the Black Prince was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester.

In the 40. of Edward the Third, his Style was -- Princeps Aquitaniae and
Walliae, Dux Cornubiae, and Comes Cestriae, Lib. C. fol. 181. w. He died June
8. 1376. 50 Ed. 3. in the Lifetime of his Father.

4. Richard of Bordeaux, Son and Heir to the Black Prince, was created Prince
of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, by his Grandfather King Edward
the Third, in Festo Sancti Michaelis, 1376. 50 Edw. 3. Stowe. But Walsingham
names only the Title of Earl of Chester in Parliament, 1376. page 190. Others
say he was after created Prince of Wales at Haveringe, 20 Novembris, 50 Edw. 3.
Powel on the Welsh History, page 385. He had a special Charter for Duke of
Cornwall, Anno 50 Edw. 3. Cooks Reports, lib. 8. fol. 30. for he was not eldest
Son of the King, his Father dying before he enjoyed the Crown. This Richard was
afterward King of England, by the Name of King Richard the Second. And in Anno
1397. he erected the Earldom of Chester into a Principality, and ordained that
no Grant should be made thereof to any Person but to the King's eldest Son
only, if it please the King to make him. See Stat. 21 Rich. 2. cap. 9. But
this Parliament was wholly Repealed, 1 Hen. 4. cap. 3. which Henry deposed
Richard the Second, and made himself King, 1399.

5. Henry, eldest Son of Henry the Fourth, born at Monmouth Anno 1388. was
created Prince of Wales, Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, about October 1 Hen. 4.
1399. in Parliament; and not long after was created Duke of Aquitain in the
same Parliament, Stowe; and was afterward King of England, by the Name of King
Henry the Fifth. F. number. 99.

6. Edward, only Child of King Henry the Sixth, born at Westminster, 13
Octobris 1452. 31 Hen. 6. Fabian, page 456. He was created Prince of Wales and
Earl of Chester in Parliament, March 15. 31 Hen. 6. 1452. and was murdered at
the Battle of Teuksbery, May 4. 1471. 11 Edw. 4. See Vincent upon Brook, page
143, He was also Duke of Cornwall by Descent.

King Henry the Sixth was never created Prince of Wales, nor Earl of Chester;
he was King whiles he was but an Infant of eight Months old.

7. Edward, eldest Son of King Edward the Fourth, born at Westminster November
4. 1470. 10 Edw. 4. was created Prince of Wales, Chester, July 26. 1471. 11
Edw. 4. Vincent upon Brook, page 115. and in Anno 19 Edw. 4. He was made Earl
of Pembroke and March. He was also Duke of Cornwall, and so Entitled; and was
afterward King Edward the Fifth, but was most barbarously murdered in the
Tower by the procurement of his Uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, Anno 1483. who
usurped the Crown to himself.

8. Edward, the only Child of King Richard the Third, created Earl of
Salisbury, 1477. 17 Edw. 4. was also created Prince of Wales and Earl of
Chester, by his Father, August 24. 1483. 1 Rich. 3. being then about ten years
old, March 1484. in the Lifetime of his Father.

9. Arthur, eldest Son of King Henry the Seventh, created Prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester, November 30. in 1489. 5 Hen. 7. and died without Issue at
Ludlow, in April 1502. 17 Hen. 7. about the Age of sixteen Years, in the
Lifetime of his Father. He was also Duke of Cornwall by Birth.

10. Henry Duke of York, second Son of King Henry the Seventh, after the Death
of his Brother Arthur, was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester,
February 18. 1502. 18 Hen. 7. at the Age of eleven Years; England by the Name
of King Henry the Eighth.

11. Henry Stewart, eldest Son of James King of Great Britain, was created
Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, June 4. 1610. 8 Jacobi, and died November
6. 1612. 10 Jacobi, without Issue, in the Lifetime of King James his Father.
He was also Duke of Cornwall by Birth.

12. Charles Stewart, second Son of King James, born at Dunferling in Scotland,
Nov. 19 1600. was Duke of Albany in Scotland; and was also created Duke of York
in England by his Father, at Whitehall in London, January 6. 1604. and after
the Death of his Brother Prince Henry he was Duke of Cornwall: for the Case of
the Duchy of Cornwall (in Cook's Reports, lib. 8.) was Printed by his
Majesty's special Command, 1613. 11 Jacobi where it is set forth, That by the
Advice of the Privy Council it was clearly and absolutely Resolved, that Prince
Charles (now the King's eldest Son) was in Right, and by virtue of the Statute
of 11 Edw. 3. ought to be Duke of Cornwall; and therefore his Majesty commanded
that Prince Charles his Son should have and enjoy the Honor and Style of Duke
of Cornwall; which he presently had and enjoyed accordingly. Vincent upon
Brook, page 146, 147. And on the third of November, 1616. 14 Jacobi, he was
also created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester; England, by the Name of King
Charles the First.

A summary Collection of the Earls of Chester contained in this second Part.
1. GHerbod, a Nobleman of Flanders, had the Earldom of Chester given him by
the Conqueror about the Year of Christ 1068. but going into Flanders, was there
taken Prisoner. And then did William the Conqueror give the Earldom of Chester
to Hugh, surnamed Lupus, Anno Domini 1070. 2. Hugh, surnamed Lupus, Earl of
Auranches in Normandy, was made Earl of Chester, Anno 1070. He died July 27.
1101. after he had held the Earldom of Chester 31 Years. 3. Richard, the only
Child of Hugh Lupus by his Wife, was but seven Years old when his Father died.
He was drowned with many others, as he was Sailing from Normandy toward
England, Anno 1120. after he had been Earl 18 Years; but had no Issue. 4.
Randle de Mecinis, or Meschines, Son of Maud, Sister to Hugh Lupus, succeeded
Earl of Chester, as Cousin and next Heir to Richard: And he died Anno 1128.
having been Earl eight Years. 5. Randle the Second, surnamed Gernouns, Son of
Randle de Meschines, succeeded his Father. He died Anno Domini 1153, having
been Earl 25 Years. 6. Hugh the Second, surnamed Cyveliok, Son of Randle the
Second, succeeded his Father: And he died Anno Domini 1181. having been Earl 28
Years. 7. Randle the Third, surnamed Blundevill, Son of Hugh the Second,
succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Chester. He was also made Earl of
Lincoln 1217. and died at Wallingford in the latter end of October, Anno Domini
1232. without Issue, and was Earl of Chester 51 Years. 8. John, surnamed The
Scot, Earl of Huntingdon, Son of Maud, eldest Sister and Coheir to Randle the
Third, surnamed Blundevill, succeeded Earl of Chester, and died at Dernhale
Abbey without Issue, June 7. 1237. having been Earl of Chester almost five
Years: from which time this Earldom was seized to the Crown of England.
Finis Partis Secundae.
The Third Part,
Treating of the ancient Barons to the Earls of Chester, with several
Catalogues of all the Bishops, Deans, Chamberlains, Judges, Sheriffs, and
Escheators of Cheshire, and also of the Recorders of the City of Chester.

CHAP. I.
Of the ancient Barons to the Earls of Chester.

I. COncerning the ancient Barons to the Earls of Chester, of whom I promised
before to speak in this third Part of my Book, these things I have principally
to Discuss and Illustrate; the true notion of their Title, the time of their
Institution, their Office, Place, and number.

II. For the true notion of their Title, Seldom tells us in his Titles of
Honor, page 688. that the noblest and greatest Tenants to the greater sort of
Subjects, had anciently the Appellation of Barons ascribed to them, especially
those to the Earls of Chester.

Spelman in his Glossary deriveth the word Baro from the old English-Saxon Per
or Were, and of later Times written Par; Francis Antiquis, Ber, signifying the
same with the Latin word Vir; Glossarium Latino-Gallicum, Ber, Bara, Vir; so
that the Latin word Vir seems to be the original Fountain whence it springs.
And both these words Baro, by some written Varo, and Vir, do agree in their
several significations; sometimes for a Man barely and absolutely; sometimes
for a Man of Worth, Power, or Prowess; sometimes for a Husband.

For the notion of the word here, it denotes as much as Magnates or Optimates:
where we may observe, That Noblemen, or Barons, seem to be a necessary
Supplement, as essential to the Royalty of a Count Palatine: for the Earl of
Chester having Royal Authority within himself, we may not unfitly style him a
petty King: And that the Majesty of his Palace may be answerable to a King, he
must have Noblemen about him, in imitation of the Barons of the Kingdom. Hence
also the Earls of Chester subtuted Offices, making the Baron of Halton
Constable in Cheshire in Fee, in imitation of the Lord High-Constable of
England; and making the Baron of Montalt Steward of Cheshire in Fee, after the
example of the Lord High-Steward of England. These Barons under the Earl Ruled
and Governed the County; and from their great Power and Sway, had the
Appellation of Barons.

III. As to the time of their first Institution, I find the Great Men of
Cheshire about the Earl, styled Barons in the time of Hugh Lupus: In the
Charter of his Foundation of the Monastery of St. Werburge in Chester, Anno
1093. 6 Willielmi Rufi, in the conclusion thereof it is said, -- Ego Comes Hugo
and mei Barons confirmavimus ista omnia coram Anselmo Archiepiscopo, etc.
Neither must we fondly imagine or expect any formal Creation of them, either by
Patent (for such are of later Times by much,) or any solemn Investure. But (as
I conceive) upon the conferring of the Earldom of Chester on Hugh Lupus by the
Conqueror, Anno Domini 1070. the principal Gentlemen and Commanders under Earl
Hugh, being called to advise and assist the said Earl (either in any time of
imminent danger, or in regulating and ordering the more weighty Affairs of the
County) were of course so styled: and thus I conceive they retained the Name of
Barons by little and little, after the manner of the Great Nobles of the Realm.

IV. And hence may we guess their Office, Adesse Comiti in Concilio, as
Cambden has it, to assist the Earl in Council upon all grand Designs and
Affairs.

V. Concerning their Place of Precedence and Dignity, we must consider them
either in relation to others, or among themselves.

In relation to others out of the County, I conceive them inferior to the rank
of the Barons of our Realm; for these are but titularly or analogically Barons
(as I may so speak) to those of the Kingdom; nay, in Place beneath all Knights:
but they were the greatest Men in the County under the Earl for Power and
Estate.

Their Priority or Dignity among themselves we shall trace as exactly as we
can, in so remote and obscure a Path. Some would have the Baron of Malpas to be
the prime Baron, forasmuch as Robert Fitzhugh (who was Baron of Malpas under
Hugh Lupus in the Conqueror's time) has for the most part the preeminence in
the Subscription of old Charts of those ancient Times, as also in the Record of
Doomsday Book, where among all the rest of the Barons he is put down first
next after the Earl; and by which it appears also that he held more Land in
this County than any one of the rest, except William Malbedenge. But this
Difficulty is easily removed, if we consider the uncertainty of Subscription of
Witnesses; but especially admitting him to be the prime Baron, till certain
Offices were annexed to other Barons: After which time the matter is without
controversy; for William Fitz-Nigell, Baron of Halton, being made Constable of
Cheshire in Fee, carries it clear by his Office annexed to his Barony. And for
further satisfaction take this Charter, remaining in one of the Couchir Books
in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's-Inne, London; Scilicet Tom. 1. Comitatus
Cestriae, number. 2. fol. 41. which Deed was made in the Reign of King Stephen by
Randle the Second, surnamed Gernouns, to Eustace Fitz-John, who Married the
elder Daughter and Coheir to William Fitz-Nigell: for William the younger died
without Issue.

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae, Episcopo Cestriae, Dapifero, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Castellanis, Vice-comitibus, Ministris and Ballivis, and omnibus hominibus suis
Francis and Anglis, Clericis and Laicis, Salutem. Proculdubio Scitote me
reddidisse and dedisse Eustachio Filio Johannis totum honorem qui fuit
Willielmi Filii Nigelli Constabularii Cestriae, in rebus and dignitatibus
omnibus: Et ipsum Eustachium constituisse haereditarie Constabularium, and
Supremum Consiliarium post me super omnes Optimates and Barons totius terrae
meae: Ea propter volo and firmiter praecipio, de sicut ei rectum suum reddidi
and donavi, and concessi Constabulariam and honorem integrum Constabulariae
Cestriae and totius terrae meae; quod in omnibus rationabiliter ei intendatis
sicut Corpori meo: Proinde Praecipio, quod ipse Eustachius and haeredes sui de
me and de haeredibus meis praedictum honorem and terram, and tenuram totam
pertinentem eidem honori scilicet Constabulariae, teneat ita been and
honorifice, and libere and quiet, sicut unquam Willielmus Nigelli Filius
melius and liberius tenuit, and sicut Willielmus Constabularius ejus Filius in
vita sua honorabilius tenuit, and die qua fuit vivus and mortuus: Teneat etiam
ita libere and quiet, sicut unquam Willelmus Filius Nigelli tenebat in tempore
Comitis Hugonis, and Comitis Ricardi, and tempore Patris mei Ranulfi, in villa
and extra, in foro and mercato, in bosco and plano, in pratis and pascuis, in
viis and Semitis, in Forestis, in molendinis and aquis, in Piscariis and
Stagnis, and in omnibus aliis locis, cum Socca and Sacca, and Tol and Theme,
Infangetheof, and cum Sciris and Hundredis, and cum omnibus consuetudinibus,
and libertatibus omnibus and quietantiis. Testibus Willielmo Comite Lincolniae,
and Willielmo de Percei, and Turstano Banester, and Simone Filio Willielmi, and
Normanno de Verdon, and Ricardo Pincerna, and Roberto Basset, and Simone de
Tuschet, and Gaufrido Dispensatore, and Ivone Constabulario de Coventria,
Ricardo de Vernon, Walchelino Mamicoc, Hugone de Nueris, Rogero de Maletoc, and
VVillielmo Malebenge, Hugone de Sancto Paulo, and VVillielmo de Vecy, and
Huberto de Muntehan, and Rogero Flamiagvill, and VVillielmo Filio Guerii,
Reginaldo Basset, and VVillielmo Capellano and Herveo Filio VVillielmi, and
VVillielmo Capellano Comitis Cestriae, and Rogero Filio Ricardi, and Gisleberto
de Aquila. Apud Coventriam.

By this Charter you find first the words Optimates and Barons explaining and
expounding one another. Next you have the Pre-eminence given to the Constable
of Cheshire (who was the Baron of Halton) above all the other Barons of the
Earl: and this appears also in the form of all the Charters made by the Earls
of Chester in those ancient Times, where the Style runs -- Ranulfus Comes
Cestriae Constabulario, Dapifero, Baronibus, etc. Salutem: where the Constable
is first named, then the Steward, then the Barons in general; only in this
Chart abovesaid the Constable is omitted, in regard he was Party to the Deed,
and in whose room it is directed to the Bishop; But Dapifero follows in his
proper place: So that the Constable had the first place, the Steward next after
him, and then the other Barons followed in their order. And in this order they
are ranked by Cambden and Spelman: 1. Baro de Halton. He was High-Constable of
Cheshire in Fee. 2. Baro de Monte alto. He was High-Steward of Cheshire in Fee.
3. Baro de VVich-Maldebeng (id est) Nant-wich. 4. Baro de Malpas. 5. Baro de
Shibbroke. 6. Baro de Dunham-Massie. 7. Baro de Kinderton. 8. Baro de Stockport.


According to this order I think little scruple can be made, unless it be for
the Barony of Malpas, why he should not precede the Baron of VVich-Malbeng,
notwithstanding the Offices annexed to the two first Barons. Now the Issue of
Robert Fitzhugh failing (who was the first Baron of Malpas,) another came in
his room of as distinct a Stock and Lineage; but where or how to be placed, let
the more curious determine, I have here placed him next after the Baron of
VVich-Malbeng.

VI For the number of these Cheshire Barons, it is not yet sufficiently agreed.
Spelman in his Glossary on the word Baro, with its several Notions, says thus:
-- Ab Hugone Lupo institutos esse Barons certum est: Sed de numero non ita
convenit: Quidam XII asserunt, ipsumque Conquestorem Hugoni Persuasisse ut
pauciores non crearet; Pollicitus se largiturum eis idonea Patrimonia in
Anglia, si Comes hoc nequivit in sua Patria: Reperiuntur vero (de quibus
praecipue constat) octo tantum. Nam quos alii Suggerunt, suspecti habentur.

Nigellus -- Baro de Halton: [seu potius Willielmus Filius Nigelli.] Robert de
Monte alto was not Baron till the end of Hen. 1. or beginning of King Stephen;
but the rest, except Stockport, were Barons in the Conqueror's time, and so was
the Ancestor of this Robert.
Robertus -- Baro de Monte alto. Willielmus Malbeng -- Baro de VVich-Malbeng.
Ricardus Vernon -- Baro de Shibbroke. Robertus Filius Hugonis -- Baro de
Malpas. Hamo de Massy -- Baro de Dunham-Massy. Gislebertus de Venables -- Baro
de Kinderton. N. (...) Baro de Stockport.
But for the better clearing of this Point, it is certain that in the
Conquerour's time there were some other Barons and Men of eminency about the
Earl, than what are here reckoned up; but these are all, whose Heirs and
Posterity have been certainly known, and accounted Barons by long continuance
to the successive Earls of Chester: And of all these, their Names and Families
were long since extinct, except the Line of Gilbert Venables, whose Name and
Family continues at this day, and is yet commonly styled Baron of Kinderton;
all the rest, with their whole Possessions, are devolved to other Persons and
Families, by Marriage of their several Daughters and Heirs, and so became
extinct long time ago.

And if any ask me what other Barons were in the time of Hugh Lupus? I answer:
Robert of Rothelent was one of Earl Hugh's Barons, and not the meanest; for he
was the principal Commander of all the Forces in Cheshire, and the prime
Governor of the County under Earl Hugh his Cousin. Ordericus, page 670. But we
find no mention of his Posterity in succeeding Ages among us, and therefore not
reckoned as a Baron among those, whose Heirs and Posterity have by long
continuance obtained the Title and Honor, as it were hereditarily, under the
successive Earls: And the like perhaps may be said of some others.

Neither must I here forget a touch of Vincent (whose Corrections need a
Corrector) in his Review of York's second Edition, page 661, 662, where he
says, That he believes the Barons of Cheshire are not so ancient as the time
of Hugh Lupus. But whether he believe it or no, it is most certain they were
styled Barons in the Charter of Hugh Lupus, of the Foundation of the Monastery
of St. Werburge in Chester, Anno 1093. which Charter I have at large
transcribed above in the second Part of this Book.

VII. As to the Baron of Stockport, mentioned in the last place by Spelman, it
is much to be doubted whether he were any of the ancient Barons to the Earls of
Chester; howbeit his Arms are put up in the Exchequer at Chester among the
Barons: but all those Arms were but of late times put up there, and where the
Baron of Monte-alto is most unjustly placed above the Baron of Halton.

It is certain, that in Doomsday Book we find not any Person that held
Stockport; whereby it may seem then to be waste and not inhabited. And as
concerning Sir Richard de Stockport and his Family, we find little or no
mention before the Reign of Henry the Third, in which King's Reign the ancient
Earls of Chester were extinct: So that the Family of Stockport could be none of
the ancient Barons.

VIII. I shall conclude this Chapter with the Charter of Randle the Third,
surnamed Blundevill, Cheshire, made about the Year of Christ 1218. granting
them many Privileges, transcribed by me out of a little Parchment Book in
Quarto, remaining among the Records in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's-Inne,
London, Fol. 107.

RANULFUS Comes Cestriae, Constabulario, Dapifero, Justiciario, Vicecomiti,
Baronibus, Ballivis, and omnibus Hominibus suis and Amicis, praesentibus and
futuris, praesentem Chartam inspecturis and audituris, Salutem. Sciatis me
Cruce signatum pro amore Dei, and ad Petitionem Baronum meorum Cestershiriae,
concessisse eis and haeredibus suis, de me and haeredibus meis, omnes
libertates in praesenti Charta subscriptas in perpetuum tenendas and habendas:
Scilicet, quod unusquisque eorum Curiam suam habeat liberam de omnibus Placitis
and quaerelis in Curia mea motis, Exceptis Placitis ad Gladium meum
Pertinentibus: Et quod si quis hominum suorum pro aliquo delicto captus fuerit
per Dominium suum, sine redemptione replegietur: Ita quod Dominus suus eum
perducat ad tres Comitatus; and eum quietum reducat, nisi Sacraber eum
Sequatur: Et si aliquis Adventitius (qui fidelis sit) in terras eorum venerit,
and ei placuerit ibidem morari, liceat Baroni ipsum habere and retinere, salvis
mihi Advocariis qui Sponte ad me venerint, and aliis qui pro Transgressu
aliunde ad Dognitatem meam venerint, and non eis: Et unusquisque Baronum, dum
opus fuerit, in Werra plenarie faciat Servitium tot Feodorum militum quot
tenet: Et eorum milites and libere tenentes loricas aut Haubergella habeant,
and Feoda sua per Corpora sua defendant, licet milites non sint: Et si aliquis
eorum talis sit, quod terram suam per Corpus suum defendere non possit, alium
sufficientem in loco suo ponere posset: Nec ego Nativos eorum ad arma jurare
faciam, sed Nativos suos qui per Ranulfum de Davenham ad advocationem meam
venerint, and alios Nativos suos (quos suos esse rationabiliter monstrare
poterant) ipsos quietos Concedo: Et si Vicecomes meus, aut aliquis Serviens, in
Curia mea aliquem Hominum suorum inculpaverit, Per Thiertnic se defendere
poterit propter Shirife-Tooth, quod reddunt nisi Secta eum sequatur: Concedo
etiam eis quietantiam de Garbis and Oblationibus, quas Servientes mei and
Bedelli exigere solebant: Et quod si aliquis Judex aut Sectarius Hundredi aut
Comitatus in Curia mea Misericordiam inciderit, per duos solidos quietus sit
Judex de Misericordia, and Sectarius per duodecem denarios: Concedo etiam eis
libertatem assertandi terras suas infra divisas Agriculturae suae in Foresta:
Et si Landa aut Terra infra divisas villae suae fuerit, quae prius culta fuit
ubi nemus non crescat, Liceat eis illam colere sine herbergatione: Et liceat
eis Housbote and Haybote in nemore suo Capere de omni genere Bosci sine visu
Forestarii: Et mortuum suum Boscum dare aut vendere cui voluerint: Et Homines
eorum non implacitentur de Foresta de superdicto, nisi cum manuopere
inveniantur: Et unusquisque omnia Maneria sua Dominica in Comitatu and
Hundredo, per unum Seneschallum praesentem defendere possit: Concedo etiam quod
mortuo viro Uxor sua per quadraginta dies pacem habeat in Domo sua, and haeres
suus (si aetatem habuerit) per rationabile relevium haereditatem suam habeat;
scilicet feodum militis per centum solidos; neque Domina, neque Haeres
maritetur, ubi disparagetur; sed per gratum and assensum Generis sui maritetur:
Et eorum Legata teneantur: Et nullus eorum nativum suum amittat occasion si in
Civitate Cestriae venerit, nisi ibi manserit per unum annum and unum diem sine
Calumnia: Et propter grave Servitium quod in Cestershiria faciunt, nullus eorum
extra Limam Servitium mihi faciat nisi per Gratum suum and ad Custum meum. Et
si milites mei de Anglia Summoniti fuerint, qui mihi Wardam apud Cestriam
debent, and venti sunt ad Wardam suam faciendam, and exercitus aliunde
inimicorum meorum non sit in praesenti, nec opus fuerit, been liceat Baronibus
meis interim ad Domos suas redire and requiescere: Et si exercitus inimicorum
meorum promptus fuerit de veniendo in Terram meam in Cestershire, vel si
Castellum assessum fuerit, praedicti Barons cum toto exercitu suo avisu suo
statim ad Summonitionem meam venient ad removendum exercitum illum ad posse
suum: Et cum exercitus ille de Terra mea recessus fuerit, praedicti Barons cum
exercitu suo ad Terras suas redire poterint and quiescere, dum milites de
Anglia VVardam suam facient, and ad opus de eis non fuerit, Salvis mihi
Servitiis suis quae facere debent. Concedo etiam eis, quod in tempore Pacis
tantum duodecem Servientes itinerantes habeant in terra mea cum uno equo qui
sit Magistri Servientis, qui etiam Prebendam non habeat a Pascha usque ad
Festum Sancti Michaelis, nisi per gratum: Et ut ipsi Servientes Comedant Cibum,
qualem in Domibus Hominum invenerint, sine emptione alterius Cibi ad opus
eorum: nec in aliquibus Dominicis Baronum Comedant: Et tempore Guerrae per
Consilium meum, aut Justiciarii mei, and ipsorum, Ponantur Servientes
sufficientes ad terram meam Custodiendam, prout opus fuerit: Et sciendum est,
quod praedicti Barons Petitiones Subscriptas, quas a me requirebant, omnino
mihi and haeredibus meis de se and haeredibus suis remiserunt: ita quod nihil
de eis de caetero clamare poterint, nisi per Gratiam and Misericordiam meam:
Scilicet Seneschallus Petitionem de Wrec and de Pisce in terram suam per mare
dejecto: and de Bersare in Foresta mea ad tres Arcus; and de percursu Canium
suorum: Et alii Petitionem de Agistamento Porcorum in Foresta mea, and de
Bershare ad tres Arcus in Foresta mea, vel ad cursus Leporariorum suorum in
Foresta in eundo versus Cestriam per Summonitionem, vel in redeundo: and
Petitionem de Misericordia Judicum de Which triginta Bullionibus Salis: sed
erunt Misericordia and Leges in Which tales, quales prius fuerint. Concedo
igitur, and praesenti Charta mea confirmo de me and haeredibus meis, Communibus
Militibus omnibus and libere Tenentibus totius Cestershire and eorum
haeredibus, omnes praedictas libertates habendas and tenendas de Baronibus meis
and de caeteris Dominis suis, quicunque sint, sicut ipsi Barons and Milites
and caeteri libere Tenentes eas de me tenent. Hiis Testibus, Hugone, Abbate
Sanctae Werburgae Cestriae, Philippo Orreby tunc temporis Justiciario Cestriae,
Henrico de Aldithley, Waltero Deyvell, Hugone Dispensario, Thoma Dispensario,
Willielmo Pincerna, Waltero de Coventrey, Ricardo Phitton, Roberto de Cowdrey,
Ivone de Caletoft, Roberto de Say, Normanno le Painter, Roberto Dispensario,
Roberto Deyvell, Mattheo de Vernon, Hamone de Venables, Roberto de Massy, Alano
de Waley, Hugone de Columbe, Roberto de Pulford, Petro Clerico, Hugone de
Pasey, Joceralino de Hellesby, Ricardo de Bresby, Ricardo de Kingsley, Philippo
de Terven, Liulfo de Twamlowe, Ricardo de Perpoint, and toto Comitatu Cestriae.

This Charter I have here, for the satifaction of some, translated also into
English, as follows, with the exposition of the hardest words.

RANDLE Earl of Chester, To his Constable, Steward, Judge, Sheriff, Barons,
Bailiffs, and to all his Tenants and Friends, present and to come, that shall
see or hear this Charter, Sends Greeting. Know ye, that I being Signed with
the Cross Those were said to be Signed with the Cross in these Ages, who had
undertaken a Voyage to Jerusalem in defense of the Holy Land; and as a Badge of
their Warfare they wore a Cross on their right Shoulder. So Spelman.
for the love of God, and at the Request of my Barons of Cheshire, have granted
to them and their Heirs, from me and my Heirs, all the Liberties in this
present Charter underwritten, to have and to hold for ever: to wit, That every
one of them may have his own Court free from all Pleas and Plaints moved in my
Court, except such Pleas as belong to my Sword The Pleas of the Sword were the
Pleas of the Dignity of the Earl of Chester, who held that Earldom as freely to
the Sword, as the King held England to the Crown.
: And if any of their Tenants shall be taken for any Offense within their Fee
or Lordship, he shall be Replevied without any Ransom, so as his Lord bring him
to three County Courts; and then he may carry him back as acquit, unless
Sakerboth, Sakber, and Sacraber, is as much as a Pledge to Sue: one that puts
in Surety to Prosecute another. Spelman.
Sakerborh do follow him. And if any Stranger (who is faithful) shall come upon
their Land, and desires to dwell there, it shall be lawful for the Baron of
that Fee to have and retain him, saving to me the Advowries who shall come to
me on their own accord, and others who for any Trespass elsewhere shall come
unto my Dignity, and not to them. And every one of my Barons, when need
requires, shall in time of War do the full Service of so many Knights Fees as
he holds: And their Knights and Freeholders shall have their Coats of Mayle
and Haubergeons; and may defend their own Land by their Bodies, although they
be not Knights: And if any of them be such a one, that he cannot defend his own
Land by his Body, he may put another sufficient Person in his Place: Neither
will I compel their Villanes to take Arms; but I do hereby acquit their
Villanes, which by Randle of Davenham shall come to my Protection, and other
their Villanes, whom they can reasonably show to be their own. And if my
Sheriff, or any Officer, shall Implead any of their Tenants in my Court, he may
defend himself by Thirtnic Thiertnic, or Thirdnicht, is Trium Noctium hospes.
Hoveden, page 606. Here it seems to signify three Nights Charges for the
Sheriffs-Tooth. Sheriffs-Tooth was a common Tax Levied for the Sheriffs Diet.
for the Sheriffs-Tooth, which they do pay, unless fresh Suit do follow him. I
do also grant unto them acquittance from the Corn and Oblations, which my
Sergeants and Bedells were wont to require; and that if any Judger It is in the
Deed Judex, which is sometimes taken for a Judge, sometimes for a Jury-man or
Freeholder; which Freeholders are by Law the Judges of a Court Baron.
, or Suitor of the Hundred or County Court, shall be Amerced in my Court, the
Judger shall be quit from his Amercement for Two shillings, and the Suitor for
Twelve pence. I do also grant unto them liberty of Enclosing their Lands within
the Boundaries of their Tillage in the Forest: And if there shall be a Land or
parcel of Ground within the Boundary of their Township, which has been
formerly Manured, where no Wood grows, it shall be lawful to Till the same
without Graizing: And they may also take Housebote and Haybote in their VVoods,
of all manner of VVood, without the view of my Forester; and may give or sell
their dead VVood to whom they please, and their Tenants shall not be Impleaded
for the same in the Forest Court, unless they be found in the manner or very
act. And every one of my Barons may defend all his Manors and Lordships in the
County or Hundred Court, by having a Steward present. I do also grant, That the
Wife, upon the Death of her Husband, shall remain peaceably in her House forty
Days: And the Heir (if he be at Age) shall have his Heritage for reasonable
Relief, to wit, Five Pounds for a Knights Fee: Nor shall the VVidow, nor the
Heir, be Married where they may be disparaged, but shall be Married by the free
assent of their Kindred. None of them shall lose his Villane by reason of his
coming into the City of Chester, unless the same has remained there a Year and
a Day without claim. And in regard of the great Service which my Barons do me
in Cheshire, none of them shall do me Service beyond the Lime That is, out of
the Limits of the County, as I conceive, Lima being an old word for Limes.
, but at their own free will, and at my Cost. And if my Knights from England
shall be Summoned, which ought to Ward at Chester, and are come to keep their
Ward, and that there be no Army of my Enemies at present from some other
Place, and that there be no need, then my Barons may in the mean time return
unto their own Houses, and take their ease: And if an Army of my Enemies be
ready to come into my Land in Cheshire, or if the Castle be Besieged, the
aforesaid Barons, upon my Summons, shall immediately come with all their Army,
to remove the Enemy according to their Power: And when that Army of the Enemy
shall retreat out of my Land, the said Barons may return to their own Homes and
Rest, while my Knights from England keep the Guard, and that there shall be no
need of my Barons, saving unto me the Services which the Barons ought to do. I
do also grant unto them, that in time of Peace they may have only twelve
Sergeants itinerant in my Land, with one Horse of the Master Sergeant, which
shall have no Provend from Easter to Michaelmas, but by courtesy: And that the
Sergeants eat such Meat as they shall find in Men's Houses, without buying any
other Provision for their use: Nor shall they eat in any Mannor-Houses of the
Barons. And in the time of War shall be appointed Sergeants sufficient for the
keeping of my Land, by my Advice, and by the Advice of my Judge and Barons, as
need shall require. And you are to know, that my Barons aforesaid have for them
and their Heirs, released to me and my Heirs, the Petitions under written,
which they desired from me; so that they can challenge nothing hereafter of
them, but by my free Favor and Mercy:

To wit, my Steward has released his Petition of Wrec, and of Fish cast upon
his Land by the Sea, and liberty of shooting Deer in my Forest for three
Shoots The Deed runs thus, Et de Bershare in Foresta mea ad tres Arcus.
Birsare, i. e. Telo configere: a Germ. Birsen; So Spelman; To shoot an Arrow or
Dart,
, and for the running of his Dogs.

Others their Petition for Lay of their Swine in my Forest, and shooting at
Deer for three Shoots, and for running their Greyhounds in the Forest going to
Chester upon Summons, or in returning; and also the Petition of the Amercement
of the Judgers of the Which of thirty Walms of Salt: But the Amercements and
Laws of the Which shall be such as they were before.

I do therefore grant, and by this present Deed confirm, from me and my Heirs,
to all my common Knights and Gentlemen of Cheshire, and their Heirs, all the
aforesaid Liberties, to have and to hold of my Barons, and of other their
Lords, whosoever they be, as the same Barons and Knights, and other Gentlemen,
hold the same of me; These being Witnesses, Hugh, Abbot of St. Werburge of
Chester, Philip Orreby, then Judge of Chester, etc.

Prince Edward, Son of King Henry the Third, confirmed the aforesaid Liberties
in these words: --

EDWARDUS Illustris Regis Angliae Primogenitus, Omnibus -- Salutem. Sciatis,
quod concessum est, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, Baronibus, Militibus,
libere Tenentibus and aliis, ac toti Communitati Cestershiriae, quod ipsi in
perpetuum habeant and gaudeant omnibus Libertatibus and Consuetudinibus, eisdem
and Progenitoribus suis dudum concessis a Domino Ranulpho quondam Comite
Cestriae per Chartam suam, prout in eadem Charta before continetur.
Concessimus autem eisdem, quod si aliquis tenens Terram in Comitatu Cestriae de
quacunque Felonia convictus fuerit, ubicunque locorum fuerit, Dominus Feodi
Feodum suum habeat and recipiat post Annum and Diem sine contradictione
alicujus: Volumus etiam, quod Servitia (quae praedicti haeredes Cestershiriae
nobis ad opus and rogatum nostrum extra Comitatum praedictum fecerunt) in
posterum non trahentur in Consuetudinem. Et ut omnia haec rata and firma in
perpetuum remaneant, praesentibus Literis Sigillum nostrum duximus apponi.
Datum Cestriae 27 die Augusti, Anno Regni Domini Regis Patris nostri 49. 49
Hen. 3.


Which afterward he confirmed also when he was King, Dated March 30. 28 Ed. 1.
as appears by the Exemplifications of all these Charters in Rotulo
Recognitionum, 3 Edw. 4.

CHAP. II.
Of the Bishops of Chester.

I Find no mention of a Bishop at Chester before the Norman Conquest; only we
read that Dwina a Scotchman was made Bishop of Mercia by King Oswy, whereof
Cheshire was a small Parcel; and that he had his Seat at Lichfield, Anno
Christi 656. from which time there remained a Succession of Bishops in that
See, until by doom of Canon Law all Bishops were to remove to the greatest
Cities in their Diocese. Polychronicon, lib. 1. cap. 52. And thereupon Peter
Bishop of Lichfield, Anno Domini 1075. removed his Seat from Lichfield to
Chester, and was then commonly styled Bishop of Chester. But Robert de Limsey,
next Successor to Peter, leaving Chester, fixed his Seat at Coventrey, Anno
1095. which was brought back to Lichfield by Roger Clinton in the Reign of
Henry the First, but so as his Title was Bishop of Lichfield and Coventrey.
From which time downwards, the Bishops here were sometimes styled of Chester,
sometimes of Lichfield, and sometimes of Coventrey, from the Place where they
fixed their Residence, having then three Sees, one at Lichfield, another at
Coventrey, and a third at Chester, yet all one and the same Bishopric.

At last King Henry the Eighth made Chester an entire Episcopal Dignity, Anno
Regni sui 33. turning the Monastery of St. VVerburge in Chester, into the
Bishop's Palace: unto which Jurisdiction was allotted Cheshire, Lancashire,
Richmondshire, and part of Cumberland, and was appointed to be within the
Province of York. See Stat. 33 Hen. 8. cap. 31.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of Chester since 33 Hen. 8. 1541. which Bishopric
was erected upon the dissolution of the Abbeys.
JOhn Bird, Doctor of Divinity of the University of Oxford, having been
formerly a Friar of the Order of the Carmelites, was the first Bishop of this
new Foundation. He was born in Coventrey, and made Bishop of Bangor, Anno 1539.
thence translated to Chester 1541. 33 Hen. 8. He was preferred for some Sermons
Preached before the King against the Pope's Supremacy, Anno Christi 1537. He
was deprived of his Bishopric of Chester by Queen Mary, Anno 1554. because he
was Married, and died at Chester, Anno 1556.

George Cotes, one of the Prebends of Chester, sometime of Magdalen College in
Oxford, and afterward Master of Baliol College, made Bishop of Chester 1
Mariae 1554. He survived his Consecration not two Years. Some mistake this
Bishop's Name, calling him John for George: It plainly appears by the Register
Book of the Consistory Court at Chester, that his Name was George Cotes.

Cutbert Scot, Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Christchurch College in
Cambridge, made Bishop of Chester by Queen Mary, 1556. He was after put out by
Queen Elizabeth; a froward Person, who being put into the Prison of the Fleet
in London, made an escape, and fled to Lovain, where he died.

William Downeham, Chaplain to Queen Elizabeth before she came to the Crown,
Doctor of Divinity, and sometime of Magdalen College in Oxford, was
consecrated Bishop of Chester May 4. 1561. 3 Elizabethae. He died in November
1577. and was buried in the Quire of the Cathedral Church at Chester, having
sat Bishop there sixteen years and a half. He had two famous Sons, George,
Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland, and John, Batchelour of Divinity, a Learned
and painful Writer.

V. William Chaderton, Doctor of Divinity, Fellow of Christ's College in
Cambridge, and after President of Queens College in Cambridge, Chester 9
Novembris, 1579. thence translated to Lincoln 1595. He was Bishop of Chester
sixteen years; and had only one Daughter and Heir, called Jone, the first Wife
of Sir Richard Brook of Norton in Cheshire; but these after parted and lived
asunder. This Bishop was a Learned and witty Man, and died in April 1608.

VI. Hugh Bellot, Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Bangor, brought up in St.
John's College in Cambridge, was translated to Chester 1557. 37 Elizabethae.
Whitsuntide 1596. buried at Wrixham in Denbighshire. His Funeral was solemnized
at Chester 22 Junii.

VII. Richard Vaughan, Doctor of Divinity, the Queens Chaplain and Bishop of
Bangor, brought up in St. John's College in Cambridge, Bellot both in the
Bishopric of Bangor and Chester. He was translated to Chester in June 1597.
Lee says he was translated May 16. 1596. and Enstalled November 10. 1597. and
continued there six years and more; and was translated hence to London about
the end of December 1604. and died March 30. 1607. He was a Man of a prompt and
ready Utterance; the beginning of whose Advancement was under the Lord Keeper
Puckering, who designed him to Examine such as sued to him for Benefices in his
Gift. So Lee, page 45. of the Vale-Royal of England.

VIII. George Lloyd, Doctor of Divinity, Bishop of the Isle of Mann, Magdalen
College in Cambridge, was consecrated Bishop of Chester 14 die Januarii 1604.
He died the first of August 1615. in the 55. year of his Age, at his Parsonage
of Thornton, and was buried in the Quire of the Cathedral Church at Chester
near to Bishop Downeham; and was Bishop of Chester ten years.

IX. Thomas Moreton, Son of Richard Moreton of York City, Mercer, St. John's
College in Cambridge, and sometime Dean of Winchester, was consecrated Bishop
of Chester 7 die Julii 1616. translated hence to Lichfield and Coventrey 6
Martii 1618. and thence to Durham 1632. He died 22 die Septembris 1659. anno
aetatis 95. after he had written many Learned Tractates, and was never Married.
See this Bishop's Life and Death in Daniel Lloyd's Memoires, Printed 1668.

X. John Bridgeman, Son of Thomas Bridgeman of Greenway in Devonshire,
Cambridge, the King's Chaplain, and Parson of Wiggan in Lancashire, was
consecrated Bishop of Chester 1619. He lived till the Parliament pulled down
all Bishops in a Puritannical Frenzy of Rebellion, and had Beheaded King
Charles the First, and after died at Morton, not far from Oswaldestrey in
Shropshire, He Married Elizabeth, Daughter of Doctor Helyar, Canon of Excester,
and Arcdeacon of Barstable, and had Issue Sir Orlando Bridgeman, made
Lord Keeper 1667. Dove, Henry, now Dean of Chester, Sir James Bridgeman, and
Richard.

XI. Brian Walton, born at Cleaveland in Yorkshire, Doctor of Divinity,
Peterhouse in Cambridge, was consecrated Bishop of Chester 2 die Decembris
1660. upon the Restoration of King Charles the Second. He died November 29. in
Vigiliis Sancti Andreae 1661. anno aetatis 62. buried in the Cathedral of St.
Paul at London. He had a principal Hand in setting out the Great Bible of many
Languages; and Married Jane, Daughter of Doctor William Fuller, Dean of Durham.

Henry Fern, Doctor of Divinity, Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, was
consecrated Bishop of Chester 9 die Februarii 1661. He died very soon after,
and never lived to come to Chester, and was buried at Westminster. He writ
clear Resolutions of certain Cases of Conscience, relating to the Differences
between the late King and his rebellious Parliament.

George Hall, one of the Sons of Doctor Joseph Hall Bishop of Excester, was
sometime of Excester College in Oxford, and Doctor of Divinity, and
consecrated Bishop of Chester, Anno Christi 1662. He was also Parson of Wiggan
in Lancashire by the Gift of Sir Orlando Bridgeman, then Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. This Bishop Married Gartred, Sister to Sir Amos Meredith, now of
Ashley in Cheshire. He died at Wiggan August 23. 1668. without any Issue of his
Body; and Gartrede his Lady also died at Wiggan in March following.

John Wilkins, Doctor of Divinity, Son of Walter Wilkins, a Goldsmith in the
City of Oxford, was first Student of Christchurch in Oxford, and after made
Warden of Wadham College in the same University, about the Year of our Lord
1651. He Married Robina, Sister to Oliver Cromwell the late Lord Protector, but
has no Issue as yet. He was made Master of Trinity College in Cambridge about
the Year 1659. and after the Restoration of King Charles the Second he was made
Dean of Rippon in Yorkshire; and was consecrated Bishop of Chester, Anno Domini
1668. He was also Parson of Wiggan by the Gift of Sir Orlando Bridgeman
Baronet, now Lord Keeper of England.

CHAP. III.
A Catalogue of the Deans of Chester.

THomas Clerk, who before had been the last Abbot of St. Werburge in Chester,
was made the first Dean of Chester after the erection of the new Bishopric
here 1541. 33 Hen. 8.

II. Henry Mann, Doctor of Divinity, afterward Bishop of the Isle of Mann. He
died 1556.

III. William Clyve, Doctor of both Laws.

IV. Roger Walker, Master of Arts.

Note.
V. John Piers, Doctor of Divinity, made Bishop of Rochester 1576. thence
translated to Salisbury 1578. thence to York 1588. He was sometime Dean of
Christchurch in Oxford. Twine. But quaere whether ever Dean of Chester, whereof
I doubt.

VI. Richard Longworth, Doctor of Divinity.

VII. Robert Dorsell, Doctor of Divinity, living 1580. 22 Elizabethae.

VIII. Thomas Modesley, Bachelor of Divinity.

IX. John Nuttall, Bachelor of Divinity, was first Prebend, Chester; and
afterward was Enstalled Dean of Chester 1589. 31 Elizabethae. He continued
Dean about 13 years. He was also Parson of Sefton in Lancashire, and of
Bebington in Cheshire; a Man of great Wealth: Queen Elizabeth termed him A
Golden Ass. He died suddenly, as he was at Supper at Sefton, Anno Domini 1603.
where he was buried.

X. William Barlow, Doctor of Divinity, and Prebend of Westminster, Chester 1
Jacobi 1603. He was made Bishop of Rochester 1605. and thence translated to
Lincoln 1508, and died about 1612.

XI. Doctor Parry was Enstalled Dean of Chester, 1 die Augusti 1605.

XII. Thomas Mallory, Bachelor of Divinity, William Mallory of Studeley in
Yorkshire, Archdeacon of Richmond, and Parson of Mobberley and Davenham in
Cheshire, was Enstalled Dean of Chester, Anno Domini 1606. He continued Dean
about 38 years; and Married Elizabeth, Daughter of Richard Vaughan Bishop of
Chester, and had many Children. He died at the Dean's House in Chester, 3
Aprilis 1644. and was buried in the Quire of the Cathedral Church at Chester.
He was Educated in Cambridge.

XIII. Doctor William Nicols, Parson of Chedell in Cheshire, Chester 1644. He
was of a good Family in the County of Middlesex, and Married Katharine, the
Widow of William Tatton of Witthenshaw Esquire, and second Daughter of Sir
George Leycester of Toft in Cheshire Knight. He died without Issue at Etchells,
Anno Christi 1658. and was buried at Norden Church in Cheshire. He was Educated
in Trinity College in Cambridge.

XIV. Doctor Henry Bridgeman, John Bridgeman late Bishop of Chester, was
sometime of Brasen-Nose College in Oxford, and made Dean of Chester, Anno
1660. He has beautified and repaired the Dean's House in the Abbey Court at
Chester very much; and is also Parson of Bangor in Flintshire, and of Barrow in
Cheshire. He has only one Child, called Elizabeth, Married to Captain Thomas
Greenough of Lancashire, who was Sheriff of Lancashire, Anno 1668. This Henry
Bridgeman was made Bishop of the Isle of Mann, Anno Domini 1671. consecrated at
Chester, 1 die Octobris eodem anno.

CHAP. IV.
A Catalogue of the Chamberlains of Chester.

PHilippus Camerarius, in the time of Randle surnamed Gernouns, Earl of Chester.

Spilem' Camerarius, in the time of the same Randle. Vide supra page 128.

Bertramus de Verdon, Chamberlain in the time of Hugh Cyveliok, and also in the
time of Randle Blundevill. This Bertram was Sheriff 31 and 33 Hen. 2. 1187. He
lived in the Reigns of Henry the Second, Richard the First, and King John.

46 H. 3. 1262.
Ricardus Orreby Camerarius.

56 H. 3. 1261.
Willielmus Bruchull Camerarius: Ille fuit Decanus Ecclesiae Sancti Johannis
Cestriae. Lib. H. fol. 117. e. John Boooth of Twamlow's Book.

Quae sequuntur ex Recordis (scilicet inter Recognitiones Scaccarii Cestriae
apud Cestriam) propria manu collecta sunt.

5 Ed. 1. 1277. Hugh Bruchull.

6 Ed. 1. 1278. Stephanus Chestnut; and 8 Edw. 1.

9, 10, 11 E. 1. William Burstow^ 1281.

12 E. 1. 1284. Robert Hemington.

29 E. 1. 1300. Willelmus Molton.

3 Edw. 2. William Stonehall.

3 Ed. 2. 1309. Paganus Tybotot.

9 Ed. 2. 1315. Walter Fulborne

15 E. 2. 1321. Ricardus de Sancto Edmundo.

18, 19. Ed. 2. 1324. Willielmus Essington Justiciarius.

20 E. 2. 1326. John Paynell; etiam 1 Edw. 3.

2 Ed. 3. 1328. Thomas Blaston.

3 Ed. 3. 1329. John Stonehall, Parson of Plemston.

4 Ed. 3. 1330. Simon Ruggeley.

5 Ed. 3. 1331. John Paynell.

6, 7, 8 Ed. 3. Simon Ruggely, 1332, 1333, 1334.

Sir John Wendour was Chamberlain when Adam Parker was Sheriff of Cheshire,
about 9 Ed. 3.

10 E. 3. 1336. B. Paynell.

12 E. 3. 1338. John Perye; etiam 14 Edw. 3.

15 E. 3. 1341. John Brunham, Parson of Eccleston.

16 E. 3. 1342. John Perye; etiam 17 Edw. 3.

18 E. 3. 1344. William Linford.

20 E. 3. 1346. John Brunham Junior. He was Chamberlain to the 41 Edw. 3. but
how long after, I find not precisely.

50 E. 3. 1376. John Woodhouse. He was Chamberlain to the 17 Rich. 2. 1393.

17 R. 2. 1393. Robert Paris, from the 17 Rich. 2. 1393. to the 23 Rich. 2.
1399. about five Years.

23 R. 2. 1399. John Trever Bishop of St. Asaph, made Chamberlain 23 Rich. 2.
He continued to 6 Hen. 4. about five Years.

6 H. 4. 1404. Thomas Barnaby, Chamberlain 6 Hen. 4. He continued to the 14
Hen. 4. eight Years.

14 H. 4. 1412. William Troutback Esquire, made Chamberlain of Chester 14 Hen.
4. He continued to the 17 Hen. 6. about twenty six Years.

17 H. 6. 1438. John Troutback, made Chamberlain in Reversion after his
Father's Death, by Patent Dated the fifteenth day of August, 15 Hen. 6. howbeit
he sat not as Chamberlain till 17 Hen. 6. when his Father died: which Year he
was also Sheriff of Cheshire. He continued Chamberlain to the 35 Hen. 6. about
eighteen Years.

35 H. 6. 1457. Sir Richard Tunstall, part of 35 Hen. 6. He continued the
remainder of Henry the Sixth's Reign, about four Years.

1 Ed. 4. 1461. Sir William Stanley, (of Hooton, as I conceive) Chamberlain 1
Edw. 4. to the 10. of Hen. 7. about thirty four Years.

10 H. 7. 1495. Sir Reginald Bray, made Chamberlain the tenth of April, 10 Hen.
7. He continued to the 15 Hen. 7. about four Years.

15 H. 7. 1499. Sir Richard Pool, made Chamberlain of Cheshire (quamdiu nobis
placuerit) 14 Januarii, 15 Hen. 7. He had another Patent (durante beneplacito)
Dated 3 Aprilis, 19 Hen. 7. Sir Randle Brereton was Vice-chamberlain 19 Hen. 7.
and 20. Hen. 7. William Tatton also Vice-Chamberlain, 20 Hen. 7. Pool was
Chamberlain to 21 Hen. 7. about six Years.

21 H. 7. 1505. Sir Randle Brereton, made Chamberlain 21 Hen. 7. In the same
Year before this Patent was another made of the same Office, unto Sir John
Longford Knight. This Sir Randle Brereton of Malpas, was one of the Knights of
the Body to Henry the Seventh, 19 Hen. 7. He continued Chamberlain to 23 Hen.
8. about twenty six Years. In the Year 21 Hen. 8. Reciting where before he had
given Officium Clerici Scaccarii Cestriae, vulgariter nuncupatum Officium
Baronis Scaccarii Cestriae Comitatus Palatini Cestriae, Johanni Tatton, and
Nicolao Farrington, etc. and that Nicolas Farrington was dead, and John Tatton
living. The King granted the Reversion of the same Office, after the death of
John Tatton, to Randle Brereton, per nomen Officii Clerici Scaccarii Cestriae,
and vulgariter nuncupati Baronis Scaccarii Cestriae. This Randle Brereton Baron
of the Exchequer, I take it, was Bastard Brother to the Chamberlain.

23 H. 8. 1331. William Brereton Esqire, made Chamberlain 23 Hen. 8. He
continued to 28 Hen. 8. about five Years. He was of the King's Privy Chamber,
and Beheaded May 17. 1536. 28 Hen. 8. for matters touching Queen Anne. Stow.

28 H. 8. 1536. Rees Manxell, 28 Hen. 8. He continued to 1 Eliz. about twenty
three Years.

1 Eliz. 1559. Edward Stanley Earl of Derby Chamberlain of Chester, 1 Eliz.
William Glazier

Vice-Chamberlain eodem anno. Earl Edward, Chamberlain six Years.

7 Eliz. 1565. Robert Dudley Earl of Leycester, 7 Eliz. He continued to 30
Eliz. about twenty three Years. William Glazier, Vice-Chamberlain 17 and 22
Eliz.

30 Eliz. 1588. Henry Stanley Earl of Derby, 30 Eliz. He continued Chamberlain
to 35 Eliz. about five Years.

35 Eliz. 1593. Sir Thomas Egerton, after Lord Keeper, was Chamberlain 35 Eliz.
He continued to the first Year of King James; about ten Years.

1 Jacobi 1603. William Stanley Earl of Derby, made Chamberlain of Chester for
his Life, October 30. 1603. 1 Jacobi. He makes Henry Townesend Esquire his
Vice-Chamberlain (durante beneplacito) as freely as ever Sir Peter Warburton,
one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, or any other Vice-Chamberlain held the
same Office before. Dated 13 Januarii, 1 Jacobi.

After this there was another Patent, joining James Lord Strange with William
his Father, for both their Lives, and to the Survivor.

To Townesend succeeded Sir Thomas Ireland of Beausy in Lancashire,
Vice-Chamberlain.

To Ireland, Roger Downs of Wardley in Lancashire.

To Downs, Orlando Bridgeman (Son of John Lord Bishop of Chester)
Vice-Chamberlain 1640.

William Earl of Derby died 1642. and James his Son continued Chamberlain, till
the Parliament put in their Speakers.

23 C. 1. 1647. Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Lords, and
William Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons, were made Chamberlains of
Chester by the Parliament, 23 Car. 1. 1647. Homfrey Macworth of Shropshire
Vice-Chamberlan.

1654. John Glinne, made Chamberlain 1654; Philip Young of Shropshire his
Vice-Chamberlain.

This Glinne purchased Harden Castle from Charles Earl of Derby, about 1654.

12 C. 2. 1660. Charles Earl of Derby, made Chamberlain of Chester by the King,
for the Lives of himself and William his Son, 12 Car. 2. 1660. Edward Rigby of
Preston in Lancashire, sat Vice-Chamberlain 1662.

CHAP. V.
A Catalogue of the Judges of Chester, collected out of the old Deeds and
Charters to the Reign of Edward the First, and from thence downwards, out of
the Fines at Chester, and out of the Recognizances in the Exchequer.

Johannes Adams Justiciarius Comitis, Witness to a Deed of William Constable of
Cheshire the younger, made to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester, of Raby in
Wirrall, about the beginning of King Stephen 's Reign.

Raufe Manwaring, Judge of Chester toward the end of Henry the Second, and
Richard the First.

Philip Orreby, Judge of Chester in the time of Roger Lacy Constable of
Cheshire about the tenth Year of King John 's Reign, Anno 1209: for Roger Lacy
died 1211. 12 Johannis, says Matthew Paris. He was Judge to 13 Hen. 3. 1228.
above twenty Years.

14 H. 3. 1230. William Vernon, Judge of Chester 14, 15, and 16 Hen. 3. 18 H.
3. 1234. Richard Phitton, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 Hen. 3. 22 H. 3. 1238. Richard
Dracot. 25 H. 3. 1241. John Lexington. 28 H. 3. 1244. Johannes Extraneus, id
est, John Strange, 28 and 29 Hen. 3. 30 H. 3. 1246. John Gray. 31 H. 3. 1247.
Sir Roger de Monte-alto, Steward of Cheshire. 32 H. 3. 1248. Henry Torboc,
locum tenens Johannis Gray. 33 H. 3. 1249. Richard Vernon, locum tenens
Johannis Gray. 34 H. 3. 1250. Alan de Zouch. 34, 35, 36, and 37 Hen. 3.
Walkelinus de Arderne. 42 H. 3. 1258. Roger de Monte-alto; etiam 43 Hen. 3. 45
H. 3. 1261. Fulco de Orreby, proved by the original Charter of Maxfield. 46 H.
3. 1262. Thomas de Orreby Knight. 49 H. 3. 1265. Lucas de Tanai, made Judge by
Simon de Montfort. 50 H. 3. 1266. James de Audeley, 50, 51, and 52 Hen. 3. 53
H. 3. 1269. Thomas Bolton; etiam 54 Hen. 3. 54 H. 3. 1270. Reginald Gray, part
of the 54 Hen. 3. as appears by the Charter of Dernhale, 2 die Augusti, 54 Hen.
3. Idem Reginaldus, 55 and 56 Hen. 3. Robertus de Huxley ejus locum tenens,
Anno 1271.
Sub Edwardo Primo.
1 Ed. 1. 1273. Idem Reginaldus de Gray, 1 and 2 Edw. 1. 3 Ed. 1. 1275.
Guncelinus de Badelesmere, to 10 Edw. 1. 10 E. 1. 1282. Reginald Gray, to 28
Edw. 1. Radulphum Hegham sibi associavit, 13 Edw. 1. Ricardus Massy locum
tenens in absentia Reginaldi, 20 Edw. 1. Idem Ricardus locum tenens pro
Reginaldo, 25 Edw. 1. 28 E. 1. 1300 Richard Massy, Judge of Chester. 29 E. 1.
1301. William Trussell, to 35 Edw. 1. 35 E. 1. 1307. William Ormesby in ultimis
Assisis, 35 Edw. 1.
Sub Edwardo Secundo.
Robertus de Holland, to the 4. of Edward the Second. 1 Ed. 2. 1308. Paganus
Tibotot; etiam 5 Edw. 2. 4 Ed. 2. 1311. Robert Holland, part of 5. etiam 6 Edw.
2. 5 Ed. 2. 1312. Hugh de Audley, to 12 Edw. 2. 7 Ed. 2. 1314. John Sapy. 12 E.
2. 1319. Robert Holland; etiam 14 Edw. 2. 13 E. 2. 1320. Oliver Ingham, to 19
Edw. 2. John Hegham his Deputy-Judge, 18 Edw. 2. 15 E. 2. 1322. Richard de
Eumary, to 2 Edw. 3. 19 E. 2. 1326.
Sub Edwardo Tertio.
Oliver Ingham, to 5 Edw. 3. 2 E. 3. 1328. William Clinton, to 10 Edw. 3. 5 E.
3. 1331. Sir Hugh Frenes. 10 E. 3. 1336. Henry Ferrers, including part of the
10. to 15 Edw. 3. 11 E. 3. 1337. Raufe Stafford. 15 E. 3. 1341. Oliver Ingham.
16 E. 3. 1342. Henry Ferrars. 17 E. 3. 1343. Oliver Ingham. 18 E. 3. 1344.
Thomas de Ferrars, to 27 Edw. 3. 19 E. 3. 1345. Roger Hillary, Judge ad
Comitatum die Martis proxime post Festum Assumptionis Beatae Mariae, 27 Edw. 3.
Bartholomew Bughurst, to 42 Edw. 3. Johannes Delves locum tenens Justiciarii
Cestriae, 33 Edw. 3. Johannes de la Pool locum tenens, 40 Edw. 3. 27 E. 3.
1353. Thomas Felton. 42 E. 3. 1368. Bartholomew Burghersth, part of this Year.
43 E. 3. 1369. Thomas Abbot of Vale-Royal, part of 43. etiam 44 Edw. 3. 44 E.
3. 1370. Thomas Felton, part of 44. to 50 Edw. 3. 45 E. 3. 1371. John de la
Pool, sub Fine 50 Edw. 3. etiam 51 Edw. 3. 50 E. 3. 1376.
Sub Ricardo Secundo.
Thomas Felton Miles, and Johannes de la Pool; etiam 2 Rich. 2. 1 Ric. 2. 1377.
Thomas de Felton. 3 Ric. 2. 1379. Thomas Felton, and John de la Pool. 4 Ric. 2.
1380. John Holland, made Judge of Chester for his Life. His Patent in the
Exchequer is Dated 5 Rich. 2. and he made Thomas Molineux his
Lieutenant-Justice, Dated eodem anno. 5 Ric. 2. 1381. John Holland continued to
9 Rich. 2. Edmund Duke of York, the King's Uncle, made Judge of Chester ad
terminum vitae, eo modo quo Johannes Holland habuit, by the King's Patent,
Dated 28 Septembris, 9 Rich. 2. He had another Patent, giving him power to make
a Lieutenant, Dated 9 Rich. 2. and he makes Thomas Abbot of Vale-Royal his
Lieutenant-Justice, with forty Marks Fee yearly, Dated on St. Martin's Eve, 9
Rich. 2. The same Edmund made John Massy of Podington his Lieutenant, 15
Novembris, 9 Rich. 2. 9 Ric. 2. 1386. The Duke was Judge to 12 Rich. 2. The
Patent of Henry Abbot of St. Werburge in Chester, Thomas Davenport, John Pigot,
and Robert Dutton, giving power to any one, or more, to Execute the Place of
Judge of Chester pro hac vice; Dated 11 Maii, 11 Rich 2. The like Commission
unto Robert Vere Duke of Ireland and Earl of Oxford, Robert Abbot of
Cumbermere, and Robert Dutton, pro una vice; Dated 8 Juni, 11 Rich. 2. 12 R. 2.
1388. Thomas Plantagenet. Thomas Duke of Gloucester, to 16 Rich. 2. This Thomas
deputes his Cousin Hugh Burnell (quamdiu nobis placuerit) his
Lieutenant-Justice, 12 Rich. 2. Henry Abbot of St. Werburge in Chester, is made
Judge of Chester pro una vice, 13 Januarii, 16 Rich. 2. 17 R. 2. 1393. Thomas
Mowbray. Thomas Comes Mareschallus and Nottinghamiae, to 20 Rich. 2. William
Bagot locum tenens, 18 Rich. 2. Roger Brescy, and Hugh Hulse, made Judges una
vice, 19 Rich 2. The Commission pro Hugh Hulse una alia vice, 19 Rich. 2. Also
Hugh Holes or Hulse, made Lieutenant-Justice to Thomas Earl of Nottingham, 10
Julii, 20 Rich. 2. 20 R. 2. 1396. Gilbertus Talbot, in fine hujus anni. 21 R.
2. 1397. William Scroop Earl of Wiltshire, 10 1 Hen. 4. John Knightley locum
tenens sub Scroop, 22 Rich. 2.
Sub Henrico Quarto.
1 H. 4. 1399. Henricus Persey (Son to the Earl of Northumberland,) made Judge
of Chester, eo modo quo Willielmus le Scroop habuit, giving him power to make a
Lieutenant-Justice, 29 Octobris, 1 Hen. 4. John Knightley made his
Lieutenant-Justice, 1 Hen. 4. Henry Percey was Judge to 4 Hen. 4. Roger Horton,
and Henry Birtles, Judges pro hac vice, 3 Januarii, 1 Hen. 4. Sir Hugh Hules,
and Roger Horton, made Judges ad iter apud Frodsham pro hac vice, 13 Aprilis 1
Hen. 4. John Pigot, made Judge pro uno Comitatu, 3 Hen. 4. Sir Hugh Hulse made
Judge pro alia vice, eodem anno 3 Hen. 4. 4 H. 4. 1402. Gilbert Talbot's
Patent, Dated 4 Hen. 4. and he makes John Knightley his Lieutenant-Justice,
eodem anno. John Knightley, made Judge of Chester pro una vice, 4 Hen. 4. This
Gilbert was made Lord Talbot, 7 Hen. 4. He continued Judge of Chester to 6 Hen.
5. Nicolas Fare, made Judge pro uno itinere apud Frodsham, 23 Januarii, 9 Hen.
4.
Sub Henrico Quinto.
John Pigot, Judge una Sessione, 1 Hen. 5. James Holt locum tenens for Talbot,
2 Hen. 5. 6 H. 5. 1418. James Holt made Judge of Chester, 6 Hen. 5. to 1 Hen.
6. Gilbert Lord Talbot, James Holt, Henry Birtles, Peter Massy, made Judges ad
unum iter apud medium Wichum, 19 Septembris, 6 Hen. 5. Idem Gilbert, James
Holt, Robert Mere, and Henry Birtles, ad unum iter apud Maxfield, 21
Septembris, 6 Hen. 5. Henry Birtles, Judge pro uno Comitatu, 11 Februarii, 8
Hen. 5.
Sub Henrico Sexto.
Thomas Holland Duke of Excester, to 6 Hen. 6. 1 H. 6. 1422. 6 H 6. 1427.
Homfrey Duke of Gloucester, to 9 Hen. 6. William Buckley his Lieutenant Justice,
7 and 8 Hen. 6. Thomas Duke of Excester. 9 H. 6. 1430. 10 H. 6. 1431. Homfrey
Duke of Gloucester, to 18 Hen. 6. Thomas Abbot of Chester, and Henry Birtles,
Judges pro uno Comitatu Cestriae, 26 Maii, 4 Hen. 6. Sir John Stanley, Sir John
Savage, Henry Biitles, John Son of Peter Legh, and Richard Piggot, ad tria
Hundreda itineris apud Maxfield Justitiarios constituimus: or to any two,
quorum praefatum Henricum unum esse volumus; 22 Septembris, 5 Hen 6. Peter Pool
made Judge uno Comitatu Cestriae, hac vice; 8 Aprilis, 5 Hen. 6. Idem Petrus
uno Comitatu Cestriae hac vice, 29 Aprilis, 5 Hen. 6. Thomas Abbot of Chester,
and Henry Birtles, uno Comitatu Cestriae, 26 Julii, 7 Hen. 6. Richard Bold, and
John Bruen de Tarvin, uno Comitatu apud Cestriam, 27 Junii, 8 Hen. 6. Thomas
Abbot of Chester, William Chauntrell, and Henry Birtles, pro uno Comitatu
Cestriae; 20 Decembris, 8 Hen. 6. Richard Bold and John Bruen, pro uno Comitatu
Cestriae, 16 Januarii, 9 Hen. 6. Sir John Stanley, Sir John Savage, Henry
Birtles, John Savage jun. John Legh del Ridge, and Richard Piggot, ad tria
Hundreda itineris apud Maxfield, or to any two, quorum praefatum Henricum unum
esse volumus, 12 Augusti. 9 Hen. 6. William de la Pool Earl of Suffolk, made
Judge of Chester and Flint, sicut avunculus noster Humfridus Dux Glocestriae
ante a habuit, 9 Februarii, 18 Hen. 6. 18 H. 6. 1439. William de la Pool makes
Sir Thomas Stanley, William Roerly, and Richard Roules, his Deputies (quamdiu
sibi placuerit) 23 Februarii, 18 Hen. 6. The Commission of Sir Thomas Stanley,
and William Ruckley of Eaton; That whereas William de la Pool was made Judge of
Chester for his Life, he now makes them his Lieutenant-Justices, and that they
shall receive 40 l. per an. per manus Camerarii. Dated on the Eve of the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, 19 Hen. 6. A Commission to Sir Thomas
Stanley, Sir Robert Booth, Sir Lawrence Fitton, Roger de Legh, and Thomas
Duncalfe, for Judges, ad tria Hundreda itineris apud Maxfield, or to any two,
whereof the said Roger or Thomas Duncalfe to be one. Dated 27 Septembris, 19
Hen. 6. William de la Pool was Judge to 22 Hen. 6. William de la Pool Comes,
and Thomas Stanley Miles. 22 H. 6. 1443. 23 H. 6. 1444. 24 H. 6. 1445. William
de la Pool Comes Suffolciae. Willielmus de la Pool Marchio Suffolciae, and
Thomas Stanley Miles; they continued to 29 Hen. 6. William Buckley,
Justiciarius sub Willielmo de la Pool, 26 Hen. 6. Thomas Stanley Miles, solus:
He continued to 38 Hen. 6. 29 H. 6. 1450. John Nedham, Lieutenant-Justice, 30
Hen. 6. M. number. 17. Thomas was made Lord Stanley 35 Hen. 6. John Earl of
Shrewbury. His Commission for Judge of Chester (quamdiu nobis placuerit) is
Dated 24 Februari, 37 Hen. 6. 38 H. 6. 1459. There was a former Commission for
John Talbot Viscount Lile, making him Judge of Chester for Life, after the
Death of Sir Thomas Stanley, prout idem Thomas habuit. Dated 20 Maii, 30 Hen.
6. which was void upon the new Commission. He was Judge to 1 Ed. 4.
Sub Edwardo Quarto.
1 E. 4. 1461. John Nedham. 2 E. 4. 1462. Thomas Lord Stanley. He continued to
1 Hen. 7. Sir John Nedham his Lieutenant-Justice, 18 Edw. 4. John Hawarden his
Lieutenant, 1 Rich. 3.
Sub Henrico Septimo.
1 H. 7. 1486. Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby, and George Stanley Lord Strange.
They continued to 19 Hen. 7. John Hawarden locum tenens, 10 Hen. 7. 19 H. 7.
1504. Sir Thomas Englefield; to the 32 Hen. 8. Quaere if there were not two
Thomas Englefields, Father and Son, who succeeded one another; the Son from 6
Hen. 8. George Bromley Lieutenant-Justice, 20 and 21 Hen. 7. Thomas Englefield
Miles, was Judge of Chester uno Comitatu apud Cestriam, hac vice tantum:
Tenendum in omnibus quae ad Officium pertinent, prout habuit in tempore quo
fuit locum tenens Thomae Comitis Derbiae, 20 Augusti, 19 Hen. 7.
Sub Henrico Octavo.
32 H, 8. 1540. Nicol^^ Hare Miles, to 37. Hen. 8. 37 H. 8. 1545. Sir Robert
Townesend, to 3 Mariae.
Sub Maria.
4 Mariae, 1556. Sir John Pollard. 5 Mar. 1557. George Wood Esquire.
Sub Elizabetha.
1 Eliz. 1558. John Throckmorton Esquire, from 6 Mariae to 21 Elizab. Edward
Hassal his Deputy, 13 Eliz. Simon Thelwall his Deputy, 18 Eliz. 21 Eliz. 1579.
John Throckmorton, and Henry Townesend. Simon Thelwall their Deputy eodem anno.
22 Eliz. 1580. 31 Eliz. 1589. 42 Eliz. 1600. George Bromley, and Henry
Townesend, to 31 Eliz. Sir Richard Shuttleworth, and Henry Townesend Esquire They
continued to 42 Eliz. Sir Richard Lewknor, and Henry Townesend. They continued
to 14 Jacobi.
Sub Jacobo.
14 Jac. 1616. 19 Jac. 1621. 20 Jac. 1622. Sir Thomas Chamberlain, and Sir
Henry Townesend. They continued to 19 Jacobi. Sir James Whitlok, and Sir Henry
Townesend. Sir James Whitlok, and Sir Marmaduke Lloyd. They continued to 1 Car.
1.
Sub Carolo Primo.
Sir Thomas Chamberlain, and Sir Marmaduke Lloyd. 1 Car. 1. 1625. Sir John
Bridgeman, and Sir Marmaduke Lloyd. They continued to 12 Car. 1. 2 Car. 1.
1626. Sir John Bridgeman, and Richard Prythergh Esquire. They continued two
Years. 12 C. 1. 1636. Sir Thomas Milward of Eaton in Derbishire, and the said
Richard Prythergh a Welshman. These continued to 23 Car. 1. 14 C. 1. 1638. John
Bradshaw, late of Congleton, and Peter Warburton of the Grange nigh Weverham,
both Natives of this County, made Judges of Chester by the Parliament, sine
Rege 1647. 23 C. 1. 1647. Homfrey Macworth of Shrewsbury, as Deputy to
Bradshaw, and Thomas Fell of Lancashire, to 1655. 1649. Bradshaw, and Fell, to
1659. 1655. 1659. Mr. Ratcliff, Recorder of Chester, deputed by Bradshaw at
Easter Assizes, 1659. pro hac vice tantum; for Bradshaw was then sick at
London, and died that Year, and Fell died before, in 1658. at his House in Low
Furneys in Lancashire.
Sub Carolo Secundo.
Job Chorleton of Ludford in Herefordshire Esquire (Deputy to Sir Geffrey
Palmer Baronet, Attorney General, and Chief Justice of Chester) and Robert
Milward of Stafford Esquire, younger Son of Sir Thomas Milward, late Chief
Justice of Chester, sat Judges of Chester, September 16. 1661. after the
Restoration of King Charles the Second. 13 C. 2. 1661. Sir Job Chorleton
Knight, now made Chief Justice of Chester (quamdiu nobis placuerit, with Power
to make a Deputy if he please) and the said Robert Milward, sat Judges at
Chester, July 28. 1662. and so have continued to this present 1669. 14 C. 2.
1662.
CHAP. VI.
A Catalogue of the Sheriffs of Cheshire, collected out of old Deeds to the
latter end of Edward the Third, and thence downwards out of the Records at
Chester, in the Prothonotary's Office, and and also in the Exchequer there,
with some Particulars out of old Deeds.

RAnulphus Vicecomes, Witness to a Deed of the second Randle Earl of Chester,
in the Reign of King Stephen, among the Evidences of St. Werburge at Chester,
1644. Vide supra 128. Gilbertus Pipardus. 30 Hen. 2. 31 and 33 H. 2. Bertramus
de Verdon: fuit etiam Camerarius Cestriae. Lidulfus, or Liulfus, Vicecomes,
about the Reign of Richard the First, or King John. This Lithulfe was Lord of
Goostrey, Twamlow, Croxton, and Crannach.
Sub Henrico Tertio.
Sir William Thebaud, sub initio Hen. 3. Lib. C. fol. 264. number. 1. and 3.
Richard Perpoint, tempore Philippi Orreby Justiciarii Cestriae. Lib. C. fol.
152. a. Ricardus Filius Lidulfi, tempore Philippi Orreby Justiciarii, as
appears by a Deed in possession of Edmund Swetenham of Sommerford in Cheshire,
Anno 1664. Richard de Sonbach, tempore Philippi Orreby Justiciarii. Lib. C.
fol. 225. c. 15 H. 3. 1230. 18 H. 3. 1233. Ricardus de Sonbach. Ricardus de
Wibenbury, tempore Richardi Fitton Justiciarii, and Johannis Scotici Comitis
Cestriae. 32 H. 3. 1248. Ricardus Berner', vel Bernerd, tempore Johannis Gray
Justiciarii. Lib. C. fol. 270. b. 36 H. 3. 1252. David de Malpas, tempore Alani
le Zouch Justiciarii. Joceramus de Hellesby, tempore Thomae de Orreby
Justiciarii; sed tempore Philippi de Orreby, says the Deed of Warford in
Vernon 's Notes. Quaere. 46 H. 3. 1262. 50 H. 3. 1266. 51 H. 3. 1267. Robert
Buckley. Robert de Huxley. Jordanus de Penlesdon, tempore Jacobi Audley
Justiciarii. Randle of Sidington, tempore Tho. Bolton, 1269. Charta inter les
Fines Cestriae. 52 H. 3. 1268. 54 Hen. 3. 56 H. 3. 1272. Sir Thomas Dutton of
Dutton, tempore Thomae Bolton Justiciarii. Richard Wilbraham; and 55 Hen. 3.
1270. and 1271. Hugh de Hatton.
Sub Edwardo Primo.
Robert de Huxley, tempore Gozelini de Badelesmere. Lib. B. page 31. m. about 4
Edw. 1. 3 Ed. 1. 1274. Hugh de Hatton. James Pool. Lib. B. page 32. r. I am
uncertain of the time. 5 Ed. 1. 1277. 6 Ed. 1. 1278. 7 Ed. 1. 1279. 9 Ed. 1.
1281. 12 E. 1. 1284. Patric de Haselwel, tempore Guncelini de Badelesmere
Justiciarii, about 5 Edw. 1. Richard de Massy. William de Hawarden. Lib. C.
fol. 268. number. 36. etiam 1280. William de Spurstowe; and 10 Edw. 1. Robert
Grosvenour of Hulme in Allostock, 12, 13. 14, and 15 Edw. 1. Etiam 16 E. 1.
Lib. B. page 32. n. 20 E. 1. 1292. William Praers. Richard de Bradwell. G. number.
9. I am uncertain of the time. 23 E. 1. 1295. 25 E. 1. 1297. 31 E. 1. 1303. 35
E. 1. 1307. Philip de Egerton; and 24 Edw. 1. F. number. 1. William Praers, 25,
27, and 28 Edw. 1. Placita 25 Edw. 1. memb. 2. in dorso. Robert Bressy, 31 and
33 Edw. 1. Ricardus de Fowleshurst.
Sub Edwardo Secundo.
2 Ed. 2. 1308. 3 Ed. 2. 1309. 5 Ed. 2. 1311. Ricardus de Fowleshurst. Robert
Buckley. Lib. H. page 109. g. John Booth 's Book of Twamlow. Richard
Fowleshurst, tempore Pagani Tibotot Justiciarii, 5 Edw. 2. Etiam 1313. and
1316. 13 E. 2. 1319. 14 E. 2. 1320. William de Mobberley. Richard de
Fowleshurst, 1320, 1321, and 1324. and 1326. 20 Edw. 2.
Sub Edwardo Tertio.
John de Wrenbury, 2, 3, and 4 Edw. 3. 2 Ed. 3. 1328. Robert Praers. 5 Ed. 3.
1330. William Praers, 1331. in a Deed of Sir Thomas Manwarings of Baddiley. 6
Ed. 3. 1332. David de Egerton, 1333. by another Deed of Sir Thomas Manwarings.
7 Ed. 3. 1333. Robert Praers. 8 Ed. 3. 1334. Adam Parker. 9 Ed. 3. 1335. John
de Wrenbury; and 1338. 11 E. 3. 1337. Robert de Buckley Jun. 15 E. 3. 1341.
Randle de Aldington, sive Olton; etiam 1344 and 1345. 16 E. 3. 1342. Hugh
Hough. 20 E. 3. 1346. Nicolas de Ruggeley. John Booth 's Book, H. page 135. K.
21 E. 3. 1347. Sir James Audely, made Sheriff for a Year, 25 Junii, 22 Edw. 3.
22 E. 3. 1348. William Praers of Baddiley. 23 E. 3. 1349. Thomas Danyers, vulgo
Daniel; and 27 Edw. 3. 25 E. 3. 1351. Thomas de Dutton; etiam 33 Edw. 3. 30 E.
3. 1356. Thomas Young. 34 E. 3. 1360. Richard de Whitley, his Patent for
Sheriff (quamdiu nobis placuerit) is Dated 35 E. 3. etiam Vicecomes 38 Edw. 3.
35 E. 3. 1361. John Scolehall; his Writ is Dated 41 Edw. 3. 41 E. 3. 1367. He
was also Escheator of Cheshire, 40 Edw. 3. Sir Nicolas de Manley. John Booth 's
Book, Lib. K. page 79. b. etiam 44 Edw. 3. 43 E. 3. 1369. 44 E. 3. 1370. Sir
Lawrence Dutton of Dutton Knight; his Writ Dated 44 Edw. 3. Also 46 Edw. 3. and
1 Rich. 2. 1 Novembris.
Sub Ricardo Secundo.
Hugh Venables of Kinderton. His Writ for Sheriff in the Exchequer of Chester
(quamdiu nobis placuerit) is Dated 1 Rich. 2. Etiam 3 Rich. 2. Lib. H. Number.
137. 2 Ric. 2. 1378. Nicolas Vernon: ut per Chartam penes Swetenham de
Somerford, Anno 1664. 7 Ric. 2. 1383. 9 Ric. 2. 1385. Hugh Earl of Stafford.
His Writ at Chester Dated 9 Rich. 2. Tenendum dictum Comitatum Cestriae ad duos
vel tres annos, and ad faciendum quod ad Officium Vicecomitis pertinet in eodem
Comitatu. This Earl Hugh deputed Sir Richard Venables of Kinderton to Execute
the Place, eodem anno, 9 Rich. 2. Sir John Massy of Tatton Knight. 11 R. 2.
1387. 12 R. 2. 1389. Sir Robert Grosvenour of Houlme in Allostock. His Writ in
the Exchequer at Chester (quamdiu nobis placuerit) is Dated 1 Januarii, 12
Rich. 2. 1388. Sir John Massy of Tatton Knight, made Sheriff 18 Octobris, 13
Rich. 2. 1389. 13 R. 2. 1390. 17 R. 2. 1393. 18 R. 2. 1395. Sir Robert Legh of
Adlington. Sir Robert Grosvenour of Houlme. He was made Sheriff again, 31
Octobris, 18 Rich. 2. 1394. He died the Year following, scilicet 19 Rich. 2.
John de Olton, as appeared by a Deed of Sir Thomas Manwarings of Baddiley, Anno
1663. 20 R. 2. 1396. Sir Robert Leigh of Adlington. 22 R. 2. 1398.
Sub Henrico Quarto.
1 H. 4. 1400. 2 H. 4. 1401. 5 H. 4. 1404. John Massy of Podington. Henry de
Ravenscroft. Vernon 's Copy of Aston 's Deeds, page 56. I. John Mainwaring of
Over-Pever was made Sheriff 18 Septembris, 4 Hen. 4. and continued 5 and 6 Hen.
4. 10 H. 4. 1409. Sir William Brereton of Brereton, 10, 11, and 12 Hen. 4. His
Writ is Dated 10 Hen. 4. 13 H. 4. 1412. Sir Lawrence Merebury Knight, Lib. C.
fol. 117, 118.
Sub Henrico Quinto.
3 H, 5. 1415. 10 H. 5. 1422. John Legh del Booth 's nigh. Knotsford, to 9 Hen.
5. Hugh Dutton of Hatton near Chester, made Sheriff (quamdiu nobis placuerit) 2
Octobris, 9 Hen. 5. 1421. Johannes Legh nuper Vicecomes Cestriae, Ricardus
Warburton, Ricardus Filius Roberti de Aston, Ricardus Buckley de Chedell,
Rogerus le Bruen, Willielmus Leycecester (id est, de Tabley,) Willielmus Daniel
de Daresbury, Thomas Legh del Baggiley, Sir William Stanley Knight, John Legh
de Legh, John de Carington, William del Holt, and William de Holford, venerunt
in Scaccarium -- Et fatentur, unumquemque eorum debere Domino Regi 140 l. de
Arreragiis Compoti ipsius Johannis Legh nuper Vicecomitis, etc. 14 Julii, 10
Hen. 5. 1422. There was also a new Writ issued out against this John Legh,
Dated 6 H. 6. for the great Arrears of his Sheriffship, then unsatisfied. I
find Hugh Dutton Sheriff also, 3 Hen. 6. Lieger Book of Vale-Royal, fol. 74. a.
Sub Henrico Sexto.
3 H. 6. 1424. 5 H. 6. 1426. 6 H. 6. 1428. Hugh Dutton of Hatton. Richard
Warburton. Sir Randle Brereton (of Malpas I think,) made Sheriff, quousque
alium inde duximus ordinandum in eodem Officio, 12 Januarii, 6 Hen. 6. A Writ
is directed to the Executors of Richard Warburton, late Sheriff, to bring in
all the Rolls touching his Sheriffship, unto Randle Brereton, Dated 13
Januarii, 6. Hen. 6. Randle was Sheriff also 11 and 14 Hen. 6. as I find in the
said Records. Upon a Writ of Diem clausit extremum of the said Richard
Warburton, Dated 6 Hen. 6. there is mention made of his Accounts not given up
for his late Sheriffship, since 5 Hen. 6. 16 H. 6. 1437. John Troutback
Esquire, and part of 17 Hen. 6. I find Sir Robert Booth Sheriff, 17 Hen. 6. 21
H. 6. 1443. A Patent, requiring the surrender of a former Patent to Robert
Booth, and now making Sir Robert Booth and William his Son (conjunctim vel
divisim) Sheriffs for both their Lives, and to the Survivor, Dated 8 Martii, 21
Hen. 6. 1442. Will. del Both I find Sheriff 33 Hen. 6. This was the first
Patent granted of the Sheriffship for Life that I meet with, made to Sir Robert
Booth of Dunham-Massy, who Married Dowse, the Coheir of Venables of Bollin. By
virtue of which Patent Sir William Booth his Son, surviving, was Sheriff 30
Hen. 6. etiam 2 Edw. 4. which Sir William died not till 16 Edw. 4. 1476.
Sub Edwardo Quarto.
William Stanley of Hooton Sen. made Sheriff (quamdiu nobis placuerit) 16
Januarii, 2 Edw. 4. 1462. Idem Willielmus Stanley, one of the King's Carvers,
made Sheriff for his Life, 26 Februarii, 5 Edw. 4. He continued Sheriff till 10
Hen. 7. 3 Ed. 4. 1463.
Soon after Edward the Fourth had obtained the Crown, he created a new Sheriff
of Cheshire, notwithstanding the Patent for Lives granted to Booth by Hen. 6.
This appears by Stanley's first Patent, as follows:

EDWARDUS, etc. Salutem. Cum 16 die Decembris 1460. humilis and fidelis Ligeus
noster Willielmus Stanley de Hooton Sen. retentus fuerit pro termino vitae cum
Excellentissimo and Praepotentissimo Principe beatae memoriae Ricardo Duce
Eboracensi Patre nostro, quem Deus absolvat, facturus fidele and diligens
Servitium praefato Patri nostro and nobis erga omnes terrenas creaturas; pro
quibus retentione and Servitio, praefatus Pater noster promisit and concessit,
quod tali tempore quo Officium Vicecomitis nostri Comitatus Palatini Cestriae
perveniret, vel pertineret concessioni ipsius Patris nostri, quod tunc ipse
concederet praefato Willielmo idem Officium, -- etc. Habendum pro termino
vitae, prout in quibusdam Indenturis sub Sigillo praedicti Patris nostri, quas
habet demonstrare: Nos concessimus eidem Willielmo idem Officium Vicecomitis,
-- etc. Habendum and occupandum per eundem Willielmum, and per suum Deputatum
sufficientem, quamdiu nobis placuerit, -- etc. Test meipso apud Cestriam, 16
die Januarii, Anno Regni nostri Secundo, 1462. Sub Henrico Septimo.
John Warburton of Arley Esquire, made Sheriff (quamdiu nobis placuerit) 6
Aprilis, 10 Hen. 7. 1495. 10 H. 7. 1495. The Sheriffship of Cheshire, with all
its Profits, given to John Warburton, uni Militum pro Corpore Henrici Septimi,
durante beneplacito, 4 Aprilis. 19 Hen. 7. 1504. And 1 Maii, 19 Hen. 7. Sir
John Warburton with others, enter into a Recognizance of 200 l. That the said
Sir John shall pay 30 l. yearly unto Randle Brereton Vice-Chamberlain, so long
as he continues Sheriff. The same Sir John is made Sheriff of Cheshire for his
Life, with all the Profits thereof to himself, to be Executed by himself or a
Deputy; 19 Julii, 23 Hen. 7. 1508. Raufe Birkenhead was under Sheriff, made 9
Decembris, 21 Hen. 7. Sir John was Sheriff to 15 Hen. 8.
Sub Henrico Octavo.
15 H. 8. 1524. Thomas Warburton Gentleman, made Sheriff ratione mortis
Johannis Warburton Militis nuper Vicecomitis, 8 Aprilis, 15 Hen. 8. 16 H. 8.
1524. Sir George Holford of Holford, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 24
Septembris, 16. Hen. 8. 17 H. 8. 1525. Sir William Stanley of Hooton, made
Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 20 Februarii, 17 Hen. 8. 18 H. 8. 1526. William
Venables of Kinderton ( he was afterward Sir William Venables,) made Sheriff
(durante beneplacito) 19 Decembris, 18 Hen. 8. 19 H. 8. 1527. Sir William Pool
of Pool in Wirrall, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 30 Novembris, 19 Hen. 8.
20 H. 8. 1528. Thomas Fowleshurst of Crew Esquire, made Sheriff (durante
beneplacito) 19 Decembris, 20 Hen. 8. 21 H. 8. 1529. John Done of Utkinton
Esquire, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 19 Novembris, 21 Hen. 8. 23 H. 8.
1531. Edward Fitton of Gawesworth Esquire, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito)
24 Novembris, 23 Hen. 8. 24 H. 8. 1532. 29 H. 8. 1537. George Paulet Esquire,
made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 8 Decembris, 24 Hen. 8. Sir Henry Delves of
Dodington, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 20 Novembris, 29 Hen. 8. 32 H. 8.
1540. 33 H. 8. 1541. 35 H. 8. 1543. 36 H. 8. 1544. 37 H. 8. 1545. Edmund
Trafford Esquire. John Holford Esquire, made Sheriff (durante beneplacito) 10
Decembris, 33 Hen. 8. Sir Peter Dutton of Dutton and Hatton both. Sir Edward
Fitton of Gawesworth. Sir Henry Delves of Dodington.
Sub Edwardo Sexto.
1550. Edw. Sexti 1 Sir Hugh Cholmeley of Cholmeley. 2 Sir William Brereton of
Brereton. 3 Thomas Aston of Aston Esquire. 4 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage. 5
Sir Lawence Smith of Hatherton. 6 Sir William Brereton of Brereton.

Sub Maria Regina.
Maria Reg. 1 Sir Peter Legh of Lime. 2 Sir Hugh Cholmeley of Cholmley. 3
Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey Esquire. 4 Sir Thomas Venables of Kinderton. 5 Sir
Philip Egerton of Egerton. 6 Sir Edward Fitton of Gawesworth.

Sub Elizabetha Regina.
1560. Elizabethae Reginae 2 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage. 3 Sir Raufe Egerton
of Wrine-Hill. 4 Sir John Warburton of Arley. 5 Richard Brook of Norton
Esquire. 6 William Massy Esquire. 7 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage. 8 Sir Hugh
Cholmeley of Cholmeley. 9 Lawrence Smith of Hatherton Esquire. 10 Raufe Done of
Flaxyardes Esquire. 11 George Calveley of Lea Esquire.
1570. Elizabethae Reginae 12 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage. 13 William Booth
of Dunham-Massy Esquire. 24 Thomas Stanley of Alderley Esquire. 15 Sir John
Savage of Rocksavage. 16 Idem Sir John Savage. 17 Henry Manwaring of Carincham
Esquire. 18 Sir Rowland Stanley of Hooton. 19 John Warren of Pointon Esquire.
20 Thomas Brooks of Norton Esquire. 21 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage.
1580. Elizabethae Reginae 22 Sir Raufe Egerton of Wrine-Hill. 23 Sir George
Calveley of Lea. 24 Sir William Brereton of Brereton. 25 Peter Warburton of
Arley Esquire. 26 William Leversage of Wheelok Esquire, 27 Thomas Wilbraham of
Woodhey Esquire. 28 Hugh Calveley of Lea Esquire. 29 Randle Davenport of
Henbury Esquire. 30 Thomas Legh of Adlington Esquire. 31 Sir Hugh Cholmeley of
Cholmeley.
1590. Elizabethae Reginae 32 William Brereton of Honford Esquire. 33 Sir John
Savage of Rocksavage. 34 Thomas Brook of Norton Esquire. 35 Thomas Venables of
Kinderton Esquire. 36 Peter Warburton of Arley Esquire. 37 Peter Legh of Lime
Esquire. 38 John Done of Utkinton Esquire. 39 Sir George Booth of Dunham-Massy.
40 Sir Edward Warren of Pointon. 41 Sir Thomas Holcroft of Vale-Royal.
1600. Elizabethae Reginae 42 Sir Thomas Smith of Hatherton. 43 Sir Thomas
Aston of Aston. 44 Richard Grosvenour of Eaton-boate Esquire.

Sub Jacobo.
Jacobi Regis. 1 Sir George Leycester of Toft. 2 Sir William Davenport of
Bromhall. 3 Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever. 4 Sir Thomas Vernon of
Haslington. 5 Sir John Savage of Rocksavage. 6 Sir Henry Bunbury of Stanney. 7
William Brereton of Ashley Esquire.
1610. Jacobi Regis. 8 Geffrey Shakerley of Houlme Esquire. 9 Thomas Dutton of
Dutton Esquire. 10 Sir William Brereton of Brereton. 11 Sir Vrian Legh of
Adlington. 12 Sir George Calveley of Lea nigh Eaton-boate. 13 Sir Richard Lea
of Lea and Dernhale. 14 Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey Baronet. 15 John
Davenport of Davenport, Knighted hoc anno. 16 Raufe Calveley of Saughton
Esquire. 17 Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever.
1620. Jacobi Regis. 18 Sir Robert Cholmeley of Cholmeley Baronet. 19 Thomas
Merbury of the Mere nigh Comberbach Esquire. 20 Sir George Booth of
Dunham-Massy Baronet. 21 Sir Thomas Smith of Hatherton. 22 Sir Richard
Grosvenour of Eaton-boate Baronet.

Sub Carolo Primo.
Caroli Primi 1 Sir Thomas Brereton of Ousaker. 2 Sir John Done of Utkinton. 3
John Calveley of Saughton Esquire. 4 Sir Edward Stanley of Bickerstaffe in
Lancashire Baronet. 5 Thomas Legh of Adlington Esquire.
1630. Caroli Primi. 6 Peter Dutton of Hatton Esquire. 7 Thomas Stanley of
Nether-Alderley Esquire. 8 Richard Brereton of Ashley Esquire. 9 Sir Edward
Fitton of Gawesworth Baronet. Obiit sine prole. 10 Peter Venables Esquire,
Baron of Kinderton. 11 Sir Thomas Aston of Aston Baronet. 12 William Legh of
Booths Esquire. 13 Sir Thomas Delves of Dodington Baronet. 14 Thomas Cholmeley
of Vale-Royal Esquire. 15 Philip Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire.
1640. Caroli Primi. 16 Sir Thomas Powel of Birket-Abbey Baronet. 17 John
Bellot of Morton Esquire. 18 Hugh Calveley of Lea; Knighted hoc anno. 19 Thomas
Legh of Adlington Esquire. 20 Richard Grosvenour Esquire Son of Sir Richard
Grosvenour of Eaton-boate Baronet. Henry Brooks of Norton, by the two Houses of
Parliament. Henry Brooks similiter. 21 Robert Tatton of Witthenshaw Esquire.
Henry Brooks of Norton, by the two Houses of Parliament. Henry Brooks
similiter. 22 Henry Brooks of Norton Esquire, by the two Houses, sine Rege. 23
Idem Henry, continued by the Parliament sine Rege. 24 Roger Wilbraham of
Darford Esquire, by the Parliament sine Rege.
1649. Caroli Primi. Robert Duckenfield of Duckenfield Esquire, by the
Committees of State, calling themselves Custodes Libertatis Angliae, after they
had Beheaded the King.

Sub Carolo Secundo.
Caroli Secundi. 1650. Sir Henry Delves of Dodington Baronet, by the Committees
of State. 1651. Edmund Jodrill of Yerdesley Esquire, by the Committees of
State. 1652. John Crew of Crew Esquire, by the Committees of State. 1653. Peter
Dutton of Hatton Esquire, by the Committees of State. 1654. George Warburton of
Arley Esquire, by Oliver Protector. 1655. Philip Egerton of Olton Esquire, by
the same Oliver. 1656. Idem Philip continued by Oliver. 1657. Thomas Manwaring
of Over-Pever Esquire, by Oliver. 1658. John Legh of Booths Esquire, by Oliver.
1659. Idem John continued by Oliver. 1660. 12 Thomas Cholmondeley of Vale-Royal
Esquire, by the King now Restored. 1661. 13 Idem Thomas continued by the King.
1662. 14 Thomas Legh of Adlington Esquire. 1663. 15 Sir John Bellot of Morton,
made Baronet this Year. 1664. 16 Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey Baronet. 1665.
17 Sir Thomas Delves of Dodington Baronet. 1666. 18 Sir John Arderne of Harden
Knight. 1667. 19 Sir Richard Brook of Norton Baronet. 1668. 20 Roger Wilbraham
of Darford Esquire. 1669. 21 Sir Peter Brook of Mere Knight. His Writ is Dated
in November 1668. 1670. 22 Roger Wilbraham of Nantwich Esquire. 1671. 23 Edmund
Jodrill of Yerdsley Esquire. 1672. 24 William Lawton of Lawton Esquire.

CHAP. VII.
A Catalogue of the Escheators of Cheshire to the Reign of King James.

IN ancient time there were but two Escheators in England, the one on this side
of Trent, and the other beyond Trent; at which time they had Sub-Escheators:
But in the Reign of Edward the Second the Offices were divided, and several
Escheators made in every County for Life, etc. and so continued till the Reign
of Edward the Third. And afterward by the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. it was
Enacted, that there should be as many Escheators assigned, as when Edward the
Third came to the Crown, and that was one in every County, and that no
Escheator should tarry in his Office above a year: and by another Statute, to
be in Office but once in three years: The Lord-Treasurer names him. Cook upon
Littleton, fol. 13. b.

But Chester, and other County-Palatines made their own Escheators, long time
before the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. and their Privileges for making Escheators
are allowed by the said Statute.

45 E. 3. 1261. Thomas de Orreby, 1261. as appears by the original Deed of the
Liberties of Maxfield.

Hugo le Mercer, sub Edw. 1.

10 E. 1. 1282. Adam de Chetwine. Mr. Holms's Book, Lib. B. page 124. Ex
placitis Cestriae die Martis proxime post Festum Sancti Nicolai, 10 Edw. 1. de
custodia and maritagio Johannis Filii and haeredis Hugonis de Hatton.

22 E. 1. 1294. Frater Robertus de valle Regali: per Inquisitionem post mortem
Hugonis de Dutton, Lib. C. fol. 156. bb.

24 E. 1. 1296. Peter of Newcastle under Lime, as appears by the Writ for the
Office of Vrian de Sancto Petro, vulgo Sampier, in the Pleas at Chester proxime
post Festum Sancti Augustini Episcopi, 28 Edw. 1.

27 E. 1. 1299. Hugh Bushy, per Inquisitionem concerning Sampier, in Placitis
ibidem in Festo Translationis Sancti Thomae Apostoli, 27 Edw. 1.

6 Ed. 2. 1312. Matthew de Hulgrave.

Edward de la Mare, also 6 Edw. 2. Mr. Holms's Book B. page 114.

1 Ed. 3. 1327. William de Swetenham; ut per Inquisitionem post mortem Hugonis
de Dutton, 1 Ed. 3. Lieger Book of Vale-Royal, fol. 46.

2 Ed. 3. 1328. 5 Ed. 3. 1331. 6 Ed. 3. 1332. John de Wetenhale. Mr. Holms's
Book E. fol. 256.

Thomas Daniers; ut per Inquisitionem penes me. V. number. 11.

Hamo Massy de Tatton. O. number. 1. He was younger Son to Robert Massy of Tatton
in Cheshire, and Married Katharine, Daughter and Heir of Alan Rixton of Rixton
in Lancashire, 6 Edw. 3. 1332. from whom the Massyes of Rixton. He was
afterward Sir Hamon Massy Knight, 1347. Lib. C. fol. 105. number. 42. and fol.
292. number. 1.

7 Ed. 3. 1333. Peter Arderne, made Escheator 7 Edw. 3. Mr. Holms's Book E,
fol. 77. Quamdiu been se gesserit. This Peter had Lands in Over-Alderley.

19 E. 3. 1345. Hugh de Hopwas, as appears by an Inquisition Ex Officio, for
the Bondary of Stubs super Rudheath, quae tenetur de Fratribus Sancti Johannis
Hierosolymitani; in possession of Sir Thomas Delves of Dodington Baronet, Anno
1664. He was also Escheator 23 and 26 Edw. 3.

Quae sequuntur, ex Recordis (scilicet inter Recognitiones Scaccarii Cestriae
apud Cestriam) propria manu collecta sunt.

35 E. 3. 1361. Adam de Kingsley; and 36 Edw. 3.

39 E. 3. 1365. John Scolehall, made Escheator (quamdiu nobis placuerit) 26
Martii, 39 Edw. 3. He was also Sheriff of Cheshire, 42 Edw. 3. I find him also
Escheator, 2 Ri. 2. and 6 and 7 Rich. 2.

8 Ric. 2. 1384. Adam Kingsley.

10 R. 2. 1386. John Ewlowe.

11, 12, 13 R. 2. Adam Kingsley.

14 R. 2. 1390. John Leech, part of 13 and 14 Rich. 2.

15 R. 2. 1391. Thomas Masterson of Nantwich, part of 14, 15, and 16 Rich. 2.

16 R. 2. 1392. Adam de Kingsley, part of 16, and 19 and 20 Rich 2.

21 R. 2. 1398. Hugh Leigh (id est, of High-Legh of the East-Hall) made
Escheator quamdiu nobis placuerit, 23 Octobris, 21 Rich. 2. The Original is
among the Evidences of Mr. Legh of High-Legh of the West-hall, Anno 1664.

22 R. 2. 1399. Adam de Kingsley.

1 H. 4. 1400. Richard Manley; and 3 Hen. 4. and 18 Augusti, 4 Hen. 4.

4 H. 4. 1403. Matthew Mere, made Escheator 4 Hen. 4.

7 H. 4. 1405. Richard Manley, made Escheator 7 Hen. 4. I find him also
Escheator 10 Hen. 4.

2 H. 5. 1414. Henry de Ravenscroft, 2 and 3 Hen. 5. and 6 Hen. 5.

9 H. 5. 1421. Richard Done of Crowton, made Escheator 9 Hen. 5.

10 H. 5. 1422. John Wetenhale of Nantwich, made Escheator, quamdiu nobis
placuerit, 26 Aprilis, 10 Hen. 5. He continued to 7 Hen. 6. and part of 7 Hen.
6.

7 H. 6. 1428. John Bruen, made Escheator December 8. 7 Hen. 6. He continued to
12 Hen. 6. and part of 12 Hen. 6. This was Bruen of Stapleford.

12 H. 6. 1434. John Legh del Ridge, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18 Hen. 6. and
31 Hen. 6.

38 H. 6. 1459. Raufe Legh; ut per Inquisitionem post mortem Domini Thomae
Dutton de Dutton Militis, 38 H. 6.

Robert Fowelshurst, made Escheator 4 Julii, 38 Hen. 6. 1460.

1 Ed. 4. 1461. William Venables de Copenhale. made Escheator 20 Julii, 1 Edw.
4.

17 E. 4. 1477. Thomas de Walton, 17 Edw. 4. and 21 Edw. 4.

10 H. 7. 1495. Roger Manwaring Gentleman, made Escheator, quamdiu nobis
placuerit, 16 Julii, 10 H. 7. Idem Roger 2 Julii, 17 H. 7. Idem Roger made
Escheator durante beneplacito, and to have the whole Profits thereof. Dated 4
Aprilis, 19 Hen. 7. He was also Escheator 24 Hen. 7. and was a younger Son to
Manwaring of Carincham.

1 H. 8. 1509. Sir Raufe Egerton, and Roger Manwaring, made Escheators of
Cheshire for their Lives, and to the Survivor of them, 7 Julii, 1 Hen. 8. It
appears Manwaring was dead 6 Hen. 8. and the said Sir Raufe Egerton (one of the
Gentlemen-Ushers of the King's Chamber) was made Ranger of the King's Forest of
Delamere in Cheshire, during his Life, 6 Hen. 8.

This Sir Raufe (as I take it) was younger Son to Egerton of Egerton, and the
first Egerton of Ridley. He died 1528. The Egertons of Ridley in short time
attained to a great Estate, but is all now sold and gone, except some small
part in Yorkshire, called Allerton, cum pertinentiis.

Vrian Brereton, one of the Grooms of the Privy-Chamber, made Escheator, and
Ranger of Delamere Forest, pro termino vitae, after the Death of Sir Raufe
Egerton, with 10 l. Fee per annum. Dated 1 Aprilis, 18 Hen. 8. He was after
Brereton of Honford in Right of his Wife, and younger Son of Brereton of Malpas.

32 H. 8. 1540. Vrian Brereton Armiger, unus Gromettorum Privatae Camerae
Regis, Escheator 32 and 35 Hen. 8. Et Vrianus Brereton Senior Miles, Escheator
2 Edw. 6. ut patet per inquisitionem captam apud Northwich, 18 Junii, 2 Edw. 6.
post mortem Johannis Carington de Carington Armigeri. Sir Vrian died 19 Eliz.
1577.

19 Eliz. 1577. John Cotton Esquire.

22 Eliz. 1580. John Nutthall, made Escheator pro termino vitae, 17 Junii, 22
Elizabethae; etiam 25 Eliz.

This was Nutthall of Catenhall nigh Dutton. Obiit 28 Eliz.

33 Eliz. 1590. Sir Hugh Cholmeley of Cholmeley the younger. He died 43 Eliz.

13 Jac. 1615. Henry Manwaring of Carincham Esquire.

CHAP. VIII.
A Catalogue of the Recorders of the City of Chester, since the Charter of 21
Hen. 7. 1506. when this City was made a distinct County of it self, to have a
Mayor, Recorder, and twenty four Aldermen, with two Sheriffs, and forty of the
Common Council.

1506. RAufe Birkenhead is said to be the first Recorder.

1518. 10 H. 8. Richard Sneyd Esquire, was Recorder 1518, 10 Hen. 8. from whom
the Sneyds of Bradwell and Keele in Staffordshire are descended.

1535. 27 H. 8. Raufe Wrine, Son of William Wrine, succeeded Recorder 1535.

1563 and 1574. William Gerard Esquire: I find him mentioned Recorder 5 and 16
Eliz. He was made Chancellor of Ireland, and died in May 1580. buried at the
Cathedral of St. Werburge in Chester. Lib D. page 174. n.

1575. 17 Eliz. Richard Birkenhead Esquire, chosen Recorder of Chester 13
Martii, 17 Eliz. He surrendered this Office to Thomas Lawton 1601. in regard of
his old Age, not able to Execute the same.

This Richard was base Son of John Birkenhead of Crowton, ut dicitur, and
purchased Manley at the side of Delamere Forest; and had to Wife Margaret,
Daughter of Piers Leycester of Tabley Esquire, and had Issue

1601. 44 Eliz. Thomas Lawton Esquire, chosen Recorder of Chester, 12 Januarii,
44 Eliz. 1601.

1606. Thomas Gamull, a Citizen born, Son to Alderman Edmund Gamull of Chester,
chosen Recorder 7 Februarii, 3 Jacobi 1605. He died August 11. 1613.

1613. Edward Whitby, Son of Robert Whitby, then Mayor of Chester, was chosen
Recorder 13 Augusti, 1613, 11 Jacobi. He died April 8. 1639. at the Bache.

1639. Robert Brierwood, a Citizen born, was chosen Recorder of Chester April
9. 15 Car. 1. 1639. He was Son of John Brierwood, Sheriff of this City: which
John was Son of Robert Brierwood Wet-Glover, thrice Mayor of Chester. John had
a younger Brother called Edward Brierwood, the famous Scholar of Brasen-Nose
College in Oxford, and afterward Professor of Astronomy at Gresham College
in London, who writ many Learned Books; scilicet, a Treatise of the Sabbath,
1631. The Enquiry of Languages, Printed 1635. De Nummis, Printed 1614. besides
his Logical Notes, and Tractate De Oculo, published by Sixsmith of Brasen-Nose.

Robert the Recorder had two Wives; the first was Anne, Daughter of Sir Randle
Manwaring of Over-Pever the younger; the second was Katharine, Daughter of Sir
Richard Lea of Lea and Dernhall in Cheshire; and had several Children by each
of them. He was Sergeant at Law, Judge of three Shires in Wales, and was made
Judge of the Common Pleas, and Knighted at Oxford 1643. He died the eighth of
September 1654. at Chester, aged 67 years, and buried in St. Mary's Church at
Chester.

1646. John Ratcliffe, a Citizen born, Son of Alderman John Ratcliffe, was
chosen Recorder 17 Novembris, 1646. in the time of the late Rebellion, after
the Surrender of Chester to the Parliament. He was put out, because he refused
the Negative Oath; and Richard Haworth of Manchester Lawyer, was chosen
Recorder 1651. and because Haworth would not reside constantly at Chester, he
surrendered it to John Ratcliffe aforesaid; who was again chosen Recorder 1656.
but was put out by the Commissioners for Regulating the Corporations of the
City and County-Palatine of Chester, Anno Domini 1662. because he refused to
take the Oath enjoined by Act of Parliament in that behalf.

1662. Richard Lieving of Parridge in Derbyshire Esquire, was chosen Recorder
by the Commissioners aforesaid, 1662, He died in the beginning of April 1667.

1667. William Williams, Son of Doctor Williams of Anglesey, was elected
Recorder with the King's Approbation, 1667. a very acute young Gentleman.

Finis Partis Tertiae.
THE PREFACE TO THE Fourth Part.
HUndreds and Tythings were appointed by King Alfred, who began his Reign over
England about the Year of Christ 872. Malmesbury de Gestis Regum, lib. 2. cap.
4. These were ordained for the better suppressing of Robberies: for every free
born Man was now to be ranked, or put into some Hundred and Tything; and if
there were any Person of such dissolute Carriage, that he could find no Pledge
or Surety in the Hundred and Tything for his good Demeanor, he was to be
Imprisoned, as a Man unworthy to be at liberty. And if any Person guilty of a
Robbery (whether before such Pledge found, or after) should fly and make an
escape, all the Inhabitants of the Hundred and Tything were to be Amerced by
the King: So that by this means there was such a Calm of Peace in the Nation in
a short space, that if any Man had left Bracelets of Gold, or Bags of Money in
the Highway, there was none durst take them away, as both Malmesbury and
Ingulphus do inform us.

Now these Freeholders, or freeborn Men, were cast into several Companies, by
ten in each Company, whence in the Western parts of the Realm they were called
Tythingmen. And every of these Pledges or Sureties were yearly presented and
brought forth by their chief Pledge, at a general Assembly for that purpose,
which we yet in remembrance thereof do call The View of the Frank Pledge, or
The Leet-Court: and as ten times ten do make a hundred, so because it was then
also appointed that ten of these Companies should at certain times meet
together for Matters of greater weight; therefore that Assembly or Court was
called The Hundred-Court. Lamberd in his Book of the Duties of Constables,
Borsholders, and Tythingmen, page 7, 8, 9. as it is commonly added at the end
of his Eirenarcha.

In this County of Cheshire we had formerly twelve Hundreds, as we find them in
the Record of Doomsday Book, viz.

Attiscros Hundred. Erestan Hundred. Chester Hundred. Wilaweston Hundred.
Dudestan Hundred. Warmundestreau Hundred. Riseton Hundred. Roelay Hundrrd.
Mildestric Hundred. Hamstan Hundred. Bucklow Hundred. Tunendon Hundred.
But these Hundreds were reduced by a later Division into seven Hundreds, as at
this day they stand divided and called, to wit, Bucklow Hundred. Maxfield
Hundred. Northwich Hundred. Nantwich Hundred. Broxton Hundred. Edesbery
Hundred. Wirrhall Hundred.


Which new Division I conjecture does not exceed the Reign of King Edward the
Third.

And as there must needs be an enlargement of the number of the Towns in each
Hundred of the new Division above the old, because the whole is contracted to a
lesser number of Hundreds, so they have all begot new Names, except this of
Bucklow Hundred, which both retains its old Name, and has now the Towns of the
other old Hundred of Tunendon annexed to it.

For the proportion of the old Hundreds to the new, it is to be observed, that
the Towns comprehended in the old Hundreds of Attiscros and Erestan, were by
the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 13. taken from Cheshire, and annexed to
Flintshire, only Dodleston yet remains to Cheshire, belonging to Broxton
Hundred. And for Chester Hundred, the City of Chester was made a distinct
County of it self (except the Castle only, cum pertinentiis) by the King's
Charter, Dated 6 Aprilis, 21 Hen. 7. 1506.

Mildest-vich Hundred, is now, called Northwich Hundred. Wilaweston Hundred,
now called Wirrhall Hundred. Dudestan Hundred, now called Broxton Hundred.
Warmundestreu Hundred, now called Nantwich Hundred. Hamstan Hundred, now called
Maxfield Hundred. Riseton and Roelay Hundreds, now comprehended in Edesbery
Hundred. Bucklow and Tunendon Hundreds, now comprehended in Bucklow Hundred.
Many more Towns are now in Cheshire than we find in Doomsday Book; for many
were then waste, which have been since improved and inhabited.

The Hundred of Bucklow now comprehends these Townships following, which I
have placed Alphabetically, for the more ready finding of any in particular,
and contains two Divisions; the East Division comprehending the old Bucklow
Hundred, and the West Division comprehending the old Tunendon Hundred; either
Division having a Head Constable yearly elected respectively.

Such as are marked thus [E.] belong to the East Division; such as remain
unmarked, belong to the West Division; only observe, that Cogshull, now
belonging to the East Division, was anciently part of the old Hundred of
Tunendon; and Limme, now belonging to the West Division, was anciently within
the old Bucklow Hundred.

The ancient Mize. l. s. d. 1. Acton Grange, Dominus pro quarta 00 13 04 E. 2.
Agden, Dominus pro quarta 00 03 10 E. 3. Altrincham, Dominus pro quarta 00 10
09 4. Anderton, Dominus pro quarta 00 10 08 5. Appleton and Hull, Dominus pro
quarta 01 00 06 E. 6. Ashley, Dominus pro quarta 01 07 04 E. 7. Ashton super
Mersey, Dominus pro tertia 00 14 00 8. Aston juxta Sutton, Dominus pro quarta
00 10 00 9. Aston Grange, Dominus pro quarta 00 08 00 10. Aston juxta Great
Budworth, Dominus pro quarta 00 16 00 E. 11. Baggiley, Dominus pro tertia 00 16
00 12. Barnton, Dominus pro quinta 00 09 00 13. Barterton, Dominus pro quarta
00 05 00 E. 14. Bexton, Dominus pro duabus partibus 00 02 09 E. 15. Bollington,
Dominus pro quarta 00 06 00 E. 16. Bowdon, Dominus pro quinta 00 10 00 17.
Budworth, that is, Great Budworth, Dominus pro tertia 00 10 08 E. 18.
Carington, Dominus pro quarta 00 10 09 19. Clifton, Dominus pro tertia 00 08 00
E. 20. Cogshull, Dominus pro sexta 00 08 00 *
21. Comberbach, Dominus pro quarta 00 10 00 22. Daresbury, Dominus pro quarta
00 07 00 E. 23. Dunham-Massy, Dominus pro quarta 00 08 00 24. Dutton, Dominus
pro quarta 00 16 08 25. Gropenhall, Dominus pro quarta 00 14 00 E. 26. Hale,
Dominus pro quarta 01 12 10 27. Halton, Dominus pro sexta 01 02 06 28. Hatton,
Dominus pro quarta 00 14 00 Hull, vids Appleton. 29. Kekwike, Dominus pro
quinta 00 05 00 E. 30. Knotsford Superior, Dominus pro quarta 00 06 08 E. 31.
Knotsford Inferior, Dominus pro quarta 00 13 04 32. Lachford, Dominus pro
quarta 33. Legh juxta Barterton, vulgo Little-Legh, Dominus pro quarta 00 15 04
E. 34. Legh, vulgo High-Legh, Dominus pro quarta 01 13 00 35. Limme, Dominus
pro tertia 01 16 00 *
36. Merebury, Dominus pro dimidio 00 04 00 E. 37. Marston, Dominus pro tertia
00 10 00 E. 38. Marthall, cum Little Werford, Dominus pro tertia 00 13 04 E.
39. Mere, Dominus pro quarta 00 19 00 40. Middleton Grange, Dominus pro duabus
partibus 00 06 00 E. 41. Millington, Dominus pro quarta 00 09 04 E. 42.
Mobberley, Dominus pro quarta 01 18 00 43. More, Dominus pro quinta 00 12 00
44. Newton juxta Daresbury, Dominus pro sexta 00 10 00 45. Norton, Dominus pro
duabus partibus 00 12 00 E. 46. Owlarton, Dominus pro quarta 00 08 00 47.
Partington, Dominus pro quarta 00 06 08 E. 48. Pever Superior, Dominus pro
quarta 01 00 00 E. 49. Pever, vulgo Little Pever, Dominus pro quarta 00 09 04
E. 50. Picmere, Dominus pro dimidio 00 12 02 E. 51. Plumley, Dominus pro quarta
00 13 04 52. Preston, Dominus pro quarta 00 13 00 53. Runcorne Superior,
Dominus pro sexta 01 01 04 54. Runcorne Inferior, Dominus pro sexta 01 01 04 E.
55. Rosthorne, Dominus pro quarta 00 14 00 E. 56. Sale, Dominus pro quarta 00
10 09 57. Stokham, Dominus pro quarta 00 08 00 58. Stretton, Dominus pro quarta
00 10 00 59. Sutton nigh Frodsham, Dominus pro sexta 00 08 00 E. 60. Tabley
Superior, Dominus pro quarta 00 13 04 E. 61. Tabley Inferior, Dominus pro
quinta 00 12 00 E. 62. Tatton, Dominus pro tertia 00 11 08 63. Thelwall,
Dominus pro quarta 00 16 00 E. 64. Timperley, Dominus pro sexta 00 10 09 E. 65.
Toft, Dominus pro tertia 00 08 00 66. Walton Superior, Dominus pro quarta 00 06
00 67. Walton Inferior, Dominus pro quarta 00 10 00 E. 68. Warburton, Dominus
pro quarta 00 12 00 69. Weston, Dominus pro quarta 00 11 01 70. Whitley
Superior, Dominus pro quinta 01 18 00 71. Whitley Inferior, Dominus pro quarta
00 16 00 E. 72. Winsham, Dominus pro quarta 00 12 02 Werford Parva. See
Marthall supra Sum 46 10 02

The Abbot of Salop for Fishing in Thelwall, stood Charged with 3 s. the Mize
in the ancient Mize-Book, but this is now lost, and is not known where to be
Charged.

The Method I propose to my self in this Fourth Part, is to take the particular
Townships of this Hundred of Bucklow in order according to the Alphabet, to the
end I might spare the labor of an Index or Table; and so observe in them
particularly what I can discover from old Deeds or Records, concerning the
Owners of those Places since the Norman Conquest; adding also the Pedegrees of
many of the better sort of the Gentry in this Hundred (so many as my leisure
will permit me to go through, and for which I have seen good Deeds and Records
proving the same) placed at the end of such Towns where such Families have been
respectively Seated in ancient time.

And as Speed calls our County-Palatine of Chester, The Seedplot of Gentility,
and Learned Cambden in his Britannia styles it, The most surpassing Nursery of
ancient Gentry above any other County in England, so I may not unfitly call
this Hundred of Bucklow, The prime Border of that Nursery, as having a more
numerous company of Gentry therein, proportionably to its compass, above any
other Hundred in our County.

Concerning the Churches and Chapels of this Hundred, I shall add what I can
gather concerning them in those particular Towns where I find them situated;
and my Authorities, as well for these as all the rest of this Fourth Part of my
Book, shall either be put down verbatim (where it is most necessary, and of
most concern) or else be referred unto, and in whose Hands the Original
remains.

Those Books quoted and referred unto in this Treatise following, styled Lib.
A. or Liber B. or Liber C. are Books of Collections of Deeds taken by me from
the Originals, some more largely, some extracted in brief.

In the mean time I shall here give you a Catalogue of all the Parish Churches,
Parochial Chapels, Chapels of Ease, and Domestic Chapels, as well within
every Hundred of this County, as in the City of Chester. The Letter R. denotes
a Rectory or Parsonage; the Letter V. stands for Vicarage.

1669. Bucklow Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. GReat Budworth 2. Runcorne 3. Gropenhall 4. Limme 5. Warburton 6. Ashton
super Mersey 7. Bowdon 8. Rosthorne 9. Mobberley
The present Patrons.
V. Christchurch College in Oxford. V. Christchurch College in Oxford. R.
Byrom of Byrom in Lancashire. R. Legh of High Legh de Westhall of one Mo. R.
Warburton of Arley of the other Moiety. R. Warburton of Arley. R. Brereton of
Honford. V. Bishop of Chester. V. Venables Baron of Kinderton. R. Mallory of
Mobberley.
Parochial Chapels.
1. Daresbury, within Runcorn Parish. 2. Aston Chapel nigh Sutton, Consecrated
1637, within Runcorn Parish. 3. Nether Knotsford Chapel, within Rosthorn
Parish. 4. Over-Pever Chapel, within Rosthorn Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Halton Chapel, in Runcorn Parish. 2. Thelwall Chapel, infra Daresbury
Parish, both within Runcorn. 3. Poosey Chapel, now in decay, within Runcorn
Parish. 4. Nether Whitley Chapel, in Great Budworth Parish. 5. Stretton
Chapel, in Great Budworth Parish. 6. Little Legh Chapel, in Great Budworth
Parish. 7. High Legh Chapel, in Rosthorn Parish. 8. Over-Tabley Chapel in the
Street, in Rosthorn Parish. 9. Nether Knotsford Chapel in the Town, in
Rosthorn Parish. 10. Ringey Chapel, in Bowdon Parish.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At the Manor Hall at Dutton, very ancient. 2. At Arley in Aston, not so
ancient as Dutton by much. 3. At Dunham-Massy Hall, made 1655. when Sir George
Booth, after Lord Delamere, converted two Ground-Rooms into a Chapel. 4. At
Ashley Hall, lately built by Thomas Brereton of Ashley, about 1653. 5. At Tossed,
but now converted to other Uses.
1669. Maxfield Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. NEther Alderley 2. Prestbury 3. Gowesworth 4. Taxall 5. Mottram
Longdendale. 6. Stopport 7. Chedell 8. Norden 9. Winslow
The present Patrons.
R. Stanley of Alderley. V. Legh of Adlington. R. The Lord of Gowesworth. R.
Downs of Offerton. R. Bishop of Chester. R. Warren of Pointon. R. Buckley of
Chedell. R. Dean of Chester. R. Trafford of Trafford in Lancashire.
Nether Alderley Parish and Gowesworth, were both formerly taken out of
Prestbury. *


Parochial Chapels.
1. Maxfield, within Prestbury Parish. 2. Marton, within Prestbury Parish. 3.
Bosley, within Prestbury Parish. 4. Dishley, within Stopport Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Duckenfield Chapel, in Stopport Parish. 2. Marple Chapel, in Stopport
Parish. 3. Norbery Chapel, in Stopport Parish. 4. Chad-kirke, in Stopport
Parish. 5. Adlington Chapel, in Prestbury Parish. 6. Newton Chapel, in
Prestbury Parish. 7. Siddington Chapel, in Prestbury Parish. 8. Chelford
Chapel, in Prestbury Parish. 9. Pointon Chapel, in Prestbury Parish. 10. Pot
Chapel, in Maxfield Chappelry. 11. Winkle Chapel, erected tempore Car. 1. in
Maxfield Chappelry within Prestbury Parish. 12. Woodhead Chapel, in
Mottram-Longdendale Parish.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At Bromhale Hall. 2. At Wittenshawe. 3. At Honford Hall. 4. At Lime Hall.
5. At Sutton Hall.
1669. Northwich Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. DAneham 2. Middlewich 3. Sanbach 4. Lawton 5. Warmincham 6. Swetenham 7.
Astberie 8. Brereton
The present Patrons.
R. Savage Earl Rivers. V. Lord Brereton of Brereton. V. The Lord of Wheeloke.
R. Lawton of Lawton. R. Crew of Crew. R. Davenport of Davenport. R. Huchenson.
R. Lord Brereton of Brereton.
Domestic Chapels.
1. Witton Chapel, within Great Budworth Parish. 2. Nether-Pever Chapel, also
within Great Budworth. 3. Holms Chapel, within Sanbach Parish. 4. Goostrey
Chapel, within Sanbach Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Congleton, in Astbery Parish.
Brereton Church was formerly a Chapel within Astberie Parish, built about the
Reign of Richard the First, and Dedicated to St. Oswald, whose Wakes or Feast
of Dedication, is on the fifth day of August yearly, and was made a Parish
Church, and endowed with the Tithes of Brereton cum Smethwick, about the Reign
of Hen. 8.

The Original of this following Deed is now in the possession of Smethwick of
Smethwick.

EGo Radulfus de Brereton dedi -- Deo, and Sancto oswaldo, and Capellae de
Brereton, pro Salute animae meae -- in perpetuam Eleemosynam, totam Terram de
Smethwick -- Ita quod Ormus Filius Turgitani de Smethwick nepos meus, and
Haeredes, eam in Feodo habebunt: Reddendo annuatim memoratae Capellae de
Brereton duodecim Denarios ad Festum Sancti Oswaldi pro omni Servitio. --
Testibus Radulfo Capellano, Petro Chanuto, Waltero Parsona de Rodeston,
Willielmo de Brereton, Osberto de Erclid, -- etc.

1669. Nantwich Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. WIbenbury 2. Aulym 3. Bartumley 4. Coppenhale 5. Baddiley 6. Aghton 7.
Church-minshul 8. Wistarston
The present Patrons.
V. Bishop of Lichfield. V. Smith of Hatherton. R. Crew of Crew. R. Bishop of
Lichfield. R. Manwaring of Baddiley. V. Wilbraham of Woodhey. V. Cholmeley of
Vale-Royal. R. Walthall of Wistarston, and Delves of Dodington, alternis
vicibus.
Parochial Chapels.
1. Merebury, within Whitchurch Parish. 2. Wrenbury, within Aghton Parish. 3.
Nantwich, within Aghton Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Burley-Dam Chapel in Dodcot cum Wilkesley, in Aulym Parish. 2. Haslington
Chapel, in Bartumley Parish.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At the sumptuous House of Crew, lately built by Sir Randle Crew, in the
Reign of King Charles the First. 2. Another old one at Woodhey Hall.
1669. Broxton Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. ALdford 2. Christleton 3. Coddinton 4. Dodleston 5. Eccleston 6. Farndon 7.
Hanley
The present Patrons.
R. The Lord of Aldford. R. Mostyn of Mostyn in Wales. R. Dean of Chester. R.
Dean of Chester. R. Venables Baron of Kinderton. R. Bishop of Lichfield. R.
Dean of Chester.
Parish Churches.
8. Harthill, a Donative. 9. Malpas two Rectories. 10. Plemston 11. Pulford 12.
Shoklach 13. Sutton-Gelders. 14. Tilstan 15. Totenhale 16. Warton
The present Patrons.
Brereton of Brereton. Idem Brereton of both fere, excepting the eighth Course
of the one. V. Bishop of Chester. R. Warburton of Arley. V. Pilston of Emrads.
V. Stanley of Alderley. R. Lord Brereton two Turns. Corbet of Stoke third Turn.
R. Bishop of Chester. R. Bishop of Chester.
Parochial Chapels.
1. Pulton, now in decay, within Pulford Parish. 2. Churchen-Heath Chapel,
within St. Werburge of Chester's Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Chad Chapel in Malpas Parish. 2. Cholmeley Chapel in Malpas Parish;
sumptuously repaired by Robert Lord Cholmeley Earl of Leinster, Anno Domini
1652. 3. Boughton Chapel in St. Oswald's Parish; it is now demolished, and was
within the Liberties of the City of Chester. 4. Hargreve Chapel, in Tarvin
Parish. 5. Wyrvin Chapel.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At Eaton Hall, the Seat of Grosvenour. 2. At Lea Hall, the Seat of the now
Lady Calveley.
1669. Edesbery Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. TArvin 2. Barrow 3. Thorneton 4. Iuce. 5. Frodsham. 6. Weverham 7.
Torperley 8. Over 9. White-gate; See Stat. of 33 H. 8. c. 32. 10. Bunbury, See
Web's Collections put out by Dan. King, in his Vale-Royal of England, page 104,
105.
The present Patrons.
V. A Prebendary of Lichfield. R. Savage Earl Rivers. R. Booth of Dunham-Massy.
V. Cholmeley of Vale-Royal. V. Christchurch College in Oxford. V. Bishop of
Chester. R. Crew of Utkinton. V. Bishop of Chester. R. Cholmeley of Vale-Royal.
V. The Company of Huber dushers in London.
Parochial Chapels.
1. Little Budworth, within Over Parish.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Watenhall Chapel, in Over Parish. 2. Alvandeley Chapel, in Frodsham
Parish.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At Stapleford Hall. 2. At Darley Hall.
1669. Wirehall Hundred.
Parish Churches.
1. BAckford 2. Bebington 3. Bidston, 4. Brunborough 5. Burton 6. Estham 7.
Haswell 8. Neston 9. Shotwyke, 10. Stoke, a Donative, 11. Thurstraston 12.
Walleysey 13. West-Kirkby 14. Woodchurch 15. Overchurch in Upton,
The present Patrons.
V. Bishop of Chester. R. Stanley of Hooton. Bishop of Chester. R. Cholmeley of
Vale-Royal. R. Bishop of Lichfield. V. In Dispute between the Dean of Chester
and Stanley of Hooton. R. Clegge of Gayton, and Brown of Upton, alternis
vicibus. V. Dean of Chester. Dean of Chester. The Lord of Dutton. R. Dean of
Chester. R. Bishop of Chester. R. Dean of Chester. R. Birch of Chester. Stanley
of Hooton.
Chapels of Ease.
1. Moreton Chapel, in Bidston Parish. 2. Birkenhead Chapel, now in decay, in
Bidston Parish.
Domestic Chapels.
1. At Hooton Hall.
Sum total, according to this Catalogue, in the whole County of Chester,
besides the City of Chester, Of Parish Curches 75 Of Parochial Chapels 18 Of
Chapels of Ease 34 Of Domestic Chapels 17 In toto of all sorts 144

1669. Churches in the City of Chester.
1. SAint Werburge, or the Cathedral Church, with a square Steeple in the
middle, having the Parish Church of St. Oswald in the South Isle thereof,
because St. Oswald's Church, which was wont to be the Parish Church, is now the
common Hall of the City. 2. St. Peter's, with a Spire Steeple, by the High
Cross. 3. Trinity Curch, with a Spire Steeple also, in the Watergate Street.
4. St. Martin's of the Ash. 5. St. Mary's, by the Castle. 6. St. Toola's, that
is, St. Olaves, near to the Bridge. 7. St. Michaels, in the middle of the
Bridge Street, formerly a Monastery. See Monasticon, Pars 2. page 185. 8. St.
Brigits, over against St. Michaels, on the other side of the Street. 9. St.
John's Church, by the River side, without the Walls. 10. Little St. John's,
without the North Gate; it was demolished in the time of the late War, about
1645.
Concerning the Churches and Chapels of Bucklow Hundred, I shall speak more
particularly in their due place and order, as within the compass of my intended
Task; only we may take notice here, that Parishes were first distinguished in
England under Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, about the Year of Christ 636.
Cambden's Britannia Printed 1607. page 116. Parker's Historia Cantuariensis,
page 52.

Ridley, in his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, tells us, pa. 176,
177. that Fonts in the Primitive Times, were not in the Churches; but the
Custom of those elder Ages, was to Baptize in Rivers and Fountains; and that
Custom being discontinued through Persecution, Fonts were erected in private
Houses; and in more peaceable Ages they made bold to build their Fonts a little
distance from the Church: afterward they obtained to set them in the Church
Porch; at last they got them into the Church: But they were not at first placed
in every Church immediately; for at the first they were found only in the
Cathedral Church where the Bishop resided: and though Service might be said in
the lesser Minsters and Rural Churches, yet the Right of Sepulture and Baptism
belonged to the Cathedral Church, unless it were in case of necessity; and it
was therefore called The Mother Church, because as People in their Mothers Womb
were born Men, so in the Fonts of Baptism, as in the Churches Womb, they were
born Christians. In succeeding Ages, when it was found that the Mother Church
was too far distant from some Villages, and so situated, that in the Winter the
People could not repair thither, consideration was had of this Inconvenience,
and the Bishop took occasion hence to transfer the Rite of Baptism and
Sepulture to the Rural Churches, and this, together with the Rite of Tithes,
made it a Parish Church of that kind which we now have. But because also in
many Parishes some Families lived so remote from the Church, that they could
not conveniently frequent the same, it was indulged to such, that they might
build a private Oratory in or near their Mansion-places, reserving for the most
part the Rite of Baptism and Sepulture to the Parish Church, which, in respect
of these lesser Oratories, was to be accounted the Baptismal or Mother Church.
It was also provided, that these Families (notwithstanding their Grant from the
Bishop for a private Oratory) should upon more solemn Feast-days, repair to
their Parish Church, as it seems by the Council held at Agatha. These private
Oratories were afterward called Capellae, Chapels; and those that did
Exercise in them the Ministerial Function, were called Capellani, Chaplains.
Thus Ridley.

Now the word Capella, quasi Capsella, is a Diminutive from Capsa, which
signifies a Chest or Coffer, because the Relics of Saints or holy Persons were
kept in such a Chest; and the place, where such Chest was kept, was so called
also; unde Nomen Capella, Capellanus, etc. So Spelman in his Glossary upon that
word.

Beatus Rhenanus, with Durand, do derive the word Capella from Capa or Cappa,
St. Martin's Hood being so called barbarously, and carried about for good luck
by Lewis the French King in all his Wars. But others derive it a Pellibus
Caprarum, wherewith such portable Tents for God's Service, as were to be
removed in their warlike Expeditions, were covered. Dr. Prideaux, in his
Consecration Sermon of Excester College Chapel in Oxford, page 26.

None might of right build Oratories without License from the Bishop, at least
none might Administer Divine Service there without the Bishop's special License.

Oratories erected in the Houses of Great Persons, for the use of a private
Family, I call such Domestic Chapels.

When built by one, or several Persons, in some convenient place, for the use
of several Families, or of a Township or Townships, not having liberty of
Baptism or Burial, I call such Chapels of Ease.

When built by a more numerous multitude of the Neighborhood, consisting of one
or more Villages, having got liberty for Baptism and Burial, with Consecration
thereof by the Bishop, and sometimes an Allowance in Money or Tithes from the
Mother Church, I call such Parochial Chapels: for these have all the Rites and
Ceremonies as the Mother Church or Parish Church has, except the Tithes; so
that indeed they are as lesser Parishes created within the greater for the
benefit of the Neighborhood.

As to the Consecration of Churches, we find the Jews had their Encaenia, or
Feasts of Dedication of their Temple, John 10. ver. 22.1 Maccabaeorum, cap. 4.
ver. 59.

But there was no Dedication of our Christian Churches to Saints, until Praying
to Saints was in use; and after Churches began to be Dedicated to Saints, their
Dedication Feasts were usually kept on that Day, which was the Feast Day
appointed in the Calendar for commemoration of that Saint, to whom such Church
was particularly Dedicated. This time was called with us, The Wakes, from
Waking, as the Latin word Vigiliae, a vigilando, because at such times the
People Prayed most of the Night before such Feast Day in the Churches. And
though the Primitive Custom herein was sacred, yet how it was abused in the
Reign of King Edgar, Anno Domini 967. aut circiter, appears by the Canons of
the Church in his Reign, Number. 28. -- Docemus, ut in Ecclesiarum Encaeniis
unusquisque se modestum exhibeat, and orationi incumbat diligenter, non
poculis, non luxui deditus. Spelman's Councils, Pars 1. page 451. And at last
it turned to Feasting and Merriment of Neighbors.

Now Invocation of Saints for three hundred years after Christ cannot be found
among any of the Fathers: None did teach Invocation of Saints, till by
Rhetorical Expressions, and Poetical Fancies, like Invocating of the Muses,
Basil, Nyssen, and Nazianzen had led the way. Dr. Prideaux, Lecture 15. page
243.

Amplissimo clarissimoque viro Domino Petro Leycester Baronetto, Patriae
Antiquitatis Instauratori faelicissimo.
Qua latus Hiberno Regina Britannia Ponto
Obvertit, Letos Cestria pandit agros.
Cestria Nobilium densa Stellata Corona,
Qualiter innumero flore superbit ager.
Emicat hos inter Proceres clarissimus Heroes
Leycester, docta nobilitate nitens.
Quicquid miratur Musarum Graecia Seeds,
Et quicquid Romae Pagina docta probat,
Quic quid condiderit praeclaris Anglia fastis,
Leycester vasto pectoris or be tenet:
Instat edax Rerum tempus, morsuque maligno
Decerpens Patriae deterit omne decus.
Occurrit perdocta manus, monumentaque fato
Interitura olim vivere penna jubet:
Splendida Plebeios dedignatura labores
Gaudent Patricia Stemmata ducta manu.
Robertus Hunter Knotsfordiensis Ecclesiae Pastor in Agro Cestrensi; Postea
vero Maxfeldensis.

The Fourth Part, Comprehending the ANTIQUITIES OF Bucklow Hundred IN CHESHIRE.
Acton Grange.
H Find no mention of this Hamlet, or Village in Doomsday Book; so that in the
time of the Conqueror it seems to be waste: and many other also in this
Hundred be now inhabited, which are not so much as named in that ancient Record.

All that I observe concerning this little Hamlet is, That it anciently
belonged to the Priory of Norton; of the Foundation of which Priory I shall
speak more fully when I come to Norton.

Soon after the dissolution of Abbeys and religious Houses by King Henry the
Eighth, it was purchased, together with the Manor of Norton, and other Lands,
by Richard Brook Esquire, from the King: the Charter under the Broad Seal
bearing Date the tenth of December, 37 Hen. 8. 1545. Since which time it has
continued entire, not having any Charterer within the same, unto his succeeding
Posterity; and is now, Anno Domini 1669. in the possession of Sir Richard
Brook of Norton Baronet, and his Tenants.

Agden.
THis small Town of Agden also is not found in Doomsday Book; it is in old
Deeds written Aketon, and sometimes Acton, but now commonly called Agden. It
seems William, Son of Simon de Lee, was possessed of Agden in the Reign of
Henry the Third, who gave unto William Rag his Son-in-law one half thereof in
these words: --

SCiant praesentes -- Ego Willielmus, Filius Simonis de Lee, dedi -- Willielmo
Rag genero meo, and haeredibus suis de Agnete Filia mea procreatis, pro Homagio
and Servitio suo, totam dimidietatem Terrae meae de Acton, quam tenui de
Henrico de Trafford: Scilicet totam Terram illam quam idem Willielmus Rag prius
habuit and Tenuit: -- Tenendum cum omnibus libertatibus and aysiamentis
praedictae dimidietati Villae de Acton ubique pertinentibus: Reddendo inde
annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis unum par albarum Cheirothecarum vel unum
Denarium, ad Festum Sancti Martini in hyeme pro omnibus Servitiis -- Salvo
forinseco Domini Terrae Servitio. Et ego Willielmus and Haeredes mei totam
praedictam dimidietatem -- in perpetuum Warrantizabimus: Et Sciendum est, quod
acquietabimus praedictum Willielmum Rag, and Haeredes suos de praedicta Agnete,
de Homagio and contra Matthaeum de Alpraham and Haeredes suos in perpetuum. --
Testibus Domino Thoma de Manwaring, Domino Willielmo de Massy, Roberto de
Moldeworth, Thoma del Broom, Alano de Limme, Aytropo de Mulinton, Rogero de
Northwich Clerico, and multis aliis. Lib. C. fol. 265. a. The Original Penes
Venables of Agden.

Originals penes Venables de Agden.
This William Rag was afterward called William de Aketon, from his Residence
here: and by that Name Matthew Somervyle, Lord of Alpraham, releaseth unto him
and his Heirs, the Impleading of him or his Tenants in his Court of Alpraham,
but must appear at his Court of Davenham. This was sub Anno Domini 1270. Lib.
C. fol. 265. b.

This Moiety of Agden came afterward to one John Daniel of Agden, Son of
William Daniel, in Marriage with Ellen, Daughter of the last William de Aketon,
or Agden, by Entail, 38 Edw. 3. which Ellen Married after one Thomas Warburton
to her second Husband, and had three other Sisters, Elizabeth, Agatha, and
Alice. Lib. C. fol. 266. m.

Ellen (after the Death of Thomas Warburton) Covenants to Settle all her Lands
in Agden on William Venables, Brother to Roger Venables, then Parson of
Rosthorn Church (both of them Sons to Thomas Venables of Horton, Son of Hugh
Venables of Kinderton) and on Ellen his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Daniel, Son of
John Daniel and Ellen his Wife aforesaid, by Deed dated 2 Hen. 4. 1401. Lib. C.
fol. 265. f. k. The Issue of which William Venables and Ellen his Wife, did
enjoy the Moiety of Agden, and whose succeeding Posterity have enjoyed the same
ever since to this day, 1669.

*
The other Moiety of Agden was held of the Barony of Dunham-Massy: for in an old
Rentall of Dunham-Massy, now in possession of George Lord Delamere of
Dunham-Massy, Dated 3 Hen. 4. I find that Robert Warburton then held medietatem
Villae de Acton, nuper Johannis Acton, per Servitium tertiae partis unius Feodi
Militis, and reddendo unum Denarium termino Johannis Baptistae. Lib. B. page
209.

This other Moiety Agnes the Widow of John Leech of Altrincham, and Daughter
and Heir of Robert de Aketon and Jone his Wife, sold unto Sir J. Savage of
Clifton, 6 H. 5. 1418. and Sir Thomas Savage Baronet, being seized of the
Reversion of this Moiety, sold the same to George Venables of Agden the elder,
17 Jacobi, 1619. Lib. C. fol. 265. g. So that now Venables of Agden has the
whole Manor of Agden, save only Ousingcroft Farm, cum pertinentiis formerly
granted away out of Savage's Moiety.

Hugh Venables of Agden, 23 Hen. 8. Sued for all the Lands belonging to the
Barony of Kinderton, as next rightful Heir, against Sir William Venables of
Golborne, but could never get the possession thereof. Afterward William
Venables of Agden released all his Right to Kinderton Lands, 30 Elizabethae,
1588. unto Thomas Venables of Kinderton Esquire, Father of Peter Venables now
Baron of Kinderton.

Altrincham.
ALtrincham is of the ancient Fee of the Barons of Dunham-Massy. In the Reign
of Edward the First, Hamon de Massy, Lord of Dunham-Massy, Instituted Burgesses
in this Town, and granted them a Gild-Mercatory here, that is, a Society for
free Traffic and Merchandise, about the Year of Christ 1290. as appears by
this following Deed, the Original whereof is now in the custody of John Coe,
the present Mayor of Altrincham, Anno Domini 1667.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus hanc praesentem Chartam inspecturis vel audituris,
Hamundus de Massy Dominus de Doneham salutem sempiternam in Domino: Noveritis
me dedisse, ac hac praesenti Charta mea pro me and Haeredibus meis confirmasse
Burgensibus meis de Altringham, quod Villa mea de Altringham sit Liber Burgus
and quod Burgenses mei ejusdem Burgi habeant Gildam Mercatoriam in eodem Burgo
cum omnibus Libertatibus, and Liberis Consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi Gildam
pertinentibus, secundum Consuetudines Burgi de Macclesfield: Et quod quieti
sint per totam Terram meam, tam per aquam quam per Terram, de Tolneto,
Passagio, Pontagio, Stallagio, Lastagio, and omnibus aliis Servis Id est,
Slavish Customs.
consuetudinibus: Concessi etiam praedictis Burgensibus meis Communam Pasturam
Common of Pasture, and Flaw-Turf, or Heath-Turf.
, Turbariam bruariam, infra Limits de Doneham, Altringham, and Tymperlegh;
salvis mihi and Haeredibus meis approviamentis nostris, and salva mihi and
Haeredibus meis Claustura de Sunderland ad voluntatem nostram sine
contradictione aliquorum, quandocunque illud claudere voluerimus: Ita quod
praedicti Burgenses mei habeant Communam Pasturam semper and ubique ad omnia
animalia sua infra metas de Sunderland, dummodo praedictus locus de Sunderland
non clausus fuerit, salvo mihi and Haeredibus meis toto tempore Pessonis in
praedicto Sunderland: Ita quod eodem tempore praedictum Sunderland in
defensionem ad voluntatem nostram habere poterimus sine contradictione
aliquorum: Et cum clausum fuerit praedictum Sunderland, praedicti Burgenses mei
ha-Beant Communam suam usque ad hayam praedicti Sunderland, and non ultra. Volo
etiam, quod omnes Burgenses mei, qui porcos habuerint tempore Pessonis, in
Burgo meo vel infra Festum beati Jacobi and tempore Pessonis dent rectum Takcum
quando Pasturant infra praedictas Communas, and alibi cum porcis suis ejusdem
Burgi tempore Pessonis non ibunt: Concessi etiam praedictis Burgensibus meis
Housebold and Haybold in omnibus boscis praedictorum locorum, exceptis Hayis
and defensis boscis meis: Concedo etiam praedictis Burgensibus meis, quod non
implacitentur extra Portimotum ejusdem Burgi, nec in aliquo Placito extra
Burgum suum tractentur de transgressionibus infra Burgum factis: Et si aliquis
eorum in misericordia pro aliquo forisfacto incidit, amercietur per Pares suos;
and hoc secundum quantitatem delicti. Volo etiam quod Burgenses mei molent
omnia blada sua super Terram de Altringham crescentia, vel in eadem Villa
Herburgata Id est, Hospitio Expensa.
, ad molendina mea pro octavo-decimo vase multurae: Concedo etiam quod
praedicti Burgenses mei faciant sibi Praepositos and Ballivos per Commune
Concilium mei, vel Ballivorum meorum and ipsorum: Et nullum Placitum in dicto
Burgo teneatur, nec determinetur, nisi coram me vel Ballivo meo: Et quod
unusquisque Burgensis teneat singulum Burgagium suum duarum Perticarum Terrae
in latitudine, and quinque in longitunine, cum una Acra Terrae integra in
Campis, pro duodecem Denariis ad tres Terminos anni mihi and Haeredibus meis
annualim Solvendis per aequales Portiones; videlicet ad Nativitatem Sancti
Johannis Baptistae, ad Festum omnium Sanctorum, and ad Annunciationem beatae
Mariae; libere, quiet, pacifice, and integre, cum omnibus libertatibus
praescriptis: Et quod singulus Burgensis Burgagium suum possit vendere,
invadiare, dare, vel in Testamento assignare cuicunque vel quibuscunque
voluerit, exceptis Ministris Domini Regis and Viris Religiosis, sine
contradictione alicujus vel aliquorum; salva mihi and Haeredibus meis liberate
Furni nostri in eodem Burgo: Ego vero praedictus Haniundus and Haeredes mei
praedicta Burgagia, cum acris Terrae eis adjacentibus, and omnibus libertatibus
suprascriptis, praedictis Burgensibus meis, and Haeredibus suis and assignatis,
contra omnes Gentes in perpetuum Warrantizabimus: In hujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis Testibus, Dominis Reginaldo de
Gray tunc Justiciario Cestriae, Humfrido de Bello campo, Ricardo de Massy
Militibus, Gilberto de Aston, Thoma de Actone, Hugone de Baggelegh, Matthaeo de
Hale, Henrico de Doneham, Johanne de Bowdon, and aliis.

Charta 18 Edw. 1. memb. 3. Rex concessit Hamoni de Massy unum Mercatum per
diem Martis apud Manerium suum de Altringham, and unam Feriam per tres dies
duraturam, videlicet, in Vigilia, die, and crastino Festi Assumptionis beatae
Mariae 15 Die Augusti.
. Lib. C. fol. 260. q.

The Tuesday Market continues at this day; but the Fair is kept now on the
twenty fifth day of July, and the later Fair-day on the eleventh day of
November.

Although we usually style the chief Officer here, Mayor of Altrincham, yet in
truth he is no more than a principal Officer, without any Magisterial Authority.

In a Rentall of Dunham-Massy, dated 3 Hen. 4. 1402. I find there were about
forty Freeholders or Charterers in Altrincham, the rest of the Tenants of
Altrincham, then not above eighteen in number, were Tenants at Will. And it
appears by that Rentall, as well as by another of my own in Henry the Seventh's
time, that in those Ages till Hen. 8. the ancient Tenants in our County had
generally no Leases for Lives, as now they have: and the Rents which at this
day we call Old Rents, were in those former Ages the utmost value of such
Tenements on the Rack, so much have these late Ages outstripped the former for
value, as well for Land as other Commodities.

At this day, 1669. there are above twenty Charterers in this Town, whereof
Robert Parker 's of Oldfield-Hall in Altrincham Gentleman is of greatest value,
next to which is that belonging to William Leycester of Hale-Lowe Gentleman.
Most of all the rest are very small Parcels, not worth the reckoning up; the
chief Lord being George Booth of Dunham-Massy, Lord Delamere.

There are so very many small Cottages erected here by the permission of the
Lords of Dunham-Massy, that it is now become a Nest of Beggars.

Anderton.
The Township of Anderton is not in Doomsday Book. Inquisitio capta post
mortem Vriani de Sancto Petro, 23 Edw. 1. (inter alia) praedictus Vrianus
tenuit Manerium de Anderton in Dominico suo ut de Feodo, de Domino Rege in
Capite per Servitium unius Librae Piperis solvendi ad Scaccarium Cestriae, etc.
as I find it in W. Vernon's Notes: So that Vrian de Sampier held Anderton in
the time of E. 1. but when first granted to the Family of Sampier, or how long
it continued in that Family, or how and when it devolved to Sutton of Sutton
nigh Maxfield in Cheshire, is yet unknown to me. Certain it is, that Sir Peter
Warburton, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas at Westminster, purchased this
Manor from Richard Sutton, Son of Francis Sutton of Sutton nigh Maxfield
Esquire, by Deed, dated the twenty ninth of November, 43 Eliz. 1600. from whom
it descended unto Sir Thomas Stanley of Nether-Alderley Baronet, now Owner
thereof, 1669. to wit, Son of Sir Thomas Stanley Knight, by Elizabeth his Wife,
Daughter and Heir of the said Sir Peter Warburton.

*
It is now commonly said of this Village by the Neighborhood, as it were
proverbially, That here is neither Gentleman nor Beggar, Charterer, Cottager,
nor Alehouse, but a Common without end: for that the Common is circular, lying
round about the Township; and the Demaine has been set to Derry-men and
Tenants, so as no Gentleman of long time has lived there.

Appleton and Hull.
THis Town of Appleton and Hull, in William the Conqueror 's time, belonged to
Osbern Son of Tezzon, the Ancestor to the Boydels of Dodleston, as appears by
the Record of Doomsday Book.

Among the Evidences of Thomas Merbury of Merbury nigh Comberbach Esquire, Anno
Domini 1666. I found this following Deed copied out in a loose Paper, the
Original whereof is there underwritten to be in the possession of Thomas
Stanley, being so attested under his own Hand. Lib. C. fol. 286. d.

HUgo de Boydel omnibus tam praesentibus quam futuris, ad quorum notitiam
praesens Pagina pervenerit, salutem. Noverit universitas vestra, me concessisse
-- Roberto Lancelyn pro Homagio and Servitio suo, totam Terram and Tenementum,
quod Ricardus Lancelyn Pater praefati Roberti tenuit de Antecessoribus meis;
videlicet, Pulton and Bebington, Appleton and Hull, cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis, illi and Haeredibus suis -- Faciendo mihi and Haeredibus meis Servitium
duorum Militum; videlicet cum duobus Armatis apud Dodleston in Werra
quadraginta diebus: Scilicet Servitium unius Hominis pro Pulton and Bebington;
and Servitium alterius Hominis pro Appleton and Hull, pro omni Servitio: Salvo
Servitio quatuor Hominum quolibet tertio Anno per sex dies ad meum Heimineum To
make his Hayment or Hedging.
faciendum apud Dodleston: Pro hac Donatione and Confirmatione idem Robertus
Lancelyn dedit mihi viginti marcas Argenti, etc. Hiis Testibus, Radulpho de
Manwaring, Radulpho de Monte-alto, Willielmo de Pall', Thoma Filio Willielmi,
Roberto de Fulford, etc. about the end of Henry the Second's Reign.

I find Geffrey Son of Adam de Dutton ( Ancestor to Warburton of Arley)
possessed of this Township in the beginning of Henry the Third's Reign, and is
at this present belonging to Warburton of Arley, 1669.

Placita Cestriae, die Martis proxime post Festum Sancti Lucae, 10 Edw. 3.

GAlfridus de Warburton opponit se versus Hugonem de Audley de Placito quod
just and sine dilatione acquietet eum de Servitiis, quae Willielmus de Boydel
Senior ab eo exigit de libero Tenemento suo, quod de praefato Hugone tenet in
Hull and Appleton: unde idem Hugo, qui medius est inter eos, acquietare debet,
etc. Vicecomes returnavit, quod praedictus Hugo nihil habuit in Balliva sua
distringere, etc. Lib. C. fol. 287. k. The Original among the Evidences of
Thomas Merbury of Merbury Esquire, Anno Domini 1666.

Charterers in Appleton and Hull, 1666.
1. Sir Peter Brook of Mere, which Lands he lately purchased from Merbury of
Walton. 2. Mr. Gregge of Bradley in Appleton. 3. Thomas Birch of Birch in
Lancashire. 4. Thomas Warburton of Hill-cliffe. 5. Mary Wright pro Southern 's
Land. 6. William Dentith of Appleton. 7. Robert Okell of Appleton. 8. John
Webster of Appleton. 9. Widow Middleton of Appleton. 10. Mr. Grimsdich of
Grimsdich. 11. William Morris of Gropenhall. 12. John Rycroft of Caterich-Lane.
13. Widow Duddle. 14. Jane Barker Widow. 15. John Minshull. 16. Mr. Thomas
Hatton. 17. Joseph Wats. 18. Widow Moss. 19. Peter Crosby Gentleman. 20.
Thomas Millington Gentleman. 21. Edward Twambrooke.
Ashley.
HAmo de Massy, the first Baron of Dunham Massy, held Ashley in the Conqueror's
time, as appears by Doomsday Book.

And in the Reign of Henry the Third, or sooner, another Hamon de Massy, then
Baron of Dunham Massy, gave half of Ashley unto Robert de Massy. Lib. C. fol
150. d. e.

Richard, Son of Robert Massy, gives the Manor of Ashley (that is, the Moiety
of Ashley) unto Geffrey Dutton of Chedle, in exchange for Dutton of Chedle's
Land in Walton (to wit, the Moiety of Nether-Walton) and for eight Shillings
Rent from William, Son of Kenewret of Newton near Chester. Lib. C. fol. 150 f.

Hamon de Massy the Son, confirms the Grant which Richard de Massy, Son of
Robert de Massy, made to Sir Geffrey Dutton of Chedle, of all his Land in
Ashley, doing those Services which Robert Massy, Father of the said Richard
Massy, did use to do to Sir Hamon Massy the Father. Lib. C. fol. 149. z. the
Original among the Evidences of George Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy.

Geffrey Dutton of Chedle gives to Hamon Dutton his younger Son, totum Manerium
suum de Ashley, about 14 Edw. 1. 1286. Lib. C. fol. 150. I. and Robert Massy of
Sale, Son and Heir of Richard Massy, releaseth unto the said Hamon Dutton, Son
of Geffrey Dutton Lord of Chedle, all his Right in the Manor of Ashley. Lib,
C. fol. 150. g.

*
This Hamon, Seating himself at Ashley, was surnamed De Ashley, as the manner of
those Ages was, to style Men from the Places where they lived; and his
Posterity afterward wholly retained the Surname of Ashley: which Family
continued in the Name of the Ashleys at Ashley, till about the end of the Reign
of Henry the Eighth.

Lib. B. page 208.
In an old Rentall of Dunham-Massy, 3 Hen. 4. I read thus: -- Georgius Ashley
tenet medietatem de Ashley, videlicet duas bovatas terrae in Dominico, and in
Servitio dimidii Feodi Militis, and faciendo liberum Servitium unius Militis
per octo dies tempore Guerrae ad Castrum Cestriae sumptibus propriis, and per
redditum duodecem Denariorum per annum: (this was the Moiety, which Hamon de
Massy gave to Hugh Massy in the Reign of Henry the Third, Lib. C. fol. 151. n.)
alteram medietatem tenet de Dutton de Chedle, reddendo unum Denarium per annum,
and faciendo Hamoni de Massy Domino de Doneham redditum and Servitia de antiquo
tempore debita; that was, Reddendo unum Circulum Rosarum termino Johannis
Saptistae, as appears by another Rentall de anno 21 Edw. 3.

blazon or coat of arms Ar, two Bars Sable, a Crescent of the first.
I. A About the end of Henry the Eighth, Thomasin, Daughter and Heir of George
Ashley of Ashley Esquire, brought this Inheritance unto Richard Brereton of
Lea-Hall, not far from Middlewich, younger Son of Sir William Brereton of
Brereton, in Marriage; by whom she had Issue George Brereton; and two
Daughters, Agnes and Jane.

II. George Brereton of Ashley Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard, Married
Sibill, Daughter and Heir of William Arderne of Timperley Gentleman, and had
Issue William Brereton, eldest Son; Richard, second Son; George Brereton, third
Son, Baptized at Bowdon the eighth day of November 1570. who was buried at
Bowdon the nineteenth of November following; Ottiwell another Son, buried 4
Octobris 1571. also another Son called George Brereton Baptized at Bowdon 7
Junii, 1573. he had a Son called John Brereton, Baptized at Bowdon August 20.
1593. Edward another Son, Baptized at Bowdon the sixth of September 1574. John
Brereton another Son, died young, buried at Bowdon 27 Junii 1575. Thomas
another Son, Baptized at Bowdon 5 Decembris, 1577. Randle another Son, Baptized
at Bowdon the tenth of May, 1585. Lucretia a Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon the
twelfth of November 1579. Jane Brereton another Daughter, buried at Bowdon 9
Novembris 1581.

This George Brereton Esquire was buried at Bowdon the twelfth of October 1587.
and Sibill his Wife was buried at Bowdon 16 Junii, 1583.

III. William Brereton of Ashley Esquire, Son and Heir of George and Sibill,
Married Jane, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Peter Warburton of Arley
Esquire 3 Decembris 1589.
, Anno Domini 1589. and had Issue Richard Brereton eldest Son, Baptized in
December December. 30. 1590. Register of Great Budworth.
1590. Thomas second Son, Baptized at Bowdon 26 Martii 1594. William third Son,
Baptized at Bowdon 23 Decembris 1596. he died unmarried, and was buried at
Bowdon 4 Aprilis 1632. Peter fourth Son, Baptized at Bowdon 26 Augusti 1601, he
died unmarried at Gray's-Inn in London 1659. Frances eldest Daughter, Baptized
at Bowdon 26 Augusti 1592. she Married Alexander Barlow of Barlow in Lancashire
Esquire. Mary second Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 20 Octobris 1595. she died
unmarried. Anne third Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 6 Januarii 1597. she Married
Robert Tatton of Withenshaw in Cheshire Esquire, 8 Januarii 1628. Katharine
fourth Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 16 Martii 1598. she Married Raufe Ashton of
Kirkby in Yorkshire, younger Son of Sir Richard Ashton of Middleton in
Lancashire.

This William Brereton of Ashley, was Sheriff of Cheshire 1609. and died August
29. 1630. aged sixty three years. Jane his Wife was buried at Bowdon 5 Martii
1627. whose Monument, with her Husbands, remains in Bowdon Church.

IV. Richard Brereton of Ashley Esquire, Son and Heir of William and Jane, was
never Married, but had an illegitimate Son, begot of one Ellin Higginson his
Servant, called William Brereton, living at Chester Anno Domini 1653.

This Richard was Sheriff of Cheshire 1632. and was buried at Bowdon 14
Septembris 1649. in the fifty ninth year of his Age.

V. Thomas Brereton of Ashley Esquire, Brother and Heir to Richard, Married
Theodosia, Daughter of Sir Thomas Tirrell of Castlethorp in Buckinghamshire,
but had no Issue, leaving his whole Inheritance to be shared by his three
Sisters abovesaid, and their Heirs.

This Thomas built the Domestic Chapel at Ashley, and a fair Dining Room
there, Anno Domini 1653. and was buried at Bowdon in the Year of Christ 1660.
aged sixty six years.

Charterers in Ashley 1666.
1. George Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy, has part of Arthur Worseley's
Tenement. 2. Daniel of Over-Tabley has one Tenement. 3. Buckley of Chedle has
part of Edward Hill's Tenement, the other part is now the Lady Whitmores,
purchased from Savage of Clifton in Cheshire. 4. Massy of Lea-Hall in
Mottram-Andrew; scilicet pro Harper's House. 5. Robert Heskith of Ashley. 6.
Richard Wright of Ashley. 7. Thomas Worseley of Ashley.
Ashton super Mersey.
IN an old Rentall of Dunham-Massy, dated 3 Hen. 4. 1402. I find it thus, --

Georgius Carington Chivaler tenet Manerium suum de Carington, and medietatem
Villae de Ashton, and tertiam partem Villae de Partington, faciendo liberum
Servitium pro duabus partibus Feodi Militis; ut per Chartam Antecessoribus
dicti Georgii per Hamonem Massy Militem factam: and reddendo per annum de
Stothe, alias dictum Sheriffs-Tooth, septem Denarios: Et ipse faciet Sectam
Curiae, quae vocatur Judger, de quindena in quindenam: ita quod pro qualibet
defalta dabit per viam amerciamenti duos solidos pro certo; and ipse, and
quatuor Tenentium suorum de villata de Carington, venient ad visum
Franci-Plegii.

In the Notes collected by Will. Vernon I read, Post mortem Willielmi Boydell,
23 Edw. 3. inter Feoda dicti Willielmi: (inter alia) Robertus Ashton, Ricardus
Dikenson, and Johannes Deane tenent medietatem Maneriorum de Sale and Ashton
per Servitium unius Feodi Militis, and quilibet eorum tertio anno tres Denarios.

This Robert Ashton was Rector Ecclesiae de Ashton 23 Edw. 3. These were
Feoffees in Trust; so that one Moiety of Ashton seems to be of the Fee of
Boydell of Dodleston, and the other Moiety of the Fee of the Barons of Dunham
Massy.

It is plain the Parish Church here was a Rectory in the beginning of Edward
the Third's Reign; which now has Brereton of Honford for its Patron, 1666. and
was invested in Sir Vrian Brereton, younger Son of Randle Brereton of Malpas,
in the Right of Margaret his Wife, Daughter and Heir of William Honford of
Honford Esquire, and Widow of Sir John Stanley; which Sir Vrian was living 1566.

The Church here comprehends within its Parish, l. s. d. Sale 00 10 09 Ashton
one half 00 07 00 00 17 09

The greatest part of Ashton super Mersey at this day 1666. belongs to Brereton
of Honford. The Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy has about an eighth part thereof.

Aston juxta Sutton.
THis Town of Aston gave Name to the Family of the Astons, who have been Seated
here for a long time.

In the Record of Doomsday Book we find, that Odard held this Town under
William Fitz Nigell, Baron of Halton, sub Anno Christi 1086. where we find
only one Aston named: for Aston juxta Sutton, and Aston-Grange, as now they be
severed and distinguished, I conceive were then but one Town.

The same Odard held part of Dutton also from Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, as
appears by the same Record; which Odard was the undoubted Ancestor to the
Duttons of Dutton, as appears by several Deeds of great antiquity among the
Evidences of Dutton of Dutton, which I have seen.

About the Reign of Henry the Second, I find one Gilbert de Aston certainly
possessed of this Town of Aston juxta Sutton: In which Line and Family it has
continued ever since to this day, Sir Willoughby Aston of Aston Baronet being
now Owner of the same, who has built a sumptuous House here a little distance
from the old one, Anno Christi 1668.

Whether that Gilbert de Aston be Descended from Odard, let the more curious
make strict enquiry; I am sure I never yet saw any thing to prove it.

*
In this Town is now only one Charterer 1666. which small Freehold Richard
Morris of Aston is now possessed of: It belonged to one Higginson, whose
Daughter and Heir Married the said Rich. Morris, and was formerly bought by one
J. Higginson, the Lessee of this Land, from Thomas Paver of Lostock, John
Thomason of Harpesford, and Richard Tailor, joint Tenants thereof, 25 Hen. 8.
This I conceive was part of that Oxgange of Land, which Richard de Aston gave
away to Raufe, Son of Richard de Kingsley, in the Reign of Henry the Third.

In this Aston lies a certain parcel of Land, called Middleton-Grange, as the
same stands Mized by it self in our common Mize-Book of Cheshire, and now
belongs to Sir Willoughby Aston Lord of this Town. I conceive it is the same
with that called Mid-Eston in Doomesday-Book, which then belonged to the Church
of St. Werburge in Chester; and was held by William Fit-Nigell Baron of Halton,
as Tenant to St. Werburge: So called, as it were, Middle of Aston, when the
Town was yet undivided, and lies between Aston-Grange, and Aston juxta Sutton;
howbeit it is now wholly taken to lie in Aston juxta Sutton. This Middle-Eston
was confirmed to the Priory of Norton by John Lacy Earl of Lincoln and Baron of
Halton, about the twentieth Year of Henry the Third, Anno Domini 1236. as I
find the Deed transcribed in a long I archment Roll among the Evidences of
Dutton of Dutton, at Dutton, wherein sundry other Deeds belonging to the Priory
of Norton are also transcribed, by the name of Middel-Estonam cum omnibus
pertinentiis, quam habent ex Dono Dominae Matildae, quondam Uxoris Domini
Collini de Loches: And also the Earl quits the same from Wardship and Relief,
for him and his Heirs, which was due for that Land.

This Middleton-Grange, called also sometimes Middle-Aston-Grange, was
purchased from the King, after the Dissolution of Abbeys, by Thomas Aston of
Aston Esquire, 37 Hen. 8. for the Sum of 270 l. 11 s. 5 d. paying the yearly
Rent of 1 l. 1 s. 9 d. So I find in the Chartulary of Aston-Deeds, page 66.
number. 537.

Here was anciently a Chapel called Middleton-Chappel, where the Prior and
Convent of Norton were bound to find a Priest, in former Ages, to say Mass on
Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, Weekly, for ever: Which Chapel being out of
Repair, and Service said there only on Sundays for forty Years then last past,
it was complained of by Richard Aston, Son of Sir Robert Aston, at a Visitation
3 Hen. 6. 1425. and an Order was made by Richard Stanley then Archdeacon of
Chester, the twentieth of August, 3 Hen. 6. That whereas the Prior and Convent
of Norton, long before the same was an Abbey, did Covenant with the Abbot of
Vale-Royal, to find at their own proper Cost a fit Chaplain to Officiate here
three days a week, as aforesaid; It was ordered, That the said Agreement should
be kept and observed. But these Variances concerning Middleton-Chappel, between
Robert Abbot of the Monastery of St. Mary of Norton, and Richard Aston of Aston
Esquire, were composed by the mediation of Thomas Dutton Esquire, and Anne his
Wife, Dame Isabel late Wife of Sir John Carrington, and Jenkin of Leycester:
Dated the tenth of November, 32 Hen. 6. The same Chartulary, page 23. number. 501.
and page 21. number. 503. and page 216. number. 504.

But after that Middleton-Chappel fell into decay, another Chapel was erected
in later Ages, somewhat nearer to the Hall of Aston, called Aston-Chappel,
situate within the Parish of Runcorne; and in lieu of finding a Priest to
Officiate here by the Abbot of Norton, the King (after those Lands came into
his Hands) gave five Pounds yearly Rent to the Maintenance of a Minister here
at Aston-Chappel, issuing out of the Lands late belonging to Norton-Abby, by a
Decree in the Court of Augmentations at London, dated the 28 of January, 33
Hen. 8. Which Decree was Exemplified and Confirmed in the 13 Year of Queen
Elizabeth, inter les Chartes de Aston, Number. 505. Which Sum of Five Pounds is
yearly paid at this day, 1671. by the Kings Auditor at his Office at Chester.

And this Aston-Chappel was lately made a Parochial-Chappel in our days by the
Grant of John Bridgeman Bishop of Chester, dated the sixteenth of April, 11
Car. 1. 1635. by the procurement of Sir Thomas Aston of Aston Baronet; and so
it is now become a Parochial Chapel for Burial, Baptism, and other Rites, for
these adjacent Villages, -- The Mize. li. s. d. Sutton 00 08 00 Aston juxta
Sutton 00 10 00 Middleton-Grange in Aston aforesaid 00 06 00 Aston-Grange 00 08
00 01 12 00

Now follows the Pedigree of this Ancient Family of Aston of Aston juxta
Sutton, with all care and fidelity taken by me from the Evidences of this
Family, and inserted in the Sumptuous Genealogy now in possession of Sir
Willoughby Aston of Aston Baronet, 1671. wherein some more Descents are put
down than I conceive can be warranted by the Deeds, and exact Computation of
Times; from which I must crave leave to vary in some of the more Ancient
Descents.

blazon or coat of arms Per Cheveron, Sable and Argent.
I. Gilbert de Aston was Lord of Aston juxta Sutton, and lived in the time of
Henry the Second, King Richard the First, and part of King John at least. This
I take to be clear out of Ancient Deeds. And he had Issue Richard, Son and
Heir. This Gilbert probably was the Son of Richard de Aston, who released all
his Right to Robert Abbot of Chester, in Villa de Aston, which Thomas Son of
Ernald sometime held, about the Reign of Henry the Second. This was
Middleton-Grange, as I take it.

II. Richard de Aston, by the Name of Richard de Aston, Son of Gilbert de
Aston, gave unto Hugh Dutton of Dutton sex Bovatas Terrae in Aston, in the
beginning of the Reign of Henry the Third, about 1230. for then lived Geffrey
Son of Adam de Dutton, who is one of the Witnesses, Lib. C. fol. 155. q. which
Lands belong now to the Demain of Dutton, 1671. wherein the Chapel of Poosey
(now in decay) was situate within the Parish of Runcorne, and had its Name from
the situation, being seated between the Park-Pool and the River; thence called
Poosey-Chappel: For Ee, or Ey, signifies a Brook in the old Saxon Language. And
so much of the Park of Dutton, lying from Poosey-Chappel toward Aston, with
the little Fields above lying up to Aston-Town-Field, I take to be the Lands
here granted to Dutton.

The same Richard also, by the Name of Ricardus de Aston, Filius Gilberti de
Aston gave unto the Priory of Norton a certain place called Hendley (or Endley)
which is now belonging to the Demain of Norton, and known by the Name of
Endley-Wood. Lib. B. page 200. number. 8.

He gave also to Randle, Son of Richard de Kingsley, one Oxgange of Land in
Aston, which John Lacy Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, confirmed;
and was afterward given to Hugh de Camera, by the Daughters and Heirs of
Richard de Kingsley; and Hugh de Camera gave the same to Adam le Turner of
Frodsham, as appears by Sir Willoughby Aston's Deeds.

This Richard had a Wife called Joan, and had Issue Richard Son and Heir.

III. Richard Aston of Aston, Son and Heir of Richard, had Issue Richard, and
Robert; which Robert had Issue Richard, to whom Sir Robert Dutton of Mere in
Staffordshire gave a Parcel of Land in Radward, in the Fee of Mere and Aston in
Staffordshire; to wit, that Land which the said Richard, Son of Robert,
formerly held: The Original in the possession of Sir Willoughby Aston of Aston
juxta Sutton, in Cheshire, Baronet, 1671.

I find also one Simon de Aston, who married Agnes, one of the Daughters and
Coheirs of Adam Hatton of Hatton, nigh Daresbery in Cheshire, living 1290. Lib.
C. fol. 4. which may fall out for the time to be a younger Son of this Richard
Aston; but I cannot certainly affirm it.

This Richard Aston of Aston is said to marry Maude, Daughter of William, Son
of Herberd de Walton; and had Issue, Richard Son and Heir, and Margery, married
to William Son of Hugh de Frodsham.

IV. Richard Aston of Aston, Son and Heir of Richard Aston, gave to his Brother
Robert two Oxganges of Land in Aston; one whereof Domina Johanna quondam
tenuit, Mrs. Joane formerly held. This Deed was made tempore Edwardi Primi; and
this Joane seems to be a Gentlewoman, probably the Wife of Richard Son of
Gilbert de Aston aforesaid.

This Richard Aston married Rose, the fourth and youngest Daughter, and after
Coheir of Roger Throssell of Maxfield in Cheshire, in the Reign of King Edward
the First; and had Issue Richard Aston Son and Heir, and Hugh Prior of
Birkenhed-Abby in Wirral-Hundred.

Rose was Widow, and living 18 Edw. 3. Placita apud Cestriam, 18 Edw. 3. in
Vigilia Beatae Mariae.

V. Richard Aston of Aston, Son and Heir of Richard, married Anabilla Daughter
of Eva de Rode, and Sister to William Rode of Rode in Cheshire, in the Reign of
Edward the Second: The Chartulary of Aston-Deeds, page 2. and had Issue Robert
Aston, living 7 Edw. 3. but then very young: Thomas, another Son, living also 7
Edw. 3. and Margery Or Margaret.
a Daughter, married to William Son of William Walensis de Halton, id est, Son
of William the Welshman of Halton.

I find among Sir Willoughby Aston's Deeds, Number. 78. a Record under the Seals
of 24. Persons, dated the fourth of July, Anno Domini 1354. 29 Edw. 3. which
Persons are all named in the Deed of Record, and witnessing, That Sir Richard
Aston of Aston Knight, Hugh and Richard Sons to the said Sir Richard, and also
Sir Robert of Aston Knight, Father of Richard Aston now Lord of Aston, were
possessed of a certain Corrody in the Abbey of Norton; so as each of them should
have, and have had by themselves, for finding a Yeoman, a Page, three Horses, a
Brace of Greyhounds, and a Goshawke, according to their Estate, with their
Chambers, and such Easment that belongs to their Degree: Whereunto the Priors
and Abbots of the said Monastery in all their time (considering the great
Possessions given out of the Lordship of Aston to the said House) were
consenting, granting, and yielding, as for their Right of old time granted and
had.

VI. Sir Robert Aston of Aston Knight, Son and Heir of Richard Aston, married
Felice Daughter of John Hawarden Citizen of Chester, about 1338. and had Issue
Richard Aston Son and Heir, Hugh second Son, Lawrence, and James living 49 Edw.
3.

By the French Deed, Number. 57. it appears, That Richard Aston, Lord of Aston,
did Covenant with John Hawarden Citizen of Chester, That Robert, Son of the
said Richard, should take to Wife Felice, Daughter of the said John; and if
Robert die before Marriage, then Thomas, another Son of the said Richard,
should have her to Wife; with other Covenants, in case Robert should die before
he attained unto fourteen Years of Age, or Matrimony had. Dated 7 Edw. 3. So
that Robert was then very young.

This Sir Robert was dead before 29 Edw. 3. as appears by the Record aforesaid,
dated 29 Edw. 3. and had Issue Richard Aston Lord of Aston, living 29 Edw. 3.

VII. Richard Aston of Aston, Son and Heir of Sir Robert, was Lord of Aston 29
Ed. 3. who died without Issue about 42 or 43 Edw. 3. or sooner.

And the Right Line now failing, the Estate came to Sir Richard Aston, If
Fillote and Felice be here meant of the same Woman, and Daughter of the same
John Hawarden, then is here some contradiction in the Evidences, and the two
Robert Astons confounded.
Son of Robert Aston of Ringey in Aston, Son of Hugh Aston, Brother and Heir to
Richard who died without Issue. It appears by the Testimony of Robin Hocan, 5
Hen. 5. 1417. then aged 70 Years, [Deed Number, 121.] That he knew Robin of Aston,
Son and Heir of Hugh, to be married by Hugh his Father to Fillote Daughter of
Black John Hawarden, at that time Steward of Hawarden; and that Robin and
Fillote were Enfeoffed of a parcel of Land called Ringey, and had Issue Sir
Richard Aston, and other Children; and afterward Robin died in Spain in the
lifetime of Hugh his Father. This Hugh had to Wife Cicely, afterward married
to Hoknell; and Hugh married Richard his Grandson, Son of Robert Aston of
Ringey, unto Jonet Daughter of John Hoknell of Hurley, and had Issue: but
Jonet, and all her Children, and Fillote Mother of Richard, died all of the
Pestilence at Ringey; and after Sir Richard Aston married Ellen Daughter of
Geffrey Dutton; and that Hocan knew Sir Richard Aston occupying the whole
Manor of Aston for forty Years and more, and Sir Robert his Son occupying it
for seven Years and more.

*
VIII. Sir Richard Aston of Aston Knight, (Son and Heir of Robert Aston of
Ringey in Aston, From this Sir Richard downwards the Pedigree is very clear.
Son of Hugh of Aston) married Jonet Daughter of John Hoknell of Huxley, and
had diverse Children by her, who died all of the Plague at Ringey, with their
Mother also: Afterward Sir Richard married Ellen Daughter and Heir of Geffrey
Dutton, 9. Rich. 2. (which Geffrey was third Son of Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton)
by whom he had Lands in Listark and Halton. Ibidem, page 5. g. and page 8. a.
22 Rich. 2.

By Ellen he had Issue, Robert, Son and Heir; Henry, living 10 Hen. 5. Elianour
married Richard Priestland of Priestland; Elizabeth married Thomas, Son of
Thomas Boydell of Gaterich in Gropenhall, in Bucklow-Hundred, 17 Rich. 2. but
had no Issue by him: After she married Robert Massy of Hale, 21 Rich. 2. And
lastly she married Thomas Danyel of Over-Tabley, in the same Hundred of
Bucklow; and she died 11 Hen. 4. 1410. Lib. C. fol. 283. g. and fol. 281. f.

This Sir Richard was Treasurer to Queen Philip, Wife of Edward the Third, of
her Lands and Rents in Ambrage in Wales, 32 Edw. 3. and Steward of Hopesdale.
He was a Soldier in Spain, 12 Rich. 2. and Steward of Halton, 10 Hen. 4.

Ellen, Wife of Sir Richard, after his death married John Rycroft.

IX. Sir Robert Aston of Aston Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Richard, married
Isabel Daughter and Heir of John Beeston of (...) and had Issue Richard Son and
Heir, David Aston, living 23 Hen. 6. and Alice Wife of John Massy of Sale in
this Hundred, 24 Hen. 6.

Sir Robert died 5 Hen 5. 1417. Afterward Isabel his Widow married John
Carington of Carington in this Hundred, 9 Hen. 5. He was afterward Sir John
Carington Knight. Isabel had the Wardship of Richard Aston her Son, page 7. c.

X. Sir Richard Aston of Aston Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Robert, married
Maude Daughter and Heir of Peter Massy of Horton in Cheshire, by Margaret his
Wife, Daughter and Heir of William de Horton, 9 Hen. 5. This Peter Massy was
younger Son of Richard Massy of Rixton in Lancashire, Esquire

Sir Richard had Issue by Maude, Thomas Aston, Son and Heir; John, second Son,
living 7 Edw. 4. Geffrey Aston, third Son, living 19 Hen. 7. William, fourth
Son, died without Issue 20 Hen. 7. Maude, married to John Done of Flax-yoards
in Cheshire; Joan, Wife of Roger Dutton, afterward Heir to all Dutton-Lands;
which Joan, after the death of Roger, married Sir Richard Strangewaies: and
Margery, another Daughter, married John Wood of Sutton, 2 Hen. 7.

Sir Richard died 8 Hen. 7. 1492.

XI. Thomas Aston of Aston Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Richard, married
Margaret, one of the Daughters of Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton in this Hundred,
7 Edw. 4. 1467. She afterward became a Coheir to Dutton-Lands, and had
Kekwick and Aston-Mondrem to her share.

This Thomas died in the Lifetime of Sir Richard his Father, about 1484.
Margaret his Widow afterward married Raufe Vernon of Haslington in Cheshire,
Esquire

XII. Richard Aston of Aston Esquire Son and Heir of Thomas, married Dowse,
Daughter of Piers Warburton of Arley in this Hundred, Esquire 1 Rich. 3. 1484. and
had Issue Thomas, Son and Heir; Richard, a Priest, 26 Hen. 8. Robert Aston of
Grange in Staffordshire; John Aston of Grange, fourth Son; Katharine, Wife of
Richard Broughton of Broughton in Staffordshire; Alice married Randle, Son and
Heir of Randle Manwaringe of Karincham in Cheshire, Esquire 23 Hen. 7. and Anne
married to William Massy of Rixton in Lancashire, Esquire 10 Hen. 8. This Richard
Aston died 20 Hen. 8. 1529.

XIII. Thomas Aston of Aston Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard, married Bridget,
one of the Daughters of John Harewell, and Sister and Coheir to Thomas
Harewell of Shotery in Warwickshire, 4 Hen. 8. 1512. and had Issue, John, Son
and Heir; Richard; Peter, third Son, 38 Hen. 8. who had a Bastard called Thomas
Aston, then living at London; William, fourth Son, married Anne Daughter of
Thomas Ireland of the Hutt in Lancashire, Esquire, and had Issue; and Francis,
fifth Son.

He had also a Bastard son called Roger, afterward Sir Roger Aston, Gentleman
of the Bedchamber to King James, who marred Mary Stewart Daughter to Alexander
Lord Oghiltrey, being lineally descended from Duncan Earl of Lenox in Scotland;
by whom he had Issue, Margaret, married to Sir Gilbert Houghton of
Houghton-Tower in Lancashire, Baronet; Mary, married to Sir Samuel Peyton of
Knowlton in Kent, Baronet; Elizabeth, Wife of Sir Robert Winkfield or Upton in
Northamptonshire; and Anne, Wife of Sir Thomas Perient of Colchester in Essex:
These were his four Daughters and Heirs. Afterward Sir Roger Aston had to Wife
Cordelia Sister to the Earl of Chesterfield, but had no Issue by her.

Thomas Aston of Aston was Sheriff of Cheshire 1551. 4 Edw. 6. and died 6 Edw.
6.

XIV. John Aston of Aston Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas, married Margaret
Daughter of Thomas Ireland of the Hutt in Lancashire, Esquire, 38 Hen. 8. 1546.
and had Issue, Thomas, Son and Heir; John, a Lawyer, died without Issue;
Edward, another Son, died without Issue; Brigit, married Thomas Bunbury of
Stanney in Cheshire, Esquire; Elizabeth, Wife of John Massy of Coughow, younger
Brother to George Massy of Podington, Esquire, and afterward Heir to his
Brother; Margaret, Wife of Thomas Egerton of Walgreve, after of Sir Edward
Tirrel of Thornton in Buckinghamshire; Mary, died without Issue; Elianour
married James Whitlok; Winifrid, Wife of Peter Derby near Leverpool in
Lancashire; Ellen, Wife of George Manwaring of Ightfield in Shropshire,
Gentleman, a younger Brother; Ursula, Wife of Geffrey Holcroft of Hurst in
Lancashire; also Richard, a Bastard-son, who lived at Rock-Savage, and died at
Halton 1616.

This John exchanged certain Lands in Whitley with Richard Starky of Stretton
Esquire for Lands in Aston, 1 Elizabethae: He died 5 Augusti, 15 Eliz. 1573.

Margaret his Widow married Hugh Beeston of Torperley in Cheshire, Esquire 27 Eliz.

XV. Sir Thomas Aston of Aston, Son and Heir of John, was Knighted 1603. and
married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Arthur Manwaring of Ightfield in Shropshire,
11 Eliz. 1569. and had Issue, John, Son and Heir; Sir Arthur Aston of Fulham in
Middlesex, second Son, who had Issue Richard Aston, and Sir Arthur Aston a
Colonel in Germany, and Governor of Oxford for the King, 1644. but was
barbarously killed after at Tredagh in Ireland, having surrendered the Town to
the Parliament-Rebels upon Conditions, 1655. and had Issue: Sir Thomas Aston,
third Son of this Sir Thomas, married Elizabeth Daughter of John Shugborough of
Burdenbury in Warwickshire, Esquire, and had Issue: Frances, eldest Daughter of
Sir Thomas Aston of Aston, married John Hocknell of Hocknell in Cheshire, after
to Richard Davys of Croughton, and thirdly to Owen Longford of Burton in
Denbighshire; Grace, second Daughter, died without Issue; Margaret, third
Daughter, married Sir Thomas Ireland, who bought Beusy nigh Warrington in
Lancashire, and was Vice-Chamberlain of Chester; Elizabeth, another Daughter,
married Richard Dod of Cloverley in Shropshire; Mary, Wife of Richard Brown of
Upton nigh Chester, Gentleman; after to Jaques Arnodio, a Frenchman; Anne,
another Daughter, married Richard Allen of Green-Hill in Nether-Whitley in
Cheshire, Gentleman; Katharine, another Daughter, married Peter Legh of Ridge
nigh Maxfield, Gentleman.

Sir Thomas had a second Wife, called Mary, Daughter of William Unton of
Draiton in Shropshire; but had no Issue by her.

This Sir Thomas was Sheriff of Cheshire, 1601. 43 Eliz. and died Anno Dom.
1613.

Mary his Widow afterward Married Edward Paler of York Esquire.

Sir Thomas bought Lands in Aston from John Witter of Torperley, and Margaret
his Wife, 20 Eliz. 1578.

XVI. John Aston of Aston Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas, was Sewer to
Queen Anne, Wife of King James, and Married Maude, Daughter of Robert Nedham of
Shenton in Shropshire Esquire, Anno Domini 1611. and had Issue Thomas, Son and
Heir; John Aston, second Son, died unmarried 1648. Robert, third Son, died
young: Maude Married Thomas Parsons of Cubbington in Warwickshire Esquire;
after to John Shugborough, now of Upton in Wirrall 1666. a younger Son of the
Shugboroughs in Warwickstire. Anne, another Daughter, died young. Elizabeth,
another Daughter, died unmarried 1628.

This John Aston of Aston died 13 Maii 16^5. 13 Jacobi.

XVII. Sir Thomas Aston of Aston Baronet, Son and Heir of John; Married
Magdalene, Daughter of Sir John Poultney, and Sister and Coheir to John
Poultney of Misterton in Leycestershire Esquire, 1627. by whom he had Issue
Robert, who died young 1634. and Thomas, who died 1637. at the age of six
years; and two Daughters, Jane and Elizabeth, who died Infants, as appears by
the Monument in Aston Chapel.

Magdalene his first Wife dying 2 die Junii.
1635. he afterward Married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Henry
Willoughby of Risley in Derbyshire Baronet 1639. by whom he had Issue Sir
Willoughby Aston now living 1666. who Married Mary, Daughter of John Offley,
late of Madeley in Staffordshire Esquire, and also two Daughters, Magdalene and
Mary, both living 1666.

This Sir Thomas was made Baronet in July, 4 Car. 1. 1628. and was Sheriff of
Cheshire Anno Domini 1635. He died in the time of the late War between the King
and his rebellious Parliament. He was Loyal to his Prince, and was
unfortunately beaten by Sir William Brereton of Honford's Party of Rebels near
to Nantwich, January 28. 1642. but Sir Thomas escaped and got away; after he
was taken at another Skirmish in Staffordshire, and brought Prisoner to
Stafford; where endeavoring to make an Escape, a Soldier espying him, gave him
a Blow on the Head, with which, and his other Wounds, he fell into a Fever,
whereon he died at Stafford not long after, to wit, 24 Martii 1645. and was
buried at his own Chapel of Aston in Cheshire: which Chapel he procured to be
Consecrated by John Bridgeman Bishop of Chester, Anno Domini 1637. with liberty
of Baptism and Burial, and repaired the Chancel thereof very handsomely, though
much defaced afterward in the late War.

Aston-Grange.
IT seems to me, that Roger Fitz-Alured was possessed of Aston-Grange in the
Reign of Henry the Second. See Monasticon Anglicanum, Pars 2. page 186. which
was held of the ancient Barons of Halton, and was afterward given to the
Priory of Norton.

But after the dissolution of Monasteries in England by Hen. 8. Richard Brook
Esquire purchased this Village from the King, together with the Manor of Norton
and other Lands, 37 Hen. 8. 1545. and has since been enjoyed by his Posterity
unto this present 1666. there being no Charterer at all within the same.

Aston juxta Great Budworth.
THis Town of Aston juxta Budworth, was held of the Earl of Chester by William
Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton, in the Reign of William the Conqueror, and one
Pagan then held it under the said William, scilicet sub Anno Domini 1086. This
appears by the Record of Doomsday Book; and at this day it is within the Fee
of Halton.

John, Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, The Originals penes
Leycester de Tabley.
gave the Manor of Hield in this Aston, unto Methroso Punterlinge in the Reign
of Henry the Second, rendering yearly a Welsh Lance on the Feast Day of St.
Bartholomew. M. number. 1. Afterward Geffrey, Son of Adam de Dutton, (Ancestor to
Warburton of Arley) buyeth the same from one Hugh the Welsh Deacon, Son of Hugh
del Hield, for twenty four Marks of Silver, in the Reign of Henry the Third,
and gave it to Agnes de Dutton his Daughter. M. number. 2. and number. 5, 6.

But after, toward the latter end of Henry the Third, Robert de Denbigh and
Margaret his Wife purchase it again from Geffrey, Son of Geffrey, Son of Adam
de Dutton, for three Marks of Silver, and a Wich-house in Northwich. I. number.
91. which Margaret was Daughter of the said Geffrey, Son of Geffrey: but Robert
Denbigh dying without Issue, the said Margaret his Widow Married Nicholas de
Leycester, about 1276. afterward Sir Nicholas Leycester Knight, unto whose
Issue it remained, till John Leycester of Tabley sold it again unto William del
Heild and Goditha his Wife, and to the Heirs of the Body of the said William,
reserving the yearly Rent of forty Shillings, Anno Domini 1355. 29 E. 3. M.
number. 14. and number. 13.

And afterward it became to be divided by the two Daughters and Coheirs of
William del Heild, Margaret and Emme; M. number. 16. and so this Land of Heild
continued to their Heirs, until the one Moiety thereof was purchased again by
Thomas Leycester of Tabley Esquire, Anno Domini 1500. M. number. 19. and the other
Moiety was purchased by Dorothy Leycester Widow, from Richard Sutton of Sutton
nigh Maxfield Esquire, Son of Francis Sutton, Anno Domini 1601. 43.
Elizabethae. M. number. 60. So that the whole is now reverted again to Leycester.

There is also another Place in this Aston, called The Manor of Wethale, which
the aforesaid Geffrey, Son of Geffrey, Son of Adam de Dutton, gave unto
Margaret his Daughter aforesaid, and to her Heirs, with all Commons and
Easements of the Town of Aston: Et Sciedum est, quod ipsa Margareta, and
Haeredes sui, and Homines eorum qui manebunt in Wethale, habebunt Housebote and
Haybote, and sufficienter ad ardendum and ad aedificandum, de Bosco de Aston
sine visu Forestariorum praedicti Galfridi, and haeredum suorum: habebunt etiam
omnes Porcos suos proprios (ubicunque fuerint nutriti) in eodem Bosco sine
Pannagio, as the very words of the Deed do run. R. number. 3. At which time also
he gave her the Town of Nether-Tabley by another Deed; and this about the
latter end of the Reign of Henry the Third: for in these Ages Gentlemen used to
give a large proportion of Lands with their Daughters in Marriage, rather than
a small Sum of Money, Land being then but of little value: All which Lands
descended to her Heirs by Sir Nicholas Leycester. And Peter Dutton, Son of the
said Geffrey, released all his Right in Nether-Tabley, Wethale and Heild, unto
Roger Leycester, Son of Sir Nicholas, Anno Dom. 1296. 24 Edw. 1. I. number. 6. and
do now remain in possession of Sir Peter Leycester of Tabley Baronet, and his
Tenants, at this day 1669.

The Manors of VVethale and Heild in Aston juxta Budworth do contain about a
third part of the Town of Aston, the Demaine Land of Arley being taken out and
excepted.

All the rest of this Town has been enjoyed by the Ancestors of the
VVarburtons of Arley, from the time of Adam de Dutton aforesaid, even to this
present, save only the Lands granted away by them unto the Predecessors of
these Charterers following -- and now, 1666. in possession of -- 1. The Widow
Garstid of Chester, called Litley Lands, formerly belonging to Hayes of Litley,
and was possessed by Adam, Son of William de Litley, Anno Domini 1335. 2.
Daniel of Tabley has two small Tenements in Aston. 3. Raufe Vernon of Aston,
called Wethale Farm. 4. Gerard of Wimbles-Trafford, late Picton's Land. 5.
Philip Antrobus of Over-Pever, one small Tenement in Aston. 6. Berry's Tenement
in Aston, which formerly was the Inheritance of Sneyd of Bradwell, and sold by
William Sneyd unto Gawen Legh of Northwood, younger Son of Matthew Legh of
Swineyard in High-Legh, 35 Hen. 8. afterward Richard Legh of Northwood sold it
to Peter Leycester of Tabley Esquire, 1633. and lastly Sir Peter Leycester of
Tabley sold it to his Servant Thomas Jackson of Heild, 1 Aprilis 1669. 21 Car.
2.


In this Aston is situated the Hall of Arley, now the chief Mansion House of
the Warburtons of Arley; which House was built by Piers Warburton of Arley
Esquire, who died 10 Hen. 7. 1495. wherein of late a Ground-Room has been
converted into a Chapel. But see more in Budworth of the ancient Places of
Habitation of Warburton.

In the Feodary of Halton, about the beginning of Edward the Third, we read
thus, --

Galfridus Warburton

Johannes Fitton tenet Villas de Budworth, and Aston juxta Budworth, tertiam
partem de Tabley Superiori, and duas bovatas Terrae in Tabley Inferiori, and
bovatam Terrae in quarta part de Comberbach, and unam bovatam Terrae in manu
Prioris de Norton in Budworth, and totam Terram de Lythe ultra Dee juxta
Cestriam, pro uno Feodo Militis and pro Relevio. l. s. d. 05 00 00

Where Geffrey Warburton is put over the Head, as then Tenant to the Baron of
Halton for those Services when this Feodary was made: the other possibly as it
stood in former Rentalls.

Here should follow the Descent of Warburton of Arley; but Sir George Warburton
denied me the perusal of his Evidences, so as it could not exactly be
performed; wherefore I have omitted the same.

Baggiley.
blazon or coat of arms Or, three Lozenges Azure.
IN the Conqueror's time, Gislebertus and Ranulfus and Hamo, held Sunderland
and Baggiley; which at the coming in of the Normans were held by Edward, and
Suga, and Udeman, and Pat, for four Manors, and were Gentlemen, Wasta est
Tota. So the Record of Doomsday.

The three first named, I take to be Gilbert Venables Baron of Kinderton;
Ranulfus, supposed to be the Ancestor of the Manwarings; and Hamon Massy Baron
of Dunham-Massy. Sunderland is Locus cognitus within the Town of Dunham-Massy.

About the Reign of King John, Hamon Massy (then Lord of Dunham-Massy, and
Descended from the other Hamon before named) gave unto Matthew de Bromhale,
Bromhale, Duckenfield, and two parts of Baggiley, which the Father of the said
Matthew held of the said Hamon, as his Inheritance in Knights Service, to him
and his Heirs: Faciendo praedicto Hamoni and Haeredibus suis liberum Servitium
Feodi unius Loricae; Quitting all other Service de aratro and hosterio Houe
Gallice, an Instrument of Husbandry to break up the Earth.
, and Segibus secandis, Feu Feu Gallice, Fire, Fuel.
Colligendo, and Homagio faciendo de Averiis, and de Pannagio, and Salicher
Salicher, puto pro Saligerio, carrying of Salt from the Which, a Service in
those Ages very usual.
, and de omnibus aliis consuetudinibus, -- etc. Lib. C. fol. 258. c. as I had
it from Mr. Vernon's Notes.

Certain it is, that this Town gave Name to the Family of the Baggileys, who
were Seated here.

Sir William Baggiley was Lord of Baggiley 13 Edw. 2. 1319. and John Baggiley
his Son made a Feofment of the Manor of Baggiley in Cheshire, and of his
Manors of Hyde and Leveshulme in Lancashire, unto Sir John Legh of Booths nigh
Knotsford, Covenanting that Sir John shall Settle them on the said John
Baggiley and the Heirs Males of his Body; and for default of such, then to
Settle the Manor of Hyde on Sir John Hyde and his Heirs; and to Settle the
Manors of Baggiley and Leveshulme upon William, John, and Geffrey, Sons of the
said Sir John Legh, and to the Heirs Males of their Bodies, in order one after
another; the remainder to Thomas, Son of Richard Massy; then to John, Son of
Robert Legh; then to William, Son of Piers Legh; then to Robert, Son of Robert
Massy of Kelsall. Lib. C. fol. 270 a. The Original in French, now remaining
with Edward Legh of Baggiley Esquire, 1666. a fair Seal with Sir John Legh's
Coat of Arms, to wit, a Bend over two Bars; the other Seal is demolished, to
wit, Baggiley's Coat, three Lozenges, with a Bear's Head for the Crest. There
is no Date put to the Deed; but Sir John Legh did Settle them accordingly, with
the Services of all the Freeholders in Baggiley, to wit, Richard Son of
William, Richard Hod, Robert Son of William, and Hamon Son of Edwin the
Wise, Dated Anno Domini 1353. 28 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 271. number. 1. John
Baggiley died about 1356.

There are now, 1666. four Charterers in Baggiley: 1. Geffrey Cartwright
Gentleman. 2. Widow Tarvin. 3. William Gibben. 4. Thomas VVorseley of Hale
habet certas Terras in Baggiley.


Now follows the Pedigree of the Leghs of Baggiley.
I. SIr William Legh of Baggiley Knight (Son of Sir blazon or coat of arms
Azure, two Bars Ar, a Bend Sable.
John Legh of Boothes nigh Knotsford, by Isabell his second Wife, Daughter of
Sir William Baggiley, and Sister and Coheir of John Baggiley of Baggiley)
Married Joane, Daughter of William Manwaring of Over-Pever the elder, 33 Edw.
3. 1359. at which time he was under Age, and Joane but five years old. Lib. B.
p. 11. x. The Original Penes Manwaring of Pever, 1666. but it seems she lived
not to have any Children by him, at least that survived.

And afterward he Married Joyce, the Widow of Sir Raufe Davenport of Davenport
in Cheshire: for I find Sir William Legh of Baggiley and Joyce his Wife, Leased
to Piers de Legh This was Piers Legh of Lime.
and John his Brother, for six years, all the Office of the Serjeanty of the
Hundred of Maxfield, which appertained to the said Joyce during the Nonage or
Minority of Raufe Davenport, Son and Heir of Sir Raufe Davenport late deceased,
rendering to the said Sir William and Joyce twelve Marks yearly. Dated at
Maxfield on All-Saints-day, 9 Rich. 2. 1385. Lib. A. fol. 150. l. the Original
Penes Legh of Baggiley, 1665.

By which Joyce Sir William Legh had Issue Thomas Legh, Son and Heir, aged
eighteen years, 21 Julii, 4 Hen. 4. 1403. on which day the said Sir William
Legh died. Lib. A. fol. 152. k. Lawrence, another Son of Sir William, living
28 Hen. 6. Lib. A. fol. 150. I.

Joyce, the Widow of Sir William, Married Sir John Kighley, 7 Hen. 4. living
also 11 Hen. 4. 1410. Lib. A. fol. 151. w.

Ex Chartulis Legh de Baggiley.
II. Thomas Legh of Baggiley, Son and Heir of Sir William, married Elizabeth
Daughter of (...) and had Issue, William, eldest Son; Richard, Nicholas,
Thomas, Geffrey, John, and James; all living 1 Hen. 6. 1423. Lib. A. fol. 151.
r. x. Also Katharine, a Daughter, married John Ashley of Ashley in Bowdon
Parish, from whom she was divorced 1432. 11 Hen. 6. And Margaret married Thomas
Hyde of Urmeston in Lancashire, Hen. 6.

This Thomas died about 34 Hen. 6. 1456. Lib. A. fol. 150. P.

III. William Legh, Son and Heir of Thomas, married Alice Daughter of (...) and
had Issue Edmund Legh Son and Heir.

William died in the Lifetime of Thomas his Father, about 16 Hen. 6. For Alice
his Widow I find married to Thomas Duncalfe, 17 Hen. 6. Lib. A. fol. 151. S.

IV. Edmund Legh of Baggiley Esquire, 35 Hen. 6. Son and Heir of William,
married Margery Daughter of John Savage of Clifton, 1442. 21 Hen. 6. The
Dispensation for their Marriage bears date 5 die Novembris, 1442. Lib. C. fol.
271. e. by whom he had Issue, John, Son and Heir; Richard, second Son, Lib. A.
fol. 150. q. and f. I find in John Booth of Tamlowe his Book of Pedegrees, That
this Edmund had also another Son, called Randle, who was never married; but had
three Bastard-sons, Randle Legh, begot on the Daughter of Carington of
Carington; Henry Legh, begotten of Woodrofe's Widow in Darbyshire; and Nicholas
Legh another Bastard-son. Edmund had also another Son, Hamlet Legh, who married
the Lady Hillyard; and Dorothy, a Daughter, the third Wife of Sir John Stanley
of Elford in Staffordshire.

Edmund Legh of Baggiley died about 15 Edw. 4. 1475. For Margery his Widow
married Thomas Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, 17 Edw. 4. Anno Domini 1477.
Lib. C. fol. 271. d. She was the second Wife of Thomas Leycester.

V. Sir John Legh of Baggiley Knight, Son and Heir of Edmund and Margery,
married Ellen Daughter of Sir William Booth of Dunham-Massy, 6 Edw. 4. 1466.
Lib. A. fol. 151. y. Whereby it appears, That this John Legh was then under 16
Years of Age; and had Issue, William, Henry, Richard, Hamon, Raufe, Peter,
Blanch, Katharine, and Jane. Lib. A. fol. 150. f.

Indeed William Legh, eldest Son of Sir John, married Maude Daughter of
William Davenport of Bromhall in Maxfield Hundred, 7 Hen. 7. 1491. Lib. A.
fol. 151. a. but he dying without Issue, in the Lifetime of Sir John his
Father, Maude afterward married William Tatton Gentleman, Lib. A. fol. 150.
f. and so Henry became Heir. William was dead 20 Hen. 7,

After the death of Ellen, Sir John Legh married Jane Daughter of Hugh Calveley
of Lea in Cheshire, Esquire, near Eaton-boat, 21 Hen. 7. 1505. Lib. A. fol. 150
d.

This Sir John Legh had also a Bastard-son, called John Legh, living 21 Hen. 7.
on whom Sir John settled a Tenement in Leveshulme in Lancashire, as an Annuity
for his Life. Lib. A. fol. 141. b.

VI. Henry Legh of Baggiley Esquire, second Son, and Heir to Sir John his
Father, married Jane Daughter of Thomas Massy of Podington in Cheshire,
Esquire, 20 Hen. 7. 1504. Lib. A. fol. 150. e. and had Issue John, Son and Heir.

John, Son and Heir of Henry, married Margaret Daughter of Otes Reddish of
Reddish in Lancashire, Esquire, 1 Hen. 8. 1509. Lib. A. fol. 150. f. and had
Issue, Frances, married to Raufe Arderne of Harden in Maxfield Hundred: She had
her Portion paid her by Richard Legh her Great-Uncle, third Son of Sir John
Legh, and next Heir-male. Lib. A. fol. 152. h. 3 Edw. 6. 1549.

John Legh, Son of Henry, died about 24 Hen. 8.

VII. Richard Legh of Baggiley Esquire, third Son of Sir John, and Brother and
next Heir-male to Henry Legh, was Lord of Baggiley 3 Edw. 6. 1549. He married
Elizabeth Daughter of Arnold Ryle, and had Issue Edward Legh, and eight
Daughters: Katharine married William Brigge of Brigge-Hall, 32 Hen. 8. Jane
married Charles Booth; Alice married Roger Legh; Ellen married Robert Ryle de
Bottoms; Margaret married John Torkinton of Torkinton; Cicely, another
Daughter; Isabel died a Child; Elizabeth married Gilbert Bibby of Salford.

This Richard Legh died 4 Edw. 6. 1550.

VIII. Edward Legh of Baggiley Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard, married Jane
Daughter of Sir Vrian Brereton de Honford nigh Wimslawe, from whom he was
Divorced; and after he married Margaret Daughter of Robert Vaw of Riddings in
Timperley, Gentleman; and had Issue, Richard Legh, Son and Heir; and Edward,
who died without Issue.

Edward Legh Esquire died May 12. 1607.

IX. Richard Legh of Baggiley Esquire, Son and Heir of Edward, married Mary
Daughter of William Glasier of Lea, Vice-Chamberlain of Chester, and had Issue,
Henry, Edward, Richard, Thomas, George, William, Hugh, John, and Robert; also
Anne married Daniel Baker Fellow of Manchester-College, and Parson of Ashton
super Mersey; Mary, Elizabeth; Townesend married John Davenport Clerk, second
Son to Sir William Davenport of Bromhall; and Jane an Infant.

Of these, Edward and Robert married in Ireland.

This Richard Legh of Baggiley was Buried at Norden, March 27. 1641.

X. Henry Legh of Baggiley Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard, married Rebecca
Daughter of Sir George Clive of Huxley in Cheshire, Knight; and had Issue
Richard, Henry, Edward, Thomas, William, and Raufe; also Susan married Nicolas
Walker of Ashton under Lyme; Mary, Katharine, Elizabeth, Frances married to
John Chorleton of Manchester, Margaret, and another Elizabeth: But none of
these Daughters had any Issue.

This Henry was Buried at Bowdon, March 20. 1634.

XI. Richard Legh of Baggiley Esquire, Son and Heir of Henry, married Brigit
Daughter of Sir Edward Harrington of Fidlington in Rutlandshire, Baronet; but
had no Issue.

This Richard Legh died without Issue, and was Buried at Bowdon, August 10.
1642. Edward to succeed.

Brigit his Widow afterward married Sir John Gore of Gilston in Hartfordshire;
and now she has married Sir Thomas Tirrell of Castle-Thorp in Buckinghamshire.

XII. Edward Legh of Baggiley Esquire, Brother and Heir to the last Richard;
married Elinour Daughter of William Tatton of Witthensu, Esquire, nigh
Baggiley; and by her had Issue, Edward, Henry, Anne, Christian, and Rebecca;
but only Christian is now surviving, 1666. who married Raufe Wilbraham,
younger Brother to Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in Cheshire, Baronet, Anno
Domini 1667.

This Edward Legh the Father is yet surviving, and married to his second Wife
Mary Daughter of William Jones of Sanford in Shropshire, late Counselor at
Law, Anno Domini 1665. and has Issue Mary, born 1666. Sophia, another
Daughter, born 1667.

Barnton.
IN the Conqueror's Time one Mundret held Bertintune of the Earl of Chester,
which one Dunninge held before; and also one Ulviet held Bertintune, which one
Levenot held formerly: so we read in Doomesday-Book. By which I understand,
Mundret held one Moiety of Barnton, and Ulviet the other half; unless the one
of these should be meant for Barterton.

William, Son of Henry, Son of Serlo, grants to Hugh Dutton of Dutton in this
Hundred, half the Town of Berthinton, which Robert de Meisnilwarin [or
Manwaringe] held of the said William, rendering yearly a Pair of White Gloves on
the day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist: For which Grant Hugh Dutton gave
unto him three Marks of Silver in pleno Comitatu Cestriae: And this was in the
Reign of King John, Philip Orreby being then Judge of Chester. Lib. C. fol.
155. I. The Original among the Evidences of Dutton of Dutton, 1666.

But Dutton of Dutton was Lord of all Barnton in the time of King Edward the
First; for in the Office of Sir Hugh Dutton, taken at Frodsham, 22 Edw. 1. he
is found to die seized of two Shillings Chief-Rent yearly from Randle de
Berthinton, for the one Moiety of Barnton; and also of other two Shillings
yearly Rent from Geffrey Starkey, for the other Moiety of Barnton. Lib. C. fol.
156. bb. Which Office is enrolled in the Leiger-Book of Vale-Royal Abbey, fol.
45. b. now in possession of Thomas Merbury of Merbury nigh Great-Budworth,
Esquire, 1666. a Copy whereof also remains among the Evidences of Dutton of
Dutton.

At this day, 1666. this small Village is mangled into several Parcels, now in
possession of these Persons following. -- 1. Stanley of Alderley has one
Tenement here, in Lease to John Basnet. 2. Thomas Merbury of Merbury has
another Parcel. 3. John Starkey of Huntrode in Lancashire has three Tenements
here in Lease, and half of Christopher Basnets Tenement. 4. Christopher Basnet,
and Joseph his Son, have the one moiety of their Tenement in Fee-farm. 5. Sir
Edward Moseley of Howes-end in Lancashire, Baronet, lately deceased, one
Tenement, Leased to Robert Litler. 6. Sir Thomas Smith of Hatherton in
Cheshire, a Parcel sold lately to Joseph Basnet. 7. Hugh Lownds of Odrode has
another Parcel. 8. Thomas Frith of Barnton, a good Farm. 9. Pawnall of Barnton,
a good Farm. 10. Thomas Vernon of Barnton, another small Parcel. 11. Legh of
Swineyard in High-Legh, Gentleman, a good Farm. This was part of Starkey's
moiety. 12. Randle Wrench, and John his Son, a small Parcel Fee-farm Land.


Barterton.
Ex Chartulis Vice-Comitissae Kilmorey de Dutton.
THis small Town of Barterton lies between Dutton and Little-Legh: It is in Old
Deeds written Bertrinton.

Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton bought half of Barterton from John Son of Richard de
Cursun, in the Reign of Edward the First. Lib. C. fol. 155. k.

In the Roll of the Ancient Chartes, called Doomesday, anciently remaining
among the Records at Chester, but now lost and taken away, it was found, --
Leuca, quae fuit Uxor Ranulfi de Kingsley, veniens in pleno Comitatu Cestriae
coram Radulfo de Manwaringe tunc Justiciario Cestriae, and Baronibus, etc.
quietum clamavit Ricardo de Kingsley totam Villam de Bertherton, unde dotata
fuit. So that in the Reign of Richard the First, it seems Kingsley of Kingsley
was possessed of all the Village of Barterton.

One fourth part of the Township, Margery, one of the Daughters and Heirs of
Richard de Kingsley, gave unto Richard her Son, in her Widowhood, whom she had
by Hugh de Cholmondley her Husband; which descended unto her out of her Fathers
Inheritance: Lib. C. fol. 155. kk. This was in the Reign of Henry the Third.
And this fourth part Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton bought of Hugh Lord of
Cholmondley, about 13 Edw. 1. 1285. these being Witnesses; Domino Rogero Priore
de Norton, Domino Vriano de Sancto-Petro, Domino Willielmo de Venables, Domino
Ricardo de Massy, Nicolao de Leycester tunc Ballivo de Halton, Roberto
Grosso-venatore tunc Vice-comite Cestershiriae, Alexandro de Baumvyle, Ranulpho
Starkey. Lib. C. fol. 155. l. Twenty Marks he gave for the Purchase.

William Lancelyn being Lord of one other fourth part, as descended from
another Coheir of Kingsley of Kingsley, sells the Royalty thereof to the said
Sir Hugh Dutton, in the Reign of Edward the First, in these words, -- Scilicet
totum Dominium suum quartae partis Villae de Berterton; videlicet partem
Willielmi filii Willielmi de Berterton, cum Homagiis, Wardis, etc. Pro hac
Donatione dedit dictus Hugo tresdecem Marcas Argenti prae manibus. Lib. C. fol.
155. ll. And after Sir Hugh and his Heirs bought out several Parcels, as they
lay scattered in several hands, and so made this Town entirely their own.

One Tenement in Barterton, late in possession of one Bradburne, was purchased
not long since from Crosby of Over-Whitley by John Dutton of Dutton Esquire, in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. It formerly belonged to one Judson, 18 Edw. 4.
Richard Judson gave it to Robert Coltstansock of Cogshull, 1 Rich. 3. and Peter
Colstan soke sold it to Hugh Crosby of Great Budworth, 8 die Augusti, 3 and 4
Phil. and Mar. whereunto Sir Thomas Venables of Kinderton released all his
Right 7 Elizabethae, as appears by the Deeds now in possession of Robert
Pickering of Thelwall Lawyer, 1666. And Crosby sold it unto Dutton.

And so this Town of Barterton is now wholly belonging to the Heir of Dutton of
Dutton, not having any Charterer therein, Anno Domini 1666.

Bexton.
THis Town of Bexton lies between Sudlowe and Toft: It is a very small Hamlet,
but 2 s. 9 d. in the Mize-Book; in the very Corner-point whereof, toward
Plumley, four Townships do all meet in an Angle, to wit, Bexton, Toft, Plumley,
and Nether-Tabley.

I believe this Town was Waste in the Conqueror's time; Ex Chartulis Daniell of
Over-Tabley.
I find little mention thereof before Henry the Third; about that time Robert
de Bexton seems to be possessed of a moiety thereof at least: for he and Sibill
his Wife, by the consent of Matthew de Bexton their Son and Heir, do give to
Randle Son of Thomas de Picmere, with Margery their Daughter, totam quartam
partem medietatis totius Villae de Bexton: Reddendo annuatim unum Denarium
Argenti ad Nativitatem Beati Johannis Baptistae- Lib. C. fol. 240. e.

John, Son of Matthew de Bexton, releaseth to Adam de Tabley, and Beatrix his
Wife, all the Lands which Maude, Mother of the said John, held in Dower in
Bexton, under Edward the Second: Whereunto another John de Bexton is Witness.
Lib. C. fol. 241. f.

Adam de Tabley was Lord of half of Bexton, 1304. as appears by the Agreement
made inter Johannem de Lostocke Dominum medietatis Villae de Bexton ex una
part, and Adamum de Tabley Dominum medietatis ejusdem Villae ex altera; super
Clausturas bladorum suorum de Bexton: Datum apud Knotsford, Anno Domini 1304.
Lib. C. fol. 241. h.

And then Adam de Tabley, Son of the other Adam, settles his Dominium
Parcenarium de Bexton after his death on Thomas Son of Thomas Daniell, 35 Edw.
3. 1361. Lib. C. fol. 241. k.

Since which time, the moiety of Bexton has belonged to the Daniels of
Over-Tabley, even to this present 1666. Concerning this Adam de Tabley, see
more in Over-Tabley

In a loose Paper among the Evidences of Daniell of Over-Tabley, I find a Copy
of a Deed, wherein John de Bexton gives Ricardo filio Johannis de Croxton, and
Margeriae Uxori ejus filiae meae, tertiam partem totius medietatis Villae de
Bexton, excepto Capitali Messuagio: Habendum sibi and Haeredibus inter eos --
Remanere Hawisiae and Elianorae Filiis meis -- remanere rectis Haeredibus meis
-- Testibus Willielmo de Massy, Johanne de Legh Militibus, Rogero de Leycester,
etc. Sub Edw. 3.

Memorandum, Quod praedicta Hawisia nupta fuit Willielmo de Moulton: Et Elinora
nupta fuit Willielmo Filio Roberti de Winnington.

This Memorandum was writ in the bottom of the Paper. Lib. C. fol. 244. p.

This John Bexton I take to be the same with John Lostock abovenamed; and
called Bexton, from the Place of his Residence.

I find also, John de Bexton gave to William Son of Robert de Winnington, and
to Elianour his Wife, totam tertiam partem totius medietatis Villae de Bexton,
tempore Edw. 2. John Booth's Book, Lib. H. page 117. h. The Original penes
Leycester of Toft.

And Hugh Toft of Toft grants to Sir Hugh Venables of Kinderton, all his Land
in Kinderton apud Rushford, and a place of Land in Sproston -- in exchange pro
sexta part Manerii de Bexton, 24 Edw. 3. 1350. Lib. C. fol. 226. l. Penes
Leycester of Toft.

In an ancient Feodary of Halton, we read, -- Johannes de Bexton tenet
medietatem Villae de Bexton pro vicesima part unius Feodi Militis. And over
the head of John de Bexton, are writ, Thomas Daniel, Raufe Hulse, and Thomas
Croxton: These last (as I conceive) as the Present Tenants about Henry the
Sixth's time, when that Rental was renewed; the other, as he stood in former
Records of Edw. 1. or Edw. 2. Lib. C. fol. 86.

Thomas Holford of Holford held Land in Bexton, of the Baron of Halton, in
Knight Service, as appears by his Office 12 Eliz. a small Parcel.

So Robert Bromfield of Witton died seized of Land in Bexton, held of the
Barony of Halton in Knight Service, by Office taken 12 Eliz. but this Land was
sold afterward by Bromfield to the Lady Mary Cholmondley of Holford, who gave
it to Hugh Cholmondley her younger Son.

Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever had Land in Bexton and Baggiley, found by
Office, Anno 5 and 6 Phil. and Mar. to be held of Edward Legh of Baggiley by
Fealty, and rendering a Red Rose yearly.

Sir Raufe Leycester of Toft had Land in Bexton and Plumley, found by Office 14
Eliz. to be held of the Honor of Halton.

Paver of Northwich had a Message in Bexton, found by Office 5 Eliz. to be
held of the Barony of Halton; and so Anne Pavers Office, 40 Eliz.

Thomas Winnington of Ermitage nigh Holmes-Chappel had Land in Bexton, found to
be held of John Croxton by Office 34 Eliz. a small Parcel.

William Croxton of Ravenscroft died seized of the third part of the Manor of
Bexton, found to be held of Halton by the third part of the twentieth part of a
Knights Fee, by Office taken 32 Eliz. and John Croxton's Office, 41 Eliz.
tenuit medietatem totius Villae de Bexton.

But Croxton's Land in Bexton was sold to the Lady Mary Cholmondley of Holford
aforesaid, who gave those purchased Lands in Bexton to her younger Son Hugh
Cholmondley, whose Son and Heir Robert afterward became Heir to all
Cholmondley-Lands, and is now Lord Viscount Kelles in the County of Meth in
Ireland, and living 1666.

So that now, Anno Domini 1666. the Town of Bexton is possessed by these
Persons following.

1. Robert Lord Cholmondley, Lord of the moiety of Bexton: He has about 70
Cheshire Acres in possession of his Tenants there, who pay one Shilling Chief
to Halton yearly. 2. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley. Esquire, Lord of the other
moiety of Bexton: He has about 65 Acres in possession of him and his Tenants
there. 3. George Leycester of Toft, one Tenement in Bexton, in possession of
William Highfield, about 20 Acres. 4. Thomas Deane of Nether-Pever, one
Tenement, in possession of George Swinton, about 30 Acres. This formerly
belonged to one Hulse of Middle-wich Of Clyve, near to Middle-wich.
, and pays a Chief to Cholmondley, and also to Halton. 5. Thomas Cholmondeley
of Holford Esquire, a small Cottage, about four Acres, in possession of Hugh
Woodward his Tenant. This anciently belonged to Holford, before the Lady Mary
Cholmondley purchased any Lands in Bexton.
Bollinton.
THis Town has its Name from the River of Bollin, which runs along after
the side thereof: It is not mentioned in the Record of Doomsday-book; so that
it seems to be Waste in the time of the Conqueror.

Hamon de Massy, Baron of Dunham-Massy, gave unto Geffrey Dutton, Son of
Geffrey Dutton, all his Land in Bolinton, to wit, all the moiety of Bolinton,
with Agnes his Daughter, in Free-marriage; Rendering yearly a Pair of Gilded
Spurs, at the Nativity of St. John Baptist: About the beginning of Henry the
Third, Lib. C. fol. 150. a.

The same Agnes in her Widowhood, by the name of Agnes de Nechel (perhaps meant
for Etchells) late Wife of Sir Geffrey de Chedle, gave unto her eldest Son
Geffrey de Chedle, all that Land of Bolinton which she had of the Gift of Hamon
Massy her Father: Lib. C. fol. 150. b. William de Massy being then Parson of
Rosthorne, and William de Baggiley Parson of Chedill, under Henry the Third.

Hereby it appears, That one moiety of Bolinton was of the Fee of the Barons
of Dunham-Massy; and also that these Duttons assumed the Surname of Chedill.

21 Edw. 3. Henry Clayton of Thelwall had this moiety. In another old Rental of
Dunham-Massy, dated 3 Hen. 4. Henricus Ratcliffe (he was Brother of Sir John
Ratcliffe. See Lib. C. fol. 262. g.) ut de jure Uxoris suae tenet medietatem
Villae de Bolinton in Socagio, reddendo in Termino Johannis Baptistae unum Par
Calcarium deauratorum, vel octo december Denarios. Lib. B. page 209.

And Robert Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex sells all his Land in Bollinton and
Thelwall unto John Carington of Carington Esquire: Dated 15 of August, 28 Hen.
8. 1536. The Original among the Lord Delamere's Evidences at Dunham-Massy.

And lastly, Sir George Booth of Dunham-Massy married Jane sole Daughter and
Heir of John Carington of Carington, about the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign;
whose Grandson George Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy is now possessed of this
moiety of Bollinton, Anno Lomini 1666.

The other moiety of Bollinton is held of the Barony of Kinderton.

One half of this moiety Robert de Mara (that is, Mere of Mere) gave to Richard
Son of Gilbert de Quike, and to Robert Son of Hugh de Ditton, in the Reign of
Henry the Third, Lib. C. fol. 208. q. rendering three Shillings yearly:
Whereunto are Witnesses, Robert Chaplain of Rosthorne, Alan of Tatton, Gilbert
of Bolinton, Robert of Tabley, (that is, Over-Tabley) William his Brother, and
another William de eadem Villa, and others. The Original among the Evidences of
John Mere of Mere, Anno Christi 1650.

Adam Filius Roberti Juvenis de Ditton releaseth all his Right in Bollinton to
Richard Son of Gilbert de la Quike: Lib. C. fol. 206. a.

Afterward Thomas le Eyr de Bolinton grants this fourth part to William Mere
de Mere Domino suo, for twenty Pound: Sub Edw. 1. Lib. C. fol. 210. n.

William Mere of Mere Esquire sells it to James Brampton of Toynton next to
Horn-castle in Lincolnshire, for 350 l. 42 Eliz. Lib. C. fol. 250. f. And James
Brampton of Legborne in Lincolnshire sells it to Sir George Booth of
Dunham-Massy for 450 l. 45 Eliz. 26 Novembris. Lib. C. fol. 250. g.

So that the Lord Delamere has now three parts of the four of the Village of
Bollinton. *


The other fourth part of Bolinton, Robert de Mara the elder gave to Gilbert de
Bolington, to be held by the eighth part of half a Knights Fee; because the
said Gilbert had resigned it up in plena Curia Roberti, about King John's time.
Lib. C. fol. 206. b.

This fourth Part now Legh of Booths has.

Charterers in Bolinton, 1666.
1. Thomas Warburton of Partington has one Cottage in Bolinton. 2. Sir George
Warburton of Arley, Baronet, has about two Acres in Bolinton, called
Heskith-Acres, lying in Bolinton-Ees. 3. Edward Allen of Rosthorne has one
Meadow in Bolinton.
Bowdon.
THis Town of Bowdon takes its Name from our two old Saxon Words, [Bode] which
is yet in use with us for a Dwelling or Habitation, and [ Don, or Dun] which is
as much as a Plain upon a rising Hill, for which we now use the word Down: So
that Bodon signsfies as much as, A Town or Dwelling on the Downs: Unless
perhaps we write it Boge-don (for so we find it anciently written in
Doomsday-book) and then it may denote a Down or Hill by a Bog; at the side
whereof, toward Ashley, lies a great deep Bog.

Hamon de Massy, the first Baron of Dunham-Massy, held this Town of Bodon in
the Conqueror's time, under Hugh Lupus then Earl of Chester.

Ex Chartulis Georgii Baronis de Delamere apud Dunham-Massy.
Roger Massy of Hale, Son of Geffrey Massy, being possessed of one half of
Bodon, sold all his Land in Bodon, to wit, totam medietatem Villae de Bodon,
unto Agatha de Massy, for 4 l. 7 s. 0 d. in Money, and two Robes, one for
himself, and the other for his Wife: Rendering therefore yearly one Pound of
Cummin-seed at the Feast of St. Martin: About the beginning of Henry the
Third's Reign. Lib. C. fol. 252. I.

Which Agatha, by another Deed, styling her self Agatha de Theray, gave the
same moiety of Bodon to Robert her younger Son, whom she made Heir thereof by
consent of Sir Hamon de Massy her eldest Son. Lib. C. fol. 252. k.

Robert de Massy, by the consent of his Wife and Heirs, gave unto Adam de
Bowdon two Oxganges of Land in Bowdon; Rendering yearly one Penny upon the Altar
of St. Mary of Bowdon, on the Nativity of St. Mary the Virgin (which is the
eighth day of September) in perpetual Alms, for the Salvation of the Souls of
the said Robert, his Wife, and Ancestors, and of his Heirs, and for the Soul of
Matthew de Hale: Sub Henrico tertio. Lib. C. fol. 252. h.

From which time there has been a Family of Gentlemen of the Bowdons of
Bowdon, who had a fourth part of Bowdon, until Vrian Bowdon of Bowdon, 4 Junii,
7 Elizabethae, sold to William Booth of Dunham-Massy Esquire, certain Parcels
of Land in Bowdon; nec non omnia Messuagia and Terras, -- quae habet in Bodon,
Hale, and Doneham. And 11 Elizabethae, Thomas Vawdrey of Bodon, and George his
Son, sell to Hugh Crosby of Over-Whitley, several Parcels of Land in Bodon
(which I conceive Bodon had past away to Vawdrey before) by two Deeds; one
dated 25 Octobris, 11 Eliz. and the other dated 28 Junii, 11 Elizabethae. And
Hugh Crosby of Over-Whitley sells all those his Lands in Bowdon unto Sir George
Booth of Dunham-Massy, for 220 l. which then were in the several Holdings of
Thomas Vawdrey, Robert Moss, Thomas Hardy, George Vawdrey, Thomas Nedle, and
Alice Hardy Widow: Dated the 16 of April, 8 Jacobi, 1610. The Originals now in
possession of the Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy.

So that George Lord Delamere has now one fourth part of Bowdon, 1666.

In the Rental of Dunham-Massy, 3 Hen. 4. Ricardus Massy de Rixton, and
Johannes de Bodon, tenent medietatem Villae de Bodon per Servitium Militare,
and reddendo per Annum 5 d. Lib. B. page 209.

Massy of Rixton's part came after to Holcroft, and (as I have heard) was
lately sold in the Reign of King James, by Sir Thomas Holcroft, unto William
Brereton of Ashley Esquire, whose Heirs are now possessed of one other fourth
part of Bodon, 1666.

The other moiety of Bodon was given by the Baron of Dunham-Massy to the Priory
of Birkenhed in Wirral, about Edw. 1. And after the Dissolution of Abbeys by
Hen. 8. it was given to the Bishopric of Chester with the Church of Bowdon.

In this Town of Bowdon is seated the ancient Parish Church of Bowdon, seated
most pleasantly for Prospect and the Downs. There was a Church here in the
Conqueror's time, ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia, cui pertinet dimidia hida, says
Doomsday-book: So that it seems to surmount the time of the Norman Conquest.

Hamon de Massy, Son and Heir of the fourth Hamon, gives to God, the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and St. James, and to the Prior and Convent of Birkenhed in
Wirral, half an Acre in Dunham-Massy, -- together with the Advowson of
Bodon-Church, Anno Domini 1278. For in that Year was Richard Massy Sheriff, who
is one of the Witnesses. Monasticon Anglicanum, 1 Pars, page 484.

After the Dissolution of Abbeys, Henry the Eighth erected a new Bishopric at
Chester, 33 Hen. 8. 1541. whereunto (among other things (he gave the Church of
Bodon, and other Lands late belonging to the Priory of Birkenhed; So that this
Church of Bodon has now the Bishop of Chester for its Patron; and was
Dedicated to St. Mary, as appears by the Deed abovementioned, whose Wakes, or
Dedication-Feast, was celebrated 8 Septembris, being the Nativity of St. Mary;
and comprehends within its Parish these Villages, -- The Mize. l. s. d.
Agden, one half 00 02 00 Bolinton, one half 00 03 00 Dunham-Massy 00 08 00
Bodon 00 10 00 Ashley 01 07 04 Hale 01 12 10 Altrincham 00 10 09 Timperley 00
10 09 Baggiley 00 16 00 Partington 00 06 08 Carington 00 10 09 Ashton super
Mersey part, to wit, one half 00 07 00 Sum Total is 07 05 01

The Vicarage of Bodon is said to be worth 120 l. per Annum. Our common Proverb
is, Every Man is not born to be Vicar of Bodon. The true Reason of the Proverb
I cannot affirm.

Charterers in Bodon, 1666.
Henry Vawdrey of Baggiley. Thomas Upton of Prestbury, about five or six Acres;
no House. Widow Tipping, a Cottage in possession of Margaret Birch Widow.
Budworth.
THis Town of Budworth has its Name from the old Saxon words, [Bode] which
signifies a Dwelling, and [Wurth] a Place by a Water; as it were, a Dwelling or
Town by a Water: And so is this Town situated on a Hill near two large Meres,
Picmere-Mere, and Budworth-Mere. It is called Great Budworth, in distinction
from another Budworth, called Little Budworth, in Edesbery Hundred; and has a
good Prospect on the South, but now a poor Village: and has yearly two Fairs,
one on Candlemas-day, 2 Februarii; the other on our Lady Day, 25 Martii: The
Toll whereof belongs to the King.

In the Reign of William the Conqueror, William Fitz-Nigell, Baron of Halton,
held this Town of Hugh Earl of Chester; and one Pagan held it of the said
William.

In the beginning of Henry the Third's Reign, Geffrey Son of Adam de Dutton was
possessed of this Town (lineal Ancestor to Warburton of Arley, whose Posterity
under Edward the Second assumed the Surname of Warburton, from the Place of
their Residence at that time.) This Geffrey, Son of Adam, lived at this Town of
Budworth: For in the Deed of the Purchase of Claterwigge, a Hamlet in Little
Legh, by Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton, one of the Witnesses subscribed was, --
Sir Geffrey of Budworth, Son of Adam de Dutton. Lib. C. fol. 156. T. And I have
seen him styled Geffrey de Budworth in many other Deeds; and so was Geffrey his
Son often so styled, who lived there also. But Peter Dutton, Son of the later
Geffrey, removing his Habitation unto Warburton toward the end of Edward the
First, his Son Peter was styled de Warburton, according to the manner of those
Ages, under Edward the Second; from which time downwards his Posterity has
wholly retained the Surname of Warburton, even to this day: But his succeding
Heirs afterward, disliking the Seat at Warburton, either for the inundation of
the Water, or for some other cause, removed their Seat to Arley in Aston, near
to this Budworth, about the beginning of Henry the Seventh's Reign; which House
of Arley was built by Peter Warburton Esquire, who died Anno Domini 1495. where
they have ever since continued to this day, as their Chief Mansion House. But
to return.

Geffrey Son of Adam de Dutton abovementioned (as I find in a Parchment Roll
among the Evidences of Dutton) gave away the third part of this Budworth unto
the Priory of Norton, in the Reign of Henry the Third, to pray for his Soul for
evermore: But after the Dissolution of Abbeys by Henry the Eighth, King Henry
sold all the Lands in Great Budworth and Comberbache, which belonged to the
late Priory of Norton, unto John Grimsdich of London, Gentleman: The Charter
under the Broad Seal is dated at Westminster, 1 die Julii, 36 Hen. 8. 1544.

These Lands in Great Budworth thus bought by John Grimsdich, (to wit, the
third part of Budworth) were part of them sold by John Grimsdich to John Eaton
of Crowley; and John Eaton sold them to Peter Leycester of Tabley, Esquire, 2
Edw. 6. 1548. whose Heirs enjoy the same at this present, 1666. Another part
thereof was bought by Malbon of Budworth, sold lately to Oasley. Another part
of them was bought by Hall of Browneslow in Budworth, whose Heirs enjoy the
same at this day, and have the Custody of the King's Original Grant unto
Grimsdich, of all these Lands aforesaid. Some small part thereof also one
Potter had. The other two parts of Budworth aforesaid, do now belong to
Warburton of Arley, 1666. the succeeding Issue of Geffrey Son of Adam de Dutton
aforesaid; but he holds the same of the King, as Baron of Halton, Chief Lord
of Great Budworth.

Here is a fair Parish Church, Dedicated to God and all Saints; in
Commemoration whereof, our Wake is celebrated the first day of November, being
All-Saints-day.

I suppose there was a Church here before the Norman Conquest; for I find in
Doomsday-book, -- Ibi Presbyter, and duo Villani, etc. and a Priest supposes a
Church; though, I confess, it is in other places of that Book usually said of
such Towns as had Churches, -- Ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia. The first Structure
hereof undoubtedly was more rude than now it is; which after-Ages beautified
with a more Sumptuous Building, as all other Churches have been.

I find on the left hand of the Steeple-door, on the outside, as we enter
therein, toward the bottom of the Fabric of the Steeple, these words engraven
in the Stone, in an ancient Character, [Argille Egarde Vidua], and on the right
hand of the said Steeple-door, opposite to that writing, [Wymincham]: Whereby
it may seem, that the Widow Egard is commemorated as a special Benefactor in
the Structure of that Steeple.

Just over the same Steeple-door, under the great Window, I find three Coats of
Arms, (but are not of such Antiquity as the other engraved Words
beforementioned seem to be.) On the left Corner, over the Door, is Dutton of
Dutton's Coat, viz. Quarterly, a Fret in the second and third Quarters. On the
right hand Corner, opposite thereunto, A Pale Fusils, which was the Coat of the
Priory of Norton, and is found frequently in the Windows of Norton. And in the
middle, between these two Coats of Arms, in a Flat is engraven, for Warbutton
of Arley's Coat, A Cheveron between three Cormorants, (which is not Warburton's
proper Coat); on the one side whereof is written [John], and on the other side,
[Warburton Knight.]

The same three Coats are also above the great Window on the same West Side of
the Steeple. Certainly the Fret in Dutton's Coat was not added before the Reign
of Edward the Third. And the first Sir John Warburton of Arley was he who was
one of the Knights of the Body to Henry the Seventh, and was Sheriff of
Cheshire for his life, and died 15 Hen. 8. 1524. And therefore it should seem
the Steeple was repaired again not many Ages since, about the beginning of Hen.
8. or in the Reign of Hen. 7. at most.

Certain it is, That the Church of Great Budworth was given to the Priory of
Norton, by William Constable of Cheshire, the younger, and Baron of Halton, in
the Reign of Henry the First, about the end of his Reign, Lib. B. page 199.
number. 1. which Roger de Lacy Constable of Cheshire afterward confirmed. See
Monast. Anglican. Pars 2. page 185.

And after the Dissolution of Abbeys by Henry the Eighth, he gave the Rectories
of Budworth and Runcorne unto Christ-Church-College in Oxford, by Special
Grant, dated 11 die Decembris, 38 Hen. 8. 1546. So this Church of Great
Budworth has now the College of Christ-Church in Oxford for its Patron, and is
now but a Vicarage, worth about 80 l. per Annum.

In this Church is yet the Case of a fair Organ, having the Coats of Arms of
Warburton of Arley, Leycester of Tabley, and Merbury of Merbury, carved
thereon. These Organs (as Tradition has it) came frem Norton, bought after the
Dissolution of that Priory, and were in good Order, till the Pipes thereof were
taken out and spoiled by the Parliament Soldiers in the late War, 1647. which
some Scotchmen among them called -- Whistles in a Box.

This Parish of Budworth is the largest Parish of Cheshire, next to that of
Prestbury; and it comprehends these Villages following, besides the Parochial
Chappelries of Witton and Nether-Pever, within the same.

The Mize. li. s. d. Nether-Tabley 00 12 00 Picmere 00 12 00 Wincham 00 12 00
Marston 00 10 00 Aston juxta Budworth 00 16 00 Budworth 00 10 08 Comberbach 00
10 00 Merbury 00 04 00 Cogshull 00 08 00 Over-Whitley, cum Hamlettis 01 18 00
Nether-Whitley 00 16 00 Appleton and Hull 01 00 06 Stretton 00 10 00 Dutton 00
16 08 Barterton 00 05 00 Little Legh 00 15 00 Barnton 00 09 04 Anderton 00 10
08 Sum Total in the Mize 11 16 02

It will not be amiss if I touch here the Parochial Chappelries belonging to
the Mother Church of Budworth, although they be both situated in Northwich
Hundred.

The one is called Witton-Chappel, dedicated to St. Hellen (the Mother of
Constantine the Great, the Christian Emperor) Daughter of Coel the British King
of Colchester, says Huntington, page 306. But Malmesbury, page 7. calls her
Stabularia, an Hostess that keeps an Inn or Victualling-house: whose
Dedication-Feast is celebrated 18 die Augusti.

The Parochial-Chappel of Witton comprehends these Villages, --

The Mize. l. s. d. In Edesbery Hundred Hartford 00 09 04 Winnington 00 04 08
Castle-Northwich 00 03 00 In Northwich Hundred Northwich 01 13 07 Witton and
Twambrooke 00 13 02 Lostock-Gralam 00 16 00 Hulse 00 07 02 Lache-Dennys 00 05
02 Birches 00 01 02 Some small part in Rudheath Lordship 00 06 08 04 19 11

The other is the Parochial-Chappel of Nether-Pever, situated in Northwich
Hundred, and built by the Parishoners (the Principal whereof was Richard
Grosvenour of Hulme of Allostocke) in the Reign of Henry the Third: It
comprehends these Villages.

The Mize. l. s. d. In Northwich Hundred Allostocke 00 17 07 Nether-Pever 00 09
07 In Bucklow Hundred Little-Pever 00 09 04 Plumley 00 13 04 02 09 10

The Chapel of Nether-Pever was Dedicated to St. Oswald, whose Wakes or Feast
of Dedication was celebrated the fifth day of August. This Oswald was King of
Northumberland, slain in Battle 5 Augusti, Anno Christi 642. at Oswaldstrey
Oswald was slain at Maserfelt, says Bid and Stow; which Powel (in his
Description of Wales before the Welsh History, page 14) says, was in
Northumberland, and not at Oswaldstrey; for Oswaldstrey was called by the
Brettons, Maesuswalht, not Maserfelt: Yet Cambden's Britannia in Shropshire,
page 452. will have him slain at Oswaldstrey, from whence it had its Name.
in Shropshire, by Penda the Pagan King of Mercia. Unto this Oswald, Bid de
Hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Bid, in his History of England, ascribes many miraculous Stories; who for
his Sanctity was Canonized for a Saint, and many Churches and Chapels were
founded in Honor of him.

I find by a Deed dated Anno Gratiae 1269. That it was then agreed between the
Prior and Convent of Norton; on the one part; and Richard Grosvenour, and other
Parishioners of Nether-Pever, on the other part: That the Prior of Norton
should find them Capellanum Secularem missam Celebrantem in dicta Capella, that
is, a Secular Chaplain to say Divine Service, and Officiate in that Chapel
every Sunday and Wednesday through the Year, and in the Feast-days of the
Nativity of Christ, St. Stephen the Martyr, Circumcision, Epiphany,
Purification, cum suis Processionibus, Annunciation, Palm Sunday, Easter Day
cum suis Processionibus, Whitsunday, Ascension-day, Nativity of St. John
Baptist, Peter and Paul Apostles, die Sancti Oswaldi, in cujus honorem fundata
est praedicta Capella, Assumption of Mary, and All-Saints-day; and to have
liberty of Baptism, if they can obtain leave from the Mother Church of
Budworth, to be allowed by the Prior and Convent of Norton: Saving to the
Mother Church all Tithes, both great and small; And the Parishioners to find
Books, Vestments, Vessels, and other Ornaments of the Church, at their own
Costs. Lib. C. fol. 120. b. The Original Penes Shakerley of Houlme.

The Abbeys being dissolved by Henry the Eighth, at this day nothing is allowed
to the Minister of this Chapel, but what the Benevolence of the Parishioners
will please to give.

In the Register Book of this Chapel it appears, That the Steeple of
Nether-Pever Chapel was built of Stone Anno Domini 1582. The Steeple began to
the built 1582. and was finished 1583.
John Bowdon being then Master of the Work. The two Out-Isles on either side of
the Chapel have been enlarged by the Parishioners in late Ages.

Carington.
THis Town is not mentioned in Doomsday-book: It is of the Fee of the ancient
Barons of Dunham-Massy, and gave name to the Family of the Caringtons, who were
Lords thereof, and seated here very anciently.

In the Rental of Dunham-Massy, 3 Hen. 4. 1402. we read thus: -- Georgius
Carington Chivaler tenet Manerium suum de Carington, and medietatem Villae de
Ashton, and tertiam partem Villae de Partington, pro duabus partibus Feodi
Militis; ut per Chartam Antecessoribus dicti Georgii per Hamonem Massy Militem
factam; and reddendo per Annum de Stuthe, alias dictum Sheriff-Tooth, -- 7 den.

The Family of the Caringtons of Carington flourished here for a long space,
near 400 Years, until Sir George Booth of Dunham-Massy married Jane sole
Daughter and Heir of John Carington of Carington Esquire, toward the end of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign; but had no Issue by her, yet enjoyed Carington's Lands,
which after her death he recovered by a tedious Suit: Whose Grandson, George
Booth Lord Delamere, is now possessed of the whole Township of Carington
entirely, 1666. there being no Charterer at all therein.

Clifton.
THis Town, or Place (for here is only a Mannor-House, with the Demain-Lands
thereof) has its name from the Cliffs or broken Rocks therein.

It is now at this day commonly called Rock-Savage, since the structure of that
sumptuous Building erected there by Sir John Savage, Anno Domini 1565. 7
Elizabethae. The old Hall stood a little distance thence, the Remains whereof
are now turned into a Granary, Stable, and other Houses of Office among the
Outhouses; and by the Servants at this day called by the name of The Old Hall.

John Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, gave unto Galfrid or Geffrey
de Dutton -- scilicet de Uxore desponsata, pro Homagio and Servitio suo, totam
Villam de Clifton: Faciendo Servitium dimidii Feodi Militis ad Castellum meum
de Halton: and nullam Wardam faciet ad Castrum Cestriae, nisi super Sumptum
meum and Haeredum meorum. Lib. C. fol. 150. c. This was in the Reign of Henry
the Second.

This Geffrey Dutton was younger Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton; the Posterity of
which Geffrey were also Lords of Chedle, who, for their Residence there, were
sir-named de Chedle, as the manner of those Ages was. At last the two Daughters
and Coheirs of Sir Roger de Chedle divided the whole Inheritance, 1 Edw. 3.
1327. Clemence the elder Daughter married William Son of Raufe Baggiley; she
had Clifton, and diverse Lands in Chedle and Hulme. Agnes the younger Daughter
married Richard Son of Robert de Buckley; she had the Capital Message of
Chedill, and the Advowson of the Church of Chedill, and diverse Homages, Rents,
and Services. Lib. C. fol. 150. l. Isabel, the Daughter and Heir of Clemence,
married Thomas Daniell of Bradley in Appleton, junior, afterward Sir Thomas
Daniell Knight; by whom he had only one Daughter and Heir, called Margaret,
married to John Savage about 49 Edw. 3. from whom the Savages of Clifton,
continuing at this day, 1666. This Margaret carried away all her Mothers Lands;
but her Fathers Lands went to the next Heir Male of the Daniells, in Old Deeds
frequently written Danyers, and from whom the Daniels of Over-Tabley. See more
of this in Over-Tabley.

Now follows the Descent of the Savages of Clifton.
blazon or coat of arms I. John Savage of Clifton, in Right of Margaret his
Wife, Daughter and Heir of Sir Thomas Daniers of Bradley in Appleton, commonly
called Daniel. Her Mothers Name was Isabel, Daughter and Heir of William
Baggiley by Clemence his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of Sir Roger de Chedill,
Lord of Chedill and Clifton. Lib. C. fol. 150. l.

This Margaret Daniell, as I have told you before, had all her Mothers Lands;
but her Fathers Lands were settled on the Heirs Males of the Daniels. She had
three Husbands: The first was John Ratcliffe, 42 Edw. 3. who died without Issue
by her not long after. Lib. C. fol. 229. v.

The second Husband of Margaret Daneil, was this John Savage, descended of the
Savages of Steinesbie in Darbyshire See Lib D. page 176. T. Omnibus -- Johannes
le Savage de Sarcliffe, Salutem. Noveritis me dedisse Stephano le Eyr de
Cesterfeld totum jus meum in Tenemento in Halywel gate. Datum apud Cesterfield,
die Mercurii, in Festo Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, 3 Edw. 2. 1310.
Lib. D. page 180. n The Original among the Evidences at Rock-Savage, Anno
Domini 1669.

So that this John Savage who writ himself of Sarcliffe in Darbyshire, I
conceive was Ancestor to the first John Savage of Clifton.


; whom he married about 49 Edw. 3. and had Issue by her John Savage Son and
Heir, Elizabeth, and Blanch, all living 4 Hen. 4. Lib. C. fol. 290. d.

blazon or coat of arms This John Savage of Clifton, the Father, died 10 Rich.
2. 1386. and Margaret his Widow afterward married Piers Legh of Maxfield
(younger Son of Robert Legh of Adlington) in November, 1388. 12 Rich. 2. Lib.
C. fol. 290. b. by whom she had Issue Piers Legh, from whom the Leghs of Lime
in Maxfield Hundred; and John Legh, younger Son, Escheator of Cheshire 12, 13
Hen. 6. from whom the Leghs of Ridge nigh Maxfield. Lib. C. fol. 290. d. e. and
234. n.

But Margaret survived all her Husbands, and in her Widowhood she gave the
moiety of Gropenhall to her Son Piers Legh, 4 Hen. 4. Lib. C. fol. 290. d. And
to John Savage her Son, and to his Heirs, she gave Liberty of Bearing her Coat
of Arms, which descended to her after the death of her Father, as I have seen
the Copy of the Deed in French, dated 3 Hen. 5. the Original whereof is now
among the Evidences of Thomas Earl Rivers, at Rock-Savage, 1669. Vide Lib. D.
page 175. q. And the Posterity of Savage bore Daniells Coat and Crest
accordingly, to wit, Argent, a Pale Fusile Sable; the Crest, A Unicorns Head
Couped Argent; until Sir John Savage of Clifton in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
took up Six Lions Sable for his own Proper Coat, and the Lions Paw Sable
erected, for his Crest.

This Margaret Daniell died 6 Hen. 6. 1427.

II. Sir John Savage of Clifton Knight, 6 Hen. 5. Son and Heir of John, married
Maude Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert Swinnarton, by whom he had the Manor of
Barrow; and had Issue, John Savage Son and Heir, William, Arnold, George, and
Roger; also Margaret married John Dutton, second Son of Sir Piers Dutton of
Dutton, 6 Hen. 5. afterward Heir to Sir Piers his Father, Lib. C. fol. 160. w.
x. Maude married Sir Thomas Booth of Barton in Lancashire.

He married Maude Swinnarton about the beginning of the Reign of Henry the
Fourth: For in Annn 1409. 10 Hen. 4. I find them married, Lib. D. page 170. d.
Whose Ancestor Sir Roger Swinnerton was made a Banneret by Edward the Third, to
whom the King (in part of three hundred Pounds worth of Land, for the
supporting of the State of a Banneret for his Life) had given all the Lands
which belonged to Hugh le Dispenser Earl of Winchester in the Counties of
Stafford and Chester; Anno 5 Hen. 6. Johannes le Vernay (and other Feoffees)
dederunt Johanni Savage Militi, and Ellenae Vxori ejus, Maneria de Picton, and
Shibrok, and Advocationem Ecclesiae de Davenham, etc. quae Margareta (quae fuit
Vxor Radulfi Vernon Militis) tenet in dotem; Remanere post decessum Margaretae,
praefatis Johanni Savage, and Ellenae, and Haeredibus ipsius Johannis Savage in
perpetuum, Lib. D. page 174. I.

So that Ellen the Daughter and Heir of Sir Raufe Vernon, seems to be the
second Wife of this Sir John Savage.


and after by his Charter, dated at Nottingham, 16 Julii, 8 Edw. 3. 1334.
Consideratione Praemissorum ac obtentu laudabilis obsequii quod idem Rogerus
nobis indies impendit, Concedimus quod ipse habeat and retineat sibi and
Haeredibus suis, Mannerium de Magna Barow in Comitatu Cestriae, cum
pertinentiis; ac omnes terras in Villis de Rushton, Corneford, Austanfield, in
Comitatu Staffordiae; quae fuerunt praefati Hugonis le Dispenser. He gave also
Little Barrow to him and his Heirs, by another Charter dated at Westminster, 25
Septembris, 8 Edw. 3. Lib. D. page 169. b. And these were confirmed to Robert
de Swynerton Consanguineo and Haeredi praedicti Rogeri, 13 Decembris, 2 Rich.
2. 1378. Which Sir Robert Swynerton Banneret died 12 Edw. 3. after whose death
Robert Swynerton Clerk possessed the same, as Son and Heir; which Robert died
Mense Junii, 23 Edw. 3. after whose death, Sir Thomas Swynerton Knight, as
Brother and Heir of Robert, possessed the same Lands; which Sir Thomas died
Mense Decembris 35 Edw. 3. after whose death, Sir Robert Swynerton his Son and
Heir enjoyed them, and left them to this Maude his Daughter and Heir. Lib. D.
page 178. d.

* This Sir John Savage I find styled Knight, Hen. 5. and he died primo die
Augusti, 28 Hen. 6. 1450. Lib. D. page 169. c. Probably he was Knighted at the
Battle of Agincourt in France, 3 Hen. 5.

III. John Savage of Clifton Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John, married (...)
and had Issue, John Savage Son and Heir; also Margery a Daughter married Edmund
Legh of Baggiley in Cheshire, Esquire, 1442. 21 Hen. 6. which Edmund dying
about 15 Edw. 4. she afterward married Thomas Leycester of Nether-Tabley
Esquire, 17 Edw. 4. 1477. Lib. C. fol. 271. d. e. to wit, the second Wife of
Thomas: Margaret, another Daughter, married John Maxfeld; afterward she
married Randle Manwaring of Carincham, third Son of Randle Manwaring of
Over-Pever Esquire.

Obiit iste Johannes Savage, 29 die Junii, Edw. 4. 1463. Aetate 53 annorum.
Lib. D. page 169. c.

IV. Sir John Savage of Clifton, senior, Knight, Vnus militum pro Corpore
Henrici Septimi, 1494. 9 Hen. 7. Lib. C. fol. 186. ^.
17 Edw. 4. 1477. Lib. C. fol. 271. d. He married Catharine Daughter of Sir
Thomas Stanley, after Lord Stanley, and Sister to Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby;
by whom he had Issue John Savage Son and Heir, Thomas Savage Bishop of
Rochester 1492. thence translated to London 1497. thence to the Archbishopric
of York, 1501. and died 1508. his Body being buried at York, and his Heart at
Maxfield in Cheshire, See Stow's Annals, sub Anno 23 H. 7.
where he built a Chapel at the side of Maxfield Church, and intended to have
made a College there; Sir Homfrey Savage, another Son; Lawrence Savage, another
Son; James Savage, another Son; Sir Edmund Savage, another Son, Knighted at
Leith in Scotland, 36 Hen. 8. 1544. 11 die Maii, by the Earl of Hertford then
General; so Stow: Which Edmund married Mary the Widow of Roger Legh del Ridge
nigh Maxfield, and Daughter and Heir of William Spark of Surrey 30 Hen. 8.
1538. Christopher Savage, another Son; William Savage, another Son; George,
another Son; and Richard, another Son: Also Ellen Savage, a Daughter, married
Peter Legh of Lyme in Cheshire, Anno Domini 1467. as appears by the License of
Philip Sancti Laurentii in Lucina Presbyter Cardinalis, for their Marriage;
datum Romae, 2 Idus Januarii, Anno quarto Papae Pauli Secundi, Lib. D. page
172. c. The Original now among the Evidences at Rock-Savage, 1669. Katharine,
another Daughter, married Thomas Legh of Adlington in Cheshire, Esquire Anno Dom.
1479. as appears by the License of John Giglis utriusque Juris Doctor,
Collector of the Popes Rents in England, dated at London 4 die Novembris, 1479.
in the ninth Year of Pope Sixtus the Fourth: Lib. D. page 177. x. The Original
among the Evidences at Rock-Savage also, Anno Domini 1669. Margaret married
Edmund Trafford of Trafford in Lancashire: Alice married Roger de Pilkington of
Lancashire; and Elizabeth married John Son of William Leeke of Langford in
Darbyshire.

Aetat. 73.
This Sir John Savage died 22 Novembris, 11 Hen. 7. 1495. and quod Johannes
Savage Armiger, Filius and Haeres Johannis Savage junioris Militis, est
Consanguineus and ejus Haeres propinquior. Lib. D. page 179. k.

Sir John Savage of Clifton, junior, Knight, Son and Heir of Sir John Savage
senior, had the Charge of the Left Wing at the Battle of Bosworth-field in
Lecestershire, 3 Rich. 3. 22 die Augusti, 1485. in which Battle Richard the
Third was slain: So Stow, and other Historians inform us. He was very
instrumental, together with Thomas Lord Stanley his Uncle, afterward made Earl
of Darby, in the promoting of Henry the Seventh to the Crown, and in obtaining
the Victory of Bosworth-field; for which Service Henry the Seventh, per Literas
suas Patentes, datas 7 die Martii, 1 Hen. 7. 1485. Memoria reducens diutina and
laudabilia Servitia, nec non probitatem actusque strenuos intimi dilecti
Militis nostri Johannis Savage junioris, quem, tam in Armis quam in Moribus and
Consilio, florere dinoscebatur; qualiterque idem Johannes cum multitudine
Copiosa suorum Fratrum, Consanguineorum, Servientium, Amicorum benevolorum, ad
sua Grandia Costus and Onera, Personaeque suae pericula Multimoda, in Servitio
nostro in Conflictu and praelio contra magnum Adversarium nostrum Ricardum
tertium tunc nuper Regem Angliae praetensum, caeterosque suos Accomplices and
Fautores, qam contra alios Rebels and Proditores nostros contra nos
hostiliter Guerram levantes, etc. Concessimus eidem Johanni Castrum and
Manerium de Gresley and Kimbley in Comitatu Nottinghamiae -- and Ekleston in
Comitatu Derbiae, ac Mineram Carbonum, etc. quae fuerunt Johannis Domini Zouche
--: Ac etiam Maneria Elineton-Holmesfield in Comitatu Derbiae; and Maneria de
Granby and Sutton in Comitatu Nottinghamiae, -- and Manerium de Shepeshed in
Comitatu Leycestriae, ac Maneria de Sutton-Hubybunderell, alias dictum
Hobbadler, and Watton alias Wotton, Croston, Eudeburne, in Comitatu Salopiae;
quae fuerunt Francisci Lovell Militis, nuper Vice-Comitis Lovell: Habenda
praedicto Johanni Savage, and Haeredibus Masculis de Corpore: Lib. D. page 171.
v. The Original among the Evidences at Rock-Savage, Anno Domini 1669.

2 Ricardi 3. 1484. this Sir John Savage junior, and eight of his Brethren,
were made Freemen of Chester, Sir John Savage the Elder being then Mayor:
Vale-Royal of England, page 188. The Brethren are there ranked in this order.

1. Sir John Savage junior. 2. James Savage. 3. Lawrence Savage. 4. Edward, for
Edmund. 5. Christopher. 6. George. 7. William. 8. Richard. 9. Homfrey.
Sir John Savage junior married (...) and had Issue John Savage, Son and Heir;
Alice married Sir William Brereton of Brereton in Cheshire; Felicia married
Robert Milward of Eaton in Derbyshire, Esquire; Ellen married John Hawarden;
Maude married Sir Robert Nedham of Shenton in Shropshire.

This Sir John Savage was slain at the Siege of Boloigne in France, Hen. 7.
1492. in the Lifetime of his Father. See Stow in eadem Anno. He was a Valiant
Man, and an expert Soldier, and made Knight of the Garter by Henry the Seventh.

He had a Bastard-son, called George Savage, Parson of Davenham in Cheshire.
This George had several Bastards, to wit, George Savage Priest, Chancellor of
Chester; John Wimslow, Archdeacon of Middlesex, begot on one Wimslow's
Daughter; Elizabeth married (...) Clayton of Thelwall in Cheshire; she was
begot also on Wimslow's Daughter: Randle Savage of The Lodge, begotten on the
Daughter of one Dies of Barrow in Cheshire; Margaret married (...) Colstensoke
of Over-Whitley; she was begot also on Dies Daughter; Ellen married (...) Hayes
of Litley in Aston juxta Pickmere; she was also begot on Dies Daughter; Edmund
Bonner, first Dean of Leycester, and after twice Bishop of London, begotten on
Elizabeth Frodshum, first married to one Edmund Bonner a Sawyer with Mr.
Armingham, who begot other Children on her afterward, and dwelt at
Potters-Hanley in Worcestershire.

VI. Sir John Savage of Clifton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir John; This Sir John
I find styled Sir John Savage of Hanley in Worcestershire, sub Hen. 8. Lib. D.
page 171. S.
was Knighted about 13 Hen. 7. and was Sheriff of Worcestershire 24 Years
together, from the death of his Father. He was styled Sir John Savage the
Elder, 12 Hen. 8. He married Anne Daughter and Heir of Raufe Bostock of
Bostock, in Davenham Parish, Esquire; and had Issue John Savage Son and Heir,
Edward, George, Lawrence, Roger, and Thomas; Anne married to Henry Lord
Barkley, about 1533. See Stow sub eodem Anno.

This Sir John died 2 Martii, 19 Hen. 8. 1527. and survived Anne his Wife.
William, 22 Edw. 4. but he died, and she became sole Heir. Lib. D. page 178. f.

VII. Sir John Savage of Clifton Knight, styled The Younger, 12 Hen. 8. Son and
Heir of Sir John, married Elizabeth Daughter of Charles Somerset Earl of
Worcester, and had Issue John Savage Son and Heir; Henry Savage, second Son;
Margaret married Sir Richard Buckley of Beaumorris in Wales; Mary married John
Hamden of Hamden.

This Sir John Savage killed one John Pauncefote Esquire; *
whereupon he and his Father both were Indicted for Murder, and Arraigned in
the King's Bench; this Sir John Savage the younger, as Principal; and Sir John
Savage the Elder, as Accessory; who confessed the Fact: But upon mediation of
Cardinal Wolsey, and Charles Earl of Worcester the King's Chamberlain, they
were pardoned by the King, paying four thousand Mark^, and covenanting that
they would not come into the Counties of Worcester or Chester during their
Lives, without the King's License under his Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Privy
Signet; as appears by the Indenture made the 24 day of November, 12 Hen. 8.
1520. Lib. D. page 179. I. The Original now remaining among the Evidences at
Rock-Savage, 1669. But after, the King under his Great Seal, dated 12 Junii, 16
Hen. 8. 1524. gave liberty to this Sir John Savage the Younger to go, ride, or
dwell in any Place either in Worcestershire or Cheshire. Lib. D. page 172. y.

This Sir John Savage died 27 Julii, 20 Hen. 8. 1528. aged 35 Years. John
Savage his Son and Heir was aged three Years and nine Months at the death of
his Father aforesaid.

Elizabeth his Widow was living 23 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 291. d. and afterward
married William Brereton of the Bedchamber to Hen. 8. *
Beheaded for Matters touching Queen Anne, 17 Maii, 1536. 28 Hen. 8. Stow. He
was younger Son of Sir Randle Brereton of Malpas.

VIII. Sir John Savage of Clifton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir John, married
Elizabeth Daughter of Thomas Mannours Earl of Rutland, about 1 Edw. 6. 1547. by
whom he had five Sons, and five Daughters; John, born 1548. died an Infant;
Another John, Lib. D. p 180.
born 1554. succeeded Heir; Thomas, born 1556. died young; Edward, born 1560.
and Francis, born 1562. died young: Margaret, eldest Daughter, born 1549.
married Sir William Brereton of Brereton in Cheshire, afterward Baron of
Laghlin in Ireland, who built the fine new House at Brereton: For Sir Lawrence
Smith of Atherton in Cheshire marrying Jane the Mother of this Sir William
Brereton, they granted the blazon or coat of arms Argent, Six Lions Rampant,
Sable.
Body and Wardship of this William Brereton to this Sir John Savage, who
thereupon married his Daughter Margaret to him, with a thousand Marks Portion;
dated 24 Januarii, 4 Eliz. 1561. Lib D. page 178. e. Elizabeth, second
Daughter, born 1552. married Thomas Langton Baron of Newton in Lancashire,
1580. who was divorced from Margaret Shirborne his Wife by Sentence of the
Consistory at York, 25 Junii, 1580. because it was in impubertate dicti Thomae,
nec pubertate adveniente per ipsum Thomam ratificatum, sed potius idem
Matrimonium reclamantem: Lib. D. page 177. z. b. and page 173. d. Elinour,
third Daughter, born 1557. married Sir Henry Bagnall, Son and Heir of Sir
Nicholas Bagnall Knight, Marshal of the Queens Army for Ireland, 1577. one
thousand Pound Portion: Lib. D. page 177. y. a. Afterward she married Sir
Sackvill Trever, Lib. D. page 178. g. Mary, fourth Daughter, born 1563. married
Sir Richard Milles in Hamshire: Frances, fifth Daughter, born 1567. married
Thomas Wilkes in the County of Surrey Esquire.

Richard Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield granted to this Sir John Savage
Knight, the Manor of Tarvin; reserving the yearly Rent of 31 l. 00 s. 00 d.
Datum 10 die Aprilis, 4 Edw. 6. 1550. Lib. D. page 171. r.

*
This Sir John assumed for his own Proper Coat, Six Lions Sable; and, The Lions
Paw Sable erected, for his Crest; now only quartering Daniell's Coat therewith
among others, which before was born as his Proper Coat. But the Virtuous Lady
Elizabeth, Wife of this Sir John Savage, died at Frodsham die Martis, 8 die
Augusti, 1570. 12 Elizabethae. Lib. D. page 180.

After whose death he married Elinour, Widow of Sir Richard Pexhull of
Beaurepair in Southamptonshire, and Daughter of John Cotgreve, 14 Eliz. 1572.
but had no Children by her. Lib. D. page 170. I. and page 174. o.

Which Elinour had given unto her, by the Will of Sir Richard Pexhull her
former Husband, all his Lands in Bromley, Beaurepair, Stratfield-Say,
Stratfield-Mortimer, Terges, Basingstoke, Chinham, Tadley, Pamber, Silchester,
Sherborne-Monachorum, Sherborne St. John, Sherborne-Cowdray, Stovington, Dene,
Bradley, and Berdenstock and Clack, Cowich, and Basing, in the Counties of
Southampton and Wiltshire: Which Lands Sir John Savage settled on Edward his
younger Son, and on his Heirs by Polyxena Daughter of William le Griz of
London, Gentleman, and of Katharine his Wife, natural Sister of the said Dame
Elinour, Lib. D. page 174. o. p. Which Edward had Issue, Sir John Savage of
Beaurepair, 17 Jacobi, 1619. Lib. D. page 172. x.

*
This Sir John Savage of Clifton built the new fair House at Clifton, Anno
Domini 1565. 7 Elizabethae; which was afterward called Rock-Savage. I find
that he first writ himself of Rock-Savage, 17 Eliz. and so by little and
little, sometimes of Clifton, and sometimes of Rock-Savage, to the 21 Eliz. But
afterward he constantly writ himself of Rock-Savage, which his Posterity have
ever since retained.

The Old Hall stood a little distance thence, where now the Out-housing
stands; being now converted into a Granary, Sable, and other Places of Office.

He was Seriff of Cheshire seven times, 1560, 1565, 1570, 1573, 1574, 1579, and
1591. and three times Mayor of Chester, Eliz. 5 Decembris, 1597. aged 73 Years;
and was buried at Maxfield the twenty fourth day of January following.

IX. Sir John Savage of Rock-Savage, Son and Heir of Sir John, was created
Baronet 9 Jacobi, 1611. and married Mary one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
Richard Allington Esquire, deceased, about the 18 Eliz. 1575. Lib. D. page 169.
a. and 170. f. and had Issue, John, aged three Years 1580. who died young;
Thomas Savage, second Son, who succeeded Heir; John Savage, third Son; Richard,
fourth Son; and William, fifth Son: All which four Sons last mentioned, were
living 42 Eliz. 1600. Lib. D. page 170. g. Also Elizabeth, a Daughter; married
Thomas Manwaring, who then waited on this Sir John Savage her Father, younger
Son of Manwaring of Martin-Sands nigh Over in Cheshire, and had Issue:
Afterward she married Sir Raufe Done of Duddon in Cheshire, descended from the
Dones of Utkinton; also Grace Savage, another Daughter, married Sir Richard
Wilbraham of Woodhey in Cheshire, made Baronet 5 Maii, 19 Jacobi, 1621. Which
Grace survived her Husband, and died at Chester, Anno Domini 1662.

This Sir John Savage had a Bastard-son, called John Savage of Barrow.

Sir John was Mayor of Chester 1607. and Sheriff of Chester also the same Year.
He was Buried at Maxfield on Friday the 14 day of July, 1615. 13 Jacobi,

X. Sir Thomas Savage of Rock-Savage, Baronet, Son and Heir of Sir John, was
Created Viscount Savage by King Charles the First, to wit, 6 die Novembris,
1626. 2 Car. 1.

Jane Sister and Heir to Sir William Cordell Master of the Rolls, and Lord of
Long-Melford in Suffolk, gave by her Will to Sir Thomas Savage, Long Melford,
with other Lands in Suffolk; Dated 15 Julii, 1602. She was Widow of Richard
Allington, and Grandmother to Sir Thomas Savage.

He married Elizabeth Darcy, eldest Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Lord Darcy
This Thomas Lord Darcy was after created Earl Rivers, 4 Novembris, 2 Car. 1.
1626
: The Covenants of their Marriage bears date 26 Martii, 44 Eliz. 1602. Lib. D.
page 170. h. and had Issue, John Lord Savage, Son and Heir; Thomas Savage,
second Son, married Brigit the Widow of Sir Edward Somerset, fifth Son of
Edward Somerset Earl of Worcester, and Daughter and Heir of William Whitmore of
Leighton in Wirrall, in the County of Chester, Esquire, by Margaret his Wife,
Sister and Heir to Sir George Beeston of Beeston in Cheshire, and Daughter of
Sir Hugh Beeston; from whom the Savages of Beeston now in Cheshire: Francis
Savage, third Son; William, James, Richard, died all three without Issue:
Charles Savage, seventh Son, now living 1666. and has Issue: Also Jane, eldest
Daughter, married John Pawlet Lord St. John, 1622. after Marquis of Winchester:
Lib. D. page 180 m. Dorothy married the Lord Andover, Son and Heir of the Earl
of Barkshire, Thomas Howard: Elizabeth, third Daughter, married Sir John
Thimbelby of Lincolnshire: Anne, fourth Daughter, married Robert Brudenal of
Stouton in Northamptonshire; after Created Earl of Cardigan, April 20. 1661.
Katharine, now a Nun at Dunkirk, 1666. And Henrietta-Maria, sixth Daughter,
married Raufe Sheldon of Beeley in Glocestershire, Esquire.

Thomas Viscount Savage was Chancellor of the Queens Court at Westminster 1634.
and died at London; but was Buried at Maxfield in Cheshire, the sixteenth of
December, Mary Savage of Bostock-Hall, his Mother, was also Buried there the
same day, as appears by the Register of Maxfield Church.

XI. John Lord Savage of Rock-Savage, Son and Heir of Thomas Lord Savage, was
Created Earl Rivers in Right of his Mother, 1639.

There were certain Articles drawn for this John's Marriage with Anne Compton
Daughter of William Earl of Northampton, 16 Julii, 1619. 17 Jacobi, Lib. D.
page 177. w. but it did not take effect: And after he married Catharine
Daughter of William Parker Lord Morley, and Lord Mounteagle, of Horneby-Castle
in Lancashire, by whom he had Issue Thomas Savage, now Earl Rivers, 1666. John,
second Son, living 1666. Richard, third Son, married Alice the Widow of John
Barneston, of Churton, and Daughter and Heir of Thomas Trofford of
Bridge-Trofford in Cheshire, and had Issue by her a Son called John Savage,
living 1666. But Alice had Issue by both her Husbands, and she died 1666. Also
Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of John Earl Rivers, married William Lord Peter's:
Jane married the Lord Chandoz, by whom she had two Daughters; after she married
Sir William Sidley, but had no Issue by him; and thirdly, she married George
Pits of Stratfordsey in Hampshire, Esquire, and by him had Issue: Mary, fourth
Daughter, married Henry Killigrew Groom of the Bedchamber to James Duke of
York; Frances, another Daughter, died young; Catharine, third Daughter, married
Sir Charles Sidley, Brother to Sir William.

John Earl Rivers, after the death of his first Lady, married Mary Ogle,
formerly Waiting Woman to his Mother; by whom he had Issue Peter Savage, who
only survived, and is now living, 1666.

John Earl Rivers sold Long Melford in Suffolk: And he died at his House in
Frodsham, commonly called Frodsham-Castle, the tenth day of October, 1654. And
that very Night was the same House by Accident of Fire burned. He was Buried at
Maxfield, among his Ancestors, in his Chapel at the side of the Church there:
But since, the Roof of the said Chapel fell down; but is now repaired, 1669.

Cogshull.
RIchard de Vernon, Baron of Shibrok, held one half of Cogshull in the
Conqueror's time, and Pagan held it of Richard. Formerly, before the Conquest,
Levenot and Dedor held the same for two Manors: Liberi homines fuerunt.

The other half of Cogshull one Randle held in the Conqueror's Reign, supposed
to be the Ancestor of the Manwarings; and before the Conquest one Ulviet held
the same, and liber homo fuit.

In the Reign of Edward the First, Hugh de Durholme was possessed of all the
Hamlet of Cogshull, who gave it to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln and Constable of
Cheshire, -- scilicet totam Villam suam de Cogshull, cum omnibus pertinentiis:
Couchir-Book in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's Inn, Tom. 1. Comitatus Cestriae,
number. 12. fol. 43.

-- Henricus de Lacy Comes Lincolniae, and Constabularius Cestriae, salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Noverit universitas vestra nos dedisse -- Hugoni Filio
Hugonis de Clyderhou valetto nostro, totam terram -- quam habuimus ex dono and
Concessione Hugonis de Durreme quondam Seneschalli nostri in Cestershiria, in
Villa and in Territorio de Cogshull -- Faciendo inde Capitalibus Dominis feodi
-- Servitia omnia debita and consueta, etc. Testibus Domino Reginaldo de Gray
tunc Justiciario Cestriae, Dominis Willielmo de Venables, Radulfo de Vernon,
Hamone de Massy, Hugone de Dutton, Ricardo de Massy, Militibus; Roberto de
Grosvenour tunc Vicecomite Cestershiriae, Alexandro de Baumvyle, Ranulpho
Starkey, Johanne de Merbury, Ranulpho de Berthinton, and aliis. Datum apud
Bertelay, nono die Novembris, 13 Edw. 1. [1285.] Couchir-Book in the
Dutchy-Office, Tom. 1. Com. Cestriae, number. 7. fol. 42. If Hugh had no Issue,
then it was to revert to Henry Lacy and his Heirs; which it seems afterward
came back to Henry Lacy.

Sachent Touz ceaux -- Henri de Lascy Count de Nicole, and Conestable de
Cester, avons done -- a nostre ame Sergeant John le Fauconier pour le bone
service, qu'il nous ad fait, and unquore ferra si Dieu plait, toute cele terre
de Coggeshulle ove ses appurtenances, la quele Huward iadys nostre vallet avoit
de nostre done en Countee de Cester, -- Rendant de ce par an a nous and nous
Heirs un Chaperon de Faucon a la Feste Seint Michael. -- Par ces Tesmoines,
Monsieur Richard de Sutton, Monsieur William de Stopham, Monsieur Miles de
Stapilton, Monsieur John Spring, Monsieur Roberd de Schirlaunde, Monsieur James
de Nevill, Monsieur Nicoale de Leyborne Chivaliers, and pluseurs autres.
Ibidem, Tom. 1. fol. 42. Com. Cestriae, number. 9.

In the Records of the Tower of Lodon, 18 Edw. 1. Hugo de Clyderhou Dominus de
Cogshull Tenet de Henrico Lacy Comite Lincolniae; and idem Henricus de Hugone
de Durreme; and idem Hugo de dono Warini Manwaring; and idem Warinus de Radulfo
de Vernon; and idem Radulfus de Domino Comite Cestriae in Capite. This Note I
had from Will. Vernon of Hulme in Allostock.

At this day, 1666. Cogshull is possessed by these Persons following, which
were all bought of the King in Fee-farm Rent, 1612. being formerly Copyholders
to Halton.

Elinour Ashton, Widow; formerly Booth's of Cogshull, *
and before that Massy's of Cogshull, descended from Massy of Rixton.

Thomas Merbury of Merbury Esquire has Land here.

Edward Piggot of Cogshull.

Edmund Massy of Cogshull.

John Richardson of Cogshull.

Pownall of Barnton: (No House.)

Green of Sanbach: In possession of Richard Perceivall.

George Low of Hartford: One Close.

Comberbach.
ROger Constable of Cheshire; and Baron of Halton, about the Reign of Richard
the First, granted Deo and Beatae Mariae, and Fratribus servientibus beatis
Pauperibus Sancti Hospitalis de Jerusalem, totam medietatem de Comberbach;
illam scilicet quam Willielmus de Comberbach de me tenuit: -- una cum salina in
Northwich quae pertinet ad Astonam juxta Budworth -- in puram and perpetuam
Elemosynam -- Et si Ricardus Fitton, vel Haeredes sui praedictum feodum super
me vel super Haeredes suos recuperaverit, Ego and Haeredes mei praedictam
donationem praedictis Hospitalariis Warrantizabimus; and Willielmo Comberbach
and Haeredibus suis: Tenendum de praedictis Hospitalariis in Feodo and
Haereditate: Reddendo eis annuatim sex denarios pro omnibus quae ad Domum and
ad Fratres ejusdem Domus pertinent. Hiis Testibus, Henrico Priore de Norton,
Ricardo Capellano, Ricardo Fratre Constabularii, Hugone de Boydell, Radulfo
Filio Symonis, Thoma Dispensatore, Hugone de Dutton, Ada de Dutton, Radulfo
Filio Rogeri, Alexandro Filio Radulfi, Liulfo Vice-Gomite, Bertramo Camerario,
Johanne Burdon, Hugone de Eccleston, Ricardo Filio Henrici, Roberto de Pulle,
Johanne Filio Aluredi, Gilberto de Lymme, Willielmo de Gamul, Alano de Waley,
Willielmo Filio Matthaei, Ricardo Filio Johannis, Ricardo Filio Gilberti,
Aytropo, Ricardo Starkey, Ricardo de Whitley, Willielmo de Tabley, Waltero de
Toft, Johanne de Comberbach, Henrico Fratre suo, and toto Hundredo de
Haltonshire. Lib. C. fol. 274. number. 1. Out of the Book of Legh of Swineyard's
Deeds, number. 1. now in his possession.

John, Son of Henry de Comberbach, gave to Adam Son of William de Litley in
Aston juxta Budworth, all his Lands in Comberbach, -- una cum reversione dotis
Elenae Matris praedicti Johannis -- and Piscaria sua in Lacu de Budworth, etc.
Entailing these Lands, first on the said Adam, and the Heirs of his Body; and
in default of such, then on Robert Brother of the said Adam: Dated at
Comberbach, die Lunae, Sancti Petri ad Vincula (which is the first day of
August) Anno Domini 1335. 9 Edw. 3. Ibidem, number. 28.

The Moiety of Comberbach is now, 1666. in possession of -- 1. Richard Legh of
Swineyard has two Tenements. Their Tenants do at this day pay the Chief-Rent
of Sixpence at Tatton-Vurt. 2. Mrs. Ashton of Cogshull, two small Cottages.
Their Tenants do at this day pay the Chief-Rent of Sixpence at Tatton-Vurt. 3.
Mr. Warburton of the Grange nigh Weverham, three little Tenements. 4. John
Gleyve of High Legh, one little Tenement, which Thomas Gleyve of High Legh
purchased from Thomas Sonkey of Little Sonkey in Lancashire, 37 Hen. 8. 1545.
Lib. C. fol. 269. number. 2. 5. Robert Venables of Anterbus in Over-Whitley, one
Cottage, about two Acres. 6. Sir George Warburton of Arley, five small
Cottages, not two Acres in all.


The other Moiety of Comberbach was granted to the Priory of Norton.

After the Dissolution of Abbeys by Henry the Eighth, the King sold all those
Lands which belonged to the Priory of Norton, unto John Grimsdich of London,
Gentleman, 36 Hen. 8. 1544. then in possession of Robert Merbury, George Hulme,
Randle Worral, Agnes Walker, Randle Low, Lawrence Persivall, Roger Grymshaw,
and George Eaton; out of which, 7 s. 7 d. ob. Chief-Rent is reserved to the
King. And these were sold by Grimsdich to Robert Eaton; and lastly, bought by
George Low of Hartford, from John Eaton of Over-Whitley, about fourteen or
sixteen Years ago.

Other two Tenements, then in possession of Homfrey Shakeshaft and Thomas
Highfield, out of which the yearly Rent of 2 s. 1 d. was reserved to the King,
were bought by Mr. Merbury of Merbury, and are lately sold to Edward Piggot of
Cogshull, who is now Owner of the same, 1666.

Daresbury.
THis Town is of the Fee of the Ancient Barons of Halton.

I find that in the Reign of Henry the Third, and before, there was a Family of
the Daresberies seated here, whence they took their Surname; but whence
originally sprung, I find not.

Rogerus de Hibernia, that is, Roger of Ireland, grants unto Beatrix Daughter
of William de Daresbery, and to the Heirs which shall be begotten on her Body
by Robert of Ireland, Ex Chartulis Daniell de Daresbery, 1649.
Son of the said Roger, all his Land of Leverpool in Lancashire: Testibus
Domino Roberto de Atherton Vice-Comite Lancastriae, Domino Henrico de Thorbock,
Roberto le Sauvage tunc Ballivo Comitis inter Ribble and Mersey, Domino
Willielmo Parsona de Waleton, Willielmo de Waleton Serviente Domini Regis,
Willielmo de Molineaux, etc. Lib. C. fol. 184. a.

Anno 1291. Henry le Norreys was Lord of Daresbery, which Manor he had in
right of Margery Daresbery his Wife.

-- Ego Margeria Domina de Daresbery dedi Alano Filio meo and Mabiliae Filiae
Ranulphi de Merton, quem idem Alanus ducet in Uxorem, totum Manerium meum de
Daresbery, cum suis pertinentiis, una cum Dominio Villae de Over-Walton, 7 Edw.
2. 1313. Lib. C. fol. 185. e. So in the Feodary of Halton, under Edward the
Second, we read, -- Alanus le Norreys tenet Villam de Daresbery, and Villam de
Wolton superiori, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis.

This Alan le Norreys had a Son, called also Alan le Norreys; and Clementia,
Daughter and Heir of Alan the Son, married William Danyers, Son and Heir of Sir
John Danyers of Daresbery, 1344. Lib. C. fol. 185. g. h. In which Family
(commonly now called Daniell) it has continued to this present, John Daniell
of Daresbery Esquire being now possessed thereof, 1666.

It seems that Daniell had Land in Daresbery before the Marriage of William
Daniell with Clementia Norreys; For Henry le Norreys, Lord of Daresbery, and
Margery his Wife, (howbeit the Original Deed hereof calls her Margaret, being
miswrit for Margery, for so she is called in all other Deeds) granted to
William Daniers the Elder one Message in Daresbery, with all the Land which
William More formerly held in the same Town; and one Water-mill, with a Croft
called Wallmore; and one Wood, called The Common VVood; also one Wood and Land,
called Daresbery-Cliff, containing 60 Acres by estimation: Dated on our
Lady Day, 1291. 19 Edw. 1. Reddendo un^am libram Piperis, vel septem Denarios
-- and sex Porcos qui Pesonam fecerint per Annum. Lib. C. fol. 184. d.

Afterward Sir John Danyers of Daresbury married William his Son and Heir to
Clemence Daughter and Heir of Alan de Norreys, about 1344. And when Sir John,
upon the death of Alan, had compounded for the Wardship of Clemence, 25 Edw. 3.
he grants the Lands to William his Son, in these Words. --

SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Johannes Danyers Miles, Filius and
Haeres Willielmi Danyers de Daresbury, Concessi -- VVillielmo Danyers Filio meo
omnia illa Maneria, Terras, -- in Villis de Deresbury and Over-VValton in
Comitatu Cestriae, and Sutton, Eccleston, and Raynhull in Comitatu Lancastriae;
quae nuper fuerunt Haereditamenta Alani le Norreys Domini de Deresbury
defuncti: Habendum -- usque ad plenam aetatem Clementiae Filiae and Haeredis
dicti Alani, and nunc Uxoris VVillielmi Danyers Filii and Haeredis mei
apparentis, in tam amplo modo prout Thomas Stanford Generalis Attornatus and
VValterus de VVhitehorse nuper habuerunt ex donatione Ducis Lancastriae --
Reddendo inde annuatim mihi praefato Johanni 40 l. 00 s. 00 d. durante termino
praedicto, -- etc. Testibus Thoma Danyers de Bradley, Matthaeo del Mere, Thoma
de Legh, Johanne Filio Thomae Danyers praedicti, Johanne Boydell, -- etc. Datum
apud Daresbury, die Lunae proxime ante Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, 25
Edw. 3. 1351. Lib. C. fol. 185. m.

William Danyers senior had Issue Thomas Danyers of Bradley, senior, living 17
Ed. 2. and also William Danyers of Daresbery, junior: Lib. C. fol. 233. b. e.
and fol. 184. d. See more hereof in Over-Tabley: Whether of these is the elder
Brother, is the Quaere.

Charterers in Daresbery, 1666.
1. William Gregg of Daresbery. 2. John Haywood of Kekwick habet Terras in
Daresbery. 3. Richard Eaton of Hatton has also Lands of Inheritance in
Daresbery.
Here is in Daresbery also an ancient Parochial Chapel (a Daughter of the
Mother Church of Runcorne) Dedicated to All Saints.

AUbert Grelly omnibus hominibus suis, salutem. Sciatis me concessisse --
Sanctae Mariae de Norton -- Omnes Donationes, quas Willielmus Constabularius
Cestriae Avus meus, and Willielmus Constabularius Cestriae Avunculus meus, eis
in perpetuam Elemosynam dederunt quae sunt in meo Feodo; scilicet totam
Ecclesiam de Piritona (this is Pirton in Oxfordshire) -- and Capellam de
Deresbiria in Cestershyra cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, quae pertinent ad
Eccesiam de Runcorne: Hanc autem Confirmationem feci praefatis Canonicis pro
animabus Patris and Matris meae, and Antecessorum meorum, pro salute Animae
meae, and omnium Haeredum meorum. -- Test Roberto de Bury, VVillielmo Filio
VVulfrici, Ricardo Filio Henrici: Lib. B. page 202. number. 18. This was in the
Reign of Henry the Second. Aubert Grelly, Father of this Aubert, married Maud
Sister and Coheir to William Constable of Cheshire, the younger.

This Parochial Chapel comprehends these Villages. --

The Mize. l. s. d. Daresbery 00 07 00 Over-VValton 00 06 00 Nether-VValton 00
10 00 Kekwick 00 05 00 Thelwall 00 16 00 Preston on the Hill 00 13 00 Newton
juxta Daresbery 00 10 00 Hatton 00 14 00 Acton-Grange 00 08 00 Moore 00 12 00
Sum Total in the Mize-Book 05 01 00

Dunham-Massy.
THis Town of Dunham-Massy was the Seat of the Ancient Barons of Dunham-Massy;
and from those Massy's, Lords thereof, it is called Dunham-Massy, in
distinction from another Dunham in this County, not far from Trofford-Bridge,
called Dunham on the Hill.

Dunham has its name from these two old English words, [Dun] which is as much
as A Rising Hill, for which we now use the word Down; and [Ham,] A House, Home,
or Dwelling: as it were, A Dwelling by the side of a Hill, A House or Town by
the Downs.

blazon or coat of arms Quarterly, Gules and Or, in the first Quarter a Lion
passant, Argent.
I. Hamon Massy, the first Baron of Dunham-Massy, held the Towns of Dunham,
Bowdon, Hale, Ashley, and half of Owlarton, in Bucklow Hundred, under Hugh
Lupus Earl of Chester, in the Reign of William the Conqueror; all which one
Elward held formerly, as appears by Doomsday-Book: So as it seems to me, That
this Elward was dispossessed of his Right therein, and these Lands given to
Hamon by Earl Hugh.

This Hamon had also in Maxfield Hundred, Bromhale; and Podinton in Wirrhall
Hundred, at the same time, and other Lands.

This Hamon had Issue Hamon Son and Heir, and Robert Massy, Witness to the
First Randle's Charter of Confirmation to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester,
about Anno Domini 1124. or thereabout. See supra in this Book, page 119.

Ex Chartulis Georgii Baronis de Delamere apud Dunham-Massy, and alibi.
II. Hamon Massy the Second, Son and Heir of Hamon, had Issue Hamon Son and
Heir; Robert Massy, from whom the Massies of Sale in Cheshire, a Family yet
extant, 1666. Lib. C. fol. 150. d. e. f.

III. Hamon Massy the Third, Son and Heir of Hamon the Second, had to Wife
Agatha, and had Issue, Hamon Son and Heir; Robert Massy, to whom his Mother
(calling her self by the name of Agatha de Theray) gave the moiety of Bowdon,
which she bought of Roger Massy of Hale, Son of Geffrey Massy; Lib. C. fol.
252. i. k. And John Massy; Lib. C. fol. 258. a. Also Agnes, a Daughter, with
whom her Father gave half of Bolinton in Free-Marriage to Geffrey Dutton of
Chedill, Son of Geffrey Dutton: Lib. C. fol. 150. a. b. Sibil, another
Daughter, who gave to Cicely, Daughter of John Massy her Brother, half of the
Town of Norden, Lib. C. fol. 271. c. Also Cicely, another Daughter of Hamon de
Massy, to whom her Father gave all his Land of Alretunstall, and all his Land
of Sunderland, Lib. C. fol. 254. b. Another Daughter married Hugh de Dutton,
which see in Dutton.

Hamon Massy the Third died about the Reign of King John, or sub initio Hen. 3.
and Agatha his Wife survived him.

This Hamon the Third gave unto John Massy his Brother all the Land of Moreton,
which Matthew de Moreton held, with Housebote and Haybote in his Demain-wood of
Bidston; for the Land of Podington, which Robert de Massy his Uncle held:
Faciendo Servitium dimidii Feodi Milits: Lib. C. fol. 258. a. about Henry the
Second, or Richard the First.

He also gave to Robert Son of Waltheof all the Land which his Father Waltheof
held of the said Hamon and his Ancestors; to wit, Etchels, to be held by the
Service of half a Knights Fee; and ego Hamo retineo ad opus meum Cervum, and
Bissam, and Aprum de Hulerswood; that is, Heart, Hind, and Boar. The said Hamon
restored also to the said Robert, Bredbury and Brininton, finding a
Sumpter-Horse, and a Man, and a Sack for the carriage of his Arms and Apparel,
when the Earl of Chester shall in Person lead an Army into Wales; and shall
give aid to the said Hamon for the Redeeming of his Body, if he be taken
Prisoner; and for the making of his eldest Son a Knight, and when his eldest
Daughter shall be married: Lib. C. fol. 258. b.

This Hamon Founded the Priory of Birkenhed in Wirrall, commonly called
Birket-Abby; the Church whereof was dedicated to St. James: And I find Oliver
Prior of Birkenhed subscribed a Witness in the Reign of King John, Lib. C. fol.
252. I. K. I conjecture it might be founded about the Reign of Henry the
Second; and Speed says, they were of the Order of the Black Monks.

IV. Hamon Massy the Fourth, Son and Heir of Hamon the Third, had Issue Hamon
Son and Heir, William Massy, from whom the Massies of Tatton, Lib. C. fol. 255.
e. Also Margery, a Daughter, to whom her Father gave the whole Town of
Stretford, about Anno Domini 1250. And after, the said Margery, then Widow of
Roger Pain of Echburn, i. e. Ashburn, released all her Right in the whole Town
of Stretford unto Henry de Trafford, Lib. C. fol. 251. d. e. The Originals of
these two Deeds were among the Evidences of Sir Cecil Trafford of Trafford in
Lancashire, 1666.

V. Hamon Massy the Fifth, Son and Heir of the Fourth Hamon, gave the Advowson
of the Church of Bowdon unto the Priory of Birkenhed in Wirrall, whereunto
Richard Massy Sheriff of Cheshire was Witness, which was 6 Edw. 1. Anno Christi
1278. which Priory was Dedicated to St. James: Monasticon Anglicanum, 1 Pars,
page 484. And this Deed was enrolled in the Cheshire Doomsday-book, which is
now lost.

This Hamon married Alice Daughter and Heir of Sir Eustace Whitney, and had
Issue Hamon Son and Heir, and

16 Edw. 1. 1288. the Barony of Dunham-Massy was found to be held of the King
in Capite by the Service of five Knights Fees: Inveniendo pro quolibet Feodo
unum Equum coopertum, vel duos discoopertos, infra divisas Cestershiriae
tempore Guerrae, cum omnibus Hominibus suis Peditibus, Tenentibus terram
forinsecam, infra Feodum praedictum: Faciendo Servitium suum secundum purportam
Communis Chartae Cerstershiriae: Lib. C. fol. 259. P. See this Common Chart
above in this Book, page 162, 163. etc.

VI. Sir Hamon Massy, the sixth and last Baron of Dunham-Massy, Son and Heir of
the fifth Hamon, married Isabel Daughter of Homfrey de Beauchamp, and on the
Marriage-day at night (as it happened) she died before Carnal Copulation:
Afterward he married Alice Sister of the said Isabell, and by her had Issue
Hamon a Son, who died without Issue; and four Daughters: Cicely married John
Fitton of Bollyn; Isabell married Hugh Dytton, who had Issue Katharine Wife of
Thomas de Belgrave; (...) another Daughter, married Thomas de Lathom, and had
four Daughters who had Issue; and Alice, another Daughter, married Hamon de
Hilond, and had Issue Hamon, Lib. C. fol. 259. l.
and other Sons: Lib. C. fol. 261. b. An old Parchment Roll in a Character
about Richard the Second, among the Evidences of Dunham-Massy.

And after the death of Hamon Massy the Son, the said Sir Hamon Baron of
Dunham-Massy was Divorced from Alice his Wife, and married Joan Clinton Sister
of the Earl of Huntington; and by the counsel of this Joan, he sold the
Reversion of the whole Manor of Doneham, with its Appurtenances, after the
death of himself and Joan his Wife, in case they had no Issue, unto Oliver de
Ingham then Judge of Chester; for which Reversion Oliver gave him 1000 Marks,
and 40 Marks Annual Rent for his Life; 10 Edw. 2. 1316. Lib. C. fol. 256. q.r.
t. x.

This Hamon, the last Baron, being sued at Chester, 1 Edw. 2. by Peter Dutton
(styled also sometimes Peter de Warburton, and Ancestor to Warburton of Arley)
concerning a Parcel of Waste Ground conceived by him to lie in Warburton, the
said Hamon pleaded, That Hamon Massy his Father was seized of the same, and
that the Land in question did lie in Doneham, and not in Warburton; and
moreover, that he the said Hamon was one of the Kings Barons, and held his
Lands of the King in Capite (as Earl of Chester) in Barony immediately, aad
ought not to proceed to Trial without a Jury of Knights and discreet Men of the
County. Placita Cestriae ad Festum Sancti Marci Evangelistae, 1 Edw. 2. Lib. C.
fol. 260. z.

Chart. 18 Edw. 1. Memb. 3. Rex concessit Hamoni de Massy unum Mercatum per
diem Martis apud Manerium suum de Altrincham; and unam Feriam per tres dies
duraturam, videlicet, in Vigilia, die, and Crastino Festi Assumptionis Beatae
Mariae. Lib. C. fol. 260. q. And hereupon he made his Charter to his Burgesses
of Altrincham of a Guild-Mercatory. See above in Altrincham.

This Sir Hamon was possessed only of these Manors, Doneham, Kelsall,
Altrincham; Bidston, Salghall, and Moreton: Lib. C. fol. 260. y. But in the
Rental of Dunham-Massy, dated 3 Hen. 4. -- John Davenport of Bromhall tenet
Villas de Bromhall, Duckenfield, Baggiley, and Etchells, per Servitium
Militare, and reddendo annuatim 2 l. 0 s. 0 d. [But 13 s. 4 d. of this Rent was
remitted by Sir Thomas Stanley and Sir Robert Booth, by Deed, 22 Hen. 6.] Lib.
C. fol. 262. h.

-- Davenport de Henbury tenet terram suam in Wernith, reddendo per Annum 5 d.
Item tenet Bredbury, Romiley, Brunington (nuper Adam de Bredbury and Matilda
Holland) per Servitium Militare; and idem inveniat Domino de Doneham unum
Championem ad pugnandum pro eo, si fuerit appellatus: and si dictus Dominus
fecerit aliquam Appellationem ad aliquem alium, tam in brevi de recto quam
aliquo alio modo, dictus Champio pro eo pugnabit: and inveniet unum Hoblar and
Sacket Jugg ad Custodiendum Carriagium suum per quindecem dies in Guerris de
Wales.

So that the Services of these, and may other Towns, did anciently belong to
the Barons of Dunham-Massy.

Hamon the last Baron of Dunham-Massy died 15 Edw. 3. aut circiter. Lib. C.
fol. 254. t.

So that the Massies continued from the Norman Conquest at Dunham-Massy, about
260 Years.

But now fell great Suits concerning the Barony of Dunham-Massy, after the
Death of Hamon and Joan without Issue of their Bodies: For Richard Fitton, and
the Heirs of the other Sisters, entered into the Manor of Dunham, as Heirs to
the said Hamon; at which time Oliver Ingham was in the King's Service
Beyond Sea, to wit, Steward of Gascony: And then, by the King's Command, Hamon
Massy of Tatton This Hamon Massy was a younger Brother of Massy of Tatton, and
afterward the first Massy of Rixton in Lancashire, in Right of his Wife. See
more of him in Tatton.
, and others of the Council of the said Oliver, came to the Manor of Doneham,
and entered in the Name of Oliver, and Richard Fitton and his Partners went out
of Doneham; and so the said Oliver Ingham died seized of the said Manor, with
its Appurtenances: And after the death of Oliver Ingham, Richard Fitton* and
his Partners entered again; and the Heirs of Oliver (who were Mary Daughter of
John Ccrson, and Joan Wife of Roger le Strange of Knocking, the Elder) brought
a Writ of Novae Disseisinae against the Coheirs: And after, Henry Duke of
Lancaster buys out all the Right of the Coheirs, as also the Right of the
Heirs of Oliver; and so the Duke being possessed of the Manor of Doneham, with
its Members, gave it to Roger le Strange Lord of Knocking. Lib. C. fol. 261. b.
Li. C. fol. 75. o. The Part of Alice, who married Hamon Hilond, released Anno
21 Edw. 3. to the Earl of Lancaster, not yet Duke.


I shall now put down the Descent of the Heirs of Fitton from this time.
I. John Fitton of Bollin in Maxfield Hundred, Son and Heir of Edmund Fitton of
Bollin-Fee, married Cecily eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir Hamon Massy Baron
of Dunham-Massy, and had Issue Richard Fitton Son and Heir, and Hugh Fitton,
another Son, who married Margery Daughter and Heir of Robert de Pownall, 1328.
from whom the Fittons of Pownall.

This John Fitton had a younger Brother called Thomas Fitton, living 1335.
which Thomas married Isabel Daughter and Heir of Thomas Orreby of Gowesworth,
from whom the Fittons of Gowesworth: Also Hugh Fitton, another Brother, Rector
of Wimslow-Church, 1335.

II. Richard Fitton of Bollin, Son and Heir of John, married Joan (...) She was
living 1335. and had Issue John Fitton eldest Son, who married Christian
Daughter and Coheir of Peter Arderne of Over-Alderley, and made Partition of
Arderne's Lands with Margaret her Sister, Wife of Richard de Wever, in Anno
1350. 24 Edw. 3. but this John died without Issue: Also Hamon Fitton, second
Son, who became Heir to his Father; and Francis, third Son, 1337. died without
Issue.

III. Hamon Fitton of Bollin, second Son, and Heir of Richard, married
Elizabeth Daughter and Coheir to Sir Peter Thornton of Thornton, Knight; and
had Issue Peter Fitton, who died without Issue about 42 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol.
179. e. Joan, Sister and Heir to Peter, married Richard Venables, younger Son
of Hugh Venables Baron of Kinderton.

IV. Richard Venables of Bollin, in Right of Joan his Wife. She was in Custody
of Thomas Dutton of Dutton Knight, 42 Edw. 3. and was then under Age, and
unmarried. She had Issue William Venables Son and Heir; and John Venables of
Anterbus in Over-Whitley, from whom Venables of Anterbus.

V. Sir William Venables of Bollin Knight, Son and Heir of Richard, married
Joan Daughter of Sir John Massy of Tatton, and had Issue Richard Venables,
drowned in the Water of Ringey, 3 Hen. 4. aged then about eight years; and two
Daughters and Heirs: Alice married Sir Edmund Trafford of Trafford in
Lancashire; and Dowse married Robert Booth, younger Son of John Booth of Barton
in Lancashire, Lib. C. fol. 257. b. afterward Sir Robert Booth of Dunham-Massy.

Sir William Venables of Bollin died 9 Hen. 5. 1421. Lib. C. fol. 257. b.

Sir Edmund Trafford and Alice his Wife, and Robert Booth and Dowse his Wife,
make Partition of the Lands of Sir William Venables, 9 Hen. 5. except
Lindow-Moor and Thornton-Mosse, and except the Homage and Service of Geffrey
Warburton and his Heirs, for the Lands which he holds in Aston and Budworth,
and elsewhere in Cheshire, which remained undivided at that time.

Sir Edmund and Alice had to their share, Morley, Chorley, and Hough, the Rents
and Services of Thomas Pownall, Richard Fitton, and William de Honford; and the
Rent and Service of Sir Lawrence Fitton (id est, de Gowesworth) for his Lands
in Bollin-Fee; as also all the Lands which Sir William Venables lately had in
Norden and Helsby, -- with the Advowson of Wimslow Church.

Robert Booth and Dowse had Styall, and Dene-row, and all the Lands which Sir
William Venables lately had in Fally-brome, Norley, Oneston, Kingsley, Arrow,
Picton, Stoke, and Chester; also the Mannor-House of Thornton, and the Advowson
of Thornton-Church, and Bollin-Mills, and 5 l. 0 s. 0 d. to be paid yearly by
the Heirs of Alice out of the Manors of Bollin and Norcliff.

This Robert, afterward Sir Robert Booth, having thus possessed himself of his
share of the Lands of Venables of Bollin, challenged his Part of the Lands of
Dunham-Massy, which ought to descend to him as one of the Heirs of Venables of
Bollin; and to Venables, as Heir to Fitton of Bollin; and to Fitton of Bollin,
as Heir to one of the Daughters and Heirs of Sir Hamon Massy of Dunham.

At last it was agreed between Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Robert Booth, and
William Chauntrell Sergeant at Law, That one half of the Manors, Lands, Rents,
and Services in Dunham, Hale, and Altrincham, should remain to the said Thomas
Stanley and William Chauntrell, and their Co-Feoffees; and the other half to
the said Sir Robert Booth and his Co-Feoffees. Dated 16 die Julii, 11 Hen. 6.
1433. Lib. C. fol. 262. e. f. g. The Originals among the Evidences at
Dunham-Massy, 1666.

And thus Sir Robert Booth got footing in Dunham, whose Heirs have since made
Purchases; and George Booth Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy, is now, 1666.
possessed of the Manor of Dunham-Massy.

Charterers in Dunham-Massy, 1666.
1. John Crew of Crew, Esquire, has three Tenements in Sunderland, now in
possession of Henry Heskith, Robert Ashton, and Henry Haselhurst. 2. George
Vawdrey of Dunham-wood-houses* one Tenement in his own possession. 3. James
Johnson, alias Ottiwell, one Tenement in Dunham-wood-houses, lately bought of
Mr. Bodon late of Bodon, to revert after Mr. Bodon's death. 4. Mr. Parker of
Parker's-Hall in Altrincham, one Tenement in Dunham in possession, besides five
Cottages.
Now follows the Genealogy of the Booths of Dunham-Massy, since the time they
were first possessed of Dunham.
blazon or coat of arms Argent, three Boars Heads erased and erected, Sable.
I. Sir Robert Booth of Dunham Knight, 11 Hen. 6. 1433. younger Son of John
Booth of Barton in Lancashire, Esquire, married Dowse Daughter and Coheir of
Sir William Venables of Bollin, and had Issue William Booth, Son and Heir;
Raufe Booth, second Son; Geffrey Booth, third Son; and Hamond Booth, Clerk:
Also Lucy, married to John Chantler of the Bache nigh Chester; Ellen married
Robert Legh of Adlington; Alice married Robert Heskith of Rufford in
Lancashire; and Joan married Hamon Massy of Rixton in Lancashire, 31 Hen. 6.
Lib. C. fol. 250. a. and fol. 294. number. 29. Also Margery Wife of James de
Scarebrick; and John Booth Bishop of Exeter, and Warden of Manchester-College,
Lib. C. fol. 249. l. who died 1478. says Weever in his Funeral Monuments, page
444, 445. And also Robert, Edward, and Peter, other Sons; as I find in the
Ancient Pedigree.

Raufe Booth, here styled the second Son, married Margaret Daughter and Heir of
Thomas Sibell of Sondwich in Kent, and had three Daughters and Heirs: Dowse
married one Gomer of London; Margaret married William Mere, Son and Heir of
Thomas Mere of Mere nigh Over-Tabley in Cheshire, 34 Hen. 6. and Jane married
Robert Leycester of Toft. Lib. C. fol. 207. n. and fol. 175.

This Sir Robert Booth, and William his Son and Heir, were made Sheriffs for
both their Lives, conjunctim vel divisim, of Cheshire, and to the Survivor of
them. The Writ dated 8 Martii, 21 Hen. 6. 1442. which is the first Patent for
Life in this kind that I meet withal in our County: Howbeit, after Edward the
Fourth had got the Crown, he presently made William Stanley of Hooton Sheriff,
2 Edw. 4. And so William Booth, Sir Robert's Son, was outed of his Sheriff-ship.

This Sir Robert Booth lived in the Reigns of Henry the Fourth, Henry the
Fifth, and Henry the Sixth; and seems to die about 29 Hen. 6.

A word or two about the Coat of Arms of Booth. I find that Thomas Barton of
Barton in Lancashire gave unto John Booth Son of Thomas Booth of Barton, and to
his Heirs for ever, liberty to Bear his Coat of Arms, to wit, Argent, Three
Boars Heads erased and erected, Sable; by Deed dated 5 Hen. 4. 1404. John
Booth's Book, Lib. H. page 49. wherein were extracted the Deeds of Booth of
Barton, and several others. Which Coat of Arms have ever since been born by
Booth of Barton, as also by Booth of Dunham, with his Distinction of a younger
Son, even to this present.

Howbeit, the said Thomas Booth of Barton had another blazon or coat of arms
Sigillum Thomas Both
Coat of his own, which is affixed in his Seal to the Deed wherein Thomas del
Both gave to Henry his Son all his Lands in Irwell: Datum apud Barton, die
Sabbati proxime ante Festum Sancti Georgii, 43 Edw. 3. In which Seal is an
Escocheon of Arms, A Cheveron engrailed, and in a Canton a Mollet; inscribed
about the Seal, -- Sigillum Thomae Both. Which Deed was in possession of
George Booth of Dunham-Massy, Lord Delamere, Anno Domini 1666. very plain and
perfect, and no way defaced: Lib. C. fol. 257. a.

II. Sir William Booth of Dunham Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Robert, married
Maud Daughter of John Dutton of Dutton Esquire, 21 Hen. 6. 1442. Lib. C. fol.
164. g. and had Issue George Booth Son and Heir, Richard Booth, Lawrence Booth,
John Booth, and William Booth; Lib. C. fol. 250. a. Also Dowse, married to
Thomas Legh of High-Legh de West-hall, Esquire, 1 Edw. 4. 1641. Anne, married
to John Legh of Boothes, Esquire; after to Geffrey Shakerley of Shakerly in
Lancashire: Ellen married Sir John Legh of Bagiley, 6 Edw. 4. 1466. Lib. A.
fol. 151. y. Margery married John Hyde of Haghton in Lancashire: Alice married
John Ashley of Ashley nigh Bowdon in Cheshire: Elizabeth Wife of Thomas Fitton
of Pownall in Maxfield Hundred: Joan married William Holt of Lancashire.

Sir William died 16 Edw. 4. 1476. and gave Lands to Feoffees in Trust, for the
providing of a Chaplain to pray for him and his Friends, in a Chapel to be
built in Bowdon Church for that purpose; which was built accordingly. Lib. C.
fol. 150. a.

III. George Booth of Dunham Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir William, married
Katharine Daughter and Heir of Robert Montfort Lord of Bescote in
Staffordshire, and Monks-path in Warwickshire, younger Son of Sir William
Montfort of Colshill in Warwickshire: Dugdale in his Antiquities of
Warwickshire, page 728. but mis-printed for 738. and so all along forward
mis-printed. By whom he had Issue William Booth Son and Heir, Lawrence, and
Roger: Alice (alii Anne vocant) married William Massy of Denfleld in Rosthorn;
Ellen married Thomas Vawdrey, after to Trofford of Bridge-Trofford in Cheshire.

This George died 1 Rich. 3. 1483.

IV. Sir William Booth of Dunham Knight, Son and Heir of George, married
Margaret Coheir of Sir Thomas Ashton of Ashton under Lyme, and had Issue
George Son and Heir, and John Booth: And afterward he had a second Wife, to
wit, Ellen Daughter of Sir John Montgomery of Throwley in Staffordshire, by
whom he had Issue William, Hamnet, Edward Booth, from whom the Booths of
Twamlow in Cheshire; Henry, and Andrew: Also Jane married Hugh Dutton, Son and
Heir of Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton and Dutton both, 12 Hen. 8. 1520. Lib. C.
fol. 167. Afterward she married Thomas Holford of Holford nigh Nether-Tabley,
Esquire: Dorothy married Edward Warren, Son and Heir of Lawrence Warren of
Pointon in Cheshire, Esquire, 10 Hen. 8. 1518. Lib. C. fol. 250. b. Anne
married Sir William Brereton of Brereton.

This Sir William Booth died 11 Hen. 8. 1519. nono die Novembris.

V. George Booth of Dunham Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir William, married
Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Thomas Butler of Beusy nigh Warrington in Lancashire,
and had Issue George Son and Heir, John Booth, and Robert Booth: Also Ellen,
married to John Son and Heir of John Carington of Carington in Cheshire,
Esquire, 29 Hen. 8. 1537. Lib. C. fol. 257. c. Anne married William Massy of
Podington in Wirrall, Esquire: Margaret married Sir William Davenport of
Bromhale in Maxfield Hundred: Elizabeth married Richard Sutton of Sutton nigh
Maxfield, Esquire, 1566. Dorothy married Robert Tatton of Withenshaw nigh
Baggiley, Esquire: Alice married Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, 4 Edw.
6. 1550. Lib. C. fol. 243. I. And Cicely died without Issue.

This George died 22 Hen. 8. 1531. aged forty Years.

VI. George Booth of Dunham Esquire, Son and Heir of George, married Elizabeth
Daughter of Sir Edmund Trafford of Trafford in Lancashire, and had Issue
William Son and Heir; Elizabeth married William Chantrell of Bache not far from
Chester; Mary married Randle Davenport of Henbury Esquire; Anne married (...)
Wentworth of (...) in Yorkshire.

When Letters were sent from the Queen (Jane Seymour) through the Kingdom, to
disperse the joyful News of the Birth of Edward the Sixth, 12 October. 1537. 29
Hen. 8. one was sent by the Queen to this George Booth Esquire. Lib. C. fol.
249. n.

This George died 35 Hen. 8. 1543. aged 28 Years. Elizabeth his Widow after
married James Done Brother and Heir to Sir John Done of Utkinton; and
afterward she married Thomas Fitton of Gowesworth.

VII. Sir William Booth of Dunham, Knighted 1578. Son and Heir of George, was
but three Years old when his Father died, and was Ward to the King. He married
Elizabeth Daughter of Sir John Warburton of Arley in Aston nigh Great Budworth,
and had Issue George Booth Son and Heir; Edmund, second Son, was a Lawyer, and
died without Issue; John, third Son, married the Daughter of Prestwich of Hulm
nigh Manchester, and had several Children; which John was buried at Bowdon 1
Augusti 1644. Robert, fourth Son, Baptized at Bowdon December 11. 1570. was a
Soldier in Holland: Peter, fifth Son, was Baptized 21 Aprilis, 1576, died 7
Septembris, 1576. Richard, sixth Son, Baptized at Bowdon 15 Junii, 1578. He
married (...) Daughter and Heir of (...) Massy of Cogshull, descended of Massy
of Rixton. I find also another Son, called William, buried at Bowdon 31 Martii,
1572. Also Mary eldest Daughter; Elizabeth, second Daughter, married William
Basnet; after to one Walshe of Ireland: Dorothy, third Daughter, married Rafe
Bunigton of Barrow-cock in Derbyshire; Alice, fourth Daughter, married one
Panton; Elinour, fifth Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 27 Februarii, 1573. And
Susan, sixth Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 21 Maii, 1577. married Sir Edward
Warren of Pointon in Cheshire: afterward she married John Fitton of Chester.
See the Office of Sir William Booth, proving the Names of all these Daughters.
See also the Office of Elizabeth Ashton, 2 Elizabethae, whose Part came to this
Sir William.

Sir William died 28 Novembris, and was buried at Bowdon 8 die Decembris, 1579.
aged 39 Years.

He was Sheriff of Cheshire, 1571. Dame Elizabeth his Wife gave five Pound for
ever yearly to the Poor of Bowdon Parish, which Gift commenced 1621. as I find
in the Register of Bowdon Church.

VIII. Sir George Booth of Dunham, Knighted about the latter end of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, and created Baronet 9 Jacobi, 1611. upon the first
Institution of that Order, Son and Heir of Sir William, did much improve his
Estate.

He had two Wifes: The first was Jane Daughter and Heir of John Carington of
Carington Esquire, whom he married the 18 day of February, 1577. John Carington
her Father dying in January before: Jane was Baptized at Bowdon the tenth day
of December, 1562. aged fifteen Years at the time of her Marriage; but she died
without Issue: Yet Sir George carried away all Carington's Lands against the
next Heirs Males of that Family, which he recovered by Suit.

After the death of Jane, Sir George married Katharine Daughter of Sir Edmund
Anderson Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, by whom he had Issue William,
eldest Son; Francis, second Son, Baptized at Bowdon 11 Decembris, 1603. and
Buried there 1 Martii, 1616. as appears by the Inscription in a Marble Monument
in the South Isle of the Chancel of Bowdon Church, and the Register-Book there:
Thomas, third Son, Baptized at Bowdon 9 Decembris, 1604. He died 1632. with a
fall from his Horse: Edmund, fourth Son, born 26 Decembris, and Baptized at
Bowdon 1 Januarii, 1609. where he was also buried 5 Septembris, 1617. John
Booth, youngest Son, now Sir John Booth of Woodford nigh Over in Cheshire,
Knighted 1660. and yet living 1667. He has several Children by his first Wife;
but after her death he married Anne the Widow of Thomas Legh of Adlington
Esquire, 1659. but they lived asunder: Mary eldest Daughter of Sir George, was
never married: Alice married George Vernon of Hastington Esquire, afterward
Judge Vernon; she was buried at Bowdon 8 Martii, 1623. Frances, third Daughter
Frances died at Chester, and was buried at Bowdon, 10 Septem. 1669.
, yet living at Chester, 1667. but never married: Susan, fourth Daughter,
married Sir William Brereton of Honford about 1623. She was buried at Bowdon 6
Junii, 1637. Katharine, another Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 22 Maii, 1606. she
is yet living at Chester, 1667. and was never married: Cicely, another
Daughter, died young: Elizabeth, youngest Daughter, was second Wife to Richard
Lord Byron of Newstede in Nottinghamshire, both living 1667. but she has no
Issue.

This Sir George was Ward to Queen Elizabeth, and was at the full age of 21
Years October 20. 29 Eliz. 1587. He was Sheriff of Chester 1597. and also 1622.
and he died at Dunham-Massy 24 Octobris, and was buried at Bowdon 18 Novembris,
1652. having completed the 86 Year of his Age.

Katharine his Lady died long before him; she was buried at Bowdon 26
Februarii, 1638.

IX. William Booth Esquire, eldest Son of Sir George, married Vere third
Daughter and Coheir of Sir Thomas Egerton (eldest Son of Sir Thomas Egerton
Lord Chancellor of England) in May, Anno Domini 1619. and had Issue Thomas
Booth, eldest Son, Baptized at Bowdon 29 Junii, 1620. he died at Chester 3
Januarii, 1632. and was buried at St. Werburge in Chester; George Booth, second
Son, succeeded Heir; William Booth, third Son, Baptized at Bowdon 28 Februarii,
1625. he died young; Nathaniel Booth, fourth Son, Baptized at Bowdon 9 Maii,
1627. is yet living at his House in Mottram-Andrew nigh Over-Alderley in
Cheshire. 1667. He married Anne Ravenscroft, Daughter of Robert Ravenscroft,
late of Bretton in the Parish of Harden in Flintshire, Esquire, and has Issue:
Charles Booth, fifth Son, Baptized at Bowdon 26 Julii, 1628. and was buried at
Bowdon 21 Januarii, 1634. Elizabeth Booth, Baptized at Bowdon 13 Julii, 1621.
she died young: Katharine, another Daughter, Baptized at Bowdon 25 Maii, 1624.
she married John Jackson of Hickelton in Yorkshire, Esquire, about 1647.
afterward created Baronet, 31 Decembris, 1660. She died 1667.

This William Booth of Dunham was buried at Bowdon 3 Maii, 1636. in the
Lifetime of Sir George his Father.

Vere his Wife was buried at Bowdon 4 Maii, 1629.

X. Sir George Booth of Dunham-Massy, Baronet, Son and Heir of William, and
Grandson of Sir George, was created Baron Delamere of Dunham-Massy at the
Coronation of King Charles the Second: His Patent bears date the 20 day of
April, 13 Car. 2. 1661. He has much beautified the Mannor-house of
Dunham-Massy, by Building the North side thereof answerable to the opposite
Part; and has encompassed a large Outward Court with a Brick-wall, and a fair
Gate of Stone. He made a Domestic Chapel there, about 1655. by laying two
Ground-Rooms together on the South side of the House.

He married Katharine Daughter of Theophilus Fines Earl of Linooln, by whom he
had Issue Vere Booth, a Daughter, Baptized 23 Julii, 1643. and is yet living,
1667.

Dame Katharine his Lady was Buried at Bowdon 5 Augusti, 1643. She died in
Childbed.

Afterward he married Elizabeth Daughter of Henry Gray Earl of Stanford, by
whom he had Issue William Booth eldest Son, a very hopeful Youth, who died Anno
Domini 1662. Henry Booth, second Son; Charles Booth, George Booth, Robert
Booth, Cecil Booth, all living 1666. Also Elizabeth, eldest Daughter by this
Lady, yet living 1667. Anne, another Daughter, died at London 1667. Jane,
another Daughter, died young, 1663. Diana, another Daughter, living 1667. Also
Nevill Booth, another Son, Baptized at Dunham 15 Novembris, 1666.

XI. Henry Booth, second Son of George Lord Delamere, and Heir to his Father,
married Mary Daughter of Sir James Langham, Son of Alderman John Langham of
London, Baronet, in July, 1670. George Lord Delamere his Father yet living.

Dutton.
I Find this Town of Dutton thrice named in Doomsday-book, as held then in the
Conqueror's time by three Persons. One Part Odard held immediately of the Earl
of Chester, as it were in Capite: Another Part was held by William Fitz-Nigell
Baron of Halton, of the Earl, in like manner: Another Part did Osberne Son of
Tezzon, Ancestor to the Boydells of Dodleston, hold also of the Earl of Chester.

Odard's Part seems to be the greatest Part, which one Ravene held before at
the coming in of the Normans. The Baron of Halton's Part, and Osbern's Part,
one Edward held before, and did then likewise hold Osbern's Part under the said
Osbern.

But both Osbern's Part, and the Baron of Halton's Part, at last came to the
Posterity of Odard: Ex Chartulis Duttonorum de Dutton.
For Osbern's Part was sold by his Heir Sir William Boydell, who released all
his Seignory unto Thomas Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton, in all the Lands which
the said Thomas held of him in Dutton, 15 Edw. 3. 1341. Lib. C. fol. 158. b.

As to the Baron of Halton's Part, John Constable of Cheshre, Baron of Halton,
gave to Adam de Dutton (younger Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton, and Ancestor to
Warburton of Arley) those four Oxgangs of Land in Dutton, which Walter Heron
held: This was about the end of the Reign of Henry the Second: Lib. C. fol.
140. And Sir Geffrey de Warburton releaseth all his Right unto Thomas Son of
Hugh de Dutton aforesaid, in all those Lands in Dutton which the said Thomas
held by Lease from the said Sir Geffrey: Dated at Dutton 28 Edw. 3. 1354. Lib.
C. fol. 158. c. So that Thomas de Dutton was now invested in the whole Town of
Dutton entirely.

This Township in the ancient Record of Doomsday-book is written [Duntune]: Dun
in the old Saxon Language signifies A Hill, for which we now use the word Down:
So that Duntune signifies as much as A Town upon a Hill or Down; now contracted
to Dutton.

From this Town did the ancient Family of the Duttons assume their Surname:
For Odard being seated here in the Conqueror's Time, his Posterity were
sir-named de Dutton from the Place of their Residence; where they have
continued ever since to this present 1666. about 600 Years: A Family of great
Worth and Antiquity, and as it were almost a constant Succession of Knights;
but now, alas! ready to change its Name, being devolved by a Daughter and Heir
unto the Lord Gerard of Gerards-Bromley in Staffordshire.

Out of this Family branched out the Warburtons of Arley under Henry the
Second, and retained their proper Surname of Dutton, till Peter Dutton seating
himself at Warburton toward the end of Edward the First, his Posterity under
Edward the Second were styled de Warburton, and have ever since wholly retained
the Surname of Warburton.

The Warburtons, Chedills, and Ashleys in Cheshire, are all originally Duttons.
About the same time of Henry the Second, branched out also Geffrey de Dutton,
another Son, from whom the Duttons of Chedill in this County; whose Posterity
afterward assumed the Surname of Chedill under Edward the First: And out of
this Family of Dutton of Chedill, branched out Hamon Dutton, a younger Son,
under Edward the First, who assumed the Surname of Ashley from the Place of
his Residence; whose Posterity wholly retained the Surname of Ashley, as you
may see more fully in Ashley*

Besides the Duttons of Hatton nigh Warton in Cheshire, more lately sprung
hence, and other Good Families.

The Mannor-house of Dutton is well seated, and has great store of Meadowing
by the River side belonging to the Demain, which is accounted the largest and
best Demain within our County, comprehending 1400 Statute Acres by Survey.

This House stands upon a pleasant Prospect to the opposite Hills of the
Forest; and has in it an ancient Chapel, built first by Sir Thomas Dutton
toward the end of Henry the Third's Reign; unto whom Roger de Lincoln then
Prior of Norton, and the Convent there, did grant liberam Cantariam in Capellis
suis de Dutton and Weston infra Limits Parochiarum nostrarum de Budworth and
de Runcorne: id est, Free liberty of Reading Divine Service, or Singing the
same; so as the Mother-Churches receive no detriment either in their greater or
lesser Tithes. Lib. C. fol. 155. s. That of Weston is long since vanished; but
this Chapel at Dutton yet remains, and is now a Domestic Chapel within the
Mannor-House of Dutton, unto which Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton, after he was
adjudged next Heir Male to the Lands of Dutton by the Award of Henry the
Eighth, did annex his new Buildings at Dutton, Anno Domini 1539. as appears by
the Inscription round about the Hall of Dutton yet extant, ad^oyning those unto
the Chapel, and so making it as one continued Building; before which time, the
old House stood a little distance from the Chapel aforesaid.

In the Demain of Dutton is also another Chapel of Ease, called
Poosey-Chappel, within the Parish of Runcorne; but is now ruinate, and in
decay. It is seated between the River and the Park-Pool within the Demain of
Dutton, but not in the Township of Dutton; for all the Town of Dutton is within
Budworth Parish. It was called Poos-eye from its Situation, [Ey] in our old
English-Saxon Tongue signifies A River or Brook; and because it stood close by
the River and the Pool also, it was called Poos-ey-Chappel, as it were, The
Chapel by the River and the Pool. In our old Norman Writing, and French way, I
find it it in Old Deeds written Puls-ey; but in our common Language anciently,
as the Country People at this day, did call a Pool a Poo; and thence it was
denominated Poo's-ey-Chappel. It was built in the Reign of Henry the Third; and
the Prior and Convent of Norton granted to Hugh Son of Hugh de Dutton, that
they would find a Chaplain to Officiate at Poos-ey for ever, and a Lamp burning
at the time of Divine Service, about 1236. 20 Hen. 3. Lib. C. fol. 155. r.
which Chapel was constantly frequented by the Neighborhood, until Robert Lord
Kilmorey and Dame Elinour his Wife came to live at Dutton, even in our days;
who beautified the Domestic Chapel at Dutton with handsome Pews, and kept a
Chaplain in his House constantly, whereunto all the Neighborhood resorted every
Sunday: Then began Poosey Chapel to be neglected, and is now totally in decay,
some part of the Structure yet remaining, 1666.

Now follows the Pedigree of the Duttons of Dutton, faithfully Collected from
the Evidences of that Family, and other good Records and Deeds.
I. Odard, or Udard, sometimes also written Hodard blazon or coat of arms
Quarterly, Argent and Gules, in the second and third Quarters a Fret Or.
and Hudard, came into England with William the Conqueror, and seated himself
at Dutton; a good part whereof Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester gave unto him, as
before you have heard out of Doomsday-book.

The ancient Roll of the Barons of Halton says, That with Hugh Earl of Chester
came one Nigell a Nobleman; and with Nigell came five Brethren, to wit, Hudard,
Edard, Wolmere, Horswyne, and Wolfaith, a Priest, to whom Nigell gave the
Church of Runcorne; and unto Hudard the same Nigell gave Weston and Great Aston
(now divided into two Townships, Aston Grange, and Aston juxta Sutton) pro uno
Feodo Militis: And from this Hudard came all the Duttons. Lib. C. fol. 84, 85.
and Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, page 187. And in the Record of Doomsday,
Odard held Aston under William Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton; and also Odard and
Brictric held Weston under the said William, Anno Domini 1086. Whether those
five Brethren aforementioned, were Brethren to Nigell, is a doubt; for then
methinks he should have said, -- Quinque Fratres sui: whereas he says only,
Cum isto Nigello venerunt quinque Fratres, and so names them.

This Hudard's, or Odard's Sword, is at this day, 1665. in the Custody of the
Lady Elinour Vicountess Kilmorey, sole Daughter and Heir of Thomas Dutton late
of Dutton Esquire, deceased; which Sword has for many Ages past been
preserved, and passed over from Heir to Heir as an Heir-loom, by the name of
Hudard's Sword; and so at this day it is by Tradition received and called. Lib.
C. fol. 163. dd.

II. Hugh Son of Hodard had those Lands which he held in Capite, or immediately
of the Earl of Chester, confirmed unto him by Randle the Second, surnamed de
Gernoniis, Earl of Chester, about the latter end of Henry the First. Lib. C.
fol. 154. b. These Lands I conceive were those which he held in Dutton.

III. Hugh de Dutton, Son of Hugh, Son of Hodard, had the Lands which his
Father Hugh held of the Baron of Halton confirmed unto him by William Son of
Nigell, Constable to Randle the Second, and by William his Son, on that day
when the said William the Father and William the Son did visit Hugh, the Son of
Hodard on his Deathbed at Kekwick; at which time Hugh the 8on of Hodard gave
unto William the Father his Coat of Mail and his Charging-Horse; and Hugh, the
Son of that Hugh, gave unto William the Son a Palfrey and a Sparrow-hawk. This
was about the end of the Reign of King Henry the First: Lib. C. fol. 154. a.
The Lands here confirmed I conceive to be Weston and Kekwick, and perhaps some
others.

This Hugh de Dutton had Issue Hugh Dutton Son and Heir; Adam de Dutton,
another Son, from whom the Warburtons of Arley are descended; Geffrey de
Dutton, another Son, from whom the Duttons of Chedill in this County were
propagated, who assumed the Surname of Chedill, and continued to the Reign of
Edward the Third, till Sir Roger de Chedill (the last of that Family) dying 1
Edw. 3. 1327. left his Inheritance to be shared by his two Daughters and Heirs,
Clemence and Agnes: Lib. C. fol. 61. h. Lib. B. page 10. q. Lib. C. fol. 150.
c. a. b. and fol. 150. l. And out of that Family de Chedill branched Hamon
Dutton under Edward the First, younger Son to Sir Geffrey Dutton of Chedill, to
whom his Father gave Ashley 13 Ed* 1. 1285.
, which he purchased for him. The Posterity of this Hamon assumed the Surname
of Ashley from the Place of their Residence, as was the manner of those Ages;
which Family of the Ashley's of Ashley continued to the end of Henry the
Eighth; about which time Thomasin, Daughter and Heir of George Ashley of Ashley
Esquire, brought that Inheritance to Richard Brereton of Lea-Hall, not far from
Middlewich, by Marriage, who was a younger Son of Sir William Brereton of
Brereton in this County; in which Name of Brereton of Ashley it continued but
four Descents, and was divided among the three Sisters of Thomas Brereton (the
last Brereton of Ashley) and their Heirs, Anno Domini 1661. See more hereof
above in Ashley.

IV. Hugh Dutton of Dutton, Son of Hugh, married (...) Daughter of Hamon Massy
Baron of Dunham-Massy, regnante Henrico Secundo; with whom her Father gave in
Free Marriage Lands in Suttersby, in Lindsey in Lincolnshire: Lib. C. fol. 154.
e. and had Issue V. I do conceive here was another Hugh ^^^ton, Son and Heir of
(...) Hugh, who married Murlel Daughter of Thomas le Dispenser, Lib. C. fol.
139. b and he had Issue Hugh, Thomas, John, and Adam, as there follows. And
if so, some of these Acts may belong to that Hugh, which are ascribed to this
Hugh. See Lib. C fol. 164. I.
Hugh Dutton eldest Son, Thomas Dutton, John Dutton, Adam Dutton. He purchased
Little Moldesworth for fifty Marks, from Robert Son of Matthew de Moldesworth,
about 1250. Lib. C. fol. 146. r. v. Also Alice Wife of William Boydell of
Dodeston, Lib. C. fol. 139. a. b.

This Hugh Dutton bought Preston nigh Dutton of Henry de Nuers and Julian his
Wife, reddendo octo Solidos annuatim, ad Festum Sancti Martini: Which Randle
Blundevill, Earl of Chester, confirmed, about the Reign of King John. Lib. C.
fol. 155. o. p.

He Purchased also the Town of Little Legh in Fee-farm from Simon Son of
Osberne, rendering the yearly Rent of two Marks of Silver at the Feast of St.
Martin: Lib. C. fol. 154. f. Which Rent is yet paid by his Heirs to the Earl of
Derby, as of his Manor of Harden, Anno Domini 1666. And Roger Lacy, Constable
of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, acquitted this Hugh Dutton de Judice de
Legha, that is, of finding a Judger to serve at Halton for Little Legh yearly,
about the Reign of Richard the First, or beginning of King John's Reign. Lib.
C. fol. 154. g.

He Purchased also the Moiety of Barnton from William, Son of Henry, Son of
Serlo, which Robert de Mesnilwarin held. Lib. C. fol. 155. I.

He had also the Magistracy, or Rule and Authority, See the Deed at large supra
page 142. made about the end of King John's Reign, or the beginning of Henry the
Third.
over all the Letchers and Whores of all Cheshire, granted unto him and his
Heirs, by John Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, as freely as the
said John held the same of the Earl of Chester; saving the Right of the said
John to him and his Heirs: Which are the very words of the Deed, only rendered
by me in English: Lib. C. fol. 154. h. So that he holds it, as it were, under
the Baron of Halton, who reserves his own Right by a special Reservation.

This Privilege over such loose Persons was granted first unto Roger Lacy
Constable of Cheshire, under Richard the First, by Randle sir-named Blundevill,
Earl of Chester, in memory of his good Service done to the Earl in raising the
Siege of the Welsh-men, who had beset the Earl in his Castle of Rothelent in
Flintshire: For the Constable having got a promiscuous Rabble of such like
Persons together, and Marching toward the said Castle, the Welsh (supposing a
great Army to be coming) raised their Siege, and fled: So says the ancient
Roll of the Barons of Halton: Lib. C. fol. 85. b. Monasticon Anglicanum, 2
Pars, page 187. This Roll says, that Rabble consisted of Players, Fiddlers, and
Shoe-makers. The Deed here touches Letchers and Whores. The Privilege and
Custom used at this day by the Heirs of Dutton, is over the Minstrelsie and
Common Fiddlers; none being suffered to Play in this County, without the License
of the Lord of Dutton, who keeps a Court at Chester yearly, on Midsomer-day,
for the same, where all the Licenced Minstrels of Cheshire do appear, and renew
their Licenses: So that the Custom seems to have been altered to the Fiddlers,
as necessary Attendants on Revellers in Bawdy-houses and Taverns.

And it is to be observed, That those Minstrels which are Licensed by the Heirs
of Dutton of Dutton, within the County Palatine of Chester, or the County of
the City of Chester, according to their ancient Custom, are exempted out of the
Statute of Rogues, 39 Eliz. cap. 4.

VI. Hugh Dutton of Dutton, Son and Heir of Hugh, lived 1234. 18 Hen. 3. He
Purchased from Richard de Aston, Son of Gilbert de Aston, six Bovates of Land
in Aston juxta Dutton, in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Third; Lib.
C. fol. 155. q. Which Land belongs to Dutton-Demain at this day, 1666.

He also built Poosey Chapel about 20 Hen. 3. 1236. of which I have spoken
before: Lib. C. fol. 155. r. which undoubtedly stood upon part of that Land
bought from Aston; for that Chapel is in Runcorne Parish.

This Hugh gave to John his Brother the third part of all the Town of Bolinton
in Maxfield Hundred, which Thomas le Dispenser gave in Free-marriage Hugoni
Patri meo cum Muriela Matre mea: Lib. C. fol. 139. b. The Original Penes Downs
of Shrigley, 1654. Which Deed was made about the Year of Christ 1234.

This Hugh de Dutton died without Issue, and Thomas his Brother succeeded Heir.
Lib. C. fol. 139. c.

VII. Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton, Brother and Heir to Hugh, lived Anno Domini
1249. 33 Hen. 3. and 1268. 53 Hen. 3. He Purchased Clatterwigge, a Hamlet in
Little Legh juxta Barterton, from Hugh de Clatterwigge, about 1244. 29 Hen. 3.
Lib. C. fol. 156. t.

He built the Chapel at the Mannor-House of Dutton, toward the end of Henry
the Third's Reign: Lib. C. fol. 155. S.

He married Philippa Daughter and Heir of Vivian de Sandon, or Standon, by whom
he had Lands in Staffordshire; and had Issue Hugh Dutton, Son and Heir; Thomas,
another Son, to whom his Father gave Great Rownall and Little Rownall in
Staffordshire, by the consent of Philippa his Wife: Lib. C. fol. 147. d. and
fol. 156. v. But I conceive this younger Son Thomas died. without Issue,
because I find Philippa in her Widowhood granting these two Manors of Rownall
to Sir Robert Dutton her other Son, and to Agnes his Wife, Daughter of William
de Mere in Staffordshire: Lib. C. fol. 156. w. Margaret, a Daughter, married
William Venables, Son and Heir of Roger Venables of Kinderton, 38 Hen. 3. 1253.
Lib. H. number. 40. And Katharine married John Son of Vrian de Sancto Petro. So I
find it in an old Pedigree.

This Sir Thomas was Sheriff of Cheshire 1268. 53 Hen. 3. Lib. A. fol. 143. o.
He died in the beginning of the Reign of Edward the First.

Philippa was living a Widow 1290, and 1294. Lib. C. fol. 156. x. and bb.

VIII. Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas, bound
himself to the Abbot of Vale-Royal, to make a Foot-Bridge at Acton, and to find
a Boat and Ferry-man at Acton-Ford, about 1286: Lib. C. fol. 156. aa. The same
is now made a County-Bridge.

He also was bound to William Gerard his Squire in una Roba Armigerorum
annuatim ad totam vitam suam ad Festum Natalis Domini, 13 Edw. 1. 1285. Lib. C.
fol. 156. z.

He Purchased Barterton, and married Joan Daughter of Sir Vrian de Sancto
Petro, vulgo Sampier; I have no Authority for this, but an old Pedigree: And
had Issue Hugh Dutton, Son and Heir; and William Dutton, who married Maud
Daughter and Coheir to Sir Richard Stockport of Stockport, 1305. Lib. C. fol.
146. k. Which William, with others, was Indicted 35 Edw. 1. for taking away the
said Maud by force from Dunham-Massy, being then in the Custody of Haemon
Massy; whom they took out of her Chamber into the Court, stripping her of all
her Clothes save her Smock, says the Record: Lib. C. fol. 215. a. Robert
Dutton, Parson of Eccleston, 1320. Lib. C. fol. 157. II. Also Margaret, a
Daughter: Lib. C. fol. 255. d.

Hugh died 22 Edw. 1. 1294. Lib. C. fol. 156. bb. Joan his Lady survived; she
was living 1298. Lib. C. fol. 157. cc.

IX. Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Hugh, born the
eighth day of December, 5 Edw. 1. 1276. at Dutton; and Baptized at Great
Budworth the day following: Lib. C. fol. 139. y. He sued the Prior of Norton
before Adam Burum and Nicolas Gruchundelee, Commissaries of the Bishop of
Lichfield and Coventry, at the Visitation of the Arch-Deanery of Chester, Anno
Domini 1315. for not finding a Chaplain and Lamp at Poosey Chapel, according
to the Original Grant, which he there produced: And John Olton, then Prior,
confessed the same, and was ordered to find them: Lib. C. fol. 146. m. This
Priory was of the Order of St. Augustine.

He married Joan Daughter of Sir Robert Holland of Holland in Lancashire, and
had Issue Thomas Dutton, Son and Heir; William, Parson of Thornton, 22 Edw. 3.
Lib. C. fol. 157. ee. and fol. 180. l. Geffrey Dutton, another Son: Robert
Dutton, another Son: Lib. C. fol. 157. ee. kk. 11 Edw. 3.

Hugh was made Steward of Halton 24 Decembris, 20 Edw. 2. Lib. C. fol. 180 m.
and died 1 Edw. 3. 1326. at the Age of fifty Years.

Joan his Widow afterward married Edmund Talbot of Bashall; and after, to Sir
John Ratcliff of Urdeshall in Lancashire, living 11 Edw. 3. and 20 Edw. 3. Lib.
C. fol. 157. hh. kk. and fol. 157. f. g.

X. Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Hugh and Joan, was
fifteen years old on Whitsunday, 1329. 3 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 161. oo. He
Purchased those Lands in Dutton which formerly belonged to Halton-Fee; and also
those Lands in Dutton which formerly belonged to Boydell of Dodleston; and so
made the Township of Dutton entirely his own: Lib. C. fol. 158. b. c. as I have
more particularly showed before.

This Thomas was made Seneschal, Governor, and Receiver of the Castle and
Honor of Halton in Cheshire, by William Clinton Earl of Huntington; and also
of all his Lands and Manors in Cheshire and Lancashire, quamdiu been se
gesserit which the Earl Farmed unto him for 440 Marks yearly: Dated at
Maxstock, 19 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 145. d.

It seems he was Indicted, for that he and others came with Armed Power (when
King Edward the Third was out of England) within the Verge of the Lodgings of
Lionell the King's Son, Protector of England, and assaulted the Manor of
Geaumes nigh Reading in Wiltshire, and there slew Michael Poynings the Uncle,
and Thomas le Clerk of Shipton, and others, and committed a Rape on Margery
the Wife of one Nicolas de la Beche, for which the King pardoned him; and he
found Sir Bernard Brocas, Sir Hugh Berewyk, Philip Durdanyt, and John Haydoke,
his Sureties in the Chancery for his good abearing, 26 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol.
153. d.

He was by several Commissions employed for the apprehending of certain
Malefactors, Robbers, and Disturbers of the Peace in this County. One is
directed unto him by the name of Thomas Dutton Equitator in Foresta de Mara,
and to Richard Done Forester of the same Forest, 14 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 181.
v. and fol. 164. e.

Anno Domini 1379. 3 Rich. 2. William Eltonhed Prior of the Hermit-Fryars of
the Order of St. Augustine at Warrington in Lancashire, and the Convent there,
grant to Sir Thomas Dutton Knight a perpetual Chantry; to wit, That a
sufficient Friar of the Convent of Warrington shall be especially elected to
pray for the Salvation of Sir Thomas, his Children, and of Philippa his Wife,
and her Parents; and for the Soul of Dame Ellen late Wife of the said Sir
Thomas, their Children and Parents when they shall die, at the Great Altar of
their Church yearly for ever; and that their Names be written down in their
Martyrology: Whereunto the Prior and Convent were bound under a Penalty of 3 s.
4 d. to be levied by the Provincial Prior upon omission of such Form of
Service; and if for a Week or a Fortnight it were omitted, then must they
double the time omitted in manner aforesaid: If neglected for six Months, then
upon pain of Suspension: If for a Year, then upon Excommunication, until the
time omitted be made up: Whereunto are Witnesses, Thomas Abbot of St. Werburge
of Chester, Stephen Abbot of Vale-Royal, Richard Prior of Norton, and Roger
Prior of Berkenhed.

This was confirmed by Henry de Towesdale Provincial Prior of the Hermit-Fryars
of the Order of St. Augustine in England, with a special Injunction, That the
said Persons be yearly twice Commemorated before the whole Convent; once at the
first entrance of the Prior of Warrington into the Convocation-house yearly;
the other time, on the Election-day of a Fellow-Prior for a Provincial
Convocation. Dated at Warrington on Sunday next after the Feast of St. Martin,
Anno supradicto. Lib. C. fol. 167. a.

This Sir Thomas Sealed usually with his Coat of Arms and Crest, to wit,
Quarterly, a Fret in the second and third; over which, upon the Dexter-Angle of
the Escocheon, a Helmet, and thereon a Plume of Feathers.

Anno Domini 1344. Robert Monning of Tatenhale grants to Thomas de Dutton and
his Heirs all the Magistracy of the Minstrels, cum omnibus pertinentiis, prout
in Charta Originali plemus continetur: Lib. C. fol. 158. h. I conceive he was
but a Feoffee.

This Thomas was Sheriff of Cheshire 30 and 33 Edw. 3. and was a Knight 35 Edw.
3. He married two Wifes: The first was Ellen one of the Daughters and Heirs of
Sir Peter Thornton of Thornton, the eldest Daughter, Lib. C. fol. 162. t. by
whom he had Issue Sir Peter Dutton, who died without Issue 35 Edw. 3. Lib. C.
fol. 158. e. Thomas Dutton, another Son, died also without Issue: Lawrence
Dutton succeeded Heir to his Father: Edmund Dutton, another Son: Henry Dutton,
fifth Son; and William Dutton another Son: Lib. C. fol. 158. d. f. g. and fol.
157. mm.

His second Wife was Philippa the Widow of Sir Peter Thornton. She was (as I
conceive) a later Wife to Sir Peter Thornton, not Mother of the Coheirs: Lib.
C. fol. 164. m. and 167. a. and 148. k.

This Sir Tomas Dutton died 4 Rich. 2. 1381. aged sixty six Years: Lib. C. fol.
159. I.

Philippa his Widow died 13 Rich. 2. 1389. Lib. C. fol. 162. T.

Edmund Dutton, younger Son of Sir Thomas, married Joan Daughter and Heir of
Henry Minshull de Church-Minshull, by whom he had the Manors of
Church-Minshull and Aston-Mondram; Lib. C fol. 159. k.
and had Issue Sir Peter Dutton, who became Heir to his Uncle Sir Lawrence
Dutton of Dutton: Hugh Dutton, second Son, of whom the Duttons of Hatton nigh
Warton in Cheshire, whose Posterity afterward, in process of time, became
Heirs of Dutton-Lands under Henry the Eighth: Lawrence Dutton, another Son; and
Thomas Dutton, another Son: Lib. C. fol. 163. x. and 145. g. Agnes de Dutton, a
Daughter, married William Leycester of Nether-Tabley, 1398. 22 Rich. 2. A. number.
5. Penes me: And Ellen, another Daughter: Lib. C. fol. 159. s.

This Edmund died before his Brother Sir Lawrence; and Joan his Widow
afterward married William de Hooton, and had Issue by him. Joan died 11 Rich.
2. 1387. Lib. C. fol. 163. x. at which time Peter Dutton, her Son and Heir, was
twenty Years old.

XI. Sir Lawrence Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir to Sir Thomas, had two
Wifes, Alice and Margaret; but who was Father to either of them, I find not. He
had no Issue by either, leaving his Inheritance to descend to Peter Dutton,
eldest Son of Edmund Dutton his younger Brother: Lib. C. fol. 159. q. I.

Sir Lawrence was a Knight 44 Edw. 3. and Sheriff of Cheshire 44, 45, 46 Edw.
3. and also 1 Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 159. m.

He had four Parts of the seven of Thornton's Estate. One Part he had as Son
and Heir to Ellen, eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir Peter de Thornton: He
purchased the Part of Elizabeth, late Wife of Roger Venables of Golborne
(Daughter and Heir of Margaret Wife of William de Golborne, which Margaret was
another of the Daughters and Heirs of Sir Peter de Thornton) 12 Rich. 2. Lib.
C. fol. 159. o. Another Part he purchased from Matthew de Weverham, Son and
Heir of Hugh de Weverham and Emme his Wife, another of the Daughters and Heirs
of Sir Peter de Thornton, 14 Rich. 2. 1391. Lib. C. fol. 159. p. The Part of
Katharine, who was Outlawed for Felony, Thomas Dutton his Father had formerly
bought of the Prince: Lib. C. fol. 162. T. Mary, another Daughter and Coheir,
had the Manor of Helsby; she died without Issue. Maud, another Daughter and
Coheir, married Henry Beeston of Beeston. Elizabeth, another Daughter and
Coheir, married Hamon Fitton of Bollin, and had Issue Joan Daughter and Heir,
Mother of William Venables of Bollin.

Sir Lawrence had License from the Earl of Chester to carry away the Chapel of
Kingsley, formerly belonging to Sir Peter de Thornton, being within the
Boundary of the Forest: Lib. C. fol. 148. I. 45 Edw. 3.

He Sealed constantly with his Escocheon of Arms, Quarterly, a Fret in the
second and third Quarters; inscribed about the Seal, -- SIGIL. LAURENTII DE
DUTTON MILITIS. Which very Seal was extant 1665. in possession of the Lady
Kilmorey.

Dutton, on Sunday, being the day after the Conversion of S. Paul, or 26
Januarii, Anno Domini 1392. 16 Rich. 2. wherein he Bequeaths his Body to be
Buried at Norton, and gives his Black Horse before his Body to the Convent of
Norton for a Heriot; also sixteen Torches, and five Tapers, about his Body on
the Burial-day, with sixteen Poor Men in Gowns to carry the Lights; also ten
Marks to the Poor, and thirty Pound to sufficient Chaplains to Celebrate for
his Soul the next Year, two in the Parish Church of Budworth, and four others
in the Chapel of Dutton: -- Also to Agnes and Ellen, Daughters of Edmund
Dutton, forty Pounds for their Marriages; -- and makes Margaret his Wife, and
his Cousin Hugh Dutton, his Executors, and the Abbot of Chester Overseer of his
Will. Lib. C. fol. 159. s.

This Will was Proved the tenth day of February following, before William
Neuhagh then Archdeacon of Chester.

So that Sir Lawrence died 1392. 16 Rich. 2. aged fifty three Years. Margaret
his Widow married afterward Sir William Brereton of Brereton, 21 Rich. 2. Lib.
C. fol. 145. f.

XII. Sir Peter Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir of Edmund Dutton, which
Edmund was younger Brother and next Heir to Sir Lawrence Dutton of Dutton. This
Sir Peter married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir William Butler of Beusy, Lord of
Warrington: Lib. C. fol. 180. o. and 160. t. and had Issue Sir Thomas de
Dutton, who married Alice Daughter of Sir John Stanley, but died without Issue
about 9 Hen. 6. in the Lifetime of his Father: Alice his Widow after married
John Wolton, Lib. C. fol. 164. d.
11 Hen. 6. ut per inquisitionem post mortem Johannis de Dutton, 24 Hen. 6. and
Lib. C. fol. 147. x. y. John Dutton, second Son, who succeeded Heir to his
Father: Richard Dutton, another Son, living 1440, and 1451. Lib. C. fol. 164.
a. which Richard had Issue Lawrence Dutton senior, 16 Hen. 7. who died without
Issue, Lib. C. fol. 161. k. Parnell, Daughter of Sir Peter, married Hugh
Venables Baron of Kinderton; after to Richard Booth, 29 Hen. 6. 1451. Lib. C.
fol. 160. c. Elizabeth, another Daughter, married John Done Son and Heir of
John Done of Utkinton the elder, 12 Hen. 4. 1410. Lib. C. fol. 164. f. Ellen,
another Daughter, married Griffith Hanmere, Son and Heir of John Hanmere
Esquire, 3 Hen. 6. 1424. Lib. C. fol. 179. d. And Sibill, another Daughter,
married Geffrey Starky, Son of Randle Starky of Stretton in Cheshire, Lib. C.
fol. 134. l.

Sir Peter Dutton was a Knight 7 Hen. 4. Lib. C. fol. 180. o. and also 5 Hen.
4. Lib. C. fol. 145. h.. The King granted him a Pardon for taking part with
Henry Percy the Son, sir-named Hotspur: Dated at Cirencester, 3 Novembris, 5
Hen. 4. 1403.

He was made Lieutenant or Deputy in the Office of the Seneschalcy of the
County of Chester, by Elizabeth Countess of Salisbury, while they both should
live, and to be of Council with her; for which Service she gave him two Marks
Annual Rent, which he ought to pay her for his Lands of Little Legh, held of
her Castle of Harden, during the Term aforesaid; 1408. 10 Hen. 4. Lib. C. fol.
164. b.

Great Contention fell between this Sir Peter Dutton, and Sir William Athurton
of Athurton in Lancashire; insomuch that they made Inroads and Invasions one
upon the other: And the said Sir Piers Dutton, and his Adherents. to wit, Sir
Rafe Bostock of Bostock, Richard Warburton of Budworth, Thomas Warburton of
Halton, John Done of Utkinton junior, John Manley of Manley, Hugh Dutton of
Hatton the elder, William Leycester of Nether-Tabley, Sir Peter Legh of Clifton
(Ancestor to Legh of Lyme), and John Carington of Carington, were all sued by
Sir William Athurton, for taking away forty of his Oxen, and forty Cows, out of
his Closes at Athurton, and for beating of his Servants. But this Variance was
composed between them by the Award of John Duke of Bedford, Earl of Richmond
and Kendall, Constable of England, and Regent of the Kingdom in the absence of
Henry the Fifth; Dated 9 Aprilis, 7 Hen. 5. 1419. Restitution being awarded on
both sides: The Horses and Saddles taken by Sir William Athurton, to be
restored to Sir Piers Dutton; and the Cattle taken by Sir Piers, to be restored
to the said Sir William: Lib. C. fol. 146. n.

Sir Peter de Dutton was made Parcarius de Northwood, or Governor of Northwood
Park in Over-Whitley, during his Life, with all the Fees thereof, 1 Hen. 6.
1423. Vel 1 Hen. 5.
Out of which he had Orders from William Harrington, Chief Steward of Halton
under Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Feoffees of King Henry the
Fifth, to deliver one Oak for the Repair of Witton Bridge, then in decay; and
another for the Repair of Farnworth Chapel: Dated 9 Hen. 6. Lib. C. fol. 147.
w.

Sir Peter died 12 Hen. 6. 1433. aged sixty six Years: Lib. C. fol. 147. x. y.
and fol. 163. x.

XIII. John Dutton of Dutton Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Peter, married
Margaret Daughter of Sir John Savage of Clifton, 6 Hen. 5. 1418. Lib. C. fol.
160. w. and had Issue Thomas Dutton, Son and Heir; Roger Dutton, another Son,
afterward Lord of Dutton; John Dutton, slain with his Brother Sir Thomas
Dutton at Blore-Heath, 1459. Stow. Robert Dutton, another Son, died without
Issue: Lib. C. fol. 180. k. Margaret married Hugh Son and Heir of Raufe
Egerton, 21 Hen. 6. 1443. Lib. C. fol. 147. b. Maud married Sir William Booth
of Dunham-Massy, 21 Hen. 6. 1443. Lib. C. fol. 164. g. Agnes married Richard
Wynnington of Wynnington nigh Northwich (Son and Heir of Robert Wynnington, Son
and Her of Sir Richard Wynnington) 25 Hen. 6. 1446. Lib. C. fol. 160. y. Ellen
married Edward Son and Heir of Richard Longford of Lancashire Esquire 28 Hen. 6.
1450. Lib. C. fol. 160. a. Elizabeth married John Merbury, Son and Heir of
James Merbury of Merbury nigh Comberbach, Esquire, 1458. The Original penes
Thomam Merbury Armigerum, 1666.

John Dutton of Dutton died 24 Hen. 6. 1445. aged forty two Years: Lib. C. fol.
160. y. z. Margaret his Wife survived, and was living 1450.

XIV. Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton Knight, Son and Heir of John and Margaret,
married Anne Daughter of James Lord Audley, and had Issue Peter eldest Son,
slain with his Father at the Battle of Blore-Heath, as Tradition has it: John
Dutton, second Son, who succeeded Heir to his Father: Anno married Sir Thomas
Molineaux of Sefton in Lancashire: Isabel married Sir Christopher Sotheworth of
Sotheworth in Lancashire: Lib. D. page 173. f.
Elizabeth married Raufe Bostock of Bostock in Davenham Parish in Cheshire, Esquire
by whom he had Issue Anne Daughter and Heir, married to Sir John Savage of
Clifton in Cheshire, juxta Halton; which Elizabeth, after the death of Raufe
Bostock, married Thomas Scriven of Frodsley in Shropshire, and she died Anno
Domini 1516. 5 die Februarii, 8 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 139. x. Margaret, another
Daughter of Sir Thomas Dutton, married Thomas Aston of Aston juxta Sutton,
Esquire, 7 Edw. 4. 1467. Afterward she married Raufe Vernon of Haslington in
Cheshire, Esquire: And Elinour, another Daughter, married Richard Cholmondley
of Cholmondley in Broxton Hundred, Esquire Lib. C. fol. 161. I. n.

Thomas was slain at the Battle of Blore-Heath in Staffordshire, September 23.
38 Hen. 6. 1459. Stow in his Annals: and in the thirty eighth Year of his Age.

Anne his Widow afterward married Hugh Done of Olton in Cheshire; and she died
19 Hen. 7. 1503. Lib. C. fol. 162. v.

XV. John Dutton of Dutton Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas and Anne, was
made Steward to the Prior of Norton for his Life, of all the Lands and
Tenements belonging to that Priory, Robert Leftwich being then Abbot of Norton;
and for which the said John Dutton had three Pound yearly for his Fee: Dated at
Norton, in September, 38 Hen. 6. 1459. Lib. C. fol. 145. c.

He married Margaret Daughter of Richard, and Sister to Sir Thomas Molineaux of
Sefton in Lancashire; Edw. 4. 1473. leaving Roger Dutton his Uncle to succeed
in his Estate: Lib. C. fol. 160. d. e.

Margaret his Widow married William Buckley of Eaton junior, 15 Edw. 4. Lib. C.
fol. 160. b.

XVI. Roger Dutton of Dutton Esquire (younger Brother to Sir Thomas, and Heir
to his Nephew John Dutton) married Joan Daughter of Sir Richard Aston of Aston
juxta Sutton, and had Issue Lawrence Dutton Son and Heir.

Roger died 14 Hen. 7. 1499. Joan his Widow afterward married Sir Richard
Strangewaies. Lib. C. fol. 162. v. and fol. 164. e.

XVII. Lawrence Dutton of Dutton Esquire, 14 Hen. 7. Son and Heir of Roger and
Joan, 8 Hen. 8.
married Joan Daughter of Robert Duckenfield of Duckenfield in Cheshire
Esquire; but died without any Lawful Issue, Anno Domini 1526. aged fifty Years:
Lib. C. fol. 164. e. and fol. 161. k.

He had a Bastard-son, called John Dutton, to whom he gave the Message in
Preston nigh Daresbery, called The New Manor, for his Life; 1526. Lib. C. fol.
162. s. He had also two Bastard-daughters, Isabel and Joan.

Upon the sailing of the Issue Male of this Line of Dutton, there fell great
Controversy and Suits of Law concerning this fair Inheritance of Dutton,
between Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton in Broxton Hundred, as next Heir Male, on
the one part; and the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton,
and their Heirs, on the other part. At last it was composed and ended by the
Award of King Henry the Eighth, Dated the sixteenth day of May, 26 Hen. 8.
1534. and Confirmed by Act of Parliament 27 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 163. y. after
seven Years Suit, and above.

The Lands allotted to the Coheirs were the Lordships of Church-Minshull,
Aston in Mondrum, and Kekwick; and all the Lands which the Ancestors of Dutton
hold in Kingsley, Norley, Chorleton Codynton, Pulton-Lancelyn, Bradley, Budword
in le Frith, Milneton, Barnton, Over-Whitley, Aston nigh Moldesworth, Hellesby,
Frodsham, and in the City of Chester.

The Lands allotted to Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton, and now adjudged the next
Heir Male, were, The Manor of Dutton, the Advowry of the Minstrels in
Cheshire, the Advowson of Poosey Chapel, the Lordships of Weston, Preston,
Barterton, Little Legh, Nesse in Wirrall, Little Moldesworth, Acton, and
Harpesford; and all the Lands which the Ancestors of Dutton held in Weston,
Clifton, Preston, Barterton, Legh, Nesse, Little Moldesworth, Acton,
Harpesford, Stony Dunham, Michbarrow, Stoke, Picton, Arrowe, North-wich,
Halton, Thelwall, Oneston, Middle-wich, Stanthorne, and Over-Runcorne.

And now before we proceed to the next Lord of Dutton, we must look back to the
first Ancestor of this Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton, which branches out of the
Family of Dutton of Dutton, and bring that Line to this Sir Piers Dutton, and
then proceed.

So then we find Hugh Dutton, the first Dutton of Hatton, in Right of Petronill
his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Peter de Hatton juxta Warton, branching out
under Richard the Second. This Hugh was a younger Son of Edmund Dutton, which
Edmund was a younger Son of Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton.

1. This Hugh had Issue John Dutton, Son and Heir; Lawrence Dutton, another
Son; Randle, Rector of Christleton nigh Chester; also Hugh, another Son, Lib.
C. fol. 146. n. Elizabeth, a Daughter, married Richard Manley of Manley.

Hugh Dutton of Hatton was Sheriff of Cheshire 10 Hen. 5. 1422. and had a
second Wife, namely, Emme the Widow of Hugh Venables of Golborne, and Daughter
of Nicolas Warren of Pointon, 16 Hen. 6. John Booth of Twamlow's Book of his
own Collections, Lib. H. page 125. a. b.

2. John Dutton of Hatton, 19 Hen. 6. Son and Heir of Hugh and Parnell, was
Mayor of Chester 30 Hen. 6. and married Margaret Daughter of William Athurton
of Athurton in Lancashire, and had Issue Peter, Son and Heir; Richard, another
Son; Geffrey, another Son: Cicely married John Byrd of Broxton: Ellen married
one Gilibrand. 3. Peter Dutton of Hatton Esquire, Son and Heir of John, married
Elizabeth eldest Daughter and one of the Heirs of Robert Grosvenour of Houlme
in Allostock, Esquire, 1464. and had Issue Peter Dutton junior, Rafe, Richard,
and Randle. 4. Peter Dutton of Hatton Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter, married
Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Robert Fouleshurst of Crew in Cheshire, and had Issue
Sir Piers Dutton, who was adjudged next Heir Male to all Dutton Lands, 26 Hen.
8. Elizabeth married Sir George Calveley of Lea nigh Eaton-boat: Elinour
married Randle Brereton of Malpas: Jane married George Leech of Carden.

This Peter died about 20 Hen. 7. for Elizabeth his Widow married Thomas
Leycester of Tabley Esquire, 22 Hen. 7. 1506. and she was the third Wife of the
said Thomas Leycester. T. number. 1.


XVIII. Sir Piers Dutton of Hatton and Dutton both, Son and Heir of Peter
Dutton of Hatton Esquire, was a Knight 19 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 162. s. and
adjudged next Heir Male to Lawrence Dutton of Dutton Esquire, 26 Hen. 8. 1534.
Lib. C. fol. 163. y. He is the eighteenth Lord of Dutton since the Conquest,
and the fifteenth Person in Lineal Descent from Odard. He built the Hall and
New Buildings of Dutton-House, which he joined to the Chapel, Anno 1539.
before which time the House stood a little more remote from the Chapel.

He had two Wifes. Elinour Daughter of Thomas Legh of Adlington was his first
Wife, by whom he had Issue Peter Dutton, eldest Son, who died without Issue;
Hugh Dutton, second Son; Rafe Dutton, third Son, to whom his Father gave all
Hatton Lands, from whom the Duttons of Hatton yet in being* 1666. are
propagated: Katharine, a Daughter, married Sir Roger Pilston of Emrads;
afterward she married Richard Grosvenour, younger Son of the Grosvenours of
Eaton-boat: Elizabeth married William Manley of Manley; afterward she married
Thomas Brown of Nether-Lee: Anne married to Hamnet Massy of Sale in Cheshire;
after to Edward Barlow of Barlow in Lancashire: Margery married John Booth,
younger Son of Sir William Booth of Dunham-Massy: Margaret married Raufe
Sherman: Mary married Matthew Ellis of Overley: Alice died unmarried. See the
Inquisition post mortem praedicti Petri Dutton Militis, 37 Hen. 8. which names
the Daughters; but their Husbands I had out of the Herald's Books.

Sir Piers married to his second Wife Julian Daughter of William Poyns of
Worthokiton in Essex, Esquire; who with her Husband built the Hall of Dutton,
and the new Chambers there, 1539. as appears by the Inscription round about the
Hall of Dutton, within the Hall.

Cheshire 34 Hen. 8. and died 37 Hen. 8. 1546. and had a Bastardson, called
John Dutton, and a Bastard-daughter, called Elizabeth, as appears by the Office
taken after his death.

Hugh Dutton, second Son, and Heir to Sir Piers, married Jane Daughter of Sir
William Booth of Dunham-Massy, 12 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 167. and had Issue John
Dutton, Son and Heir; and Anne, married to Cristopher Son and Heir of Thomas
Holford of Holford nigh Nether-Tabley in Cheshire, Esquire.

This Hugh died in the Lifetime of Sir Piers his Father, and Jane his Widow
married Thomas Holford aforesaid.

XIX. John Dutton of Dutton Esquire, Son and Heir of Hugh, and Grandson to Sir
Piers, married Elinour Daughter of Sir Hugh Calveley of Lea nigh Eaton-boat,
and had Issue Peter, eldest Son, who married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of
Richard Massy of Aldford in Cheshire, 27 Eliz. 1585. Lib. C. fol. 163. aa. and
died the thirtieth day of May, 35 Eliz. 1593. without Issue Male of his Body
then living, in the Lifetime of his Father: See John Dutton's Office, 7
Jacobi. Also John Dutton, second Son; and Hugh, third Son, both died without
Issue; Thomas, fourth Son, succeeded Heir to his Father: Lawrence, Raufe, Adam,
Geffrey, and George, all five died without Issue: Jane died unmarried: Anne
married one Hersey; and Elinour died unmarried.

This John had also John Dutton Bastard-son, who was after Gardener at Dutton,
and died 1664. And Elizabeth, a Bastard-daughter, married Mr. Marshall Chaplain
to the Lord Gerard of Gerards-Bromley in Staffordshire, Mother to the two
famous Women-Actors now at London, called The two Marshals.

The same John sued Raufe Dutton of Hatton his Uncle, for all Hatton Lands, as
Heir at Law: But this Suit was composed by the Award of Robert Earl of
Leycester, the fifth day of July, 14 Eliz. 1572. wherein he gave to John Dutton
the Lands of Claverton, and in Honbridge in the City of Chester, and in
Littleton in Cheshire, and the Lands in Harden and Mancote in Flintshire, and
also 500 Marks to be paid by Raufe Dutton to the said John: And all the rest of
Hatton Lands he continued and gave to Raufe Dutton. Lib. C. fol. 168. b.

John Dutton of Dutton died the thirtieth day of January, 6 Jacobi, 1608. at
Dutton, Jacobi.

XX. Thomas Dutton of Dutton Esquire, Son and Heir of John, married Thomasin
Daughter of Roger Anderton, younger Brother of Anderton of Anderton in
Lancashire, and Widow to John Singleton of Stany in Lancashire; by whom he had
Issue John Dutton, who married Elizabeth eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir
Thomas Egerton, late Son of Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Chancellor of England, 3
Jacobi, 1605. Lib. C. fol. 163. bb. But this John died without Issue the ninth
day of February, 6 Jacobi, 1608. at Tarvin, in the Lifetime of Thomas his
Father: Also Elinour, a Daughter, who became sole Heir to her Father.

This Thomas Dutton of Dutton was Sheriff of Cheshire 1611. 9 Jacobi, and died
1614. 12 Jacobi, aged forty six Years: Lib. C. fol. 163. dd. ee. Elinour his
Daughter and Heir being then aged eighteen Years.

Thomasin his Widow afterward married Sir Anthony St. John, younger Brother to
the Earl of Bolingbroke; but had no Issue by him. She was second Wife to Sir
Anthony, and he was third Husband to her.

XXI. Elinour, sole Daughter and Heir of Thomas Dutton, married Gilbert Gerard,
Son and Heir of Thomas Gerard Lord Gerard of Gerards-Bromley in Staffordshire,
7 Jacobi, 1609. she being then but thirteen Years old: Lib. C. fol. 163. cc.
Gilbert was afterward Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight of the Bath, 30 Maii, 1610. at
the Creation of Henry, eldest Son of King James, into the Title of Prince of
Wales and Earl of Chester: And after the death of Thomas Lord Gerard his
Father, he was then Gilbert Lord Gerard, 1618. and had Issue Dutton Lord
Gerard; and Thomas, who died in his Infancy: Also Alice, eldest Daughter, born
in Chester 12 Junii, and Baptized 18 Junii, 1615. She married Roger Owen, Son
and Heir of Sir William Owen of Cundor in Shropshire, who died 1660. and Alice
his Wife after married Henry Heylyn of Oxfordshire, 1663. Nephew to Dr. Peter
Heylyn. Frances, second Daughter, married Robert Nedham, Son and Heir of Robert
Viscount Kilmorcy, by whom he had only one Child, called Elinour, which died
young, 1643. Frances was Buried at Great Budworth, 25 Maii, 1636. she died in
Childbed: And Elizabeth, third Daughter, born at Gerards-Bromley in
Staffordshire, Anno Christi 1620. married Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley in
Cheshire, Esquire, 6 Novembris, 1642. afterward Sir Peter Leycester Baronet,
1660. the Author of this Book.

After the Death of Gilbert Lord Gerard, who died 1622. Elinour his Lady
married Robert Nedham of Shenton in Shropshire, Viscount Kilmorey in Ireland:
She was second Wife of Robert, and had Issue by him Charles Nedham, afterward
Lord Kilmorey, who died at London 1660. George, second Son, died at Chester
without Issue, 1644. Thomas Nedham, third Son, now living, 1669. Arthur,
another Son, died an Infant, over-laid by his Nurse: Anne died in her Infancy:
Elinour first married Peter Warburton, Heir to Arley Estate, 1638. she was then
but eleven Years old: But Peter dying without Issue, and under Age, of the
Small Pox, at Oxford, Anno 1641. she married afterward John Lord Byron of
Newstede in Nottinghamshire, Anno 1644. then Governor of Chester, who died in
France, without any Issue by her, Anno 1652. This Elinour (a Person of such
comely Carriage and Presence, Handsomness, sweet Disposition, Honor, and
general Repute in the World, that she has scarce left her Equal behind) died
at Chester the twenty sixth day of January, 1663. about the Age of thirty six
Years, and was Buried in Trinity Church in that City. Susan, third Daughter,
married Richard scriven of Frodsley in Shropshire, Esquire, 1652. She died in
August, 1667. at Frodsley. Katharine, the fourth Daughter, died unmarried at
Dutton, 11 Martii, being Sunday, 1665. Mary, fifth Daughter, now living, and
unmarried, 1669. Penelope, sixth Daughter, married Randle Egerton of Betley in
Staffordshire, Esquire, 1653. Dorothy, seventh Daughter, died unmarried at
London in June, 1669. And Elizabeth, youngest Daughter, now living, and
unmarried, 1669.

Robert Viscount Kilmorey died at Dutton 12 Septembris, 1653. So that the Lady
Elinour Kilmorey survived both her Husbands; in whose Custody Hudard's Sword,
as Tradition has it, now remains, whereof I made mention in the beginning.

This Lady Elinour died at Dutton the twelfth day of March, 1665. aged sixty
nine Years; and her Daughter Katharine also dying at Dutton the day before,
were both Interred at Great Budworth together on the Friday following, being
the sixteenth day of March, 1665.

So ended the Family of Dutton of Dutton.

Gropenhale.
THis Town of Gropenhale in the Conqueror's Time belonged to Osbern Son of
Tezzon, Ancestor to the Boydells of Dodleston in this County.

Afterward it seems to be given to William Son of Samson, who released the
same to Hugh Boydell about the Reign of Richard the First, in these words: --

Ex Chartulis Thomae Merbury de Merbury de Merbury juxta Great Budworth,
Armigeri, 1666.
Notum sit -- Ego Willielmus Filius Samsonis, dedi and omnino relaxavi Domino
meo Hugoni de Boydell pro defectu Servitii sui, quod retro est, Gropenhale, cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis, in Bosco and Plano, etc. Salvo forinseco, scilicet
dimidia Part trium Partium de Feodo unius Militis: Et pro hac Donatione mea
Dictus Hugo de Boydele Dominus meus valentiam trium Marcarum mihi donavit. --
Testibus Radulpho de Manwaringe tunc Justiciarto Cestriae, Hamone de Massy,
etc. Lib. C. fol. 280. bb.

After this, Sir John Boydell, in the Reign of Edward the First, gives Caterich
(a certain Place in Gropenhale) unto Robert his younger Son, who granted the
same to Thomas Son of Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton; but Thomas Dutton releaseth it
unto William Son of Sir William Boydell of Dodleston, 16 Edw. 3. 1342. Lib. C.
fol. 280. cc.

6 Edw. 2. the King granted to William Boydele liberam Warrennam in Dominicis
Terris suis de Dodleston, Gropenhale, and Lachford: Lib. C. fol. 282. r. This
William Boydell married Maud Daughter of Raufe Vernon, and had Issue Raufe
Boydell, who died without Issue; and so the Inheritance of Boydell was shared
by the two Sisters and Coheirs of William Boydell aforesaid, to wit, Margaret
Wife of Owen Voil a Welshman, and Joan Wife of Sir John Danyell of Gropenhale,
younger Son of Thomas Danyers of Bradley in Appleton senior, and afterward
Heir to his Father.

Howel ap Owen Voil released to Sir John and Joan all his Purparty of
Gropenhale-Wood, 25 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 291. f. The Original hereof is now
among the Evidences of Legh of Lime, 1666.

42 Edw. 3. Sir John and Joan Levied a Fine of the Manor of Gropenhale, To
remain to the Heirs Males of the said John and Joan; and if Sir John had no
Heir by Joan, then one half of Gropenhale should revert to the Heirs of Sir
John, and the other half to the Heirs of Joan. Lib. C. fol. 242. v. and fol.
290. a.

Sir John Daniell had Issue by Joan a Daughter and Heir, called Nicolaa, Mother
of Margaret Wife of Alan de Rixton in Lancashire; which Margaret dying without
Issue, 6 Rich. 2. Margaret the Wife of John Savage of Clifton, Daughter and
Heir of Sir Thomas Daniell of Bradley the younger, elder Brother of the said
Sir John Daniell, had the Purpart of the said Lands, as one of the Heirs of
Margaret late Wife of Alan de Rixton, 9 Rich. 2. And Thomas Boydell (Son of
William sir-named Boydell, Son of Howell, Son of Margaret Sister of Joan,
Mother of Nicolaa) was the other Heir: Lib. C. fol. 290. c. whose Land was
after divided, as anon shall appear.

Margaret Wife of John Savage, afterward married Piers Legh of Maxfield, 1388.
12 Rich. 2. younger Son of Robert Legh of Adlington; and she gave unto Peter
Legh of Lyme, her Son, the Moiety of Gropenhale, 4 Hen. 4. in her Widowhood,
which she had as Heir to Margaret late Wife of Alan de Rixton; from whom the
Leghs of Lime, now Lord of the moiety of Gropenhale, 1666. Lib. C. fol. 290. d.
The Originals Penes Legh of Lime.

The other Moiety of Gropenhale, descending to Thomas Boydell aforesaid, Ex
Chartulis Merbury de Merbury juxta Great Budworth.
came to the Part of Hugh Reddish of Caterich (younger Son of Reddish of
Reddish in Lancashire) in Right of Margaret his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of
Thomas Boydell, by Partition made of all Thomas Boydell's Lands, 5 Hen. 5. Lib.
C. fol. 282. I.

Isabell, the other Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Boydell, married John
Alburgham; whose Son Gilbert had also two Daughters and Heirs; Constance Wife
of Henry Byrom of Byrom in Lancashire, and Isabel Wife of James Holte, 3 Hen. 7.

The Part belonging to Reddish of Caterich, came to William Merbury of Merbury
Esquire in Right of Maud his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Thomas Reddish of Caterich
in Gropenhale, Anno 1556. Lib. C. fol. 284. P. whose Heirs have ever since
enjoyed the same, to this present, 1666.

In this Township has been anciently, and yet is, a Parish Church Dedicated to
St. Wilfrid, whose Feast of Dedication was usually Celebrated the twelfth day
of October yearly; and has only two Townships in its Parish, to wit, --

The Mize. l. s. d. Gropenhale 00 14 00 Lachford 00 10 00 01 04 00

I find Gropenhale Church was a Rectory in the Reign of Henry the Third, Lib.
C. fol. 283. x. and had then the Boydells of Dodleston for its Patron, who were
Lords of Gropenhale and Lachford both: But now Byrom of Byrom in Lancashire
has the Advowson hereof, 1666.

Sir William Boydell of Dodleston built a Chapel in this Church, wherein
William Boydell his Son and Heir swore to find an honest Chaplain to pray for
the Souls of the said Sir William and Nicolaa his Wife, for evermore, 8 Edw. 3.
1334. She was Daughter of William de Doncaster: Lib. C. fol. 285. d. e.

Charterers now in Gropenhale, 1666.
1. John Middlehurst. 2. William Morris of Gropenhale. 3. Richard Davys. 4.
Thomas Blackborne of Lachford now has got half of Davys's Land.
Hale.
THis Township of Hale was held by Hamon Massy in the Conqueror's Time, as
appears by Doomsday-book: So that it is anciently of the Fee of the Barons of
Dunham-Massy.

In this Town were Seated the Massies of Hale anciently, who were propagated
Originally out of the Massies of Dunham-Massy; which Family continued for many
Ages, but is now extinct.

3 Hen. 4. there were fourteen Freeholders or Charterers in Hale: At this day,
1666. there are twenty three Freeholders. The Lord Delamere is now Chief Lord
of the one Moiety of Hale; and John Crew of Crew, Esquire, is Chief Lord of the
other Moiety.

Here is a Hamlet in Hale, called Ringey, wherein is situated a Chapel of
Ease, called Ringey-Chappel, within the Parish of Bowdon; of which I have
little to say, save that it was much frequented in the late War by Schismatical
Ministers, and, as it were, a Receptacle for Non-Conformists; in which
dissolute Times, every Pragmatical Illiterate Person, as the Humor served him,
stepped into the Pulpit, without any Lawful Calling thereunto, or License of
Authority.

Halton.
THis Town in common Pronunciation is called Hauton, and is as much as A Town
upon a Hill; for Hawe and How is an old English word for A Hill: Howbeit, in
our Norman way of Writing, it is usually written Halton; in Doomsday-book it is
written Heletune.

Here is yearly a Fair kept on the Feast of the Nativity of St. Mary, which is
the eighth day of September, and has been very anciently; for I find it
mentioned in an Old Deed made toward the latter end of the Reign of Henry the
Third: Lib. C. fol. 164. b.

It is now a poor Town or Village; and the Inhabitants, that have any Lands of
Inheritance there, are all Copyholders to the King, as Baron of Halton; save
two small Cottages now, 1666. in possession of John Jackson and Richard
Jennings, which are of the Fee of St. John of Jerusalem.

The Castle was built by the Barons of Halton presently after the Norman
Conquest, and by degrees Repaired and Enlarged; who being Seated here,
flourished for a long time, and were Constables of Cheshire in Fee, that is, to
them and their Heirs by Descent; as it were, after the manner of Lord High
Constables of England, so were the Barons of Halton to the Earls of Chester;
and in their Ancient Charters did always style themselves by the Title of
[Constabularius Cestriae] Constables of Cheshire; and were the Highest in Place
and Dignity next to the Earl himself, and above all the other Barons of
Cheshire.

In the Reign of Henry the Third their Posterity became Earls of Lincoln: And
upon the Death of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, 1310. all his Lands and Honors
came to the Earl of Lancaster with Alice his Daughter and Heir in Marriage: And
at last Henry of Bolingbroke, Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was so
Great a Subject, and so Popular, that he drew unto his Part most of the
Nobility of England, and thereby most Traitorously and Rebelliously Deposed
Richard the Second, and made himself King of England by the Name of Henry the
Fourth.

So was the Barony of Halton annexed to the Crown.

All which will better appear by the following History of these Eminent Barons
of Halton, till this Barony came to the Crown.

In this Town of Halton was formerly a Chapel of Ease within the Parish of
Runcorne, situated near to the Castle, as I well remember the same, 1625. But
it is now totally in decay, 1666.

Barons of Halton.
I. Nigell, the first Baron of Halton after the coming blazon or coat of arms
in of the Normans: The ancient Roll says thus: -- Cum Hugone Comite venit
quidam Nobilis, nomine Nigellus; and cum isto Nigello venerunt quinque Fratres,
videlicet, Hudardus, Edardus, Wolmerus, Horswine, and Wolfaith: Dictus vero
Comes Cestriae dedit praefato Nigello Baroniam de Halton, ad quam pertinent
novem Feoda Militum, and dimidium, and quarta pars unius Feodi, and quinta pars
unius Feodi, nomine Constabularii Cestriae; and fecit eum Mareschallum suum,
ita quod quando dictus Hugo Comes exercitum suum mitteret in Walliam, dictus
Nigellus and Haeredes sui in eundo praecederent, and in redeundo cum exercitu
ultimi remanerent. Lib. C. fol. 84. and ob hanc causam dedit praefatus Hugo
Comes dicto Nigello duo Feoda Militum in Englefeld Vel circa.
citra Rothland; and illam terram tenuerunt praefatus Nigellus and Haeredes sui
asque ad tempus Rogeri Hell. Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, page 187.

This Nigell, if we may believe Pecham in his Complete Gentleman, page 189. was
the Son of Ivo (Vice-Comes or Governor of Constantia in Normandy) by Emme
Sister to Adam Earl of Bretagne: Sed quaere.

Nigellus Vice-Comes Constantiensis in Normannia Coenobium Sancti Salvatoris
construxit: Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 950. b. He killed the Forces sent into
Normandy by King Ethelred, as they came on Shore out of their Ships, about the
Year 1004. Willielmus Gemeticensis, lib. 4. cap. 4. Quaere if of this Family.

The Office of Constable of Cheshire was an Office of especial Trust, as in
whom was reposed the Charge and Disposing of all the Soldiers, Horse, Armor,
and other Provision for War, through the whole County: We now call the like
Office Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire: And I do conceive that William, Son of this
Nigell, was the first that was made Constable of Cheshire.

Certain it is, This Nigell Baron of Halton had two Sons, William and Richard,
as appears by the Charter of the Foundation of the Abbey of St. Werburge in
Chester, by Hugh Lupus Vide supra, page 109.
, 1093. and also the Charter of Confirmation to the said Abbey, by Earl Richard
Vide page 117.
, Anno 1119. Unto both which Charters these two Brothers are Witnesses.

II. William Son of Nigell was the second Baron of Halton, and Constable of
Cheshire.

Anno 1086. I find in Doomsday-book that this William held these Towns in
Cheshire under Hugh Earl of Chester, to wit, In Cestre Hundred. Newton, Lee,
one half. Bruge, one half.
In Dudestan Hundred. Clutton.
In Riseton Hundred. Barrow.
In Wilaweston Hundred. Neston, one half. Rabie, one half. Capeles, id est,
Capenhurst. Berneston.
blazon or coat of arms In Mildest-vich Hundred. Goostrey, one half. Lache.
In Hamstan Hundred. Over-Alderley, one Half.
In Bucklow Hundred. Warburton, one half. Millington. Knotsford. Over-Tabley.
Nether-Pever, one half. Tatton, one half.
In Tunendon Hundred. Halton. Weston. Aston. Norton. Endley. Dutton, a part
only. Little Legh. Aston juxta Budworth. Great Budworth. Whitley.



This William Fitz-Nigell Founded a Priory at Runcorne, Anno Domini 1133. 33
Hen. 1. Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, page 187.

He gave Newton near Chester to the Monastery of St. Werburge in Chester,
together with the Service of Hugh Son of Hudard (that was Hugh de Dutton) of
four Oxgangs of Land, and the Service of Wiceline of two Oxgangs, Anno 1119.
Vide supra, page 117.

William Fitz-Nigell, Constable of Cheshire, died about the end of Henry the
First's Reign, and was Buried at Chester. He had Issue William Constable
junior; Agnes married Eustace Fitz-John, a Great Baron of the Realm; and Maud
married Aubert de Grelley. Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, page 798, 799. Lib.
B. page 202. number. 18.

III. William Constable of Cheshire, junior, Son of William, was the third
Baron of Halton.

He removed the Canons of Runcorn to Norton, as may appear by this Deed, which
I found Copied out with many others belonging to Norton Priory, in a long
Parchment Roll, of a very ancient Character, remaining among the Evidences of
Dutton, 1665.

IN Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Ego Willielmus
Constabularius Cestriae, Filius Willielmi Constabularii, Filii Nigelli, Do and
Concedo Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de Norton, and Canonicis ibidem Deo
Regulariter Servientibus, eandem Nortonam in Elemosynam cum omnibus ad eam
pertinentibus, in nemore, cum Foresta and Warrenna, in Plano, in Agris, in
Pascuis, in Aquis. Et rogatu and Consilio Rogeri Cestrensis Episcopi, and
Consilio hominum meorum, muto habitationem Canonicorum de Runcorna in Nortonam:
Quam Nortonam do and concedo Canonicis in Elemosynam and Escambium trium
Carucarum terrae in Stannings, and unius Carucatae and dimidii in Astona; and
in Escambium totius Runcornae, praeter Ecclesiam and quatuor Bovatas terrae and
unam Piscariam quae vocatur Pulceorpa, quae ad Ecclesiam ipsius Runcorne
pertinet, quae Ecclesia praedictorum. Canonicorum est: Do etiam eis and concedo
Molendinum de Haltona, and mediatatem omnium Piscariarum quae ad Haltonam
pertinent: Communitatem etiam nemorum, Pascuorum, and Aquarum, ad Haltonam
pertinentium, eis and hominibus suis concedo; and duas Bovatas terrae in
Haltona cum una Mansura; and medietatem totius Piscariae meae de Thelwall, and
unam Bovatam terrae ibidem cum Piscatore: Et duas Bovatas in Wydneis, cum
Communitate nemorum and Pascuorum, quae ad Pultonam pertinent, sibi and
hominibus suis in Wydneis manentibus: Concedo and Communitatem nemorum and
Pascuorum de Cuerdleia, and Molendinum de Barrow, and duas parts Dominicarum
Decimarum in eadem Villa; and duas parts Dominicarum Decimarum in Suttona; and
similiter in Stanney, and in Rabie, and in Stanings; and unam Mansionem in
Cestria; and Ecclesiam de Buddewurth, and Ecclesiam de Dunintona, and Decimam
Molendini ejusdem Villae, and unam Carucatam terrae in Dominio in eadem Villa,
and in ipsa Parochia Waver Toft, quod deputatur pro dimidia Carucata terrae, in
Leycestershiria; and Eclesiam de Radecliva, and quartam partem Molendinorum,
and decimas reliquarum trium partium in eadem Villa and Ecclesiam de Cneshall,
and Decimam Molendinorum quae ad eandem Villam pertinent, quae sunt juxta
Sitellam; and Decimam Molendini de Alretona: and Ecclesiam de Burtona in
Lindeseia; and Ecclesiam de Piritona in Oxenfordshira Omnia autem, quae ab
hominibus meis data sunt, vel in posterum danda sunt, pro salute Animarum eorum
concedo. Haec autem feci Suggerente and Confirmante Rogero Cestrensi Episcopo,
and Consensu Ranulfi Comitis Junioris, pro salute Hugonis Comitis, and Ricardi
Comitis, and Ranulfi Comitis, and pro salute Animae meae and Uxoris meae, and
pro salute Animae Patris mei and Matris meae, and Fratrum, and Sororum, and
omnium Antecessorum meorum and Successorum. Hanc autem Elemosynam ita ab
omnibus Servitiis and Consuetudinibus, placitis and querelis, liberam and
solutam concedo, sicut ulla Elemosyna liberior and solutior concedi debet vel
potest: Quicunque vero hanc Elemosynam adauxerit vel manutenuerit, per
Participationem illius Ecclesiae Beneficiorum consequatur Regna Coelorum: Qui
vero hanc in aliquo violaverit, vel infringere tentaverit, cum Juda and Pilato,
cum Dathan and Abyron, in inferno puniatur, nsi ad emendationem venerit.
Testibus Willielmo Capellano, Rogero de Angervilla, Alfredo Humfridi Filio,
Nigello Ansgoti Filio, Roberto Petri Filio. -- Lib. B. page 199. number. 1.

This was made in the Reign of King Stephen.

He gave also half of Raby in Wirrall to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester,
as Sustenance anciently given thereunto by his Father: Certum namque est (so
run the Words of the Deed) quod Pater meus Willielmus Constabularius dedit
dimidium de Raby, quod erat in Feodo suo, Domino Abbati Ricardo, and Ecclesiae,
pro tertia part de Neston, quae erat antiquitus Prebenda Sanctae Werburgae.

This William is styled Nepos Walteri de Gant: Monast. 1 Pars, page 143. and
his Sister Agnes styled Agnes de Gant: Lib. C. in the Paper before fol. 84. By
which it may seem, that William Son of Nigell married a Sister of Walter de
Gant, and Daughter of Gilbert.

This William Constable junior died in Normandy, in the Reign of King Stephen,
without Issue; and so his Inheritance was divided and shared between his two
Sisters and Heirs. Lib. C. fol. 85. b.

His Seal had the Impression of a Griffin, with a Serpent or Snake sucking at
the Breast of the Griffin.

IV. Eustace Fitz-John, in Right of Agnes his Wife, was the fourth Baron of
Halton; to whom Randle the Second, sir-named Gernouns, Earl of Chester,
restored totum Honorem qui fuit Willielmi Filii Nigelli Constabularii Cestriae,
in Rebus and Dignitatibus omnibus; and ipsum Eustachium constituisse
haereditarie Constabularium, and Supremum Consiliarium post me super omnes
Optimates and Barons totius terrae meae: Ea-propter volo and firmiter
praecipio, desicut ei rectum suum reddidi, and donavi and concessi
Constabulariam, and honorem integrum Constabulariae Cestriae and totius terrae
meae, quod in omnibus ei rationabiliter intendatis sicut Corpori meo; as the
very words of the Charter, made in the Reign of King Stephen, do run: The
Original hereof, Seldom in his Titles of Honor, page 688. tells us he has
seen, remaining (as I conceive) in Cotton's Library at Westminster in London.
It is also upon Record in one of the Couchir Books in the Duchy Office at
Gray's Inn, London, Tom. 1. fol. 41. a. Comitatus Cestriae, number. 2. which I have
transcribed at large in this Book supra, Pars 3. page 160.

This Eustace was Son of John Monoculus, so called because he had but one Eye;
which makes Hoveden to call Eustace, Luscus and Proditor nequam, A wicked
Traitor with one Eye; because his Father had but one Eye, p. 483. where he
tells us, That this Eustace defended the Castle of Malton in Yorkshire against
King Stephen, Anno 1137. 2 Steph.

Johannes Monoculus was Brother to Serlo de Burgo sive de Pembroke. This Serlo
built Knaresburough Castle in Yorkshire; who dying without Issue, his
Inheritance descended to this Eustace Fitz-John: Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars,
page 801. Johannes Monoculus and Serlo were both Sons of Eustace a Norman.

Eustace Fitz-John, and Nephew and Heir to Serlo, had two Wifes: Beatrix sole
Daughter and Heir of Ivo de Vescy was the first Wife of Eustace, by whom he had
the Baronies of Malton and Alnwick, and by her had Issue William de Vescy, who
assumed the Surname and Arms of Vescy, which his Posterity retained:
Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 801.

Agnes, Sister and Coheir to William Constable of Cheshire the younger, was
second Wife of Eustace Fitz-John; by whom he had Issue Richard Constable of
Cheshire: Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 799. Which Agnes, with Eustace her Husband,
Founded a Nunnery at Watton in Yorkshire. Ibid. page 798, 799.

Eustace Fitz-John (says Pecham in his Complete Gentleman, page 189.) by the
consent of Agnes his first Wife Founded the Monastery of Watton in Yorkshire;
and by the Consent of Beatrix his second Wife Founded the Abbeys of Malton and
Alnwick, and the Hospital of Broughton: Where he calls Agnes first Wife of
Eustace, contrary to Cambden in his Britannia, page 588. in Yorkshire; and to
Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 801. where Agnes is said to be the second Wife, and so
probably she was.

Eustace Fitz-John was slain in Battle against the Welsh, together with Robert
Curcy, and many others, 3 Hen. 2. 1157. Stow in his Annals. And Willielmus
Neubrigensis, lib. 2. cap. 5. page 100. speaking of this Battle with the
Welsh, says, -- Ibique Eustachius Johannis Filius, Vir Magnus and Grandaevus,
atque inter Primos Angliae Proceres divitiarum and Sapientiae titulis
refulgens, cum Roberto de Curcy aeque Nobili Viro aliisque pluribus interiit.

V. Richard Constable of Cheshire, Son of Eustace and Agnes, succeeded his
Father in the Barony of Halton.

In the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Second he held one Knights Fee in
Smathe in the County of York: Ex Libro Rubro Scaccarii VVestmonasteriensis.

He married Albreda, or Awbrey, Daughter and Heir of Robert de Lizours, and
Sister by the Mother, id est, Half Sister, to Robert Lacy Baron of Pomfret
Castle in Yorkshire, commonly called Pontefract, who made her his Heir also,
because he had no other so near allied unto him: In whose Right her Posterity
enjoyed sexaginta Feoda Militum, sixty Knights Fees, of the Honor of Pomfret:
unde illa, post Roberti de Lacy mortem, utramque Hereditatem, Fraternam de
Lacy, and Paternam de Lizours occupavit. These are the Words of the Book of
Stanlaw Monastery, says Cambden in his Britannia, page 566. of the last
Edition, Printed 1607.

And here I cannot pass by the mistake of Pecham in the Place before cited,
where he calls this Aubrey Daughter of Eudo de Lizours, when I find her Fathers
Name plainly recorded to be Robert de Lizours, in a Fine levied at Winchester
21 die Aprilis, 5 Rich. 1. 1194. Couchir Book in the Duchy Office at Grays
Inn, Tom. 2. page 110. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number. 1. Of which Fine I
shall have occasion to speak more fully, when I come to Roger Lacy the seventh
Baron of Halton. See also Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, page 188. linea 18. a.

Richard Fitz-Eustace had Issue by Aubrey his Wife John, who succeeded
Constable of Cheshire; Robert the Hospitaller, id est, of the Hospital of St.
John of Jerusalem in England, the Grand Priory being at Jerusalem; Mary Alii
hic Saram legunt: Monasticon, 2 Pars, p 188. sed perperam ut opinor.
married Robert de Aldford; and Awbrey married to Henry Bysset: Lib. C. fol.
85. b. and le Paper ante, fol. 66. c.

Pecham tells us of another Son, called Roger, Lord of VVarkworth in
Northumberland, from whom are descended the ancient Barons of Clavering, the
Baron Evers, and Sir John Clavering of Caloley in Northumberland: But quaere of
this Roger, whether he were the Son of this Richard Fitz-Eustace; I find
another Family called Constables, descended from the Constables of Gloucester;
and that Milo Constable had Issue Roger, Henry, Walter, Matthew, and William.
Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 66. Sed quaere.

Richard Fitz-Eustace was dead before 24 Hen. 2. 1178. but I find not the
precise Year when he died.

Aubrey his Widow afterward married William Fitz-VVilliams, and had Issue
William: Monasticon, 1 Pars, page 831. and Lib. C. fol. 64. g.

VI. John Constable of Cheshire, Son and Heir of Richard and Awbrey, succeeded
his Father, and was the sixth Baron of Halton.

He Founded the Abbey of Stanlaw in VVirral in Cheshire, Anno Domini 1178. 24
Hen. 2. in these words. --

UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis, -- Johannes Constabularius Cestriae
Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmasse Deo, and
Sanctae Mariae, and Abbati atque Monachis de Stanlawe, ad construendam
Abbathiam Ordinis Cisterciensis, ipsum locum Stanlawe; quem, mutato nomine,
benedictum locum vocari volumus: and Villam unam, quae vocatur Stanney; and
alteram Villam, quae vocatur Maurice-Aston; cum omnibus pertinentiis -- liberas
and quietas ab omni terreno Servitio, and Seculari exactione, pro salute Animae
meae, and Patris mei, and Matris meae, and Uxoris meae, and omnium Antecessorum
and Haeredum meorum, in puram and perpetuam Elemosynam. Concessi quoque eis in
perpetuam Elemosynam quietantiam Tolnei, in emptione and venditione omnium
rerum suarum per totam terram meam; necnon and quietantiam Tolnei de proprio
Blado suo in Molendinis meis: Dedi etiam eis Messuagium unum in Villa Cestriae,
cum omnibus Aedificiis suis, quod habui juxta Ecclesiam Sancti Michaelis --
etc. Et quando ego and Haeredes mei voluerimus, in Domo praenominata Placita
nostra tenebimus, and ad expensas nostras hospitabimus -- Anno ab Incarnatione
Domini 1178. Hujus autem Donationis testes sunt isti, Robertus Decanus de
Donington, Nicolaus Parsona de Marnaham, Radulfus Sacerdos de Sallowe, Simon
Sacerdos de Eston; Gregorius Sacerdos de Castello, Galfridus Monachus de Parco,
Simon Monachus de Combermere, Henricus Bysset, Johannes de Danvilla, Martinus
Angevinus, Hugo de Dutton, Johannes Filius Thurstani, -- etc. Lib. C. fol. 62.
a. Also Witnesses Ricardus Fitton, Willielmus Filius Ricardi, Robertus Venator,
Adam de Dutton, Hugo ejus Frater, -- etc. Apud Dodyngton.

This Abbey was after Translated to Whalley in Lancashire, 1296.

This John Constable of Cheshire gave all Hield in Aston nigh Great Budworth to
Methroso Punterling; rendering a Welsh Lance yearly on St. Bartholomew's day, M.
number. 1. which at this day belongs to Leycester of Tabley.

He married Alice Sister of William Mandevyle, by whom he had Issue Roger
Constable of Cheshire, who assumed the Surname of Lacy; Eustace sir-named De
Cester, Richard de Cester, to whom his Brother Roger gave the Town of Moore in
Cheshire; and after Richard became a Leper, and was buried at Norton: Geffrey,
another Son; Peter, another Son; Alice, a Daughter: Lib. C. fol. 85. b. and
fol. 62. b. c. d.

Anno Domini 1181. John Constable of Cheshire, and Richard Peche [Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield] were appointed Governors of Ireland, and sent to keep
Dublin, which Hugh de Lacy kept: For Hugh de Lacy was sent for into England by
King Henry the Second, with whom the King was much displeased, because he had
married the Daughter of the King of Connaught without the License of Henry the
Second: Hoveden, page 611. Also Giraldus and Hollinshed.

This John Constable of Cheshire had a Clerk called William, an excellent
Astrologer, who in the Year 1186. writ of the Conjunction of the Planets that
Year; whose Words and Opinion thereon, you may read in Hoveden, page 624.

John Constable of Cheshire died at Tire in the Land of Jerusalem, Anno Dom.
1190. 2 Rich. 1. Hoveden, page 685.

VII. Roger Lacy Constable of Cheshire, Son and Heir of John, succeeded his
Father, and was the Seventh Baron of Halton: He was sir-named Hell, for his
fierce and magnanimous Spirit.

He is the first of the Barons of Halton who assumed the Surname of Lacy;
which Name he retained after the Possessions of Robert Lacy of Pomfret Castle
in Yorkshire accrewed to him; which Robert Lacy died Anno Domini 1194. and in
the Year following a Fine was Levied at Winchester between this Roger
Constable, and Awbrey his Grandmother, wherein she settles on him the great
Inheritance which belonged to Robert Lacy, in these words. --

5 Rich. 1. 1194.
Haec est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Wintonam, 21 die
Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini Regis Ricardi Quinto, coram Domino Rege, and Huberto
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Willielmo Eliensi Episcopo, Domini Regis
Cancellario, Hugone Dunelmensi, G. Roffensi Episcopis, Willielmo de Sanctae
Mariae Ecclesia, Ranulpho Comite Cestriae, Comite R. le Bigot, Willielmo
Mareschallo, Gaufrido Filio Petri, Hugone Bard, and aliis fidelibus Domini
Regis qui tunc ibi aderant: Inter Albreiam de Lisores, and Rogerum
Constabularium Cestriae, Nepotem Nepos here signifies a Grandson, as properly
the Word ought; but very frequently in old Deeds it is used for a Nephew.
suum, de tota Terra quae fuit Roberti de Lasci: Unde placitum fuit inter eos
in Curia Domini Regis, scilicet quod praedicta Albreia, and Haeredes sui,
quietum clamaverunt praedicto Rogero and Haeredibus suis totam praenominatam
terram quae fuit Roberti de Lascy: Et praedictus Rogerus concessit praedictae
Albred, quod teneat totam Terram quae fuit Roberti de Lisores Patris ipsius
Albred sine aliquo retenemento tota vita sua, been and in pace, per servitium
quod ad illam Terram pertinet; scilicet, Servitium Feodorum octo Militum: Et
post decessum suum, Willielmus Filius praefatae Albred (He was Son of Awbrey by
William Fitz-Williams) and Haeredes sui Terram illam tenebunt libere and quiet
per praedictum Servitium de praedicto Rogero, and Haeredibus suis, in Feodo and
Haereditate: Praeterea praefatus Rogerus dedit praedictae Albred viginti
Libratas Terrae in Bardinton, quas ipsa Albred tota vita sua tenebit quietas ab
omni Servitio; and post decessum suum, Willielmus Filius suus and Haeredes sui
eandem terram tenebunt de praedicto Rogero and Haeredibus suis in Feodo and
Haereditate, per Servitium Feodi unius Militis: Et pro Concessione harum
viginti Libratarum Terrae, praedicta Albred continuo deliberavit and quietam
clamavit praedicto Rogero Villam de Hauton in Lindeseia, cum omnibus
pertinentis suis, quam in Dotem tenuerat. Couchir-Book in the Dutchy-Office at
Gray's Inn, Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number. 1 page 110. Lib. C.
fol. 64. g.

This Roger is ranked by Hoveden, page 783. as the most eminent Baron of the
Realm, and next after the Earls, among those Great Persons whom King John most
doubted, and required to swear Fealty to him by his Commissioners, Anno Domini
1199. upon the death of Richard the First; which they did upon Condition that
every of them should have their Lands restored.

And the King restored unto Roger Lacy his Castle of Pomfret, having first
received his Son and Heir for a Pledge: Hoveden, page 794. put out with other
Authors by Sir Henry Savil, 1601.

He was one of those whom King John employed for the Safe Conduct of the King
of Scotland unto the Court of England, when the King of Scotland did Homage to
the King of England at Lincoln, presently after the Coronation of King John,
sub Anno Domini 1200. Hoveden, page 811. And Roger Lacy is there again put down
the first of all the Barons of England, who were Witnesses of the King of
Scotland*s Homage; and where the Chief of the Nobility are named by Hoveden.

Anno Domini 1201. King John sent beforehand William Marshall Earl of
Strigvill, cum centum militibus Soldariis; and Roger Lacy Constable of
Cheshire, cum aliis centum militibus Soldariis, into Normandy, for the
suppressing of his Enemies. Hoveden, p. 819.

Milites Soldarii, id est, Stipendarii, Stipendio retenti: So Spelman.

Anno 1204. Roger Constable of Cheshire, Vir magnificus and bellicosus, a most
Heroique and Magnanimous Champion, kept the Castle de Rupe Andeliaci in
Normandy, for King John, against the French, with such Gallantry, that after
all his Victuals were spent, having been Besieged almost a Year, and many
Assaults of the Enemy made, but still repulsed by him, he mounts his Horse, and
issues out of the Castle with his Troop into the midst of his Enemies Forces,
choosing rather to die like a Soldier, than to be starved to death: He slew many
of the Enemy, but was at last with much difficulty taken Prisoner: So he and
his Soldiers were brought Prisoners to the King of France, where, by the
Command of the King, Roger Lacy was to be no strict Prisoner Sub libera
custodia detentus est, says Paris; meaning (as I conceive) had liberty to go
up and down at his Pleasure, on his Paroll or Word.
, for his great Honesty and Trust in keeping the Castle so gallantly. Mat.
Paris, put out by Dr. Wats, page 211.

King John's Letter to Roger Lacy, concerning the keeping of the said Castle,
you may see among the Norman Writers put out by Andrew du Chesne, and Printed
at Paris 1619. page 1059.

One other notable Exploit of this Roger Lacy I find mentioned in the Ancient
Roll of the Barons of Halton: When Randle Earl of Chester, sir-named
Blundevill, Monasticon, ^ Pars p 188.
was Besieged in Rothelent Castle in Flintshire by the Welsh, this Roger
gathers a tumultuous Rout of loose and dissolute Persons, Players, Minstrels,
Shoe-makers, and the like, and marched speedily toward the Enemy. The Welsh
seeing a great Multitude coming, raised their Siege and fled. The Earl thus
delivered, confers the Authority over all the loose idle Persons in Cheshire
upon his Constable: And John Constable of Cheshire, Son of the said Roger,
confers the Authority and Rule over all the Letchers and Whores in Cheshire on
Hugh Dutton of Dutton, as freely as he held the same of the Earl; saving the
Right of the said John to him and his Heirs. See the Deed it self Transcribed
supra, Pars 2. page 142.

Roger Lacy purchased from Robert Bushel the Barony of Penwortham in
Lancashire, to hold of John King of England, and his Heirs, in Capite; for
which he acquitted the said Robert Bushel of 310 Marks of Silver to King John.
Couchir-Book in the Dutchy-Office at Gray's Inn, Tom. 1. fol. 79. b. Com.
Lancastriae, number. 78.

This Roger gave the Church of Rochdale in Lancashire, which belonged to the
Honor of Pomfret, unto the Abbey of Stanlaw: Lib. C. fol. 61. h. and also the
Town of Little Wolneton: Lib. C. fol. 62. c. and in Principio, fol. 12. d.

He gave also his Moiety of Nether Pever cum Little Pever, which belonged to
the Fee of Halton, unto Osbert de VVethale, rendering to him and his Heirs the
yearly Rent of 6 s. 8 d. and by doing Foreign Service as much as belongs to
the twentieth part of a Knights Fee: The Original in my possession; and which
Rent of 6 s. 8 d. is at this day, 1666. paid to Halton by Leycester of Tabley
for the same moiety.

Roger Lacy married Maud de Clare, Lib. C. fol. 70. a. The Original Penes
Towneley of Carre in Lancashire, June 24. 1657. and had Issue John Lacy
Constable of Cheshire, afterward Earl of Lincoln.

Pecham in his Complete Gentleman, page 190. tells us of another Son of Roger,
called Robert Constable of Flamborough in Yorkshire, whose Posterity assumed
the Surname of Constable: From which Robert in a direct Line are descended Sir
William Constable of Flamborough, Sir Philip Constable of Everingham,
Christopher Constable of Hatfield Esquire, James Constable of Cliffe Esquire,
John Constable of Carthrop Esquire, Marmaduke Constable of Kirby Esquire, --
Constable of VVassam Esquire, Sir John Constable of Dromandby, with many others
then living, 1622.

I find mention indeed of Robert Constable of Flamborough, called also Robert
Son of the Constable to the Earl of Chester; Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars,
page 799. But whether Son of Roger, is not manifest to me; but must leave it to
Pecham's Authority.

Nor can I here pass by the mistake of the ancient Roll of the Barons of
Halton: *
Lib. C. fol. 84, 85, Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 187. and several other old
Manuscripts there be of the same: In all which this Maud de Clare, Wife of
Roger Lacy, is said to be Sister of the Treasurer of York Minster: Now Bevoys
de Clare Treasurer of York Minster had no Sister called Maud; for all the
Sisters are punctually reckoned up in the Book of Tewksbery, as you may find
them copied out by Vincent in his Corrections of Brook's Catalogue of Nobility,
page 221. whereby it appears plainly, that those Sisters also were all born
after the death of Roger Lacy. Possibly in the old Roll there may be an
omission of a Word; as where it is said, -- Sororem Thesaurarii Eboracensis
Ecclesiae, for Sororem Patris Thesaurarii Eboracensis Ecclesiae; or some other
Word. Quaere.

Anno Domini 1211. 13 Johannis Regis, vir Nobilis and Miles egregius Rogerus
Cestriae Constabularius vitam finivit: Mat. Paris, put out by Wats, page 230.

Anno 1211. obiit Rogerus de Lacy, in Festo Sancti Remigii (which is the first
day of October) cui successit Johannes Filius ejus, postea Comes Lincolniae per
Uxorem suam: Manuscript in Oxford Library, among the Books given by William
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, noted G. 9. fol. 125. b.

blazon or coat of arms VIII. John Lacy Constable of Cheshire, Son of Roger,
succeeded his Father, and was the eighth Baron of Halton.

He was one of those Great Persons of England whom Pope Innocent the Third
Excommunicated for Conspiring against King John, Anno Dom. 1216. Mat. Paris,
page 277. See also page 262.

Anno Domini 1218. there came to the Siege of Damiata, a City in Egypt, many
Strangers out of diverse Parts of the World. -- Out of England came the
Illustrious Randle Earl of Chester, with Saher Earl of Winchester, and William
Earl of Arundel, and the Barons Robert Fitz-Walter, John Constable of Cheshire,
William de Harecourt, with much Company. Idem Paris, page 303.

This John had two Wifes. The first was Alice Daughter to Gilbert de Aquila:
She was Buried at Norton Abbey.

Afterward he married Margaret Daughter and Heir, or Coheir at least, to
Robert de Quency, eldest Son of Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester.

This Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester was Lord of Groby in Leycestershire,
and died Anno Domini 1220. as Mat. Paris says. He married Margaret younger
Sister and Coheir to the fourth Robert Earl of Leycester, called Robert
Fitz-Parnell, and had Issue Robert Quency, eldest Son, who married Hawys fourth
Sister and Coheir to Randle sir-named Blundevill, Earl of Chester and Lincoln,
by whom he had Issue Margaret, married to John Lacy aforesaid; Roger de Quency,
second Son of Saher, who succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Winchester;
Lib. C. fol. 67 a
and another Robert de Quency, third Son, who married Hellen the Widow of John
the Scot Earl of Chester; which Robert died Anno Domini 1257. 41 Hen. 3. in a
Torneament at Blie: So Mat. Paris. Also Hawys, Daughter of Saher de Quency,
married Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford; and Orabella, another Daughter of Saher,
married Richard Son of William Harecourt, with whom her Father gave Bosworth in
Leycestershire in Marriage: Burton's Antiquities of Leycestershire, p. 47. This
was Harecourt of Stanton-Harecourt in Oxfordshire.

Hawys the Widow of Robert de Quency eldest Son of Saher (which Robert died in
the Lifetime of Saher his Father) had the Earldom of Lincoln given unto her by
her Brother Randle Earl of Chester, scilicet, quantum ad me pertinuit, ut inde
Comitissa existat, as the Words of the Deed do run. This was not long before
Randle's death, who died at Wallingford 26 die Octobris, Anno Domini 1232. 17
Hen. 3. Vincent upon Brook, page 317.

And King Henry the Third, by Patent dated at Northampton, 23 die Novembris,
Anno Regni sui 17. 1232. granted the Earldom of Lincoln to John Lacy, in these
words. --

HENRICUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae and
Aquitaniae, Comes Andegaviae: Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem. Sciatis, Quod ad instantiam Hawisiae de Quency dedimus and concessimus
dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni de Lascy Constabulario Cestriae, illas
viginti Libras, quas Ranulphus quondam Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae recepit
pro tertio Denario Comitatus Lincolniae, nomine Comitis Lincolniae; and quas
praedictus Comes in vita sua dedit praedictae Hawisiae Sorori suae: Habendas
and Tenendas, nomine Comitis Lincolniae, de nobis and Haeredibus nostris, ipsi
Johanni, and Haeredibus suis qui exibunt de Margareta Uxore sua Filia
praedictae Hawisiae in perpetuum. Et in hujus rei Testimonium has Literas
nostras Patentes ei fieri fecimus. Test meipso apud Northampton, 23 die
Novembris, Anno Regni nostri decimo septimo. Couchir-Cook in the Dutchy-Office
at Gray's Inn, scilicet Tom. 2. Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, number. 10. page
500. Lib. C. fol. 66. w.

Thus was John Lacy in Right of his Wife made Earl of Lincoln.

Some Competition there was by this John concerning the Inheritance of Saher de
Quency Earl of Winchester, and also of the Inheritance belonging to Margaret
his Countess: For Saher had by Deed formerly Covenanted with Robert his Son and
Heir, quod infantes sui, qui procreabuntur ab ipso and Hawisia de Cestria Uxore
sua, Haeredes sint totius Haereditatis dicti Saheri and Haereditatis Uxoris
suae Comitissae Margaretae; and hoc legaliter tenendum affidavit. The Original
in possession of Sir Simon Dewes Baronet, 1647. Lib. C. Paper ante fol. 66.

But how Roger de Quency and John Lacy were agreed, appears by this Fine
following, 14 Hen. 3. 1230. --

Haec est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium in
Octabis Sancti Michaelis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Filii Regis Johannis quarto
decimo, coram Thoma de Mulet, Willielmo de Ralegh, Roberto de Lexington,
Willielmo de Insula, Willielmo de London, Magistro Roberto de Sherdelawe,
Justiciariis, and aliis Domini Regis Fidelibus tunc ibidem praesentibus: Inter
Rogerum de Quency Querentem, and Johannem de Lascy Constabularium Cestriae, and
Margaretam Uxorem ejus, Deforciantes, de Haereditate Saheri de Quency Comitis
quondam Wintoniae, in Kotelastan, Chennoure, Sudho, Aymbirye, Bukby, Gransete,
Hardwyk, and Bradenham, cum pertinentiis; and de Haereditate Margaretae de
Quency Comitissae Wintoniae, scilicet de medietate Honoris Leycestriae: Unde
Placitum Conventionis summonitum fuit inter eos in eadem Curia, scilicet quod
praedicti Johannes and Margareta recognoverunt omnes praedictas Terras, and
praedictam medietatem Honoris Leycestriae, cum pertinentiis, and totam
Haereditatem ipsius Saheri in Anglia, Scotia, Flandria, and Normannia, and
totam Haereditatem ipsius Margaretae Comitissae Wintoniae in Anglia and
Normannia, esse jus ipsius Rogeri: Et pro hac Recognitione, Fine, and
Concordia, Idem Rogerus dedit and concessit praedictis Johanni and Margaretae
Mannerium de Kingston, cum omnibus pertinentiis in Comitatu Dorsetiae, and
similiter totam Terram cum pertinentiis, quam Loretta quondam Comitissa
Leycestriae aliquando tenuit nomine Dotis in Wymburne, Blaneford, cum tota
Foresta and Chaceis de Wimburn-Holt, and cum omnibus Boscis and Warrennis de
Kingston, -- Excepto Tenemento quod Nicolaus de Wilelegh tenuit: praeterea idem
Rogerus recognovit and concessit praedictis Johanni and Margaretae, Maneria de
Bradeham, de Granset, de Bukby, and de Hardewyck, cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis, sicut Hawisia (quae fuit Uxor Roberti de Quency) ea tenuit in Dote; and
Homagium and totum Servitium Matthaei Tinfin, and Haeredum suorum, de Feodo
unius Militis cum pertinentiis in Winterflawe in Comitatu Wiltshire: Habendum
and Tenendum eisdem Johanni and Margaretae, and Haeredibus de Corpore ipsius
Margaretae procreatis, de praedicto Rogero and Haeredibus suis, Faciendo inde
Servitium quinque Militum pro omni Servitio and Exactione: -- Et sciendum est,
quod si praedicta Margaretae sine Haerede de Corpore suo procreato decesserit,
omnes praedictae Terrae cum pertinentiis redibunt ipsi Rogero and Haeredibus
suis sine ullo retenemento: Salvis praedicto Johanni Constabulario omnibus
praedictis Terris cum pertinentiis tenendis tota vita sua: Couchir-Book in the
Dutchy-Office, Tom. 2. Comitatus Dorset. number. 10. Lib. C. fol. 66. x.

Henry the Third gave to this John Lacy the Manors of Colingham and Berdsey,
unde Abbas de Kirkstall nobis reddidit per Annum 90 Libras de firma, donec ei
dederimus rationabile Escambium ad Valentiam eorundem Manneriorum in Escaetis
vel Wardis -- Datum apud Aurebel, 17 die Julii, 14 Hen. 3. Ibidem Tom. 2. Honor
sive Soca de Bolingbroke, fol. 22. number. 46.

Anno Domini 1233. 18 Hen. 3. John Scot Earl of Chester, and John Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, were by Peter Bishop of Winchester, for the Bribe of a thousand Marks,
drawn to the Kings Party; who before were Confederat with Richard Earl-Marshal
against the King. Mat. Paris.

About the same Year 1233. John sir-named The Scot, Earl of Chester and
Huntingdon, gave to John Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of Cheshire, ten
Knights Fees in England, illa scilicet quae de me tenuit, and Antecessores sui
de Antecessoribus meis tenuerunt, (This was the Service for the Ancient Barony
of Halton in Cheshire.) for the Service of half a Knights Fee, to be done by
him and his Heirs, for all Service to the said John Scot and his Heirs.
Testibus Domino Henrico de Audidelegh, Domino Willielmo de Cantilupo, Domino
Ricardo Phiton tunc Justiciario Cestriae, etc. Couchir-Book in the
Dutchy-Office, Tom. 1. fol. 49. a. Comitatus Cestriae, number. 24. Lib. C. fol.
65. s.

John Lacy had Issue by Margaret his second Wife, Edmund Lacy; and Maud, a
Daughter, married to Richard de Clare, Earl of Clare, Gloucester, and Hartford,
Anno Domini 1238. 22 Hen. 3. Stow in his Annals.

Ob. 1240. 22 Julii.
Anno 1240. 24 Hen. 3. die Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, scilicet undecimo
Calendas Augusti, died John Earl of Lincoln, after a long and tedious Sickness.
Mat. Paris, p. 533.

Margaret Countess of Lincoln afterward married Walter Marshall Earl of
Pembroke, which Walter died without Issue 29 Hen. 3. 1245. Mat. Paris. Also
Vincent upon Broke.

But Margaret survived both her Husbands, and then was styled, -- Domina
Margareta Comitissa Lincolniae and Pembrochiae, in all her Charters: Lib. C.
fol. 66. y. Living 33 Hen. 3.

I find mention in the Book of Whalley, fol. 126. b. of one Peter de Lascy a
Bastard, called also Peter de Cester, Rector of Whalley Church in Lancashire,
1249. but whether Bastard-son of this John Lacy, I cannot positively affirm.

IX. Edmund Lacy Constable of Cheshire, Son and Heir of John Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, succeeded his Father, and was the ninth Baron of Halton.

His Mother Margaret enjoyed the Earldom of Lincoln while she lived, by whom it
came; and she survived Edmund her Son, who was Ward to the King.

And howbeit Vincent upon Brook, page 318, 319. cites a Record out of the Close
Rolls, to prove that this Edmund, by way of Recitation, had tertium Denarium
Comitatus Lincolniae; yet certain it is, he was never styled in any of his own
Chartes by the Title of Comes Lincolniae, but only Edmundus Lacy
Constabularius Cestriae: Lib. C. fol. 67. c. and fol. 1. f. Sometimes Sir
Edmund Lacy only. Lib. C. fol. 67. b.

Yet Matthew Paris tells us, That in the beginning of May, 1247. two Girls of
Provence in France were by the Providence of Peter of Savoy married unto two
very Noble young Gentlemen, Edmund Earl of Lincoln, and Richard de Burgo, whom
King Henry the Third had Educated for some few Years in his own Court; the King
himself staying at Woodstock from the twenty eighth of April to the first of
May, for the accomplishment thereof. Concerning which Marriages there was much
murmuring through the Kingdom, because those strange Ladies were married (as it
was said) contrary to the desires of the young Noblemen, and against their
wills.

Where he styles this Edmund, Earl of Lincoln, rather out of Civility, in
regard it was Hereditarily in him if he had survived his Mother, than that in
truth he was so styled in any Deed or Record during his Life.

*
The young Ladies Name to whom the King married him, was Alice Daughter of the
Marquis of Saluces in Italy, and Cousin to the Queen of England, of whom he
begot Henry Lacy, afterward Earl of Lincoln.

Roger Quency Earl of Winchester, and Constable of Scotland, gave unto his
Cousin Edmund Lacy the Manors of Kypes and Scales in Yorkshire: Lib. C. fol.
67. a Tom. 1. of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, fol. 168. b. Com.
Eboraci. number. 12.

Anno Domini 1254. aliqui magnatum, utpote Johannes de Warrenna, and Edmundus
de Lascy, apud Doveram transfretantes, versus Burdegaliam lora direxerunt. Mat.
Paris.

Edmund Lacy died the fifth day of June, 1258. 42 Hen. 3. and was Buried at
Stanlaw Abbey in Wirrall in Cheshire. So the Book of Whalley Abbey. Lib. C. fol.
61. a. and fol. 67. e.

Alice, the Widow of this Edmund, was living 1271. 55 Hen. 3. Tom. 2. of the
Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, Honor sive Soca de Bolingbroke, fol. 23.
number. 49. being a French Deed, wherein by Agreement with Henry Lacy her Son, she
was to hold for her Life all those Lands whereof she was Enfeoffed by the King:
-- And she releaseth all her Dower in Halton in Cheshire, and in Widneys, and
in Almanbyrye.

X. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of Cheshire, Son and Heir of
Edmund Lacy, succeeded his Father, and was the tenth Baron of Halton.

King Edward the First gave unto him the Castle and Lordship of Denbigh in
Wales, Anno Domini 1284. 12 Edw. 1. Stow in his Annals. In this Year, on the
ninth of April, was so great Thunder and Lightning, that Men could scarce stand
on their Feet.

His Title, in Anno 1286. 14 Edw. 1. and also 1296. 24 Edw. 1. did run thus in
his own Charters, -- Henricus de Lacy Comes Lincolniae, Constabularius
Cestriae, Dominus de Roos and Rowynock. Monasticon, 1 Pars. page 901. and Lib.
C. fol. 67. g.

He was in greatest Favor with his Prince, on whose Fidelity Edward the First
did principally rely, making him the Chief Commissioner for the Rectifying and
Discovering of the Abuses and Briberies of his Corrupt Judges, complained of in
Parliament 18 Edw. 1. 1290. Among whom, Sir Thomas Weyland, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, was Banished, and all his Goods Confiscate; Sir John Lovetot
Compounded for 3000 Marks; Roger Leycester Clerk, for 1000 Marks; Sir William
Brompton, for 6000 Marks. These were all Judges of the Common Pleas; and other
Judges were also Fined.

About this time, 1290. Sir Nicolas Leycester Knight was Seneschal to this
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln: G. number. 60. from whom the Leycesters of Tabley in
Cheshire.

Henry Lacy is placed next after the Prince of Wales, as the Prime Nobleman of
England, in the Catalogue of the Parliament at Carlisle, 1307. 35 Edw. 1. as
they be ranked by Stow in his Chronicle.

He was very Famous in all Grand Matters of State in the Reign of King Edward
the First, as Walsingham, Stow, and other of our Historians do report.

Anno 1293. he was sent Ambassador to the French King, to demand Satisfaction
for the Goods of the English Merchants which were taken by the French.

Also after the death of Edmund Earl of Lancaster, he was Commander in Chief of
all the Kings Forces in Gascoyn, and sometime Viceroy of the Duchy of
Aquitain.

Anno 1298. he Marched into the Confines of Toulouse, and expelled the French,
delivering the Castle of St. Catharine from a strict Siege.

Anno 1299. he led the Foreward of the Battle of Fowkirk in Scotland, where the
Scots were defeated.

He was Protector of England when Edward the Second was in Scotland. In a word,
He was Vir Illustris in Concilio, strenuus in omni Praelio, Princeps Militiae
in Anglia, and in omni Regno Ornatissimus, says the Book of Dunmow, as I find
it cited by Wever in his Funeral Monuments, page 366.

Anno 1273. 1 Edw. 1. Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and
Reginald Gray, for the Preservation of the Peace of this Nation, Besieged
Robert de Ferrers in the Castle of Chartley in Staffordshire, which Castle
Robert had entered and kept by Force, it being lately given by King Henry the
Third unto Hamon le Strange; which Castle indeed was the Inheritance of the
said Robert, and descended unto him by Agnes his Grandmother, third Sister and
Coheir to Randle Blundevill Earl of Chester, till Robert forfeited the same by
his Rebellion. In this Siege many Persons were slain on both Sides, and the
said Robert and his Accomplices were at last taken. Now the King Pardoned these
Besiegers for the slaying of these Disturbers of the Peace, and Confirms the
Protection of such Persons as the said Edmund had received into Favor. Dated
at Rothelent, 20 die Decembris, 11 Edw. 1. 1282. Lib. C. fol. 67. I. Tom. 2. of
the Couchir-Books at Gray's Inn, in the Dutchy-Office there. Derby-Ferrers, number.
4.

This Henry, by the Name of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of
Cheshire, Confirms to the Prior and Canons of Burstow a Place called Ruddegate,
which Henry Torbock and Ellen his Wife had before Granted unto them; so as one
Leprous Person of his Fee of Widneys [in Lancashire], if any such were found,
should be admitted in the said House, and be reasonably maintained; and after
the Decease of one, another to come in his room: And that the said Henry Lacy,
and Margaret his Wife, be put in their Martyrologie, and their Names written in
the Canon. Dated at Halton, die Sancti Geronimi Confessoris (which is the
thirtieth day of September), Anno Domini 1285. The Original hereof was in
possession of Sir Simon Dewes Baronet, 1646. with a very fair Seal, scilicet,
The Earl on Horseback, with his Sword drawn; and on the Breast of the Earl, an
Escocheon of Arms, in which is A Lion Rampant; and on the Reverse or Backpart
of the Seal, also, A Lion Rampant in an Escocheon, which I take to be the Coat
of these Lacies Earls of Lincoln. Lib. C. fol. 68. k.

blazon or coat of arms To his Deed of two Tofts in Haburge, made Ecclesiae
Sancti Martialis de Newhouse (the Original whereof also remained with Sir Simon
Dewes aforesaid) he affixed his Seal, on the Reverse part whereof was in an
Escocheon of Arms, Quarterly, with a Bend through the whole, and a Label of
five Points; written about thus, -- SECRETUM HENRICI DE LACY.

Queeen Elinour's Grant to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, That all his Tenants in
the Manor of Dynelnegh be quit of all Toll, Stallage, Payage, Pavage, Pontage,
Murage, and Passage, for ever, per omnes Terras nostras Walliae, and in
Comitatibus Cestriae, Staffordiae, Salopiae, Glocestriae, Wigorniae, and
Herefordiae. Apud Gretindon, primo die Septembris, 18 Edw. 1. Tom. 1. of the
Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, fol. 28. number. 49.

Infinite other Grants were made to and by this Henry Lacy, which here would be
tedious to mention.

He had two Wifes. Margaret Daughter of Sir William Longspee, and his only
Heir, was the first Wife of Henry Lacy, married about Christmas, 1256. 40 Hen.
3. For on Friday before Christmas in that Year, it was agreed between Sir
Edmund Lacy on the one Part, and Sir William Longspee on the other Part, That
whereas the Marriage of Henry Lacy, Son and Heir of the said Edmund, with
Margaret Daughter and Heir of the said William, had been formerly mentioned in
Gascoyne, it was now finished by the Consent of the Parties: And William
Longspee gave with Margaret his Daughter and Heir, in Free-Marriage, to Henry
Lacy, the Manors of Burencester and Middleton, cum omnibus Homagiis,
Redditibus, and Servitiis: And Edmund Lacy gave for Jointure to the said
Margaret his Manors of Kypeis and Scales in Yorkshire. Lib. C. fol. 67. b.
Tom. 2. of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, Comitatus Oxoniae, number. 2.
Henry Lacy was but six Years old when he was married.

This William de Longspee, although he was Right Heir to the Earldom of
Salisbury, yet did he never enjoy the same: nor had Henry Lacy ever that Title;
but all the Lands of this Longspee descended to him.

Henry Lacy had Issue by this Margaret two Sons, Edmund and John, and both died
young; and also two Daughters, Alice and Margaret. Fern in Lacy's Nobility
calls Margaret by the Name of Joan, page 125. but falsely. Only Alice survived,
who became Sole Heir to her Father, and married Thomas Plantagenet Earl of
Lancaster, Leycester, and Darby. Lib. C. fol. 86.

So was the Barony of Halton annexed and united to the Earldom of Lancaster.

Brooks and Fern say, That Edmund eldest Son of Henry Lacy was drowned in the
Draw-well of Denbigh Castle; but I am told by a more Ancient Authority,
Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 188 b. That in Anno 1282. Edward the First gave to
Henry Lacy two Cantreds in Wales, to wit, Roos and Roweynock; and that the
King, eodem Anno, gave to Edmund Lacy his Son a young Girl in Marriage, but
five Years old, namely Maud the Daughter and Heir of Patrick de Chaworth by
Isabel Beauchamp his Wife, Daughter of William de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick:
Lib. C. fol. 73. e. But this Edmund Lacy died young without Issue; and John his
Brother, running hastily in his Youth upon a Turret in Pomfret Castle in
Yorkshire, fell down from the Walls and was killed.

The second Wife of Henry Lacy was Joan Daughter of William Martin Lord Keimis;
but had no Issue by her. Lib. C. fol. 86. a.

This Great Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Cheshire, Baron of
Halton, Pomfret, Blackburnshire, Roos, and Roweynock, and Protector of England,
died on the fifth day of February, 1310. 4 Edw. 2. at his own House in Chancery
lane at London, now called Lincoln's Inn, and was buried at St. Paul's Church in
London, in the New Work which was of his own Foundation, under a goodly
Monument, with his Armed Pourtraicture cross-legged, as one that had taken a
Voyage in Defense of the Holy Land. He was aged sixty Years at the time of his
death: Wever's Funeral Monuments, page 366. and Stow in his Annals, sub Anno
1310. Lib. C. fol. 69. t.

Joan his Widow afterward married Nicolas Lord Audley: Lib. C. fol. 69. v.
which Nicolas died 1316.

And it is to be remembered, That in the Time of this Henry Lacy, who gave the
Church of Whalley in Lancashire, with the Chapels thereof, unto the Monks of
Stanlaw, the Abbey of Stanlaw was Translated unto Whalley, scilicet Anno Domini
1296. in Festo Sancti Ambrosii Episcopi, id est, 4 Aprilis: Lib. C. fol. 61. a.
Domino Gregorio de Norbury tunc Abbate.

Anno 1309. 3 Edw. 2. die Vincentii Martyris, obiit Gregorius de Norbury Primus
Abbas de Whalley: An old Parchment Book of Whalley, in possession of Mr.
Townley of Carre in Lancashire, 1657. fol. 23.

XI. Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, Leycester, blazon or coat of arms
and Derby, High Steward of England, (Son and Heir of Edmund Plantagenet
sir-named Crook-back) was the eleventh Baron of Halton, in Right of Alice his
Wife, Daughter and Sole Heir of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln and Constable of
Cheshire.

He was Beheaded at Pomfret, his own Manor, Anno Domini 1321. 15 Edw. 2. 22
die Martii, for Rebelling against his Sovereign King Edward the Second: Stow
and Walsingham. Leaving no Issue of his Body to succeed him; whose Lands were
now forfeited to the King.

Anno 1314. 8 Edw. 2. he purchased from Audomare de Valentia the Temple-house
at London, (which formerly belonged to the Templars, but is since become a
Society for the Students of our Law) with all the Lands and Rents thereto
belonging in the Suburbs of London and in the County of Middlesex, which were
of the Fee of the Honor of Leycester, and Confirmed unto him by the Grant of
King Edward the Second, Dated at York, primo die Octobris, 8 Edw. 2. Tom. 2. of
the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, Comitatus Middlesex.

Alice, the Widow of this Thomas, had the Earldom of Lincoln restored unto her
by the King, during her Life, 20 die Septembris, 1322. 16 Edw. 2. She had also
the Manor of Halton in Cheshire, cum pertinentiis, restored unto her for her
Life, 12 die Julii, 16 Edw. 2. in which Deed she is styled Countess of Lincoln
and Salisbury: Lib. C. fol. 68. l. Afterward she married Sir Eubulo le
Strange, without the Kings Consent, about 1325. 19 Edw. 2. but had no Issue by
him. Eubulo Lord Strange was in her Right made Earl of Lincoln: Vincent upon
Broke, page 320. and he died about 7 Edw. 3. 1333. For, 9 Edw. 3. I find Alice
styled Countess of Lincoln and Salisbury: Lib. C. fol. 69. p. q.

After this, Alice married Hugh de Frenes to her third Husband, who usurped the
Title of Earl of Lincoln in her Right, and died 1334. Walsingham, page 134. but
had no Issue by her.

Concerning this Alice, and one Richard de St. Martin, I shall give you here
the Story out of Walsingham, sub Anno 1317. 10 Edw. 2. page 108, 109.

On Monday before Ascension-day, 1317. the Countess of Lancaster was Ravished
at Caneford in Dorsetshire, by a certain Knight of the House of John Earl of
Warren, very many of the English being assistant to that detestable Fact, and
by the Kings Assent, as it was said: She was brought in great Triumph to the
Earl Warren 's Castle of Ryegate, in disgrace of her Husband Thomas Earl of
Lancaster; and by the way, the Conductors supposing they had seen Flags or
Banners between the Hedges and Woods of Halton and Farnham afar off, (which was
nothing but Priests in their Surplices walking Procession with the People in
the Fields, according to their Custom) were struck with a great fear, thinking
the Earl of Lancaster her Husband had been coming with a Power to revenge her
Injury; and so ran away, leaving the Lady almost all alone: But the matter
being discovered, they returned with Threatenings and Pomp; with whom there was
a low, lame, hulch-back'd Fellow, of a malicious spirit, called Richard de St.
Martin, who being backed with great Aid, challenged the miserably-derided Lady
for his Wife, protesting that he carnally knew her before she married the Earl
of Lancaster; which she openly acknowledged to be true: And although she was
reputed a most Noble Lady all her lifetime before, she was by the Wheel of
Fortune proclaimed an odious Strumpet: And the said Richard triumphing over
her, presumes to challenge the Earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury in the King's
Court, as in Right of his Wife; but in vain, as shall after appear more fully.
Thus Walsingham.

But here seems to be great improbability in this Story. Cambden tells us out
of the Book of Stanlaw Monastery, that she was but nine Years old when she
married Thomas Earl of Lancaster: Lincolnshire, page 409. And then St. Martin
must lie with her before she was nine Years old, which is not probable. And
then these Actions and Words done and said unto her in time of Hostility, to
make the Earl odious, might be given out against her, as if she had confessed
the Fact; though perhaps an absolute Falsity. Nor is it likely Eubulo Lord
Strange would have married her, as he did, had these things been true which are
here related by Walsingham.

This Countess Alice died Anno Domini 1348. 22 Edw. 3. Annoque aetatis suae
sexagesimo septimo; and was Buried at Berlyng Abbey, by Eubulo her second
Husband: Monasticon, 2 Pars, page 190. leaving no Issue by any of her Husbands.

Now for the Lands which were the Inheritance belonging to this Alice, they are
said to be worth 10000 Marks per Annum, and more; howbeit, she had not above
3000 Marks thereof per Annum allowed her by the King. Monasticon, Pars 2. page
189. b.

The Inheritance of Henry Lacy was so settled upon the Marriage of Alice his
Daughter and Heir, that in Case Henry Lacy had no Heirs of his Body, in defect
of such, then his Lands were to revert to Edmund the King's Brother, and to his
Heirs for ever. Dated 28 Octobris, 22 Edw. 1. 1294. Lib. C. fol. 67. f.
Monasticon, Pars 2. page 189. a.

So Alice having no Issue, all Henry Lacy's Lands came to the Earls of
Lancaster.

But before I proceed, it will be requisite I say something here of the Earls
of Lancaster before Thomas Plantagenet.

The first Earl of Lancaster I meet withal, was John sir-named Without Land,
younger Brother to King Richard the First. He was afterward King John, and
therefore I shall say the less of him.

The next Earl of Lancaster was Edmund Plantagenet, sir-named Crook-back,
younger Son to King Henry the Third, and Brother to King Edward the First.

He had given him by his Father -- Honorem, Comitatum, Castrum, and Villam de
Lancaster, and omia Dominica nostra quae sunt in Comitatu Lancastriae, cum
Vaccariis and Forestis de Wiresdale and Lounsdale; and Novum Castrum subtus
Limam; Manerium, Forestam, and Castrum de Pickering; Manerium de Scaleby,
Villam de Gomecester, redditumque Villatae de Huntendon. Dated at St. Paul's in
London, 30 die Junii, 51 Hen. 3. 1267. Lib. C. fol. 71. e. Tom. 1. of the
Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, fol. 1. number. 1. So he was made Earl of
Lancaster, 1267.

He was also Earl of Leycester, and High Steward of England, by Patent dated 25
die Octobris, 49 Hen. 3. 1265. upon the Forfeiture of Simon de Montfort Earl
of Leycester, who was slain at the Battle of Evesham, 5 die Augusti, 1265.

He was made Earl of Derby at Kenillworth, 28 Junii, 50 Hen. 3. wherein he has
granted unto him -- Castra and omnes terras quae fuerunt Roberti de Ferrariis
quondam Comitis Derbiae, qui Simoni de Monteforti quondam Comiti Leycestriae,
Inimico and Feloni nostro, and Imprisis suis adhaesit tempore Guerrae, quae
nuper in Regno nostro mota fuit per ipsum Simonem -- Lib. C. fol. 71. g. Tom.
1. of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, fol. 3. number. 11. Which Robert de
Ferrars was also Lord of Tutbury; and was afterward bound unto this Edmund,
with William de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, John Warren Earl of Surrey, William
de Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, and many other Sureties, for the Payment of
50000 l. Sterling in Quindena Johannis Baptistae proxime ventura, 53 Hen. 3.
for the Redemption of his Lands: Lib. C. fol. 71. I. But I find not that they
were ever redeemed.

This Edmund was Invested King of Sicily and Apuly with a Ring sent from the
Pope by the Bishop of Romania, 1255. 39 Hen. 3. Mat. Paris. But it was a mere
delusion; for he never had it.

He had the Castle of Kenilworth given him, 16 Decembris, 51 Hen. 3. Lib. C.
fol. 71. f. And the Savoy-House in London, by the Gift of Queen Elinor his
Mother, 24 die Februarii, 12 Edw. 1. 1283. Lib. C. fol. 72. n. And the Castle
of Chartley he had by the Grant of his Brother King Edward the First, 26 die
Julii, 4 Edw. 1. 1276. Lib. C. fol. 72. k.

Anno Domini 1271. 55 Hen. 3. in the Month of May, Prince Edward Son of King
Henry, with Edmund his Brother, and four Earls, and so many Barons, and many
other Gentlemen, took a Voyage into the Holy Land. So Mat. Paris.

Edmund Earl of Lancaster married to his first Wife Aveline Daughter and Heir
to William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle and Holderness, and Widow to Ingram de
Percy; Aveline and all her Issue died before her Parents.
but left no Issue by her. Vincent upon Broke, page 293. He married her the
eighth day of April, 1270. Mat. Paris, page 1006. of the Edition by Wats; sed
cum tota prole illa mortem Parentum praevenit: Walsingham in his Hypodigma
Neustriae places her Marriage with Edmund Anno 1269.

His second Wife was Blanch Queen of Navarre, the Widow of Henry de Champaigne
King of Navarre, and Daughter of Robert Earl of Artois, Brother of St. Lewis
King of France; in whose Right Edmund was Earl of Champaigne, 7 Edw. 1. So as
he was now Earl of Lancaster, Leycester, Derby, and Champaigne, and High
Steward of England. Vincent on Broke, Tit. Lancaster, page 293.

By Blanch the King of Navarre had Issue Joan married to Philip the Fair King
of France. Vincent, page 293.

Blanch married Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Anno Domini 1276. and by him had
Issue three Sons, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the eleventh Baron of Halton in
Right of his Wife, of whom I have spoken before, who Rebelled against his
Prince, and died without Issue: Henry de Lancaster Lord of Monmouth, second
Son, afterward Earl of Lancaster, and Heir to his Brother Thomas: And John,
third Son, who lived with the Queen of France his Half-Sister, and died there
without Issue. Hypodigma Neustriae, page 473. and Lib. C. page 73. a. b.

Vincent, page 293. will have the Queen of Navarr's Name here to be Elinour,
and not Blanch, from a Record which he there voucheth: Quaere, if that Record
be not mistaken; for I find her called Blanch in sundry Deeds in the
Register-Books of the Duke of Lancasters Evidences in the Dutchy-Office, called
The two Couchir-Books.

Anno Domini 1296. 24 Edw. 1. this Edmund the King's Brother, and Henry Lacy
Earl of Lincoln, went into Gascoyn with a strong Army, where many Castles were
delivered unto them; but when they came within two Miles of Bordeaux, the
French Army coming out of Bordeaux as it were unawares upon them, after a sore
Conflict retreated to the City, and the Earls burned a great part of the
Suburbs.

And shortly after, Edmund died: Hypodigma Neustriae, page 483.

XII. Henry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth, sir-named Grismond, second Son of
Edmund Crook-back, and Brother and Heir to Thomas Plantagenet Earl of
Lancaster, was restored to all his Brothers Lands and Honors, 1 Edw. 3.
Anno Domini 1326. and then his Titles were thus, -- Henricus Comes Lancastriae
and Leycestriae, Seneschallus Angliae. Lib. C. fol. 74. k. 13 Edw. 3. And he
was the twelfth Baron of Halton.

He married Maud Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Patrick de Chaworth or de
Gadurcis, Lord of Kidwelly in Caermarthenshire, and of Ogmore Castle in
Glamorganshire: Cambden's Britannia, Printed 1607. page 619. sub Titulo
Lancastriae: and Lib. C. fol. 73. d.

This Maud was formerly given to Edmund Son of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, by
Edward the First, Anno 1282. being then a Girl but five Years old; which Edmund
died very young, before he came to Maturity, without Issue, as you may see
above in Henry Lacy.

Henry Earl of Lancaster had Issue by this Maud only one Son, Henry, made Earl
of Derby in his Fathers Lifetime, to wit, 1336. 11 Edw. 3. Hypodigma
Neustriae, and Vincent, page 297. And six Daughters: Blanch married Thomas Lord
Wake of Lidell: Maud married William Lord Burgh Earl of Ulster in Ireland, and
after to Sir Rafe Ufford: Joan married John Lord Mowbray of Axholme: Isabel was
Abbess of Ambersbury: Elinour, first married to John Son of Henry Lord
Beaumont, and Earl of Bughan in Scotland; after to Richard Earl of Arundel: And
Mary, sixth Daughter, married Henry Lord Percy of Alnwick. So Broke in his
Catalogue of Nobility.

This Henry of Lancaster, with others, was sent by the Queen into Wales (where
the King then sculked) to take King Edward the Second her Husband; whom they
took with Hugh Spenser the Son, Robert de Baldock, and Simon de Reading. The
King was committed to the Custody of this Henry of Lancaster: This was in Anno
1326. Soon after this was the King deposed, and Edward his young Son made King,
by the Name of Edward the Third: Which young King was Knighted by this Henry
Earl of Lancaster. Walsingham Hist. Ang. Edw. 2. page 125, 126, 127. But this
Henry was in nothing more infamous, than in betraying his Lawful Sovereign.

Anno Domini 1345. obiit Henricus Grismond, Frater Thomae Comitis Lancastriae:
Jacet apud Leycestriam, X Calendas Octobris, which is the twenty second of our
September, 19 Edw. 3. A Manuscript in the University Library at Oxford, among
the Books given by Archbishop Laud, of an ancient Character, noted -- G. 9.
fol. 125.

And Walsingham's Hist. Ang. Edw. 3. page 165. thus, -- Anno 1345. 19 Edw. 3.
obiit Henricus Comes Lancastriae, Pater Henrici Comitis de Derby; and Sepultus
est Leycestriae in Monasterio Canonicorum, Praesentibus Rege and Regina, tam
antiqua quam nova, Archiepiscopis and Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus quasi
totius Regni: Filius ejus eo tempore in Wasconia, ut praefertur, actus
bellicosos and strenuos exercebat; quamobrem interesse non potuit exequiis
Patris sui.

XIII. Henry of Monmouth, sir-named Tort-Coll or Wry-neck, only Son of Henry
Grismond, succeeded his Father in all his Lands and Honors, and was the
thirteenth Baron of Halton.

He was Earl of Derby in his Fathers Lifetime, Created 16 Martii, 11 Edw. 3.

After his Fathers death, his Title was thus, 21 Edw. 3. 1346. -- Henricus
Comes Lancastriae, Derbiae, Leycestriae, Seneschallus Angeliae: Lib. C. fol.
75. o.

He was Created Earl of Lincoln, 23 Edw. 3. and then his Style was, 1349. --
Henricus Comes Lancastriae, Derbiae, Leycestriae, and Lincolniae, Seneschallus
Angliae: Lib. C. fol. 75. P.

Lastly, He was Created Duke of Lancaster, 6 Martii, 25 Edw. 3. 1350. Vincent,
page 297. Selden's Titles of Honor, page 754. But Walsingham places his
Creation of Duke, Anno 1353. page 520. above two Years too late.

This Henry Repaired the Savoy House in the Strand in London, which cost him
52000 Marks, which Money he got at the Town of Bryggerak. Knighton, page 2627.

He was the first of all the Nobility of England (of a Subject) who was
Invested with the Title of Duke since the Norman Conquest: For the Black
Prince, who was made Duke of Cornwall fourteen Years before, though in truth he
be a Subject, yet is he King Hereditarily if he survive; and therefore I look
upon the Prince as a Higher Pitch than the other Nobility.

So the Earldom of Lancaster became a Duchy.

Anno Domini 1354. 28 Edw. 3. this Henry Duke of Lancaster went Beyond Sea in
great State, to have sought a Duel at Paris with the Duke of Brunswick, who had
taken and spoiled his Goods as he returned from the Court of Rome, whither he
was sent for the Confirmation of a Peace between the King of England and the
King of France: But by Mediation of Friends it was taken up: Hypodigma
Neustriae, page 520. See also Stow's Annals.

Anno 1345. in which Year his Father died, this Henry Sailed into Gascoyn with
six hundred Armed Men, and so many Archers, who at the first Assault took the
strong Town of Brigerak, and won fifty Towns and Cities to the King of England.
He defeated the Army of the King of France which came against him, took twenty
three Persons of Quality, besides a great number of Common Soldiers: The rest
either ran away, or were killed. His Munificence was such, that, when he took
any Town, he gave all the Booty to his Soldiers, kept little or nothing to
hiself. Walsingham.

He married Isabel Daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont, by whom he had Issue two
Daughters and Coheirs: Maud married William Duke of Zeland, and Earl of
Henault, eldest Son of Lewis Duke of Bavarre, Anno Domini 1352. 26 Edw. 3.

Blanch the other Daughter married John of Gaunt Earl of Richmond, fourth Son
to King Edward the Third, 19 die Maii, 1359. 33 Edw. 3. at Rading, having a
Dispensation of the Court because she was his Cousin. Walsingham and Stow.

How the Lands were divided between the two Sisters, take here these two
following Chartes, enrolled in one of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office at
Gray's Inn, Tom. 2. Comitatus Norfolciae, number. 3. and Honor sive Soca de
Bolingbroke, page 4. number. 4. Lib. C. fol. 77. dd. a.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod nos Johannes Episcopus Lincolniae, Robertus
de la Mare, Johannes de Bukland, Johannes Charnells, Walterus Poer, Simon
Simeon, and Johannes Neumarche, Concessimus -- Willielmo Comiti de Henaud and
de Leycestria, and Matildae Uxori ejus, Filiae Domini Henrici nuper Ducis
Lancastriae, Maneria de Gymingham, Thesford, Mathe, Would, and Tunstede, and
Hundreda de Galhowe, and Brothercors, cum pertinentiis; and triginta and novem
Feoda, and quartam partem unius Feodi Militum cum pertinentiis, in Canefeld,
Eysten Attemount, Horton, Berewyk, Creke, Waterdene, Snyterle, Barsham,
Sidesterne, Wyneton, Salthus, Gresham, Aylemerton, Clopton, Fyncheam,
Northwald, Feltewell, Roukelound, Middleton, East-Rudham, West-Rudham, Sal,
Haydon, Kerdeston, Wodedalling, Repam, Bergh, Hegheton, Rongham, Fransham,
Weting, Toftes, Croxton, Gresynghale, Lexam, Elsyng, Wesenham, Tanerham,
Drayton, Swynington, Alderford, Lyneford, Grimeston, Congham, Bykeston in
Goldestthorp, Stanfeld, Briselye, Bilneye, Titeleshale, West-Lexam, Skernynge,
and Ho, and Advocationes Abbathiae Marham, Prioratus Canonicorum de Thesford,
Hospitalium Domus Dei de Thesford, Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae de Thesford, and
Sancti Johannis de Thesford, ac Ecclesiarum de Suthreppes, Northreppes,
Trymingham, Manesele, Eykesthorpe, Bradefelde, Swathefeld, and Beston, and
medietatis Ecclesiae de Aylmerton; ac etiam duo Feoda Militum cum pertinentiis,
in Westfeld and Brantham: Habenda and tenenda praedictis Willielmo Comiti de
Henaud and de Leycestria, and Matildae Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus de Corpore
ejusdem Matildae exeuntibus, de Domino Rege Angliae, and aliis Capitalibus
Dominis Feodi. -- Et si contingat, quod praedicta Matilda obierit sine Haerede
de Corpore suo exeunte, quod absit, ex tunc omnia praedicta Maneria, Hundreda,
Feoda Militum, and Advocationes cum pertinentiis suis, plenarie and integre
remaneant rectis Haeredibus Domini Henrici nuper Ducis Lancastriae in perpetuum
-- etc. Datum apud Londoniam, 22 die Octobris, 35 Edw. 3.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod nos Johannes Dei Gratia Episcopus
Lincolniae, Ricardus Comes Arundelliae, Robertus de la Mare, Johannes de
Bukland, Johannes Charnells, Walterus Poer, Simon Simeon, and Johannes
Newmarche, Concessimus -- nobili viro Johanni Comiti Lancastriae and
Richmondiae, and Blanchiae Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus suis de Corporibus eorum
legitime procreatis, Castrum de Bolingbroke and Parcum eidem Castro
pertinentem, eum omnibus Advocationibus Ecclesiarum, Abbathiarum, Prioratuum,
Hospitalium, and aliarum Domorum Religiosarum, and Feodis Militum, praedicto
Castro and Sokae de Bolingbroke pertinentibus, quae habuimus ex dono and
redditione Nobilis Viri Henrici Ducis Lancastriae per Finem in Curia Domini
Regis inde leuatum; adeo plene and integre sicut Henricus de Lacy quondam Comes
Lincolniae ea tenuit and habuit. Retentis nobis Manerio, Villa, and Soca de
Bolingbroke, ac Maneriis de Sutton, Thoresby, Wathe, and Ingoldsmeles, cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Lincolniae -- Concessimus etiam Castrum, Villam,
Mannerium, and Honorem de Tutbury -- ac Villas de Strepton, Merchington,
Chalangewood, Uttexhater, Adgarest, and Newburgh, cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Staffordiae; and Hundredum de Higham-Ferrers, ac Maneria de Hegham-Ferrers,
Raundes, Rissheden, cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Northamptoniae; -- ita quod si
idem Comes and Blanchia obierint sine Haerede de Corporibus suis exeunte, quod
tunc post decessum ipsorum Comitis and Blanchiae, omnia praedicta Castra,
Maneria, etc. remaneant rectis Haeredibus ipsius Henrici Ducis Lancastriae;
Tenenda de Domino Rege, and Haeredibus suis, per Servitia inde debita and
consueta in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigilla
nostra apposuimus. Hiis Testibus, Edwardo Principe Walliae, Illustris Regis
Angliae Filio Primogenito, Willielmo Episcopo Wintoniae, Cancellario Angliae,
Simone Abbate Westmonasterii Angliae Thesaurario, Johanne de Bukyngham
Northamptoniae Archidiacono, Henrico Green, and Roberto de Thorpe,
Justiciariis Domini Regis Angliae, and aliis. Datum Londini, die Dominica,
proxime post Festum Sancti Martini, 35 Edw. 3.

So that William Earl of Henault had the Earldom of Leycester, and John of
Gaunt had the Earldom of Lancaster.

And after the death of Maud Countess of Leycester, who died without Issue Anno
Domini 1381. the Earldom of Leycester, and all Maud's Part of the Lands
belonging to Henry Duke of Lancaster her Father, reverted unto John of Gaunt,
in Right of Blanch his Wife the other Sister.

Henry Duke of Lancaster died on the Eve before our Lady Day, 35 Edw. 3. which
is the last Day of the Year, 1360. at Leycester, where he was buried.
Walsingham, page 178. says he died Anno 1361. But he accounts the Year from
Christmas, not from our Lady Day.

It will not be impertinent if I put down here the Claims of this Henry Duke of
Lancaster, as Baron of Halton, upon a Quo Warranto brought against him, as I
find them Transcribed in one of the Couchir-Books in the Dutchy-Office, to wit,
Tom. 1. Comitatus Cestriae, fol. 45. number. 21. Lib. C. fol. 91.

HENRICUS Dux Lancastriae, Constabularius and Mareschallus Cestriae, and
Dominus Manerii de Halton, clamat per se and Haeredibus suis, habere infra
Dominium suum Manerii sui de Halton, Castrum suum Kernellatum apud Halton; and
habere ibidem Prisonam, and capere ibidem Castle-ward; and habere infra
Manerium Dominii sui Infangtheof, Outfang-theof, Waif, Wreck, Stray, and visum
Franci-Flegii, and quicquid ad visum pertinet, de omnibus Tenentibus and
Residentibus infra Dominium suum praedictum extra Burgos de Halton and
Congelton, tenendum bis per Annum; videlicet, semel inter Festa Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli and Michaelis in Monte Tumba November. 16.
, apud Halton; and iterum inter Festa Annunciationis Beatae Mariae and
Inventionis Sanctae Crucis 3 Maii.
, apud Thelwall quod est infra Dominium suum praedictum, per rationabilem
praemonitionem; and habere liberum Parcum suum apud Halton cum duobus
Saltatoribus Corrupt pro Saltuariis, i.e. Forestars.
in eodem Parco; and habere liberam Warrennam in omnibus Dominicis Terris suis
infra Dominium suum Manerii praedicti.

Item clamat tenere Villam suam de Halton, ut liberum Burgum; and habere
ibideem liberos Burgenses: Et quod ipse, and Burgenses sui ejusdem Burgi, erunt
quieti de Theoloneo, Passagio, Pontagio, and de Stuth Stuth, i. e.
Sheriff-tooth.
pro omnibus rebus per eos emptis and venditis, tam in Civitate Cestriae, quam
per totum Comitatum Cestriae, praeterquam de Theoloneo Salis in VVychis.

Item, Clamat habere in eodem Burgo liberam Curiam suam de Quindena in
Quindenam tenendam; and Cognitionem Placiti liberi Tenementi de omnibus
Tenementis in eodem Burgo coram Seneschallo suo ibidem, per Billam seu Querelam
sive Breve; and visum Franci Plegii, and quicquid ad visum pertinet, de omnibus
Tenentibus and Residentibus in eodem Burgo: Tenendum ter per Annum, videlicet
semel inter Festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli and Sancti Martini in Hyeme; and
iterum inter Festa Sancti Hilarii and Annunciationis Beatae Mariae; and tertio
inter Festa Sanctae Trinitatis and Assumptionis Beatae Mariae.

Item, Clamat habere in eodem Burgo quoddam Mercatum singulis Septimanis per
diem Sabbati On the Saturday.
and habere ibidem duas Ferias annuatim, videlicet, unam Feriam tenendam per
quatuor dies proxime ante Festum Nativitatis Beatae Mariae September. 8.
, and in Festo, and per duos dies proxime sequentes: and aliam Feriam in
Vigilia Festi Beatae Catharinae November. 25.
Virginis, and in die ejusdem Festi, cum omnibus libertatibus and prosicuis
quae ad Mercatum vel ad Ferias pertinent.

Item, Clamat habere aliam liberam Curiam annual im de Quindena in Quindenam
tenendam apud Halton, vel alibi ubicunque voluerit infra Feodum Dominii sui
praedicti per rationabilem praemonitionem: Et in eadem Curia habere cognitionem
Placitorum de Transgressionibus, Conventionibus, Debito, and Vecio Namio ad
Sectam Partis: Et si Praesentatum sit per Ballivos dicti Ducis Curiae suae
praedictae, quod aliquis Hominum, Tenentium, seu Residentium infra Feodum
Dominii sui praedicti, fregerit Pacem vel Assisam Panis seu Cervisiae seu
Carnis, aut Carnes malas vendiderit, ceu Affraiam fecerit, vel Hutegium Levied
Hue and Cry.
levaverit, vel falsa Pondera vel Mensuras falsas usus fuerit infra eundem
Feodum, ceu vendiderit Pisces captos infra Feodum praedictum ante horam primam
alicujus diei; quod tunc Ballivi dicti Ducis Curiae suae praedictae per
Processum debitum, scilicet, per Attachiamentum and Districtionem, facient
eosdem Transgressores venire ad respondendum in Curia praedicta; de quibus si
convicti fuerint, -- etc.

Item, Dux clamat habere Fines and Amerciamenta illorum, and punitionem
dictorum Transgressorum in forma juris; pro quibus Transgressionibus si postea
indictati fuerint coram Justiciario Cestriae, vel Vicecomite Cestershiriae, vel
aliquibus aliis Ministris dicti Comitis Cestriae, pro praedictis Finibus ceu
Amerciamentis, ceu Punitionibus per Ballivos dicti Ducis factis, erunt quieti.

Item, Clamat, quod si aliquis Conquestus fuerit in eadem Curia, quod aliquis
disseisans eum in libero Tenemento suo infra Feodum Dominii sui praedicti extra
Burgos de Halton and Congleton per Billam, in natura Novae Disseisinae, quod
tunc Ballivi dicti Ducis ejusdem Curiae facient Processum versus Partem
Defendentem per Attachiamentum and Districtionem, quousque venerit in Curiam
praedictam ad respondendum de Placito praedicto: Et si Pars defendens dedicat
disseisinam, and ponit se super Patriam, tunc ambabus Partibus consentientibus
capiatur Inquisitio in natura Assisae Novae Disseisinae: Et si inde convictus
fuerit de Disseisina, recuperet Pars querens Seisinam suam simul cum damnis
suis, and Pars Desendens in misericordia: quam quidem misericordiam idem Dux
clamat habere.

Item clamat, quod si aliquis Conquestus fuerit in praedicta Curia versus
aliquem de aliqua via arctata, obstructa, vel obstupefacta, vel de aliquibus
aliis hujusmodi nocumentis, infra Dominii sui praedicti Feodum factis, vel
etiam per Ballivos dicti Ducis dictae Curiae praesentatum fuerit tale
nocumentum per aliquem Forefactum infra eundem Feodum, quod tunc Seneschallus
Curiae praedictae per Attachiamentum and Districtionem faciat dictum
Transgressorem venire in Curiam praedictam ad respondendum de nocumento
praedicto, and tunc si ipse in eadem Curia se ponere voluerit, and inde
convictus fuerit, quod tunc graviter amercietur; and dabit Seneschallo dictae
Curiae unum Bovem, and nocumentum illud removere debet; quod quidem
Amerciamentum idem clamat habere.

Item clamat, quod si aliquis acquisiverit liberum Tenementam infra Feodum
Dominii sui praedicti sine Licentia sua, and illud praesentatum sit per
Ballivos dicti Ducis Curiae suae praedictae, quod tunc idem Acquisitor
attachiari debet per Ballivos ejusdem Curiae ad respondendum dicto Duci in
Curia praedicta de acquisitione praedicta: Et si inde convictus fuerit, dabit
praedicto Duci rationabilem Finem secundum quantitatem Tenementi acquisiti, and
secundum Considerationem Seneschalli, and Judicatorum ejusdem Curiae.

Item clamat habere Stallagium de omnibus Merchandizam exercentibus infra
certas Villas Dominii sui praedicti; videlicet, Halton, Runcorne, Weston,
Clifton, Sutton, Aston juxta Sutton, Middleton, Aston-Grange, Stokham, Norton,
Preston, Daresbery, Newton, Rekwick, Moore, Acton-Grange, Walton superiorem,
Walton inferiorem, Hull and Appulton, Thelwall, Stretton, Hatton,
Nether-VVhitley, Over-VVhitley, Comberbach, Budworth juxta Comberbach, Aston
juxta Budworth, Merebury, Cogshull, Berthington, Legh, and Dutton. Et quod
nulli hominum Tenentium seu Residentium infra Villas praedictas facere debent
sectam seu apparentiam coram Justiciariis ad Placita, vocatis Eyres, nec ad
Turnum Vicecomitis pro aliqua re, nisi solummodo ad visus and Curias dicti
Ducis praedictas; and quod nulli hominum Tenentium ceu Residentium infra Villas
praedictas, Summoneantur, Attachientur, Distringantur, seu Capiantur infra
Villatas praedictas, ad respondendum alicui coram Justiciariis in Placitis
praedictis, nec coram Vicecomite in Turno suo praedicto, nec in Hundredo, nisi
ipsi, vel Catalla, vel Tenementa sua, sint ceu inveniantur extra Villas
praedictas.

Item clamat habere Aquam de Mersey apertam a quodam loco vocato Frespoole
usque ad Piscariam dicti Ducis de Thelwall, tam in solo alieno quam in solo suo
proprio, ita largam quod habere possit Passagium cum quodam Batello de octo
Ferreys sine impedimento, per filum dictae aquae usque ad dictam Piscariam, and
redire omni tempore anni, -- etc. Et si aliquid nocumentum ibidem factum fuerit
ad contrarium, liceat ei illud amovere, etc.

Item clamat habere omnes Pisces Regales captos ceu inventos infra Feodam
Dominii sui praedicti.

Item clamat ratione Dominii sui de Halton fore Constabularium and Mareschallum
Domini Comitis Cestriae, and habere omnia Feoda and Proficua, quae ad ea
pertinent.

Item clamat ratione Dominii sui and Constabulariae suae praedictae, habere
Advocarias suas per totum Comitatum Cestriae de omnibus, qui se in Advocariis
suis se ponere voluerint; and habere omnia Proficua and Libertates, quae ad
illas Advocarias pertinent.

Item clamat, Quod ipse and Tenentes sui de quadam Salina in Northwycho de XII
Plumbis, vocata Whitley-Wich-house, sint quieti de Theoloneo praestando pro
Sale in eadem Salina facto and vendito: ac Emptores ejusdem Salis in eadem
Salina facti and empti, erunt quieti de Theoloneo pro eodem praestando in eadem
Villa.

Item clamat habere infra Feodum Dominii sui praedicti unum Magistrum
Servientem A Master-Serjeant.
ad aequum juratum cum octo Subservientibus, and duobus Garcionibus Two
Servants.
sub eodem Magistro jurato ad custodiendam Pacem per totum Feodum praedictum,
and ad Serviendum dicto Duci de Executionibus Curiarum suarum praedictarum
faciendis: qui quidem Magister Serviens cum Subservientibus and Garcionibus
suis praedictis habere debebent Puturam Free Quarter for Meat Drink.
, vel rationabilem Finem pro Putura eadem, de omnibus Tenentibus tres Landas
Terrae vel plures, Terrarum vocatarum Warland, infra Feodum praedictum;
scilicet, pro dicto Magistro Serviente, and duobus Subservientibus suis, and
uno Garcione cum uno Tenente Tenentium praedictorum, Coenare, pernoctare, and
in die proxime sequenti ante recessum suum jentare; and pro aliis duobus
Subservientibus cum uno Garcione cum alio Tenente Tenentium praedictorum
similiter Coenare, pernoctare, and in die proxime sequenti ante recessum suum
jentare; and pro aliis duobus Subservientibus cum alio Tenente Tenentium
praedictorum similiter Coenare, pernoctare, and in die proxime sequenti ante
recessum suum jentare: Et pro aliis duobus Subservientibus cum alio Tenente
Tenentium praedictorum similiter Coenare, pernoctare, and in die proxime
sequenti ante recessum suum jentare: Et sic de sex Septimanis in sex Septimanas
separatim annuatim in forma praedicta Coenare, pernoctare, and jentare: Ita
quod quilibet Tenens Tenentium praedictorum cum quo praedictus Magister
Serviens cum duobus Subservientibus and uno Garcione vel etiam cum quo duo de
Subservientibus praedictis cum uno Garcione, vel etiam cum quo duo de
Subservientibus praedictis in forma praedicta coenaverunt, pernoctaverunt, and
jentaverunt, erit quietus tam de dicto Magistro Serviente, quam de aliis
Subservientibus and Garcionibus praedictis pascendis, per sex Septimanas
proxime tunc sequentes: Et idem Magister Serviens habere debet de quolibet
Tenente Tenentium praedictorum pro Equo suo unum Bushel Avenarum pro Prebenda
Rectius Probenda, i.e. for Provand.
capienda annuatim inter Festa Sancti Michaelis and Inventionis Sanctae Crucis.

Item clamat, quod si dicti Servientes seu Ballivi sui aliquem Latronem pro
aliquo furto ubicunque fuerit, facto cum manuopere infra Feodum Dominii sui
praedicti ceperint, seu attachiaverint, and si ille Latro Feloniam illam coram
quatuor Villatis spontanea voluntate cognoverit, tunc liceat dictis
Servientibus seu Ballivis suis dictum Latronem decollare: Et dictus Dux tunc
habebit omnia Bona and Catalla dicti Latronis infra Feodum suum praedictum
inventa.

Item clamat, quod si aliquis captus fuerit infra Feodum Dominii sui praedicti
per dictos Servientes seu Ballivos suos cum Manuopere alicujus Feloniae, quod
tunc, Felonia illa cognita aut incognita, liceat dictis Servientibus seu
Ballivis ducere dictum Felonem ad Prisonam dicti Ducis apud Halton, and ibidem
illum retinere per tres Curias ibidem proxime sequentes, ad quas venient omnes
Judicatores and Sectatores Curiae praedictae per rationabilem praemonitionem:
Et in quacunque Curia illarum liceat Seneschallo ejusdem Curiae illum Felonem
de dicta Felonia ibidem arrainiare: Et si ille Felo se ponere ibidem voluerit
super Inquisitionem Curiae praedictae, tunc liceat Seneschallo illam
Inquisitionem capere: Et si ipsum inde culpabilem invenerit, tunc liceat dictis
Servientibus seu Ballivis suis dictum Felonem super Furcas dicti Ducis de
Halton suspendere; and Bona and Catalla dicti Felonis infra Feodum Dominii sui
praedicti inventa habebit dictus Dux sibi Forisfacta: Et si dictus Felo in
nulla Curiarum praedictarum se ponere voluerit super Inquisitionem ibidem, tunc
mandetur ad Castrum Cestriae: Et si ibidem dictus Felo convictus fuerit,
reducatur per Servientes seu Ballivos dicti Ducis ad furcas ejusdem Ducis de
Halton, and ibidem suspendatur; seu si Finem inde fecerit Domino Comiti
Cestriae, tunc in utroque Casu idem Dux clamat omnia Bona and Catalla dicti
Felonis infra Feodum Dominii sui praedicti inventa.

Item clamat habere Market-Geld de Villatis de Weston, Aston juxta Sutton,
Middleton, Preston, Newton, Kekwick, Moore, Daresbery, Halton, Over-Walton,
Nether-Walton, Stretton, Appulton, Middlehurst in Gropenhall, Over-Whitley,
Comberbach, Merebury, Budworth, Aston juxta Budworth, Nether-Tabley,
Berthinton, Dutton, Plumley, Over-Tabley, Toft, Bexton, Knotsford-Booths,
Millington, Limme, and Lostock: Quae sunt infra Feodum Dominii sui praedicti.

Item clamat habere Villam suam de Congleton liberum Burgum, and habere ibidem
liberos Burgenses: Et quod ipsi Burgenses sui praedicti erunt quieti de
Theoloneo, Passagio, Pontagio, and Stuth, tam in Civitate Cestriae quam per
totum Comitatum Cestriae, praeterquam de Theoloneo Salis in Wichis; and habere
ibidem unum Mercatum qualibet septimana per diem Sabbati; and unam Feriam
ibidem per Annum, videlicet, in die Sancti Martini in Hyeme cum omnibus
Libertatibus and Proficuis, quae ad Mercatum seu ad Feriam pertinent. Et habere
ibidem Visum Franci Plegii, and quicquid ad visum pertinet, de omnibus
Tenentibus and Residentibus infra Burgum praedictum: Tenendum ter per Annum,
videlicet, semel inter Festa Sancti Michaelis and Sancti Martini in Hyeme, and
iterum inter Festa Sancti Hilarii and Annunciationis Beatae Mariae; and tertio
inter Festa Sanctae Trinitatis and Assumptionis Beatae Mariae: Et habere ibidem
Cognitionem Placiti de libero Tenemento in Burgo praedicto per Parvum Breve de
Recto Clausum; Tenendum coram Ballivis dicti Ducis: Et habere exitus, Fines,
and Amerciamenta inde provenientia.

Item clamat habere liberam Curiam in Civitate Cestriae de omnibus Sutoribus,
and liberis Tenentibus suis, in eadem Civitate; Tenendum bis per Annum.

Item idem Dux, Dominus and Baro de Halton, clamat pro se and Haeredibus suis,
habere liberam Curiam de omnibus Placitis and Querelis in Curia Domini Comitis
Cestriae, infra Feodum dictae Baroniae emergentibus, exceptis Placitis ad
Gladium Domini Comitis Cestriae pertinentibus.

Item clamat, quod si quis hominum suorum pro aliquo delicto captus fuerit, per
ipsum Baronem sine redemptione Replegietur, ita quod dictus Baro eum perducat
ad tres Comitatus, and eum quiet reducat nisi Sakerbor A Pledge to Sue, one
bound to Prosecute. Vide Spelmanni Glossarium.
ipsum sequatur.

Ita clamat, quod si aliquis Adventitius, qui fidelis sit, in terras ejus
venerit, and si placuerit morari; liceat ei ipsum habere and reducere, Salvis
Domino Comiti Cestriae Advocariis, qui sponte ad se venerint; and aliis; qui
pro transgressu aliunde ad dignitatem suam veniunt; and non eis extraneis qui
sunt in Advocaria dicti Ducis ad Dominium suum de Halton pertinentibus.

Item clamat, quod si Vicecomes Domini Comitis Cestriae, vel aliquis Serviens
in Curia sua, aliquem hominum dicti Baronis inculpaverit, pro Thirtnyk i. e.
Trium noctium Hospes: Here it seems to signify Three Nights Charges.
se defendere poterit, nisi Secta eum sequatur.

Item clamat habere quietantiam de Garbis and Oblationibus, quas Servientes and
Bedelli Domini Comitis Cestriae exigere solebant.

Item clamat, quod si aliquis Judex vel Sectarius Hundredi aut Comitatus in
Curia Domini Comitis Cestriae in misericordiam ceciderit, per duos Solidos
quietus sit Judex; Sectarius autem per duodecem Denarios.

Item clamat, quod non faciat aliquod Servitium Domino Comiti Cestriae extra
Lyme and Cluyd, nisi per Gratum suum and ad Costum Domini Comitis Cestriae.

Item clamat, quod omnia Maneria sua Dominica in Comitatu and Hundredo per unum
Seneschallum praesentem defendere possit.

In a little Parchment Schedule among my own Evidences, I find some part of
Halton-Fee, as follows; which I here have rendered in English, because of some
obsolete Latin Words therein.

HUgo de Preston Bailiff of the Serjeanty of Halton, 33 Edw. 3. 1359. For
Account before William Blaby, then Auditor to the Duke of Lancaster, for 4 l.
13. s. 4 d.

l. s. d. For Rent in Pever i. e. Nether-Pever.
00 06 08 at two Terms. Alderley i. e. Over-Alderley.
00 05 00 die Johannis Baptistae. Listard 00 13 04 Martlemas. Birtles 00 12 00
Martlemas. Macclesfield 00 01 00 eodem Termino. Toft 00 07 00 eodem Termino.
Henbury and Pexhull 02 00 00 eodem Termino. Cotton 00 07 11 eodem Termino.
Middlehurst in Gropenhall 00 00 04 eodem Termino.

l. s. d. Unde Termino Martini 04 04 11 In die Nativitatis Joh. Bapt. 00 08 04

s. d. And of 03 01 in Hulme at Wallfield, Termino Martini. And 01 00 from the
Shoe-makers of Chester, Termino Martini. And 00 01 ob. for a Manchester-Knife
with a Horn Haft, out of Millington, eodem Termino. And 01 00 from Adam
Clayton, for his Tenement in Thelwall, or one Pair of Stag-leather Gloves
Furred with Fox, Termino Michaelis. And 14 00 Rent from the Fre-men of Chester
City, Termino Martini. And 02 04 From a Tenement in Longdendale, for the Ward
of the Ways, which they used to keep at the time of Chester-Fair; Termino
Johannis Baptistae. And 02 00 in Nether-Walton, for the Liberty of taking
Salmons in Mersey, at our Lady Day. And 00 06 for a Pair of White Spurs, from
William Mobberley, for his Lands in Plumley; Termino Johannis Baptistae.

XIV. John of Gaunt, fourth Son of King Edward blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT
QVI MAL Y PENSE

the Third, was born at Gaunt in Flanders, 1339. 13 Edw. 3. was Created Earl of
Richmond 16 Edw. 3. 1342. Couchir-Book in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 1. fol. 411.
b. Comitatus Richmondiae, number. 2. Lib. C. fol. 77. c. And he had Castrum,
Villam, and Honorem de Hartford given unto him by his Father, 20 die Maii, 34
Edw. 3. 1360.

He was Created Duke of Lancaster in Right of his first Wife, Blanch Daughter
and Coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, 13 die Novembris, 36 Edw. 3. 1361.
Couchir-Book in le Dutchy-Office, Tom. 1. fol. 142. number. 1. And after the death
of Maud the other Daughter and Coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, who died
without Issue Anno 1381. the Earldom of Leycester, and all Maud's Part of the
Lands which belonged to Henry Duke of Lancaster, reverted unto John of Gaunt.

Blanch his first Wife died Anno Domini 1369. 43 Edw. 3. and was buried at St.
Paul's Church in London: Walsingham. By whom he had Issue, Henry of Bolingbrok,
so called because he was born at Bolingbroke Castle, made Earl of Derby in his
Father's Lifetime, scilicet, Anno 1385. 9 Rich. 2. and Duke of Hereford also
1397. 21 Rich. 2. And in the Year following, 1398. this Henry Duke of Hereford
accused Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk for speaking certain Words in dishonor
of the King's Person; which the Duke of Norfolk denied: Whereupon they had a
Combat granted by the King, to have been fought at Coventry on the seventeenth
day of September, both of them entering the Lists courageously: But the King
took up the Matter, causing it to be Proclaimed, That the Duke of Hereford had
honorably performed his Part; and presently after Banished the Duke of
Hereford for ten Years, and the Duke of Norfolk for ever: So Stow and
Walsingham. But this Duke of Hereford returning into England, Deposed Richard
the Second, causing the King to read his own Resignation of the Crown to this
Henry publicly in the Tower, before the Nobles of England: Walsingham's Hist.
page 359. Cursed Traitors! And so by force of Arms made himself King, by the
Name of Henry the Fourth.

So was the Duchy of Lancaster, and the Barony of Halton, united to the Crown
of England.

John of Gaunt had also Issue by Blanch two Daughters: Elizabeth married John
Holland Duke of Exeter, and after to Sir John Cornwall, Knight of the Garter,
and Baron of Fanhope: Philippa, the other Daughter, married John King of
Portugal.

After the death of Blanch, he married Constantia Daughter and Coheir to Petro
late King of Spain; and Edmund Earl of Cambridge, his Brother, married Isabella
the other Daughter, Anno Domini 1372. 46 Edw. 3. Stow and Walsingham: Lib. C.
fol. 78. f. And from this time he writ himself King of Castile and Leons. By
this Constance he had Issue Katharine, married to Henry Son of John King of
Spain, 1389.

Upon the Marriage of Katharine, a Peace was concluded between John of Gaunt
and the King of Spain: John of Gaunt was to have ten thousand Pounds yearly for
his own Life, and the Life of Constance his Wife: Walsingham: Who before, in
the Year 1367. had routed the Spaniards in a great Battle between him and Henry
the Bastard, who had ejected Peter King of Spain.

Constance died Anno Domini 1394. Walsingham.

John of Gaunt, relinquishing his Title of King of Castile and Leons, was
Created Duke of Aquitain by Consent of Parliament, 2 die Martii, 13 Rich. 2.
1389. And then his Title, Anno 1394. 18 Rich. 2. did run thus. --

Johannes Filius Regis Angliae, Dux Aquitaniae and Lancastriae,
Comes-Leycestriae, Lincolniae and Derbiae, Seneschallus Angliae. Couchir-Book
in the Dutchy-Office, Tom. 2. Comitatus Southampton, number. 36.

For he had Honorem de Tickhil, 46 Ed. 3. while he was styled King of Castile
and Leons, and Duke of Lancaster; and Castrum and Leucatam de Pevenese (inter
alia), in exchange for the Earldom of Richmond, 46 Edw. 3. And by his Brother
the Black Prince, Earl of Chester, he had 100 Marks yearly given him out of the
Exchequer at Chester, during his Life, by the Name of John by the Grace of God
King of Castile and Leons, and Duke of Lancaster: 47 Edw. 3. 1373. Lib. C. fol.
78. e.

After the death of Constance his second Wife the Duke went into Aquitain,
scilicet, Anno 1396. 19 Rich. 2. to have obtained the Good Will of the
Inhabitants, having the Title of Duke of Aquitain conferred upon him before by
his Father; but was suddenly called back into England by the King: And as soon
as he returned into England, he married Katharine Swynford his old Concubine,
to the wonder of all Men; which Katharine formerly waited on Blanch his first
Wife: Stow and Walsingham.

This Katharine was the Daughter of Pain Roet, alias Guyen, King at Arms, and
Widow of Sir Otes Swynford; by whom John of Gaunt had Issue before he married
her; Sir John Beaufort, the eldest, was Earl of Somerset, and Marquis Dorset,
which Marquis-ship was taken away by Parliament, 1 Hen. 4. Henry de Beaufort
was after Bishop of Winchester, Cardinal of St. Eusby sive Euscbii, and
Chancellor of England; Thomas Created Earl of Dorset 21 Rich. 2. Joan de
Beaufort was second Wife of Raufe Nevill, the first Earl of Westmorland; after
she married Robert Ferrers Lord of Owseley. They were all sir-named de
Beaufort, because they were born at Beaufort in France. All which were
Legitimated by Parliament, 1397. 20 Rich. 2. to all Purposes, Honors, State,
and Dignities, excepta Dignitate Regale, as you may see in the Record
transcribed by the Lord Cook in his Jurisdiction of Courts, page 37. Lib. C.
fol. 82. P.

Walsingham, put out by Mr. Cambden, calls Thomas Beaufort, Comitem de
Somerset, all along, page 354. and 550. for Dorset; unless the Title of
Somerset and Dorset were promiscuous. See Vincent on Brook, page 169.

Katharine Synford died in May, 4 Hen. 4. 1403. Stow.

This John procured the County of Lancaster to be made a County Palatine; to
whom his Father King Edward the Third by his Charter granted Jura Regalia: And
when he has reckoned up the Good Service which the said John of Gaunt his Son
had done for his Country at home and abroad, he adds, -- Concessimus pro
nobis and Haeredibus nostris praefato Filio nostro, quod ipse ad totam vitam
suam habeat infra Comitatum Lancastriae Cancellariam suam, ac Brevia sua sub
Sigillo suo pro Officio Cancellarii deputando consignanda, Justiciarios suos
tam ad Placita Coronae quam ad quaecunque alia Placita Communem legem tangentia
tenenda, and Cognitiones eorundem, and quascunque Executiones per Brevia sua,
and Ministros suos ibidem, faciendas; Et quascunque alias libertates, and Jura
Regalia ad Comitatum Palatinum pertinentia, adeo libere and integre, sicut
Comes Cestriae infra eundem Comitatum Cestriae dignoscitur obtinere, -- etc. 28
die Februarii, Anno Edw. 3. Angliae 51, and Franciae 38. Couchir-Book of the
Dutchy-Office, Tom: 1. fol. 430. number. 16. Confirmed to him and his Heirs by
Consent of Parliament, 16 die Februarii, 13 Rich. 2. Ibidem, Tom. 1. fol. 52.

Many are the Acts of this John of Gaunt, Recorded in our Annals and Histories:
I will reckon up some of the most memorable.

Anno Domini 1373. 47 Edw. 3. John Duke of Lancaster went with a Puissant Army
into France: He passed by Paris to Burgundy, and so through all France, no Man
daring to oppose him; but at last leaving France, he came into the Desert
Mountains of Avernia, where there was neither Meat for Horse nor Man, and so
lost most part of his Army through Famine and Pestilence; whence he came to
Bordeaux scarce with forty Horse, whereas he entered France with thirty thousand
Horse attending him. Walsingham.

Anno 1377. he was threatened to be killed by the Londoners, for some high Word
spoken against their Bishop of London; they had burned his House, called The
Savoy, but that the Bishop interceded: Whereupon the Duke fled to Kensington,
and hating the Londoners, caused the Mayor and other Officers to be put out,
and new ones chosen. Shortly after, Richard the Second, before his Magnificent
Coronation at Westminster, reconciled the Citizens and the Duke of Lancaster.

Anno 1376. the King sent again for John of Gaunt his Son to Govern the
Kingdom, who was Governor thereof as long as the King lived

For the Constableship of Cheshire, formerly inherent in the Barony of Halton,
and now Granted to John Duke of Lancaster by Richard the Second, take here the
Charter at large, as I have transcribed the same out of the Couchir-Book in the
Dutch-Office at Gray's Inn, Tom. 1. fol. 49. a. Comitatus Cestriae, number. 25.

RICARDUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Princeps
Cestriae, Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint Salutem. Sciatis, Quod
Concessimus pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris Principibus Cestriae, quantum in
nobis est, Charissimo Avunculo nostro Johanni Duci Lancastriae Officium
Constabulariae totius Principatus nostri Cestriae, and ipsum Johannem
Constabularium ejusdem integri Principatus nostri praefecimus: Habendum and
Tenendum idem Officium sibi and Haeredibus Masculis de Corpore suo exeuntibus;
and quod ipse and Haeredes Masculi de Corpore suo exeuntes habeant, occupent,
and exerceant praedictum Officium in locis quibuscunque, and ubicunque, infra
Principatum praedictum, tam in Dominicis and Bundis veteri Comitatui Cestriae,
in Parliamento nostro apud Westmonasterium tento die Lunae proxime post Festum
Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo primo, annexis; (quae
quidem Dominia, Bundae, and Comitatus, tunc facta fuerunt Principatus) quam in
veteri Comitatu praedicto: Habendum, Tenendum, and Occupandum Officium
praedictum infra integrum Principatum supradictum, adeo libere and integre, cum
omnibus Feodis, Servitiis, Jurisdictionibus, and aliis Proficuis quibuscunque,
infra and per totum integrum Principatum supradictum, prout and sicut
Constabularius Angliae Officium suum in residuo Regni nostri Angliae possidet
in praesenti. Eo non obstante, quod aliquod hujusmodi Officium infra Dominia
and Bundas praedicta, veteri Comitatui Cestriae praedicto jam annexa, ante haec
tempora non extitit usitatum nec consuetum: Ita quod alia Feoda, Servitia,
Jurisdictiones, and Proficua, de Ligeis nostris veteris Comitatus Cestriae
praedicti, per ipsum Ducem and Haeredes Masculos de Corpore suo exeuntes,
Constabularios Principatus praedicti, nullatenus de caetero exigantur, seu
quovismodo percipiantur in futurum, quam de jure in praedicto vetere Comitatu
ante haec tempora erat consuetum; nec infra Dominia and Bundas praedicta eidem
veteri Comitatui (ut praedictum est) jam anexa, quam de jure percipi d^beant,
and Officio Constabularii de recto pertineant. In cujus rei Testimonium, has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Sigillo Principatus nostri Cestriae
Signatas. Test meipso apud Castrum nostrum de Holt, octavo die Augusti, 22
Rich. 2. 1398.

But this Principality lasted not long; for that Statute was Repealed 1 Hen. 4.
cap. 3.

Anno Domini 1398. the third day of February, 22 Rich. 2. John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, at the Bishop of Ely's Lodgings in Holborn juxta London, and lies
Honorably Buried at St. Paul's Church in London, near to Blanch his first
Wife; So Stow: Anno Aetatis suae 60. See Wever's Funeral Monuments, page 365.
Lib. C. fol. 82. r.

Feodarium Dominii de Halton in Comitatu Cestriae, nec non in Comitatu
Lancastriae, de omnibus Hominibus qui tenent de Domino de Halton per Servitium
Militare and per Relevium cum acciderit.

This Feodary seems to have been taken out of the Records of Halton about Edw.
2.

Such as are put over the Head, seem to be the Tenants at that time when this
Feodary was Renewed, about Hen. 6.

Dominus Willielmus Lovell. l. s. d. Longdendale. Dominus Robertus de
Longdendale tenet Longdendale, pro uno Feodo Militis, and per Relevium cum
acciderit -- 05 00 00 Willielmus Trussell Miles. Henbury and Pexhull. Oliverus
de Bordeaux tenet Villam de Henbury and Pexhull de Haereditate Matildis Uxoris
suae, pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium cum acciderit --
01 05 00 Tho. Wever. Over-Alderley. Dominus Robertus de Monte alto tenet Villam
de Alderley pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 01 05 00
Tho. Weever. Clutton. Idem Robertus tenet Villam de Clutton, pro sexta part
unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 00 16 08 Robertus Leycester. Toft.
Rogerus de Toft tenet Villam de Toft pro vicesima part unius Feodi Militis,
and per Relevium -- 00 05 00 Tho. Daniell, Radulfus Hulse, and Tho. Croxton.
Bexton, one half. Johannes de Bexton tenet medietatem Villae de Bexton pro
vicesima part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 00 05 00 Johannes
Leycester. Over-Tabley, one half. Hugo Filius Adae de Tabley tenet medietatem
Villae de Tabley pro vicesima part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 00
05 00 Knotsford-Booths. Johannes de Legh tenet Villam de Knotsford-Booths, pro
sexta part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 00 16 08 Johannes Dumvyll.
Limme, one half. Gilbertus de Limme tenet medietatem Villae de Limme pro
medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 02 10 00 Norton, and
Middleton in Aston juxta Sutton. Prior de Norton tenet Norton pro octava part
unius Feodi Militis, and tenet Middleton pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis,
and per Relevium. -- 01 17 06 Johannes Savage Miles. Great Barrow. Dominus Hugo
Spenser tenet Villam de Magna Barrow una cum dimidio Bovatae Terrae in Parva
Barrow, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 02 10 00
Millington, one half. Robertus de Mulinton tenet medietatem Villae de Mulinton
pro octava part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 00 12 06 Johannes
Savage Miles. Clifton, now called Rock-Savage. Domina Matildes de Chedull tenet
Villam de Clifton pro medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 02 10
00 Willielmus Filius Radulfi de Raggiley.
Sutton. Galfridus de Warburton tenet Villam de Sutton pro quinta part unius
Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 01 00 00 Aston juxta Sutton, and Endeley
nunc locus cognitus in Norton. Ricardus de Aston tenet Villam de Aston and
Endley pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 01 05 00
Listark. Idem Ricardus tenet Villam de Listark pro quinta part unius Feodi
Militis, and per Relevium. -- 01 00 00 Willielmus Holford. Lostock-Gralam, and
half of Plumley. Thomas de Vernon tenet Villam de Lostock cum Parva Lostock,
and medietatem de Plumley, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium.
-- 02 10 00 Cotton. Henricus de Cotton tenet Villam de Cotton pro vicesima
part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 00 05 00 Ricardus de Moreton.
Moreton-Rode. Thomas le Vernon tenet Villam de Moreton-Rode pro octava part
unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. 00 12 06 Hulmes-Chappell. Henricus de
Hulme tenet Villam de Hulme pro vicesima part unius Feodi Militis, and per
Relevium. -- 00 05 00 Robertus le Grosvenour. Half of Nether-Pever. Willielmus
de Mobberley tenet medietatem Villae de Pever inferiori, pro vicesima part
unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 00 05 00 Nether-Whitley. Dominus
Robertus Touchet tenet Villam de Whitley-inferiori, pro tertia part unius
Feodi Militis [alii legunt, pro medietate], and per Relevium. -- 01 13 04
Dominus Rex. Halton. Dominus Comes Lincolniae tenet Villam de Halton pro
medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 02 10 00 Thomas Stanley
Miles, and Henricus Litherland. Kirkby, half. Ricardus Samson tenet medietatem
Villae de Kirkby in Waley pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis, and per
Relevium. -- 01 05 00 Johannes de Tildesley. Barnston, half. Hugo de Berneston
tenet medietatem Villae de Berneston pro quarta part unius Feodi Militis, and
per Relevium cum acciderit. -- 01 05 00 Thomas de Pool, and Ricardus
Cholmondeley. Capenhurst. Robertus Pool tenet Villam de Capenhurst; pro quarta
part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium -- 01 05 00 Thomas de Hulme, and
Willielmus de Brunborough. Traunmoll. Ranulphus de Traunmoll tenet Villam de
Traunmoll pro nona part unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. 00 11 00
Galfridus de Warburton. Budworth, Aston nigh Budworth, Over-Tabley third part,
Nether Tabley two Oxgangs of Land, Lythe nigh Chester, Comberbach one Oxgang.
Johannes Fitton tenet Villas de Budworth, and Aston juxta Budworth, tertiam
Partem de Tabley Superiori, and duas Bovatas Terrae in Tabley-Inferiori, and
Bovatam Terrae in quarta part de Comberbach, and unam Bovatam Terrae in manu
Prioris de Norton in Budworth, and totam Terram de Lithe ultra Dee juxta
Cestriam, pro uno Feodo Militis, and per Relevium. -- 05 00 00 Johannes Daniell
de Daresbery. Daresbery. Over-Walton. Alanus de Norreys tenet Villam de
Daresbery, and Villam de Walton-Superiori, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis.
-- 02 10 00 Weston. Kekwick. Nether-Walton, half. Over-Runcorn, third part
Newton juxta Cestr. Dominus Hugo de Dutton tenet Villam de Weston, and
medietatem de Walton-Inferiori, and tertiam partem Villae de
Runcorne-Superiori, and sex Bovatas Terrae in Newton juxta Cestriam, and Villam
de Kekwick, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis, [alii legunt, pro uno Feodo] and
per Relevium cum acciderit. -- 02 10 00 Dominus Rex. Over-Whitley. Dominus
Robertus de Holland tenet Villam de Whitley-Superiori, puo medietate unius
Feodi Militis, and per Relevium cum acciderit. -- 02 10 00 Dominus Rex.
Over-Runcorne. Nether-Runcorne. Moore. Congleton. Domina Comitissa tenet Villam
de Runcorne-Superiori, and Inferiori, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis, and
Moore pro sexta part unius Feodi Militis, and Villam de Congleton pro
medietate unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium. -- 05 16 08 Gafridus Warburton
Miles. Hatton. Stretton. Sale. Nether-Walton, half. Dominus Petrus de Warburton
tenet Villam de Hatton pro decima part unius Feodi Militis, and Villam de
Stretton pro decima part unius Feodi Militis, and Villam de Sale pro decima
part unius Feodi Militis, and medietatem de Walton-Inferiori pro decima part
unius Feodi Militis, and per Relevium cum acciderit. 02 00 00

Feodarium Dominii de Wydenesse in Comitatu Lancastriae, ad Castrum de Halton
pertinentis.

Thomas Stanley Miles, Controwler. l. s. d. Knowsley. Hyton. Roby. Torbock.
Dominus Robertus de Lathom tenet de Domino de Widneys, Maneria de Knowsley,
Hyton, Roby, and Torbock, pro uno Feodo Militis, and dat de Relevio cum
acciderit. 05 00 00 Johannes Daniell de Daresbery. Sutton. Eccleston. Raynhull.
Gilbertus le Norreys junior tenet Villas de Sutton, and Eccleston, and
Raynhull, pro uno Feodo Militis, and per Relevium. -- 05 00 00 Little-Crosby.
Ricardus Molineaux de Sefton tenet Villam de Parva Crosby pro tribus Carucis
Terrae unde december Carucae faciunt unum Feodum Militis, and per Relevium. -- 01
10 00 Ricardus Halsale. Halsale. Gilbertus de Halsale tenet Villam de Halsale
pro medietate unius Carucae Terrae, and dat de Relevio. -- 00 05 00 Petrus
Gerard. Kirkby, half. Dominus Ricardus de Burton tenet medietatem Villae de
Kirkby pro una Caruca Terrae, and per Relevium. -- 00 10 00 Thomas Bethum.
Kirkby, the other half. Radulfus de Bethum tenet alteram medietatem Villae de
Kirkby pro una Caruca Terrae, and per Relevium. -- 00 10 00 Ricardus Ratcliffe.
Asteley. Hugo de Tildesley tenet Villam de Asteley pro una Caruca, and pro
Relevio cum acciderit. -- 00 10 00 Appulton. Villa de Appulton tenetur de
Domino in Bondagio similiter cum Membris suis, and tres Carucae ibidem, unde X
faciunt unum Feodum Militis, and per Relevium cum acciderit. -- 01 10 00
Craunton. Abbas de Whalley tenet Villam de Craunton in pura and perpetua
Elemosyna pro tribus Carucis Terrae, and per Relevium. -- 01 10 00
Great-Wolneton. Little-Wolneton. Prior Hospitalis Sancti Johannis tenet Villam
de Magna Wolneton, and de Parva Wolneton, pro V Carucis Terra, and per
Relevium. -- 02 10 00

This Record following I transcribed out of an ancient Parchment Roll, in the
Custody of Peter Danyell of Over-Tabley Esquire, July 20. 1647.

In Dorso. Placita Comitatus Cestriae apud Cestriam, coram Gilberto Domino de
Talbot Justiciario Domini Regis, ad Comitatum tentum ibidem die Martis proxime
post Festum Translationis Sancti Thomae Martyris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
quinti post Conquestum sexto.

JUratores diversorum Hundredorum alias coram Gilberto Domino de Talbot
Justiciario Domini Regis Cestriae, scilicet ad Comitatum tentum apud Cestriam
die Martis proxime post Festum Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc
quinto, praesentaverunt quod Thomas de Nesse de Runcorne in Comitatu Cestriae
Knave That is, Servant.
, die Martis proxime post Festum Annunciationis Beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno
Regni Domini Regis nunc quinto, apud le Newstede per insultum and insidias
praecogitatas and praeordinatas in Thomam de Cester Canonicum de Norton,
Magistrum ipsius Thomae, vi and armis insultum fecit, and ipsum vulneravit in
diversis partibus Corporis cum quodam Cultello, vocato A Dagger: Et ipsum
ibidem quasi mortuum dimisit, supponens quod mortem habuisset de ictibus
praedictis: Et ad hunc diem, scilicet diem Martis proxime post Festum
Translationis Sancti Thomae Martyris, venit praedictus Thomas de Nesse in
propria Persona sua allocutione instanti qualiter se de Transgressione
praedicta superius ei imposita velit acquietare: Qui dicit, quod Dominus Rex,
ut Dux Lancastriae, est and fuit seisitus in Dominico suo ut de Feodo, de
Manerio and Dominio de Halton cum pertinentiis, tempore Transgressionis
praedictae confectae: Et dicit, quod idem Dominus Rex habet, and omnes
Progenitores sui, and omnes alii, quorum statum ipse habet in Manerio and
Dominio praedicto, habuerunt and habere consueverunt (a tempore cujus contrarii
memoria non existit) infra Manerium and Dominium praedictum libertates
subscriptas; videlicet, visum Franci Plegii and quicquid ad illum visum
pertinet, de omnibus Tenentibus and Residentibus infra Manerium and Dominium
praedictum: Tenendum ter per Annum, videlicet, semel inter Festa Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli and Sancti Martini in Hyeme, and iterum inter Festa Sancti
Hilarii and Annunciationis Beatae Mariae Virginis; and tertio inter Festa
Sanctae Trinitatis and Assumptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis: Et etiam idem
Dominus Rex habet, and omnes Progenitores sui, and omnes alii, quorum statum
ipse habet in Manerio and Dominio praedicto, habuerunt and habere consueverunt
(a tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit) aliam liberam Curiam Baronis
Annuatim de Quindena in Quindenam apud Halton, vel alibi infra Manerium and
Dominium praedictum ubicunque voluerint, Tenendam per rationabilem
praemonitionem inde faciendam: Et in eadem libera Curia Baronis habere
cognitiones Placitorum de Transgressionibus, Conventionibus, Debitis,
vetito-namio ad Sectam Partis: Et si praesentatio facta fuerit per Ballivos
ejusdem Regis, Progenitorum suorum, aut aliorum, quorum statum ipse habet in
Manerio and Dominio praedicto Manerii and Dominii praedicti liberae Curiae suae
praedictae, quod aliqui vel aliquis hominum Tenentium seu Residentium infra
Manerium and Dominium suum praedictum, fregerit vel fregerint Pacem, ceu
Affraiam fecerit vel fecerint, quod tunc praedicti Ballivi per processum in
eadem Curia libera usitatum, a tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit, per
attachiamentum and districtionem facerent eosdem Transgressores praedictos
venire ad respondendum in Curia praedicta de Transgressione praedicta: vel si
hujusmodi Transgressores, aut eorum aliquis, aliquo tempore praesentati in
Curia Baronis praedicta, Transgressionem praedictam gratis cognoscere voluerint
vel voluerit, aut si convicti fuerint aut aliquis convictus fuerit, idem
Dominus Rex and omnes Progenitores sui, and omnes alii, quorum Statum ipse
habet in Manerio and Dominio praedicto, habuerunt and habere consueverunt (a
tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit) potestatem faciendi Fines cum
ipsis pro Transgressionibus praedictis, and Fines and Amerciamenta praedicta
and punitionem praedictarum Transgressionum habere and levare per Ballivos suos
praedictos; Pro quibus Transgressionibus si praedicti Transgressores indictati
fuerint coram Justiciario Cestriae, vel coram Vicecomite Cestershiriae, vel
aliquibus aliis Ministris Domini Comitis Cestriae, pro praedictis Finibus,
Amerciamentis, seu punitione sic factis, fuerunt quieti a tempore cujus
contrarii memoria non existit: Et pro eo, quod idem Thomas de Nesse fuit Tenens
praedicti Domini Regis infra Manerium and Dominium praedictum tempore
praedictae Transgressionis factae, and quod praedicta Transgressio facta fuit
apud le Newstede, quae est infra Manerium and Dominium praedictum, fuit in
electione ejusdem Domini Regis and Ministrorum suorum Manerii and Dominii
praedicti, ad puniendum Transgressionem praedictam virtute visus Franci Plegii
sui, vel virtute alterius liberae Curiae suae praedictae, etc. Et Dicit, Quod
ad liberam Curiam Baronis ejusdem Regis, tentam apud Halton, coram Willielmo de
Stanley juniors, Milite, Seneschallo ibidem, die Sabbati in septimana Paschae,
Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc quinto, praesentatus fuit per Ricardum del Wood
Ballivum Domini Regis Manerii and Dominii praedicti de Halton, quod praedictus
Thomas de Nesse tunc tenens and residens infra Manerium and Dominium
praedictum, die Martis proxime post Festum Annunciationis Beatae Mariae
Virginis, Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc Secundo, fregit Pacem and insultum fecit
super Thomam de Chester Canonicum de Norton, and ipsum verberavit, vulneravit,
and male tractavit vi and armis and contra Pacem Domini Regis, etc. Et pro eo,
quod idem Thomas de Nesse praedicto die Sabbati praesens in eadem Curia libera
de Halton extiterit, dictum fuit eidem Thomae per praedictum Willielmum de
Stanley Seneschallum ibidem, qualiter ipse de Transgressione praedicta se
voluerit acquietare, qui dixit quod ipse Thomas de Nesse Transgressionem
praedictam non potuit dedicere, sed posuit se in gratiam Domini, and fecit
Finem pro Transgressione praedicta pro quadraginta Denariis coram praefato
Seneschallo, secundum consuetudinem liberae Curiae Baronis praedictae; quae est
eadem Transgressio in praedicto Indictamento specificata, etc. unde non
intendit, quod Dominus Rex ut Comes Cestriae alias eundem Thomam Nesse pro
Transgressione praedicta punire seu inquietare velit, -- etc.

Et Matthaeus del Mere, qui sequitur pro Domino Rege, in propria Persona sua
venit, and non potest dedicere materiam per praedictum Thomam de Nesse superius
allegatam; nec quin Dominus Rex, and omnes Progenitores sui, and omnes alii,
quorum Statum idem Dominus Rex habet in Manerio and Dominio de Halton
praedicto, habuerunt and habere consueverunt omnes libertates and consuetudines
praedictas, a tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit, etc. Ideo
consideratum est per Judicatores Comitatus praedicti, quod praedictas Thomas de
Nesse de Indictamento praedicto sit quietus, -- etc.

Hatton nigh Daresbury.
IN the Reign of Henry the Third, Geffrey Son of Adam de Dutton (Ancestor to
Warburton of Arley) gives this Town, being of the Fee of the Barony of Halton,
unto William Son of Hothy of Hatton, in these Words: --

SCiant praesentes and futuri, -- Quod ego Galfridus de Dutton, Filius Adae de
Dutton, dedi -- Willielmo Filio Huthi de Hatton, totam Villam de Hatton, --
etc. Reddendo inde annuatim unum Nisum, vel sex Denarios, ad Festum Sancti
Jacobi Apostoli, pro omnibus Servitiis -- Salvo tamen forinseco Servitio Domini
Regis, and Secta Curiae de Halton, -- etc. Testibus Domino Hamone de Mascy,
Domino Hugone de Dutton, Thoma de Orreby, Gilberto de Limme, -- etc.

The Original of this Deed remained in possession of William Merbury of Merbury
nigh Great Budworth, Esquire, Anno Domini 1572. And an ancient Copy thereof in
Parchment remains now, 1666. among the Evidences of Robert Pickering of
Thelwall, Counselor at Law.

In the Feodary of Halton under Edw. 2. -- Dominus Petrus de Warburton tenet
Villam de Hatton pro decima part unius Feodi Militis.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod ego Adam de Hatton dedi -- Alano Filio
Ricardi de Hellesby in libero Maritagio cum Beatrice Filia mea, quandam Terram
quae vocatur Quisty cum omnibus pertinentiis -- ac quintam partem Dominii
Villae de Hatton, cum quinta part totius Bosci and Wasti ejusdem villae --
Reddendo inde annuatim -- mihi and Haeredibus meis, de se and Haeredibus suis
de dicta Beatrice Genitis in Domo Capitali de Hatton manentibus, unam Sagittam
ad Nativitatem Sancti Johannis Baptistae -- Testibus Hugone de Dutton, Petro de
Thorneton, -- etc. The Orignal penes Grimsdich of Grimsdich in Nether-Whitley,
1572. but taken by me out of Bostock's Book of Collections, fol. 62. n.
belonging to Sir Simon Dewes Baronet, 1649.

This Town gave Name to the Family of the Hattons residing here: The Hattons of
Quisty-Birches continuing until Peter Hatton Gentleman, with his two Sons
Richard and Thomas, sold unto Robert Pickering Counselor at Law, for the Sum
of 1230 l. the Capital Message of Quisty-Birches, and five Messuages in
Hatton: Dated 1 die Maii, 13 Car. 2. 1661. Mr. Pickering bought also six
Messuages more in Hatton from Mr. Moors, 1653. and which Mr. Moors bought
formerly part from Merbury of Merbury nigh Comberbach, and part from Starkey of
Stretton. One other Message in Hatton Mr. Pickering bought from Merbury of
Walton.

I find the Town of Hatton nigh Daresbury scattered into several Parcels, among
the Daughters and Heirs of Adam Hatton Son of William de Hatton: For Anno
Gratiae 1290. 18 Edw. 1. Simon de Aston and Agnes Uxor ejus, John Merbury and
Cicely his Wife, Randle Newton and Isabel his Wife, do Covenant for them and
their Heirs, to pay unto Thomas de Walton and his Heirs two Shillings yearly;
for which Thomas and his Heirs are to do Suit of Court to Halton, to wit, that
which Adam de Hatton formerly did for the Town of Hatton: Lib. C. fol. 4. a.

At this day, 1666. Robert Pickering of Thelwall aforesaid, Esquire, is Lord of
the greatest Part of Hatton. The Remainder is now enjoyed by these Persons
following, who have Freehold Lands here.

1. Thomas Penkith. 2. Thomas Dunbabbin. 3. Richard Wood. 4. The Heirs of one
Southern. 5. John Dunbabbin. 6. Thomas Hatton. 7. Robert Webster, a little
Parcel. 8. Grimsdich of Grimsdich. 9. Rafe Starkey of Newton Lawyer. 10.
Richard Rutter of Moore two Tenements bought of Merbury of Walton. 11.
Coppocke. 12. Another Hatton. 13. Peter Lightfoot.
Hull, vide Appulton.

Kekwick.
THis small Village of Kekwick is of the Ancient Fee of the Barons of Halton,
but not mentioned in Doomsday-Book.

It belonged to the Duttons of Dutton very anciently, even from the Time of
Henry the First, whose Heirs ever since enjoyed the same, until by the Award of
Henry the Eighth it was allotted (among other Lands) to the Daughters and
Coheirs of Sir Thomas Dutton of Dutton, 26 Hen. 8. 1534. and came to the Part
of Margaret one of the Daughters of Sir Thomas Dutton aforesaid, who married
Thomas Aston of Aston nigh Sutton Esquire, and whose Heirs have ever since
enjoyed the same, Sir Willoughby Aston Baronet being now possessed thereof
entirely, 1666.

Nether-Knotsford.
WIlliam Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton held Cunetesford under Hugh Lupus Earl of
Chester, as we read in Doomsday-Book; and one Erchbrand then held it of William.

But whether that Knotsford, so held by this William, comprehended any more
than that which is now a distinct Township of it self, called Or,
Over-Knotsford.
Knotsford-Booths, and is at this day in Halton-Fee, is some Quaere.

Certain it is, William de Tabley, Lord of Over-Tabley, was also Lord of both
Knotsfords, Nether-Knotsford and Over-Knotsford, in the Reign of King Edward
the First; as may appear by this following Charter, wherein he Institutes
Burgesses in both Knotsfords; the Original whereof is in my Possession. Q. number.
11.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod ego Willielmus Dominus de Tabley (that is,
Over-Tabley) dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi omnibus
and singulis Burgensibus meis de Knotsford Burgagia libera, unumquodque infra
se continens duas Seliones and dimidium Terrae: Habendum and Tenendum de me and
Haeredibus meis vel Assignatis, sibi and Haeredibus suis, vel Assignatis eorum,
libere, quiet, been, and in pace, and jure Haereditario in perpetuum; cum
Housbold and Haybold Burgensibus de Knotsford in nemore de Knotsford, and in
Turbaria; Et cum Housbold and Haybold Burgensibus de Boys [id est,
Knotsford-Booths, sive Over-Knotsford] in nemore de Boys, and Turbariam and
Communem Pasturam utrique eorum de Boys and Knotsford omnibus animalibus suis,
infra metas de Knotsford and metas de Boys, quantum praefata Terra poterit
sustinere in Hyeme, and liberam Communam in Mora de Cressewalleclef (sicut
medietas aquae praecucurrit) ad metendum and ad falcandum, salva venditione
ejusdem Herbagii: Reddendo inde annuatim mihi and Haeredibus meis vel
Assignatis, de quolibet Burgagio XII Denarios, ad duos Anni terminos,
videlicet, sex Denarios ad Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and sex Denarios
ad Festum Sancti Martini in Hyeme: Et unusquisque eorum tertium meliorem Porcum
nomine Pannagii pro Porcis suis nutritis infra metas Willielmi, qui pingues
sunt de Pesona ejusdem Willielmi: Et quod dicti Burgenses molant blada sua ad
molendinum meum de Knotsford pro XX grano: Et si contigerit, quod molendinarius
aliquod damnum Sutoribus ad molendinum fecerit, per Vicinos suos secundum
quantitatem delicti in Curia emendabit: Et quicunque dictorum Burgensium panem
desiderat obtinere in Furno pistum infra quatuor portas Villae, pro quoquo
Bushel unum Obolum Furnario meo praestabit; and quod nullus eorum infra
quatuor portas Villae nullum Furnum elevabit: Et quod dicti Burgenses mei
faciant Sectam ad Curiam meam magnam bis in Anno, videlicet, ad proximam Curiam
post Pascha, and ad proximam Curiam post Festum Michaelis: Et quod Portimotus
teneatur in eodem Burgo de tribus Septimanis in tres Septimanas: Et quod omnia
Placita de Transgressionibus, Attachiamentis, Conventionibus fractis
placitantur in eadem Curia: Et quicunque dictorum Burgensium pro aliquo
forisfacto in misericordia ceciderit, non det nisi XII Denarios ante Judicium;
and post Judicium, rationabilem misericordiam secundum quantitatem delicti,
nisi id forisfactum ad Gladium pertineat: Et quod dicti Burgenses mei inter se
idoneum Ballivum eligant and habeant, qui in Officio suo mihi and Burgensibus
meis Sacramenta observanda fideliter praestabit: Et quod dicti Burgenses de
Knotsford and de Boys illam Terram vendere, quandocunqua and cuicunque, seu
invadiare possint, salvo viro Religioso and Domino Capitali ejusdem Feodi. Et
ego vero praefatus Willielmus, and Haeredes mei vel Assignati, praedictis
Burgensibus meis de Knotsford omnia Burgagia sua, and Assignatis eorum, pro
omnibus Servitiis Secularibus, Exactionibus, Consuetudinibus, and Demandis,
Salva Summonitione de Culward, contra omnes homines and foeminas
Warrantizabimus. In hujus rei Testimonium praesentem Chartam Sigilli mei
munimine roboravi. Hiis Testibus, Domino Ricardo de Massy, Willielmo de
Modburlegh, Willielmo de Manwaring, Rogero de Toft, Ada de Tabley, at multis
aliis.

This Deed aforesaid was made about the Year 1292. For this William de Tabley
obtained the King's Charter for a Saturday-Market Weekly here at
Nether-Knotsford, which yet continues; and also for a Fair to be kept here
Yearly in Vigilia, and in Die, and in Crastino Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, id
est, June 28, 29, and 30. Dated at Walsingham, 3 die Augusti, 20 Edw. 1. Which
Charter was also Confirmed to William his Son and Heir, and another Fair
Granted to be kept here Yearly in Vigilia, and in Die, and in Crastino
Apostolorum Simonis and Judae, id est, October 27, 28, and 29. Dated at
Hartford, 14 die Februarii, 6 Edw. 3. 1332. Lib. C. fol. 223. a. Ex Rotulo
Chartarum de Anno 6 Edw. 3. in Turre Londinensi.

How the Royalty of Nether-Knotsford was shared between Sir Richard Massy of
Tatton, and the aforesaid William de Tabley, in the Reign of Edward the First,
will more fully appear by these following Deeds, made about 22 Edw. 1. 1294.
the Originals whereof now remain in possession of the Earl of Bridgewater, 1667.

CUM Willielmus de Tabley tenuit totam Villam de Knotsford [He means
Nether-Knotsford] de Ricardo de Massy per Servitium Per tertiam partem Feodi
Militis, held of the Baron of Dunham-Massy; ut in Rentali de Dunham-Massy, de 3
Hen. 4 Lib. B. page 209.
Militare, ac Dominus noster Edwardus Rex Angliae concesserat per Chartam suam
eidem Willielmo Mercatum and Feriam certis diebus in eadem Villa habenda; Idem
Willielmus postmodo Feoffavit plures Burgenses in eadem Villa de Burgagiis and
certis Terris eisdem annexis; Tenendum de eodem and Haeredibus suis immediate:
Ricardus de Massy Dominus Capitalis, clamans and Asserens hoc Feoffamentum fore
ad damnum and exhaeredationem sui and suorum manifestam, secundum virtutem
Statuti Domini nostri Edwardi de Terris and Tenementis alienatis, Tenendis de
Capitalibus Dominis Feodi immediate: Ita convenit amicabiliter inter eosdem,
videlicet, quod praedictus Willielmus dedit and concessit dicto Ricardo and
Haeredibus suis vel assignatis, salvis Capitalibus Dominis suis, medietatem
omnium exituum and cujuslibet Commodi de praedicto Mercato, Curia, and Feria
ejusdem Villae provenientium: Concessit etiam, quod medietas Terrarum and
Tenementorum ejusdem Villae, quae tenentur, and in futuro debeant teneri, in
Burgagiis cum Terris eisdem annexis, Teneantur de praedicto Ricardo immediate
per Servitia and Consuetudines inde ab antiquo Debita and Consueta; Salvo tamen
eidem Willielmo, and Haeredibus suis vel Assignatis, redditu pro eisdem Terris
and Tenementis; videlicet, pro quolibet Burgagio and Terra eidem annexa,
duodecem Denariis per Annum, and Pannagio, cum Secta ad molendinum suum
secundum quod vicini ejusdem Villae faciunt: PRO qua quidem Concessione and
Donatione praedictus Ricardus de Massy concessit dicto Willielmo de Tabley, and
Haeredibus suis vel Assignatis, quod licite possent dare and vendere aliam
medietatem Terrarum and Tenementorum quae tenentur, vel quae in futuro debeant
teneri, in Burgagiis and Terris eisdem annexis in praedicta Villa, and tenendum
de eodem Willielmo and Haeredibus suis immediate; Salvis tamen eidem Ricardo,
and Haeredibus suis vel Assignatis, Servitiis and Consuetudinibus inde ab
antiquo Debitis and Consuetis: Concessit etiam praedictus Ricardus, quod
praedictus Willielmus and Haeredes sui vel Assignati, quieti sint in perpetuum
de Servitiis and Consuetudinibus, quae ab antiquo debentur de Terris and
Tenementis, quae tenentur, vel in futuro debeant teneri, in eadem Villa de
praedicto Ricardo in Burgagiis and Terris eisdem annexis secundum Concessionem
dicti Willielmi. In cujus rei Testimonium alter alterius scripto in medio
inciso Sigillum suum apposuit. Hiis Testibus, Willielmo de Modburleg, Ada de
Tabley, Thoma de Legh, Rogero de Toft, Willielmo del Mere, Johanne de Legh,
Willielmo de Meynwaring, Thoma Clerico, and aliis.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod ego Willielmus de Tabley, Dominus de
Knotsford, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Ricardo de
Massy Militi Domino meo, and Isabellae Uxori ejus, omnes Terras, Redditus,
Homagia, Consuetudines, and Servitia subscripta in Villa de Knotsford;
videlicet, de Burgagio quod Thomas Pratin tenet; and Burgagio quod Willielmus
Filius Amelie tenet; and Burgagio quod Alexander Mucheman tenet; and Burgagio
quod Elias Rotarius tenet; and Burgagio quod Radulfus Molendinarius tenet; and
Burgagio quod Thomas Filius Jordani tenet; and illis duobus Burgagiis quae
Ricardus Filius Adae Brodfot tenet; and de duobus Burgagiis quae Robertus
Pistor tenet; and de Burgagio quod Hugo le Harper tenet; and de uno Crofto quod
Alexander Mucheman tenet; and de duobus Burgagiis quae Magister Rogerus de
Tablegh tenet; and de duobus Burgagiis quae Nicolaa Filia Adami de Toft tenet;
and duobus Burgagiis quae Rogerus Mekehove tenet; and de una Domo cum
Curtilagio, quam Margeria del Broke tenet ad terminum; and de uno Burgagio quod
Ricardus le Harper quondam tenuit; and de Burgagio quod Robertus Pese tenuit ad
terminum de Adamo Hurne. Habendum and tenendum praedictis Ricardo and
Isabellae, and Haeredibus vel Assignatis ipsius Ricardi, libere, quiet, been,
and pacifice, cum omnibus Libertatibus, Commoditatibus, Eysiamentis, Eschaetis,
praedictis Terris, Redditibus, Homagiis, Consuetudinibus, Servitiis quoquo modo
spectantibus. Faciendo inde ipse Ricardus and Isabella, and Haeredes vel
Assignati ipsius Ricardi, pro me and Haeredibus vel Assignatis meis, unam
Sectam per afforciamentum Efforcement Gallice, Utmost endeavor, with all force
and power.
ad Curiam Domini Hamonis de Massy de Dunham per rationabilem Summonitionem,
and per facturam Hayae and Hiri By making of the Hedge and Common ^ence.
Communis, quae ego and Antecessores mei facere Consuevimus cum Feodo de Tatton
Domino de Dunham pro Villa de Knotsford, pro omni Servitio, Consuetudine,
exactione quacunque, and demanda: Et ego praedictus Willielmus and Haeredes mei
omnes Terras, Redditus, Homagia, Consuetudines, and Servitia cum suis
pertinentiis, sicut praedictum est, praedictis Ricardo and Isabellae, and
Haeredibus vel Assignatis ipsius Ricardi, contra omnes Homines and Faeminas
Warrantizabimus, Acquietabimus, and in omnibus defendemus per praedictum
Servitium in perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Scripto
Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis Testibus, Hugone de Venables, Radulfo de Vernon
Militibus, Willielmo de Modburlegh, Willielmo de Meynwaring, Thoma de Legh,
Johanne de Legh, Willielmo de Mara, Adamo de Tabley, Eytropo de Mulinton,
Roberto Parsona medietatis Ecclesiae de Limme, and aliis.

So that by these Deeds it should seem that William de Tabley held
Nether-Knotsford of Massy of Tatton immediately, but mediately from the Ancient
Barons of Dunham-Massy: And upon the Agreement before at large set down, Sir
Richard Massy of Tatton was to have one Moiety of the Manor of
Nether-Knotsford, and half of the Profits of the Market, Fair, and Court; and
William of Tabley the other half.

This William de Tabley writ himself Dominus de Knotsford, and sometimes
Dominus de Tabley, which is to be understood of Over-Tabley. He married Alice
Daughter of William de Mobburley the Elder: She was Widow 27 Edw. 1. 1299. and
then lived at her Principal Mansion House at Nether-Knotsford, F. number. 1, 2.
For William her late Husband had not long before granted away the third Part of
Over-Tabley (which was all the Lands in Over-Tabley wherewith he stood then
possessed) unto Sir John Gray, Son of Sir Reginald Gray, 22 Edw. 1. And Sir
John Gray granted all his Lands in Over-Tabley, which he had of the Grant of
William de Tabley, unto Roger de Leycester Lord of Nether-Tabley, together with
all the Lands, Rents, and Services which Alice the Widow of William de Tabley
then held in Dower, de praedictis Tenementis in praedicta Villa de Over-Tabley,
to revert to the said Roger Leycester after her death. This was about Anno
Domini 1298. F. number. 1.

This William de Tabley, who died about 1297. 26 Edw. 1. had Issue William de
Tabley, eldest Son; and John de Tabley, another Son: Lib. C. fol. 222. m. And
also two Daughters; Agnes married William de Torperley, by whom she had Issue
Margaret; and Alice, another Daughter of William de Tabley.

* These Notes following are the Notes of John Halsey of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire,
extracted out of the Evidences of the Earl of Bridgewater, 1667.

William de Tabley, Lord of Nether-Knotsford, Son and Heir of the aforesaid
William, had a Charter from Edward the Black Prince, dated 4 die Aprilis, 11
Edw. 3. 1337. to excuse him all his Life from being put on any Jury, and from
being Mayor, Sheriff, Coroner, or other Officer, against his will. The Original
now remains among the Evidences of the Earl of Bridgewater, 1667. His Wife was
named Aunora: She was Widow 14 Edw. 3. and had Issue William de Tabley, under
Age, and Ward to Hugh Massy of Tatton, 16 Edw. 3. and died 26 Edw. 3. at the
Age of 16 Years, leaving his four Sisters to be his Heirs, Maud, Emme, Marion,
and Agnes.

1. Maud married Richard de Cotton. She and her Children were all dead 45 Edw.
3. and her Part fell to the other Sisters.

2. Emme, the second Sister, married Walter Spicer of Chester. She was dead
before 26 Edw. 3. and Richard Spicer their Son was found Heir.

3. Marion, or Mary, (for some Deeds call her by the one Name, and some by the
other) married Roger Son of William de Minshull; who, with her Husband, Leased
a fourth Part of the Manor of Knotsford to Thomas Stathum for forty Years, 38
Edw. 3. Afterward she married Thomas Hyde of Warford, who, with the said
Thomas her second Husband, Demised to David Pinke her sixth Part of the Manor
of Nether-Knotsford, which came to her by the death of Agnes her Sister; Rent
per Annum 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. 46 Edw. 3.

4. Agnes, the fourth Sister and Coheir, married Robert Son of William de
Downs, living 27 Edw. 3. After she married Warin de Croxton, but left no Issue.

So that all William of Tabley's Moiety of Nether-Knotsford was now in Spicer
and Marion, who scattered the same into certain Parcels: For Richard Son of
Walter Spicer Granted to Sir John Massy of Tatton, 45 Edw. 3. all his sixth
Part of Nether-Knotsford, which descended to him by the Decease of Agnes Wife
of Warin de Croxton; which Sir John sold to one John Shard, and others, 50 Edw.
3. and had it Re-granted back to him the said Sir John, 3 Rich. 2. So that Sir
John Massy had now the sixth Part of William de Tabley's Moiety, the other
Moiety being his own by Descent.

Sir Hugh Hulse had two fourth Parts Granted to him by John Stathum Nephew to
Thomas Stathum his Uncle, 1 Hen. 4. and which the said Thomas Stathum bought
from Marion de Tabley and Richard Spicer. And Hugh de Knotsford also Releaseth
to Sir Hugh Hulse, 1 Hen. 4. his Right in a third Part of a fourth Part, which
the said Hugh had from David Pinke, who had it from Spicer.

Marion, or Mary de Tabley, the Widow of Thomas Hyde, 19 Rich. 2. grants to
Hugh de Toft Chaplain, Dominium de Knotsford; who re-grants the same to Mary
for Life, the Remainder to Thomas Haselford and Joan his Wife, Daughter of the
said Mary, and to the Heirs of their Bodies.

And in Anno 21 Rich. 2. this Mary Covenants with Cicely Daughter of the last
William de Mobberley, to settle all she had in possession in Nether-Knotsford
by Fine, first to her self, and the Heirs of her Body; The Remainder to Sir
Hugh Hulse and Margery his Wife, in Tail; -- The Remainder to Thomas Hulse,
their Son, in Tail; -- And so to Edmund, and so to Andrew, Brothers of the said
Thomas; -- And so to Elinour, and so to Elizabeth, Sisters of the said Thomas,
in Tail; -- The Remainder to the said Cicely and her Heirs: And to cause Thomas
Haselford to grant the Marriage of Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir to the said
Cicely. And after, on Tuesday post Clausum Paschae, 21 Rich. 2. the said Mary
Levied a Fine of eight Marks Rent in Knotsford, of the fourth Part of the
Manor of Knotsford, of the fourth Part of the Market, Fair, Toll, and Stallage
of Nether-Knotsford, to John Brunstath Parson of Mobberley, and to Thomas
Swetenham of Mobberley; who re-grant the same to Mary, as before, -- etc. and
to Sir Hugh Hulse, -- etc. as in the former Covenant: And afterward Mary died
in the same Year, 21 Rich. 2. her Daughter Joan, the Wife of Thomas Haselford,
being dead before her.

The said Cicely, one of the Daughters of the last William de Mobberley, and
Sister and Coheir of Sir Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley, and Widow to John
Dumbill of Mobberley, makes Sir John Massy of Tatton her Attorney to receive
all Toll, and other Profits in Knotsford, belonging to her jure Haereditatis
post decessum Mariae de Tabley tunc nuper defunctae: Which Cicely died 5 Hen.
4. and whose Daughter Margery married Sir Hugh Hulse. She had also a Daughter
called Ellen, who (as I conceive) died without Issue.

This Sir Hugh Hulse having now got in all Titles to the five Parts in six to
be divided of William de Tabley's Moiety, and having the Marriage and Custody
of Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Thomas Hasselford granted unto him, he
married the said Elizabeth to David Hulse, Son of John Hulse of Norbury in
Cheshire: To which David, Sir Hugh Hulse gave all his Lands in Knotsford, 3
Hen. 5. This Right continued in the Heirs of the said David Hulse, until Hugh
de Hulse sold the same unto Richard Brereton of Tatton Esquire, 32 Elizabethae,
1590. And so the whole Royalty of Nether-Knotsford was invested in the Lords of
Tatton. Which Richard settled all his Estate, having no Issue, on Sir Thomas
Egerton Lord Chancellor of England, from whom the Earls of Bridgewater.

Su far out of the Notes sent me by John Halsey Esquire.

* The Earl of Bridgewater then is now Lord of Nether-Knotsford, 1667. wherein
are above forty Charterers at this day.

I have seen the Copy of a Deed in a Book of Collections by John Booth of
Twamlow in Cheshire, noted Lib. H. page 137. f. taken out of an ancient
Parchment Roll penes Davenport of Henbury; wherein John Hall Mayor of Knotsford
is Subscribed as Witness, about the later end of Edward the First, in these
Words: --

SCiant -- Quod ego Robertus Filius Johannis Hurne dedi -- Yockin Hukin.
de Duiton duo Burgagia, quae habui ex dono Patris mei, in Villa de Knotsford.
-- Reddendo inde annuatim Domino Capitali Villae de Knotsford, qui pro tempore
fuerit, octodecem Denarios. -- Testibus Domino Rogero de Venables Rectore
Ecclesiae de Rosthorne, Rogero de Toft, Johanne de Bexton, Johanne de Aula tunc
Majore Villae de Knotsford, Thoma Snowball, Elia Rotario, Johanne Coco, -- etc.

I have also seen an Original Deed, noted D. number. 9. then in the possession of
George Wilson of Nether-Knotsford, June 2. 1650. wherein Adam Putill grants
unto John Cook, totam illam medietatem illius Burgagii quod habui juxta
Burgagium Johannis Gleyve, de quo quidem Burgagio ego dictus Adam feoffavi
Reginaldum Pistorem in alia medietate illius Burgagii, in Villa de Knotsford --
Reddendo Aliciae Generosae Dominae annuatim duodecem Denarios, -- etc. Et post
obitum ejusdem Aliciae, duodecem Denarios Domino Villae de Knotsford, -- etc.
Hiis Testibus, Johanne de Legh, Rogero de Toft, Johanne de Aula tunc Majore de
Knotsford, Elya Rotario, Thoma Lilicock, Thoma Snowball, Ricardo Kylting,
Rogero Filio Jordani, and aliis. Lib. C. fol. 221. b.

* Nether-Knotsford comprehends the blazon or coat of arms Cross-Town, and
has in it an ancient Parochial Chapel, a Daughter of the Mother Church of
Rosthorne, situated in the very Confines of Nether-Knotsford, toward the
Demain of Booths; and has these subjacent Villages belonging thereunto. --

The Mize. l. s. d. Nether-Knotsford. 00 13 04 Over-Knotsford cum
Norbury-Booths 00 06 08 Bexton 00 02 09 Toft 00 08 00 Owlarton 00 08 00 01 18
09

On the West side of the Steeple is Legh of Booths Coat Quartered with another,
as is expressed in the Margin; and a little above that, under the Window where
the Bells hang, is written on the Stone, ROBERT WEBSTER AND MAUD HIS WIFE:
WILLIAM HEFELD AND MARGERY HIS WIFE. These probably were Benefactors to the
Building of that Steeple with Stone, which was in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.

There is also a Chapel of Ease situated within the Lower Town of Knotsford,
with a School-house adjoining. Sir John Legh of Booths purchased from the King
certain Lands in Nether-Knotsford, Sudlow, and Over-Knotsford, 3 Edw. 6. which
in old time were given for the finding of a sufficient Schoolmaster at
Nether-Knotsford, and also for finding of a Priest to say Service in the said
Chapel; which Lands came to the King by the Statute of Dissolution of
Chantries and Abbeys.

Now the said Sir John Legh was bound in a Recognisance of 200 Marks to the
King, to pay out of those Lands 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. yearly, to the Maintenance of a
Schoolmaster, and to suffer the said Chapel to stand for Administration of
the Communion: Dated 3 Edw. 6. And which Moneys are yearly paid by his Heirs at
this day.

An ancient Copy of which Recognizance remains with me, 1667.

Over-Knotsford, alias Knotsford-Booths.
OVer-Knotsford is belonging to the ancient Fee of the Barons of Halton.

In the Feodary of Halton under Edward the Second, it is said -- Johannes de
Legh tenet Knotsford-Booths pro sexta part unius Feodi Militis.

This Town of Knotsford-Booths, with Norbury-Booths, William de Tabley Leased
to Sir John Orreby, for the Life of Sir John, 11 Edw. 1.

Sir John Orrely sells his Title herein to John Legh and Ellen his Wife; and
afterward William de Tabley releaseth to John Legh, and his Heirs, all his
Right in Knotsford-Booths and Norbury-Booths, die Martis proxime ante Festum
Sancti Bartholomaei Apostoli, 28 Edw. 1. 1300. Lib. C. fol. 219. b. c. d. e. g.

The Heirs of this John Legh have ever since enjoyed the same to this day,
1667. Peter Legh of Booths Esquire being now Lord thereof, and under Age.

There are now about twelve small Charterers in Knotsford-Booths.

*
This John Legh, who Purchased Knotsford-Booths cum Norbury-Booths from William
de Tabley, was younger Son of William Venables de Bradwell, by Agnes his second
Wife, Daughter and Heir of Richard Legh of High-Legh de West-Hall, Lord of the
Moiety of High-Legh, and Widow of Richard de Limme.

This John, being brought up with his Mother in High-Legh, was sir-named de
Legh from the Place of his Residence, as was the manner of those Ages; which
Surname his Posterity retained, and bear the Coat of Arms of Venables, with
the distinction of a Bend Gules, even to this day.

William Venables, Father of this John de Legh, was younger Brother to Sir Hugh
Venables of Kinderton; which William gave to John de Legh his Son Lands in
Rosthorn; which William, Son of William Venables of Bradwell, and Half-Brother
of this John, released unto him, 13 Edw. 2. 1319. Which Lands in Rosthorn, Legh
of Booths enjoys at this day, 1667.

This John de Legh, the first Legh of Booths, gave to Robert Legh his younger
Son a Tenement in High-Legh, which Sir John Legh (elder Brother of Robert)
confirmed to the said Robert, 1336. 10 Edw. 3. which Tenement continued in the
possession of the Leghs of Adlington, until Sir Vrian Legh of Adlington not
very long since sold the same to John Legh of Aldford, who sold it to Richard
Legh of Swineyard in High-Legh, his Brother, 45 Elizabethae, 1602. And from
this Robert, the Leghs of Adlington are Originally descended: Of which see more
in High-Legh.

Ellen, the Widow of this first John Legh, purchased a Weekly Market on the
Wednesday, and a Fair to be kept yearly at Knotsford-Booths on Tuesday and
Wednesday in Whitson-week, under the Seal of the Exchequer at Chester: Dated 18
die Maii, 9 Edw. 3. Which Fair is at this day kept accordingly; but the Market
vanished long ago. Lib. C. fol. 219. l.

* Here should follow the Descent of Legh of Booths: But because I was denied
the Perusal of the Evidences, by Robert Venables Esquire, younger Son of Peter
Venables of Kinderton Esquire, who has married the Widow of John Legh late of
Booths deceased, I must omit the same; and therefore let Posterity blame him
for it, and not me.

Lachford.
WIlliam Son of Samson released Domino suo Hugoni de Boydell, pro defectu
Servitii sui retro, Lachford cum omnibus pertinentiis: Pro hac donatione Hugo
dedit Valentiam quatuor Marcarum: Testibus Radulfo de Manwaring tunc
Justiciario Cestriae, etc. tempore Ricardi Primi: Lib. C. fol. 286. t. The
Original penes Thomas Merbury de Merbury Armigerum, 1666. This was at the same
time, and before the same Witnesses, when he Released Gropenhale also. Vide
Gropenhale.

NOverint Universi, -- Anno Domini 1305. 32 Edw. 1. Inter Dominum Johannem de
Boydell Militem ex part una, and Davidem Filium and Haeredem Patricii de
Barton ex altera; super Partitione Vastorum de Lachford -- Praedictus David
cognovit, quod tres parts omnimodi soli in eadem Villa sint jus and Haereditas
ipsius Johannis -- and quarta pars est Haereditas ipsius Davidis: Lib. C. fol.
285. c. The Original hereof also in possession of the said Mr. Merbury.

Sir John Daniell and Joan his Wife Purchased to them and their Heirs, from
Edward styled The Black Prince, then Earl of Chester, to keep two Fairs in
Lachford yearly; one upon the fifth and sixth days of May, and the other upon
the seventeenth and eighteenth days of October; and also to have two
Market-days Weekly, every Wednesday and Friday, nisi sint ad nocumenta
Vicinorum Mercatorum: Datum apud Cestriam, 3 die Martii, 41 Edw. 3. under the
Seal of the Exchequer. The Original penes Merbury de Merbury. Lib. C. fol. 283.
f.

Anno 26 Edw. 3. Partition was made of the Inheritance of William Boydell, in
Cheshire and Wales, between Sir John Danyell of Gropenhale and Joan his Wife on
the one Part, and Howel ap Owen Voil on the other Part. Lib. C. fol. 282. q.

William the Son of Howell called himself by the Name of Boydell, and had to
Wife Cicely Sister of William Belew, by whom he had Issue Thomas Boydell: She
was Widow 8 Hen. 4. for William Boydell her Husband died 16 Rich. 2. 1392. Lib.
C. fol. 286. v. and 281. g.

Thomas Boydell had Issue Thomas, who died without Issue; also Margaret,
married to Hugh Reddish; and Isabel, married to John Alburgham, afterward to
Nicolas de Langton: Which Margaret and Isabell divide the Inheritance of Thomas
Boydell their Father, 5 Hen. 5. 1416. Lib. C. fol. 282. l. And among other
Lands, these of Lachford were divided between them.

The Part belonging to Reddish came to William Merbury of Merbury Esquire in Right
of Maud his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Thomas Reddish of Caterich in
Gropenhale: They were married 2 and 3 Philip and Mary, 1556. whose Heir is now
possessed of one Moiety of Lachford, 1666.

The Part belonging to Alburgham descended to two Daughters and Heirs, 3 Hen.
7. Constance, Daughter of Gilbert Alburgham, married Henry Byrom of Byrom in
Lancashire; Isabell, the other Daughter, married James Holt of Griselhurst in
Lancashire.

Francis Holt, and Thomas his Son, sell all their Part of Lachford unto Thomas
Starkey of Stretton Esquire, 25 Elizabethae. Starkey sells it to Thomas Brook
of Norton Esquire, 43 Eliz. and Thomas Brooks of Norton sells it to Thomas
Ireland of Beusy nigh Warrington, 43 Elizabethae. He was afterward Sir Thomas
Ireland.

Thomas Ireland, Son of Sir Thomas, with other Brothers and Feoffees, sell
their Lands in Lachford unto Thomas Blackborn, 5 Car. 1. whose Son Thomas
Blackborn of Lachford now enjoys the same, 1666.

*
Byrom's Part in Lachford was sold to the Ancestors of these Freeholders in
Lachford following.

Freeholders in Lachford, Anno Domini 1666.
1. John Longshall. 2. Richard Hall. 3. Widow Middlehurst pays 1 d. Chief to
Blackborn. 4. Peter Barker, one Acre, formerly Part of Widow Middlehurts. 5.
Peter Hall. 6. Arnold Middlehurst. 7. William Morris of Gropenhale. 8. Legh of
Lyme, one Tenement. 9. Widow Pierson. 10. Widow Hatton, now Twambroke.
Byrom of Lancashire retains yet the Advowson of the Church of Gropenhale.

Legh juxta Barterton, vulgo Little-Legh.
THe Township of Little-Legh was held by William Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton,
in the Time of the Conqueror, as appears by Doomsday-Book.

Out of the Originals remaining among the Evidences at Dutton, 1649.
Simon Fitz-Osbern, being possessed of this Village about the Reign of King
John, Grants the same unto Hugh Dutton, Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton, and to
his Heirs; scilicet, totam Villam de Leia in Feu-firma: Reddendo annuatim duas
Marcas Argenti ad Festum Sancti Martini: Lib. C. fol. 154. f. Which Rent is
paid by the Heirs of Dutton at this day, 1666. as to the Manor of
Harden-Castle.

Roger Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, acquitteth Hugh Dutton of
Dutton de Judice de Legha in Hundredo meo de Halton; (id est) Of the Judger of
Legh in his Hundred of Halton, about Anno Domini 1200. Lib. C. fol. 154. g.

To be Judger of a Town, was to serve at the Lord's Court on the Jury for such
a Town; whereof Dutton was discharged for Little-Legh by this Deed.

The Hamlet of Clatterwig in Little-Legh was Purchased by Sir Thomas Dutton of
Dutton, from Hugh de Clatterwig, in the Reign of Henry the Third: Hiis
Testibus, Domino Galfrido de Dutton tunc Seneschallo, Domino Galfrido de
Budworth Filio Adae de Dutton, Domino Hugone Priore de Norton, Ricardo de
Astona, Rogero de Toft, -- etc. Lib. C. fol. 156. t.

This Township has ever since remained to the Heirs of Dutton, even to this
day, 1666. and is 25 l. 18 s. 00 d. of an old Rent.

Charterers in Little-Legh, 1666.
1. Sir Gilbert Ireland of Hut in Lancashire, one Cottage, in possession of
Thomas Clough. 2. William Touchet of Nether-Whitley Esquire, one Tenement in
Lease. 3. William Bentley of Northwich, Physician, two Crofts, but no House. 4.
Joseph Basnet of Legh, formerly part of Dr. Bentley's. 5. Mr. Huxley, one
Tenement, in possession of Joseph Basnet. 6. John Barker of Legh, lately bought
of Mr. Merbury of Merbury. 7. Richard Worrall of Legh. 8. John Eaton of
Woolley. 9. Mrs. Anne Moseley of Howes-end, one Cottage, in Possession of one
Lawrenson.
In this Township is an ancient Chapel of Ease, called Little-Legh Chapel,
within the Parish of Great-Budworth. It was lately Repaired by the Inhabitants
of Little-Legh, Anno Domini 1664. whereunto Five Pounds was given, toward the
Repair thereof, by the Parishioners of Great-Budworth, me praesente.

Legh, vulgo High-Legh,
GIlbert Venables, Baron of Kinderton, held this Town in the Reign of The
Conqueror, under Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester: Ulviet and Dot pro duobus Maneriis
tenuerunt; ibi una Hida Geldabilis; ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia, cum uno
Villano, and duobus Bordariis, habens dimidiam Carucam; ibi Silva unius Leuvae
Longitudine, and dimidiae Leuvae in Latitudine: As you may read more at large
in Doomsday-book.

So that it appears here was a Church at the Time of the Conquest; but at this
day no Prints thereof remain.

Here is now a Chapel of Ease in this Township, called High-Legh Chapel,
within the Parish of Rosthorn, which was built by Thomas Legh of High-Legh de
East-Hall Esquire, Anno Domini 1581. as I find the Year, his Name, and Coat of
Arms engraven in the Stone on the side of the same Chapel: In which very Year
his Grandson, George Legh, married Elizabeth second Daughter of Peter Leycester
of Nether-Tabley Esquire, and Coheir to the Lands of her Mother Elizabeth,
sole Daughter and Heir of Edward Colwich of Colwich in Staffordshire, near
Owsley-Bridge, as appears by my own Deeds; and in which Year also the said
Thomas Legh died: which Thomas built the New Hall of Stone in High-Legh, called
The East-Hall, in which House his Heirs do now Inhabit, the Old Hall there
being pulled down.

Here was also another ancient Chapel of Ease in this Township, belonging to
the Family of the Leghs of the West-Hall in High-Legh: The Fabric is yet
standing near to his House; but now converted to other Uses, by the Heirs of
that Family. This Chapel was built about the Reign of Henry the Fourth. See in
Limme.

In the Reign of Edward the First, I find one Hugh de Legh, Ancestor to the
Leghs of the East-Hall in High-Legh, possessed of the Moiety of High-Legh: The
Right Line of which Hugh ending about the Reign of Henry the Seventh, a long
Suit happened between the Daughters and Coheirs Raufe Legh de East-Hall the last
of that Lane, had three Daughters and Heirs; for Richard his Son died without
Issue.

Jane married Randle Spurstow of Spurstow; Margaret married Robert Shaw; and
Katharine married Thomas Legh, Son and Heir of Richard Legh de West Hall, but
had no Issue: After the married Richard Done of Flaxyards.


on the one Part, and Thomas Legh of Northwood on the other Part; which Thomas
then Claimed as next Heir-Male, by virtue of an Entail, and Recovered; of whom
is descended Henry Legh of the East-Hall Esquire, now living, 1666. and
branched out first from the ancient Leghs of the East-Hall under Edward the
Third: For John Legh of the East-Hall, Son and Heir of Hugh, Lord of the Moiety
of High-Legh, tempore Edw. 2. had Issue William Legh de East-Hall, Son and
Heir, (of whom the Leghs de East-Hall, who continued till the Issue-Male of
that Line failed under Henry the Seventh) and John Legh of Alpram, second Son,
from whom the Leghs of Northwood in High-Legh anciently descended, whose Heir
Thomas Legh of Northwood was adjudged next Heir-Male, and from whom the Leghs
of the East-Hall now in being, and Lords of the Moiety of High-Legh: And
Matthew Legh, third Son of John, of whom the Leghs of Swineyard in High-Legh,
yet in being, 1666. are descended.

The other Moity of High-Legh was possessed by Thomas de Legh, Ancestor to the
Leghs of the West-Hall in High-Legh, whom I have seen subscribed as a Witness
unto sundry old Deeds made in the Reign of Edward the First, by the Name of
Thoma Domino medietatis Villae de Lega. But one half of this Moiety was
Purchased by Sir Richard Massy of Tatton, toward the middle of Edward the
First's Reign, as may appear by this Partition. --

HAEc est Partitio Terrarum in Villa de Legh -- Inter Dominum Ricardum de Massy
Militem, and Thomam de Legh ex una part; and Hugonem quondam Dominum de
medietate Villae de Legh, and Johannem Filium and Haeredem ejusdem Hugonis, and
Matthaeum de Alpraham custodem ejusdem Johannis, ex altera part; videlicet,
Quod Terrae and Tenementa subscripta remaneant in perpetuum Domino Ricardo de
Massy and Thomae de Legh, and Haeredibus eorum seu Assignatis, in Campo Jordani
de Verdon sex Acrae -- And so of several other Parcels: Lib. C. fol. 267. 9,
10. This was in the Reign of Edward the First: The Original Penes Legh de
West-Hall, 1665.

Roger de Monte alto, Seneschallus Cestriae, Confirms to Sir Richard Massy all
the Lands and Tenements, cum Boscis and Wastis, which he had of the Grant of
Raufe Son of William de Hawarden, in the Township of Legh; Robert Grosvenour,
then Sheriff of Cheshire, being one of the Witnesses: which was about Anno
Domini 1286. The Original among the Evidences of the Earl of Bridgewater, 1667.
whose Heirs at this day enjoy the same: videlicet, The Earl of Bridgewater has
a fourth Part of High Legh, which belonged to the Massies of Tatton; and Mr.
Legh of the West-Hall in High-Legh has now one other fourth Part of High-Legh,
which belonged to his Ancestors of Ancient Time.

Charterers in High-Legh, 1666.
1. John Gleyve of High-Legh. This is a very ancient Freehold: For Matthew
Somervyle, Lord of Alpraham, releaseth Gilbert Gleyve from his Service to the
Court of Alpraham, 1270. 54 Hen. 3. And Thomas de Legh, Dominus medietatis
Villae de Legh, gave unto Gilbert, Son of Gilbert Gleyve of High-Legh, freedom
of Pannage in all the Woods of High-Legh, about the beginning of the Reign of
King Edward the First. And Agnes de Legh, the Widow of Richard de Limme, calls
Gilbert Gleyve her Uncle; which Agnes was Daughter and Heir of Richard de Legh
Lord of the Moiety of High-Legh, and Mother of Thomas de Legh aforesaid, as
shall by and by appear. Lib. C. fol. 269. number. 10, 11, 14. The Originals Penes
John Gleyve aforesaid, 1664. 2. Richard Legh of Swineyard in High-Legh
Gentleman. This Family branched out of the ancient Leghs of the East-Hall in
High-Legh, under Edward the Third; whose Ancestor, Matthew Legh, marrying
Margery Daughter and Heir of Richard de Sworton in High-Legh, had the half of
Sworton, 1369. 3. Peter Legh of Northwood in High-Legh. He is descended from
Gawen Legh, younger Son of Matthew Legh of Swineyard. This Gawen Purchased his
Land in Northwood from the Leghs of West-Hall, and married Margaret Daughter of
Thomas Grimsdich of Hallum in Newton juxta Daresbury; which Gawen and Margaret
were living 32 Hen. 8. 4. Mr. Millington of Millington. He had about thirty
Acres in High-Legh; which Land came to his Ancestor Aytrop de Millington, in
Marriage with Margery Daughter of Richard de Legh, in the Reign of Henry the
Third: Lib. C. fol. 273. number. 3. The Original remained among the Evidences of
Mr. Millington aforesaid, 1665.

But this Land is now sold to Mr. Geffrey Cartwright of Baggiley.

This was Parcel of the Moiety belonging to Legh of the West-Hall, from whose
Ancestor it came.

5. Thomas Dichfield of Swineyard. 6. Widow Wilkinson. 7. Pownall of Barnton
has Land in the Mosse-houses. 8. Widow Harper of Northwood, in the Lord
Bridgewater's Part. 9. John Bentley of Northwood, in the Earl of Bridgewater's
Part.
So much of the Charterers.

We are now to take notice, That Agnes de Legh, Daughter and Heir of Richard de
Legh Lord of the Moiety of High-Legh, had three Husbands. Her first Husband was
Richard de Limme, younger Son of Hugh de Limme Lord of the Moiety of Limme; by
whom she had Issue Thomas de Legh of the West-Hall in High-Legh, Surnamed de
Legh from the Place of his Birth and Residence, as was very usual in those
Ages; which Surname of Legh his Posterity ever since retained to this day.

Her second Husband was William Venables of Bradwell, younger Brother to Sir
Hugh Venables Baron of Kinderton; by whom she had Issue John de Legh, Surnamed
also from the Place of his Education and Residence; which Surname of Legh his
Posterity also ever since retained. This John de Legh purchased
Knotsford-Booths, cum Norbury-Booths, from William de Tabley, 28 Edw. 1. 1300.
And from this John de Legh are the Leghs of Booths nigh Knotsford descended.

The third Husband of Agnes was William de Hawarden, by whom she had Issue
Raufe de Hawarden; which Raufe had the Half of the Moiety of High-Legh given
him by his Half-Brother Thomas Legh of the West-Hall; and Raufe sold his Part
to Sir Richard Massy of Tatton, 1286.

All which will better appear by these Evidences following.

a. SCiant -- Ego Ricardus Filius Ricardi de Legh dedi -- Ricardo Filio Hugonis
de Limme, dimidiam Bovatam Terrae (illam, quam Gilbertus Filius Walteri Bek
tenuit) cum Agnete Filia mea in Libero Maritagio -- etc. Testibus Hugone de
Limme, Thoma Fratre suo, Ada de Lehe, Hugone Filio suo, Madiou de Sworton,
Rogero Parsona de Limme, -- etc. The Original now in possession of Legh de
West-Hall, 1666. Lib. C. fol. 268. 30. Sub Hen. 3.

b. SCiant -- Ego Agnes de Legh, quondam Uxor Ricardi de Limme, in mea propria
viduitate dedi -- Gilberto Glaive de eadem Avunculo meo, pro Homagio and
Servitio suo, totam medietatem de quodam Assarto quod vocatur Le Park, cum Mora
quae vocatur Le Park-Moor, -- etc. Reddendo inde annuatim unum Par
Cheirothecarum, vel unum Denarium, ad Nativitatem Sancti Johannis Baptistae,
pro Omnibus -- Testibus Domino Willielmo de Massy, Domino Johanne de Sonbach
tunc Rectore Ecclesiae de Rosthorne, -- etc. Lib. C. fol. 270. 14. The Original
in Possession of John Gleyve of High-Legh, 1666.

c. SCiant -- Ego Radulfus Filius Willielmi de Hawerthin dedi -- Thomae Fratri
meo, and Haeredi, totam Terram una cum Bosco in Territorio Villae de Lega -- in
Schirley-Hey; exceptis quatuordecem Acris Terrae, quas dedi Johanni Fratri meo
Filio Willielmi Venables, -- etc. Testibus Domino Willielmo de Venables, Domino
Hamone de Massy, Domino Ricardo de Massy Militibus, Roberto le Grosvenour tunc
Vicecomite Cestershiriae,-etc. about Anno Domini 1286. Lib. C. fol. 267. number.
17. The Original Penes Legh de High-Legh de West-Hall, 1666.

d. SCiant -- Quod ego Thomas de Legh dedi -- Johanni Filio Willielmi Venables,
Fratri meo, pro Homagio suo, sexdecem Acras and dimidium Terrae in Villa de
Legh juxta Swineyard -- in Escambio pro quatuordecem Acris Terrae, quas habuit
ex dono Radulfi Fratris sui apud Schirley. -- Testibus Hamone de Massy, Ricardo
de Massy Militibus, Hugone de Leye, Aitropo de Millington, -- etc. Lib. C. fol.
271. number. 4.

e. OMnibus Christi fidelibus -- Willielmus Filius Willielmi Venables de
Bradwell Salutem. Noveritis me remisisse Johanni de Legh de Terris and
Tenementis in Rosthorne -- quae praedictus Johannes habet ex dono Willielmi
Patris mei. Testibus Domino Petro de Warburton, Willielmo de Baggelegh
Militibus, Willielmo de Mobberley tunc Vicecomite Cestershiriae, Roberto de
Massy de Tatton, Hamone de Ashlegh, -- etc. Datum 13 Edw. 2. 1319. Lib. H. of
John Booth's Collections, page 122. g. Which Lands in Rosthorne, Legh of Booths
has at this day, 1666.

f. UNiversis Christi fidelibus -- Johannes Filius Johannis de Legh Miles
salutem in Domino. Sciatis me remisisse Roberto de Legh Fratri meo, and
Sibillae Uxori ejus, totum jus in Terris, quas praedictus Robertus habuit ex
dono and Feoffamento Johannis de Legh Patris mei, in Villa de Legh in Parochia
de Rosthorne -- Datum apud Mannerium de Boothes, die Martis proxime post Festum
Sancti Jacobi, Anno Domini 1336. (10 Edw. 3.) Lib. C. fol. 271. number. 6. Which
very Tenement in High-Legh continued in the Possession of the Leghs of
Adlington, until Sir Vrian Legh of Adlington, not very long since, sold the
same to John Legh of Aldford, who sold it to his Brother Richard Legh of
Swineyard in High-Legh, 45 Eliz. 1602. whose Heirs now enjoy the same. Lib. C.
fol. 270. number. 19, 20.

By all which it appears, first, That Richard de Limme married Agnes Daughter
and Heir of Richard de Legh of High-Legh de West-Hall. a. b.

That Thomas de Legh, John de Legh Son of William Venables, and Raufe Hawardyn,
were Brothers. c. d.

That this John de Legh was afterward Legh of Boothes. e. Which he purchased
from William de Tabley, 21 Edw. 1. 1300. as you may see above in Over-Knotsford.

That Robert Legh was younger Son of this first John Legh del Boothes; from
whom the Leghs of Adlington. f.

Now follows the Descent of the Leghs of the West-Hall in High-Legh.
blazon or coat of arms I. Gilbert de Limme lived in the Reign of King John:
Lib. C. fol. 141. and had Issue Hugh and Thomas: Lib. C. fol. 268. number. 30. and
263. a.

II. Hugh de Limme Lord of the Moiety of Limme, Son of Gilbert, lived 1258.
Emma Uxor ejus.

He had Issue Alan Lord of Limme; Richard de Limme, another Son; Simon, another
Son; and Beatrix, a Daughter. Lib. C. fol. 272. 9. and 269. 4. and 263. d.e.
and 264. 2, 3, 4.

III. Alan de Limme had Issue Gilbert, and Agnes Soror Gilberti, living 33 Edw.
3. Lib. C. fol. 263. k.

IV. Gilbert de Limme, Son and Heir of Alan, had a Wife called Anabilla, 1338.
and had Issue Peter, eldest Son, whose Son Peter married Margaret Daughter of
Sir Geffrey de Warburton, 1338. William, second Son of Gilbert; Richard, third
Son; Robert, fourth Son: And four Daughters, Christian, Cicely, Agnes, and
Edusa, all living 1338. Remanere Thomae de Legh, and Haeredibus. Lib. C. fol.
263. h.

I. Hamon Legh of the West-Hall in High-Legh; about Hen. 2.

II. William de Legh.

III. Richard de Legh, Son of William, had Issue Richard, and Madoc, cui Pater
dedit medietatem de Sworton in High-Legh; and Margery married Aytrop Son of
Aytrop of Millington, tempore Hen. 3. Lib. C. fol. 273. number. 3.

IV. Richard de Legh, Son of Richard, Son of William, Son of Hamon de Legh.

V. Agnes, Daughter and Heir of Richard, had three Husbands: The first was
Richard de Limme, younger Son of Hugh de Limme; and had Issue Thomas de Legh de
West-Hall.

After she married William Venables of Bradwell, and by him had Issue John de
Legh, from whom the Leghs of the Booths near Knotsford.

And lastly, she married William de Hawardyn, and by him had Issue Raufe de
Hawardyn.

I. Thomas de Legh Lord of the Moiety of High-Legh, blazon or coat of arms Or,
a Lion Rampant, Gules.
Son and Heir of Richard de Limme, by Agnes de Legh Daughter and Heir of
Richard de Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, was Surnamed de Legh from the Place
of his Residence, after the manner of those Ages. He had to Wife Cicely which
Thomas and Cicely were both living 1305. Lib. C. fol. 267. number. 11. and had
Issue Thomas Legh, Son and Heir; Margery, a Daughter, married William Son and
Heir of Robert Massy of Tatton: Lib. C. fol. 267. number. 12. Agnes married
William Daniell of Limme: Lib. C. fol. 233. a. Sed quaere if Agnes were not
Sister to Thomas Legh the Father. He had also two younger Sons; John Legh, on
whom he settled Lands in Limme, 1 Edw. 2. and William Legh: Lib. C. fol. 268.
number. 25.

This Thomas gave away one half of his Moiety of High-Legh, which came to Sir
Richard Massy of Tatton, Regnante Edwardo Primo; so that he had only one
fourth Part of High-Legh afterward, which his Heirs enjoy at this day, 1666.

This Thomas Legh died about 10 Edw. 2. Lib. C. fol. 268. number. 27.

II. Thomas Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Son and Heir of Thomas, married
Alice and had Issue Thomas Legh Son and Heir, living 11 Edw. 2.

Gilbert de Limme releaseth to this Thomas Legh all his Right in the Advowson
of the Moiety of the Church of Limme, 10 Edw. 2. 1316. Lib. C. fol. 266. number.
1. Since which time the Leghs of West-Hall have been Patrons of the half of
Limme-Church, to this day, 1666.

Alice was Widow Anno Domini 1333. Lib. C. fol. 268. number. 28. I find her a
Widow also 1330. Ibid. fol. 268. number. 38.

III. Thomas Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Son and Heir of Thomas, married
and had Issue Richard Legh, Son and Heir; Agnes, a Daughter, married Robert
Dumbill, from whom the Dumbills of Limme. Gilbert de Limme releaseth to this
Agnes and Robert Dumbill, and the Heirs of their Bodies, all his Lands in
Limme, cum Servitiis liberorum Tenentium; Remanere Thomae Filio Johannis
Dumbill praedicti, and Margaretae Filiae praedicti Thomae de Legh -- Dated at
Limme, on Thursday next after Michaelmas, 1342. Lib. C. fol. 263. I. So that
Margaret, another Daughter, married Thomas Dumbill.

Agnes, Daughter of Alan de Limme, releaseth to Robert Dumbill, and Agnes his
Wife, all her Right in all those Lands, Rents, and Services, which formerly
belonged to her Brother Gilbert de Limme, in the Township of Limme. Dated at
Limme, 33 Edw. 3. (1359.) Lib. C. fol. 263. k. The Originals in possession of
Dumbill of Limme, 1664.

IV. Richard Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Son and Heir of Thomas, married
Maud Daughter and Heir of Geffrey Massy of VVinsham, Anno Domini 1375. (49 Ed.
3.) Lib. C. fol. 266. number. 4, 5. Lib. B. page 35. h. and had Issue John Legh
Son and Heir; and Alice married Richard Starky of Stretton.

This Richard was living 4 Hen. 5.

V. John Legh of VVest-Hall in High-Legh, Son and Heir of Richard, married and
had Issue Richard Legh, Son and Heir; Roger Legh of Oldgrave in Cheshire;
Margery married John Leycester of Nether-Tabley the younger, 20 Hen. 6. 1442.
Son and Heir of John Leycester of Tabley, the elder, Esquire: Covenants of the
Marriage are now in possession of Legh of VVest-Hall, 1666. Alice, another
Daughter, married John Son and Heir of John Parr of Worseley in Lancashire Esquire
35 Hen. 6. Lib. C. fol. 280. h.

VI. Richard Legh de VVest-Hall in High-Legh Esquire, Son and Heir of John,
married Alice Daughter of John Leycester of Nether-Tabley, the Elder, Esquire,
Anno Domini 1442. 20 Hen. 6. and had Issue Thomas Legh, Son and Heir; John Legh
of Oughtrington in Limme, of whom the Leghs of Oughtrington; Maud married
Nicholas Legh of East-Hall in High-Legh, 1463. Hamnet Legh, third Son; Peter
Legh, fourth Son; Richard, fifth Son; Dowse married John Son and Heir of
William Mere of Mere juxta Over-Tabley, Esquire, living 1487. 3 Hen. 7. Lib.
C. fol. 209. g. Isabel married Peter Venables of Anterbus in Over-VVhitley
Lordship; Ellen married Richard Moldesworth of VVinsham, 19 Edw. 4. 1479. Lib.
C. fol. 213. y. The Original penes Sir Peter Brook of Mere, 1666.

This Richard Legh died about 1486. Lib. C. fol. 209. g.

VII. Thomas Legh of VVest-Hall in High-Legh Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard,
married Dowse Daughter of Sir William Booth of Dunham-Massy, 1 Edw. 4. 1461.
and had Issue Richard, Son and Heir, who died in the Lifetime of his Father,
having married Beatrix Daughter of Geffrey Boydell of Pulcroft, 3 Hen. 7. by
whom he had Issue Richard Legh, Son and Heir.

This Thomas had also George Legh of Manchester, second Son, whose Daughter and
Heir Elizabeth married Alexander Barlow of Barlow in Lancashire: Alice Legh,
another Daughter of Thomas, married Hamon Massy of Hale; afterward she married
George Newton: James Legh, third Son of Thomas: John Legh, fourth Son; Roger
Legh, Parson of Limme, fifth Son: And Jane married Matthew Legh of Swineyard in
High-Legh.

This Thomas Legh had a second Wife, called Joan, Daughter of John Holcroft of
Holcroft in Lancashire; by whom he had Issue John Legh, Thomas Legh, and Jane
Wife of Thomas Sanky of Little-Sanky in Lancashire.

VIII. Richard Legh of VVest-Hall in High-Legh Esquire, Son and Heir of
Richard, and Grandson of Thomas Legh, married Rose Daughter of Raufe Davenport
of Davenport Esquire, 20 Hen. 7. 1504. by whom he had Issue Thomas Legh, Son
and Heir, who married Katharine one of the Daughters and Heirs of Raufe Legh of
the East-Hall in High-Legh Esquire; but he died without Issue, in the Lifetime
of his Father: Also Parnell, and Anne, two Daughters by Rose.

After the death of Rose, Richard married Anne Hough, Sister of Richard Hough
of Leighton; by whom he had Issue Richard Legh, Heir to his Father; George,
another Son; John Legh, another Son, who married Mary Daughter of Alexander
Barlow of Barlow in Lancashire; Dorothy Legh, a Daughter, married David Massy
of Broxton in Cheshire.

IX. Richard Legh de VVest-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard,
married Clemence Daughter of John Holcroft of Holcroft in Lancashire, and had
Issue Richard Legh, Son and Heir; John Legh, second Son, died young; Peter
Legh, third Son, afterward became Heir; Francis Legh of London; George Legh,
another Son; John Legh of London, another Son, married Dorothy Daughter and
Heir of Thomas Eaton, and Widow of Robert Holcroft, and had Issue: Thomas Legh,
another Son; Elizabeth, a Daughter, married Thomas Torbock; Jane married John
Aston of Aston in Mondrum; Margaret married Thomas Haughton.

After the death of Clemence, he married Margery Widow of George Tirrell of
Thornton in Buckinghamshire, and had Issue by her, Thomas Legh, John Legh,
George Legh, William Legh, Agnes.

This Richard Legh de VVest-Hall died Anno Domini 1582.

X. Richard Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard,
married Anne Daughter of Raufe Belfield of Gledge, but was divorced from her;
Anno Domini 1586. leaving his Brother Peter to succeed in his Inheritance.

XI. Peter Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Brother and Heir to the
last Richard, married Elizabeth Daughter of John Baptista Castilian of
Benham-Valence in Berkshire, and had Issue Ricbard, who died young; Peter Legh,
who succeeded Heir; Thomas, another Son; Anne married Thomas Cooper of Ewborne
in Berkshire; Mary married one Davys of Salisbury; Elizabeth married Nathaniel
Lancaster Parson of Torperley in Cheshire; Jane, another Daughter; Frances
married William Edwards Alderman of Chester; Margaret married one Wats a
Schoolmaster at Walsingham; and Christian married Thomas Bate of Limme, a
Physician.

This Peter died 14 die Martii, 1613.

XII. Peter Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter,
married Mary Daughter of Robert Tipping of Manchester, and had Issue Peter
Legh, Son and Heir; Richard Legh, Thomas, Samuel, Edmund, William, James, and
Elizabeth, all living 1665.

This Peter died 1657. aged 62 Years.

XIII. Peter Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter,
Anno Domini 1665.

XIV. Richard Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Brother and Heir to the
last Peter, is now living, but unmarried, Anno Domini 1669. August, 1670.
leaving Thomas his Brother to succeed in his Inheritance.

XV. Thomas Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, Esquire, Brother and Heir to
Richard, married Mary Daughter of William Austine Esquire, now of Westminster
in London, but born in Northamptonshire, near Owndle; married Anno Domini 1660.
and has Issue Austine, Peter, William; all living 1670.

* Here should have followed the Descent of the other Legh de East-Hall in
High-Legh; but I could not have the Perusal of the Evidences of that Family:
For that Henry Legh Esquire, now Owner thereof, affirmed, that his Deeds were
most of them lost in the late War.

Limme.
IN this Township of Limme is a very ancient Parish Church, Dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, whose Wakes or Feast of Dedication is on the fifteenth day of
August, being the Feast of the Assumption of Mary; which Parish comprehends
only the Township of Limme: It is in our common Mize-book Mized at 01 l. 16 s.
00 d. A large Town, which contains in it these little Hamlets or Places,
known by the Names of Stathum, Reddish, Oughtrington, Brom, and Heateley.

Here has been a Church before the Norman Conquest: For it appears by
Doomsday-book, that in the Conqueror's Time Gilbert Venables Baron of Kinderton
held half of this Town, which Ulviet formerly held; ibi dimidia Ecclesia cum
dimidia Virgata Terrae, says the Record.

And Osberne Son of Tezzon held the other Half: He was Ancestor to the Boydells
of Dodleston; ibi dimidia Ecclesia cum Presbytero cum dimidia Virgata Terrae
quieta.

So that either Lord had one half of the Church; and so at this day are two
Parsons Presented to Limme, who supply the Ministry there alternis vicibus;
one, one Sunday; and the other, the next Sunday after, and so by course;
Warburton of Arley being now Patron of one Moiety of the said Church, and Legh
de West-Hall in High-Legh Patron of the other Moiety: And one Parson has one
half of the Tithes of Limme, and the other Parson has the other half of the
Tithes.

Gilbert de Limme released all his Right in the Advowson of the Moiety of
Limme-Church unto Thomas Legh de West-Hall in High-Legh, 10 Edw. 2. 1316. The
Original among the Evidences of Legh de West-Hall, 1666. Since which time that
Family have continued their Right of Presenting to that Moiety, which (I
conceive) was the Moiety belonging to Gilbert Venables in Doomsday-book.

The Steeple of this Church was Repaired, and built anew of Stone not many Ages
since: For, Anno Domini 1521. I find by a Writing now in possession of Dumbill
of Limme, That Sir Thomas Butler Knight, Sir Piers Legh, Sir John Warburton,
Sir William Molineaux, Sir George Holford, Thomas Legh Esquire, Robert Reddish
Esquire, James-Dumbill Esquire, Randle Clayton Esquire, William Wilm Gentleman,
John Legh Gentleman, Sir Roger Legh Parson of the same Church, Sir Richard
Comberbach, our Ladies Priest, and Overseer of the Work, Sir John Persevall
Parish Priest of the same Church, do desire a Charitable Contribution of all
Pious Persons toward a Steeple of Stone then in Building at Limme-Church,
whereof our Blessed Lady is the Founder, without which the Parish was not able
to finish the Work; where there were three Priests to pray for the Benefactors:
and Constituting Matthew Legh and Reginald Legh Collectors, to receive the
Contributions. Dated the twenty fourth of April, 1521. Lib. C. fol. 264. P.

Ex Chartulariis Episcopi Coventriae and Lichfieldiae, Concerning the
Presentations made by the Leghs de West-Hall in High-Legh, to the Moiety of
Limme-Church: Being the Notes taken by William Vernon in July, 1649.
10 Edw. 2. ANno 1316. 11 Calendas Februarii, Thomas Filius Thomae de Legh,
Patronus, praesentat Ricardum de Massy (post mortem Domini Petri de Limme,
quondam Rectoris medietatis Ecclesiea de Limme) ad medietatem Ecclesiae de
Limme. 23 Edw. 3. Anno 1349. 3 Nonas Septembris, Thomas de Legh Patronus
medietatis Ecclesiae de Limme, praesentat Adamum de Denfeld ( or Wenfeld)
Capellanum post mortem Jordani ultimi Rectoris. 35 Edw. 3. Anno 1361. Thomas
Legh Patronus medietatis Ecclesiae de Limme, praesentat Thomam Filium Johannis
de Legh Clericum ad medietatem Ecclesiae praedictae. 13 Rich. 2. Anno 1390. 2
die Aprilis, Ricardus de Legh Patronus, praesentat Thomam Filium Thomae de Legh
Presbyterum ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 9 Hen. 4. Anno 1408. penultimo
Augusti, concessit Episcopus Incolis, ceu Inhabitantibus Villulam de Leye infra
Parochiam de Rosthorn, quod possint facere Divina Celebrari in Capella de Leye.
4 Hen. 5. Anno 1416. 4 die Augusti, Nobilis Vir Ricardus de Legh Armiger,
Patronus, praesentat Rogerum Dumbill ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 35 Hen.
6. Anno 1457. 18 die Octobris, Johannes Legh de Legh Armiger, Patronus,
praesentat Ricardum Vayse Capellanum ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme per
Resignationem Hamonis Leycester ultimi Rectoris. 33 Hen. 6. Anno 1455. 21 die
Novembris, Licentia Hamundi Leycester in Legibus Bacalarii, Rectoris medietatis
Ecclesiae de Limme, de non Residendo. 12 Edw. 4. Anno 1472. ultimo Januarii,
Venerabilis vir Ricardus Legh Armiger, Patronus, per resignationem Ricardi
Vayse, praesentat Nicolaum Devyas ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 4 Hen. 7.
Anno 1489. 14 die Augusti, Thomas Legh de Legh Armiger, Patronus, praesentat,
post mortem Nicolai Devyas ultimi Rectoris, Hamonem Legh ad medietatem
Ecclesiae de Limme. 16 Hen. 7. Anno 1501. in July, Thomas Legh Armiger,
Patronus, praesentat Johannem Heton Capellanum, post mortem Hamonis Legh,
ultimi Rectoris, ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme.
Concerning the other Moiety of the Church, belonging to Warburton of Arley.
1 Edw. 3. ANno 1327. 11 Calendas Aprilis, Robertus de Warburton Miles,
Patronus medietatis Ecclesiae de Limme, praesentat Willielmum Warburton
Clericum, post mortem Roberti de Dentene, ad medietatem pradictam. 41 Edw. 3.
Anno 1367. 2 Nonas Octobris, Johannes Daniell Miles, and Johanna Uxor ejus,
praesentant Petrum de Shawe, post mortem Willielmi de Warburton ultimi
Rectoris. 14 Rich. 2. Anno 1391. 28 die Junii, Dominus Johannes Massy de Tatton
Miles, Patronus hac vice ratione Custodiae Petri Warburton minoris aetatis in
manu dicti Johannis, praesentat, post mortem Domini Petri de Shagh ultimi
Rectoris, Johannem Berkin Presbyterum, ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 10
Hen. 6. Anno 1432. 7 die Octobris, Galfridus Warburton Miles, Patronus,
praesentat Rogerum Dumbill utriusque Juris Bacalaurium, per resignationem
Johannis Berkin ultimi Rectoris, ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 36 Hen. 6.
Anno 1458. 7 die Maii, Hugo Calveley, Philippus Egerton Armigeri, and Johannes
de Hogh, hac vice ratione Feoffamenti Petri Warburton Armigeri, praesentant One
of these Names is mistaken by Vernon, either Richard Chounall, or Thomas
Chounall.
Richardum Chounall Capellanum, ad medietatem Ecclesiae de Limme. 1 Hen. 7.
Anno 1486. 24 die Februarii, Rogerus Chapman per mortem One of these Names is
mistaken by Vernon, either Richard Chounall, or Thomas Chounall.
Thomae Chounall, vacant medietate Ecclesiae praedictae.
In the Feodary of Halton under Edward the Second, it is said, -- Gilbertus de
Limme tenet medietatem Villae de Limme, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis.

The Issue of this Gilbert failing, Thomas Legh de West-Hall in Hig-Legh was
next Heir, as descended Lineally from Richard Limme Uncle of the said Gilbert.

And indeed at last Gilbert de Limme settles all his Lands in Limme, cum
Servitiis liberorum Tenentium, on Robert Dumbill, Son of John Dumbill, and
Agnes Daughter of Thomas Legh de West-Hall, and on the Heirs of the Bodies of
the said Robert and Agnes, Anno Domini 1342. 16 Edw. 3. from whence are
descended the Dumbills of Limme.

This Robert Dumbill (if I mistake not) was younger Son of John Dumbill of
Oxton in Wirrall in Cheshire.

John Dumbill (Son of the said Robert and Agnes) was retained the King's
Servant, and had Five Pounds yearly Pension for his Life given him out of the
Exchequer at Chester. Dated 21 Rich. 2. 1397. Lib. C. fol. 264. m. and was
employed in the War against Owen Glendore, 3 Hen. 4. and was a Soldier under
Sir John Stanley Governor of Roxborough-Castle, 20 Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 263.
i. k. m. n. o. The Original in possession of Dumbill of Limme, 1664.

In which Family of the Dumbills of Limme, has the Moiety of the Town of
Limme, and the Seigniory thereof, ever since continued to this present.

The Advowson of the Moiety of Limme-Church, being formerly granted away to
Thomas Legh de West-Hall by the said Gilbert de Limme, 10 Edw. 2. continues
still in the same Family, as I have showed before.

Indeed I find the first Gilbert de Limme to have lived about King John's Time,
who was Lord of the Moiety of Limme; which Family of Limme were Surnamed from
the Place of their Residence here, and continued to the end of Edward the
Third, the last Gilbert de Limme and his Issue-Male then failing.

But whether the first Gilbert de Limme was originally a Venables, or of what
other Family, and how this Moiety came to the Baron of Halton, from the Baron
of Kinderton, I find no mention.

The Seigniory of the other Moiety has for long time belonged to the
Warburtons of Arley; howbeit, at this day he has not above six or seven
Tenements in possession there. How it came from the Boydells to Warburton, I
find not precisely: I conceive it came with Agnes Daughter and Heir of Roger
Fitz-Alfred in Marriage to Adam de Dutton Ancestor of Warburton, together with
the Moiety of Warburton, and other Lands, about the Reign of Richard the First.

In this Township are now, 1666. these Charterers.

1. John Gandy of Over-Limme-Booths. 2. John Dichfield of Stathum lately
Purchased Cherry-tree-hurst, formerly Daniell of Tabley's Land. 3. John Legh of
Oughtrington. 4. Gilbert Steel of Reddish. 5. Robert Gleyve of Heateley. 6.
John Blackburne of Limme-Booths. 7. Richard Legh of Lyme Esquire has seven
Tenements. 8. Randle Cross of Limme nigh Agden. 9. William Reddish of Stathum.
10. Richard Rowlinson of Stathum. 11. John Trevis of Chester, formerly
Daniell's of Tabley. 12. Peter Davys of Oughtrington. 13. James Hey of
Limme-Booths. 14. Nicolas Peacock of Brown-Edge in Limme. 15. John Perceivall
of Stathum. 16. Peter Martin of Heateley; formerly Daniell's. 17. Richard Deane
of Heateley; formerly Daniell's. 18. Robert Thomason; formerly Daniell's. 19.
John Legh of Higher-Lane. 20. Richard Dutton of Reddish. 21. Peter Page in
Stathum.
Marbury.
THis Hamlet of Marbury comprehends only the Mannor-House, with the
Demain-Lands thereunto belonging; and has its Name from our two old English
Words, [Mere] which signifies A great Lake or Pool, and [Birig] which signifies
A House, or Place covered, and sometimes A Town: So Verstegan. And here denotes
as much as A House or Dwelling by the Mere.

About the very beginning of Henry the Third's Reign, Warin Vernon Baron of
Shibbrok confirms this Hamlet to William de Merebirie, in these Words. --

GUarinus de Vernon Omnibus Amicis and hominibus suis, Clericis and Laicis,
Francis and Anglis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, Salutem. Notum sit vobis me
concessisse and hac mea praesenti Charta confirmasse Willielmo de Merebiria
totam Villam de Merebiria; Tenendam de me and Haeredibus meis, illi and
Haeredibus suis, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, in Bosco, in Plano, in Pratis,
in Pascuis, in Molendinis, in Vivariis, in Aquis, in Viis, in Semitis, and in
omnibus aliis locis, and in omnibus Libertatibus ad praedictam Villam de
Merebiria pertinentibus, Haereditarie sicut Ricardus Frater suus de Merebiria
concessit and ei per Chartam suam coram nobis consirmavit, and sicut Ranulphus
de Merebiria Pater suus eam melius and liberius tenuit and habuit unquam in
vita sua, libere and honorifice, and eodem Servitio, scilicet, pro sexta part
Servitii unius Militis. Ut autem haec nostra confirmatio futuris temporibus
rata and inconcussa permaneat, eam Sigilli mei impressione coram hiis Testibus
confirmavi, Ricardo de Vernon and Matthaeo de Filio suo, Gilberto de Bostock
and Willielmo Filio suo, Hugone de Tiwa, Hamone Briton, Matthaeo de Muneshull
and Ricardo Fratre suo, Radulfo Filio Rogeri Dispensatoris and Willielmo Fratre
suo, Willielmo Capellano de Shibbrok, and aliis multis.

A very fair Seal; In a Rondlet a Lion Rampant, written about thus, -- SIGILL.
WARINI DE VERNUN. The Original hereof remaining among the Evidences at Merbury,
1666.

From hence had this Family the Surname of Merbury, and seems to be originally
a Vernon. Nothing more usual than in those Elder Ages to be styled from the
Places of their Habitation, which After-ages retained as Sir-names.

This Family has continued in this Seat ever since, by the Name of the
Merburies; and Thomas Merbury of Merbury Esquire is now Owner thereof, 1666.

Out of this Family branched Randle Merbury in the Reign of Edward the First,
whose Son Simon married Idonea Daughter and Heir of Thomas de Walton, from whom
the Marburies of Walton in this Hundred were propagated. See more hereof in
Walton.

Marston.
THis Township of Marston is not in Doomsday-book, and seems to have its Name
from the two Meres whereto it adjoineth, to wit, Budworth-Mere, and
Pickmere-Mere; as it were Meres-Town, or The Town abutting on the Meres. It
has very anciently belonged to the Barons of Kinderton.

Andrew Prior of Norton, and the Convent there, granted unto Sir William
Venables Charissimo Amico nostro, to find him the Celebration of Divine Service
in his Chapel at Marston, during his Lifetime, when either he or his Wife
shall be there; and do also Lease to Robert his Son, Clerk, their Tithe of the
Mill, and of the Fishings there, about the beginning of Henry the Third: Lib.
H. number. 21.

It seems Hugh Son of Alfred of Marston had some Parcel of Land here tempore
Edw. 3. For Richard Venables releaseth to Hamon de Venables all his Right de
Pueris Hugonis de Marston. Ibidem, number. 7.

Peter Venables Esquire, now Baron of Kinderton, 1666. has an old Mannor-House
in Marston, with ancient Demain-Lands thereunto belonging; and has also all
the rest of Marston Township in possession of his Tenants there, except only,
-- 1. Richard Symcock's Tenement in Marston, now belonging to Sir Peter
Leycester of Nether-Tabley; which Tenement was sold by Sir Thomas Venables of
Kinderton, and Thomas his Son and Heir, to Peter Leycester of Tabley Esquire, 6
Elizabethae, 1564. and adjoyneth to Nether-Tabley: B. number. 2. 2. Bromfield's
Lands in Marston, which anciently belonged to Bromfield of Witton; but now
Richard Wilcocson has bought Part hereof; and the other Part, called
Sim-fields, Peter Kennardy of Aston juxta Pickmere has bought.


Marthall.
IN the Conqueror's Time, in Doomsday-book, I find no mention of Marthall.

But this Town anciently belonged to the Wynningtons of Wynnington nigh
Northwich, in whose Offices they are found to hold it of the Heirs of Manwaring
of Warmincham in Soccage, by the yearly Rent of one Penny.

Of which Family, Richard Wynnington of Wynnington Esquire married Katharine
the fifth Daughter and Coheir to Robert Grosvenour of Houlme in Allostock
Esquire, by whom he had the Manor of Pulford beyond Chester, by Partition,
Anno 1465. and a fifth part of Allostock, as Heir to her Sister Margery
Grosvenour, by Partition, Anno 1474. and had Issue three Sons, Richard
Wynnington, Peter, and George; and two Daughters, Jane, and Elizabeth; all
living 5 Hen. 7. Lib. C. fol. 125. F. and 161. O.

Richard Wynnington, Son and Heir of Richard and Katharine, married Joan Smith,
and had Issue two Daughters, Katharine, who died without Issue 23 Hen. 7. as
appears by her Office taken 6 Hen. 8. and Elizabeth married Sir Piers Warburton
of Arley, 2 Hen. 8. being then sole Daughter and Heir: For Richard Wynnington
died 19 Hen. 7. Joan his Wife died 24 Hen. 7. and Sir Piers Warburton died 4
Edw. 6. and Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Richard Wynnington of
Wynnington Esquire, died Anno sexto Mariae.

So that Warburton of Arley had by this Match all the Lands then belonging to
Wynnington of Wynnington, as well as the Part of Grosvenour's Lands
beforementioned, which descended also; whose Heir at this day, 1666. is
possessed of the Town of Marthall entirely, there being no Freeholder or
Charterer in this Township at all.

Mere.
THis Town undoubtedly took its Name from the Mere therein; and was held by
Gilbert Venables Baron of Kinderton in the Time of William the Conqueror, which
one Ulviet held before.

Not many Ages after, it became the Seat of the Family of the Meres, who took
their Surname from hence; among whom Robert de Mere senior lived about the
Reign of King John; whether originally a Venables, I cannot positively affirm.

Ex Bundello Escaetarum in Turri Londinensi, 8 Rich. 2. Willielmus de Mere
tenuit Villam de Mere, cum medietate Manerii de Bollinton, de Hugone de
Venables; which Hugh was Lord of Kinderton.

Certain it is, this Family of Mere of Mere continued in this Seat a long time
together, until in our days John Mere of Mere Esquire, and William his Son,
sold this Manor of Mere unto Peter Brooks, younger Son of Thomas Brooks of
Norton Esquire, Anno Domini 1652. Which Peter also bought the Estate of Thomas
Merbury of Walton, and was after Sir Peter Brooks, Knighted Anno Domini 1660.
and Sheriff of Cheshire, 1669. He has Beautified and Built anew the Hall of
Mere very handsomely; and had three Wives: The first was Alice Hulse, Daughter
and Heir of Richard Hulse of Killingworth in Warwickshire, by whom he had Issue
Thomas Brooks, eldest Son, who married Margaret Daughter and Heir of Henry
Brereton of Eccleston in Cheshire, Gentleman, 1663. Richard Brooks, second Son,
who married Margaret Daughter and Heir of Robert Charnock of Charnock in
Lancashire, 1666.

The second Wife of Sir Peter Brooks was Frances the Widow of William Merbury
of Merbury nigh Comberbach in Cheshire Esquire, and Daughter of Sir Nicholas
Trot of Quickshot in Hartfordshire; but had no Issue by her.

The third Wife of Sir Peter Brooks of Mere, was Mabill the Widow of Richard
Clayton of Crook in Lancashire Esquire, and Daughter of William Farrington of
Werden in Lancashire Esquire, who, with Sir Peter her Husband, are now living,
1669. but has no Issue by her.

Charterers in Mere, 1666.
1. Henry Legh de East-Hall in High-Legh Esquire, pro Strethull-Farm, not long
since Purchased from Hugh Cocker of Pickmere. 2. One Message in Possession of
Robert Simmons, given to the use of the Poor of the Parish, whereof Massy of
Mosse-house is a Feoffee. 3. George Venables of Agden Esquire, one small
Tenement in Mere. 4. John Spinke of Howes-Heath in Mere. 5. William Pownall of
Barnton, for Granthams Lands. 6. Peter Fernhead of Mere, for Granthams Lands.
7. John Bradburne of Mere. 8. John Bentley of the Hole in Mere. 9. George
Bentley of Mere-Heys. 10. William Grantham of Mere, a small Parcel. 11. Edward
Allen of Rosthorne, one small Tenement in Mere. 12, John Barker of Little-Legh,
one small Tenement in Mere.
Middleton-Grange.
THis is but one Farm so called, lying in Aston juxta Sutton: Vide supra in
Aston juxta Sutton.

Millington.
IN the Time of William the Conqueror, William Son of Nigell, Baron of Halton,
held Millington in Bucklow-Hundred: So we read in Doomsday-book.

John Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, in the Reign of Henry the
Second, gave to Wrono of Stretton half of Millington, to wit, that which he had
in his Demain; Rendering yearly a little Irish Nag, called A Hobby, at
Midsommer: Whereunto Hugh Dutton, and Adam his Son, with several others, were
Witnesses: Lib. C. fol. 154. c. out of Vernon's Notes.

Whereby it should seem he had then but half of Millington in his Fee, if these
Words [ Quam habuit in Dominico suo] be understood of his Fee: Unless Dominico
here be understood of his Demain, or in his own Hands, not given away from him,
as the other Moiety was; which very probably is so meant here.

For Hugh de Millington, being seized of Lands here before the Grant made by
John Constable to Wrono de Strettona, gives unto Wrono Punterling (called also
Wrono de Stretton) duas Bovatas Terrae in Millington. -- Faciendo Servitium
Forense quantum pertinet aliis duabus Bovatis unde octo Bovatae faciunt octavam
partem Militis in eadem Villa. Hiis Testibus, Hugone de Duttona, Ada Filio suo,
Ranulfo Filio Gilberti, and Gilberto Filio suo, Tobaldo Avunculo Comitis, and
Hereberto de Punterling, Liulfo de Twamlow, and Ranulfo de Davenham, and omni
Hundredo Haltonae: Which John Constable also confirmed: Lib. C. fol. 273. number.
1, 2. The Originals Penes Millington of Millington, 1666.

So the Office of John Millington of Millington, 37 Elizabethae, finds he held
one half of Millington of the Honor of Halton, by the eighth part of a Knights
Fee; and the other half of Millington he held of the Honor of Halton, in
Soccage, by the yearly Rent of two Shillings: Possibly the yearly Rent in tract
of time might be continued, in lieu of the Irish Hobby aforesaid.

But to return. Certain it is, That Aytrop de Millington (whom I take to be the
Son of Hugh) married Christian Daughter and Heir of Wrono de Stretton
aforesaid, about the Reign of Henry the Second; Lib. B. page 200. number. 6. and
so he came to be possessed of all Millington.

This Town gave Surname to the Family of the Millingtons, Seated here near to
the Time of the Conqueror: A very ancient Family of Gentlemen, and continuing
at this day; William Millington of Millington Gentleman being now Owner
thereof, 1664. He died in June, 1666.

Aytrop de Millington, Son of the first Aytrop, as I take it, gave unto Robert
Blund of Bexton, pro finali Concordia inter nos facta de fine Duelli, unam
dimidiam Bovatam Terrae in Villa de Mulinton -- Rendering three Pence at
Martlemas yearly -- Philip Orreby being then Judge of Chester, etc. sub initio
Hen. 3. Lib. C. fol. 274. number. 6. The Original in possession of Millington of
Millington.

Charterers in Millington, 1666.
1. The Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy: Two Tenements, bought from Millington.
2. Venables of Agden, one Tenement, in possession of Hugh Gandy; but part of
Gandy's Tenement lies in Agden: That Parcel lying in Millington, was given by
Aytrop de Millington to the Priory of Norton, about King John's Time: Lib. B.
page 200. number. 6. Afterward, scilicet 1329. Robert de Millington bought it of
Agnes Daughter of William de la Booths, and sold it to William de Aketon (or
Agden) from whom it descended to Venables of Agden. 3. Geffrey Cartwright
Gentleman has lately bought the Shaw-house in Millington, from Millington of
Millington.
Mobberley.
MObberley-Church was Dedicated to St. Wilfrid, a Holy Archbishop of York, who
died Anno Domini 708.4 Idus Octobris: Bid de Hist. Angliae, lib. 5. cap. 20.
ad finem. And Mobberley-Wakes were formerly Celebrated on the twelfth day of
October, though at this day those Dedication-Feasts are not so strictly
observed.

Mr. Mallory of Mobberley is now Patron hereof; and this Rectory is conceived
to be fully worth 120 l. per Annum. This Parish only comprehends the
Township of Mobberley, which is 1 l. 18 s. 00 d. in the Mize-book.

I find in Monasticon, the second Volume, page 320. That one Patrick de
Mobberley Founded here a small Priory of Regular Canons, of the Order of St.
Augustine, in Honor of God, the Virgin Mary, and St. Wilfrid, to abide and
dwell for ever in the Church of Mobberley; whereunto he gave all that half of
the Church of Mobberley, with its Appurtenances, which belonged to his Grant;
so as the Parsons of the other half of the Church of Mobberley, which was not
of his Grant, might challenge no Right in the said Tenements: And he
Constituted one Walter, a Canon, the first Prior thereof. This was in the
beginning of King John's Reign, about Anno Domini 1206.

By the half of the Church of Mobberley, seems to be included here the half of
the Manor of Mobberley: for in the end of the Grant is Liberty given to keep
Courts there, as freely as ever the said Patrick kept the same.

But not long after, Patrick was Convented before Randle Blundevill Earl of
Chester, as appears by this Inrolment following, a Copy whereof I received from
old John Booth of Twamlow.

PAtricius de Mobberley, Conventus a Johanne Filio Augustini de Brethmete
Fratris sui Primogeniti, in pleno Comitatu Cestriae, coram Domino Comite
Ranulpho, and Philippo de Orreby tunc Justiciario Cestriae, Cognovit se nihil
Juris Haereditarii habuisse in illa medietate de Mobberley quam tenebat, nisi
tantum in vita sua ex permissione Fratris sui Augustini Primogeniti, sicut
before continetur in Cheirographo inter memorato Augustinum and Patricium
Fratres habito: Et cum saepe dictus Augustinus tunc viam Universitatis
ingressus fuit, memoratus Johannes ejus Filius and Haeres seizinam praefatae
Terrae recuperavit, and Homagium suum fecit inde Domino Ricardo de Aldford, qui
ei fecit Chartam suam Confirmationis: quam tamen Terram praefatus Patricius
tenebat in vita sua de ipso Johanne, ex permissione ipsius Johannis Nepotis
sui: Et, sicut praemonstratum est, a Domino Ranulpho dicto Johanni per Chartam
suam confirmata est: and irrotulatur in testimonium veritatis.

There was a Doomsday-book in our Exchequer at Chester formerly, wherein many
Deeds and Records were Enrolled; but this Book of Record is now lost.

I suppose this Priory continued not long, the said Patrick having no further
Estate in the half of Mobberley, than only for his Life.

The Advowson of the whole Church was Invested in the Heirs of John Son of
Augustine; which should have descended to John Leycester of Tabley, by the
Settlement of Sir Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley, dated Anno Domini 1359. had not
the said John Leycester released all his Right and Claim, as well in the said
Advowson, as in all the Lands which belonged to Sir Raufe Mobberley, unto John
Dumbill of Mobberley, and to Cicely his Wife: Dated at Chester, on Tuesday next
after the Feast of St. Mark the Evangelist, 1 Rich. 2. scilicet, in April,
1378. Which Release is upon Record at Chester, in the Prothonotaries Office
there, die Martis proxime post Festum Sanctae Margaretae Virginis, 5 Rich. 2.
Lib. A. fol. 129. gg. kk.

From Dumbill it came to Hulse; from Hulse, to Troutback; from Troutback, to
Talbot of Grafton, whose Posterity afterward came to be Earls of Shrewsbury;
and at last, in our days, Thomas Mallory, late Dean of Chester, and Parson of
Mobberley, bought the Advowson hereof, to whose Posterity it yet remains.

Parsons of Mobberley.
1281. Dominus Laurentius de Cestria, 1281, and 1285. 1299. Adam Kelsall,
Presented by William de Mobberly, 5 Calendas Julii, 1299. 1304. Johannes de
Mobberley, per Resignationem Adae de Kelsall, 1304. Presented by William
Mobberley of Mobberley. 1306. Richard de Mobberley, Presented by William de
Mobberley his Father, 1306. 34 Edw. 14. Calendas Januarii. This Richard was
killed by one Richard Son of Richard de Mobberley, as seems by an Appeal
brought by William Mobberley, Son of William Mobberley, Lord of the Moiety of
Mobberley, for the death of his Brother: In Placitis Cestriae, die Martis in
Festo Sancti Hilarii, 14 Edw. 2. (1320.) 1320. Henry de Henley Presbyter, 1320.
Presented by William Mobberley. 1327. Robert Son of Robert de Huxley, 3 Nonas
Novembris, 1327. per Johannem Arderne Militem, ratione Custodiae Radulfi Filii
and Haeredis Willielmi de Mobberley. 1351. Robertus de Craven, 1351. Causa
Permutationis. 1359. William Jeffeson, 1359. Lib. A. fol. 128. F. 1378.
Johannes Brunstath Parson of Mobberley, 1378. 1 Rich. 2. Lib. A. fol. 130. ll.
1416. John Scolehall Parson, 4 Hen. 5. Lib. C. fol. 266. number. 2. 1439. Roger
Bolton Parson of Mobberley, 18 Hen. 6. and 37 Hen. 6. 1460. Hamon Leycester,
Presented 1 Junii, 1460. which was in the last Year of Henry the Sixth. This
Hamon was a younger Son of John Leycester of Tabley, the elder, Esquire He seems to
have been Parson of the Moiety of Limme-Church, which he resigned 1457. See in
Limme.
There was extant in the Church of Mobberley, the 28 of January, 1653. in the
upper North-window of the Chancel, the Picture of a Man kneeling, and the
Coat Armor of Leycester of Tabley, in a Border- Argent for distinction; under
which was written in the Glass, -- Orate pro Anima Magistri Hamonis
Ley................................... Fenestram fieri fecit, Anno Domini 1492.

Supply the defect thus, -- Orate pro Anima Magistri Hamonis Leycester Rectoris
hujus Ecclesiae, qui hanc Fenestram fieri fecit, Anno Domini 1492. Who was
Parson of Mobberley from 1460. to 1492. whose Father, John Leycester of Tabley
the elder, was Son and Heir of William, Son and Heir of John, Nephew to Sir
Raufe Mobberley abovementioned, the last Heir of that Family of the Mobberleys.

Hitherto have I traced some of the Parsons of Mobberley.

As concerning the Parsons of Mobberley of these last Ages, I find in the
Register-Book of Mobberley-Church these following; which Register begins but
in Anno 1578.

John Caldwall Bachelor of Arts, Rector of Mobberley-Church full twenty four
Years, and of Winwick in Lancashire about twenty Years. He was born at Burton
upon Trent; and going into that Country to see his Friends, as he returned
homewards he fell sick at the Parsonage-House of Clyfton-Convill in
Staffordshire, where he died the last day of June, and was buried at that
Church the first day of July, in the 51 Year of his Age, Anno Domini 1595.

Robert Eaton, Master of Arts, succeeded Rector of Mobberley-Church, 1595. He
was Rector here about 26 Years, and died at his Parsonage of Mobberley the
fifth day of July, 1621. and was buried at Gropenhale (whereof he was also
Rector) on Thursday the thirteenth of July following, in the 74 Year of his
Age, having been Minister of God's Word 51 Years.

Thomas Mallory Dean of Chester, younger Son of Sir William Mallory of Stewdley
in Yorkshire, succeeded Parson of Mobberley, 1621. He was Parson of Davenham in
Cheshire about 43 years, and of Mobberley about 23 Years. In November, 1642. he
was forced (by reason of the Rebellion then raised in England) to fly from
Mobberley to Chester, where he lived Sequestered from both his Parsonages of
Davenham and Mobberley until the third day of April 1644. on which day, being
Wednesday, he died at the Dean's House in the Palace-yard at Chester, and was
buried in the Quire of the Cathedral-Church in that City, aged about 78 Years.
He married Elizabeth Daughter of Richard Vaughan Bishop of Chester, and had
many Children.

Roger Tovie Curate under Dean Mallory, 1622.

Samuel Carrington Curate of Mobberley under Dean Mallory, 1623. to 1630. or
more.

George Mallory Curate of Mobberley under his Father, 1632.

Edward Wyrley Master of Arts, younger Brother to Sir John Wyrley of
Hampsted-Hall in Staffordshire Knight, succeeded Dean Mallory in the Rectory of
Mobberley; Instituted into the same by John Bridgeman Bishop of Chester, the
eighth day of April, 1644. Which Edward had married Mary Mallory, Daughter of
the said Dean Mallory, the thirteenth of September, 1642.

But this Edward VVyrley continued Sequestered hereof until the Restoration of
King CHARLES the Second, 1660. and then he procured the King's Grant, and was
dispensed with by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, to hold with his
Rectory of Mobberley, the Rectory of Loughton in the County of Essex also.

In the Time of the late War, one Robert Barlow Clerk, born about Aston super
Mersey, was possessed of Mobberley-Church; who married Mary Shakerley, eldest
Daughter of Peter Shakerley of Shakerley in Lancashire, and of Houlme in
Allostock in Cheshire, Esquire Married at Mobberley the sixth day of July, 1652.

James Stanley, younger Son of Sir Thomas Stanley of Nether-Alderley Baronet,
succeeded Rector of Mobberley, 1664. per Resignationem Edwardi VVyrley: And
after the death of Mr. Samuel Shipton Parson of Nether-Alderley, the same James
was also Rector of Nether-Alderley, by the Gift of his Father, Patron of the
Church of Nether-Alderley. Parson Shipton died 1670. This Mr. James Stanley was
Master of Arts of Jesus-College in Cambridge, and married Elizabeth Byron, an
Inheritrix, Daughter of John Byron of Maxfield.

So much of the Parsons of Mobberley.

This Township of Mobberley, Bigot held in the Reign of the Conqueror, under
Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, which one Dot held before.

Afterward it came to Aldford of Aldford in Cheshire, not far from Chester:
And about the Reign of Richard the First, Augustine de Brethmete was possessed
of one Moiety, which he gave to his Brother Patrick during his Life; which
Moiety was confirmed to John Son and Heir of Augustine, by Sir Richard Aldford,
and also by Randle Earl of Chester, surnamed Blundevill, about the Reign of
King John, as appears by the Enrollment aforesaid; whose Posterity enjoyed the
said Moiety, until Sir Raufe Mobberley (having no Lawful Issue of his Body)
Estated all his Lands, by Chaplains entrusted, according to the manner of those
Times, on John Leycester of Tabley, his Nephew, with the Advowson of the Church
of Mobberley also, 1359. 34 Edw. 3. For Sir Raufe had often protested, That he
would not have his Lands mangled among his Sisters, but that his Nephew John
Leycester should have them wholly; as appears by the Certificate of Sir John
Winkfield: Dated at London, the eleventh day of June. 35 Edw. 3. (1361.) Lib.
A. fol. 129. ff. gg. hh.

Afterward, upon some Composition, John Leycester releaseth all his Right in
Mobberley's Lands, and in the Advowson of the said Church, unto John Dumbill of
Mobberley, and to Cicely his Wife, 1 Rich. 2. 1378. yet so as John Dumbill and
Cicely should settle 15 Messuages, 316 Acres of Land, 16 Acres of Wood, 8 Acres
of Moss, the third part of a Watermill, and the third part of all the Wastes in
Mobberley unmeasured [to be understood of Mobberley's Moiety], after the death
of John Dumbill and Cicely, to descend to Raufe Leycester, younger Brother of
the said John Leycester, and to his Heirs for ever; which by Chaplains
entrusted was settled accordingly, 30 die Maii, 2 Rich. 2. 1397. Lib. A. fol.
130. mm. which was either Conditioned in the Agreement of John Leycester, or
the Reversion thereof bought by the said Raufe Leycester; from which Raufe are
descended the Leycesters of Toft, who do now enjoy these Lands, Anno Domini
1666. about one third part of the Moiety of Mobberley.

The other two Parts of this Moiety of Mobberley, which John Dumbill had,
descended to Sir Hugh Hulse, in Marriage with Margery Daughter and Heir of the
said John Dumbill and Cicely: And afterward Margery, Daughter and Heir of
Thomas Hulse, married John Troutback Esquire; which Margery died 35 Hen. 6. and
had Issue William Troutback, whose Son Sir William dying without Issue, Adam
Troutback (Brother of Sir William) had Issue Margaret, Daughter and Heir,
married to John Talbot Lord of Albrighton in Shropshire, from whom the Talbots
of Grafton in Worcestershire, whose Posterity afterward came to be Earls of
Shrewsbury.

The other Moiety of Mobberley Sir John Arderne of Aldford granted to John Legh
of Booths, with Wardships, and Freedom from Appearance at his Court of
Nether-Alderley; Rendering eight Pounds yearly for his Life: And after the death
of John Legh, then to remain to John Legh, Son and Heir of the other John Legh
aforesaid, and to Maud Daughter of the said Sir John Arderne, and to their
Heirs for ever; Rendering a Rose at Midsommer, for all Service: And if John
Legh, Son of John, died before he married Maud, then William Brother to John
Legh, Son of John, was to marry her. Witnesses of this Deed were, Sir John
Orreby, and Sir Richard Massy, Knights; Robert de Pulford, Philip de Egerton,
Richard de Fowleshurst, Thomas de Legh, William de Mobberley, Roger de
Leycester, William de Mere, Adam de Tabley, William Danyers, Master Roger of
Alderley, Hugh Clerk, and others: Lib. A. fol. 122. a. The Original remaining
among the Evidences of Mr. Robinson of Mobberley, 1664.

This Deed was made about 1303. 31 Edw. 1.

Richard Ratcliffe of Urdeshall in Lancashire married Maud Daughter and Heir of
John Legh, Son and Heir of Sir John Legh by Maud Arderne, and had these Lands
of her Grandmothers, to wit the Moiety of Mobberley; whose Heirs enjoyed the
same, till they sold out certain of their Tenements in Mobberley to their
Tenants there: And what remained, together with the Services of such Tenants as
were formerly sold out of this Moiety, Sir John Ratcliffe of Urdeshall sold
unto Mr. Robert Robinson of Mobberley, about the beginning of King James's
Reign over England. Lib. A. fol. 122. b. c.

Now follows the Descent of Mobberley of Mobberley.
blazon or coat of arms Argent, two Cheverons Gules, in a Canton of the second
a Cross Croslet Fitchee, Or.
Augustine de Brethmete, elder Brother to Patrick de Mobberley, gave the half
of Mobberley to Patrick for his Life; which Patrick Founded here a Priory of
Regular Canons of the Order of St. Augustine, about Anno Domini 1206.

John, Son and Heir of Augustine, Lord of the Moiety of Mobberley, lived in the
Reign of King John. Lib. A. fol. 124. a.

Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley, Lord of the Moiety of Mobberley, lived in the
Reign of Henry the Third; but I cannot prove him Son of John.

William Mobberley of Mobberley, Son of Raufe, was Lord of the Moiety of
Mobberley, and Patron of Mobberley-Church. He bought the Moiety of Nether-Pever
from Richard Bonstable, Anno Domini 1281. G. number. 21. The Original in my
possession.

This William had Issue William Mobberley; John Mobberley, to whom his Father
gave all his Lands in Nether-Pever and Tatton, 31 Edw. 1. 1303. G. number. 65. But
John dying without Issue, those Lands reverted to William his Brother: Richard
Mobberley, another Son, made Parson of Mobberley by his Father, 1306. slain by
Richard Son of Richard de Mobberley, 1320. 14 Edw. 2. Lib. A. fol. 124. w. and
131. Alice, a Daughter, married William de Tabley Lord of Over-Tabley and
Knotsford: She was Widow 27 Edw. 1. 1300.

This William died about the beginning of Edw. 2.

William Mobberley of Mobberley, Son and Heir of William, married Maud Daughter
and Heir of Robert Downs of Chorley juxta Werford; unto which Robert, Edmund
Fitton gave all his Lands in Chorley in Free Marriage with Margery his Sister.
Lib. A. fol. 127. t. v.

This William was Sheriff of Cheshire, 13 Edw. 2. 1319. and had Issue Raufe
Mobberley; Cicely married John Dumbill of Mobberley, Son and Heir of John
Dumbill of Oxton in Wirrall; Elizabeth married Sir Hugh Venables of Kinderton;
Margery married Richard Bold of Bold in Lancashire; Emme married Robert
Grosvenour of Houlme in Allostock, who purchased the Moiety of Nether-Pever
from this William de Mobberley: Mary, another Daughter, married Nicolas
Leycester, Son and Heir of Roger Leycester of Tabley; Joan married William
Athurton of Athurton in Lancashire; Ellen married Richard Bromhale of Bromhale
in Cheshire; and Agnes never married: Lib. A. fol. 127. w. x. y. z. a. and fol.
128. cc. and fol. 129. kk.

This William Sealed usually with his Coat of Arms, to wit, Two Cheverons, and
in a Canton a Cross-Croslet Fitchee: Lib. A. fol. 124. y. z. as is before
expressed in the beginning of this Descent.

He died 1 Edw. 3. 1327. Lib. C. fol. 103. number. 9. Maud his Widow afterward
married John Dumbill senior: Lib. A. fol. 128. ff.

Sir Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley Knight, Son and Heir of William, was Ward to
Sir John Arderne of Aldford, 3 Edw. 3. Lib. A. fol. 128. cc. who gave the
Marriage of this Raufe unto John Pulford of Pulford, Son of Sir Robert Pulford,
sine disparagatione, 1329.

This Sir Raufe married Vincentia Daughter of John Pulford: Lib. A. fol. 128.
bb. and died in France, 35 Edw. 3. 1361. without any Lawful Issue of his Body.

Sir Raufe had by Alice Rode (his Concubine) a Daughter, called Margaret,
married to Thomas Toft, younger Brother to Hugh Toft of Toft, to whom Sir Raufe
Mobberley gave his Manor in Plumley, 1357. Afterward Margaret married Hugh
Chaderton, living 1360. Lib. C. fol. 226. v. Lib. A. fol. 129. hh.

These Lands in Plumley descended to the two Daughters and Coheirs of Margaret
by Thomas Toft; to wit, Ellen, who married John Bodon of Plumley; and Sybill,
who married Thomas Haslington of the Ermitage nigh Holmes-Chappel.

John Bodon, Son of John Bodon aforesaid, sold his Moiety of these Lands in
Plumley to John Leycester of Tabley, the elder, Esquire, 25 Hen. 6. 1446. whose
Heirs enjoy the same at this day: S. number. 2, 3, 5, 6, 9.

The other Moiety of those Lands in Plumley descended unto Cicely Daughter and
Heir of Sybill aforesaid; which Cicely married Hugh Winnington of Northwich,
1444. and ever since continued to the VVinningtons of Ermitage, until Mr.
Bradshaw of Marple in Cheshire bought those Lands from VVinnington in the Reign
of King CHARLES the First; Thomas Buckley of Plumley being now Tenant thereof,
1666.

The Sisters of Sir Raufe Mobberley shared their Mothers Land in Chorley; but
Emme Grosvenour purchased most of the other Sisters Parts: Lib. A. fol. 127. w.
x. y. aa.

So ended the Line of Mobberley of Mobberley.

The Mannor-House of Mobberley of Mobberley, and which at last came to the
Talbots of Grafton in Worcestershire, stood close by Mobberly-Church, where
now, 1672. the House of Mr. Mallory of Mobberley stands: But the ancient
Fabric, which was more spacious, and very ruinous, was not long since taken
down: Which Old House, with the Demain thereof, together with the Advowson of
Mobberley-Church, and Mobberley-Mill, was bought by Andrew Carrington of
Mobberley Gentleman, from George Talbot of Grafton Esquire, about 14 Jacobi.
Part of which Demain was sold soon after by Carrington to Robert Robinson of
Mobberley Gentleman.

The Advowson of the Church was sold by Andrew Carrington aforesaid, and John
his Son and Heir, unto Thomas Mallory Dean of Chester, by Deed dated the
eleventh day o^ October, 17 Jacobi, 1619. whose Heir Thomas Mallory, now under
Age, is Patron of Mobberley-Church, 1672. Son of Thomas, Son of Richard
Mallory, Son and Heir of Dean Mallory aforesaid.

The Mannor-House aforesaid, with what remained of the Demain unbought by Mr.
Robinson, was sold by Andrew Carrington aforesaid, and John his Son and Heir,
unto Dean Mallory, the eighth of May, Anno primo Caroli Primi, 1625.

Dean Mallory also Purchased the Royalty of Talbot's Part of Mobberley from
John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury: Dated the twentieth day of March, 7 Car. 1.
1631.

The Mill Carrington sold to Legh of Booths.

There is Engraven in the Stone, under the Ledge or Border, on the West End of
Mobberley-Steeple, and on the South-west-corner, as follows: -- ORATE PRO
BONO STATU DOMINI JOHANNIS TALBOT MILITIS, ET DOMINAE MARGARETAE UXORIS SUAE,
And then beginning again just over the said Border, in the very Corner of the
Steeple aforesaid, -- PATRONAE ECCLESIAE. And so passing along to the
South Side of the Steeple, -- ANNO DOMINI MILESIMO QUINGENTESIMO TRICESIMO
TERTIO. RICHARD PLAT MASTER-MASON. Over which, on the said South Side, above,
near to the Little Window under the Bells, is Ratcliff's Coat of Arms,
Quartered with another Coat, engraven in a Stone.

So that Mobberley-Steeple seems to have been built with Freestone, and the
Church repaired, Anno 1533. 24 Hen. 8.

The Names of all such Persons who now stand possessed of any Freehold Lands
of Inheritance in Mobberley, Anno Domini 1672.
1. Raufe Leycester of Toft Esquire, Lord of a third Part of one Moiety of
Mobberley. This came originally to his Ancestor (as is before declared) 2 Rich.
2. 1379. And he has at this day a Demain-House there, rebuilt this Year,
1672. and also sixteen Tenenements, and twelve Cottages, in Lease to his
Tenants.

2. The other two third Parts of this Moiety, together with the Advowson of
Mobberley-Church, lately belonged to the Talbots of Grafton in Worcestershire,
whose Posterity afterward came to be Earls of Shrewsbury; and were lately sold
away by Talbot, to his Tenants here in Mobberley, in the Reign of King James.

Talbot's Lands, as they now stand Possessed, 1672. or, more briefly, the
Freeholders of Mobberley in Talbot's Part, since their several Purchases from
Talbot, as they now stand, 1672.

Edward Alcock. Charles Bradbury of the Wood-end. Randle Barlow. Robert Barlow,
late Griffin's House. Thomas Booth. Hugh Brook, late Wilkinson's. John Hough.
William Barnes. John Davenport, for Mosse's House by the Mill: A small Cottage.
Richard Strethull's Cottage; formerly Hobson's House by the Mill. Hugh
Strethull of Brown-Edge. James Stewart of Brown-Edge, Schoolmaster. Raufe
Wrenshaw of Brown-Edge. Francis Newton of Knowl-Green; late John Baggiley. Hugh
Strethull of Salterley in Mobberley. Edward Davenport. Roger Symcock; late
Stretche's House. Hugh Strethull of Reyley-Wood. Richard Wright; part of
Worseley's Tenement. John Hawkinson; late Bolton's Tenement. John Hewet. John
Oaks. Richard Parker; late Edward Hewet's. Roger Worthington of Hield-Mill in
Mobberley; and also for Hill-house. John Burges of Wood-end. Susan Grange
Widow. Henry Stewart, formerly Berry's Tenement. John Fletcher, formerly
Berry's Tenement. John Holland of the Dam-head in Mobberley. George Talbot of
Grafton Esquire sells the Tenement of John Strettle of the Dam-head to one Perine
of Manchester, 1 Junii, 14 Jacobi. Perine Mortgageth it to Francis West of
London, 16 Aug. 14 Jacobi. West and Perine after join in the Sale of it to
William Holland, 1650. Peter Bredbury of Lea-House. William Nuthall; now
Richard Yarwood. Widow Tipping of Bowdon has a Tenement in Mobberley, now in
possession of Richard Cragg of Baggiley-Green in Mobberley. Peter Legh of
Booths Esquire has Mobberley-Mill, and three Tenements, now in Possession of
Loundes, Barrow, and Symcock; and also Graisty's Cottage, These were anciently
Talbot's. The Heir of Nathaniel Robinson Gentleman, has part of the Demain
which belonged to the old Mobberley-House, formerly belonging to Talbot. Thomas
Mallory of Mobberley Gentleman, now under Age. This was the old Mobberley
House. And he has also the Royalty of all Talbot's Part of Mobberley, and the
Advowson of the Church.
3. The other Moiety of Mobberley, lately belonging to the Radcliffs of Ordsall
in Lancashire, nigh Manchester, was sold away by Sir John Radcliff, about the
beginning of King James's Reign over England, to his Tenants there.

The Names of the Freeholders in Radcliff's Part, since the several Purchases
from Radcliffe, as they now stand, 1672.
The Heir of Nathaniel Robinson, late of Mobberley, Gentleman, has now seven
Messuages and eleven Cottages in Mobberley, besides a Demain-House here, built
first by Robert Robinson, about 1612. who Purchased these Lands by the Name of
Robert Robinson of Manchester Clothier, from Sir John Radcliff of Ordsall
Knight; together with the Royalty of all Radcliffs Lands in Mobberley, formerly
sold by Radcliff to his Tenants here; and all the old Rents reserved to
Radcliff, amounting in the whole to 23 l. 00 s. 00 d. yearly, or thereabout: by
Deed dated the 19 of April, 4 Jacobi, 1606. for which he paid 1530 l.
Purchase-Money.

Randle Blackshaw. This was bought from Sir John Radcliff of Ordsall, by Deed
dated the eighth day of August, 1611. and is said to be the Ancient
Demain-House of Mobberley, which did belong to Radcliff.

Peter Legh of Booths Es Esquire has three Tenements in Radcliff's Part, now in
Tenure of George Leycester, Cookson, and the Fox-house.

John Gleave of High-Legh, Owner of Holden-Cliff-House in Mobberley. Roger
Symcock, lately Purchased from Mrs. Martha Hurleston, formerly Oldfield's
Lands. Homfrey Cherry, lately Purchased from Mrs. Martha Hurleston, formerly
Oldfield's Lands. William Coppock, lately Purchased from Mrs. Martha Hurleston,
formerly Oldfield's Lands. Rafe Shaw, lately Purchased from Mrs. Martha
Hurleston, formerly Oldfield's Lands. Richard Parker, for Mere-House; sold away
by Mr. Robinson. Richard Yarwood for Bowers. John Anson; sold by Mr. Robinson.
Richard Seddall of Wood-end. Richard Bruch; formerly Duncalf's. Thomas Hield of
the Broad-Oak in Mobberley. John Strethull; late Bateson's House. Roger Hewet
of Pavement-Lane. Henry Hasselhurst. Richard Rowlinson of Roanes, pro
Fox-house. William Hobson. George Stubs. John Symcock of the Dub'd-Hedge.
Daniel Yarwood; formerly Oldrinshaw's. Homfrey Lea. John Baggiley of the
Mosse-side. Widow Strethull of the Town-Lane. John Holland of Dam-head has
certain Parcels of Land in Ratcliff's Part, sold away by Mr. Robinson, 1639.
Urmeston's Lands in Mobberley, bought for Pious Uses. Thomas Whitchcot; late
John Radford's. Peter Bradbury of Brook-bank, a Cottage. Robert Ridgeway, a
Cottage.
More.
THis Town of More is of the Fee of Halton. Roger Lacy Constable of Cheshire
and Baron of Halton, had a Brother called Richard, to whom he gave the Town of
More: and afterward the said Richard became Leprous, and was buried in the
Chapter House of the Canons of Norton: Monasticon, Vol. 1. page 860.

This was about the Reign of King Richard the First.

The Name More signifies a more barren Ground than Marshes be; a Miry and
Moorish Soil, yet serves not to get Turfs thereon: Coke upon Littleton, fol.
5. a.

The Inhabitants of More and Runcorn were formerly Copyholders to the Barons
of Halton; but have lately bought out their own Land, to hold in Fee-farm, in
Free and Common Soccage, of the Manor of Enfield in the County of Middlesex;
the Kings Grant bearing date the ninth day of September, 4 Car. 1. 1628. save
only these Persons following, who now are, and their Ancestors anciently
before them were, Freeholders in the Manor of More, and not Fee-farmers, as
follows.

Freeholders or Charterers in More, 1666.
1. Henry Porter of More: This has continued in the Name of Porter since
Edward the Fourth: This Freehold before belonged to one Peter Arderne, in the
Reign of Edward the First, as by the Deed now in Possession of this Henry
Porter appears. 2. Sir Richard Brooks of Norton Baronet, has now about
twenty Cheshire Acres of Free-Land in More, as late belonging to the Priory of
Norton; and also about six Acres more of Freehold Land adjoining, lately
bought from Crosby of Over-Whitley. 3. These were all purchased from Brook of
Norton; and Brook bought them of Harper of Newton. Robert Pickering of Thelwall
Esquire, Counselor at Law, has one Janion's House. Richard Rutter has also
other Freehold Land. Richard Dutton of Mosse-end, other Freehold Land.
4. Widow Harper has now also certain Freehold Land in More.
Newton juxta Daresbury.
THis Town, according to its Name, is not of so great Antiquity: For I find it
granted by Parcels, and Enclosures, and Closes, some in Henry the Third's Time,
some under Edward the First, and some in the Reign of Edward the Second, by the
Ancestors of VVarburton of Arley, before they had relinquished their proper
Surname of Dutton; who were Lords thereof from King John's Time unto this
present, 1666.

The Charterers now in Newton, 1666.
Sable, a Cross engrailed Ermine. And in 11 Edw. 4. 1471. Thomas Chickford and
Elizabeth his Wife (Daughter and Heir of Robert de Hallum, Son and Heir of
William de Hallum) sold the Manor of Hallum to Sir John Nedham, sometime Judge
of Chester, who settled the same upon Robert Nedham his younger Brother; whose
Line failing at last for want of Heirs Males, it descended to Robert Nedham of
Shenton Esquire, 21 Eliz. from whom the Lord Kilmorie, now Owner of Hallum,
1666. I speak here out of the Lord Kilmorie's Evidences. 2. Rafe Starky of
Morthwait in Newton, Lawyer; whose Ancestor Thomas Starky married Agnes Sister
and Heir of Thomas Harper, and Daughter of Richard Harper of Newton, 32 Hen. 6.
Lib. C. fol. 205. g. 3. Grimsdich of Grimsdich in Nether-Whitley has also
Lands in Newton, which Thomas Grimsdich (then of Hallum by Lease) bought of
John Daniell of Daresbury, 12 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 194. number. 44, 46, 47. And
which Lands John Daniell Ancestor of the said John, had in Marriage with Jonet
Daughter and Heir of Thomas Hallum of Newton, 1 Hen. 6. Lib. C. fol. 193. number.
36, 37. 4. Robert Venables of Anterbus in the Lordship of Over-Whitley, has
Lands in Newton. 5. John Starky of Newton.
Norton.
THis Township of Norton was given by William Constable of Cheshire the
younger, Son of William Fitz-Nigell, unto the Canons of Runcorne, in exchange
for Lands in Runcorne; and so he removed the Canons of Runcorne to Norton,
about the Reign of King Stephen.

Anno 1135. Monasterium de Norton in Comitatu Cestriae Fundatur a Willielmo
Filio Nigelli, Constabulario Cestriae: Historia Aurea Johannis Tynemytensis,
lib. 19. cap. 41. A Manuscript in the Public Library at Oxford, inter Libros
Juris, v. 4. number. 4. Wherewith also agrees Polychronicon, lib. 7. cap. 17.

Monasticon, Vol. 2. page 187. tells us, William Fitz-Nigell Founded a
Religious House of Canons Regular at Runcorne, Anno Domini 1133. And afterward
William Constable of Cheshire, the younger, removed them from Runcorne to
Norton. Which agrees with the Deed Lib. B. page 199. number. 1.

After the Dissolution of Abbeys in England by Henry the Eighth, Richard Brooks
Esquire Purchased from the King the Manor of Norton, with its Members and
Appurtenances, to wit, Norton, Stockham, Acton-Grange, and Aston-Grange in
Cheshire, and Cuerdly in Lancashire, with other Lands. The Charter is dated
decimo die Decembris, 37 Hen. 8. 1545. whose Heir now enjoys these Lands,
1666.

There is a certain Hamlet or Place, called Endley, now belonging to the
Township of Norton, and enjoyed as Part and Parcel of the same, which William
Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton held as a distinct thing by it self in the
Conqueror's Time, as appears by Doomsday-book. This afterward came to Aston of
Aston: For Richard Aston of Aston, Son of Gilbert, gave to God, and St. Mary,
and to Randle Prior of Norton -- all his Land of Hendeley, with all its
Appurtenances, about King John's Reign. Lib. B. page 200. number. 8.

Here was anciently a Church belonging to this Priory, dedicated to St. Mary:
But this Church of Norton was pulled down after the Dissolution of Abbeys.

The Place of this Priory is now the Seat of Brook of Norton, who enjoys the
whole Town of Norton entirely, by himself and his Lessees, wherein is no
Charterer at all.

Now follows the Descent of Brook of Norton since the Purchase.
This Family is descended from the Brooks of Leighton in Nantwich-Hundred; of
which Family I find one Adam Dominus de Leighton, sub Henrico Tertio, whose Son
was styled William de la Brook de Leighton, and his Son Richard styled Ricardus
de Doito, in an old Deed, 5 Edw. 1. that is, Of the Brook; for Doet in French,
is A Brook in English; and under the said Manour-House in Leighton a Brook
runs, from whence their Posterity assumed the Surname del Brook.

Thomas Brook of Leighton Gentleman, the last of that Family in the Direct
Line, died about 1652. very aged, having Issue four Daughters; but he sold away
the Reversion of his Lands to the Lady Mary Cholmondley, 6 Jacobi, 1608. which
afterward came to Francis Cholmondley, third Son of Thomas Cholmondley of
Vale-Royal Esquire, who now enjoys the same, 1666.

blazon or coat of arms I. Richard Brook of Norton Esquire, younger Son of
Thomas Brook of Leighton in Nantwich-Hundred, purchased the Manor of Norton,
with its Members, from the King, Anno Domini 1545. 37 Hen. 8.

He married Christian Daughter of John Carew of Haccomb in Devonshire, and had
Issue Thomas Brook; Christian married Richard Grosvenour of Eaton-Boat in
Cheshire Esquire; and Martha married Hugh Starky of Moore, younger Son of
Starkey of Darley.

This Richard died 11 Eliz. 1569. Christian his Widow afterward married
Richard Done.

This Richard Brook was Sheriff 1563. 5 Eliz.

II. Thomas Brook of Norton Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard, had three Wives.

The first was Anne Daughter of Henry Lord Audley, by whom he had Issue Richard
Brook, Son and Heir; George, drowned in Warrington-Water; Christian married
Richard Starky of Stretton in Cheshire, Esquire; Elinour married John Brook of
Blacklands in Staffordshire; and Margaret married one Warburton.

His second Wife was Elizabeth Sister of Thomas Merbury of Merbury nigh
Comberbach, Esquire, by whom he had Issue William Brook, Thomas Brook, and
Valentine Brook; also Townesend married Thomas Legh de East-Hall in High-Legh
Esquire; Elizabeth married George Spurstow of Spurstow in Cheshire Esquire;
Dorothy married William Barneston of Churton in Cheshire; Frances married
George Legh of Barton in Lancashire Esquire; Anne married Richard Merbury of
Walton in Cheshire; and Clare, Wife of Theophilus Legh of Grange in the File of
Lancashire.

His third Wife was Elinour Gerard, by whom he had Issue Andrew, who died
young; and Peter Brook, who Purchased the Manor of Mere, nigh Over-Tabley,
1652. and was Knighted 1660. of whom see more in Mere: Also Alice, a Daughter,
married Thomas Birch of Birch in Lancashire; Elinour married William Ashton
Rector of Middleton in Lancashire, and younger Son of Ashton of Middleton;
which William purchased the Lands of Booth of Cogshull in Cheshire juxta
Over-Whitley; Elinour was Widow 1660. And Rachel Wife of Henry Slater of
Light-Okes in Bedford in Lancashire, afterward Sir Henry Slater.

This Thomas Brook of Norton was twice Sheriff of Cheshire, 1578. and 1592. and
died Anno Domini 1622.

III. Sir Richard Brook of Norton Knight, Son and Heir of Thomas, was Knighted
in Ireland, and married Jane Daughter and Heir of William Chaderton Bishop of
Chester, by whom he had a Daughter, married to one Joseline of Cambridgeshire,
who had all her Mothers Lands: But through some dislike after Marriage, Sir
Richard and Jane his Wife lived asunder.

Afterward Sir Richard married to his second Wife Katharine Daughter of Sir
Henry Nevill of Billingsbere in Berkshire, by whom he had Issue Henry Brook,
Son and Heir; Thomas Brook, second Son, who married Jane Daughter of one Weston
of Sutton nigh Frodsham, Tenant to Warburton of Arley, by whom he had Issue
Richard Brook, and Catharine a Daughter, both living 1666. Richard Brook, third
Son of Sir Richard, Professor of Physic, died at Boughton, nigh Chester,
without Issue, Anno Domini 1667. George, fourth Son; and John, fifth Son: Mary
married Thomas Merebury, Half-Brother and afterward Heir to William Merebury
of Merebury nigh Comberbach Esquire; Anne married Edward Hyde of Norbury juxta
Pointon, Esquire; Dorothy married Lawrence Hyde, younger Brother of the said
Edward.

Sir Richard Brook died Anno Domini 1632.

IV. Henry Brook of Norton, Son and Heir of Sir Richard, was Created Baronet,
1662. He married Mary Daughter of Timothy Pusey of Nottinghamshire, by whom he
had Issue Richard, Son and Heir; Henry, second Son, married Mary Daughter and
Heir of Philip Prichard of Bostock-Green in Davenham-Parish; and Pusey Brook,
third Son, all living 1666.

This Henry Brook was Sheriff four Years together, beginning 1644. appointed by
the Parliament without the King, in the time of the late Rebellion: Richard
Grosvenour of Eaton-Boat Esquire (Son and Heir to Sir Richard Grosvenour of
Eaton, Baronet, then also living) being made Sheriff by the King in the same
Year, 1644. The other being extrajudicial, against the Law and Prerogative of
the King.

Sir Henry Brook Baronet died Anno Domini 1664.

V. Sir Richard Brook of Norton Baronet, Son and Heir of Sir Henry, married
Francisca-Posthuma (so called, because she was born after the death of her
Father) Sister to Richard Legh of Lyme in Cheshire Esquire, and has Issue.

This Sir Richard was Sheriff of Cheshire, 1667.

Owlarton.
IN the Reign of William the Conqueror, Hamon Baron of Dunham-Massy held one
Moiety of Owlarton; and Ranulphus, the supposed Ancestor of the Manwarings,
held the other Moiety.

This Township was afterward scattered into several Parcels; but Sir Richard
Massy of Tatton by Purchase got into his Hands most part of this Township, and
was Lord of the Manor of Owlarton in the Reign of Edward the First, as may
appear by these following Notes, extracted out of the Earl of Bridgewater's
Deeds, 1667. by John Halsey of Lincoln's Inn Esquire.

Nicolas Lord Audley gave all his Lands in Owlarton and Tatton to Richard Massy
and Isabell his Wife, about 1286.

Sir John Arderne of Aldford gave to Sir Richard Massy and Isabell his Wife,
omnes Terras suas and Tenementa in Owlarton: Habendum cum Homagiis, Servitiis,
Wardis, Releviis, Redditibus, Escaetis, -- etc. Reddendo quatuordecem Denarios
per Annum pro omni Servitio, Secta Curiarum, -- etc. This was about 27 Edw. 1.

Richard Dunne of Owlarton gave certain Lands in Owlarton, and two Parts of a
Mill with the Pool, in exchange with Sir Richard Massy for other Lands in that
Township.

Robert Massy of Sale, gave to Robert Massy of Tatton, Lands in Owlarton, in
exchange for Lands in Sale, under Edward the Second.

Anno 1 Hen. 6. there was a Survey of the Manors and Lands of Sir Geffrey
Massy of Tatton by a Jury; it was there found, That Sir Geffrey was Lord of the
Manor of Owlarton, and diverse Free Tenants there; among whom Ranulphus
Manwaring qui reddit pro le Bronteles-Place, 5 s. 0 d. and Johannes Legh del
Booths, pro certis Terris vocatis Babrinchull, reddendo per Annum 2 s. 8 d. and
had also nine Tenants at Will, paying in all 8 l. 11 s. 10 d. Rent.

In the Office after the death of Alice the Widow of Sir John Massy of Tatton 6
Hen. 6. 1427. she was found to hold the Manor of Owlarton of John Ratcliffe of
Urdeshall in Lancashire nigh Manchester.

How it descended from Massy of Tatton to the Earl of Bridgewater, see the
Pedigree in Tatton.

Charterers in Owlarton, 1666.
1. Legh of Booths, now under Age, has about fifty Cheshire Acres in Owlarton
in Lease, in possession of Randle Cadman, John Wainwright, John Ridgeway del
Oak, Richard Ward, William Baggiley's Cottage, and Robert Partington's
Cottage. 43 Edw. 3. Isabell the Widow of Sir John Legh del Booths died seized
of the sixth Part of Owlarton, which was then found to be held of Hugh Massy of
Tatton. 2. Edmund How of Owlarton has a good Freehold there. 3. Richard
Wright of Ashley has Land in Owlarton. 4. William Baggiley junior, about four
Acres of Priest-land. 5. Downs of Shropshire, but late of Toft, four Tenements
in Owlarton, in possession of Philip Ridgeway, Roger Cadman, John Smith, and
John Clerk. These 4 pay Chief to the Lord of Nether Alderley, as held of
Arderne. 6. John Norbury of Harborough in Over-Alderley has one Tenement in
Owlarton, and three Cottages. These 4 pay Chief to the Lord of Nether Alderley,
as held of Arderne. 7. Humfrey Duncalf; bought of Page of Yerdshawe. These 4
pay Chief to the Lord of Nether Alderley, as held of Arderne. 8. John Swinton
of Nether-Knotsford has two Tenements, in possession of James Ridgeway and
Richard Banks. These 4 pay Chief to the Lord of Nether Alderley, as held of
Arderne. 9. Lawrence Barlow, one Cottage, bought of John Merriman, in
possession of Hugh Manwaring; another in possession of Elizabeth Huet. 10.
Randle Cadman; bought from John Hall of Norley lately.
Partington.
THis Township of Partington was anciently of the Fee of the Barons of
Dunham-Massy.

a. Hamon Massy gave to Hugh Bodon Clerk, the sixth Part of Partington, about
Edw. 1.

Hugh Bodon Clerk, gave to Aytrop de Millington, cum Mabilia Nepte mea, sextam
partem totius Villae de Partington; Rendering to Hamon Massy, and his Heirs, one
Pair of Gloves at Midsummer.

b. Hamon de Massy gave to Adam Sunderland all the Moiety of his Land in
Partington, which he bought of Geffrey Holdene; Salvo Servitio and Homagio
Ricardi Bolour in eadem Villa; videlicet, sextam partem totius Villae de
Partington: Reddendo dimidiam Marcam Argenti: An old Copy of a Deed, no
Witnesses. This is conceived to be the Copy of Mr. Hadfield's Deed, of
Derbyshire, who now holds a sixth Part of Partington, and pays 6 s. 8 d.
yearly to Mr. Crew of Crew, 1666.

c. Geffrey Son of Robert de Walley gave to John his Brother all his Land in
Partington, which he had of the Grant of Sir Hamon Massy; Rendering yearly to
Hamon Massy and his Heirs, one Pound of Cummin, in Festo Johannis Baptistae,
that is, Midsummer-day, about Edw. 1. Lib. B. page 211. number. 3, 4, 5, 6. The
Originals among the Evidences of the Lord Delamere at Dunham-Massy.

d. In an ancient Rental of Dunham-Massy, 3* Hen. 4. -- Georgius Carington
Chivaler tenet Manerium suum de Carington, and medietatem Villae de Ashton, and
tertiam partem Villae de Partington, pro duabus Partibus Feodi Militis.

So that now, Anno Domini 1666. the Manor of Partington is shared as
follows: --

1. George Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy is Lord of a third Part of Partington
in Possession, which was Carington's of Carington; and also Chief Lord of the
other two third Parts, which are originally held of the Barons of Dunham-Massy.

2. John Hadfield of Over-Cliffe in the County of Derby has now a sixth Part
of Partington, according to the Original Deed made by Hamon Massy: supra b.

3. Thomas Warburton of Partington has another sixth Part, according to the
Purchase thereof made by Thomas Flixton from Hamon de Massy (tempore Henrici
tertii): Rendering yearly four Shillings: Which Rent idem Thomas Warburton
pays to the Lord of Dunham-Massy at this day.

Idem Thomas Warburton has an eighteenth Part of Partington more, id est, a
third Part of a sixth Part, which his Ancestor William Son of Peter Warburton
had from Richard le Harper of Partington, and Agnes his Wife, by Fine at
Chester, 13 Edw. 2. 1319. Lib. B. page 212. number. 6, 7. The Originals now
remaining with the said Thomas Warburton of Partington.

4. John Warburton of Partington, Have another sixth Part, lately Purchased
from John Millington of Millington, according to the Original Deed of Hamon
Massy, supra a. Who now pay one Penny yearly, in lieu of the Gloves, to Dunham.
John Owen of Partington, Have another sixth Part, lately Purchased from John
Millington of Millington, according to the Original Deed of Hamon Massy, supra
a. Who now pay one Penny yearly, in lieu of the Gloves, to Dunham.

5. John Partington of Partington has two Parts of the three of a sixth Part,
or two third Parts of a sixth Part of Partington; which, with Thomas
Warburton's third Part of a sixth Part, makes up the other sixth Part.

Over-Pever.
IN the Time of the Conqueror, Ranulphus (the supposed Ancestor of the
Manwarings) held this Township of Over-Pever, or the greatest part thereof; and
also the Hamlet, or Place, called Cepmundwich in Over-Pever, as a distinct
thing by it self: as appears in Doomsday-book.

This Roger Manwaring was Son of Raufe Manwaring Judge of Chester, about the
Reign of Richard the first.
In the Reign of Henry the Third, Roger Manwaring of Warmincham in Cheshire,
gave unto his younger Son William Manwaring -- Totum Tenementum, Redditum, and
Boscum, quae praedictus Rogerus habuit in Villa de Pever -- Salvo Capitali
Domino debito and consueto Servitio per manum dicti Rogeri and Haeredum suorum:
-- Reddendo inde annuatim praedidicto Rogero, and Haeredibus suis, unum Nisum
Sorum ad Festum beati Petri ad vincula, pro omni Servitio: Lib. B. page 2. c.
The Original. Penes Sir Thomas Manwaring of Over-Pever Baronet, 1666. Sealed
with an Escocheon of Six Barrulets.

This William Manwaring fixed his Habitation at Over-Pever, where his
succeeding Heirs have ever since continued to this day; and do now pay yearly
unto Mr. Crew of Crew, Lord of Warmincham, one Sore-Sparrow-Hawk, or two
Shillings in lieu thereof, according to the Deed aforesaid.

In this Township are now only two Charterers, 1666.
Ex Chartulis ejusdem Johannis Swinton.
1. John Swinton of Nether-Knotsford, for Radbrook-House in Over-Pever. In the
Reign of Edward the First, William Manwaring then Lord of Over-Pever gave unto
Thomas his younger Son, -- illam Terram quae vocatur Radbroc, integram:
Reddendo ad Nativitatem Sancti Johannis Baptistae unum Denarium, vel unum par
albarum Cheirothecarum: -- Testibus Domino Thoma de Manwaring That was,
Manwaring of Warmincham.
, Domino Warino Filio suo, Domino Willielmo de Manwaring tunc Rectore Ecclesiae
de Werunith, -- etc. Lib. B. page 7. number. 1.

Richard Son and Heir of Thomas Manwaring, gives all his Land in Over-Pever to
William Glasebroke, Anno Domini 1320. Lib. B. page 7. number. 2.

William Glasebroke releaseth all his Lands in Radbrook in Over-Pever, unto
William Son of John del Mere, and to Agnes his Wife, and the Heirs of her Body,
45 Edw. 3. 1371. It continued in the Name of Mere until the Year 1501. when
Robert Mere gave all his Lands in Over-Pever to Oliver Hurlebot, Son of Richard
Hurlebot; Rendering yearly twenty Shillings: Dated 14 die Augusti, 16 Hen. 7.
1501. Which Rent of twenty Shillings Mere passed over to Thomas Manwaring of
Nantwich, Son of Nicolas Manwaring; and the said Thomas Manwaring passed it to
John Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire, by Deed dated 24 die Octobris, 23 Hen. 7.

Robert Burges of Knotsford married Joan one of Hurlebot's Daughters, to whom
her Father gave Radbrook: Which Burges had only two Daughters; Katharine
married Mr. Thomas Brown, and Jane married John Harper of Hallywell near
Bolton in the Moors in Lancashire.

Katharine had a Son called George Brown, who married Townesend Sister to
George Leycester of Toft Esquire, and had Issue three or four Children; but all
died before they came to maturity: Afterward Katharine suffers a Fine and
Recovery, and settles these Lands on Jane Daughter of John Harper aforesaid.
This Jane married John Swinton of Nether-Knotsford aforesaid, the ninth of
February, 1659. who now has Radbrook-House in Possession.

Ex Chartulis Willielmi Beard.
2. William Beard of Over-Pever, has part of Fodon-Land in Over-Pever; which
Land he lately bought of John Downs of Toft, 1663. and Downs formerly bought
the same, by the Name of Half a Message called Fodon-Land, from John Henshaw
of Lockwood in Staffordshire; Dated 6 Junii, 33 Eliz. 1591.

I find by ancient Deeds, that there were anciently two Places or Hamlets in
Over-Pever; one called Cepmundewich, the other Fodon.

William Manwaring, Lord of Over-Pever, gave Fodon to Thomas his younger Son,
under Edward the First; and Thomas gave it away to Hugh de Stoke.

Cepmondswich, William Manwaring, Son of William, and Brother of Thomas, gave
unto Gilbert Gykes, toward the end of Edward the First.

But these Lands came afterward to be divided, and are now all bought in by
the Lords of Over-Pever, save that Part of Fodon which Beard now enjoys.

7 Edw. 3. Thomas de Cepmondswich, and Agnes his Wife, gave to John Son of
William Glasebrook, and to Nicolaa Daughter of Thomas Cepmondwich, unum
Messuagium and 21 Acras Terrae in Over-Pever in quodam Hamletto qui vocatur
Fodon, and Capitale Messuagium nostrum and december Acras Terrae, duas Acras
Mossetae, and unam Acram Bosci, in eadem Villa, in quodam Hamletto qui vocatur
Cepmondswich: Remanere rectis Haeredibus praedictae Agnetis: And a Fine was
levied hereon at Chester, 7 Edw. 3. Lib. B. page 6. f.


So much of the Charterers in Over-Pever.

In this Township is also a Parochial Chapel, Seated near to the Mannor-Hall
of Over-Pever, and has these Villages within the Chappelry: --

The Mize. l. s. d. Over-Pever 01 00 00 Marthall cum Little-Werford 00 13 04
Snelston in Maxfield Hundred 00 02 00 01 15 04

This Chapel is a Daughter of the Mother Church of Rosthorn, and seems to be
first Erected about the Reign of Edward the Third: But I find not any Monument
in this Church exceeding the Reign of Henry the Sixth: It was certainly a
Parochial Chapel in Henry the Sixth's Time, and had then liberty of Burial;
and has now the yearly Stipend of Five Pounds six Shillings and eight Pence
allowed from the Vicar of Rosthorne.

The neat Chapel, and Vault under the same for a Burying-place, on the
North-side of the Chancel, was built in Stone at the Charge of Ellen the Widow
of Philip Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire, Anno Domini 1648.

The other Chapel of Stone, on the South Side of the Body of Over-Pever
Church, seems to be built Anno Domini 1456. as appears by the Inscription in
one of the Windows of the same Chapel, yet extant, 1666.

Now follows the Descent of the Manwarings of Over-Pever.
I. William Manwaring of Over-Pever, younger blazon or coat of arms Son of
Roger Manwaring of Warmincham, had Over-Pever by the Gift of his Father,
regnante Henrico Tertio: Lib. B. page 2. c.

He had Issue William, Son and Heir; Thomas, to whom his Father gave Fodon in
Over-Pever: Lib. B. page 2. d. and page 3. g. h. Benedict, another Son: Ibid.
page 4. m. and page 13. e. f. Guy, another Son: Sir Tho. Aston's Deeds, page
31. n. Also Roger, another Son, whose Son William married Margaret Daughter of
Roger Toft of Toft, 1 Edw. 1. Lib. B. page 8. a.

II. William Manwaring of Over-Pever, Son and Heir of William, married -- and
had Issue Roger, eldest Son; William, another Son, whose Daughter Ellen married
Adam Glasebrook, 14 Edw. 3. 1341. Lib. B. page 9. g. Reginald, another Son:
Lib. B. page 11. r. And Maud, a Daughter, to whom her Father gave a Message in
Over-Pever, which Hamond of Radbroke formerly held: Lib. B. page 11. t.

This William Lord of Over-Pever lived 1286. 14 Edw. 1.

Roger Manwaring, Son and Heir of William, married Christian de Birtles, and
had Issue William, Son and Heir; and Joan, a Daughter, married Robert de
Fallybrome nigh Birtles, by whom she had Issue Robert, John, and Roger, living
1342. Lib. B. page 27. y. and page 9. I.

This Roger died in the Lifetime of his Father; and Christian his Widow
afterward married John de Byrun; and lastly, she married Robert de Varnon,
living 8 Edw. 3. 1334. Lib. B. page 8. b. d. f.

III. William Manwaring of Over-Pever, Son and Heir of Roger, married Mary
Daughter of Henry Davenport, living 19 Edw. 2. Lib. B. page 8. c. d. and had
Issue William Manwaring, Son and Heir; Roger, Margery, and Millicent, all
living 8 Edw. 3. 1334. Lib. B. page 8. f.

This William died about 12 or 13 Edw. 3.

IV. William Manwaring of Over-Pever, Son and Heir of William, had two Wives.

His first Wife was Joan Daughter and Coheir of William Praers of Baddiley
near Nantwich, by whom he had Issue William Manwaring Son and Heir: Lib. B.
page 13. g. and 15. I.

Margery, the other Coheir, married John Honford of Honford in
Maxfield-Hundred, who had Issue John Honford: Afterward she married Hugh Holt,
33 Edw. 3. but had no Issue by Holt: And she died 3 Rich. 2. 1380. Lib. B. page
28. b. But in the Inquisition taken at Chester, 28 Febr. 21 Rich. 2. it was
found that John Honford the Son was a Bastard, and that William Manwaring was
sole Heir to Margery, and nullus alius: Lib. B. page 27. z. Yet did William
Manwaring by his Will, Anno 1399. divide the Lands of Baddiley between John
Manwaring his Half-Brother, and the said John de Honford: Lib. B. page 28. a.

After the death of Joan Praers, this William married Elizabeth Daughter of
Nicolas Leycester, and Sister of John Leycester of Nether-Tabley, by whom he
had Issue John Manwaring, Randle Manwaring, both afterward Lords of Over-Pever
successively; Thomas, Alan, and Richard, living 38 Edw. 3. Lib. B. page 9. h.
and page 10. n. o. Also Emme, a Daughter, married Richard Wynnington, Son and
Heir of Sir Richard Wynnington of Wynnington nigh Northwich, 1357. 31 Edw. 3.
Lib. B. page 11. w. Ellen, another Daughter, married Raufe, Son and Heir of
Raufe, Son of Richard Vernon of Shibrok in Cheshire, 33 Edw. 3. 1359. Lib. B.
page 12. b. And Joan married William Legh of Baggiley, 33 Edw. 3. 1359. She
was but five Years old on Candlemas-day then last past; Lib. B. page 11. x. and
lived not to have any Issue by William Legh.

This William Manwaring was styled William Manwaring the Elder, 33 Edw. 3. Lib.
B. page 9. I. and page 12. b. He Sealed with his Coat of Arms most usually, to
wit, Three Bars, with a Lion Passant in Chief: Lib. B. page 9. I. Inscribed
about the Seal, -- SIGILL. WILLIELMI DE MAYNWARINGE. Which Coat of Arms he gave
in distinction from Manwaring of Warmincham, out of which Family his Ancestor
branched.

For Roger Manwaring of Warmincham, in the Reign of Henry the Third, Sealed
with Six Barrulets; whose Son and Heir Sir Thomas Manwaring of Warmincham used
only Two Bars in his Seal; as I have seen their Seals. And after the
Male-Line of Manwaring of Warmincham failed, then did the Heir of Manwaring of
Over-Pever assume the Two Bars only, in the Reign of Richard the Second, as
next Heir Male; leaving off this Coat of Three Bars with a Lion in Chief, as
shall anon in due place appear.

This William Manwaring the Elder died 38 Edw. 3. 1364. Elizabeth his Widow
survived, and was living 1405. 6 Hen. 4.

V. William Manwaring of Over-Pever junior, Son and Heir of William Manwaring
the Elder, by Joan Praers, had also two Wifes.

The first was Katharine Daughter of John Belgrave of Belgrave in the Township
of Eaton-boat in Cheshire, whom he married 40 Edw. 3. 1366. Lib. B. page 10. p.

His second Wife was Clementia Cotton: Lib. B. page 13. g. But he had not any
Issue by either Wife.

This William settles his Estate, upon his departure out of England toward
Guyen, 17 Rich. 2. 1393. and afterward made his Will, 1394. wherein (among
other things) he Bequeaths his Body to be Buried in Aghton-Church, and his
Picture in Alabaster to cover his Tomb in the said Church: He gave also to the
said Church a part of Christ's Cross, which the Wife of Randle Manwaring his
Half-Brother had in her Custody, shut up in Wax: Also to the Chapel of
Over-Pever, unam Togam de Blueto, ut fiat inde Vestimentum ibidem. He left also
a competent Salary for a Chaplain to celebrate for his Soul in the Chapel of
St. Mary in Aghton-Church, for seven Years: Lib. B. page 14. H. I.

His Seal, 17 Rich. 2. had the Impression of his blazon or coat of arms Coat
and Crest; to wit, In an Escocheon, two Bars only; and corner-ways, on the
Dexter-Angle, on a Helmet, An Ass-Head Couped; Lib. B. page 15. I. Inscribed
about, -- S. VVILLIELMI MAYNVVARINGE. For now the elder House of VVarmincham
was extinct, and devolved to a Daughter and Heir; wherefore he bears their Coat
without distinction, as next Heir-Male, which his Heirs have ever since
continued; to wit, Argent, two Bars Gules; the Creast, An Ass-Head Couped,
Proper.

This William died without Issue 1399. 22 Rich. 2. and was buried at
Aghton-Church, leaving John Manwaring his Half-Brother to succeed in his
Inheritance.

VI. John Manwaring of Over-Pever, Half-Brother and Heir to the last William,
and Son to William Manwaring the Elder by Elizabeth his second Wife, married
Margaret the Widow of Sir John Warren of Pointon in Cheshire, and Daughter and
Heir of Sir John Stafford of VVigham, about 13 Rich. 2. For Sir John Warren
died the tenth of Richard the Second: Lib. F. page 19. b.

The King gave to this John Manwaring all the Lands and Goods of Sir Hugh
Browe, which the said Sir Hugh had forfeited by his Rebellion: Dated 18
Augusti, 4 Hen. 4. Lib. B. page 24. d. e.

This John Manwaring waited on the Prince, afterward King Henry the Fifth; and
he was made Sheriff of Cheshire (quamdiu nobis placuerit) 18 Septembris, 4 Hen.
4. and continued Sheriff 5 Hen. 4. and 6 Hen. 4. In which Writ the Earl of
Chester calls him Armigerum suum.

He had also an Annual Pension of twenty Marks given him pro bono Servitio
impenso and impendendo, 8 Hen. 4.

Also he, with Matthew del Mere, and Thomas Meyshawe, were Constituted Judges
of the Jail-deliver at Chester, hac vice, nono die Aprilis, 5 Hen. 4.

This John Manwaring died without Lawful Issue, 11* Hen. 4. 1410. leaving his
Brother Randle to succeed in his Inheritance.

Margaret his Widow survived, and was living 4 Hen. 5. Lib. B. page 22. a. and
page 12. a.

He had a Bustard-son by Margery VVinnington, called Peter Manwaring: Lib. B.
page 13. g. h.

VII. Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire, Brother and Heir to John
Manwaring, married Margery the Widow of Richard Buckley of Chedill in Cheshire,
and Daughter of Hugh Venables Baron of Kinderton: He Petitioned the King for
enjoying the Dower of Margery his Wife, because he had Married her without the
King's License, 16 Rich. 2. by whom he had Issue John Manwaring, eldest Son;
William Manwaring, second Son, from whom the Manwarings of Ightfield in
Shropshire; Randle Manwaring, third Son, from whom the Manwarings of Carincham
in Cheshire; Elizabeth married Raufe Egerton of Wryne-Hill in Staffordshire;
Lib. B pa 16. n.
Cicely married Thomas Fowleshurst of Crew in Cheshire; Joan married John
Davenport, Son and Heir of Raufe Davenport of Davenport in Cheshire, 12 Hen. 4.
1411. Lib. B. page 16. m. Ellen married Thomas Fitton of Gowesworth in
Cheshire; Agnes, another Daughter, was Affianced to William Bromley of
Badington in Cheshire, Son of Sir John Bromley; but she died before Marriage:
whereupon he married Margaret Sister to Agnes, 4 Hen. 6. 1426. Lib. B. page 7.
number. 8, 9. This Margaret was Widow 15 Hen. 6. 1436. Lib. B. page 17. q. r. And
after she married Sir John Nedham of Crannach, Justiciarius de Banco, and Judge
of Chester 1 Edw. 4. But Sir John Nedham had no Issue by her.

This Randle was also a Courtier, styled Armiger Regis, The King's Servant, and
Sagittarius de Corona, 21 Rich. 2. and went into Ireland with his Brother John
in the King's Service, 22 Rich. 2. He had the Office of Equitator Forestae de
Mara and Mondrum granted unto him for his Life, 6 Hen. 4. and two Parts of the
Serjeanty of Maxfield-Hundred, which were Raufe Davenport's, till John
Davenport came to Age; Dated 3 Hen. 5. And he had also (with others) the
Custody of the Manor of Kerincham in Cheshire, 13 Hen. 6.

He had a Bastard-Son by Emme Farrington, called Hugh Manwaring, from whom the
Manwarings of Croxton nigh Middle-wich: Also Thomas Manwaring of North-Rode,
another Bastard-Son, 12 Rich. 2. and Randle, another Bastard-Son, 4 Hen. 4. and
also three Bastard-Daughters: Lib. B. page 13. h. and page 42. a. b. c.

This Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever, styled commonly Honkyn Manwaring in the
Language of those Times died 35 Hen. 6. 1456. Lib. B. page 21. e. Buried at
Over-Pever, in the Stone Chapel on the South side of the Church: Which Chapel
Margery his Wife surviving, erected, with the two Monuments therein, for her
self and Husband, Anno Domini 1456.

VIII. Sir John Manwaring of Over-Pever Knight, Son and Heir of Randle, married
Margaret Daughter of John Delves of Dodington the Elder, 13 Hen. 4. 1411. Lib.
B. page 16. k. l. and had Issue William Manwaring, Son and Heir; Elizabeth
married Piers Warburton, Son and Heir of Sir Geffrey de Warburton Lord of
Arley, 1436. 14 Hen. 6. Lib. B. page 16. o. Margaret married Hamnet Son and
Heir of John Ashley of Ashley in Bodon-Parish, 30 Hen. 6. 1452. Lib. B. page
17. t.

Anno 38 Hen. 6. the King sends his Letter to this Sir John Manwaring, that he
deliver to the Lord Stanley these Persons following, then in the Castle of
Chester, for some Matters alleged against them in the late Parliament at
Coventry; to wit, Thomas and John Nevill Sons of the Earls of Salisbury, Sir
Thomas Harrington, James Harrington, Raufe Rokeby, Thomas Ashton, and Robert
Evereus, Esquires. Stow in his Chronicle mentions many more attainted in this
Parliament at Coventry, 38 Hen. 6.

Anno 13 Edw. 4. the King grants to Sir John Manwaring Officium Magistri
Deductus nostri Parcorum nostrorum de Blakemere and Cheswardyn in Comitatu
Salopiae, during the Minority of George Son and Heir of John Earl of
Shrewsbury, with four Marks Annual Fee: Dated 30 die Novembris, 13 Edw. 4. 1473.

The Parchment Book belonging to March King at Arms, tempore Edw. 4. says, Sir
John Manwaring had two Sons, William and John.

Sir John Manwaring of Over-Pever died about the very end of Edward the
Fourth's Reign; and had a second Wife, called Joan, Daughter of John Warren of
Pointon, 33 Hen. 6. Lib. B. page 21. P.

William Manwaring, Son and Heir of Sir John, married Ellen Sister to John
Butler of Bewsy nigh Warrington in Lancashire, and Daughter of Sir John Butler,
22 Hen. 6. 1443. Lib. B. page 17. s. and had Issue John Manwaring: Lib. B. page
23. b.

This William died in the Lifetime of Sir John his Father.

IX. John Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire, Son and Heir of William, marired
Maud Daughter of Robert Legh of Adlington Esquire; and had Issue John
Manwaring, eldest Son; and Robert Manwaring: Lib. B. page 19. b. and 23. b.
Maud, a Daughter, married to Thomas Starkey of Wrenbury in Cheshire Esquire, 5
Hen 7. 1490. Lib. B. page 21. q. Joan, another Daughter, married Sir Thomas
Ashton of Ashton super Mersey in Cheshire, 4 Hen. 8. 1512. Lib. B. page 18. x.
Maud, wife of John Manwaring, being then Widow.

This John Manwaring Esquire died the eighth day of July, 10 Hen. 7. 1495 Lib.
B. pa. 17. w.

He had a Bastard-son, called Charles Manwaring, living 35 Hen. 8. Lib. B. pa.
19. b.

X. Sir John Manwaring of Over-Pever Knight, Son and Heir of John, was Knighted
in France, 1513. Lord Herbert's History of Hen. 8. page 42. He married
Katharine Honford, Sister of William Honford of Honford in Cheshire Esquire;
Lib. B. page 19. aa. and had Issue Randle Manwaring, eldest Son; Edmund died
without Issue; John died without Issue; Piers died without Issue; Philip
Manwaring afterward became Lord of Over-Pever; Edward, from whom the
Manwarings of Whitmore in Staffordshire: Robert, from whom the Manwarings of
Martin-Sands in Cheshire; Thomas, George, Henry: Lib. B. page 18. y. Margaret,
a Daughter; and Katharine, married to William Son of Homfrey Newton of Pownall,
13 Hen. 8. 1521. Lib. B. pa. 19. a.

On this Sir John's Monument in Over-Pever-Church, I find mention of three
other Children more then is abovementioned: Nicolas, and two Williams, which
probably died very young.

This Sir John was Sheriff of Flintshire, 6 Hen. 8. 1514. and dyed 8 Hen. 8.
1515. at the age of 45 years.

By his Will, among other things, he gave to the Parish Church of Over-Pever
his Black Velvet Gown, guarded with Cloth of Gold, to make a Cope for the same
Church; and also 4 l. 13 s. 4 d. to an honest Priest to pray for his Soul for
four Years in Over-Pever-Church; and twenty Pounds toward the making of a new
Steeple of Stone at Over-Pever; but this last was never effected: and also to
Charles Manwaring his Bastard-brother yearly 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. for his Life, etc.
Dated 4 Martii, 1515. 7 Hen. 8. Lib. B. page 18. y.

Katharine, the widow of Sir John, died 1529.

XI. Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever Knight, Son and Heir of Sir John,
married Elizabeth the Widow of Richard Cholmondeley of Cholmondley in Cheshire,
Esquire, and Daughter of Sir Randle Brereton of Malpas, by whom he had Issue
Margaret, married to Sir Arthur Manwaring of Ightfield in Shropshire;
Elizabeth, married to Peter Shakerley of Houlm in Allostock in Cheshire
Esquire; afterward to Christopher Holford of Holford Esquire, 1561. And
Katharine, married to John Davenport of Henbury in Cheshire Esquire: ut per
inquisitionem post mortem Ranulphi Manwaring Militis, 5 and 6 Phil. and Mar.

After the death of his first Wife, Sir Randle married Elizabeth Daughter of
Sir Raufe Leycester of Toft, 6 Edw. 6. 1551. Lib. B. page 19. b. d. but had no
Issue by her.

Sir Randle dyed 6 die Septembris, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. 1557. Elizabeth his
Widow after married Sir Edmund Trafford of Trafford in Lancashire nigh
Manchester, and by him had Issue.

XII. Philip Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire, fifth Son of Sir John Manwaring,
and Brother and next Heir-male to Sir Randle, married Anne Daughter of Sir
Raufe Leycester of Toft juxta Over-Pever: Lib. B. page 20. e. and had Issue
Randle Manwaring, Son and Heir; Edmund Manwaring of Ranmore nigh Nantwich,
called Captain Manwaring; and Elizabeth, who died without Issue:

This Philip died 11 die Aprilis, 1573. 15 Eliz. as appears by his Monument in
Over-Pever Church.

XIII. Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever, the Elder, Knight, Son and Heir of
Philip, married Margaret Daughter of Sir Edward Fitton of Gowesworth in
Cheshire, sometime Treasurer of Ireland, 9 Eliz. 1567. Lib. B. page 20. f. and
had Issue Sir Randle Manwaring the younger; Edmund Manwaring Doctor of Law, and
Chancellor of Chester, 1642. Thomas Manwaring, third Son, Doctor of Divinity,
and Parson of Weldon in Northamptonshire, living 1634. Edward, John, Arthur,
died all in their Infancy; Sir Philip Manwaring, Secretary of Ireland to the
Earl of Strafford, 1638. youngest Son, was never married, and died 2 die
Augusti, 1661. at London: Anne, a Daughter, married Lawrence Smith, Son and
Heir of Sir Thomas Smith of Hough in Widdenbury Parish in Cheshire; married at
Great-Budworth 31 Augusti, 1591. Katharine, another Daughter, married Sir
Edward Stanley of Bickerstaff in Lancashire, Baronet; Elizabeth, another
Daughter, married Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley in Cheshire, Esquire 1611. 9
Jacobi: And Elinour, another Daughter, never married.

After the Death of Margaret, this Sir Randle married Katharine the Widow of
William Brereton of Honford in Cheshire, Esquire, and Daughter of Roger
Hurleston of Chester, Esquire: Lib. B. page 20. h.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Herald made for this Sir Randle's Coat,
Barry of Twelve Pieces, Argent and Gules: See Guillim's Heraldry, page 373. but
erroneous. So also the Herald then placed the Earl of Chester's Coat in the
Quarterings of Manwaring; but absurdly, and not right.

This Sir Randle the Elder built the Hall of Over-Pever anew, 1586. the Fabric
being now of Brick: And he was Sheriff of Cheshire, 1605. 3 Jacobi.

Sir Randle the Elder died 27 Maii, 1612. 10 Jacobi.

XIV. Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever, the younger, Knight, Son and Heir of
Sir Randle the Elder, married Jane Daughter of Sir Thomas Smith of Hough
aforesaid, by whom he had Issue Philip Manwaring Son and Heir; George Manwaring
of Marthall, second Son, now living 1666. Margaret, the eldest Daughter, died
an Infant; Elizabeth, second Daughter, marrried first to Robert Ravenscroft of
Bretton in Harden-Parish, beyond Chester, Esquire, and had many Children;
Afterward she married Sir Francis Gamole of Chester, but she had no Issue by
him: She survived both her Husbands, and died at Chester 13 Augusti, 1661. and
was buried at Harden: Anne, third Daughter, married Robert Brierwood of
Chester, Counselor at Law, after Sir Robert Brierwood, Knighted 1643. and
Judge of three Shires in Wales: Margaret, youngest Daughter, married Henry
Birkenhed, Son and Heir of Henry Berkinhed of Backford nigh Chester, Esquire,
Prothonotary of Chester, and had Issue; but they all died before they came to
Maturity. This Margaret died at Chester, 25 Julii, 1661.

This Sir Randle the Younger was Sheriff of Limrick in Ireland, 3 Jacobi, 1605.
Lib. B. page 26. t. in which very Year also his Father was Sheriff of Cheshire.

The same Sir Randle the Younger was Sheriff of Cheshire 1619. and Mayor of
Chester also the same Year; and died 12 die Januarii, 1632. 8 Car. 1.

XV. Philip Manwaring of Over-Pever, Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Randle the
Younger, married Ellen Daughter of Edward Minshull of Stoke near Nantwich, Esquire
20 Jacobi, 1622. and had Issue Randle, who died without Issue in his Youth;
Philip, second Son, died in his Infancy; Thomas, third Son, survived Heir to
his Father; A fourth Son, lived not to be Baptized; Edmund died in his Infancy;
George, sixth Son, died in his Infancy; Another Philip, seventh Son, died in
his Infancy; Edward Manwaring, youngest Son, living 1666. And Jane, a Daughter,
died in her Infancy.

This Philip was Captain of the Light Horse of Cheshire; and was Sheriff of
Cheshire 1639.

He died the tenth of December, 1647. Ellen his Widow surviving, built a neat
Chapel of Stone on the North-side of the Chancel of Over-Pever Church, with
two brave Monuments for her self and Husband, and a fair Vault under the said
Chapel, for Burial, Anno Domini 1648.

She built also a stately Stable, and Dove-house, at Over-Pever, 1654. and she
died 1656.

XVI. Sir Thomas Manwaring of Over-Pever Baronet, Son and Heir of Philip,
married Mary Daughter of Sir Henry Delves of Dodington in Widdenbury-Parish,
Baronet; and had Issue Philip, Thomas, Randle, who died young all three; John
Manwaring, and William Manwaring, both living 1666. Henry died in his Infancy;
Mary, and Helen, both died in their Infancy; Elizabeth, Anne, Katharine, and
Grace, all four now living, 1666.

This Thomas Manwaring was Sheriff of Chester, 1657. and created Baronet 22
Novembris, 1660. and is yet living, 1666. Mary his Lady died at Baddiley the
first day of March, 1670. and was buried at Over-Pever, in the Vault under the
New-Chappel there, on Monday the sixth of March, Anno Domini 1670.

Little-Pever.
THe Township of Nether-Pever, though now divided into two Hundreds, was
anciently but one entire Township: At this day it seems to be divided into two
Townships; Great-Pever, which lies in Northwich-Hundred; and Little-Pever,
which lies within Bucklow-Hundred, severed by the River called Pever-Eye. Ee
is an old word for a Brook; and Ees is a Bank or Land lying by the side of a
Brook, or River.


And whether you take them together, as one Township, by the Name of
Nether-Pever; or as two Towns, called Great-Pever, and Little-Pever; yet have
they jointly, or severally, been severed into two distinct Fees or
Inheritances, ever since the Norman Conquest, to this day.

One Moiety of them was held by William Fitz-Nigell, Baron of Halton, in the
Conqueror's Time, as appears by Doomsday-book.

This Moiety (I speak now out of my own Evidences) was given by Roger Lacy,
Constable of Cheshire, and Baron of Halton, unto one Osberne de Wethale, about
King John's Reign; to wit, all his Moiety of Pever; Rendering yearly half a Mark
of Silver, and doing Foreign Service as much as belongs to the twentieth Part
of a Knights Fee. G. number. 1.

And I find Robert de Pever possessed hereof in the Reign of Henry the Third;
to whom William Son of Richard Haddlebert (who, as it seems, claimed some
Property there releaseth all his Claim in that Moiety of Nether-Pever, which is
of the Fee of the Constable of Cheshire, that is, of the Fee of Halton. G. number.
3.

Hugh, Son of that Robert de Pever, sells all his Birthright in Pever, which
was to descend to him after the death of his Father Robert de Pever, unto
William de Hawarthen, for One hundred Pound Sterling, about the beginning of
Edward the First's Reign. G. number. 4.

William de Hawarthen sells it to Richard Bonetable; and Richard Bonetable
sells it to William Son of Raufe de Mobberley, for fifty Marks of Silver, 1281.
whose Son William de Mobberley was possessed of the said Moiety of
Nether-Pever, cum Homagiis, Wardis, etc. 13 Edw. 2. G. 6, 7.

Afterward this Moiety was Purchased (as I take it) by Robert Grosvenour of
Holme nigh Nether-Pever, about Edward the second: In which Line it continued
till Edward the Fourth, about 150 Years; and at last it descended to Margaret
the youngest Daughter and Coheir of Robert Grosvenour of Houlme in Allostock
Esquire, with the third Part of Alderley also, the Wife of Thomas Leycester of
Tabley Esquire, by Partition dated 1465. 5 Edw. 4. Z. number. 28. whose Heirs do
now enjoy the said Moiety of Nether-Pever, 1666. and the Rent now paid to
Halton, according to the Original Deed of Roger Lacy aforesaid.

Charterers in this Moiety, 1666.
1. Thomas Wood of Little-Pever, near to Pever-Bridge: He pays a Pair of White
Gloves yearly to Leycester of Tabley, at Midsommer, pro libero Tenemento suo in
Pever. 2. Peter Wood of Little-Pever, formerly Robert Cotton's, more anciently
styled Minshull-Seat, did pay to Leycester 3 s. 4 d. yearly, Chief-Rent: But
John Leycester of Tabley Esquire remitted the same to Cotton, by Deed dated 17 Hen.
7. 3. Hiccock's Land, situate in Great-Pever, now enjoyed by Powdrill, Thomas
Deane, and Mrs. Pemberton, who pay amongst them yearly 2 s. of Chief-Rent to
Leycester of Tabley.
And all these Charterers do Suit of Court to the Court Baron of Leycester of
Tabley, held for his Manor of Pever.

The other Moiety of Nether-Pever was held in the Conqueror's Time by
Ranulphus, as I take it, in Doomsday-book.

This Moiety was given to Richard Pool of Hartington by Robert Morley Marshal
of Ireland, with all the Rents, Homages, and Services, which descended
Hereditarily to the said Robert in the County of Chester, after the death of
Sir Robert de Monte alto his Uncle; except the Rents formerly given unto Queen
Isabel: Dated 24 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 230. y. The Original of this Deed
remained among the Evidences of the late Lord Cholmondley; and the Copy of the
Fine Levied hereon in the same Year, is Enrolled in the Leiger-Book of the Abbey
of Vale-Royal, fol. 30. b. which Book was in possession of Thomas Merbury of
Merbury nigh Comberbach, Esquire, 1666.

Vide Tom. 2. of my own Evidences, in principio.
In the Year of Christ 1364. die Veneris in Festo Sanctae Luciae Virginis, John
Pool came before Thomas then Abbot of Vale-Royal, in the said Abbey, and did
Fealty to the said Abbot for this Moiety of the Manor of Nether-Pever, which
he acknowledged to hold of the said Abbot by the yearly Rent of Twelve Pence,
to be paid at the Feast of St. Michael only, and by paying to the said Abbot
two Shillings for Relief; as appears by the same Book.

Lib. C. fol. 230. z.
From Pool of Hartington this Moiety was granted to George Holford of Holford,
about the Time of Henry the Seventh: In which Family of the Holfords of Holford
it continued, till Mary Daughter and Heir of Christopher Holford Esquire
brought the Inheritance of all Holford-Lands unto Sir Hugh Cholmondley of
Cholmondley, the younger, in Marriage, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Concerning which Inheritance great Suits fell between the said Lady Mary
Cholmondley, and George Holford of Newborough in Dutton, uncle to the said
Mary, and next Heir-male of the Holfords.

These Suits lasted above forty Years: At last, toward the end of King James's
Reign, the matter was composed by Friends: The Lady Mary had Holford-Demain;
and George Holford had the Demain of Iscoit in Flintshire, near to Whitchurch
in Shropshire. The Lands in Nether-Pever, Plumley, and Lostock-Gralam,
belonging to the Holfords, were promiscuously allotted, Part to the one, and
Part to the other, as at this day they be enjoyed.

So that in the Year 1659. Robert Cholmondley Earl of Leimster in Ireland, Son
and Heir of the said Lady Mary, and James Holford of Newborough Esquire, Son of
Peter, Son of George Holford abovesaid, did enjoy this other Moiety of
Nether-Pever between them: In which Year the said Lord Cholmondley died,
without any Lawful Issue of his Body.

Concerning the Chapel of Nether-Pever, see above in Budworth.

Picmere.
This Township of Picmere is not in Doomsday-book, whereby it seems to be
Waste at that time.

It was anciently of two Fees in the Reign of King John. One Moiety Raufe
Manwaring (sometime Judge of Chester) gave unto Henry de Aldithley, or Audley,
in Free-Marriage with Bertrey his Daughter, together with the Towns of
Smallwood and Snelston, and a Mark of Annual Rent in the City of Chester, of
the Land which belonged to one Fagun: Unto which Deed Philip Orreby, then Judge
of Chester, was a Witness. The Original is in Cotton's Library at Westminster:
Lib. B. page 1. a.

Henry of Audley, by the consent of Bertrey his Wife, gave to Thomas Son of
Randle de Longsdon, libero homini suo, half of his Land in Picmere, and half of
his Wood there; Rendering yearly 3 s. 4 d. as I find the Deed extracted in
Vernon's Notes.

This Moiety of Picmere is now enjoyed by these Persons following, 1666.

1. Thomas Merbury of Merbury Esquire has one half of this Moiety, which
formerly belonged to the Cockers of Picmere ever since the Reign of Henry the
Third, until Hugh Cocker of Pickmere sold the Reversion hereof, after his Life,
unto Thomas Merbury, Father of Thomas aforesaid, Anno Domini 1604. Probably
this was that Part which Henry Audley gave to Thomas Longsdon.

2. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire has four Tenements here in Lease.
These were formerly held by William Wiche, and called Wiche's Lands; which upon
the Attainder of Sir William Stanley of Holt-Castle, Anno Domini 1495. Lord
Chamberlain to Henry the Seventh, Escheated to the King, and were afterward
given to George Sutton, one of the Grooms of the Chamber, 14 H. 8. Sutton sold
them to Richard Sneyd, 7 Novembris, 14 Hen. 8. and William Sneyd sold them to
Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, 36 Hen. 8.

3. Sir Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley, Baronet, has one Tenement here, now
in Possession of John Perceivall; which was Part of Wiche's Lands, and was sold
by William Sneyd to Gawen Legh of Northwood in High-Legh, 35 Hen. 8. 1543.
before he sold the rest to Daniell: And this Tenement afterward Richard Legh
of Northwood Gentleman, sold (among other Lands) to Peter Leycester of Tabley
Esquire, 1633. whose Son now enjoys the same.

4. John Swinton of Nether-Knotsford has one good Tenement here: But part of
this lies in Winsham, formerly Crocket's Land of Nantwich.

5. John Key of the Yate in Picmere; Part of Crocket's Land formerly.

6. Peter Deane of Over-Tabley has Land in Picmere, lately bought from Key of
the Yate.

7. Philip Anterbus of Over-Pever, one Close, belonging to his Freehold Land
in Aston juxta Picmere.

8. Sir George Warburton of Arley Baronet has about one Acre and a half, in
Possession of Robert Deusbery and Thomas Starky of Feldy.

The other Moiety of Picmere, together with the Manor of Winsham, William
Venables gave to Maud his Sister in Free-Marriage, to be held by the Service of
half a Knights Fee; whereunto Roger Lacy, Constable of Cheshire, is a Witness;
Which Roger died Anno Domini 1211. 13 Johannis Regis, says Matthew Paris in
his History: Lib. B. page 50. a.

This Maud had two Husbands: The first was Raufe Son of Roger; the second was
Hugh de Bixis, or Brixis. This Hugh and his Wife grant to Hugh Venables all the
Land which William de Offley held of them in Picmere, and the Wardship of the
Children of Hugh Son of the said William de Offley, till they come to such Age
as to govern the said Land. Lib. B. page 50. e.

Ex Chartulis Glover de Picmere.
Hugh Venables grants to Hugh de Picmere, and his Heirs, the whole Moiety of
the Village of Picmere, for the same Service contained in the Deed of William
Venables his Father, the Donor of the same Lands. This was tempore Henrici
Tertii: Lib. B. page 51. number. 1.

Afterward William Son of Guy of Winsham grants to Henry Son of Hugh de
Picmere all his Rent in the Township of Picmere, to wit, 3 s. 1 d. ob. which he
yearly received from Hugh de Picmere; Rendering a Pair of White Gloves yearly:
Lib. B. page 54. number. 19.

And Pagan, Son of Raufe de Wastneys, Lord of Winsham, releaseth to the said
Henry all his Right in 3 s. 1 d. ob. Rent, which he received of the said Henry:
So that now he was only to pay 3 s. 1 d. ob. yearly from henceforward, and a
Pair of Gloves, for all Services: And this was in the Reign of Edward the
First: Lib. B. page 51. number. 2.

Hugh Picmere, Son of Henry, was seized of this Moiety; whose Son Hugh had
three Daughters, Isabel, Alice, and Margaret, 1343. Lib. B. page 52. number. 6.
And in Anno 1356. he settles his Manor of Picmere, for want of Heirs-Males of
his Body, on Hugh Bruyn of Stapleford, and Margaret his Wife, Daughter of the
said Hugh Picmere: Lib. B. page 53. number. 12.

Margaret, the Widow of Hugh Bruyn of Picmere, grants to Hugh Hulse of Picmere
all her Lands of Picmere, 42 Edw. 3. Lib. B. page 52. number. 10.

This Hugh Hulse was Lieutenant-Justice of Chester, 20 Rich. 2. to Thomas Earl
of Nottingham; and married Ellen Daughter and Heir of Hugh Bruyn and Margaret,
36 Edw. 3. The Marriage and Wardship of Ellen was granted by Margaret her
Mother to David Hulse Vicar of Great-Budworth, to marry Hugh Son of Sybill,
Daughter of William Son of Hugh de Norbery, 36 Edw. 3. Lib. B. page 52. number.
11. and page 54. number. 21. This Sir Hugh Hulse dying 3 Hen. 5. or thereabout, it
was found by Inquisition, That he died seized of seven Messuages in Picmere,
200 Acres of Land, and 20 Acres of Wood ibidem, quae tenentur de Willielmo
Leycester, ut de Manerio suo de Wethale, sed per quod Servitium ignoratur:
Inter Recognitiones Scaccarii Cestriae, Bundle 3 Hen. 5.

Afterward John Troutback Esquire married Margery Daughter and Heir of Thomas
Hulse, in the Reign of Henry the Sixth: Lib. B. page 53. number. 17.

And Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Adam Troutback, married John Talbot of
Albrighton in Shropshire, from whom the Talbots of Grafton in Worcestershire
descended, whose Posterity at last came to be Earls of Shrewsbury: And George
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury sells all his Lands in Picmere (to wit, the Moiety of
Picmere) unto his Tenants there, Anno 1620. every Tenant buying his own, and so
are become particular Freeholders at this day.

Thomas Starkey's Lands, now in Picmere, were Purchased from Raufe Bostock of
Moulton by John Starkey his Father, 14 Aprilis, 7 Jacobi, 1609. and was
originally given by Henry de Picmere unto Richard his younger Son, 1192. A
Parcel thereof was given to the said Richard, by Hugh Picmere his Elder
Brother, 1308. Lib. B. page 58. a. b. c.

Plumley.
ROger Manwaring gave Plumley to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester, when he
made his Son Wido a Monk there; William and Randle his Sons being Witnesses:
Which Grant, with many others, Richard Earl of Chester confirmed, 1119. 19 Hen.
1.

In the Feodary of Halton, about Edw. 2. we read, -- Thomas de Vernon tenet
Villam de Lostock, cum Parva-Lostock, and medietatem de Plumley, pro medietate
unius Feodi Militis.

This Thomas de Vernon was second Husband of Joan de Lostock, in whose Right he
held these Lands. Her former Husband was William de Toft, younger Son of Roger
Toft of Toft: The Posterity of which William assumed the Surname of Holford,
from the Place of their Residence at Holford, according to the Custom of those
Ages.

This Place, or Hamlet, called Holford, lies Part in Plumley, and Part in
Lostock-Gralam, and has its Name from the Ford which runs under the
Mannor-Hall, which, because it is situate in a Derne Hole, was therefore called
Holford, as if you should say, A Ford in a Hole: Or else, from the old Word [
Hale], which we now call [ Hall], and so denotes as much as A Ford under the
Hall: Or, possibly, from the old Word [ Holt] A Wood, quasi Holt-Ford; for that
the Ford anciently was environed with a Wood round about.

All the Tenants of Plumley at this day do Suit of Court to the Manor of
Barnshaw, which formerly belonged to the Abbey of St. Werburge in Chester, but
was bought by Manwaring of Carincham since the Dissolution of Abbeys in England.

Agnes the Daughter of Walthef de Plumley by Henry her Son Attornatum positum
ad lucrandum and perdendum, by Fine at Chester, 2 Edw. 1. 1274. passes the
eighth Part of Plumley unto Thomas the Smith of Plumley, and to William his
Son. This William, in his Seal, calls himself Willielmus Filius Ceciliae de
Plumley.

And by another Fine, 2 Edw. 1. the same Agnes passes over one other eighth
Part of Plumley unto Richard Sladehurst of Plumley, and Lettice his-Wife* which
Lettice, in her Seal, calls her self the Daughter of William de Plumley: Lib.
A. fol. 157. h. k. The Originals Penes Manwaring of Carincham, 1666.

I find also, that William Mobberley of Mobberley had certain Lands in Plumley,
about Edward the Second: Lib. A. fol. 124. y. which were held of the Baron of
Halton, by the yearly Rent of a Pair of White Spurs, or Six Pence: See supra in
Halton.

And Sir Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley gave his Manor in Plumley unto Thomas
Toft, and Margaret his Wife, and their Heirs, 1357. 32 Edw. 3. Lib. A. fol.
129. II. One half of these Lands now belong to Leycester of Tabley, and the
other half to Bradshaw of Marple, as you may see more at large in Mobberley.

So that now, Anno Domini 1666. the whole Township of Plumley is enjoyed by
these Persons following. --

* Thomas Cholmondley of Holford Esquire, and James Holford of Newborough in
Dutton, have one Moiety of Plumley between them.

The other Moiety is enjoyed by these Persons following. --

1. Sir Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley Baronet has five Tenements here, now
in Possession of Robert Massy, Geffrey Wright, William Ridgeway, Thomas Wright,
and Thomas Hough.

2. Mr. Bradshaw of Marple, a good Farm, in Possession of Thomas Buckley.

3. The Land late Litler's of Wallers-cote nigh Northwich, three Tenements, in
Possession of Hugh Yanes, Homfrey Mere, and Widow Bebington.

4. George Leycester of Toft Esquire, one Tenement, in Possession of William
Highfield.

5. Robert Venables of Anterbus in Over-Whitley has three Closes in Plumley,
in Possession of Raufe Henshaw.

6. Reynolds of Middlewich (late belonging to Bostock of Moulton) one Tenement,
in Possession of Raufe Newhall, at the end of Plumley-Moore.

7. John Hall of Norley, one Tenement in Plumley, in Possession of John Kirkman.

8. Manwaring of Pever's Land (sold to Holford of Holford) one Tenement at the
side of Plumley-Moore, in Possession of Richard Eaton.

9. Earl of Bridgewater, a small Parcel, about four Cheshire Acres.

Now follows the Descent of Holford of Holford.
blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Greyhound Passant, Sable.


Hugh de Runchamp, Lord of Lostock: Lib. C. fol. 126. ll. Ricardus de Runchamp.
Gralanus Filius Ricardi de Runchamp; in memory of whom the Town was called
Lostock-Gralam, for distinction. He gave the Town of Lees unto Lidulf of
Twamlow, about the Reign of King John: Lib. C. fol. 227. z. This Gralam also
sold Houlme juxta Nether-Pever to Richard Son of Randle Ranulfi, con Radulfi.
Grosvenour, 1234. Lib. C. fol. 120. a. Gralam de Lostock, and Letitia Uxor
ejus: Tempore Hen. 3. Galfridus de Lostock, ^ui Frater dedit medietatem de
Rode. Gralam de Morton.
Robert de Lostock: Lib. C. fol. 182. b. Richard* Son of Gralam de Lostock
married Emme de Merton: Lib. C. fol. 228. a. Joan, Sister and Heir to her two
Brothers. * Thomas de Lostock, second son, di'd without Issue. Richard, Son of
Rich. Lostock, died without Issue: Lib. C. fo. 228. b. c. gg. and fol. 229. v.
-- Agnes, Daughter of Richard Wilburham, living 28 Edw. 1. and 5 Edw. 1. She
survived 1319.





blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Text Tees Sable.
I. William Toft, younger Son of Roger de Toft, Lord of Toft, married Joan
Daughter of Richard de Lostock, and Sister and Heir to Richard and Thomas her
Brothers, 5 Edw. 7. 1277. Lib. C. fol. 228. b. by whom he had Issue Roger de
Holford, Henry, and Walter: Lib. C. fol. 229. k. l. and fol. 231. q.

After the death of William Toft, Joan married Thomas Vernon, about Anno Domini
1316. and had Issue by Thomas, Richard Vernon, from whom the Vernons of
Haslington in Cheshire. Lib. C. fol. 228. d.

And after the death of Thomas Vernon, she married William Hallum of Hallum in
Newton juxta Daresbery, Anno Domini 1337. 11 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 228. g. h.

II. Roger de Holford, Son and Heir of William Toft and Joan Lostock, lived
1316. He assumed the Surname of Holford from the Place of his Residence, as
was the manner of those Ages; which Surname his Posterity ever since retained.

He married Margery Daughter of Richard le Dispenser; but died without Issue, 5
Edw. 3. 1330. Lib. C. fol. 229. k. v.

III. Henry Holford, Brother and Heir to Roger, married Margery Daughter of
(...) and had Issue William, eldest Son; and Roger Holford, younger Son, to
whom his Father gave Lands in Plumley, 1344. Lib. C. fol. 228. hh.

William Holford, Son and Heir of Henry, had to Wife Isabel Daughter of (...)
and had Issue John Holford, Son and Heir.

This William died in the Lifetime of his Father. Isabel his Widow was living
1347. 21 Edw. 3.

IV. John Holford of Holford, Son and Heir of William, married Joan Daughter of
Roger Bruyn of Stapleford, 1347. 21 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 229. m. and had Issue
Thomas Holford.

This John recovered the Manor of Holford against Richard Vernon of
Lostock-Gralam, 42 Edw. 3. and Sealed usually with his Coat of Arms, to wit,
Holford's Coat is, Argent a Cheveron between three Text Tees Sable.
A Cheveron between three Text Tees; which Cheveron gives the distinction from
Toft of Toft, who bears that Coat without a Cheveron: Lib. C. fol. 229. v. and
230. a.

This John Holford died 99 Hen. 4. 1408.

Thomas Holford, Son and Heir of John, married Alice Daughter of William
Buckley of Oateworth: Lib. C. fol. 229. r. and died before his Father, to wit,
12 Rich. 2. leaving Issue William Holford.

V. William Holford of Holford, Son and Heir of Thomas, lived 1423. 2 Hen. 6.
Lib. C. fol. 230. w. He married Margaret Daughter of Sir Richard Venables of
Kinderton; and had Issue Thomas, Son and Heir; John, Hugh; Jonet, Wife of
Randle Brereton of Malpas; and Margery: Lib. C. fol. 132. b. l. and 231. s. t.
and 230. b.

This William Holford died 38 Hen. 6. 1459.

VI. Thomas Holford of Holford Esquire, Son and Heir of William, married Joan
Daughter of Richard Legh de VVest-Hall in High-Legh, and had Issue Thomas
Holford.

This Thomas Holford died 4 Edw. 4. 1464. Lib. C. fol. 231. T.

VII. Thomas Holford of Holford, the younger, Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas
the elder, married Maud Daughter of William Buckley Deputy-Judge of Chester,
1444. Lib. C. fol. 230. b. and had Issue, George Holford, Son and Heir; Randle
Holford, second Son, who had Issue Homphrey and Richard; Robert Holford, third
Son of Thomas, who had Issue John, Philip, Bartholomew, Owen, Matthew, and
Bryan.

This Thomas died about 13 Edw. 4. 1473.

VIII. Sir George Holford of Holford Knight, Son and Heir of Thomas, married
Isabel Widow to Lawrence Warren of Pointon in Cheshire, and Daughter of Robert
Legh of Adlington Esquire, 1475. 15 Edw. 4. Lib. C. fol. 231. l. and had Issue
John Holford, Son and Heir; George Holford, another Son, 22 Hen. 7. Lib. C.
fol. 231. n. p. Constance married William Son of Edward Bradshaw, 2 Hen. 8.
1511. Lib. C. fol. 231. o.

Sir George had four Bastard-sons; Thomas; Arthur, from whom the Holfords of
Davenham; Raufe, and Robert; also Ellen, a base Daughter; all living 22 Hen. 7.
Lib. C. fol. 231. p.

Sir George was Sheriff of Cheshire 16 Hen. 8. 1524. He bore Lostock's Coat in
his Seal, Lostock 's Coat, Argent, a Greyhound Sable.
to wit, A Greyhound, over which, corner-ways, on the Dexter Angle of the
Escocheon, on a Helmet, Wreath, and Mantle, a Greyhound's Head Couped; written
about the Seal, -- S. GEORGII HOLFORD MILITIS.

IX. Sir John Holford of Holford Knight, Son and Heir of Sir George, married
Margery Sole Daughter and Heir of Raufe Brereton of Iscoit in Flintshire, not
far from Whitchurch in Shropshire, 22 Hen. 7. 1507. and had Issue Thomas
Holford, Son and Heir; Christopher Holford, younger Son, married Margaret
Daughter of Thomas Danyell of Over-Tabley Esquire, 1555. Lib. C. fol. 243. k.
from whom the Holfords of London and Essex; Alice, a Daughter, married Piers
Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, 21 Hen. 8. 1529. O. number. 6.

I find he was Knight 21 Hen. 8. O number. 6. He was Sheriff of Cheshire, 33 Hen.
8. 1541. And he died about 1545. For Margery his Widow married Sir Henry
Sacheverell of Morley in Darbyshire, 1 Edw. 6. 1547. Lib. C. fol. 231. m. and
230. h.

X. Thomas Holford of Holford Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John, married
Margaret Daughter of Sir Thomas Butler of Bewsy in Lancashire, nigh Warrington;
by whom he had Issue Christofer, Son and Heir.

After the death of Margaret, he married Jane the Widow of Hugh Dutton, Son and
Heir of Sir Piers Dutton of Dutton and Hatton both, and Daughter of Sir William
Booth of Dunham-Massy; by whom he had Issue George Holford of Newborough in
Dutton, Gentleman; Thomas, and John; also Ellen, married to John Carrington of
Carrington in Cheshire, Esquire; Dorothy, married to John Bruyn of Stapleford
in Cheshire, Esquire; and Elizabeth, married to Charles Manwaring of Croxton in
Cheshire, Esquire, 1560.

This Thomas Holford died 24 Septembris, 11 Eliz. 1569.

XI. Christofer Holford of Holford Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas, had also
two Wives.

The first was Anne, Daughter of Hugh Dutton and Jane aforesaid; by whom he had
Issue Thomas Holford; John died young, and Anne died young.

The second Wife of Christopher was Elizabeth the Widow of Peter Shakerley of
Houlme juxta Nether-Pever, and Daughter and Coheir of Sir Randle Manwaring of
Over-Pever. She married this Christopher the thirteenth of July, 1561. and had
Issue by him Mary Holford, Baptized at Nether-Pever the twentieth of January,
1562. who became sole Heir to her Father.

Thomas Holford, Son and Heir of Christofer, married Dorothy Daughter of Peter
Shakerley of Houlme Esquire and Elizabeth aforesaid, the thirteenth of July, 1561.
But Thomas died without Issue, and was buried at Nether-Pever the twenty fifth
of February then next following; and Dorothy his Widow afterward married Adam
Leycester of Tabley Esquire, the ninth of January, 1582.

Christofer Holford Esquire died 27 Januarii, 1581. 23 Eliz. Cook's Reports,
lib. 2. fol. 50. b. Sir Hugh Cholmondley's Case.

XII. Sir Hugh Cholmondley of Cholmondley in Cheshire, the younger, married
Mary Daughter and sole blazon or coat of arms Heir of Christopher Holford of
Holford aforesaid, and had Issue Robert Lord Cholmondley; Hatton Cholmondley,
Second Son, who died at London, 1605. Hugh Cholmondley, third Son; he died
before his eldest Brother, whose Issue afterward became Heir to
Cholmondley-Lands; Thomas Cholmondley, fourth Son, from whom the Cholmondleys
of Vale-Royal in Cheshire; Francis died in his Infancy; Mary, eldest Daughter,
married Sir George Calveley of Lea nigh Eaton-boat: Lettice married Sir Richard
Grosvenour of Eaton-boat, after Baronet; and Frances, youngest Daughter, was
second Wife to Peter Venables of Kinderton Esquire, commonly called Baron of
Kinderton.

Between this Lady Mary Cholmondley, and George Holford of Newborough in
Dutton, Brother to Christopher Holford, and now next Heir-Male of the Holfords,
happened long and tedious Suits concerning Holford-Lands, which continued above
forty Years: At last the Matter was composed by Mediation of Friends, and the
Lands parted between them. The Lady Cholmondley had the Mannor-House of
Holford, with the Demain-Lands thereof; and George Holford had the Manor of
Iscoit in Flintshire: The Lands and Tenements in Lostock-Gralam, Plumley, and
Nether-Pever, were parted promiscuously, as they be now enjoyed.

This George Holford married Jane Daughter and Heir of Charles Awbrey of
Cantriff in Brecknockshire, and Widow of Henry Masterson; and by her had Issue
Thomas Holford and John, Twins; Edward, third Son; Peter, fourth Son Peter, the
fourth Son, waited on James Earl of Darby, and married Frances Daughter of
William Wolley of Warrington, Mercer, and Widow of one Pikford of London,
Haberdasher, and had Issue James, Peter, and George; and also Frances, Mary,
Anne, and Hannah.
; George, Charles, and William: Also Mary, married to William Harcourt of
Winsham, Gentleman, 1629. both yet living, 1666.

George Holford of Newborough died 1635. and Thomas Holford of Iscoit, Son and
Heir of the said George, died without Issue-Male: Wherefore his Inheritance is
descended now unto James Holford This James Holford married Margaret Daughter
of Matthew Carleton of Lincoln's Inn in London, and had Issue Thomas Holford, a
Son; and Mary, a Daughter. James Holford died 1666 Margaret his Wife died 1662.
of Newborough, Son and Heir of Peter fourth Son of George; for all the other
Brothers of Peter died without Issue: But the Manor of Iscoit was sold by
Thomas Holford, eldest Brother, unto one Mr. Adams of London.

The Lady Mary Cholmondley survived her Husband, and lived at her Mannor-House
of Holford, which she builded new, repaired, and enlarged, and where she died
about 1625. aged 63 Years, or thereabouts. King James termed her The Bold Lady
of Cheshire.

So ended the Family of Holford of Holford.

XIII. Robert Cholmondley of Cholmondley, Son and Heir of Sir Hugh and Mary
Holford his Wife, was Created Baronet in June, 1611. and after Created Viscount
Cholmondley of Kellis in Ireland, about 1635. and lastly, Lord Cholmondley,
Baron of Wich-Malbeng Made Baron of Wich-Malbank, Sept. 1. 1645.
, id est, Nantwich in Cheshire, and also Earl of Leinster in Ireland, 21 Car.
1. 5 die Martii, 1645.

He married Katharine Sister of Charles Lord Stanhop of Harrington; but had no
Issue by her.

This Robert Lord Cholmondley died 1659. aged 75 Years, without any Lawful
Issue of his Body; leaving Robert, eldest Son of Hugh Cholmondley his Brother,
to succeed in his Inheritance: Which Robert was Created Viscount Kells in the
County of Mead, in the Kingdom of Ireland, 29 Martii, 1661. 13 Car. 2.

But this Robert Earl of Leinster estated Holford-Lands (which came by his
Mother) on Thomas Cholmondley his Son by one Mrs. Goldston, to whom (as some
think) he was affianced, though never married to her.

blazon or coat of arms XIV. Thomas Cholmondley of Holford Esquire, Son to
Robert Earl of Leinster, married Jane Daughter of Edward Holland of Eyton in
Lancashire Esquire, and had Issue Robert Cholmondley, eldest Son, aged fifteen
Years, 1667. Thomas Cholmondley, second Son; Richard, third Son, died young,
Anno Domini 1665.

This Thomas Cholmondley died at Holford, in Festo Epiphaniae, the sixth of
January, 1667. and was buried at Nether-Pever on Thursday the sixteenth day of
January following; on whom Mr. Kent his Chaplain, in the Funeral Sermon, truly
observed, That he was a Loyal Subject, a Good Husband, a Good Father, a Good
Master, a Good Landlord, a Good Neighbor, a Good Friend, a Good Christian, and
a Good Man.

This Coat of Arms, as it is here inserted, he had granted unto him by the
Patent of William Dugdale, Norroy at Arms, about Anno 1666.

Preston juxta Dutton.
THis Township of Preston was Purchased by Hugh Dutton of Dutton, from Henry de
Nuers and Julian his Wife; Rendering eight Shillings yearly at the Feast of St.
Martin, exceptis Foranis Servitiis; and propter hanc Concessionem dedit Hugo
Dutton quinque Marcas Argenti; and praedictae Julianae de Recognitione unum
Palfridum Nigrum, and unum Annulum Aureum, as the Words of the Deed be. This
was about King John's Reign.

This Grant was Confirmed by Randle Earl of Chester, surnamed Blundevill: Lib.
C. fol. 155. o. p. The Originals to possession of the Lady Kilmorey at Dutton,
1649. Since which time this Township has belonged to the Duttons of Dutton.

Charterers in Preston, 1666.
1. Thomas Barker of Preston. 2. Thomas Baxter of Preston.
Rosthorne.
HEre is an ancient Parish Church, Dedicated to St. Mary; their Wakes or Feast
of Dedication being on the fifteenth day of August.

This Parish comprehends these Villages following (besides the Parochial
Chappelries of Knotsford and Over-Pever, which see in their due Places.)

The Mize. l. s. d. Rosthorne 00 14 00 Tatton cum Norshagh 00 11 08 Over-Tabley
cum Sudlowe 00 13 04 Mere 00 19 00 Millington 00 09 04 High-Legh, with its
Hamlets of Swineyard, Sworton, and North-wood, 01 13 00 Agden, one half 00 01
10 Bollington, one half 00 03 00 05 05 02

That there was a Church at Rosthorne before Anno 1188. appears by this
following Deed, collected by Samson Erdeswick of Sond in Staffordshire, out of
the Evidences of Venables of Kinderton: Lib. H. number. 1.

UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis -- Willielmus de Venables Miles
salutem. Noverit universitas vestra, me concessisse Hugoni de Venables Clerico
id juris quod habui in Ecclesiis terrae meae, scilicet, in Ecclesia de
Rosthorne, and in Ecclesia de Eccleston, and in Ecclesia de Estbirie, -- etc.
Facta vero est haec Donatio Synodo apud Cestriam proxime celebrata post
confectionem Venerabilis Episcopi nostri and Domini Hugonis de Novant; and
existente Custode Honoris Cestriae Domino Adamo de Aldithley: Datusque est
Tutor Praenominato Clerico Hugoni de Venables, Adam Panton ejus Avunculus. Hiis
Testibus, G. de Venables, and R. and Michaele ejusdem Fratribus, N. and G.
Capellanis, Willielmo de Monte alto, and Magistro Philippo de Cestria Clerico,
R. Capellano, and Waltero Ecclesiae Sanctae Trinitatis Presbytero, Domino
Nigello, and Hugone Filio Andreae Husbanda Ecclesiae Sancti Johannis in Cestria
Canonico, Warino de Vernon, and R. Fratre ejus, Liulfo de Crokeston, and
Willielmo Done, and multis aliis.

Hugh Novant was Consecrated Bishop of Coventry, 1188. So Hoveden in his
History.

But the Advowson of Rosthorne-Church came afterward to Massy of Tatton; and
Sir Richard Massy of Tatton releaseth all his Right in the Advowson of St.
Mary's Chuch of Rosthorn, unto Sir Hugh Venables of Kinderton, in the Reign of
Edward the First. Lib. H. number. 61.

And ever since the Barons of Kinderton have been Patrons hereof, to this day,
1666.

The Steeple of this Church was built in Stone Anno Domini 1533. 25 Hen. 8. as
appears by the Figures cut in Stone on the South Side of the said Steeple: Over
these Figures is written, -- Orate pro Anima Domini Willielmi Hardwick Vicarii
hujus Ecclesiae, and pro animabus omnium Parochianorum suorum qui hoc
sculpserunt.

This Town of Rosthorne was held in the Conqueror's Time by Gilbert Venables
Baron of Kinderton, as appears in Doomsday-book.

These following Notes were taken out of Will. Vernon's Collections.

In the Reign of Henry the Second, or thereabouts, the Daughters and Heirs of
Homfrey de Rosthorne grant all their Lands in Rosthorne to Robert de Manwaring,
in these Words. --

SCiant tam praesentes quam futuri, Nos Filias and Haeredes Homfridi de
Rosthorne, scilicet Margeriam and Sibillam, dedisse -- Roberto de Menilwaring
pro Homagio and Servitio suo, and pro 3 l. 7 s. 0 d. Argenti, totam terram
nostram in Rosthorne, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis: Tenendum illi and
Haeredibus -- honorifice in Feodo and Haereditate: Reddendo inde annuatim nobis
and Haeredibus nostris -- quatuor Denarios in Vigilia Natalis Domini, pro omni
Servitio quod ad nos pertinet, -- etc. Praeter hoc, quod praedictus Robertus de
Menilwarin and Haeredes sui debent facere forense Servitium Ricardo de Vernon
and Haeredibus suis, quod nos illi facere debemus; scilicet decimam sextam
partem Servitii unius Feodi Militis, unde nos illi spontanea voluntate nostra
and sua in pleno Comitatu Cestriae attornavimus praedicto Ricardo de Vernon,
and in Curia ejusdem Ricardi coram Hominibus suis. Testibus Gilberto Pipardo,
Ada de Aldithley, Radulfo Dapifero, Willielmo de Mesnilwarin, Liulfo de
Twamlow, Ricardo de Sondbach, Roberto de Moldesworth, Roberto de Stafford,
Rogero de Cumbray, -- etc.

RIcardus de Vernon omnibus Amicis and Hominibus suis, tam praesentibus quam
futuris, salutem. Sciatis me prece and petitione Haeredum Homfridi de Rosthorne
concessisse -- Roberto de Menilwarin and Haeredibus suis -- totum Tenementum
illud quod tenuit in Rosthorne de Haeredibus Homfridi de Rosthorne. Tenendum
illi and Haeredibus suis, libere and quiet honorifice in Feodo and
Haereditate, cum omnibus libertatibus and pertinentiis suis, sicut Charta
praedictarum Haeredum praedicto Roberto Testatur, salvo forinseco Servitio meo,
unde praedictae Haeredes Humfridi praedictum Robertum mihi Attornaverunt in
pleno Comitatu Cestriae, and in Curia mea coram hominibus meis. Testibus,
Radulpho de Mesnilwarin, Willielmo de Mesnilwarin, Liulfo de Twamlow, Ricardo
and Hugone de Blakenhall, Hugone and Willielmo de Lega, Gilberto de Hertford,
Ricardo de Tewa, Roberto de Mara, Hugone le Bret, Petro Chanu, Gralam de
Lostock, Ranulfo de Bertumley, Selone Clerico, and multis aliis.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Ego Willielmus de Massy and Uxor mea Margeria
dedimus -- Hugoni de Venables and Haeredibus suis, vel cui dare aut assignare
voluerit, pro Homagio and Servitio suo -- certas Terras in Rosthorne. Testibus
Domino Willielmo de Venables, Domino Warino de Vernon, Domino Alano de Tatton,
Domino Willielmo de Venables juvene, Viviano de Davenport, Ranulfo de Arclid,
Ricardo de Blakenhall, Ada de Legh, Willielmo de Mara, Willielmo de Mobberley,
Aytropo de Mulinton, Ricardo Clerico, and aliis.

-- Ego Margeria Domina de Rosthorne in ligia potestate mea dedi -- Hugoni de
Venables, and Heredibus suis, [certain Lands in Rosthorne]. Testibus, Domino
Willielmo de Vebles, Domino Warino de Vernon, Domino Alano de Tatton, Domino
Willielmo de Venables juvene, Viviano de Davenport, Ranulpho de Arclid, Ricardo
de Blakenhall, Ada de Legh, Willielmo de Mara, Willielmo de Mobberley, Aytropo
de Millington, Ricardo Clerico, and aliis.

These two Deeds were made tempore Hen. 3. at one time, coram iisdem Testibus.

SCiant -- Ranulfus de Starkey and Ellena Uxor mea dedimus -- Hugoni de
Venables and Haeredibus suis, quartam partem totius Villae de Rosthorne cum
pertinentiis, and quartam partem molendini -- Excepta terra, quae prius data
fuit Monialibus Cestriae -- Reddendo inde annuatim duodecem Denarios in Festo
Sancti Johannis Baptistae. pro omni Servitio. Testibus, Thoma de Sondbach,
Johanne Capellano Fraire ejus, Henrico Capellano de Budworth, Ricardo Capellano
de Torperley, Thoma Capellano de Rosthorne, Willielmo de Massy, Ricardo
Clerico, and aliis.

-- Ego Ranulfus Starkey confirmavi and quietum clamavi Willielmo de Venables
Domino de Kinderton, and Haeredibus suis, totum Servitium, Homagium, and
redditum duodecem Denariorum annui redditus, quae Ricardus Starkey Pater meus
annuatim quondam solebat recipere de praedicto Willielmo de Venables, pro
quarta part Villae de Rosthorne, -- etc. This Deed was made Anno 1286. or
thereabouts.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus -- Hugo de Venables Miles salutem -- Neveritis me
concessisse Johanni de Legh, and Ellenae Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus vel
Assignatis ejusdem Johannis, totum jus and clameum quod habeo in omnibus Terris
and Tenementis redditibus and servitiis, quae vel quas dictus Johannes and
Ellena habuerunt ex dimissione and Feoffamento Willielmi Venables Fratris mei,
in Villa de Rosthorne: ita quod nec ego Hugo, nec Haeredes mei, aliquod jus aut
clameum -- exigere poterimus, praeter exitum redditus duodecem Denariorum, and
unius Paris albarum Cheirothecarum ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, -- etc. Testibus Domino Roberto de Holland tunc Justiciario
Cestriae, -- etc. Datum apud Marston die Parasceuae On Goodfriday, 1308.
, Anno Domini 1308. (2 Edw. 2.)

OMnibus Christi fidelibus -- Willielmus Filius Willielmi Venables de Bradwell
salutem. Noveritis me remisisse Johanni de Legh totum jus in Terris and
Tenementis in Rosthorne, quae praedictus Johannes habuit ex dono Willielmi
Patris mei, -- etc. Testibus Domino Petro de Warburton, Willielmo de Baggiley
Militibus, Willielmo de Mobberley tunc Vicecomite Cestershiriae, Roberto Massy
de Tatton, Hamone de Ashley. Datum 13 Edw. 2.

Thus far out of Will. Vernon's Notes.

This was John Legh of Boothes, Son of William Venables of Bradwell by Agnes
his second Wife; to whom, you see, his Father William Venables gave these Lands
in Rosthorn; and they are confirmed unto him by William, Son of William
Venables of Bradwell, Half-brother to the said John Legh.

And these Lands in Rosthorne, here given to John Legh, (as I take it) was a
Moiety of Rosthorne; and Legh of Booths has this Moiety at this day, 1666.

The Notes of Mr. John Halsey of Lincoln's Inn, out of the Earl of Bridgewater's
Evidences. 1667.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Mattheus de Alpraham dedi -- Ricardo de
Massy Militi, Homagium and Servitium Galfridi Filii Ricardi Starkey, de Terris,
Tenementis, and Feodis omnimodis, quae de me ceu Antecessoribus meis unquam in
Villa de Rosthorne tenebantur, -- etc. Testibus Hamone de Massy, Rogero de
Domvill Militibus, Ricardo de Bonebury, Thoma le Cryour, Thoma de Legh, Johanne
de Legh, Henrico Heyron, Roberto de Massy, and aliis. (Sub Edw. 1.)

William Chanu granted to Richard Son of Richard Clerk de Rosthorne, in Fee,
all his Right in one Oxgang of Land in Rosthorne; to wit, quartam partem
Villae, quam Petrus Chanu Avunculus meus tenuit: For which was a Suit per Breve
de morte Antecessoris, between the said William Chanu Demandant, and William de
Massy and Margery his Wife, Tenants: Testibus Philippo de Orreby tunc
Justiciario Cestriae, Willielmo Venables, Hamone de Massy, etc. Sub initio Hen.
3.

-- Ego Ricardus de Rotherston, Filius Ricardi Clerici de Rothesthorne dedi --
Margeriae Filiae Homfridi de Rothesthorne Clerici, unam Bovatam Terrae in
Rothesthorne, quam Petrus Chanu tenuit; scilicet, quartam partem Villae: Pro
qua, Margeria dedit quatuor Marcas Argenti: And so released to Richard all
Covenants which had been between Richard and his Father and Wimar his Sister on
the one Part, and the said Margery and William her Son and Amabilia her
Daughter on the other Part: Testibus Philippo de Orreby tunc Justiciario
Cestriae, -- etc.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod ego Rogerus de Hale Carpentarius, dedi
Thomae de Massy, Filio Domini Willielmi de Massy, totam Terram meam Tenementum
meum, tam in Molendinis quam in Terris, quod habui in Villa de Rosthorne --
Faciendo inde Servitium Dominis illius Villae, quod continetur in Charta
Originali quam sibi deliberavi quando istam Chartam sibi feci, -- etc. Testibus
Ricardo de Wilbraham tunc Vicecomite Cestershiriae, Ricardo de Vernon,
Willielmo de Massy, Willielmo de Carrington tunc Ballivo de Doneham, -- etc.
This Deed was made 1270.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus, -- Willielmus Filius Willielmi Filii Gilberti de
Tabley, salutem. Noveritis me remisisse Roberto de Massy Domino de Tatton --
totum jus meum in omnibus Terris quae fuerunt Margeriae Proaviae meae in Villa
de Rosthorne, -- etc. (Sub. Edw. 2.)

Richard Bruncroft gives to Richard Massy, Son of Sir William Massy Knight,
certain Lands in Rosthorne, in exchange for Lands in Quiter-hall, toward the
Bounds of Norshagh in Tatton. Testibus Willielmo de Venables, -- etc.

The Prior and Convent of Norton give to Sir Richard Massy Knight, the Homage
and the Service of the Lands of Henry the Hunter in Rosthorne. Testibus Hamone
de Massy, Roberto le Grosvenour tunc Vicecomite Cestershiriae, -- etc. This was
made in Anno 1286. or thereabout.

Robert Massy Lord of Tatton, and John Legh of Booths, make an Agreement and
Partition; to each a Moiety of Rosthorne-Mill, and to each the Mulcture of
their own Tenants: They exchange Land, and release Rent to each other; and Legh
is to hold a fourth Part of Rosthorne of Robert Massy in Fee, by the yearly
Rent of Twelve pence. Testibus Hugh de Heelegh Chief Justice of Chester This
was Hugh de Audley of Heeley-Castle in Staffordshire.
, -- etc. (1315.)

So far out of Mr. Halsey's Notes.

Inter les Fines Cestriae, 18 Edw. 3. Finalis Concordia coram Henrice de
Ferrars Justiciario Cestriae, Johanne de Arderne, Radulfo de Vernon, Petro de
Thorneton, Willielmo Boydell Militibus, Johanne de Wetenhale, Willielmo de
Praers, and Thoma Danyers -- Inter Ricardum Filium Hugonis Massy de Tatton and
Aliciam Uxorem ejus quaerentes, and Hugonem Filium Willielmi Massy de Tatton
deforciantem; de Mannerio de Rosthorne cum pertinentiis, -- etc.

So that Massy of Tatton was Lord of the other Moity of Rosthorne, ever since
the Reign of Edward the First; if not the Royalty of the whole.

How these Lands descended to the Earl of Bridgewater, see the Pedigree in
Tatton.

Charterers in Rosthorne, 1666.
1. George Massy of Denfield, whose Ancestors descended out of the Massies of
Tatton under Edward the Third. 2. Edward Allen of Rosthorne.
Runcorn Superior and Inferior.
THese two Townships, now distinguished into Over-Runcorn and Nether-Runcorn,
are Mized together in our Common Mize-book, and are very hard Mized.

Here at Runcorn that Magnanimous Virago, Elflede Countess of Mercia, and Widow
to Ethelred the Chief Governor of Mercia, and Sister to King Edward the Elder,
did build a Town, Anno Domini 916. as Florentius, Huntington, and other our
Historians do affirm: A Town and Castle, says Stow, page 81. Probably it was
then in a more flourishing condition than now it is: For now it is a very poor
Village, and seems to be Waste in the Conqueror's Time; for it is not mentioned
in Doomsday-book.

Both these Townships comprehend not fully 300 Cheshire Acres, upon a Survey of
the Assessors made by estimation in the Time of our late War.

These little Villages are both of the Fee of the ancient Barony of Halton, and
were formerly Copyhold Land to the Manor of Halton, until the several Owners
bought out their Lands in Fee-farm, to hold in Free and Common Soccage of the
Manor of Enfield in Middlesex; the King's Grant bearing date the ninth day of
September, 4 Car. 1. 1628. as you may see also above in Moore.

Some Lands in these Townships are ancient Freehold Land: For Sir Hugh Dutton
of Dutton, by Office taken at Frodsham, 22 Edw. 1. 1294. was found to hold
seven Bovates of Land in Runcorn, with other Lands, of the Honor of Halton;
which are termed The third Part of Over-Runcorn, in the Feodary of Halton: Vide
supra, at the end of Halton: But these Lands were sold lately by Gilbert Lord
Gerard, unto Savage of Rock-Savage, in the Reign of King James.

Here is seated, on the Bank by the Riverside, an ancient Parish Church,
Alhallowes of Nether-Runcorn, Dedicated to All Saints.

William Son of Nigell, Baron of Halton, founded here a House of Canons
Regular, Anno Domini 1133. And afterward William Constable of Cheshire the
younger, Son of William, Son of Nigell, removed their Habitation unto Norton,
about the Reign of King Stephen. All which Donations of William Constable of
Cheshire the younger, and of the Churches of Runcorn and Great-Budworth, and
many other things, Henry the Second confirms to the Canons of Runcorn, as you
may see the Charter in Monasticon, Vol. 2. page 186. Ratified also by the
Charter of Edward the Third, wherein he Confirms Donationem, quam Hugo de
Duttona Filius Hugonis de Duttona fecit per Chartam suam praedictis Canonicis
de duobus Solidis and octo Denariis de redditu de Pulseya -- ac de Terra de
Frodsham cum pertinentiis; and de Terra de Pulles-eya, cum Capella, and tota
Terra Assartata, and Pastura ad sexaginta animalia ibidem, ante Publicationem
Statuti praedicti de Terris ad manum mortuam non ponendis editi. Datum apud
Gloucester, 30 die Augusti, 3 Edw. 3.

See more of the Priory of Norton, of the Order of St. Augustine, supra, in
Norton.

The Church of Runcorn seems to be before the Norman Conquest: For we read in
the ancient Roll, That Nigell Baron of Halton gave the Church of Runcorn to
Wolfaith a Priest his Brother, in the Reign of the Conqueror.

This Church has now for its Patron Christ-Church College in Oxford: For after
the Statute of Dissolution of Abbeys, Henry the Eighth gave the Rectory of
Runcorn, and the Rectory of Great-Budworth in Cheshire, unto Christ-Church in
Oxford, by special Grant, dated 11 die Decembris, 38 Hen. 8. which before
belonged to the Priory of Norton.

This Parish comprehends these Villages following, over and besides the
Parochial-Chappelries of Daresbery and Aston juxta Sutton, within the same;
which see in their due Places.

The Mize. l. s. d. Weston 00 11 01 Runcorn Superior and Inferior 01 01 04
Clifton, now Rock-Savage 00 08 00 Halton 01 02 06 Norton 00 12 00 Stockham 00
08 00 04 02 11

Sale.
SAle is not in the Record of Doomsday-book. The Town of Sale is of the Fee of
Halton; for we read in the Feodary of Halton, sub Edw. 2. --

Dominus Petrus de Warburton tenet Villam de Sale pro decima part Feodi
Militis. Here is Seated the ancient Family of the Massies of Sale, which
branched out from the Massies Barons of Dunham-Massy about the Reign of King
John: For I find Richard Massy, Son of Robert Massy, possessed of Lands in Sale
under Henry the Third; which Robert was younger Son of Hamon Massy Baron of
Dunham-Massy: And this Family of Massy of Sale is still continuing, 1666.

In the Offices of Massy of Sale he is found to hold the Moiety of Sale of
Warburton of Arley; and some of them have been Ward unto Warburton: but
Wardships are now taken off by Statute, Anno 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

And as Massy was possessed of one Moiety, so the other Lands in Sale are
possessed at this day, 1666. by these Persons following.

1. Edward Holt of Sale, whose Lands in Sale his Ancestor John Holt, Son of
Robert, Base Son of Geffrey de Holt, had in Marriage with Ellen Daughter and
Heir of Thomas Sale of Sale, 21 Rich. 2. 1397. Lib. C. fol. 273. a. b. The
Originals in possession of Edward Holt of Sale, 1666.

2. The Lord Delamere of Dunham-Massy has seven Tenements in Sale. These were
Parcel of Holt's Lands, and were purchased by Sr George Booth of Dunham-Massy
from Thomas Holt of Whickleswick in Lancashire, and Randle Holt his Son, 4
Augusti, 2 Jacobi, 1604. being then twelve Messuages and Cottages, with 4 d.
Rent yearly issuing out of the Lands in Sale then in the Tenure of George
Massy; and also 4 d. Rent then issuing out of Thomas Wrenshaw's Tenement, now
the Lands of Sir Edward Moseley of Howesend in Lancashire, late deceased: Lib.
C. fol. 273. c.

3. Geffrey Cartwright Gentleman. His Lands in Sale were formerly bought from
Massy of Sale.

4. William Williamson of Sale.

5. Richard Wrenshaw of Sale.

6. The Lands of Sir Edward Moseley lately deceased; to wit, five Messuages and
Cottages in Sale, now in Lease; and pays 4 d. Chief-Rent yearly to Mr. Massy of
Sale.

7. Mr. Gerard of Riddings in Timperley, three small Cottages in Sale, now in
Lease, late Vawdrey's Land.

8. Edward Legh of Baggilegh Esquire, has one small Cottage in Sale, now in
Lease.

9. Robert Tatton of Wittenshaw Esquire, has certain Land in Sale, now in
Lease, and and pays 3 s. 4 d. yearly Rent to Mr. Massy of Sale.

10. James Wrenshaw of Limme, one Tenement in Sale, now Leased to Thomas Davys.

So that it seems Massy of Sale had anciently one Moiety of Sale, and Holt
another Moiety, though now scattered as aforesaid: For these other Parcels came
some from the one, and some from the other, originally.

Stockham.
THis Township of Stockham belonged to the Priory of Norton, and was Purchased
from the King by Richard Brook Esquire, 37 Hen. 8. 1545* with Norton, and
other Lands also; whose Posterity enjoys the same at this day, 1666. See in
Norton supra.

In Stockham is no Charterer at all.

Stretton.
THis Township of Stretton has for long time belonged to the Starkeys, Starkey
of Stretton bears for his Coat of Arms A Stork; possibly in allusion to his
Name: scilicet, Agent, a Stork Sable, the Bill and Legs Gules.
since the Reign of Henry the Second: For Roger Fitz-Alured granted Stretton to
Richard Starkey, and his Heirs; To hold as freely, as any of the said Richard's
Ancestors ever held the same; for the Service of the tenth part of a Knights
Fee: Lib. C. fol. 135. a. This was was the Reign of King John.

This Roger Fitz-Alfred's Daughter and Heir, called Agnes, married Adam de
Dutton the Ancestor of Warburton of Arley.

Wherefore in the Feodary of Halton under Edw. 2. we read, -- Dominus Petrus de
Warburton tenet Villam de Stretton, pro decima part unius Feodi Militis.

So that it should seem to be held originally from the Baron of Halton: But I
find it not mentioned in Doomsday-book; probably it was then Waste.

And Sir Geffrey de Warburton released unto Thomas Starkey of Stretton, and to
his Heirs, all his Claim in Villa de Stretton, ceu in aliqua Parcella ejusdem,
ut de Wardis, Maritagiis, Releviis, Escaetis, Homagiis, aut Servitiis, quae
praedictus Thomas aut Antecessores sui mihi, seu Antecessoribus meis, facere
solebant: Datum 4 die Aprilis, 5 Rich. 2. (1382.) Yet notwithstanding the said
Thomas and his Heirs shall pay yearly to the said Sir Geffrey, and his Heirs,
one Pair of White Gloves on Easter Day, for all Service: Lib. C. fol. 134. a.
The Original hereof was in possession of Starkey of Stretton, of the
Lower-Hall, 1650. Sealed with Warburton's Proper Coat of Arms, Warbu^ton's
Coat, Argent, two Cheverons Gules, in a Canton of the second a Mollet Or.
which he assumed upon taking the Surname of Warburton, to wit, Two Cheverons,
and in a Canton, a Mollet; inscribed about the Seal, -- SIGILL. GALFRIDI DE
WARBURTON. Sundry of the like I have seen to Deeds of Edward the Third's Time.

The Starkeys of Stretton branched into two Families here in Stretton long time
ago: The Lower-Hall, and the Over-Hall.

Starkey of Over-Hall in Stretton is descended of a younger Son of Starkey of
the Lower-Hall, and branched out first about 16 Edw. 1. 1287. Lib. C. fol. 135.
c. f. and 134. h. k. Randle Starkey, the first of the Family of the Over-Hall,
being younger Brother to Richard Starkey of the Nether-Hall Lord of Stretton,
living both 3 Edw. 2. 1309.

So that Starkey of the Lower-Hall is the Original Root, and Lord of the Manor
of Stretton; but now lately in our days has sold a good Parcel of the Demain
of the Lower-Hall, called Mosse-wood, unto Raufe Jackson of Crowley; whose Son
Thomas Jackson, now of Mosse-wood, 1665. enjoys the same.

Also one George Webster, alias Bromfield, has lately bought another Parcel of
the Demain of Lower-Hall.

And William Southern, late of Hatton, has bought several Tenements in
Stretton from Starkey of the Lower-Hall: So that this ancient Family Of Starkey
of the Lower-Hall.
is now languishing, from when also branched the Starkey's of Wrenbury, and the
Starkeys of Olton in Cheshire, and other Families, originally.

In this Town of Stretton is an ancient Chapel of Ease, within the Parish of
Great-Budworth, called Stretton-Chappel; but it is now very ruinous, and in
decay, 1666.

Sutton juxta Frodsham.
SUtton nigh Frodsham is not mentioned in Doomsday-book: It is of the Fee of
Halton.

Adam de Dutton, younger Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton, and And Ancestor to
Warburton of Arley, was possessed of this Township in the Reign of Richard the
First; whose Heirs enjoy the same at this day, 1666.

This Adam dedit Deo, and ad Constructionem Ecclesiae Beatae Mariae de Norton,
and Canonicis ibidem Deo servientibus, three Shillings yearly Rent, issuing out
of his Mill in Sutton juxta Halton; -- and after his own Life, the Mill of
Sutton entirely: To which Deed Roger Constable of Cheshire is Witness, who died
1211. 13 Johannis Regis. This Deed, with many others which belonged to the
Priory of Norton, I found Copied out in an old long Parchment Roll, among the
Evidences of Dutton of Dutton, 1665. of an ancient Character.

In the Feodary of Halton under Edw. 2. -- Galfridus de Warburton tenet Villam
de Sutton, pro quinta part unius Feodi Militis. But others read, Pro quarta
part.

Die Martis proxime ante Festum Ascensionis Domini, 4 Edw. 2. coram Pagano
Tybotot Justiciario Cestriae -- Inter Galfridum Filium Petri de Dutton
querentem, and Petrum de Dutton deforciantem, de Manerio de Sutton, cum
pertinentiis -- Habendum dicto Galfrido, and Haeredibus Masculis de Corpore
suo, -- etc.

In this Township there is no Charterer at all, 1666.

Nether-Tabley.
THis Village of Nether-Tabley, sometimes in old Deeds styled Little-Tabley,
and in the Record of Doomsday-book written Stabley, is bounded on the
North-side with Over-Tabley, and on the South Side thereof is severed from
Plumley with a little Brook, called Benstall-Brook, which at last falls in
with Waterles-River, before it be run quite past Nether-Tabley, and so passes
on toward Winsham.

In the Reign of William the Conqueror one Gozeline held this Township under
Hugh Earl of Chester, surnamed Lupus; which one Ostebrand held before, and
liber homo fuit: ibi duae Bovatae Terrae Geldabiles: Terra est dimidia Caruca:
Wasta fuit and est: So run the Words of Doomsday-book.

Afterward Adam de Dutton seems to be possessed hereof toward the end of
Henry the Second's Reign; Nether-Tabley of the Fee of St. John of Jerusalem.
to hold of the Prior of St. John of Jerusalem in England, by the yearly Rent
of Sixpence at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, for all Service: Which
Tenure is found in all the Offices of my Ancestors, which I have hitherto seen;
and the Rent of Six Pence is yet at this day paid to the King, by virtue of the
Statute of the Dissolution of that Priory, 32 Hen. 8. cap. 24.

This Adam de Dutton was younger Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton in Cheshire, and
lineal Ancestor to Warburton of Arley; whose Posterity living at Warburton in
the Reign of Edward the Second, were surnamed de Warburton from the Place of
their Residence, according to the manner of those Ages; which Surname they
have ever since retained.

Geffrey Dutton, Son of Geffrey, Son of Adam Dutton aforesaid, gave this
Township to Margaret his Daughter, and to her Heirs, about the very end of the
Reign of Henry the Third, in these Words, -- I. number. 1.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Galfridus de Dutton dedi and concessi
and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Margaretae Filiae meae, pro Homagio and
Servitio suo totam Villam meam, quae vocatur Parva-Tabley, sine ullo
retenemento; cum Homagiis and Servitiis, cum Villenagiis, cum Boscis, cum
Planis, cum Pratis, and Pascuis, cum Moris and Marciscis, cum Aquis and
Molendinis, cum Viis and Semitis, cum omnibus locis praedictae Villae
pertinentibus: Tenendam and habendam sibi Margaretae, and Haeredibus suis, de
me Galfrido and Haeredibus meis, libere, quiet, and pacifice, cum omnibus
libertatibus and Aysiamentis praedictae Villae pertinentibus: Faciendo inde
mihi forinsecum Servitium, quantum pertinet ad duas Bovatas Terrae, unde
triginta Bovatae Terrae faciunt Feodum unius Militis; and faciendo Servitium de
Hauthoner Hauthoner, id est, Homo Loricatus.
quantum pertinet ad praedictam Villam; pro omni seculari servitio,
consuetudine, and demanda, mihi and Haeredibus meis pertinente. Et ego
Galfridus and Haeredes mei praedictam Villam, ut praedictum est, praedictae
Margaretae and Haeredibus suis, contra omnes homines and foeminas in perpetuum
Warrantizabimus. Et ad majorem hujus rei securitatem huic praesenti scripto
Sigillum apposui meum. Hiis Testibus, Domino Thoma de Dutton, Domino Galfrido
de Dutton, Hugone de Limme, Thoma Fratre ejus, Ricardo de Aston, Rogero de
Toft, Willielmo de Waleton, and multis aliis.

The Seal is, -- A Man's Arm in a Maunch or Loose Sleeve, with a Flower de Luce
in his Hand; written about, -- SIGILLUM GALFRIDI DE DUTTON, in a Roundlet, not
in an Escocheon.

This Margaret Dutton first married Robert de Denbigh, but had no Issue by him.
After she married Nicolas de Leycester, about 1276. by whom she had Issue; and
to whose succeeding Progeny the Manor of Nether-Tabley still belongs at this
day, 1666.

This Nicolas Leycester had also by Margaret the Manors of Wethale and Hield,
both situate in Aston nigh Great-Budworth, which his Heirs also enjoy at this
present. R. number. 3. I. number. 91.

He was afterward Sir Nicolas Leycester Knight, so styled 1292. 20 Edw. 1. I.
number. 98.

In this Township is not any Charterer at all: For the Freehold of Heart of
Nether-Tabley, and some others, were all bought out in the Reign of Edward the
Third, by Roger Leycester, Son of Sir Nicolas and Margaret, and so made this
Township entirely his own; since which time it has so continued, and is now
entire, without any Charterer at all, 1666.

Now follows the Genealogy of the Leycesters of Tabley, exactly proved out
of the Evidences of this Family; and the Originals quoted all along, as they
now stand marked.
I. Sir Nicolas Leycester Knight was sometime Seneschal to Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln and Constable of Cheshire: G. number. 24. He married Margaret the Widow of
Robert de Denbigh, and Daughter of Geffrey Dutton Ancestor to Warburton of
Arley, about the Year of Christ 1276. 5 Edw. 1. by whom he had Issue Roger
Leycester, Son and Heir; and John Leycester, Vicar of Walleysey in Wirrall,
1312. 6 Edw. 2. F. number. 101. I. number. 2, 3.

He had by this Margaret his Wife the Township of Nether-Tabley, and the Manors
of Wethale and Hield in Aston nigh Great-Budworth: I. number. 1. R. number. 3. I.
number. 91.

Anno 1292. 20 Edw. 1. I find him styled Knight: I. number. 98. And he had Lands
in Adwick near Doncaster in Yorkshire: I. number. 95, 96, 97. and also in Wath
near Adwick, 22 Edw. 1. I. number. 5.

Sir Nicolas Leycester died 23 Edw. 1. 1295.

blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms II. Roger Leycester, Son and
Heir of Sir Nicolas and Margaret, lived constantly at his Manor of Wethale in
Aston nigh Picmere; to whom Peter Dutton, Son of Geffrey, released all his
Right and Claim in Nether-Tabley, Wethale, and Hield, 24 Edw. 1. 1296. I. number.
6. I find this Peter Dutton styled Knight, 25 Edw. 1. 1297. I. number. 7.

He bought out all the Freeholders or Charterers in Nether-Tabley, the
principal whereof was that of William Heart of Nether-Tabley; and so made that
Township entirely his own: I. number. 38. and number. 60. and number. 43.

Anno Christi 1296. he had the third part of Over-Tabley cum Sudlow, by the
Grant of Sir John Gray, Son of Sir Reginald Gray, and which Sir John Gray had
of the Grant of William de Tabley Lord of Over-Tabley and Knotsford: F. number. 1.

This Roger married Isabel Daughter of (...) and had Issue Nicolas Leycester,
Son and Heir; Roger Leycester; and Margaret, married to Adam de Moldesworth, 17
Edw. 2. 1323. Which Adam was Sheriff of Flint 5 Edw. 3. I. number. 60. and number.
83. Lib. C. fol. 206. c. and fol. 207. i.

His Seal of Arms was, -- A Fesse between three Flower de Luces; inscribed
about thus, -- SIGILLUM SECRETUM. I. number. 26. and many others. Sub Anno Domini
1325.

Roger Leycester died about 1349. and survived his Father fifty three years.

III. Nicolas Leycester, Son and Heir of Roger, had to Wife Mary Daughter of
William Mobberley de Mobberley, and one of the Sisters and Coheirs to Sir
Raufe Mobberley; married about 15 Edw. 2. 1322. R. number. 23. and had Issue John
Leycester, Son and Heir; Raufe Leycester, younger Son, from whom the Leycesters
of Toft in this Hundred of Bucklow; and Elizabeth, the second Wife of William
Manwaring of Over-Pever, the Elder, from whom are descended the Manwarings of
Over-Pever. She was Widow 38 Edw. 3. 1364. and was living 6 Hen. 4. 1404. S.
number. 2. I. number. 68. Lib. C. fol. 126. KK. II. Lib. B. page 9. h.

Nicolas Leycester died 1349. 23 Edw. 3. Lib. A. fol. 127. y. For he survived
his Father very little, if he died not before him.

IV. John Leycester of Nether-Tabley, Son and Heir of Nicolas and Mary, served
in the Wars of France under John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, 1373. 47 Edw. 3.
of whose Puissant Army our Histories do make mention. Walsingham tells us, That
when he entered France at Calice, triginta and amplius millia Equorum in
Comitatu habuerat: But of these thirty thousand Horse, very few were brought
alive to Bordeaux, being starved for want of Victuals; so that this Voyage
proved unsuccessful.

It appears by the Account of this John Leycester, before John Tilly Clerk, and
other Auditors of Sir Thomas Felton (who was at that time Judge of Chester)
dated at Southampton on the Eve of St. John, 49 Edw. 3. 1375. where he
accounted for 266 l. 13 s. 4 d. allowed unto him for the Payment of Jenkyn
Mobberley Esquire, and other Soldiers, who served under the said John
Leycester, and also for his own Pay, that he had allowed for himself for 210
days Pay, beginning on St. Michael's day, 47 Edw. 3. to the first of May then
next following, at 3 s. per diem, 31 l. 10 s. 00 d. And there was also pardoned
unto him, remaining of his Account, the Sum of 38 l. 10 s. 00 d. which I
conceive was for a Reward or Gratuity: Whereupon he gave to the Lady Felton a
White ambling Pal^rey. I. number. 85.

Sir Raufe Mobberley his Uncle settled on him by Feoffment of Chaplains
entrusted (as was the manner of those Times) all his Lands in Mobberley, with
the Advowson of the Church of Mobberley, and other Lands: Dated at Mobberley,
1359. 33 Edw. 3. For Sir Raufe often protested, having no Lawful Issue but
eight Sisters expecting to share his Inheritance, that all his Lands should
descend to his Nephew John Leycester, and that his Estate should not be
shattered and divided; as appears by the Certificate of Sir John Wynkfeld
Knight, dated at London, 1360. 35 Edw. 3. A. fol. 128. ff. and fol. 129. hh.

Yet did John Leycester after release all his Right in these Lands unto John
Dumbill of Mobberley and Cicely his Wife, and also to the Advowson of the
Church of Mobberley; Dated at Chester, 1 Rich. 2. 1378. Which Cicely was one of
the Sisters of Sir Raufe Mobberley aforesaid: Lib. A. fol. 129. kk. But so
conditioned and agreed between them, That Dumbill and Cicely should settle 15
Messuages, 316 Acres of Land, 16 Acres of Wood, 8 Acres of Mossing, the third
part of a Water-mill, and the third part of all the Wastes not measured (to be
understood of that Moiety of Mobberley belonging to Sir Raufe Mobberley) to
descend after the death of John Dumbill and Cicely his Wife, unto Raufe
Leycester, younger Brother of the said John Leycester, and to his Heirs for
ever: Which was so settled accordingly, 2 Rich. 2. 1379. Lib. A. fol. 130.
ll.mm. and are at this day, 1666. enjoyed by Leycester of Toft, as Heirs of the
said Raufe, about a third part of Mobberley's Moiety of Mobberley.

This John Leycester also sold away his Manor of Hield in Aston to William del
Hield and Goditha his Wife, in Fee-farm, 1355. 29 Edw. 3. which Manor reverted
back again to Leycester of Tabley; to wit, one Moiety purchased 1500. and the
other Moiety purcha^ed again 1601. as shall be observed in their due places: M.
number. 13, 14.

This John built the Manor-Hall of Nether-Tabley, within the Pool, in that
place where it now stands, about Anno Domini 1380. 4 Rich. 2. before which
time it stood a little higher, out of the Compass of the Pool, in a certain
place adjoining to the Saffron-yards, where there is yet a Trench to be seen,
which environed the Old Hall about with Water; which Old Hall, I conjecture,
was the Seat of the Hearts of Nether-Tabley, whose Freehold was bought out by
Roger Leycester, as I have told you before.

John Leycester Sealed constantly with his Seal of his blazon or coat of arms
Coat of Arms and Crest, which is cut cornerways, according to the manner of
those Ages, to wit, -- A Fesse between three Flower-de-Luces: Over the Dexter
Angle of the Escocheon, which is set uppermost, is a Helmet, Wreath, and
Mantle; thereon A Swans Head Couped, Guttee: Inscribed about thus, -- SIG.
JOHANNIS LEICESTER: A. number. 2. and sundry others affixed to several of his
Deeds under Richard the Second's Reign.

The Colors of the Coat at this day received are, -- Azure, a Fesse Gules
between three Flower-de-Luces Or: The Crest A Swans Head Couped Proper, with
little Drops upon the Neck Gules.

He married Joan Daughter of Robert Touchet of Nether-Whitley, 5 Rich. 2. A.
number. 2. and had Issue William Leycester, Son and Heir; Raufe Leycester, another
Son, living 14 Rich. 2. I. number. 74.

6 Novembris, 1387. Concessa fuit Licentia Johanni Leycester pro Oratorio suo
apud Tabley per unum Annum. Regist. Ricardi Scroope apud Lichfield, fol. 123.
b. This is Mr. Dugdale's Note.

This John Leycester died 1398. 22 Rich. 2. about the Age of 58 Years, and
survived his Father 49 Years.

V. William Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of John, is the
first that I find styled de Tabley* But this may be by reason of the Statute of
Additions, blazon or coat of arms 1 Hen. 5. cap. 5. For till after this
Statute, few were written either of the Place, or with the Title of Esquire.
Certain it is, this William lived at his Mannor-House of Nether-Tabley, which
his Father John had newly erected, and where his Heirs have ever since fixed
their Residence, even to this day: E. number. 2. R. number. 10.

He was one of the Justices of Peace of Bucklow-Hundred in the Reign of Henry
the Fifth, and Sealed with a Seal of his Coat of Arms and Crest, in all points
like that of his Fathers, save only the Form of the Mantle was a little
different: R. number. 10. and many others: Lib. B. page 115.

He had two Wives: The first was Agnes Dutton Sister to Sir Piers Dutton of
Dutton, and Daughter of Edmund Dutton, whom he married Anno Domini 1398. 22
Rich. 2. A. number. 5. By her he had Issue John Leycester, Lawrence Leycester,
Geffrey Leycester, living 5 Hen. 6. K. number. 9. and Joan, a Daughter, married to
Thomas Son of Thomas Starky de Wrenbury, 1422. 1 Hen. 6. A. number. 12. Also
Cicely married Thomas Masterson of Masterson nigh Nantwich.

His second Wife was Pillaryne Widow to Robert Massy of Hale, and Sister to Sir
Richard Cradock Knight, whom he married 3 Hen. 6. 1425. A. number. 11. But he had
no Issue by her.

William Leycester died Anno Christi 1428. 6 Hen. 6. E. number. 3. about the Age
of 50 Years, and survived his Father 30 Years.

VI. John Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, the Elder, Son and Heir of
William and Agnes, married Elizabeth Daughter of Hamon Massy of Rixton in
Lancashire Esquire, 10 Hen. 5. 1422. A. number. 9. and had Issue John Leycester
the Younger; Hamon Leycester, made Parson of Mobberley 1460. Randle Leycester,
admitted into the Hospital of Holy Trinity and St. Thomas the Martyr in Rome,
with all the Privileges thereof, 1449. E. number. 4. Nicolas, another Son; Henry,
another Son; William, another Son: A. number. 26. Maud, a Daughter, married to
Thomas Son and Heir of Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley, Esquire 1440. 18 Hen. 6. A.
number. 16. Alice, another Daughter, married to Richard Son and Heir of John Legh
of High-Legh de West-Hall Esquire, 20 Hen. 6. 1442. Lib. B. page 121.

John Leycester the Elder died 2 Edw. 4. 1462. about the Age of 62 Years; and
survived his Father 34 Years. Elizabeth his Widow was living 19 Edw. 4. H. number.
20.

VII. John Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire the Younger, Son and Heir of John and
Elizabeth, married Margery Daughter of John Legh of High-Legh de West-Hall
Esquire, 20 Hen. 6. 1442. Lib. B. page 121. and had nine Sons; Thomas
Leycester, Hamon, Bryan, Martin, John, Sir Lawrence a Chaplain, Piers, Roger,
and Godfrey; Isabell, a Daughter, married John Glegge of Gayton in Wirrall
Esquire: H. number. 2. A. number. 25.

John Leycester the Younger died Anno Christi 1496. 12 Hen. 7. Wills, number. 2.
about the Age of 73 Years, and survived his Father 34 Years.

VIII. Thomas Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of John
Leycester the Younger, had four Wives.

The first was Margaret sixth Daughter and Coheir of Robert Grosvenour of
Houlme nigh Nether-Pever Esquire, whom he married Anno Christi 1464. 4 Edw. 4.
A. number. 20. and had Issue by her John Leycester, Son and Heir.

By this Margaret, Thomas Leycester had the Moiety of Nether-Pever cum
Little-Pever, the third part of Over; Alderley, the third part of Pygreve-wood
in the Demain Lands of Allostock in the County of Chester, and certain Lands in
Hope juxta Alstonfield in the County of Stafford, by Partition dated 5 Edw. 4.
(1465.) and Margery Grosvenour, fourth Daughter, and Coheir, dying without
Issue 1474. John Leycester (Son and Heir of Thomas and Margaret) had in Right
of his Mother, as Sister and Coheir to Margery, a fifth part of Allostock, by
Partition dated 14 Edw. 4. 1474. For Margery had all Allostock to her Share:
But Margaret the Mother of John Leycester was now dead at the time of this
later Partition, made Z. number. 28. V. number. 1, 2. She was living 9 Edw. 4. K.
number. 6. But she was dead 14 Edw. 4.

The second Wife of Thomas Leycester was Margery the Widow of Edmund Legh of
Baggilegh Esquire, and Daughter of Sir John Savage of Clifton near Halton in
Cheshire. She was married to Thomas Leycester 17 Edw. 4. 1477. and by him had
Issue Arthur Leycester, and Geffrey Leycester, living 1508. Lib. C. fol. 271.
d. e. Lib. B. page 133. A. number. 25.

The third Wife of Thomas Leycester was Elizabeth the Widow of Peter Dutton of
Hatton Esquire, and Daughter of Sir Robert Fowleshurst of Crew in Cheshire,
whom he married 22 Hen. 7. 1506. T. number. 1.

The fourth Wife of Thomas Leycester was Blanch the Rich. Widow of Oliver
Berdesley of Warrington, whom he married 1522. 14 Hen. 8. A. number. 29. But he
had no Issue by her.

This Thomas Leycester purchased again the one Moiety of Hield, 1500. 16 Hen.
7. M. number. 19. which John Son of Nicolas Leycester sold away, as I have showed
before,

Thomas Leycester of Tabley Esquire died about 1526. 18 Hen. 8. about the Age
of 82 Years, and survived his Father 30 Years.

IX. John Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas by
Margaret his first Wife, married Lucy Daughter of John Ratcliffe of Ratcliffe
in Lancashire, Esquire 19 Edw. 4. 1479. A. number. 26. by whom he had Issue William
Leycester, who married Anne Daughter of Richard Sneyd of Bradwell in
Staffordshire, Esquire, 23 Hen. 7. 1508. A number. 25. But William dying without
Issue in the Lifetime of John his Father, Anne his Widow married Roger
Hurleston of Chester Esquire, 25 Hen. 8. 1533.

After the death of Lucy, John Leycester married Alice Daughter of Henry
Henshaw de Milne-house nigh Chelford, Gentleman, 15 Hen. 7. 1499. Z. number. 13.
and by her had Issue Peter Leycester, who succeeded Heir to his Father;
Richard, another Son; James Leycester, third Son by Alice, from whom the
Leycesters of Hale-lowe in Bodon-Parish; Lawrence Leycester, another Son,
living 1577. Also Isabel, a Daughter, married John Ogle of Roby in Lancashire
Esquire: O. number. 6. Wills, number. 3.

This John Leycester had also two Bastard-sons; Nicolas, from whem the
Leycesters now of Hield, 1666. and John Leycester, who died without Issue: Also
three Bastard-daughters; Elizabeth married Thomas Swynton of Nether-Knotsford,
30 Hen. 8. Joan, another Base Daughter; she was called Joan Birchenhead, 1543.
And Margaret, another Base Daughter: O. number. 6. Wills, number. 3. A. number. 34.

John Leycester of Tabley sold Hulme-House in Over Alderley, now called The
Pastures, unto Nicolas Hobson, 18 Hen. 7. 1502. Z. number. 1.

This John died 35 Hen. 8. 1543. Wills, number. 3. and was buried at
Great-Budworth, in our Lady Mary's Chapel there, in the appropriate
Burial-place of his Family, in the seventy seventh Year of his Age; and
survived his Father seventeen Years.

X. Piers Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of John by Alice his
second Wife, married Alice Daughter of Sir John Holford of Holford juxta
Nether-Tabley, 21 Hen. 8. 1529. O. number. 6. by whom he had Issue Peter, Son and
Heir; Adam, second Son; William, third Son, from whom the Leycesters of Legh in
Staffordshire: B. number. 28. Alice, a Daughter, married Geffrey Brereton, Son and
Heir of Sir Richard Brereton of Tatton nigh Knotsford, Anno Christi 1551. 5
Edw. 6. A. number. 35. Margaret, another Daughter, married Richard Birkenhed of
Manley Recorder of Chester; Elizabeth, Ellen, and Parnell were never married:
Wills, number. 10. E. number. 7, 9.

Piers had also two Bastard-sons, John and Christopher: O. number. 7.

He bought the Lands of Budworth, 2 Edw. 6. and Symcock's Tenement in Marston,
7 Eliz. 1564. and the Lands in Northwich, 13 Eliz. 1571. B. number. 2. and number.
26. L. number. 10, 11. For the effecting of these, he sold the Land in Hope juxta
Alstonfeld in Staffordshire, which came by Margaret Grosvenour; a very small
Parcel, and remote.

Piers Leycester Esquire died 8 die Aprilis, 1577. 19 Eliz. and was buried at
Great-Budworth the eleventh of April following, in the appropriate Burial-place
of his Family, in our Ladies Chapel there, in the seventieth Year of his Age,
and survived his Father 34 Years: Wills, number. 10. and Register-book of
Budworth. O. number. 7.

Alice his Wife was buried also at Great-Budworth, 1575. 17 Eliz. the thirtieth
day of August: So the Register.

Piers Leycester in his Will bequeaths his Body to be buried in his Chapel at
Great-Budworth. This Chapel anciently was styled Our Lady Mary's Chapel; but
of late times Dutton-Tenants have styled it Dutton-Chappel, and Leycester's
Tenants styled it Leycester's-Chappel; for both have Right of Burial here: But
now of late, to wit, Anno Domini 1670. Leycester's Part of the said Chapel is
separated, and Railed out from the rest, and is now entire within it self, as a
distinct Chapel of it self.

* In this Lady Mary's Chapel aforesaid was anciently the Image of the Virgin
Mary cut in Wood, curiously trimmed and decked, her Shoes gilded, and Hair
fastened on her Head; set on a Frame of Wood about two Foot high: But these
Idolatrous Images were removed out of all the Churches of England upon
Reformation of Religion, which was first done by Command of Hen. 8. Anno Domini
1538. Tom. 3. of my Evidences, fol. 116. b.
Speed's Hist. page 790. But this of Budworth was taken down, hewed in pieces,
and burned in the Vicar's Oven, about Anno Domini 1559. by Command from Queen
Elizabeth, who purged all the Churches from what remained of those Images.

XI. Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire. Son and Heir of Piers and Alice,
married Elizabeth Daughter and Sole Heir of Edward Colwich of Colwich in
Staffordshire Esquire, near Owsley-Bridge, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 1554. A. number.
53. and had Issue Peter, who died without Issue; Alice married Sir George
Leycester of Toft; Elizabeth married George Legh of High-Legh de East-Hall
Esquire, 1581. And Katharine married John Son and Heir of George Ireland of
Hutt in Lancashire Esquire, 1583. E. number. 26. Wills, number. 4.

This Peter purchased Stanley of Hooton's fifth Part of Allostock, 21 Eliz. V.
number. 8.

He died 21 die Julii, 1581. 23 Eliz. and was buried at Great-Budworth, in his
appropriate Burial-place in our Ladies Chapel there, the 26 of the same Month,
in the fortieth Year of his Age; and survived his Father four Years: O. number. 9.
and Register of Budworth-Church.

Elizabeth his Widow married George Ireland of Hutt in Lancashire Esquire,
1583. 26 Eliz. A. number. 47.

The three Daughters and Heirs carried away the Lands of their Mother: But this
Peter entailed all his ancient Lands on his Brother Adam Leycester, 1581. E.
number. 26. N. number. 1.

XII. Adam Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Brother and Heir-male to Peter,
married Dorothy the Widow of Thomas Holford Son and Heir of Christopher Holford
of Holford Esquire, and Daughter of Peter Shakerley of Houlme nigh Nether-Pever
Esquire 9 die Januarii, 1582. and had Issue John, who died young, buried at
Great-Budworth, 1586. Piers Leycester, second Son, died an Infant, buried at
Nether-Pever the 20 of January, 1587. Peter, born the tenth day of July, and
Baptized at Nether-Pever, 14 die Julii, 1588. O. number. 12. survived Heir; and
Adam, baptized at Nether-Pever, 21 die Octobris, 1590. was buried there the
nineteenth day of November next following: So the Register of Nether-Pever.

This Adam Leycester Esquire died 7 die Junii, and was buried at
Great-Budworth, in the appropriate Burial-place of his Ancestors, the
seventeenth day of June, 33 Eliz. 1591. and survived his Brother Peter ten
Years: O. number. 12. and Register de Budworth.

Dorothy, the Widow of Adam, purchased the other Moiety of Hield, Anno 1601. M.
number. 60. And so the whole is now reverted. She also built the Gate House at
Nether-Tabley: And she was buried at Nether-Pever, 23 die Aprilis, 1630.

XIII. Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Adam and
Dorothy, married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever, the
Elder, 1611. 9 Jacobi. He was but three Years old when his Father Adam died,
and was Ward to his Mother, who had Compounded for his Wardship with Queen
Elizabeth.

He had Issue Margaret, born September 29. 1612. and buried at Great-Budworth
12 die Octobris, 1612. Peter, who Composed this Book, born 3 die Martii, 1613.
Elizabeth, born the first day of June, 1615. and buried at Great-Budworth 15
die Julii following: Philip, born 1616. who dying soon after, the next Son was
also called Philip, born 1618. Collector of Oxford 1641. made Fellow of
Brazen-nose-College 1643. and died unmarried 1653. Thomas Leycester, born 26
die Julii, 1620. died also unmarried 27 die Augusti, 1652. Adam Leycester,
youngest Son, born 21 die Octobris, 1625. now Captain of a Foot-Company in
Ireland, 1666. and living in Limrick. This Adam married Mary Thaddius, the
Widow of one Lieutenant Pope in Ireland, Anno Domini 1667. She was Daughter to
one Thaddius late of Northdown in Kent, of a Welsh Extraction.

Elizabeth, the Wife of this Peter Leycester the Father, died at Nether-Tabley
on Satturday the thirteenth day of November, 1641. and was buried at
Over-Pever, as she had often in her Lifetime desired. She was born the tenth day
of May, 1587. so that she lived 54 Years and 6 Months.

Peter her Husband died on Tuesday the seventh day of March, 1647. aged 59
Years and 8 Months, and was buried at Great-Budworth on the Satturday
following, in the appropriate Burial-place of his Ancestors in our Ladies
Chapel there, on the North-side of the said Church; and survived his Father 56
Years.

XIV. Sir Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley Baronet, Son and Heir of Peter and
Elizabeth, married Elizabeth the third and youngest Daughter of Gilbert late
Lord Gerard of Gerards-Bromley in Staffordshire, by Dame Elinour his Lady,
Daughter and sole Heir of Thomas Dutton late of Dutton in Cheshire, Esquire.
This Peter and Elizabeth This Elizabeth was Baptized 23 Maii 1620 as by the
Register of Ashley-Church in Staffordshire appears: Lib. B. page 156.
were married at Dutton the sixth day of November, 1642. and had Issue Robert
Leycester, eldest Son, born at Chester on Monday the eleventh day of September,
1643. Byron Leycester, second Son, born also at Chester on Tuesday the twenty
sixth day of November, 1644. He died the seventeenth day of May next following,
and was buried at Trinity-Church in Chester, where he was also Christened:
Thomas Leycester, third Son, born at Nether-Tabley on Thursday-Morning the
eighth day of January, 1651. He died the fifth day of March, being Thursday,
1667. at Nether-Tabley, and was buried at Great-Budworth, in the seventeenth
Year of his Age; Magnae spei Juvenis: Elinour, eldest Daughter, born at
Nether-Tabley on Palm Sunday, 22 die Martii, 1645. married Raufe Leycester
eldest Son of George Leycester of Toft Esquire, 29 die Augusti, 1665. and has
several Issue: Elizabeth, second Daughter, born at Nether-Tabley on Wednesday
the sixteenth day of June, 1647. married Samuel Birch younger Son of John Birch
of Whitborn in Herefordshire, 1666. She miscarried of a Female-Child in
November, 1667. and soon after died of the Smallpox, on Saturday the last of
November, at Whitborn aforesaid, Anno Domini 1667. and was buried at
Whitborn-Church: Byron Leycester, third Daughter, born at Nether-Tabley on
Saturday the sixth day of October, 1655. and is yet living, 1669.

Sir Peter Leycester and Elizabeth his Lady are both yet living, 1669. He was
Created Baronet the tenth day of August, 1660. 12 Car. 2.

XV. Robert Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, eldest Son of Sir Peter and
Elizabeth, married Meriel Daughter and Heir of Francis Watson late of
Church-Aston nigh Newport in Shropshire, Esquire, 6 die Junii, 1667. and has
Issue Robert, a Son, born at Marcham in Berkshire on Friday the sixteenth day
of April, Anno Domini 1669.

Over-Tabley.
THe Township of Over-Tabley was held by William Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton,
in the Time of William the Conqueror: We read in Doomsday-book thus: -- Isdem
Willielmus tenet Stabelei: Lewinus tenuit and liber Homo fuit: ibi tertia pars
unius Hidae Geldabilis Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit, and est: Silva ibi
dimidia Leuva longa, and XL Perticis lata: valuit X solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet in ipsa Villa unam Bovatam Terrae, and tertiam partem
unius Hidae Geldabilem: Segrid and Ulsi tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis, and
liberi fuerunt: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit, and est: Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat septem solidos.

But not long after, certain it is that this Township was of three distinct
Fees.

One third Part of Over-Tabley Roger de Manwaring gave to the Monastery of
Saint Werburge in Chester, in the Reign of Henry the Second: Lib. B. in
principio. This third Part came afterward to William de Tabley This William de
Tabley writ himself Dominus de Tabley, that is, de Over-Tabley; and sometimes
Dominus de Knotsford: tempore Edw. 1.
, who gave the same to Sir John Gray Son of Sir Reginald Gray; and Sir John
granted it to Roger Leycester Lord of Nether-Tabley, Anno Domini 1296. F. number.
1. Which in all the Offices of Leycester of Tabley is found to be held of the
Abbey of St. Werburge: And Leycester of Tabley is now possessed of this third
Part at this day, 1666.

One other third Part was possessed by Adam de Tabley in the Reign of Edward
the Third, Sir William Boydell being Chief Lord thereof: For William Son of
John Boydell of Dodleston releaseth unto Adam de Tabley all Services due for
his third Part of Over-Tabley, for one Penny only, to be paid at the Nativity
of St. John Baptist yearly, for all Service: Dated at Dodleston, 17 Edw. 3.
1342. F. number. 3. This Adam de Tabley I conceive was originally a Massy; for he
Sealed with Massy's Coat of Arms. This third Part came afterward to Thomas
Daniell, younger Son of Thomas Daniell of Bradley in Appleton, the Elder, by
Joan Norreys a second Wife, in Marriage with Katharine Daughter and Heir of
William Son of Adam de Tabley, 27 Edw. 3. 1353. Lib. C. fol. 241. l. for which
Marriage Thomas Daniell the Father gave to Adam de Tabley 46 l. 13 s. 4 d. By
Katharine came also the Moiety of Bexton to Thomas Daniell the Son, her
Husband, who was afterward Sir Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley, 6 Rich. 2. 1382.
whose Heirs are possessed of this third Part at this present, 1666.

One other third part remaining was possessed anciently by another Family of
the Tableys, called The Hall of the Wood in Over-Tabley; until Matthew de
Tabley was Attainted of Felony, 22 Edw. 4. 1483. whose Lands, by the Office
taken 1 Hen. 7. were found to be held of the Honor of Halton, and so were
seized into the King's Hands. And I find John Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire
excepting against that Office of 1 Hen. 7. and complaining to the Judges and
Chamberlain of Chester, and alleging, That these Lands were held of him by
Homage and Fealty, and Twelve Pence This 12 d. Rent is at this day paid to
Leycester, by Th Warburton of Tabley-Hill; which Tenement is Parcel of the Hall
of Wood lands.
yearly Rent; and praying that he may be restored to these Lands, as Chief Lord
of the Fee: C. number. 31. But he had too Potent a Person to deal with. And King
Henry the Seventh granted these Lands to Sir William Stanley of Holt-Castle,
Lord Chamberlain: But he being beheaded for Treason, 1495. these Lands
Escheated again to the King: And Henry the Eighth Leased them to Randle
Brereton for his Life, 2 Hen. 8. And after, Roger Brereton his Son had them for
his Life. Afterward these Lands continuing in the King's Hands, Robert
Chornock and Roger Chornock of London purchased the same, and sold them to
Piers Leycester of Nether-Tabley Esquire, for 240 l. whereof one Moiety was
paid in Hand, and the other he gave Bond for: But Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley
Esquire purchasing these Lands at 9 l. per Annum in the King's Books, the
Chornocks purchased them after the Rate of 18 d. in the King's Books, and
cheated the said Piers Leycester by a fraudulent Conveyance, so that he could
not enjoy these Lands; It was Decreed in the Court of Requests, 4 Maii, 1 Eliz.
1559. That the Chornocks should restore the Money which they had received, and
deliver up the Bond Obligatory to be Cancelled: And so Daniell had the Lands,
which his Posterity now enjoys, 1666. C. number. 13.

Charterers in Over-Tabley, 1666.
1. Edward Hewet of Mobberley has one Tenement in Over-Tabley, now in
Possession of his Tenant John Kell; which is within Mr. Daniell's Part. 2.
There is also one other in Leycester's third Part, to wit, the Tenement in
Possession late of Richard Duncalfe of Tabley-Hill, whereunto formerly
Coithurst-Meadows (now part of Mr. Daniell's Demain) did belong. This pays 12
d. of Chief-rent yearly to Leycester, now paid by William Legh of Tabley-Hill.
This Freehold was Purchased by George le Criour from Thomas Monkys, 5 Ed. 4.
Afterward this Land was purchased by John Duncalfe of Mere, 30 Hen. 8. After
it came to Peter Hulse of Over-Tabley: Hulse sells it to Whitmore of Sudlow,
1604. Whitmore sold it to Peter Daniell Esquire, 1611.
In this Township there is an Ancient Chapel, called Over-Tabley-Chappel, or
more generally known by the name of The Chapel in the Street; for it is
situate in the High Street: An old pitiful Structure, ill seated, and now in
decay. This Chapel of Ease, being within the Parish of Rosthorn, was built
about the Reign of Henry the Sixth, by the Ancestors of Leycester of
Nether-Tabley and Daniell of Over-Tabley, for the Ease and Convenience of these
two Families, and of all their Tenants in Over-Tabley and Nether-Tabley:
Probably after the Match of Thomas Daniell and Maud Leycester, which was in
Anno Dimini 1440. 18 Hen. 6. It seems to be erected not long after, for
Convenience of both Families, and placed in the middle-way between the two
Houses; one half of the said Chapel belonging to Leycester and his Tenants,
and the other half to Daniell and his Tenants; and so has been enjoyed ever
since accordingly.

Before this Chapel was erected here in Over-Tabley, there was anciently a
Chapel situate in Nether-Tabley, within the Parish of Great-Budworth, in a
certain Field called at this day The Chappel-Field, Parcel of the Demain-Land
of Nether-Tabley; where, within our Memory, Servants in Ploughing have
discovered Great Stones, which were the Foundation-Stones of that Chapel,
seated in the very uppermost Corner of the Great-Rye-Field-Hedge adjoining to
the Chappel-Field: But this Chapel, I conceive, was neglected, or taken down,
upon the erecting of the other in Over-Tabley, and was much better Seated.

Now follows the Descent of the Daniels of Over-Tabley.
I. William Danyers senior Purchased Lands in Daresbery from Henry le Norreys,
Anno Domini 1291. 19 Edw. 1. Lib. C. fol. 184. d. and had to Wife Agnes de
Legh, Daughter of Thomas de Legh of High-Legh of the West-Hall, by whom he had
Issue Margery, married to Henry Horsale of Limme: Lib. C. fol. 233. a. and 243.
b. c. Agnes, another Daughter, married Alexander, Son of Richard, Son of
Alexander de Waleton nigh Daresbury, 30 Edw. 1. Lib. B. page 204. number. 12. He
had also two Sons, Thomas Daniers of Bradley in Appleton, eldest Son; and
William Daniers of Daresbery junior, second Son; and (if I mistake not) John, a
third Son: Lib. C. fol. 243. a. unless that John Son of William Daniers, 23
Edw. 3. be meant of William Daniers junior.

William Daniers junior, second Son, had his Father's Land in Daresbery, and
had a Wife called Agnes, and had Issue John Danyers, Son and Heir: Lib. C. fol.
185. m. acd three Daughters, Cicely, Agnes, and Magot; and another Son, called
Henry; all living at the time of their Father's death, 1306. who was buried at
Limme: Lib. C. fol. 187. v. Cicely married Robert Stathum of Stathum in Limme,
living 20 Edw. 3. I conceive William Danyers junior was he who died 1306.

Sir John Danyers of Daresbery, Son and Heir of William Danyers junior, had
Issue William Son and Heir, who married Clemence Daughter and Heir of Alan de
Norreys, 1344. by whom he had the Manor of Daresbery, and Royalty of
Over-Walton in Cheshire, and the Lands of Sutton, Eccleston, and Raynull in
Lancashire: Lib. C. fol. 185. e.h.m. from whom the Daniells of Daresbery in
Cheshire are descended; a Family continuing at this day, 1666.

I find Sir John Danyers of Daresbery styled Knight, 1344. 18 Edw. 3.

II. Thomas Danyers of Bradley, senior, 17 Edw. 2. Son and Heir of William
Danyers senior, had Land in Limme by the Grant of William Danyers his Father:
Lib. C. fol. 186. q. He Purchased Bradley from Peter Dutton Lord of Warburton,
1301. Lib. C. fol. 242. z. He married Margaret Daughter of Adam de Tabley: Lib.
C. fol. 221. g. and had Issue Thomas Danyers junior, eldest Son: Lib. C. fol.
186. q. Sir John Danyers of Gropenhale, second Son; Augustine, who had Lands in
Sworton in High-Legh, 11 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 275. number. 30. Alice, a Daughter,
married Matthew Son of William Mere of Mere nigh Over-Tabley, 13 Edw. 2. 1319.
Lib. C. fol. 208. s. Margaret, another Daughter, married John Son of Vivian de
Derewallshaw, id est, Thelwallshaw, 1335. Lib. C. fol. 245. a. Joan, another
Daughter: Also three Bastard-sons, William, Roger, and Robert: Lib. C. fol.
233. K. (1349.)

Thomas Danyers senior had to his second Wife Joan Norreys, by whom he had
Issue Thomas Danyers, afterward Sir Thomas Danyers of Over-Tabley: Lib. C.
fol. 244. E. Henry, another Son, to whom his Father gave the Marriage of the
Heir of William Clerk of Over-Tabley, 28 Edw. 3. Ibid. fol. 235. P. And
Richard, another Son, living 6 Rich. 2. Ibid. fol. 241. m.

Thomas Danyers made his Will, 28 Edw. 3. 1354. and was buried at Limme. Joan
Norreys his Widow married after William Bostock of Bostock: Lib. C. fol. 244. M.
9.

This Thomas Danyers was Sheriff of Cheshire 25 and 27 Edw. 3.

III. Sir Thomas Danyers of Bradley Knight, Son and Heir of Thomas Danyers
senior, married Isabel Daughter and Heir of William Baggiley by Clemence his
Wife, Daughter and Coheir to Sir Roger Chedle, alias Sir Roger Dutton of
Chedle in Cheshire; which William was Son of Rafe Baggiley: Lib. C. fol. 245.
b. and 150. l.

This Thomas Danyers died before his Father, to wit, 26 Edw. 3. leaving only
one Daughter and Heir, called Margaret, who had three Husbands. She carried
away all her Mothers Lands, and had Clifton and other Lands in Chedle; of whom
you may see more in Clifton: But his own Lands were settled on the Heirs-Males
of the Danyers.

IV. Sir John Danyers of Gropenhale in Right of his Wife, next Heir-Male to Sir
Thomas his elder Brother, had two Wives. The first was Joan Daughter of Sir
William Boydell, and Sister and Coheir to William Boydell of Dodleston in
Cheshire; and had Issue Margaret, a Daughter, living 28 Edw. 3. whom I conceive
was she that was Affianced young to Sir Robert Grosvenour of Houlm in
Allostock; but she lived not to enjoy him, or have any Issue: Lib. C. fol. 235.
P. and 126. II.KK. Nicolaa, another Daughter, Heir to the Lands of her Mother,
married (...) and had Issue Margaret, Daughter and Heir, the Wife of Alan de
Rixton in Lancashire, by Hollin-Ferry; which Margaret died without Issue 6
Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 290. a.c.

The second Wife of Sir John was Alice Daughter of (...) but had no Issue by
her.

This Sir John usually Sealed with his Coat and Crest, to wit, A Pale Fusile;
on a Helmet, a Unicorns Head Coupcd. The Colors at this day received are,
Argent, a Pale Fusile Sable.

Sir John Danyers died 47 Edw. 3. and Alice his Widow afterward married Sir
Edward Benestede, living 14 Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 242. s.t.w.x. It seems Sir
John had a Son called Robert, 43 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 233. h. but he died
without Issue.

After the death of Sir John, Thomas Danyers (Son of Thomas Danyers of Bradley
senior, by Joan Norreys his later Wife) succeeded as next Heir-male. He was
Half-brother to Sir John, and was afterward Sir Thomas Danyers of Over-Tabley.
He gave 20 s. Annuity for his Life unto Hugh Hulse of Picmere, to be on Counsel
with him, 48 Edw. 3. Lib. 3. fol. 243. f. Whose Descent follows.

Roger of Over-Tabley. Adam de Tabley, Son of Roger, married Beatrix Daughter
of (...) and had Issue Adam; Hugh de Tabley, This Hugh died 1346. Lib. C. fol.
241. g.
who married Margery Daughter of Hugh de Picmere: Lib. B. page 53. number. 18. but
left no Issue: William, another Son: Thomas, a Chaplain: Lib. C. fol. 241. g.
l. Also Margaret, a Daughter, Wife of Thomas Daniers of Bradley senior: Lib. C.
fol. 221. f.g. Adam de Tabley, Son of Adam, Lord of the third Part of
Over-Tabley, and of the Moiety of Bexton, living 35 Edw. 3. married Katharine
(...) and had Issue William; and Alice the Wife of William, Son of Robert, Son
of William de Buckley, 18 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 229. q. William de Tabley, Son
and Heir of Adam, had to Wife Mary (...) and had Issue Katharine, Daughter and
Heir, married to Thomas Danyers, afterward Sir Thomas Danyers of Over-Tabley:
Lib. C. fol. 241. l.



* Adam de Tabley Sealed with Massy's Coat of Arms, whereby he seems to be
Originally a Massy.

I. Sir Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Knight, Son of Thomas Daniell of Bradley
in Appleton senior, by Joan Norreys, and Heir to his Fathers Lands after the
death of Sir John Daniell his Half-brother. I find him styled blazon or coat of
arms Knight, 6 Rich. 2. in which Year he served in the Wars under Sir Hugh
Calveley of Lea, the famous Soldier: Lib. C. fol. 244. q.r.

The Surname of this Family was anciently written Danyers; and I have seen it
written De Anyers under Edward the Second: but in later Ages it was constantly
written Daniell, and so at this day they are usually called, which I rather
choose to follow.

He married Katharine Daughter and Heir of William Son of Adam de Over-Tabley,
27 Edw. 3. 1353. Lib. C. fol. 233. l. and 241. l. for which Marriage Thomas
Daniell his Father gave to Adam de Tabley, Grandfather of the said Katharine,
46 l. 13 s. 4 d. Whereupon the third part of Over-Tabley was settled on this
Thomas Daniell the Son, and Katharine his Wife, to descend after the decease of
the said Adam de Tabley.

He had Issue Thomas Daniell; John Daniell, living 15 Hen. 6. Lib. C. fol. 242.
r. And Jonet, a Daughter, married John Warwick of Upton in VVirral, the
younger, 15 Rich. 2. 1391. Lib. C. fol. 240. c.

Sir Thomas Daniel died 6 Rich. 2. 1383. paulo ante Festum* Sancti Edmundi
Archiepiscopi,: Lib. C. fol. 241. m. Katharine survived, and was living 3 Hen.
5. 1416. Lib. C. fol. 217. a.

II. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas, married
Elizabeth Widow of Thomas Boydell of Gropenhale junior, and Daughter of Sir
Richard Aston of Aston nigh Frodsham-Bridge: Lib. C. fol. 281. f. and 283. g.
and had Issue Thomas, John, Richard, Henry, Roger, and Lawrence: So the
Herald's Book: Lib. C. fol. 241. o.

This Thomas Daniel died 10 Hen. 6. 1431. Elizabeth died 11 Hen. 4.

III. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, styled The Elder, 18 Hen. 6. Son
and Heir of Thomas, married Isabel Daughter of John Rixton, 1 Hen. 5. 1413. by
whom he had Lands in Warrington; and had Issue Thomas Son and Heir; John
Daniell, another Son, was Soldier under Captain Piers Daniell, Son of John
Daniell of Daresbery, 21 Hen. 6. Lib. C. fol. 236. q.r. and fol. 244. s. And
Elizabeth Wife of John Son of Henry Legh, 26 Hen. 6.

IV. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas Daniell the
Elder, married Maud Daughter of John Leycester of Nether-Tabley, the Elder,
Esquire, 11 Hen. 6. 1440. Lib. C. fol. 236. s. and had Issue Thomas, Son and
Heir; William Daniell, living 12 Edw. 4. Katharine married Roger Millington of
Millington in Rosthorn-Parish, Gentleman: She was Widow 1487. 3 Hen. 7. And
Parnel married Robert Lathom of Congleton, 4 Hen. 7. 1489. And Cicely, another
Daughter: Lib. C. fol. 236. w.z. and 243. g.

* In the Herald's Book of Chester I find, That this Thomas Daniell and Maud
had Issue Thomas, William, John, and Cicely; and that Thomas the Son married
Katharine de Middleton (or Milneton), and had Issue Thomas, William, Katharine,
Parnel, and Cicely, as is above-shewed. Sed quaere.

V. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas, married
Blanch Daughter of Piers Warburton of Arley Esquire, 1472. 13 Edw. 4. Lib. C.
fol. 236. x. and had Issue Peter Daniell, Son and Heir; Thomas, second Son;
Richard, third Son; and three Daughters, Ellen, Margery, and Margaret, living
15 Hen. 7. Lib. C. fol. 237. a. and 239. q.

This Thomas Daniell died 10 Hen. 7. 1494. Buried in the North-Chappel, called
Our Ladies Chapel, in the Parish Church of Rosthorn. He left by his Will 20 s.
per Annum to Cicely his Whore during her Life, in those very Words: Lib. C.
fol. 237. a.

Blanch his Wife died on St. James's-day, 1508. 24 Hen. 7. Lib. C. fol. 239. r.

This Thomas took possession of Cherry-tree-Hurst in Limme, as next Heir, 1493.
For then died Thomas Daniell of Limme without Issue, the last Heir of that
Family of Limme: But the Matter was not fully settled, till the Award of William
Hill Prebend of Lichfield, 23 Hen. 8. when William Daniell of Longdon in
Staffordshire (who claimed as next Heir to Daniell of Limme, as Son of William,
Brother of John Daniell, late of Cherry-tree-Hurst in Limme) by virtue of that
Award passed all his Right in those Lands to Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley,
Grandson of this Thomas Daniell aforesaid.

VI. Piers Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas and Blanch,
married Julian Daughter of Sir Peter Newton, Secretary to the Prince, who had
the Wardship of the said Piers, 15 Hen. 7. 1499. Lib. C. fol. 239. q. and had
Issue Thomas, Son and Heir; Robert Daniell of Bexton, second Son; Peter, third
Son, living 1522. Anne, eldest Daughter, married first to Whitmore, after to
William Hulse; Elizabeth, second Daughter, married first to William Owen, after
to Anthony Shepherd; Parnel married John Bressy of Teerton in Cheshire: Lib. C.
fol. 240. x. 242. y. and 244. n.

Piers Daniell had also three Bastard-daughters, Margery Daniell, Isabel
Daniell, and Anne Daniell; and three Bastard-sons, John Daniell, Raufe Daniell,
and Humphrey Daniell, by Anne Brachegirdle; all living 1522. Lib. C. fol. 242.
y.

This Piers Daniell Esquire died 1522. 14 Hen. 8. at the Age of 38 Years.
Julian his Wife died 34 Hen. 8. 1542. Lib. C. fol. 239. s.t.

VII. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Piers and Julian,
married Margaret Daughter of William Wilbraham of Woodhey in Cheshire Esquire 1521.
13 Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 237. e. and had Issue Peter Daniell, Son and Heir;
Thomas Daniell, second Son; Sir William Daniell, Judge of the Common Pleas,
third Son; Richard Daniell, fourth Son, died 1605. Ellen married John Massy of
Codington in Cheshire, 1553. Margaret married Christofer Holford of Iscoit in
Flintshire, younger Son of Sir John Holford of Holford nigh Tabley, 2 and 3
Phil. and Mar. 1555. After she married James Barker of Hamond near Shrewsbury:
Lib. C. fol. 238. I. and 243. h.k.

This Thomas Daniell died 5 Edw. 6. 2 die Junii, 1551. aged 48 Years: Lib. C.
fol. 238. I. Margaret his Wife survived. He Purchased the Lands in Picmere,
which his Posterity now holds, 1666. from William Sneyd, 36 Hen. 8. called
Wiche's Lands; which came to the Crown by the Attainder of Sir William Stanley,
Lord Chamberlain to Henry the Seventh, as I have before declared in
Over-Tabley: Lib. C. fol. 244. o.

VIII. Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas and
Margaret, married Alice Daughter of George Booth of Dunham-Massy Esquire, 4
Edw. 6. 1550. and had Issue only a Daughter and Heir called Dorothy, married
to William Massy, Son and Heir of Richard Massy of Rixton in Lancashire
Esquire, 14 Eliz. 1571. Lib. C. fol. 243. I. l.

This Peter Purchased the Hall of Woodlands in Over-Tabley, 3 and 4 Phil. and
Mar. 1556. which Escheated to the Crown upon the Attainder of Matthew de
Tabley, 22 Edw. 4. as I have shown before in Over-Tabley.

This Peter Daniell died 9 die Novembris, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. 1557. at the
Age of 28 Years within a Month, leaving Thomas his Brother and Heir to succeed
him: Lib. C. fol. 238. k.

IX. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Brother and Heir-male to the last
Peter, married Alice Daughter of Fouk Dutton of the City of Chester, and had
Issue Peter, Son and Heir; Thomas, second Son; Richard, third Son; William,
fourth Son, died 20 die Maii, 33 Eliz. 1591. John, fifth Son; and Margaret, a
Daughter, living 1575. 17 Eliz. Lib. C. fol. 240. x.

This Thomas Daniell Esquire died 1575. 17 Eliz. aged 41 Years. Alice survived,
and was living 1590. Lib. C. fol. 239. m. and 238. l.

X. Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Thomas and Alice,
married Anne Daughter of Henry Manwaring of Carincham in Cheshire Esquire,
1574. and had Issue Peter, Son and Heir, six Years old when his Father died;
Richard Daniell, second Son, died without Issue; Frances married Edward
Littleton, younger Son of Littleton of Pillaton in Staffordshire, near
Pancridge; Anne, second Daughter, died without Issue; Mary, third Daughter,
married John Woodnot of Shenton in Cheshire; after to John King of Salmondley
in Lincolnshire; Jane, fourth Daughter, died without Issue.

This Peter died 3 die Augusti, 1590. 32 Eliz. aged 29 Years. Anne his Widow
afterward married Thomas Ashold Parson of Swetenham in Cheshire: And she died
29 Julii, 1633. and had the Wardship of her Son: Lib. C. fol. 239. n.o.

XI. Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter and Anne,
married Christian Daughter of Richard Grosvenour of Eaton-boat in Cheshire
Esquire, and had Issue Peter, eldest Son; Henry, second Son, married Anne
Daughter of Sir John Dorell of Westwoody in Berkshire, but had no Issue; John
Daniell, third Son, was an Apprentice in London, and married, but died also
without Issue; William, fourth Son, married Dorothy Forth of Wiggan in
Lancashire; Thomas, fifth Son, slain at the Battle of Brainford near London,
1642. Margaret, eldest Daughter, married Richard Green of Conglyton in
Cheshire, Gentleman; Christian, second Daughter, married George Davenport of
Calvelcy Esquire; Mary, third Daughter, married one Colonel Finch, 1651. an
Officer for the Parliament-Party against the King, and are both now living in
Ireland, 1666. Elizabeth, fourth Daughter, died unmarried; Anne, the youngest
Daughter, married Robert Sanford of Sanford in Shropshire Esquire, 1648.

This Peter Daniell was one of the Knights of this County for the Parliament,
1625. and died the eighteenth day of April, 1652. aged 68 Years, and was buried
at Great-Budworth. Christian his Wife survived, and died 1663.

XII. Peter Daniell of Over-Tabley, the younger, Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter
and Christian, married Sarah Daughter of Richard Wilcocks of London, and had
Issue Thomas, Son and Heir; Sarah died in her Infancy; and Margaret, another
Daughter.

This Peter the Son died at Oxford, of a Shot received at the Siege of
Gloucester, 1643. in the lifetime of his Father, being at that time a Captain
of a Foot-Company in the Regiment of John Earl Rivers, raised on the King's
Part.

Sarah his Widow afterward married Robert Hyde of Nantwich, one of the
Sequestrators of Cheshire for the Parliament, 1651. but she had no Issue by him.

XIII. Thomas Daniell of Over-Tabley Esquire, Son and Heir of Peter and Sarah,
married Alice Daughter of William Smith, alias Nevill, second Brother of Henry
Nevill of Holt in Leycestershire; and has Issue Samuel, Thomas, Nevill, Peter,
and Sarah, all living 1666. William, the fourth Son, died young.

Tatton.
IN the Reign of William the Conqueror, William Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton
held one half of Tatton, which one Erchbrand held formerly.

And Ranulfus (the supposed Ancestor of the Manwarings) held the other half,
which one Leuvinus held before: So the Record of Doomsday-book informs us.

About one hundred Years afterward, I find Alanus de Matton possessed of the
Manor of Tatton: And Alanus Filius Alani de Tatton styled himself in his
Chartes, Dominus de Tatton; who assumed the Surname of Tatton from this Place
of their Residency here, which their Posterity retained: For Sir-names in those
elder Ages were not taken up generally; but Men were denominated usually of the
Places where they lived; and that by Continuance at last became a Surname.

William, Son of William, Son of Quenild de Tatton, granted a great part of
Tatton unto Sir Richard Massy and Isabel his Wife, about the Year of Christ
1286. which Peter Hackham, then Prior of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem
in England, confirmed.

Placita ante Festum Sancti Dunstani, 16 Edw. 2. apud Cestriam; upon a Distress
by Hamon Massy, Baron of Dunham-Massy, on the Goods of Robert Massy of Tatton,
taken in Tatton aforesaid, Hamon pleads, That Nicolas de Audley held the Manor
of Tatton of him the said Hamon by Knights Service, and by working at his
Castle of Dunham, and by the Service of Sixty Shillings yearly Rent: Of which
Services the said Hamon was seized by the Hands of the said Nicolas de Audley:
Which Three Pound yearly Rent, Sir James Audley of Heelegh-Castle in
Staffordshire released afterward to Sir John Massy of Tatton, 1 Rich. 2. 1377.
for which Sir John gave him two Messuages in VVrenbury in Cheshire.

Also it appears that Nicolas de Alditheley (or Audley) granted to Sir Richard
Massy, and Isabel his Wife, all his Lands in Tatton and Owlarton: Testibus
Reginaldo de Gray Justiciario Cestriae, Johanne Filio suo, Radulfo de Vernon,
Hamone de Massy, VVillielmo de Venables Militibus, Roberto le Grosvenour
Vicecomite Gestershiriae, -- etc. This was about 1286. The Original of which
Deed is now among the Evidences of the Earl of Bridgewater, 1667.

So that it should seem to me, that in the Reign of Edward the First, one
Moiety of Tatton was held of the Baron of Dunham-Massy, and the other Moiety of
the Prior of St. John of Jerusalem. That of the Fee of John of Jerusalem,
probably was the Moiety that in the Conqueror's Time belonged to the Barony of
Halton.

It is manifest by Deed, That Alan Son of Alan de Tatton Released to Helen
Manwaring and her Heirs, and to Robert Manwaring and his Heirs, sequelam
Halmoti mei de Tatton. under Henry the Third: Lib. C. fol. 135. number. 34.

So that Alan de Tatton seems to have the Royalty of all Tatton; and he grants
the Land called Bruchel, in Tatton, unto William Son of William Massy: Ibid.
number. 36. But whether he had any more than a Moiety of the Town, I cannot
affirm; in regard we see above, William Son of William Son of Quenild of Tatton
had a good part.

How, and when, *
this Manor of Tatton was given to be held of the Priory of St. John's of
Jerusalem; or whether only a Moiety thereof, or the whole Township be so
held, I find not yet to affirm positively. Certain it is, that Sir Richard
Massy was possessed of all or most part of Tatton, in the Reign of King Edward
the First, by Purchases of several Parcels; whose Heirs are now possessed of
the whole Manor, 1667. which the following Pedigree will more clearly manifest.

Charterers in Tatton, 1662.
1. John Brown of Tatton: His Freehold Land in Tatton was lately bought from
John Bentley of The Hole in Mere. 2. Edward Hewet of Mobberley has Freehold
Lands in Tatton: But now (1667.) Richard Parker has this Land, in Right of
Jane his Wife, Daughter of the said Edward Hewet; to his other Daughters he
gave Portions. 3. Edward Allen of Rosthorn has also certain Freehold Land in
Tatton.
The Descent of the Massies of Tatton.
I. William Massy, younger Brother to Hamon Massy Baron of Dunham-Massy.

II. William Massy, Son of William, to whom Alan

blazon or coat of arms Son of Alan of Tatton gave the Lands in Tatton called
Bruchel, bounding the same in his Deed; Rendering a Pair of White Gloves yearly
on the Feast Day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, (Sub Hen. 3.) Lib. C.
fol. 105. number. 36.

He married Margery Domina de Rosthorn: I guess she may be Daughter to Robert
de Manwaring, and Sister and Heir to Hugh Manwaring Lord of Rosthorn, or Lord
of one Moiety at least; and Lord of the Moiety of Norshagh in Tatton: Lib. C.
fol. 105. number. 40, 41.

He was styled Sir William Massy, 1270. and had Issue Richard, Son and Heir;
Robert Massy of Rosthorn, second Son, afterward Heir to his Brother; Thomas,
another Son, living 1270. Lib. C. fol. 104. number. 25. b. And Hawise, a Daughter,
married Richard de Ferneley: Lib. A. fol. 140. o.

This William Massy died about the beginning of Edw. 1.

III. Sir Richard Massy of Tatton Knight, Son and Heir of Sir William, married
Isabel Daughter of --

He Purchased out most of the Lands remaining in Tatton, 1286. He was Sheriff
of Cheshire, 6 Edw. 1. 1278. and Judge of Chester, 28 Edw. 1. 1300. He was
Knighted about 14 Edw. 1. for then I first find him so styled; unto whom was
granted liberty of Free Warren in all his Demain-Lands of Rosthorn, Tatton,
Owlarton, Legh, Timperley, and Hale, in Cheshire; Dated at Westminster, 4 die
Decembris, 22 Edw. 1. 1294.

Sir Richard died without Issue on Tuesday in the Easter-week, Anno Domini
1305. 33 Edw. 1. leaving Robert Massy his Brother to succeed in his Inheritance.

Isabel his Widow survived him.

IV. Robert Massy of Tatton, Brother and Heir to Sir Richard, married (...) and
had Issue William Massy, eldest Son; Hamon Massy, another Son, Escheator of
Cheshire. 6 Edw. 3. 1332. O. number. 1. and he married Katharine Daughter and Heir
of Alan Rixton of Rixton in Lancashire, 6 Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 292. number. 1, 3,
11. styled afterward Sir Hamon Massy, 1347. 21 Edw. 3. from whom the Massies
of Rixton in Lancashire: Adam Massy, another Son, to whom his Father gave the
Custody of the Lands of Norshagh in Tatton, belonging to Raufe (Son of William
de Mobberley) till Raufe came to Age: Dated 1 Edw. 3. 1327. Lib. C. fol. 103.
number. 9. Robert Massy, another Son, 15 Edw. 3.

Robert Massy of Tatton died about 1328. 2 Edw. 3.

V. Sir William Massy of Tatton Knight, 1335. Son and Heir of Robert, married
Margery Daughter of Thomas Legh of High-Legh de West-Hall: Lib. C. fol. 267.
number. 12. This was about 1307. And had Issue Hugh Massy, Son and Heir; Oliver
Massy of Denfield in Rosthorn, another Son, from whom the Massies of Denfield;
Richard Massy of Dich-house in Rosthorn, another Son; Ellen, a Daughter,
married Gilbert Hassall of Hassall in Lancashire; afterward to Sir William
Brereton of Brereton in Cheshire.

Sir William Massy died the second of May, 1338. 12 Edw. 3.

VI. Hugh Massy of Tatton, Son and Heir of Sir William, had to Wife Alice
Daughter of (...) and had Issue Richard Massy, Son and Heir, who married Alice
Daughter of Gibert de Haydok in Lancashire, 16 Edw. 3. 1342. but died without
Issue 3 die Septembris, 1370. 44 Edw. 3. And John Massy, another Son, who
succeeded Heir to his Father.

This Hugh Massy died before 49 Edw. 3. about 45 Edw. 3. 1371.

VII. Sir John Massy of Tatton Knight, Son and Heir of Hugh, married Alice
Sister and Heir to Sir Geffrey Worseley of Worseley in Lancashire, about 46
Edw. 3. and had Issue Thomas, eldest Son, who married Margaret Daughter of
(...) but died without Issue, on St. Bartholomew's day, 1420. 8 Hen. 5.
afterward Margaret married Sir John Gresley: Geffrey Massy, second Son,
succeeded Heir to his Brother Thomas; Richard Massy, third Son: These are
warranted by Deeds. But I find mention, in an old Pedigree, of three other
Sons, Hugh, John, and Lawrence; also Joan, married first to Sir William
Venables of Bollin-Fee in Maxfield-Hundred, and after to Sir Oliver Stanley;
Margery married Sir John Bromley of Badington in Cheshire.

Sir Geffrey Worseley beforementioned married Mary Daughter of Sir Thomas
Felton; which Mary being divorced, entered into a Nunnery: Then he took to Wife
Isabel Stanley, by whom he had Issue Elizabeth. After the death of Sir Geffrey
VVorseley, Mary came out, and proved she entered for fear, and that she was
divorced upon a fained ground, and proved Elizabeth to be Illegitimate: And the
Pope confirms her Return into Secularity.

Sir John Massy of Tatton was Sheriff of Cheshire 11 Rich. 2. 1387. and also 13
Rich. 2. 1390. He and Thomas his eldest Son were attainted 1 Hen. 4.

Sir John died 1403. 22 July, 4 Hen. 4. Probably he was slain at the Battle of
Shrewsbury, taking Part with Henry Percy against Henry the Fourth; for that
Battle was sought the Eve before Mary Magdalen's day.

Alice the Widow of Sir John Massy died 6 Hen. 6. in the beginning of October,
1427.

VIII. Sir Geffrey Massy of Tatton Knight, Son to Sir John, and Heir to his
Brother Thomas, married Margery Daughter of John Hilton of Farnworth in
Lancashire.

This Sir Geffrey died 4 die Octobris, 1457. 36 Hen. 6. aged 70 Years, without
any lawful Issue surviving.

I find he had a Bastard-son, called John Massy, living 31 Hen. 6.

IX. William Massy of Tatton Esquire, Son and Heir of Richard Massy, Brother to
Sir G^offrey, married (...) and had Issue Geffrey Massy, Son and Heir; Thomas,
second Son; and Richard, third Son.

This William Massy died in Festo Epiphaniae, 1467. 7 Edw. 4. and had a Brother
called Geffrey Massy, as well as a Son of that Name.

X. Sir Geffrey Massy of Tatton Knight, Son and Heir of William, married Isabel
Daughter of Sir John Butler of Bewsy nigh Warrington in Lancashire, 31 Hen. 6.
1453. and had Issue only one Daughter and Heir, called Joan.

Sir Geffrey was living 15 Edw. 4. 1475. Q. number. 7.

XI. William Stanley of Tatton Esquire, in Right of Joan his Wife, Daughter and
Heir of Sir Geffrey Massy, was Son and Heir of Sir William Stanley of
Holt-Castle in Denbigh-shire; and had Issue only one Daughter and Heir, called
also Joan; in Latin she is styled Johanna. Joan and Jane in 32 Eliz. were
agreed to be all one Name by the Court of the King's Bench: Cambden in his
Remains, on the Name Jane, page 98.

This Sir William Stanley of Holt was Lord Chamberlain to Hen. 7. and Brother
to Thomas Stanley the first Earl of Darby of that Family; which Sir William was
Beheaded 1495. as supposed to incline to the Part of Perkin Warbeck: See Crokes
Reports, 4 Car. 1. page 123, 124. whose Lands and Goods were all Confiscated to
the King. He had in ready Money and Plate, in his Castle of Holt, forty
thousand Marks, besides Jewels, Household Stuff, and Stock of Cattle in his
Grounds. He had in Lands 3000 l. per Annum of an old Rent, as my Lord Bacon
says in his History of Henry the Seventh. He aspired to Petition the King for
the Earldom of Chester, which ended both in a denial, and a distaste. He had by
Joyce his Wife, Daughter of Edward Lord Powys, and Widow of John Tiptoft,
William Stanley beforementioned; and Jane, married to Sir John Warburton of
Arley in Cheshire, one of the Knights of the Body to Henry the Seventh.

William Stanley of Tatton died about 14 Hen. 7. 1498. Joan his Widow
afterward married Sir Edward Pickering, 16 Hen. 7. 1500. And lastly, she
married Sir John Brereton to her third Husband, living 24 Hen. 7. And Joan died
3 Hen. 8. 1511.

XII. Joan, sole Daughter and Heir of William Stanley by Joan Massy his Wife,
had two Husbands.

First she married John Ashton, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Ashton of Ashton
super Mersey in Cheshire, 16 Hen. 7. She was then but eight Years old. This
John Ashton died young, without any Issue by her, 5 Hen. 8. 1513.

Afterward she married Sir Richard Brereton, younger Son of Sir Randle
Brereton of Malpas in Cheshire; by whom she had Issue Richard Brereton, eldest
Son, who married Dorothy Daughter of Thurstan de Tildesley in Lancashire
Esquire, 35 Hen. 8. 1543. But he died without Issue about 4 Edw. 6. Geffrey
Brereton, second Son, succeeded Heir: Anne Brereton, a Daughter, married John
Booth of Barton in Lancashire Esquire 32 Hen. 8. 1540. X. number. 26.

This Lady Jane Brereton died the sixth of April, 12 Eliz. 1570. aged 77 Years.

Sir Richard Brereton her Husband died at Islington in Middlesex, 3 and 4 Phil.
and Mar. 1557. Geffrey his Son and Heir being then of full Age.

XIII. Geffrey Brereton of Tatton Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Richard Brereton
and Jane Stanley, married Alice, Daughter of Piers Leycester of Nether-Tabley
Esquire 5. Edw. 6. 1551. A. number. 35. and had Issue Richard Brereton Son and Heir,
and Anne a Daughter, living 8 Eliz. who died without Issue.

This Geffrey died in June 1565. 7 Eliz. about the age of thirty Years. Alice
his Widow afterward married Robert Charnocke Gentleman; and she died the
second of April 1572. 14 Eliz.

XIV. Richard Brereton of Tatton Esquire, Son and Heir of Geffrey and Alice,
married Dorothy, Daughter of Sir Richard Egerton of Ridley in Cheshire, 14
Eliz. 1572. but died without Issue December 18. 41 Eliz. 1598. Dorothy his
Widow afterward married Sir Peter Legh of Lime in Cheshire, but had no Issue
by him: She was second Wife to Sir Peter, and survived both her Husbands; and
she died the fourth of April 1639.

This Richard Settled all his Estate on Sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor of
England; from whom the Earls of Bridgewater are descended, who are now Owners
of these Lands, 1667.

Thelwall.
IN the Year of Christ 920. King Edward, surnamed The Elder, built a Town here
at Thelwall, though now an obscure Village; so called, Test Forilego, from the
Stakes and Stumps cut from the Trees, wherewith they had environed it about, as
a Wall: for the Saxons called such Stakes Thell; and the word Wall is a word
yet used for a high Fence that encompasseth any Place about with Stone, or
other thing or Building. So Cambden's Britannia, Cheshire. Polychronicon, lib.
6. cap. 5. ad finem: and that King Edward made it a Garrison, and placed
Soldiers therein; wherewith also agrees Florentius Wigorniensis. But it seems
to lie waste in the time of the Conqueror; for I find no mention of it in
Doomsday Book.

Roger of Poictou (Son of Rogerde Montgomery the first Earl of Shrewsbury) was
Lord of all the Land in Lancashire, between the Rivers of Ribble and Mersey;
and gave half of the Fishing of Thelwall to the Abbot of Shrewsbury, under
Henry the First. Monasticon, vol. 1. page 383. This was the Fishing on the
Lancashire side.

The Prior of Norton had the other half of the Fishing of Thelwall on the
Cheshire side, granted by William Constable of Cheshire the younger, Baron of
Halton, about the Reign of King Stephen. Monasticon, vol. 2. page 186.

In our Mize-book of Cheshire, anciently the Abbot of Salop stood charged with
three Shillings in the Mize for Fishing in Thelwall: but this Mize is now
totally lost, no Man now living being able to inform us who ought to pay the
same. I conceive after the dissolution of Abbeys in England by Henry the
Eighth, that Fishing coming to the King's hands, the Mize thereof ceased, being
not at all paid of late Times, the Fishing being then but of little value.

This Township of Thelwall is of the Fee of the Honor of Halton: one third part
whereof William Constable of Cheshire gave to the Abbey of Salop, cum
pertinentiis, in bosco, in plano, in aqua. Monasticon, vol. 1. page 383.

In the Reign of Henry the Third, Edmund Lacy Baron of Halton and Constable of
Cheshire, gave Domino Galfrido de Dutton (Ancestour to Warburton of Arley)
totam terram suam de Thelwall cum Wera, and Piscaria, and Stallagiis suis: and
also all the Land which he had of the Abbot and Convent of Evesham in Thelwall:
Reddendo inde annuatim unam Par Cheirothecarum Cervi Furratarum ad Festum
Sancti Michaelis pro omni Servitio. Lib. C. in ipso initio, Ex Chartulis
Roberti Pickering de Thelwall.
fol. 1. f. This could be but two third parts of Thelwall. The Original of this
Deed is now in possession of Mr. Pickering of Thelwall, 1666.

This Geffrey Dutton gave these Lands to Thomas his younger Son. Ibidem g.

Afterward it was possessed by Clayton in the Reign of Edward the Third, and
continued in the possession of the Claytons, till John Clayton of Thelwall sold
it to Richard Brooks of Norton Esquire, about 4 Eliz. 1561. whose Son Thomas
Brooks of Norton Esquire, sold the same to John Moors Doctor of Physic in
London, Anno Christi 1621. and John Moors of Kirtlington in Nottinghamshire,
Nephew of Doctor Moors aforesaid, sold them to Robert Pickering Councellor at
Law, 1662. who is now possessed of the Manor of Thelwall, 1666.

In this Township of Thelwall are now, 1666. certain Freeholds of Inheritance
possessed by these Persons following.

1. Sir Peter Brooks of Mere, has four Tenements, which were given him by his
Father Thomas Brooks of Norton Esquire, before he sold away the other Lands of
Thelwall. 2. John Martinscroft of Thelwall: This has for long time continued
in the Name of Martinscroft, an ancient Freeholder. 3. Robert Legh of Thelwall,
bought from Sir Edward Moors. 4. Peter Drinkwater, formerly one Massies. 5.
Raufe Caldwell, Fee-Farmer. 6. John Rowson, Fee-Farmer. 7. Randle Bood,
Fee-Farmer. 8. Margaret Hog, Widow. 9. John Legh of Oughtrington in Limme,
bought Lands in Thelwall from Sir Edward Moors. 10. Katharine Moss, one
Close. 11. Thomas Thomason, Fee-Farmer. 12. John Dunbabin, a Meadow. 13. Sir
George Warburton of Arley, half an Acre of Meadow.
Here is a Chapel of Ease called Thelwall-Chappel, situate near to the
Mannor-House of Thelwall, and within the Parochial Chappelry of Daresbury, but
both within the Limits of the Mother Church of Runcorne.

This I conceive was built by Thomas Brooks Esquire, and was lately repaired
by Mr. Pickering aforesaid, 1663.

Timperley.
IN the Rentall of Dunham-Massy, 3 Hen. 4. Ranulfus Manwaring tenet de jure
Uxoris suae medietatem villae de Timperley cum clausura in eadem, vocata
Chenall, in Soccagio: and reddit per annum termino Johannis Baptistae duodecem
denarios: Et de Stuth, alias dictum Sheriffe-Tooth, 2 d. ob. This Randle
Manwaring of Over-Pever, married Margery the Widow of Richard Buckley of
Chedle; and so in her Right, during her Life, held the Moiety of Timperley;
which belonged to the Buckleys of Chedle, and at this day, 1666. belongs to
Buckley of Chedle, being anciently of the Fee of the Barons of Dunham-Massy.

The other Moiety formerly belonged to the Ardernes of Timperley: which Moiety
Charles Arderne, younger Son of John Arderne of Harden in Maxfield Hundred
Esquire, had by the Marriage of Elizabeth the Daughter of Richard Ratcliffe
Lord of Backford.

Sir William Booth of Dunham-Massy, bought certain Lands in Timperley, and the
fourth part of Timperley-Mosse from John Parr junior and Alice his Wife, in
exchange for Lands in Stoke, Picton, and Chester, 2 Edw. 4. 1462. Lib. C. fol.
253. l. And Timperley-Mosse and Common was divided October 28. 15 Edw. 4. 1475.
one fourth part to Sir William Booth; another fourth part to John Arderne, Son
and Heir of of Charles Arderne late deceased, by Elizabeth his Wife then Widow
surviving; and the other half of Timperley-Mosse and Common to William Buckley
Esquire, ibidem fol. 253. m. The Originals among the Evidences of the Lord
Delamere of Dunham-Massy, 1666.

So that the Lord Delamere has now the fourth part of Timperley; and another
fourth part now belongs to Sir Amos Meredeth, in Right of Anne his Wife,
Daughter of Robert Tatton of Witthenshaw in Cheshire Esquire. On which Anne and
her Heirs Mrs. Barlowe (one of the Sisters and Coheirs to Thomas Brereton, late
of Ashley deceased) has settled her part; unto whose share the Lands of
Timperley, which belonged to Brereton, are solely with other Lands allotted.
These Lands came first to Brereton by Sibill, Daughter and Heir of William
Arderne of Timperley, Wife of George Brereton of Ashley. William Arderne died
August 28. 26 Eliz. 1584.

And the other Moiety of Timperley belongs to Buckley of Chedle, as aforesaid.

Charterers now in Timperley, 1666.
1. Thomas Gerard of Riddings in Timperley Gentleman. These Freehold-lands
belonged to Vawdrey of Riddings, and were not long since purchased by the said
Thomas Gerard. These Lands were originally granted away by John Arderne of
Timperley, and Thomas his Son and Heir, unto Thomas Vawdrey and his Heirs,
rendering yearly 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. Dated the tenth of August, 13 Hen. 7. 1498.
Lib. B. page 37. The Original in the possession of Thomas Gerard aforesaid. 2.
William Steel of Nether-Knotsford, has three Cottages in Timperley: These
formerly belonged to the Riddings. 3. George Ward of London, one Cottage,
formerly belonging to the Riddings. 4. Peter Parker of Altrincham, has about
an Acre in Timperley, formerly belonging to the Riddings. 5. Robert Hield of
Etchells, one Cottage in Timperley.
Toft.
THis Township of Toft is not found in Doomsday Book; wherefore it seems to be
Waste at that time. The word Toft signifies a parcel of Land wherein a House
has stood. Cambdens Remains, page 120. and in that sense it was taken by the
Judges and expounded, 2 and 3 Philip and Mary. Plowdens Commentaries, Hill
envers Graunge, page 170.

This Town gave Name to the Family of the Tofts, who in ancient Time were
seated here: One Moiety thereof is held of the Barony of Halton in Soccage, by
the yearly Rent of seven Shillings: and the other half is held of the ancient
Barons of Dunham-Massy in Soccage, by the yearly Rent of five Shillings: for so
I find it in John Leycester of Toft's Office, 2 Hen. 8. and in other Offices
downwards: which Rents are paid at this day, 1672. Howbeit, in an ancient
Feodary of Halton under Edward the Second it is said -- Rogerus de Toft, tenet
Villam de Toft pro vicesima part unius Feodi Militis. Yet I find among the
Evidences of Toft, T. number. 14. a little Parchment, about the time of the
beginning of Edward the Third's Reign, in Latin, and by me here rendered in
English, as follows:

HUgh de Toft confesses that he holds of the Earl of Lancaster, Lord of
Halton, the one Moiety of the Township of Toft, by the twentieth part of a
Knight's Fee, by Homage and Fealty, and the yearly Rent of Seven Shillings, to
be paid to Halton on Martlemas-day; and that he owes Suit of Court to Halton
for the same, de Quindena in Quindenam (that is, every Fortnight) upon notice:
And will appear at the Court of Passage or Fare; and ought to pay 12 d. to the
Sergeants of Halton -- and 4 d. for Market-Gold.

And I find alsa among the Evidences of Toft, that the Moiety of Toft belonging
to the Barons of Dunham-Massy was scattered into several Parcels: For Hamon de
Massy grants to Arnold de Toft the Third Part of his Moiety of Toft, rendering
the yearly Rent of Twenty Pence, about the Reign of King John: T. number. 3. This
third Part of that Moiety, Benedict the Son of Orme, the Son of Arnold de Toft,
released unto Roger de Toft, Anno 18 Hen. 3. 1234. T. number. 6. Confirmed by
Hamon Massy, T. number. 4.

Gervase Son of Hugh of Mobberley also releaseth to Walter de Toft the Right
which he has to the sixth Part of the Township of Toft: T. number. 1. And after
releaseth to Roger Son of Walter Toft all his Right in the whole Township of
Toft, about 15 Hen. 3. 1230. T. number. 2.

Robert Son of Wentlyan releaseth also to Roger Son of Walter de Toft his
Moiety of another third Part of the whole Moiety of Toft, about 1230. T. number.
8. This Moiety of a third Part, Robert Son of Wentlyan had in Free-Marriage
with Alice his Wife, Daughter of one Hugh de Toft: T. number. 7. And by this Deed
it appears, that this Hugh de Toft then had the other Moiety of that third Part
in his possession.

So that now Roger Son of Walter de Toft was possessed of most of the Town of
Toft, under Henry the Third: And I find Roger Toft, Son of this Roger Toft,
stiling himself Dominus de Toft, Anno Domini 1298. 26 Edw. 1. T. number. 9. to
whose Posterity the Manor and Town of Toft has continued ever since; that is
to say, The Family of Toft of Toft continued till the end of the Reign of Henry
the Sixth, above 250 Years; and then Robert Leycester (Son of Robert, Son of
Joan, Daughter and Heir of Robert Toft of Toft Esquire) was possessed of the
Manor of Toft, 2 Edw. 4. and has since belonged to his Posterity, Rafe
Leycester of Toft Esquire being now possessed of the same, Anno Domini 1672.

Charterers in Toft, Anno Domini 1672.
1. The Message late the Inheritance of Litler of Wallers-cote nigh Northwich;
Randle Mores now Tenant. 2. John Stretch of Little-Pever has now certain
Freehold-Lands in Toft, which he lately purchased from John Downs late of
Toft; and purchased by Downs formerly from Mainwaring of Pever: For in the
Office taken after the death of Sir Randle Mainwaring of Over-Pever, 5 and 6
Phil. and Mar. -- Tenuit terras in Toft de Radulfo Leycester Milite per
fidelitatem and redditum december Denariorum, -- etc.
The Pedigree of Toft of Toft, collected out of the Evidences of Toft, 1672.
I. Walter de Toft. He assumed the Surname of blazon or coat of arms Toft from
the Place of his Habitation, as was the manner of those elder Ages; but of what
Family descended, I cannot tell. He lived in the Reign of King Richard the
First, and King John, and had Issue a Son, called Roger de Toft.

II. Roger de Toft, Son of Walter de Toft. He lived Anno Domini 1230. and
purchased several Lands in Toft, as I have before declared, T: number. 2. and T.
number. 8. He had two Sons, Roger de Toft, and William de Toft; and Margaret, a
Daughter, married William Son of Roger Manwaring, 1 Edw. 1. 1272. Lib. C. fol.
226.

William de Toft, younger Son of this Roger, married Joan Sister of Richard de
Lostock-Gralam the younger, Son of Richard de Lostock, 5 Edw. 1. 1277. Lib. C.
fol. 228. b. This Joan became Heir to her Brothers, Richard and Thomas, who
both died without Issue; but she had Issue by this William, Roger de Holford,
who living at Holford, gained the Surname of Holford; which his Posterity
retained, and from whom the Holford's of Holford are descended. Lib. C. fol.
229. K. o. She had two other Husbands; of whom see more in Plumley.

Note, That John Holford under Richard the Second, Sealed with Tofts Coat,
differenced with a Cheveron, as I have seen in sundry of his Seals, to wit,
Argent, a Cheveron between three Text Tees Sable: but Toft of Toft's Coat is
Argent, three Text Tees, without a Cheveron.

III. Roger Toft of Toft, Son of Roger, married Beatrix, Daughter of Hugh
Venables of Kinderton, about the very beginning of Edward the First; to whom
her Father gave Land in Rusford in Kinderton, beyond the Brook toward
Sproston. Lib. C. fol. 225. e. and had Issue Roger, Son and Heir, Richard
living 6 Edw. 2. Hugh died before 9 Edw. 2. Lib. C. fol. 215. K. Thomas living
9 Edw. 2. and Hamon Toft. also Henry Toft another Son. T. number. 12.

IV. Roger Toft of Toft, Son and Heir of Roger, married Margery, Daughter of
Thomas Wever of Weever in Cheshire, Anno Dom. 1298. 26 Edw. 1. T. number. 9, 10,
11. and had Issue Hugh Toft; Thomas Toft, who married Margaret, to whom Sir
Rafe Mobberley gave his Mannor-House in Plumley, 1357. 31 Edw. 3. T. number. 24.
Lib. C. fol. 226. v. William Toft another Son, T. number. 13. 16 Edw. 3. Margaret
Toft, Sister of Hugh Toft, 16 Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 226. w.

V. Hugh Toft of Toft, Son of Roger, married Felice, Daughter of Thomas de
Donstable, 19 Edw. 2. 1325. Lib. C. fol. 225. K. and had Issue Robert de Toft;
Roger de Toft, living 2 Hen. 5. and 8 Hen. 5. Emme, a Daughter, married Thomas,
Son of Sir Hamon Ashley of Ashley in Bowdon Parish, 1359. 33 Ed. 3. John Booths
Book, Lib. H. page 110. d.

It seems that Roger Toft was elder Brother to Robert, T. number. 46. and had no
Issue-male at least.

This Hugh de Toft gave to Sir Hugh Venables all his Lands in Kinderton and
Sproston (which Lands were given by Venables to his Grandmother) in exchange
for the sixth part of Bexton, 1359. 34 Edw. 3. B. number. 12. Lib. C. fol. 226. l.

Sir John Seyvill Knight, Brother of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, and
procurer of the Pardon or Indulgence of the Castle of St. Peter (by virtue of
this Indulgence of Pope Alexander the Fifth, granted to all those who have put
to their helping hand to the fortification of the said Castle, that they shall
choose themselves a Confessor) now grants to Hugh de Toft and Alice his Wife,
because of their Charity and Aid toward the said Castle, full liberty by the
Pope's Authority, to choose themselves a Confessor; whereunto the Seal of the
Indulgence for the said Castle is affixed: Dated apud Templum Bruer; Anno
Domini 1412. And on the back of the said Deed is written in Latin, which I have
here put into English as follows, --

THe Lord Jesus Christ, who has given to his Disciples power of binding and
loosing, absolve thee; and I by the Apostolical Authority of St. Paul, and the
whole Mother Church, by the help of both which and the Popes Indulgence, do
absolve thee from all thy sins, of which by contrition thou have confessed, or
hereafter shall confess -- And I grant thee full remission of all thy sins,
that thou may have eternal life for ever. Amen. And if it happen that thou
recover not this present Infirmity, I reserve it for thee even in the very
point of death. T. number. 48.

By which Deed it may seem that Hugh de Toft had a later Wife called Alice, and
that he died Anno 1412. or thereabout. T. number. 44. Quaere if John de Holford
did not afterward marry this Alice. T. number. 35.

Robert Toft of Toft, Son of Hugh, married Cicely the Widow of John Clark of
Hawarden, and had Issue Roger de Toft, who died without Issue; and Jone married
Rafe Leycester, younger Brother to John Leycester of Tabley: Howbeit, her Issue
was not possessed of the Manor of Toft till after the death of her Father and
Brother, about the end of the Reign of Henry the Sixth. T. number. 78. T. number. 47.
T. number. 51.

John Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield (this was John Burghill) granted to
Robert de Toft and Cicely his Wife, liberty of keeping a Chaplain for
celebrating of Divine Duties in their private Oratories. Dated in our City of
Lichfield, December 21. 1398. 22 Rich. 2. T. number. 39.

And it seems to be this Robert de Toft who was Constable of the Castle of
Halton in Cheshire, and received 40 l. 00 s. 00 d. at Chester by the hands of
William de Alcumlow, Bailiff of the Sergeanty of Halton, from Robert Paris,
then the Kings Auditor at Chester, the 2^. day of July, 23 Rich. 2. for the
Ward and Custody of the said Castle, for himself and diverse Esquires and
Archers, then being in the said Castle by the appointment of the King's
Council. T. number. 80.

So ended the Family of Toft of Toft.

The Descent of Leycester of Toft, collected carefully out of the Evidences of
that Family, 1672.
I. Rafe Leycester, younger Brother of John Leycester blazon or coat of arms of
Tabley, married Jone, Daughter and Heir of Robert Toft of Toft: She was Widow
14 Rich. 2. 1390. and Rafe died between Michaelmas-day and the twelfth of
October, in the fourth Year of the Reign of King Richard the Second. C. number.
22, 23.

The first of the Issue of Joan that possessed the Manor of Toft whom I meet
withal, was Robert Leycester, Son of Robert, Son of this Rafe and Joan, and
that 2 Edw. 4. 1462. T. number. 51. for that till about this time Robert Toft
Father of Joan, survived, or Roger his Son.

When John Leycester of Nether-Tabley sold away all his Right and Title to the
Moiety of the Manor of Mobberley, with the Advowson of the Church of
Mobberley, unto John Dumvill of Mobberley and Ciceley his Wife, 1 Rich. 2.
1377. (which Lands were Settled on the said John Leycester by Sir Rafe Mobberley
of Mobberley his Uncle, by Feoffees entrusted, Anno Domini 1359. M. number. 32.
and M. number. 33. and T. number. 31.) It was then agreed, That one third part of
that Moiety should descend to Rafe Leycester his Brother, after the death of
John Dumvill and Cicely: which was Estated accordingly by Thomas Fitton of
Gowesworth, and other Feoffees entrusted, (after division thereof made) by the
Name of 15 Messuages, two parts of a Message 316 Acres, half an Acre, half a
quarter of an Acre, ten Perches and half a Perch of Land, sixteen Acres of
Wood, one quarter and five Perches, eight Acres of Moss, the third part of a
Water-Mill, and the third part of all the Wastes of Mobberly then unmeasured,
together with the Rent and Services of the said Rafe Leycester and William
Dawson in Mobberley; to hold to John Dumvill and Cicely his Wife for their
Lives -- and after their Deaths then to remain to Rafe Leycester and the
Heirs-males of his Body; and if Rafe die without Heir-male of his Body, then to
remain to the right Heirs of Cicely aforesaid for ever: Dated at Mobberley on
Tuesday in the Feast of St. Petronill the Virgin, 2 Rich. 2. 1378. M. number. 34.
And Rafe Leycester had 15 l. 00 s. 00 d. annual Rent Estated on him, during the
Lives of the said John Dumvill and Cicely, out of all the Lands in Mobberley by
Fine Levied to the said Feoffees, 1 Rich. 2. M. number. 2. and M. number. 3. which
Lands of Mobberley so Settled on this Rafe Leycester, are now in possession of
Leycester of Toft, 1672.

So that it seems Rafe Leycester aforesaid, had one Message in Mobberley by
the Grant of Nicholas Leycester his Father, and Mary his Mother, before these
other Lands were Estated on him in Mobberley, M. number. 39. and he purchased
William Dawson's Land in Mobberley after the Settlement aforesaid, to wit, 3
Rich. 2. M. number. 27, 28.

But the third part of the Mill in the Settlement mentioned Robert Leycester
sold to John Troutback. 18 Hen. 6. M. number. 13.

This Rafe Leycester and Joan his Wife, had Issue Robert Leycester, who
succeeded Heir; and Roger Leycester living, 18 Rich. 2. E. number. 1. among the
Evidences of Leycester of Tabley.

Now that this Rafe Leycester was younger Brother to John Leycester of
Nether-Tabley, appears by their Examinations taken on the part of Robert
Grosvenour of Hulme, against Scroop, concerning the bearing of a Coat of Arms,
Anno Domini 1386. 10 Rich. 2. where John Leycester is said to be then forty six
years old, and Rafe Leycester forty years old. Lib. C. fol. 126. KK. II. The
Original upon Record in the Tower of London, called The Bundle inter Scroop and
Grosvenour: A Copy of which Record, transcribed in a great Book, remains now
with Grosvenour of Eaton-boate in Cheshire.

As also, that the ancient Lands of the Leycesters remain at this day, 1672. in
the possession of Leycester of Tabley; which must have descended to the Heirs
of this Rafe, if he had been the elder Brother.

Again in the Deeds of Toft, M. number. 10. mentioning the Partition of the Lands
in Mobberley, between John Dumvill and Cicely his Wife on the one part, and
John Leycester and Rafe his Brother on the other part: for if Rafe Leycester
had been the elder Brother, it would have been said betwixt Rafe Leycester and
John his Brother.

And lastly, That Leycester of Toft bears his Coat of Arms at this day with a
distinction from the Coat Armor of Leycester of Tabley, by adding a Fret upon
the Fess: and omnis additio probat minoritatem.

But of this enough; which I rather mention, least any should judge me partial
in my own Cause, without certain Grounds of Truth.

This Rafe Leycester had Lands in Chorley juxta Warford, by the Grant of Mary
his Mother.

II Robert Leycester, Son and Heir of Rafe, married (...) and had Issue Robert
Son and Heir, Randle second Son, and John third Son, living 11 Hen. 4. C. number.
11.

This Randle Leycester, second Son, married Isabel Daughter and Coheir of David
Crew of Pulcroft; from whom the Leycesters of Poole in Nantwich Hundred are
descended, as appears by the Evidences of that Family. This Randle died Anno
Dom. 1438. whose Posterity continued here until Richard Leycester, late Mayor
of Chester, and Alderman of that City, having no Issue, gave all his Lands in
Poole to Sir Henry Delves of Dodington Baronet, in Marriage with Mary his
Niece, Daughter of Randle Leycester his late Brother. This Lady Mary Delves was
second Wife of Sir Henry, and was Widow 1666. but had no Issue by Sir Henry.
But these Lands are Settled to descend to another Leycester sprung from that
Family, after the Death of the said Mary without Issue.

III. Robert Leycester of Toft Esquire, Son of Robert, is the first of this
Family whom I find styled De Toft, and possessed of the same, to wit, 2 Edw. 4.
1462. T. number. 51.

He married Jane, Daughter and Coheir of Rafe Booth, younger Son of Sir Robert
Booth of Dunham-Massy, whom the said Rafe begot on Margaret his Wife, Daughter
and Heir of Thomas Sibell of Sandwich in Kent.

This Robert had Issue Rafe Leycester, Robert another Son, living 1 Hen. 7.
John another Son, 12 Hen. 8. Agnes a Daughter, married to John Birtles of
Birtles nigh Over-Alderley, 6. Edw. 4. 1466. M. number. 14. Lib. A. fol. 133. e,
f, g, h, i, k.

This Robert Leycester and John Legh of Booths, committed an Assault on Dennys
Holland, Servant to Sir Geffrey Massy of Tatton, in the nightime, and chased
and destroyed his Deer in Tatton Park; for which they paid 20 l. apiece. 20
Hen. 6. T. number. 79. by Award.

IV. Rafe Leycester Son and Heir of Robert, married Agnes Daughter of Robert
Ratcliff, 17 Edw. 4. 1477. and had Issue John Leycester Son and Heir, and James
Leycester, living 1 Hen. 7. Lib. A. fol. 133. H, I, K, L.

This Rafe died in the Lifetime of his Father, to wit, 1 Hen. 7. 1485.

V. John Leycester of Toft Esquire, Son and Heir of Rafe, married Elinour, one
of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir James Harrington of Wolfage in
Northamptonshire; M. number. 37.
and had Issue Rafe Leycester Son and Heir; Philip, another Son, who married
Elizabeth the Widow of James Grimsditch of Grimsditch in Nether-Whitley. 27
Hen. 8. Lib. C. fol. 196. m. Geffrey Leycester, another Son, living 12 Hen.
1520. T. number. 89. Jane, a Daughter, married Robert Langton of Low in
Lancashire Esquire, 14 Hen. 8. T. number. 88. I find also mentioned in a Pedigree
two other Sons, Thomas and Richard; but I cannot yet prove them so directly as
the other.

This John Leycester died 2 Hen. 8. 1511. Elinour survived, and was Widow 12
Hen. 8. 1520. T. number. 89. and 14 Hen. 8. T. number. 88. She was the ninth Daughter
and Coheir, and had Lands in Bricklesworth in Northamptonshire: for Sir James
had ten Daughters and Coheirs in all. Lib. A. fol. 133. m.n.

VI. Rafe Leycester of Toft Esquire, Son and Heir of John, married Ellen
Daughter of Rafe Egerton of Ridley in Cheshire Esquire, 4 Hen. 7. 1489. Lib. A.
fol. 133. l. and fol. 134. P. and had Issue Rafe Leycester Son and Heir.

This Rafe died 16 Hen. 8. 1525. aged 37 years. Afterward Ellen his Widow
married Robert Honford of Chorley. Lib. A. fol. 134. r. and 135. T. Ellen
survived both her Husbands, and was living 20 Hen. 8. C. number. 13.

VII. Sir Rafe Leycester of Toft Knight, Son and Heir of Rafe, was Knighted at
Leith in Scotland the 11. day of May, 36 Hen. 1. 1544. at which time the Earl
of Hertford, being then General, Knighted some other Cheshire Gentlemen, and
several others also. So Stow in his Annals of that Year.

Sir Rafe had two Wives; the first was Ellen Daughter of Philip Legh of Boothes
nigh Knotsford Esquire, 13 Hen. 8. T. number. 83. by whom he had Issue Rafe
Leycester eldest Son, who died young. William Leycester second Son succeeded
Heir. F. number. 4.
Lawrence Leycester, another Son, married Jane Daughter of John Warburton of
Bromfield; and John, who died without Issue: Also Elizabeth married Sir Randle
Manwaring of Over-Pever; she was his second Wife, but had no Issue by him:
afterward she married Sir Edmond Trafford of Trafford nigh Manchester. Anne,
another Daughter, married Philip Manwaring, Brother and after Heir to Sir
Randle aforesaid. Ellen died in her Infancy; and Mary married Hugh Calveley of
Lea nigh Eaton-boate in Cheshire Esquire

His second Wife was Jane, the Widow of John Edwards of Chirk in Denbighshire
Esquire, and Daughter of Sir George Calveley of Lea, but had no Issue by her.

William Davenport of Chorley Gent. granted to this Sir Rafe Leycester the
Office of Seneschall, or Stewardship of all his Lands in Chorley, Werford, and
Fulshaw, and the Conduction, Governance, and Service in time of War called The
Mauraden, as well of him the said William and his Heirs, as of all his Tenants:
Dated 4. July, 4 and 5 Phil. and Ma,. C. number. 25. Also the like Deed made to
Sir Rafe by Henry Bradshaw of Bradshawbrooke in Allostock, 1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. Also another such Deed made to Sir Rafe by John Hiccock of Nether-Pever, 1
and 2 Phil. and Mar. H. number. 25. H. number. 28. the Originals are in Latin.
Hiccock's Land of Nether-Pever, is now Powdrell's and others. These I note for
the rarity of the Deeds.

Sir Rafe also bought from William Bradshaw of Allostock, two Messuages in
Allostock, Hulse, and Bancroft, by Fine, Levied at Chester the 27. of May, 1
and 2 Philip and Mary. F. number. 1.

He was entrusted for receiving certain Sums of Money by way of Loan in
Denbighshire, and for delivering such Privy-Seals as were sent unto him, as
appears by the Queens Letter unto him, Dated the 30. of December, 5 Eliz. C.
number. 33.

And I find that Gilbert Dethick, alias Norroy, Principal Herald and King of
Arms of the North Parts of England from the River Trent Northward, gave to this
Sir Rafe Leycester the Arms and Crest in manner following, to wit, Sable, on a
Fess engrailed between three Falcons Silver volant, becked and membred Gold, a
Lions Head Caboche Azure, langued and eared, between two Cups covered, Gules:
upon his Helm, On a Torse Silver and Sable, a Roe-buck Party-Pale Gold and
Gules, Horned of the second, holding in his Mouth an Acorn Branch, stalked and
leafed vert, mantled Gules, doubled Silver: to hold for him and his Posterity,
to their Honors for evermore: Dated the 15. of May, Anno 2. Edw. 6. two fair
Seals appendant in wooden Boxes, the one being his own Arms, and the other the
Seal of his Office as Norroy. T. number. 55. at which, I confess, I wonder, that
he should seek for a Coat, as being ignorant of one due to him: and yet I have
observed, that among all the Deeds there is not any one to be found among the
Deeds of Leycester of Toft hitherto, which has any Coat of Arms at all in an
Escutcheon affixed to any of their Deeds, or in any of their Seals,
appropriated to Leycester of Toft: Howbeit, the Heralds of Chester have
Recorded for them Leycester of Tabley's Coat with a difference, which indeed is
most truly suitable.

This Sir Rafe Leycester sold away all his Purpart of the Manor of Brassingham
in Norfolk, and Advowson of the Church there, to Francis Baldero and Edmund
Wiseman Gentlemen: Dated the first day of April, 4 Eliz. A. number. 1.

Upon some Difference between Sir Rafe and Dame Jane Legh, late Wife of Sir
John Legh of Boothes deceased, it was agreed between Sir William Sneyd Knight,
and the said Dame Jane Legh on the one part, and Sir Rafe Leycster Knight on
the other part, by Deed dated the eighth of October, Anno primo Elizabethae,
That Sir Rafe should not pursue any further Suit in the Court of Wards: in
consideration whereof, the said Sir Rafe and Dame Ellen his Wife should
peaceably enjoy those Lands Demised to them, etc. and Sir Rafe to kill one fat
Buck in Summer, and a Do in Winter, out of the Park at Boothes, during the
Minority of John Legh; and to have the keeping of a Horse in the same yearly.
T. number. 92. But Anno quinto Elizabethae, Sir Rafe had a Grant from the Queen of
certain parcels of Land, late the Inheritance of Sir John Legh deceased, and
late the Jointure of the said Dame Jane, during the Minority of the Ward. C.
number. 32.

Sir Rafe Leycester died 23. Februarii, 14 Eliz. 1572. aged 53 years. T. number.
59.

VIII. William Leycester of Toft Esquire, second Son and Heir of Sir Rafe,
married Katharine, Daughter of John Edwards of Chirk in Denbighshire Esquire,
and by her had Issue. Rafe Leycester, eldest Son, died without Issue; George
Leycester, second Son, succeeded Heir; Jane, a Daughter, married Henry
Davenport of Chorley Gent. 37 Eliz. C. number. 28. Anne, another Daughter; Ellen,
another Daughter; Parnell or Petronill, another Daughter; these three were
never married: and Mary, another Daughter, married Rowland Huntington, after to
David Middleton of Chester, thirdly to George Calveley, Bastard-Son to Sir
George Calveley of Lea. C. number. 31.

Katharine the Wife of William Leycester, died Anno Domini 1572. 14 Eliz. C.
number. 31. Afterward William Leycester married Elizabeth, Daughter of Robert
Worsley of Boothes in Lancashire.

This William sold away all his part of Bricklesworth in Northamptonshire, unto
Thomas Barham of Teston in Kent Gent. for 300 l. by Deed dated the 29. of
April, 20 Eliz. A. number. 2.

William Leycester of Toft died November. 18. 32 Eliz. 1589. and was buried at
Mobberley the 25. of November following, aged 48 years. T. number. 60.

IX. Sir George Leycester of Toft Knight, second Son and Heir of William,
married Alice, eldest Daughter of Peter Leycester of Tabley Esquire and Coheir to
the Lands of Colwich nigh Owseley-Bridge in Staffordshire, 22 Eliz. F. number. 9.
which Lands descended in Right of their Mother Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of
Edward Colwich of Colwich Esquire.

Robert Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, etc. her Majesty's Lieutenant, and
Captain General of all her Army and Forces in these Parts, and Governor-General
of all the Provinces and Cities united, and their Associates in the
Low Countries, for the good opinion we have of the fidelity of this Gentleman
George Leycester our Servant, we have appointed him Captain of 150 Footmen,
and Hugh Starkey his Lieutenant, now Servant to Sir Christopher Hatton, etc.
Given under my Hand and Seal at Amersford the 15. of May 1586. T. number. 58.

Sir George was Knighted about 44 Eliz. and was made Sheriff of Cheshire by
Patent dated December. 29. 45 Eliz. but the Queen dying in March following, he
had another Patent for the same durante beneplacito, Dated Apr. 3. 1 Jac. 1603.
T. number. 63.

He had Issue William Leycester, who died at the Age of three years; George,
second Son, who died at the Age of seven years; Rafe, third Son, succeeded
Heir; also Elizabeth, eldest Daughter, died in her Infancy; Katharine married
William Tatton of Withenshaw in Cheshire Esquire F. number. 12. afterward she married
Doctor Nichols Parson of Chedle: Mary, another Daughter, married James Massy of
Sale Esquire 9 Jac. 1611. whose Wardship Sir George had. F. number. 33. Alice, another
Daughter, married John Bradshaw of Bradshaw in Lancashire Esquire

Sir George was buried at Mobberley Apr. 4. 1612. so the Register of that
Church has it: He was then aged about 45 years; a Person who had been very
serviceable to his Country. He bought certain parcels of Land in Toft, from
Randle Mainwaring of Over-Pever, Esquire, 33 Eliz. T. number. 61.

X. Rafe Leycester of Toft Esquire third Son and Heir of Sir George, married Mary,
Daughter of Anthony Woodhull of Mollington in Oxfordshire Esquire and had Issue
George Leycester Son and Heir; Rafe, second Son, died without Issue; Anthony,
third Son, died without Issue; Mary, eldest Daughter, married Culvert Chambers
of Oxfordshire, who bought the Castle of Carnow, and other Lands in Ireland;
after whose Death she married Job Ward; and lastly to Colonel William Air,
lately Imprisoned in Ireland; Jane, second Daughter, married Captain Conney,
after to Thomas Heart of the Heart in Fetter-Lane in London; Townesend, third
Daughter, married George Brown of Radbrooke in Over-Pever Gent. and had Issue
George, Thomas, and other Children, but they all died before they came to
maturity. F. number. 25, 26. F. number. 13, 14.

This Rafe sold his part of the Lands of Colwich, and the Advowson of that
Church, and was buried at Mobberley the 17. of June 1640. Mary his Wife was
buried also at Mobberley the 21. of September 1653.

XI. George Leycester of Toft Esquire Son and Heir of Rafe, married Dorothy
Daughter of John Clayton, and Sister and Coheir of Richard Clayton of Crook in
Lancashire Esquire 14 Car. 1. 1639. F. number. 22. and has Issue Rafe Leycester,
eldest Son; George Leycester, second Son; Philip Leycester, third Son, who
married Anne, Daughter and Coheir to Mr. Furnivall of Old-Withington deceased,
Anno 1671. John, fourth Son, died without Issue 1666. William another Son, and
Richard another Son; Mary, eldest Daughter, married George Hocknell of Prenton
in Wirrall Com. Cestr. 1668. Anne, second Daughter, and Elizabeth third
Daughter, living 1672. and six Children more died in their Infancy, Richard,
Anthony, Richard, Joan, Dorothy, and Joan.

This George was buried at Mobberley the 19. of June 1671. Dorothy survived, by
whom came the Lands in Lincolnshire and Crook.

XII Rafe Leycester of Toft Esquire Son and Heir of George, married Eleanour,
eldest Daughter of Sir Peter Leycester of Nether-Tabley Baronet, 29 Augusti,
1665. and has Issue Eleanour, Elizabeth, Dorothy, Frances, and Anne born at
Mobberly August 24. 1672. being Saturday.

Over-Walton.
Ex Chartulis Petri Brook de Mere Militis, 1665.
IT seems that Over-Walton was held immediately from the Lord of Daresbery: for
Margeria Domina de Daresbery, Daughter and Heir of William Daresbery of
Daresbery, and Widow of Henry le Norreys, gave to Alan le Norreys her Son and
to Mabill his Wife, Daughter of Randle de Merton, the Manor of Daresbery, una
cum Dominio Villae de Over-Walton, 7 Edw. 2. 1314. Lib. C. fol. 185. e. The
Original in possession of Daniell of Daresbery, 1649.

Howbeit, originally it is held of the Baron of Halton: where in the Feodary
thereof under Edward the Second, it is said, -- Alanus le Norreys tenet Villam
de Daresbery, and Villam de Walton Superiori, pro medietate unius Feodi Militis.

And among the Evidences of Sir Peter Brook of Mere, thus: Sciant omnes, Ego
Alanus Dominus de Daresbery dedi Thomae filio meo totam terram, quam Adam de
Stockton quondam tenuit de Willielmo de Walton in Walton: Item dictus Alanus
obligavit se sub pena 20. marcarum Domino Comiti Lincolniae solvendarum, quod
totam terram, quam habebit vel habere poterit in Villa de Walton superiore,
dicto Thomae and haeredibus suis integre dimittet. -- Et si contingat quod Uxor
Thomae, scilicet Helewisa, sine haerede de Corpore discedat -- tunc mihi
praefato Alano integre remaneant. Reddendo unum Par albarum Cheirothecarum ad
Festum Sancti Martini. -- Testibus Ricardo de Aston, Ada de Hatton, etc. made
about the very beginning of Edward the Second. Lib. B. page 203. number. 3.

So that William de Walton, Son of Herbert de Walton, was before possessed of
Over-Walton.

Afterward I find Simon de Merbury, Son of Randle de Merbury, together with
Idonea his Wife, passing away unto Hugh Standish and his Heirs, Medietatem
totius Villae nostrae de Over-Walton, excepto Capitali Messuagio and Piscaria
nostra de Mersey: whereupon a Fine was Levied at Chester, 3 Edw. 2. Lib. B.
page 203. number. 5.

This Idonea was Daughter and Heir of Thomas de Walton, Lib. C. fol. 215. e. by
whom Simon had Issue Randle de Merbury Son and Heir; from whom the Merburies of
Walton; also Thomas and John, both dead without Issue before 41 Edw. 3. Lib. B.
page 205. number. 19. and page 206. number. 2.

Hugh Standish aforesaid, by Fine at Chester, 8 Edw. 2. had five Acres of Land,
and half of the Manor of Over-Walton, cum pertinentiis, granted unto him by
Henry Son of Richard de Walton, Lib. B. page 204. number. 7. whereby it may seem
that Standish now had all Over-Walton, except the Capital Message and the
Fishing in Mersey River.

But afterward I find Isabel, Daughter of Thomas de Elton, making Richard
Lestwich her Attorney, to take possession in her Name of the Manor of
Over-Walton, and of certain Lands in Nether-Walton, together with the Reversion
of the Lands of Idonea, Grandmother of Thomas Son of Randle Merbury, in Hatton.
34 Edw. 3. Lib. B. page 204. number. 13.

Not long after Merbury was possessed of Over-Walton: for William Danell of
Daresbery (having the Wardship of the Heir) grants to Alice Widow of Randle
Merbury, two parts of the Manor of Over-Walton, during the Minority of Hugh,
Son of the said Randle Merbury now deceased, for the yearly Rent of 01 l. 06 s.
04 d. Dated 3 Hen. 4. 1401. Lib. B. page 204. number. 14.

Since which time the Merburies of Walton enjoyed the same, until Sir Peter
Brook of Mere now living, 1666. lately bought the same from Thomas Merbury of
Walton Gent. with all his whole Estate.

Charterers now in Over-Walton, 1666.
1. John Dunbabbin of Over-Walton. 2. Richard Rutter. 3. Richard Webster. These
Lands formerly belonged to Sir Richard Brook of Norton. 4. Thomas Warburton of
Partington: lately bought from Thomas Merbury, late of Walton.
Nether-Walton.
THis Town, as well as the other Walton, seems to take their Name from the
multitude of the Springs therein: for the ancient Saxons called a springing
Water, A Wawe; for which we now use the word Well.

Geffrey Dutton of Chedill, gave to Richard Son of Robert Massy of Sale, all
his Lands in Nether-Walton, in exchange for his Manor of Ashley, in the Reign
of Edward the First. Lib. C. fol. 150. f.

Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton, 22 Edw. 1. is found to hold half of Nether-Walton
of the Baron of Halton. Lib. C. fol. 156. bb.

And in the Feodary of Halton sub Ed. 2. -- Dominus Petrus de Warburton tenet
medietatem de Walton inferiore, pro decima part unius Feodi Militis. And in
the Offices of Massy de Sale, Massy is found to hold half of Nether-Walton of
Warburton of Arley.

But Massy of Sale has sold his Moiety of Nether-Walton, except one Cottage,
as follows, 1666.

1. Thomas Massy of Nether-Walton. This was bought from his Landlord Massy of
Sale. 2. William Ford of Nether-Walton; bought from Massy of Sale. 3. John
Hatton of Nether-Walton; bought from Massy of Sale. 4. Richard Massy of Sale
Esquire, has now one Cottage, in possession of William Wilson. 1666. 5. John
Dumbill. 6. William Norman.
The other Moiety of Nether-Walton, which formerly belonged to Dutton of
Dutton, is now belonging to Sir Peter Brook of Mere; which he purchased lately
from Merbury of Walton, as also all his Lands in Over-Walton, Appleton, Hull
and Stockton.

The Mannor-House is situate in Over-Walton, but part of the Demain now
thereunto belonging, lies in Nether-Walton.

Warburton.
HEre is an ancient Free Chapel at Warburton, now usually taken for a Parish
Church; whereof Warburton of Arley, Lord of the Town, is Patron. This Parish
comprehends only the Township of Warburton, which in our Mize-Book is Rated
at 00 l. 12 s. 00 d.

The words of the Institution and Induction of the present Parson are, -- Ad
liberam Capellam de Warburton, and medietatem Rectoriae Ecclesiae de Limme. So
that Warburton has the Gift of half of Limme, as well as of Warburton wholly:
and he is Presented here to both, and ought to supply Warburton every Sunday,
and Limme every other Sunday by course.

In the time of William the Conqueror, William Fitz-Nigell Baron of Halton,
held one Moiety of Warburton, which Ernui formerly held: And Osbern Son of
Tezzon (surmized to be the Ancestor of the Boydells of Dodleston) held the
other Moiety of Warburton, which Ravene formerly held.

Adam de Dutton, younger Son of Hugh Dutton of Dutton, became possessed of both
these Moieties of Warburton, toward the Time of King Rtchard the First. One
Moiety he had by Agnes his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Robert Fitz-Alured; and I
take it to be that Moiety held of Boydell: Which Adam, by the Consent of Agnes
his Wife, gave to the Religious House of Canons, of the Order of Premonstrants,
here at Warburton, about the Reign of King John, in these Words: --

-- Ego Adam de Dutton assensu Agnetis Sponsae meae dedi Deo, and Sanctae
Mariae, and Sanctae Werburgae de Werburton, and Canonicis Premonstratensis
Ordinis ibidem -- medietatem totius Villae de Werburton in liberam Eleomosynam,
pro salute Animae Johannis Constabularii and Antecessorum suorum; and pro
salute Animae and Corporis Rogeri Constabularii, and Sponsae suae; and pro
Anima Patris mei and Matris meae; pro Anima Rogeri Filii Aluredi de cujus Feodo
haec est, and Antecessorum suorum; pro Anima Johannis Filii mei, cujus Corpus
ibi sepultum est; and pro salute Animae meae, and Sponsae meae, and omnium
Antecessorum meorum. Testibus Hugone de Dutton, and Galfrido Fratre suo, --
etc. Extracted by me from the Original, remaining among the Evidences at
Dutton: Lib. C. fol. 136. b.

This Saint Werburge was the Daughter of Wolfere King of Mercia, a Holy Virgin,
whose Feast is celebrated usually on the sixteenth day of June: Some Almanacks
place it to the 21 of June.

And probably from the Church, or some Religious House founded here anciently
unto the Honor of this Virgin, it had the Name of Warburton.

Certain it is, that it gave the occasion of the Surname of Warburton to the
Lords and Owners thereof: For the Posterity of that Adam de Dutton coming to
reside at Warburton under Edward the Second, Peter de Dutton was then styled
Peter de Warburton, from the Place of his Residence, as was the manner and
custom of those Ages; which Surname of Warburton his Heirs have ever since
wholly retained to this day. See more of this supra, in Budworth.

But to return to the Moiety of Warburton of the Fee of Boydell, which was
confirmed to Adam de Dutton by Hugh Boydell, in the Reign of Richard the First,
or thereabouts, in these Words: --

NOverint universi tam praesentes quam futuri, quod ego Hugo de Boydele dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Adae de Dutton pro homagio
and servitio suo, totam terram meam in Warburton, scilicet, totam dimidiam
partem ejusdem villae, cum omnibus pertinentiis, jure haereditario illi and
haeredibus suis: Tenendum de me and haeredibus meis libere -- pro XII solidis
annuatim reddendis; scilicet, sex solidis ad Festum Sancti Johannis, and sex
solidis ad Festum Sancti Martini; and unum hominem ad Castellum operantem ad
suam expensam per octo tantum dies annuatim inveniendo, pro omni servitio. --
Hiis Testibus, Rogero Constabulario Cestriae, Willielmo de Boydell, Ricardo and
Alano de Boydele, Johanne de Boidele, Willielmo de Radeclyve, Hugone de Dutton,
Galfrido de Dutton, Hugone Dispensario, Hereberto de Waleton, Rogero Venables,
Ricardo Starky, Alano de Daresbery, and aliis.

One of these Witnesses, Roger Constable of Cheshire, died 1211. the thirteenth
of King John, says Matthew Paris: Wherefore this Deed must be made before that
Year.

Now this Deed was produced in pleno Comitatu Cestriae, 1233. before Sir
Richard Fitton then Judge of Chester, Walter Abbot of Chester, William de
Venables, Hamon de Massy, Richard de Wibbenbury then Sheriff of Cheshire, and
others, upon a Writ of Warranty brought against Sir William Boydell by Sir
Geffrey Dutton Son of Adam Dutton aforesaid: Lib. C. fol. 136. a.

Et de Anno 23 Edw. 3. inter Feoda Willielmi Boydell -- Sir Geffrey Warburton
held the Manor of Hull and Appleton, and half of Warburton, of the said William
Boydell, by the Service of one Knight's Fee, and twelve Shillings yearly Rent,
and two Shillings every third year.

These Notes I received from the Collections of Will. Vernon late of Houlme in
Cheshire.
Anno 5 Hen. 5. Division was made of the Inheritance of Boydell; and six
Shillings of the Rent issuing out of Warburton, which Sir Geffrey de
Warburton's Heirs ought to pay, was allotted to Reddish, which came after to
Merbury of Merbury juxta Comberbach: Lib. C. fol. 282. I, So that the Rent of
Warburton was divided.

The other Moiety of Warburton, being of the Fee of Halton, John Constable of
Cheshire gave to Adam Dutton, in these Words: --

JOhannes Constabularius Cestriae, Omnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis
salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Adae de Dutton, dare Deo, and
Sancto Johanni Baptistae, and beatis Pauperibus Sanctae Domus Hospitalis
Hierosolymitanae and Fratribus in eadem Domo Deo servientibus, pro salute mea
and Dominae Aeliz Uxoris meae, and Infantium nostrorum, and omnium Parentum and
Amicorum and Antecessorum nostrorum, totam partem meam villae de Werburtona;
videlicet, plenarie and integre totam medietatem villae cum omnibus
pertinentiis -- in puram and perpetuam Elemosynam, liberam, solutam, and
quietam ab omni Seculari servitio -- Hiis Testibus, Henrico Priore de Nortona,
Anselmo Capellano, Ricardo Capellano, Fratre Roberto Filio Ricardi, Hugone de
Dutton, Gilberto Filio Rondulphi, Hamone de Berthinton, Willielmo de Camull,
Mattheo Tuschet, Stephano da Muschamp, Willielmo Filio Rogeri, Johanne Burdon,
Galfrido de Stretlee, Aytropio, Ricardo Filio Rogeri, Simone Cusin, Willielmo
de Baale, Henrico Camerario, Willielmo de Comberbache, and multis aliis.

Sealed with a large Seal, the forepart whereof is broken and cloven off; on
the back-part, A Lion Rampant; written about thus, --

SIGILLUM JOHANNIS CONSTABULARII CESTRIAE.
The Original among the Evidences at Dutton, 1649.



And this Moiety he held from the Priory of St. John of Jerusalem in England
ever since.

It seems to me, that this Adam de Dutton had by Agnes his Wife, the Daughter
and Heir (or Coheir at least) of Roger Fitz-Alfred, half of Warburton, half of
Limme, the Towns of Newton juxta Daresbery, Hatton, Appilton, and the Royalty
of Stretton.

Sure I am, the said Adam Dutton, and Geffrey his Son, about the Reign of King
John, were possessed of the Towns of Great-Budworth, Aston juxta Budworth,
Nether-Tabley, Sutton juxta Frodshum, Appilton and Hull, Newton juxta
Daresberie, Hatton, Stretton, Warburton, half of Limme, half of Sale, half of
Nether-Walton: But many of these were long time ago given away by Geffrey Son
of Adam Dutton, and Geffrey Son of that Geffrey.

Warford.
WArford in the Conqueror's Time was then held by one Ranulphus, or Randle,
supposed to be the Ancestor of the Manwarings. Idem Ranulfus tenet Warford, and
Godid de eo: ipsa tenuit, and libera fuit: So are the Words of Doomsday-book.

This Town is since divided into two Towns, Great-Warford and Little-Warford:
Both of them were within the old Bucklow Hundred; but upon the new Division of
the Hundreds (which I conjecture exceeds not the Reign of Edward the Third)
Great-Warford was allotted to Maxfield Hundred.

But Little-Warford continued to Bucklow Hundred, and is joined now with
Marthall in one Constableship.

This small Hamlet of Little-Warford, now in Bucklow Hundred, was given by
Roger Manwaring of Warmincham in Cheshire, to Robert de Vernon Militi suo,
Filio Ricardi de Vernon, in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Third.

Lib. B page 59 Extracts out of Sir Thomas Manwaring of Pever's Deeds, 1665.
Gilbert Lee of Middleton in Yorkshire Esquire, sells Little-Warford to John
Millington, and Henry Hough, and their Heirs, 22 die Maii, 4 Eliz. 1562.

Henry Hough of Knotsford Mercer, settles his Lands in Little-Warford to his
own use for his Life, and after to the use of his Nephew Thomas Antrobus of
Lincoln's Inn, and his Heirs, 28 Julii, 15 Eliz. 1573.

Division is made of the Lands in Little-Warford, between John Millington and
Thomas Antrobus, 27 Julii, 18 Eliz. 1576.

Thomas Antrobus and Elizabeth his Wife pass all their Land in Little-Warford
unto Thomas Colthurst and his Heirs, 17 Aprilis, 13 Jacobi, 1615.

Thomas Colthurst, by Deed enrolled, sells all his Lands in Little-Warford to
Stephen Smith and his Heirs, 30 Octobris, 16 Jac. 1618.

Stephen Smith sells all his Lands in Little-Warford to Sir Randle Manwaring of
Over-Pever, and his Heirs, 20 Martii, 17 Jacobi, 1619. whose Heirs are now
possessed of this Moiety of Little-Warford, 1666.

The other Moiety, which belonged to John Millington aforesaid, is now in
possession of Millington Colthurst of Little-Warford, 1666.

Charterers in Little-Warford, 1666.
William Bailey. This Freehold-Land of Inheritance in Little-Warford was
Purchased from Sir Randle Manwaring of Over-Pever, the sixteenth of April,
1620. and belonged to his Moiety.
Great-Warford Roger Manwaring sold to Richard Putra, regnante Henrico Tertio;
and Putra sold it to Randle Manwaring, younger Brother to the said Roger; and
Randle Earl of Chester confirmed it to Randle Manwaring, in the beginning of
the Reign of Henry the Third; Lib. B. page 1. z. from whom the Manwarings of
Warford-Magna: But this Family was long since extinct.

Weston.
WIlliam Fitz-Nigell, Baron of Halton, held Weston of Hugh Lupus Earl of
Chester, in the Reign of William the Conqueror; and Odard and Brictric held it
of William Fitz-Nigell.

In Monasticon, Vol. 2. page 187. we read, That Nigell gave to Odard, Weston
and Great-Aston: And from this Odard came all the Duttons: And that Nigell gave
to Edward Brother of Odard two Ox-gangs of Land, quas Haeredes Willielmi Filii
Ranulphi modo tenent.

Guarinus de Vernon released to Sir Hugh Dutton of Dutton, and his Heirs, in
pleno Comitatu Cestriae, Gilbertum de Weston and Rogerum Filium suum (quondam
homines Guarini) cum Catallis suis, -- etc. Pro hac Concessione dedit Hugo
quatuor Marcas Argenti: -- tempore Philippi Orreby Justiciarii Cestriae: Lib.
C. fol. 153. c. about the end of King John's Reign.

So that the Duttons of Dutton were possessed of Weston since the Conqueror's
time, to this present, 1666. Only some small Parcel thereof Hugh Dutton
Purchased out in the Reign of King John, or thereabouts.

Charterers in Weston, 1666. only one.
Richard Heath of Weston.
Nether-Whitley.
THis Town of Nether-Whitley is originally of the Fee of Halton since the
Norman Conquest.

Randle Earl of Chester, surnamed Blundevill, gave it to Alfred de Combre about
the Reign of Richard the First, Scilicet Witeleiam cum omnibus Pertinentiis
suis in Haltonshire; and eam illi admensuravi ad Servitium dimidii Militis,
donec viderim aut Audierim quod possit pati. Ea propter volo and firmiter
praecipio, quod ipse Alvredus, and haeredes sui, praedictam terram teneant de
me and haeredibus meis, been and honorifice per admensuratum Servitium, in
Villa and extra, in foro and Mercato, in bosco and plano, -- in Sok and Sak,
and Toll, and Teme, and Infangtheife, and cum omnibus aliis Consuetudinibus,
and libertatibus. -- Testibus Radulfo Abbate Cestriae, Warino de Vernon, and
Ricardo Pincerna, and Thurstano Bannaster, and Willielmo Bar, and Willielmo
Capellano. Apud Braham.

The Copy of this Deed I had from Will. Vernon.

I find in the Pedigree of Touchet, in the Book of Pedegrees by John Booth late
of Twamlowe, that this Alvred was Son of Reginald de Cumbrey, Lord of
Leigh-Cumber in Shropshire; and that Roger, Son of Alfred, had two Daughters
and Heirs; Alice, married to Sir Robert Touchet, Lord of Buglawton and
Tattenhale; and Agnes, married to Adam de Dutton, younger Son of Hugh Dutton of
Dutton, and Ancestor to the Warburtons of Arley. Sed quaere concerning Alice.

Sure I am, that Thomas Tuschet was Lord of Nether-Whitley in the Reign of
Henry the Third, as appears by the original Deed of Grimsdich in
Nether-Whitley, now in possession of Grimsdich of Grimsdich, 1666. Lib. C. fol.
189. f. in these words: --

SCiant omnes praesentes and futuri, quod ego Thomas Tuschet dedi -- Adae Filio
Hugonis de Grimsdich pro Homagio and Servitio suo totam Terram de Grimsdich
pertinentem ad Villam de Witelegh, cum metis and divisionibus suis. Tenendum
illi and haeredibus suis -- cum Communia and Pastura, and in omnibus locis and
Aysiamentis praedictae terrae pertinentibus: Et cum liberate Cariagii,
scilicet de mortuo bosco, in nemore de Witelegh cum una Quadriga, vel cum uno
Plaustro: Et cum acquietantia Pasnagii in praedicto loco de Nether-Witelegh,
Scilicet ad Porcos suos in praedicta Villa nutritos -- Reddendo annuatim de
praedicta terra mihi and haeredibus meis, -- tres solidos Argenti: Scilicet
octodecem denarios in Nativitate Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and octodecem
denarios in Festo Sancti Martini, pro omnibus Servitiis -- Testibus Galfrido de
Dutton, Hugone de Dutton, Thoma de Orreby, Gralam de Lostock, etc.

And in the Feodary of Halton under Edward the Second -- Dominus Robertus
Touchet tenet Villam de Whitley inferiore pro tertia part unius Feodi Militis
[alii legunt pro medietate unius Feodi Militis.]

Here have the Touchets of Nether-Whitley continued their Seat since King
John's time to this day, 1666.

Out of this Family branched out the Touchets, Barons de Audley; says Cambden.

Charterers in Nether-Whitley, 1666.
1. Grimsdich of Grimsdich, an ancient Family of Gentlemen, seated here at
Grimsdich in Nether-Whitley in the Reign of Henry the Third, and continuing at
this day, 1666. 2. Allen of Green-Hill in Nether-Whitley. 3. Henry Manwaring of
Carincham Esquire, a Tenement in possession of one Whitakers. 4. Mr. Bressy of
Buckley has one Tenement in Nether-Whitley, now in possession of Hugh Gandy,
1666. 5. Mr. Eaton of Ireland has another Tenement in possession of Thomas
Deusbery. 6. Doctor Bentley of Northwich has about three or four Acres in
Nether-Whitley.
In this Township is a Chapel of Ease, called Whitley-Chappel, within the
Parish of Great-Budworth. This Chapel was built anew, but upon an old
Foundation, by Thomas Tuschet late of Nether-Whitley Esquire about sixty years ago,
at his own Cost: whereunto one Thomas Pierson Minister of Brampton in
Herefordshire, born at Weverham in Cheshire, and brought up at Mr. Touchet's of
Nether-Whitley, did by Will dated the 15. of October 1633. give two hundred and
fifty Pounds toward the maintaining of a Minister at this Chapel, and fifty
Pounds more to the maintaining of a Minister at Witton Chapel.

There belongs also to Whitley Chapel, Land lying in Anterbus in
Over-Whitley, of the yearly value of 03 l. 10 s. 00 d. purchased about the year
1631. with Moneys given by Thomas Legh, Richard Kelsall of Dutton, and Tho.
Saunders of Clatterwigge.

Over-Whitley.
OVer-Whitley is a great Township, comprehending the Hamlets of Norcot,
Anterbus, Middle-Walke, Seaven-Oakes, and Crowley, within the same: It is
commonly called by the Neighborhood, The Lordship, and is of the Fee of
Halton-Castle from the time of the Conqueror.

Formerly this Town was Copyhold Land to the Baron of Halton, until the same
was bought out into Fee-Farm by Fealty and Suit of Court to Halton, and not to
be held in Capite nor Knight Service. The King's Charter is dated the 17. day
of December 1612. 10 Jacobi, remaining now in the custody of Richard Peacock of
Over-Whitley, Anno Christi 1666. Lib. C. fol. 277, 278. The Purchasers from the
King were Thomas Merbury of Merbury Esquire John Grimsdich of Grimsdich Gent.
Thomas Gregge of Bradley in Appleton Gent. and Hugh Crosby of Over-Whitley
Gent. who sold to every man his own Land.

So now they be all Fee-Farmers in Over-Whitley, the Town being scattered into
sundry parcels of Free-holds of Inheritance in Fee-Farm, save only these
following, who are ancient Freeholders, and not Fee-Farmers, for some Parcels.

1. Robert Venables of Anterbus Esquire. 2. Sir George Warburton of Arley
Baronet. 3. Thomas Merbury of Merbury nigh Comberbach Esquire. 4. Grimsdich of
Grimsdich in Nether-Whitley has some ancient Freehold Land in Over-Whitley.
Winsham.
THis Township in Doomsday Book is written Wimundesham, and was held by
Gilbert Venables, Baron of Kinderton, under Hugh Earl of Chester, surnamed
Lupus, in the Reign of William the Conqueror, which formerly was held by one
Dott; and liber homo fuit.

In old Deeds it is written Wimingham, but now usually called and written
Wincham, or Winsham.

Ex Chartulis Willielmi Harcourt de Winsham, 1666.
William Venables of Kinderton gave unto Maude his Sister in Marriage, about
the Reign of Richard the First, Winsham, and half of Pickmere; Faciendo
Servitium dimidii militis de forinseco Servitio. Lib. B. page 50. a.

This Maude de Venables gave the Manor of Winsham, infra villam and extra, and
unam Carucatam terrae cum pertinentiis in Twambroke, cum medietate bosci de
Alreschagh, and Communa Pasturae in Linwood, unto Nicholas de Elets, for the
Service of half a Knights-Fee. Lib. B. page 50. b. which Grant was confirmed by
Randle Earl of Chester and Lincoln, surnamed Blundevill, about 1230. Lib. B.
page 29. a. This Nicolas had married Maude her elder Daughter.

This Nicholas de Elets gives the Manor of Winsham to Henry de Elets. Lib. B.
page 50. c.

And Maude de Venables confirmed the Grant to Henry de Elets: for which
Confirmation he gave to her and her Heirs, scilicet, to Maude de Shirburne,
sometime Wife of Nicolas de Elets, and to Robert Brant and Emme his Wife,
twenty Marks of Sterling Money. Lib. B. page 29. d. which Daughters she had by
her first Husband Raufe Son of Roger; and after she married Hugh de Bixis or
Brixis.

Henry de Elets sells the whole Manor of Winsham, with its Apurtenances, to
William Venables the younger, about 1233. 18 Hen. 3. Lib. B. page 29. c. and
page 50 d. which Grant was confirmed by John the Scot, Earl of Chester and
Huntingdon. Lib. B. page 29. b.

This William de Venables the younger thus possessed of the Manor of Winsham,
bought out certain Lands in Winsham, which William Son of Guy of Winsham then
stood possessed of: but these Lands of William Venables the younger, descended
to his two Daughters and Heirs, by Partition made about 1273.

Lettice the elder Daughter married Philip de Baumvile, she had all the
Outlands, to wit, Radnour, Hulme, Castle of North-wich, Hulcroft, and two
Ox-gangs of Land in Congleton, and two Wich-houses in Middle-wich.

Beatrix the younger Daughter married Raufe de Wasteneys: she had all the Manor
of Winsham, except Twambrookes, and the Mill of Winsham. Lib. B. page 31. m.

Raufe Wasteneys de Tyxale and Beatrix his Wife, gave to Pagan their Son and
Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Alexander de Baumvyle, and to their Heirs, all
the Manor of Winsham, with Wardships, Reliefs, Escheats, etc. 21 Edw. 1. 1293.
Lib. B. page 32. o. rendering six Marks yearly during the Lives of Raufe and
Beatrix.

Margaret, after the death of Pagan Wasteneys, married Hugh Son of Henry de
Pickmere, living 14 Edw. 2. Lib. C. fol. 229. o.

Placita apud Cestriam, 46 Edw. 3. in Crastino Sancti Botulphi.
RObertus de Cholmondeley and Alicia Uxor ejus, and Johannes Filius Willielmi
de Legh, and Margareta Uxor ejus, petunt versus Hugonem Filium Alexandri de
Wasteneys, unum Messuagium, and 30 Acras Terrae, and 6 Acras Prati cum
pertinentiis in Winsham, quae Radulfus de Wasteneys and Beatricia Uxor ejus
dederunt Pagano Filio suo and Haeredibus de Corpore, -- etc. Et quae post
mortem Johannis, Filii praedicti Pagani and Margaretae Uxoris suae, Praefatis
Aliciae, and Margaretae Uxori praedicti Johannis Filii Willielmi de Legh, ut
Filiabus and Haeredibus praedicti Johannis Filii praedictorum Pagani and
Margaretae, descendere debent, -- etc.

This John Legh of High-Legh de East-Hall, married Margaret Wasteneys, 1365. 40
Edw. 3. Lib. C. fol. 268. number. 39. and had a Daughter and Heir married to John
Massy of Winsham. Lib. B. page 33. x.

This John Massy of Winsham, by his Coat of Arms wherewith he Sealed, Anno 19 R
2. Geffrey, Son of John Massy of Winsham, Sealed with a Cheveron between three
Lozenges, written about the Seal, Sigillum Galfridi Mas^y. Lib. C. fol. 266.
number 5.
seems to be descended from Massy de Sale originally, and had Issue Geffrey
Massy of Winsham, living 21 Rich. 2. and 7 Hen. 4. which Geffrey had Issue
William Massy, who died without Issue; and Maude married to Richard Legh of
High-Legh of the West-Hall, 1375. and afterward became Heir to her Father's
Lands. Lib. B. page 35. g. h. Lib. C. fol. 266. number. 4, 5.

So that from about 10 Hen. 6. the Leghs of High-Legh de West-Hall were
possessed of the Moiety of Winsham, until Richard Legh and Clemence his Wife,
sold unto Anthony Grosvenour of Ridley in Cheshire Esquire, all his Lands in
Winsham for two hundred and twenty Pounds: Dated the 14. of June, 7 Eliz. 1566.
Lib. B. page 56. b. and Grosvenour sold them to Roger Pilston of the Temple at
London, and to John Grosvenour of Tussingham, Anno 8 Elizabethae. And soon
after these Lands were bought by Sir Richard Egerton of Ridley in Cheshire.

Raufe Egerton of Ridley Esquire and Sir Richard Egerton his Son and Heir, do sell
unto Richard Harecourt of Winsham Gent, all the their Moiety of the Manor of
Winsham, with certain Enclosures taken out of the Commons of Winsham by Sir
Thomas Venables of Kinderton late deceased, and particularly named in the Deed
bearing Date the 16. of April, 4 Jacobi 1606. excepted out of this Grant, all
those Lands in Winsham formerly sold by them to Edmund Moldesworth of Winsham,
Roger Wood, and Thomas Norcot: but Richard Harcourt after purchased Norcot's
Message

Concerning the Enclosures aforesaid, there was formerly some difference
between Sir Rich. Egerton of Ridley, and Sir Tho. Venables aforesaid; but upon
an Award made between them, Sir Thomas Venables released unto Raufe Egerton of
Ridley Esquire Son and Heir of Sir Richard, and to others, all the said Enclosures,
to revert to the Heirs of the said Raufe Egerton, after the Death of Sir Thomas
Venables aforesaid, and Thomas Venables his Son: Dated the 8. of June, 16 Eliz.
1574. The Originals of these Penes Harcourt of Winsham, 1666.

For in truth, though the Baron of Kinderton be Lord Paramount, yet had he then
nothing to do with any part of the Manor of Winsham, or Wastes thereto
belonging, that being given away by his Ancestour long time ago; only the
Service reserved in the original Deed was due to him, but no part of the Land
or Soil, as is clear by the Deeds beforementioned.

The other Moiety of Winsham (which was invested in Robert Cholmondeley's Heirs
in Right of Alice his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of John Wasteneys) came
afterward to Buckley of Eyton nigh Davenham; and from that Family this Moiety
at last descended to Richard Leftwich of Leftwich Esquire in Right of Margaret his
Wife, Daughter and Coheir of Robert Buckley of Eyton, whom he married 13 Hen.
8. 1521. and had Issue by her a Daughter and Heir, called Margaret Leftwich,
who carrid away all her Mothers Lands; but her Father's Lands were Entailed on
the Heirs Males of the Leftwiches: And she had two Husbands; the first was
Thomas Woodrofe, by whom she had Issue Thomas, who died without Issue; and two
Daughters, Elizabeth married Robert Edowe and Brigit.

After the Death of her first Husband, who died about 1 Eliz. 1559. the said
Margaret Leftwich married William Harcourt Gent. third Son of John Harcourt of
Ranton in Staffordshire Esquire unto the Issue of which William Harcourt by
Margaret, this other Moiety of Winsham descended, and has continued unto his
Heirs to this present, 1666.

So that William Harcourt of Winsham now living, 1666. having lately purchased
Woods Tenement in Winsham, and two Water-Corn-Mills in Twambrooke, is now
possessed of the Manor and whole Township of Winsham, excepting these
Charterers following: 1. Moldesworth of Winsham: These Lands were purchased by
Edmund Moldesworth of Winsham Gent. from Raufe Egerton of Ridley in Cheshire
Esquire 3 Jac. 1605. Lib, B. page 56. a. 2. Robert Venables of Anterbus in
Over-Whitley has two Messuages in Winsham; one now in possession of Raufe
Pownall, the other of Richard Eyton. 3. Thomas Marbury of Marbury Esquire has one
Message in Winsham, the greatest part whereof he has now laid to his Demain
of Merbury: the other part, and the House is now in possession of Widow
Maddock, 1666. 4. John Swinton of Nether-Knotsford has a parcel of Land in
Winsham, adjoining to his Land in Picmere: This was purchased from Mr. William
Merbury, elder Brother of the said Thomas. 5. William Peacock of Winsham: This
Message was sold by Mr. William Merbury aforesaid, unto Raufe Billinge; and
Raufe Billinge sold it to William Peacock, Father of the said William. 6. Hugh
Lowton of Winsham: This Cottage he purchased from Mr. William Merbury
aforesaid, the 13. of April, 14 Car. 1. 1638.
Richard Leftwich of Leftwich Esquire, Obiit 2 Hen. 8. -- Margery Daughter of
Laurence Marbury of Marbury Esquire. Richard Leftwich of Leftwich senior, died
30 Hen. 8. -- Katharine Daughter of Henry Manwaring of Carincham Esquire. 1.
Richard Leftwich junior, Son and Heir, died without Issue-male, 34 Hen. 8. --
Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Robert Buckley of Eyton nigh Davenham, Lord of
the Moiety of Winsham. Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Richard Leftwich: She
died 1588. 30 Eliz. -- Thomas Woodrofe, first Husband: He died 1 Eliz. William
Harcourt, third Son of John Harcourt of Ranton in Staffordshire Esquire, second
Husband.
Thomas sine prole. Elizabeth Wife of Robert Edowe. Brigit.

2. Raufe, Heir-male to his Brother Richard. Ob. 37. H. 8. -- Elizabeth
daughter of Foulk Dutton of Chester. John Legh del Ridge, second Husband.
Raufe, a Child, died 6 Edw. 6.
3. George Leftwich third Son, of whom the Leftwiches of Leftwich.




* Thomas Buckley of Eyton died 6 Hen. 7. and had Issue Thomas Buckley of
Eyton, living 15 Hen. 8. who died without Issue; and Robert Buckley of Eyton,
Brother and Heir to Thomas.

This Robert Buckley had Issue Margaret Wife of Richard Leftwich, and Anne Wife
of John Brereton, 7 Hen. 8. younger Son of Sir William Brereton; and Katharine,
third Daughter: But Anne and Katharine had no Issue.

The Family of the Harcourts of Ranton in Staffordshire are a Noble and Ancient
Family; whose Ancestor Richard Harcourt, Son of William Harcourt of
Stanton-Harcourt in Oxfordshire, married Orabella Daughter of Saher de Quency
Earl of Winchester, and of Margaret his Wife, Sister and Coheir to Robert
Fitz-Parnell Earl of Leycester, unto whom her Father Saher gave Bosworth in
Leycestershire in Marriage, to wit, Market-Bosworth, about the end of King
John's Reign, to be held by the Service of a whole Knights Fee: So says Burton
in his Description of Leycestershire, p. 47. where he adds, That this Family
came originally out of France; and that Jean le Feron a Frenchman (who wrote
under our Edward the Sixth) blazeth the Coat-Armor of John de Harcourt, Marshal
of France under Philip le Beau, 1286. thus: -- Gules, two Fesses Or; which is
the same Coat born by the Harcourts in England: And further says, That the
Family of Harcourt had continued more than 800 Years, to his time. But of this
enough.

I. William Harcourt of Winsham Gentleman, third blazon or coat of arms Son of
John Harcourt of Ranton in Staffordshire Esquire married Margaret Daughter and Heir
of Richard Leftwich of Leftwich in Davenham-Parish Esquire, and Widow to Thomas
Woadrofe, about 6 Eliz. 1563. and had Issue Richard Harcourt, eldest Son;
Thomas Harcourt, second Son, who died without Issue 1640. Simon, third Son,
died without Issue; and Margaret, married to John Grimsdich (then of Hallum, by
virtue of a Lease).

And by Parnell, a second Wife, William Harcourt had Issue Mary Wife of Robert
Pownall of Witton; she was born 1599. And Jane married Richard Broom of
Lostock-Gralam.

Margaret, the first Wife of William, who had her Mothers Lands, to wit, the
Moiety of Winsham, died 30 Eliz. 1588. William Harcourt her Husband died 43
Eliz. 1600.

II. Richard Harcourt of Winsham Gentleman, Son and Heir of William, was Lord
of the one Moiety of Winsham, by Descent, in Right of his Mother: The other
Moiety he Purchased 1606.

He married one Elizabeth Widnester of London, and had Issue William Harcourt,
eldest Son, born 1605. Raufe, born 1614. he died without Issue 1647. Thomas,
another Son, died without Issue: Elizabeth married Randle Birchenhead of
Northwich, whose Father was Usher of the Free School of Northwich; Mary married
John Capper of Brindley; she was born 1619. Margaret, and Jane, both died
Infants.

This Richard Harcourt died 1628.

III. William Harcourt of Winsham Gentleman, Son and Heir of Richard, married
Mary Daughter of George Holford of Newborough in Dutton, Gentleman, Anno Domini
1629. This George Holford was younger Son of Thomas Holford of Holford nigh
Nether-Tabley, Esquire.

This William Harcourt and Mary are both yet living, 1669. and had Issue
Frances, a Daughter, who died young, 1651. and George Harcourt, a Son, born
1632. yet living 1669. who has sold the Reversion of all Winsham-Lands (after
the death of his Father and Mother), and also what he had in possession, unto
Robert Venables of Anterbus in Over-Whitley, Gentleman, Anno Domini 1668. to
whom he had Mortgaged the same before.

THus have I, by God's Assistance, run through BUCKLOW-HUNDRED, according to
such Evidences and Records as I had carefully collected concerning the same. If
I had not met with some Obstructions by some Gentlemen, who, either out of
Waywardness, or Jealousy, did refuse to let me have the Perusal of their
Evidences, some things might possibly have been further discovered and
illustrated. In the mean time, I wish this may incite some more able Hand to
undertake the like for the reviving of those decayed Monuments of Antiquity in
the other Hundreds of this our County, which yet lie buried and covered in the
Rubbish of Devouring Time.

FINIS. (...).
Addenda in Part II.
Page 134. -- It seems that Hugh Cyveliok, Earl of Chester, had either another
Base Son, or Daughter, not there mentioned; as appears by this following Deed,
the Original whereof is now in possession of Somerford Oldfield of Somerford in
Cheshire, Esquire, 1672.

SCiant omnes tam praesentes quam futuri, Quod ego Nicolaus de Verdon concessi
and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Siwardo filio Siwardi totam illam
terram in Bidulf, quam de Johanne de Lindele tenet, cum Bosco and cum omnibus
aliis aisiamentis and libertatibus eidem terrae pertinentibus, sicut Charta
praedicti Johannis testatur: Sed praedictus Siwardus non dabit praedictam
terram nec Hospitalariis nec Templariis nisi licentia praedicti Nicolai vel
Haeredum suorum: Pro hac autem Concessione praefatus Siwardus dedit praedicto
Nicolao unam Marcam Argenti, and homagium suum, and annuatim octo Sagittas
barbatas ad Natale Domini. Hiis Testibus, Davide de Malo passu, Willielmo filio
ejus, Randulpho de Estbury Nepote Comitis Cestriae, and multis aliis.

Where we find plainly, That Randle of Estbury was Nephew to the Earl of
Chester; and this was Randle the Third, surnamed Blundevill, who was then Earl
of Chester.

And it is not probable, that this Randle de Estbury was Nephew to the Earl by
any of his four Sisters and Coheirs; for then he would have had another
Surname, and have been subscribed before the other two Witnesses. Wherefore it
seems that he had a Sister illegitimate, married to Estbury, who was Mother to
this Randle of Estbury, and so was Nephew to Earl Randle; or else a base
Brother, surnamed de Estbury, who was Father to this Randle of Estbury, Nephew
to the Earl of Chester.

And therefore Hugh Cyveliok, Earl of Chester, had either another Base
Daughter, omitted in the place aforesaid; or else another Base Son.

Place these two Sheets after Fol. 392. being the End of the Fourth Part.
Addenda in Mobberley, Part IV.
Concerning the Descent of Mobberley of Mobberley, Page 320.
I find William de Mobberley Witness to a Deed of Gervase Son of Hugh de
Mobberley, about 1230. Lib. C. fol. 296. T. number. 1. which seems to me very
probable, that he was Father of Rafe Mobberley; I mean that William.

I. Rafe Mobberley was Lord of the Moiety of Mobberley in the Reign of Henry
the Third: This is certain by good proof; and had Issue William Mobberley, and
Henry de Mobberley, who gave Lands in Mobberley to Mary Daughter of William
Mobberley the younger, about 1324. Lib. C. fol. 14. M. number. 1.

II. William, Son of Rafe de Mobberley, was Lord of the Moiety of Mobberley;
and purchased the Moiety of Nether-Pever from Richard Bonetable, 1281. and had
Issue as is mentioned before in the Book.

This William died about the beginning of Edward the Second. He had a Wife
called Maud, who (after the death of her Husband) married John Boydell of
Limme, living 1359. Lib. C. fol. 17. M. number. 32.

III. William of Mobberley, Son and Heir of William, had a former Wife (as I
conceive) by whom he had Issue Sir Rafe Mobberley, and Cicely a Daughter, who
married John Domvill of Mobberley the younger, as by and by will better appear;
both under Age 3 Edw. 3. 1329. Lib. A. fol. 128. cc.

His other Wife was Maud Daughter and Heir of Robert Downs of Chorley, by whom
he had those other Daughters and Coheirs to their Mothers Lands in Chorley, as
is mentioned in the Book before.

This William dying 1 Edw. 3. 1327. Maud his Widow afterward married John
Domvill the elder, Father of John Domvill the younger who married Cicely: And
this Maud survived both her Husbands, and lived 1 Rich. 2. 1378. Lib. A. fol.
130. kk.

IV. Sir Raufe Mobberley of Mobberley Knight, Son and Heir of William, had a
Wife called Vincentia; by whom he had a Daughterr, called Margaret, whom he
held not to be his Daughter, and therefore estated all his Lands on John
Leycester his Nephew, as appears by the Certificate of Sir John Wynkfield, 35
Edw. 3. M. number. 33. which hereafter follows, and is transcribed at large.

He had a Concubine, called Alice Rode, by whom it may seem that he had a Son,
called Jenkin of Mobberley Esquire, who served under John Leycester of Tabley
in the Wars of France, 47 Edw. 3. 1373. as appears by John Leycester's Account,
in my possession, dated at Southampton on the Eve of St. John, 49 Edw. 3. 1375.
But this Jenkin died without Issue: Nor is he there styled Son of Sir Rafe; but
I conjecture him to be so.

Margaret, the Daughter of Sir Rafe, married Thomas Toft; both living 1357.
Afterward she married Hugh de Chaderton, living 1361.

And therefore Page 320. the last Line but one, these words -- [without any
Lawful Issue of his Body] are to be expunged; and in the very next Line, these
words, -- [by Alice Rode his Concubine] are also to be expunged.

The Deed wherein John Spendelow and William Geffeson, two Chaplains entrusted,
do settle all Sir Rafe Mobberley's Lands on John Leycester of Nether-Tabley,
1359. The Original remaining among the Evidences of Leycester of Toft, 1672. M.
number. 32
SCiant praesentes and futuri, M. number. 32.
Quod nos Johannes Spendelow and Willielmus Geffeson de Modburlegh Capellani
dedimus, concessimus, and hac praesenti Charta nostra confirmavimus Johanni de
Leycester and Haeredibus suis, duas parts Manerii de Modburlegh, and
Advocationem Ecclesiae ejusdem Manerii, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, quas
prius habuimus de dono and concessione Radulphi de Modburlegh militis in eodem:
Dedimus etiam and concessimus praedicto Johanni de Leycester and Haeredibus
suis, omnes terras and tenementa nostra in Norshagh, Fernilegh, and Holey, cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis: Concessimus etiam quod tertia pars praedicti Manerii
de Modburlegh, and omnes terrae and tenementa in Norshagh, Fernilegh, and
Holey, cum suis pertinentiis, quae Johannes Domvill senior and Matilda uxor
ejus tenent in dotem ipsius Matildae de Haereditate nostra, and quae post
mortem ejusdem Matildae ad nos and Haeredes nostros reverti deberent, integre
remaneant praefato Johanni de Leycester and Haeredibus suis in perpetuum:
Volumus insuper and concessimus, quod omnes terrae and tenementa, cum suis
pertinentiis, quae Johannes Boydell de Limme and Matilda Uxor ejus tenent in
dotem ipsius Matildae in Holey de Haereditate nostra, and quae post mortem
ejusdem Matildae nobis and haeredibus nostris reverti deberent integre
remaneant praedicto Johanni de Leycester and Haeredibus suis in perpetuum.
Habendum and tenendum duas parts Manerii praedicti and Advocationem Ecclesiae
praedictae, and omnes terras and tenementa praedicta, and Reversiones Dotum
praedictarum cum acciderint, praedicto Johanni de Leycester and haeredibus
suis, and suis Assignatis, in Dominicis, Wardis, Releviis, Escaetis, Terris,
Pratis, Boscis, molendinis, Aquis, Stagnis, Turbariis, Redditibus, and
Servitiis liberorum Tenentium nostrorum, scilicet Mariae de Leycester, Thomae
de Toft and Margaretae Uxoris ejus extunc de Plumlegh, Johannis Laurensson de
Modburlegh, and Willielmi Dawson; and cum omnibus aliis libertatibus,
commoditatibus, approviamentis, proficuis, communis, and aysiamentis,
praedictis Manerio, Advocationi Ecclesiae praedictae, Terris and Tenementis,
Redditibus and Servitiis, ubique adjacentibus; libere, quiet, integro jure and
haereditario in perpetuum; De Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum per Servitia
inde debita and de jure consueta: Et nos vero pradicti Johannes Spendelow and
Willielmus Geffeson Capellani, and haeredes nostri, dictas duas parts Manerii
praedicti, and Advocationem Ecclesiae praedictae, and omnes terras and
tenementa praedicta, tam de Dotibus quam de aliis, una cum redditibus and
servitiis praedictis, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, praefato Johanni de
Leycester and haeredibus suis, and suis Assignatis, contra omnes homines
Warrantizabimus and defendemus in perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic
praesenti Chartae nostrae Sigilla nostra apposuimus. Hiis testibus, Willielmo
de Maynwaringe, Thoma de Davenport, Hugone de Mascy de Tatton, Hugone de Toft,
Ada de Tablegh, and aliis. Datum apud Modburlegh, die Veneris proxime ante
Festum Sancti Ceddae Episcopi Anno Domini millesimo, trecentesimo,
quinquagesimo, nono.

Two Seals of Red Wax appendant.

The Certificate of Sir John Wynkfeld, rendered into English; the Original
whereof is in French, remaining among the Evidences of Leycester of Toft, 1672.
M. number. 33.
TO all those who shall see or hear these Letters, John de Wynkfeld Knight
sends greeting. M. number. 33.
Whereas Plea and Debate is moved between John de Leycester on the one part,
and Hugh de Chaderton and Margaret his Wife (who says she is Daughter and Heir
of Sir Rafe de Mobberley Knight, deceased) on the other part; concerning the
Manor of Mobberley, with its Appurtenances, and other Lands and Tenements in
the County of Chester, which belonged to the said Sir Rafe.

The Work of this Chart is to testify and publish the Truth, so as the Knights
and Sergeants who are to try the Right thereof upon the Plea aforesaid, and all
others who are not to meddle therewith, may be instructed to which of the
Parties aforesaid the Right does appertain; and that they be not inveagled, by
concealment of the Truth, to disinherit him that has Right thereunto, to the
Peril of their Souls.

These give you to understand, That the said Sir Rafe in the beginning of his
Sickness (whereof he died) came unto me before Reins, and said unto me, That
before he went into Gascoigne, he had enfeoffed certain Chaplains, that is to
say, John Spendelow, and others, of the said Manor, and of all the other Lands
aforesaid, on certain Conditions comprised in certain Indentures made between
them; and reckoned up the Conditions to me, and said, the Conditions were yet
depending on his Will and Ordinance: And there he said in my presence, That his
Heritage should not be divided nor dismembered by no means; but ordained then
and there, before me, That if he died in this Voyage, the said Chaplains should
enfeoff, John de Leycester his Nephew of all his said Heritage, to him and to
his Heirs, as entirely as the said Chaplains were enfeoffed thereof by him: And
prayed me, in the Work of Charity, that I would Record, Witness, and openly
declare his said Ordinance and Will to all that it might concern, and to all
the Deeds which he had made, when time required: And that in the mean time this
was to be kept private, because of his Wife; for he said, he had a Daughter,
which he held not to be his Daughter, who should never inherit any of his
Heritage, nor any other, save only the said John de Leycester: And afterward,
a little before he died, I sent a certain Messenger (whom I firmly trusted) to
the said Sir Rafe, to move him on the behalf of his Daughter, to see whether he
was in the same mind (as formerly) toward the said John de Leycester, and as
he was at our last Conference abovesaid: By which Messenger he certified me,
That he had fully granted and assigned to the said John de Leycester all his
Heritage, in manner as before me he had ordained, and is abovementioned; and
that neither his Daughter, nor his Wife, nor any other, save the said John de
Leycester, should ever have any of his Heritage: And prayed me, for the Love of
God, that I would see his said Ordinance toward his said Nephew might be
performed in manner aforesaid, as it was made before me. Which Will and
Ordinance was spoken before me by the said Sir Rafe, as is abovementioned:
And, as I desire to answer it before God, I have witnessed and published the
same before our thrice honorable Lord the Prince, and before many other Grave
and Wise Men, as well Judges and Men of Holy Church, as before other Knights,
that they hold the said Ordinance good and sufficient, and this my said
Testimony to be true. Wherefore may it please you to give faith and credence to
this my Testimony, which, before God, on peril of a Curse, I avow to be
faithful. And in case, that there may not be any who may doubt of this my
Testimony made in this my Letter, because I am so much employed in the Affairs
of my said Lord the Prince, that I cannot come speedily into those Parts, if he
please to travel so far as to come where I am, I shall be ready to make good my
said Testimony by all reasonable ways which a Man of Worth shall desire me:
For, to do this, I am bound by my own Grant, made to the said Sir Rafe at the
time when he showed me his said Will and Ordinance in manner abovesaid. In
Testimony whereof, because I cannot be present at all times to certify and
publish the things abovesaid by word of mouth, I have hereunto put my Seal.
Given at London the eleventh day of June, 11 Junii, 35 Edw. 3. 1361.
in the Thirty fifth Year of the Reign of King Edward the Third after the
Conquest.

So that by this Certificate it appears a Suit was then depending between John
Leycester, and Hugh Chaderton and Margaret his Wife, concerning Sir Rafe
Mobberley 's Lands, which Margaret challenged, as Daughter and Heir of Sir
Rafe: But this Suit ended by the determination of Nicolas Aston Friar, William
Jorden Friar, Thomas Garlond, and Friar John de Byninton, Professors of the
Holy Scriptures, who were requested to hear the Cause; And they say, That if
Sir Rafe Mobberley might lawfully give, sell, or alienate his Lands, that in
case he has given the same to Sir John Spendelow Priest, and others, by his
Deed, in Fee-simple; and afterward, being in Remote Parts beyond Sea, did
manifestly show that his last Will was, That the aforesaid Sir John Spendelow,
and others, should settle and give the said Lands to John Leycester his Nephew;
and he the said Sir John Spendelow, and others, understanding the last Will of
Sir Rafe Mobberley to be such, have given the said Lands to John Leycester
aforesaid; We say, according to our Conscience and the Law, That the said John
Leycester has clear Right to the Lands aforesaid: And this we firmly hold and
declare by these Presents. In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto put our
Seals. Dated on the Eve of St. Bernard the Abbot, 20 Aug. 35. Edw. 3. 1361.
Anno Domini 1361.

Lib. C. fol. 298. The Original being in Latin, and now remaining among the
Evidences of Leycester of Toft, 1672. T. number. 31.

Afterward, about the Year of our Lord 1377. another Contest fell between John
Domvill of Mobberley and Cicely his Wife on the one part, and John Leycester
aforesaid on the other part, concerning these Lands of Sir Rafe Mobberley of
Mobberley: which John Domvill challenged in Right of Cicely his Wife, as sole
Heir and Sister of the Whole Blood to Sir Rafe her Brother. Whereupon the same
John Leycester, John Domvill, and Cicely, were sworn at Knotsford, before Sir
John Massy Parson of Stopport, Thomas Fitton of Gawesworth, Thomas de Whyllok,
John de Hatton, John de Damport, and many others, sur la Corpse de Jhesu Christ
sacred, etc. to stand to the Ordinance of Sir Thomas Dutton, Hugh Venables of
Kinderton, Sir John Massy Parson of Stopport, Thomas de Whyllok, Thomas Fitton
of Gawesworth, William de Stanley, Robert le Grosvenour, John de Olton, John de
Damport, and David de Calveley: to wit, That the said John Domvil and Cicely
his Wife, and John Leycester, shall put all their Right in the Manor of
Mobberley to the Ordinance of the Persons aforesaid: And another Point is, That
the said John Domvill and Cicely his Wife, and the said John Leycester, shall
shake hands, and charge the Arbitrators aforesaid (as they will answer it) to
award nothing on either Part, but according to Right: And also that neither
Party do make Grievance one to the other, till the said Arbitrators have made
their Ordinance; and also that the said John Domvill and Cicely make no delay,
by reason they have got the Possession of the Manor, but may hold what the
Award shall render according to all their Power: And if any of the Persons
aforenamed be contrary to Reason, that the rest of them shall choose other
reasonable Men in their place: And also, that if these Persons abovesaid cannot
agree of their Ordinance, then to take others at their choice where they please.

The Original is in French, but has no date; and remains among the Evidences
of Leycester of Toft, 1672. M. number. 5. Lib. C. fol. 15.

So that I conjecture Cicely was the only Sister to Sir Rafe by the first Wife
of William de Mobberley; for otherwise the other Sisters of Sir Rafe would have
challenged Mobberley Lands, as well as Cicely: which other Sisters were
Daughters of William de Mobberley by Maud Downs of Chorley his later Wife, and
shared their Mothers Land in Chorley, as Coheirs; whereunto I find not that
the said Cicely ever made any Claim: Lib. C. fol. 21. C. number. 16, 17, 18, 19.

But how that could avoid the Settlement on John Leycester, by the Chaplains
enfeoffed by Sir Rafe Mobberley beforementioned; or what was the Award of the
Arbitrators elected between John Leycester, and John Domvill and Cicely his
Wife, at Knotsford, I find not positively and directly.

Only I find, so it was, That John Domvill and Cicely his Wife did levy a Fine
at Chester, die Martis proxime post Festum Sancti Petri in Cathedra, Anno primo
Ricardi secundi, (that is, in January, 1377.) unto John Brunstath Parson of
Mobberley, John Brereton Chaplain, Thomas Fitton of Gawesworth, and Robert
Grosvenour, of 35 Messuages, 627 Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Wood, 20 Acres of
Pasture, 120 Acres of Moor, the Rent of two Pair of Gloves, two Parts of a
Water-mill, and tertia part unius Molendini Fullonici, with the Appurtenances
in Mobberley, and Tatton: -- together with the Homages and Services of Rafe
Leycester, John Lawrenson of Mobberley, Roger del Bower, In January, 1377.
and William Dawson, and their Heirs, -- etc. Lib. C. fol. 14. M. number. 2.

After this I find that the said John Leycester, Son of Nicholas Leycester,
releaseth unto John Domvill of Mobberley, and Cicely his Wife, all his Right
and Claim to all those Lands which the said John Domvill and Cicely do hold of
the Inheritance of the said Cicely in Mobberley, Tatton, Plumley, Somerford
juxta Swetenham, Od-Rode, and elsewhere in the County of Chester; and also in
the Advowson of the Church of Mobberley: -- Witnesses, John de la Poole Judge
of Chester, John Woodhouse Chamberlain of Chester, Thomas de Dutton and Geffrey
de Warburton Knights, Hugh Venables de Kinderton, John de Holford, and William
del Mere. Dated at Chester on Tuesday next after the Feast of St. Mark the
Evangelist, In April, 1378.
Anno primo Ricardi Secundi.

Also the said John Leycester, Son of Nicolas Leycester, releaseth all his
Right to Thomas Fitton of Gawesworth, Robert le Grosvenour, John Brunstath
Parson of the Church of Mobberley, and John Brereton Chaplain, in all those
Lands which the said Thomas, Robert, John Brunstath, and John Brereton had of
the Grant of John Domvill of Mobberley, and Cicely his Wife, in Mobberley and
Tatton, by Fine levied thereon at Chester, In April, 1378.
-- etc. Dated also at Chester, in April, 1 Rich. 2. [1378.] Lib. A. fol. 130.
kk.

These two last preceding Deeds are enrolled among the Pleas at Chester, in the
Prothonotary's Office in the Castle of Chester, coram Johanne de la Poole
Justiciario Cestriae, die Martis proxime post Festum Sanctae Margaretae
Virginis, 5 Rich. 2.

And two days after these Releases made by John Leycester, the same Feoffees,
to wit, Thomas Fitton of Gawesworth, Robert le Grosvenour, John Brunstath, and
John Brereton, do grant to Rafe Son of Nicolas Leycester, and to the Heirs
Males of his Body, an Annual Rent of Fifteen Pounds, for the term of the Lives
of John Domvill and Cicely his Wife, issuing out of all the Lands in Mobberley
and Tatton, which the said Feoffees had of the Grant of the said John Domvill
and Cicely his Wife, by the Fine levied at Chester. -- Dated at Chester on
Thursday next after the Feast of St. Mark the Evangelist, In April, 1378.
1 Rich. 2.

Lib. C. fol. 14. M. number. 3.

Afterward three of the same Feoffees, to wit, Thomas Fitton, John Brunstath,
and John Brereton, grant to John Domvill and Cicely his Wife 15 Messuages, two
parts of one Message, 316 Acres, half an Acre, half a quarter of an Acre, 10
Perches, and half of one Perch of Land; 16 Acres of Wood, one quarter, and five
Perches; 8 Acres of Moss, the third part of a Watermill, and the third part of
all the Wastes of the same Town, not measured at the making of this Deed;
together with the Rent and Services of Rafe Leycester and William Dawson, with
the Appurtenances in Mobberley; To hold for the Lives of the said John Domvill
and Cicely his Wife; and after the death of John Domvill and Cicely, then to
remain to Rafe Leycester, and the Heirs Males of his Body: And if Rafe die
without Heir Male, then to remain to the right Heirs of the aforesaid Cicely
for ever. -- Witnesses, John Massy of Tatton, William de Legh, Knights; William
de Mere, Hamon de Ashley, Robert de Toft, and others. Dated at Mobberley on
Tuesday in the Feast of St. Petronill the Virgin, 31 Maii, 1379.
2 Rich. 2. Lib. C. fol. 18.

Three fair Seals, very perfect.

This Deed was enrolled before Thomas Felton Judge of Chester, on Tuesday next
after the Feast of the Epiphany, 3 Rich. 2.

The Original in Latin remains among the Evidences of Leycester of Toft, 1672.
M. number. 34.

And these are the Lands in Mobberley belonging to Leycester of Toft at this
day, 1672. who are descended from Rafe Leycester abovesaid; about a third part
of Sir Rafe Mobberley's Moiety of Mobberley.

So that upon the whole matter, John Leycester of Tabley sells or gives away
all his Right to those Lands in Mobberley upon some Composition; but what
Composition, either from Domvill, or from his Brother Rafe Leycester, appears
not to me as yet.

Again, we may observe out of the Deeds abovementioned, That John Leycester
and Rafe Leycester were Brothers, both Sons of Nicolas Leycester of Tabley, by
Mary Daughter of William de Mobberley, and Nephews to Sir Rafe Mobberley of
Mobberley aforesaid, clearly so proved. John was Son and Heir of Nicolas, and
Rafe younger Brother to John.

This Rafe Leycester was also seized of Lands in Chorley, 51 Edw. 3. 1377. Lib.
C. fol. 21. C. number. 19, 20. which Lands I conceive came unto him by virtue of
an Entail made by Emme Grosvenour: Lib. C. fol. 20. C. number. 5. For Emme
purchased all her Sisters shares in the Lands of Chorley, which descended to
them after the death of their Mother Maude: Lib. C. fol. 21. C. number. 16, 17, 18.

It is observable also, That this Rafe Leycester had some Land in Mobberley,
before those given him by the Feoffees, 1379. whereof the Homage and Service is
mentioned in the Fine of 1 Rich. 2. And this was the Land given by Henry de
Mobberley to Mary Daughter of William de Mobberley, in the Reign of Edward the
Second: Lib. C. fol. 14. M. number. 1. and fol. 19. M. number. 39. And Mary gave the
same afterward to this Rafe Leycester her younger Son: Which Rafe married Joan
Daughter of Robert Toft of Toft Esquire, whose Issue afterward inherited all
the Lands of Toft.

This Rafe Leycester died 14 Rich. 2. 1391. Lib. C. fol. 22. C. number. 23.

And so much of Mobberley.

A TRANSCRIPT OF CHESHIRE AT LARGE, Out of the Greater Doomsday-Book, Remaining
on Record in the TALLY-OFFICE at WESTMINSTER.

Belonging to the Custody of the TREASURER and the two CHAMBERLAINS OF THE
EXCHEQVER at LONDON.

According as the same was Transcribed by Mr. SQUIRE from the RECORD it self,
Anno Domini 1649.

The Original comprehends a Survey of all England, as well as Cheshire, some
few Counties only excepted: And was made by William the Conqueror's Command,
after he had won this Kingdom by the Sword. It was begun and finished between
the Fourteenth and the Twentierh Year of his Reign over England.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini M.DC.LXXII.

A TRANSCRIPT OF CHESHIRE AT LARGE, Out of the Greater Doomsday-Book.
CIvitas de Cestre Tempore Regis Edwardi This was Edward called The Confessor.
, Geldabat pro L Hidis: Tres Hidae and dimidium, quae sunt extra Civitatem (hoc
est, una Hida and dimidium ultra pontem, and duae Hidae in Neutone, and
Redeclive, and in Burgo Episcopi) hae geldabant cum Civitate.

Tempore Regis Edwardi erant in ipsa Civitate CCCC and XXXI. Domus geldantes:
and praeter has habebat Episcopus LVI domus geldantes: Tunc reddebat haec
Civitas X Marcas Argenti and dimidiam: Duae parts erant Regis and tertia
Comitis: Et hae Leges erant ibi.

Pax data manu Regis, vel suo Brevi, vel per suum Legatum, si ab aliquo fuisset
infracta inde Rex C solidos habebat: quod si ipsa Pax Regis, jussu ejus a
Comite data, fuisset infracta, de C solidis (qui pro hoc dabantur) tertium
denarium Comes habebat: si vero a Praeposito Regis, aut Ministro Comitis, eadem
pax data infringeretur, per XL solidos emendabatur, and Comitis erat tertius
denarius.

Si quis liber homo, Regis Pacem datam infringens in domo hominem occidisset,
terra ejus and pecunia tota Regis erat, and ipse Utlagh fiebat: hoc idem
habebat Comes de suo tantum homine hanc forisfacturam faciente: Cuilibet autem
Utlagh nullus poterat reddere pacem nisi per Regem.

Qui sanguinem faciebat a mane secundae feriae usque ad nonam Sabbathi, X
solidis emendabat: a nona vero Sabbati usque ad mane secundae Feriae sanguinis
effusus XX solidis emendabatur: similiter XX solidos solvebat, qui hoc faciebat
in XII diebus Nativitatis, and in die Purificationis beatae Mariae, and primo
die Paschae, and primo die Pentecostes, and die Ascensionis, and in Assumptione
vel Nativitate Sanctae Mariae, and in die Festo Omnium Sanctorum.

Qui in istis sacris diebus hominem interficiebat, IV libris emendabat: in
aliis autem diebus XL solidis: similiter Heinfaram vel Forestel in his Festis
diebus and die Dominico, qui faciebat, IV libras exsolvebat: in aliis diebus XL
solidos.

Hangenuitham faciens in Civitate X solidos dabat: Praepositus autem Regis vel
Comitis hanc forisfacturam faciens, XX solidis emendabat.

Qui Revelach faciebat, vel latrocinium, vel violentiam foeminae in domo
inferebat, unumquodque horum XL solidis emendabatur.

Vidua, si alicui se non legitime commiscebat, XX solidis emendabat: Puella
vero X solidis pro simili causa.

Qui in Civitate terram alterius saisibat, and not poterat diratiocinare suam
esse, XL solidis emendabat: similiter and ille qui clamorem inde faciebat, and
suam esse debere non posset diratiocinare.

Qui terram suam, vel propinqui sui, relevare volebat X solidos dabat: Qud si
non poterat-uel nolebat, terram ejus in manum Regis Praepositus accipiebat.

Qui ad terminum, quod debebat gablum, non reddebat, X solidis emendabat.

Si ignis Civitatem Comburebat, de cujus domo exibat, emendabat per tres or as
Denariorum; and suo Propinquiori vicino dabat duos solidos.

Omnium harum forisfacturarum duae parts erant Regis, and tertia Comitis.

Si sine Licentia Regis ad portum Civitatis Naves venirent, vel a portu
recederent, de unoquoque homine qui in Navibus esset XL solidos habebant Rex
and Comes.

Si contra pacem Regis, and super ejus prohibitionem, navis adveniret, tam
ipsam quam homines, cum omnibus quae ibi erant, habebant Rex and Comes.

Si vero cum pace and licentia Regis venisset, qui in ea erant quiet vendebant
quae habebant: sed cum discederet, quatuor denarios de unoquoque Lesth habebant
Rex and Comes: Si habentibus Martrinas pelles juberet Praepositus Regis, ut
nulli venderent, donec sibi prius ostensas compararet, qui hoc non observabant
XL solidis emendabant.

Vir sive mulier, falsam mensuram in Civitate faciens, deprehensus IV solidis
emendabat: similiter malam cervisiam faciens, aut in Cathedra ponebatur
Stercoris, aut quatuor solidos dabat Praepositis.

Hanc forisfacturam accipiebant ministri Regis and Comitis in Civitate, in
cujuscunque terra fuisset, sive Episcopi, sive alterius hominis: similiter and
Theoloneum siquis illud detinebat ultra tres noctes, XL solidis emendabat.

Tempore Regis Edwardi erant in Civitate hac Septem Monetarii, qui dabant
Septem libras Regi and Comiti extra firmam, quando moneta vertebatur.

Tunc erant XII Judices Civitatis: Et hi erant de hominibus Regis and Episcopi,
and Comitis: Horum si quis de Hundret remanebat, die quo sedebant, sine
Excusatione manifesta X solidis emendabat inter Regem and Comitem.

Ad murum Civitatis and pontem readificandum de unaquaque hida Comitatus unum
hominem venire Praepositus edicebat: cujus homo non veniebat, Dominus ejus XL
solidos emendabat Regi and Comiti: Haec forisfactura extra firmam erat.

Haec Civitas tunc reddebat de firma XLV libras, and tres timbres Pellium
Martrinium; tertia pars erat Comitis, and duae Regis.

Quando Hugo Comes recepit, non valebat nisi XXX libras: valde enim erat
vastata: Ducentae and quinque Domus minus ibi erant, quam tempore Regis Edwardi
fuerant: modo totidem sunt ibi, quot invenit.

Hanc Civitatem Mundret tenuit de Comite pro LXX libris, and una Marka Auri.

Ipse habuit ad firmam pro L libris, and una Marka Auri, omnia Placita Comitis
in Comitatu and Hundretis praeter Inglefeld.

Terra in qua est Templum Sancti Petri; quam Robertus de Rodelend clamabat ad
Teinland, (sicut diratiocinavit Comitatus) nunquam pertinuit ad Manerium extra
Civitatem, sed ad Burgum pertinet: and semper fuit in consuetudine Regis and
Comitis, sicut aliorum Burgensium.

IN Cestre-Scire tenet Episcopus ejusdem Givitatis de Rege quod ad suum
pertinet Episcopatum.

Totam reliquam terram Comitatus tenet Hugo Comes de Rege cum suis hominibus.

Terram inter Ripe and Mersham tenuit Rogerius Pictaviensis, modo tenet Rex.
The Land between the Rivers of Ribble and Mersey in Lancashire.


EPiscopus de Cestre habet in ipsa Civitate has Consuetudines.

Si quis liber homo facit opera in die feriato, inde Episcopus habet octo
solidos: De Servo autem vel ancilla feriatum diem infringente, habet Episcopus
quatuor solidos.

Mercator superveniens in Civitatem and Trussellum deferens, si absque licentia
Ministri Episcopi dissoluerit eum a nona hora Sabbati usque ad diem Lunae, aut
in alio festo die, inde habet Episcopus quatuor solidos de forisfactura.

Si homo Episcopi invenerit aliquem hominem caricantem infra leuvam Civitatis,
inde habet Episcopus de forisfactura quatuor solidos, aut duos boves.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Ferentone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi q^'atuor hidae geldabiles:
Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae; and septem Villani cum una Caruca:
Silva ibi unius leuvae longitudine, and dimidii leuvae latitudine.

De hac terra tenent duo Presbyteri unam hidam and dimidium de Episcopo: ibi
una Caruca in Dominio: Et duo Francigenae, and duo Villani, and suus Bordarius
cum una Caruca and dimidio, and quatuor servis: Presbyter villae habet dimidium
Carucae, and V Bordarios cum una Caruca: Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat
quatuor solidos, modo LX solidos; wasta fuit.

In Risetone Hundred.
Terve, and tenet: ibi VI hidae geldabiles: Terra est XXII Carucarum: In
Dominio sunt tres Carucae: and VI Bovarii, and III Radmans, and VII Villani,
and VII Bordarii, cum sex Carucis: silva unius leuvae in longitudine, and
dimidii in latitudine.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenet Willielmus duas hidas de Episcopo; and ibi
habet dimidium Carucae: and quatuor Villani, and tres Bordarii, cum tribus
Carucis and dimidio.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo libras, modo quatuor libras and december
solidos. Wastatum fuit.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Sudtone, ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est
una: and V Villani, and II Bordarii, cum una Caruca: ibi VI acrae Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos, modo XX solidos.

In Exestan Hundred.
Sanctus Cedde tenuit Eitune: Tempore Regis Edwardi ibi una hida.

In Eitune habet isdem Sanctus unum Villanum, and dimidiam Piscariam, and
dlmidiam Acram Prati, and duas Acras Silvae: valuit V solidos.

Rex Edwardus dedit Regi Grifino totam terram, quae jacebat trans aquam quae
Dee vocatur: sed postquam ipse Grifinus forisfecit ei, abstulit ab eo hanc
terram and reddebat Episcopo de Cestre, and omnibus suis hominibus qui ante a
ipsam tenebant.

In Warmundestrou Hundred.
Wimeberie, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: modo tenet Willielmus de eo, ibi
dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus Presbyter, and
duo Villani, and duo Bordarii, cum una Caruca: ibi Sylva dimidii leuvae
longitudine, and tantundem latitudine: ibi duae Haiae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat LXIV Denarios, modo quatuor solidos: Wastatum
fuit.

In Risetone Hundred.
Burtone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra
est VII Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae Carucae, and septem Villani, and
quatuor Bordarii, and Presbyter, and unus Radman, cum tribus Carucis: ibi una
Acra Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos, modo tantundem: Quando recepit XV
solidos.

Ipse Episcopus tenuit and tenet in Redeclive duas parts unius hidae
geldabilis: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XIII solidos, modo valet duos
denarios: Prius ad Ecclesiam Sancti Johannis pertinebat.

In Monasterio Sanctae Mariae, quod est juxta Ecclesiam Sancti Johannis, jacent
duae bovotae terrae quae wastae erant and modo sunt wastae.

Ecclesia Sancti Johannis in Civitate habet VIII domos quietas ab omni
consuetudine: una ex his est Matricularii Ecclesiae; aliae sunt Canonicorum.

In Manerio Roberti Filii Hugonis Bedesfeld calumniatur Episcopus Cestre duas
hidas, quae de Episcopatu erant -- Tempore Cnut Regis: and Comitatus ei
testificatur, quia Sanctus Cedda injuste perdit.

In Civitate Cestre habet Ecclesia Sanctae Wareburgae, XIII domos quietas ab
omni consuetudine: una est custodis Ecclesiae, aliae sunt Canonicorum.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Saltone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra
est octo Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca, and unus Servus, and IX Villani
cum quinque Carucis: valuit and valet XL solidos.

Cavelea, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra
est quinque Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and tres Servi, and tres Villani,
and unus Bordarius cum duabus Carucis: ibi Navicula and Rete. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, modo XX solidos.

Hunditone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi tres hidae geldabies: Terra
est sex Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and quatuor Servi, and duo Villani,
and duo Bordarii cum una Caruca: ibi una Acra Prati, and Navicula, and Rete.
Tempore Regis Edwardi fuit wastum: modo valet XVI solidos.

Bocstone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra
est quinque Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and quatuor Servi, and V Villani,
and quatuor Bordarii cum tribus Carucis: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX
solidos, modo XVI solidos.

In Riseton Hundred.
Etingehalle, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est unius Carucae: In Dominio est dimidium Carucae, and unus Servus: ibi Silva
dimidia leuva longitudine, and una Acra latitudine. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat octo solidos, modo V solidos.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Wivevrene, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi una hida and duae parts
unius hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi quatuor Villani, and duo
Bordarii habent unam Carucam and dimidium: ibi dimidium Acrae Prati: Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, modo XX solidos.

Crostone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
unius Carucae: ibi est unus Radman, and duo Villani, and unus Bordarius habent
unam Carucam: ibi una Acra Prati: valuit and valet X solidos.

Ipsa Ecclesia tenuit and tenet Wisdelea, ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo Servi, and duo Villani, and duo
Bordarii cum una Caruca: and una Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X
solidos, modo tantundem.

Sudtone, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
V Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidium Carucae: and V Villani, and IX Bordarii
cum duabus Carucis: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos, modo XXX solidos.

Salhare: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est unius Carucae: ibi est in Dominio:
and duo Servi: and unus Villanus, and unus Bordarius. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XVI solidos, modo tantundem.

Sotowiche; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi quatuor
Villani, and duo Bordarii cum una Caruca: and una Acra Prati. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XVI solidos, modo XIII solidos and III denarios.

Nestone; and Willielmus de ea: ibi tertia pars duarum hidarum geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca.

Reddidit and reddit de firma XVII solidos, and IV denarios.

Rabie and Willielmus de ea: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca,

Reddidit and reddit de firma sex solidos, and octo denarios.

In Roelau Hundred.
Trosford: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est

In Dominio est una Caruca: and quatuor Servi, and una and Ancilla, and unus
Bordarius; and una Acra Prati; and unus homo reddit XX denarios. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat V solidos, modo octo solidos.

Inise; ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio est una
Caruca, and duo Servi, and octo Villani, and unus Bordarius cum una Caruca:
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, modo XVI solidos: ibi duae Acrae
Prati.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Midestune, and Willielmus de ea: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium
Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidium Carucae: and unus bovarius, and tres Villani
cum dimidia Caruca; and unus Bordarius: ibi duae Acrae Silvae. Tempore Regis
Edwardi reddebat XVI solidos, modo valet X solidos.

Cliftune, and Willielmus de ea: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo bovarii, and unus Radman, and unus
Bordarius cum una Caruca: valet X solidos: Wastum fuit.

In Exestan Hundred.
Ipsa Ecclesia tenuit and tenet Odeslei: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca: ibi est unus Villanus, reddidit octo denarios, valet tres solidos:
Wastum fuit.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Pulford, and tenuit tempore Regis Edwardi: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca: ibi est cum uno Villano, and uno Bordario: valebat IV solidos,
modo V solidos.

In Atiscros Hundred.
Ipsa Ecclesia tenuit and tenet Wepre: ibi duae parts unius hidae geldabiles:
Terra est una Caruca: ibi est cum duobus Villanis, and duobus Bordariis:
Willielmus tenet de Ecclesia: ibi est Silva unius leuvae longitudine, and
dimidiae leuvae latitudine.

Leche: ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra est dimidia Caruca: Wasta fuit and
est.

In Roelau Hundred.
Hugo Comes tenet in Dominio Wivreham, Comes Edwinus tenuit: ibi XIII hidae
geldabiles: Terra est XVIII Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae: and duo bovarii,
and duo servi, and X Villani, and unus Bordarius, and unus Radman cum uno
Villano: Inter omnes habent tres Carucas: ibi Ecclesia, and Presbyter, and
molina serviens aulae: and una acra Prati: Silva duabus leuvis longitudine, and
una leuva latitudine: ibi duae Haiae Capreolorum: Huic manerio pertinent X
Burgenses in Civitate: Ex his sex reddunt X solidos and octo denarios, and
quatuor nil reddunt: Francigena tenet de Comite.

In Wiche fuerunt septem Salinae huic Manerio pertinentes, una ex his modo
reddit Salem Aulae, aliae sunt Wastae.

De alio Hundredo una virgata terrae, Entrebus dicta, huic Manerio pertinet:
Wasta est.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenet Gozelinus IV hidas de Comite: and ibi habet
unam Carvam, and tres Servos, and quinque Villanos, and unum Radman cum duabus
Carucis, and dimidium Piscariae. De hac terra tres hidas misit Comes in
Foresta. Totum Manerium tempore Regis Edwardi erat ad firmam pro X libris:
Comes wastum invenit: modo Dominium ejus L solidis, Gozelini X solidis.

Kenardeslie, Ulfac unus liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum: Tota est in Foresta. Silva una leuva longitudine, and dimidia
leuva latitudine.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex solidos; wasta fuit.

Doneham: Essull tenuit in Paragio, ut liber homo: ibi tres hidae geldabiles.
Terra est IX Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidia Caruca: and septem Villani, and
faber, and tres Bordarii cum una Caruca and dimidio: ibi duae Acrae Prati:
Silva dimidia leuva longitudine, and quarta part latitudine.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos, modo XVI solidos. Wasta fuit.

Eltone, Tochi and Grym pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt ut liberi homines: ibi
duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est septem Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo
Bovarii, and sex villani, and unus Bordarius cum una Caruca. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XXXVIII solidos, modo VI solidos. Wasta fuit.

Troford, Leuric and Gotlac pro duobus maneriis, tenuerunt ut liberi homines;
ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi est cum uno Radman, and
duobus Bordariis. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos, modo duos solidos.
Wasta invenitur.

Menlie, Touchi tenuit ut liber homo: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca; reddit de firma Markam Argenti.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos.

Helesbe, Ernut [Foc] tenuit ut liber homo; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
trium Carucarum; ibi tres villani cum uno bordario habent unam Carucam: ibi una
Acra Prati: and Silva dimidia leuva longitudine, and tantundem latitudine.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII solidos, modo X solidos.

Frotesham, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est IX
Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and unus servus, and octo villani, and tres
bordarii cum duabus Carucis.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Alretune, Godric tenuit; ibi una virgata terra geldabilis: Terra est dimidia
Caruca. Wasta fuit and est.

Ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia habent unam virgatam terrae; and Molinum ibi
Hiemale and duae Piscariae and dimidium: and tres Acrae Prati: and silva una
leuva longitudine, and dimidia leuva latitudine: and ibi duae Haiae: and in
Which dimidia Salina serviens aulae.

Tertius denarius de Placitis istius Hundredi pertinebat tempore Regis Edwardi
huic Manerio: tunc valebat octo libras, modo quatuor libras, wasta fuit.

Aldredelie, Carle tenuit: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum:
wasta fuit and est modo in Foresta Comitis. Tempore Regis Ewardi valebat XXX
solidos.

The Hundred of these two Towns following is omitted.
Ipse Comes tenet Done, Uviet tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae hidae geldabiles:
Terra est duarum Carucarum; Wasta fuit and est; modo in Foresta Comitis.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos.

Ipse Comes tenet Edesberie, Godvinus tenuit, ut liber homo: ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum: wasta fuit and est. Haec terra una leuva
longa and tantundem lata.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Etone, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est
duarum, Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo bovarii, and duo villani cum una
Caruca: ibi Piscaria reddit mill Salmones, and sex Piscatores: and una Acra
Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X libras, and post octo solidos: modo X
libras.

Lai, Godvinus liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra
est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo bovarii, and octo villani
cum una Caruca: ibi una Acra Silvae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, and post V solidos: modo X solidos.

Cotintone, Ernui and Ausgot and Dot tenuerunt pro tribus Maneriis: ibi duae
hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo
bovarii, and quinque villani, and nnus bordarius, and unus Radman, and unus
francigena cum duabus Carucis: ibi molina, and XII Acrae Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat novem solidos and sex denarios; modo XII
solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Ipse Comes tenet Lai, Stein tenuit ut liber homo; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca. Wasta est.

Rusitone, Chepin tenuit ut liber homo; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum. Wasta est.

Ipse Comes tenet Opetone, Erni liber homo tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis:
Terra est duarum Carucarum: Wasta est: Silva ibi una leuva longitudine, and
duabus acris latitudine.

Bodevrde, Dedol liber homo tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum. Wasta est. Silva una leuva longitudine, and dimidia
latitudine.

Altetone, Stein tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum. Wasta est.

Ovre, quatuor liberi homines tenuerunt pro quatuor Maneriis; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est quinque Carucarum; ibi unus Radman cum una Caruca: Silva
ibi dimidia leuva longitudine and tantundem latitudine. Valebat sex solidos,
modo quinque solidos.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Estham, Edwinus Comes tenuit; ibi XXII hidae geldabiles: Terra est totidem
Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae Carucae; and quatuor Servi, and XIV Villani,
and X Bordarii cum sex Carucis; ibi molina, and duo Radmans, and unus Presbyter.

De terra hujus Manerii tenet Mundrit duas hidas, and Hugo duas hidas, and
Willielmus unam hidam, Hamo septem hidas, Robertus unam hidam, Robertus
dimidiam hidam, and Walterus dimidiam hidam: In Dominio sunt quatuor Carucae,
and octo bovarii, and XXII Villani, and duo bordarii, and V Radmans, and duo
Francigenae cum novem Carucis.

Totum Manerium tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXIV libras, and post quatuor
libras; modo Dominium Comitis valet quatuor libras, hominum CXII solidos.

Traford, Ordin tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est
sex Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae; and duo Servi, and quatuor Villani, and
duo Bordarii cum una Caruca.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat C solidos: modo XL solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Ipse Comes tenet Edelaue, Edwinus Comes tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca. Wasta fuit, modo arat ibi quidam homo and reddit duos solidos.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Maclesfeld, Edwinus Comes tenuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est X
Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca, and quatuor Servi; ibi molina serviens
Curiae: Silva sex leuvis longitudine, and quatuor latitudine; and ibi septem
Haiae erant; Pratum bobus. Tertius denarius de Hundret pertinet huic manerio.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo libras, modo XX solidos. Wasta fuit.

Edulvintune, Edwinus Comes tenuit; ibi quatuor hidae and dimidium geldabiles:
Terra est X Carucarum; ibi duo Radmans, and sex Villani, and tres Bordarii cum
tribus Carucis; ibi XXI acrae Prati: Silva duabus leuvis longitudine, and
duabus latitudine; and ibi septem Haiae, and quatuor Air Accipiturum.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo libras, modo XX solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Govesurde, Benulf liber homo tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est sex
Carucarum. Wasta est. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; ibi Silva
duabus leuvis longitudine, and duabus leuvis latitudine, and duae Haiae.

Merutune, Godfric tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi una virgata terrae geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca. Wasta fuit, and est; ibi XX Perticae Silvae.

Ipse Comes tenet Hungrewenitune, Godwinus tenuit; idi dimidia hida geldabilis.
Wasta fuit, and est.

Celeford, Brun tenuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum. Wasta fuit and est.

Hamiteberie de dimidio hidae, Copestor de dimidio hidae, and Hameteberie de
una hida geldabilis, and Hofinchel de una hida and Tengestivisie de una virgata
terrae, and Holisurde de una virgata, and Warnet de una virgata, and Rumelie de
una virgata, and Laitone de una virgata terrae. Omnes geldabant. Has terras
tenuerunt octo liberi homines pro Maneriis. Terra est XVI Carucarum inter
totos. Wasta fuit et est tota.

In Hefinghel est Silva duabus leuvis longa, and duabus lata; In Tengestvisie
Silva est quatuor leuvis longa, and duabus lata: In Warnet Silva est tribus
leuvis longa, and duabus lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat istud Hundredum XL
solidos, modo X solidos.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Ipse Comes tenet Eleacier, Uluric liber homo tenuit: ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta est. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat tres
solidos.

Sanbec, de duabus virgatis and dimidia geldabilis: and Clive de una virgata
geldabilis: and Sutoue de quatuor bovatis terrae geldabilis: and Wibaldelai de
una virgata geldabilis: and Wevre de una virgata terra geldabilis: and
Aculvestune de una hida geldabilis. Has terras tenuerunt sex liberi homines pro
sex Maneriis: Terra est sextem Carucarum inter tota. Wasta fuit and est tota.

In Wibaldela est una Acra Prati, and quarta pars Silvae quae habet unam leuvam
longitudine and quatuor perticas latitudine.

In Weure dimidia Acra Prati, and quarta pars Silvae quae habet unam leuvam
longitudine and tantundem latitudine.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Optone, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi quatuor hidae and dimidia geldabiles. Terra
est XII Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo bovarii, and XII villani, and
duo Radmans cum V Carucis.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenet Hamo duas parts unius hidae, and Herbertus
dimidiam hidam, and Mundret unam hidam; ibi sunt in Dominio quatuor Carucae,
and octo bovarii, and duo villani, and duo bordarii cum una Caruca; ibi una
Acra Prati.

Totum Manerium tempore Regis Edwardi valebat LX solidos; modo Dominium Comitis
XLV solidos valet, hominum ejus XL solidos.

Stanei, and Restaldus de eo: Ragenal tenuit sicut liber homo; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum. In Dominio est una and duo bovarii, and
duo villani, and duo bordarii, and una Piscaria. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat
XII solidos, modo XIV solidos.

De hac terra quinta Acra fuit and esse debet in Ecclesia Sanctae Werburgae;
Test Comitatu. Canonici calumpniantur, quia injuste perdunt.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Entrebus, Levenot tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una virgata terrae and
dimidia geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca. Wasta fuit and est: Silva ibi una
leuva longa, and dimidia lata..

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Rotbertus Filius Hugonis tenet de Hugone Comite Beddesfeld, Edwinus Comes
tenuit: ibi septem hidae geldabiles: Terra est octo Carucarum. In Dominio est
una: and duo Servi, and tres Villani cum una Caruca: ibi dimidia Acra Prati:
Silva tribus leuvis longa and duabus lata.

In hac terra habent tres milites tres Carucas in Dominio, and novem Villanos,
and duos Bordarios, and duos Servos and tres homines alios: Inter omnes habent
tres Carucas. Presbyter habet unam Carucam.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVIII libras, and XVII solidos, and IV
denarios: wasta fuit modo inter totum valet tres libras: hoc manerium praeter
Silvam habet duas leuvas longitudine, and tantundem latitudine.

De hoc Manerio Calumpniatur Episcopus de Cestre duas hidas, quas tenebat
Sanctus Cedda tempore Cnuti Regis: sed ex tunc usque modo se plangit amisisse.

Isdem Robertus tenet Burwardestone, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi V hidae
geldabiles: Terra est XIV Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and XII Villani and
duo Bordarii cum tribus Carucis: and unus Miles habet unam Carucam: ibi and
alter miles tenet dimidiam hidam quae reddit ei XII solidos: ibi salina de XXIV
solidis.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex libras, and quatuor solidos: modo LIVE
solidos. Wasta invenitur: De hoc manerio calumpniatur Episcopus de Cestre unam
hidam and dimidiam, and unam salinam.

Hurdingberie, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi V hidae geldabiles.

Terra est X Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and unus Servus, and tres Villani,
and tres Francigenae, unus Radman cum quatuor Carucis: ibi molinum novum, and
una Acra Prati. De hoc Manerio tenet unus miles unam hidam and dimidiam; and
ibi habet unam Carucam cum hominibus suis.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII oras, quas Villani reddebant: modo valet XXX
solidos.

Wasta invenitur habet in longitudine duas leuvas, and unam in latitudine.

Depenbech Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi octo hidae geldabiles: Terra est XIV
Carucarum. In Dominio sunt tres: and unus bordarius and dimidia Acra Prati. De
hac terra tenent V milites de Roberto V hidas and dimidiam: and ibi habent tres
Carucas, and septem Villanos cum duabus Carucis cum dimidia: ibi duae Acrae
Prati.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XI libras, and quatuor solidos: Wasta
postea fuit: modo inter totum valebat LII solidos: habet duas leuvas
longitudine, and unam latitudine.

Tillestone, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi quatuor hidae geldabiles. Terra est octo
Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo Servi, and quatuor villani, and duo
bordarii, and quatuor Radmans, and Praepositus, and faber, and molinarius cum
quatuor Carucis inter omnes: ibi molinum de octo solidis.

De hac terra tenet Ranulphus dimidiam hidam de Roberto, reddendo sex solidos
and octo denarios.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex libras; modo XXX solidos: Wasta
invenitur: habet unam leuvam longitudine and aliam latitudine.

De hujus Manerii terra Calumpniatur Episcopus de Cestre dimidiam hidam: sed
Comitatus non testificatur eam de Episcopatu suo.

Cristetone, Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi septem hidae geldabiles: Terra est XIV
Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca: and duae Ancillae, and XII Villani, and V
bordarii, and duo Praepositi cum octo Carucis: ibi molinum de XII solidis; and
duo Radmans ibi.

De hoc manerio tenet Ranulfus de Roberto duas hidas, reddendo ei XII denarios.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex libras: modo valet tres libras: wasta
invenitur.

habet duas leuvas longitudine, and unam latitudine.

Calmundelei, Eduinus and Dot liberi homines tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis: ibi
duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum. Edwinus and Drogo tenet de
Roberto: In Dominio est una Caruca: and V servi, and unus villanus, and tres
bordarii, and unus praepositus and faber cum una Caruca: and silva ibi una
leuva and dimidia longitudine, and una latitudine. ibi tres Haiae. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat XIII solidos, modo sex solidos and tres denarios. habet
dimidiam leuvam de Plano.

Eghe, Eduinus tenuit, and adhuc tenet de Roberto, liber homo fuit: ibi duae
hidae and dimidia geldabiles: Terra est una Caruca: Morae sunt ibi: In Dominio
est una Caruca: and tres servi: silvae duabus Acris longitudine, and una
latitudine. wasta fuit and invenitur. modo quatuor solidos.

Hantone and Edvinus and Drogo de eo: Ipse Edvinus tenuit pro duobus Maneriis
and liber homo fuit: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum:
ibi sunt tres hospites nil habentes: ibi silva quinque acris longa, and duabus
lata.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V solidos: modo duos solidos -- and unum
Sprevarium reddit.

Lavorchedone, and tenuit Edwinus and Drogo de eo: Isdem Edvinus tenuit; liber
homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi est unus
homo and reddit XII denarios: and unus Bordarius reddit duos solidos: Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat octo solidos habet quatuor leuvas longitudine, and
quatuor latitudine.

Dochintone, and Edvinus de eo: Ipsemet tenuit ut liber homo: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: wasta est.

Isdem Robertus, and Edvinus de eo tenet Eghe: and tenuit ut liber homo: ibi
dimidia hidae geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: wasta est. Silva ibi duabus
acris longitudine, and una latitudine, valet XII denarios.

Celelea, and Mundret de eo: Vlueue tenuit, and libera fuit: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ibi est cum duobus Radmans: Silva dimidia
leuva longa, and dimidia Acra lata. Et duae Haiae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo V solidos. wasta invenitur.

Brosse, and Rogerus Picot de eo: Brismere and Raven duo liberi homines
tenuerunt pro duobus maneriis: ibi V hidae geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum:
In Dominio est una Caruca: and tres villani cum una Caruca: Silva unius leuvae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos and octo denarios: modo XV solidos and
octo denarios.

Ovreton, Vluoi tenuit, liber homo fuit: ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis:
Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una: silva duabus acris longitudine,
and una latitudine: valebat V solidos: modo sex solidos.

Cuntitone, Vluoi superior tenuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una
Caruca: ibi sunt duo bordarii cum duobus bobus arantes. valet XVI denarios,
wasta fuit.

Socheliche, and Drogo de eo; Dot liber homo tenuit: ibi tres hidae geldabiles:
Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae: and duo villani cum una
Caruca: ibi dimidia Acra Prati:

Tempore Regis Ewardi valebat octo solidos: modo XII solidos.

Tusigeham, and Humphridus de eo: Ernuin liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una: cum uno bordario:
silvae dimidia leuva. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos: modo quatuor
solidos: wasta fuit.

Bichelei, and Fulco de eo: Vodeman tenuit, and liber homo fuit. ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca and
Praepositus, and duo bordarii cum una Caruca. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V
solidos: modo octo solidos: wasta invenitur.

Isdem Robertus tenet Bicretone, and Drogo de eo: Dot Edvinus and Ernvinus tres
Taini, Bicketton.
liberi homines pro tribus maneriis tenuerunt: ibi tres hidae geldabiles. Terra
est quatuor Carucarum: ibi sunt duo villani, cum una Caruca: Silvae dimidia
leuva. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVIII solidos: modo XI solidos. wasta
fuit, and est ex maxima part.

Burwardeslei, and Humphridus de eo: Aluric Colbert, and Ravencheb tenuerunt
pro tribus maneriis; and liberi homines fuerunt: ibi tres hidae geldabiles:
Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi tres bordarii cum una Caruca: and Silva una
leuva longa and dimidia lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat duos solidos: modo
V solidos, wasta fuit.

De hac terra una hida fuit ablata ab Ecclesia Sanctae Warburgae: hanc
vendiderunt Praepositi Comitis Edwini and Morcari cuidam Ravechel.

Creuhalle and Eli de eo: Ipsemet tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca. Ibi est in Dominio cum duobus bordariis and
dimidia Piscaria: valet X solidos: wasta fuit and sic invenitur.

In Riseton Hundred.
Tidulstane, and Willielmus de eo: Stenulfus tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi
duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una olim uno
Bordario: ibi modicum silvae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex solidos and
octo denarios: modo quatuor solidos: wasta invenitur.

Buistane, Vluoi tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum and dimidii: in Dominio est una, cum duobus bovariis.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos: modo V solidos. wastum invenit.

Boliberie, Dedol tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and Presbyter cum duobus villanis
habent unam Carucam: Silva una leuva longa and una Acra lata. valebat quatuor
solidos: modo XIII solidos.

Tevretone, Dedol and Hundulf tenuerunt: pro duobus maneriis, and liberi
homines fuerunt: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: ibi
tres villani, and duo bordarii habent unam Carucam: silva una leuva longa and
alia lata. valebat X solidos: modo XXV solidos.

Spuretone, Vluric tenuit, and liher homo fuit: ibi hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi duo Radmans, and tres bordarii
habent unam Carucam: silva ibi una leuva and dimidia longa, and dimidia leuva
lata: and una Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI solidos: modo sex
solidos: wasta invenitur.

Pevretone, Vluric liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum: ibi est unus villanus cum una Caruca. valebat octo solidos: modo XX
solidos reddit.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Sudtone, Tochi tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and tres bordarii cum uno villano; ibi sex
Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; and post sex solidos;
modo reddit LXIV denarios de firma.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Butelege, Hundin tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis; Terra
est V Carucarum; wasta est praeter XII Acras satas. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XXX solidos; modo duos solidos; ibi duae Acrae Prati est dimidium.
Silva tribus leuvis longa and una lata: and una Haia ibi.

Robertus tenet de Comite Croeneche, Godric tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi
una hida geldabilis; Terra est una Caruca and dimidium; ibi unus Radman and
unus villanus habent dimidiam Carucam; ibi silva dimidiae leuvae longitudine
and XL perticarum latitudine; and ibi una Haia. wasta fuit; modo valet tres
solidos.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Robertus de Rodelent tenet de Hugone Comite Molintone, Godvinus tenuit and
liber homo fuit; ibi hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In
Dominio est una; and tres Servi, and tres Villani, and tres Bordarii; and duae
Acrae Prati, and duae Acrae Silvae: Tempore Regis Edwardi fuit Wasta: Quando
recepit, valebat XX solidos; modo XV solidos.

Molintone, and Lambertus de eo: Gunner and Ulf tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis,
and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum: Ibi est una in Dominio cum duobus Servis; and ibi duae acrae Prati:
valet XIV solidos. Wasta fuit, and wasta invenitur.

Lestone, and Willielmus de eo: Levenot tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una
hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca cum uno
Servo and uno Francigena, and duobus Bordariis, and duabus Piscariis; valuit
and valet XV solidos.

Torintone, and Willielmus de eo: Ulchetel tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi
dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus Radman, and unus
Villanus, and unus Bordarius habent dimidian Carucam. Valuit X solidos; and
post, and modo, V solidos.

Gaitone, and Willielmus de eo: Levenot liber homo tenuit; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi duo Villani and tres Bordarii
habent unam unam Carucam; and ibi duae Piscariae: valuit XV solidos, and post,
duos solidos; modo, tres solidos.

Eswelle, and Herbertus de eo: Ulchel tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi duae
hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca; and
duo Bovarii, and tres Villani, and unus Bordarius cum una Caruca.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI solidos, and post XX solidos, modo XXII
solidos.

Turastaneton, and Willielmus de eo: Levenot tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi duae
hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo
Bovarii, and quatuor Villani, and quatuor Bordarii cum una Caruca and dimidio.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, and post, octo solidos; modo, XVI
solidos.

Calders, Levenot tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra
est X Carucarum; ibi V Villani and V Bordarii habent duas Carucas, and unus
Francigena cum uno Serviente habet duas Carucas: In Dominio duo boves, and duae
Acrae Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat L solidos, and post, X solidos; modo XXIV
solidos.

Melas, Levenot tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca and
dimidia; ibi est unus Radman, and duo Villani, and duo Bordarii habent unam
Cacam.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XV solidos, modo X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Melas, Levenot tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum; ibi
unus Radman, and tres Villani, and tres Bordarii habent unam Carucam. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos, and post, octo solidos; modo XII solidos.

Walea, Uctredus tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est quatuor Carucarum; ibi unus Villanus, and unus Bordarius
cum dimidia Caruca; and unus Francigena habet unam Carucam cum duobus Bovariis,
and uno Radman, and uno Bordario.

Robertus [Cocus] tenet de Comite Nestone, Osgot tenuit, and liber homo fuit;
ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae; and
unus Servus, and duo Villani, and quatuor Bordarii cum una Caruca; and unus
Francigena ibi. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XIII solidos and quatuor
denarios: modo XVI solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Haregrave, Osgot tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum;
ibi tres villani and duo bordarii habent unam Carucam. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat sex solidos and octo denarios: modo X solidos: valuit quatuor solidos,
cum recepit.

In Risetone Hundred.
Ricardus de Vernon tenet Estone, Toret tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi
quatuor hidae geldabiles: Terra est V Carucarum. In Dominio est una; and duo
servi, and quinque villani, and duo Radmans, and tres bordarii cum duabus
Carucis. ibi Silva dimidia leuva longa, and una acra lata.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI solidos; modo XX solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Pichetone, Tochi tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis; Terra
est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo bovarii, and unus Radman, and
tres bordarii cum una Caruca; ibi dimidia Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XL solidos; and post, V solidos; modo, XX solidos.

Hotone, Toci tenuit; ibi una hida and duae parts unius hidae geldabiles:
Terra est trium Carucarum; ibi quatuor Radmans, and unus villanus, and quatuor
bordarii cum duabus Carucis. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos, and
post, V solidos; modo, XVI solidos.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Cocheshalle and Pagan de eo: Levenot and Dedor tenuerunt pro duobus maneriis;
liberi homines fuerunt; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi
est cum uno Radman and uno bondario: Silva unius leuvae longitudine, and
dimidii latitudine. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat duos solidos; modo V solidos.

In Mildestvich Hundred.
Sibroc, Osmer tenuit; liber homo fuit: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est V
Carucarum: In Dominio est una: and duo servi, and duo villani cum Duabus
Carucis: ibi tres acrae Prati, and duae acrae silvae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos: modo X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Surveleg, Edward and Bers tenuerunt pro duobus maneriis; and liberi fuerunt:
ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca,
and duo servi, and duo villani cum dimidia Caruca: and unus bordarius, and una
Piscaria: and tres Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo solidos:
modo septem solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Wice, Osmer and Alsi tenuerunt pro duobus maneriis: and liberi fuerunt: ibi
una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo
servi, and tres villani cum una Caruca: and quatuor Acrae Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII solidos: modo sex solidos.

Moletune, Levenot tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: ibi unus villanus, and unus bordarius habent dimidiam
Carucam: ibi una Acra Prati. Silva una leuva longa, and una lata; ibi una Haia.
Valuit and valet V solidos.

Wanetune, Haregrim and Alsi tenuerunt pro duobus maneriis, liberi homines
fuerunt: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ibi est in Dominio:
and duo servi, and duo bordarii. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos:
modo sex solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Deveneham, Osmer tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca; and duo servi, and Presbyter
cum Ecclesia; and unus villanus, and unus bordarius cum dimidia Caruca: valebat
octo solidos; modo V solidos.

Botestoch, Osmer tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum;
ibi sunt cum tribus Radmans, and duobus servis; and duae Acrae Prati; and duae
Acrae Silvae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat tres solidos; modo X solidos: Wasta invenitur.

In Warmundestrou Hundred.
Aldelime, Osmer tenuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est V Carucarum: In
Dominio est una, and unus servus, and unus villanus, and unus Radman, and unus
bordarius cum una Caruca; ibi duae Acrae Prati. Silva duabus leuvis longa, and
una leuva lata; and tres Haiae; and Aira Accipitris. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XX solidos; modo octo solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Crev, Osmer tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi
est unus Radman, and unus villanus, and duo Bordarii cum una Caruca; ibi una
Acra and dimidia Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo V solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Ricardus Pincerna tenet de Comite Pontone, Edvinus tenuit, and liber homo
fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio sunt tres
Carucae; and sex bovarii, and Praepositus and tres Bordarii cum duabus Carucis;
ibi octo Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; and post,
tantundem; modo quatuor libras.

Calvintone, Dot tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dua hidae geldabiles: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: Wasta fuit, and wasta invenitur; modo est ad firmam pro
LX solidis.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Vernon tenet Bretberie, and Uluric de eo; qui and tenuit ut liber homo; ibi
una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum; ibi unus Radman, and sex
villani, and duo bordarii habent unam Carucam: Silva ibi una leuva longa, and
dimidia leuva lata; and tres Haiae; and una Air Accipitris. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo similiter.

In Risetone Hundred.
Walterius de Vernon tenet de Hugone Comite Winfletone, Erniet tenuit and liber
homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi duo villani
habent unam Carucam: Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and una Acra lata. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat octo solidos; modo X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Nesse, Erniet tenuit; ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo bovarii, and V villani, and tres
bordarii cum duabus Carucis; ibi dimidia Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XX solidos; modo XVI solidos.



Prestune; Ulviet, Edric, and Leuvede tenuerunt pro tribus Maneriis, and liberi
fuerunt; ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In
Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii, and duo Bordarii; ibi molinum serviens Curia.
Silva una leuva longa, and una lata: valebat VII solidos; modo V solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Willelmus Malbedeng tenet de Hugone Comite Tatenale, Ernuin tenuit and liber
homo fuit; ibi V hidae geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum: In Dominio est una,
and duo villani, and duo Bordarii habent aliam; and unus Francigena tertiam;
ibi una leuva Silvae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo XXVI.
Wasta fuit.

Colburne, Loten tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca,
quae ibi est in Dominio; and duo bovarii cum uno villano, and tres bordarii;
ibi molinum hiemale: valebat V solidos; modo sex solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Riseton Hundred.
Isdem Willelmus tenet Ulvre; Ulfac tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum; ibi unus Radman, and duo villani, and
tres bordarii habent duas Carucas; ibi duae Acrae Prati: Silva una leuva longa,
and dimidia lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; modo X solidos.
Wasta invenitur.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Wivrevene, Colbert tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi tertia pars unius hidae
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi sunt duo villani cum dimidia Caruca:
valebat octo solidos; modo quatuor solidos.

Pol, Ernuin tenuit pro Manerio; ibi terra quatuor boum geldabilis; ibi unus
villanus, and unus bordarius habent dimidiam Carucam: valuit and valet quatuor
solidos.

Salhale, Leving tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi sex hidae geldabiles: Terra
est sex Carucarum: In Dominio est una and dimidia; and unus servus, and septem
villani, and unus Radman, and quatuor bordarii cum tribus Carucis and dimidia:
ibi Piscaria. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; and post, XXII solidos:
modo, XLV solidos.

Landechene, Essul tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi septem hidae geldabiles:
Terra est octo Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and Presbyter, and novem villani,
and septem bordarii, and quatuor Francigenae cum quinque Carucis inter omnes.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat L solidos: modo XL solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Optone, and Colbertus de eo: qui and tenuit ut liber homo; ibi tres hidae
geldabiles: Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and quatuor servi, and
duo villani, and unus Radman, and quatuor bordarii cum una Caruca: ibi duae
Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXV solibos: modo XX solidos.

Tuigvelle, and Durandus de eo: Winterlet tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi una
hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo servi,
and unus villanus, and unus bordarius habent aliam: Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat octo solidos: modo V solidos.

Chenoterie, and Ricardus de eo: Colbertus tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi
dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca, quae ibi est in Dominio; cum
duobus bovariis, and duobus villanis: valnit XV solidos; modo X solidos. Wasta
fuit.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Isdem Willelmus tenet Eteshale, Ova tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia
hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus Radman cum dimidia
Caruca, and uno Servo; and unus Radman, and duo Villani, and tres Bordarii cum
una Caruca: Silva una leuva longa; and Haia ibi, and Aira Accipitris. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos; modo V solidos.

Isdem Willelmus tenet Eteshale, Godric tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia
hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus Radman cum uno Bordario
habent dimidiam Carucam. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V solidos; modo V
solidos. Wasta fuit.

Manessele, Levenot tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca; ibi unus Radman, duo Servi, and duo Bordarii habent unam
Carueam; ibi una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and una lata; and quatuor
Haiae, and Aira Accipitris: valebat and valet quatuor solidos. Wasta fuit.

Maneshale, Derth and Aregrim tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis, and liberi homines
fuerunt; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi sunt cum
tribus Radmans, and duobus Bordariis; ibi una Acra Prati; and Silva dimidia
leuva longa, and dimidia lata; and Haia; and Aira Accipitris: valet quatuor
solidos; mode octo solidos.

Sprostune, Elmar tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca; ibi est cum uno Radman, and uno Servo, and duobus
Villanis, and duobus Bordariis; ibi dimidia Acra Prati. Silva duabus
Quarentenis longa: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V solidos; modo quatuor
solidos: Wasta invenitur.

In Warmundestrou Hundred.
Actune, Morcar Comes tenuit; ibi octo hidae geldabiles: Terra est XXX
Carucarum: In Dominio sunt tres; and duo Servi, and XIII Villani, and XV
Bordarii cum septem Carucis; ibi molinum serviens Curiae; and X Acrae Prati:
Silva sex leuvis longa, and una lata; and una Aira Accipitris; ibi duo
Presbyteri cum una Caruca, and duo Francigenae habentes unam Carucam and
dimidiam, and unus Servus, and sex Villani, and septem Bordarii, cum quatuor
Carucis.

Hoc Manerium habet suum placitum in Aula Domini sui; and in Which unam domum
quietam ad salem faciendum. Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X libras, modo
sex libras.

Isdem Willelmus tenet Estune, Dot tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum. In Dominio est una, and duo Bovarii,
and duo Villani, and tres Bordarii habent aliam Carucam; ibi Silva una leuva
longa, and tantundem lata: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo V
solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Wilavestune, Ulviet liber homo tenuit; ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra est
dimidia Caruca; ibi est unus Bordarius: valebat V solidos; modo duos solidos.

Wareneberie, Carle tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii,
and unus Bordarius; ibi Silva duabus leuvis longa, and una lata; and duae
Haiae; and Aira Accipitris: valuit and valet V solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Cerletune, Fran tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est dimidia Caruca; ibi est unus Villanus cum duobus Bobus: valuit and valet
duos solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Merberie de una hida and dimidia, and Norberie de una hida and dimidia, and
Wireswelle de una hida: Hae terrae geldabiles.

Berewiche fuerunt, In Westone jacuerunt. Heraldus Comes tenuit: Terra est V
Carucarum. In Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii, and duo Villani, and tres
Bordarii cum una Caruca: Silva duabus leuvis longa, and una leuva lata and XL
Perticatis: Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXI solidos; modo, X solidos.
Wiresvelle est wasta.

Walcretune, Gunuuic and Alden tenuerunt, and liberi homines fuerunt, (i.) pro
duobus Maneriis; ibi una hida and una virgata geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum; ibi est una, cum uno Bovario, and uno Radman, and duobus Bordariis.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat novem solidos, modo V solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Santune, Godvinus and Dot tenuerunt, and liberi homines
fuerunt; pro duobus Maneriis: ibi tres virgatae geldabiles: Terra est una
Caruca; ibi unus Radman habet dimidiam Carucam, and duos Bordarios.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos; modo tres solidos. Wasta
invenitur.

Burtune, Seunardus tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est trium Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and unus Bovarius; ibi Silva dimidia
leuva longa, and tantundem lata, and tres Haiae, and Aira Accipitris: Valet X
solidos. Haec duo Maneria, Tempore Regis Edwardi valebant XL solidos, modo X
solidos.

Haretone, Ulchetel tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est V Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo Bovarii, and duo Villani, and unus
Bordarius cum una Caruca. Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem lata;
ibi una Haia. Haec duo Maneria, Tempore Regis Edwardi valebant XL solidos, modo
X solidos.

Westanestune, Uluric tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hidae geldabilis:
Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo Bovarii, and duo Villani,
and unus Radman, and duo Bordarii cum una Caruca; ibi dimidia Acra Prati: Silva
una leuva longa, and dimidia lata, and duae Haiae: Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XXX solidos, modo X solidos.

Berchesford, Owin, Erlechin, and Leuric tenuerunt pro tribus Maneriis; and
liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum;
ibi tres Radmans, and duo Villani, and tres Bordarii habent unam Carucam; ibi
una virgata Prati; Silva quatuor Quarentenis longa, and una lata: valebat V
solidos; modo similiter. Wasta fuerunt.

Berdeltune; Halden and Derth tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis; and liberi homines
fuerunt; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio
est una, and duo Bovarii, and unus Villanus, and duo Bordarii; ibi XL
Perticatae Silvae.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex solidos; modo tres solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Werblestune; Hacon, Elward, and Elric tenuerunt pro tribus Maneriis, and
liberi fuerunt: Ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In
Dominio est una, and duo Bovarii, and unus Villanus, and unus Radman, and duo
Bordarii cum una Caruca; ibi Silva dimidia leuva longa, and dimidia lata: Et
una Haia: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat septem solidos and quatuor denarios;
modo octo solidos: Wasta fuit.

Bertemeleu, Seuuardus tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hidae geldabilis.
Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii. Presbyter, and
unus Radman, and unus Villanus, and duo Bordarii cum duabus Carucis; ibi una
Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata; and una Haia; and Aira
Accipitris. Valuit and valet XX solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Essetune, Osmer and Owinus tenuerunt pro duobus
Maneriis; and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi tres virgatae geldabiles. Terra est V
Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii, and tres Bordarii cum una
Caruca; ibi una Acra Prati. Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata; ibi tres
Haiae: and una Aira Accipitris. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo
X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Wivelesde, Dot and Godric tenuerunt pro duobus
Maneriis; and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida and una virgata geldabilis:
Terra est trium Carucarum: ibi unus Radman, and unus Villanus, and sex Bordarii
habent unam Carucam; ibi una Acra Prati. Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem
lata. Et V Haiae; and una Aira Accipitris. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVIII
solidos; modo V solidos.

Titesle, Edric tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi tres virgatae geldabiles: Terra
est una Caruca; ibi est cum duobus Villanis, and buobus Bordariis. Silva ibi
dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem lata. Valebat quatuor solidos; modo V
solidos.

Steple, Eluric and Dot pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi homines
fuerunt; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi est una,
cum duobus Bovariis, and uno Villano, and uno Bordario; ibi una Acra and
dimidia Prati. Silva dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem lata. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat X solidos, modo sex solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Wistetestune, Leuuinus and Osmer pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt; and liberi
fuerunt; ibi tres virgatae geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio
est una and dimidia; and tres Bovarii, and unus Villanus, cum dimidia Caruca,
and unus Bordarius; ibi una Pertica Prati: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and
tantundem lata. Valebat octo solidos; modo X solidos.

Brunhala; Edric and Edric pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi fuerunt;
ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: In Dominio est dimidia, cum
uno Bovario: Silva est una leuva longa, and dimidia lata: and Haia ibi.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos, modo duos solidos: Wasta
invenitur. Una virgata jacebat in Pol Manerio.

Pol; Hacon tenit and liber homo fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca: Ipsa est in Dominio cum duobus Bovariis, and tribus Bordariis: Ibi
dimidia Acra Prati. Valebat V solidos; modo octo solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Tereth, Leuuinus and Osmer pro duobus Maneriis
tenuerunt; and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum: Ibi tres Villani habent unam; and quatuor Acrae Prati: Silva
dimidia leuva longa, and tribus Quarentenis lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat
septem solidos; modo V solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Cerlere; Aluric liber homo tenuit; ibi tres virgatae
geldabiles: Terra est una Caruca and dimidia; ibi sunt duo Villani, and unus
Bordarius cum dimidia Caruca: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and duabus Quarentenis
lata; ibi Haia: Valet tres solidos.

Bedelei, Aluric liber homo tenuit, ibi dimidia virgata geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca, quae ibi est in Dominio: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem
lata: Ibi Haia: Valebat X solidos; modo V solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet unam Berewicham Stanleu; haec jacebat in Westone;
Heraldus Comes tenuit; ibi dimidia virgata geldabilis: Terra est duobus Bobus;
ibi est unus Radman: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and dimidia lata; ibi Haia:
Valuit and valet duos solidos.

Copehale, Halden and Ulfac pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi fuerunt;
ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est quatuor Carucarum. In Dominio est una, and
duo Bovarii, and unus Radman, and unus Villanus, and unus Bordarius cum una
Caruca; ibi tres Acrae Prati.

Silva una leuva longa, and una lata; ibi duae Haiae. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XXIV solidos; modo XII solidos.

Pol, Ulvena tenuit and libera fuit; ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra est una
Caruca; ibi est unus Villanus, and tres Bordarii cum dimidia Caruca. Ibi duae
Acrae Prati, and una Acra Silvae modicae: Valuit and valet tres solidos.

Estone, Ravencate tenuit and libera fuit; ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca; ibi unus Radman habet dimidiam Carucam cum duobus Bordariis;
ibi una Acra Prati and dimidia: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata:
Valebat V solidos; modo tres solidos: Wasta fuit.

Chelmundestone, Ulvena tenuit and libera fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum; ibi est unus Radman habens unam Carucam; and tres Villani
cum una Caruca: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo sex solidos.

In Cestre Hundred.
Willielmus Filius Nigelli tenet de Hugone Comite Newentone, Erne tenuit; ibi
una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae; and
quatuor Bovarii, and sex Villani cum una Caruca.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos, and post X solidos; modo XX solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Lee, Erne tenuit: ibi una virgata geldabilis: Terra est
dimidia Caruca; ibi est cum tribus villanis: valebat V solidos; modo octo
solidos.

Bruge geldabilem: Erne tenuit pro Manerio; ibi sunt tres Bordarii habentes
dimidiam Carucam: Valebat X solidos; modo quatuor solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Clutone; Edwardus and Ulwinchit pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi
homines fuerunt. Ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In
Dominio est dimidia Caruca; and unus Francigena cum tribus Villanis habent
dimidiam Carucam; ibi dimidia Acra Prati: Silva dimidia leuva.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo octo solidos.

In Risetone Hundred.
Bero, Toreth tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est
octo Carucarum; ibi est una in Dominio, and duo Bovarii, and duo Villani, and
quatuor Bordarii, and duo Francigenae, Inter eos est una Caruca; ibi duo molina
de X solidis; and una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat tres solidos; modo tantundem: Wasta invenitur.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Nestone; Erne tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi duae parts duarum hidarum
geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae Carucae; and unus
Servus, Presbyter, and quatuor Villani, and duo Bordarii habent ibi tres
Carucas. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; and post tantundem: modo XXV
solidos.

Rabie, and Harduinus de eo: Erni tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca in Dominio; est ibi and unus Servus, and duo Villani, and duo
Bordarii cum una Caruca. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; and post XIV
solidos; modo XX solidos.

Capeles, and David de eo; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Erne tenuit: Terra est
una Caruca; ibi est cum uno Villano, and duobus Bordariis. Tempore Regis
Edwardi, and post, valebat V solidos; modo octo solidos.

Bernestone, and Randulfus de eo: Rauesuar and Leviet pro duobus Maneriis
tenuerunt; and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo Bovarii, and tres Bordarii.
Valebat X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Wareburgetune, Ernui tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca; ibi est unus Radman, cum duobus Bobus: valebat V solidos;
modo duos solidos.

Mulintune, Dot unus liber homo tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est.

Cunetesford, and Erchbrand de eo; qui and tenuit ut liber homo; ibi dimidia
hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: Wasta fuit and est: Silva dimidia
leuva longa, and duabus Acris lata: valuit X solidos.

Stabelei, Leuuinus tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi tertia pars unius hidae
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est: Silva dimidia leuva
longa, and XL Perticis lata: valuit X solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet in ipsa villa unam bovatam terrae and tertiam partem
unius hidae geldabilem: Segrid and Ulsi tenuerunt pro duobus Maneriis, and
liberi fuerunt: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat septem solidos.

Pevre, Edwardus tenuit [ibi duae parts unius hidae geldabiles:] and liber
homo fuit: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est: Silva ibi una leuva longa,
and una Acra lata: valebat V solidos; modo XII denarios.

Tatune, Erchbrant liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium
Carucarum and dimidii: ibi tres villani, and quatuor bordarii: valet quatuor
solidos.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Heletune; Orme tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi X hidae, harum V geldabiles,
and aliae non geldabiles: Terra est XX Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae Carucae;
and quatuor bovarii, and quatuor villani, and duo bordarii, and duo Presbyteri,
cum V Carucis inter omnes: ibi duo Piscatores reddunt V solidos; and una Acra
Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata; ibi duae Haiae.

In Which una Domus wasta.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenet Odard dimidiam hidam; Goisfridus duas hidas;
Actard unam hidam and dimidiam: Humphridus unam hidam and dimidiam; Ordard
dimidiam hidam; Harduinus dimidiam hidam.

Ibi sunt in Dominio tres Carucae, and XII villani, and unus Radman, and V
bordarii, cum V Carucis inter omnes; and sex bovarii; and dimidia Acra Prati;
and XVIII Acrae Silvae.

Totum Manerium tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; and post fuit wastum:
modo quod Willielmus tenet valet L solidos: quod milites, valet LIVE solidos.

Westone, Grifin tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est V
Carucarum: Ordard and Brictric tenent de Willielmo: ibi habent duas Carucas in
Dominio, and tres bovarios, and quinque villanos, and tres bordarios cum tribus
Carucis, and duos Piscatores, and duas Acras Prati; and Silvae unam leuvam
longitudine, and dimidiam latitudine; and Haiam.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo solidos; modo XXXV solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Estone, Odard de eo: Leuric liber homo tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum, and dimidii: In Dominio est una Caruca and dimidia, and
tres bovarii, and unus villanus, and unus bordarius cum una Caruca: ibi molinum
serviens Curiae, and Piscator, and una Acra Silvae. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat V solidos: modo XX solidos.

Nortune, and Ansfrid de eo: Uctred and T^chi pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt,
and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum:
In Dominio est una, and duo servi, and tres villani cum una Caruca: ibi unus
Piscator, and tres Acrae Prati; and quatuor Acrae Silvae; and duae Haiae:
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI solidos: modo novem solidos and quatuor
denarios. Wasta invenitur.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Enelelei: Wuche tenuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Enley, locus cognitus, now in Norton. Dutto^, a part of it.
Terra est dimidia Caruca: Wasta fuit and est.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Duntune, Edward tenuit ut liber homo pro uno Manerio;
ibi dimidia virgata geldabilis: Terra est duorum boum; ibi est unus Radman, and
unus villanus: valet sex denarios: wasta fuit.

Lege, Edwardus tenuit ut liber homo; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una
Caruca; ibi est cum uno Radman, and uno servo, and duobus villanis, and uno
bordario: valet quatuor solidos; valuit V solidos.

Hugo Comes habet de hac terra unam virgatam, quae reddit tres solidos.

Estone, and Pagen de eo: Levenot tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae virgatae and
dimidia geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; quae ibi est in Dominio, and duo
bovarii, and unus Radman, and unus bordarius, and unus servus: ibi Silva
longitudine una leuva, and XL Perticis latitudine; and ibi duae haiae.

Budevurde, and Pagen de eo: Edwardus tenuit ut liber homo: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidia Caruca; and unus
servus, and Presbyter, and duo villani, and unus bordarius cum una Caruca; and
molinum serviens aulae: Ibi una Acra Prati and dimidia.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat sex solidos; modo octo solidos.

Witelei, and Pagen and Ordard de eo: Levenot tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae
hidae geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una cum uno servo:
ibi una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longitudine, and dimidia latitudine: valet
sex solidos.

In Mildestvich Hundred.
Gostrel, and Ranulfus de eo: Colben tenuit ut liber homo: ibi una virgata
geldabilis: Terra est duorum boum: Wasta fuit and est.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Aldredelie; Brun tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est quatuor Carucarum: Wasta fuit and est: Silva duabus leuvis longa, and
duabus lata: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Lece; Hasten tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis. Terra
est una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est.

In Cestre Hundred.
Hugo de Mara tenet de Hugone Comite Lee; Leuuinus tenuit: ibi una virgata
terrae geldabilis; ibi sunt duo villani, and unus bordarius cum dimidia Caruca:
valebat tempore Regis Edwardi X solidos; modo octo solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Puto esse Honbridge juxta Cestriam. Radclive, puto esse inter les Suburbs de
Cester juxta Ecclesiam Sancti Johannis.
Isdem Hugo tenet Bruge; Leuuinus tenuit: ibi una Carucata terrae geldabilis:
ibi duo bordarii habent dimidiam Carucam: valebat and valet tres solidos.

Isdem Hugo tenet Radeclive; Gunnor tenuit: ibi tertia pars unius hidae
geldabilis: ibi est una Caruca in Dominio cum duobus bovariis: Wasta fuit cum
recepit.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo sex solidos and octo denarios.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Calders; Erniet tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una cum uno bordario: valebat V solidos;
modo X solidos.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Lavtune; Godric tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est trium Carucarum: Wasta est: Silva ibi una leuva longa, and una lata; and
una Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI solidos.

Lautune; Godric tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est trium
Carucarum: Wasta est: Silva ibi una leuva longa, and una lata. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XX solidos.

Bevelei; Godric and Godvin and Archil pro tribus Maneriis tenuerunt; and
liberi fuerunt: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi duo
Radmans, and duo bordarii habent unam Carucam: ibi duae Acrae Prati, and duae
Acrae Silvae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos, modo tantundem.

Gostrel; Godric tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi tres virgatae terrae
geldabiles: Terra est una Caruca and dimidia: Wasta fuit semper, and est.

Hugo Filius Osberni tenet de Comite in Bruge unam Carucatam terrae geldabilem:
Ulnodus tenuit; ibi sunt duo bordarii cum tribus bobus: valet tres solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Caldecote; Ulgar Presbyter, and alii tres Teini, tenuerunt pro tribus Maneriis
and liberi fuerunt; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: Ipsae
ibi sunt cum uno Radman, and duobus villanis, and tribus bovariis; ibi dimidia
Piscaria. Tempore Regis Edwardi fuit wasta, tamen reddebat duos solidos; modo
XV solidos.

Pulford; Uluric tenuit sicut liber homo; ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca; and ibi est cum duobus Radmans, and uno villano, and
duobus bordariis: Wasta fuit haec terra: modo valet V solidos.

In Riseton Hundred.
Warhelle; Alwold tenuit, ut liber homo; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca; ibi unus villanus habet dimidiam Carucam: Silva ibi dimidia leuva
longa, and una acra lata: valuit and valet tres solidos.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Boselega; Godric tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est quatuor Carucarum: Wasta est: ibi Silva duabus leuvis longa, and
dimidia leuva lata.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos.

Meretone; Godric tenuit, and liber homo fuit: Terra est dimidia Caruca: ibi
una virgata terrae geldabilis: Wasta fuit semper; ibi Silva XX Perticas longa,
and tantundem lata.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Sumreford; Godric tenuit, ut liber homo; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca: Wasta fuit and est adhuc.

Cerdingham, Godric tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum: wasta fuit and est: valet V solidos.

In Warmundestrou Hundred.
It should be Wilaveston Hundred.
Hamo tenet de Comite Hugone Potitone; Uluric tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi
duae hidae and dimidia geldabiles: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est
una, and unus servus, and quatuor villani, and quatuor bordarii, and unus
Radman cum una Caruca: valebat XX solidos: Wasta fuit.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Doneham; Elward tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo bovarii, and duo villani, and
unus bordarius: and una Acra Silvae: and in Civitate una Domus.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII solidos: modo X solidos: Wasta fuit.

Bogedone; Eluuard tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: ibi duo Francigenae habent unam Carucam: ibi Presbyter
and Ecclesia, cui pertinet dimidia hida: ibi molinum reddit XVI denarios: valet
tres solidos: Wasta fuit and ita invenitur.

Hale; Eluuard tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum and
dimidii: ibi tres villani cum uno Radman habent duas Carucas: ibi Silva una
leuva longa and dimidia lata: and Haia: and Aira Accipitris: and dimidia Acra
Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XV solidos; modo XII solidos: Wasta invenitur.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Bramale; Brunus and Haccun pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi homines
fuerunt: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est sex Carucarum: ibi unus Radman, and
duo villani, and duo bordarii habent unam Carucam: Silva ibi dimidia leuva
longa, and tantundem lata: and dimidia Haia: and una Acra Prati: Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XXXII solidos; modo V solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Ascelie; Eluuard tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una virgata terra
geldabilis: Terra est duorum boum: Wasta fuit and est.

Olretune; Aluuard tenuit: ibi una virgata terra and dimidia geldabilis: Terra
est sex bobus: Wasta fuit and est.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Bigot tenet de Hugone Comite Ferentone; Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi quatuor
hidae geldabiles: Terra est octo Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae, and septem
Villani, and tres bordarii cum duabus Carucis: ibi molinum, and Piscaria cum
duobus Piscatoribus, and una Acra Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; modo sex libras: Wasta invenitur.

Lai; Ansgot tenuit ut liber homo; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum; ibi sunt duo bordarii, and una Acra Prati: valet duos solidos: Wasta
fuit.

Isdem Bigot tenet Torintune; Steinchetel tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi duae
hidae geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidia, and duo
villani and bordarius habent dimidiam Carucam; ibi Ecclesia and Presbyter, and
una Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo X solidos. Wasta
invenitur.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Motburlege; Dot tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est quatuor Carucarum; ibi habet unus Teinus dimidiam
Carucam; and unus servus, and unus villanus, and duo bordarii; ibi una Acra
Prati; and Silva duabus leuvis longa, and tantundem lata; and duae Haiae.
Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII solidos; modo V solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Nordberie; Brun tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est IV Carucarum; ibi unus Radman cum tribus bordariis habet unam Carucam; ibi
una Acra Prati: Silva V leuvis longa and tribus leuvis lata; and ibi tres
Haiae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo tres solidos. Wasta
invenitur.

Aldredelei; Godvinus tenuit ut liber homo; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
octo Carucarum: In Dominio est una cum duobus bovariis, and tribus villanis;
and unus Radman cum una Caruca; ibi una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva and dimidia
longa, and una leuva lata; and ibi duae Haiae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX
solidos; modo X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Sudendune; Brun tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est septem Carucarum; ibi unus Francigena habet dimidiam
Carucam; and unus villanus, and unus bordarius cum dimidia Caruca; ibi Silva
una leuva longa and dimidia lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos;
modo V solidos.

Rodo; Bernulf tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra
est duarum Carucarum: Wasta est, and sic invenitur. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat octo solidos: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia leuva lata.

In Mildestvich Hundred.
Cogeltone, Godvinus tenuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est quatuor
Carucarum; ibi sunt duae, cum duobus villanis, and quatuor bordariis: Silva ibi
una leuva longa, and una lata; and ibi duae Haiae. Wasta fuit and sic
invenitur. Modo valet IV solidos.

Sanbec, Dunuing tenuit and liber fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis; and una
virgata and dimidia similiter geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi est
unus Francigena cum dimidia Caruca, and tribus servis; and duo villani cum
dimidia Caruca: ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and XL
perticatis lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos; modo octo
solidos.

Sudtone; Alestan and Bilam pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi homines
fuerunt; ibi tres virgatae and XVI Acrae terrae geldabiles: Terra est una
Caruca and dimidia: In Dominio est dimidia Caruca; and duo bovarii, and duo
villani habent dimidiam Carucam. Tempore Regis valebat quatuor solidos; modo
tres solidos. Wasta fuit.

Wibaldelai, Leuuinus tenuit, and liber fuit; ibi una virgata terrae
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ibi unus Radman habet dimidiam Carucam, and
duos servos cum uno villano: valet duos solidos: Wasta fuit and sic invenitur.

Wevre, Stenulf tenuit and liber homo fuit: ibi una virgata terrae geldabilis:
Terra est dimidia Caruca: ibi est cum uno Radman and uno villano, and duobus
bordariis: Silva longa una Quarentena, and tantundem lata; and ibi Haia: valuit
duos solidos; modo tres solidos.

In Riseton Hundred.
Baldricus tenet de Hugone Comite Cocle, Ulfac tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi
una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ibi est ipsa in Dominio, and unus
servus. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XL solidos; modo similiter: Wasta
invenitur.

In Exestan Hundred.
Toret liber homo tenuit Alentone, ibi tres hidae geldabiles: In Eitone tenuit
Sanctus Cedda unam hidam; and in Sutone, unam hidam geldabilem tenuit isdem
Sanctus: Haec tria maneria, quando Hugo Comes recepit, erant wasta: modo tenet
Hugo filius Osberni de eo; and habet dimidiam Carucam in Dominio, and tres
servos, and septem villanos, and V bordarios, and duos francigenas: inter omnes
habent unam Carucam and dimidiam: ibi molinum de quatuor solidis; and dimidia
Piscaria; and quatuor Acrae Prati: Silva duabus leuvis longa, and dimidia lata:
Ibi duae Haiae: valet XXX solidos; ibi quatuor Carucae; plus possent esse.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Gislebertus de Venables tenet de Hugone Comite Ecclestone; Edvinus tenuit, and
liber homo fuit; ibi V hidae geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum: In Dominio
est una, and duo servi, and quatuor villani, and unus bordarius cum una Caruca;
ibi navis and Rete, and dimidia Acra Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X
solidos; modo L solidos. Wasta fuit.

Alburgham, Edvinus Comes tenuit: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor
Carucarum; ibi tres villani cum sex bordariis habent unam Carucam. Silva ibi
duabus leuvis longa, and una lata; and duae Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi
valebat XX solidos; modo octo solidos.

In Riseton Hundred.
Torpelei, Ulviet tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra
est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo servi, and quatuor villani,
and duo bordarii cum una Caruca: Silva una leuva longa, and una lata; and una
Acra Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo X solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Watenhale; Gleuvinus tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis:
Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus Radman cum uno villano, and duo bordarii
habent unam Carucam; ibi duae Acrae Prati. Silva una leuva and dimidia longa,
and una leuva lata: valuit and valet V solidos. Wasta invenitur.

In Roelau Hundred.
Herford; Dodo tenuit pro duobus Maneriis, sicut liber homo; ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi sunt quatuor villani, and duo
bordarii, and faber habentes unam Carucam.

In Which una Salina reddit duos solidos; and alia dimidia Salina wasta; ibi una
Acra Prati.

De hac terra tenet unus miles dimidiam hidam, and ibi habet unam Carucam, and
duos bovarios, and tres bordarios. Tempore Regis Edwardi valet XX solidos; modo
X solidos.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Lime; Ulviet tenuit and liber fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum
Carucarum; ibi sunt tres bordarii; ibi dimidia Ecclesia cum dimidia virgata
terrae: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem lata.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo XII denarios. Wasta invenitur.

Lege; Ulviet and Dot pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt; and liberi homines
fuerunt: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum; ibi unus homo
ejus habet dimidiam Carucam, and tres servos: Ibi Presbyter and Ecclesia cum
uno villano, and duobus bordariis, habens dimidiam Carucam; ibi Silva unius
leuvae longitudine, and dimidia leuvae latitudine; and ibi Haia. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo V solidos.

Wimundesham; Dot tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una Caruca cum uno
servo: Ibi una Acra Silvae; and Aira Accipiaris; and una Domus in Wiche; and
unus bordarius: valet X solidos. Wasta fuit, and sic invenitur.

Mera; Ulviet tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum: Wasta fuit and est: Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and XL
perticatis lata: ibi duae Acrae Prati. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat octo
solidos.

Pevre, Dot tenuit; ibi duae bovatae terrae geldabiles: Wasta fuit and est.

Isdem Gislebertus tenet Rodestorne; Ulviet tenuit; ibi una virgata terrae
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta fuit; ibi duae Acrae Silvae. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos.

In Exestan Hundred.
Isdem Gislebertus tenet Hope; Edvinus tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; and ibi est cum duobus villanis; and duae
Acrae Silvae: valet septem solidos: Wasta fuit, and sic invenitur.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Neubold; Ulviet tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est V Carucarum; ibi unus Radman habet unam Carucam; and
Presbyter unam Carucam, and tres villani, and duo bordarii; ibi una Acra Prati:
Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem lata: Et duae Haiae ibi. Tempore Regis
Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo octo solidos.

Bretone; Ulviet tenuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor
Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo bovarii, and duo villani, and tres
bordarii: ibi una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata; and
molinum de XII denariis: De hac terra tenent duo homines ejus unam hidam, and
habent unam Carucam cum duobus servis, and duobus villanis, and quatuor
bordariis. Totum tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo similiter.
Wasta invenitur.

Cinbretune; Godvinus tenuit and liber homo fuit: Ibi tres hidae geldabiles:
Terra est V Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo servi, and tres bordarii;
ibi una Acra Prati. Silva dimidia leuva longa, and tantundem lata; and ibi
Hata: valet X solidos. Wasta fuit and invenitur.

Deneport, Godvinus tenuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca:
ibi est cum uno Radman, and duobus bovariis, and tribus bordariis: and una Acra
Silvae: valebat tres solidos: Wasta invenitur.

Witune; Dot tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis:
Terra est duarum Carucarum: ibi unus Francigena habet unam Carucam, and duos
bovarios, and unum bordarium: ibi molinum de tribus solidis: valet septem
solidos: Wasta invenitur.

In Warmundestrou Hundred.
Blachenhale; Godvinus tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi IV hidae una virgata
minus geldabiles: Terra est V Carucarum: ibi quatuor Radmans and duo bordarii
habent duas Carucas: Silva ibi duabus leuvis longa, and una leuva lata: Ibi
Haia: and Aira Accipitris. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos: modo XII
solidos.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Gozelinus tenet de Hugone Comite Neutone; Criffin tenuit, and liber homo fuit:
ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo
bovarii: Presbyter cum uno bordario habet unam Carucam: ibi dimidia Acra Prati.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat quatuor solidos: modo X solidos.

Crostune; Godvin tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est una Caruca; quae ibi est cum uno Radman, and duobus servis, and duobus
villanis, and uno bordario: valuit quatuor solidos: modo X solidos.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Stablei; Ostebrand tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi duae bovatae terrae
geldabiles: Terra est dimidia Caruca: Wasta fuit and est.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Ranulfus tenet de Hugone Comite Blacheholl; Toret tenuit and liber homo fuit:
ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio sunt duae,
and quatuor bovarii, and quatuor villani, and quatuor bordarii habent unam
Carucam: ibi Piscaria. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XIV solidos; modo XL
solidos.

In Roelau Hundred.
Wenitone; Levenot tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est dimidia Caruca: ibi est unus Radman and unus villanus: valet duos
solidos.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Tatune; Lewinus tenuit: ibi sexta pars hidae geldabilis: Terra est dimidia
Caruca: Ipsa est ibi cum uno Radman, and duobus servis, and duobus villanis,
and quatuor bordariis: Silva ibi una leuva longa and tantundem lata. In Wiche
una Domus wasta: valet tres solidos.

Pevre; Erniet tenuit, and liber fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca: ibi quidam homo ejus habet duos boves, and duos servos, and duos
villanos: Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and XL perticatis lata; and Aira
Accipitris.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XV solidos: modo quatuor solidos: Wasta fuit.

Wareford, and Godid de eo: Ipsa tenuit and libera fuit: ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ibi duos boves, and quatuor servos, and duas
ancillas: valet tres solidos: Wasta fuit.

Pevre, de duabus bovatis terrae geldabilis: Terra est dimidia Caruca.

Cepmundwich est certus locus in Over-Pever. Owlarton, one half. Snelston.
Isdem Ranulfus tenet Cepmundewiche, de dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
dimidia Caruca: Godid tenuit, and libera foemina fuit: haec terra wasta fuit
and est.

Isdem Ranulfus tenet Alretune, de dimidia virgata terrae geldabilis: Godid
tenuit: Terra est duorum boum: Wasta fuit and est.

Isdem Ranulfus tenet Senelestune; Levenot tenuit: ibi una virgata terrae
geldabilis: Terra est dimidia Caruca: Wasta fuit and est.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Cocheshalle; Ulviet tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca: De Pastura exeunt tres solidi: Wasta est terra.

In Mildestvich Hundred.
Hoiloch; Morcar Comes tenuit: ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor
Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and quatuor servi, and duo Radmans cum una
Caruca: Silva ibi tribus leuvis longa, and una lata.

Tempore Regis Edwardi, and post, wasta fuit: modo valet XX solidos.

Tadetune; Godit tenuit: ibi una hida and una virgata geldabilis: Terra est
duarum Carucarum: ibi unus francigena habet unam Carucam, and duos bovarios,
and unum Radman cum dimidia Caruca, and tribus bordariis. Silva ibi XL
Perticatis longa, and una Acra lata: Ibi Haia.

Tempore Regis Edwardi, and post, wasta fuit: modo valet X solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Radulfus Venator tenet de Hugone Comite Stapleford; Ulsi tenuit, and liber
homo fuit: ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est
una, and unus Radman, and duo villani, and V bordarii cum tribus Carucis: Silva
ibi duabus Acris longa, and una lata: ibi molinum: valuit and valet XVI solidos.

In Exestan Hundred.
Rainaldus tenet Erpestoch; Rees tenuit sicut liber homo: ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Ipsa ibi est cum uno Radman, and uno villano,
and uno bordario. Tempore Regis Edwardi wasta fuit, and post: valuit X solidos,
modo novem solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Ilbertus tenet de Hugone Comite Wavretone; Eruin tenuit and liber homo fuit:
ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and
tres Frvncigenae cum tribus villanis habent tres Carucas.

Timpore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos, and post sex solidos: modo XVI
solidos.

Etone; Alnod and Ervin pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi homines
fuerunt; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium Carucarum; ibi est unus
villanus cum una Caruca. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos; modo novem
solidos and quatuor denarios. Wasta fuit.

In Riseton Hundred.
Clotone; Stenulf tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi tres hidae geldabiles: Terra
est sex Carucarum; ibi sunt sex villani, and duo bordarii, and quatuor Radmans
habentes V Carucas: valuit and valet XII solidos.

In Dudestan Hundred.
Osbernus Filius Tezzonis tenet de Hugone Comite Hanlei; Grinchel tenuit, and
liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In
Dominio est una Caruca and dimidia, cum uno servo, and duobus villanis, and uno
bordario; habent dimidiam Carucam. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XIII solidos
and tres denarios; modo XV solidos.

Colborne; Edvinus tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra
est trium Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and unus villanus, and unus bordarius;
ibi dimidia Acra Prati: valuit and valet XVI solidos.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Pontone, and Rogerus de eo: Gamel tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: In Dominio est una; and duo servi, and
unus Radman, and unus villanus, and Presbyter, and quatuor bordarii cum una
Caruca inter omnes.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXV solidos, and post wasta fuit: modo valet XXV
solidos.

In Roelau Hundred.
Wenitone; Hunding tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Terra est dimidia Caruca; ibi est unus Radman cum uno villano: valet duos
solidos.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Lime; Edwardus tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
quatuor Carucarum: Eduuardus tenet de eo: ibi habet unam Carucam, and duos
bovarios, and duos villanos, and quatuor bordarios; and dimidia Ecclesia cum
Presbytero cum dimidia virgata terrae quieta: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and
tantundem lata. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos; modo octo solidos.
Wasta invenitur.

Wareburgetone; Ravene tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi unus Radman and duo villani, and unus
bordarius cum dimidia Caruca: valuit V solidos; modo duos solidos: Wasta fuit.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Duntune; Edwardus tenuit, liber homo fuit; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis:
Eduuardus tenet de Osberno: ibi est unus Radman, and unus villanus, and tres
bordarii, cum una Caruca and dimidia. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XII
denarios: modo duos solidos.

Epletune; Dot tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est
quatuor Carucarum: Wasta fuit, and est: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XVI
solidos: Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and XL perticatis lata.

Gropenhale, and Eduuardus de eo: Ipse and Dot pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt;
and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida and dimidia virgatae terrae
geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una and dimidia; and duo
servi, and unus villanus, and tres bordarii: Silva ibi una leuva longa, and XL
perticatis lata; ibi duae haiae. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V solidos; modo
sex solidos: Wasta fuit.

In Riseton Hundred.
Nigellus tenet de Hugone Comite Oltetone; Dunning tenuit and liber homo fuit;
ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; reddit de firma V solidos
and quatuor denarios. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos: Wasta invenitur.

In Wilaveston Hundred.
Gravesberie, Dunning tenuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium
Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo servi, and tres villani, and duo
Francigenae, and unus bordarius, cum una Caruca inter omnes.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXV solidos, and post X solidos: modo XX solidos.

Stortone, Dunning tenuit; ibi duae hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium
Carucarum: In Dominio est dimidia Caruca, and unus servus, and V villani, and
tres bordarii cum una Caruca and dimidia: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XV
solidos; modo XX solidos: Wasta fuit.

Jezelinus tenet de Hugone Comite Sumreford, Ravesne, and Chetel, and Morfar,
pro tribus Maneriis tenuerunt: Duo liberi homines fuerunt: Morfar non poterat
recedere a Domino suo: ibi una virgata terrae geldabilis: In tres parts erat
divisa: Terra est trium Carucarum: Ibi est unus Radman habens unam Carucam, and
duos servos: Silva ibi XL Perticatarum longitudine, and tantundem latitudine:
valebat sex solidos: modo quatuor solidos.

In Tunendune Hundred.
Odardus tenet de Comite Duntune; Ravene tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi una
virgata terrae and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi est unus
Radman cum uno servo: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia lata; ibi Aira
Accipitris: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat V solidos: modo XII denarios.

Mundret tenet de Comite Bertintune; Dunning tenuit; ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: ipsa ibi est cum uno Radman and uno servo,
and uno bordario. Tempore Regis valebat tres solidos: modo LXIV denarios.

Ulviet tenuit de Comite Bertintune; Levenot tenuit: ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Wasta est: valuit duos solidos.

Unus Serviens Comitis tenet unam terram in hoc hundredo Tunendune: haec terra
nunquam fuit hidata: ibi habet unam Carucam cum uno bovario: valet quatuor
solidos.

In Roelau Hundred.
Dunning tenet de Comite Chingeslie; ipsemet tenuit sicut liber homo; ibi una
hida geldabilis: Terra est duurum Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and V servi,
and unus villanus, and tres bordarii; ibi Piscaria and dimidia: ibi Silva unius
leuvae longitudine, and unius latitudine.

Hanc posuit Comes in sua Foresta; and ibi Aira Accipitris; and quatuor Haiae
Capreolorum. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos; modo sex solidos.

Leuric tenet de Comite Elveldelie; Ernui tenuit and liber homo fuit; ibi
dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est IV Carucarum: In Dominio est una, cum
villano, and duobus bordariis. Silva dimidiae leuvae longitudine, and dimidiae
latitudine.

In Hamestan Hundred.
Uluric tenet Botelege; Ipsemet tenuit sicut liber homo; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est V Carucarum: Wasta est praeter septem acras seminatas.
Silva ibi tribus leuvis longa, and una lata: and Haia ibi: and duae acrae prati
and dimidia. Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XXX solidos; modo duos solidos.

Gamel tenet de Comite Cedde; Pater ejus tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est sex Carucarum: In Dominio est una, and duo bovarii, and
IV villani, and tres bordarii cum duabus Carucis: Silva ibi una leuva longa,
and dimidia lata; and Haia, and Aira Accipitris, and una Acra Prati: valuit and
valet X solidos.

Totum Manerium habet duas leuvas longitudine, and unam latitudine.

Motre, Pater ejus tenuit; ibi una hida and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est
quatuor Carucarum: Wasta est: ibi Silva tribus leuvis longa, and duabus lata;
and duae Haiae; and Aira Accipitris.

Uluric tenet de Comite Alretune; Ipsemet tenuit ut liber homo; ibi duae parts
unius hidae geldabiles: Terra est trium Carucarum; ibi est una cum uno bovario,
and uno villano, and duobus bordariis; ibi una Acra Prati; and tres Acrae
Silvae: valuit V solidos: Wasta fuit tempore Regis Edwardi.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Moran tenet de Comite Lece; Colben tenuit ut liber homo; ibi dimidia hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi est in Dominio, and duo bovarii, and unus
bordarius: ibi dimidia Acra Prati: valet octo solidos: Wasta fuit tempore Regis
Edwardi.

In Bochelau Hundred.
Ranulfus and Bigot tenet de Comite Norwordine; Ulviet tenuit pro uno Manerio
and liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est duarum Carucarum: wasta
est: ibi Ecclesia, and duae Quarentenae Silvae: valet tres solidos. Tempore
Regis Edwardi valebat X solidos.

Gislebertus and Ranulfus and Hamo, tenent Sundreland and Bagelei; Eluuard, and
Suga, and Vedeman, and Pat tenuerunt pro quatuor Maneriis, and liberi homines
fuerunt: ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca and dimidia: Wasta est
tota: Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat tres solidos.

In Exestan Hundred.
Hugo, and Osbernus, and Rainaldus tenent Gretford; Thoret tenuit, ut liber
homo; ibi XIII hidae geldabiles: Terra est XII Carucarum: Hugo habet V hidas;
Osbernus sex hidas and dimidiam; and Rainaldus unam hidam and dimidiam: In
Dominio est una Caruca and dimidia: Ecclesia and Presbyter: ibi and septem
villani, and XII bordarii; and unus Francigena, Inter omnes habent duas Carucas
and dimidiam.

In toto Manerio Silva quatuor leuvis longa, and duabus lata; and duae Airae
Accipitris.

Osbernus habet molinum annonam suae Curiae molantem.

Totum tempore Regis Edwardi wastum erat, and wastum receperunt; modo valet LXV
solidos inter omnes.

De hac terra hujus Manerii jacuit una hida tempore Regis Edwardi in Ecclesia
Sancti Ceddae; dimidia in Chespine, and dimidia in Radenour; hoc testatur
Comitatus, sed nescit quomodo Ecclesia perdiderit.

In Mildestvic Hundred.
Hugo and Willielmus tenent de Comite Rode; Godric and Ravesna pro duobus
Maneriit tenuerunt; and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi est una hida geldabilis:
Terra est trium Carucarum: Wasta est praeter quod unus Radman habet sub
eis........Carucas and dimidiam: valet duos solidos.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat XX solidos: Silva ibi duabus leuvis longa, and
una lata; and duae Haiae; and Aiera Accipitris.

Tempore Regis Edwardi erat in Warmundestrou Hundred unum Which, in quo erat
Puteus ad salem faciendum; and ibi erant octo Salinae inter Regem and Comitem
Edwinum: ita quod de omnibus exitibus and redditionibus salinarum habebat Rex
duas parts, and Comes tertiam: Ipse vero Comes praeter has habebat unam
salinam propriam, quae adjacebat suo Manetio Acatone. De hac salina per totum
annum habebat Comes salem sufficientem suae Domui: si quid autem inde
venderetur, de theoloneo habebat Rex duos denarios, and Comes tertium.



Omnes istae salinae, and Comunes and Dominicae, cingebantur ex una part
quodam flumine, and quodam fossato ex alia part.

Qui infra hanc metam forisfecisset, poterat emendare pro duobus solidis, aut
per XXX bullitiones salis, excepto homicidio vel furto, de quo ad mortem
judicabatur latro: haec si ibi fiebant, emendabantur sicut per totam Sciram.

Si quis ex praescripto Circuitu Salinarum alicubi per totum Comitatum
detulisset theoloneum, probatus inde referebat, and per XL solidos ibidem
emendabat, si liber homo erat: Si non erat liber, per quatuor solidos.

Tempore Regis Edwardi reddebat XXI libras de firma istud. Which cum omnibus
Placitis ejusdem Hundredi.

Quando Hugo Comes recepit, erat wastum praeter unam tantum Salinam.

Modo tenet eundem Which Willielmus Malbedeng de Comite, cum omnibus
consuetudinibus ibidem pertinentibus, and totum ipsum Hundredum, quod
appreciatur XL solidos: de quibus denariis ponuntur super terram ipsius
Willielmi XXX solidi, Reliqui X solidi super terram Episcopi and super terras
Ricardi and Gisleberti, quas habent in eodem Hundredo; and Which est ad firmam
pro X libris.

In Mildestvich Hundred erat aliud Which inter Regem and Comitem: non erant
tamen ibi Dominicae Salinae: sed eaedem leges habebantur ibi and consuetudines,
quae in Superiori Which dictae sunt; and eodem modo participabant Rex and Comes.

Hoc Which erat ad firmam pro octo libris: and Hundret in quo jacebat pro XL
solidis: Rex duas parts, tertiam Comes.

Quando Hugo Comes recepit, wastum fuit: modo tenet ipse Comes; and est ad
firmam pro XXV solidis and duabus caretedis salis: Hundret vero valet XL
solidos.

De his duobus Wichis quicunque emptum salem Carro portabat, de Theoloneo
quatuor denarios dabat si ad Carrum quatuor boves aut plus habebat: si vero
boves duos, denarium theoloneo dabat si duae summae salis erant: homo de alio
hundredo de summa Caballi dabat duos denarios: Homo vero de eodem Handredo non
nisi obolum dabat pro summa salis.

Qui Carrum in tantum onerabat, ut Axis frangatur infra unam leuvam circa
utrumque Which, dabat duos solidos Ministro Regis vel Comitis, si infra leuvam
posset consequi.

Similiter qui Caballum ita onerabat, ut dorsum frangeret, dabat duos solidos
infra leuvam consecutus; extra leuvam, nihil.

Qui de una summa salis faciebat duas, XL solidis emendabat, si minister eum
posset consequi; si non esset inventus, nil per alium emendabat.

Homines Pedites de alio Hundredo salem ibi ementes de octo oneribus hominum
dabant duos denarios: Homines ejusdem hundredi pro octo oneribus unum denarium.

In eodem Mildestvic Hundred erat tertium Which, quod vocatur Nor-wich; and erat
ad firmam pro octo libris: Ipsae leges and consuetudines erant ibi, quae erant
in aliis Wichis; and Rex and Comes similiter Partiebant redditiones.

Omnes Teini, qui in isto Which habebant salinas, per totum annum non dabant in
die Veneris bulliones salis.

Quisquis ex alia Scira Carrum adducebat cum duobus bobus, aut cum pluribus,
dabat de Theoloneo quatuor denarios.

Ex eadem Scira homo dabat de Carro duos denarios infra tertiam noctem qua
reversus erat unde venerat: si tertia nox transibat, XL solidis emendabat.

De alia Scira homo de summa Caballi unum denarium dabat, de eadem vero Scira
unum minutum infra tertiam noctem ut dictum est.

Homo manens in ipso hundredo, si carro ducebat salem ad Vendendum per eundem
Comitatum, de unoquoque Carro dabat unum denarium, quotquot vicibus oneraret
eum.

Si equo portabat salem ad vendendum, ad Festum Sancti Martini dabat unum
denarium: Qui in ipso termino non reddebant, XL solidis emendabant.

Caetera omnia in his Wichis sunt similia: Istud quando Hugo Comes recepit erat
wastum: modo valet XXXV solidos.

In Atiscros Hundred.
Hugo Comes tenet in Dominio Haordine; Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi tres hidae
geldabiles: Terra est quatuor Carucarum and dimidia: In Dominio sunt duae
Carucae, and IV servi: ibi Ecclesia ad quam pertinet dimidia Caruca terrae: and
ibi quatuor villani, and sex bordarii cum duabus Carucis; ibi dimidia Acra
Prati. Silva duabus leuvis longa, and una lata: valet XL solidos: in Civitate
duae mansurae wastae ibi pertinentes.

Ipse Comes tenet Radintone; Edwinus Comes tenuit: ibi una hida geldabilis:
Terra est una Caruca. Wasta fuit and est.

Robertus de Roelent tenet de Comite Brochetune; Levenot tenuit, and liber homo
fuit; ibi una virgata and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est dimidia Caruca; quae
ibi est cum uno villano: Prati una virgata and dimidia: valet tres solidos; and
habet tertiam partem Silvae unius leuvae longitudine and latitudine.

Isdem Robertus tenet ibi unum manerium de dimidia hida geldabile: Ulmer liber
homo tenuit: Terra est dimidia Caruca; hanc habet ibi unus Radman cum uno
villano and uno bordario: valet tres solidos.

Isdem Robertus tenet Ulfemiltone, and Azelmus de eo: Levenot tenuit, liber
homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi sunt duo villani,
and unus bordarius cum sex bobus: Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem lata:
valet X solidos.

Isdem Robertus tenet Lathroc; Levenot and Ulbert pro duobus Maneriis
tenuerunt, and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi dimidia hida geldabilis: Terra est
una Caruca: Hanc habent ibi duo Radmans cum duobus bordariis: Silva una leuva
longa, and tantundem lata: valet X solidos.

Isdem Robertus tenet Bachelie, and Rogerus de eo: Erne tenuit; ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: hanc habent ibi duo villani, and quatuor
bordarii: valet octo solidos.

Isdem Robertus tenet Coleselt, and Edvinus de eo; qui and tenuit ut liber
homo; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: Ipsa est ibi cum uno
Radman, and quatuor villanis, and duobus bordariis: valet X solidos; valuit sex
solidos.

Willielmus Malbedeng and Ricardus de eo, tenet Claitone; Ranvechel tenuit and
liber homo fuit; ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; ibi est in
Dominio cum duobus bordariis; ibi una Acra Prati: Silva una leuva longa, and
tantundem lata: valet X solidos.

Isdem Willielmus tenet Wepre; Ernui tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi tertia
pars hidae geldabilis: Terra est tertiae partis Carucae: hanc habet ibi unus
Radman cum uno villano: valet X solidos.

Willielmus Filius Nigelli tenet Merlestone; Erne tenuit: Ansgerdus tenet de
Willielmo; and habet ibi dimidiam Carucam; ibi una virgata terrae geldabilis;
ibi unus servus est: Wasta fuit, modo valet quatuor solidos.

Hugo Filius Osberni tenet Brochetone; Rauesvardus tenuit, and liber homo fuit;
ibi una virgata terrae and dimidia geldabilis: Terra est dimidia Caruca: hanc
habet ibi unus Radman cum uno villano, and duobus bordariis: Silva ibi una
leuva longa, and una lata: valet V solidos.

Isdem Hugo tenet Claventone; Osmer tenuit, and liber homo fuit; ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: una est in Dominio, and duo bovarii,
and quatuor villani habent aliam cum tribus bordariis: Ad hoc Manerium
pertinent in Civitate octo Burgenses, and quatuor ultra aquam; and reddunt
novem solidos and quatuor denarios.

In Nor-wich una Salina de XII denariis; ibi tres Acrae Prati: valuit and valet
X solidos. Wasta invenitur.

Isdem Hugo tenet Edritone, and Ricardus de eo: Elmer and Rauechet pro duobus
Maneriis tenuerunt, and liberi homines fuerunt; ibi una hida and dimidia
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: haec ibi est cum duobus Radmans, and tribus
bordariis; ibi una acra Prati: valet X solidos. Hujus terrae unam hidam tenet
Osbernus filius Tezonis, and Hugo filius Normanni dimidiam hidam.

Osbernus filius Tezonis tenet Dodestune; Edvinus Comes tenuit: ibi duae hidae
geldabiles: Terra est duarum Carucarum: In Dominio est una and dimidia, cum
tribus bovariis; and quatuor villani cum tribus bordariis habent dimidiam
Carucam. Huic Manerio pertinent XV Burgenses in Civitate, and reddunt octo
solidos: Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem lata: valet XL solidos.

Hamo tenet Estone: Edvinus and Toret pro duobus Maneriis tenuerunt and liberi
fuerunt ibi una hida geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca; haec ibi est cum duobus
Radmans, and duobus villanis, and tribus bordariis: Silva ibi una leuva longa,
and tantundem lata: valet X solidos.

De hac terra tenet Ranulfus unam virgatam.

Isdem Hamo tenet Castretone, and Osmundus de eo: Edwinus tenuit sicut liber
homo: ibi dimidia hida geldabilis Terra est una Caruca. Dimidiam habent ibi duo
villani cum uno bordario: Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem lata: valet V
solidos.

Radulfus Venator tenet de Comite Brochetune; Ulfac tenuit, and liber homo
fuit: ibi una virgata terrae geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: haec ibi est in
Dominio cum duobus servis: ibi una virgata Prati: valet V solidos.

Radulfus tenet Sutone; Sherne tenuit, and liber homo fuit: ibi una hida
geldabilis: Terra est una Caruca: haec ibi est cum uno Radman, and quatuor
bordariis: valet V solidos: Silva ibi dimidia leuva longa, and quatuor Acris
lata.

Harum XX hidarum omnes Silvas habet Comes in Foresta sua positas: unde maneria
sunt multo pejorata.

Haec foresta habet X leuvas longitudine, and tres leuvas latitudine: ibi sunt
IV Airae Accipitrum.

In Atiscros Hundred.
Hugo Comes tenet de Rege Roelent; ibi tempore Regis Edwardi jacebat Englefeld:
and totum erat wastum. Edwinus Comes tenebat: Quando Hugo Comes recepit,
similiter erat wastum: modo habet in Dominio medietatem Castelli quod Roelent
vocatur, and Caput est hujus terrae, ibi habet octo Burgenses, and medietatem
Ecclesiae and monetae. and medietatem mineriae ferri, ubicunque in hoc manerio
inventa fuerit; and medietatem aquae de Cloit de molinis and Piscariis quae ibi
fient; in ea scilicet part fluminis quae pertinet ad feudum Comitis: and
medietatem forestarum quae non pertinebant ad aliquam villam istius manerii:
and medietatem theolonei, and medietatem villa quae vocatur Bren.

Ibi est terra trium Carucarum; and ibi sunt in Dominio cum septem servis: Ad
Bren pertinent hae virgatae terrae, Cauber, Kevend, Brennehedui, Leuvar, Ludie,
and dimidia Peintret: valet tres libras.

Ad hoc manerium Roelent jacent hae Berewichae, Dissaren, Bodugan, Cilven, and
Mainevall: In his est terra unius Carucae tantum; and Silva una leuva longa,
and dimidia lata: ibi unus francigena, and duo villani habent unam Carucam.

Item Widhulde, Blorat, Dinmersch, and Brenuuen: Terra est una Caruca, quam
habent ibi duo villani, and unus serviens Comitis: Silva una leuva longa, and
dimidia lata.

In Trevelesneu and Schiuiau est terra unius Carucae, quam habent ibi tres
villani: Silva XL Perticatis longa, and tantundem lata.

In Lesthunied and Motlitone, and Lessecoit, est terra unius Carucae: quam
habent ibi tres villani; and una Acra Silvae.

In Brunford, and Helchene, and Ulchenol, est terra unius Carucae: quam habent
ibi V villani: Silva una leuva longa, and duabus Acris lata.

In Folebroc est terra unius Carucae, quam habent ibi tres villani and duo
bordarii: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and XL perticatis lata.

In Meretone, and Caldecote, and tertia part de Widford, est terra unius
Carucae; quam habent ibi Presbyter cum sex villanis, and Ecclesia. Silva
dimidia leuva longa, and XX Perticatis lata. Odin tenet de Comite.

In Asketone, and Cheslilaued, est terra unius Carucae: Marendus tenet de
Comite; and ibi sunt tres villani, and unus bordarius cum X bobus arantes.

Omnes hae Berewichae wastae fuerunt tempore Regis Edwardi; and quando Hugo
Comes recepit: modo inter omnes valet CX solidos.

Rotbertus de Roelent tenet de Hugone Comite medietatem ejusdem Castelli and
Burgi, in quo habet ipse Robertus X Burgenses, and medietatem Ecclesiae, and
monetae, and minariae ferri ibidem inventae: and medietatem aquae de Cloith,
and de Piscariis and molinis ibidem factis and faciendis; and medietatem
theolonei, and forestarum quae non pertinent ad aliquam villani supradicti
Manerii, and medietatem villae quae vocatur Bren cum his Berewichis --
Lauarludon, Penegors, Renuordin, Tredueng, and Parvum Cauber. In his est terra
ad tres Carucas tantum; and ibi sunt in Dominio cum sex servis; and molinum ibi
reddit tres modios annonae: valet tres libras.

In Bissard and Boteuuarul and Rudgor terra est unius Carucae; ibi est in
Dominio, and duo servi, and Ecclesia cum Presbytero, and duo villani, and
molinum de tribus solidis, and duo bordarii: Silva una leuva longa, and dimidia
lata; and ibi Aira Accipitris: valet XXX solidos.

In Raduch and Pengdestion est terra unius Carucae; ibi est in Dominio cum
tribus villanis: valet X solidos.

In Riuelenot est terra unius Carucae; and ibi est in Dominio cum duobus
servis, and quinque bordariis: valet XX solidos.

In Caioros and Lanuvile and Chartan est Terra unius Carucae: and ibi est ipsa
cum uno servo, and sex bordariis: Silva XL Perticatis longa, and XL lata: valet
XV solidos.

In Meincatis and Treueri and Coiwen est terra unius Carucae: and ibi est in
Dominio cum duobus servis, and quatuor bordariis, and duobus villanis: valet
XXV solidos.

In Inglecroft and Brunfor and Alchene est terra unius Carucae: ibi est in
Dominio cum Ecclesia and Presbytero, and tribus bordariis: ibi molinum de V
solidis: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and XL Perticatis lata: valet X solidos.

In Widford and Putecaine est terra unius Carucae; ibi est cum duobus villanis:
and XII inter servos and ancillas: Ibi Piscaria; and Silva dimidia leuva longa,
and XL Perticatis lata: valet XX solidos.

In Mostone est terra unius Carucae; ibi est cum quatuor villanis, and octo
bordariis: Silva una leuva longa, and XL Perticatis lata: valet XX solidos.

In Pichetone and Melchanestone est terra unius Carucae; and ibi est cum duobus
villanis and duobus bordariis: Silva dimidia leuva longa, and XL Perticatis
lata: valet XV solidos.

In Danfrond, Calston, and Wesbie est terra unius Carucae: ibi sunt duo
Radmans; and Tual quidam francigena cum septem bordariis: and una Ecclesia:
valet XV solidos.

In Cancarnacan and Whenescol est terra unius Carucae: ibi est in Dominio cum
duobus francigenis and duobus villanis, and una Ecclesia wasta: valet XV
solidos.

In Gronant and Ulvesgrane Terra est unius Carucae: haec ibi est cum duobus
villanis, and V bordariis: valet XVI solidos.

In Wenfesne est terra unius Carucae; and ibi est in Dominio cum duobus servis:
valet XL solidos.

In Prestetone and Ruestoch est terra unius Carucae: and ibi est in Dominio cum
duobus bovariis, and duobus villanis, and quatuor bordariis; ibi est Ecclesia:
valet XX solidos.

In Dicolin and Rahop and Witestan est terra unius Carucae; and ipsa ibi est
cum duobus villanis and duobus bordariis. Silva ibi una leuva longa, and
dimidia lata: valet XII solidos.

Omnes hae Berewichae supradictae de Englefeld jacebant tempore Regis Edwardi
in Roelent: and tunc erant wastae: and quando recepit Hugo Comes, erant wastae.

Terra hujus Manerii Roelend, and Englefeld, vel aliarum Berewicharum
supradictarum ibi pertinentium, nunquam geldavit neque hidata fuit.

In ipso manerio Roelend est factum noviter Castellum, similiter Roelent
appellatum: ibi est novum burgum; and in eo XVIII burgenses inter Comitem and
Robertum, ut supradictum est: Ipsis burgensibus annuerunt Leges and
Consuetudines, quae sunt in Hereford and in Bretvill: scilicet, quod per totum
Annum de aliqua forisfactura non dabant nisi XII denarios, praeter homicidium,
and furtum, and Heinfare, praecognita.

Ipso anno hujus descriptionis datum est ad firmam hujus Bugi theoloneum pro
tribus solidis.

Redditio Hugonis Comitis ex Roelent and Englefeld est appretiata sex libris,
and X solidis. Rodberti pars XVII libris, and tribus solidis.

In Atiscros Hundred.
Biscopestreu fuit Manerium Edwini Comitis tempore Regis Edwardi: nunquam
geldavit nec hidata fuit: Tunc erat wastum; and quando Hugo Comes recepit,
similiter wastum: modo tenet Hugo filius Normanni de Comite medietatem hujus
Manerii, and totam Leg, and Sudfell: Terra est unius Carucae; quae ibi est in
Dominio cum duobus bordariis; and una Acra Prati ibi: valet X solidos.

Aliam medietatem hujus Manerii, and medietatem de Mulintone, and totam Wiselei
tenet Comite Odinus. Terra est unius Carucae; quae ibi est cum duobus servis,
and uno bordario: valet X solidos.

Berewichae ejusdem Manerii -- Hendrebifau, and Weltune, and Munentone, and
Horse duae Pol, and Mulintone dimidiam tenet Hugo filius Normanni de Comite:
Terra est duarum Carucarum; ipsae duae Carucae ibi sunt cum tribus villanis and
duobus bordariis: valet XVIII solidos.

Bruncot tenet Warmund Venator de Comite: Terra est una Caruca; ibi est unus
villanus cum dimidia Caruca and duobus bobus: valet X solidos.

Risteselle tenet Radulfus de Comite. Terra est una Caruca: ipsa ibi est cum IV
bordariis: valet octo solidos.

Quisnam tenet Willielmus de Comite: Terra est una Caruca: ipsa est ibi cum
Presbytero, and duobus Villanis: Silva ibi una leuva longa, and dimidia lata:
valet X solidos.

Omnis haec terra pertinet ad Biscopestreu, and wasta fuit.

In hoc eodem Manerio est Silva una: nunquam geldavit nec hidata fuit:
longitudine unius leuvae, and latitudine dimidiae leuvae; ibi est Aira
Accipitris: hanc Silvam habet Comes in Foresta sua positam.

In eodem Atiscros Hundred habuit Rex Griffin unum Manerium Biscopestreu; and
in Dominio unam Carucam habebat, and homines ejus sex Carucas. Quando ipse Rex
ibi veniebat, reddebat ei unaquaeque Caruca CC hesthas, and unam Cunam plenam
Cervisia, and unam butiri ruscam.

Rotbertus de Roelent tenet de Rege Nortwales ad firmam pro XL libris praeter
illam terram quam Rex ei dederat in feudo, and praeter terras Episcopatus.

Isdem Robertus calumniatur unum Hundredum Arvester; quod tenet Rogerus Comes:
Walenses testificantur istum Hundredum esse de his Nortwalis.

In feudo (quod ipse Robertus tenet de Rege) Ros and Reweniov sunt XII leuvae
terrae longitudine, and quatuor leuvae latitudine: Terra est XX Carucarum
tantum; appretiata est XII libris.

Omnis alia terra est in Silvis, and Moris, nec post arari.

Inter Ripe and Mersham.
The Land between the Rivers of Ribble and Mersey; now part of Lancashire.
Terram infra-scriptam tenuit Rogerius Pictavensis, Inter Ripe and Mersham.

In Derbei Hundret.
Ibi habuit Rex Edwardus unum Manerium Derbei nominatum cum sex Berewichis; ibi
quatuor hidae: Terra est XV Carucarum: Foresta duabus leuvis longa, and una
lata; and Aira Accipitris. Uctredus tenebat sex Maneria, Rabil, Chenulueslei,
Cherchebi, Crosbei, Magele, Achetun; ibi duae hidae. Silva duabus leuvis longa
and lata; and duae Airae Accipitrum.

Dot tenebat Hitune and Torboc: ibi una hida quieta ab omni consuetudine
praeter geldam: Terra est quatuor Carucarum: valebat XX solidos.

Bernulf tenebat Stochestede; ibi una virgata terrae, and dimidia Carucata
terrae, Reddebat quatuor solidos.

Stainulf tenebat Stochestede: ibi una virgata terrae, and dimidium Carucae
terrae: valebat quatuor solidos.

Quinque Taini tenebant Sextone; ibi una hida: valebat XVI solidos.

Uctredus tenebat Chirchdele; ibi dimidia hida quieta ab omni consuetudine
praeter Geldam: valebat X solidos.

Wineston tenebat Waletone; ibi duae Carucatae terrae, and tres bovatae,
valebant octo solidos.

Elmae tenebant Liderlant; ibi dimidia hida; valebat octo solidos.

Tres Taini tenebant Huine pro tribus Maneriis: ibi dimidia hida valebat octo
solidos.

Ascha tenebat Torentune: ibi dimidia hida valebat octo solidos.

Tres Taini tenebant Mele pro tribus Maneriis: ibi dimidia hida valebat octo
solidos.

Uctred tenebat Uluentune: ibi duae Carucatae terrae, and dimidia leuva Silvae:
valebat LXII denarios.

Edelmundus tenebat Esmedune: ibi una Carucata terrae valebat XXXII denarios.

Tres Taini tenebant Alretune pro tribus Maneriis: ibi dimidia hida valebat
octo solidos.

Uctred tenebat Spec: ibi duae Carucatae terrae: valebat LXIV denarios.

Quatuor Radmans tunebant Cildewelle pro quatuor Maneriis: ibi dimidia hida:
valebat octo solidos: ibi Presbyter erat habens dimidiam Carucatam terrae in
Elemosynam.

Ulbert tenebat Wibaldeslei: ibi duae Carucatae terrae: valebat LXIV denarios.

Duo Taini tenebant Unetone pro duobus Maneriis: ibi una Carucata terrae
valebat XXX denarios.

Leuingus tenebat Wauretreu; ibi duae Carucatae terrae valebant LXIV denarios.

Quatuor Taini tenebant Boltelai pro quatuor Maneriis: ibi duae Carucatae
terrae valebant LXIV denarios: Presbyter habebat unam Carucatam terrae ad
Ecclesiam Waletone.

Uctred tenebat Achetun: ibi una Carucata terrae valebat XXXII denarios.

Tres Taini tenebant Fornebei pro tribus Maneriis: ibi quatuor Carucatae terrae
valebant X solidos.

Tres Taini tenebant Einuluesdel, ibi duae Carucatae terrae valebant LXIV
denarios.

Stenulf tenebat Hoiland, ibi duae Carucatae terrae valebant LXIV denarios.

Uctred tenebat Daltone, ibi una Carucata Terrae valebat XXXII denarios.

Isdem Uctred [tenebat] Schelmeresdele, ibi una Carucata terrae valebat XXXII
denarios.

Isdem Uctred tenebat Literland, ibi una Carucata terrae valebat XXXII denarios.

Wibertus tenebat Erengermeles, ibi duae Carucatae valebant octo solidos: Haec
terra quieta fuit praeter geldam.

Quinque Taini tenebant Otegrimele, ibi dimidia hida valebat X solidos.

Uctredus tenebat Latune cum una Berewicha: ibi dimidia hida: Silva una leuva
longa, and dimidia lata: valebat X solidos and octo denarios.

Uctred tenebat Hirletun, and dimidium Merretun; ibi dimidia hida valebat X
solidos and octo denarios.

Godene tenebat Melinge, ibi duae Carucatae terrae: Silva una leuva longa, and
dimidia leuva lata: valebat X solidos.

Uctred tenebat Leiate: ibi sex bovatae terrae: Silva una leuva longa, and
duabus Quarentenis lata: valebat LXIV denarios.

Duo Taini tenebant sex bovatas terrae pro duobus Maneriis in Hoiland: valebat
duos solidos.

Uctred tenebat Acrer: ibi dimidia Carucata terrae: Wasta fuit.

Teos tenebat Bartune: ibi una Carucata terrae: valebat XXXII denarios.

Chetel tenebat Haleshale: ibi duae Carucatae terrae: valebat octo solidos.

Omnis haec terra geldabilis: and XV Maneria nil reddebant nisi geldam Regi
Edwardo.

Hoc Manerium Derbei cum his supradictis hidis reddebant Regi Edwardo de Firma
XXVI libras, and duos solidos: Ex his tres hidae erant liberae, Quarum Censum
pardonavit Teinis, qui eas tenebant.

Ista reddebant quuatuor libras, and quatuordecem solidos, and octo denarios.

Omnes isti Taini habuerunt consuetudinem reddere duas oras Denariorum de
unaquaque Carucata terrae: and faciebant per consuetudinem domos Regis, and
quae ibi pertinebant, sicut villani: and Piscarias, and in Silva Haias and
Stabilituras: and qui ad haec non ibat quando debebat, duobus solidis
emendabat; and postea ad opus veniebat, and operabatur donec perfectum erat:
unusquisque eorum uno die in Augusto mittebat Messores suos secare segetes
Regis: si non, per duos solidos emendabatur.

Si quis liber homo faceret furtum, aut Forestell, aut Heinfaram, aut Pacem
Regis infringebat, quadraginta solidis emendabat.

Si quis faciebat sanguinem aut raptum de foemina, vel qui remanebat de
Sire-mote sine rationabili excusatione, per december solidos emendabat.

Si de Hundredo remanebat, aut non ibat ad Placitum ubi Praepositus jubebat,
per quinque solidos emendabat.

Si cui jubebat in suum servitium ire, and non ibat, quatuor solidis emendabat.

Si quis de terra Regis recedere volebat, dabat quadraginta solidos, and ibat
quo volebat.

Si quis terram Patris sui mortui habere volebat, quadraginta solidis relevabat.

Qui nolebat, and terram and omnem pecuniam Patris mortui Rex habebat.

Uctredus tenuit Croseby and Chirchedele pro una hida: and erat quieta ab omni
Consuetudine, praeter has sex, Pace infracta, Forestel, Heinfara, and pugna
quae post Sacramentum factum remanebat, and si constrictus justitia Praepositi
alicui debitum solvebat, and si terminum a Praeposito Datum non attendebat.

Haec pro quadraginta solidis emendabantur. Geldum vero Regis, sicut homines
Patriae, solvebant.

In Ot^ingemele and Herleshala and Hiretun erant tres hidae quieta a geldo
Carucatarum terrae, and a forisfactura sanguinis, and foeminae violentia: alias
vero consuetudines reddebant omnes.

De isto Manerio Derbei tenent modo Dono Rogeri Pictavensis: Hi homines terram:
Goisfridus duas hidas, and dimidiam Carucam: Rogerus unam hidam and dimidiam:
Willielmus unam hidam and dimidiam: Warinus dimidiam hidam: Goisfridus unam
hidam: Tetbaldus hidam and dimidium: Robertus duas Carucatas terrae:
Gislebertus unam Carucatam terrae.

Hi habent in Dominio quatuor Carucatas, and quadraginta sex villanos, and unum
Radman, and sexaginta duos bordarios, and duos servos, and tres Ancillas: Inter
omnes habent viginti quatuor Carucatas.

Silva eorum tribus leuvis and dimidia longa, and una leuva and dimidia and
quadraginta Perticatis lata: and ibi tres Airae Accipitrum.

Totum valet octo libras, and duodecem solidos: In unaquaque hida sunt sex
Carucatae terrae.

Dominium vero hujus Manerii, quod tenebat Rogerius, valebat octo libras: Sunt
ibi modo in Dominio tres Carucatae, and sex bovarii, and unus Radman, and
septem villani.

In Neweton Hundret.
In Neweton tempore Regis Edwardi fuerunt quinque hidae. Ex his una erat in
Dominio. Ecclesia ipsius Manerii habebat unam Carucatam terrae, and Sanctus
Oswoldus de ipsa villa duas Carucatas terrae habebat quietas per omnia.

Hujus Manerii aliam terram XV homines, qui Drenchs vocabantur, pro XV Maneriis
tenebant.

Sed hujus Manerii Berewichae erant: and inter omnes triginta solidos
reddebant. Silva ibi december leuvis longa, and sex leuvis and quarentena lata:
and ibi Air Accipitrum.

Hujus Hundredi homines liberi, praeter duos, erant in eadem consuetudine qua
homines Derberiae: and plus illis duobus diebus in Augusto metebant in Culturis
Regis: Illi duo habebant quinque Carucatas terrae, and forisfacturam sanguinis,
and foeminae violentiam passae, and Pasuagium suorum hominum: Alias habebat Rex.

Totum hoc Maneriumrddebat de firma Regi december libras, and december solidos: modo
sunt ibi sex Drenghs, and duodecem villani, and quatuor bordarii: Inter omnes
novem Carucatas habent: valet quatuor libras hoc Dominium.

In Walintune Hundret.
Rex Edwardus tenuit Walintune cum tribus Berewichis; ibi una hida: ad ipsum
Maneaium pertinebant triginta quatuor Drengh; and totidem Maneria habebant, In
quibus erant quadraginta duae Carucatae terrae, and una hida and dimidia.

Sanctus Elfin tenebat unam Carucatam terrae quietam ab omni consuetudine
prater Geldum.

Totum Manerium cum Hundredo reddebat Regi de firma XV libras duobus solidis
minus: modo sunt in Dominio duae Carucatae, and octo homines cum una Carucata.

Homines isti tenent ibi terram. Rogerus unam Carucatam terrae. Tetbaldus unam
Carucatam and dimidiam. Warinus unam Carucatam. Radulfus quinque Carucatas.
Willielmus duas hidas and quatuor Carucatas terrae. Adelardus unam hidam and
dimidium Carucatae. Osmundus unam Carucatam terrae.

Valebat hoc totum quatuor libras, and december solidos. Dominium valet tres
libras and december solidos.

In Blacheburne Hundret.
Rex Edwardus tenuit Blacheburne; ibi duae hidae and duae Carucata terrae:
Ecclesia habebat duas bovatas de hac terra; and Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae habebat
in Wallei duas Carucatas terrae quietas ab omni consuetudine.

In eodem Manerio Silva una leuva longa, and tantundem lata; and ibi erat Aira
Accipitris: ad hoc Manerium vel Hundredum adjacebant viginti octo liberi
homines, tenentes quinque hidas and dimidiam, and quadraginta Carucatas terrae,
pro viginti octo maneriis. Silva ibi sex leuvis longa, and quatuor leuvis lata:
and erant in supradictis consuetudinibus.

In eodem Hundredo habebat Rex Edwardus Hunnicot de duabus Carucatis terrae:
Waletune de duabus Carucatis terrae; and Peniltune de dimidia hida. Totum
Manerium cum Hundredo reddebat Regi de firma triginta duas libras, and duos
solidos.

Hanc terram totam dedit Rogerius Pictavensis, Rogerio de Busli, and Alberto
Greslet: and ibi sunt tot homines, qui habent undecem Carucatas and dimidiam;
quos ipsi concesserunt esse quietos usque ad tres annos; and ideo non
appretiatur modo.

In Salford Hundret.
Rex Edwardus tenuit Salford, ibi tres hidae and duodecem Carucatae terra
wastae: Foresta tribus leuvis longa, and tantundem lata; and ibi plures Haiae,
and Aira Accipitris.

Radecliue tenebat Rex Edwardus pro Manerio; ibi una hida: and alia hida
pertinens ad Salford.

Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae, and Ecclesia Sancti Michaelis tenebant in Mainecestre
unam Carucatam terrae quietam ab omni consuetudine praeter Geldum.

Ad hoc Manerium vel Hundredum pertinebant XXI Berewichae, quas tenebant
totidem Taini pro totidem Maneriis: In quibus erant undecem hidae and dimidium,
and december Carucatae terrae and dimidium. Silva ibi novem leuvis and dimidio
longa, and quinque leuvis and una quarentena lata.

Gamel tenens duas hidas in Recedham habebat suas consuetudines quietas praeter
sex has, furtum, Heinfare, Forestell, pacem Regis infractam, terminum fractum a
Praeposito stabilitum, pugnam post Sacramentum factum remanentem: haec
emendabat quadraginta solidis.

Aliquae harum terrarum erant quietae ab omni consuetudine praeter Geldum:
aliquae a Geldo sunt quieta.

Totum Manerium Salford cum Hundredo reddebat triginta septem libras, and
quatuor solidos: modo sunt in Manerio in Dominio duae Carucatae, and octo
servi, and duo villani cum una Caruca: valet centum solidos hoc Dominium.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenentes Milites dono Rogerii Pictavensis: Nigellus
tres hidas and dimidiam Carucatam terrae. Warinus duas Carucatas terrae: and
alter Warinus unam Carucatam and dimidium. Goisfridus unam Carucatam terrae:
Gamel duas Carucatas terrae: In his sunt tres Taini, and triginta villani, and
novem bordarii, and Presbyter, and december servi: Inter omnes habent viginti duas
Carucatas: valet septem libras.

In Lailand Hundret.
Rex Edwardus tenuit Lailand: ibi una hida and duae Carucatae terrae: Silva
duabus leuvis longa, and una lata; and Aira Accipitris. Ad hoc Manerium
pertinebant duodecem Carucatae terrae, quas tenebant duodecem homines liberi
pro totidem Maneriis: In his sex hidae and octo Carucatae terrae: Silva ibi sex
leuvis longa, and tribus leuvis and una quarentena lata.

Homines hujus Manerii and de Salford, non operabantur per consuetudinem ad
Aulam Regis, neque metebant in Augusto: tantummodo unam haiam in Silva
faciebant, and habebant sanguinis forisfacturam, and foeminae passae violentiam.

De aliis consuetudinibus aliorum superiorum Maneriorum erant consortes. Totum
Manerium Lailand cum Hundredo reddebat de firma Regi novendecem libras, and
octodecem solidos, and duos denarios.

De hac terra hujus Manerii tenet Girardus hidam and dimidiam: Robertus tres
Carucatas terrae: Radulfus duas Carucatas terrae: Rogerus duas Carucatas
terrae: Walterus unam Carucatam terrae: ibi sunt quatuor Radmans, Presbyter,
and quatuordecem villani, and sex bordarii, and duo bovarii.

Inter omnes habent octo Carucatas: Silva tribus leuvis longa, and duabus
leuvis lata; and ibi quatuor Airae Accipitrum: valet totum L solidos; ex part
est wasta.

Rex Edwardus tenuit Peneverdant: ibi duae Carucatae terrae; and reddebant X
denarios.

Modo est ibi Castellum: and duae Carucatae sunt in Dominio, and sex Burgenses,
and tres Radmans, and octo villani, and quatuor bovarii: Inter omnes habent
quatuor Carucatas: ibi dimidia Piscaria, Silva, and Airae Accipitrum, sicut
tempore Regis Edwardi: valet tres libras.

In his sex Hundredis Derbie, Neutone, Walintune, Blacheburne, Salford, and
Lailand sunt Centum, quater viginti, and octo maneria: In quibus sunt quater
viginti hidae geldabiles, una minus.

Tempore Regis Edwardi valebat CXLV libras, and duos solidos, and duos denarios.

Quando Rogerius Pictavensis de Rege recepit, valebat CXX libras: modo tenet
Rex; and habet in Dominio duodecem Carucatas; and novem milites feudum
tenentes: Inter eos and eorum homines sunt CXV Carucatae, and tres bovatae.

Dominium, quod tenuit Rogerius, appretiatur XXIII libris, and X solidis.

Quod dedit militibus, XX libris, and undecem solidis, appretiatur.

Finis Doomsday-Book, sub Titulo Cestre-Scire.
The Proportion of the Old Hundreds in CHESHIRE to the New Hundreds.
New Hundreds. Comprehends Old Hundreds. 1. Wirrall Wilavestan 1. 2. Broxton
Dudestan 2. and Cestre 3. 3. Edesbery Riseton 4. and Roelau 5. 4. Northwich
Mildestvic 6. 5. Nantwich Warmundestrou 7. 6. Maxfield Hamstan 8. 7. Bucklow
Bochelau 9. and Tunendune 10. Atiscros 11. Exestan 12. The Division of the
County into these New Hundreds, I conceive exceeds not much the Reign of Edward
the Third. The Towns in these two last Old Hundreds were long since taken from
Cheshire, and are now Part of Flintshire. Vide le Statute 33 Hen. 8. cap. 13.
Many more Towns are now in Cheshire, than were in Doomsday-Book; as made
Habitable since. Only Dodleston remains yet to Cheshire.

READER,
BY reason of the Author's absence, several Faults have escaped the Press:
These (which are the most material) thou art desired to amend, and to pardon
them all.

PAge 11. line 36. read coesis victisque p. 72. l. 29. r. Topographia
Hiberniae. p. 76. l. 25. dele Lacy. p. 90. l. 10. r. being thereby disabled to
defend themselves. p. 91. l. 41. r. 11 Edw. 1. p. 108. l. 16. r. supra page
104. p. 133. l. 17. r. Earldom of Lincoln. p. 134. l. 6. r. Gilberti filii
Rogeri. p. 153. l. 24. r. 1640. p. 159. l. 8, 9. r. Ber and Bar. p. 161. l. 33.
r. a distinct Stock. p. 167. l. 15. r. 1595. p. 169. l. 12. r. Parson of
Davenham in Cheshire, and dele Mobberley. p. 191. l. 23. to Lachford insert 0
l. 10 s. 0 d. ibid. l. 24. r. 00 l. 15 s. 0 d. p. 193. l. 2. r. consecrated
1635. p. 194. l. 27. r. Parochial-Chappels. p. 197. l. 18. r. Burges of
Chester. p. 207. l. 1. r. 17 Novembris. p. 214. l. 33. r. 1635. p. 219. l. 11.
r. Robert Vawdrey. p. 219. l. 22. r. March 27. 1621. p. 227. l. 36. r. Picmere
0 l. 12 s. 2 d. ibid. l. 37. r. Wincham 0 l. 12 s. 2 d. p. 245. l. 16. r. 1461.
p. 311. l. 8. r. Galfridus de Warburton. p. 317. l. 27. r. 34 Edw. 1. ibid. l.
33. r. Robert Son of John de Huxley. p. 317. l. 37. after William Jeffeson
should follow thus, -- Anno 1372. 10 Martii, William Brackley admitted to the
Church of Mobberley by the Resignation of William Wickford; which he changed
for Drayton-Basset: Lib. C. fol. 16. b. M. number. 16. p. 318. l. 40. r. Ashton
super Mersey. p. 319. l. 12. 13. dele among his Sisters. ibid. l. 24. r. 1379.
p. 319. l. 9. dele having no lawful Issue of his Body. p. 333. l. 8. r. in the
Township of Eccleston. p. 342. l. 33. r. 5 Edw. 1. p. 343. l. 21. r. 9 Hen. 4.
p. 351. l. 23. after [Dedicated to All Saints,] should be inserted, -- For that
is the day of their Wakes: But since the Printing of this Book, I find it
called the Church of St. Bartholomew of Runcorn, in a Deed of Sir Willoughby
Aston's of Aston juxta Sutton in Runcorn-Parish, dated 9 Hen. 5. and in the
Book of his Evidences, page 15. p. 355. l. 17. r. this was about the Reign. p.
356. l. 32. r. about 1 Edw. 3. 1327. p. 357. l. 7. dele having no lawful Issue,
but eight Sisters expecting to share his Inheritance. p. 366. l. 17. r. 18 Hen.
6. p. 367. l. 24. r. the Hall of Wood in Over-Tabley, with the Lands thereto
belonging. p. 368. l. 28. r. Alanus de Tatton. p. 376. l. penult. r. T. number.
48. also dele these words, [ Quaere if John de Holford did not afterward marry
this Alice: T. number. 35.] and insert in stead thereof, -- unless Alice be there
mistaken for Felice. p. 377. l. 22. r. in the fourteenth year. p. 378. l. 29.
dele by the grant of Mary his Mother. p. 379. l. 11. r. 12 Hen. 8. ibid. l. 26.
r. 36 Hen. 8. p. 384. l. 6. r. Roger Fitz-Alured. p. 395. l. ult. r. Sanguis
effusus.

map of Chester THE COUNTYE PALATINE OF CHESTER With that most aNCIENT CITY
described.
The Arms of the Earls of Chester sin^ the Normans Conquest
Hugh Lupus Earl Richard the sone of Hu Ranulph Meschines Ranulph Gernones Hugh
Ceuelioc E S Ranulph Blundeuill John Scot Earl


A North Gate B North Gate stret C Corn Market D Shambles E Bridge Street F S.
Brides Church G S. Michaells chur. H Old common Hall I White Friars lane K
Gerurds lane L Trinity lane M Watergate stret N Watergate O Black Friars lan P
S. Peter's Church Q Trinity Church R S. Martins church S Nuns lane T Cupping
lane V Bunse lane 2 Castle lane 3 Sheep lane 4 Bridge Gate 5 Hanbridge 6
Fulling mills 7 Pepper Stret 8 Fleshmongers lane 9 S. Were burgd lane 10 S.
Tooloys church 11 East gat Stret 12 East Gate 13 Gose Lane 14 Parsons Lane 15
Barn lane 16 Little S. John's 17 Foregate Stret 18 S. John's Lane 19 Cow Lane
20 Newgate 21 Do lane 22 Love Lane 23 Barkers lane 24 S Worchargd ni 25 St
John's Church 26 S. Mary's Church 27 Canon Hall 28 Clauering lane 29 S. Nicholas
lane 30 The Bars 31 Boughton


Performed by John Speed, assistal by William Smyth. And are to be sold by
Roger Rea the Elder and younger at the Golden Cross in Cornhill against the
Exchange




