TWO Great Questions DETERMINED BY THE PRINCIPLES OF Reason. and Divinity.

I. Whether the Right to Succession, in Haereditary Kingdoms, be Eternal and
Unalterable? Neg.

II. Whether some certain Politic Reasons may not be sufficient Grounds of
Divorce? Affirm.

-- It was Enacted and Provided out of the Warrant of Ancient Laws, That if any
should Affirm, That the Laws and Statutes cannot Limit and Bind the Right of
the Crown, and the Succession thereof, every such Person should be Guilty of
High Treason. Camb. Hist. of Qu. Eliz. Ann. 1571, and 1572. (...) Erasm.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in
Pater=Noster=Row, 1681.

THE CONTENTS
The first Question, WHether the Right to SUCCESSION in Hereditary Kingdoms be
Eternal and Unalterable?

CHAP. I. That the Power and Authority which Princes, or Supreme Magistrates
have, is derived to them from God; and that, by these several ways, immediate
Deputation, Hereditary Succession, and Election. page 1

CHAP. II. That a Disposition in a Prince, proceeding from Opinion or
otherwise, to both the Spiritual and Temporal damage and destruction of a
Nation, makes a Forfeiture of Right to Succession. p. 6

CHAP. III. That the Forfeiture is made to the Supreme Authority; that it is
none, unless it be taken Advantage of whilst He continues a Subject; but that a
Prince once possessed of the Supreme Power, cannot be Deposed: that the same
Reasons which Warrant to take the Forfeiture of Him whilst Heir, if it be not
taken then, are afterward of no force against Him. p. 11

CHAP. IV. That Men's throwing themselves wholly on Providence, for averting
these Mischiefs, without making use of rational and moral means to prevent
them, is unreasonable and absurd. page 17

The Second Question, WHether some certain Politic Reasons may not be alone
sufficient Grounds of DIVORCE?

CHAP. I. Of Marriage, its Institution, Ends and Obligation, of its special
Rights and Privileges in the state of Christianity. p. 19

CHAP. II. What is Divorce? What are sufficient Reasons of Divorce; And the
Words of our Savior, St. Mat. 5. 31, 32. and Chap. 19. 9. and elsewhere about
Divorce, only for the Cause of Adultery and Fornication, considered and
explained. p. 23

CHAP. III. Whether the Case of Princes Marriages be the same with private
Men's; and whether they are not sometimes extraordinarily Indulged and Dispensed
with by God. p. 30

ERRATA,
Page 3. Lin. 15. before the insert of.
For Posterity, p. 5. 1. 3. Read Paternity. Immediately, p. 5. 1. 16.
Mediately. either, p. 27. 1. 34. neither. a Vowed, p. 28. 1. 33. an avowed.

TWO Great Questions.
I. Question. Whether the Right to Succession in Hereditary Kingdoms, be
Eternal and Unalterable?
CHAP. I.
That the Power and Authority which Princes, or Supreme Magistrates have, is
derived to them from God; and that, by these several Ways, Immediate
Deputation, Hereditary Succession, and Election.

BEing about to Discourse of a Point both difficult and dangerous, I mean, The
Right of Succession to Supreme Authority, whether it be not limited by
Conditions, and subject to Alterations? I shall in the following Dispute use
such Caution in Arguing, and that too, from no worse Topics than Principles of
Reason and Divinity, as may, I hope, prove some means of Satisfaction, but none
of Distaste. And because this Question about the Alterability of Succession to
the Supreme Authority, will receive great Light from a Discussion of what is
the Nature of that Right which Princes have to Succession, and the Nature of
that Right be Cleared, by a Consideration of him who gives it, and to what
Ends; I shall in the first place state, from what Fountain, Power, and
Authority, it is Derived; by what Ways, and to what End.

First, I take it for granted, that no man Naturally and of Himself, has a
Right Inherent in Himself to exercise Rule and Government over others; and all
men as to a state of Nature to be Born in the same Degree of equality with one
another; but yet, that most Men are Born in a state of Subjection to some
other, comes thus to pass; because Man, being at the Will, Disposal, and
Command of His Creator, who gave Him Life and Existence, and continues it to
him, shall be likewise at the Command of whomsoever the Creator shall transfer
a Right to of Government and Command; and only of Him: So that supposing God
not to have transferred His Right of Dominion over Man, or any part of it to any
else, every Man is born in the same condition and relation of Equality, (for
though Sonship does Oblige to many Offices of Gratitude and Duty, yet not to
such a Subjection as we are handling) and consequently, no one is Naturally a
Servant or Subject, nor any one a Prince, till God has Invested some Person
with an Authority of Governing such a number of Men, and all that shall be born
of them. The Inference then is plain, that if men should be naturally equal,
and no one subject to other, did not God Depute some one Person to Exercise
part of his Authority and Government over others; then, that they are not
Equal, is the effect of God's Appointment; and so all Pre-eminence of Power and
Authority, is primarily derived from Him. And that this immediate conclusion
from right Reason, is Consonant to God's Word (and so must all such of
necessity be) I shall quote but one place of Scripture, viz. Romans 13. 1. Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God,
the Powers that be are Ordained of God, etc.

This being laid for a Foundation, that all Authority is derived from God; the
next Doubt is, how we shall know to whom He does derive it, that we may give
Him due Obedience, and not be imposed on by Usurpers? And this will best be
known, if we consider the several ways, by which God Derives this Power to Men:
For we may infallibly conclude, that He has no Authority from God, who did not
receive it by those ways by which God Confers it; and that He is God's Minister
to whom we see Providence has Derived it by some such way, as He makes use of
to that purpose: and they are these; His own Immediate Choice and Deputation.
Hereditary and Natural Succession of Kindred. And Election by the Common Votes
and Suffrages of any People.


Of the first sort, were Moses, Saul, and David; of the second, were Solomon,
and Rehoboam, etc. the last was Jeroboam; though God had also foretold to Him
by His Prophet, that He should be King over Ten Tribes, and accordingly v. 20.
of the 12. Chap. of the 1 of Kings, All Israel, when they had heard that
Jeroboam was come again, (out of Egypt) sent and called Him to the
Congregation, and made Him King over Israel. Of these three ways of being
Inaugurate into the Supreme Power, the First is more Noble and Glorious, for as
much as in that, a particular Approbation of the Person by God Himself, is the
Reason of his Advance; but He who Succeeds as next of Blood, owes it to his
good Fortune; and He who is Elected by the People, often to some Policy,
whereby He Ingratiated himself; but sometimes to his Virtues: and of the two
last, Hereditary Succession and Election; the former is more Preferrable, for
the inconveniences it avoides, which Elections subject a Nation to: And
besides, one time with another, it has produced as many Examples of Virtue and
Ability to Govern, as the other.

The Right of Government then being once by God Immediately Transferred to any
one, after His Decease (unless God immediately by Himself Transfer it to any
other, or the Prince do) Naturally does pass to the very next of Blood and Kin,
and that for these Reasons: Because He who received Authority from God to
Govern a People, received it to this end, to procure that peoples Good and
Welfare, to the utmost of His Knowledge; which He would never do, if he took not
care that the evils of Anarchy, (to prevent which God had Crowned Him,) might
likewise be prevented for the future, by translating His Authority at His Death
to some other, who might sustain the Government when He was incapable of
bearing it Himself; and on this Reason is founded the Axiom in our common Law,
Rex nunquam moritur. Now because Government does not only intend the Peoples
good, but imply the great Honor and Dignity of Him who bears it; the Prince
cannot be supposed to wish so great a Dignity (if he declare not himself to the
contrary) to any less than Him who may be reasonably supposed most inward in
His Affections the next of Kin; and therefore if He die, His silence shall be
taken for Consent that the very next in Blood is the Person to whom for love
and custom sake He Propagates His Right: (by the very next of Blood meaning
that Person, who is esteemed so by the Vulgar Account of that Nation; Opinions
as to nearness of Blood, among different People, differing) and that Princes
may exercise their Authority in provision for the Future after their Decease,
and consequently appoint a Successor, is evident from hence, because the Laws
any one of them makes, are not supposed to cease to be so immediately upon his
Death, but to retain their full force for ever after, unless a like Authority
repeals them.

Before I proceed further, I must speak to an Objection, which possibly may be
raised; That to found the Right of Succession to Government in being lineally
Descended or next of Blood and Kin, or appointed by Testament, to Succeed to
some one, who Originally, tracing the Line of Princes backwards, derives His
Authority from one who Immediately received it, and was Deputed to it by God,
is to destroy the Right of most or all Princes, who cannot derive their
Authority from such a Predecessor, and that it is to take away the old and
common Notion of Supreme Authority, being naturally founded in Posterity: I
Answer, that I am of Opinion, that Paternity or Father-hood never did give a
Right of Sovereignty over Children; that before God Actually and Immediately
constituted Governors, and that, not upon the Account of Fatherhood, or Men
Chose some to themselves, or voluntarily upon certain Considerations submitted
themselves, there were no such Persons in the World as Kings, or Persons
possessed of Sovereign Authority, or pretending to be so merely as Fathers: and
that if no Prince can trace His Authority backwards to him who received it from
God Himself immediately, yet he may to him who received it, together with the
condition of Hereditary Succession for the Future, from God Immediately, either
by the Election of men, for as much as that first Predecessor could not Reign
without the Consent of People (which is the same thing as Choice) or else to
him who took the Advantage of a Forfeiture of their Liberty by some Offense,
and so in compensation righted himself by enforcing their Subjection; which is
as good a Title to Dominion as any, especially if by After-Acts and Compacts
settled and confirmed.

Now, that Election of Princes does Transfer as full and ample Power and Right
to Government as any other way whatsoever, (which being proved, though all
Princes may Succeed to such an One as primarily was Elected by the People, will
take away all Defect on that account) I Argue thus, that where God does not
immediately provide for the safety and welfare of any People by giving them
Laws, or a sufficiently authorized Lawgiver; there God, and Nature, and Reason
do permit and encourage that People, to procure their own welfare, by what
honest means are most conducive to it in their judgment, by choosing or
pitching upon a Person or Persons to exercise over them Gods Power and
Authority, in order to the public Good; and the Person so Elected Acts by Gods
Authority not the Peoples, forasmuch as all Power is solely Gods, and therefore
no one can Act lawfully as a Governor by any Authority but by Gods, though
this Authority may be conveyed to Him instrumentally by a Predecessor or the
People; and as a Successor in the Government, Acts not by the Authority of His
Predecessor who had none Originally of Himself, and therefore could not
properly give any, (for He Governed not by His own Authority, but by Gods; and
therefore His Successor Acts not by His Authority who had none of his own, but
by Gods, which the other conveyed to Him) so neither may an Elected Prince be
said to govern by the Peoples Authority by whom he was Elected, but by Gods,
who empowred these People by right of Nature and Reason, to Depute or Name one
to the Government in order to the public Good, when he himself did not: And
such a Prince is subject or accountable to none but God: But if in any Nation
the Prince, or He who bears the Title of such, and appears to be so, is
accountable to any else, they to whom He is accountable are the Supreme
Authority, and He only in Name, not really a Prince.

CHAP. II.
That a Disposition in a Prince, proceeding from Opinion or otherwise, to both
the Spiritual and Temporal Damage, and Destruction of a Nation, makes a
Forfeiture of Right to Succession.

HAving Discoursed of the Principle from whence all Humane Power is Derived,
Namely God; and of the several ways by which He Conveys this Authority to Men;
that Right and Succession, depends either on the Prince's Will to bestow it on
whomsoever He pleases, whether next of Kin or not; or, in case of Law. to tie
it precisely to the next of Kin (which still is the Princes Will, because his
Law) it may depend on the nearness of Alliance, Or, on popular Election; the
Question lies thus, whether a Prince having Right to Succession, by those Laws
which tie it up precisely to the next in Blood or Kin, may not Lawfully and
Rightfully, for some Reasons be Deprived of Succession without Injury done to
Him, and both Forfeit and lose his Right to Succession? And this we shall be
able more clearly to Decide, after having Considered what Qualifications are
necessarily requisite in a Prince, and they are these; First, To intend and
Design the utmost Good of His People both Spiritual and Temporal. Secondly,
That Intending and Designing Well, He be not accidentally Disposed either by
Opinion or otherwise to both the Spiritual and Temporal Destruction of His
People, though contrary to His intent.


Now, I Assert, that either the want of the First of these, or addition of the
last, is sufficient Reason and Ground to cut off, and alter Succession, and
makes Forfeiture of Right to it, which may be taken without Injury or Wrong to
the Person so Affected.

For the Proof of this position, I shall first show, that Hereditary Right to
Succession is not of it self in its own Nature Eternal or Unalterable; and
Secondly, that the above mentioned Disposition in a Prince, makes a perfect
forfeiture of it.

It Is used by some as an Argument, to prove that a Right to Succeed to the
Sovereign and Monarchical Authority in Hereditary Kingdoms is unalterable and
Sacred, because Monarchy, say they, is of Divine Right, and the apparent Heir
to it, having his Right from God, His Right is immovable. I Answer, that I
acknowledge not only Monarchy, but all other Forms of Government to be of Divine
Right: because there is no Power but is ordained of God; (so the Sanhedrim or
great Council among the Jews being an Aristocracy was by God Constituted to
be, and continued for a long while the Sovereign Authority on Earth over them)
But deny, that any person, who by Ordinary Course or Rule, has a Right to
Succession, has it from God; for Succession is Determinable, according to the
Will of the Supreme Authority on Earth, and then, He who has Right to
Succession, has it by Virtue of those Laws and Determinations of the Supreme
Authority which might otherwise have settled it; and not from God; who appointed
not Him to Succeed, and therefore, gave Him no right to Succession, but he has
it from the Supreme Authority on Earth; in which Authority is comprehended a
Power of appointing a Successor, as I before showed, that is, of giving the
Right of Succession to some Person who can receive that Right from none but
Him, and may be deprived of it by Him, because he gave it. But supposing (which
I need not) that He has his right to Succession from God, I deny that he has
therefore an unalterable Right, because He has his Right from whence He is to
have his Power, from God; for neither Right nor any thing else is therefore
unchangably appropriated to any Man, because God gave it; for what he gives us,
He gives on certain Conditions, on the non-observance of which, the thing given
may be impropriated and taken from us; so Life, which I think a Man may as
properly call his own as any thing, is given on Condition of obeying God, else
our life is Forfeited, and our right to it lost. So that right to Succession is
not unalterable supposing it is Gods Gift; but contrariwise, is therefore
alterable because it is Gods Gift, that is, bestowed and granted on certain
Conditions to be performed, which not performed do Forfeit it: So that
Secondly, the Heir to Succession having no other Reason for His Right to
Succession in the Government, than there is for Government in general, that is,
the safety and welfare of Prince and People; if he be so Disposed as to destroy
the Reason of Government, He likewise loses the Reason of Right to Succession
in government; because no one has right to succeed in Government who destroys
the very Reason of it, why there should be any Government at all, even the
safety of the People which was the Foundation and Reason of his Right; and he
who has no Reason for a Right has no Right at all; and being yet a Subject,
(for the very words, Heir, and having Right to Succeed, imply, that He is not
in actual Possession of the Sovereignty, and therefore in subjection (for
between them there is no Medium) He may incur the Forfeiture of every thing he
has as a Subject, and so he has the Right of Succession; for, though the Heir
to one Kingdom may be Sovereign in another, yet is a Subject in the Kingdom to
which he is Heir, because he receives Right from another; and such an one is
less than Him who gives it, and therefore subject; and if he be a Subject, and
biased from the public good, he is accountable, and may be Censured with
Disinheritance. And this the Heir has no great reason to resent in such a Case;
For if he be Conscientiously Disposed to both the Spiritual and Temporal Ruin
of the Subjects, He then will exact Obedience to many things which they will in
Conscience know to be Sins, and therefore, be Obliged not to Obey; and so that
Prince, had better never have Assumed the Regal Authority, than in his own
Opinion be slighted and disrespected, because Disobeyed in what He Commands
(though really it be no Disrespect to be disobeyed in things not within his
Command, but the dishonor lies in enjoining them) and be forced to turn the
Persecutor of his Subjects, to Vindicate the Honor of himself and Commands,
and leave his Name to stink upon Earth.

But neither is the Person so Disinherited at all Injured; for, Injury implies
Violence to Right, which I have proved he Forfeited, and therefore, That
Proceeding just; the whole Argument I will thus sum up: He who is a Subject,
(and so is every Heir to the Supreme Power as Heir, as I hinted before) is in a
capacity of offending the Supreme Power, and then of being punished: He may
offend against the present Sovereigns Authority and care of providing for the
future welfare of his people, by intending and purposing to do such things as
would hereafter prove extremely Damageable and Destructive to the Nation; and
if He offend in this kind, a more proper Punishment cannot be applied to Him
than such an one as will prevent those Mischiefs, the designing of which brings
Him to punishment, and that is Disinheritance; for Civil Punishments ought not
properly to be Vindicative, but remedies for preventing Mischief: Or, if His
Intentions and Designs are not evident by any Hint or Prospect He has given of
them by Words or Actions, yet if his Prepossessions, which Himself owns, are
such as Naturally and Necessarily tend and lead him to such Designs and
Intentions, as being most nearly conjoined with them, though outwardly He makes
no Declaration of His intentions; He is, as far as Reason can judge, most
dangerously Affected, and incapable to attain the end of Government, the
general Welfare; Nay, will hereafter, as far as Men can see, do that, which
will be Destructive to their Welfare, the end of Government, insomuch as it
were the same thing if they had none: Now, He who destroys the end of
Government, does as ill as destroying Government it self, but since that ought
to be Eternal, for the same Reason it ever had a beginning, He Forfeits His
Right to it, who is disposed to a Nations extreme Hazard or Destruction, to
prevent all which is the only Reason he should Succeed in the Government, and
that there should be any such thing at all; which if He will not only not
prevent, but is the Person who brings it about, there is no Reason He should
Succeed in the Government, he has made a Forfeiture of His Right.

CHAP. III.
That the Forfeiture is made to the Supreme Authority; That it is none unless
it be taken Advantage of, whilst He continues a Subject; but that a Prince once
Possessed of the Supreme Power, cannot be Deposed; That the same Reasons, which
Warrant to take the Forfeiture of Him, whilst Heir, if it be not taken then,
are afterward of no Force against Him.

I Above put the Power of Designing a Successor, either at Pleasure, or else by
some fixed standing Rule and Law, in the Supreme Authority; and therefore, if
the Designed Successor make Forfeiture of his Right, it can be to none but Him
who conveyed it to Him, His Superior, for none else could Convey it to him;
And for another Reason, the Forfeiture must be made to the Supreme Authority,
because the Care of the Future Welfare and Safety of the Subjects, against
which He was Disposed, belongs properly to the Supreme Magistrate, and
therefore the power of preventing future Mischiefs and taking the Forfeiture,
which is the way to prevent, does reside solely in Him. For although it cannot
be denied, but that the People are mainly Concerned in a matter of that Weight,
as is their Spiritual and Temporal Welfare, and so might seem sufficiently
warranted of themselves to provide for their own safety, as is every one
Naturally; Yet may they use only such Means as are to them Lawful, and as may
not prove as Great or greater Inconveniences than the thing they would avoid;
and what such are, I shall presently show.

Every one Naturally has a Power and Right to preserve himself, not only by
Avoiding, or Flying from that which actually Assaults Him, but by standing and
defending Himself against it, Nay, by Offending and Assaulting that; for the
others Violence being Arbitrary, that is, exercised by One who had no Right or
Authority so to do, was Unjust, and might therefore not only be Resisted, but
returned in the same Degree according to the just and natural Laws of
Retaliation. and that even Immediately, and by the private hand of the Person
Assaulted, forasmuch as the imminent danger could not admit of the delay of
expecting a public Determination: but in case, one be not actually Assaulted
(I speak of private Persons,) it is not lawful either to Kill or Bind Him, who
you suspect will be the Aggressor, but to fly from him is Lawful, Or, to
endeavor to persuade him who bears Authority over Him, to take away His Arms,
or confine him, or make him give Security for his keeping the Peace; by this
way of prevention, for any one to provide for his own safety, is not only
Lawful, but Prudent and Commendable: So in case a Nation fear the future
Practices of Him who is now Heir, they may forecast a prevention, by engaging
and obtaining of Him, under whose Authority He is, to tie him up by such Rules
and Laws, as will put it without his Power to Effect the dreaded Mischief; or
by utterly and totally removing Him out of that Place and Capacity, in which
alone he can hurt them: But they themselves have not sufficient Authority to
tie Him up by Laws, or Disinherit Him, and therefore cannot do it without
Injury; and if it so come to pass, that the Supreme Authority will suffer him,
whom you suspect will Murder You, to bear Arms, and will not confine Him; if
He Assaults you, being a private Man, you have the power of defending your
self; but if the Supreme Magistrate will appoint a Successor over a Nation, who
that Nation has good reason to suspect will endanger their Lives and Fortunes,
and Corrupt them in their Religion, to the hazard of their Souls, they have
done all that lawfully they may, for preventing that Succession; but Violently
and of their own Authority (which is none) to go about to Disinherit, or Alter
the Succession, upon pretense that the Injury done to him is not comparable to
the Mischiefs and Injuries prevented; (which though true enough, and there want
nothing but a competent Authority to alter the Succession without Injury, to
the Person Disinherited) yet still, it remaining an Injury because they do it
who have not sufficient Authority, it is a breach of the Laws of Christianity,
which allows not evil to be done that good may come of it, or evil be
prevented: And supposing my self to speak to Christians, I hope the Laws of our
Religion will be judged to Oblige them, as much as any Civil Laws whatsoever,
for Christians ought to suffer Injury rather than do any.

Having then proved this Forfeiture to be made to the Supreme Authority, that
the Care and Power of preventing those 'foreboded Mischiefs resides only in it,
the Subject ought in Prudence, and Duty to himself, to endeavor their
prevention by moving the Supreme Authority to prevent them, but not otherwise;
and if he foresees no remedy, ought to Arm his Conscience from Corruption in
Religion and the Spiritual Danger, and his resolution to suffer under the
Temporal, and bear Injury when it cannot without Sin be prevented or Opposed:
And this submission is not only necessarily enforced from the Principles of
Christianity, but grounded upon Civil and Sate-Policy; for if it were in the
Peoples Power to Disinherit whom they would, no Person could ever Succeed, from
whom the Multitude might not have Assurance of being Complied with, in what
they pleased; and Men's desires being sometimes Extravagant and Sinful, great
Inconveniences must needs ensue too the Government by the allowance of them;
frequently to a Successor might be Disinherited by the Faction or ill
Disposition of the most, by reason of false and scandalous Imputations, which
they can hear and believe, but not disprove; or on purpose, which is sometimes
very Be-witching, to show their Power: and this must needs make a Government
unsettled, and dispose it to Anarchy, Ruin and Destruction. Now, upon reflection
of the inconveniences of a Power in the People to Disinherit, and of those
which sometimes may happen for want of that Power in them, when the Ordinary
Supreme Authority which has Power will not exercise it upon a due Occasion;
some Men may possibly fall into a Rage, accusing their ill Fortune which
unavoidably subjects them to Misery on both sides; and Him, who having Power
will not use it to secure them from the dangers they fear; but if they consider
that He who refuses to Gratify them in this, cannot be imagined not to wish and
intend his Peoples good as much as his own, and several ways formerly has
procured it, they have no reason to be disaffected to Him for this, since the
Cause of his refusal to comply, must be either that he is not so apprehensive
of the danger they Dread, and sees no Reason so to be; or if he be as
apprehensive as they, yet perhaps he thinks it not within his Power to deprive
the next Legal Heir of Succeeding without injury, forasmuch as He judges his
personal Affection or Disposition to any Opinion or Religion, cannot alter and
take away his Right; and either, or both these being the Motives which
withold Him from proceeding as he is desired, and both pertaining to
Conscience, which he must satisfy as well as other Men; besides, the
Consideration of the Kings Heart being in the Hand of God, and particularly
directed and turned by His Providence, His Subjects ought to submit to and
Acquiesce in his Pleasure; and so no remedy, but Succeed he must, and the
Forfeiture, not being taken Advantage of whilst he remained a Subject, after He
is once Possessed of the Supreme Authority, cannot then be taken: For, although
that Disposition which Forfeited his Right to Succession when He was Heir, may
seem to Forfeit his Right to Actual Possession, because no one has a Right to
be Possessed of that which he had no Right to take into His Possession; yet the
Condition of this Forfeiture is such, that, not being taken, the Supreme
Magistrate is supposed not to have judged it a Forfeiture.; and it belonging
properly to his Cognizance to determine, whether it were or no, what he judged
was no Forfeiture that he did not take for one, and what He did not take, when
he is Dead, no one can take for Him, if to no one he Delegated Authority so to
do; and if a Forfeiture is made to a Superior, and the Supreme Magistrate
neither by himself nor Delegate did take it, no one being Superior to the
Succeeding Heir, no one may take it, either by forcible hindering him to
Succeed, or Warring against, or Deposing Him when He is possessed; for the Crown
once worn taking away all Defects, as say the Lawyers, and that passing over to
the Heir immediately upon the expiration of the Predecessor, all Previous
Forfeitures or present Indispositions are of no force against Him, because
there is none on Earth Sufficiently Authorized to take advantage of them. God
indeed, if he pleases, by Interposing his Immediate Command, may depose Him; I
mean not on the account of His Supreme Intendency over all the World, (for so
He may depose a Prince though he be not so evilly affected) but according to
the rules of Justice and Reason, as an Offender against Him whose Substitute he
is, by overthrowing the Ends of Government: but this God rarely does; for
although Saul for his grievous Offenses were rejected by God, yet suffered he
Him to live and dye a King without proceeding to actual Deposition, although
Samuel had told Him from God, that the Kingdom of Israel was rent from him,
that is, from his Tribe and Family.

If it be Objected, That though the Predecessor by a particular application of
his Will did not take the forfeiture, because he did not see it, or believed it
not; Yet generally he must be supposed to Will and Design the taking it,
forasmuch as he Wills and Designs the Public welfare; and so, though not by a
Special Act, Yet by his General Intention of the Peoples good He must be
supposed to have taken the advantage of it.

I answer, That this will not stand good in Policy, as it may do in many other
things; because such a belief would put it in the Peoples Power at their
pleasure to Disinherit and Dethrone whomsoever they would, forasmuch as they
might frequently upon Distaste, pretend him to have made a Forfeiture, who made
none, and so depose him under the Color of the Predecessor's Implicit and
General Will to Disinherit him: and this is so great an Inconvenience and
Danger to the Public, that it is far more eligible to run the hazard of
Sometimes having a bad Prince, than of having good ones turned off as bad, or
of suffering such ill Consequences as War, and Bloodshed, and an Unsettled
Kingdom, which must attend an attempt to depose even bad Ones, since there is
no one but has some Adherents. The Scriptures command Servants Obedience not
only to Gentle, but froward Masters, Applaud Suffering Wrongfully; and the
Primitive Christians did so, even when they were strong enough to resist, and
the Soldiers were content to be decimated, and to lay down their Arms, to be
wrongfully put to Death, that is for a cause not deserving Death, for
professing the Christian Religion; which plainly proves that both the Apostles,
and Primitive Christians, who were as well Catechized in the Principles of
Religion as we can pretend to be, thought it an Article of their Faith, that it
was not lawful for Subjects to Depose or Resist the cruelest Tyrants, though
endeavoring their Spiritual destruction by obliging them to Idolatry, and
their Temporal by Proscribing them, by Imprisoning and Murdering them if they
refused: and this we call Passive Obedience, that is, submitting to the Supreme
Authority's pleasure even when we are Injured rather then Rebel against Him.
And thus much to show, that if the Heir be not Disinherited whilst He remains
so, it will afterward be too late, and in reason and justice Impossible.

CHAP. IV.
That Men's Throwing themselves wholly upon Providence for Averting these
Mischiefs, without making use of Rational, and Moral Means to prevent them, is
Unreasonable, and Absurd.

THe Countryman in the Fable who called upon Hercules, to draw His Cart out of
the Mire in which it was set, was bid to apply His own Shoulders to it, and
thrust, if he would have it out. Many there are, who Idely rely upon Providence
to save them from the Dangers they foresee, but will not step a foot
themselves, or use the least Industry and Care for preventing those Evils; and
because nothing comes to pass without Gods Permission, imagine therefore that
nothing is done without His Appointment; and on this account leave it wholly to
him to Provide for their Safety.

But this careless Opinion I much dislike; because it often brings Men into
Misery, by making them to neglect those Means for their Safety which God
frequently puts into their own hands, and so they are undone for want of Care,
for presuming God will Save them without the least of their Caution and
Circumspection. Nay, sometimes there may be some, whose Honors, Lives and
Fortunes, must stand or fall with a present Condition of a Nation; who know in
their Hearts, and are sure, if the Times turn, unless they will turn with them
(which it is Reasonable many times to believe they may not) they must lose both
Lives and Fortunes, and the Spiritual Welfare of all the Subjects be
Endangered; yet they are not content not to endeavor the Disinheriting a
Successor, with whom all this Mischief comes in, upon a Scruple, that such a
Disinheriting is Un-lawful; are not content fairly to give way to such a
Successor without Opposition; but are His best Friends, Court and Complement
Him most at every turn, and take occasion from their Opinion of the
unlawfulness to Disinherit Him, to be the strongest maintainers of Him; which
is both Imprudent and unreasonable Flattery; drudging for one who Laughs at
their Sedulousness to their own Ruin. In any Nation, if there be any in such a
case so mad, they must not think themselves e're the Honester and Wiser for
Courting their own Destructions; submit one would, where it was unlawful to
resist, but not invite Him who was to do one a Mischief.

It Is to be Confessed, that Disinheriting a Prince, perverting the Lineal
Succession, is a dangerous Precedent, because of the ill Consequences it may
draw with it; the Right of Succession ought to be Sacred, and not touched or
meddled with, but with the greatest Reverence and Caution, and upon weighty
Considerations; but when once People have prevailed on a Prince, to Disinherit
a Legal Heir for real and great Causes, they may often afterward prove
humoursom; and sometime for no Causes, or not equal, exact and require the
doing of it, because they have an Example and Precedent: This, I say, is a
great inconvenience, but is unavoidable; because, as long as Men are Men, they
will be subject to Faults; but yet I suppose it not Impossible, but such Laws
and Rules may be stated and provided, whereby to proceed in such Cases, as
would much Alleviate this inconvenience: But shall leave that to Wiser Heads to
Determine what they must be. And so much of the First Question.

The Second Question. Whether some certain Politic Reasons may not be alone
sufficient Grounds of Divorce?
CHAP. I.
Of Marriage, its Institution, Ends, and Obligation: Of its special Rights and
Privileges in the State of Christianity.

I Am very Sensible, this Second Question carries so much the more Difficulty
than the First, as it has been less Controverted, and consequently less
Understood; that it lies under a far greater Disadvantage, by reason of the
many more Actually Interested and concerned in it; the Right of Marriage being
more Men's, than is Right to Succession and Heir-ship in Government, and they
generally Prejudicated in their Opinions about it; And lastly, so much the
harder Case, as it concerns the Dispossession of those who are Actually in
Possession of a Right, and so owned to be; but the other only the prevention of
Succeeding into such Actual Possession. But in order to its Discussion, I will
proceed in the same Method I used in the First, that by inquiring into its
Institution, Rights, and Ends, we may better judge of the true Causes of its
Dissolution.

The Institution of Marriage seems not to have been Occasional and by accident,
as the appointment of most things by God was, but Cotemporary with the very
Creation, and Formation of man it self; so that He was no sooner shaped into
the form of Body which we see he has, but he seemed to be Incomplete and
Solitary, till such a Companion were given him; for the use and enjoyment of
which, in order to another end, Procreation, His Body both in its inward and
outward Fabric, provision and design of Nature appeared to have been purposely
Framed, and by it self, as to that end, to be useless and imperfect: Nay,
Marriage must have been Instituted, and Pre-ordained, even before Man's
Creation; for if God, when He said, Let Us make Man, had an Exemplar or Idea
before Him, of what manner of Creature He was about to make, He then both saw,
that the Creature He should make according to that Pattern, would want such a
Companion, because of his inability to procreate without Her; and yet, for
which Procreation his Body appeared purposely Designed, by reason of its
proper, natural, and convenient Composure for it; Nay, further, Designedly and
on Purpose made him such a Creature, as should have such a Companion in order
to Procreation, because else, all that Aptitude and Structure which now serves
to that end, would have been useless; and God have done, what He and Nature
never do, something in vain.

Now the Institution, or Reason of Ordaining Marriage, depending on its End;
and its Immediate, and Natural End, being Procreation and Propagation of a
Species of Creatures, and Man's Body apt and suitable for such Procreation, at
the Moment of His formation Completed; it follows, that at the Moment of his
formation Completed, when he was an apt, and fit Creature for the End of
Marriage, Procreation, the Institution of Marriage, if not before, yet then
Commenced; because the Natural Frame of Man, did Necessarily suppose such a
thing as Marriage; and therefore, its Institution was Original and Natural, not
Occasional: it was designed by Nature, it self, and therefore needed not to be
Instituted with any formal Ceremony, Law, or Circumstance whatsoever. I
confess, that a secondary end of Marriage, namely mutual Society, help and
Comfort, seems to have been Occasional: for after God had made Man, and placed
Him in the Garden, He said, Genesis 2. 18. That it was not good that Man should be
alone, that He would make Him an Help meet for Him; as if, upon consideration
of his Solitariness, as having no Creature capable of Conversing with Him, He
resolved for remedy of that evil, to give Him a Wife: and Adam in the 23 ver.
of that Chap. gives another Reason, why a Man should leave his Father and
Mother, and cleave to his Wife; because she was taken out of Him, was Bone of
his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh; not that this was the only Reason of
Marriage, because Woman was taken out of Man; but that it should be a strong
Motive of Love and Inclination to Woman, because she was a piece of Man
himself, and therefore He should prefer Her before the Dear Relations of Father
and Mother. By which very words, Father and Mother, Adam seems to have
understood the end of Marriage to be Procreation, and what Procreation was;
else He could not have known what the words Father and Mother signify; unless
you will suppose those Words not Adams, but the Holy Pen-mans by a Prolepsis.
From what has been said, it is clear, that the two great Ends of Marriage are
Procreation, and mutual help; and that He who Marries, is Obliged to intend
none other but those Ends.

Having showed, that the Institution of Marriage was Cotemporary with Man's
first Creation, that the natural Disposition and Frame of Man's Body, was its
very Institution in Nature it self, without further Ceremony, Law, or
Circumstance, that Adams Marriage was Consummate, and Perfect without such; yet
now since the World is Increased, there is something more requisite to be done,
I mean, as to the Contracting, and Solemnization of Matrimony. For when there
were none in the World but one Man and one Woman, and both naturally loving
one another, Circumstance and Ceremony were needless, since they are
significative only of our minds to others, but there being no others but
themselves, and their minds sufficiently known to one another, from the very
inclinations and dispositions of Nature, as Man and Woman in general, and there
being no other Woman for Him to take, or Man for Her; I say, neither Nature
nor Reason could require Circumstance and Ceremony as convenient or useful: but
now they must be used as signs and tokens of Consent, that such a particular
Man and Woman do agree to Marriage, and to prevent Defrauding one onother by
denying the Marriage, (which, if done in secret between themselves only, either
might) and to prevent any ones wronging of either, by intruding upon the Right
of either; which is better secured and known, by being Public and Solemn, and
Acted before VVitness. Further, because all words do not equally express
Consent, but some more, some less; it is likewise convenient, a determined form
of words, whereby to express Consent validly, should be Authorized, and so all
refuge to Equivocation, and dubious Interpretation of former Promises might be
avoided. And to the end, that the Persons consenting to Marriage, might have
the stronger Obligation to stand to their Promise, it was thought fit, they
should mutually Promise each other, as far as lies in their Power, before God
Himself, in the Presence and Hearing of one of his Ministers.

So then, the Ends and Reasons of Marriage, is Procreation and mutual Help; an
inducing Motive is the natural Love Man and Woman bare to each other, as being
originally Flesh of one another Flesh; the Essence or Actual Contract of it
consists in Consent, and several outward Circumstances, are requisite for its
Confirmation ad extra, and may not ordinarily be neglected without fault,
because they are wholesome and useful Appointments.

I have been the longer on this Head, because the Notion of any thing being
first clearly and at large laid down, it is easier after to pass a judgment on
it; and that I may pass by nothing which concerns it, I shall Observe what
Advantages and Privileges Christianity has raised it to, beyond what it has in
Nature, or in Judaism. It is become the Representation of that Holy Union, Love
and Obedience, which is betwixt Christ and His Church, and therefore is
accounted now a more honorable Estate than formerly; forasmuch as neither the
Jews nor Heathens tied themselves up to strict Marriages, but using Polygamy,
did, as it were, prostitute and dishonor the Marriage Bed, which became thus
common to many; but now the Marriage of two Persons during Life, is enobled and
recommended by that Similitude of Christ and His Church; the first owning no
other Spouse, the last no other Lord: Besides, that Marriage is not now so
easily dissoluble as among the Jews, nor for such slight Reasons; and lastly,
there lies now an Obligation on each, to Procure, as far as they can, not only
the others Temporal, but Spiritual Comfort and VVelfare. And so much for the
Nature, Institution, and Duties of Marriage.

CHAP. II. What is DIVORCE?
What are Sufficient Reasons of Divorce; and the Words of Our Savior? St.
Matthew. 5. 31, 32. and Chap. 19. verse. 9. and elsewhere, about Divorce, only for
the cause of Adultery and Fornication, Considered and Explained.

MArriage, although so strait an Union as nothing more, yet admits of a
Dissolution, commonly called Divorce; that is, a Separation of both Man and
Woman, so as to return into the very condition of Liberty, and Singleness of
Life, in which they were before their Marriage; but this, not lightly, but on
great weighty and high Considerations: And this is by the By to be observed,
that every Separation of Man and Woman after Matrimony outwardly Solemnized
between them is not properly Divorce; for Divorce is only a Separation of
Persons, who according to the intent of outward Solemnization, were really and
perfectly in a state of Marriage, and that, so as to return into a state of
utter Disobligation or Non relation one to the other: but a Separation of
Persons not perfectly Married, or of Persons Married if not for ever, so as
both shall remain disengaged, is not properly Divorce. When therefore two
Persons are Separated and Disjoined, because the one is naturally Impotent;
that is, in Body not Perfect Man or Woman, (for by natural Impotency, Age,
Weakness, or Barreness is not to be understood; for they are to be born with;
but an imperfect or monstrous Body.) Such Separation I say, is not properly
Divorce, because none are Divorced but Husband and Wife; and such were not
they: For since none are Husband and Wife, but they who are perfectly Married;
and the firm Contract of Marriage depend not only on the Consent of the
Parties, and Solemnization, but on a supposition that they are what they are
taken to be; that is, perfect Man or Woman; (for Marriage supposes the joining
of such together) if either be naturally Impotent, that is, not perfectly Man
or Woman, the other is imposed on, and the Consent of that Person to have
married a Man or Woman, shall not be adjudged Valid, so as to imply that
Persons Consent to Oblige to Cohabitation, with one who is not Man or Woman,
whom alone that Person did Consent and intend to have in Marriage; and
therefore, such are not joined together by God and Nature, since Nature Abhors
such a Conjunction; but without more ado, are Actually Single.

Secondly, If for other Reasons, a Man and Woman perfectly so, and Married, do
Part; that parting is not a real Divorce, so as to be Disengaged from each
other; for thus St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. And unto the Married I Command; yet
not I, but the Lord; Let not the Wife depart from Her Husband, but and if she
Dapart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her Husband; and let not
the Husband put away his Wife: In which place St. Paul first Exhorts, that
there be no Separation between Man and Wife, that is, that they should not
Disagree, so as to part from one another; but if such a Case ever happens; that
their Separation for such a Reason, is not Divorce, does not dis-unite them,
but that the Woman continues the Man's Wife still, notwithstanding this
Separation, and ought not to marry any one else, but that a Reconciliation
should be Endeavored, and both return to each other: but by the last words,
Let not the Husband put away his Wife, is not to be understood, as if a Man
might by no means, for no Cause, Totally Divorce his Wife; for even our
Savior allows Adultery and Fornication to be a sufficient Cause; Matthew. 5. 32.
and 19. 9. etc. In the first place in these Words, I say unto you that
whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the Cause of Fornication, causes
Her to commit Adultery; and whosoever shall Marry her that is Divorced,
commits Adultery: In the last place thus, I say unto you, whosoever shall
put away his Wife, except it be for Fornication, and shall Marry another,
Commits Adultery; and wboso Marries her which is put away, does Commit
Adultery: which Exception of the Case of Adultery, plainly Proves, that Divorce
for some Cause is Lawful, namely for that.

But because these Places are generally understood in that rigid Sense, which
the Words without due Attention, seem to bear, as if no other Cause whatsoever
but Adultery and Fornication in the Woman, is sufficient Cause of a Total
Divorce, and so it is impossible that my Policick Reasons should be sufficient
Cause; I shall clear the Sense and Meaning of the Words, First, Observing,
that even Adultery it self is partly a Politic Reason of Divorce; forasmuch as
Marriage is Instituted for Propagation, and that is mischiev'd, and hindered by
nothing more, than promiscuous Embraces; and thence Accrues great Damage to a
Commonwealth, and its politic Good. Besides, if the Woman do sometimes prove
with Child, it being possibly another, it shall however be obtruded on the
Mothers Husband to Maintain: She then who is found Guilty of this high Crime,
shall be Finally Dismissed, as one who perverts and hinders the end of Marriage,
and endamages the public if she have not Children; and if she have, greatly
injures her Husband, both by disposing of her self to another, who was
Rightfully only His, and probably burdens Him with what ought naturally to be
another Charge. But to clear the Sense of the above Cited Places.

In the 19. of St. Mat. Ver. 3. we have the Pharisees coming to our Lord, and
tempting him, by proposing a Branch of Moses's Law, to try whether he would
contradict it; and then they had sufficient reason of Accusation against him
they thought. They Asked him; Whether it were Lawful for a Man to put away his
Wife for Every Cause, according to what is written in Deuteronomy. 24. 1. When a Man
has taken a Wife, and Married Her, and it come to pass, that she find no
favor in his Eyes, because He has found some Uncleanness in Her, then let him
write her a Bill of Divorcement, and give it her in her Hand, and send her out
of his House. The Law gave License to put away Wives for Every Cause, for every
Dislike; for not finding Favor in their Husbands eyes, for no greater cause
than not pleasing their Humor: What think Thou, Is it Lawful or Agreeable
to the Rules of Equity and Reason, as well as to the strict Letter of the Law?
And this Their Question he thus in effect Answers: That such Reasons as these,
for which Moses allowed the Jews to put away their Wives, were not Reasonable
nor Equitable, but Extorted from him by them, whose hardness of Heart would be
content with nothing less; and therefore it was better the Law should be
Remitted, and so their hardness become more pardonable, as not being an Offense
against any Positive Law, but allowed of: But for the future, Divorce shall not
be Lawful for any of those Petty Reasons, but for no less than Adultery, which
the Law judged so Heinous, as to punish with Death it self; but, as all Rigors
in the Gospel are Mitigated, so now Adultery shall be punishable only with
Divorce; or else, because the Jews now cannot put any Man to Death, have lost
Jus vitae and necis; they shall punish it by Divorce, which remains in their
power. The whole Scope and Design of which Answer, I judge to be This; That the
Jewish Rigor and Moroseness of Divorcing their Wives for every petty Dislike he
did not only not approve, but hereafter would not have Adultery it self punished
so severely as formerly, with Death, but only with Divorce; and that Divorce
was punishment great enough for Adultery; and that nothing less than Adultery
does deserve to be, and must in the Gospel-state be punished with Divorce. And
that this Answer does not suppose, but that Offenses as great as Adultery, may
deserve it as well as Adultery; nor deny, but some Offenses may be as great as
Adultery, I have this Reason to think; because, in the 6th. Verse, Christ says
of Man and Wife, That they are no more Twain, but One Flesh, and that Man
should not put asunder what God had joined together; which being generally
spoken of all Husbands and Wives; (for, All God has Joined together) one might
conclude, that because All Husbands and Wives are joined together by God, and
no man must put asunder what God has joined; therefore it is not Lawful to put
them asunder for any Cause whatsoever, no not for Adultery, because God did
once join them together; which being contradictory to the Permission he gives
afterward, for the cause of Adultery, plainly shows, those words are not to be
understood in a strict and literal Sense, which excludes even the cause of
Adultery. And therefore it is reasonable to suspect, That its not being Lawful
to Divorce but for the Cause of Adultery only, is not either strictly and
literally to be understood of Adultery, and only that; but that nothing less
than Adultery is a sufficient cause, not denying, but something may be as
great. I shall state a Case, which I will leave others to Judge, whether it be
as Great or no.

Suppose two Persons of different Religions Married, and one by the avowed
necessary and immutable Principles of His or Her Religion, firmly Believes the
other to be in a State of Heresy, Damnation, and Enmity to God and true
Religion, and that Faith may lawfully be broke with that Person; that it is
Lawful, Nay, highly Commendable to murder that Person, because His or Her
Religion, by this Act, is according to all moral Certainty, sure to be
Propagated; which to promote, as far as in this Person lies, is an
indispensable Duty; and to compass, is to rescue Multitudes of Souls from Hell,
and to cover and expiate for all this Persons private Sins, and to secure to
Him or Her self Heaven and Gods Favor, by so meritorious an Act: that there is
no other probable way of effecting this great Work but by this means; that to
die in the Attempt, or failing of Success to be afterward put to Death for it,
is a most glorious Martyrdom. I should think a Person in the same Kingdom,
City, House, but much more Bed, with such an one, to be very un-secure; and if
the Person escapes, it can be Attributed to nothing but the others extreme
Faint-Heartedness, which one can scarce Imagine any guilty of, who is
prepossest by such winning, prevailing, and strong Motives, as these I have
been mentioning: And therefore, between a Sinful, Amorous and Adulterous Love
of a Stranger, if it remain still within the Heart, and has not proceeded to
Actual Commission; and such Principles as believing it Lawful and Meritorious
to Murder an Husband or wife, as to the Influence they have on Marriage in
order to Dissolution, there is no other difference but this; That a Man must
expect the Actual Commission of Adultery, the bare intention or desire of which
is not sufficient Cause of Divorce; besides, that it proceeds not from a Vowed
Principle, that it is Lawful and Commendable so to do, and therefore that
intention may alter; but the imminent danger from those other Principles as
fixed and unalterable, will not admit of that Delay until the Fact be Committed.
Separation therefore from such a Person, as to all Society and Converse, is
immediately Necessary, and always, is Natural and agreeable to Reason, forasmuch
as it is for the preservation of Life; and a Separation warranted by Reason to
be perpetual, cannot suppose any mutual Obligation, Tie or Relation whatsoever
in Reason to remain between them whom good and justifiable Reasons have
perpetually Separated; and therefore being thus Separated, not accidentally,
but by moral and reasonable Necessity, there shall not remain an Obligation to
the Person so Necessitated to remain Bound to the other in the Tie of Marriage;
the Duties of which it is impossible for one to Satisfy and Perform, because it
is absolutely rendered useless by the other: and for disengagement in such a
Case as this, there is both Ground and Countenance in Scripture; we have these
Words in the 15 Ver. of the 7 Chap. of the 1 Epistle to the Corinth. But if the
Un-believing depart, let Him depart; a Brother or Sister is not under Bondage
in such a Case: Whence I argue thus, if upon the voluntary Departure of a
barely Un-believing Husband or Wife, either from other, neither is so tied up,
but that in such a case of Separation and Departure, a Christian is not in
Bondage; that is, remains not Obliged under the Yoke of that Marriage which the
other by final Departing, has Dissolved, but may Marry; Shall not then the
Necessitated sending away or Dismission of a Person for the Reasons I have
mentioned (since it is the same thing, whether a Person depart voluntarily, or
force himself to be sent away, because the person who caused the Separation
must be judged to depart)? Shall not such a Necessity release a Brother or
Sister, a Christian, from being bound, and leave Him or Her at their Liberty to
Marry if they please? The only difficulty is, whether one Person believes the
other to be thoroughly so Principled or Persuaded, as that Religion of which
that Person is a Member, teaches, and as is necessary to justify the Divorce.

CHAP. III.
Whether the Case of Princes Marriages be the same with private Men's; And
whether they are not sometimes Extraordinarily Indulged and Dispensed with by
God?

IF the Case, I in the last Chapter put, were a Princes, no doubt but that
would Aggravate it with Circumstances, as peculiar to Princes as is their
Charracter and Authority; For a Prince being not only an Husband but a
Sovereign, such Principles would be more than doubly Pernicious, because they
are directed against a Person, who is not only in a twofold Capacity, and
therefore doubly Injured, but likewise, because imagining or believing the
Destruction of a Prince to be Lawful, is it self an higher Crime than the same
belief concerning a private man; because His Right in his Wife as His Subject
is more immediate from God and Absolute, than as he is Her Husband; the Right
of Dominion being greater than that of Propriety and Use. Besides, the
endangering such a Person is not Confined to His own Detriment, but involves
all his Subjects in it, as those whose Welfare depends on their Head and
Protector; and either the utter Ruin, or extreme Danger of the whole Nation
attends His Destruction, especially in the Case of being morally certain after
His Death, to be both Spiritually and Temporally enthralled: And therefore,
such a Case would so much the more warrant a Divorce, as the breach of a far
greater Obligation is more notorious, and of more dangerous Consequence, and
less capable of Delay, and a stronger and more necessitating Reason to put her
away, supposing the Wife to be so Principled as to give just Occasion of such
fear and necessity. It Is possible, I consess, that one Externally of such or
such a Profession may not be so in Heart, or may not be seasoned with those
Doctrines which the Presidents of that Religion judge too apparently startling
to Communicate to some of their Disciples: but nothing there is but may be
susspected and feared from some men's Importunity, Cunning, Boldness and
Impudence. But I will not Insist upon this supposed Case any longer, which
under all these Aggravations must needs imply the Lawfulness of Divorce, which
I think I can infer Allowable in a Case more moderate, and of less evil Aspect.
For I will imagine the Consort not so dangerously disposed and affected, nor to
Design any such thing; but that the Prince having no Heir of his Body, to
Succeed, to be Instructed in such a Religion and Principles, as will incline
Him to procure the Peoples real good, and that such a destructive and dangerous
Religion naturally falls in with him who is the presumtive Heir, as they call
it, that is the next of Blood or Kin for want of a nigher; and that this
Princess or Queen never had, nor, morally speaking, ever can have, and bring
forth an Heir to be so Instructed and Succeed; and this Conjecture for the
Future, grounded on the time past; because she had none then when it was more
probable and natural, and without such an Heir so much danger and destruction
imminent; the Case thus Stated, I say, prevention of Mischief, which could not
give the People Authority to Depose a Prince, because though they may be
Injured by Him, yet they never can have Authority to vindicate themselves
against Him; will however give a Prince, who has a full Authority over all,
Power and Warrant to Divorce a Wife, as being unavoidably and necessarily
forced thereto, though not by Her self, or own Principles, yet so accidentally,
as is inseparable from Her Marriage; and this necessity is unavoidable, because
it is absurd, that a Prince should suffer His People to incur such great danger
and destruction knowingly, upon any pretense whatsoever, and therefore is not
to be supposed: For the Christian Maxim of not doing Evil that Good may come of
it, would be mis-appli'd here; for, a private Interest or good standing in
Competition with the public, ceases to be a real Right if inconsistent with
the public, inasmuch as every Subject does implicitly and tacitly relinquish
His Right, Possession and Pretentions to every thing which cannot consist with
the Common Good; and then to make void such a Right, is not to do Evil, and so
the necessity remains unavoidable; but still with this Proviso and not else,
That the Prince may proceed thus, if He believe the probability and certainty
of such a destructive Religion's coming in, if He Die without other Heir than
He has already; Or that, if it do come in, He believes it as Dangerous and
Destructive as others do: else His Conscience is bound, and He Obliged to
follow it. In the last place, to strengthen the belief of this Maxim, on which
the stress of the Dispute depends, that what was once a Man's full and undoubted
Right and Propriety, if it ever after prove utterly inconsistent with the
public Good, finally ceases to be His Right or Propriety; and that to deprive
him of the Possession of that thing, is not an Injury, nor doing Evil that Good
may come of it, I will in short, endeavor to make out, by showing, That God
does Himself Dispense in such Cases, with Princes forced Actions. I might
insist on a tacit Consent of every Subject to this purpose, because Government
is not Fixed and settled without such a Consent, but shall rather conclude with
the strongest Proof, the Authority of Scripture.

The Apostles had a Power given them by our Savior, That what soever they did
bind on Earth should be Bound in Heaven, and whatsoever they did loose on Earth
should be loosed in Heaven; and whosoever Sins they did Remit they were
Remitted, and whosoever Sins they did Retain, they were Retained. Which
Apostolical Power of Loosing and Binding, Remitting and Retaining, the Learned
observe, and Expound to be the power of admitting into the Number and
Fellowship of the Faithful, upon Repentance, and Exclusion or Banishment from
it for Sins Scandalous, and putting them into a state of unworthyness, to
partake of the Christian Mysteries, and be reputed a Member of Christ; and this
is called Excommunication; from which too, upon unfeigned Repentance, they had
Authority to Release; now this Power is commonly called the Power of the Keys,
is an ordinary jurisdiction derived from the Apostles to their Successors, who
exercise such an Authority to this day. Now, This jurisdiction seems to derive
from the abovementioned Texts, on which it is grounded, so universal an extent,
as if no one whatsoever, not Princes themselves, were exempt from it, the words
Whatsoever and Whomsoever being Universal; and in common Speech Excluding none,
but comprehending all. And some men, namely the Romanists, who catched at the
least outward appearance or countenance from Scripture for erecting the Popes
Unlimited Power, suppose these places of Scripture to confer on Church
Governors a Jurisdiction, Authority, and Right of Government over Princes
Themselves, so as to Censure, and Actually Excommunicate them; because it is
said, That Whatsoever they did bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven: But
neither in the Apostles practice nor examples of Antiquity can we find ever
such an Authority to have been exercised over Princes, though no doubt,
occasion might often enough occur. And Conformably to this, the best Reformed
Church, (I mean That of England) Teaches, That it is not Lawful to Excommunicate
Princes; that is, denounce them to be No Members of Christ and his Church. For,
although this Power is for Edification, and not for Destruction; and no doubt
every Christian Prince, like every other Private Christian, is entrusted to the
care of some Spiritual Pastor or Pastors to Instruct him, and give Account for
his Soul, if it be lost through their default; and therefore they might seem to
have Power of using all means for His Salvation as they may for others, and
this of Excommunication being such, they might therefore Excommunicate Him; (I
mean not from the Visible Company of the Faithful, for that they cannot, but
from Participation of the Mysteries and Ordinances of our Religion, and from
being a Member of Christ's Invisible Church); But this neither they did nor we
do, on this Supposition, and Maxim in Divinity, that Princes are, and ought to
be Exempt from common and ordinary Rules, which others are Subject to, if so be
the Obliging a Prince to those Rules, would be occasion of Damage and Danger
to the Commonwealth, as subjecting him to Church Censures, tho never so
deservedly, would necessarily be; for it would look as if he had a Superior on
Earth, though really it were only a Superiors Delegate; and subject Him to be
despised and slighted by some, who would value themselves above him, as not so
near to Gods Favor and Commnunion as themselves; it would occasion discord
between the Prince and the Church, and hazard the taking away all just
Authority, nay, the expulsion of Christianity it self: and therefore rather
than endanger the public Peace and Tranquillity, the Prince should be Exempt
from an Ordinance and Institution of Christ Himself, which in Reason does touch
Him as well as any else; Will it not then follow, that rather than manifestly
hazard the both Spiritual and Temporal good of His People, a Divorce, being the
only remedy, may as well be warranted; and He as well freed from the dangerous
Tie of Marriage in such a Case, as from Excommunication it self? Nay, we find
God himself Dispensing with an Eternal and Natural Law for the sake of the
Public Spiritual Good. God Dispensed with the Natural Law of doing no Murder,
and that within the near Relation of Father and Son, and commanded Abraham to
flay Isaac, that He might thus give a rare Example of his Faith for all the
Church of God afterward to imitate, both Jews and Christians: and David in
extremity of Hunger was Indulged, and that not immediately by God, but by the
prudential rational deduction of Ahimelech the Priest, that a Case of necessity
did sufficiently Dispense, was Indulged, I say eating the Shewbread against a
positive Law, that none but the Priests alone should eat it, and yet did not do
Evil, in eating the forbidden Bread, that Good might come of it, the
preservation of his Life; and that was all the good it did, because his Life,
at that time not being King, had no other Influence on the public Good, than
as afterward he was to be King.

I Conclude therefore, that if not only the public good cannot be procured,
but the greatest and highest Mischiefs be prevented without the Divorce of a
Person whose Marriage hinders the only remedy and prevention of those great
Mischiefs, introduction of Idolatry, Superstition, and Defection from the true
Religion; that a perpetual Separation of that Person from the Prince is made
necessary to the avoiding those Mischiefs, and because those Mischiefs must and
ought to be, and may lawfully, by this way of Separation be Avoided;
(Christianity it self, for the prevention of like Mischiefs dispensing with Him
in another as solemn an Ordinance of Religion,) this Separation so necessitated
shall not leave any Tie or Obligation on the Prince which is inconsistent with
perpetual necessary, not accidental Separation, and such a Tie is Marriage, but
that the Prince is thus dis-ingaged single and free to pursue the averting
those dreadful, destructive, and otherwise certain Mischiefs which would Ensue
to the ruin of the greatest Public Good, both Spiritual and Temporal; the
procurement of which cannot be prejudiced by any private Interest or Right, for
that ceases to be so, when it stands in competition with the Public; but
dispenses with the Annulling that Right and Propriety, by a prudential,
rational, and true Inference from an unavoidable Necessity.

FINIS.

