A Brief or General REPLY, UNTO Mr. KNUTTONS Answers unto the VII. QUESTIONS,
About the Controversy between the Church of ENGLAND, AND The SEPARATIST and
ANABAPTIST* Briefly discussed.

By JOHN MABBATT.

Prove. 22.19, 20, 21. verses.

Verse. 19. That thy Confidence may be in the LORD, I have showed thee this day,
thou therefore take heed. Verse. 20. Have not I written unto thee three things
in Counsels and Knowledge. Verse. 21. That I might show thee the assurance of
the words of Truth to answer the words of truth to them that send to thee. 2 Timothy 2.9. Even unto bonds, but the Word of God is not bound. Prove. 30.5. Every
word of God is pure, he is a shield to those that trust in him. Printed in the
Year. 1645.

Upon the Honorable Court of Parliament, Englands worthy Patriots be the
spirit of magnanimity, profunditie of wisdom and sound judgment, the
pleasure of Industriousnesse, the happy reaping of a righteous soweing, mercy
abundantly, and seasonably beshowring the fruits of the ground with a blessed
increase, for under the defense of the All-protection, I doubt not of the free
passage of all and every Truth; A rich Treasure for Parliament and Kingdom:
the ground or cause of this following discourse, as the seed of it was the
Tenants of the Separation, Mr. Knutton charged to be unchristian in his
opposite writing, yet I suppose the blade that rises from the seed, which
sometimes an opposite controversy in some sense may be said to be; yet I hope
will not be offended at the grain in thee are, ripened for the use of the
Owner thereof, yet will be burn up the Chafe with unquenchable fire.
The Power of safety overshadow the PARLIAMENT, and glory dwell in our Land.
UNto the Pyons inquiring understanding Reader, increase of knowledge is a
portion of God, in promise yours: then shall we know the Lord, when we follow
on to know him, Hosea 6.3. And as the weight of all heavenly knowledge, is God
therein understood, so is there a worth in the knowledge of heavenly things in
the knowing of them according unto God, which knowledge no man has by nature,
but only of God, and in him enjoyed, who manifesting himself unto us, gives
forth the knowledge of things, which we understood not before, opening the
mouth to confess him, and the things of him, though others deny him, and will
not receive him, nor the things of him; But like the Jews, that would not
believe that Christ gave sight unto the man that was borne blind, Joh. 9.18. so
is it with many, too like the Pharisees, who would not acknowledge God in it;
yet would he that was blind, but then seeing confess Jesus, although the
Jews had ordained, that if any man did confess that he was the Christ, he
should be excommunicated out of the Synagogue, who being cast out by them, yet
embraced by Christ; So is Christ unto all his, holding fast his truths, though
for it they are excluded by men, in reading these few lines in this reply, you
must not expect Scholar Phrases, nor the eloquence of the wisdom of men, the
Greeks seek after no such things as runs in the stream amongst men generally
in allowance, for we are not ignorant how that this way is spoken against every
where, yet God causes Truth to gain such that in receiving it are advantaged
by it, though there may be, as Solomon says, a price in the hand of a fool,
yet he has not the heart to take it, but in you Beloved, let the Word of God
dwell plenteously or richly, try the spirits, search the Scriptures, examine
the texts of Scriptures alleged in proof in this matter in reply. And as you
read, you shall first have the original Question, then Mr. Knuttons Answer,
Reason or Objection, marked with the Letter F, and Ob. wherein there passes
not a word but what was his own.

Secondly, in Note for that is mine in Reply, is noted with the Letter R, and
A. which matter in Reply, wherein it holds out my Judgment and practice with
those Churches in the faith and order of the Gospel, am willing to be tried by
the Scriptures, as knowing that the day shall declare all things approved, and
what shall be disapproved, that matter that is declared unto us shall be
approved, is the matter that the Scripture evinceth and approves unto us, and
whosoever shall walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be upon them, and
Mercy upon the Israel of God, desiring not to be found in our own
righteousness, after the Law, but in the righteousness of God by faith in
Jesus Christ, under which covering, the Lord everlastingly find you.

Beloved, after your effectual call of God unto the Faith and Order of the
Gospel in Nottingham, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you from God
our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, although since it has pleased God to
make known his truth unto you, you are not with us unacquainted with what
Controversy, Contention, Tumults, Oppositions, that both you and the Churches
in London and other parts of the Country have and do meet withal, for walking
up to the Light of truth, made known to us from God, who has fulfilled his
promise unto us, saying, That he would teach us, and lead us in the way that
we have not known, Isai. the 42.15, 16. Verse. in whom also we trust he will
fulfill that his promise in Isai. 49.11. where he says, I will make all my
mountains as a way, and my paths shall be exalted.

Behold it much rejoiced me; and I was glad to hear that the knowledge of the
true and pure Ways of God, was in manifestation unto you in Nottingham, which
was unknown and unheard of by me that it was so amongst you, until that which
was in opposition against you came out in public view and Print here in London
against you; which one having one of the Books, knowing it contrary to my
judgment and practice, gave it me, saying; here is that takes you to do;
which I took and read, understanding in it, that the Author affirms that he
cannot maintain, in which affirmation of his, the truth being opposed, was one
reason put me upon this Reply to his book; the second Reason was, in referrence
to those persons in Nottingham, opposed, though unacquainted with any of them,
yet bearing affection to them, as those in that County of Aliance, from which
I had my descent; Among whom I hearing the truth embraced, was moved in
referrence unto them, having to them both an inward and outward relation, yet
through consciousnesse of mine own inabilitie, found some demurre, but being by
a friend stirred to it, and informing me of the desire in the contrary, that
there might be some answer unto Mr. Knuttons Book; I from a willing principle,
according unto the former reasons so to do, willingly according to what
abillity and time God gave me, I have made this Reply, that his supposed
Answers to these 7. Questions, in his Book may appear, as they are void, and
the Resolution of the Question as far off as when Mr. Knutton began to resolve
them, for any thing in his Answers; so that the truth in the Question in the
port of them, stands firm and undeniable, and the strength of his opposition
against you languisheth in its own weakness; will but occasion more courage,
and double resolution unto you in the Truth, and that way of God, which by some
may be called the way of heresy, yet so, says the Apostle, worship I the God
of my Fathers, believing all things in the Law and the Prophets, Act. 24.14,
15. which that you may so do in the true Knowledge and Holiness, according
unto God, I shall pray.

Yours in CHRIST JESUS, John Mabbatt.

QVESTION THE FIRST. Whether is the Church of England, as it now stands, a true
Church?
F. I Premize this, that in this Church is much defect in Discipline, and in
the execution of it, in comparison of other Reformed Churches, who in this far
exceed it; the second Part of the Answer is, I affirm, it is a true Church,
yea the Spowse of Christ.

R. In the first part of the Answer, nothing is said for the Church of England,
except it be in way of denial, to which there need be little reply to it; The
second part of the Answer is a positive affirmation; it is a true Church, yea
the Spowse of Christ; but upon what ground, proof or reason, he is too short to
demonstrate; They of the Church of Rome will give as positive an affirmation,
that their Church is a true Church, yea the Spowse of Christ; Though she be a
Harlot, therefore a bare affirmation to be such, must not be taken, 2 Pet.
2.18. here is neither ground nor proof to make good this affirmation, therefore
if any thing be pretended, it is in the following reason.

F. Because the Church of England has the matter and form of a true Church;
the matter of a Church are men and women in a right logical sense, matter
which is one of the causes, has this property, it is Passive, for Action is
from the Form, which is called the beginning of doing, as matter is of
suffering, so are men by nature in the internal and real work of Grace, in
conversion passive; Such matter the Church of England has: it has also the
form of a Church; the form of a thing in strict logical sense, is a chief
cause which actuates the matter, and perfects it, it is a constituting cause;
now the form or constituting cause of a Church is faith, which brings it into
relation to Christ; this form our Church has, it has many true Believers.

R. This argument cannot justify the Church of England to be a true Church. 1.
Because what this Argument affirms to maintain it so, is no more then may be
affirmed of the Church of Rome. 2. Because it denies all visible Apostolical
Churches, as they were planted by the Apostles in the Primative times, which
may appear as follows.

First, it grants what it affirms may be in the Church of Rome; thus; the
matter and form he expresses to be the matter and form of a Church: be there
the matter, says he, in a right Logical sense, is men and women, but men and
women are the matter of the Church of Rome, ergo the matter is in Rome, which
is one of the Causes that has this property; it is passive, so are men by
rature in the internal and real work of grace in conversion, so is it with
all men and women in Rome, and in all the World, it has also the form of a
Church, which form he thus explaines, the form of a thing in strict Logical
sense, is a chief cause which actuates the matter, and perfects it, as he
says, action is from the form which is called the beginning of doing, but the
Church of Rome has a form, as a chief cause, which actuates the matter, and
perfects it, and is a constituting cause to it, which is here proved, 2 These.
2.9.10. Revel. 13.4, 5.12.13.14.15.16.17.

F. Now the form or constituting Cause of a Church is faith, which brings it
into Relation to Christ.

R. Which I deny, Faith alone is not a form or Constituting cause of a
Church, for what ever is essential to the being of the Church of Christ, is
essential to be in the Church, considered in its constitution, Ephesians. 2.19,
20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5. and for what he affirms of Faith, that it should
be a form or constituting cause of a Church, in being in relation to Christ,
is false, there may be such in the Church of Rome, have Faith, and stand in
relation to Christ, Revel. 18.4. ergo, there is faith in some of the Church of
Rome, that brings it into relation to Christ, and is a constituting cause of
her to be his Church and Spowse, whom he has disclaimed, and to be a harlot,
and the mother of whoredoms. Rev. 17.5.

Therefore for him to say, because here is some have Faith, and many true
Believers in the Church of England, and this their faith brings it into
relation to Christ, this form our Church has, it is no more then may be said
of Rome, and this does not make neither one nor the other a true Church.

2. This Argument denies all visible Apostolical Churches, as they were
planted by the Apostles in the Primitive times: First the matter of the Church
in the Apostles times, were Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Secondly, not
simply, as men and women, but such men and women as professed Faith and
Repentance at the least. Act. 2.41.

3. Now men and women are in the work of Conversion merely passive, but as
they are matter, for the Church of Christ they are more then merely passive,
not dead stones, but living stones, because that you have tasted that the Lord
is gracious, to whom coming as a living Stone, ye also, as living stones be
made a spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.3.4.5.

The form or Constituting cause of a Church, is faith, which brings it into
relation to Christ, if he would say any thing in this Argument, it is in these
words, Yet how contrary it is to stand with the Primitive Church, may plainly
appear.

1. It denies the visibility of Christ's Church, because the Argument cannot
hold, but with reference only unto the Church of Christ mystical: for
Believers in all ages, places, and people, by reason of their union and Faith
in Christ, are called his body, Ephesians. 1.23. and thus they are of his body, yet
visibly not his Church.

2. Faith cannot be only a form or constituting cause of the visible Church;
because first, Faith may as well be a form or constituting cause, as well to
particular persons to be a Church of Christ, for he has the same Faith, brings
him into this relation unto Christ, as does the faith of more, and makes him a
member of his body mistically, yet not his Church visibly; For the Scripture
never gives the name of Church to one person; no less then two or three, Matt.
18.20.

3. Believers living in several distinct parts of this Kingdom, neither
acquainted one with another, nor have any thing to do each with another in the
matters pertaining to a Church, yet by virtue of their Faith in Christ, may
have that form or constituting Cause of a Church, he alleges, that brings
it into relation unto Christ; yet none will say, they are Christ's visible
Church, as the Apostle meaned, when he writ, saying unto the Church of God at
Corinth, and unto the Church of Galatia, and if any will say any thing of them,
it must be in the words of the Apostle Peter, in his first Epistle, first
Chapter, first Verse. unto the strangers that dwell here and there throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Assia and Bithynia.

F. Because the Church of England has the essential notes and marks of a
true Church; 1. The Word of God purely and powerfully Preached, professed and
maintained, which always gather a People to the Lord, being so taught.

2. The lawful Administration of the two Sacraments, according to Christ's
Institution, Matt. 28.19, 20.

3. True obedience to the Word of God, a right following Christ, voice and
conforming to his will.

4. The Union with God by his Spirit and Faith, and with his Saints by love.

R. As he could not make it good in the matter and form of a true Church,
neither will these Notes and Marks be found in her to be a true Church, but
will prove like unto the Nethinims, who came of the Gibeonites, who pretended
that they were of the Levites, and sought their writing of the Genealogies, but
it was not found; therefore they were put from the Priesthood, Josh.
9.3.4.9.27. Ezra. 2.43.62. Nehem. 7.60.64, 65.

Laodicean says, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; But the answer of God is, and know not how thou art wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Revel. 3.17.

To the first note, for pure preaching of the Word of God, it is purely, when
it is without mixture with humane rites, or humane Tradition, or Authority of
humane Authors. But the Church of England, in stead of being like unto the
House of God, the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. to hold up, and forth, pure truth: Does she not hold out Truth mixed
with humane rites, and Traditions in the Authority of humane Authors, witness
the doctrine of Infants, Baptism, which to do, Christ says, you worship me
in vain, teaching for Doctrine men's Preceps.

2. The Word is purely Preached, when it is in the simple purity of the Word it
self, and not to be wise above what is written, holding out nothing in matter
of Faith and Worship, then the pure Word of God holds out so to be, which only
is sufficient to make the man of God absolute and perfect to all good Works. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. But this is not a pure Preaching, to affirm that the
Scripture is not Sufficient to make the man of God perfect to every good work!
Witness, no man is able to preach the Gospel, except he have humane Learning,
and the knowledge of Tongues.

3. Thirdly then is the Word purely Preached, when the whole Counsel of God is
preached. Act. 20.20.27. Now where any part of Gods Counsel is withstood,
there is no pure preaching of his Word, but as it was said conserning the
Pharisees, and the expounders of the Law, in the hearing of Christ preached, in
refusing to have heard to one part of Gods Truth in point of John's Baptism,
they were so far from purely hearing the Word, that they are said to despise
the Counsel of God. Luke 7.30. so may it be said in the other respect, to
preach a part, and not the whole Counsel of God made known, is but to despise
the Counsel of God, Christ's Prerogative Royal, peculiar and alone King and
Lawgiver to his Church, is to be preached up and maintained. Psalm. 2.6. Isaiah.
9.6. Revel. 19.16. and not to pretend to hold up Christ's Prerogative, in word
only, to spoil him of his Prerogative Royal, which is so done, when Christ
has said in his Word, thus and thus shall ye preach my Word, my will and my
Commands. But to contradict, and say, not so as the Word requires, but thus and
thus, according to such and a humane Tradition of the Fathers; this is to
spoil Christ of his Prerogative as a King, and to make void his Commands to
his Church, which he has enjoined them to observe unto the end of the World.
Mat. 28.20. And where any such things as these be, are contrary to pure
Doctrine, there is not the Word purely preached.

Further, not only purely, but powerfully preached, when according to the power
of God, subjecting people to the pure word of God, that obedience that is from
the heart, unto the form of the doctrine of Christ's Word to the truth, as the
truth is in Jesus, not only to one Truth but every Truth of Christ, teaching
them to observe all that I command you, Mat. 28.20. And the Word in such purity
and power as the Apostles preached it, calling and bringing home people unto
God, this they did in several places, and all this while, not a note or mark
of a true Church gathered, for after this they planted Churches, and of these
Converts, were joined unto Churches, and this may be out of a Church, calling
and conversion, as the hand of the Lord was with diverse, after the scattering
of the Church, for the persecution about Stephen, Act. 11.19, 20, 21.

2. F. Note: But in the Church of England, is the lawful administration of the
two Sacraments, according to Christ's Institution. Mat. 28.19, 20.

R. By this note or mark of a true Church, he cannot make it good; First, the
two Sacraments must be lawfully Administered, and then lawfully, when done
according to Christ's Institution, Matt. 28.19, 20. Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost: In
the Institution is plainly laid down, First Teach, and then Baptize; he must
so teach, as the party be instructed by teaching, (teaching implies a Scholar
learning) Go Teach all Nations, that is Disciples, all Nations, Baptizing
them. Now how lawfully has this Sacrament been by Mr. Knution, or those his
aspersion pleads for, administered lawfully, has he taught* or were they taught
Disciples they administered Baptism upon; if not, then not lawfully administered
as the Institution is given by Christ, to be observed.

Children cannot be the lawful subjects of this Sacrament, for they are not
capable of teaching, Christ Institutes and commands one thing, you say and do
another thing, he says, Teach and Baptize; you say, no Baptize without
Teaching, yea, the untaught, and such incapable of teaching: Is this a lawful
administration of this Sacrament? and one will not serve without the other, if
that were lawfully administered, for he enjoynes, teaching to observe all that
he commands, verse. the 20.

F. 3. Note the true obedience to the Word of God, a right following Christ's
voice, and conforming to his Will. John. 10.27.

R. This note will not serve to maintain the thing affirmed: For when Christ's
institution is not rightly hearkened unto, and followed, there cannot be
boasting of obedience, and harkening unto, and following Christ rightly, Mat.
7.24.26.

F. 4. Note. Union with God by his Spirit and faith, and with his Saints by
love.

R. This is not so essential a mark of a true Church, but that the scattered
Saints, Believers far remote one to another have, and Saints in their own
particular, it may be affirmed of them, to have union with God by his Spirit
and faith, and with his saints by love, and this the believing Saints had in
the Apostles times, when they were called before visibly they were joined unto
any Church, and some that never saw the Apostles face, hearing of his
conversion and preaching, glorified God for him Gal. 1.22, 23.

F. Because this Church of England was rightly called and constituted at the
first by the preaching of the Word, and gracious Laws of the Magistrate.

R. Here it is affirmed, it was called and constituted either by the preaching
of the Word alone, or else by the preaching of the Word, and the Laws of the
Magistrate together, he would not be understood to affirm, it was constituted
by the preaching of the Word alone, yet it seems, that if he should speak
according to the light of truth, he could not tell how to make it out
otherwise; as mind what he says himself, -- Constraint it self may justly
have place in a lawful Constitution, or Reformation of a Church, -- there must
be first a lawful constitution before a law of constraint by the Magistrate,
and this he cannot deny, without he will deny his own words, as he says in
the first Argument, page 1. the form or Constituting cause of a Church is
Faith; If this be a Constituting Cause in his Judgment, he says of faith and
believing, the Magistrate must not compel a man to believe, says he; then
from his own Argument, a Church may be of a lawful constitution without the
Power of the Magistrate, which is a truth, according to the primitive Churches,
who were so.

But they must compel them to attend the means of grace, and leave their
wickedness; if so, then it is but just and right reason, where any Church or
Churches are in a lawful constitution according to the word of God, in
relation unto Christ by faith through the Spirit, according together in the
order and fellowship of the Gospel, subjected unto Christ their only King,
Priest, and Prophet, is Gods Church appointed, that to them they should grant
protection, for there has God appointed the blessing for evermore, and this
the Apostle put us upon to pray for; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. for kings and all that
are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
Godliness and honesty.

But never did the Apostle call upon the Magistrate by the sword, to cause any
man to be of the Church of Christ, this was effected by the power of God in the
Word preached, Act. 2.41.

His fourth and fifth Argument he says more properly comes in elsewhere, which
here is passed by.

But concerning Christ's visible Church, note these particulars. 1. The
foundation of the Church is Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.

2. The layer of this foundation is God. Isaiah 18.16.

3. The place where God lays this foundation, is in Sion, his Church. Romans
9.33. 1 Pet. 2.6.

4. The builder on this foundation, is God by his Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. 1 Cor. 3.9.

5. The matter laid upon this foundation, is living Stones. 1 Pet. 2.5.

6. The form of this building, is a Temple, or Spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5.
Ephesians. 2.21.

7. The end of this building or house of God is, that it should be a habitation
for God, through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22.

Seven particulars more the Scripture holds out to us, as in one Conjunction
unto these seven principal heads, pertaining unto Christ's visible Church.

1. In Christ being the foundation of the Church, so is he the Lord and King,
and only head of the Church, Psalm. 2.6. Mat. 21.42. Ephesians. 1.22.

2. God laying this foundation, he lays it as the stock of all the fullness of
the treasury of Righteousness and life, 1 Cor. 1.30. Coloss. 1.9. Coloss. 2.9.

3. In regard of the place where God lays this foundation, the Church, he
makes it the fullness of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. 1.23. 2 Pet. 1.3.
Mat. 18, 19, 20.

4. From Gods being the builder, the building of Christ's Church shall go on,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Mat. 16.18. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Heb. 3.4.

5. In regard of the matter laid upon this foundation, living Stones, this that
the believing sheep of Christ shall be gathered into the Sheepfold of the Lord
Jesus, and built up upon him. John. 10.16. Mat. 24.31. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.13.

6. In that this building is a Temple and spiritual House; this, that the
Church is a glorious and admirable building. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Psalm. 87.7. Revel. 21.2.11. Cant. 6.10.

7. From the end of this building, to be a habitation for God, through the
Spirit, is this, from Gods inhabiting: here are these two things to be
understood; First, Gods purging his floor, Mat. 3.12. Revel. 21.27. Secondly,
his filling his House with his glory. Revel. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Revel. 21.3, 4,
5.

Now to these former particulars, I shall lay down these four conclusions.

1. That the foundation, and the Saints mutual, according together in the
Order and Fellowship of the Gospel, to be the Church of God, is in one
Conjunction together, Matt. 18.20. Joh. 15.1.5. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Colloss. 2.19.
Ephesians. 2.21.

2. This is so by the Lords doing alone, and it is marveilous in our eyes,
Matt. 21.42. Ephesians. 2.22.

3. Thirdly, that in the Church, in Sion, God has only declared, that there is
this foundation laid by him, Isay. 28.16. Romans 9.33. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. Ephesians.
3.10.

4. That the Church of Christ is such a choice one to him, as his Spowse; that
it is not the Faith of another, or others can instate any into this relation to
Christ to be his Church or Spowse, for she is his Church and Spowse, by her own
being one with Jesus Christ; I am my beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. Cant.
6.2.

QVESTION II. Whether the Church of England be a right National Church?
F I Assieme, it is as true a National Church, as the Jewish Church was.

R. To return back to him his own words, wherein may appear what little weight
of truth there is in his affirmation, -- It is as true a National Church as
the Jewish Church was, yet says he, in the Old Testament the Jews were never
called by the name of National Church, which is denial enough to what he
affirms; and further he says, that no National Church is mentioned in the New
Testament, but only particular Churches gathered by the Apostles preaching, and
in this he gives himself a second denial to what he affirmed; thus, both in
the old and new Testament, there is no warrant for an National Church by his
own grant, but says he, if the judgment of Mr. Brightman, and some other
learned, upon the Revelation, be Orthodox and sound, then National Churches
are spoken of, and prefigured by those seven Asian Churches, whom that
Eagle-eyed Expositor looks upon as Tipes of succeeding Churches, and those
Churches whom they set out to be their Counterpain, as Sardis sets out the
Church of Germany, Laodicia the Church of England, and Philadelphia the
Churches of France, Helvetia, Sueuca, Geneva, Holland, Scotland, -- what ever
Mr. Brightman or others say, it is not Anthentick, and so to be taken, without
the Scripture says it. Neither is this Mr. Brightman has said, of any great
stay to the Church of England, whose Counterpaine he sets out from Laodicea, of
whom God said in Revel. 3.16. because thou art Lukewarm, and neither hot nor
cold, it will come to pass, that I will spue thee out of my mouth; and it may
be minded, what Mr. Brightman says, that Christ prefers a blind Papist, or
no Religion at all, before this hodge-podge Lukewarmenesse, of which Laodicea,
and the Church of England, if you will have it so, does consist.

And concerning that in the Old Testament, are diverse Illustrious Prophesies of
a National Church of the Jews, when God shall convert them, to bring them
back, to settle them in their own Kingdom. Isai. 60.4. Likewise we find, says
he, the Prophetsspeaking of National Churches amongst the Gentiles, which
shall come and join with the Church of the Jews, but these Prophesies have
referrence unto that time after the Jews calling and conversion, which is not
yet, and so serve not now, and we have the Scriptures speaking of some out of
every Country, Kingdom, Nation and People is redeemed out from all the rest,
is a truth as well, as to affirm it of the whole Nations; read two Proofs,
Revel. 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Revel. 21.24.

Therefore we see, there is nothing he can say, does prove a National Church,
therefore not a Nation. But conclude with Act. 10.35. in every Nation, he that
fears God, and works Righteousness is accepted with him.

A Reason or two, why a Church in an National consideration, cannot be.

1. The Church was so many as could meet together in one place, a whole Nation
cannot do so. Act. 14.^7.

2. The Church is such a company, over whom the Pastor, or Pastors of it may
discharge that work of Duty, Care, Service and watchfulness over them, as
those flocks over which God makes them Overseers, now who can fulfill or
discharge a Pastoral charge over a whole Nation, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.

3. The Church is such over whom their Pastor, or Pastors that are over them,
are to give account of; what Pastor or Pastors will or can be accountable for a
whole Nation, as their flock, according to the Apostles mind, as Pastors
should be, Heb. 13.17.

QVESTION III. Whether are the Ministers in the Church of England sent of God,
and so are true Ministers, or not?
F. I Affirm, they be true Ministers of Jesus Christ, sent of God into his
Vinyeard, to build up his Church and people, as living stones, upon Christ the
chief Corner Stone.

R. In this Answer in a true Minister, we may observe these particulars; First,
he is sent of God. 2. The place whether he is sent, is into his Vinyeard. 3.
The work there that he is to do, is to build up his Church and People. 4.
The quality of the matter they are to build, which is living Stones. 5. The
foundation they must build upon, is Christ, the chief Corner Stone. But now
whether these be in the Ministers of the Church of England, examine.

First a true Minister of Christ is sent of God, that is in one of these two
ways. 1. Immediately by God, as the Apostles were. 2. Mediately by the Church,
in choice, in election, and ordination, lawfully proceeded in according to the
rule of the Word of Christ so requiring of it.

1. For immediate sending of God, as the Apostles were sent, so he does not
say, are the Ministers he would plead for, are sent: he goes not about to show
such a pattern as Paul could; Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
through the will of God, Romans 1.1.5. 1 cor. 1.11. But as he does say, is this,
that they have gifts, and exercise their abilities to convert and conform
souls; Now says he, their ability and fidelity argues, that God has sent
them, so much may be said of the woman of Samaria, was able and faithful to
declare Christ the Messiah to the Samaritans, that they believed because of her
words. Joh. 4.39.

2. God or Christ may be said to send in a mediate way, when a Ministre in a
Church is lawfully elected and ordained into the Church of Christ as Act.
14.23. and tell them, it is not the greatness of his gifts, or what he has
done, makes him officiously a Minister of the Church, till he be called and
ordained to it; And there can be no true and lawful election and ordination of
a true Minister, but in a true Church, Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. Now for such a
call by lawful election, in ordination in the Church, as Act. 14.23. to be
ordained in the Church, thus to justify those Ministers he pleads for, he
says nothing, truly to be sent of God, and thus from neither of these, to
sending of God, can he justify them to be Ministers sent of God, neither
immediately of God, as the Apostles, nor mediately in the Church; and he may
say what he said, They be true Ministers of Jesus Christ, sent of God, but
those he sets to plead for to be Ministers, are not those Ministers sent of
God, not immediately, as Paul, nor mediately called, elected, ordained in the
Church of Christ, his Vinyeard, into which he says they are sent.

But Christ seeing the Laborers standing idle in the Marketplace, Mat.
20.4.7. says unto them, go ye also into my Vinyeard, and whatsoever is
right, I will give you, and they went their way, Verse. 7. and his promise is,
whatsoever is right, that shall you receive.

F. I grant, says he, that the calling of the Lordly Prelates, as they are
described in the second Article of the Covenant, and exercise their
jurisdiction in their Courts, by their substitutes, is Antichristian, yet the
Godly, Learned Ministers of this Church, called by them, are true Ministers.

R. First he grants, the calling is Antichristian, and so unlawful, yet see
how he contradicts himself; if they be Godly men, called by them, then the call
is not Antichristian, nor unlawful, but they true Ministers of Christ; now
what little show of reason is in this; is the Call Antichristian in respect of
the Prelates calling, or the Persons called; it is Antichristian in the Caller,
and that is the Prelates, then all without exception, let them be whom they
will, as they are called by them, it is an Antichristian Call to the Ministry,
and so not a true Minister, but a false.

Ob. But the Prelates are Christians, and so their Call of us is not altogether
unlawful, which the Seperates, every Plebeian Artificer has power to Elect,
and ordain by virtue of his Christian Profession, the Act of the worthiest
standing for all: -- how can they deny this right to Persons, in some measure
quallified for this Work?

R. This is denied, as untrue; they did not choose you, considered as
Christians, if they did simply so, it was to set you Pastors over them, in that
consideration alone, which if they did, these chosen by them should have stood
close to them, and not forsake them, but let them sink under the Antichristian
doom alone.

3. They did not as Christians call you, as you say, with the Separates; if
they did, why will not you allow with Christians to be the power of Calling,
Electing, and ordaining Ministers, which you seem to contemn by your words;
every Plebeian Artifieer has power to elect and ordain by virtue his
Christian profession, which you should not contemn, for you can be under no
people, but they must be some Artificers; will you not have their voices to
choose you, or have you been only a Teacher to Lordly Prelates, then have you
lost your flock, and take heed how you contemn the choice of the Lords people,
it is no matter how mean or contemptible their calling or trades are, or how
common the persons be: Is not this said, they disdain the Carpenters Son?
What ever Christ purchased for the Saints, and gave to them that privilege,
the Apostles in their time would not deny them: but they did give their voices
in electing their Elders, Act. 1. last. Act. 14.23.

4. They did not as Christians, for they did disclaim it, as to belong to
Christians, barely so considered, to meddle at all in calling and ordaining
Ministers, and some of you also they did call, should not have all the number
of their name, nor allowed to do so.

5. Not as Christians from your own words, as you acknowledge, saying, which
yet I speak not in favor of their calling, for I look upon it as
Antichristian, and directly opposing Christ's Word, and approve you allege for
it. Matthew. 20.25, 26.

Ob. The Prelates in their Ordination, command us to Preach the Gospel truly;
now if we not rightly called, because called by them; then one of these two
things, or both follows; First, either it is unlawful for the Prelates to
command us to preach the Gospel. 2. Or else it is unlawful for us to preach
the Gospel as they command us.

R. Now they command you to preach the Gospel by virtue of their ordaining of
you, or not; If not, by virtue of their ordaining of you, then they disclaimed
their Ordination of you, but if by virtue of their ordaining of you, as so they
did, and so it was unlawful and Antichristian, even as they commanded you so
to do, and for you to Preach from their so commanding you, by virtue of their
ordaining of you so, is unlawful and Antichristian, as the Call from them is
Antichristian, you have granted over and over.

Ob. If a Minister should go and preach amongst the Pagans, and convert diverse
of them, he may be said to be a Minister sent of God.

A. It is such a Minister he means, as has a Call to the Ministry, to seek
for, as would find it in something; but this will declare it no more then it
would the Woman of Samaria to be one.

F. But I, says he, propose this Querie to the Conscience of any reasonable
man; Suppose a profane parish, where no means of Grace ever was, nor any godly
Christian ever dwelt; should from the convixion of the necessity of Preaching,
make suit to some godly Minister to be their Pastor; I demand, whether this be
not a divine Call from God, I conceive, says he, it is.

R. This is a very strange Querie, he says, a true Minister was one sent of
God into his Vinyeard, yet here, where there is not, nor ever was any godly
Christian, yet he concluded, he has a devine call from God to be their Pastor,
when he said before, God sent into his Vinyeard, to build up living Stones upon
Jesus Christ, the Apostles, they well know the mind of Christ, did not, nor
would not have ordination of Pastors over any but the flocks of Christ, nor no
other ordination would the Apostles have, but that is in the Church, and this
from the Apostles is left to observe, for election and ordination of true
Ministers, Act. 14.23. Act. 20.28. and to go upon this supposition unjustly,
though they be not a Church, yet they may come to be a Church the Apostles
planted; no such may be Churches, and for any to do thus, if it be not to
ru^ne before they be sent, nothing is. The immediate-sending of the Apostles,
had no Commission to set down amongst any such people, to be a Church, till
they were converted, as the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. you know what manner
of entrance in we had unto you, and how we turned to God from Idols, to serve
the living and true God.

And the mediate call of God he cannot conceive to be here, to be called by, or
in his Church, -- for here is not one godly Saint amongst them.

F. But I think, says he, a Minister may be truly sent by God, by a Synod of
godly and Learned Divines to a Pastoral charge, though the people call him
not, but are a profane Parish, that desire not powerful Preaching, but hate
it, and would oppose the coming in of such a one.

R. Mr. Knutton says a little before, in his Book, what is contrary unto this:
-- I think, says he, every Godly Minister will not account himself a Minister
sent of God, as he has his calling from the Prelates, which says he, I
acknowledge is Antichristian, but will rather look at his divine Quallification
for the Lords work; as his internal call from God, and at his peoples
election of him to such a Charge as his outward call, and will look at the
Episcopal ordination as a mere Ceremony, which cannot nullify his divine call
from God, and his Church, -- as the Episcopal Ordination is in Annullity, not
to be observed, and if Gods call, and his Churches call is sufficient, and only
to be stood too, as it is, he need run to no other, and for any to force
themselves upon any people, opposing and hating any such thing, it is contrary
to the order given by Christ to his Ministers, sending them out, If they will
not receive you, shake off the dust off your feet against them. Matt. 10.14.
Act. 18.6.

In a word by way of Reply to what Mr. Knutton says, to maintain Tithes.

F. Tithes, says he, are not Ceremonial, for a Jewish ceremony was a Carnal
tipe of an holy thing enjoined for the service of the Tabernacle and Temple,
only until the time of Reformation.

R. But Tithes was a Jewish Ceremony, and a carnal Tipe of an holy thing
enjoined for the Service of the Tabernacle and Temple, only until the time of
Reformation.

1. Tithes Tipe out to the Levites, that God was their portion in Israel, Number.
18.20.21.24. Josh. 13.14.33.

2. It was enjoined for the service of the Tabernacle and Temple, this ye
shall have for your service in the Tabernacle. Numb. 18.21. Heb. 7.5.

3. Until the time of the Reformation, Heb. 9, 10.

Ob. Now to say, Tithes were instituted, to signify something for a time, as
all other Ceremonies were, is not true.

A. But to say of Tithes, is truth, as thus; Tithes Type or signify out God to
be the portion of the Levites, from the rest of their brethren in Israel, only
in their Generation, and that till all their service in the Tabernacle, and
waiting upon the Aaltar in offering sacrifices for sin, offered up by them,
were put to an end by the alone and only sacrifice for sin, by the death of
Christ; this is truth, Number. 18.23, 24. Heb. 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Ob. Tithes are Morrall, and so perpetual. 1 Cor. 9.13.14.

A. It is denied; Tyths are not morrall nor perpetual, and for that Proof 1
Cor. 9.13.14. will prove no such thing, and he might as well say, the
Priesthood of Aaron is morrall and perpetual, and aledge as good proof to
prove it, as here he brings to prove the morality of Tithes in Heb. 5.4.5. and
this he will not undertake to maintain, except he will be Jewish perpetually,
and everlastingly, Heb. 7.11.16.18. but let us consider the Text he aledgeth, 1
Cor. 9.13.14. 1. The 13. Verse. Do ye not know that they which Minister about
the holy things, eat of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the
Aaltar, are partakers with the Aaltar; This verse will not prove Tithes to be
morrall and so perpetual, not morrall thus; because the things of the Temple
cannot be eaten no longer then there be them that Minister about the holy
things of the Temple.

2. Neither can there be any partaker of the Aaltar, no longer then they wait
upon the Aaltar.

3. It cannot be denied, but that the Temple, Ministry, and the Aaltar,
waiting, and the eating of the Sacrifice, and pertaking of the Altar, are all
abollished, the whole 9. Chapter, Heb. 1, 2, 3. testify, Heb. 10.9. the
morallity of Tithes in this verse, is flatly denied, and to fall with the
Ministry, Service and sacrifice of that Temple and Altar.

14. Verse. What will that say to prove the morallity of Tithes, from this
verse, is no mention of Tithes, much less any thing for the morallity of
Tithes, the words of the Verse is, So has God ordained, that they that Preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, that is, says Mr. Knutton by Tithes;
and because the Apostle does not not say so with him, he charge the Apostles
argument to be lame.

His speech impertinent: wherein Mr. Knutton is in one, if not both these
offenses; First, if he did not understand the Apostles mind, he should not have
so charged him. 2. Seeing the Apostles words would not serve for his purpose, he
should not have wrested them from the Apostles mind; but consider the words in
the Verses, so has God ordained, that they that Preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel: these words deny this thing morrally to have appertained to
those that served under the Law: and so not morrall, for it is peculiar to
those that preach the Gospel, and it allows it not morrall to the Levites
before them, as the Tithes of the Levites, not theirs, and so not morrall and
perpetual.

Not Morrall: for if it had been morrall and perpetual, then the Churches
should have given it to the Apostles, and they have declared it to them so to
be, and to have refused it, they should not but have taken it, except they
would part with what was morrally their right; but the Apostles knew they were
not to require any thing as morrally in the Tything under the Levites, and he
speaks plainly, that was theirs, was properly theirs, as they preached the
Gospel, which the Levites under the Law had no part in it. Heb. 13.10. and that
which was the Levites, was theirs as they served in the The Tabernacle, and the
more freer the Gospel is in dispensation, the more like it self it is, and he
that weighs taking least in the free dispensation of the Gospel, holds forth
the Gospel in the greatest freeness. Mat. 10.8. 1 Cor. 9.18.

Ob. Tithes are Morrall, for the Heathen, who by the light of nature, judge by
the light of Nature; Tithes were to be paid to the Gods that they worshipped.

A. Such a thing as this, to have been drawn from the Heathen, pertaining to
their worship, to be observed by Israel, unto the true God, was an abomination
in Israel, and forbidden by God himself, Ex^d. 23.13. you shall not observe
other Nations, to Worship me as they do their Idols, and we under the Gospel
are exhorted ^o keep our selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21. and as the Apostle
says, an Idol is nothing, neither is any thing offered to them; any thing, 1
Cor. 10.19, 20.

Ob. Tithes were the Lords right long before the Law was given, therefore
Tithes are Morrall.

A. Was Tithes only the Lords right? whose was all the the substance besides?
not only Tithes, but all was Gods, as in Psalm. 50.10. If I need any thing, I
will tell thee, the Cattle on a Thousand hills are mine, And as the Apostle, 1
Cor. 10.26. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: how argues this
the morrallity of Tithes before the Law was given; if he means they were Gods
in a morrall right, so was all the substance in all the world; if he mean so,
God gives not the whole, nor it in any part unto any Creature, this Right, his
it is, and he is the Sovereign Lord to dispose of his own as he pleases, and
he never gave Tithes in the morrallity of the right of them, thus unto the
Leviticall Priesthood of Aaron, the Levites: for he did enjoyne and command
them to offer up the Tithe of the Tithe received of the people in sacrifice,
unto the Lord, and this they were to do, so long as they received Tithes in
the Leviticall Priesthood, and that in a stricter manner in what they offered
of that, then that of the offering of the people; of that they might eat, but
not eat of that offered for themselves, Numb. 18.26, 27, 28. Levit. 6.23.

F. He says, all that which concerning Tithes, was instituted in the Law, was,
that Tithes should be assigned unto the Levites, so long as they should serve
the Tabernacle; And though God gave the Tithes to the Levites, yet says he,
he did not found them in that incorporation.

R. Neither did God first found his right in the Tenths, as the Tithe, but in
his right of all, God gave the land to all the tribes of Israel, except them,
but to the Levites your brethren, I give none, he shall have the Tenth of all,
and live of the sacrifice. Deuteronomy. 10.9, 10. and from his right in all he
disposes the tenth to them. And God has declared only his taking the right of
the Tithe for a time only in that incorporation, as the Truth affirms, so long
as they serve the Tabernacle, Number. 18.21. but says he, the same right
descended to the Ministers of the Gospel, but he is too short to bring any Word
for it, and this was denied before. But he brings in this lame Argument, which
cannot go upon all four, nor upon two thus; so Tithes were due to the
Leviticall Ministers, as Ministers, not as Leviticall, and so are successively
due to Evangelicall Pastors, as Pastors, not formally as Evangelicall by way of
Reply; thus the Levites by the Offerings and Sacrifices of the Tabernacle to
which they served were maintained; but when the Offerings and Sacrifices of the
Tabernacle ceased, the maintenance of them as Ministers must be at an end.
Numb. 18.21.31. there is no Law of right reason, nor Proofs of Scripture to
maintain them as Ministers longer, but approve to the contrary, Heb. 13.10.

Again, it was not Leavies simply, as Levites did accomplish the Service of
the Tabernacle, but as they were Levites ministering, and Leviticall Ministers
that received it, as the wages of their work. Number. 18.31. so says he, are
successively due to Evangelicall Pastors, as Pastors not formally as
Evangelicall, and thus it seems he would imply a Minister to be maintained, and
maintenances due to them, neither doing the service of the Law, nor the Gospel,
not Levitically as serving in the Tabernacle, nor Evangelically, as preaching
the Gospel; was ever any such thing as this affirmed under the Law, or spoken
for in the Gospel in the least allowance of such a thing, the Law was against
it, it was the Priests portion for his service. Psalm. 16.4. the Apostle
reprehends it. Phillip. 3.18, 19. But his Argument would join a Pastor or
Minister in name and maintenance by means in the substance together, and so
would contradict the wisdom of the Parliament, who seeing this evil by Order,
declare putting it down, as in all Non-residences, plurality dumb-dogges, so
far as God has given them light, to part of that he will have them strip the
false and Antichristian Ministry of, till God has made her desolate and
naked, and because his Argument is lame, and cannot stand, I need not stand
long to prove it to halt, or not to go.

Ob. It was the custom of Gods Church in all ages, to pay Tithes to the Lord;
before the Law was written, Abraham paid Tithe of all, Genesis 14.20. therefore
Tithes are Marrall.

A. It is denied, it cannot be proved to be the custom of the Church of God in
all Ages before the Law, to pay Tithes. First, this does not prove it, to
instance only Abraham in his Age. 2. And that in Abraham; for a Custom does
not prove it, being done but once by Abraham in all his life, as we can read
of; and to prove the morrality of Tithes, being before the Law, he might as
well go about to prove the same of Circumcision, and of burnt-offering, that
these were all morrall, and perpetual as well as Tithes, and plead for them to
be, which were before the Law, as well as Tithes, and observed by Abraham. And
for that he says of Jacob, he says nothing to prove it, for it cannot be
proved that Jacob paid Tithes at all in any place, and for his bringing in of
Jacob now, is nothing to the purpose.

F. Further he says, Tithes were due, and were paid to Milchizedech by Abraham.

R. This Argument has two parts in it; First Tithes were due, and in this he
has recourse unto what he had said before of Jacob, of whom he conceived it
was Jacobs opinion, that Tithes was to be paid, because Jacob vowed so to do
it, in which, says he, Jacob sinned against God, if he did not know it
pleased God, that he would vow such a thing, but in as much as he finds, that
Jacob did it not, here he leaves him under the first charge of a rash Vow, and
secondly, of never observing, that Mr. Knutton says, was a Morrall thing by
him to be observed; and therefore says he, in this fourth Reason, that he
might sin; yet to say something, because Tithes were due, and so as from
Jacob, here is a morrall due, as if he should say, but not Morrally kept, ergo,
not so morrall in Jacobs judgment, to Action. Second part of the Reason, and
were paid to Milchizedech by Abraham; here it is paid, but not as due, morrall
and perpetual the dues, was minded in referrence unto Jacob: but paid only by
Abraham to Milchizedech, not in the dues morrall, that part of the Reason had
referrence unto Jacob; and that was in referrence to opinion, and not for
action.

Ob. But Abraham paid it to Milchizedech, and so Tithes ought to be paid to
Christ; else Christ should fail in something, to be as Milchizedech was.

A. And so should Christ do, except only Abraham should pay it him.

Ob. Now Tithes being due to Christ, must be paid to his servants, the
Ministers of the Gospel.

A. How does this hold in Christ, answering Milchizedech? was the Tithes paid
by Abraham to Milchizedech, transferred by Milchizedech, from him, to his
servants, or Ministers of his? there was no such thing mentioned of
Milchizedech, nor could be, for the Priesthood, nor the rights of it could not
be transferred to any other, if it could have been, he could not properly have
been the Type of Christ his Antitipe; for Christ, who is the Antitipe of
Milchizedech his Priesthood, and the rights of it, are not, nor cannot be
transferred over to any other, Heb. 5.10. Heb. 7.24. Concerning Tithes, observe
these particulars. 1. That Tithes Tipe or sign out to the Levites, that God
was their portion in Israel, Number. 18.20, 21.24. Josh. 13.14.33. Deu. 10.8, 9.
2. That it was enjoined for the Saints of the Temple and Tabernacle, Number.
18.21. Heb. 7.5. 3. Until the time of Reformation. Heb. 9.10. 4. That this was
only to continue in the Generation of the Levites, till all Sacrifices and
Offerings for sin by them in the Temple and Tabernacle was put to an end, by
the coming of that Tabernacle pitched by God, and not man, which was Jesus
Christ, putting all the former Sacrifices to an end, by the sacrifices of
Himself, the only Sacrifice for sin, Numb. 18.23, 24. Heb. 9.11. Heb.
10.8.9.10.11, 12.

Tithes not Morrall nor perpetual, and now under the Gospel not to be paid,
nor taken for these Reasons.

1. Be cause it calls for the setting up of the Jewish Temple, Tabernacle and
Altar. 2. Because it calls for the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Levites in
their former Office to Serve. 3. Because it lays a yoke of bondage upon him
that paies Tithes, and upon him that takes Tithes, which the Gospel sets at
liberty from. 1. To pay Tithes, is to be bound to the whole law of Tithes, in
which was a Lamb to be brought for a sinne-offering, which is abolished. 2. He
that was to take Tithes, was one who offered daily sacrifice for sin, which
if any do so now, he denies Christ come in the flesh, and the alone sacrifice
for sin by his death.

A word or two to that appertains to the Gospel, Ministers, and the
maintenance of them, in that the Gospel holds out to us. 1. Concerning the
Lords ordaining, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel;
that the Word of God holds out to us in the time of the Gospel, by his Work,
he is to be a preacher of the Gospel. 2 Cor. 9.14.

Secondly, the Word holds out to us the nature or quallity of this work, that
it is in one preaching the Gospel, chosen in the Church to this work, is to
labor in the Word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 5.17. the Word requires of him, that it
may be so; these things in diligence labor. 1. Attending upon the work, Romans
12.7, 8. 2. Herein he is to give attendance to reading of the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.16. 3. Which study to show himself approved unto God, a
workman that need not to be ashamed, deviding the Word of God aright. 2 Timothy
2.15. 4. He must hold fast the true pattern of wholesome words. 2 Timothy 1.13.
Tit. 1.9. 5. He must be apt to teach. 1 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 2.24. 6. Harkening to
the Exhortation of Christ by his Word to this Work, through the Spirit,
fulfilling obedience to the exhortation from the same Spirit dwelling within
them, 2 Timothy 1.14. 7. Laboriously finishing this work of preaching the Gospel,
watching thereunto, 2 Timothy 4.2.5.

And as these seven particulars are considerable to lie in the work of the
Ministry, in preaching the Gospel, so there is these four or five properties
the Word requires of those will take upon them this Work, and undergo it.

1. Willingly, not by constraint, nor for silthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, in
a simple freeness to serve the Church, the folk of Christ, 1 Pet. 5.2. 2. A
high esteem of the Work in preaching the Gospel, counting it in it self, that
they have a precious reward, in being employed in the Work it self. 1 Timothy
1.12. 1 Cor. 9.17, 18. 3. Contentedness of mind, notwithstanding the want of
any outward thing to supply them for this their work. 1 Timothy 6.6. 1 Cor. 4.11,
12, 13. Ephesians, 4.11, 12. 4. Free and willing subjection, to suffer any thing
for the Church, in the Cause of Christ. Act. 20.22, 23, 24. Act. 21.13. Coloss.
1.24. 5. And all this freeness of will to the work and undergoing, and
accomplishing of it, to be from no other principle or power, then by Jesus
Christ alone. Phil. 4.13. Gal. 1.11, 12. John 15.5. Romans 15.18.

Further, in reference unto those that are to give the maintenance unto those
that preach the Gospel are, considerable in these particulars. 1. Is to
acknowledge that God has ordained, that those that preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 19.14. 1 These. 5.12. 2. That the maintenance is
there to be given and communicated in that Church wherein the Minister labors
in preaching the Gospel, 1 These. 5.12. now when he that labors in the Gospel
and the Church, is thus united, as he is over them their Pastor, and they the
flock the Word requires.

1. That they should have them in singular love for the Work sake. 1 Thessalonians.
5.13. 2. Such alone as highly esteem of them, Phil. 2.29. Isai. 52.17. Nahum.
1.15. Romans 10.15. 2 Cor. 8.24. 3. So as they count them worthy of double
honor. Tim. 5.17. 4. Such alone, as is fruitful in giving and communicating
of all needful, yea bountiful supply unto them, according to their ability.
Phil. 4.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 9.5.13. 5. And
which is not the least discovery of the true love unto the Pastors preaching
the Gospel, to receive their ministry in all love, attending and harkening
unto their Ministry they have received of the Lord, and Minister unto them,
which is one of the chefest fruits the true Pastor will rejoice and take
pleasure in amongst his flock in the Lord. 2 Cor. 7.2. 1 Pet. 2.2. Heb. 13.17.
Romans 1.8, 10.11, 12. Phil. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.19, 20. the third Epist. of John,
verse. 3, 4. And with this, they both pray for them, and praise God for them,
Heb. 13.18. Gal. 1.22, 23.

Two particulars concerning the Pastor, in reference to his maintenance.

1. To be contented with the free Contribution of the Church, under the
exhortation of the Word, 2 Cor. 9.6. Phil. 4.12. 2. The place where he is to
receive his maintenance, is of the Church, by whom he is freely chosen and
elected in Ordination over them, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, Act.
20.28. Gal. 6.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Phil. 4.15. Act. 14.23.

QVESTION IIII. Whether is the Baptism of Infants a true and lawful Baptism,
or not?
F. I Affirm, it is as true, right, Lawful and fit Baptism, and ought to be
used in a Christian Church, professing Gods Truth.

R. Baptism of Infants is not true Baptism, the Reason is, because true
Baptism has the truth of Christ witnesses it to be true Baptism, but the
truth of Christ witnesses not that the Baptism of Infants is true Baptism,
Act. 10.47.48. Act. 11.17.18. Act. 8.12. 2 Reas. Is not right and lawful
Baptism, because right and lawful Baptism, according to Christ's Institution,
is to Teach and Baptize, but Infants are not capable of being taught, therefore
not to be Baptized, Matt. 18, 19. Mar. 16.15.16. 3. That Baptism that the
truth of Christ testifies not to be his Baptism, and is such that is not right
and lawful from the institution, is not fit, but unsuitable any such thing
should be observed by any Church professing the truth of Christ. Col. 2.5, 6.
Ephesians. 4.21. 2 Cor. 13.8.

Ob. F. Because there is the same Analogy of reason of Baptism, as of
Circumcision, the same internal and spiritual thing signify Remission of
sins, and Mortification of the flesh.

A.R. It is denied, there is not the same Analogy of reason of Circumcision, as
is of Baptism, for they differ in the Institution in their subject, and in the
Covenant to which either did appertain. As may be seen; for Circumcision, God
Institutes it in Genesis 17.8, 9. God says to Abraham, I will give thee and thy
seed after thee, the Land, even all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, and I will be their God, upon this, God enjoynes him and his seed
to keep his Covenant, what that is, is laid down in the 10.11.12, 13.14.
verses of the same Chapter following, in sign and obligation to which, they
were to be Circumcised; thus in the institution of Circumcision, here is the
ground laid down, God makes it with Abraham, and his seed after the flesh.
First, upon this ground, that the whole Land of Canaan should be theirs. 2. The
Act in the Institution to be done, is to Circumcise the fore-skinne of the
flesh. 3. The subject there, Males eight days old, and all in his house are
bought with his money. 4. Is the Covenant to which Circumcision in the
Institution stood in relation unto i^; was that Covenant that had the promise
upon Condition laid down to be enjoyed by them, as they were obedient, and
threatened a curse to the breakers of it, Verse. 14. Romans 2.25. Gal. 5.3.

But there is another Covenant mentioned, Genesis 17.19. which is called the New
Covenant, as the Apostle says in the Galatians, are the Two Testaments, and as
Isay. 51.32, 33. Compared, Heb. 10.16. Heb. 8.13.

So then the Covenant of God, mentioned to Abraham in Isaac, I will establish
my Covenant in thy seed, as of one which is Chist, Gal. 3.16. which holds out
clearly two distinct Covenants, one had referrence unto Abraham, and all his
seed after the flesh, the other of Isaac, and that was only in Christ, of whom
the Scripture speaks, That God would give Christ for a Covenant, Isai. 42.6.

Circumcision is clear to have appertained only unto the first, that which
gendered unto bondage, as the Apostle says in Act. 18.10, 11. to them that
would have brought in Circumcision upon the Disciples, the Apostle calls it a
yoke, that we, says he, nor our Fathers were able to bear.

Now there cannot be the same Annalogy of Reason of Baptism, as of
Circumcision, the Institution of Baptism is not expressed upon no such. 1.
Ground. 2. No such Act. 3. No such Administration. 4. No such Subject as
Children. 5. In relation to no such Covenant, to which Circumcision stood in
relation unto.

Ob. Abraham received Circumcision, the seal of the Righteousness of faith,
therefore it seems, that Circumcision was a seal to the Covenant of grace,
Romans 4.11.

A. Abraham's Faith was not imputed to him for Righteousness, because he was
Circumcised, nor because he should be Circumcised, for it was imputed to him
when he was uncircumcised, Romans 4.10.

And the most can be said, is, that of him only Circumcision may be said, he
received the Sign of Circumcision, as the seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, though it be doubtful he did so, but only, as he should be the Father
of the faithful under Circumcision; for the reason the Apostle gives is, That
he might be the Father of all that Believe, both of the Circumcision, and
uncircumcision, as the eleventh and twelfth verse. of the fourth of the Romans
does plainly import; and none did receive it as the Father of the Faithful, as
Abraham did.

Again, that which ties or holds a man under a yoke of Bondage, wherein he
cannot but sin, as Circumcision binds to observe the whole law, and so long
as a man is under the Law, he is under sins, power and Dominion: that it
binds under a yoke, Gal. 5.3. Romans 7.5. such a thing as this cannot have the
same Annalogie of Reason with Baptism to Believers, internally and spiritually
to signify remission of sins, and Mortification of the flesh, Romans 6.3.6.
Phil. 1.7. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Baptism means something Circumcision did not, therefore comes not in the
room of circumcision, for it has to do with a subject has faith. Mar. 16.16

Further, the Christian Believers have no cause to complain, that their
Children are not as the Jews Children were, under the Law of Circumcision, in
which they were under a yoke, they nor their Fathers were able to bear, Act.
15.10.

2. Nor no cause to complain, that their Infants are not taken into Baptism
before actually they do believe; First, because God has put believing and
Baptism together, Mar. 16.16.

Secondly, because God has not laid it down to us in his Word, Childrens
Baptism.

Thirdly, because Baptism is then rightly enjoyed, when by faith, the subject
a believer, participates of Christ in his death and Resurrection, Romans 6.3, 4.

Fourthly, if there were any outward privilege, barely in partaking of the
Ordinances of Baptism for Children of believers, the Word of God must show it
to us, but the Word of God tells of no such thing to any barely to partake of
the outward Ordinances, simply in the outward Administration of it, without
faith he that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but if they have not
faith, the Word tells us, they may be in the gaell of Bitterness, and the bond
of iniquity, with Simon Magus, Act. 8. though outwardly he had been Baptized.

Ob. But if the Infants of Believers be not baptized now, as well as the
Infants of the Jews were Circumcised, then the grace and favor of God is more
obscured and strait, and less testified then to the Jews.

A. No, it is now like it self in manifestation, and let none say it is
obscure, when God says it is light, take heed of calling Light darkness, and
darkness light, there is a woe pronounced against such; God is not now holding
out himself to us in shadows, but in substance, in the manifestation of his Son
Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 3.17, 18. And neither it were, not to obscure the light
of Gods grace come by Christ, to shut it up in the womb and the cradle, where
nothing can be said of it, be not to obscure it, and a great indignity offered
unto Jesus Christ, to say, in that his Word has not commanded Infants
baptism, the grace of God is obscured.

Ob. But Christian Infants are in the Covenant of grace, as well as the
Children of the Israelites; good reason therefore the seals of the Covenant
should not be straightened, nor made narrower then Circumcision was.

A. God instituted a Sign to the Jews, to pass only upon the Males, and only
on them observed; so the institution of Baptism takes in the subject upon
Faith and repentance, and no larger can this be, then the institution gives it
forth to be; God exempted the Females under the Law, from a sign of that
Covenant with the Jews, yet of them belonged unto the Covenant of grace, of
whom the Apostle Peter speaks of those holy women, which trusted in God, 1 Pet.
3.5. and so were such of their females in the Covenant of grace, without the
Sign or Seal to it. And as by his Word he has not instituted Baptism to
Infants, there is no warrant for it, and the doing of it without a command can
be but Will Worship; and though it be granted, that of the Children of
Believers they are, that do belong to the Covenant of grace, yet all their
Children do not, and who they be of them that do, it cannot be in their
Infancy known unto us, nor it is not barely the belonging to the Covenant of
grace, so does all afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call; yet
these are not to be baptized till they are called.

Ob. The place alleged, 1 Cor. 7.14. Your Children are holy, if but one person
in the marriage estate, the man or the woman be Believer, their children are
holy, as belonging to the Covenant of grace.

A. This cannot be affirmed, unless they will say, all the Children of
Believers are holy as belong unto the Covenant of grace, but that is false, for
Believing Abraham had an Ismael, a believing Isaac an Esau.

Again, to affirm all the Children of Believers are holy, as belonging unto
the Covenant of grace, is false, unless they will say, those that are in the
Covenant of grace, may fall out of it, which is to hold the error of the
Arminians, contrary to this Scripture, Josh. 13.1. Philip. 1.6. and he that
has begun the good work will perfect it.

3. If it be said, their Children are holy, as belonging unto the Covenant of
grace, they must distinguish and know which of them be such, or else the seal
of the Covenant, Baptism cannot be administered upon them.

4. Or else they must bring the Word of God, that says plainly, they are so
holy to partake of Baptism; within that place is no such thing expressed.

5. It must be made out so holy, belonging unto the Covenant of Grace, as they
are so by calling, and have faith, or else all afar off, who belong unto the
Covenant of grace, yet not called for implicit respect unto them, Baptism
shall be Administered upon all the world, without any calling or respect of
faith in any, the Argument takes part with this, having not a word of Christ
to speak for it.

Ob. Infants are capeable of the thing signified by Baptism, therefore they
may have it.

A. If they are capable, it is by Grace, and not by nature, and till their
capeablenesse by grace be manifested, nothing is said, if it be said they are
capable by nature, then are all children: it is said, many such belong to
heaven, But who that many be, must be known, Christ, as God knew all things,
when he said, such, all children, none can say he meant; Christ is said to
bless them, and lay his hands upon them; Children were brought unto him, yet
it is not said, he baptized them; for it is said, Christ himself baptized none,
Joh. 4.2. and the Disciples are said to forbid them that brought little
Children unto him, which if Christ had used to baptize them, they would not
have forbid the bringing of them; and none of these things in the least proves
Childrens Baptism.

Ob. It cannot be infallibly discerned which man has true grace, and is
elected, we may and ought to judge very charitably upon an exact profession,
and so upon a bare profession.

A. It does not follow therefore upon no profession, that this Ordinance must
pass, and to say, the faith of the Parents may warrant their Children
Baptism, then the faith of Parents may warrant their Children to partake of
the supper, of which says the Apostle, let every man examine himself, and so
let him eat, 1 Cor. 11.28. and in Romans 10.10. he says, with the heart man
believes to righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation:
it is neither with the heart, nor the mouth of another.

Ob. But those Pharisees teach and Baptize, Repent and Believe, and be
baptized, is meant of such who were of riper years.

A. The Institution speaks of no other; and we must hold unto the words of
Christ, and not hearken unto the vain Consciences of men, and Arguments made
up from Antichrist, Apostasy, nor false Premizes drawn from the Jews, as what
a false thing is this to say of the Jews, The faith of the Parents, applying
the Righteousness of Christ to themselves, by their Circumcision, it made
their Children to be borne Jews by nature; the believing Jew could not apply
the righteousness of Christ to him for his Circumcision, for his Circumcision
stood in relation to the old Covenant to be done away, and bound him to the Law
for Righteousness, by that, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. though not as a Believer, yet as
he had by Circumcision relation unto it, so he was under the Obligation to the
first Covenant, to work for righteousness, so far was Circumcision remote to
it, as for him to apply the Righteousness of Christ to himself by
Circumcision, and their Children were borne Jews in the flesh, and not by faith
propagated Jews, which if so, then Believers, children of the Gentiles would
be borne Jews, now in the flesh, whereas the Jews are properly said to be
outwardly Jews in the flesh only, and by faith, a Jew is one in word, and that
of the Spirit, Romans 2.28, 29. and till they have Faith, they are not so
accounted, Gal. 3.9.

As for aledging whole households were baptized, there is no mention made of any
Children there were baptized, nor that there were any Children in those
households mentioned, but in Act. 18.8. it is said, Crispus the chief Ruler of
the Synagogue believed in the Lord, with all his household, the thing could not
be affirmed of Children.

Ob. Out 1 Cor. 10.2. that the Apostle makes there, passing under the Cloud,
and and throughout the Red sea, a Tipe of Baptism.

A. To bring it in a Tipe of Children, Baptism is false, and would take away
the force of the Apostles Argument, for which he brings it, admonishing and
advertising those that partake of outward privileges by their examples, that
they fall not into the same sins, read from the 6. verse, to the 12. of that,
1 Cor. 10. Chapter.

Now it was not any thing pertaining unto Children, the Apostle means, who
could not be forewarned by their examples, nor receive his admonition, he
affirms of what subjects he speaks to, as the end of this his saying, 15.
verse. I speak as unto them which have understanding; judge ye what I say.

Ob. And for that aledged, 1 Pet. 3.21. that the Apostle makes Noah's Arc a
Tipe of Childrens Baptism.

A. To tipe out that in the Gospel, we have not the Antitype following, is
unsound; for how Baptism should answer this figure in Children, cannot be
made act, who are not capable of it, not having understanding to conceive of
it, for they are such have Faith, the confident demand of a good Conscience,
claims in God salvation, through the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Ob. Baptism has been effectual to produce Mortification, and Vivification
in many, as diverse good people can witness, which it should not have done, if
God had not approved of pedo-baptisme.

A. It is denied, Baptism does not in it self produce Mortification and
Vivification in none, for if it did, it should cease to be a Sign, and become
the thing signified; Baptism is but a sign of that invisible grace; we have
in Christ remission of sin, and mortification of the flesh, that by the power
of Christ, the sinful body of the flesh is put off, and by the virtue of
Christ's resurrection, we revive, and live unto God, Christ the Power of life
from God producing this in every believer, to which Baptism is a sign. Joh.
1.11.15. Romans 8.11.13. Collos. 2.10, 11, 12.

1. And whosoever hold Regeneration by Baptism, holds a Popish Doctrine.

2. If Baptism did produce it, it should do it to all that partake of it.

QVESTION V. Whether is it lawful to rebaptize, or not?
F. I Answer, that if one were baptized in the Name of God in general, without
particular explication and recitation of the Three Persons, be not mentioned,
but omitted in baptism, it is not right and lawful baptism: or if one was
baptized of those Heretics, who delivered not the right Doctrine of the
Trinity, such as were the Marcionites, Arrians and Pueamatomachi, it is not
right and lawful baptism, because the essential form of Baptism is not
observed, which according to Christ's Institution, must be In the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; but if it be rightly Administered, according to
the Institution of Christ, and the form prescribed of him, then rebaptizing is
unlawful.

R. But now whether the baptism of Infants have been right and lawful
baptism, according to the Institution of Christ, examine, if not right and
lawful, according to Christ's Institution, they may be baptized again, he
implies; For whoever is baptized not rightly and lawfully, according to Christ's
Institution, as some may be, having not the true form of Words, or be baptized
by those deliver not the right Doctrine of the Trinity.

And for the form of Words, says he, it must be with a particular
explication, or recitation of the Father, and Son, and holy Ghost; now this
particular explication or recitation, must be in referrence either to himself,
or to the party baptized; to himself it cannot be, for he must understand to
explain and explicate, and if he understand, what need any explication to
himself, but then it must be a particular explication, or recitation in respect
of the party to be baptized, and that is proper, according to what goes in
resolution unto the Apostles Question to those in Act, 19.3. unto what were you
baptized? unto which, according to their own knowledge they could give an
answer, and it is apparent, it is to be in referrence unto the party baptized,
then in Infants cannot be the subject of this Ordinance, according to Christ's
Institution, upon whom cannot pass the form of words in the Institution in
any explication unto them, according to Mr. Knuttons own words.

But let us examine the Institution further, in referrence unto Infants,
whether the Institution means them at all to be the subject of baptism. Mat.
28.29. Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: First is the Commission, go ye, and this
Commission is grounded upon, That all power in Heaven and Earth, is Christ: --
Expressed in verse before the Institution, enjoyne first Teaching, Go ye, Teach
all Nations, and baptize them first, is Teaching which plainly implies a
subject to be taught, Infants cannot be here meant in the Institution; who are
not capable of teaching, and so not being made Disciples; the Institution is
not for them to be baptized.

Now for any to pretend Baptism, and have not the Truth of its Institution,
void of the Doctrine of the Truth of Christ, no Commission from Christ to
preach, nor right subject of Baptism, useing not the form of words in the
Institution, yet pretends persons to be baptized, this may easily be counted
none, that this is no Baptizme, and if possible, some called to God had been
one amongst such, without Question it were, it is duty to count it none, and
readily with all submission embrace and subject unto Christ's Ordinance,
according to his Institution, and ought not to be charged for rebaptization,
but obedient unto Christ, who from the light of the Truth of Christ yield
obedience unto him, Matt. 18.10. And though we are not often, or more then once
to be baptized, as to eat the Lords Supper often, yet it must be that one
Baptism rightly and lawfully, such as Christ has instituted it to be, Matt.
18.19, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Epist. Jude. 3. Then am I, says
Christ, your Lord and Master, when ye do all that I command you. Joh. 13.13,
14.

Ob. Baptism is a Sacrament of Regeneration.

A. But you cannot say, Baptism is a Sacrament of Regeneration unto Infants,
except you will affirm one of these two things. 1. That Children in natural
birth, have regeneration from their Parents, which is contrary to these
Scriptures, Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3. Joh. 3.6.

2. Or that Baptism by water does regennerate, which is a Popish Doctrine, who
hold, the Water of Baptism does wash away original sin in Infants.

3. Or if you will clear your self of this, you must aprove from the
Institution Baptism is a Sacrament of Regeneration to Infants, which you
cannot do.

But concerning Believers, the word proves this, that the virtue of the grace
of Mortification and Vivification of the Spirit of God, we have from the
virtue of Jesus Christ, effectually working in us, to which Baptism is a
Sign, Romans 6.3.6. Colos. 2.12, 13.

Ob. Those that are only for Believers to be Baptized, they grossly err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God in the Sacrament.

A. Thus only to do, is according to that knowledge the Scriptures give out
unto us, Mar. 16.16. and upon such only is the experience of the power of God
Signed out by this Ordinance, made known unto them. Collos. 2.12. Act. 24.14,
15.

Ob. Those that are only for the Baptism of Believers, they seek to nullify
and frustrate the sacred Ordinance of Christ, viz. Baptism of Infants.
Secondly, Consequently speak blasphemy, horribly taking GODS Name in vain.

A. It cannot be proved, that Baptism of Infants is an Ordinance of Christ's
Institution, therefore let it be examined, who go about to nullify this
Ordinance of Christ of Baptism, they that observe it, as it is Instituted by
Christ, or they that observe that for his Ordinances his institution requires,
not that which agrees with it is according to it, but that discends from it, is
contrary to it, and works to annullity of it, to believe and be Baptized, is
accordidg to the Institution, Mar. 16.16. but the Institution of Christ in the
Gospel says; none ere baptize Infants, nor in the Gospel, no example for it,
the Apostle plainly says, for what I received of the Lord, I delivered unto
you, as in that of the Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23. but never a word no where in the
Gospel for this, and where he received no Commission from the Lord, to do or
require any thing, nothing is required of us pertaining unto his Worship.

And this is certain, if any unwritten Tradition for Gods Worship and Service
might be suffered to take place in one Ordinance, or any part of Gods Worship
under the Gospel, it would let in an inroade for all, and make void the whole
worship of God in his Word laid down unto us, Collos. 2.8.18.

Ob. But the second part of the Objection is, and so by Consequence, speak
blasphemy horribly, taking Gods Name in vain, in that they villifie and reject
one of his Ordinances, as matter of no worth or efficacy.

A. Let it be examined who speaks blasphemy, and what else here is said, he
that speaks truth, as the Truth is in Jesus, or he that reproacheth the Saints
for speaking the truth, as it is in Jesus, it is Blasphemy to reproach the
Saints, Revel. 13.5, 6. Revel. 2.9. Revel. 3.9.

And who is it that takes the Name of God in vain, he that speaks Truth, or
he that bears false witness.

Who nullifies the Ordinances, he that priseth it from pertaking of the
preciousnesse of Christ, is subjected to it, or he that priseth it in Christ
remote from it; he that injoyes the inward life and spirituality of that
Ordinance in Christ Jesus, or he that sees or discovers no further then the
outside of what might agree with Circumcision, whose Circumcision may be
counted to him uncircumcision, and so in an nullity to him, Romans 2.25.

Ob. They discover hipocrisy, in that they made profession formerly of the
Covenant made with God in Baptism, but now since their separation disclaim it.

A. Let it be examined who discovers hypocrisy, he that from the grace of the
Covenant of God in Christ, is carried forth to profess his Covenant and Name
in obedience to his Truth, manifested to him, or he that professes that which
has no being or reality of it in him, nor from any manifestation from God to
him, it should be so, which they do which profess such an Ordinance or
Worship to be Gods, that is not Gods, nor of his appointment. Isai. 58.2.5. or
himself in such or such a Relation unto God, in such or such a thing, that he
is not so in Relation unto him in, as he professes is Hypocrisy.

And neither in both these respects it does not appear, First to profess that
Ordinance and Worship to God, which his Word has not made out to us, to be his
Ordinance, and if the baptism of Children be not so.

2. It holds out a profession of that thing to be, which cannot appear so to
be, nor is not manifested from God so to be, neither by his Word commanding,
nor by his grace manifested, that the party, the Infant to be in relation unto
Christ by Faith, according to Mark. 16.16. believe and be baptized; And
hypocrisy by profession does appear most palpably in such a thing as this, in
that form used in the baptism of Children, this is required of the Child by
way of Question. Do thou believe, (...). an Infant that has not knowledge,
nor capeable of understanding, nor no sensiblenesse of will to assent unto any
thing, Will thou be baptized in this says? Will your severity in this thing be
acquitted before God. Gal. 6.7.

Ob. This their opinion is but New, and upstart, there is good reason they
should disclaim it, and be humbled for it.

A. The Apostles were in their time charged for new and upstart Doctrine by
some, should they by good reason therefore disclayme it, and be humbled for it,
and so have denied Christ's doctrine and Truth, which was not new, but from the
beginning, Joh. 1. 1, 2.1 Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. so might the Church of Rome have
said, if they did not so, against Luther, and others, though they brought forth
the Ancient Truths of the Gospel of free Justification, and renouncing
Transubstantiation of Christ, real presence of his flesh and blood in the
bread and wine in the Supper, they were counted new and upstart; shall we say
so, and that they should have disclaimed the doctrine of free Justification,
and their renouncing of Transubstantiation, and repented of it; it was woeful
in the instance of Francis Spira, who owned the Doctrine of free Justification,
and taught it, yet for the fear of them that took part with Rome, renounced
it, who was terrified in his Conscience, and cried out, there was no mercy for
him. Again, it is not new, nor an upstart opinion, but it is as old as the
Gospel Churches, who in this path walked, of whom it is said in Act. 2.41, 42.
then they that gladly received the Word, were baptized, 42. verse. and they
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in Prayer. Acts 8.12.

QVESTION. VI. Whether is it lawful to separate from all the public
Ordinances, and Christian Assemblies in our English Church, because there are
some defects in Discipline, and in other things amongst us?
F. I Conceive it is absolutely unlawful to relinquish Gods holy Ordinance,
and the Assemblies of Godly Christians in this Church of England, because of
our mixed Congregation, and because of some defects in our Discipline.

R. These two things must be made good before it can be absolutely unlawful to
relinquish; First, that it be a Church Assembly of Saints. 2. That the holy
ordinances of God are there enjoyed: First for a Church Assembly of Saints,
such a Church Assembly as are styled Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1, 2. and as
they are the matter of the Church Assembly, they profess holiness and
godliness. Romans 1.7.

But the Church of England do not so assemble together, as from a holy Call,
to a holy according together. First called, then exhorted to walk worthy of
their holy Calling, Ephesians. 4.1. and a holy according in Assembling of
themselves together in holy fellowship, is one thing pertaines to walking
worthy the Call, Ephesians. 4.3. 1 Pet. 2.17. Heb. 12.23.24.

But for that Assembly that gathers together after the Rudiments of the World,
and not after Christ, is not the Church Assembly of Saints, Collos. 2.8.

And that Assembly that gathers together without faith, in according together
in Jesus Christ, after his Word: Whether this be, or not be, is after the
Rudiments of the World; and therefore that Assembly which is one with the
World, in the worldly consideration of its Assembly of it, is that from which
God has always called and separated his people out of it unto himself, Joh.
15.18, 19. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Act. 19.9.

And for that where the holy Ordinances of God are enjoyed, is there where
Christ's presence is, and that is, where his are gathered together in his Name,
according to his Word, Mat. 18.20.

And Christ is said to walk in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks,
Revel. 2.1. which Candlesticks are interpreted by Christ in the Revel. 1.20. to
be the Seven Churches, and in his Church he holds forth his Ministry and
Ordinances. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Ephesians. 3.10.

But as in the former part of the book, the Ministry of Christ, that which is
of his sending, was considered either immediate of himself, or mediately in his
Church, was not such: In the Church of England, neither there his Ordinances,
according to his Institution enjoyed, as in Reply unto Mr. Knuttons Answer unto
the first and third Question in his book, nor this Ordinance of Baptism,
according to Christ's Institution.

Ob. Because Jesus Christ leaves us (...) for our defects and weakness.

Ans. It is the great mercy of Christ to his, not to leave them for their
defects and weaknesses, but it is not to maintain their defects and weaknesses
in them, but to work them out of them. But for you to say, Christ leaves you
not, as considered by you the Church of England, you cannot maintain, for
Christ upholds, nor maintains no other House or Church, then that which is of
his own building, that is founded upon himself, nor no other Ordinances, then
those of his own Institution, Heb. 3.6. Mat. 7.24, 25 with the 21, 22, 23.
verses of the same Chapter.

Ob. It appears Christ dwells amongst us, because he has settled his Sacred
Word amongst us, sent us many Godly and learned Teachers, and where these are,
teaching the truth, there is Christ. Mat. 28.20.

An. It is not only having the Word taught, but there must be the receiving,
obeying, and conforming unto it, is that Scripture received, you aledged in
Matt. 28.19, 20. observed, are fought against; Do you, according to the
Institution in 19. verse. go teach and Baptize? Is there that teaching to
observe all that Christ commands? if the Word come near you only in
Declaration, not hearkened to, as to obey it, but opposed; the Kingdom of God
comes near you but not to stay with you opposition against the truths of
Christ by a people, prosageth Christ's Word departing from them, Act. 18.5, 6.
Mat. 10.14.

Ob. He has converted many souls in our Land to himself, by the faithful
dispensation of his Ordinances, and where all this is, there Christ is resident.

An. The more the mercy and grace of God has shown forth it self to convert
many fowls unto himself in the Land, the more meet matter by him is there for
his House and Building, and the faithfulness that has done this, is Gods, and
not man's; Christ is the life and power of Conversion, and not Ordinances. Act.
16.14. Act. 14.27. Act. 3.26. And for that of Christ being resident, is
considerable these two things. 1. He is resident with his people, as considered
his in Conversion, and in another respect, as they are his Church: he is not
resident with them, as he is with his Saints coupled and compacted together, as
they are his Church, not till they are so coupled and compacted together; For
if he were so, this would imply Church fellowship needless, and would work
unto annullity of it. But Christ calling and converting by his Word unto
himself, is for the increasing and building of his Church, Act. 2.41, 42. and
so are interessed into all the privileges of his Church, Pet. 2.2, 3, 4, 5 and
so have him resident with them, as his Church, Matt. 18.20. Ephesians. 2.21, 22.

Ob. Because in separating from our assemblies and ordinances, such prevent the
exercises of many a holy (...), which you might, and ought to have performed
amongst us.

A. But that assembly (...) stands repugnant unto the use of Christ's Ordinance,
according to this Insti^^^ion, or repugnant unto the Saints privileges, and
that wherein they are (...) in their duty, in (...) to edify, as in the body
of Christ, his Church (...) another, according to the effectual power of each
part, to (...) it self in love, Ep. (...) 16.17. is that assembly Christ is
(...) head of, nor his Saints (...) members of it; for if he were the head,
(...) be the doing the thing (...) as he says, then am I you^ (...) when you
do that I comm^^ (...) head say, I have no need of (...).

Ob. Because this seperati^^ (...) clear, Heb. 10.25, 26. for such (...) holy
Ordinances amongst us, (...) Christ his presence and love from (...) Truth, and
to sin (...).

A. Whether is the ready (...) obedience unto the truths of (...) stand in open
opposition unto the truth of (...) cording of the Saints unto that manner of
(...) quires, is in the way an union of the spirit (...) that assembly that
answers not unto (...) wars against, and opposes such asse^^ (...) Saints, as
Christ requires, and would (...) sin against the holy Ghost, Act. 13.50. (...)
despise or disert Christian assemblies; (...) with that assembly that is truly
Chris^^ (...) truly such? who dispiseth, or diserteth (...), those that make
out after them, and to enjoy them according to the will of Christ, or those
that cleave to those? for Christ's Ordinances to be his, his will declares not
to be such, Collos. 2.20.21, 22, 23.

Ob. They are his Ordinances, though there be same defects and imperfections.

A. A fundamental defect in, and Ordinances is such, that it cannot be said to
be his Ordinance ( Rev. 2.9. Rev. 3.9. I know, says Christ, the blasphemy of
them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan, they
profess themselves to be Jews, but the gathering together was of Satan:) Now
every Ordinance of Christ is sundamentally made good to us to be such from the
word of Christ, as we have the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23. therefore that I
have received of the Lord, that I deliver unto you as concerning the Supper,
according to that Matthew. 28.20. Teach them to observe all that I command you;
the Church of GOD is his great Ordinance, which fundamentally is made out to us
by the Word, Mat. 18.20. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.20.21, 22. So is Baptism in its
sundamentall, is laid down how to be in the Institution Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16.
as well as the Ordinance of Preaching, which fundamentally is sending, Romans
10.15.

Now for any to profess an Ordinance to be (...) which is deficient in (...)
fundamental of his Ordina^^^, as ^^^tuted by (...), there is not Christ (...)
in his love, and will, as with that which is his Ordinance, yet of his (...),
he may bring over these into the (...) ^dience of himself, in his (...) 26, 27,
28, 29: 3 (...) Though it may be gran(...) him, of his geace, according to the
(...) where it lists, and that some (...) show it forth in many (...)
Ministry made out to us, (...) Official Ministry; Fur(...) did communicate
it forth to (...) that through the grace of (...) and lively building of Gods
(...) ^ation, in the order and fellowship of the Go(...) requires, that it
should not ^e so, but so far (...) Christ, should be unto thee for Ordinance ^.

(...) in his love, truly from them he is (...) Thus is he to all are made
one with (...) that the Spirit shall lead them into ^.

(...) ^^ted from you, as the Church of England can be in (...) house Christ
speaks of, that was built upon the sands, which when the rain fell, and the
floods came, and the wind blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and the
fall thereof was great, Mat. 7.26, 27. and the foundation thereof discovered,
to have been only upon the sands, they heard the words of Christ, but the
spirit of life in obedience, with conjunction unto Christ's Word and will, they
had not, Mat. 7.21.22.23, 24, 25. For they were such as heard the words of
Christ, but did them not, who was likened unto a foolish man, which had built
his house upon the sands.

Now whether is it left to build with the foolish builders upon the sands, and
the rather, because they say, Christ is not a linated from them, or according
unto the wisdom of Christ to build upon the Rock.

There is a time that the foolish are full of presumption, and there is a time,
when the foolish seek unto the wise Virgins for Oil, and neither of these any
evidences that Christ is with them.

QVEST^^^ (...) Whether is it necessary (...) ^molish our (...) them, and to
build^^ in other (...) Idolatrous Word^^ were (...)
F. I Hold (...) trous (...)

R. (...) worship (...) brought to Annullity, (...) Act. 19.18, 19.24.25, 26,
(...).

Ob. But they that Wor^^ (...) used in them, and use them (...)

Ans. They do not reje^^ (...) Idolaters in their Idol Wor^^ (...) stitions,
that in that place the (...) as they have made it an Idol^^ (...) thus to be,
though it have so (...) been broken down, as the (...) I^olaters setting up. 2.
Reas. (...) worship God in the places (...) their Idols, to say, they might
(...) ing those superstitions were used in (...) be allowed into the believing
Corin^ (...).

Nothing superstitiously in use with (...) in use lawful in the true worship
of (...) sacrificed to Idols, sold in the shan^ (...) rinthians, 1 Cor 10.25,
26, 27. yet in (...) to eat of them, eat in Idol service, (...) and eat in
the Lords Supper, that wa^ (...) crifices, 1 Cor. 10.16.21. 3 Nor in case of
(...).

Ob. If for the superstitions Rites of (...) shed, then how comes it to pass,
that the (...) meant, seeing they have been Consecrated (...) latrous
Supe^stitions, as the Temples were (...).

An. The I^^aelites were to destroy all (...) ground on which they stood, was
theirs; for (...) Canaan unto them; Though all their Idolat^ (...) was to fall,
and be spoiled upon it, and so let all (...) on cease, as in the place of
desolation, to the grave of oblivi^^ (...).

Ob. Popish Baptism, being in like manner defiled with Idolatr^ (...) (...) to
be sought, and while you (...) in Popery, you cannot without par(...) by (...)
Cer^monies of Crosseing, (...) eat as (...) ^^ution of the Temples ^line.

(...) ^ishnesse is in appro(...) objection speechless. (...), because of
their for(...) ^emples, as Infants in their (...) Ordination, and Popish (...)
Idolatrous rites, as our ^.

(...) claim that Idolatry and (...) subject unto it, that God may (...)
^olatry and Popery destroy(...) be like the unclean spirit (...) popery erects
unto it living (...) Consciences; here is living (...) Temples of Popish
Mini(...) Popish Princes in their Corona(...) ^royed; and did we see the spirit
(...) 3.16. as it erects it self up in living (...) People and Nations, and
how in the (...) with men in the spirit, and life of (...) fit self; that if
you will destroy, that (...) persons too; so loath is Popery. (...) ^mples be
no more unto it. This Ob(...) Living Temples. First is, in Infants (...) no
more unto him. Second is, Popish (...) offes this Living Temple be no more
(...) ^onation; this Living Temple be no (...) they are, which is God, who
says, ^.

(...) wraped all persons of all sorts in it (...) to be, they are it, so
Popishly, as by the port (...) some out of (...) himself, Reve. 13.8. Rev. ^.

(...) God is held out to us, for the effecting of this (...) unto God and his
Worship, pasively as well as negative(...) forsake all false worship, whether
styled the worship of the Beast, Idol, all Popish Idolatrous (...).

Therefore whoever is the (...) those assent to that (...) would that the me^
(...) of which the Apos^^ (...).

Infants in their (...) Ministers, in their (...) sent not unto: for in (...)
speak. Revel. 16.13.

Princes in their (...) by the Pope, nor any of (...) Temples, as those King
(...) hour with the Beast. Re^^ (...).

But let the Believer, the (...) profession of the Baptism (...) 3.16.17.1
Cor. 6.19, 20. Mar^^ (...).

And let the Ministry tha^ (...) of life, in whom the Spirit (...).

And let our Princes and (...) us in his light of Counsel, and (...) in all
godliness and honesty, (...) them; For which we pray: Ezra^^ (...).

F^^^^
E^^^^^
Page 3. lin. 34. for Behold, read Belo^^ (...) for no, r. not, p. 9. l. 18.
for aspertio^ (...) l. 35. for as r. all. p. 14. l. 13. for sets^ (...) r. vow.
l. 35. for sin, r. seem. p. 21. (...) r. with, l. 36. for alone, r. a love.
l. (...) for Administration, r. Administrato^ (...).


