AN APOLOGY Against a Pamphlet CALLED A Modest Confutation of the
Animadversions upon the Remonstrant against SMECTYMNUUS.



LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

An Apology, etc.
IF, Readers, to that same great difficulty of well doing what we certainly
know, were not added in most men as great a carelessenes of knowing what they,
and others ought to do, we had bin long ere this, no doubt but all of us much
farther on our way to some degree of peace and happiness in this kingdom. But
since our sinful neglect of pract^sing that which we know to be undoubtedly
true and good, has brought forth among us, through Gods just anger so great a
difficulty now to know that which otherwise might be soon learnt, and has
divided us by a controversy of great importance indeed, but of no hard
solution, which is the more our punishment, I resolved (of what small moment
soever I might be thought) to stand on that side where I saw both the plain
authority of Scripture leading, and the reason of justice and equity persuading;
with this opinion which esteems it more unlike a Christian to be a cold neuter
in the cause of the Church, then the law of Solon made it punishable after a
sedition in the State. And because I observe that fear and dull disposition,
lukewarmenesse and sloth are not seldomer wont to cloak themselves under the
affected name of moderation, then true and lively zeal is customably
dispareg'd with the term of indiscretion, bitterness, and choler, I could not
to my thinking honor a good cause more from the heart, then by defending it
earnestly, as often as I could judge it to behoove me, notwithstanding any false
name that could be invented to wrong, or undervalue an honest meaning. Wherein
although I have not doubted to single forth more then once, such of them as
were thought the chief and most nominated opposers on the other side, whom no
man else undertook: if I have done well either to be confident of the truth,
whose force is best seen against the ablest resistance, or to be jealous and
tender of the hurt that might be done among the weaker by the intrapping
authority of great names titl'd to false opinions, or that it be lawful to
attribute somewhat to gifts of Gods imparting, which I boast not, but
thankfully acknowledge, and fear also left at my certain account they be
reckoned to me many rather then few, or if lastly it be but justice not to
defraud of due esteem the wearisome labors and studious watchings, wherein I
have spent and tired out almost a whole youth, I shall not distrust to be
acquitted of presumption. Knowing that if heretofore all ages have received
with favor and good acceptance the earliest industry of him that has been
hopeful, it were but hard measure now, if the freedom of any timely spirit
should be oppressed merely by the big and blunted fame of his elder adversary;
and that his sufficiency must be now sentenc't, not by pondering the reason he
shows, but by calculating the years he brings. However, as my purpose is not,
nor has been formerly, to look on my adversary abroad, through the deceaving
glass of other men's great opinion of him, but at home, where I may find him
in the proper light of his own worth, so now against the rancor of an evil
tongue, from which I never thought so absurdly, as that I of all men should be
exempt, I must be forced to proceed from the unfeigned and diligent inquity of
mine own conscience at home (for better way I know not, Readers) to give a
more true account of my self abroad then this modest Confuter, as he calls
himself, has given of me. Albeit that in doing this I shall be sensible of
two things which to me will be nothing pleasant; the one is, that not unlikely
I shall be thought too much a party in mine own cause, and therein to see
least; the other, that I shall be put unwillingly to molest the public view
with the vindication of a private name; as if it were worth the while that the
people should care whether such a one were thus, or thus. Yet those I entreat
who have found the leisure to read that name, however of small repute,
unworthily defamed, would be so good and so patient as to hear the same person
not unneedfully defended. I will not deny but that the best apology against
false accusers is silence and sufferance, and honest deeds set against
dishonest words. And that I could at this time most easily, and securely, with
the least loss of reputation use no other defense, I need not despair to win
belief. Whether I consider both the foolish contriving, and ridiculous aiming
of these his slanderous bolts, shot so wide of any suspicion to be fastn'd on
me, that I have often with inward contentment perceav'd my friends congratulating
themselves in my innocence, and my enemies ashamed of their partners folly. Or
whether I look at these present times wherein most men now scarce permitted the
liberty to think over their own concernments have removed the seat of their
thoughts more outward to the expectation of public events. Or whether the
examples of men, either noble or religious, who have sat down lately with a
meek silence and sufferance under many libellous endorsements, may be a rule
to others, I might well appease my self to put up any reproaches in such an
honorable society of fellow sufferers using no other defense. And were it that
slander would be content to make an end where it first fixes, and not seek to
cast out the like infamy upon each thing that has but any relation to the
person traduc't, I should have pleaded against this Confuter by no other
advocates, then those which I first commended, Silence, and Sufferance, and
speaking deeds against faltering words. But when I discerned his intent was not
so much to smite at me, as through me to render odious the truth which I had
written, and to stain with ignominy that Evangelick doctrine which opposes the
tradition of Prelaty, I conceav'd my self to be now not as mine own person,
but as a member incorporate into that truth whereof I was persuaded, and
whereof I had declared openly to be a partaker. Whereupon I thought it my duty,
if not to my self, yet to the religious cause I had in hand, not to leave on
my garment the least spot, or blemish in good name so long as God should give
me to say that which might wipe it off. Lest those disgraces which I ought to
suffer, if it so befall me, for my religion, through my default religion be
made liable to suffer for me. And, whether it might not something reflect upon
those reverent men whose friend I may be thought in writing the Animadversions,
was not my last care to consider, if I should rest under these reproaches
having the same common adversary with them, it might be counted small credit
for their cause to have found such an assistant, as this babbler has devised
me. What other thing in his book there is of dispute, or question, in answering
thereto I doubt not to be justified; except there be who will condemn me to
have wasted time in throwing down that which could not keep it self up. As
for others who notwithstanding what I can allege have yet decreed to
mis-interpret the intents of my reply. I suppose they would have found as many
causes to have misconceav'd the reasons of my silence.

TO begin therefore an Apology for those animadversions which I writ against
the Remonstrant in defense of Smectymnus, since the Preface, which was
purposely set before them, is not thought apologeticall anough; it will be best
to acquaint ye, Readers, before other things, what the meaning was to write
them in that manner which I did. For I do not look to be asked wherefore I writ
the book, it being no difficulty to answer that I did it to those ends which
the best men propose to themselves when they write. But wherefore in that manner
neglecting the maine bulk of all that specious antiquity, which might stunne
children, but not men, I chose rather to observe some kind of military
advantages to await him at his forragings, at his watrings, and when ever he
felt himself secure to solace his vein in derision of his more serious
opponents. And here let me have pardon, Readers; if the remembrance of that
which he has licenc't himself to utter contemptuously of those reverend men
provoke me to do that over again which some expect I should excuse as too
freely done; since I have two provocations, his latest insulting in his short
answer, and their final patience. I had no fear but that the authors of
Smectymnus to all the show of solidity which the Remonstrant could bring, were
prepared both with skill and purpose to return a suffizing answer, and were
able anough to lay the dust and pudder in antiquity, which he and his, out of
stratagem, are wont to raise; but when I saw his weak arguments headed with
sharp taunts, and that his design was, if he could not refute them, yet at
least with quips and snapping adagies to vapor them out, which they bent only
upon the business were minded to let pass, by how much I saw them taking
little thought for their own injuries, I must confess I took it as my part the
less to endure that my respected friends through their own unnecessary
patience should thus lie at the mercy of a coy flurting style; to be girded
with frumps and curtall gibes, by one who makes sentences by the Statute, as if
all above three inches long were confiscat. To me it seemed an indignity, that
whom his whole wisdom could not move from their place, them his impetuous
folly should presume to ride over. And if I were more warm then was meet in
any passage of that book, which yet I do not yield, I might use therein the
patronage of no worse an author then Gregory Nyssen, who mentioning his
sharpness against Eunomius in the defense of his brother Basil, holds himself
irreprovable in that it was not for himself, but in the cause of his brother;
and in such cases, says he, perhaps it is worthier pardon to be angry, then to
be cooler. And whereas this Confuter taxes the whole discourse of levity, I
shall show ye, Readers, wheresoever it shall be objected in particular that I
have answered with as little lightness as the Remoustrant has given example.
I have not been so light as the palm of a Bishop which is the lightest thing
in the world when he brings out his book of Ordination: For then contrary to
that which is wont in releasing out of prison, any one that will pay his fees
is laid hands on. Another reason, it would not be amiss though the Remonstrant
were told, wherefore he was in that unusual manner beleaguered; and this was
it, to pluck out of the heads of his admirers the conceit that all who are not
Prelaticall, are grosse-headed, thick witted, illiterat, shallow. Can nothing
then but Episcopacy teach men to speak good English, to pick and order a set of
words judiciously? Must we learn from Canons and quaint Sermonings interlin'd
with barbarous Latin to illumin a period, to wreath an Enthymema with maistrous
dexterity? I rather incline, as I have heard it observed, that a Jesuits
Italian when he writes, is ever naught, though he be borne and bred a
Florentine, so to think that from like causes we may go near to observe the
same in the style of a Prelat. For doubtless that indeed according to art is
most eloquent, which returns and approaches nearest to nature from whence it
came; and they express nature best, who in their lives least wander from her
safe leading, which may be called regenerate reason. So that how he should be
truly eloquent who is not withal a good man, I see not. Never the less as often
as is to be dealt with men who pride themselves in their supposed art, to leave
the^ unexcusable wherein they will not be bettered there be of those that
esteem Prelaty a figment, who yet can pipe, if they can dance, nor will be
unfurnisht to show that what the Prelates admire and have not, others have and
admire not. The knowledge whereof, and not of that only, but of what the
Scripture teaches us how we ought to withstand the perverters of the Gospel
were those other motives which gave the animadversions no leave to remit a
continual vehemence throughout the book. For as in teaching, doubtless the
Spirit of meekness is most powerful, so are the meek only fit persons to be
taught: as for the proud, the obstinate, and false Doctors of men's devices, be
taught they will not; but discovered and laid open they must be. For how can
they admit of teaching who have the condemnation of God already upon them for
refusing divine instruction; that is, to be filled with their own devices, as
in the Proverbs we may read; therefore we may safely imitate the method that
God uses; with the froward to be froward, and to throw scorn upon the scorner,
whom if any thing, nothing else will heal. And if the righteous shall laugh at
the destruction of the ungodly, they may also laugh at their pertinacious and
incurable obstinacy, and at the same time be moved with detestation of their
seducing malice, who employ all their wits to defend a Prelaty usurp^, and to
deprave that just government, which pride and ambition partly by fine fetches
and pretenses, partly by force, has shouldered out of the Church. And against
such kind of deceavers openly and earnestly to protest, lest any one should be
inquisitive wherefore this or that man is forwarder then others, let him know
that this office goes not by age, or youth, but to whomsoever God shall give
apparently the will, the Spirit, and the utterance. Ye have heard the reasons
for which I thought not my self exempted from associating with good men in
their labors toward the Churches welfare: to which if any one brought
opposition, I brought my best resistance. If in requital of this and for that
I have not been negligent toward the reputation of my friends, I have gained a
name bestuck, or as I may say, bedeckt with the reproaches and reviles of this
modest Confuter, it shall be to me neither strange, nor unwelcome; as that
which could not come in a better time.

Having rendered an account, what induc't me to write those animadversions in
that manner as I writ them, I come now to see what the confutatio^ has to say
against the^; but so as the confuter shall hear first what I have to say
against his confutation. And because he pretends to be a great conjector at
other men by their writings, I will not fail to give ye, Readers, a present
taste of him from his own title; hung out like a toling signe-post to call
passengers, not simply a confutation but a modest confutation with a laudatory
of it self obtruded in the very first word. Whereas a modest title should only
inform the buyer what the book contains without further insinuation, this
officious epithet so hastily assuming the modesty which others are to judge of by
reading, not the author to anticipate to himself by forestalling, is a strong
presumption that his modesty set there to sale in the frontispice, is not much
addicted to blush. A surer sign of his lost shame he could not have given,
then seeking thus unseasonably to prepossesse men of his modesty. And seeing he
has neither kept his word in the sequel, not omitted any kind of boldness in
slandering, it is manifest his purpose was only to rub the forehead of his title
with this word modest, that he might not want color to be the more impudent
throughout his whole confutation. Next what can equally savor of injustice,
and plain arrogance, as to prejudice and forecondemne his adversary in the
title for slanderous and scurrilous, and as the Remonstrants fashion is, for
frivolous, tedious, and false, not staying till the Reader can hear him proved
so in the following discourse; which is one cause of a suspicion that in
setting forth this pamplet the Remonstrant was not unconsulted with; thus his
first address was an humble Remonstrance by a dutiful son of the Church,
almost as if he had said her white-boy. His next was a defense (a wonder how it
escaped some praising adjunct) against the frivolous and false exceptions of
Smectymnus, sitting in the chair of his Title page upon his poor cast
adversaries both as a Judge and Party, and that before the jury of Readers can
be impannell'd. His last was A short answer to a tedious vindication; so little
can he suffer a man to measure either with his eye or judgment, what is short
or what tedious without his preoccupying direction: and from hence is begotten
this modest confutation against a slanderous and scurrilous libell. I conceave,
Readers, much may be guest at the man and his book, what depth there is, by the
framing of his title, which being in this Remonstrant so rash, and unadvised as
ye see, I conceit him to be near a kin to him who set forth a Passion Sermon
with a formal Dedicatory in great letters to our Savior. Although I know that
all we do ought to begin and end to his praise and glory, yet to inscribe him
in a void place with flourishes, as a man in complement uses to trick up the
name of some Esquire, Gentleman, or Lord Paramont at Common Law, to be his
book-patron with the appendan^ form of a ce^emonious presentment, will ever
appear among the judicious to be but a^ an insuls and frigid affectation. As
no less was that before his book against the Brownists to write a Letter to a
prosopopoea a certain rhetoriz'd woman whom he calls mother, and complains of
some that laid whoredom to her charge; and certainly had he folde^ his Epistle
with a superscription to be delivered to that female figure by any Post or
Carrier who were not a Ubiquitary, it had been a most miraculous greeting. We
find the Primitive Doctors as often as they writ to Churches, speaking to them
as to a number of faithful brethren and sons, and not to make a cloudy
transmigration of sexes in such a familiar way of writing as an Epistle ought
to be, leaving the track of common adresse, to run up, and tread the air in
metaphorical compellations, and many fond utterances better let alone. But I
step again to this emblazoner of his Title page (whether it be the same man or
no I leave it in the midst) and here I find him pronouncing without reprieve
those animadversions to be a slanderous and scurrilous libell. To which I,
Readers, that they are neither sl^nderous, nor scurrilous, will answer in what
place of his book he shall be found with reason, and not ink only in his
mouth. Nor can it be a libell more then his own, which is both namelesse, and
full of slanders, and if in this that it freely speaks of things amiss in
religion, but established by act of State, I see not how Wickleffe and Luther,
with all the first Martyrs, and reformers, could avoid the imputation of
libelling. I never thought the humane frailty of erring in cases of religion
infamy to a State, no more then to a Council; it had therefore been neither
civil, nor Christianly, to derogate the honor of the State for that cause,
especially when I saw the Parliament it self piously and magnanimously bent to
supply and reform the defects and oversights of their forefathers, which to
the godly and repentant ages of the Jews were often matter of humble
confessing and bewailing, not of confident asserting and maintaining. Of the
State therefore I found good reason to speak all honorable things, and to
join in petition with good men that petitioned: but against the Prelates who
were the only seducers and mis-leaders of the State to constitute the
government of the Church not rightly, me thought I had not vehemence anough.
And thus, Readers, by the example which he has set me I have given ye two
or three notes of him out of his Title page; by which his firstlings fear not
to guess boldly at his whole lump, for that guess will not fail ye; and
although I tell him keen truth, yet he may bear with me, since I am like to
chafe him into some good knowledge, and others, I trust, shall not mis-spend
their leisure. For this my aim is, if I am forced to be unpleasing to him
whose fault it is, I shall not forget at the same time to be useful in some
thing to the stander by.

As therefore he began in the Title, so in the next leaf he makes it his first
business to tamper with his Reader by sycophanting and misnaming the work of
his adversary. He calls it a mime thrust forth upon the stage to make up the
breaches of those solemn Scenes between the Prelates and the Smectymnuans.
Wherein while he is so overgreedy to fix a name of ill sound upon another, note
how stupid he is to expose himself, or his own friends to the same ignominy;
likening those grave controversies to a piece of S^^gery, or Scene-worke where
his own Remonstrant whether in Buskin or Sock must of all right be counted the
chief Player, be it boasting Thraso, or Davus that troubles all things, or one
who can shift into any shape, I meddle not; let him explicate who has
resembl'd the whole argument to a Comedy, for Tragical, he says, were too
ominous. Nor yet does he tell us what a Mime is, whereof we have no pattern
from ancient writers except some fragments, which contain many acute and wise
sentences. And this we know in Laertius, that the Mimes of Sophron were of such
reckning with Plato, as to take them nightly to read on and after make them his
pillow. Scaliger describes a Mime to be a Poem imitating any action to stir
up laughter. But this being neither Poem, nor yet ridiculous, how is it but
abusively taxt to be a Mime. For if every book which may by chance excite to
laugh here and there, must be termed thus, then may the Dialogues of Plato, who
for those his writings has obtained the surname of Divine, be esteemed as they
are by that detractor in Athenaeus, no better then Mimes. Because there is
scarce one of them, especially wherein some notable Sophister lies sweating and
turmoyling under the inevitable, and merciless dilemma's of Socrates, but that
he who reads, were it Saturn himself, would be often robbed of more then a
smile. And whereas he tells us that Scurrilous Mime was a personated grim
lowering fool, his foolish language unwittingly writes fool upon his own
friend, for he who was there personated, was only the Remonstrant; the author
is ever distinguished from the person he introduces. But in an ill hour has
his unfortunate rashness stumbl'd upon the mention of miming. That he might
at length cease, which he has not yet since he stepped in, to gall and hurt him
whom he would aid. Could he not beware, could he not be think him, was he so
uncircumspect, as not to foresee, that no sooner would that word Mime be set
eye on in the paper, but it would bring to mind that wretched pilgrimage over
Minshews Dictionary called Mundus alter and idem, the idlest and the paltriest
Mime that ever mounted upon bank. Let him ask the Author of those toothlesse
Satyrs who was the maker, or rather the anticreator of that u^iversall foolery,
who he was, who like that other principle of the Maniches the Arch evil one,
when he had looked upon all that he had made and mapt out, could say no other
but contrary to the Divine Mouth, that it was all very foolish. That grave and
noble invention which the greatest and sublimest wits in sundry ages, Plato in
Critias, and our two famous countrymen, the one in his Vtopia, the other in
his new Atlantis chose, I may not say as a field, but as a mighty Continent
wherein to display the largeness of their spirits by teaching this our world
better and exacter things, then were yet known, or used, this petty
prevanicator of America, the zanie of Columbus, (for so he must be till his
worlds end) having rambl'd over the huge topography of his own vain thoughts,
no marvel, if he brought us home nothing but a mere tankard drollery, a
venereous parjetory for a stews. Certainly he that could endure with a sober
pen to sit and devise laws for drunkards to carouse by, I doubt me whether the
very soberness of such a one, like an unlicour'd Silenus, were not stark
drunk. Let him go now and brand another man injuriously with the name of Mime,
being himself the loosest and most extravagant Mime, that has been heard of;
whom no less then almost half the world could serve for stage room to play
the Mime in. And let him advise again with Sir Francis Bacon whom he cites to
confute others, what it is to turn the sins of Christendom into a mimicall
mockery, to rip up the saddest vices with a laughing countenance, especially
where neither reproof nor better teaching is adjoynd. Nor is my meaning,
Readers, to shift off a blame from my self, by charging the li^e upon my
accuser, but shall only desire, that sentence may be respited, till I can come
to some instance, whe^eto I may give answer.

Thus having spent his first onset not in confuting, but in a reasonlesse
defaming of the book, the method of his malice hurries him to attempt the like
against the Author: not by proofs and testimonies, but having no certain
notice of me, as he professes, further then what he gathers from the
animadversions, blunders at me for the rest, and flings out stray crimes at a
venture, which he could never, though he be a Serpent, suck from any thing that
I have written; but from his own stuff magazin, and hoard of sl^nderous
inventions, over and above that which he converted to venom in the drawing. To
me Readers, it happens as a singular contentment, and let it be to good men no
slight satisfaction, that the sl^nderer here confesses, he has no further notice
of me then his own conj^cture. Although it had been honest to have inquired,
before he uttered such infamous words, and I am credibly informed he did
inquire, but finding small comfort from the intelligence which he received,
whereon to ground the fals^ties which he had provided, thought it his likeliest
course under a pretended ignorance to let drive at random, lest he should lose
his odd ends which from some penurious Book of Characters he had been culling
out and would feign apply. Not caring to burden me with those vices, whereof,
among whom my conversation has been, I have been ever least suspected; perhaps
not without some suttlety to cast me into envy, by bringing on me a necessity
to enter into mine own praises. In which argument I know every wise man is more
unwillingly drawn to speak, then the most repining ear can be averse to
hear. Nevertheless since I dare not wish to pass this life unpersecuted of
slanderous tongues; for God has told us that to be generally praised is
woeful, I shall rely on his promise to free the innocent from causeless
aspersions: whereof nothing sooner can assure me, then if I shall feel him now
assisting me in the just vindication of my self which yet I could defer, it
being more meet that to those other matters of public debatement in this book
I should give attendance first, but that I fear it would but harm the truth,
for me to reason in her behalf, so long as I should suffer my honest
estimation to lie unpurg'd from these insolent suspicions. And if I shall be
large, or unwonted in justifying my self to those who know me not, for else it
would be needless, let them consider that a short slander will often times reach
farther then a long apology: and that he who will do justly to all men, must
begin from knowing how, if it so happen, to be not unjust to himself. I must
be thought, if this libeller (for now he shows himself to be so) can find
belief, after an inordinat and riotous youth spent at the University, to have
bin at length vomited out thence. For which commodious lie, that he may be
encouraged in the trade another time, I thank him; for it has given me an apt
occasion to acknowledge publicly with all grateful mind, that more then
ordinary favor and respect which I found above any of my equals at the hands
of those courteous and learned men, the Fellows of that College wherein I
spent some years: who at my parting, after I had taken two degrees, as the
manner is, signified many ways, how much better it would content them that I
would stay; as by many Letters full of kindness and loving respect both before
that time, and long after I was assured of their singular good affection
toward me. Which being likewise propense to all such as were for their
studious and civil life worthy of esteem, I could not wrong their judgments,
and upright intentions; so much as to think I had that regard from them for
other cause then that I might be still encouraged to proceed in the honest and
laudable courses, of which they apprehended I had given good proof. And to
those ingenuous and friendly men who were ever the countnancers of virtuous and
hopeful wits, I wish the best, and happiest things, that friends in absence
wish one to another. As for the common approbation or dislike of that place, as
now it is, that I should esteem or disesteeme my self or any other the more
for that, too simple and too credulous is the Confuter, if he think to obtain
with me, or any right discerner. Of small practice were that Physician who
could not judge by what both she or her sister, has of long time vomited, that
the worser stuff she strongly keeps in her stomach, but the better she is ever
kecking at, and is queasie. She vomits now out of sickness, but ere it be well
with her, she must vomit by strong physic. In the mean while that Suburb
sink, as this rude Scavinger calls it, and more then scurrilously taunts it
with the plague, having a worse plague, in his middle entraile, that suburb
wherein I dwell, shall be in my account a more honorable place then his
University. Which as in the time of her better health, and mine own younger
judgment I never greatly admired, so now much less. But he follows me to the
City, still usurping and forging beyond his book notice, which only he affirms
to have had; and where my morning haunts are he wisses not. It Is wonder, that
being so rare an Alchymist of slander, he could not extract that, as well as
the University vomit, and the Suburb sink which his art could distill so
cunningly, but because his Limbeck fails him, to give him and envy the more
vexation, I Will tell him. Those morning haunts are where they should be, at home,
not sleeping, or concocting the surfets of an irregular feast, but up, and
stirring, in winter often ere the sound of any bell awake men to labor, or to
devotion; in Summer as often with the Bird that first rouses, or not much
tardier, to read good Authors, or cause them to be read, till the attention
be weary, or memory have his full fraught. Then with useful and generous
labors preserving the bodies health, and hardiness; to render lightsome,
clear, and not lumpish obedience to the mind, to the cause of religion, and
our Countries liberty, when it shall require firm hearts in sound bodies to
stand and cover their stations, rather then to see the ruin of our
Protestation, and the inforcement of a slavish life. These are the morning
practices; proceed now to the afternoon; in Playhouses, he says, and the
Bordelloes. Your intelligence, unfaithful Spy of Canaan? he gives in his
evidence, that there he has trac't me. Take him at his word Readers, but let
him bring good sureties, ere ye dismiss him, that while he pretended to dog
others, he did not t^rne in for his own pleasure; for so much in effect he
concludes against himself, not contented to be caught in every other gin, but
he must be such a novice, as to be still hampered in his own hemp. In the
Animadversions, says he, I find the mention of old clokes, falsbeards,
night-walkers, and salt lotion; therefore the Animadverter haunts Playhouses
and Bordelloes; for if he did not, how could he speak of such gear? Now that
he may know what it is to be a child, and yet to meddle with edged tools, I
turn his Antistrophon upon his own head; the Confuter knows that these
things are the furniture of Playhouses and Bordelloes, therefore by the same
reason the Confuter himself has been trac't in those places. Was it such a
dissolute speech telling of some Politicians who were wont to eavesdroppe in
disguises, to say they were often liable to a night-walking ^^dgeller, or the
emptying of a Urinall? What if I had writ as your friend the author of the
aforesaid Mime, Mu^dus alter and idem, to have bin ravished like some young
Cephalus or Hylas, by a troop of camping Huswives in Viraginia, and that he
was there forced to swear himself an uxorious varlet, then after a long
servitude to have come into Aphrodisia that pleasant Count^ey that gave such a
sweet smell to his nostrils among the shameless Courtezans of Desvergonia?
surely he would have then concluded me as constant at the Bordello, as the
gally-slave at his Oar. But since there is such necessity to the hearsay of a
Tire, a Periwig, or a Vizard, that Plays must have bin seen, what difficulty
was there in that? when in the Colleges so many of the young Divines, and those
in next aptitude to Divinity have bin seen so often upon the Stage writhing and
unboning their Clergy limbs to all the antic and dishonest gestures of
Trinculo's, Buffons, and Bawds; prostituting the shame of that ministry which
either they had, or were nigh having, to the eyes of Courtiers and
Court-Ladies, with their Grooms and Madamoisellaes. There while they acted,
and overacted, among other young scholars, I was a spectator; they thought
themselves gallant men, and I thought them fools, they made sport, and I
laughed, they mispronounc't and I mislik't, and to make up the at^icisme, they
were out, and I hist. Judge now whether so many good text men were not
sufficient to instruct me of false beard^ and vizards without more expositors;
and how can thi^ Confuter take the face to object to me the seeing of that
which his neve^ent Prelates allow, and incite their young disciples to act. For
if it be unlawful to sit and behold a mercenary Comedian personating that
which is least unseemely for a hireling to do, how much more blamefull is it
to endure the sight of as vile things acted by persons either entered, or
presently to enter into the ministry, and how much more foul and ignominious
for them to be the actors.

But because a^ well by this upraiding to me the Bordello's, as by other
suspicious glancings in his book he would seem privily to point me out to his
Readers, as one whose custom of life were not honest, but licentious; I shall
entreat to be born with though I digress; and in a way not often trod acquaint
ye with the sum of my thoughts in this matter through the course of my years
and studies. Although I am not ignorant how hazardous it will be to do this
under the nose of the envious, as it were in skirmish to change the compact
order, and instead of outward actions to bring inmost thoughts into front. And
I must tell ye Readers, that by this sort of men I have bin already bitten at;
yet shall they not for me know how slightly they are esteemed, unless they
have so much learning as to read what in Greek (...) is, which together with
envy is the common disease of those who censure books that are not for their
reading. With me it fare^ now, as with him whose outward garment has bin
injured and ill be^ighted; for having no other shift, what help but to turn
the inside outward, especially if the lining be of the same, or, as it is
sometimes, much better. So if my name and outward demeanor be not evident
anough to defend me, I must make try all, if the discovery of my inmost
thoughts can. Wherein of two purposes both honest, and both sincere, the one
perhaps I shall not miss; although I fail to gain belief with others of
being such as my perpetual thoughts shall here disclose me, I may yet not
fail of success in persuading some, to be such really themselves, as they
cannot believe me to be more then what I fain. I had my time Readers, as others
have, who have good learning bestowed upon them, to be sent to those places,
where the opinion was it might be soonest attained: and as the manner is, was
not unstudied in those authors which are most commended; whereof some were
grave Orators and Historians, whose matter me thought I loved indeed, but as my
age then was, so I understood them; others were the smooth Elegiack Poets,
whereof the Schools are not scarce. Whom both for the pleasing sound of their
numerous writing, which in imitation I found most easy; and most agreeable to
natures part in me, and for their matter which what it is, there be few who
know not, I was so allured to read, that no recreation came to me better
welcome. For that it was then those years with me which are excused though they
be least severe, I may be saved the labor to remember ye. Whence having
observed them to account it the chief glory of their wit, in that they were
ablest to judge, to praise, and by that could esteem themselves worthiest to
love those high perfections which under one or other name they took to
celebrate, I thought with my self by every instinct and presage of nature
which is not wont to be false, that what imboldn'd them to this task might with
such diligence as they used imbolden me, and that what judgment, wit, or
elegance was my share, would herein best appear, and best value it self, by
how much more wisely, and with more love of virtue I should choose (let rude
ears be absent) the object of not unlike praises. For albeit these thoughts to
some will seem virtuous and commendable, to others only pardonable, to a third
sort perhaps idle, yet the mentioning of them now will end in serious. Nor
blame it Readers, in those years to propose to themselves such a reward, as
the noblest ^ispositions above other things in this life have sometimes
preferred. Whereof not to be sensible, when good and fair in one person meet,
argues both a gross and shallow judgment, and withal an ungentle, and
swainish breast. For by the firm settling of these persuasions I became, to my
best memory, so much a proficient, that if I found those authors any where
speaking unworthy things of themselves; or unchaste of those names which before
they had extolled, this effect it wrought with me, from that time forward their
art I still applauded, but the men I deplored; and above them all preferred the
two famous renowners of Beatrice and Laura who never write but honor of them
to whom they devote their verse, displaying sublime and pure thoughts, without
transgression. And long it was not after, when I was confirmed in this opinion,
that he who would not be frustrate of his hope to write well hereafter in
laudable things, ought him self to be a true Poem, that is, a composition,
and pattern of the best and honourablest things; not presuming to sing high
praises o^ heroic men, or famous Cities, unless he have in himself the
experience and the practice of all that which is praiseworthy. These
reasonings, together with a certain niceness of nature, an honest
haughtiness, and self-esteem either of what I was, or what I might be, (which
let envy call pride) and lastly that modesty, whereof though not in the Title
page yet here I may be excused to make some beseeming profession, all these
uniting the supply of their natural aid together, kept me still above those
low descents of mind, beneath which he must deject and plunge himself, that
can agree to salable and unlawful prostitutions. Next, (for hear me out now
Readers) that I may tell ye whether my younger feet wandered; I betook me among
those lofty Fables and Romances, which recount in solemn canto's the deeds of
Knigh^hood founded by our victorious Kings; and from hence had in renown over
all Christendom. There I read it in the oath of every Knight, that he should
defend to the expense of his best blood, or of his life, if it so befell him,
the honor and chastity of Virgin or Matron. From whence even then I learnt
what a noble ve^tue chastity sure must be, to the defense of which so many
worthies by such a dear adventure of themselves had sworn. And if I found in
the story afterward any of them by word or deed breaking that oath, I judged it
the same fault of the Poet, as that which is attributed to Homer; to have
written undecent things of the gods. Only this my mind gave me that every free
and gentle spirit without that oath ought to be borne a Knight, nor needed to
expect the guilt spur, or the laying of a sword upon his shoulder to stir
him up both by his counsel, and his arm to secure and protect the weakness
of any attempted chastity. So that even those books which to many others have
bin the fuel of wantonness and loose living, I cannot think how unless by
divine indulgence proved to me so many incitements as you have heard, to the
love and steadfast observation of that virtue which abhorres the society of
Bordello's. Thus from the Laureat fraternity of Poets, riper years, and the
ceaselesse round of study and reading led me to the shady spaces of philosophy,
but chiefly to the divine volumes of Plato, and his equal Xenophon. Where if I
should tell ye what I learnt, of chastity and love, I mean that which is truly
so, whose charming cup is only virtue which she bears in her hand to those who
are worthy. The rest are cheated with a thick intoxicating potion which a
certain Sorceresse the abuser of loves name carries about; and how the first
and chiefest office of love, begins and ends in the soul, producing those
happy twins of her divine generation knowledge and virtue, with such abstracted
sublimities as these, it might be worth your listening, Readers, as I may one
day hope to have ye in a still time, when there shall be no chiding; not in
these noises, the adversary as ye know, barking at the door; or searching for
me at the Burdello's where it may be he has lost himself, and raps up without
pity the sage and rheumatick old Prelatesse with all her young Corinthian
Laity to inquire for such a one. Last of all not in time, but as perfection is
last, that care was ever had of me, with my earliest capacity not to be
negligently trained in the precepts of Christian Religion: This that I have
hitherto related, has bin to show, that though Christianity had bin but
slightly taught me, yet a certain reservedness of natural disposition, and
moral discipline learn^ out of the noblest Philosophy was anough to keep me in
disdain of far less incontinences then this of the Burdello. But having had
the doctrine of holy Scripture unfolding those chaste and high mysteries with
timeliest care infused, that the body is for the Lord and the Lord for the
body, thus also I argued to my self; that if unchastity in a woman whom Saint
Paul terms the glory of man, be such a scandal and dishonor, then certainly
in a man who is both the image and glory of God, it must, though commonly not
so thought, be much more deflouring and dishonorable. In that he sins both
against his own body which is the perfeter sex, and his own glory which is in
the woman, and that which is worst, against the image and glory of God which is
in himself. Nor did I slumber over that place expressing such high rewards of
ever accompanying the Lamb, with those celestial songs to others
inapprehensible, but not to those who were not defiled with women, which
doubtless means fornication: For marriage must not be called a defilement.
Thus large I have purposely bin, that if I have bin justly taxt with this
crime, it may come upon me after all this my confession, with a tenne-fold
shame. But if I have hitherto deserved no such opprobrious word, or suspicion,
I may hereby engage my self now openly to the faithful observation of what I
have professed. I go on to show you the unbridl'd impudence of this loose rayler,
who having once begun his race regards not how far he flies out beyond all
truth and shame; who from the single notice of the animadversions, as he
protests, will undertake to tell ye the very clothes I wear, though he be much
mistaken in my wardrobe. And like a son of Belial without the hire of I^sabel
charges me of blaspheming God and the King, as ordnarily as he imagines me to
drink Sack and swear, merely because this was a shred in his common
place-book, and seemed to come off roundly, as if he were some Empirick of
false accusations to try his poisons upon me whether they would work or no.
Whom what should I endeavor to refute more, whenas that book which is his only
testimony returns the lie upon him; not giving him the least hint of the
author to be either a swearer, or a Sack drinker. And for the readers if they
can believe me, principally for those reasons which I have alleged, to be of
life and purpose neither dishonest, nor unchaste, they will be easily induc't
to think me sober both of wine, and of word; but if I have bin already
successelesse in persuading them, all that I can further say will be but vain;
and it will be better thrift to save two tedious labors, mine of excusing, and
theirs of needless hearing.

Proceeding further I am met with a whole ging of words and phrases not mine,
for he has maimed them, and like a slye depraver mangled them in this his
wicked Limbo, worse then the ghost of Deiphobus appeared to his friend Aenaeas.
Here I scarce know them, and he that would, let him repair to the place in
that book where I set them. For certainly this tormenter of semicolons is as
good at dismembring and slitting sentences, as his grave Fathers the Prelates
have bin at stigmatizing and flitting noses. By such handy craft as this what
might he not traduce? Only that odor which being his own must needs offend his
sense of smelling, since he will needs bestow his foot among us, and not allow
us to think he wears a Sock, I shall endeavor it may be offencelesse to other
men's ears. The Remonstrant having to do with grave and reverend men his
adversaries, thought it became him to tell them in scorn, that the Bishops
foot had been in their book and confuted it, which when I saw him arrogate, to
have done that with his heels that surpast the best consideration of his head,
to spurn a confutation among respected men, I questioned not the lawfulness of
moving his jollity to bethink him, what odor a Sock would have in such a
painful business. And this may have chanced to touch him more nearly then I
was aware; for indeed a Bishops foot that has all his toes maugre the gout,
and a linen Sock over it, is the aptest emblem of the Prelate himself. Who
being a pluralist, may under one Surplice which is also linen, hide four
benefices besides the metropolitan toe, and sends a fouler stench to heaven,
then that which this young queasinesse reches at. And this is the immediate
reason here why our enraged Confuter, that he may be as perfet an hypocrite as
Caiaphas, ere he be a High Priest, cries out, horrid blasphemy! and like a
recreant Jew calls for stones. I beseech ye friends, ere the brick-bats fly,
resolve me and your selves, is it blasphemy, or any whit disagreeing from
Christian meekness, when as Christ himself speaking of unsavory traditions,
scruples not to name the Dunghill and the Jakes, for me to answer a slovenly
wincer of a confutation, that, if he would needs put his foot to such a sweaty
service, the odor of his Sock was like to be neither musk, nor benjamin? Thus
did that foolish Monk in a barbarous Declamation accuse Petrarch of blasphemy
for dispraising the French wines. But this which follows is plain bedlam
stuff, this is the Demoniack legion indeed, which the Remonstrant feared had
been against him, and now he may see is for him. You that love Christ, says
he, and know this miscreant wretch, stone him to death, lest you smart for his
impunity. What thinks the Remonstrant? does he like that such words as these
should come out of his shop, out of his Trojan horse? to give the watch word
like a Guisian of Paris to a mutiny or massacre; to proclaim a Crusada against
his fellow Christian now in this troublous and divided time of the Kingdom? if
he do, I shall say that to be the Remonstrant is no better then to be a Jesuit.
And that if he and his accomplices could do as the rebels have done in Ireland
to the Protestants, they would do in England the same to them that would no
Prelates. For a more seditious and Butcherly Speech no Cell of Loyola could have
belch't against one who in all his writing spoke not, that any man's skin should
be raised. And yet this cursing Shimei a hurler of stones, as well as a rayler,
wants not the face instantly to make as though he despaired of victory unless
a modest defense would get it him. Did I err at all, Readers, to foretell ye,
when first I met with his title, that the epithet of modest there, was a
certain red portending sign, that he meant ere long to be most tempestuously
bold,, and shameless? Nevertheless he dares not say but there may be hid in
his nature as much venomous Atheism and profanation, as he thinks, has broke
out at his adversaries lips, but he has not the soarerunning upon him, as he
would intimate I have. Now trust me not, Readers, if I be not already weary of
pluming and footing this Seagull, so open he lies to strokes; and never offers
at another, but brings home the dorre upon himself. For if the sore be running
upon me, in all judgment I have escaped the disease, but he who has as much
infection hid in him, as he has voluntarily confessed, and cannot expel it,
because he is dull, for venomous Atheism were no treasure to be kept within
him else, let him take the part he has chosen, which must needs follow, to
swell and burst with his own inward venom.

Sect. 1. But mark, Readers, there is a kind of justice observed among them
that do evil, but this man loves injustice in the very order of his malice.
For having all this while abused the good name of his adversary with all manner
of license in revenge of his Remonstrant, if they be not both one person, or as
I am told, Father and Son, yet after all this he calls for satisfaction, when
as he himself has already taken the utmost fa^ding. Violence has been done,
says he, to the person of a holy, and religious Prelat* To which, something in
effect to what S. Paul answered of Ananias, I answer, I wist not brethren that
he was a holy and religious Prelat; for evil is written of those who would be
Prelates. And finding him thus in disguise without his superscription or
Phylactery either of holy or Prelat, it were no sin to serve him as Longchamp
Bishop of Elie was served in his disguise at Dover* He has begun the measure
namelesse, and when he pleases we may all appear as we are. And let him be
then what he will, he shall be to me so as I find him principl'd. For neither
must Prelat or Arch-Prelat hope to exempt himself from being reckoned as one
of the vulgar; which is for him only to hope whom true wisdom and the contempt
of vulgar opinions exempts, it being taught us in the Psalms that he who is in
honor and understands not is as the beasts that perish. And now first the
manner of handling that cause which I undertook, he thinks is suspicious, as if
the wisest, and the best words were not ever to some or other suspicious. But
where is the offense, the disagreement from Christian meekness, or the precept
of Solomon in answering folly? when the Remonstrant talks of froth and scum, I
tell him there is none, and bid him spare his Ladle: when he brings in the
mess with Keale, Beef, and Brewesse, what stomach in England could forbear to
call for flanks and briskets? Capon and whitebroth having been likely
sometimes in the same room with Christ and his Apostles, why does it trouble
him that it should be now in the same leaf, especially, where the discourse is
not continued but interrupt? And let him tell me, is he wont to say grace, does
he not then name holiest names over the steame of costliest superfluities? Does
he judge it foolish or dishonest to write that among religious things, which
when he talks of religious things he can devoutly chew? is he afraid to name
Christ where those things are written in the same leaf whom he fears not to
name while the same things are in his mouth? Does not Christ himself teach the
highest things by the similitude of old bottles and patcht clothes? Does he not
illustrate best things by things most evil? his own coming to be as a thief
in the night, and the righteous man's wisdom to that of a^ unjust Steward? He
might therefore have done better to have kept in his canting beggars and
^eathen Altar to sacrifice his thredbare criticisme of Bomolochus to an
unseasonable Goddess fit for him called Importunity, and have reserved his
Greek derivation till he lecture to his fresh men, for here his itching
pedantry is but flouted.

But to the end that nothing may be omitted which may further satisfy any
conscionable man, who notwithstanding what I could explain before the
animadversions, remains yet unsatisfi'd concerning that way of writing which I
there defended, but this confuter whom it pinches, utterly disapproves, I shall
assay once again, and perhaps with more success. If therefore the question
were in oratory, whether a vehement vein throwing out indignation, or scorn
upon an object that merits it, were among the aptest Ideas of speech to be
allowed, it were my work, and that an easy one to make it clear both by the
rules of best rhetoricians, and the famousest examples of the Greek and Roman
Orations. But since the Religion of it is disputed, and not the art, I shall
make use only of such reasons and autorities, as religion cannot except
against. It will be harder to gainsay, then for me to evince that in the
teaching of men diversely tempered different ways are to be tried. The Baptist
we know was a strict man remarkable for austerity and set order of life. Our
Savior who had all gifts in him was Lord to express his indoctrinating power
in what sort him best seemed; sometimes by a mild and familiar converse,
sometimes with plain and impartial home-speaking regardlesse of those whom
the auditors might think he should have had in more respect; otherwhiles with
bitter and irefull rebukes if not teaching yet leaving excuselesse those his
wilful impugners. What was all in him, was divided among many others the
teachers of his Church; some to be severe and ever of a sad gravity that they
may win such, and check sometimes those who be of nature over-confident and
jocond; others were sent more cheerful, free, and still as it were at large,
in the midst of an untrespassing honesty; that they who are so tempered may
have by whom they might be drawn to salvation, and they who are too
scrupulous, and dejected of spirit might be often strength^'d with wise
consolations and revivings: no man being forced wholly to dissolve that
groundwork of nature which God created in him, the sanguine to empty out all
his sociable liveliness, the choleric to expel quite the unsinning
predominance of his anger; but that each radical humor and passion wrought
upon and corrected as it ought, might be made the proper mould and foundation
of every man's peculiar gifts, and virtues. Some also were indu'd with a staid
moderation, and soundness of argument to teach and convince the rational and
sober-minded; yet not therefore that to be thought the only expedient course of
teaching, for in times of opposition when either against new heresies arising,
or old corruptions to be reformed this cool unpassionate mildness of positive
wisdom is not enough to damp and astonish the proud resistance of carnal, and
false Doctors, then (that I may have leave to soar a while as the Poets us^)
then Zeal whose substance is ethereal, arming in complete diamond ascends his
fiery Chariot drawn with two blazing Meteors figured like beasts, but of a
higher breed then any the Zodiac yields, resembling two of those four which
Ezechiel and S. John saw, the one visag'd like a Lion to express power, high
authority and indignation, the other of countenance like a man to cast derision
and scorn upon perverse and fraudulent seducers; with these the invincible
warrior Zeal shaking loosely the slack reins drives over the heads of Scarlet
Prelates, and such as are insolent to maintain traditions, brusing their stiff
necks under his flaming wheels. Thus did the true Prophets of old combat with
the false; thus Christ himself the fountain of meekness found acrimony
anough to be still galling and vexing the Prel^ticall Pharisees. But ye will
say these had immediate warrant from God to be thus bitter, and I say, so much
the plainlier is it proved, that there may be a sanctified bitterness against
the enemies of truth. Yet that ye may not think inspiration only the warrant
thereof, but that it is as any other virtue, of moral and general
observation, the example of Luther may stand for all: whom God made choice of
before others to be of highest eminence and power in reforming the Church; who
not of revelation, but of judgment writ so vehemently against the chief
defenders of old untruths in the Romish Church, that his own friends and
favorers were many times offended with the fierceness of his spirit; yet he
being cited before Charles the fifth to answer for his books, and having
divided them into three sorts, whereof one was of those which he had sharply
written, refused though upon deliberation given him to retract or unsay any
word therein; as we may read in Sleiden. Yea he defends his eagerness, as
being of an ardent spirit, and one who could not write a dull style: and
affirmed he thought it Gods will to have the inventions of men thus laid open,
seeing that matters quietly handled, were quickly forgot. And herewithall how
useful and available God had made this tart rhetoric in the Churches cause,
he often found by his own experience. For when he betook himself to lenity
and moderation, as they call it, he reapt nothing but contempt both from
Cajetan and Erasmus, from Cocleus, from Ecchius and others, insomuch that
blaming his friends who had so counseled him, he resolved never to run into
the like error; if at other times he seem to excuse his vehemence, as more
then what was meet, I have not examined through his works to know how far he
gave way to his own fervent mind; it shall suffice me to look to mine own.
And this I shall easily aver though it may seem a hard saying, that the
Spirit of God who is purity it self, when he would reprove any fault severely,
or but relate things done or said with indignation by others, abstains not from
some words not civil at other times to be spok'n. Omitting that place in
Numbers at the killing of Zimri and Cosbi done by Phineas in the height of
zeal, related as the Rabbines expound, not without an obscene word, we may
find in Deuteronomy and three of the Prophets, where God denouncing bitterly
the punishments of Idolaters, tells them in a term immodest to be uttered in
cool blood, that their wives shall be defiled openly. But these, they will say
were honest words in that age when they were spok'n. Which is more then any
Rabbin can prove, and certainly had God been so minded, he could have picked
such words, as should never have come into abuse. What will they say to this.
David going against Nabal, in the very same breath when he had but just before
named the name of God, he vows not to leave any alive of Nabals house that
pisseth against the wall. But this was unadvisedly spoke, you will answer, and
set down to aggravate his infirmity. Turn then to the first of Kings where
God himself uses the phrase; I will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wall. Which had it been an unseemely speech in the heat of an
earnest expression, then we must conclude that Jonathan, or Onk^los the
Targumists were of cleaner language then he that made the tongue; for they
render it as briefly, I will cut off all who are at years of discretion, that
is to say so much discretion as to hide nakedness. Whereas God who is the
author both of purity and eloquence, chose this phrase as fittest in that
vehement character wherein he spoke. Otherwise that plain word might have
easily bin forborne. Which the Mas^reths and Rabbinicall Scholiasts not well
attending, have often used to blurre the margent with Keri, instead of Ketiv,
and gave us this ins^l^ rule out of their Talmud, That all words which in the
Law are writ ob^cenely, must be changed to more civil words. Fools who would
teach men to speak more decently then God thought good to write. And thus I
take it to be manifest, that indignation against men and their actions
notoriously bad, has leave and authority often times to utter such words and
phrases as in common talk were not so mannerly to use. That ye may know, not
only as the Historian speaks, that all those things for which men plough,
build, or sail, obey virtue, but that all words and whatsoever may be spoken
shall at some time in an unwonted manner wait upon her purposes.

Now that the confutant may also know as he desires, what force of teaching
there is sometimes in laughter, I shall return him in short, that laughter
being one way of answering A Fool according to his folly, teaches two sorts of
persons, first the Fool himself not to be wise in his own conceit; as Solomon
affirms, which is certainly a great document, to make an unwise man know
himself. Next, it teaches the hearers, in as much as scorn is one of those,
punishments which belong to men carnally wise, which is often in Scripture
declared; for when such are punished the simple are thereby made wise, if
Salomons rule be true. And I would ask, to what end Eliah mocked the false
Prophets? was it to show his wit, or to fulfill his humor? doubtless we
cannot imagine that great servant of God had any other end in all which he
there did, but to teach and instruct the poor misledde people. And we may
frequently read, that many of the Martyrs in the midst of their troubles, were
not sparing to deride and scoff their superstitious persecutors. Now may the
confutant advise again with Sir Francis Bacon whether Eliah and the Ma^tyrs
did well to turn religion into a Comedy, or Satir; to rip up the wounds of
Idolatry and Superstition with a laughing count^nance. So that for pious
gravity his author here is matched and overmatcht, and for wit and morality in
one that follows.

-- laughing to teach the truth
What hinders? as some teachers give to Boys
lunkets and knacks, that they may learn apace.
Thus Fl^ccus in his first Satir, and in his tenth
-- Jesting decides great things
Stronglier, and better often then earnest can.
I could urge the same out of Cicero, and Seneca, but he may content him with
this. And hence forward, if he can learn, may know as well what are the bounds,
and objects of laughter and vehement reproof, as he has known hitherto how
to deserve them both. But lest some may happily think, or thus expostulat with me
after all this debatement, who made you the busy Almoner to deal about this
dole of laughter and reprehension which no man thanks your bounty for? To the
urbanity of that man I should answer much after this sort? That I, friend
objecter, having read of heathen Philosophers, some to have taught, that
whosoever would but use his ear to listen, might hear the voice of his
guiding Genius ever before him, calling and as it were pointing to that way
which is his part to follow; others, as the Stoics, to account reason, which
they call the Hegemonicon, to be the common Mercury conducting without error
those that give themselves obediently to be led accordingly, having read this,
I could not esteem so poorly of the faith which I profess, that God had left
nothing to those who had forsaken all other doctrines for his, to be an inward
witness, and warrant of what they have to do, as that they should need to
measure themselves by other men's measures how to give scope, or limit to their
proper actions; for that were to make us the most at a stand, the most
unce^taine and accidental wanderers in our doings, of all religions in the
world. So that the question ere while moved who he is that spends thus the
benevolence of laughter and reproof so liberally upon such men as the Prelates,
may return with a more just demand, who he is not of place and knowledge never
so mean, under whose contempt and jerk these men are not deservedly fallen?
neither can religion receive any wound by disgrace thrown upon the Prelates,
since religion and they surely were never in such amity. They rather are the
men who have wounded religion, and their stripes must heal her. I might also
tell them, what Electra in Sophocles, a wise Virgin answered her wicked Mother
who thought her self too violently reproved by her the daughter.

It Is you that say it, not I, you do the deeds,
And your ungodly deeds find me the words.
If therefore the Remonstrant complain of libels, it is because he feels them
to be right aimed. For I ask again as before in the animadversions, how long
is it since he has dis-relisht libe^s? we never heard the least mutter of his
voice against them while they flew abroad without control or check defaming
the Scots and Puritans. And yet he can remember of none but Lysimachus Nicanor,
and that he mislikt and censured. No more but of one can the Remonstrant
remember? What if I put him in mind of one more? What if of one more whereof
the Remonstrant in many likelyhoods may be thought the author? Did he never see
a Pamphlet intitl'd after his own fashion, A survey of that foolish, seditious,
scandalous, profane libell the Protestation protested? The child does not more
expressly refigure the visage of his Father, then that book resembles the style
of the Remonstrant, in those idioms of speech, wherein he seems most to
delight: and in the seventeenth Page three lines together taken out of the
Remonstrance word for word, not as a citation, but as an author borrowes from
himself. Who ever it be, he may as justly be said to have libelled, as he
against whom he writes: there ye shall find another man then here is made show
of, there he bites as fast as this whines. Vinegar in the ink is there the
antidote of Vipers. Laughing in a religious controversy is there a thrifty
physic to expel his melancholy. In the mean time the testimony of Sir
Francis Bacon was not misalledg'd, complaining that libels on the Bishops part
were uttered openly; and if he hoped the Prelates had no intell^gence with the
libellours, he delivers it but as his favorable opinion. But had he
contradicted himself, how could I assoil him here, more then a little before,
where I know not how by entangling himself, he leaves an aspersion upon Job,
which by any else I never heard laid to his charge. For having affirmed that
there is no greater confusion then the confounding of jest and earnest,
presently he brings the example of Job glancing at conceits of mirth, when he
sat among the people with the gravity of a Judge upon him. If jest and earnest
be such a confusion, then were the people much wiser then Job, for he smiled,
and they believed him not. To defend Libels, which is that whereof I am next
accused, was far from my purpose. I had not so little share in good name, as
to give another that advantage against my self. The sum of what I said, was
that a more free permission of writing at some times might be profitable, in
such a question especially wherein the Magistrates are not fully resolved; and
both sides have equal liberty to write, as now they have. Not as when the
Prelates bore sway, in whose time the books of some men were confuted, when
they who should have answered were in close prison, denied the use of pen or
paper. And the Divine right of Episcopacy was then valiantly asserted, when he
who would have bin respondent, must have bethought himself withal how he
could refute the Clink or the Gate House. If now therefore they be persn'd with
bad words, who persecuted others with bad deeds, it is a way to lessen tumult
rather then to encrea^e it; when as anger thus freely vented spends it self,
ere it break out into action, though Machiavell whom he cites, or any
Machiavillian Priest think ^he contrary.

Sect. 3. Now Readers I bring ye to his third Section; wherein very cautiously,
and no more then needs, lest I should take him for some Chaplain at hand, some
Squire of the body to his Prelat, one that serves not at the Altar only, but at
the Court cup board, he will bestow on us a pretty model of himself; and sobs
me out half a dozen tizicall mottoes where ever he had them, hopping short in
the measure of convulsion fi^^; in which labor the agony of his wit, having
escaped narrowly, instead of well sized periods, he greets us with a quantity of
thum-ring posies. He has a fortune therefore good, because he is content with
it. This is a piece of sapience not worth the brain of a fruit-trencher; as if
content were the measure of what is good or bad in the gift of fortune. For by
this rule a bad man may have a good fortune, because he may be often times
content with it for many reasons which have no affinity with virtue, as love of
ease, want of spirit to use more, and ^he like. And therefore content, he
says, because it neither goes before, nor comes behind his merit. Belike then
if his fortune should go before his mer^t, he would not be content, but
resign, if we believe him, which I do the less, because he implies that if it
came behind his merit, he would be content as little. Whereas if a wise man's
content should depend upon such a Therefore, because his fortune came not
behind his merit, how many wise men could have content in this world? In his
next pithy symbol I dare not board him, for he passes all the seven wise
Masters of Greece attributing to himself that which on my life Solomon durst
not; to have affections so equally tempered, that they neither too hastily
adhere to the truth, before it be fully examined, nor too lazily afterward.
Which unless he only were exempted out of the corrupt mass of Adam, borne
without sin original, and living without actual, is impossible. Had Solomon
(for it be^hoves me to i^stance in the wisest, dealing with such a transcendent
Sage as this) had Solomon affections so equally tempered, as not adhering too
lazily to the truth, when God warned him of his halting in idolatry? do we
read that he repented hastily? did not his affections lead him hastily from an
examined truth, how much more would they lead him slowly to it? Yet this man
beyond a Stoic apathy sees truth as in a rapture, and cleaves to it. Not as
through the dim glass of his affections which in this frail mansion of flesh
are ever unequally tempered, pushing forward to error, and keeping back from
truth often times the best of men. But how far this boaster is from knowing
himself, let his Preface speak. Something I thought it was that made him so
quick-sighted to gather such strange things out of the Animadversions, whereof
the least conception could not be drawn from thence, of Suburb si^ks,
sometimes out of wit and clothes, sometimes in new Serge, drinking Sack, and
swearing, now I know it was this equal temper of his affections that gave him
to see clearer then any fenell rubbed Serpent. Lastly, he has resolved that
neither person, nor cause shall improper him. I may mistake his meaning, for
the word ye hear is improper. But whether if not a person, yet a good
Personage, or Impropriation bought out for him would not improper him, because
there may be a quirk in the word, I leave it for a Canonist ^o resolve.

Sect. 4. And thus ends this Section, or rather dissection of himself, short
ye will say both in breath, and extent, as in our own praises it ought to be,
unless wherein a good name has bin wrongfully attainted. Right, but if ye
look at what he ascribes to himself, that temper of his affections which
cannot any where be but in Paradise, all the judicious Panegyricks in any
language extant are not half so prolixe. And that well appears in his next
removal. For what with putting his fancy to the tiptoe in this description of
himself, and what with adventuring presently to stand upon his own legs
without the crutches of his margent, which is the sluice most commonly, that
feeds the drouth of his text, he comes so lazily on in a Similie, with his arm
full of weeds, and demeanes himself in the dull expression so like a dough
kneaded thing, that he has not spirit anough left him so far to look to his
Syntaxis, as to avoid nonsense. For it must be understood there that the
stranger, and not he who brings the bundle would be deceav'd in censuring the
field, which this hip-shot Grammarian cannot set into ^ight frame of
construction, neither here in the similitude, nor in the following reddition
thereof, which being to this purpose, that the faults of the best picked out,
and presented in gross, seem monstrous, this says he, you have done, in
pinning on his sleeve the faults of others; as if to pick out his own faults,
and to pin the faults of others upon him, were to do the same thing. To answer
therefore how I have culled out the evil actions of the Remonstrant from his
virtues, I am acquitted by the dexterity and conveiance of his nonsense,
loosing that for which he brought his parable. But what of other men's faults I
have pinned upon his sleeve, let him show. For whether he were the man who
termed the Martyrs Foxian confessors, it matters not; he that shall step up
before others to defend a Church Government, which wants almost no
circumstance, but only a name to be a plain Popedom, a government which
changes the fatherly and everteaching discipline of Christ into that Lordly and
uninstructing jurisdiction which properly makes the Pope Antichrist, makes
himself an accessory to all the evil committed by those, who are armed to do
mischief by that undue government; which they by their wicked deeds, do with a
kind of passive and unwitting obedience to God, destroy. But he by plausible
words and traditions against the Scripture obstinately seeks to maintain. They
by their own wickedness ruining their own unjust authority make room for
good to succeed. But he by a show of good upholding the evil which in them
undoes it self, hinders the good which they by accident let in. Their manifest
crimes serve to bring forth an ensuing good and hasten a remedy against
themselves, and his seeming good tends to reinforce their selfe-punishing
crimes and his own, by doing his best to delay all redress. Shall not all the
mischief which other men do, be laid to his charge, if they do it by that
unchurchlike power which he defends? Christ says, he that is not with me is
against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters. In what degree of enmity
to Christ shall we place that man then, who so is with him, as that it makes
more against him, and so gathers with him, that it scatters more from him?
shall it avail that man to say he honors the Martyrs memory and treads in
their steps? No; the Pharisees confessed as much of the holy Prophets. Let him
and such as he when they are in their best actions even at their prayers look
to hear that which the Pharisees heard from John the Baptist when they least
expected, when they rather looked for praise from him. Generation of Vipers who
has warned ye to flee from the wrath to come? Now that ye have sta^ted back
from the purity of Scripture which is the only rule of reformation, to the old
vomit of your traditions, now that ye have e^ther troubled or leven'd the
people of God, and the doctrine of the Gospel with scandalous ceremonies and
mass borrowed Liturgies, do ye turn the use of that truth which ye profess,
to countenance that falsehood which ye gain by? We also reverence the Martyrs
but rely only upon the Scriptures. And why we ought not to rely upon the
Martyrs I shall be content with such reasons as my confuter himself affords
me; who is I must needs say for him in that point as officious an adversary as
I would wish to any man. For first, says he, there may be a Martyr in a wrong
cause, and as courageous in suffering as the best: sometimes in a good cause
with a forward ambition displeasing to God. Otherwhiles they that story of them
out of blind zeal, or malice may write many things of them untruly. If this be
so, as ye hear his own confession, with what safety can the Remonstant rely
upon the Martyrs as Patrons of his cause, when as any of those who are alleged
for the approvers of our Liturgy or Prelaty might have bin though not in a
wrong cause Martyrs, yet whether not vainly ambitious of that honor, or
whether not misreported, or misunderstood, in those their opions God only
knows. The testimony of what we believe in religion must be such as the
conscience may rest on to be infallible, and incorruptible, which is only the
word of God.

Sect. 5. His fifth Section finds it self agriev'd that the Remonstrant should
be taxt with the illegal proceedings of the high Commission, and oath Ex
officio; And first whether they were illegal or no, it is more then he knows.
See this malevolent Fox? that tyranny which the whole Kingdom cried out
against as stung with Adders, and Scorpions, that tyranny which the Parliament
in compassion of the Church and Commonwealth has dissolved, and fetched up by
the roots, for which it has received the public thanks and blessings of
thousands, this obscure thorn-eater of malice and detraction, as well as of
Quodlibets and Sophisms knows not whether it were illegal or not. Evil,
evil, would be your reward ye worthies of the Parliament, if this Sophister and
his accomplices had the censuring, or the sounding forth of your labors. And
that the Remonstrant cannot wash his hands of all the cruelties exercised by
the Prelates, is past doubting. They scourged the confessors of the Gospel, and
he held the scourgers garments. They excuted their rage, and he, if he did
nothing else, defended the government with the oath that did it, and the
ceremonies which were the cause of it: does he think to be counted guiltless?

Sect. 6. In the following Section I must foretell ye, Readers, the doings will
be rough and dangerous, the bating of a Satir. And if the work seem more
trivial or boistrous then for this discourse, let the Remonstrant thank the
folly of this confuter, who could not let a private word pass, but he must
make all this blaze of it. I had said that because the Remonstrant was so much
offended with those who were tart against the Prelates, sure he loved toothlesse
Satirs, which I took were as improper as a toothed Sleekstone. This Champion
from behind the Arras cries out that those toothlesse Satyrs were of the
Remonstrants making; and arms himself heretooth and nail and horn to boot,
to supply the want of teeth, or rather of gumms in the Satirs. And for an onset
tells me that the simily of a Sleekstone shows I can be as bold with a Prelat
as familiar with a Laundresse. But does it not argue rather the lascivious
promptness of his own fancy, who from the harmless mention of a Sleekstone
could neigh out the remembrance of his old conversation among the Viraginian
trollops? For me, if he move me, I shall claim his own oath, the oath Ex
officio against any Priest or Prelat in the kingdom to have ever as much hated
such pranks as the best and chast^st of them all. That exception which I made
against toothlesse Satirs the Confuter hopes I had from the Satirist, but is
far deceav'd: neither had I ever read the hobbling distick which he me^^^.
For this good hap I had from a careful education to be inur'^ and seasoned
betimes with the best and elegantest authors of the learned tongues, and
thereto brought an ear that could measure a just cadence, and scan without
articulating; rather nice and humorous in what was tolerable, then patient to
read every drawling versifier. Whence lighting upon this title of toothlesse
Satirs, I will not conceal ye what I thought. Readers, that sure this must be
some sucking Satir, who might have done better to have used his coral, and
made an end of breeding, ere he took upon him to weild a Satirs whip. But when
I heard him talk of scouring the rusted swords of elvish Knights, do not blame
me, if I changed my thought, and concluded him some desperate Cu^ler. But why
his scornful muse could never abide with tragic shoos her ankles for to
hide, the pace of the verse told me that her maukin knuckles were never shapen
to that royal buskin. And turning by chance to the sixth Satyr of his Second
book I was confirmed; where having begun loftily in heavens universal Alphab^t
he falls down to that wretched poorness and frigidity as to talk of Bridge
street in heaven, and the Ostler of heaven, and there wanting other matter to
catch him a heat, (for certain he was in the frozen Zone miserably benumbed)
with thoughts lower then any Beadle betakes him to whip the sign posts of
Cambridge Alehouses, the ordinary subject of freshmens tales, and in a strain
as pitiful. Which for him who would be counted the first English Satyr, to
abase himself to, who might have learnt better among the Latin, and Italian
Satyrists, and in our own tongue from the vision and Creed of Pierce plowman,
besides others before him, manifested a presumptuous undertaking with weak, and
unexamin'd shoulders. For a Satyr as it was borne out of a Tragedy, so ought to
resemble his parentage, to strike high, and adventure dangerously at the most
eminent vices among the greatest persons, and not to creep into (...) blind
Taphouse that fears a Constable more then a Satyr. But that such a Poem should
be toothlesse I still affirm it to be a bull, taking away the essence of that
which it calls it self. For if it bite neither the persons nor the vices, how
is it a Satyr, and if it bite either, how is it toothlesse, so that toothlesse
Satyrs are as much as if he had said toothlesse teeth. What we should do
therefore with this learned Comment upon teeth and horns which has brought
this confutant into his Pedantick kingdom of Cornucopia, to reward him for
glossing upon hor^^^ even to the Hebrew root, I know not unless we should
commend him to be Lecturer in East-cheap upon ^. Luk^s day, when they send
their tribute to that famous hav'n by Detfo^^. But we are not like to escape him
so. For now the worm of Criticisme works in him, he will tell us the
de^ivation of German rutters, of meat, and of ink, which doubtless rightly
applied with some gall in it may prove good to heal this tetter of
Pedagoguism^ that bespreads him, with such a tenasmus of originating, that if
he be an Arminian and deny original sin, all the etymologies of his book
shall witness that his brain is not meanly tainted with that infection.

Sect. 7. His seventh section labors to cavil out the flawes which were found
in the Remonstrants logic; who having laid down for a general proposition,
that civil polity is variable and arbitrary, from whence was inferred
logically upon him that he had concluded the polity of England to be arbitrary,
for general includes particular, here his defendant is not ashamed to confess
that the Remonstrants proposition was sophistical by a fallacy called ad
plures interrogationes which sounds to me somewhat strange that a Remonstrant
of that pretended sincerity should bring deceitful and double dealing
propositions to the Parliament. The truth is he had let slip a shrewd passage
ere he was aware, not thinking the conclusion would turn upon him with such a
terrible edge, and not knowing how to wind out of the briars, he or his
substitute seems more willing to lay the integrity of his Logic to pawn, and
grant a fallacy in his own Major where none is, then be forced to uphold the
inference. For that distinction of possible and lawful is ridiculous to be
sought for in that proposition; no man doubting that it is possible to change
the form of civil polity; and that it is held lawful by that Major, the word
arbitrary implies. Nor will this help him, to deny that it is arbitrary at any
time or by any undertakers (which are two limitations invented by him since)
for when it stands as he will have it now by his second edition civil polity
is variable but not at any time or by any undertakers, it will result upon him,
belike then at some time, and by some undertakers it may. And so he goes on
mincing the matter, till he meets with something in Sir Francis Bacon, then he
takes heart again and holds his Major at large. But by and by as soon as the
shadow of Sir Francis has left him, he falls off again warping and warping till
he come to contradict himself in diameter: and denies flatly that it is either
variable or arbitrary, being once settled. Which third shift is no less a
piece of laughter. For before the polity was settled how could it be vari^ble
when as it was no polity at all, but either an Anarchy or a Tyranny. That
limitation therefore of after settling is a mere tautology. So that in fine his
former assertion is now recanted and civil polity is neither variable nor
arbitrary.

Sect. 8. What ever else may persuade me that this confutation was not made
without some assistance or advice of the Remonstrant, yet in this eighth
Section that his hand was not greatly intermixed, I can easily believe. For it
begins with this surmise, that not having to accuse the Remonstrant to the
King, I do it to the Parliament, which conceit of the man cleanly shoves the
King out of the Parliament, and makes two bodies of one. Whereas the Remonstrant
in the Epistle to his last short answer, gives his supposall that they cannot
be severed in the rights of their several concernments. Mark, Readers, if they
cannot be severed in what is several (which casts a Bulls eye to go yoke with
the toothlesse Satyrs) how should they be severed in their common concernments,
the welfare of the land, by due accusation of such as are the common
grievances, among which I took the Remonstrant to be one. And therefore if I
accused him to the Parliament, it was the same as to accuse him to the King.
Next he casts it into the dish of I know not whom that they flatter some of the
House and libell others whose consciences made them vote contrary to some
proceedings. Those some proceedings can be understood of nothing else but the
Deputies execution. And can this private concocter of malecontent, at the very
instant when he pretends to extol the Parliament, afford thus to blurre over,
rather then to mention that public triumph of their justice and constancy so
high, so glorious, so reviving to the fainted Commonwealth with such a
suspicious and murmuring expression as to call it some proceedings? and yet
immediately he falls to glozing, as if he were the only man that rejoyc't at
these times. But I shall discover to ye Readers, that this his praising of them
is as full of nonsense and Scolastick foppery, as his meaning he himself
discovers to be full of close malignity. His first Encomium is that the Sun
looks not upon a braver nobler convocation then is that of King, Peers, and
Commons. One thing I beg of ye Readers, as ye bear any zeal to learning, to
elegance, and that which is called Decorum in the writing of praise, especially
on such a noble argument, ye would not be offended, though I rate this
cloistered Lubber according to his deserts. Where did thou learn to be so
agueish, so pusillanimous, thou lozel Bachelour of Art, as against all custom
and use of speech to term the high and sovran Court of Parliament, a
Convocation? was this the flower of all thy Syn^nyma's and voluminous Papers
whose best f^lios are pred^stin'd to no better end then to make winding sh^etes
in Lent for Pilchers? Coul^'^ thou presume thu^ wi^h one words speaking to clap
as it were under hatches the King with all his Peers and Ge^try i^to square
Caps, an^ Morkish hoods? How well do thou now appear to be a Chip of the old
block that c^uld find Bridg^ st^e^t and Al^ houses in h^av^^; why did thou
no^t be his per^^ct mi^^tor, liken the King to the Vice Chancellor and he
Lords to the Doctors. N^ith^r is this an indignity only ou^ a re^ro^ch t^ call
the inviolable residence of just^ce and liberty by such an ^dious name as now a
Convocation is beco^e; which would be nothing inju^'d, though it were styled
the house o^ bondage, whereout so many c^uell tasks, so many ^^j^st bur^ens,
have been ^aden upon the b^used con^ciences of to ma^y Ch^^stian through^ut the
land. But which of th^se worthy deeds, whereof we and our poste^ity must
confess this Parliament to have done so many and so noble, which of those
memor^ble acts come^ first into his praises? none of all, not one. What will he
then praise them for? not for any thing doing, but for deferring to do, for
deferring to chastise his lewd and insolent compriests. Not that they have
deferred all, but that he hopes they will r^mit what is yet behind. For the
rest of his oratory that follows, so just is it in the language of stall
epistle non sense, that if he who made it can understand it, I deny not but
that he may deserve for his pains a cast Doublet. When a man would look he
should vent something of his own, as ever in a set speech the manner is with
him that knows any thing, he, lest we should not take notice anough of his
barren stupidity, declares it by Alphabet, and referres us to odd remnants in
his topics. Nor yet content with the wonted room of his margent, but he must
cut out large docks and creeks, into his text to unlade the foolish frigate of
his unseasonable autorities, not wherewith to praise the Parliament, but to tell
them what he would h^ve them do. What else there is, he j^mbles together in
such a lost construction, as no man either lette^'d, or unlettered will be able
to piece up. I shall spare to transcribe him, but if I do him wrong, let me be
so dealt with.

Now although it be a digression from the ensuing matter, yet because it shall
not be said I am apter to blame others then to make trial my self, and that I
may after this harsh discord touch upon a smo^ther string, awhile to ente^t^ine
my self and him that list, wi^h some more pleasing fit, and not the lest to
testify the grati^ude which I owe to those public benefact^rs of their
country, for the sh^re I enjoy in the common peace and good by their incessant
labors, I shall be so troublesome to this declamer for once, as to show him
what he might have better said in their praise. Wherein I must mention only
some few things of many, for more then that to a digression may not be granted.
Although certainly their actions are worthy not thus to be spoken of by the
way, yet if hereafter it befall me to attempt something more answerable to
their great merits, I perceave how hopeless it will be to reach the height of
their praises at the accomplisment of that expectation that weights upon their
nob^e deeds, the unfinishing whereof already surpasses what others before them
have left enacted with their utmost performance through many ages. And to the
end we may be confident that what they do, proceeds neither from uncertain
opinion, nor su^den counsels, but from mature wisdom, deliberat virtue, and
dear affection to the public good, I shall begin at that which made them
likeliest in the eyes of good men to effect those things for the recovery of
decayed religion and the Commonwealth, which they who were best minded had long
wished for, but few, as the times then were desperate, had the courage to hope
for. First therefore the most of them being either of ancient and high
Nobility, or at least of known and well reputed ancestry, which is a great
advantage toward virtue one way, but in respect of wealth, ease, and flattery,
which accompanies a nice and tender education, is as much a hindrance another
way, the good which lay before them they took, in imitating the worthiest of
their progenitors, and the evil which assaulted their younger years by the
temptation of riches, high birth, and that usual bringing up, perhaps too
favorable and too remiss, through the strength of an inbred goodness, and
with the help of divine grace, that had marked them out for no mean purposes,
they nobly overcame. Yet had they a greater danger to cope with; for being
trained up in the knowledge of learning, and sent to those places, which were
intended to be the seed plots of piety and the Liberal Arts, but were become
the nurseries of superstition, and empty speculation, as they were prosperous
against those vices which grow upon youth out of idleness and superfluity, so
were they happy in working off the harms of their abused studies and labors;
correcting by the clearness of their own judgment the errors of their
mis-instruction, and were as David was, wiser then their teachers. And although
their lot fell into such times, and to be bred in such places, where if they
chanced to be taught any thing good, or of their own accord had learned it,
they might see that presently untaught them by the custom and ill example of
their elders, so far in all probability was their youth from being, misl^d by
the single power of example, as their riper years were known to be unmoved
with the baits of preferment, and undaunted for any discouragement and terror
which appeared often to those that loved religion, and their native liberty.
Which two things God has inseparably knit together, and has disclosed to us
that they who seek to corrupt our religion are the same that would inthrall our
civil liberty. Thus in the midst of all disdvantages and disrespects (some
also at last not without imprisonment and open disgraces in the cause of their
country) having given proof of themselves to be better made and framed by
nature to the love and practice of virtue, then others under the holiest
precepts and best examples have been headstrong and prone to vice, and having
in all the trialls of a firm ingrafted honesty not oftener buckl'd in the
conflict, then given every opposition the foil, this moreover was added by
favor from heaven, as an ornament and happiness to their virtue, that it
should be neither obscure in the opinion of men, nor eclipst for want of matter
equal to illustrat it self; God and man consenting in joint approbation to
choose them out as worthiest above others to be both the great reformers of the
Church, and the restorers of the Commonwealth. Nor did they deceave that
expectation which with the eyes and desires of their country was fixed upon
them; for no sooner did the force of so much united excellence meet in one
globe of brightness and efficacy, but encountering the dazzled resistance of
tyranny, they gave not over, though their enemies were strong and subtle, till
they had laid her grovelling upon the fatal block. With one stroke winning
again our lost liberties and Charters, which our forefathers after so many
battles could scarce maintain. And meeting next, as I may so resemble, with
the second life of tyranny (for she was grown an ambiguous monster, and to be
slain in two shapes) guarded with supe^stition which has no small power to
captivate the minds of men otherwise most wise, they neither were taken with
her mite^'d hypocrisy, nor te^rifi'd with the push of her bestiall horns, but
breaking them immediately forced her to unbend the pontifical brow, and
recoile. Which repulse only, given to the Prelates (that we may imagine how
happy their removal would be) was the producement of such glorious effects and
consequences in the Church, that if I should compare them with those exployts
of highest fame in Poems and Panegyricks of old, I am certain it would but
diminish and impair their worth, who a^e now my argument. For those ancient
worthies delivered men from such tyrants as were content to enforce only an
outward obedience, letting the mind be as free as it could. But these have
freed us from a doctrine of tyranny that offe^'d violence and corruption even
to the inward persuasion. They set at liberty Nations and Cities of men good
and bad mixed together: but these opening the prisons and dungeons called out of
darkness and bonds, the elect Martyrs and witnesses of their Redeemer. They
restored the body to ease and wealth; but these the oppressed conscience to that
freedom which is the chief prerogative of the Gospel; taking off those
cruel burdens imposed not by necessity, as other tyrants are wont for the
safeguard of their lives, but laid upon our necks by the strange wilfulness
and wantonness of a needless and jolly persecuter called Indifference.
Lastly, some of those ancient deliverers have had immortal praises for
preserving their citizens from a famine of corn. But these by this only
repulse of an unholy hierarchy almost in a moment replenisht with saving
knowledge their country nigh famisht for want of that which should feed their
souls. All this being done while two armies in the field stood gazing on, the
one in reverence of such nobleness quietly gave back, and dislodged; the other
spite of the unrulinesse, and doubted fidelity in some regiments, was either
persuaded or compelled to disband and retire home. With such a majesty had
their wisdom begi^t it self, that whereas others had levied war to subdue a
nation that sought for peace, they sitting here in peace could so many miles
extend the force of their single words as to overawe the dissolute stoutnesse
of an armed power secretly stir^'d up and almost hired against them. And having
by a solemn protestation vowed themselves and the kingdom anew to God and his
service, and by a prudent foresight above what their Fathers thought on
prevented the dissolution and frustrating of their designs by an untimely
breaking up, notwithstanding all the treason^us plots against them, all the
rumors either of rebellion, or invasion, they have not bin yet brought to
change their constant resolution, ever to think fearlesly of their own
safeties, and hopefully of the Commonwealth. Which has gained them such an
admiration from all good men, that now they hear it as their ordinary surname,
to be saluted the Fathers of their country; and sit as gods among daily
Petitions and public thanks flowin^ in upon them. Which does so little yet
exalt them in their own thoughts, that with all gentle affability and courteous
acceptance they both receave and return that tribute of thanks which is
tende^'d them; testifying their zeal and desire to spend themselves as it were
peice-meale upon the grievances and wrongs of their distressed Nation. Insomuch
that the meanest artizans and laborers, at other times also women, and often
the younger sort of servants assembling with their complaints, and that
sometimes in a less humble guise then for petitioners, have gone with
confidence, that neither their meannesse would be rejected, nor their
simplicity contemned, nor yet their urgency distasted either by the dignity,
wisdom, or moderation of that supreme Senate; nor did they depart unsatisfi'd.
And indeed, if we consider the general concourse of suppliants, the free and
ready admittance, the willing and speedy redress in what is possible, it will
not seem much otherwise, then as if some divine commission from heaven were
descended to take into hearing and commiseration the long remediless
afflictions of this kingdom; were it not that none more then themselves labor
to remove and divert such thoughts, lest men should place too much confidence
in their persons, still referring us and our prayers to him that can grant all
and appointing the monthly return of public fasts and supplications. Therefore
the more they seek to humble themselves, the more does God by manifest signs
and testimonies visibly honor their proceedings; and sets them as the
mediators of this his covenant which he offers us to renew. Wicked men daily
conspire their hurt, and it comes to nothing, rebellion rages in our Irish
Province, but with miraculous and losselesse victories of few against many is
daily discomfired and broken; if we neglect not this early pledge of Gods
inclining toward us, by the slacknesse of our needful aids. And whereas at
other times we count it ample honor when God voutsafes to make man the
instrument and subordinate worker of his gracious will, such acceptance have
their prayers found with him, that to them he has bin pleased to make himself
the agent, and immediate performer of their desires; dissolving their
difficulties when they are thought inexplicable, cutting out ways for them
where no passage could be seen; as who is there so regardlesse of Divine
providence, that from late occurences will not confess. If therefore it be so
high a grace when men are preferred to be but the inferior officer^ of good
things from God, what is it when God himself condescends, and works with his
own hands to fulfill the requests of men; which I leave with them as the
greatest praise that can belong to humane nature. Not that we should think they
are at the end of their glorious progress, but that they will go on to follow
his Almighty leading, who seems to have thus cov'nanted with them, that if the
will and the endeavor shall be theirs, the performance and the perfeting shall
be his. Whence only it is that I have not feared, though many wise men have
miscarried in praising great designs before the utmost event, because I see
who is their assistant, who their confederat, who has engaged his omnipotent
arm, to support and crown with success their faith, their fortitude, their
just and magnanimous actions, till he have brought to pass all that expected
good which his servants trust is in his thoughts to bring upon this land in the
full and per^et reformation of his Church.

Thus far I have digrest, Readers, from my former subject; but into such a
path, as I doubt not ye will agree with me, to be much fairer and more
delightful then the rode way I was in. And how to break off suddenly into
those jarring notes, which this Confuter has set me, I must be wary, unless I
can provide against offending the ear, as some Musicians are wont skilfully to
fall out of one key into another without breach of harmony. By good luck
therefore his ninth Section is spent in mournful elegy, certain passionat
soliloquies, and two whole pages of intergatories that praise the Remonstrant
even to the sonetting of his fresh cheeks, quick eyes, round tongue, agil hand,
and nimble invention.

In his tenth Section he will needs erect figures, and tell fortunes. I am no
Bishop, he says, I was never borne to it; let me tell therefore this wizzard
since he calculats so right, that he may know there be in the world, and I
among those who nothing admire his Idol a Bishopric, and hold that it wants so
much to be a blessing, as that I rather deem it the meerest, the falsest, the
most unfortunate gift of fortune. And were the punishment and misery of being
a Prelat Bishop terminated only in the person, and did not extend to the
affliction of the whole Diocese, if I would wish any thing in bitterness of
soul to mine enemy, I would wish him the biggest and the fattest Bishopric.
But he proceeds; and the familiar belike informs him, that a rich Widow, or a
Lecture, or both, would content me; whereby I perceave him to be more ignorant
in his art of divining then any Gipsy. For this I cannot omit without
ingratitude to that providence above, who has ever bred me up in plenty,
although my life has not bin unexpensive in learning, and voyaging about, so
long as it shall please him to lend me what he has hitherto thought good,
which is anough to serve me in all honest and liberal occasions, and something
over besides, I were unthankful to that highest bounty, if I should make my
self so poor, as to solicit needily any such kind of rich hopes as this
Fortuneteller dreams of. And that he may further learn how his Astrology is
wide all the houses of heaven in spelling marriages, I care not if I tell him
thus much profestly, though it be to the losing of my rich hopes, as he calls
them, that I think with them who both in prudence and elegance of spirit would
choose a virgin of mean fortunes honestly bred, before the wealthiest widow.
The feind therefore that told our Chaldean the contrary was a lying feind. His
next venom he utters against a prayer which he found in the animadversions,
angry it seemss to find any prayers but in the Service Book. He dislikes it,
and I therefore like it the better. It was theatricall, he says. And yet it
consisted most of Scripture language: it had no Rubric to be sung in an antic
Coape upon the Stage of a High Altar. It was big-mouth'd he says; no m^rvell;
if it were framed as the voice of three Kingdoms: neither was it a prayer so
much as a hymn in prose frequent both in the Prophets, and in humane authors;
therefore the style was greater then for an ordinary prayer: It was an
astounding prayer. I thank him for that confession, so it was intended to
astound and to astonish the guilty Prelates; and this Confuter confesses that
with him it wrought that effect. But in that which follows, he does not play
the Soothsayer but the diabolick slanderer of prayers. It was made, he says,
not so much to please God, or to benefit the weal public (how dares the Viper
judge that) but to intimate, says he, your good abilities, to her that is your
rich hopes, your Maronilla. How hard it is when a man meets with a Fool to
keep his tongue from folly. That were miserable indeed to be a Courter of
Maronilla, and withal of such a hapless invention, as that no way should be
left me to present my meaning but to make my self a canting Probationer of
orisons, The Remonstrant when he was as young as I could*

Toothlesse Teach each hollow Grove to sound his love


Satyrs, Wearying echo with one changelesse word.


And so he well might, and all his auditory besides with his teach each.

Toothlesse Whether so me list my lovely thoughts to sing,


Satyrs, Come dance ye nimble dryads by my side,
Whiles I report my fortunes or my loves.

Delicious! he had that whole bevie at command whether in morris or at May
pole. Whilst I, by this figure-caster must be imagined in such distress as to
sue to Maronilla, and yet left so impoverisht of what to say, as to turn my
Liturgy into my Ladies Psalter. Believe it graduat, I am not altogether so
rustic, and nothing so irreligious, but as far distant from a Lecturer, as
the meerest Laick, for any consecrating hand of a Prelat that shall ever touch
me. Yet, I shall not decline the more for that, to speak my opinion in the
controversy next moved. Whether the people may be allowed, for competent
judges of a ministers ability. For how else can be fulfilled that which God
has promised, to power out such abundance of knowledge upon all sorts of men
in the times of the Gospel? how should the people examine the doctrine which
is taught them, as Christ and his Apostles continually bid them do? how should
they discern and beware of false Prophets, and try every spirit, if they must
be thought unfit to judge of the ministers abilities: the Apostles ever
labored to persuade the Christian flock that they were called in Christ to all
perfectness of spiritual knowledge, and full assurance of understanding in
the mystery of God. But the non-resident and plurality-gaping Prelates the
gulphs and whirle pools of benefices, but the dry pits of all sound doctrine,
that they may the better preach what they list to their sheep, are still
possessing them that they are sheep indeed, without judgment, without
understanding, the very beasts of Mount Sinai as this Confuter calls them;
which words of theirs may serve to condemn them out of their own^ mouths; and
to show the gross contrarieties that are in their opinions. For while none
think the people so void of knowledge as the Prelates think them, none are so
backward and malignant as they to bestow knowledge upon them; both by
suppressing (...) frequency of Sermons, and the printed explanations of the
E^glish Bible. No marvel if the people turn beasts, when their Teachers
themselves as Isaiah calls them, Are dumb and greedy dogs that can never have
anough, ignorant, blind, and cannot understand, who while they all look their
own way every one for his gain from his quarter, how many parts of the land
are fed with windy ceremonies instead of sincere milk; and while one Prelat
enjoyes the nourishment and ^ight of twenty Ministers, how many waste places
are left as dark as Galile of the Gentiles, sitting in the region and shadow
of death; without preaching Minister, without light. So little care they of
beasts to make them men, that by their sorcerous doctrine of formalities they
take the way to transform them out of Christian men into Iudaizing beasts. Had
they but taught the land, or suffered it to be taught, as Christ would it
should have bin, in all plenteous dispensation of the word, then the poor
mechanic might have so accustomed his ear to good teaching, as to have
discerned between faithful teachers and false. But now with a most inhumane
cruelty they who have put out the peoples eyes reproach them of their
blindness. Just as the Pharisees their true Fa^hers were wont; who could not
endure that the people should be thought competent judges of Christ's doctrine,
although we know they judg^d far better then those great Rabbis. Yet this
people, said they, that knows not the law is accursed. We need not the authority
of Pliny brought to tell us, the people cannot judge of a minister. Yet ^ha^
hurts no^. For as none can judge of a Painter, or Stain^ry but he who is ^n
Artist, that is, either in the Practick or the Theory which is often separated
from the practick, and judges learnedly without it, so none can judge o^ a
Christian teacher, but he who has, either he pract^ze, o^ the knowledge of
Christian religion, though not so art^^l^y dige^e^ in him. And who almost of
the meanest Christians has not heard the Scriptures often read from his
childhood, besides so many Sermons and Lectures mo^e in number then any stu^ent
heard in Philosohy, whereby he may easily attain to know when he is wisely
taught and when weakly. Whereof three ways I remember are set down in
Scripture. The one is to read often that best of books written to this
purpose, that not the wise only but the simple and ignorant may learn by them;
the other way to know of a minister, is by the life he leads, whereof the
meanest understanding may be appprehensive. The last way to judge a right in
this point is when he who judges, lives a Christian life himself. Which of
these three will the Confuter affirm to exceed the capacity of a plain
artizan? And what reason then is the^e left wherefore he should be denied his
voice in the election of his minister, as not thought a competent discerner? It
is but arrogance therefore, and the pride of a metaphysicall fume, to think
that the mutinous rabbl^ (for so he calls the Christian congregation) would be
so mistaken in a Clerk of the University that were to be their minister. I
doubt me those Clerks that think so, are more mistaken in themselves, and what
with tru^nting and debaushery, what with false grounds and the weakness of
natural faculties in many of them (it being a maxim in some men to send the
simplest of their sons thither) perhaps there would be found among them as
many unsolid and corrupted judgments both in doctri^e and life, as in any
other two Corporations of like bigness. This is undoubted that if any
Carpenter Smith, or Weaver, were such a bungler in his trade, as the greater
number of them are in their profession, he would starve for any custom. And
should he exer^ise his manifacture, as little as they do their talents, he
would forget his art: and should he mistake his tools as they do theirs, he
would mar all the work he took in hand. How few among them that know to
write, or speak in a pu^e style, much less to distinguish the idea's, and
various kinds of style: in Latin barbarous, and often not without solecisms,
declaming in rugged and miscellaneous gear blown together by the four winds,
and in their choice preferring the gay rankness: of A^uleius, Arn^bius or any
modern fustianist, before the native Latinisms of Cicero. In the Greek tongue
m^st of them unlettered, or unenter'd to any sound proficiency in those Attick
masters of moral wisdom and eloquence. In the Hebrew text, which is so
necessary to be understood except it be some few of them, their lips are
utterly uncircumsised. No less are they out of the way in philosophy; pestring
their heads with the saplesse dotages of old Paris and Salamanca. And that
which is the main point, in their Sermons affecting the comments and postils of
Friars and Jesuits, but scorning and slighting the reformed writers. In so much
that the better sort among them will confess it a rare matter to hear a true
edifying Sermon in either of their great Churches; and that such as are most
humm'd and applauded there, would scarce be suffered the second hearing in a
grave congregation of pious Christians. Is there cause why these men should
overween, and be so queasie of the rude multitude, lest their deep worth
should be undervalu'd for want of fit umpires? No my matriculated confutant
there will not want in any congregation of this Island, that has not been
altogether famisht, or wholly perverted with Prelatish leven, there will not
want diverse plain and solid men, that have learnt by the experience of a good
conscience, what it is to be well taught, who will soon look through and
through both the lofty nakedness of your Latinizing Barbarian, and the
finicall goosery of your neat Sermon-actor. And so I leave you and your fellow
stars, as you term them, of either horizon, meaning I suppose either
hemisphere, unless you will be ridiculous in your astronomy. For the rational
horizon in heaven is but one, and the sensible horizons in earth are
innumerable; so that your allusion was as erroneous as your stars. But that
you did well to prognosticat them all at lowest in the horizon, that is either
seeming bigger then they are through the mist and vapor which they raise, or
else sinking, and wasted to the snuff in their western socket.

Sect. 11. His eleventh Section intends I know not what unless to clog us with
the residue of his phlegmatic sloth, discussing with a heavy pulse the
expedience of set forms: which no question but to some, and for some time may
be permitted, and perhaps there may be usefully set forth by the Church a
common directory of public prayer, especially in the administration of the
Sacraments. But that it should therefore be enforced where both minister and
people profess to have no need, but to be scandalized by it, that, I hope,
every sensible Christian will deny. And the reasons of such denial the
confuter himself, as his bounty still is to his adversary, will give us out of
his affirmation. First says he, God in his providence has chosen some to
teach others and pray for others, as ministers and Pastors. Whence I gather,
that however the faculty of others may be, yet that they whom God has set
apart to his ministry, are by him endu'd with an ability of prayer; because
their office is to pray for others. And not to be the lip-working deacons of
other men's appointed words. Nor is it easily credible that he who can preach
well should be unable to pray well; when as it is indeed the same ability to
speak affirmatively, or doctrinally, and only by changing the mood to speak
prayingly. In vain therefore do they pretend to want utterance in prayer, who
can find utterance to preach. And if prayer be the gift of the Spirit, why do
they admit those to the Ministry, who want a maine gift of their function,
and prescribe guifted men to use that which is the remedy of another man's want;
setting them their tasks to read, whom the Spirit of God stands ready to assist
in his ordinance with the gift of free conceptions. What if it be granted to
the infirmity of some Ministers (though such seem rather to be half
ministers) to help themselves with a set form, shall it therefore be urged
upon the plenteous graces of others? and let it be granted to some people while
they are babes in Christian gifts, were it not better to take it away soon
after, as we do loitering books, and interlineary translations from children;
to stir up and exercise that portion of the spirit which is in them, and not
impose it upon congregations who not only deny to need it, but as a thing
troublesome and offensive refuse it. Another reason which he brings for
liturgy, is the preserving of order, unity, and piety, and the same shall be
my reason against Liturgy. For I Readers, shall always be of this opinion,
that obedience to the Spirit of God, rather then to the fair seeming pretenses
of men, is the best and most dutiful order that a Christian can observe. If
the Spirit of God manifest the gift of prayer in his Minister, what more
seemly order in the congregation, then to go along with that man in our
devoutest affections? for him to abridge himself by reading, and to forestall
himself in those petitions, which he must either omit, or vainly repeat, when
he comes into the Pulpit under a show of order, is the greatest disorder. Nor
is unity less broken, especially by our Liturgy, though this author would
almost bring the Communion of Saints to a Communion of Liturgicall words. For
what other reformed Church holds communion with us by our liturgy, and does not
rather disl^ke it? and among our selves who knows it not to have bin a
perpetual cause o^ d^^nion. Lastly, it hinders piety rather then sets it
forward, being more apt to weaken the ^pirituall faculties, if the people be
not weaned from it in due time; as the daily pouring in of hot waters quenches
natur^ll heat. For not only the body, and the mind, but also the imp^ovement of
Gods Spirit is quickn'd by usin^. Whereas they who will ever adh^re to liturgy,
bring themselves in the end to such a pass by overmuch leaning as to loose
even the legs of their devotion. These inconveniences and dangers follow the
compelling of set forms: but that the toleration of the English Liturgy now in
use, is more dangerous then the compelling of any other which the reformed
Churches use, these reasons following may evince. To contend that it is
fantastical, if not senseless in some places, were a copious argument,
especially in the Responsori^s. For such alternations as are there used must be
by several persons; but the Minister and the people cannot so sever their
interests, as to sustain several persons; he being the only mouth of the
whole body which he presents. And if the people pray he being silent, or they
ask one thing and he another, it either changes the property, making the Priest
the people, and the people the Priest by turns, or else makes two persons and
two bodi^s representative where the^e should be but one. Which if it be naught
else, must needs be a strange quaintness in ordinary prayer. The like, or
worse may be said of the Litany, wherein neither P^iest nor people speak any
entire sense of themselves throughout the whole I know not what to name it;
only by the timely contribution of their parted stakes, closing up as it were
the schism of a slic't prayer, they pray not in vain, for by this means they
keep life between them in a piece of gasping sense, and keep down the
sauciness of a continual rebounding nonsense. And hence it is that as it has
been far from the imitation of any warranted prayer, so we all know it has
bin obvious to be the pattern of many a Jig. And he who has but read in good
books of devotion and no more, cannot be so either of ear or judgment
unpractiz'd to distinguish what is grave, patheticall, devout, and what not,
but will presently perceave this Liturgy all over in conception lean and dry,
of affections empty and unmoving, of passion, or any height whereto the soul
might soar upon the wings of zeal, destitute and barren: besides errors,
tautologies, impertinences, as those thanks in the woman's Churching for her
delivery from Sunburning and Moonblasting, as if she had bin travailing not in
her bed, but in the deserts of Arabia. So that while some men cease not to
admire the incomparable frame of our Liturgy, I cannot but admire as fast what
they think is become of judgment, and taste in other men, that they can hope to
be heard without laughter. And if this were all, perhaps it were a complyable
matter. But when we remember this our liturgy where we found it, whence we had
it, and yet were we left it, still serving to all the abominations of the
Antichristian temple, it may be wondered how we can demurre whether it should
be done away or no, and not rather fear we have highly offended in using it so
long. It has indeed bin pretended to be more ancient then the Mass, but so
little proved, that whereas other corrupt Liturgies have had withal such a
seeming antiquity, as that their publishers have ventured to ascribe them with
their worst corruptions either to S. Peter, S. James, S. Mark, or at least to
Chrysostom, or Basil, ours has bin never able to find either age, or author
allowable, on whom to father those things therein which are least offensive,
except the two Creeds, for Te Deum has a smach in it of Limbus Patrum. As if
Christ had not opened the kingdom of heaven before he had overcome the
sharpness of death. So that having received it from the Papal Church as an
original creature, for ought can be shown to the contrary, formed and
fashioned by work masters ill to be trusted, we may be assured that if God
loathe the best of an Idolaters prayer, much more the conceited fangle of his
prayer. This Confuter himself confesses that a community of the same set form
in prayers, is that which makes Church and Church truly one; we then using a
Liturgy far more like to the Masse-book then to any Protestant set form, by
his own words must have more communion with the Romish Church, then with any
of the reformed. How can we then not partake with them the curse and vengeance
of their superstition* to whom we come so near in the same set form and
dress of our devotion? do we think to sift the matter finer then we are sure
God in his jealousy will? who detested both the gold, and the spoil of
Idolatrous Cities, and forbid the eating of things offered to Idols. Are we
stronger then he to brook that which his heart cannot brook? It is not surely
because we think that prayers are no where to be had but at Rome; that were a
foul scorn and indignity cast upon all the reformed Churches, and our own; if
we imagine that all the godly Ministers of England are not able to new mould a
better and more pious Liturgy then this which was conceav'd and infanted by an
idolatrous Mother: how base^y were that to esteem of Gods Spirit, and all the
holy blessings and privileges of a true Church above a false? Hark ye
Prelates, is this your glorious Mother of England, who when as Christ has
taught her to pray, thinks it not anough unless she add thereto the teaching
of Antichri^t? How can we believe ye would refuse to take the stipend of Rome,
when ye shame not to live upon the almes-basket of he^ pr^yers? will ye
persuade us that ye ea^ curse Rome from you^ hearts when none bu^ Rome must
teach ye to pray? Abraham disdained to take so much as a th^ed or a shoolatchet
from the King of Sod^me, though no foe of his, but a wicked King, and shall we
receave our prayers at the bounty of our more wicked enemies? whose gifts are
no gifts, but the instruments of our ban^? Alas that the Spirit of God should
blow as an uncertain wind, should so mistake his inspiring, to misbestow his
gifts promised only to the elect, that the idolatrous should find words
acceptable to present God with and abound to their neighbors, while the true
profess^rs of the Gospel can find nothing of their own worth the constituting,
wherewith to worship God in public. Consider if this be to magnify the Church
of England, and not rather to display her nakedness to all the world. Like
therefore as the retaining of this Romish Liturgy is a provocation to God, and
a dishonor to our Church, so is it by those ceremonies, those purifyings and
off^ings at the Altar, a pollution and disturbance to the Gospel it self; and
a kind of driving us with the foolish Galatians to another gospel. For that
which the Apostles taught has freed us in religion from the ordinances of men,
and commands that burdens be not laid upon the redeemed of Christ, though the
formalist will say, what no decency in Gods worship? Certainly Readers, the
worship of God singly in it self, the very act of prayer and thanksgiving with
those free and unimpos'd expressions which from a sincere heart unbidden come
into the outward gesture, is the greatest decency that can be imagined. Which
to dress up and garnish with a devised bravery abolishe in the law, and
disclam'd by the Gospel adds nothing but a deformed ugliness. And has ever
afforded a colorable pretense to bring in all those traditions and carnalities
that are so killing to the power and virtue of the Gospel. What was that which
made the Jews figured under the names of Aholah and Aholibah go a whooring
after all the heathens inventions, but that they saw a religion gorgeously
attired and desirable to the eye? What was all, that the false Doctors of the
Primitive Church, and ever since have done, but to make a fair show in the
flesh, as S. Paul's words are? If we have indeed given a bill of divorce to
Popery and superstition, why do we not say as to a divors't wife; those things
which are yours take them all with you, and they shall sweep after you? Why
were not we thus wise at our parting from Rome? Ah like a crafty adultresse she
forgot not all her smooth looks and enticing words at her pa^ting; yet keep
these letters, these tokens, and these few ornaments; I am not all so greedy of
what is mine, let them preserve with you the memory of what I am? No, but of
what I was, once fair and lovely in your eyes. Thus did those tender hearted
reformers dotingly suffer themselves to be overcome with harlots language. And
she like a witch, but with a contrary policy did not take something of theirs
that she might still have power to bewitch them, but for the same intent left
something of her own behind her. And that her whoorish cunning should prevail
to work upon us her deceitful ends, though it be sad to speak, yet such is our
blindness, that we deserve. For we are deep in dotage. We cry out Sacrilege
and misdevotion against those who in zeal have demolish't the dens and cages
of her unclean wallowings. We stand for a Popish Liturgy as for the ark of our
Covenant. And so little does it appear our prayers are from the heart, that
multitudes of us declare, they know not how to pray but by rote. Yet they can
learnedly invent a prayer of their own to the Parliament, that they may still
ignorantly read the prayers of other men to God. They obj^ct that if we must
forsake all that is Rome's, we must bid adieu to our Creed; and I had thought
our Creed had bin of the Apostles; for so it bears title. But if it be hers
let her take it. We can want no Creed, so long as we want not the Scriptures.
We magnify those who in reforming our Church have inconsideratly and
blamefully permitted the old leven to remain and sour our whole lump: But
they were Martyrs; True and he that looks well into the book of Gods
providence, if he read there that God for this their negligence and halting,
brought all that following persecution upon this Church, and on themselves,
perhaps will be found at the last day not to have read amiss.

Sect. 12. But now, Readers, we have the Port within sight; his last Section
which is no deep one, remains only to be foarded, and then the wished shore.
And here first it pleases him much, that he has discri'd me, as he conceaves,
to be unread in the Counsels. Concerning which matter it will not be
unnecessary to shape him this answer; That some years I had spent in the
stories of those Greek and Roman exploits, wherein I found many things both
nobly done, add worthily spoken: when coming in the method of time to that age
wherein the Church had obtained a Christian Emperor, I so prepared my self, as
being now to read examples of wisdom and goodness among those who were
foremost in the Church, not else where to be paralleled: But to the amazement
of what I ex^ected, Readers, I found it all quite contrary; excepting in some
very few, nothing but ambition, corruption, contention, combustion: in so much
that I could not but love the Historian Socrates, who in the proem to his fifth
book professes, He was fair to intermixe affairs of State, for that it would
be else an extreme annoyance to hear in a continued discourse the endless
brabbles and counterplottings of the Bishops. Finding therefore the most of
their actions in single to be weak, and yet turbulent, full of strife and yet
flat of spirit, and the sum of their best councels there collected, to be
most commonly in questions either trivial and vain, or else of short, and
easy dec^sion without that great bustle which they made, I concluded that if
their single ambition and ignorance was such, then certainly united in a
Council it would be much more; and if the compendious recital of what they
there did was so tedious and unprofitable, then surely to sit out the whole
extent of their tattle in a dozen volumes, would be a loss of time
irrecoverable. Besides that which I had read of S. Martin, who for his last
sixteen years could never be persuaded to be at any Council of the Bishops.
And Gregory Nazianzen betook him to the same resolution affirming to Procopius,
that of any Council, or meeting of Bishops he never saw good end; nor any
remedy thereby of evil in the Church, but rather an increase. For, says he,
their contentions and desire of Lording no tongue is able to express. I have
not therefore I confess read more of the Councels save here and there, I
should be sorry to have bin such a prodigal of my time: but that which is
better, I can assure this Confuter; I have read into them all. And if I want
any thing yet, I shall reply something toward that which in the defense of
Muraena was answered by Cicero to Sulpitius the Lawyer. If ye provoke me (for
at no hand else will I undertake such a frivolous labor) I will in three
months be an expert councelist. For be not deceav'd, Readers, by men that would
overawe your ears with big names and huge Tomes that contradict and repeal one
another, because they can cramme a margent with citations. Do but winnow their
chafe from their whe^t, ye shall see their great heap shrink and wax thin
past belief^. From hence he passes to enqui^e wherefore I should blame the
vices of the Prelates only, seeing the inferior Clergy is known to be as
faulty. To which let him hear in brief; that those Priests whose vices have
been notorious, are all Prelaticall, which argues both the impiety of that
opinion, and the wicked remissness of that government. We hear not of any which
are called Nonconformists that have been accused for scandalous living; but are
known to be pious, or at least sober men. Which is a great good argument, that
they are in the truth and Prelates in the error. He would be resolved next What
the corruptions of the Universities concern the Prelates? and to that let him
take this, That the Remonstrant having spok'n as if learning would decay with
the removal of Prelates, I showed him that while books were extant, and in
print, learning could not readily be at a worse pass in the Universities then
it was now under their government. Then he seeks to justify the pernicious
Sermons of the Clergy, as if they upheld soveranty, when as all Christian
soveranty is by law, and to no other end but to the maintenance of the common
good. But their doctrine was plainly the dissolution of law which only sets up
sov'ranty, and the erecting of an arbitrary sway according to private will, to
which they would enjoyne a slavish obedience without law; which is the known
definition of a tyrant, and a tyrannized people. A little beneath he denies
that great riches in the Church are the baits of pride and ambition of which
error to undeceave him, I shall allege a reputed divine authority, as ancient as
Constantine, which his love to antiquity must not except against; and to add
the more weight, he shall learn it rather in the words of our old Poet Gower
then in mine, that he may see it is no new opinion, but a truth delivered of
old by a voice from heaven, and ratified by long experience, This Constantine
which heal has found
Within Rome anon let found
Two Churches which he did make
For Peter and for Paul's sake:
Of whom he had a vision,
And yafe thereto possession
Of Lordship and of worlds good;
But how so that his will was good
Toward the Pope and his Franchise
Yet has it proved otherwise
To see the working of the deed,
For in Cronick thus I read
Anon as he has made the yeft
A voice was heard on high the left
Of which all Rome was adrad
And said this day venim is shad
In holy Church, of temporal
That medleth with the spiritual
And how it stant in that degree
Yet may a man the sooth see.
God amend it when he will
I can thereto none other skill.


But there were beasts of prey, says he, before wealth was bestowed on the
Church. What though? because the Vulturs had then but small pickings; shall we
therefore go and fling them a full gorge? if they for lucre use to creep into
the Church undiscernably, the more wisdom will it be so to provide that no
revennu there may exceed the golden mean. For so, good Pastors will be content,
as having need of no more, and knowing withal the precept and example of
Christ and his Apostles, and also will be less tempted to ambition. The bad
will have but small matter whereon to set their mischief a work. And the worst
and sutlest heads will not come at all, when they shall see the crop nothing
answerable to their capacious greediness. For small temptations allure but
dribling offenders; but a great purchase will call such as both are most able
of themselves, and will be most inabl'd hereby to compass dangerous projects.
But says he, A widows house will t^mpt as well as a Bishops Palace. Acutely
spok'n. Because neither we, nor the Prelates can abolish widows houses which are
but an occasion taken of evil without the Church, therefore we shall set up
within the Church a Lottery of such prizes as are the direct inviting causes of
avarice and ambition, both unnecessary and harmefull to be proposed, and most
easy, most convenient, and needful to be removed. Yea but they are in a wise
dispencers hand. Let them be in whose hand they will, they are most apt to
blind, to puff up and pervert the most seeming good. And how they have bin
kept from Vultures, what ever the dispencers care has bin, we have learnt by
our miseries. But this which comes next in view, I know not what good vein, or
humor took him, when he let drop into his paper. I that was ere while the
ignorant, the loyterer, on the sudden by his permission am now granted to know
something. And that such a volley of expression^ he has met withal, as he
would never desire to have them better clothed. For me, Readers, although I
cannot say that I am utterly untrain'd in those rules which best Rhetoricians
have given, or unacquainted with those examples which the primeauthors of
eloquence have written in any learned tongu, yet true eloquence I find to be
none, but the serious and hearty love of truth: And that whose mind so ever is
fully possessed with a fervent desire to know good things, and with the dearest
charity to infuse the knowledge of them into others, when such a man would
speak, his words (by what I can express) like so many nimble and airy
servitors trip about him at command, and in well ordered files, as he would
wish, fall aptly into their own places. But now to the remainder of our
discourse. Christ refused great riches, and large honors at the Devils hand.
But why, says he, as they were tendered by him from whom it was a sin to
receave them. Timely remembered: why is it not therefore as much a sin to
receave a Liturgy of the masses giving, were it for nothing else but for the
giver? But he could make no use of such a high estate, quoth the Confuter;
opportunely. For why then should the servant take upon him to use those things
which his master had unfitted himself to use, that he might teach his
ministers to follow his steps in the same ministry. But they were offered him
to a bad end. So they prove to the Prelates; who after their preferment most
usually change the teaching labor of the word, into the unteaching ease of
Lordship over consciences, and purses. But he proceeds, God entic't the
Israelites with the promise of Canaan. Did not the Prelates bring as slavish
minds with them, as the Jews brought out of Egypt, they had left out that
instance. Besides that it was then the time, when as the best of them, as Saint
Paul says, was shut up unto the faith under the Law their School-maister, who
was forced to entice them as children with childish enticements. But the
Gospel is our manhood, and the ministry should be the manhood of the
Gospel, not to look after, much less so basely to plead for earthly rewards.
But God incited the wisest man Solomon with these means. Ah Confuter of thy
self, this example has undone thee, Solomon asked an understanding heart,
which the Prelates have little care to ask. He asked no riches which is their
chief care: therefore was the prayer of Solomon pleasing to God: he gave him
wisdom at his request, and riches without asking: as now he gives the Prelates
riches at their seeking, and no wisdom because of their perverse asking. But
he gives not over yet, Moses had an eye to the reward. To what reward, thou
man that looks't with Balaams eyes, to what reward had the faith of Moses an
eye to? He that had forsaken all the greatness of Egypt, and chose a
troublesome journey in his old age through the Wilderness, and yet arrived not
at his journies end: His faithful eyes were fixed upon that incorruptible
reward, promised to Abraham and his seed in the Messiah, he sought a heavenly
reward which could make him happy, and never hurt him, and to such a reward
every good man may have a respect. But the Prelates are eager of such rewards as
cannot make them happy, but can only make them worse. Jacob a Prince borne,
vowed, that if God would but give him bread to eat and raiment to put on, then
the Lord should be his God. But the Prelates of mean birth, and often times of
lowest, making show as if they were called to the spiritual and humble
ministry of the Gospel, yet murmur, and think it a hard service, unless
contrary to the tenor of their profession, they may eat the bread and wear
the honors of Princes. So much more covetous and base they are then Simon
Magus, for he proffered a reward to be admitted to that work, which they will
not be mea^ly hired to. But says he, Are not the Clergy members of Christ, why
should not each member thrive alike? Carnal textman! As if worldly thriving
were one of the privileges we have by being in Christ, and were not a
providence often times extended more liberally to the Infidel then to the
Christian. Therefore must the Ministers of Christ not be over rich or great in
the world, because their calling is spiritual, not secular; becuase they have
a special warfare, which is not to be intangl'd with many impediments: because
their Master Christ gave them this precept, and set them this example, told
them this was the mystery of his coming, by mean things and persons to subdue
mighty ones: and lastly because a middle estate is most proper to the office of
teaching. Whereas higher dignity teaches far less, and blindes the teacher.
Nay, says the Confuter, fetching his last endeavor, The Prelates will be very
loath to let go their Baronies, and votes in Parliament, and calls it Gods
cause, with an unsufferable impudence. Not that they love the honors and the
means, good men and generous, but that they would not have their country made
guilty of such a sacrilege and injustice. A worthy Patriot for his own corrupt
ends! That which he imputes as sacrilege to his country, is the only way left
them to purge that abominable sacrilege out of the land, which none but the
Prelates are guilty of. Who for the discharge of one single duty receave and
keep that which might be anough to satisfy the labors of many painful
Ministers better deserving then themselves. Who possess huge Benefices for
lazy performances, great promotions, only for the execution of a cruel
disgospelling jurisdiction. Who ingrosse many pluralities under a nonresident
and slubbring dispatch of souls. Who let hundreds of parishes famish in one
Diocese, while they the Prelates are mute, and yet enjoy that wealth that would
furnish all those dark places with able supply, and yet they eat, and yet they
live at the rate of Earls, and yet hoard up. They who chase away all the
faithful Shepherds of the flock, and bring in a dearth of spiritual food,
robbing thereby the Church of her dearest treasure, and sending herds of souls
starvling to Hell, while they feast and riot upon the labors of hireling
Curats, consuming and purloyning even that which by their foundation is
allowed, and left to the poor, and to reparations of the Church. These are
they who have bound the land with the sin of Sacrilege, from which mortal
engagement we shall never be free, till we have totally removed with one
labor as one individual thing Prelaty and Sacrilege. And herein will the King
be a true defender of the Faith, not by paring or lessning, but by distributing
in due proportion the maintenance of the Church, that all parts of the Land may
equally partake the plentiful and diligent preaching of the faith, the
scandal of Ceremonies thrown out, that delude and circumvent the faith. And
the usurpation of Prelates laid level, who are in words the Fathers, but in
their deeds the oppugners of the faith. This is that which will best confirm
him in that glorious title. Thus ye have heard, Readers, how many shifts and
wiles the Prelates have invented to save their ill got booty. And if it be true,
as in Scripture it is foretold, that pride and covetousness are the sure
ma^kes of those false Prophets whicst are to come, then boldly conclude these
to be as great seducers, as any of the latter times. For between this and the
judgment day, do not look for any arch deceavers who in spite of
reformation will use more craft, or less shame to defend their love of the
world, and their ambition, then these Prelates have done. And if ye think that
soundness of reason, or what force of argument soever, will bring them to an
ingenuous silence, ye think that which will never be. But if ye take that
course which Erasmus was wont to say Luther took against the Pope and Monks,
if ye denounce war against their Miters and their bellies, ye shall soon
discern that Turbant of pride which they wear upon their heads to be no
helmet of salvation, but the mere mettle and horn-work of Papal jurisdiction;
and that they have also this gift, like a certain kind of some that are
possessed, to have their voice in their bellies, which being well drained and
taken down, their great Oracle, which is only there, will soon be dumb, and
the Divine right of Episcopacy forthwith expiring, will put us no more to
trouble with tedious antiquities and disputes.

The End.
Page 25. lin. 9. for speak correct it read


