THE Muse of New Market: OR, Mirth and Drollery BEING Three FARCES Acted before
the KING and Court AT NEW MARKET;

Viz. The Merry Milkmaid of Islington, or the Rambling Gallants defeated. Love
lost in the Dark, or the Drunken Couple. The Politic Whore or the Conceited
Cuckhold.

Ut Pictura Poesis erit, quae si proprius stes,
Te capiet magis, and quaedam si longius obstes
Haec amat, obscurum, volet hac suh luce, videri;
Haec placuit sem^l, haec decies repetita placebit.
LONDON:

Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, Dan.
Major at the Hand and Scepter over against S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet,
and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1680.



THE Merry Milkmaid OF ISLINGTON; OR, THE Rambling Gallants DEFEATED.

ACTED AT NEW MARKET.

LONDON:

Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, Dan.
Major at the Hand and Scepter over against S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet,
and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

The ACTORS NAMES.
SIR Jeffery Jolt, a half-witted Knight. Lovechange, Wenchlove, two
Town-Gallants. Anthony, a Clown, Sir Jeffery's Man.
WOMEN.
Artezhim, the Lady Jolt. Isabella, a lost Gentlewoman. Margery, the Milkmaid
to Lady Jolt, her Cousin disguised. Tapster.
The Scene ISLINGTON, or thereabouts.

THE Merry Milkmaid OF ISLINGTON.
Enter Sir Jeffery Jolt, Anthony his Man. Sir Jeff. YOu that call your sins
your duty, obey your Ladies Riots, preserve her spittle to cure your salt Itch,
and thread in Bracelets the Pearls that drop from her Authentic Nose.


Ant. Cuds heart Sir, what do you mean?


Sir Jeff. To cleave you from the Scull to the Twist, make nine Skittles of thy
bones, and wind thy Heart Strings about my Thumb.


Ant. Sir, have a care what you do; so rotten are my limbs, that if you blow on
me too hard, I am straight scattered into sand.


Sir Jeff. Coward, creep into my Hourglass then, and there eternally
distinguish fatal time.


Enter Artezehim. Artez. What Slave disturbs my quiet?


Ant. Never look Sir, I serve my Lady, and scorn to yield.


Sir Jeff. Do bristle Pork pine?


Ant. Take heed Sir, I have the Malady of France.


Art. Withdraw your violence; if you disorder but a hair that belongs to my
meanest Groom, I will proclaim my superiority and rule in the streets.


Sir Jeff. Hell cannot miss thee long.


Art. Insult in thy own Pigs sty, this Apartment calls me Sovereign: Tony, send
in one that waits there.


Sir Jeff. What will she do at last?


Art. A slow device Sir, but of my own brain.


Enter Lovechange. Sir Jeff. What art thou?


Love. A kind Guest invited here.


Sir Jeff. To what?


Love. To taste your Wives Gammons.


Sir Jeff. Bold Sir, be in your speech more plain.


Love. I come to get Children for you.


Art. Do you want plainer Paraphrase; he is my servant Sir, my Stallion if I
please, a Courtly complement, and much in use among Ladies of my growth and
blood.


Sir Jeff. O my cold blood, this Woman will distract me.


Art. You see I Am furnished, now your Concubine may share you and the house in
peace.


Sir Jeff. I step my ears to thy bold clamours: But for you Sir, the minutes
you must waste on Earth are few.


Love. This I consider Sir, and therefore make such have to mingle with your
Wife, that the kind World may have some Issue from my Loins.


Sir Jeff. If this prove true, may Cats piss out my eyes. [Love. draws.


Art. Hold weak Jeff. or else I Will wound thy heart. [Art. draws a Dagger.


Love. If you advance one inch beyond that Chink, Ple through the streets blow
your Dirge, with the great Horn that grows upon your Brow.


Sir Jeff. A whole shower of Gall is fallen at once.


Love. 'Uds life Sir, I come to ease the labor of your body, and you want
courtesy to return thanks.


Art. Hang him ungrateful.


Love. But what hereafter I perform, shall be for your Ladies sake, not yours.


Sir Jeff. For all this, I know you will not wrong my Bed.


Love. Who told you so?


Sir Jeff. I read it in your Noble Feature, and your shape.


Love. The better shapt I am Sir, the more cause you will have to love the Issue I
shall get upon your Wife.


Sir Jeff. I know thou scorns to do it.


Love. Not I, believed Sir, I must do it; is your Lady fruitful, I would be loath
to loose my labor on her.


Sir Jeff. Death and the Devil. [Offers to draw, they laugh at him,


Art. I Will have a Trumpet and a Drum, and sound to the world thy living shame.


Love. O fie Sir! what own your disgrace aloud, as if you were proud on it.


Art. Nay it becomes you finely.


Love. You think because you are eurst we'll allow you short Horns; no, I Will
grast upon your head a pair so tall, they shall go near to prick the very
Planet that ruled at your Nativity.


Art. He sleeps.


Love. Take down a Cushion and pray Sir, you cannot choose but know the frailty
of the times, the surfeits of the Womb, and how great Ladies use to relieve
their appetites; your own confession of my parts commends your Wife in her
choice; there be them that fin with feeble Ushers, and withered Dwarss.


Art. He wants judgment to consider this.


Love. I merit better looks Sir, that must thrash all night for you, and
without wages too Sir.


Art. Dead as a Monument let us leave him.


Love. Hadhe chose the Devil for h^s Physiclan, he could never come by the like
Cordial, [Exeunt ambo.


Sir Jeff. I follow you. [Exit.


Enter Isabella alone. Isa. The day begins to break; and trembling light, as if
affrighted with the nights disaster, steals through the farthest air, and by
degrees salutes my weary longings: new fears assault me; it is a Woman's voice,
and cheerfully expresses her freedom: Be propitious thou Regent of my Fate,
and guide her hither to my comfort. Singing within.


Enter Margery singing, as going a Milking. Marg. What a pleasant life the
Milkmaids lead,
She trips and dances over the Mead;
She dabbles in Dew, and sings to her Cow,
And cries fond love, I defy thee now;
She sleeps in the night, though she toyls in the day,
And merrily passes her time away.

Marg. Ha! what silken Butterflies yonder; she looks not like one that had kept
her self warm at the Brick-kills; yet silk Petticoats many times are glad of
worse lodging.


Isa. Goodmorrow Maid.


Marg. Should I salute you so, 't would bring my wit in question: pray what are
you?


Isa. A distressed Maid.


Marg. A Maid at your years, and so near London! where the sale of a Maidenhead
at fifteen is as rare as a light Wenches Conversion.


Isa. Good Maid, Wise, or Widow, for sure you are a woman, do me a courteous
office, and guide me to some house.


Marg. It seems you are a kind Country Gentlewoman, that has bestowed your
Maidenhead on your Fathers man, and are come up to have a Citizen salder your
broken ware; the policy is grown stale, 't would hardly take, ever since the
Ballet cursed the Carrier that brought her to Town.


Isa. Do you from the abundance of your own ills suspect mine?


Marg. The Toy is angry, it would fain counterfeit something to make me her
Agent but you are deceived my pretty morsel of wantonness, my self and my Pale
are both honest; I am not the Blades Intelligencer, whether Doll and M^ll
remove their lodgings to escape the Constable, and Bridewell: I will to my
Cows, and leave you to the fate of the morning; despair not of a Customer, but
be sure I catch you not napping, for if I do, expect no mercy, for I hate
Hedge-coupling worse than sasting at Christmas.


Isa. If you are good, stay and comfort me, the sense of my distress stops
further speech. [Sounds.


Marg. Ha! she sounds poor Gentlewoman; should she miscarry, I were in danger
of being thought her Murdercss; alas she is dead: why Tony, Tony, help me, a
Gentlewoman is fallen dead.


Enter Anthony. Ant. Why, what is she dead?


Marg. Nay, that is as hard to tell as the success of my danger.


Ant. Is she quite dead?


Marg. I, I, quite dead.


Ant. And are not you in a pickle Margery? she is not dead, she moves.


Marg. Pull her by the Nose.


Ant. I, I, pull it off; no matter for spoiling her face, if she be dead.


Marg. Wring her by the little finger.


Ant. Her little finger is ring'd, and l'de wring it off if I could.


Marg. No robbing of the dead Tony.


Ant. Why, what a Devil should the Dead do with living movables?


Marg. Cast water in her face.


Ant. Blow wind in her Arse; can water make one alive that is dead, unless it be
hot water?


Marg. She surs, give her more air.


Isa. E're you return me to my angry Uncle, my soul shall fly, and meet with my
dearest embraces.


Ant. Why, what a Devil do you mean, Mistress Gentlewoman.


Isa. You are murderers of all my content, you serve the world for base
reward, and that shall render you base to opinion.


Ant. Prithee Margery let me conjure down this Devil in her tongue, 't will
raise a Tempest else, murdere^s and base? pray Gentlewoman, who do you speak
all this to?


Isa. To you, the injurers of my love.


Ant. Hey day! she is mad; love with a vengeance; come, come, I must take her
aside, and give her satisfaction.


Marg. I pity your feeling sorrows, would I could comfort you.


Isa. Since my distress has made me an object of your pity, pray lead me to
some house, for I am wondrous saint.


Marg. That I will, what e're comes on it, [ Exit Marg. Isa.


Ant. But pray Margery forget not my Breaksast; rising early, and rambling
about, has got me a good stomach; yet I could be content to fast with such
laced Mutton, and a good Callice, more than half a morning.


Enter Art^zehim. Art. The blind that Lovechange and I cast upon our actions,
must be withdrawn with discretion, lest my Reputation fall in the Encounter.


Ant. Here Is my Lady; now for a trick to put upon her to revenge my Masters
wrongs: Madam, as I was in the Market to fetch sweet Bryar, I met a Maid; she
told me she was in danger of losing a piece of ground which was her own by
Inheritance, and left her by her Mother, now there is a Knight would fain
enclose it, and lay it to part of his Manor.


Art. Where lies this Land?


Ant. Not far off; she would be content to let him enjoy it after her decease,
if that would serve his turn.


Art. Has she given you any writing to make me better understand the matter?


Ant. This is the Survey, not only of the Manor it self, but the Meadow,
Pasture, P^ow land, Coney-borrow, Fish Pond, Hedge, Ditch and Bush that (...)ds
in it,


Art. My Husbands hand to it, and a Love-letter; where had it you?


Ant. From the aforesaid party, that would fain keep the foresaid Land from the
foresaid Knights fingers.


Art. Sir Jeffery turned Ranger?


Ant. Madam, you are a good Hunteress; though she love now and then to have a
private Borrow ferrited for her own pleasure, yet she will not allow him to run
down a Deer: Sir Jeffery would fain be a Ranger, hut she requests you to let
him run a Course in your own Park; if you will not do it for love, then do it for
money; she has no Silver, but there is Gold; or else she prays you to Ring him
by this Token, and so you shall be sure his Nose will not be routing in other
folks Pastures.


Art. This Purse and Ring was mine, I know them; to requite your pains, take
thou the Gold.


Ant. No not I, so I may be called in question if I came honestly by it.


Art. These lines are even, the Arrows love let fly,
The very Ink dropped out of Venus Eye:
To me he never thus writ;
But Lust can set a double edge on Wit.

Ant. Nay, that is true Madam, a Wench can whet anything, if it be not too dull.


Art. What is the Creature?


Ant. One of those Creatures that are contrary to Man, a Woman.


Art. What manner of Woman?


Ant. A tiny Woman, lower than your Ladyship by the head and shoulders, but as
mad a Wench as ever untyed a Petticoat.


Ant. Why should she send back these, and by you?


Enter Sir Jeffery. Ant. Ware, ware, there is knavery in the wind.


Art. Did not he send them by you?


Ant. Never, never, I hope you will not put that upon me.


Art. Are you so close you Baud, you Pandering Slave?


Sir Jeff. Why how now Wife, what is your quarrel?


Art. Out of my sight base Varlet, get thee gone.


Sir Jeff. Away you Rogue; what grown a fighter; prithee what is the matter, how
you change, surely you are not well. [ Exit Authony.


Art. All is not well indeed. [She-kneels.


Sir Jeff. Why do kneel?


Art. Earth is sins Cushion, Sir Jeffery, Husband I dare not call thee; I have
stolen that Jewel of my chaste Honor, which was only thine, and given it to a
slave.


Sir Jeff. Ha!


Art. On thy Pillow Adultery and Lust have slept, thy Groom has climbed the
unlawful Tree, and plucked the sweets, a Villain has, usurped the Husbands
Sheets.


Sir Jeff. Did I out of a sound faith in you forget the Go^tish Monster you
entertained, thinking not to fret my soul by your seeming ludeness, and now to
act the sault indeed; 'uds death, who wast made me a Cuckold, who wast?


Art. Your man Tony.


Sir Jeff. Worse than damnation, bold Strumpet, hang not on me, think I Will
be a Baud to a Whore, and my Wife too?


Art. All I beg is, use me how you will, but darken the Clouds of my shame.


Sir Jeff. How, conceal my Horns, they cannot be hid, nor shall my revenge;
could not I feed your appetite?

O women, you were created Angels pure and fair,
But since the Fall you tempting Devils are:
You should be man's bliss, but you prove our Rods,
Was there no women, men might live like Gods:
Get from my sight henceforth, and from my Bed,
I Will with no Strumpets breath be poisoned.
But how drew you him in, or could he bewitch you, how was the manner?


Art. Why thus: First he assaulted me with this Battery of beaten Gold, yet I
held out; but at last, when this was shot, it charmed me: what, do you change?
who sent this Diamond to your Wench? could not I feed your appetite?

O men, you were created Angels pure and fair,
But since the Fall you worse than Devils are:
You should our Shields be, but you prove our Rods,
Were there no men women might live like Gods.
Guilty Sir Jeffery?


Sir Jeff. Yes guilty, my Lady.


Art. Nay, you may laugh but henceforth shun my Bed,
With no Whores leavings I Will be poisoned. [Exit.

Sir Jeff. O'rereach'd so finely; it is the very Diamond and Letter which I
sent; this Villain has discovered all: well, this is the second trick she has
put upon me; she varies more in mind than e're the wind had points, still I the
fool must be; but if I break her, who is she or me. [Exeunt.


ACT II.
Enter Isabella in Margeries Clothes, and Margery in bers. Marg. I Hope you are
satisfied; but to what end this change is, I would fain be instructed.


Isa. I Will tell you, when I left my Unkles house, in a few minutes I was
pursued; now this disguize shall help me escape the search.


Marg. Now out upon it, had I no better opinion of your honesty than of your
wit, both which smell altogether of the Country, I Would leave you to seek your
own Adventures: you have gentilifi'd me with your Clothes, and you are handsome
enough in mine; for though I am but a Milk-wench, I ever loved neatness: now
you shall be my Maid, and wait on me to the City, if I find not out your Sweet
heart, let me never be accounted a Prophetess; and I Am sure I have foretold
weather from the turning up of my Cows Tail.


Isa. Dispose of me as you will now, love has armed me with resolution.


Marg. In this disguize I Will meet the Blade that Courts me every morning when I
go a Milking to Islington, my condition is too low to win upon his desires to
marry me, and the other thing without it he shall never have, for I conceive it
will not be for my honor. [Tony within.


Ant. Why Margery, Margery, I say, my Breakfast; a quick supply of meat, drink,
and sleep, or I ragepresently.


Isa. Bless me, what is that!


Marg. Why it is Tony, my Masters Rogue, and my Ladies Knave.


Isa. He Will spoil all again.


Enter Anthony. Ant. Where Is this clean-wash'd Chitterline, come give me my
Breakfast: Hay day! Margery gentlefi'd, and this Mistress that was ready to die
for love Margerifi'd! Now I swear hy Hunger, and that is a strong Oath, I think
women have more Vagaries, than the Devil would have Clients, if he were a
Lawyer, and pleaded without Fees.


Marg. Keep counsel Sirrah, you had best; and if my Lady ask for me, say I wont
be lost long: so farewell Tony. [ Exit Marg. Isab.


Ant. You will not be lost long, he is likely to have a sweet match of it that
finds you, yet I could be content my seven yearsservice were no worse rewarded,
but the Baggage is as coy as an Aldermans eldest Daughter; she has beaten me a
hundred time (Coward that I was for suffering it) for attempting to kiss her:
if my hand had slipped going over a Style or so, 'twould not have vexed me to have
kissed her hand so, though thrown in my face; but now I will revenge it upon her
Cream Bowls, over whose sweets I will triumph.

New mischief, I am again delaid, if I forbear my Breakfast but two minutes
longer, my Guts will shrink to Minikin, which I Will bequeath to the poor Fiddlers
at Islington for a May^day Legacy.


Enter Wenchlove, Artez. Art. Mr. Wenchlove, such a kind of woman my Maid met
withal, but as how I am ignorant: Sirrah, call Margery forth.


Ant. Which, your Margery Gentlewoman, or your Gentlewoman Margery?


Art. Your trifling's unseasonable, Sirrah.


Ant. Why Madam, Margery is no more plain Margery, but Margery in silks, the
Gentlewoman and she are run out of themselves one into another.


Wen. But where are they?


Ant. For ought I know run away one with another.


Art. Do you run after, and call'um back.


Ant. It Is impossible, who knows which way they are gone? besides it is a mist
would choke a Brewers Horse, I cannot see one hand from the other.


Wen. Madam, my sufpition prompts me you are treacherous, and these fair
seeming undertakings traps to catch me.


Art, Nay then what Mr. Lovechange has told me is true: Sirrah, do you try to
overtake them, and we'll follow.


Ant. Oh killing Command! the best is it break my Heart, no matter then for my
Belly; Hunger I defy thee, Revenge I hug thee, I will lead a Wild-goose Chase
till I come to Islington, where I will score two dozen, and reckon with my
Hostesses Maid, whose Belly I have filled with Mary-bones and Pudden. [Exit.


Wen. Now Madam, why do you look so wistly on me?


Art. I, I, it is so, now the love of man's society defend me from this abuser of
Creation; come not near me thou man of Cloats, thou Mauking of Virility, thou
half woman, and all beast, or with these Nails I will tear out thy eyes, and
all the double things about thee.


Wen. Be milder Madam, there is nothing in me appears to my self so full of
guilt, that it should deserve a reproach from you a stranger.


Art. There Is nothing in you indeed Sir, your friend has given me your
Character; you pretend to hate women, because women have reason to hate you.


Wen. I hate women by my love of pleasure, no delight has any relish on the
wanton palate of my desires, unless seasoned with what is derived from them.


Art. Yes Sir, you may take delight in them, but they little in you; come not
near me, there is infection in it; my blood desires no freezing, the Summer of my
Youth is not yet half spent, or if it were Winter with me, high feeding and
ease requires something.


Wen. She takes me for an Eunuch sure, Lovechange has overdone his part; she
has foiled him, and now he hopes my downfall: sweet Madam hear me, I love you,
and my desires are thoroughly fired, and burn my blood, which nothing can
squench but your free enjoying.


Art. Say you so, why I am a Woman Sir.


Wen. I think you are, and one made up for pleasure more than the dull converse
of what is defective.


Art. You say true Sir, I hear it with a heavy heart, but I hope Sir you would
not have me make my Husband a Cuckold; I Will lead him by the Nose till I put a
trick upon him. [Aside.


Wen. Fie, that is a gross construction, only shame and common knowledge does
it, not the act of a Wives wantonness.


Art. I need no instructions for secrecy, trust me a handsome Gentlewoman,
dare you kiss me Sir?


Wen. Now it may come about a Pledge for what shall follow,


Art. Pray Sir, is this a fit place to make ones Husband a Cuckold in?


Wen. Oh the fittest place in the world, let not any weak excuse rob my hopes
of enjoying you.


Art. Sir, I defy weakness, should some of my servants come.


Enter Isabella. Isa. Ha Wenchlove! all the Race of mankind is false, I'e watch
this eager pursuit he has put upon my Lady, and find a way for revenge; I do
love, but it is honorably: and that is a Crime now a days.


Wen. Come, come, we loose the time that might make the pleasure fruitful.


Art. Indeed I durst e'ne venture to make him a Cuckold, if I were sure you
would get a Boy.


Wen. Oh! that is doubly sweet.


Art. And shall he be like the Father?


Wen. As ever Citizens Son was.


Art. I mean my Husband.


Wen. I am a Courtier.


Art. Kind Sir, you deserve it for your policy; but I am so fraid.


Wen. Mischief on these delays. [ Sir Jeff. within.


Jeff. Artezhim, where are you?


Art. O me! what shall I do? my Honor, my Honor!


Wen. Vexation racks me, prevented at the very point of happiness.


Art. Pray hide your self, Sir Jeffery will bolt out this way I fear.


Wen. Pox on it where, where? [Gets into the Tub.


Art. Happy fortune; here is an empty Tub, get in as nimbly Sir, as if you were
a leaping your Neighbors Pale to have a run at his Deer.


Enter Sir Jeff. Jeff. O Artezhim l I have got a sound Bottle in my head, it
o're-charges me.


Art. You make no scruple of pressing upon Women's Retirements.


Wen. Would he was drunk as the Devil with Wine mixed with Opium, that he might
sleep for a fortnight. [Speaks out of the Tub.


Jeff. Hum, what is that Wife? O my stomack's sick as a Cat after eating Candles
ends.


Wen. Would there was nine Kitlings in it.


Art. Step into the Yard, let not the servants see your debaucheries.


Jeff. O I am taken quick! why not in this Tub?


Art. Fie Beast, defile a necessary implement of Huswifry; you have been
drinking of Healths to Cuckolds, your old frolic.


Wen. He might have been one himself had not the Devil brought him home an hour
too soon. [Lovechange to them.


Love. O Madam! where is Sir Jeffery? Fie, fie, what flinch us, and run home.


Jeff. O my head, Mr. Lovechange, my head; what shall I do Wife?


Love. You have received a blow of the forehead, it looks as if 'twere swelled.


Art. No Sir, you nor no man else has given him a bloW there yet, I cannot tell
when it may be done, there is no more than what has been ever since I was his
Wife, three years and more, a long time of barrenness.


Enter Isabella with a Pale. Isa. O Lord, Madam! why stay you here? we are a
coming to wash. [Throws water into the Tub.


Jeff. Oh! Oh! I am sick, I am sick. [ Runs to the Tub, Wench. starts up,


Wen. Hold, hold, 'eds will you drowned me.


Love. How now Tom, what makes you here?


Jeff. Oh mischief on you Sir, you have spoiled a good Vomit; I Will lay my life
he hid himself from my Wife; you told me he was a woman hater: alas poor
Gentleman, to see how things will happen.


Wen. Hell take your Wife, and you too; accursed woman that in your curse made
man so; Pox of your delays, and fearful denials.


Love. What, scold so quickly after you Cucking?


Jeff. Good heart, but that he cannot endure a woman, he should kiss my Wife for
amends.


Art. I came hither Sir, for something else than to be scolded at.


Jeff. Come, come, vex him no more, I Will go sleep a little. [ Exit Jeff. Art.


Love. There will be a safe opportunity for me, I love this Cuckold-making.


Wen. Though you intended a Reformation for your self, you might for-bear me,
this was your plot.


Love. Mine! I never resolved staidness, but I could alter for my pleasure, nor
can I hate or envy it in others, I am only sorry Tom that you should drink
water after your sweet Meats.


Wen. O Tony, have you made any discovery? [ To them Tony.


Love. Have you been in search of the two Wenches I saw cross the Fields
toward Islington.


Ton. O then you took notice of 'um; she in the Silk-Gown you shall have Mr.
Lovechange, and the Milk-wench you shall have Mr. Wenchlove, I have been
condogging with her about it.


Both. Thanks honest Tony, there is something for thee. [He takes the Money, his
arms cross behind him.


Ton. So Sirs, now here, now there, and now here.


Wen. But Tony, what is the Milk-wenches condition?


Ton. Oh womanish, Sir; she will cry when she is angry, laugh when she is tickled,
and be sick when she cannot have her will.


Wen. I mean her Calling.


Ton. She is called Margery.


Wen. Her Profession then.


Ton. Not very honest, and yet very honest; she cheats all the world that
thinks she is wanton; but you will find that neither your Aunts, nor your
Cosins, can keep their Legs so close.


Wen. There Is more money for thee, I will try that.


Ton. You are as bountiful as a new-made Knight that is in hope of preferment.


Love. But what say thou to that I must have; how was she born?


Ton. Why that you had best ask the Midwife.


Love. Is she a Gentlewoman, or not?


Ton. She is, and she is not; she is a Gentlewoman, because she loves pride,
which makes Gentlewomen apt to fall, especially waiting Gentlewomen; then she
is no Gentlewoman, because, because, because.


Love. Prithee no more.


Ton. It Is well he interrupted me, for 'egad I had no more Reason than a Horse:
But Sir, I will bring her to the bar of your presence, where she may answer for
herself, whilst I convert your bounty into wholesome nourishment, from a Bottle
of Canary, and have about with my own Turnep. Exit.


Enter Isabella and Margety. Love. By your leave, fair Maid.


Marg. What would you have Sir?


Love. A little pleasure Sweet; come, come, what is your price?


Marg. You mistake me, I assure you Sir.


Love. As if I had not practiced Wenching sufficiently to understand a seeming
modesty, I Will come to your Lodging when I know where it is: but say your price,
a Guiney, or half a Crown.


Isa. Have I found you Gallant, it is he who I too fondly do affect: but mum,
the truth is Sir, I have a Maidenhead yet, though it be agreed for, therefore
I am dearer Sir.


Wen. Nay Sweetheart, thou shall serve, thy Mistress is too dear, I am loath to
pay too dear for Repentance; it is but changing Offices, let her hold the door
for thee.


Marg. Pray speak, and mean civilly, you will not be welcome else.


Wen. Good Lady light heels, give your servant leave to practice the Trade you
have taught her, that such perfection as appears in this woman should be sold
to every base desire: come Wench, I like thy brown complexion, thou do not
paint, and art the likelier to be the wholesomer.


Marg. Good Gentleman, he is jealous, and would circumvent her.


Wen. Here Is half a Crown Girl, methinks it is a fair rate.


Isa. What Is in me to grant you shall command.


Wen. I take your word, the pleasure of your Bed I must have, I will reward it
with a new Gown; come dally not with coy denials.


Marg. I marry Sir, but not in this place; but if you please. [Whispers.


Isa. Now Jealousy instruct me, I fear this woman's naught.


Wen. It Is a motion I like, the pains will make the pleasure more sweet in the
enjoying.


Marg. Mr. Lovechange, I Will in a word inform you. [Whispers.


Isa. How Fate conspires to make me miserable?


Love. I thank thee, and approve of thy advice; what say you Tom to the Fiddlers?


Wen. With all my heart, send in the Minstrils.


Enter Anthony, old Hostess, both drunk. Ant. I, I, we will be merry, and in
the gallant fashion: Gentlemen, Music is common, no man shall stop my ears,
nor my throat, we must put in amongst you.


Love. By all means Tony, 'twill complete the Medly. [Dance.


Ant. Nay, we know what belongs to that. [Love, kiss the women.

Come away. [ They kiss, and reel out. Exeunt.


ACT III.
Sir Jeffery asleep in a Chair. Enter Lovechange, Artezh. Art. O The effects of
drinking! I could e'ne curse my own kindness, that am ready still to make more
of him, than he does of me.


Love. Why don't you then?


Art. What Sir, I warrant you would make him a Cuckold.


Love. It Is only giving a friend leave to do you a pleasure in earnest, which
you made me make him believe I would do: the truth is, I do now love you
heartily, and have dallied my self into a flame.


Art. Nay, Mr. Lovechange, you were ever kind, but are you as well armed as you
used to go if he should prove subborn: now 'twill work. [Aside.


Love. No faith, I must trust to my single valor; come, demur not, let me
enjoy those forbidden sweets, be assured my secrecy is as firm as Night and
Locks.


Art. Secrecy, Mr. Lovechange, no, I Will be open to all the world, nor will I
distinguish places, dark or light, it is all one to me, were it before my
Husbands face.


Love. Hear then, he sleeps securely, never dreaming of any Foreheads arming.


Art. Fie Sir, you are such a tempter, pray forbear, many a woman would not
hold out so long.


Love. Consent then sweet Lady, and we'll to it straight.


Jeff. ( Snores) Ware Horns there.


Love. O mischief! what noise has waked him?


Art. An infirmity he has got to talk in his sleep: nay, I assure you, he will
rise sometimes, and do the office of a waking man in his dream, and not know of
it in the morning.


Jeff. Room for a Head man of the Parish, a Monster of his Wives making.


Art. O wicked man! he dreams now that I would make him a Cuckold.


Love. Pray Jove it be no counterfeit. [ Sir Jeff. pulls Love. by the ears.


Jeff. And have I taken you Sir Lancelot? would you be billing with my
Guinivere?


Love. Help to pull him off, Madam.


Jeff. For this attempt King Arthur does degrade thee, from a Knight of his
Round Table, to be a Squire of his Wives Body; so conduct me to my Bed, where
I will beget a Race of VVarriours shall Cage the Great Turk again! and restore
Constantinople to the Emperor.


Love. You mistake: Oh! 'uds death, my Perriwig is not a Turbant.


Jeff. Peace follows Victory, now let me rest.


Art. Pray Sir forgive him, I dare undertake he will be sorry when he wakes, if
any thing I can do can make amends. [Smiles aside,


Love. Prove his dream true, when the smart's over I shall forget.


Enter Tapster. Tap. Madam, some Ladies in the house are not well, and desire
your assistance.


Jeff. Who wants assistance? who breaks the Kings Peace? fetch me a Constables
Staff.


Love. He Will dream again, had I best stay?


Art. Now Drunkard, are you recovered yet?


Jeff. What. Mr. Lovechange, and my Wife, where is the rest of your Company?


Art. Gone, being weary of such a Sot as you are, to be drunk so early: I had
done well to have served you in your own kind; here was Company enough to have
brought me home, and some not far off that used me kindly, whilst you snorted
to fright the Fleas, and dream perhaps some wickedness of me.


Jeff. Come, come, I Will buy my pardon with a new Gown, and a journey into the
Country for a Month.


Art. You know I am easy to be wrought upon.


Tap. Will you discharge Mr. Lovechange?


Love. Not so willingly, though I value it not; no revenge of this dreaming
Fox: what is the Reckoning?


Tap. Nine and eleven pence.


Jeff. How Is that? let us have the particulars, Mr. Lovechange shall know how he
parts with his money.


Love. Shall he so, kind Sir?


Tap. Why Sir, Cakes two shillings, Ale as much, a quart of mortified Claret
eighteen pence, stewed Pruens a shilling.


Art. That Is too dear.


Tap. Truly they cost a penny a pound of the one-handed Costermonger, out of his
Wives Fish Basket; a quart of Cream half a Crown.


Love. That Is excessive.


Tap. Not if you consider how many Carriers Eggs miscarried in the making of
it, and the charge of Isinglass, and other ingredients, to make Cream of the
sour milk.


Art. All this does not amount to what you demand.


Tap. I can make more, two three penny Papers of Sugar a shilling, than you had
bread Sir.


Jeff. Yes, and drink too Sir, my head takes notice of that.


Tap. It Is granted Sir, a pound of Sausages, and forty other things, make it
right, our Bar never errs.


Love. This cannot be, I Will talk with your Mistress my self. [Exit.


Jeff. I, do Sir, know what you do, put it to her Conscience.


Art. Owl, when do you think he will find that, she is too deep for you or him
either; prithee talk sense.


Jeff. No matter, he will pay all; where is he Tapster?


Tap. Gone Sir.


Jeff. How, gone! give me my Sword and Belt.


Tap. I must have the Reckoning first.


Jeff. Must I pay, must I?


Art. This revenge he took for your beating him in your sleep, I warrant you
never dreamt of all this now,


Jeff. Has he such tricks? well, it is no matter, it is but a large Groat for
ebng drunk. Here Sirrah. [Exeunt ambo.


Tap. You Are welcome Sir, some profit comes from hence,
I have o're-reckon'd nine and twenty pence.

Enter Isabella, Anthony. Ant. My Master must have a fair Course with you; and
so he bid me tell you, besides what other kindnesses he will do for you: but
stuff your Pannier, he is resolved to do.


Isa. Ah Anthony! why should his lustful thoughts be bent at me? some timely
Guardian Angel rescue me from his foul intent.


Ant. A Pox of this whining; what an unreasonable thing you are? there is hardly
a quarter in the house that you may not rest your limbs in; and because he has
a mind to tire himself in one quarter of yours, you count your self ill used.


Isa. When time gives me a more fair way of opening my self to the world, I Will
gratify thee, if you will but contrive or help to avoid this snare designed
for my ruin.


Ant. Why, is not this pretty? she refuses the thoughts of my Masters singly
opening of her; yet in a breath, she says she will do it to all the world.


Isa. I must confess I am a stranger, and have stragled to this house, and have
received my Lady Jolts protection, but yet in return of their bounty I would
not shipwreck my Fame: where is Margery? I Will straight consult with her about it.


Ant. I know what she will say, Pox on him for a Baudy Knight; nay, and very
likely call him Cuckold too, for she is pretty well acquainted with the
Constitution of my Ladies longings; but since I find thou have that
out-of-fashion quality in thee, Honesty, I Will assist thee, and save thy
Mouse-trap from being baited with Sir Jefferies dry Cheese.


Isa. O how shall I give thee thanks fast enough!


Ant. (Aside) Not a word; I am afraid she is fallen in love with me, and will
come on with a powder when she falls to: so to secure all, I Will tell my Lady to
spoil him, and fill my Belly soundly to fill hers: Mrs. Isabella, I Will not
forget you, adieu. [Exit.


Enter Wenchlove and Margery. Marg. You are informed how I have designed the
matter; that is, I must be brought to your Lodging in a Basket, as some
Moveable Commodity for your special use; my Master is coming this way,
therefore about your occasions, I Will be at your Chamber instantly.


Wen. Well, pretty Maid, I will not doubt your performing your promise: to say
any more, were but to retard my joys; I Will fly to my Lodging, where in the dear
expectation of your coming I Will languish, not to be revived but by your sweet
sight: so sweet Mistress adieu. [Exit.


Isa. Oh unkind Wench! have thou forgot thy Isabella, and all thy Vows and
desperate Protestations?

I must try the event, Despair may bring
A good success to an indifferent thing.

Enter Lovechange. Marg. Since we have agreed no way but that can be safe,
therefore in that great Basket within be you packt up, and directed to me, I Will
find out an excuse for my not showing you, I need not say any more.


Isa. Ha, my Brother with Margery too! what can this whispering mean?


Love. Pox on it, I do love this Wench; but if I can eat a Meal gratis, it is
better than to have that Bugbear Marriage for an everlasting standing Dish:
I Will try all ways, if this fail, then I Will take her for better or for worse:
Well, into the Basket I go, be as speedy as you can. [Exit.


Marg. I Will be there straight.


Isa. O Margery! thy instant help, or I am most miserable.


Marg. Hold, I know your grief, Sir Jeffery, is the cause, I heard him a
dealing with Anthony about it, but I can blow that off with ease; make him an
appointment, the time, place, and dress, and then let me alone to complete the
Comedy.


Isa. Thou have mitigated my passion with thy promised assistance; but what
said my Brother to thee?


Marg. Your Brother, who is your Brother?


Isa. Virtuous Maid, I Will rely on thy secrecy, Mr. Lovechange is the man, but
conceal it till your Plot has had its scope, then I Will discover more.


Marg. Ha! you Mistress Isabella Lovechange, and I not peep into you till now;
it is she: well, since you have told me one thing, then I Will tell you another to
requite you, I love Mr. Lovechange your Brother.


Isa. Love my Brother, O beware!


Marg. If my Beauty, which has been flattered for a taking one, can win upon
his desires, I Will soon work him to what I please; nay, rather than the Project
fail, he shall enjoy; but fairly, I have another discovery, but that is for the
closing pin.


Isa. Well, as to your love of my Brother, I Will join with you when things are
ripe, I have but one doubt.


Marg. What may be that I am not a Gentlewoman, you shall know that there is
many a Gentlewoman has stroakt the Dug: Hark, I hear Wenchlove I must retire,
call for the Basket, all shall be well. [Exit,


Isa. I Will force my passion for once, here is the Gentleman: hold Heart, can he
be so near, and I not reproach him? [Wench. to them.


Enter two men carrying a Basket, Lovechange in it. Wen. Now Wench, is all ready?


Isa. I have packt her up like a Dormouse in a Box, I warrant you for hurting
her.


Wen. It Is a good Wench, I Will give thee a fine Petticoat for this.


Isa. I thank you Sir; when you are a weary of my Mistress, and cast her off,
as I know you must have change, you shall have my Maidenhead at the same rate;
if you please, I Will keep it for you.


Wen. With all my heart.


Isa. Pray use her never the worse for my promise.


Wen. The better I Will turn her off within this fortnight, and send for thee.


Isa. O Sir! it is not fit a Servant should shift her Mistresses Plate before
the Bones are clean picked; you have Flesh enough to hold out a Month.


Wen. It shall be a Month then.


Isa. Pray Sir let me ask you one question.


Wen. Quickly then.


Isa. How many Maidenheads have you bought thus?


Wen. Some nineteen with thy Mistress.


Isa. Pray let me make up the score an even reckoning.


Wen. It shall, it shall; go away with your burthen-fellows, farewell Wench. [
Exit Wenchlove, Basket.


Enter Margery. Marg Now Mistress, what think you of it? have not I taken a
course to let the Blades find their error?


Isa. Now I am instructed wholly to commend your Virtue, and steer my course by
your example; it is time to be gone, Lust is a gilded Pill,

It mocks the Sense with pleasure, but at last,
The shining outside leaves a bitter taste. [Exeunt.

Enter Sir Jeffery and Anthony. Jeff. And is she resolved? shall I enter the
Port securely?


Ant. The Harbor is deep, yet the water flows but seldom, the passage free
from drownding: But should my Lady know this.


Jeff. Oh, never fear that, she has had her fling, and still she bobs me with
it, only devises to try me.


Ant. She has tried you too much her own way, I believe therefore I think she
need not doubt you now with any other: but the Plot is thus; the Young Sinner
that must be, if you can make her so, will come like Mother Red Cap to buy Malt
of you; then take her into the Counting House, and try what Figure you can
bring her to; a Cipher you need not fear, and the round O is the completing of
your sum.


Jeff. Anthony, I Will give thee Margery for this exploit, but you must be very
careful my Wife take not the sent.


Ant. I Will set a naked man in her way Sir, that will employ her longer than you
will be playing the blunt Prize of dried Mary-bones, and young Coney-skins.


Enter Wenchlove, two Men, a Basket. Man. I Will vow it is heavy.


Wen. That Is strange, and she a light Wench.


Man. You say true Sir, it is enough to break ones back.


Wen. His mistake hits upon truth, rest you a while then, O witty Luxury! how
it accutes invention, makes barren faculties beget new issues of rare
conceits: Pox on it, here is Sir Jeffery Jolt, he will certainly stop me: Oh how I
long to see how she looks after this close confinement! she thinks to have me
closer anon, and so she shall.


Jeff. O Tony! so there is VVenchlove, what must we do with him?


Ant. Well enough, he is upon the like design, see what is in the Basket.


Jeff. O Mr. VVenchlove, what is here? let us see, I cannot open it; what is in it?
what is in it?


Wen. Would 'twere his Wife, I Would be revenged for this rudeness: let it alone,
Sir Jeffery, it is only a thing that I have a great mind to experiment.


Jeff. Look Tony, what shall I do now? [ Enter Art. like Mother Red Cap.


Ant. To her, never mind him, never mind him: now 'ware a Storm.


Jeff. It Is needless to trifle time, I love, and must enjoy thee.


Art. Oh fie Sir! what will your Lady say to this, if we be caught?


Jeff. Fear not that, good Cuckquean, she will never think of such a thing.


Wen. What, Mother Red Cap? how goes Cakes and Maidenheads? This is not Mother
Red Cap: what, my Lady Jolt?


Art. Let him never see my face more. O indignity to my Beauty! die you weak
Villain: O me! how shall I vent my passion?


Love. I can hold out no longer, let me out. [Lovechange in the Basket.


Ant. Whence came this voice? what, have you got an Humble Be in your Basket,
or a Flesh Fly? [Comes out.


Love. 'Uds death, I have been sufficiently mortified.


Wen. How came all this?


Love. I Will tell you, bargaining for a little pleasure with a young
Gentlewoman, whom I thought to be a Wanton, she engaged me in this Adventure to
come to her.


Wen. Pox on it, I am baffled in the same Noose, I expected her to be in the
Basket: Oh! where is this witty Contriver?


Marg. Here Sirs, and am come to laugh at all your follies; for I know Sir
Jeffery is in the same Labyrinth: but we must make all well again, for he was
set on by Tony, and me; but he and she thought it true, Madam Jolt is privy to
all this.


Art. It Is truth, Jeff. this I Will forgive, but no more, if you do, I go to
work: Now Girls, if you were well fitted, a Husband is the least you can
expect; and now Margery I Will discover, you was my Brothers Daughter, put to me
to conceal for a time, the reasons best known to my self.


Isa. To avoid prolixity, see Isabella, who ever had a Chaste Flame for this
wild Wenchlove, and Margery for you.


Love. Then by joint consent we'll end the day with mirth: to Pancras, and be
married straight; Sister, I am glad I have found you in no worse Company.


Wen. Then virtuous Isabella, do you forget what Heats of Youth has made me
guilty of, and I Will remember to be ever just to you.


Love. And thou, Margery, deservest more than I can ever repay or express.


Marg. Let me have but all you can do, and I Will never complain.


Ant. No, it is I must complain, that thought to have had Margery instead of my
wages: but for this trick, the next Maid that comes, down she goes, after once
she has dropped a Duck to my Lady.


Art. You see, Gallants, what success attends your Enterprise.
Henceforth account not every lively Wife
Wanton, because she lives a merry life.

Jeff. So here is a double comfort, being wedded,
She Is neither false, nor am I jealous headed. [Exeunt.

FINIS.
The PROLOGUE.
You Are not to expect from hence the Modish sport,
Abusing either City, or the Court:
The Poet's mannerly, and cautious too
And neither will affront himself, nor you.
'Faith, both are needless, since it is done each day,
By you who judge, and him who writes a Play:
Nor does he Controversies set afoot,
But thinks it better if none else would do it;
Nor tells you what Religion he is on;
May be, like some of you, he is of none:
You Are easily pleased, and please the Poets too,
Now that the Critics have no more to do:
The Devil's in them that censure Farce and Show;
Who'd be a Poet then, at least to you?
Who, when he writes, is fool and Coward too.
How do you murder men of that Profession?
There Is hardly one that ever scapes a Session:
For once be courteous to a Country Muse
Untaught, such Tricks the Wits of London use;
And in short time, he may find out the way
To write fine Poppet Plays as well as they.
The EPILOGUE.
ANd how? and how? Gallants, what is it but so?
Our Female Sex Abhors short things, we know.
But tell me, 'Faith, is it not better far
To ride in Flying Coach, than Dronish Car?
Great Theaters, like Husbands cloyed, move on,
Without long preparation nothing's done;
We finish thrice, e're they have once begun.
One bout for Broths and Jelly cost you there
More than would buy six merry Pushes here;
Nay, to oblige you, we'll truck Ware for Ware.
Tell me, good Houswifes, is not the pleasure more, when Butter quickly comes,
Than to be three long hours a jogging of your Bums.
To you, Gallants, our sport no trouble brings,
All your delight we know's in little things:
Likewise we so unconscionable are,
We covet to enjoy you only h^re:
Yet for variety, try all the rest,
That will convince you our things are the best.
See us again when you have roam'd your fill,
And, like good Wives, we'll make you welcome still.
LOVE LOST IN THE DARK; OR, THE Drunken Couple.

ACTED AT NEW MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, Dan. Major at the Hand and Scepter over against S. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1680.

ACTORS NAMES.
A Dorio, a Libertine beloved by Calista. Camillo, Lover of Calista.
Callandrino the Clown, his Man.
WOMEN.
Calista, a virtuous young Lady in love with Adorio. Mittilla, her Maid, in
love with Adorio. Muggulla, the Nurse.
LOVE lost in the DARK; OR, The DRUNKEN COUPLE.
ACT I.
Enter Calandrino, and Muggulla. Call. MAdam Muggulla, you most joyfully are met
to pleasure me.


Mug. It may be so; I used to pleasure many: here lies my way; I do beseech
you, Sir, keep your own Voyage.


Call. Nay, be not so short, I must with you.


Mug. With me! I pray Sir; what, what Sir, do you see in me?


Call. Do not mistake me, dear Beauty, nothing but honesty in faith.


Mug. Hang honesty, Trump not me up with honesty: do you mark Sir, I have a
charge, and a special charge Sir, and it is not honesty can win on me Sir.


Call. Prithee conceive me rightly.


Mug. I conceive you.


Call. But understand.


Mug. I will not understand, I cannot, nor I do not understand.


Call. But prithee Muggulla, let my young Master Camillo see thy Mistress; but
look upon her, and do you stand by.


Mug. How Is this? shall I stand by? what do you think of me? Now by the virtue
of the place I hold, you are a paltry Squire to tempt my trust thus; I am no
Helen to be defloured of my Loyalty, by your fair language.


Call. You mistake me still.


Mug. It may be my place will bear me out in it, and will mistake you still,
make your best on it. Call. A Pox upon you, let him but have a glance at her.


Mug. The Devil's in you, he shall never see her.


Call. This is a Croan in grain; thou art so testy, prithee take breath, and
know thy friends.


Mug. I will not: I have no friends, nor will I have any this way: but now I
call to mind, why will he see her?


Call. Because she loves him woundily, and he loves her totally.


Mug. She hates him damnably, most wickedly, take that upon my word, and swears
her eyes are sick when they see him: how fearfully have I heard her rail
against him, and cast, and rail again? call for hot waters, and then rail again?


Call. I Will believe a Witch that has been nine years dead, before this.


Mug. I have heard her swear, that he is the beastliest man: what a grief must
this be? Sir-reverence of the Company, a rank Whoremaster, ten Livery Whores,
she assured me on her Credit, with weeping eyes she spoke it, and seven
Citizens Wives, besides all Volunteers that serve under him, and of all
Countries.


Call. The Devil never fathered such a Lie.


Mug. Besides, he is so careless of his body, which is a foul fault in him.


Call. Come, leave fooling, it is a mere Fable drawn from thy Ancient Virtues;
may be it is her Maid is angry with him, because he wooed her with his Honor;
and you mistake.


Mug. She hates him very well too, but her Mistress hates him heartily: Look
upon him! on my Conscience she would see the Devil first, with eyes as big as
Saucers; when I but named him, she lept back thirty foot.


Call. That Is a lie by five and twenty.


Mug. If once she smell him, (for certainly he is rank, she says extreme rank,
and the wind stands with him so) she is gone for ever.


Call. For all this he shall see her, and give her such a heat, that the Hoegoe
of her Constitution shall perfume his Chamber for two long hours after.


Mug. Has he any new eyes when those are scratcht out, or a Nose to clap on
warm? Is he proof against a Piss-pot? which if they bid me, I must throw upon
him.


Call. Well then, a Devil take you, he shall not see her.


Mug. His Dam coddle you for his Supper, if he do.


Call. Then be so far his friend, good parch'd-handed Muggulla, as to give her
this Letter, and leave thy pleasant lying, or leave it in her Pocket, there is
no harm in it, do it, and I Will take thee up a Petticoat.


Mug. Take up my Petticoat, I scorn the motion, I scorn it with my heels, take
up my Petticoat.


Call. And so hot, Reverent Muggull.


Mug. Sir, you shall find me hotter, if you take up my Petticoat.


Call. I Will give you a new Petticoat.


Mug. I scorn your gift, give your Masters old Boots, you give a Petticoat:
Alas, you are too young Sir, you are too young to circumcize me that way; take up
my Petticoat, I am a woman, a Gentlewoman, a woman of another way; he that
takes up my Petticoat, shall have enough to do I warrant him; I would sain see
the proudest of you all dare to do it.


Call. Still mistakes: what a Pox do you look at the wrong end of the
Prospective Glass.


Mrg. Petticoat! you show now what you are; but do your worst Sir.


Call. A Wildfire take thee, what ails thee?


Mug. I ask no favor of you, and so I leave you; and withal, I charge you in
my own name; for I would have you know, that in this place I represent my
Ladies Person.


Call. The Devil could not have picked out such a Representative.


Mug. Upon your life do not dare to follow me; for if you do, I know you have a
standing that way: but if you do, look to it, look to it. [Exit.


Call. Go, and the Pox go with thee, if thou have so much moisture as to receive
it; for thou will have 'um, though a Horse bestow'um; I must devise a way, for
he must see her, and very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat, it all the wit I have,
and this can do, I Will make you sell your charge and your place. But here they
come.


Enter Adorio, Camillo, Calista, Mirtella. Came. I know I wrong my modesty.


Ado. And wrong me in being so importunate, for that I neither can nor must
grant.


Call. A hard sentence from him, I have chosen my Judge: Alas Sir, did I
approach you with unchaste Desires, a sullied Reputation, or were deformed, as
it may be I am, though many affirm I am something more than handsome.


Came. I dare swear it.


Call. Or if I were no Gentlewoman, and breed courtesy, you might with some
pretense of reason slight what you should sue for.


Ador. I Am sure I should; the Fleas are cursed troublesome: Hey day! there is a
Legion of young Cupids in my Breeches.


Call. Pray Sir, name my defects; when once convinced, I trouble you no further.


Ado. Then I will bluntly and truly tell you, you are too honest (a noted
Libertine I profess my self) and talk too soon of Marriage: Can I part with my
uncurbed liberty, and on my Neck wear such a heavy Yoke? No, let crooked Hams,
declining Shoulders, furrowed Cheeks, be awed by Ceremonies; if you love me in
the way young people should, I Will fly to meet you, and we'll meet merrily.


Call. It Is strange such a man can use such language.


Ado. My tongue speaks my heart freely: Fair one, think on it, a close or
private Mistress is Court Rhetoric; a Wife is a mere rustic device; and so
good morrow.


Came. How like you this, Caland ino?


Call. A well-bred Gentleman, I am now thinking whether or no in the dark, or
drunk, I formerly might not have met his Mother; he must have some drops of my
blood in him, for at his years I was much of his Religion.


Ado. You may perceive I seek not to displant you, where you desire to grow;
for further thanks, it is needless complement. [Cam. stops him.


Came. Only your patience one moment.


Ado. Sir, be brief then.


Mirt. Pray, observe. [Cam. shrugs, makes faces.


Call. How he looks like a Schoolboy that has played the Truant, and went to be
Breeched.


Came. Madam.


Call. A new affliction; after all this preparation, I am obliged to hear you,


Came. Madam -- while I at all parts (without boast) his Equal, in vain pursue
you, you follow one that with winged feet flies from you, and attempts to
undermine the Fortress of your Honor; nay, and more, your Virgin Honor.


Ado. My friend Camillo here is an Ass; what a Devil has he to do with Virgin
Honor? when he should speak to the purpose, of the delight to meet in the old
Dance between a pair of sheets, my Granam calls it the peopling of the World.


Call. To vindicate my Honor, is needless; I don't fear the worst aspersion
malice can throw upon it.


Came. Can you undergo the scorn of being refused, for which I deeply suffer? I
must confess it makes for my ends; but his ills shall not make way for my good
intents.


Ado. You take that Sir, which yet I never granted.


Came. Calandrino, stand to me, I Will force more, Sir; was she, this excellent
she, mad to be a slave to your lusts, and used as Physic after drunken
Surfeits? mankind must rise against thee, must we not, Callandrino?


Call. I, I, come, come, mankind must rise about it. [Camillo draws. Callandrino.


Calist. Murder!


Mirt. Help!


Call. Nay, nay, stand still, or you are disabled for ever.


Ado. 'Uds death.


Call. After a whining Prologue, who would look for such a rough Catastrophe?
nay, come Sir, fear nothing; and do you hear Sir, yet I love you too; if you
take the Wench now, I Will post it first, then Chronicle you were beaten to it.


Ado. A memorable piece of valor this between you; it may perhaps deserve her
Shooe-string for a Favor; wear it without my envy, but expect for this
affront, when time serves, I shall call you to a strict account. [Exit.


Call. Nay, let him go to thy Mistress Boy; if I were in thy shirt, how I could
nick it?


Came. Madam, I fear my passion has offended; 'twas my excess of love to do you
right.


Calist. You have sought my favors Nobly, and I am justly punished in wild
Adorio's contempt and scorn: more I cannot say, but that I truly pity you, and
wish you a better choice, which in my prayers, Camillo, I ever will remember.
[Exit.


Call. It Is a sweet Rogue, what Thunderstruck!


Came. I am not so happy: O that I were but Master of my self, you should soon
find me nothing.


Call. What would you do?


Came. With one stab give a fatal period to my woes and life together.


Call. For a Woman, better the Kind were lost, and Generation maintained a new
way.


Came. Yet all this is nothing to Calista.


Call. Down into the Country amongst your Tenants, there you shall command
twenty Calista's, for every night a fresh and lusty one, Nut-brown wholesome
Girls, I have bred 'um to it; should their Fathers murmr, straight his Lease
is void.


Came. Hang thee, and thy folly, come away. [Exeunt.


Enter Calista, Mirtilla, and Muggulla. Mug. Censured, Madam! what Lord or Lady
lives worthy to sit a competent Judge on you?


Calist. Yet black detraction will find faults, when there are none.


Mug. Her foul mouth is stopped; you being the Object, rest secure of this, all
the Braveries of the City run mad for you: Come, come, it is nothing for you,
being a simple Maid, that never had a hand in the Honey-pot of Pleasure, to
sorbear it: but such as have lickt there, and lickt there often, and felt the
sweetness, will.


Mirt. How her mouth runs over with the rank imagination?


Mug. If such can, as I named before, the Kickshaw being offered, refuse to
take it, they may be Sainted, though for my part I don't think it possible to
be denied.


Call. Not stir abroad, the use and pleasure of my eyes denied me?


Mirt. Insufferable!


Call. Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter?


Mirt. Not to be endured.


Call. Nor look upon a man?


Mug. Flat tyranny, insupportoble tyranuy to a Lady of young blood.


Call. She is my Mother that commands it, how shall I decline it?


Mirt. Run away, take any course.


Call. But without means, how shall we live?


Mug. What a question's that? as if a Bucksome Lady could want maintenance in
any place in the world where there are men, wine, meat or money stirring.


Call. Rather than in a thought or dream, I Will consent to ought that may take
from my Honor, I Will endure more than my Mother can impose upon me.


Mug. I grant your Honor is a glorious dressing, but without conversation of
men a kind of nothing; she may as well command you when you are a hungry not to
eat, or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easy, compared to the not
seeing of a man: I will not urge Camillo's love, but make trial of Adorio.


Call. And give my Honor to his lust.


Mug. There Is no such thing intended, Madam; yet now I think on it, write to'um
both, catch one fast, and then throw the other in Mirtilla's mouth.


Call. It Is a business to be considered on.


Mug. When the satisfaction of your love's in question, to talk of
consideration is of no moment; if your Mother would allow you a Dancer in the
morning to well-breath you, a Songster in the afternoon to open your Pipes, a
Servant to air you in the evening, you might bear it; but not to see, or talk,
or touch a man, O abominable!


Call. Do not my blushes speak how willingly I would assent?


Mirt. Do something, Madam, to deserve'um, and blush after.


Mug. I, I, do something as Mirtilla. [Exeunt.


ACT II.
Enter Camillo; Callandrino meets him. Call. SIr, Sir, are you ready?


Came. To do what? I am sure it is not yet Dinner time.


Call. True; but I asher such a dainty bit for Breakfast, as yet I never cooked;
it is not Potargo, sri'd Frogs, Potato's marrow'd, Cavier, Carps Tongues, the
Pith of an English Chine of Beef, nor the Italian oyled Mushroom, and yet a
drawer on too; and if you show not an appetite, and a strong one, I Will not say
to eat, but devour it, without Grace too, for it will not stay a Preface: I am
shamed, and all my provocatives will be jeered at.


Came. Art thou in thy wits? what newfound Rarity have thou discovered?


Call. No such matter Sir, it grows in our own Country Sir.


Came. Leave prating, and serve it up Sirrah, bring in your dainty.


Call. 'Twill bring in it self, it has life and spirit in it, and for proof:
Behold now, fall to boldly, my life on it it comes to be tasted.


Enter Mirtilla with a Letter and a Ring. Came. Ha! Calista's Maid; you are welcome
fair one, aims your designs at me?


Mirt. I am trusted with a business of consequence, which I would to your
private ear deliver.


Call. I told you so, give her Audience on your Couch, it is a fit State for such
an Ambassadress; dispatch first for your Honor, you know what follows.


Came. Come Sir, will you please to vanish, or I Will --


Call. O Sir! pray don't; O Sir! pray don't forget how you used your Tailors
Daughter when she brought you home a Stomacher to keep your Breast warm. [Exit
running.


Came. Now, pretty one, your pleasure, you shall find me ready to serve you; if
you will put me to my Oath, I Will take it upon this Book.


Mirt. O Sir, the favor is too great, and far above my poor ambition; I must
kiss your hand in sign of humble thankfulness.


Came. So modest.


Mirt. It well becomes us Maids Sir, spare those blessings for my Noble
Mistress, this speaks her chaste desires with this Ring.


Came. Oh the powerful Charms by that fair hand set down, Heaven be pleased to
qualify this excess of happiness, or I shall expire with a Surfeit of
felicity! with what art the cunning Lapidary has here expressed the Rape of
Proserpine; I apprehend her purpose, and oblige it, yet not as a helping
friend, but a Husband; I will meet her Virtues flame with a lawful heat, and
warm our Hymenical Sheets with such delights as leave no Sting behind'um.


Mirt. You speak well, and I believe you.


Came. Would you ought else?


Mirt. I would carry some Love-sign to her, and now I think on it, the kind
salute you offered me at your entrance, hold it not impudence that I desire it,
I Will faithfully deliver it.


Came. A kiss; you must excuse me, I was then my own, now wholly hers; but
there is Gold to bind thee still my Advocate, I Will not fail the appointed time.
[Exit.


Mirt. Not a kiss; I was coy when it was offered; and now justly, when I begged
one, am denied.

If I catch either still my game's well played,
But if I miss I Am with repentance paid. [Exeunt.

Enter Adorio and Muggulla. Ado. You are mistaken, I cannot be the man you are
sent to.


Mug. Not you the man, you are the man of men, and such another in my Ladies
eye never to be discovered.


Ado. I am a mere stranger to thee, -- or will at least seem so. [Aside.


Mug. Still the more probable, since Ladies as you know affect strange
dainties: this is not an Age in which Saints live, but women, knowing women.


Ado. As most are at a coupling age.


Mug. Why Sir do you Gallants travel, but at their returns to discourse the
difference in foreign Females; as the lusty Girl of France, the sober German,
the plump Dutch Fr^, the stately Dame of Spain, the Roman and spritely Tuscan,
the merry Venetian Curtizan, the English fair Companion, that learns something
from every Nation, and will fly at all.


Ado. But may I ask without offense your gravity, what Title your Lady bears in
this City?


Mug. If you were true Town-bred, you would do the business first, and ask that
after: Sir, she is no Half-crown Trader, nor no Beldam so frozen up, a Fever
cannot thaw her.


Ado. Leave this impertinence, and come to the matter.


Mug. Impertinence! what my Granams Cat left in the Malt in Impertinence
teeth; if it be impertinent to say her Name's Calista, God buy to you, and your
impertinence too.


Ado. Oh I have heard of her, for Chastity and Beauty the wonder of the age!


Mug. Pray not too much of that Sir, fair and free, I Will subscribe too, and
you will find her so.


Ado. This cannot be Calista, your covering your foul ends with a fair name,
gives me just reason to suspect you have a plot upon my life.


Mug. A Plot! very fine; nay it is a dangerous one, beware on it: I plot to bring
you in a minutes space to those a man of Snow would ride a thousand miles for;
you shall be received by one whose touch would make old Nestor young: a
terrible plot, a kiss then ravished from you by such lips as flow with Nectar,
a juicy palm to guide you safe to a private room; but I almost forget, to make
the plot more horrid, the retiring Bout, the silver bathing Tub, the Cambrick
Rubbers, the imbroidered Quilt, a Bed of Jessemine and Damask Roses, a mere
Powder Plot to blow you up: and last of all, a Bedfellow, to whose rare
entertainment all these are but fools.


Ado. No more, her breath would warm an Eunuch.


Mug. I knew I should heat him.


Ado. I am flesh and blood, your motion I approve, I Will come.


Mug. My plot's on your life, a base and dangerous woman, farewell Sir.


Ado. I will along too, come pardon my suspicion; hear, hear, you shall.


Mug. I am good-natured, you may do what you will with me, at twelve I Will be
your Convoy.


Ado. I desire not better. [Exeunt.


Enter Calista, Mirtilla. Call. How do you like my Gown?


Mirt. It Is rich, and Court-like.


Call. My Mother little dreams of my intended flight, and that these are my
Nuptial Ornaments.


Mirt. I hope so.


Call. How dully thou answered? do thou envy Adori,'s noble change?


Mirt. No Madam, I am a little daunted; how to bear your absence, that very
thought confounds me; to be devorc'd from all my comfort, can this be born with
patience?


Calist. The necessity of my fate commands it; but I vow by my Adorio's love, I
pity thee.


Mirt. Pity me Madam! a cold charity, you must do more, and help me.


Calist. Ha! what said you, I must; is this fit language for a servant?


Mirt. One that would continue your poor servant: Can Mirtilla fit mourning
alone, imagining those pleasures which you this blessed night enjoy in the
embraces of your Lord, and mine too, in being yours? shall a stranger sow you
up in a sheet to guard that Maidenhead you must pretend to keep, and 'twill
become you? shall another do this, and I pine with envy? Pardon me, either let
me go with you, or by my life I will discover all.


Calist. Thou can not be so treacherous and cruel.


Mirt. Pray don't tempt me, for it is resolved.


Calist. Prithee Mirtilla be not so violent, I am so taken with thy affection.
to me, I will send for thee.


Mirt When?


Calist. This very night, by Adorio I will.


Mirt. Forgive my boldness past, 'twas iny zeal to serve you.


Calist. I thank thee for it.


Mirt. You Will keep your word.


Calist. Still doubtful.


Mirt. Now Fortune play thy game,
It shall be hard but I will hit my aim. [Exit.

Enter Adorio. Ado. It Is eleven by my Watch, the hour appointed, I hear none
stirring, some cursed business keeps her Mother up; I Will walk a little circle,
this short delay asflicts me, and I presume to her it is no pleasure. [Exit.


Enter Camillo, Callandrino. Call. What Is now to be done? would I were a Bed, I
am so sleepy: by this hand I Will break the house for you tomorrow, and she shall
be yours by fair or foul means.


Came. This is the time, I take it, I was ordered by Mirtilla to come; she may
perhaps, to take the air, open the Casement.


Call. Would you were in her Cellar, so I were a Bed.


Came. And looking out, will be a new Star to be gazed on by me with adoration.


Call. Is not here fine fooling? Pox of gazing, and sighing, and peeping, and
prying; if you must go to it, put her to the squeak at first sight, and there is
an end. [Within.


Enter Calista, Mirtilla. Calist. Mirtilla.


Came. It Is her voice.


Calist. You heard some footing.


Mirt. Most certainly.


Calist Speak low, my love Adorio.


Came. The darkness befriends me now, most honored Madam: Alorio, your servant.


Calist. If you are so, I do commend your silence, and this kiss assures you I
am wholly yours. [Exit.


Call. Now miss, and may you be gelt.


Mirt. Madam, think on Mirtilla. [Exit.


Call. I am the fortunatest man in these night works. [Exit.


Enter Adorio. Ado. This slowness amazeth me; but here comes somebody.


Enter Mirtilla. Mirt. Whether shall I fly for succor?


Ado. These arms shall be a Castle of defense; how her heart beats; take
comfort, dear Calista, Adorio loves you, loves you in a Noble ways silence
becomes you till we are in safety.


Mirt. O blessed error! [Exeunt.


Enter Camillo! Came. They have cast me, and say I must wait; but I have found
some of their Cordials may be a provocative that was prepared to enable me to
perform the Marriage night-duties, up it goes, be it what it will. I cannot
dread any danger where she is: it is pleasant, some restorative to animate their
spirits; this nights ramble, with other encumbrances of business, has almost
tired me; I feel sleep apprehending me for my neglect of nature, it is too
powerful, I must obey. [Sits down.


Enter Muggulla. Mug. 'Uds death, I cannot find the sleepy portion that is
prepared for my Ladies Mother: What Dormouse asleep a ready? much good may
women expect from you! what a Devil do you mean to do? my old Lady's coming
this way; here is a lump of Sluggard: you lie with a Lady, you lie with a
drunken Sow, so you will be taken napping; thy Nose shall pay for this.
[Muggulla within.


Enter Calista. Calist. What Is the matter you stay so long? is he fallen
asleep? how Camillo, who I took for Adorio! wake him, and bid him be gone.


Mug. I must carry him on my back then, for any way else he is not fit to go:
is he not dead? cold by this hand. [Falls out of the Chair.


Calist. O, O! call in his man, let him remove him; he has got some hurt in his
night rambles, and comes here to die, to have the shame fall upon me.


Enter Calan. Muggulla. Call. Stark dead! are you sure? you have held him at
hard service; I Will be hanged if Muggulla has not thrown him on his back, for
she is an old Swinger at these sports.


Calist. Leave your idle discourse, and convey him away.


Mug. Out of the house you cannot carry him, your Mother must see it done.


Calist. Search him Calandrino, if he be not wounded any where.


Call. O here is large wound! how it is swelled! this must, this must be
cunningly drawn out, should it break, 'twould strangle him: O what a deal of
foul matter's here! this has been a long time of gathering: here is a gash too
in the Rimb of his Belly, it may have matter in it; he was a choleric man I
see; what comes from him is as yellow as Gold: how, troubled with the Stone?
I Will cut you for this. His Pocket, then his Purse.


Mug. It must be so, he has drank the sleepy portion which was designed. for
your Mother, so that we'll lay him in the great Chest in the next Room, may be
when he awakes we may have a more fit opportunity to let him out.


Call. I had rather bury him quick than part with my purchase; let his Ghost
walk, I care not: who is that? where is the Chest? I am afraid her calling should
wake him. [Calista, Mugg. within.


Mug. A shrill voice, it comes with the wind.


Call. Then I Will take this way.


Calist. Why, Sir?


Call. Because I Will trust my heels before all the winds in the Sky; we are far
wiser than our Gransi^^s were; and thus I Will prove it, they say, haste to the
beginning of a feast, there I am with'um; but to the end of a fray, that is
Apocryphal, it is Canonical, not to come there at all: after a Storm, there are
still some drops behind.


Mug. Pure fear has made the fool a Philosopher; come, help away with him.


Call. He Is wondrous heavy, but the Porter's paid, there is the comfort. [Lays
him in the Chest, and falls upon him.


Calist. Away, my Mother will come out.


Call. Now if he wakes not, I am made for ever;
And if he does, 'twas but a fools endeavor. [Exit.

ACT III.
Enter Adorio and Mirtilla. Ado. WAs ever man thus crossed?


Mirt. So blessed I hoped to have been; this is the finest wild Chase.


Ado. What Is that you mutter?


Mirt. A short prayer, that you may find my Lady, your wished-for love, though
I am lost for ever. [Camillo in the Chest.


Came. Calandrino, light a Candle, it is horrible dark.


Mirt. O me! what is that? from whence could that come?


Ado. I don't know, may be the old Lady has discovered our coming.


Came. Draw the Curtains, I say, you Rascal; what a Devil do you mean to do?
Adorio will get there before I shall come.


Ado. If it be a Spirit, it made use of my name; it is somewhere in the room.


Mirt. I am afraid, yet dare not stir, for fear you should be found here.


Came. Sirrah, I say Calista made the appointment, and would you have me fail
her, Rogue, Dog, Devil?


Ado. It must be some Imp, it has the Devil so frequently in's mouth.


Mirt. I tremble to think on it.


Came. 'Zounds, I Will stay for this damned Dog no longer. [Rises out of the Chest.


Ado. My courage fails me, doubting it is not mortal. [Both run out.


Mirt. Oh the Devil! the Devil!


Came. What can this mean? that seemed to be Adorio going out; how came I to
have this wooden Tenement? this room they left me in; now dare not I call
Muggulla, because I am ignorant how matters go in the house.


Calist. What noise was that I heard?


Enter Calista. Came. Madam, I know not, nor what caused it; but I am in as much
doubt as they could be in fear, how by what means I was laid in this Chest;
Providence I must ever bless that it proves so well, since you allow on it.


Calist. What Is this? 'twas necessity made me so careful of your proceedings;
now you are at liberty, I desire your absence.


Enter Adorio, Mirtilla. Came. Madam, it is strange, but for once I Will withdraw,
and render you my hearty thanks for the care you have used to preserve me safe,
and your own Honor. [Exit.


Calist. My loved Adorio, though disasterous chance has made me lament thy
absence, it pays me ample satisfaction that I am now possessed of thee.


Ado. Away: have you played your game with him, and now come to me to retrieve
your appetite? I must reassume my ancient Faith, all Womankind is false. [Exit.


Calist. False man, but more treacherous woman, it is apparent you jointly have
conspired against my weakness, for which expect my just anger; reply not. [Exit.


Mirt. She commands both, one is enough for me,
If I be false, Love is a treachery. [Exit.

Enter Calandrino, a Bottle of Wine. Call. Good speed on all sides, it is main
strong Wine: O the yauns that Muggulla will make! look to your Stern, dear
Mistress, and steer right: Stay, let me see, I Will try her by thy Nose first,
for if she be a right Sow, sure she will find it: yonder she comes; O how she
holds up her Nose like a Jennet in the wind of a grass Mare!


Enter Muggulla. Mug. It Is Wine, I Am sure it is Wine, excellent strong Wine,
very good Wine; this way too.


Call. How true she hunts, I Will make the Train a little stronger. [Spills Wine.


Mug. Stronger and stronger still, still blessed Wine.


Call. Now she hunts hot.


Mug. This way it went sure.


Call. Now she is at a cold sent: O well hunted! that is she! that is she!


Mug. O if I could but see it! O what a precious sent it has! but handle it,
and then but taste it.


Call. Now I Will come in view.


Mug. Still it is stronger: Calandrino, what have thou got there? answer to the
point man.


Call. It Is Wine, Madam Muggulla, sweet Sweet-wine.


Mug. Is this a drink for Slaves to tipple on? dear sweet Sweet-wine come
hither; give me a Bottle thou most debauched Drudge.


Call. With no small pains I purchased this on purpose for you, to show how
willing I am to give you all my service.


Mug. I will give thee more: there, kiss my hand on it.


Call. I thank you cleanlily for your dirty favor; how rank it smells?


Mug. By your leave sweet Bottle, and sweet Sweet-wine, I now come to thee,
hold your Cap under.


Call. She sucks off her sweet Sweet-wine, sweet, sweet, sweetly: how do you
like it?


Mug. Hold up your Cap again Sir, and now come kiss me: I Will be your friend at
a word Sir; come, drink to me.


Call. I must not be too bold with this liquor.


Mug. Here Is to thee then; it is for thy good, it is confessed; nay, it is naught
for thee, and may chance to make you break out, and spoil thy complexion: it is
excellent for me, I have a cold Stomach, and the Wine*


Call. Blows out at both ends.


Mug. Kiss me again, thou shall kiss Calista too: again cherish thy lips, I Will
show thee all.


Call. Bless my eyes!


Mug. Enter all the secrets in my Country Commands, and thou shall be my Heir,
and I Will leave thee Heaven knows what.


Call. I believe so; but I shall never know.


Mug. Then you shall have my Daughters two sweet Wenches, but you must commit
with me first, and show yourself a Gentleman.


Call. Excellent Mistress Muggulla, I thank you heartily.


Mug. And prithee, Calandrino, take heed of being overtaken with too much
drink, it is a lamentable fin: O it is a damnable thing to be drunk, Heaven cannot
endure it! And hark you, one thing I would have you do, knock my Husband on the
Head, for he is an errant Puppy, and cannot perform; why, where the Devil is
this foolish Bottle?


Call. O how her Husband would cry, did he know how drunk she will be with this
Wine!


Mug. Who Is that talks of Wine there?


Call. I think it is your Husband at the door.


Mug. Bring him before me, I Will beat him damnably; nay, break the Bottle about
his Pate, then tie it to his Tail, and all the Dogs in the Town shall follow
him: Come, sit down, and let us propound a modest question, to see who is
drunkest, you or I.


Call. The very sent has disabled me; what is the question?


Mug. Whether Whitehall or Cheapside be nearest Whetstones Park? or what is the
natural reason, why a woman should long to make her Husband a Cuckold? Bring
the Curate, that learned Philosopher, that found out a Pudden had two ends, let
him with his Jacob's Staff discover what is the third part of three farthings,
three halfpence being the half, and I am satisfied.


Call. You blow me down with your Learning.


Mug. Too much for that Bull-head, my Husband: Hang him, he is but the shadow of
a man of action, a debauched Puppy, let him sleep, and thou shall sleep with me.


Call. You are a very loving worthy woman, I had as live she had said I should
have lain in the Hog-sty.


Mug. Not a word of Wine Callandrino, or any thing like Wine, or any thing
concerning Wine, or by, or from, or with Wine: Come, lead me like a Countess.
[Exeunt.


Enter Adorio, Mirtilla. Ado. Then it seems you ever have affected me.


Mirt. Should my Lady stand by and hear't, and in her sudden fury kill me
for it, I durst not Sir deny it; nor is it me alone, but all our Sex, I think,
stand bound to be enamoured of you.


Ado. O my Fate! I am justly punished for my defended wantonness: I that
scorned the Mistress when she sought me, now I would upon my knees receive her,
am become a Prey unto her Bondwoman: thou art one of those aim to be the wrong
way Ladifi'd: Was there no forward Page or Footboy in the Town to do the feat,
but I must be chosen for the Executioner? how durst you hope it?


Mug. Kings sometimes leave Calveare, Salmon, and eat Sprats; in modesty I dare
speak no more.


Ado. How came thou to my hands?


Mirt. My Lady being slipped aside in the dark, fearing her Mother should find
out the appointment, and, as I thought, quitted the house, thanks to the
darkness of the night, running after her, I run into your arms; and I had
wronged my breeding near the Court, had I refused it.


Ado. You expect to reap the Harvest of your Flattery but your hopes will be
blasted: I assure you I am tired, I must sleep; you could lie down too.


Mirt. Willingly, so you please to use me.


Ado. Use thee?


Mirt. As your Pillow Sir, I dare presume no farther.


Ado. Well, sit down.


Mirt. I am ready Sir. [Sits down.


Ado. So nimble.


Mirt. Love is active, nor would be a slow thing, rest securely; Sir, on my
Maidenhead, I Will not ravish you. [Lays bis head in her lap.


Ado. For one so fair, I Will trust you.


Mirt. Let all the joys of rest dwell on his Eyelids; let no dream disturb
your soft and gentle slumbers: I cannot sing, but I Will talk you asleep she
snores already: I am all fire, I can no longer forbear, I Will touch his lips, I
am intranced; our Fancy, some say, in sleep works stronger, I will prove how
far mine will work. [Sleeps.


Enter Calandrino, Call. My Bones ache with sleeping on the Bench, and I am
exceeding cold after my heat, I must seek out a mere convenient Truckle-Bed:
Ha! do I dream? No, no, I wake; as I live Adorio in a handsome Wenches Lap: O
Whoreson! you are better accommodated than I have been with my old drunken
She-goat; I Will call my Master and his Mistress to this Pageant, this may work
more upon her than all he can say: Master, Madam, come forth.


Enter Camillo. Calista. Came Well, what is your hasty business? what have you
seen the Devil? or how?


Cala. No Boy, no; but here are some that you thought not of.


Calist. Adorio.


Cala. The Idol you used to worship.


Calist. Is this Mirtilla? I was but a Cloak to his intended Villainy.


Cala. I knew 'twould take.


Came. I Will not kill him sleeping, but if you please, I Will wake him, and then
make him fall a Sacrifice to your just anger.


Cala. No, reserve your blood for a better use.


Calist. My fond love is turned to extreme hatred, his very sight is odious.


Cala. I have thought of a punishment for 'um, and then leave him to his
Harlotry; if she prove not torture enough, hold me an Ass: I saw their Horses
not far off, I Will cut their Girts and Bridles, and turn 'um out to the Road.


Calist. In his Hat he wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet, as a
Salary of her Lust, deceived me of; he shall not keep it to my disgrace, nor
will I stir till I have it.


Cala. I am not a professed nimmer, yet l'le make a shift: by your leave Sir,
it is restitution; pray bear witness I do not steal it; here it is.


Calist. Take it not as a Mistress's favor, but a strong assurance I am your
Wise.


Came. O Heaven!


Cala. Pray in the Church: let us away: have you not been billing in the Hay,
and so deserved this unexpected favor?


Came. You Are pleasant Sir, come, will you walk. Exit Came. Calista, Calandrino.


Ado. As thou art a Gentleman kill me not basely, give me leave to draw my
Sword. [Adorio starts up, his Hat falls off.


Mirt. What Is the matter? do you dream?


Ado. A fearful one I dreamed, methought Camillo's Sword was at my Throat,
Calista frowning by, commanding him, as he desired my favor her favor to
strike off my head.


Mirt. Mere imagination; here is your Hat.


Ado. But where is my Jewel?


Mirt. I looked upon when you slept.


Ado. What Is come on it then? Restore it; thou have it; force me not to search
thee


Mirt. Search me.


Ado. You was before your Ladies entertainment a Night-walker, traded in
picking of Pockets, when tame Cully's charmed with your prostitute fluttery,
vouchsafed to embrace you.


Mirt. Love, give place to anger; were thou an Emperor, 'twas false; in thy
teeth l'le tell it thee, steal what I present.


Ado. This will not do, though thou have swallowed it, I Will rip thee up, but
I Will recover it.


Mirt. Help, help, help, murder!


Ado. What, a new plot; let me have it, I say.


Enter Calandrino and Dancers. Cala. Hey day! at it before folks! fie for shame;
you are a hot Cock of the Game.


Mirt. O me wretched Maid! [Mirtilla swoonds.


Cala. Hold her up, she will fall again before her time else: Come, come,
Mistress, the man's a well-timber'd man, he is whole Chested, and may be a
little forward with his work, in time you will make him ride more moderate;
then if he prove not of the right strain, Cuckold him first, and after make a
Capon of him, never fear a Rape, fear him not.


Enter Camillo, Calista. Calist. Methought I heard some Women's shrieks; what,
was it Calandrino?


Cala. Nothing, only Master Adorio would force her to say one Lesson too often
over, which is a fault I seldom heard a woman complain on, to refuse that sort
of exercise.


Calist. My too fond Love Adorio, I have for ever banished from my heart, and in
lieu, the Holy man has given me to Camillo, in whose worthy love Calista must
be safe.


Came. Calista, you are all goodness.


Ado. Nay then Adorio be a man, I see the Diamond; Mirtilla forgive me, thy
honest virtuous love I will repay; take me, and dispose of me as you think fit.


Cala. Chain him up; and when you feel the loving hour coming on you, let him
recreate you, and then to his Cell again, in a short time you will find him a
sober Companion.


Mirt, My heart cannot let me give a denial; take me your faithful Handmaid.


Enter Muggulla. Mug. O who shall take me! for something has taken my Husband,
the Fates be blessed: but whether above or below he is gone, that matters not.


Cala. O! to Heaven he must go; you have been always a careful woman in that
kind: Well, you and I will never marry; for now we may drink and sleep together
without control, since that Ram-headed Block is removed.


Mug. Lord, I am so troubled with the Teago, I believe it is because I drink
but little Wine.


Ado. It Is a raw humor blows up in your head, you don't take it often enough.


Mug. 'T may be so: truly Sir, I don't drink above a Bottle in an hour.


Call. How many's that a day? Mrs. Muggnlla, l'le be your Doctor, and administer
effectually, I warrant you.


Came But are your Dancers ready?


Call. All things ready: pray seat your selves, that I may have room to perform
matters of admiration: let your eye be riveted to my heels, and miss not a
hair, breadth of my footing: our Dance has a most melodious note, and I command
you to have Ears like Hares this night for our Masters Honor, and something of
my Worship; your reward is to be drunk blind, like Moles, in the Wine-cellar,
and though you never see after, it is the better: and do you hear wire-string
Cats guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoe boys, for the credit of your Calling;
twang it perfectly, as you would read your N^ck verse; marshal your selves in
the Rear, the Van is ours: Come, Mrs. Muggulla, imagine it our wedding day. [A
Rustic Dance.


Came. Adorio, Let us forget all but honorable friendship, and let that last
till Time shall be no more.

Now may all here, that love, as they are Friends,
To our good fortunes find like prosperous ends, [Exeunt.

The PROLOGUE.
OUr Habits and our Acting such appears,
Like weather-beaten weary Travelers:
Who have endured more then may here be told,
From Eastern blasts and sharper Northern cold.
Which keeps our sadded Hearts in deep suspense,
Wanting a place to fix our Residence.
Yet if these Radiant Beauties will but please
To smile on our Endeavors, 'twill much ease
Our Cares, abate our Fears: well knowing then,
Their Influence creates Favors in those Men:
Whose noble Bounty and Compassion may,
Transform our sable Night to cheerful Day.
So by your Goodness with your mercy mixed,
We wandering Planets may in time be fixed.
The EPILOGUE.
AS timorous Crack with Bailiffs close beset,
Knowing her Rigging cannot discharg her Debt;
Scrues up invention to the highest pin,
To make a Trap to catch the Devil in.
Melting in tears with looks half lust half love,
Hoping the hot-rein'd ravenous Foe to move;
Sighs in his Bosom, Sir, if you will be kind,
I would do, you know what, you know my mind.
The goatish hell-hound boiling in a Fever,
Cry's damn the Plantiff, swears he will never leave her.
Imagine now the feat is done, and she
Is gone and clapped him for his Courtesy.
I just like her, have ventured out to you;
Could I but wheedle and over come you too:
Then like a loving and a fearful Elf,
I Would send you sound away, be clapped my self.
THE POLITIC WHORE: OR, THE CONCEITED CUCKOLD

ACTED AT NEUU-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, Dan. Major at the Hand and Scepter over against S. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1680.

Actors Names.
SIr Cornelius Credulous, a Fond Husband. Sir Isaac Jealousy, always doubtful
of his Wife. Fido, a Friend to both. Mocko, Sir Cornelius's Clown. Drudgeo, a
Pimp. Mutchcraft, a Gentleman disguised, Gallant to Policia.
Women.
Policia, Wife to Cornelius, the Politic Whore. Innocentia, Sir Isaac's Wife.
A Bawd.
THE POLITIC WHORE: OR, The CONCEITED CUCKOLD.
ACT I.
Enter Sir Isaac Jealous, Solus. Isa. I Have given all the slip on purpose, to
get home at unawares, to try what Jack Fido does with my Wife; I know no reason
why I should trust him more than all the world, I do remember he told her I
bought the Bucks Head, and therefore deserved to have the Horns: though I bid
him try her, I did not bid him, bid her with one eye love, and with the other
wink at a Friend: What pains we Husbands take to be miserable, and as many
words do aptly hold concordance to make one sentence: Just so many causes seem
to agree, when conceit makes us Cuckolds, and here comes apparent proof; [
Enter Fido leading Innocentia. hand in hand: How their palms meet! That grasp
begets a bastard.


Fido. By your white hand, I swear 'twas only so.


Isa. Poison of Toads between you.


Innocentia. Fido you have well satisfied me.


Isa. Insatiate Whore, could not I satisfy you? I shall commit a murder if I
stay: I Will go forge Thunder for you; what Plague can transcend a whorish Wife,
and a persidious Friend, Traitor to Truth and Friendship, I could rip out that
blushing Hypocrite, thy Heart.


Fido. What means this Fury?


Isa. Can you spell Stag, Sir? it is four letters with two Horns: get you from
my fury, for fear of greater mischief.


Fido. Thou yellow Fool.


Ino. I would you would instruct me, Sir, but how to understand all this.


Isa. Did ever mortal see so foul a guilt stand underneath a look so innocent.


Ino. My Lord.


Isa. You Whore. [Kicks her.


Fido. Were It not for looking to the Lady, I Would call you to strict account.


Isa. Look to her, hang her: let me now send her to the Devil, with the scarlet
Robe of Sin she is lapt in, that men should ever marry, and when we lay our
Heads in women's laps, rise up with Horns.


Ino. With patience hear me, good Sir.


Isa. Yes, and go make Potgims.


Ino. It Is late, and sleep will do good, Sir.


Isa. Why do you think I Am mad?


Ino. I hope not, Sir Isaac.


Isa. Then you lie, I am made Horn-mad; I shall be acted at both the Theaters:
Oh he that can believe a sleep's secure

In a false Friends Oaths or a bad Wives Arms,
Trusts Circes Witchcrafts, or Calipsos Charms. [ Exit Isa. Fido.

Ino. Oh Sir Isaac, how far am I in love with affliction, because it calls thee
Father:

Oh Jealousy, Loves Eclipse, thou art in thy Disease,
A wild mad Patient, wondrous hard to please. [Exit.

Enter Sir Cornelious Credelus, and Mocko. Cor. My negligence deserves just
blame, and how my Policia will take it I cannot tell.


Mock. As Snuff does you, by the Nose. [ Enter Fido,


Fido. Sir Credelus your Servant; I hope your fair Lady's well.


Sir Cor. See, see she and her zealous Schoolmaster: I Will put you all upon her
anon. [ Enter Policia, Muchcraft.


Mock. Then I shall have my turn.


Fido. You are a wondrous happy man in one so virtuous.


Sir Cor. Nay, you shall have no Sir Isaacs of me, I warrant ye.


Mock. Nor no Inocentia of your wife, I warrant ye.


Sir Cor. Sweet Chick I come to take leave of thee, for I am going to see a
Ship launched, you may walk and see Sir Isaac Jealousie's Lady.


Poli. Alas she is too merry for my company.


Fido, Too merry; I have seen her sad, but very seldom merry.


Poli. I mean Sir, that she can walk to the Change, tell Tales, run in the
Garden.


Mock. Why then your Ladyship may hold your tongue, say nothing, and walk in
the Orchard.


Poli. She can drink a glass of Wine not alayd with Water.


Mock. Then you may drink a cup of Water without Wine.


Poli. Nay if a Gentleman comes to her House she will let him kiss her, though a
stranger.


Fido. Why a modest Woman may be kissed by accident, yet not give the least touch
to her Reputation.


Sir Cor. Well said, touch her home.


Poli. Nay, but they may not; she that will kiss, they say, will do worse I
warrant you.


Fido. Why Madam I have seen you kissed, may be against your will.


Poli. You may be sure 'twas against my will, though I have been kissed indeed.


Mock. There Is nothing in that can be against a Woman's will, and I dare be
sworn, if my Lady kissed but one man, it is because we cannot do with all.


Sir Cor. Nay that I know to be true, therefore she shall only kiss you Fido at
this time; nay, come kiss her, and we are gone.


Poli. Nay pray Sir Cornelious, it is against my customs.


Sir Cor. I care not; let naturals love customs, my humour's my humor: look
ye she spits, kiss her close.


Mock. The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh, Lady.


Poli. How now sawce-box.


Mock. Why Madam, I had but my turn, are you angry at that?


Sir Cor. Sirah, go and call a pair of Oars, Muchcraft, prithee stay thou at
home with thy Lady, make her merry, get your Instrument ready, this melancholy
will spoil her; make her laugh but heartily before I come home, and I Will give
you a Lease of forty Crowns per annum.


Much. Can you tell whether she be ticklish or no Sir?


Sir Cor. Oh infinitely ticklish.


Much. I Will deserve your Lease before you come home again I warrant you.


Sir Cor. And thou shall have't I faith boy.


Mock. Sir, there is a boat ready for you.


Sir Cor. Oh that is well, farewell my dear Policia. [Exit.


Fido, Adieu Madam, and when so e're I marry, Fortune turn no worse Card to me
than you are. [Exit.


Mock. And when so e're I marry, Venus send me a Card may save Fortune a
labor, and turn up her self. [Exit.


Polic. What made him leave you behind.


Much. To lie with your Ladyship.


Polic. How!


Much. How: Why in the Bed, or on the Bed, or without the Bed.


Polic. Why how now Muchcraft.


Much. Why, the plain truth on it is, I must lie with you.


Polic. Why, Muchcraft?


Much. And I know too, that you will lie with me.


Polic. Nay, but Muchcraft.


Much. A Pox of Muchcraft; I am neither Much Craft, nor Little Craft, but a
Barkshire Gentleman, that has heard of your Beauty; assumed this Name and
Fortune, saught this Service, and tell you truly what I guess you.


Polic, You will not Ravish me, Muchcraft?


Much. No; but unravel you, in two lines Experience writ lately.

Extremes in Virtue, are but Clouds to Vice;
She Will do in the dark, who is in the day too nice.

Polic. Indeed you do not well to belie me thus.


Much. Come, I Will lie with thee Wench, and make all well again: your Husband
swears no Woman can deceive him, and 'twere well done to cozen his confidence.


Polic. Truly, Muchcraft, some Women would do it.


Much. Who can you choose more convenient to practice with than me, whom he
doats on? Where shall a man find a Friend but at home? so break one Proverbs
Pate, and give the other a Plaster. Is It a Match, ha?


Polic. Well, for once it is; but and you do any more, indeed I Will tell my
Husband.


Much. But when shall this once be, now?


Polic. Now! no indeed, Muchcraft, it shall be soon, at Night my Knight comes
home.


Much. Then, how is it possible?


Polic. Possible; Women can make any of these things possible, Muchcraft: many
casualties may cross us, but soon at night my Cornelius I Am sure will be sleepy
after his hard drinking; and when well drenched in Wine, he sleeps in his
Clothes on the Bed so sound, Bells would not wake him were they rung in the
Chamber.


Much. Then he will never dream of our Intrigue.


Polic. Now Mocko that makes him merry in his Chamber, shall, when the Candle's
out, and he asleep, bring you into the Chamber.


Much. But will he be secret?


Polic. Will he, good Soul! I am not to try him now.


Much. 'Uds-foot, this is brave,
My Knights kind Fool is my cunning Ladies Knave.
But pray, how then?


Polic. When Mocko has brought you to the Bed, give me but softly a touch, I Will
rise, and follow you into the next Chamber: But truly and you do not use me
kindly, I shall cry out, and spoil all.


Much. Use you kindly; was ever Lady used cruelly in the dark? do you but
prepare Mocko and your Maid, let me alone with her Mistress; about Eleven I
desire to be expected.


Polic. And till the Clock strike Twelve I lie alone.


Much. Now you dare kiss.


Polic. Once with a Friend, or so; yet you may take two, Muchcraft.


Much. My Cast is Ames-Ace then.


Polic. Deuce-Ace had got the Game.


Much. Well, if you will set, I Will throw at all.


Polic. If you throw out, then down you fall. [Exeunt.


Enter Innocentia alone. Innoc. Here, miserable Innocentia, let thy sorrows
take breath; unto this House where Gentlemen lodge I was directed, but I here
discover strange actions carried on in this House: Great Persons, but not good,
here nightly Revel in Surfeits, and in Riots; and yet the next day the place
appears a Sanctuary, rather than Sins foul Receptacle: these ways have to me
still been strangers.


Enter Bawd and Drudgeo. Drud. Yonder she walks mumbling to her self, my Lord
Generous has cast an eye of liking on her, and you win her but for him, your
House bears the Bell away; acost her quaintly.


Baw. I warrant thee Drudgeo, I can effect wonders of more weight than a
Maidenhead: Have I ruined so many Cities, Citadels, to let in
Court-Martialists, and shall this Country-Cottage hold out? I were more fit for
a Cart than Coach then 'lfaith. How now Philice, how do you this morning?


Innoc. Well, I thank so good a Landlady.


Baw. But hark you Philice, is the Door close Drudgeo?


Dru. As an Usurers Conscience: Madge was coming in, till she saw the Door shut
upon her.


Baw. I Will set Madge about her business, and I come to her: Is here any work
for her, with a mischief to her? We shall have Eves-droppers, shall we?


Innoc. Honor guard me, how I tremble.


Baw. Come hither Mistress Philice: Fie, how you let your hair hang about your
Ears too: How do you like my House, Phil.


Innoc. Well, exceeding well.


Baw. Nay, I know a Woman may rise here in a Month, if she will her self: but
truth's truth, I know you see something, as they say, and so forth. Did you see
the Gallant was here last night till Twelve?


Innoc. Which of them mean you? here was many.


Baw. Which; he in the white Feather, that skipp'd in the Gallery: Was it
white, Drudgeo?


Dru. As a Ladies hond, by this five fingers.


Baw. White; no, no, 'twas a Tawny; now I remember.


Dru. As a Gypsy; by this Hand it looked white by Candlelight though.


Baw. That fine Lord is called my Lord Generous, Phil. a great man, I Will assure
you Phil.


Innoc, His Excellent Carriage spoke him of Noble Birth.


Baw. And this Lord loves you Phillis.


Innoc. Now Heaven defend me!


Baw. What, from a Lord? marry come up with a Murrian; from whence came you
tro', ha?


Dru. Thus nice Madge was at first, if you remember.


Baw. I would have you know Huswife, I could have taken my Coach, and fetched
him one of the best Pieces in London, and her Husband should have looked after
me, that his Neighbors might have noted, and cried, Farewell Naunt, commend me
to my Uncle.


Dru. And yet from these perfumed fortunes, Heaven defend me.


Innoc. Perfumed indeed.


Dru. Perfumed; I am a Pander, a Rogue, that hangs together like a Beggars Rags
by Geometry, if there was not three Ladies fwore yesterday that my Mistress
perfumed the Coach; so they were fain to unbrace the Side-parts to take in
fresh Air.


Baw. He tells you true, I keep no company, I warrant you.


Innoc. But have you so many several Women to answer so many men that come?


Dru. I Will answer that by Demonstration: Have you not observed the variation of
a Cloud, sometimes 'twill be like a Lion, sometimes like a Horse, sometimes a
Castle, and yet still a Cloud.


Innoc. True.


Dru. Why so can we make one Wench one day look like a Country Weneh, another
day like a Citizens Wife, another day like a Lady, and yet still be a Crack.


Innoc. What shall become of me? Oh the sad Curse
Of goodness, to leave one woe for a worse.

Baw. Come Phil. let us in, and be merry. [Exeunt.


ACT II.
Sir Cornelius asleep on a Bed in his Clothes, Policia in Bed; to them, Moeko
leading in Muchcraft. Much. SOftly sweet Mocko; are we in the Chamber yet?


Mook. Within a yard of my Lady, and ye can be quiet.


Much. Art sure Sir Cornelius is asleep?


Mock. I know not, I Will go and ask him.


Much. No, no, no, do not awake him, we are undone then, man.


Mock. Ha, ha, ha, now I see Cuckold-making is as ticklish a profession as
Cunney-catching: my Lord was so paid with Healths, he is fast enough.


Much. But still I pursue wonder, why my Lady should prescribe this strange,
nay wondrous desperate way to her desires.


Mock. Is that a question to ask now? would you would grope out the Bed, for I
sleep in my talk I am sure of that. [ Sir Cornelius Coughs.


Much. We are lost for ever: did he not cough?


Mock. It Is nothing but the last Cup comes up in stewd broth; if ever you make
true Whoremaster burn me: sea-sick before you come in the salt water; let me go
in your stead.


Much. No I Will venture, stood a Gulf between belching up a Tempest. O valiant
Lust! how resolute thou go to Acts unjust. Mocko good night: desire drowns
fear in presupposed delight.


Mock. Turn of your left hand, 'twill lead you to the Devil, to my Lady, I
should say presently. [Exit.


Much. Let me see: Four steps on the left hand. I have the Bed, and on this
side she lies: Ud's foot there is a beard; but all is well yet; she lies on this
side sure: I have her; it is her Hand, I know the touch, it melts me into
passion: I have much ado to contain my wild desires: as the wind strains in
caverns locked, so through my big swollen vains my blood cuts capers.


Polic. Who Is there?


Much. It Is I.


Polic. Muchcraft.


Much. Fortunate Muchcraft, that was wrapped in his Mothers Smock.


Polic. Give me your hand.


Much. There it is: I melt already.


Polic. Sir, Husband; Sir Cornelius, awake.


Much. I am lost for ever, Madam.


Polic. Sir Cornelius, Husband.


Much. If I pull too hard, I shall pull her out of the bed too.


Polic. Why Knight, will you not awake.


Sir Cor. What Is the matter, what is the matter?


Much. How I dwindle.


Polic. Pray hear me Sir; I cannot sleep till you have resolved me one thing.


Sir Cor. What is that Sweetheart?


Polic. Of all men which do you love best?


Sir Cor. That Is a strange question to ask at midnight; why Muchcraft.


Polic. And that same false Muchcraft in your absence most leudly tempted me to
wrong your bed.


Much. Was ever woodcock cateh'd thus.


Sir Cor. Oh Rogue, Ple cut his throat sleeping.


Polic. Nay I have fitted him finely.


Much. Now, now, now, now I am splted.


Polic. I seemed Sweetheart to consent to him.


Much. A pox of shammings: I were best confess and beg pardon.


Polic. And to make him sure for your revenge, I appointed about this hour,
the door left open on purpose


Much. Ah.


Polic. To meet me in the Garden.


Much. All Is well again.


Polic. Now Sweetheart, if you would but steal down, you might catch him, and
snap the Fool very finely.


Sir Cor. Oh Heavens what a wench have I of thee! I Will take my Rapier, and the
night being dark, I Will speak like thee, as if thou had kept thy word: O
Villain, I shall have you; do you lie still, and I Will bring thee his Heart for
thy Monkeys breakfast.


Polic. And would you part unkindly and not kiss me?


Sir Cor. I have no more manners than a Goose: Farewell

My chaste delicious Girl: what may his life
Be compared to, that meets with such a Wife! [Exit.

Enter Mocko. Much. Hist Mocko.


Mock. Hear Boy.


Much. Go meet him in the Garden -- and hark.


Mock. Excellent: I Will play my Lady I warrant you. Well, I may hope for a
Squiers Place, my Father was a Costermonger. [Exit.


Much. Well now I see, he who would know Hells Crafts in her may read it, in
brief put him to School

(Would cheat the Devil of's right,)
To a dainty smooth-faced Hypocrite. [Exit.

Enter Sir Cornelius and Mocko. Sir Cor. Why here is a Wife Mocko!


Mock. Ay Sir, to discover upon the pinch to you.


Sir Cor. Oh what Fortunes we loving Husbands meet with!


Mock. Ay Sir, Fortune's in the fashion of Hay Forks.


Sir Cor. Mocko, thou shall hardly see a harsh Fellow have such a Wife, such a
fortunate Wedding.


Mock. He Will go to hanging as soon.


Sir Cor. No, no; we loving souls have all the luck: There Is Sir Isaac Jealous,
what ado there is about his Wife; and now she is fled: and what has brought her
to it, but his dogged usage of her.


Mock. Nay she never lived a good day with him.


Sir Cor. Therefore the whole Town rings of the winding of his Horns. Had he
such a wife as I: what a Villain did I entertain, to teach her Music; he had
done her no good since he came, that I see.


Mock. Hang him: he has made her a little perfect in Prick-Song, that is all;
and it may be she had skill in that before you married her.


Sir Cor. She could sing at first sight by this hand, Mocko: but hark, I hear
somebody.


Enter Muchcraft. Mock. It Is he sure: he has a dreaming Whoremasters pace. Pray
let me practice my Ladies Part, and counterfeit for her.


Sir Cor. Can thou imitate to the life?


Mock. Can I? Oh wicked Muchcraft.


Sir Cor. Admirable thou shall do it.


Mock. Pray be you ready with your Rapier to spit him then; and Ple watch him a
good turn, I warrant you.


Much. Here they are: If Mocko now comes off with his Part neatly, the Comedy
passes bravely. Who Is there -- Madam?


Mock. Muchcraft?


Much. The same.


Mock. I think this place lies open to the Air, Muchcraft.


Sir Cor. Delicate Mocko.


Mock. And truly there is a great Dew fallen to night, the Grass is very wet.


Sir Cor. Sweet-tongu'd Rogue.


Mock. Come Muchcraft,

And let us sport our selves in yonder Rushes;
And being set, I Will sinother thee with bushes.

Sir Cor. Oh Villain.


Much. Here my Lady; it is enough my Master has now a Friend in these days that
dares be honest.


Sir Cor. How Is this?


Mock. Nay for thy Master, he is a mere Coxcomb, Muchcraft.


Sir Cor. Out Rogue.


Much. It Is but your bad desires that tell you so: can I contain a Heart, or
can that Heart harbor a thought of injury against him, under whose Wing I
safely stretch my Pinions: has he not nobly entertained me? Stand I not next
neighbor, save your self, unto his Heart?


Sir Cor. Ay, by this Hand do thou.


Much. And shall I requite him thus? No Lady, no.


Sir Cor. Brave Muchcraft.


Much. I am too wise to fall in love with Woe, much less with Woman: I but took
advantage of my Masters absence for your Trial, Madam, for fear some Fellow,
far hotter-rein'd then I, might have sought and sped; and I should be loath a
Master so loving,


Sir Cor. Shall have five Leases, by these Fingers.


Much. Should have a Lady false.
Back Lady to your yet unblemished Bed;
Preserve your Honor, and your Lords Calves Head.

Mock. Well Muchcraft you had been better: if I do not tell your Master of this.


Sir Cor. He has put him to it now.


Much. Then I am lost for ever: You Will turn it all on me I know; but ere I Will
live to wrong so good a man, or stand the mark unto your malice, I will first
fall on my Sword, and perish.


Sir Cor. Hold, hold man.


Much. Ha; who are you?


Sir Cor. One that has more humanity in him than to see a proper Fellow cast
himself away, I warrant thee: it is I, it is I man; I have heard all.


Mock. And 'twas I have played my Lady, to have snapt you.


Much. Has she then been so good to tell you? Now I am worse afflicted than
before, that she should thus outrun me in this race of honesty.


Sir Cor. Nay, she has hobb'd thee bravely: She has a thousand of these tricks,
I faith man; but howsoever, what I have found thee, I have found thee: Hark in
thy ear: Thou shall have five Leases, and my own Nagg, when thou have a mind to
ride.


Much. Let me deserve it first.


Sir Cor. Thou shall have 'um, I know what I do, I warrant thee.


Much. I joy in such a Lady.


Sir Cor. Nay, there is a couple of you, for a Wife and a Friend: thou shall be
no more my Servant; I had thought to have made thee my Steward, but thou art
too honest for the place that is the truth on it.


Mocko. His superfluity is my necessity; pray let me have it Sir.


Sir Cor. I will talk with thee to morrow: Mocko, thou shall have something
too, but I Will to Bed: honest Muchcraft, the dearest must part, I see; I will so
hug the sweet Rascal that thinks every hour ten, till I come yonder: Goodnight
Muchcraft; to Bed Mocko:

What delight in life,
Can equal such a Friend, and such a Wife. [Exit.

Mock. Go; and a Cartload of Horns go with thee. But shall I not be thought on
for my nights Service?


Much. Why look you: pray forget not you had something.


Mock. Well: and pray do you remember I had nothing.


Much. Nothing; what is that?


Mock. Nothing before I had something I mean; so you are welcome from Utopia.


Much. You are very nimble; Sir, good morrow. [Exeunt.


Enter Sir Cornelius and Fido. Sir Cor. Did ever Chronicle match this couple?


Fido. You make me wonder, that both should meet in one resolved goodness
unknown to one another.


Sir Cor. There lies the Jest on it: Sirrah Mocko, come hither.

[ Enter Mocko. I do but think, had she met him in the Garden, how she would
have ratled him.


Mock. Ay, and ruffled him too Sir; the Camomile would have been better for it
many a day after.


Fido. Such an honest-minded Servant, where shall one find?


Sir Cor. Servant; my sworn brother, man: he is too honest for an Office, he will
never thrive in it.


Fido. A Wife; why she is a Saint, one that bears a good sound Soul about her.


Mock. Yes, when she wears her new Shoes.


Sir Cor. Where is she Mocko?


Mock. Walking a turn or two in the Garden with Muchcraft, shall, I go call,
Sir?


Sir Cor. No, no, no; it is pity to part 'um, they are so well matched: What
are they doing?


Mock. Why Sir, she was weeping to him; she heard this morning that her
Confessor Father Joseph was dead.


Sir Cor. Why now shall not we have her eat a bit these five days.


Mock. She Will Munch the more in a Corner, that is her Fasts.


Sir Cor. Nay, do but judge Fido: Whereas most Dames go but once a month, some
twice a quarter, and once a year to Confession, and that upon constraint too;
she never misses twice a week.


Fido. It Is a sign she keeps all well at home; they are even with the World,
that so keep touch with Heaven.


Enter Policia, Muchcraft. Sir Cor. See where she comes! Why how now Chick,
weeping so fast, this is the fault of most of our Ladies; Painting, weeping for
their sins, I should say, spoils their Faces.


Much. Sweet Madam.


Sir Cor. Look, look, loving Soul, he weeps for company.


Mocko. And I shall laugh outright by and by.


Polic. Oh that good man!


Sir Cor. Why, Bird.


Fido. Be patient.


Polic. And would he go to Heaven without me?


Mocko. It may be he knew not your mind, Madam.


Polic. He knew my mind well enough.


Mocko. Why then, it may be, he knew you could not hold out for the Journey;
pray do not set us all a crying. [Weeps.


Sir Cor. Prithee, sweet Birds-n'ye, be content.


Polic. Yes, yes, be content; when you two leave my company, no one comes near
me, so that were not for simple modest Muchcraft here.


Mocko. As modest as a Gib-Cat at Midnight.


Polic. That sometimes reads to me some virtuous Treatise; were it not for him,
I might go look content: but it is no matter, no body cares for me.


Sir Cor. Good Fido, help to comfort her. [Weeps.


Mocko. Now is the Devil a writing an Encomium upon cunning Cuckoldmakers.


Much. You have been harsh to her of late, I fear Sir.


Sir Cor. By this hand I turned not from her all last-night; what should a man
do?


Fido. Come, this is but a sweet obedient Shower, to bedew the lamented Grave
of her old Father.


Mocko. He thinks the Devil's dead too.


Sir Cor. Prithee Muchcraft walk a turn in the Garden, to get her a Stomach to
her Dinner; we'll be with you presently.


Polic. Nay, when you please; but why should I go from you?


Sir Cor. Loving Soul, prithee take her away.


Polic. Pray let me kiss you first: come, Muchcraft, no body cares for us.


Sir Cor. Well, she is a precious Creature. [Much. as they go out, kisses her.


Fido. 'Uds death, he kissed her at the door: Have I found you Lady? But mum.


Sir Cor. Hark you Mocko, you must go and invite my Lady Meriday to Sup with
us; tell her my Lady is never well but in her company.


Mock. What if you invited Sir Isaac Jealous, he is so melancholy since his
Wife and he are parted.


Sir Cor. Do as you are bid, let him alone: I Will have no Cuckold sup in my
House to Night.


Mock. It Is a very hot Evening, your Worship will sup in the Garden.


Sir Cor. Why, yes marry, I will Sir; what of that?


Mock. Why, your Worship was ever as good as your word, keep the Cuckolds out
of doors, and lay a Cloth for my Lord in the Arbor. [Exit


Sir Cor. I have been about a Project these three months, Fido.


Fido. What is it, Sir?


Sir Cor. To compose a Book of my Wives Virtues; a Pattern for all that marry.


Fido. That will do well, Sir: I have another too for you; but that we'll
discourse as we go.

Conceit and Confidence are Juglers born;
One grafts in Air, the other hides the real Horn. [Exit.

ACT III.
Enter Sir Cornelius like a Friar, Fido. Sir Cor. AM I fitted Fido, am I fitted?


Fido. To the life, Sir; and able to cheat suspicion: and so like Father
Anthony the Confessor, that I protest there is not more semblance in a pair of
Eggs; an Apple cut in half, is not so like.


Sir Cor. Well, you have counseled me to this, and I in this habit shall know
the Core of her Heart.


Fido. By this time she may be coming; I Will step aside: You Will tell what is
done.


Sir Cor. What, reveal confession? But go your ways; as much as may lawfully be
revealed we will laugh at next meeting.


Fido. Well, much good may you find:

I have raised the storm, let who can lay the wind. [Exit.

Sir Cor. Yonder she comes, I can hardly forbear blushing; but I must have a
care of discovery.


Enter Politia. Polic. Hail Father.


Sir Cor. Welcome my chaste Daughter.


Polic. Death having taken my Father Joseph, to you I fall for absolution.


Sir Cor. Empty then my Daughter that Vessel of thy Flesh of all the Dregs.


Polic. Since last I confessed my first Sin was, That my Tailor, not making my
Now Gown to my mind, in an unchristian Passon I bid the Devil take him.


Sir Cor. That was something harsh, yet the more pardonable, because, may be,
your Tailor lies in Hell night by night: Pray to your second.


Polic. Next, in a most savage rage, my Chambermaid putting too much Blew in
her Starch, I most unmercifully broke her Head.


Sir Cor. That was rashly done indeed Daughter: but are you sure the Maids Head
was not broke before?


Polic. No, no: she came to me with never a crack about her.


Sir Cor. These are trivial and light: Have you greater?


Polic. Yes Sir, one.


Sir Cor. One: what should that be, I wonder!


Polic. One yet remains behind of weight and consequence.


Sir Cor. She has trod some Chicken to death, I warrant you.


Polic. Hear me, and let a blush make you look red;
Unseemly I Have abused my Husbands Bed.

Sir Cor. You did ill to drink so hard that Night.


Polic. Alas, you are mistaken; I have lai'n with another Man besides my
Husband.


Sir Cor. How!


Polic. Nay the same way I use to lie with him, but not altogether so often.


Sir Cor. Death and the Devil: You're somewhat broad, but I have a Penance for
your Whoreship. Are you not with Child, Daughter?


Polic. Yes, yes: sure 'twas that Nights work.


Sir Cor. How know you that?


Polic. Alas, by experience, Sir: The kind Fool my Husband wishes all well;
but like a light piece of Gold, he is taken for more than he weighs.


Sir Cor. With Child that charges too: there should follow a zealous
Exhortation, but great Affairs brooks no stay: You are ingeniously sorrow.


Polic. Yes indeed, Sir.


Sir Cor. And resolve to fall no more so?


Polic. No in truth, Sir.


Sir Cor. Then I pronounce you here absolved. Now for your Penance.


Polic. Anything.


Sir Cor. As the Fact seems strange, so blame me not if your Penance be as
strange, though it is easy performed: It Is neither East, Prayer, nor Pilgrimage.


Polic. Let it be what 'twill, I vow the performance.


Sir Cor. Soon at Night, when you are with your Husband at Supper, or any other
way in Public, you shall say aloud to him, You are not this Child's Father, but
such a Man is; naming the right Father as you think was Partner in your Sin.


Polic. Good Sir.


Sir Cor. This is it I expect to have done you know the danger of breaking it;
it is nothing.


Polic. Nothing: Is this your Penance so wondrous easy in performance?


Sir Cor. It Is irrevokable.


Polic. I am silent: Your new Penance may meet a new Performance: Farewell, Sir.

You are the cruell'st e're confessed me before: [Exit.

Sir Cor. And this is a trick to catch a canting Whore. [Exit.


Enter Bawd, Innocentia, Drugeo. Baw. Come Phillis, be not so melancholy, the
Sparks are in view.


Enter Sir Isaac disguised Sir Isa. Good morrow sweet Madam: Oh look how like
the Sun behind a Cloud she beams to give intelligence how it is there.


Baw. You are reciprocally welcome, Sir.


Sir Isa. What, have you brought this young wild Haggard to the Lure.


Baw. Faith Sir, she is a little irregular yet, but time may bring the wonder
about.


Sir Isa. Bless you, sweet Mistress.


Enter Fido. Dru. 'Uds foot, here is another Fleshmonger; I smell a Storm.


Baw. Sir, you are methodically welcome; you must pardon my variety of phrase,
the Courtiers e'ne clog us with good words.


Sir Isa. What Is he?


Baw. Why Sir, it is a German Prince, but a speaks English.


Sir Isa. Did not I charge you to keep her for me? how dare you set her out to
fail?


Baw. Indeed Sir.


Sir Isa. Indeed Sir; Pox of your indeeds Sir. [Kicks her.


Baw. Oh my Sciatica!


Sir Isa. You Sir, she says, you are a German Prince: I cannot help it. [ Kicks
Fido; they draw.


Baw. Nay, good my Lord.


Dru. Good Sir, it is one of the Dukes Chamber.


Fido. Let him be of the Devils Chamber.


Sir Isa. Sirrah, leave the House, or I Will thunder you out.


Dru. Sir, it is madness to stand him.


Fido. Kicked; pray that we meet no more again Sir; still keep Heaven about you.
[Exit.


Innoc. What e're thou art, a good man still go with thee.


Sir Isa. Will you bestow a Cast of your Profession?


Baw. We are vanished, Sir.


Innoc. Oh! what shall become of me? in his eye murder and lust contends.


Sir Isa. Nay, fly not sweet, I am not angry with you; do you know me?


Innoc. Yes Sir, report has given you to be the Lord Generous, but I fear
Fame's a liar.


Sir Isa. Why so, Madam?


Innoc. Were you that Lord, you will not sure be a slave to your Bloods
passion, to haunt such houses as these: I crave your pardon for my language,
Truth has a Forehead free, and in the Tower of her Integrity fits an
unvanquish'd Virgin.


Sir Isa. If you rail upon the place; prithee, how came you hither?


Innoc. By treacherous intelligence, honest men so Ignorant of the way, through
Thieves perils go. This is a Cave of Scorpions and Dragons: Oh turn back!

Toads here engender, it is the Steam of Death,
The very Air poisons a good man's breath.

Sir Isa. Within there.


Baw. Sir, did you call? I hope you found her plyant: Your Coach waits you, Sir.


Enter Bawd, Drudgeo. Sir Isa. You are a rotten Hospital hung with greasy
Satin. [Kicks her.


Baw. Ah! ah me!


Dru. Came this nice piece from France, with a Pox to her?


Baw. If she has not warmed his Stomach, I Will be stead for it. [Exit.


Sir Isa. I have more to say, will you meet me at Sir Cornelius Credulous
house? my intents are virtuous, there I Will discover.

Let me borrow goodness from thy lip, farewell:
Here Is a new wonder, I have met Heaven in Hell. [Exit.

Inno. I know that voice, I dare not think of ill, and I will meet at Sir
Cornelius's house: No, Sir Isaac,

Had Law to this new Love made no denial,
A Chaste Wifes truth shines through the greatest trial. [Exit.

Enter Sir Cornelius, Fido. Sir Cor. Let it be carried with a silent
Reputation, for the credit of the Conclusion: I do not desire to be laughed at,
till my designs are ripe, and she has performed her Penance.


Fido. Is this your Chaste Religious Wife? you see now it is possible for a
cunning Wife to make an Ass of her Husband.


Sir Cor. An Ass; I will prove a contented Cuckold the wisest man in his
company.


Fido. How? Prove you that, Sir.


Sir Cor. Because he knows himself. Mocko, Are all things ready to entertain
our Guess?


Enter Mocko. Mocko. Yes Sir, and by the way I met the Knight Sir Jealousy,
and he and a strange Lady do intend to invite themselves to Supper to you.


Sir Cor. A shall be welcome, he will be fit company.


Fido. No, I fear he wrongs his Wife with idle suspicion; I dare, and will avow
it with my life, Muchcraft keeps before Sir.

[ Enter Muchcraft, Policia. Why don't you, Mocko, keep all well behind?


Sir Cor. I, and then there will be devout Lechery, between Hawk and Buzzard:
Mocko, draw out the Table with the Banquet.

[A Table furnished with all sorts of Horns in Dishes.
Polic. Now fie upon this variety, it is profane; Chastity defend me srom such a
Meeting.


Fido. Why Madam, what is the matter?


Polic. There was a Lady invited to such a Treat, and going home in the dark,
though as Chaste as Night, yet the poor Fellow, her Husband, lost her in a
throng, and the good Soul came home so crushed in the morning.


Enter Sir Isaac. Sir Cor. Sir Isaac, welcome.


Sir Isa. Fido, I am thoroughly sensible of my Ladies Loyalty, and thy true
Honorable Friendship; I beg your pardon for what has past in my folly and
rage, and now could wish my Lady was here, that I might reconcile my self to
her, and obtain her forgiveness for my wronging the Innocent.


Sir Cor. Have a care what you say, Sir Isaac: Pray sit; come, all sit.


Fido. I Will give you a fair occasion to produce the performance of her Penance.


Sir Cor. Go forward, I Will catch occasion by the Forelock.


Fido. Here Is a Health to you, it shall go round.


Sir Cor. It Is a general Health, and leads the rest into the Field.


Mocko. Your Worship breaks Jests, as Serving-men do Glasses, by chance.


Fido. As I was drinking, I was thinking, trust me, how fortunate our kind Host
was to meet with so Chaste a Wife: Good Sir Cornelius, admit Heaven had her.


Sir Cor. Oh, good Sir, do not wound me! Admit Heaven had her! Alas Sir, what
should Heaven do with her?


Fido. Your love makes you passionate; but admit so, what Wife would you choose?


Sir Cor. Were I to choose then, as I would I were; so this were in Barbados, I
would wish Sir, a Wife so like my Lady, that once a Week she should go to
Confession, and to perform the Penance she should run; nay, do naught but dream
on it till it was done.


Fido. There Is a delicate Momento, to put her in mind of her Penance.


Polic. Now you talk of Dreams, Sweetheart, I Will tell you a very unhappy one;
I was a-dream 't last night of Muchcraft.


Sir Cor. Of Muchcraft.


Polic. Nay, I have done with him.


Mocko. Now you shall see the Devil outdone.


Sir Isa. Pray on with your Dream, 'twill be good diversion.


Polic. Bless me, I am e'ne ashamed Chick; but it is no matter, a Dream's a
Dream, and thus it was; methought, Husband, Muchcraft lay with me.


Sir Cor. The best friend at home still, Muchcraft; Could the Devil, Sir,
perform a Penance neater, and save his Credit better? On Wife, a Dream's a
Dream I know.


Polic. Methought I proved with Child, Sweetheart.


Sir Cor. Ay, Bird.


Much. A pox of these Dreams.


Polic. Methought I was brought to bed; and one day sitting in the Gallery, who
should come there to play at Foyls, but thee and Muchcraft.


Sir Cor. Muchcraft and I; do you mark that?


Fido. Ay; and wonder at her neat conveyance on it.


Polic. Playing, methought he hit you a blow on the Forehead; it swelled so,
thou could not see: at which the child cried.


Fido. Excellent Woman at a shift: but I Will have a trick for her. [Exit.


Polic. And my thought at last you came thinking to quiet it, and it cried the
more; whereat pointing to you, away naughty Man, you are not this Child's Father.


Sir Cor. Meaning the Child Muchcraft got?


Polic. The same: And then I waked and kissed you.


Sir Isa. A pretty Dream, and a merry one.


Enter Fido. Fido. Sir, I am told there is one Father Anthony, a holy man, stays
without to speak with you.


Sir Cor. With me, or my Lady.


Fido. Nay, with you, and a business of importance.


Sir Cor. I Will go send him in, and he shall interpret my Ladies dream. [Exit.


Polic. Husband, Sir Cornelius, stay a little.


Mocko. I smell Wormwood and Vinegar.


Fido. She changes color, I must out again. [Exit.


Polic. He will not sure reveal Confession.


Sir Isa. We many times make modest mirth a necessity to produce a Ladies dream.


Much. Would I were in France; how they shoot at us?


Enter Innocentia disguised. Innoc. I am a bold intruder to this house, and am
come in Quest of one my Lord Generous.


Sir Isa. He will be here instantly: it is she, I can hardly forbear discovery;
but I will bridle till Sir Cornelius returns.


Enter Fido, Sir Cornelius like a Friar. Fido. Here Is brave juggling; this Friar
has confessed, that you Lady in your last Confession owned, that Muchcraft had
lain with you; at which your Husband runs mad about the Garden.


Polic. Art mad? deny it, I am undone else.


Mocko. Father Tony, what a Devil do you mean to do?


Sir Cor. I confess it, I deny it; I do any thing, I do every thing, I do
nothing.


Sir Isa. The Friars frantic, and so has wronged the Lady.


Polic. It Is my misfortune still to suffer Sir.


Sir Cor. Did you not see one slip out of a Cloak-bag, in the fashion of a
Gammon of Bacon, and run under the Table among the Hogs?


Fido. He Is mad, he is mad.


Mocko. I, I, a Tyth-Pig was overlaid last night, and he spoke nonsense all the
day after.


Polic. Shall I suffer this in my own house?


Mocko. I Would scratch out his eyes first.


Sir Isa. Faith Madam, the best way is to disrobe this irregular Friar, and lay
him open to all the world: Tear off his holy Weeds.


Much. Now my frantic Brother, had you not better spared your breath?


Polic. And do you keep counsel no better? we'll ease you of your Orders.


Mocko. Nay, let me have a hand in it; I Will tear with more zeal than a Puritan
would a Surplice.


Polic. See what it is to accuse when you are mad; I confess again to you, this
man did lie with me.


Mocko. And I brought him to her Chamber.


Fido. A ha house! this Sir Cornelius!


Sir Cor. How Dreams do fall out true, Wife?


Polic. Oh, good Sir, I crave you pardon.


Sir Cor. What say you, Muchcraft?


Much. You have run best Sir, vain it is to defend,
Craft sets forth swift, but still fails in the end.

Sir Cor. You brought him to her Chamber, Sir.


Mock. Oh Sir, I was merely inveagl'd.


Much. Lust is still like a midnight Meal, after our violent drinkings:

It Is swallowed greedily, but the Course being kept,
We are sicker when we wake, than e're we slept.

Sir Cor. You shall to Flanders to a Monastery, and spend your days reclusive.


Polic. Your Doom is just; no Sentence can be given
Too hard for her, plays fast and loose with Heaven.

Sir Cor. I will buss thee, and bid fair weather after thec. But for you,
Sirrah.


Mock. Sir, I brought but flest to flesh, and you do as much when you bring
your Meat to your Mouth.


Sir Cor. You Sirrah, at a Carts Tail shall be whipe through the City: I am a
Justice of Peace, and will see it done.


Mock. There Is my dream out already; but since there is no remedy but the
Whipping cheer must close up my stomach: I will request a Note from your Hand
to the Carman, to entreat him to drive apace, I shall never endure it else.


Sir Isa. 'Twas a sine Penance; but Oh the Art of Woman in the performance!


Sir Cor. It Is nothing, had she bin in her great Grannums place:

Had not the Devil first began the Sin,
And cheated her, she would have cheated him.

Sir Isa. Now if my Innocentia was but here to clear my grief, then all our
Joys were complete.


Innoc. Then here she stands spotless and innocent Heaven can testify, and all
good men cannot deny.


Fido. I Will add my Life and Sword to justify she is a matchless piece of
virtue, and so receive her.


Sir Isa. I am easily persuaded to it, for I have made a trial on it my self, and
found her all Excellence: Oh pardon me.


Innoc. I do; and pray Heaven may: And now,
Receive me just, both in my Life and Vow.

Sir Isa. Vice for a time may shine and Virtue sigh;
But truth like Heavens seen, plainly do reveal,
And scourge or crown, what darkness did conceal. [Exit.

FINIS.
The PROLOGUE.
JUst so a Crack, first vent'ring on the Sin,
Does with reluctance and fear begin.
As we Gallants (when such as you are here)
Produce our homely Cate's plain country Cheer.
But yet we scorn to do like some that write
Make use of Art, to raise your Appetite:
And make you think they have prepared a Feast,
When it is but Husks and Element at best.
No; we acknowledge we have nothing here
Worthy your least acceptance can appear.
Yet such as our poor Fate has kept in store,
We freely give, and wish we could give more.
And as the Persian Monarch when distressed,
Swore filthy Puddle-Water was the best
Pleasantest Drink he ever tasted: So,
Since ripe Town-Wit does not in the Country grow:
We humbly hope for once these Green Fruits may,
If not suffice, your Appetite allay;
And be accepted of.
But if our Fate you otherwise decree,
We must submit without reluctance.
And in our Ruin we shall still rejoice,
That such as You, 'twas, gave the Casting Voice.
The EPILOGUE.
WEll, Gentlemen, you have heard my Dreadful Doom,
In a dull Nunnery I must now consume
My Blooming Youth; and watch, and fast, and pray,
To take the Guilt of my past sins away.
But faith, Gallants, I Will e'ne appeal to you,
It Is damnably unjust, and cruel too:
Because I once obliged a Friend, or so;
Must I to Eternal Penance therefore go?
Must I, because I have to some been kind,
For ever be secluded from Mankind,
And those sweet dear delights we reap in Love,
And pine my self away? -- Not I by Jove.
Thanks to my Stars, our Sex as yet is free,
Kind England grants us Christian Liberty;
And some of you, no doubt, would be so good,
To pity and relieve poor Flesh and Blood:
Nay, it is but a just Tribute due to Beauty,
For you did first debauch us from our duty;
You subtly teach us first to go astray,
And, would ye, would ye, cast us then away?
No Faith, I Am sure ye dare not *
For if you once begin to sham us so,
'I'would make us Wives, e'ne downright honest grow;
And then, alas, what would become of you?
You Would find but little amorous work to do:
Then 'faith reverse my Sentence; if you don't,
When e're you would do the Feat, be sure we wont.

