THE LIFE OF THE Most Illustrious Monarch Almanzor: And of the several
Revolutions of the Mighty Empire of the CALIPHS, And of the African KINGDOMS.
Together with the History of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors.

Composed in Arabic by Abulcacim Tariff Abentariq, one of the Generals in that
Spanish Expedition; and Translated into Spanish by Michael de Luna, Interpreter
to Philip the Second.

Made English by an Eminent Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown, without Temple Bar, and Isaac Cleave, next to
Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, 1693.

THE PREFACE OF Abulcacim Tariff Abentariq.
PRaised and Glorified be, for evermore one sole God In Arabic, Alhaliq,
Alhadin.
, and Creator of all things, whose Reign is without beginning, and without
middle, as well as without end. The Being from whence proceeds all Beings: The
first and only cause that subsists of it self, and gives motion to all others,
which it causes to act through incomprehensible Resorts, moving as it pleases,
the Hearts of all Men, and particularly that of Kings; to accomplish by them,
as second causes upon Earth, what Providence has resolved on from all Eternity
in Heaven; who punishes him that merits it by his Justice, and predestines
whomever he pleases by his Mercy, seeing written together, and of one and the
same date, the past, present and future, in the great Book of his infinite
knowledge.

To this great God do I make my humble Addresses, to obtain the force I shall
need to write exactly and truly, In Arabic Miusch, that is without doubt,
Majah, Invention, by reason he has done it without any forging.
The History of the Conquest of Spain, and the Wars occasioned by the Death of
Caliph Aboulvalid Almanzor, not only in that great Kingdom, but in Africa, and
throughout the whole extent of the Arabians: first of all among the Princes his
Children, and afterward among the Governors of all his Kingdoms; who after
having revoltev against their King, waged War upon one another, about the
division of that great Empire. As I will add nothing of my self to such great
events, save such considerable matters as occurred in those times; I neither
expect nor merit Honor or Profit: I only require of him that shall read what I
am going to write, that he would pray God to teach me what I ought to do for
his service; and that he would supply what is not in me by his Grace: And
indeed I am well assured of being blamed for having undertaken so vast a
design, and that several will find (as it is true) that it required both more
lofty and more polished Genuisses than mine, In Arabic Each meallalhimar,
Highland.
to give the necessary Weight and Authority to so great a Work. But after
having agreed with them in this, they will allow me to tell them the Reasons
that made me take Pen in Hand; and perhaps, they will be satisfied when I shall
tell them that I was present in that War, from the first day that General
Tariff entered Spain with Count Julian, until that he had finished that
Conquest; and that there was no Battle nor Occasion, but whereat I was in
Person, excepting the Sieges of Carmona, and of Merida; by reason that at that
time, I was in the Province of Grenada, with that great Captain.

Thus I may say, that I have been an Eyewitness of most of the things whereof
I speak; and that as for those I have not seen in all times, I have had the
Curiosity to be informed of them from Persons who could know them better; as
from the Principal Officers and Generals of Armies, who have themselves given
me the Letters and Memoires whereof I make mention in this History, that I
might be accordingly provided for the writing it one time or other.

Wherefore I may hope that those as shall take the pains to read it, instead of
Wondering at my Boldness, will con me thanks for my Ni acha mila, Inclination.
Good Will, and will have some indulgence for the faults as shall doubtless, in
great numbers occur therein, when they shall consider that there is no Body in
the World exempt from them, and that we ought to mind our own, before we judge
of those of others; nay, some there will be that will find there would have
been much more reason to have blamed me, had I not made any Memoires of all I
had seen, than to have made them such as they are; and the greatest Critics
will be obliged to own, That if all Authors that undertake to write History,
had like me, had some part in the Events they describe, their Works would be
much better received by the Public, and not be, as they are, for the most
part, full of Falsities and Uncertainties.

I make no Difficulty to speak in this manner, for as at the very moment that I
write these great things, there are still People of that time, that, as well as
me, have seen the greatest part of them, and who can give me the lie, if I do
not relate them according as they passed? I shall content my self with taking
them to witness of the truth; and I willingly submit my self to their Censure.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
SInce the Novelty of the matter, and the Form of this ensuing History, do
possibly require something to be said for its better Illustration, I shall a
little stress upon thy Patience, Gracious Reader, by so modish a Transgression
as that of a Preface. A man seldom arrives at a Delicate Entertainment without
running the Gauntlet of a bundance of Formality; seldom gets to Court without
standing the Brunt of continual Ceremony; nor to the Enjoyment of a Mistress
without brushing through a Confounded deal of VVooing and Riffling: And yet
without being an Epicure, Ambitious, or a Lover; if the Scene be new, whatever
trouble it may have cost him, he finds his satisfaction. Now this is matter to
urge for my Excuse in the present instance: For undoubtedly, hardly has there
ever been such very considerable Occurrences and Revolutions in the World as
those here described, and yet with which we are less acquainted: Thus the
Learned, as well as others, will have wherewithal to gratify their Curiosity,
and augment their Knowledge. This is abundantly made out by the Translator, in
the Dissertation he had annnex'd: But he going into France this Summer, and
leaving his Copy with a Friend, that Friend handed it to the Press; and it was
agreed it would make the Compleater Book, were the Dissertation adjoined to the
second and last Volume; though it proves the Truth of this History, by
conferring it with the History of Spain, and several Arabian, Turkish, and
Persian Manuscripts. His absence must at the same time Apologize for some,
perchance, unpolished passages, which he would have refined had they passed his
Review; which possibly, so far from being Blemishes, like Moles, rather
heighten the Beauty.

But bating such small slips, what can be of more importance, than an account
both of one of the greatest and least known Heroes that was ever in the World,
as was that Famous Arabian Monarch Almanzor; who after having taken Damascus,
and Conquered the greatest part of Persia, and the Indies, rendered himself
Master of all Africa that was known at that time; and whose Generals, having
reduced Spain in subjection to him, could hardly curb themselves from passing
the Pyrenees, and undertaking the Conquest of France, before they had received
orders from their Master for that purpose. Yet do not our Historians so much as
agree upon this mighty Princes Name, of the time when he Reigned, nor of the
Year when the Moors passed the Straight.

But the Principal cause of our little acquaintance with this, and other the
Histories of the Eastern Princes, is the Ignorance of the Arabic, Persian,
Turkish, and Mauritanick Languages, which hinders us from being so Critical as
to know the good, from bad Books, written in those Tongues; and the difficulty
there is, not only in understanding them aright, but in reading them also
aright; insomuch, that after many Years Study, few People but do at length
desist.

Wherefore we must needs own our selves the more indebted to Michael de Luna,
for having taken the pains to Translate Abulcacim's Works into Spanish; since
this single History may stand in Competition with all those of the Greeks and
Romans. And indeed, the Circumstances of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors, in
the Year 712 of our Lord, are so curious, and the Life of the Caliph Almanzor,
under whom this great Event happened, so fine, that Abulcacim Abentari, who
accompanied Tariff and Muca throughout that whole Expedition, may be said to
Challenge more Credit than Arrian, who only writ after the Memoires of Ptolomy
and Aristobulus, who attended Alexander in his; and that he has all the
Qualifications necessary to merit the Character of the most perfect of
Historians.

Now to show the Authentickness of the Arabic Original, and the Spanish
Version, many of the most Eminent Spanish Authors, as Pedrasa, Rodrigo Caro,
Bleda, and others, Quote and Commend Abulcacim Tariff, as an Author the most
worthy of Credit they knew: And as for Michael de Luna, his Translator, as he
was a Citizen of Grenada, whence the Moors had not been long driven, he could
know by Tradition many things that had relation to this History: And in all
probability having been chosen by Philip the Second, to be Interpreter of the
Arabic Tongue; and having doubtless had a great part in the Scrutiny made
after Arabic Books, that composed the greatest part of the Escurial Library,
he must have seen and examined all those that speak of the same subject; and
that he would not have chosen it to have given it to the Public, if he had not
judged it more worthy of it than all the rest.

We shall not descend to justify this History particularly, referring that to
the Dissertation in the second Volume; wherein it is compared, and put to the
Test with the most Authentic Oriental Manuscripts. Besides, we have been but
too rude already, in detaining thee so long, when the Entrance is so alluring.
History is the Mistress of all Mankind; a Mistress that Refines and Diverts the
Ingenious, new Polishes the gross and uncouth, and has Reformed me; and so, out
of Gratitude, my Darling. But through an overgreat Public Spirit, I could no
longer deny the English World the Possession of so Ravishing a Mistress; and
so have ground to hope that this piece of Generosity will meet with such a due
Acceptance, as may quicken me to hasten out the next, and indeed more
entertaining Volume. And so Farewell.

A TABLE Of the Chapters contained in the First Part.
PART I. Containing the Life of Don Rodrigo, King of Spain. The Conquest of
that Kingdom under the Caliph Valid Almanzor: And the Wars which his Death
occasioned in Africa, in Europe, and Asia, between his Children and his
Generals.
Chap. 1. A Nagilda, King Acosta's Widow, withdraws, with the Prince her Son,
to Cordoua. Rodrigo invites her to bring him back to Court to assist at a
Festival. She goes thither, and departs thence forthwith. page 1 Chap. 2.
Rodrigo causes the Prince Don Sancho to be taken into Custody. His Mother frees
him out of Prison, and goes with him into Africa. 7 The Letter of Queen
Anagilda, the Prince Don Sancho's Mother, to the King D. Rodrigo. 11 Chap. 3.
Rodrigo causes most of the Fortresses of his Kingdom to be dismantled; and
commits several Violences, that make him incur the anger of God. 19 Chap. 4.
Rodrigo falls in love with Florinda, called La Caux by the Arabs. She signifies
to Count Julian, her Father, then in Africa, the violence done her by this
Prince. 25 Florinda's Letter to Count Julian, her Father. 27 Chap. 5. Count
Julian being thoroughly informed of the outrage done to his Danghter, resolved
to be Revenged, and to deliver Spain to the Moors. 30 Muca's Letter to Valid
Almanzor. 32 Almanzor's Letter to Muca. 35 Chap. 6. Rodrigo enters a Cave that
was at the Gates of Toledo, and thinking to find Treasures therein, finds only
Presages of the loss of Spain. 38 Chap. 7. Muca sends Tariff and Count Julian
into Arabia, to give an account to Almanzor, of the success of the Voyage they
had made into Spain. 46 Almanzor's Letters Patents. 49 A Prediction made by a
Religious. 55 Chap. 8. Great Preparations for War made by Rodrigo, in all the
parts of his Dominions. 59 Chap. 9. Muca passes into Spain, and joins with
Tariff. Rodrigo puts himself at the head of his Army, gives them Battle, and
loses it. 64 Chap. 10. General Tariff, causes search to be made through all the
Country for D. Rodrigo, and promises great rewards to whom ever shall deliver
him dead or alive into his hands. 72 Chap. 11. The Amors of Mahomet Gilhair
with the Queen, who induces him to turn Christian, and then Marries him. 76
Chap. 12. Tariff makes himself master of the Province of Grenada, and of the
Snowy Mountains, called by the Spaniards of the Sun, and of the Air. 84 Chap.
13. The Conquests of Muca, and his return to Cordoua. 91 Chap. 14. The
Conjunction of the two Generals, and their entrance into Castile. 103 Chap. 15.
The March of the two Generals toward Valentia and Murtia, and their Return to
Cordoua. 109 Chap. 16. The Order that Tariff left in Spain, before his
Departure thence. 113 A Letter from King Pelage, to General Tariff Abenziet.
120 A Letter from Tariff Abenziet, to Caliph Valid Almanzor, Emperor of the
Moors. 122 Chap. 17. Pelage takes the City of Gixa from the Moors, and burns
it. 125 Chap. 18. The Unhappy end of Count Julian, of the Countess his Wife,
and of Florinda his Daughter. 131 Chap. 19. Muca being vexed that Almanzor did
not send for him as well as Tariff, dispatches his Brother to him with the
description of all Spain. 136 A Letter from Muca, Viceroy of Africa, to Caliph
Almanzor, Emperor of the Arabians. 138 A Letter from Valid Almanzor, to the
King of Thunis. 145 The King of Thunis's Answer. 147 Chap. 20. Adilbar goes to
invest the City of Hispalis with his Army, but is constrained to raise the
Siege, and return to Cordoua. 149 Chap. 21. Adilbar makes a second Attempt upon
Hispalis, and is as Successless as before. 156 Chap. 22. Adilbar goes to
Valence, defeats the Governor of that Province, and has him Beheaded. 165
Chap. 23. Almanzor gives Tariff a place in his Council, and chooses him for his
Ambassador Extraordinary, for the Conclusion of the Prince his Sons Match,
with the King of Thunis's Daughter. 168 Letters Patents, of Almanzor's
Demission in favor of his Son. 171 Chap. 24. Abraham Amcary goes to fight
Abenbukar; defeats him, and has him beheaded. 180 Chap. 25. King Aboulvalid
assembles a great Army in Africa, and marches against his Brother Abraham,
gives him Battle, wherein his Brother is killed. 185 King Aboulvaiid's Letter
to Muca, Viceroy of Morocco and Africa. 188 Chap. 26. Adilbar, Viceroy of
Spain, leads his Army into Biscaya, against Pelagius, and thence returns
without doing ought. 195 Chap. 27. Of the Death of the King of Thunis, and of
the great Wars Aboulvalid was obliged to make to render himself Master of that
Kingdom. 200 Chap. 28. Aboulvalid makes Muca Generalissimo of his Armies, and
after having reduced the Kingdom of Thunis under his Obedience, returns into
Arabia. 206 Aboulvalid's Letter to Muca Abenzairi, Generalissimo in his Armies.
207 Chap. 29. The Oath of Allegiance which Aboulvalid causes the States to take
to Jacob Almanzor his Son. 214 Chap. 30. Aboulvalid's Death; who leaves to one
of his Kinsmen, called Mahomet Amcari, the Regency of his State, during his
Sons Minority. 221 Chap. 31. The Regent Amcari, meaning to bereave Prince
Almanzor of his Life, is discovered and punished for his Perfidy. 230 Chap. 32.
Prince Almanzor's Death; the Queen his Mother dies of Grief, in a short time
after, and Ali Abilhachek causes himself to be Proclaimed Caliph. 235
PART I.
Containing the Life of Don Rodrigo, King of Spain. The Conquest of that
Kingdom under the Caliph Valid Almanzor: And the Wars which his Death
occasioned in Africa, in Europe and Asia, between his Children and his Generals.
Luna and all the Spanish Authors put Mira mamolin, instead of Emir el mumenin,
Prince of Believers. Almanzor signifies August, Victorious. Caliphe, Vicar,
Successor.

CHAP. I.
Anagilda, King Acosta's Widow, withdraws, with the Prince her Son, to
Cordoua. Rodrigo invites her to bring him back to Court to assist at a
Festival. She goes thither, and departs thence forthwith.

IN the Year 91 of the Hegira, Hegira signifies Series, from whence the Arabs
begin to reckon their years.
Spain was governed by a King called Rodrigo, of the Race of the Goths; a
People that came into that Country from the farthest parts of the North, and
who made profession of the Christian Religion. The year 91 of the Hegira falls
in with the year 712 of our Lord.
This Kingdom did then enjoy a profound Peace, and was as much under his
subjection, as Arabia could be formerly to the Great Almanzor, our Sovereign
Lord. Insomuch that this unhappy Prince (for we may well term him so) had the
freedom to abandon himself to all the Vices, whereof Idleness is commonly the
source.

What curbed him, was the young Prince Don Sancho, Son to the late King Acosta,
his Eldest Brother; to whom by consequence Har Malmucq, Royal Scepter.
the Crown was devolved after his Death, and which had been only conferred upon
him until the Majority of his Nephew. But he was loath to resign so precious a
Pledge, and his thoughts were wholly taken up in contriving the means to
appropriate the whole Authority to himself; which to him did not seem
sufficiently Charming, as long as it was only borrowed.

The more his Nephew became fortified in Body and Mind, the more this unnatural
Uncle became peevish and uneasy. The Affection which all the Grandees bore
him, much before the time giving him a Aldahir, to show another thing outwardly.
Jealousy, which he had much ado to dissemble.

Queen Anagilda having sooner than any other, perceived the ill will he bore
her Son, seldom suffered him out of her sight, and only placed such persons
about him, as of whose fidelity she was well assured. But, in short, the
Affection she had for Don Sancho making her shrift into all Rodrigo's
pernicious Designs, and to foresee the storm that was suddenly like to come
pouring upon her Head; she asked Rodrigo's Permission to leave Toledo, the
usual Abode of the Kings of Castille, to retire to a City in Andalousia, called
Cordoua, whither she took along her Son, and all her Household. This Resolution,
which Rodrigo durst not thwart, made him harbor new and stronger Distrusts: He
every moment fancied that his Nephew had attained to his years of Majority;
that the Scepter was to be put into his Hands, and of an absolute King as he
was, become his Subjects Alcabir, submitted, subjected.
Pupil: And looking on this fall as a thing worse than Death, he found no
better means to screen himself from it, than to dispatch as soon as possible
Don Sancho out of the World.

To bring this Design the more easily and secretly about, he caused a Turnament
to be proclaimed at Toledo; where several days were wholly spent in the
Preparations for so great an Entertainment: And as all People were invited to
be there on the day it was to begin, he sent a Courier on purpose to Cordoua,
earnestly to entreat Queen Anagilda to Honor it with her Presence, and with
that of the Prince her Son. This Princess ever laboring under the
apprehensions of some Treachery, at first waved with Excuses the undertaking of
this Journey; but at last, being pressed by the Messengers that were sent upon
the heels of one another, she consulted those in whom she thought she might
confide: They all agreed, That the Diffidence she harbored of her
Brother-in-Law was well grounded, but that it became her not to suffer it to be
perceived: That Rodrigo would easily guess the Reason why the Prince went not
to Court, and so might be urged to Extremities, for which they ought not to
give him any occasion.

Immediately after, Orders being given for the Departure, and the rumors
thereof being spread about Andalousia, several Persons of Quality came to ask
the Queen leave to attend her; and she being willing to be accompanied by the
most People she could, with joy accepted their offers. Thus did she repair with
a very numerous, brisk and stately Train into the Province of Castille; at her
arrival at Toledo, she was there received with all the Honors due to her, and
found the Court extraordinary full.

She was lodged, with all her Train, in a Stately Palace, wherein she had
hardly remained the time necessary to recreate herself after the fatigue of so
great a March, but that the day appointed for the solemnity of that Festival
being come, she was conducted in Ceremony, upon Maus^^s, a Scaffold.
a Scaffold erected and spread with Tapistries magnificently, in a place where
the Prince D. Sancho sat in the middle, having the King his Uncle on his Right
Hand, and the Queen his Mother on his Left.

As soon as this Entertainment was over, (it having been performed with much
Joy and Magnificence) notwithstanding the earnest entreaties and instances made
by the King D. Rodrigo, to oblige Anagilda to stay some days to divert herself
in his Court, she remained fixed in the Resolution she had taken; and alleging
the best Reasons she could bethink herself of, she took her leave of him, and
returned in all haste to Cordoua, with her Son, and all the Company she had
brought along.

Rodrigo being extremely vexed, that so sudden a departure had robbed him of the
means of executing his perverse Intentions, and touched to the quick, that in
the Journey Don Sancho had taken to Toledo the Grandees of the Court, the
Governors of Places, the Prelates, and the People Alhamemma, the Common People,
the Commons.
had treated him in his own Presence, as their real King; he knew not what
course to take to render himself the sole Master of Spain: He rolled a thousand
things in his mind, but paused not upon one without finding a thousand
Difficulties in it, and out of which he could, with any likelihood, promise
himself a good issue. At last he resolved upon what we shall see in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Rodrigo causes the Prince Don Sancho to be taken into Custody. His Mother
frees him out of Prison, and goes with him into Africa.

ROdrigo, after having missed of so fair an occasion to rid himself of his
Nephew, was too much dejected for to be able to resolve on any thing in
himself. But it was not sufficient to find out expedients, there needed such
People as were capable of making use of them. Astolpho was the man of all the
Court in whom he had the most Confidence; wherefore upon him did he unburden
himself of a Am^, the Care, the thing.
Secret, that lay so much the heavier upon him, as that he meant to have kept
it to himself; and offered him at the same time all the Gold and Money that was
in his Power, and the Governments of the most considerable Places of his
Kingdom, if he could help him to bring about his design.

Astolpho wanting neither Industry nor Malice, advised him to practice false
Witnesses, that might charge Don Sancho with some great Crime: Representing to
him. That when he should cause him to be confined under the color of Justice,
no body could find fault therewith; and that during the Prince's Imprisonment,
it would be easy for him, either to put him to death, or to render himself in
such manner Master of the Kingdom, that it would be impossible to divest him of
its Administration.

The King very much relishing this Contrivance, was not long without causing D.
Sancho's Process to be made; who by the Informations, was found charged with
Crimes as black and notorious, as needed to authorize the clapping him up into
Prison.

Astolpho having received the Commission for this purpose, departed from
Toledo, without the least suspicion being had of the occasion of his Journey,
and reaching Cordoua before it could in the least get Wind, he entered the
Prince's Chamber, whom he found sleeping, in perfect security from any such
like Treason; and passing with all expedition across the City, that dreamt not
in the least how matters went, he carried him through the Mountains making the
Desert, that separate Castille from Andalousia, into a little Town that may be
seen from Cordoua, The Tower of Stone in Sierra Merena, Land or Mountain,
brown, black.
from which it is not far distant; and is called The Tower of Stone.

The Queen, amazed at so unexpected a Blow, was for some while without knowing
what to resolve on; but as she had more Courage than her Sex does usually
afford, and quickly suspected how the case stood, she resolved at any rate to
free her Son out of so great a Danger. Insomuch, that having caused five and
twenty of the bravest men of her household to take Horse and Arms, as well as
five and thirty others, whom she ordered to follow her on foot. She herself
went with this small Troop after those that carried away her Son, whom she
overtook in that Tower, I have newly mentioned.

At first Astolpho meant to have stood upon his Defense, but having vigorously
attacked him, and killed all his Men, she herself took him Prisoner, and
brought her Son back to Cordoua.

She at first designed to have fortified herself in that Town, and to have
provided it with all things necessary, but fearing Rodrigo might come to
besiege her there, she packed up all she had most precious, and having
assembled her most trusty Servants, she withdrew to the most Western part of
Spain, into a place called the Algesires, belonging to Count Julian; the same
that a little while after occasioned the loss of Spain. Not finding herself
even there in sufficient security, she thought the best course would be to put
the Sea between her and D. Rodrigo, and go seek in a foreign Country for
succors to conquer her own. This Resolution Ascald, Design, Resolution.
being taken, she caused Astolpho's Nose and Ears to be cut off, as a Traitor
to his King; and passed the Straight, after having sent him back to the King
her Brother-in-Law, with a Letter, which, Translated out of Spanish into
Arabic, is as follows.

This Letter was found in King D. Rodrigo's Cabinet at Cordoua, and as it was
translated out of Spanish into Arabic, by Abentariq, was again put into the
tongue out of which it was originally turned.
The Letter of Queen Anagilda, the Prince Don Sancho's Mother, to the King D.
Rodrigo.
The Unhappy Anagilda, to the Traitor, D. Rodrigo. Health to him that does not
deserve it.
THy Natural Malignity, and the desire thou have, at any rate, to Reign, must
needs have plunged thee into a strange Blindness, for to render thee so unjust
as to go about to practice false Witnesses against an Innocent; so perfidious
as to fail in thy Loyalty to thy Lord; so unnatural as to rob thy Nephew of his
Life.

All the Laws of Knighthood, as well as those of humanity, do not suffer the
revenging one's self on those that have meant us the most mischiefs, as soon as
they can no longer do us any: Nay, and Generosity requires that we pardon them,
tho they have done us hurt; but the least of these Virtues is too great for
thee: Thou will not so much as know what these same Duties are, and do not
mind the praises that are gained by fine Actions; since that instead of being
for the Truth, which is the friend of God, thou make it thy whole business to
stifle it, and to declare thy self against it; vowing the ruin of him that
never had the least thought to offend thee; and who, on the contrary, has had
so much confidence in thee, that he put himself under thy Protection.

Thou would do much better to make War upon thy Enemies, and conquer some one
of their Provinces, than to attack a Woman and a Child; wherein thou have not
any Honor to acquire; and wherein thou can not miss of ruining it in this
World, to lose after that thy Soul in the other. Learn to harbor no longer
such Hiaan, bad Design.
empty and such Criminal Designs; and think of leading no longer such a
disorderly Life as that thou leadest; while that God, who only requires the
Taube, Penitence, Change.
Conversion of the Sinner, may still grant thee Mercy.

Do thou think that thy Reign will last always? Do thou not know that only
that of God has no end? That all the Kings of the Earth are but Dust; that
they must one day become Dust again; and that when after thy Death, thou shall
appear before his Tribunal, thou will only carry along with thee thither, the
Good and Evil thou have done in this Life.

I Challenge thee in his Name, and summons thee to restore the Crown to whom it
belongs, and to rest satisfied with thy Condition. If thou do not do it,
assure thy self, that though I am a Woman, and weak by Consequence, Truth shall
strengthen me, and make me triumph, with the help of God, over all thy
Artifices Algadr, Treason.
; that will all vanish into smoke: The Innocence of my Son, as well as my own,
will be Chains of Iron, which all thy efforts can never break; and the Calumny
and Treason wherein thou would involve us, will last no longer than threads of
rotten Flax: whereas the justice of my Cause being firm and stable as Marble,
will appear in the Eyes of all the World, as clear and as pure as Cristal. It
is easy for thee to judge of the little reason thou have, by the little help
Heaven gives thee. Thou sendest to take an Innocent with a Troop of Guards, as
if he had been a Malefactor: God has broke those bonds; and if thou doubtst it,
thou need only to see the Nose and Ears of him, to whom thou gave thy
Commission for that purpose, who will inform thee whether thou or we have the
best Right. I will put an end to my Letter; but take this along, That I am not
at all resolved to put an end to either my Cares, or my Endeavors against
thee; from which, on the contrary, I will never desist, till such time as that
I am fully Revenged.

From the Algesires, on the 23 day of January, in the year 750 of the The era
of Caesar; from whence the Spaniards began to reckon their years is thirty
eight years before our Lord.
era of Caesar. The Superscription of the Packet was to D. Rodrigo, the
Tyrant and Usurper of D. Sancho his Nephews Kingdom.




Rodrigo in the mean while, thinking he had taken his measures aright,
flattered himself with the hopes of suddenly seeing that Prisoner arrive, whom
he had so great a longing to rid himself of; but strangely was he surpised,
when he saw his dear Astolpho come all disfigured as he was, disclaiming
against, and cursing his ill fortune* He was much more so, when having asked
him, Who had put him into that condition? He acquainted him how that having
taken Don Sancho, and bringing him along toward Toledo, the Queen his Mother
issued out of Cordoua, with abundance of Horse and Foot, and had used such
expedition, that she had overtaken him on the way, had cut all his Party to
pieces, whatever resistance he had been able to make, to endeavor to hinder
her from rescuing his Prisoner from him; and that she would, doubtless, have
put him to Death as well as the rest, had she not thought fit to reserve him to
carry him this Letter; which he did not expect would be over welcome: The King,
after having taken it, asked what was become of Anagilda and her Son? And he
having replied, That they had taken Shipping for Africa; he was so sorely
grieved, that his Affliction had like to have made him run mad. He went and
shut himself up in his Closet, that he might so with the more freedom give a
loose to the vexation he had for the unhappy event of his Enterprise. He could
not then forbear opening the Queens Letter; and as Truth has great force, he
felt in that moment some Repentance for what he had done. But Ambition being
the ruling Passion of his Soul Faqr, Mind, thought.
, the remorse of his Conscience did not trouble him so much, as the fear he had
lest Anagilda should go demand succors of the Moors against him. This made him
send in all haste for Count Julian, to whom belonged the Castle of the
Algesires, where she had resided for some time before she went into Africa,
that he might by him discover the intention of her Journey into those parts.
This Count being come to Court, and having assured the King, that she went away
with a Resolution to prevail with the Moors to wage War upon him, he resolved
to send this Count into Africa, to endeavor to divert this Storm; and to
procure the better welcome for his Letters to Muca, who was then Viceroy for
the Caliph Valid-Almanzor, he accompanied them with a world of Presents
Haddavia, or rather Haddya, Presents.
, and made him the offer of entering into a Treaty of Alliance with his Master.
Anagilda in the mean while falling sick, through Grief rather than fatigue, was
obliged to stay for for some time at a City of Africa called Tangier; by which
means Count Julian had seen the Viceroy, and presented him with the Jewels
sent him by Rodrigo, before he had heard talk of her. Muca received him with
much Honor; and after having treated him several times in a House he had
caused to be prepared for that purpose, he made him answer, That he could not
of his own head resolve upon any thing of what Rodrigo required; but that if he
would stay some time, he would write to the Caliph Almanzor, who would,
undoubtedly, receive in due manner the advances of so great a King; and would
do all that should be most fitting, and most suitable for both.

During these Transactions, Rodrigo received Tidings, that Anagilda and D.
Sancho were both dead at Tangier; which inspired him with mighty Joy, seeing
himself at the point he had so long wished to be at; and believing he had now
nothing more at all to fear. He nevertheless imagined that the Amity of the
Moors might be of some use to him: For which reason, he wrote to Count Julian,
that notwithstanding the Prince's Death, he should nevertheless remain in
Africa, to wait the event of his Embassy.

After having taken these Precautions for abroad, his thoughts were now only
bent how to secure all things at home, where were still some Princes that might
dispute the Crown with him. He caused the States to be held at Toledo, where,
D. Sancho's Death being made known, he caused an Oath of Allegiance to be taken
to him by all the Grandees there assembled, as Don Sancho's Lawful Successor to
the Crown. He had likewise his Coronation performed in great Ceremony, and with
all the rejoicing that is wont to be used in such like solemnities. But in the
midst of all this Joy, could not he refrain from laboring under some Disquiet;
and to free himself wholly from it, and to put himself into a posture that he
should not need to dread any thing from any of the Grandees, or any of his
Subjects, the only People he imagined he needed to fear, having learnt the good
success of the African Negotiation; he bethought himself of expedients, whereof
mention shall be made in the following Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Rodrigo causes most of the Fortresses of his Kingdom to be dismantled; and
commits several Violences, that make him incur the anger of God.

IT is very true, and Men have daily but too much Experience of it) that having
once believed Fortune Albatb, Fortune, felicity, perhaps Debetz, whiteness.
propitious, we ought not to expect that it will so long continue: On the
contrary, as it has not any stability; and that it is inconstancy it self; the
more it smiles upon us, the more ought we to distrust it; and often expect that
she delights to invite us, by small baits and allurements, to run after her, to
abandon us afterward, when we shall stand most in need of her succors.

Of this there can be no greater, nor a more illustrious Example found than
Rodrigo: For after having rendered him absolute Master of all Spain, and
procured him to be Crowned King thereof; she took a pleasure in Albufram, loss,
destruction, from the Root. Saram renders it miserable.
despoyling him in a short time, of all she had conferred on him, and tumbled
him from his Throne, by the same means he pretended to make use of to defend
himself on it.

Such of his Subjects as he most distrusted (for he had no longer any
Apprehension from Strangers) were some Grandees, and Governors of the Places
of Andalousia, and of Castile, who had been of D. Sancho's Party. Wherefore he
began to make sure of their Persons; and after having put them to Death, he
caused not only their Castles to be razed, but most of the strong Places of
Spain; reserving to himself only such as seemed to him most necessary for his
own security; wherein he put such men as were wholly at his Devotion. He did
not think this sufficient; He caused Proclamation to be made through all his
Territories, That not any of his Subjects henceforwards should have the
boldness to bear any sort of Arms, nor to keep any in his House; and that all
People should bring them into his Palace, upon pain of Death; imagining that
after the People had thus laid aside the Exercise Alchiad.
of War, and should only addict themselves to Agriculture, his Government would
be much more absolute, and much more quiet.

But the poor Prince was much mistaken, for not being then curbed by any fear,
he abandoned himself to all manner of Irregularities and Dissolutions,
according as I have been told by Spanish Bishops, and other persons worthy of
Credit, of whom I made enquiry, during my abode in that Country: So far as that
he made no difficulty to put the worthiest persons of all his Kingdom to Death,
that he might have his Pleasure with their Wives and Daughters. So loose a Life
occasioned an Universal Disorder: For as Kings are looked upon by their
Subjects as the Models by which they ought to square all their Actions; and
that, indeed, they seldom sail to imitate their Virtues, and still more their
Vices: The bad Example of this Prince passed on to the People, who would needs
equal him in Wickedness and Libertinism; insomuch that we need not wonder at
the punishment God inflicted upon them.

Rodrigo being still young, either out of the desire of perpetuating himself,
which Nature inspires into all Animals Haigua, what has Life: from thence comes
the name of Eve.
; or from that of having lawful Children that might succeed him, which is a
sentiment peculiar to Men; he had a great desire to Marry, but he could not
find out a fitting Match.

At that time was there in the Eastern part of Africa a King called Mahomet
Abhehedin, who had but one Daughter, of an extraordinary Beauty, called The
Spaniards call her Eliatta.
Zahra Abnaliaca: This young Princess walking one Evening upon the Seashore,
with her Maids, and some of her Fathers Servants, it seemed to her so Calm and
Charming, that the fancy took her to go on board a Ship, so to divert herself
upon the Water. Her Attendants, without making over much Reflection upon what
they did, did not divert her from the Design. The Mariners made ready the
Ship, all her Company were eager to go with her on board, and in the merry pin
they all were; they did not mind that they distanc'd themselves a little too
far from the Land, whither they did not trouble their Heads about returning,
while it was in their Power. In the mean while the Wind changing all on the
sudden, the Storm became so great, that being unable to put into any Port of
Africa; they were constrained to abandon themselves to the open Sea; and were
at length drove upon the Coasts of Spain, in a place called Alcapta, Place of
ill luck.
Alcapta by the Arabians, which in that Tongue signifies a Place of ill luck;
and by the Spaniards, Cabodegata; where they were all taken, and made Slaves by
the Christians of that Place. It was easy to see by their Clothes and
Equipage, that they were Persons of great Quality; insomuch that whatever Care
the Moors took to conceal that of the Infanta, Husian, disguise, dissemble.
she was known at length, and brought, with all her Train, to Rodrigo; who
being informed of it, gave order that she should be handsomely received, and
treated in all Places.

He was well made and Gallant, the Princess was Young and Beautiful; insomuch
that Love easily engaged them, and quickly augmented by the Entertainments he
made her, and by the soft Conversations they ever had together. The thing came
at length so far, that the King having offered to Marry, and place the Crown of
Spain upon her Head, provided she would turn Christian; she, without much
trouble, resolved to do so. The Nuptials were performed with great rejoicing
and solemnity. The Men and Women of her Retinue that were minded to be
converted, and stay with their Mistress, had considerable Settlements in Spain;
and those that could not be persuaded to that, returned into Africa, whither
they brought this News. Mahomet being very uneasy for his Daughter, was so
surpised to hear that she had abjured his Faith, that he died of Grief; and by
his Death left the Crown to Avilgualid; who, as his nearest Relation, succeeded
him in his Kingdom. We shall see in the series of this History the unhappy
issue of this Marriage, as well as the Amors of this Prince with Florinda.

CHAP. IV.
Rodrigo falls in love with Florinda, called La Caux by the Arabs. She
signifies to Count Julian, her Father, then in Africa, the violence done her by
this Prince.

THo Rodrigo was married, he led the same life he did before he was so: Resque,
Gallantry.
He nevertheless fell in Love with one of the most beautiful Ladies of his
Court, called Florinda, Count Julian's Daughter; who was at that time in his
African Embassy. She had Wit enough to perceive that the Kings Courtship did
not at all tend to her own Honor, nor to that of her Family, since that it,
doubtless, only aimed at Ravishing her of it; and she had Virtue enough to
receive his fondnesses with much indifference and Modesty; but the more
firmness she exerted, with the more obstinacy did he persevere to overcome it.

Now for the more easy effecting of this his purpose, he made several new
Regulations in his Court: Among other things, he ordered that when he should
eat with his Queen, none but the Ladies of the Palace should serve at Table,
and required them to be dressed finer than ordinary on such days. This being
thus established, one day after Supper, whereat Florinda had served with
others, he so ordered matters, that he caused her to enter a Room void of all
other Company, and following her thither, whatever resistance and screams she
was able to make, he gained of her, at length, by force, what she never would
have granted him.

Being under the utmost Despondency at such an Outrage, and not knowing how
either to be Revenged or Comforted, she resolved to make her Case known to her
Father. In short, after having contrived the most mysterious terms she could
bethink herself of, that they might only be understood by him, she made use of
those of this Letter; which, Translated out of Spanish into Arabic, is as
follows.

Florinda's Letter to Count Julian, her Father.
THe regret I have for the absence of a Father so dear to me as you must needs
be, makes me in Writing to you, seek the Consolation I cannot find, of seeing
you. Not that I mean to send you all the News of the Palace Mabzan, House.
, that ever affords sufficient that deserves your knowledge; this is only to
acquaint you with one, which, though it be already old in this Court, will ever
be new for such a Maid as I; and will ever appear in the Eyes of the whole
World very strange, for such a great Prince as Rodrigo. You must know then, my
dear Father, that I had, heedlesly, left upon a Table the Ring I send you in
this Letter; and was not so careful to lock up close this precious Jewel, which
I esteemed more than my Life, and which you and my Mother had so earnestly
recommended to me: But the King having a desire to it, impetuously threw
himself to take it; and seeing I would not give it him, he drew his Sword Hucan
Almuque, Coutelas Royal.
, and gave it so many hacks, that whatever screams and struglings I used to
hinder him, he has, as you see, cloven it in two, both the Ring and Emerald
enchas'd in it. So vexatious and so unexpected an accident plunges me into so
much confusion, that I cannot explain it further; and makes me conjure you to
remedy it, if possible; for to you only can I have recourse in this matter. My
Mother is very ill, and I still worse. I pray God to preserve you.

From Toledo, the 3 of December, in the Year This Epoch is thirty eight years,
or thereabouts, before the Birth of our Lord.
750 of the era of Caesar.

Count Julian being wise Fahim, Wise.
and prudent, having received this Letter, presently understood his Daughters
meaning; and was so concerned, that, without staying one moment in Africa, he
took leave of Muca, and returned with all expedition to the Algesires. He staid
in his House only the time necessary to give his Wife order to feign her being
sick of grief, for his and her Daughter's absence, and went directly to Court;
where he made no semblance of knowing the least of what had been fignify'd to
him in the Letter; but giving the King an account of his Negotiation, and of
the state he had left all things in in Africa, he represented them to him in
such manner, as made him comprehend that it was necessary for him to return
forthwith thither. The King, after having given him his Expeditions as soon as
he desired them, was very much surpised, when at his taking his leave of him,
the Count asked his permission to carry his Daughter to the Algesires, to stay
some time there with her Mother, who was very ill, and mighty desirous to see
her. But though this went very much against the grain, he could not handsomely
refuse him his Request. And thus the Count went with her to the Algesires,
where he made some days abode. In the following Chapter we shall see the
Resolution he took in this place.

CHAP. V.
Count Julian being thoroughly informed of the outrage done to his Daughter,
resolved to be Revenged, and to deliver Spain to the Moors.

AS soon as the Count was got to his own home, he made Florinda relate more
precisely, and more particularly what she had written to him in obscure terms;
and when he was fully certain of the shame of his Family, and in such sort as
was past all doubt, then was his Grief so much the more sensible, in that he
saw that the person that had done him so great an outrage, was his Lord and
King, from whom he seemed to be under an obligation of enduring all, and that
it was impossible for him to wreak his Revenge.

Wherefore not knowing what to do in this Distress, and not minded, without
mature deliberation, to abandon himself to all that his Passion might suggest,
he, with all possible secrecy, assembled his Relations and Friends, who
interesting themselves in the affront Rodrigo had put upon the Count, and
animating one another to Revenge, after having found that they were not strong
enough to assert their Resentments, unless backed by a foreign Power, they
unanimously resolved that the Count should return into Africa to treat with
Muca; and that they on their parts should abide in their Houses, waiting the
success of his Voyage. After having all embraced one another, and engaged to
keep this Enterprise very secret, the Count took Shipping, with his Wife and
Daughter, and whatever he had of value, which he carried along with him into
Africa. He was very kindly received by the Viceroy, with whom he had struck up
a particular friendship in his Embassy; and told him immediately, That he was
come to him, not on the behalf of the King of Spain as the time before, but on
his own account, to offer him to deliver up all that great Kingdom to the
Caliph Almanzor; and that if he could prevail with him to favor the Party he
had in Spain, Vid. the Note in the Margin of the Title, and the Preface.
he would furnish him with the means of quickly rendering himself Master of that
Realm.

This Proposal was not displeasing to Muca; on the contrary, after mature
examination, and long Conferences with the Count, he found what he said
feasible; and proposed to him to him to go himself to the Caliph, to unfold to
him more particularly the means he had to effect so great an Enterprise; and
for that purpose gave him the following Letter of Credence.

A LETTER.
Praised be God, our Sovereign Lord, the Creator of all things.
TO the most High, most Noble, most Illustrious Emperor of all the Arabian
Nation, and Defender of the Law of God, Valid Almanzor; t^^ whom God Almighty
grant Peace, and all manner of good fortune, as well as to all his Subjects,
and augmentation of Glory and Dominions; as is wished him by his faithful
Servant Muca, under his Authority, and under the Protection of the Almighty God
(to whom alone is due Prayer and Sacrifice) Governor of the Dominions of
Africa: Who writes to you, Sir, to assure you, as his Charge obliges him, of
the Alhana, Peace.
Tranquillity which your Subjects of these Provinces do enjoy; Hana, Repose,
Convenience.
and then about an affair, which will be told you by the Bearer of my Letter,
who is a Christian, and a Spaniard by Nation; but who, nevertheless, shows much
zeal for your Prosperity, and the augmentation of your Empire: He is called the
Count D. Julian, and thinks himself very much offended by an outrage done him
by the King of Spain, D. Rodrigo, who is the nearest Neighbor you have in the
North; and I have found him true and upright in all he told me, insomuch that
you may have credence in him; and, I believe, that if you would grant him the
succors he requires, there will be no great danger, nor great trouble to try
if all he says be true; on the contrary, with the help of God, this may produce
a great good, and contribute to the increase of your Kingdoms; as we all desire
that are your faithful Servants.

From the Palace of Morocco, This Date jumps with the month of December, in the
year 712 of our Lord.
the 3 of the month Dulhises, in the year 91 of the Hegira.

Count Julian going on board a Felucca he had caused to be fitted out on
purpose; and in a short time being arrived in Arabia, where Valid had then his
Residence; he presented himself to him, and gave him Muca's Letter of Credence.
This Prince caused his Council to assemble, to examine a Proposal of such great
consequence. The Count was there heard with great attention: He had a thousand
Difficulties put to him, which, as he was a shrewd man, and understood The
Arabic, Harb, the Spanish, Ardider, Military Art, Stratagems of War.
War as well as any Captain of his time, he found it no hard matter to answer:
He had a thousand Questions asked him; all which he neatly solved. Insomuch
that Almanzor being very much satisfied, it was resolved on in his Council,
That Orders should be sent to Muca, to favor the Count in all he should
desire; and for that purpose he was dispatched away back with all Expedition,
with this Letter for the Viceroy of Africa.

A LETTER. Praised be God, our Sovereign Lord.
The Supreme Ruler of the Arabs, Vicar of God, and Defender of his Law, Valid
Almanzor,
To the Noble, Accomplished, Virtuous and Trusty Knight, Muca; Governor of our
Kingdoms of Africa; Greeting.
THe Answer that is made to the Letter of Credence, brought by the Count D.
Julian, is, That his Proposal has been kindly received; and that he has given
very pertinent Reasons for it. Wherefore it is convenient to attempt this
Enterprise, and to commit the Conduct of it to some good Captain; who, with a
sufficient number of Horse and Foot, should go to view the Country: Then you
shall give us a succinct account of the event of his Voyage, and what you shall
think convenient to be done, that we may give orders accordingly. In the mean
while God take you into his keeping.

In the month of September, in the year 713 of our Lord.
From our Palace of Carval, in Arabia foelix, on the 2 of the Moon of Sabben, in
the 92 year of the Hegira.

The Count D. Julian having brought this Letter from Almanzor to Muca, it gave
him great satisfaction: And in pursuance of the Emperors Orders, he made a
small Body of six thousand Foot, and some few Horse, which he put under the
command of a very brave man, called Tariff Abenriet, of the City of Damus; whom
he enjoined with Count Julian to pass the Straight, which the Spaniards call of
Hercules Now called Gibralter.
, and which after this was called by this great Captain Jubulfath.

They had no sooner landed, and chosen a place fit for the Encampment of their
Troops according as they came ashore, but that Count Julian's Relations and
Friends came to join them, with a great number of their Vassals, whom they had
caused to Revolt. Tariff sent immediately to view the Country. His men entered
very far into it without meeting with any Resistance; and after having killed
all those they met, pillaged and ravaged not only the open Country, but also
the Buroughs and Towns, they returned loaded with Booty.

Tariff seeing things still more easy than he had imagined them, gave an
immediate account accordingly to the Viceroy; who signified to him, not to
stay the longer for that in this Country, but to return speedily again into
Africa, with all his Troops. He obeyed his Orders, though with some reluctance,
and went back into Africa with great Riches, and an infinite number of Slaves;
carrying along with him all those, that having declared themselves for Count
Julian, durst not stay any longer in Spain, but expected to return thither in a
short time with greater Forces: ws we shall see in the sequel of this History,
they failed not of doing.

CHAP. VI.
Rodrigo enters a Cave that was at the Gates of Toledo, and thinking to find
Treasures therein, finds only Presages of the loss of Spain.

THe King Rodrigo having had notice of the descent of the Moors into Spain,
with Captain Tariff, and Count Julian his Enemy; and that, after having
overrun all Andalousia, they were returned with many Slaves; was not so
anxious for what they had newly done, as for the apprehension of the long and
dangerous War; with which he saw himself threatened; it being easy to judge
that Tariff had not made that trial, to stop there.

He knew Count Julian to be a Man of Wit and Execution, of Courage, and a
through knowledge of War, a Natural Spaniard, that knew the state of his
Affairs, knew the Country, had there many Adherents, nay, and Places, wherein
he could enter and go out as often as he pleased. He easily perceived, but too
late, the fault he had committed, in losing, for a moments Pleasure, a man of
such importance, and in giving him to his Enemies. He made reflection upon the
bad posture of his Kingdom, since he had disarmed his Subjects, and caused all
the strong Places to be demolisht. He considered that the long Peace which
Spain had enjoyed, was the occasion that he had no Disciplined Troops, and that
when he had assembled an Army, they would be only raw men: All this plunged him
into surious Disquiets. He asked Counsel of all People, and found none good. At
length, having consulted and Archbishop, a Relation of his, called Torrife,
and having told him the little Money he had to raise and keep forces on foot;
this Archbishop persuaded him to break open a Place called the Enchanted
Tower, where there was said to be a Treasure. And as this is a thing very
extraordinary, I am willing to insert here at length what the same Torrife told
me; who shortly after quitted that Kings Party, to come to Count Julian in our
Camp; and who could give the best account of it, as having been present when D.
Rodrigo caused it to be opened. Now this is what he then told me.

About a mile from Toledo, between steep Rocks that lie East of that great
City, there was formerly a Tower, of a very ancient and very magnificent
structure, tho a little endamag'd by Time, that consumes all: Under whose
foundation was a very deep Cave, separated into four different Vaults, across a
very narrow Entrance cut in the Rock, where a great Iron Door had been made up,
with a thousand Locks, and as many Bolts: Upon this Door there was Greek
Characters, that seemed rather Ciphers than Letters, and might be diversely
interpreted; but whose meaning were, (as those pretended, who thought they knew
them best) that the King that should open this Cave, and discover all the
Wonders that were therein, would certainly find a great deal of Good and Evil.

Several Kings before this, had had a desire to shrift into the truth of this
mystery, but whatever Orders they had given for that purpose, they had never
been able to cause them to be executed. Upon the opening this Door, so great a
Noise was heard, that the Earth seemed to open at the same time under the feet
of those that meant to enter therein: Hauf.
They were seized with such a dread, that most of 'em fell sick upon it, some
died, and no body had the Courage to enter further. The Door had still been
shut up more strongly than before, and People still believed that the time
appointed for the breaking so great an Enchantment was not yet come; but
Rodrigo's ill fate would have it that this fatal adventure was reserved for
him. He had chosen very resolute men to enter with him into that Cave; but they
had not gone very far, when the Torches they had being extinguished, the
greater part fled away, out of a pannick fear which seized them, of a terrible
Hobgoblin they said they saw. The King in great anger caused other Flambeaux to
be lighted which he had caused to be made on purpose, after a particular
manner, that so the air of the Cave might not put them out: With this light he
entered the first of all, and without showing any fear, tho perhaps he was not
exempt from a little; hardly had he gone some steps, but that he found himself
in a beautiful Room, enriched with as delicate Sculptures as those we see in
the greatest Palaces: In the midst of this great Room was a Brazen Statue, with
a fierce posture, placed upon a Pillar three Cubits high, holding in its hand a
Macmah.
Battel-Axe, with which it struck the Earth from time to time, and so strongly,
that there was reason to believe it to be partly the violent agitation it
occasioned in the air, by the blows it gave, that made the great noise that was
heard at their entrance.

Rodrigo, tho a little startled, did not however lose Courage; and began to
conjure this Phantome; telling him, That he did not pretend to commit any
Disorder in the place of his abode, and that he would go his ways as soon as he
had seen all its Wonders.

He had no sooner uttered these words, but the Statue left off beating the
Earth. The King and his Attendants being a little encouraged, most carefully
visited all the corners of that great Room. On the Left hand of the Statue they
saw these words written on the Wall, Unhappy Prince, thy ill Destiny has
brought thee hither. Turning to the Right, he found nothing better, for there
was written, Thou shall be dispossessed by foreign Nations, and thy Subjects
shall be punished as well as thee, for all their Crimes. Upon the back of the
Statue was written these words in Arabic, To my Succors: and upon its Breast
these, I do my Duty.

I forgot to say that at the entrance of this Room there was a kind of round
Fat, like a Bowl; from whence there issued a kind of spout, whose surging made
a hideous murmur.

After having well considered all these things, and caused the Inscriptions of
them to be taken in a Table Book; the King went away very much disturbed, and
very peevish; and had no sooner turned his back, but that the Statue fell again
to striking the ground, after its usual manner. The King caused this Cave to be
shut up again more carefully than before, and had its entrance stopped with
Earth, that so none thenceforward might enter therein, forbidding all his
Attendants to make the least mention of this Adventure, by reason of the
terror that so ill a presage might put into all Peoples minds: But
nevertheless is was immediately buzzed about all the Court.

The Night following Cries were heard, that waywards, like to those that People
make when they are fighting; and after a Clap, that made a mighty hurly burly,
this old Tower sunk; and all people were amazed the next day to find no more
footsteps of it, than if all they had seen before had been only a Dream.

The King having assembled the Wise men of his Kingdom, to demand of them the
Explication of all he had seen: They found that the Brazen Statue, with its
perpetual motion, signified Time, that was obliged never to stop, as was noted
by the Inscription it had upon its Breast. That that which was on the Back
signified, that in the sequel of time, Spain should be conquered by the
Arabians: That of the Walls presaged, The loss of his Kingdom, and a great
Calamity of all his People: And that above the Door, The great Evils the
Conquered would suffer, and the great benefits the Victors would thence derive.

Such an Explication gave no little anxiety to Rodrigo, and to such of his
People as heard it. They all lift up their Eyes to Heaven, well seeing that it
was from God alone that they could hope for any succors. For tho they had news
that Tariff and Count Julian were returned into Africa, this was not capable of
re-assuring the King against so many intimations of the anger of Heaven.
Whereupon he began to order the re-erecting all the Fortifications he had
caused to be demolished; and had Proclamation made throughout his Kingdom, that
the People should take up again the Arms he had forbidden, and exercize
themselves therein, as before. He resolved also to quit Toledo, and go make his
residence at Cordoua; that so he might be nearer the place, from whence
apparently all the mischief was to come, and thereto apply Remedies the more
easily.

CHAP. VII.
Muca sends Tariff and Count Julian into Arabia, to give an account to
Almanzor, of the success of the Voyage they had made into Spain.

TAriff Abenriet and Count Julian being returned into Africa, much satisfied
with their Voyage, were there admirably well received by the Viceroy; and after
having among themselves concerted the means of effecting their Design, it was
resolved, That this Captain and this Count should both go to Almanzor's Court,
to communicate to him, and render him a faithful and an exact account of all
they had done, and of the propitious Disposition wherein they had found the
People of Spain: well perceiving it to be difficult by Letters to remove all
the doubts Hirisaf, Inconveniences.
, and solve all the Difficulties that might be started upon an affair of so
great a moment, as the Conquest of so great a Kingdom; and show upon Paper, and
at a distance, so great an Enterprise, so easily as those could do it by word
of mouth, that had themselves considered things more nearly.

Whereupon having caused a Ship to be fitted out, and having provided
themselves with all Necessaries Sarra, Martial Men.
, as well for their Subsistence, as for their Safety; after having weathered a
furious Storm, they at length arrived happily in Arabia, where having presented
themselves to Almanzor, he received them as well as they could wish, and had
them lodged and treated with all their Train, and all the Soldiers they had
brought along with them. Tariff in a few days after his arrival, had a long
audience of Almanzor; in which, after having given him an account of all he had
done for his service, he promised him, That if he would do him the honor to
send him back into Spain, and rely upon him for the Conquest of so great a
Country, he would subdue it in a little time to his Obedience. The Confidence
with which this great Captain spoke, had so mnch power over Almanzor's mind,
that he immediately caused his Council to assemble, with it, still more
particularly to examine all the Difficulties that might be met with in so great
an Enterprise, and all the means he proposed to bring it about. Whereupon, this
affair having been agitated with mature deliberation, and accordingly reported
to the Emperor, and debated anew again in his presence. At last the Conquest
of Spain was resolved on, and the rumor of the Declaration of War against the
King Don Rodrigo spread immediately throughout the whole extent of the Caliph's
Empire. Tariff, who had already exerted his Valor, as well as his Conduct, in
other occasions, wherein he had acquired Almanzor's esteem, and that of all the
Arabians; knowing the Country better than any man, and having entered into
strict Engagements with Count Julian, it would have been both injustice and
imprudence to have taken from him the Command of the Army: For which reason he
was at the same time nominated General, and these are the Letters Patents that
were issued out to that intent.

Letters Patents.
Praise be to God alone, Amen.
THe Great and Warlike Valid Almanzor, of the high Lineage of Motaleb, Vicar of
God, and the Defender of his Law; Son of the most High and most Noble Caliph,
and potent Ruler of all the Arabic Nation, Abdulmeleck; to all those who shall
these present Letters see, Greeting. We, for certain confiderations and just
causes us thereunto moving, having Ordered, as We Order by these presents, the
Conquest of the Western Kingdoms, that are possessed by the King, Don Rodrigo,
a Christian by Profession, our Capital Enemy; by reason of the great profit
which will redound thence to our Subjects, and the augmentation which will
thence accrue to our Empire. We have resolved to nominate and choose, as We
choose and nominate by these presents, for Governor and Captain General in all
those Countries, the Noble, the Virtuous, Honored and Renowned Captain, our
Vassal, and Faithful Servant, Tariff Abenriet; whom for this purpose We empower
to go with the Troops We shall cause to be given him, into the Territories of
Spain, and there execute the Orders that we shall cause to be expedited to him,
and do all that to him shall seem fitting, for the accomplishment of our Will,
without his needing to stay for new Orders from Us, on that acconnt. We enjoin
all Governors of Places, Officers and Soldiers, as well those he shall lead
into his Army, as those of all our Realms, that they obey him, and execute his
Commands, as well by Sea as by Land, as if they were issued out immediately
from us, and Sealed with our own Seal, and Signed by our own Hand: Giving him
for this purpose, Power and Authority sufficient to give them, and expedite
them, under the penalties he shall please to establish; and which he may cause
to be Executed, as Sovereign Judge, upon the Persons and Estates of those as
shall Countervene them, and shall be Rebels to our Commands, which We have
encharg'd him to accomplish and execute, in the entire Confidence we have in
him: For such is our Pleasure.

The year 713 of our Lord, in the month of December.
Given in our High Presence, in our Palace Royal of Carval, in Arabia Foelix, in
the 22 of the Moon Dulchisa, in the year 92.

Almanzor had still another Captain, a Greek and Renegado, called Hiza Humani,
in whose Valor he had much Confidence: He gave him the Command of the Troops
he caused to be raised in the East, of which he quickly made a Body of thirty
thousand good Men, and well Armed. At the same time he fitted out a great
number of Ships, wherein he put not only all sorts of Ammunition, but a great
abundance of Arms, Tools and Instruments of War. And as soon as this Fleet was
ready, he Shipped all the Forces, and caused it to depart In the year 714 of
our Lord, in the month of June.
on the thirteenth of the Moon of Inmod, and the second day of the year 93.

This Prince, not content with these great preparations, imagined that as it
was a War of Religion he was going to undertake, it was convenient to assemble
all the Mohammedan Forces. For which reason he dispatched a Man away on purpose,
to the King of Thunis, his Ally, to impart to him his Design; and represent to
him the great advantages he might derive from the Conquest of Spain; conjuring
him to come and join him, and succor him, as soon as possible, with what Foot
and Horse he could assemble. This Envoy having put himself into a Felucca, was
not long on his Voyage, and met with a most welcome Reception from the King of
Thunis, who expressed much Joy to see, by Avilgalit's Letter, and by his Envoys
discourse, that he would make use of him in this occasion. He caused the Drum
immediately to be beat throughout all his Kingdom, and in a short space levied
an Army of thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse; the Command of which
he would needs give to Prince Mahomet-Gilhair, his second Son. What troubled
him most, was the few Ships he had in a readiness to put to Sea, as not being
prepared for so great an Embarkment. For which reason he was obliged to cause
all these Troops to wait in a Body, till the arrival of Merchant Ships, wherein
he caused them to embark; and at last weighed Anchor, In the month of August,
in the year 714.
on the 2 of the Moon of Sanguel, in the same year 93.

These two great Armies being arrived on the Coast of Africa, Muca, who waited
for them there, after having held a Council of War with all the General
Officers, found they needed some days refreshment after the fatigue of the Sea.
For which reason all the Troops were brought on shore; and that the time they
might spend in refreshing themselves might not be lost, Tariff and Count Julian
were sent before, with a small Body, to make a Descent into Spain; and enquire
into the state things were in since their Departure thence; and what Forces the
King D. Rodrigo might have on foot. The Troops they chose for this Expedition
were to the number of six thousand Foot, as well Moors as Julianist Christians;
and about three hundred Horse: With these they crossed the Straight of
Gilbralter, and having found a Mountain by the Seaside, fitting to Encamp the
few Troops they had, Tariff gave it his own It is still called Tariff.
Name, as being the first place where he began to establish himself. Since the
first entrance of the Moors, Rodrigo had not lain idle, but had made the best
Preparations he could for War: Insomuch, that as soon as he knew Tariff had
made a fresh Descent, for the hindering his Fortifying himself there, he sent
his General Astolpho, with an Army of thirty thousand Foot, and about five
hundred Horse, that were indeed not over-well Armed, nor over-well Martializ'd,
for the Reasons I have already hinted.

Astolpho going directly to Tariff, and Encamping in sight of him, there was at
first several Skirmishes between the Horse of both sides, wherein that of
Tariff had the disadvantage, which so intimidated the Moors, that it had
already quite discouraged them; when that on the morrow morning, at break of
day, one of the Sentinels perceived a Christian Woman, with a Staff in her
hand, on which was a little white Streamer, for a sign of Peace: This Woman
being taken, asked to speak with the General of the Army, saying, she was come
to bring him such News as would undoubtedly be agreeable to him. As soon as she
was in Tariff's presence, she prostrated herself at his Feet, and having
embraced them with great signs of Tafacrum, Caresses Applause.
Joy, and great demonstrations of affection, she spoke to him in this manner.

A Prediction made by a Religious.
Related to General Tariff by a Christian Woman.
SIgnior, I am born in Spain, and am called La Testue. I remember that about
sixty years agone, when I was very young, I heard my Father relate, as I was in
the Corner of his Chimney, a Prophecy, importing that the people of our
Religion should lose the Government of our Country, which was to be conquered
by the Moors: And among other things, it was precisely mentioned, that the
Captain who was to make this Conquest, should be very brave, and have on his
Right Shoulder a Mole very hairy, of the bigness of a Pea, nay, and that his
Right Hand should be much longer than his other; insomuch, that without
stooping, he might cover all his knee with that hand. He who made this
Prediction is an honest Religious, for whom we Christians have a singular
veneration. I earnestly conjure you, in case you have these marks I have newly
specified, in recompense for the good News I bring you, to save our Lives, I
and my Children; and to hinder any injury from being done to their Persons or
Goods.

Tariff having caused what this Woman had newly said, to be explained by a
Christian Interpreter he had with him, was overjoyed to hear these things. He
strips himself immediately, in the presence of Count Julian, and of all his
People, and having caused the place the Woman instanced to be viewed, they
found there the Mole she had mentioned, and the Right Hand longer than the
Left, tho not quite so long as she had said.

This News being spread about the Army, occasioned an universal joy, and all
the Officers would needs share in that their General had, to hear, by
infallible proofs, that he it was that was to have the Honor of so noble a
Conquest. And indeed he was resolved to give Battle, and therein to vanquish or
dye. And that all the Soldiers might have the same Resolution, he would needs
deprive 'em of all hopes of Retreat.

For that purpose, as he wanted no industry, he secretly caused Fire to be set
to all the Ships that had brought his Troops, and reserved nothing but a small
Vessel, nay, and would needs have that too put out to Sea, for the sending by
it to Muca, the good or ill News of the Battle.

Tariff having given this Order, and by a Speech, short indeed, but pithy,
animated his Soldiers to the Conflict: It was very bloody and obstinate on
both sides, but at length the Christians were put to flight.

Astolpho, wanting neither Heart nor Conduct, performed in this occasion, not
only the Duty of a General, but also that of a Soldier; he Rallied the
Runaways the best he could, returned several times to the Charge, and would
never yield himself up, whatever entreaties he had made him, choosing rather to
dye with his Sword in Hand, as all those are wont to do that are jealous of
their Honor, and are resolved to leave no room ever to be Almubatida, to blame
wrongfully, or without reason.
reproached that they have done any thing contrary to the Fidelity they owe
their King.

In this action Count Julian was dangerously wounded in the Arm with a
Partizan, and Tariff slightly in the Left Leg; which very much afflicted the
Moors and Julianists.

The News of this great Defeat being come to Rodrigo, he was extremely grieved,
particularly when he knew his General Astolpho to be dead, and that he had been
defeated by such a small handful of men.

Tariff and Count Julian retired forthwith with their Troops to their former
Camp on Tariff, from whence they sent in all haste to Muca, by the Bark he had
reserved on purpose for this intent, the News of this first Victory, earnestly
desiring him to Ship, with all expedition, the two Bodies of Army that had been
left in Africa, for their refreshment; which Muca failed not to do, fearing
they might need them.

CHAP. VIII.
Great Preparations for War made by Rodrigo, in all the parts of his Dominions.

ROdrigo being dejected, as I have newly said, at this first loss, knew not
what course to take to hinder the progress of the Enemies, and with whatever
hopes those of his Council and Court would needs flatter him, he was not
capable of receiving any Consolation, so full had his Heart been of anxiety for
some time, and pre-possess'd with the ill Opinion he had of the success of this
War. He was not wanting however to use all possible Diligence, and omitted
nothing of what he thought could help to free him out of so great a danger, for
he was but too sensible, that he it was, particularly, that so horrible a
Tempest threatened.

Wherefore he caused the Troops he had levied in all the Provinces of his
Kingdom to advance from all parts, and gave them a general Rendezvouze at
Cordona, where of late he kept his Court; that so he might send them from
thence to such places as should need them, and be the readier to take such
courses as his occasions should require.

His Orders were so well Executed, that in a little time his Army was found to
be fourscore thousand Foot, and twenty thousand Horse; all of 'em People
huddled indeed together, and most of 'em without Arms and Experience. He gave
them for their General the Archbishop D. Oppas, his very near Relation; whom
he sent before with thirty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, to try
Fortune once again against Tariff, and endeavor to take the Count D. Julian,
imagining, that as he had the Secret and Conduct of this Enterprise, it was,
doubtless, the most compendious way to put an end to the War.

In the mean while fresh reinsorcements came every minute to Tariff, Muca
caused the two Armies that were left behind in Africa, to file daily into
Spain, as well that which Hiza had brought from Arabia, as that which Prince
Mahomet Gilhair had brought from Tunis: But as they came by little and little,
and separately, it could not otherwise be but that there must be some Disorder.
Tariff, to prevent the being surpised in the hurry of Landing, and to draw his
Troops up in Battle array, accordingly as they descended from their Ships,
resolved to take more ground, and a little farther in the Country to choose a
place sufficiently spacious for the Encampment of his whole Army, and in
security wait the coming of D. Rodrigo: Wherefore he advanced as far as the
River which the Arabs call It Is the River called Guidalette.
Guidalete, at the same time that the Archbishop D. Oppas came thither, and
sent to propose to him a Truce for eight days, to give the two Armies time to
recover themselves after the fatigues of the March. The Archbishop, who
doubtless was not informed of the state of the Enemies Army, imagined this
Truce would turn to his advantage, by giving his own time to increase. But in
the mean while, all those Troops that Tariff had caused to file off, according
as they landed, being come, they made up Sixty Thousand Foot, and Ten Thousand
Horse, at the review he made of them after the Truce was expired. Oppas
perceiving the fault he had committed, and fearing that the King would reproach
him with having given the Enemies time to join all their Forces, and fortify
their Camp, he resolved to give them Battle without any farther delay. The
reinforcement he had received, joined with what he had before, made not up
above Forty Thousand Men: Yet was he not wanting with these to push the Moors
so vigorously, that Tariff was constrained to retire, after having lost Three
Thousand Foot, and about Five Hundred Horse: Whereas the Christians lost no
more in this action, than Two Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Horse. The Night
having parted them, Oppas also retreated into his own Camp, to let his
Soldiers take Breath, before he renewed the Conflict. The number of the
Wounded being very great on both sides, Oppas sent to propose a Truce to
Tariff, for three days, which was forthwith concluded on between the two
Generals. Things being in this estate, the following Night, a Traitor (for so
he may well be called, since he sold his own Country) stole out of the
Christians Camp, into that of the Arabs. This Man being the Companion of Oppas,
and called Sisebert, went to tell Tariff, that the King D. Rodrigo's General,
had only demanded this Truce, that he might surprise him that Night, and put
him by that means the more easily to rout. Tariff affording Credence to this
notice, upon the account of the eminent Quality of the person that brought it,
(tho it was an imposture, as was afterward verified) thought it became him to
prevent his Enemy, and without waiting till he had put himself in a posture to
execute his evil intentions, he made his Soldiers stand immediately to their
Arms, and caused them to march directly to the Christians Camp, where they fell
on with so much impetuosity, that they forced it, put the whole Army to rout,
took General Oppas, with the Principal Officers, Prisoners, and got an
inestimable Booty, and an infinity of Slaves.

After this Victory, Tariff made great presents to Sisebert, and retreated near
to the Guadalette, into the Quarters he had before, and which he had found very
convenient for the Subsistence of his Army.

CHAP. IX.
Muca passes into Spain, and joins with Tariff. Rodrigo puts himself at the
head of his Army, gives them Battle, and loses it.

MVca hearing daily of Tariffs great Victories, began no longer to doubt of the
Conquest of Spain, whether he incessantly sent reinforcements of Soldiers, and
Amunitions, and Provisions.

But not being with this contented, he resolved to pass the Sea in person, in
the head of a fourth Army, so to share in the honor of so fine a Conquest.
Wherefore he left to a Brother of his, called Ishmael, the Government of
Africa, in his absence; and having with all possible diligence, got together
twenty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, brave Men, and well appointed; he
went to join Tariff, who was very joyful at the thing.

When it came to be known that the Viceroy had himself passed the Streights,
there passed so great a number of Moors, being invited by the hopes of pillage,
that in the review they made of all their Troops, they were found to be a
hundred and fourscore thousand Foot, and forty thousand Horse, besides an
infinite number of useless people that are wont to accompany Armies.

Rodrigo, who then exerted all the Duties of a great King, seeing the number of
the Moors daily to augment, thought it in no wise convenient to give them time
to fortify themselves more: And having assembled his Council, to see what
Resolution it became him to take in so great an exigency; they unanimously
agreed, That he could do nothing better than go himself in the head of his
Army, give them Battle, rather sooner than later; and that all the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of Service in Spain would not fail to attend him.

This Resolution being taken, the King having nominated for Generalissimo of
all his Troops, his Favorite Almerique, a man very brave and resolute; a
General review was held near Cordoua, in a Plain the Arabs shortly after named
Fahe Alguidah It is now called the plain of Truth.
, where was found twenty three thousand Horse, and a hundred and thirty
thousand Foot. This Prince having caused the General Officers to come thither,
and the most considerable of the Captains, gave them to understand the danger
their Country was in, that not only their Honor and their Estates, but their
Life and Liberty depended on the good or ill success of the Battle he was going
to fight; that after this Action there was no more succors to be expected from
their Country, that was exhausted by the late Defeats; that they had no longer
any hopes but in their own Valor; that they had only to consider whether they
should not rather choose to dye generously, in fighting for their Country, than
to fall themselves, their Families and Children, into a perpetual Slavery
Dimiin, slaves of one Enemies.
, and be a Prey to foreign Nations, and so different from them in Manners and
Religion, that he said not this to them, to expose them alone to the peril,
with a design to shelter himself from it; that he should be the first to show
them the way and example; and that he did not believe there to be any man that
made a difficulty of going with his King, when they should see him resolved to
dye with them, and for them.

The Soldiers being encouraged by this discourse, and resolved to dye for
their King and Country, having had order to march against the Enemies, there
happened a remarkable thing, and and of an ill augure, which was that D.
Ramiro, Alfier Major of King Rodrigo; being mounted on Horseback, his Horse
gave him so terrible a fall, that he died of it, and the Lance broke in two,
to which the Royal Standard Halam.
was fastened.

Those who saw so sudden a Atiar, Prodigy.
Death, were a little terrified; but Rodrigo having given the Colors Badr.
Cornet.
to another, continued his march to the River Gardalete, where he encamped in
sight of Tariff, in a Plain very proper for the ranging all his Troops in
Battalia.

The day following, the King sent one of the bravest men of his Army, called
Thodomir, with five hundred Horse, and two hundred Foot, all choice men, and
well armed, to view the Enemies. Tariff failed not to detech out at the same
time, five hundred Moors, and three hundred Julianists, having in the head of
them Abraham Abenabis, who began so bloody, and so obstinate a Combat, that it
lasted from Three a Clock in the Afternoon, till Night Vear, from dinner till
the Evening.
, which constrained them to part, leaving it undecided which had the advantage;
the dead and wounded being much the same on both sides.

The King, whose heart was puffed up with the success of this Skirmish, having
held a Council in the Evening, and proposed to the principal Officers of his
Army, to give Battle on the morrow, it was resolved on, and a Herald sent to
signify it to Tariff, who accepted it.

It was on the third Wednesday of the month of Maharran, In the midst of
October, in the year 714.
in the year 94 of the Hegira, that this Battle was fought, which began at
break of day, and cost both Parties a great deal of Blood: For the Christians
in this action lost their General Almerique, with about three thousand Foot,
and eight hundred Horse, and the Moors a thousand Foot, and three hundred Horse.

Rodrigo was extremely afflicted for the Death of Almerique; ^abra, Grief.
for he had that day performed Heroic actions, and shown he was not only a
good Soldier, but a great Captain. And indeed, he it was alone, that had put
the Camp of the Moors to disorder; among whom he broke in with so much bravery,
that he was killed upon the spot; and after his death, the Christian Army
wanted little of being totally deseated.

And indeed, Rodrigo found it convenient to go and encamp six Leagues from
thence, the more safely to deliberate on what he had to do. Whereupon he made
his Retreat in the best order imaginable; by these means abandoning the Field
of Battle to Tariff, who on his side, caused all the dead, both Moors and
Christians, to be buried, for fear the Corruption of their Bodies might
occasion some Distempers in his Camp. But as soon as he heard Rodrigo was
retired, taking his Retreat for a flight, he marched after him with all
Expedition, and overtook him on the Friday following; when the Conflict (...)
Battle.
being renewed, it lasted from Noon till Night, which parted them, without
either parties having the occasion to boast of the advantage. What most
afflicted General Tariff, was, that Prince Mahomet Gilhair, the King of Thunis
Son, and Count Julian, were both dangerously wounded in this action, and the
later particularly of three great wounds. On the other side, Rodrigo being
paul'd by the opposition of the Enemies, found that all he had been thitherto
able to do, was but a small matter, and desponding of his being capable of
doing any thing more hereafter, he knew not what to determine upon; and all the
courses proposed to him, seeming to him equally bad and dangerous, he chose
rather to leave the Decision of Fortune to the day following, than to wait it
any longer, having taken a steadfast resolution to Conquer then or Dye.

Whereupon having marshalled all his Forces in the best order he could, he led
them to the Enemies with great vigor, and was by them received with so much
bravery and firmness, that there died that day fifteen hundred Foot, and two
hundred and fifty Horse, of the Christians, and fifteen hundred Moors, in all,
as well Horse as Foot. As for the wounded, on both sides, the number of them
scattered up and down, was so great, that they were not reckoned Mudmia, Bloody.
. The Battle having been deserr'd till the Wednesday following, by the consent
of both parties, it began again at break of day, but not with the same
obstinacy. For in short, Rodrigo seeing his Men stagger, threw himself into the
midst of the fray, to re-inspire them with Courage, and did all he could to
rally them; but the defeat being absolute, and without remedy Diz, Hopes.
, he forbid the few people he had about him, to follow him; and he left his
Camp, without its being known what became of him.

All the Christians being thus, or dead, or prisoners, or put to slight; all
the Riches of their Camp, wherein there was abundance, became the booty of the
Conquerours. But Tariff, without suffering his Soldiers to trifle away their
time in plunder, and without allowing them one days rest, marched directly to
Cordoua, which he took without its costing him one man; and encamped all his
Troops in the neighborhood of the Town, in such manner as he judged most
fitting to refresh them, after so many fatigues; and to give the wounded time
to be cured of their wounds.

CHAP. X.
General Tariff, causes search to be made through all the Country for D.
Rodrigo, and promises great rewards to whom ever shall deliver him dead or
alive into his hands.

Taurib, Exploits.
TAriff reckoned for nothing, all these Battles he had won, since Rodrigo had
escaped him; and did not think Spain was ever conquered, unless he had him in
his hands, For which reason, he had Proclamation made throughout his Army, That
whosoever, either Moor or Christian, should deliver him up alive, or dead; he
would not only grant Inhan, Promise.
him great Franchizes and Exemptions, but wherewithal to live at his ease the
rest of his days. The hopes of such great gains, set several Christians, Moors,
and Renegadoes, upon the hunt, throughout all Andalousia, to enquire after the
King.

At last, some of them questing in the Mountains and Lands thereabouts, at a
distance saw a Shepherd in a very rich garb, being the same that unhappy Prince
was wont to wear. With great joy did they run after him to catch him, and
brought him immediately to the General, who having caused Count Julian to come
to view him, he was found to be a very simple and ignorant Swain, from whom
they could hardly get a word, and much less information of what they were in
quest. He told them he knew nothing else of what they demanded, but that as he
was keeping his flock upon the Mountain where they had taken him, he had seen
coming toward him, upon a Horse very much tired, and that seemed out of
Breath, a man, in the Clothes he at present wore, who, with a furious voice,
and frightful countenance, had bid him pull off forthwith a Coat lined with
Sheep-skin he had then on; that accordingly having stripped himself immediately,
he had caused him to take those fine Clothes in lieu of his own; and that
having afterward asked him if he had any thing to eat in his Scrip, he had
given him a little Bread he had left. After which, the Unknown having taken his
Crook, commanded him to come show him the way; which he did, putting him in a
little path that went upwards, which he saw him mount, till he lost sight of
him.

Tariff was not satisfied with this News, for after having discoursed the
People of the Country of the place where the Shepherd had seen Rodrigo, he
understood he was gone toward Castile; insomuch that he lost hopes of finding
him, and bent his thoughts wholly upon taking all the advantages he might
derive from his Victory.

Queen Zahra Beneliaza was at Cordoua, at the taking of that Town; and tho she
had time enough, before the Defeat of her Husband, to make her escape into
Castile, she had not done so, either that she had been surpised by Tariff's
Diligence, or for want of Resolution, and improving her time; or rather, in
short, through the ill luck those labor under, whom Fortune prosecutes, who
are wont to want Council as well as all things.

Tariff left her in her Palace, without suffering any one to enter therein, to
commit the least Disorder; he only made sure of her Person as well as the
Palace: And as this great City could not be kept without a great number of
Troops, he thought fitting to leave there Prince Mahomet Gilhair, as well for
the containing 'em in their Duty, as for the recovering his perfect health, for
he was not yet well cured of his Wounds, nor recovered from the fatigues of
this War. He placed about this Prince the Moor, Abulcacim Hadilbar, to assist
him with his Council in Military Expeditions, in case such occasions should be
offered; and after having given his Orders, he divided his Troops into two
equal Armies, one of which he left to the Viceroy Muca, to go into the Western
part of Andalousia, and took the other to go into the more Southern, called
Grenada; so to leave nothing behind them, when they had a mind to enter into
the Province of Castile, which is separated from Andalousia on the Eastern side
by a great Desert, composed of Mountains and Lands, which the Spaniards call
Sierra Morena. This Resolution being taken, those two Generals directed their
March each his own way, and Mahomet Gilhair staid with Queen Zahra.

CHAP. XI.
The Amors of Mahomet Gilhair with the Queen, who induces him to turn
Christian, and then Marries him.

BEfore they departed from Cordoua, Tariff failed not to do what is commonly
done by Conquerours; who change the manner of the Government of the Cities they
take, and there Establish such Laws as they please. He seized on the great
Church, and of some others which he turned into Moschs; leaving some to the
Christians, for the exercise of their Religion. And after having caused great
Fortifications to be made around that Town, which he considered as the
Metropolis of Spain; he particularly encharg'd Prince Gilhair to have great
respect for Queen Zahra Beneliaca, and so to order matters, that she might be
as little as possible sensible of her Captivity; representing to him, that
being by Nation an Arabian, and a near Relation of Almanzor, his Master; so
nigh that Mahomet Abnehedim, her Father, had shared Africa with him; they ought
all to treat her as their real Queen, to endeavor to make her again espouse
the Manners and Religion of her Forefathers; which there was a likelihood she
would not find it a difficult matter to resolve on, seeing she must needs be
inclined thereto, by the sentiments of Nature. The Unfortunate Gilhair did but
too faithfully acquit himself of this Commission; for he saw her so often, and
rendered her so many services, that as she was Young and Beautiful, and he
Gallant and Witty, he became desperately in Love with her. Nothing now but
Feasts and Merriments at Cordoua, he daily invented something new to divert and
please her, and his thoughts were wholly taken up in making her a thousand
presents, wherein there was ever as much gallantry as magnificence: As he had
all the convenience of seeing her he could desire, the respect he bare her, had
long hindered him from declaring his passion to her. But this at length being
become the strongest, he could not forbear giving her to understand, in a
thousand conversations he had with her, that if she would again espouse the
Religion in which she had been brought up, he would bring her back into her own
Country, with the Crown of Thunis, which he would put upon her Head, instead
of that of Castile, which she had lost. Every time he discoursed her upon this
point, she pretended she did not understand him; but he imagined it to be an
uneasiness of hers, in suffering a Declaration of Love, that hindered her from
answering; and that he had to vanquish rather her modesty than her aversion. At
length, they two only being together one day, and he thinking her disposed to
be more favorable to him, he threw himself at her feet, and conjured her not
to leave him any longer in the uncertainty of his good or evil fortune; and at
last, resolve upon pronouncing the word that was to give him his death, or to
render him happy all his life long. The Queen not hating him, would not suffer
him any longer to flatter himself with vain hopes: Wherefore she declared to
him, she was resolved to live and dye in the Faith Hy^man, Faith.
she had embraced; but that if the desire he expressed to her of marrying her,
was as strong as he would fain persuade her, and if he imagined it so easy a
matter to change Religion, he would find no difficulty in doing for her, what
he proposed to her, to do for him; that instead of pressing her to turn
Mohammedan, he needed only to turn Christian; and that upon this condition, she
would consent to a match, wherein there was nothing unworthy of her Royal
extraction Fac^ Alcatanae, Blood Royal.
. After this answer, the Prince went his ways home very pensive, but he was not
capable to resist his passion long. They were neither of them in a place to
solemnize this Marriage, which was quickly agreed on; and the juncture of times
was not propitious: For which reason, the Princess caused one of her Calch,
Religious.
Religious to come, without the least notice being taken out, and marry her in
private with the Prince, after he had baptized him. The Ceremonies were
performed with all possible secrecy Muh^i, convert.
, and Gilhair and Zahra enjoyed their Amors peaceably for some time, carefully
concealing the Images they adored in private. But they could not keep their
intelligence so secret, but that it was discovered by one of the Queens Ladies,
in whom she confided: She was born in Arabia, of the number of those that had
been thrown upon the Coasts of Spain, with the Queen, and who with her were
converted. This Woman, called Sigebeste, having been persuaded Muhin,
persuasion.
by some Moors, had betaken herself again to her ancient Religion; insomuch,
that having seen Mahomet make profession of Christianity with the Queen, in her
Palace; she resolved, tho with trouble, to inform Abulcacim Adilbard how
matters went, whom Tariff had left with that Prince, in all things to assist
him, with his Council. Aldilbar was extremely afflicted at the tidings, and
would by no means believe the least on it for a long time; imagining this Woman
might perchance, have a grudge to the Prince, for some particular reason Varia,
false testimony.
. But making reflection upon the greatness of the passion he had long observed
this Prince have for the Queen, he began to believe him capable of all.

He had then the curiosity, to fathom the thing, without making semblance of
ought; and knew at length so well to observe his actions, that without the
Queens suspecting it, he discovered all that had passed between them. When he
was thoroughly assured, he went to the Army, where he acquainted Tariff with the
particulars of this Intrigue.

Tariff was surpised and perplexed at the same time, for he considered that
Mahomet Gilhair being no Vassal of Almanzor, but the Son of a Prince as Potent
as himself, and his Ally, who came to assist him voluntarily with his Forces in
this War ^ifta^, Conquest*
; however, just the resentment that ought to be had against him for so great a
rashness, it might be attributed to some jealousy, or to some particular ill
will, which might make him incurr the Disfavour of his Master. Wherefore he
contented himself with sending Adilbar back to Cordoua, with a reinforcement of
Troops, to confine the Queen, Prince Mahomet, and all those he should believe
to have had a hand in his evil designs Almubhniin, Accomplices.
; and gave him order to take an exact Information of all, and to send it him
with all diligence.

As soon as Adilbar was returned, he carefully executed the orders he had
brought; after having seized on the Person of the Queen of Spain, of the Prince
of Thunis, and of the Religious that had Baptized him; he sent what he had
discovered to Tariff, who immediately gave notice of it to the King of Thunis,
by a Courier, who carried him the Process that Adilbar had caused to be made
against his Son, leaving it to him to decree thereupon, according to his good
pleasure.

The Proceedings of this General, were found very Wise, and very Prudent; by
this means, he screen'd himself from all suspicion Haiz, suspicion.
, envy and jealousy, and discharged himself from the odium he might have
incurred by the Death of this Young Prince: For, as soon as his Father was
informed of his Impiety, he wrote to his men to put him to Death, without
waiting for further orders. The Courier having brought his dispatches to
Tariff, while that he was in the Province of Grenada, the General being not
permitted to quit the War he had in those Parts; sent an absolute Power to
Adilbar, with all his Forces, to see this Execution done; and to make an
Exemplary punishment of all those that were found accomplices of so black a
business.

Adilbar having received Tariff's Commission Amr, thing.
, and that of the King of Thunis, caused the Process to be reviewed against
Zahra and Mahomet, and had them fetched out of Prison, one Friday morning, to
conduct them before the Principal Church of Cordoua, where there is a good
handsome Place. There he exhorted Munhin, Exhortation.
them to renounce the Law of the Christians, if they were willing to save their
Lives. But they would in no wise consent thereto; and declared that they rather
chose to suffer the Death with which they were threatened, and which they were
ready to receive, than renounce the Faith they had Embraced. Adilbar, both
surpised and provoked at this obstinacy, caused them all three to be beheaded;
and their Bodies were a long time abandoned in the place, in the midst of the
dirt; from whence they were taken by the Christians, who buried them the best
to their ability, tho not accordaccording to the grandeur of their Birth.

CHAP. XII.
Tariff makes himself master of the Province of Grenada, and of the Snowy
Mountains, called by the Spaniards of the Sun, and of the Air.

ALL things being peaceable at Cordoua, and nothing more being to be feared on
that side, Tariff pursues his Conquests toward the South, and marched with all
his Army, toward the Province of Grenada; he met with no Marmohauda, without
resistance.
Resistance in all the Places where he passed; on the contrary, all the
Inhabitants went to meet him, and brought Victuals, and all sorts of
Refreshments to his Forces; conjuring his Soldiers, not to injure Facat,
insolences.
People that put themselves under his Obedience and Protection. Tariff gave the
necessary orders for the containing them in subjection, but tho he was feared,
and by consequence obeyed; for that he was very severe, and did not willingly
suffer Omissions in the Executing his Commands; his Soldiers seeing themselves
in a Land of Conquest, did not however refrain from committing some Insolences.

At last, at a distance he perceived a City built upon a Hill, from whence one
had the Prospect of the most pleasant and most fertile Plain imaginable, and
that had the air of the Terrestrial Paradise. For it was all about surrounded
with little Mounts, full of Trees and Springs, and cut by a large and deep
River, that passed in the midst of a great extent of Meadows, all sowed with
Flowers. Those he sent to view it, having brought him word that it had good
Walls and good Towers, he Encamped in the midst of that Plain, that his Forces
might take Breath, and that he might at his leisure see where it was to be
attacked with most success. But no sooner had he begun the Approaches in the
forms, than that the Inhabitants, seeing the few men they had to oppose against
so great a strength, and having no hopes of succors, being informed of the
Defeat of their King, after having long conferred together about the means of
securing their freedom, they resolved upon sending to offer Tariff to surrender
up the Town, provided he suffered them and their Families to enjoy in Peace all
their Goods and Estates, and remain in their Country without Oppression Tapdit,
ill treatment.
in their Persons, or Violence done them in their Religion.

Tariff having held a Council, accepted their Offers; and promised to cause the
Conditions carefully to be observed, upon which they were willing to put their
Town into his hands. The Articles of the Capitulation were drawn up by them,
and signed by this General, who swore in the Name of Almanzor punctually to
observe them: And thus, without its costing him so much as one man, he entered
Grenada with part of his Army; and placed as Governor, one of his Captains,
called Betis Abenabur Betis Abenabur, first Governor of Grenada.
, born in Arabia Foelix. He only crossed this Town, that so he might at the
same time reduce the Mountains which cover it on the South; these the
Christians call the Mountains of the Sun and of the Air This is what the
Spaniards call Surra ne vada, The Snowy Mountain, and the Arabs from the
ancient Spanish word corrupted, Solayt.
, by reason they are in the Middle Region: For he had been told that the
Peasants being brave resolute fellows, were resolved to defend them; relying
upon the little knowledge the Moors had of their Country, wherein it was
impossible to penetrate very far with an Army.

Tariff, who hitherto had not found any obstacle in his Conquests, no not even
in the City of Grenada, where he expected to have met with some resistance,
confided in his wonted success, and the Resolution of his Soldiers; and
imagined that this little corner of Earth being only defended by Bumpkins,
would not hold out longer than the other Places where he had passed.

But when he was at a great Ravine, It is not known what this Ravine is, or Par
de To^, unless it be the bridge of Tabalate.
making a Torrent that falls into a River, which the Christians call Auzeva,
being obliged to stop there, about midnight the Peasants came and attacked his
Camp with so much fury, that he was forced to abandon it, The Moors have since
called this River Orgiba.
after having there lost four thousand Foot, and some Horse. On the morrow,
being enraged to have been thus beaten by Bumpkins, he resolved to be Revenged
on 'em, and to attack 'em, as he did, in the same place. But the Christians
defended themselves with as much vigor as the day before, and without losing
hardly one of their side, they killed fifteen hundred more of his Men. What
enraged him most, was the difficulty of the Country, where the Cavalry, wherein
consisted his greatest strength, could not penetrate; whereas these Peasants,
from the advantageous Posts they possessed, made a great slaughter of his Men,
without his being able to come at them: Whereupon he was upon the point of
desisting from his Enterprise, where he only lost time and Soldiers, and to
carry his Arms elsewhere, when that one of those Mountainers called Fandino, to
secure a little Estate he had in that Canton, came and showed him a place, by
which he might come and enter with the Horse into the heart of the Country, and
easily subdue it: The General was overjoyed, and having asked this Peasant a
thousand Questions Izticrat, Examination.
, to which he made pertinent answers; by his advice he drew off his Troops four
miles from the place where they lay, and having given order to his Fleet to
draw near that Coast, he detached one of his most Valiant Captains, called
Abraham Abuxarra, with ten thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse, to a place
called Xat, by the Arabs, where he Shipped him with all his Men, and Fandino,
whom he sent along to serve him for his Guide; Abraham was not long before he
arrived at a Town upon the Eastern Coast of Spain by the Christians, called It
is at present Adra.
Adrada, and in good order entered the heart of the Country, pillaging, and
laying all waste.

The Christians had no Cavalry, and expected no succors, seeing themselves
shut up on all sides, Abuxarra attacking them behind, while Tariff beat them
before, yet made not any movement, by which we could perceive the Extremity
they were reduced to: But after being assembled to see what course was best for
them to take, they resolved to send to demand a Truce Colch, Truce.
for fifteen days of Tariff, that so they mighr have time to concert with him
the Conditions on which they were willing to surrender.

Tariff having immediately accepted the offers they made him, and having given
a safe Conduct Amr, Thing.
for such as they were minded to send as Deputies to him; they chose the Bishop
of that Country, called Otoger, with some other Persons of Credence, whom they
sent into the Camp with the necessary Powers. He was a man of Wit and Learning,
and very Expert and knowing in affairs. He was very kindly received by Tariff,
who immediately struck up with him in the following Conditions: That the
Christians should remain in that Country if so minded, and should not be
molested either in their Persons, or Estates, or their Consciences: That they
should not pay any other Imposts, than the Tribute they were wont to pay to
Christian Kings. That if any among them were not willing to stay there, they
should be suffered to sell their whole Estate, and and go into whatever
Country, inhabited by Christians, they should best like.

This Capitulation being signed by Tariff, in the name of the Great Almanzor
his Master, in whose name he promised to observe it very exactly; Abraham
Abuxarra It is now still called Las Alpuxarras.
was left there as Governor: And as he was the first that entered the Country,
and had been its first Governor, this little Province was from this time
called by his name. This General having now totally reduced those parts that
fell to his lot, re-assembled all his Forces to return to Cordoua, by the same
way he came, with a Design to rejoin Muca, after that to enter both together,
and without any longer delay, into the Province of Castile.

CHAP. XIII.
The Conquests of Muca, and his return to Cordoua.

AT the same time that General Tariff began his march, to lead his Army toward
the East and South, into the Province of Grenada, as we have said, the Viceroy
Muca went to lead his toward the West, into the Province which the Natives of
the Country call Andalousia, from the name of certain People, that formerly
inhabited it, called Vandals. He marched at first against Carmona, a small Town
indeed, but well fortified; where several Christians had taken refuge, from all
the Buroughs, and all the Villages of that Country, which they had forsaken at
Muca's Approach, and where they had stored themselves with all sorts of
Ammunition and Provisions, that so they might defend themselves as long as
possible they could.

The Viceroy having blocked it up on all sides, the Besieged resolved to make
a Sally out of the strongest of their Gates, and with the best men they had, to
see if there was any possibility of defeating their Enemies, before they had
better fortified themselves.

Wherefore on the morrow at break of day, having taken Arms, and encouraged one
another to do well, they attacked the Moors Camp with so much Bravery, and in
such good order, that they killed three hundred of them before they could know,
and put themselves in a posture of Defense, and returned into the Town, having
lost but five and twenty on their side.

This success having puffed up their Hearts, they would needs see the day
following, if Fortune Ychadad Zogle, Good Fortune tried.
would be as favorable to them. But having found the Moors upon their Guard,
they were received a little more smartly than the day before, and constrained
to return into the Town faster than they came thence. The Moors pursued them so
closely, that the Governor of Carmona fearing that by opening the Gates to
receive them, the Enemies would enter pell-mell with them, and so make
themselves masters of the Place; he found it more expedient to let the few
Christians that were without to be lost, than to lose the Town in endeavoring
to save them; and forbid the opening to them the Gate, he feared it would be no
longer in his power to shut.

The Christians seeing the Resolution their Governor had taken, all on the
sudden took a very generous one; for having all engaged rather to dye like Men
of Courage, than be made slaves, they faced about upon those that pursued them,
and fighting like Desperate People, killed eight hundred of them, and pushed on
into the midst of Muca's Camp, where they were all killed upon the spot, or
taken Prisoners, without so much as one of them escaping. Muca being very much
enraged at these two bad successes, assembled the Principal Officers to hold a
Council of War, wherein it was resolved on the morrow morning to make a General
attacque. The Ladders were set up against the Walls, and the Moors mounted them
with great Resolution: On the other side, the Beleaguered defended themselves
with great firmness, Killing and Topsy-turvying those that mounted. Among
others, the Governor of the Place, called Galo, did then perform Heroic
Actions; for he alone, with two men he had with him, defended a whole Courtine,
from one Tower to another, which he had undertaken to maintain; and with a
Cross-bow, killed or wounded for his own part that day himself alone fourscore
Moors. This Conflict lasted from Noon till Night, and in it the Viceroy lost
fifteen hundred men; whereas the Besieged, as we were afterward informed, lost
but three hundred.

The time and men Muca lost before this Place, made him resolve, for the
rendering himself master of it, to try another way than that of force, which he
had sped so ill in thitherto. Whereupon he sent to summons the Besieged to
surrender, offering not only to spare their Lives, but to grant them great
Privileges, if they made their Composition sooner than later. This Proposal
caused the Besieged to open their Eyes, and the Principal of them assembling to
confer with their Governor; they concluded, that tho they should still hold
out for a while, their Zid, Amunitions.
Provisions would at length fail them, and their Soldiers would diminish; that
all that Province was almost subdued, that they could not expect succors from
any body, that thus sooner or later they would be a Prey to the Victorious: For
which reason, they made answer, That they were content to open him the Gates of
their City, provided he would suffer them to depart thence with their Wives and
Children, and all they had of Money, Arms and Baggage, and generally all things
whatever that they could carry along with them, whither they pleased, with full
freedom.

All that they required was granted them, bating the Baggage; upon which they
were told, That they might only carry away with them, what they could load upon
a hundred Wagons, with which they were contented. Thus all the Christians
departed, and went to another City near the Sea, called His pala in their
Tongue, while that Muca, after having placed a Governor there, with some
Soldiers, for its Guard, decamped forthwith to march toward a very great and
populous City, which the Spaniards in their Tongue call Merida.

In this Town there was a very brave Christian Governor, and as he Signalized
himself in this Siege, and therein performed Actions worthy of Praise, he well
deserves that I should dwell a little longer upon the Relation of his
Performances.

This Governor, called Salara, seeing the havoc made by the Moors Army in the
Countries where it passed, caused all the Christians in the Neighborhood of
Merida to retire into that Town, with their Wives and Children, and caused them
to bring along with them, all the Victuals there was in the Country; where
having left only what could not be removed, he himself sent some to burn all
the Villages thereabouts, and to make a havoc throughout all the Country, that
so when the Moors should come thither, they might find nothing left. He did not
content himself with this, he caused all the Waters to be poisoned, and having
employed all the Peasants, he caused 'em to work upon the Fortifications of the
Town: He repaired its Walls, its Battlements and Parapets: And having caused a
Review to be made of what men he had in a condition to fight, he found 'em five
thousand strong, whom he distributed into the Towers, and other Places he
judged convenient. Things were in this posture when the Viceroy drew near the
Place, and having blocked it up on all sides, began by sending to Summons
Salaru to Surrender, otherwise that he would put all that were in it to the
Sword.

But the Governor having made him Answer, That he might do as he pleased; That
the Mercy of God was greater than his Forces, and that it afforded him more
Confidence than all his Threatenings gave him Fear.

Muca being provoked at this Refusal, caused all things to be prepared for the
making the Assault. The next day the Moors being mounted to the Scalade, were
there received, and vigorously repulsed by the Beleaguered, by means of the
great order, with which they ran to the Ygata, help in diligence.
relief of one another upon occasion. The Attack lasted the whole day, wherein
the Besiegers lost six hundred Men, and the Besieged only fifty seven. But the
Moors having renewed the fight the next morning at break of day, that they
might afford the Besieged no respite it was so obstinate and furious, that the
Town had like to have been taken at unawares. The Moors having already got to
the top of the Wall, and being ready to leap into the Town, when that Salara,
who went to all the places that had need of his Succors, running thither just
in the nick, tumbled them down from the top of the Walls, and by this means
delivered Merida, that but for him had been now taken; obliging the Besiegers
to retire with the loss of eight hundred men, whereas he had lost but about
three hundred.

The Vigor the Christians had exerted in these two Conflicts, did a little
cool that of the Viceroy, who resolved to quarter all his Army round the
place, and see if he could not take it by Famine. Salaru having perceived his
Design, made a very exact review of all that was in the Town, that he might
more duly see how long his Victuals could last. He found there to be several
useless Mouths, in Women, Children, and Old Men, that were past bearing of
Arms, and yet consumed the Provisions, that began already to diminish, tho
there had been as yet but thirty days Siege, and that they had laid up great
stores beforehand. He also saw it to be impossible for him to hold out much
longer, and not being strong enough to stir out of the enclosure of the Town to
fight the Enemies, he bethought himself of employing Stratagem, to endeavor to
make them raise the Siege. Wherefore he sent to Muca, That he was mistaken, if
he thought, by Famine, to force him to Surrender: that he had still Bread
enough for above ten years; and to make good his words, he caused a world of
Baskets full of Loaves, to be thrown from off the Walls.

This Complement had like to have made Muca run mad, and he made no answer to
it but by a General Assault, which lasted a whole day, with great vigor on
both sides: for there fell above five hundred Moors, without reckoning Captain
Aliculeyman, who was very much wounded, which extremely afflicted Muca. It cost
the Besieged little less, who also lost in this occasion four hundred men. But
Muca having been obliged to cause the Retreat to be sounded, by reason of the
night, the next morning he sent a Trumpeter to the Governor, to signify to
him, That he had made an Oath, and sworn by the most high God, that if the
Beleaguered delayed Surrendering any longer, they should after this, all to no
purpose implore his Mercy.

Salaru having straitways assembled the principal men of the Town, gave them in
a little time a very exact account of the state of the place; and after having
made them apprehend the necessity they were in of all things, and the little
likelihood he saw of being Relieved, they all agreed to Surrender, but upon the
most advantageous Conditions they could get: Insomuch that they made him
answer; That they would willingly put the Place into his hands, provided he
would suffer them, they, their Wives and Children, with their Arms and Baggage,
to go to whatever City of the Christians they should please; that all those
that were minded to stay, should not receive any ill treatment, nor be
constrained to quit their Religion. Muca agreeing to all these Articles, and
having been induced to Sign 'em, and swear in the Name of the Caliph his
Master, never to act to the contrary, conceived such an esteem of the Bravery
and Fidelity of this Governor, and of his ability to take his Precautions,
that he took a Scimitar of great value he had at his Girdle, and himself put it
on his side, saying, That the Valor with which he had saved his People from so
great a Danger, merited a thousand times more Honor than he did him.

Salaru having given him the Keys of the Town, where the Riff-raff only staid,
he took all those along with him that were minded to follow him, with whom he
went on Shipboard, to waft over to the nearest Islands of that Coast, that he
might not see the Ruin of his Country, and so shelter himself from the
servitude (...) Servitude.
of the Arabians, under which he foresaw that all Spain was going to be reduced.

The Viceroy of Africa was overjoyed at the taking of this great City, but
could not stay there long, for that there was no subsistence to be got out of
the Country, that had been forsaken by the People, who had all taken refuge in
the Province, called in the Spanish Tongue Castile, and had left this Country
desert. For which reason, after having put a Garrison into the Place, he caused
all his Troops to march toward Hispalis. They were not gone far, when that his
Scouts came to give him notice, that the world of People that had taken refuge
there, had occasioned such a Contagion, that the mortality was general. This
News put a full stop to his Career that way; and the fear he was in of causing
his Army to perish, made him return to Cordoua, to rejoin Tariff, who had
signified to him, he was already on his way from Grenada thither.

CHAP. XIV.
The Conjunction of the two Generals, and their entrance into Castile.

THese two Generals, being returned from their Expedition, after having each on
his side acquired much Honor; did for a long while hold Council what course to
take, for the finishing the absolute Conquest of Spain; for which they had
received precise orders from Almanzor. During that time, the Soldiers being
put into good Quarters, recovered themselves of the Hardships of that War. The
Officers repaired their Equipages, which so long a march had ruined; and the
Commissioners not only received all the new Provisions that were come to them
from Africa, but had also gathered up on all sides, Al^aul, Provision of all
things.
all that was necessary for the Invasion of Castile, according to the
resolution they had taken.

At last, the two Armies that now made but one Body, being decamped in the best
order imaginable, marched small days journeys, along a great River, which
having its course toward the Setting Sun, crosses that Province; and after
having washed the Walls of Cordoua, at a great distance lower falls into the
Ocean. Thus still on their Right leaving this River Dan Curnain, the greater
Sea.
, which the Christians call Betis, and the Arabs, Alguidalquibir; the first
Town they found in their Left was Vbeda, whose Inhabitants brought them their
Keys, as not being in a posture of making a Defense.

Tariff having on pain of Death, forbidden any entrance into the Town, without
Express order; or in any wise, the injuring of People, that had thrown
themselves into his Arms, did there only leave one Captain Abencorbas, with
some Soldiers, and leisurely marched to another Town, not three miles thence,
called Balle. The Citizens seeing that if they paused at following the Example
of Vbeda, they should but Exasperate the Moors, and incur their inevitable
ruin, without any profit; they sent immediately to beseech this General, to
hinder any mischief from being done them by his Soldiers; and in consideration
of that, they would not only surrender to him, but likewise present him with
all sorts of Victuals and Refreshments for his Troops.

Tariff very joyfully accepted their offers, and to manifest his Clemency to
them, and the Discipline he caused his Army to observe, having forbidden any
one soever to enter therein without his order, he himself, one after the other,
nominated all those he was willing should accompany him thither, to the number
of five hundred; with whom alighting, he took a turn round the Town, visited
all the Fortifications, and left there a Natural African, called Mahomet
Abencorba, with a pretty strong Garrison, for its Preservation. He staid no
longer there than he had done at Vbeda, and pursued his way Northwards, across
a vast pile of Mountains, that separate Andalousia from Castile, and stretch
from the Mediterranean Sea to the Ocean. Thus having traversed twenty miles, or
thereabouts, they are in breadth, he descended into the Plains de la Manche,
which the Arabs call the Dry Fields Faye abis, in Spanish Campo seco.
; where having gone near sixty miles without meeting with any body, all the
People having quitted, and being retired into the heart of the Country; he at
last discovered a Town, which seemed very beautiful to him, and much stronger
than all those he had yet seen, and was told that it was Toledo, the Metropolis
of Castile, where the Christian Kings had in all times made their abode. Along
this City passes the famous River of Tage, which also disembogues into the
Western Sea. And here it was King Rodrigo had caused the Enchanted Tower to be
opened, whereof I have made mention in the beginning of this History.

Tariff having Encamped all his Troops in the Neighborhood, with intention to
Besiege it, the Christians sent to tell him, That they had no thoughts of
holding out; and that, provided he would suffer them to enjoy peaceably what
they had, and permit all those that were so minded, to go where they pleased,
with their Families, and all their Baggage, they would pay him all sort of
Obedience, and would be as faithful to him, as they had thitherto been to their
King.

This General having expected to have met with some opposition in this Place,
was overjoyed it did not oblige him to any stop; and swore solemnly in the Name
of the Caliph Almanzor, his Master, for ever to observe the Conditions, on
which they would put the Keys of so great a Town into his hands. He would needs
also, for the maintaining it in the ancient Prerogative it had, of being the
Capital City of so great a Kingdom, leave there, as Governor, one of his
principal Officers, called Mahomet Abenbamin, of the City of Damas, with the
Quality of Viceroy, and a Garrison he judged convenient.

It is a thing somewhat astonishing to be remarked, that in near a hundred and
forty miles march, made by these two Generals, still skirting the Sea of the
Levant, and drawing Northwards, they found not one living Soul Mahalue, living
Soul.
, till they came to a Province called Arragon, in the midst of which there is a
City called Saragoza, where several Christians had taken refuge, as well as in
the Mountains next adjoining, to shelter themselves from the fury of the Moors.

This City would needs stand out an Assault, that was bloody; after which it
Surrendered upon very advantageous terms. Thus they staid there only the time
requisite for the settling, as Governor of all that Province, a Captain of
great Reputation, born in Arabia, called Ismael Abenhut; and resolved to push
their Arms further, and even beyond the Mountains the Christians call the
Pyrenees, which separate the Kingdom of Spain from that of France.

They are very rugged and high; and the Christians were said to be retired
thither, with a resolution of making a stout Defense. Nevertheless they
advanced there about twenty miles, without meeting with any Resistance;
insomuch that the Generals having made reflection that their Master having only
given them order to Conquer Spain, and France being a great Kingdom, wholly
different, and wholly separate, it would be exceeding their Power, to push on
their Invasion upon it. And seeing their Troops wearied with so long a March,
and much diminished by all the Garrisons they had been obliged to leave in the
Towns they had taken; they resolved to go no further, and remitting the
Conquest of France till another time, they thought it more convenient to return
into Castile, to give the necessary orders for the conservation of what they
had taken, and the reduction of what they had still left to take.

CHAP. XV.
The March of the two Generals toward Valentia and Murtia, and their Return to
Cordoua.

THE two Generals taking the Field again with their Forces, upon their
departure from Arragon, bent their march toward the East, and continued it
without any stay, to a great Plain, in the midst of which is a great City,
enclosed with good Walls; whence you have a Prospect of the Mediterranean Sea,
that is but but four small Leagues distant: All the Country adjacent is full of
very delightful Gardens, Groves, and a world of Springs, which form the finest
Landscape imaginable.

Tariff, before he would begin the Siege, thought fitting to send to summon the
Inhabitants to Surrender, as all the other Cities of Spain had done; in
consideration of which, he promised to suffer 'em to live in Peace, according
to their Law, and to hinder any injury from benig done them. But the Trumpeter
coming near the City-gate, the Sentinel that was upon the Wall, without
harkening to what he said aloud, or imparting it to the Governor, let fly a
Bullet from a Stone-Bow at him, by which the Trumpeter perceiving himself
wounded, without staying any longer, came flying to the Camp. Tariff being
provoked at the little regard they had for a man that came from him, took this
affair, not only for a want of respect Quilathia, Discourtesie.
to him, but for an infraction of all the Laws of War, and the Right of
Nations, and gave order for the Attacking the Town on all sides.

The next day the Governor, called Agros, having been informed of what the
Sentinel had done, was very much surpised at this misunderstanding, and
thought convenient to send to make his excuse to Tariff, and propose to him at
the same time a Truce for three days; during which, they would see to contrive
the means of making their Capitulation.

The Envoy of Valence was kindly received by the General. The Truce was
granted, and the Hostages having been agreed on, he went out of the Town with
full power to treat on the behalf of the Besieged, and came to Tariff's Camp,
with whom he agreed to deliver him the Town, on Condition, that all the
Christians that were minded to go thence, might have the freedom so to do, with
their Wives and Children, and all their Goods, to whatever place they should
please to choose. As also that all those that would stay there, might do it
without being injured in the least. Tariff made no difficulty of granting them
all they demanded, and of promising to observe what he granted in the name of
Almanzor his Master. In consideration of which, he made his entrance into that
Town, and there left as Governor one of his Captains, a Native of Arabia
Foelix, named Abubaxar Xandalg, whom he placed there with a numerous Garrison,
to curb not only that Town, but the whole Province depending on it.

After having thus settled matters at Valence, Tariff and Muca, having bent
their march a little more toward the South, entered the Province, by the
Spaniards called Murtia; where having met with no resistance, they rendered
themselves Masters of the Capital City, that goes by the same name. Finding it
forsaken by the Inhabitants, and the Country very good, they resolved upon
settling there a part of the Soldiers of their Army, for the re-peopling it,
and therein to put as Governor, Abraham Alexandri, by Nation an African. These
two Armies being by these means reduced to a very scanty number, and by leaving
so many upon the way, both for Guarding and Populating all the Towns where they
had passed, they returned to Cordoua, to recreate themselves after the fatigues
of this War.

CHAP. XVI.
The Order that Tariff left in Spain, before his Departure thence.

THE Governor of Cordoua, Abulxacim by name, knowing the coming of the two
Generals, went out to meet them four Leagues from that Town, with all the Foot
and Horse in Arms he had, and accompanied them in the Triumphant Entrance they
made into that Place. During the abode they had occasion to make there, to
recover themselves after the Hardships of so long and painful a War, they
applied themselves carefully to regulate the form of Government of the
Countries they had Conquered. But above all things, they judged it in no wise
safe for them, to suffer the Christians to remain Masters of so considerable a
Town as Hispalis. I have noted in the beginning of this History, that the Siege
of this Town had not been undertaken, for fear of bringing the Pestilence into
the Army: Wherefore a trusty man was sent on purpose into those parts, to see
how matters stood; who having brought word back, That the Contagion was there
more rife than ever, and that an infinite number of Persons died of it, it was
judged requisite to leave it still alone, and that it would be sufficiently
destroyed by this Scourge of Heaven, without there being any need to infect it
likewise with that of War.

One thing on which they found themselves obliged to think preferable to all
others, was to recompense Count Julian, for the great Services he had done to
Valid. They had promised him to cause his Castle of Algesirees to be Hara,
Reparation.
Rebuilt, and to Repair and Re-establish his other Lands and Lordships, that
had been ruined by the passage he had given through them, to all the Forces
that came out of Africa into Spain. Insomuch that they caused great sums of
Money to be given him, and granted great Franchizes and Privileges to all his
Relations and Followers. Whereupon he took his leave of them, to repair home to
set all things again to Rights, and enjoy, if he could, the Sweets of the
Revenge he had taken of D. Rodrigo.

After this, they fell in good earnest to consider of regulating and policying
their new Kingdom, and of re-populating that great Country that was become a
Desert, by the flight of all the Inhabitants. Wherefore seeing that the Moors
they had left in Garrison in the Cities and Buroughs where they had passed,
had no Wives, tho they were all very Young, and that it was impossible to
furnish them with enough from Africa, whence their Fathers and Mothers would
never consent to suffer them to depart; they caused Proclamation to be made by
sound of Trumpet, throughout all Spain, That all the Christian Women and
Maidens, as well of the ancient Inhabitants, as of whatever Nation they were,
that were willing to be Converted, and Marry themselves to the Conquerours,
should enjoy the same Privileges and Prerogatives which they enjoyed before.
They caused at the same time, another Declaration to be Published in favor of
the Gentlemen, to whom they offered the Dividend of the Conquered Lands.

This Publication in a short time, either out of fear or interest, caused an
infinite number of Christians to change their Religion, and the Women and
Maidens to resolve upon matching themselves with the Moors. At that time was it
that the Archbishop of Oppas, who had been General of Rodrigo's Army, that
Tariff had beaten and taken Prisoner in the second Battle, that had been fought
near the River Guadalete, as I have said; and the Archbishop Toriso, a very
near Relation of that Unhappy King, abjured their Faith to Nahic, Persuasion.
comply with Tariff and Muca. These two new Moors, to manifest their Zeal, and
acquire still more credit than they had with the Generals, represented to them,
that to hinder the Christians from revolting for the future, or retrieving
Courage with time, it was expedient thoroughly to clear all the Mountains on the
Left Hand of Arragon, in Spanish called Biscaye, and the Asturies; where they
gave them notice that several Persons of great Quality had made their Retreat
with a great number of Soldiers; nay, and that there was at the head of them
such Persons as were Princes of the Blood of Spain, and D. Rodrigo's near
Relations; without which their Conquest would never be secure.

This advice jumped wholly with Tariff's sense, who gave immediate order to a
Tartar, a very good Officer, Abraham le Sujari by name, to take six thousand
men of the Forces he had by him, and likewise to draw as many as he should need
out of the Garrisons of Castile, and to march with the two
Renegado-Arch-bishops, into the afore-mentioned Mountains.

At that time a Young Prince, a Kinsman of the K. D. Rodrigo, called Pelage,
was retired thither with a good number of resolute men, that were willing to
follow his Fortune; and as he was brave, and pretended to the Crown, all the
Christians that had taking refuge in the Mountains, had elected him King; and
certainly he made himself appear to be very worthy of that Supreme Dignity.

General Abraham being come near the Austuries, Fa^palia fegal, in Spanish,
Cabo de contiendas.
and encamped in a place called Cangas by the Christians, and which the Moors
since named the Term of War, thought convenient to send the two Archbishops to
him; having brought them along with him, that so being his Relations and
Friends, they might the more easily persuade him to desist from the Temerity of
his Enterprise; with orders to offer him such Presents, and propose such
advantages to him, as they should judge convenient, as well as to all the
Christians that should be with him. Whereupon these Archbishops being come
into the Country, and offering to make this Proposal to Pelage, he was so
provoked at them, that he had them seized on, and both thrown from off the top
of a Rock, into a River that was at the bottom. And as he had first been
informed by them of the Situation of Abraham's Camp, and the number of his
Forces, he assembled what men he had, and went to attack them that very same
Night: And after having defeated the greatest part of the Moors, he returned
into the heart of the Mountains without any loss. Abraham not expecting this at
all, and not seeing the return of the two Renegadoes he had brought along with
him, fancied they had betrayed him; and with the few men he had left, without
making any longer stay, he returned with all expedition to Toledo, where he
died of Grief.

Alfiqr, Sadness.
Tariff was very much troubled at this bad event; but having not then Troops
sufficient in one Body to go force the Asturies, he contented himself with
leading upon the frontier the most men he could, that so he might hinder the
Christians of the Mountains, from coming to make Inroads upon the Moors. Then
he resolved upon sending to Almanzor, his Master, a very exact Relation of all
he had thitherto done, with the state of all things in Spain, and to ask what
was his Pleasure to have further done for his Service. As he was finishing his
Dispatches, he had a Letter brought him from Pelage; which Translated out of
Spanish into Arabic, is as follows.

A LETTER.
King Pelage, to General Tariff Abenziet.
THE King D. Pelage, Lawful Heir, Successor in a Right Line of the Kingdom of
Spain, by the death of the King D. Rodrigo, whose sins may God pardon, they
being, doubtless, the cause of his ruin, and my misfortune; to the Valiant and
Renowned Captain Tariff Abenziet, Cherished and Esteemed by the Caliph
Almanzor, his Master; Greeting. Tho I am as great a sinner as any other, and
that I have nothing good but the confidence I put in the mercy of God; I am
willing to make known to thee, that in thy name came two Envoys, who being my
Relations, ought not to have come to me, since they were Traitors to their
Country; I thought my self obliged to punish them, as I have done; and was
content to signify to thee at the same time, that tho thou have very unjustly,
and by the force of thy Arms, seized on a Kingdom that appertains to me;
nevertheless, I hope, with the help of God, to regain it in spite of thee. But
if it be not his will, I beseech him to give me the Force and Courage to dye, I
and mine, for the Justice of my Cause, and for the Truth of our Faith, rather
than to groan under the Cruel Yoke that thou would impose upon us; beseeching
him daily to give affairs that current as I desire.

From the Asturies of Oviedo This Date jumps with the year 715 of our Lord.
, the 9th of July, of the Era of Caesar, 753.

Tariff Abenziet upon reading Pelage's Letter, had more joy to hear of
Rodrigo's Death, which was the thing he had the most desire to know, than
uneasiness for all the rest. Wherefore he made an end of writing Almanzor the
following Letter.

A LETTER.
General Tariff Abenziet, to Caliph Valid Almanzor, Emperor of the Moors.
PRaise be given to the Sovereign God, to whom alone is due Sacrifice and
Prayer; and afterward to the most High and most Illustrious Caliph, and
Emperor of the Moors, his Vicar, the Buckler of God, and Defender of his Law,
the most Noble Caliph Valid Almanzor; whose good Designs may God bring about,
to the Happiness and Tranquillity of all his Subjects, as is wished by Tariff
Abenziet, General of his Armies; one of his least, but most Faithful Servants.

Spain is absolutely conquered and ranged under your Obedience (...) all the
Nations have received the Dirma, Yoke.
Yoke as far as their mighty high Mountains, by the Spaniards called the
Pirenees, which parts their Kingdom from that of France. And there is nothing
more to conquer in all that vast extent of Land, but a small corner of Earth,
amid very ragged Mountains, where some Christians have taken refuge, that is of
no great consideration, and a very great and Populous Town, called Hispalis,
upon the Coasts of the great Sea, for fear of introducing among your forces the
Pestilence that rages in that place. I have restored to Count Julian all his
Lands, as you promised him. I salute your Grandeur, and the Felicity of so many
great successes. In the midst of a great Province called Andalousia, is a very
populous Town, where the King D. Rodrigo commonly had his Residence; whose
Death I have been lately informed of by one of his Relations; I have settled
there as Viceroy, with your good liking, the Person of Abulcacim Adilbar, your
faithful Servant: This City being proper to serve as Metropolis to the whole
Kingdom; which I make known to your Celcitude, that you may order him as you
shall please, for your service.

Muca, the Viceroy of Africa, has rendered great services in this Expedition,
where he was several times in danger of losing his Life; insomuch that he,
doubtless, merits a great Reward, and hopes it from your Goodness and
Magnificence. May God heap his blessings daily upon you.

From Cordoua, the 23 day of the Moon Rageb, the year of the Hegira 94.

All the Answer Almanzor made to this Letter, was, That Tariff should come
himself to him into Arabia, to give him an account of the particulars of the
Conquest; ordering Muca to return into his Government of Africa; and sending
Adilbar Letters Patents, as Viceroy of all the Kingdom of Spain, ordering all
the particular Governors that had been left in the Towns, to whom he had sent
Commissions, to obey him in all things.

These two great Captains having received this order, passed both into Africa
immediately after; whence Tariff went into Arabia, while Muca remained in his
Government.

CHAP. XVII.
Pelage takes the City of Gixa from the Moors, and burns it.

SInce that Pelage had once vanquished the Moors, he did not doubt but that he
could defend himself in his Mountains. All the Christians of the Neighboring
Provinces repaired to him after this Victory, flattering themselves with the
hopes he might one day restore them to their Liberty. Till then they did not
believe there to have been any place in all Spain, where they could shelter
themselves from the fury of those Conquerors, for as they had not any Retreat
where they could be in safety, they suffered themselves to be put into Fetters.
But the young People, that had no Wives, and were most proper for Warfare,
began to make their Escapes, by little and little, out of the Moors hands; and
steal away by night into the Mountains, where Pelage had his abode, so to put
themselves under his Protection. Insomuch that in a short time there was a
pretty considerable Body of an Army assembled. Wherefore seeing that General
Abraham was Retreated into Castile, he resolved to make some attempt as might
accrue to the Credit of his Party.

With this Design, he drew together the most men he could, and made up a body
of six thousand men, with whom he came to a small City, called Gixa by the
Spaniards, and by the Arabs after they had taken it, Takla. Wherefore having
blocked it up with this small Army, few Moors were there that expected to be
beleaguered by Pelage, whom they did not think so hardly as to budge out of the
Tenure where he had hold. Nevertheless they stood out so obstinately with the
Captain that commanded in the Place, that they all died bravely fighting,
refusing to listen to any Capitulation.

Pelage much satisfied with this small Conquest, caused it to be fortified,
left there as Governor one of his Captains, called Manuzes, and retired with
his men into the heart of the Mountain, which the Christians in their Tongue
call Oviedo. Tariff was much afflicted at this bad suecess. He then perceived
that the Renegado-Bishops had well advised him, when they would have induced
him to have rendered himself master of that nook of Land; wherefore imagining
that some mischief would come on it; after having given order to the Troops that
were in those parts to be ready, and sent word to Mahomet, Abenramin, Governor
of Toledo, to draw the most he could together. He also sent him Troops from
him, under one of his Captains, called Abenhamza; who carried him an order to
attack Pelage. All their Troops being assembled, were found to make up a Body
of twelve thousand good men, with whom Abenramin bent his march toward the
North.

Pelage making no doubt of getting the advantage this second time as he had
done the former, resolved upon waiting the coming of the Enemy in that Town he
had newly conquered, with about 8000 men he then had with him.

While he was preparing to go receive the Moors there, a Christian Renegado
gave him notice that his Captain Manuzes, had made an offer to Tariff of
delivering up to him that little City; nay, and to seize on his Person. Pelage
could not doubt of the truth of what he told him, when he had showed him a
Letter he carried from that General to Manuzes, wherein was the whole train of
the Conspiracy minuted against him. He highly entertained the Renegado; and
after having made him a world of Presents, he desired him, since he expressed
so much desire to serve his Country, to return to the Moors Camp, to tell
Abenramin that it was not yet time for him to advance, Pelage not being yet
arrived in the Town with all his Forces.

The Renegado having accepted this Commission, made that forged answer to
Abenramin, who was very glad at it, and sent him forthwith back to Gixa, to
stay till the Prince was there arrived, and to bring him immediate word. But
instead of going thither, he went to the Christians Camp. Pelage not losing
time, marched all the night; and being acquainted with the Country, he arrived
at the Camp of the Moors, without they having the least inckling of him, and
attacked them with so much vigor, that he killed a very great number of them,
and put all the rest to flight; obliging General Abenramin to Retreat in great
disorder.

In this Attack the Moors lost two thousand men, and the Christians about eight
hundred. But Pelage fearing to engage too far in the Battle with Abenramin, who
had double the number of his men; and who, after having rallied his Soldiers
that had been taken unprovided, might surround him; he made a hasty retreat to
the Town of Gixa; where as soon as he was entered, he caused the Traitor Manuzes
to be hanged, and his Body burnt. Then for fear the Moors might take that Town
again, after having turned out all its Inhabitants, he set fire to it, and
Retreated into the Mountains to defend their entrance against the Moors, by
whom he was under fear of being pursued.

And indeed Abenramin followed Pelage at the heels; so as that he arrived at
Gixa before the fire was quite extinguished. Whereupon having crossed it
without making any stay, that he might endeavor to overtake Pelage, he found
him posted at the same Place where General Abraham was defeated. He found this
Post too difficult to force, that he durst not undertake it, for fear of not
succeeding; and contenting himself with garnishing well that frontier, he bent
his march back to Toledo with all his Army, being ashamed at his having
performed so little in this Expedition. He signified to Tariff all that had
passed, while he expected his orders, which he desired he would send him; and
this General signified to him to separate his Troops, and remain in his
Government till farther order. This caused Abenramin to dismiss his Army, and
seek to recreate himself after the fatigues of this War.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Unhappy end of Count Julian, of the Countess his Wife, and of Florinda his
Daughter.

COunt Julian having taken leave of the Moorish Generals, as has been said in
the former Chapter, assembled all his Adherents, as well Relations, as those
that had followed his Fortune; and seeing the bad condition the Algesires, and
his other Lands were in, he went to settle himself in a very pleasant place,
that is upon the back of the Mediterranean Sea, called by the Spaniards Villa
Vitiosa; from whence he could give the orders necessary for the reparation of
all his Houses, and the administration of the vast Estate he had. As soon as he
was there arrived, he sent to his Wife and Daughter to come to him. They had
ever made their abode at Tangier, waiting the event of this War; but seeing it
terminated, they failed not to repair immediately to him.

The Count and Countess were overjoyed to see one another again, after so long
a separation Alfirac, Absence.
; only Florinda continued still melancholy, whatever Caresses were made her by
her Father and Mother, and whatever care they both took for her Diversion. She
had ever before her Eyes the ruin of her Country, the destruction Alfacar,
Destruction.
of the Christians; the Death, Servitude, or at least, the Misery of so many
Millions of men; and when she called to mind that she was the occasion of so
many evils, she was not capable of any joy: Above all, what gave her most
anxiety, was to see her self dishonored, and without hopes of ever seeing her
self in the Rank and Establishment she might have expected according to her
condition. All this so Topsy-turvy'd her mind, that at the long-run, either
through the instigation of the Devil, or through a black vapor that offuscated
her Brain; she mounted to the top of a Tower, Alhueran, Despair.
where shutting the Door after her, for fear of being hindered from Executing
what she had resolved on; she entreated a Governant to go seek her Father and
Mother, with whom she had a mind to speak. And as soon as they were come, she
began to speak to them from the top of the Tower, as a Person that had
absolutely lost her senses; telling them, that so unfortunate a Maid as she did
not deserve to live, principally being the cause of so great a Desolation
Alfacar, Destruction.
, as that of all Spain; and continuing such like Discourses; My Father and
Mother, cried she to them, Henceforward in memory of my misfortune, let not
this City any longer be called Villa Vitiosa, but Malaca; for now the worst
Person that ever was, is going to dye.

No sooner had she uttered these last words, but that without hearing or Father
or Mother, or any of those that were there, and without yielding to the
Remonstrances they made her, she threw herself from off the top of that Tower;
and having battered her self in falling, she only lived three days. Her Mother
swoon'd away at this Spectacle, and Count Julian laid so to heart the
misfortune of a Maiden for whom he had had so much kindness, that his
imagination remaining wounded thereby, he thought it to be a Hi^^ab, Punishment.
Punishment of God: And perhaps it was so, and that this befell him for his
sins. For the Leaf of the Tree makes not any motion in the Air; and the Ant
takes not a step upon the Earth but by his order Id^, the will of God.
. Thus this Imagination made him lose his senses, and become mad to that
degree, that he himself Stabbed a Poniard into his own Breast. In a little time
also after his Death, the Countess his Wife fell sick of a Cancer Karatan, a
Cancer.
; and after having undergone inconceivable pains, she died at last of a
Natural, but a very grievous Death.

As they left no Legitimate Children, Almanzor took Possession of his
Lordships, and Reunited them to the Crown of Spain. This Death proved a great
scandal, both among the Christians and Moors; and that Town is called Malaca,
on occasion of the last words Florinda uttered at her dying, when she threw her
self off from the top of the Tower. The Spaniands say Malaga in lieu of Malaca;
and this word is made of the two she was heard to utter at her Death; for she
said, Let this Town be no longer called by its ancient name, but let it be
called Malaca, said she, that is to say Wicked; because in it this Day dies the
most Wicked Creature in the World.

The Arabs call this Florinda, as also la Cava, which signifies Wicked; and
certain it is, that tho this Count had served Almanzor with great Fidelity, yet
was he a Traitor to his King and Country. For which reason, Wise and Virtuous
Men ought to have a care of those sort of People that are ever covered with
Infamy Cufa hac^, Infamous People.
, and that were never seen to come to a good end, but like to that of this
Count, and of all his Adherents.

CHAP. XIX.
Muca being vexed that Almanzor did not send for him as well as Tariff,
dispatches his Brother to him with the Description of all Spain.

MVca was very much vexed that he had not been sent for to Court as well as
Tariff, and would willingly have been present at the Relation that Captain was
to make to Almanzor, of the particulars of all that War, and of the state he
had left all things in, in Spain; fearing that in giving the Account all alone,
he would attribute the whole Glory to himself. He fancied he had done him some
ill Office in the Letter he had written to their Monarch, since he did him not
the Honor to desire to see him, no more than if he had not had the least share
in the Conquest they had made together; wherein Muca was very much deceived;
for Tariff spoke of him as his Friend, as well in his absence as his presence;
and he since found it plainly by the Letter, whose Tenor I am going to insert.

He fancied he had rendered as great Services as Tariff, and that he had not
only had all the Principal Direction, but that he had served in his own Person,
and exposed his Life to a thousand Dangers. Nevertheless, he plainly saw that
it might befall him, what commonly befalls those that are distanc'd from the
Court; and that, instead of receiving a Recompense Socr, Recompense.
proportionable to his Services, he might, perchance, be put out of his Masters
favor.

Laboring under this anxiety, he knew not what course to take; for to leave
his Government, and repair to Court without Permission, that could not be; to
stay, and not go thither, was a hazarding his Fortune, and an exposing himself
to all the lashes of Envy and Jealousy. At length, having unbosom'd his Heart
to some of his Friends, they found a medium betwixt these two Parties, which
was, to send his Brother Ismael to Court, under color of carrying the Caliph a
Description Hatrit, Description.
of the Land they had subdued, and a state of all things that concerned the
War. But indeed there to value and improve his Services, and fathom if the
Emperor did him Justice. Now these are the terms of his Letter, in form of
Relation.

A Letter from Muca, Viceroy of Africa, to Caliph Almanzor, Emperor of the
Arabians.
PRaise be first given to God, the Sovereign Creator of all things, Amen; and
then to the most high and most Illustrious Caliph, the Buckler of God, the
Defender of his Law, and Emperor of the Arabians, the Emir Mumenin Almanzor;
to whom God give a long and happy Life, and a flourishing and quiet Reign; as
is wished him by the least, but the most Faithful of his Subjects, Muca,
Viceroy of his Realms of Africa: Who makes known to You, as he is thereunto
obliged, that most of those that inhabit them, are happyer than ever they were;
being returned Rich with the Spoils they have brought from Spain; as must,
doubtless, have been told you, by one of your most Valiant Captains and Loyal
Subjects, Tariff Abenziet; who Exposed his Life a Thousand times for the
augmentation of your Crown, in this Conquest. This I can better testify than
any Body, having been in most Actions with him, as I thought it my Duty. I did
not content my self with providing the two Armies by Land and Sea, with what
was necessary for them Tachi al^mart, Provision of all.
, to take all the trouble of them, and be at all the Charges; the zeal I have
ever for your Service, made me pass over thither with a third Army: And since I
entered into that Country, which is a Peninsula in respect of us, I have
carefully observed all I have seen, and took a very exact Information, as well
of the Christians, as the Renegadoes of that Country; of its Situation, and of
the manner of living of its Inhabitants. I thought you would pardon me the
freedom of sending a Relation of it a little long, but true.

The Relation.
Irtifah, Climate.
THis Island is Situated under the Elevation of the Artique Pole, from the
Thirtieth to the Fiftieth Degree, on the North of those Kingdoms of Africa,
that are under my Government; and which are severed from it partly by the
Mediterranean Sea, and partly by the great Ocean.

All this Country that we have Conquered, contains about Eighteen Hundred Miles
in Circumference; and stretches out into a Length, representing the Figure of
an Animal. The Climate is exempt from bad Vapors; the Air is there ever Serene
and refreshed by the Winds, which occasions the People to be long Lived and
very Healthful; the Plains are watered with an Infinity of Springs that fall
from the Rocks, whose Water is very subtle and well tasted. All these Waters
collected from space to space, from Noble Rivers, the most of which have their
Course toward the West, and so go and disembogue themselves into the Ocean,
tho there are some that fall into the Mediterranean Sea; and all of them
furnish the People with a World of Fish of a very good Taste, and not
Unhealthful. We see no Serpents there, nor any Wild Beasts; there are no
Leopards nor Lions, Ounces or Griffins: And when any of those Creatures have
been sometimes brought thither from other Countries, they could not live. This
occasions the Country to be very Populous, and that there are neither Lands nor
Mountains altogether uninhabited Hala, Desert.
. Besides this, there are all sorts of Fruits, as well in Winter as Summer;
there being so many Trees in the Gardens, that they seem to be Forests, and
such Delicious Places, as seem to be a Terrestial Paradise. In Summer, there is
a vast abundance of all sort of Meat, by means of the great abundance of
Pasturages; where an infinity of Cattle is ever found, and a great quantity of
all sorts of Wild and Tame Birds, that even come to Winter there from several
Countries, as one more Temperate.

The People, as well Men as Women, are of a middle stature Hadaca, Discretion.
; and the Cities observe an Excellent Policy. The Inhabitants are all Clothed
in very Fine Woollen, are naturally Wise, and being addicted to War, they are
curious of Horses, and have such as are very Vigorous. The Soil produces good
Bread and excellent Wine, and so great a quantity of Oil, that there is rather
too much than too little. There grows all sorts of Herbs and Pulse; and
particularly, all Simples as are needful in Physic. They gather there Silk and
Linen in abundance, of which they make very fine Stuffs. There are Mines of
Silver, of Copper, of Lead, of Iron, and Quicksilver: For as for Gold, I have
not heard there was any. As there are many different Nations, there are also
several sorts of Tongues, that have not any Relation with ours.

This Peninsula confines upon France on the North, and is Tuhcim, Divided.
separated thence by very high and very rugged Mountains, by them called the
Pyrenees. We passed them, Tariff and I, in the Head of your Armies; but we
thought that it became us not to undertake the Conquest of another Kingdom than
that of Spain, without your Permission: After having entered pretty far into the
Country, we Retired again, without having lost any of our Men.

I end in telling you, That this Country is full of all sorts of Riches, and
that there is wherewithal to live very pleasantly, and with all sorts of
Conveniences: Congratulating you for so many, and such happy succrsses, which I
only inform you of in the Bulk, leaving the particulars to Tariff, who will
give you an Account of all that is not in this Letter; relieve me in the faults
I have therein committed, and with your Celcitude's leave, will here find
assurances of my Friendship; praying God that he would assist you in all things
with his Grace.

From the Palace of Morocco in Africa, the 3d of the Moon Dulquesita This is in
the month of November, in the Year 715 of our Lord.
, the Year 94.

Ismael with this his Brothers dispatch, being Shipped in a very light Barque,
for the making the more haste; in a little time arrived in Arabia, and
presented his Letter to Almanzor: This great Prince, tho sufficiently informed
of all those Affairs of Spain, did nevertheless express much joy at his
receiving Testimonies of the care Muca took of all things that related to his
Service; and to show the value he had for him, he commanded his Brother to stay
with him until farther order.

Ismael sent immediately a Courier to his Brother, to signify to him the manner
of his Reception.

This was a great Consolation to Muca, he taking the order the Emperor had
given his Brother to attend upon his Person, as a good Augure. This Mighty
Prince having assembled the Principal Lords of his Empire, and conferred with
them, and particularly with Tariff, upon all matters; the Result of this
Council was to send Ismael, as Ambassador, to the King of Thunis, to condole
with him the Death of the Prince his Son, thank him for the Succors he had
given him in that War, that had more than a little contributed to the Conquest
of Spain; and to demand in Marriage his Daughter, called Omahair, for
Abilgualit Abinacer, his Eldest Son, and Heir to all his Kingdoms.

Ismael, very well satisfied with being chosen for so Noble an Employ, departed
with an Magnificent Equipage; a very Noble Train, and a great number of Martial
Men, as well for his Guard as for the Dignity of his Embassy. He was very
welcome at Thunis, and had immediate Audience of Mahomet; to whom he gave the
Caliph's, his Masters Letter, and the Presents he had brought. He was highly
entertained by that Prince; who having agreed to the Proposal, and having
Examined it with the Principal of his Council, this Match was found
advantageous for the State, and suitable for the Princess Omahair; and for this
reason, he with all Expedition dispatched away Ismael with an Answer as
favorable as the Valid could desire it; as it is easy to see by the Letter and
Answer.

A Letter from Valid, to the King of Thunis.
Praise be to God, Amen.
THE most High, and most Puissant Caliph Valid Almanzor, Emperor of the
Arabians, to the most Wise, and most Potent King of the Moors, Grand Justiciar,
Warrior, Martial, and Defender of the Law of God, Mahomet Gilhair, Greeting
with all sort of Tenderness and Amity. I am under great Obligations of
imparting to you the happy Event of the Enterprise I made upon the Kingdom of
Spain, since you had so great a share therein, by the Succors you gave me for
the Conquering of it. But the Death of Prince Gilhair your Son Ga^an,
Extraordinary Grief.
, has much diminished the joy I should have had; and I have only to represent
to you on this Occasion, that since it has pleased Destiny, (...), Farality.
, or rather the Providence of our Great God, so to ordain by one of his
Decrees, conceived from the knowledge of men, and reserved to his Eternal
Science: There is only Suffering with Patience the Evils he sends us; and
praise him in the mean while for the Benefits we daily receive from him. For
which reason I shall say no more to you upon this, resting satisfied with
showing you how much I interest my self in all that concerns you, through the
peculiar Esteem I have of your Virtue, through the acknowledgment I ought to
have of all the Benefits I have received from you, and the Amity you have ever
had for me, as your Good Relation: And through a thousand other Reasons, which
Ismael the Bearer of this Letter will tell you; whom I desire you to afford
entire Credence, as to the Proposals he shall make you in my Name, that I shall
reckon my self happy, can they but Succeed as well as all your Designs; for
which I pray God with all my Heart.

From our Palace of Carbal This is in the month of April, in the Year 716 of
our Lord.
, the 4th. of the Moon of Babeth, the 2d. day of the Year 94.

The King of Thunis's Answer.
Praise be to God the Creator of all things; to whom alone is due Sacrifice and
Prayer.
THE Generous King of the Moors, the Exalter of the Law of God, and Extirper of
his Enemies, Mahomet Gilhair; to the most Honored, most Noble, most Wise, most
Prudent, and most Potent Emperor of the Arabians, Valid Almanzor; to whom the
Great God give a Long and Happy Life, as well as to all his Servants: Health. I
am obliged to you for imparting to me the happy success of the Conquest of
Spain, which has afforded great joy; and still more at the Proposal that has
been made me in your name, according to the Credentials you sent me. To which I
have no other answer to make, but that I shall esteem my self very Happy, that
all you express your self desirous of, be treated and accomplished in such
manner as you shall please to order; as a thing that absolutely depends on you.
I pray God to take you into his keeping.

From our Palace Royal of Thunis This is in the month of July, in the year 716
of our Lord.
, the 11th of the Moon of Rageb, in the year 95.

Ismael was very much pleased to carry back so favorable an Answer as this
into Arabia, where he had a kind Reception made him by Almanzor and all his
Court. The happy issue of this Embassy, occasioned the Caliph to give him the
Office of The Office of Algouazil among the Moors, was as that of President of
Castile.
Algouazil; being one of the Chief of his State that fell vacant after his
Return, and made him at the same time incur a great deal of Envy.

CHAP. XX.
Adilbar went to invest the City of Hispalis with his Army, but is constrained
to raise the Siege, and return to Cordoua.

WHen that General Tariff and the Viceroy Muca had repassed the Sea, before
they began their Voyage, the one into the East, according to Almanzor's orders,
and the other into the West, to his Palace of Morocco, where his Brother Ismael
expected him; they caused Proclamation Bore^ A^^l^an, a public cry by sound of
Trumpet.
to be made throughout all Africa, in the name of the Emperor their Master;
That all those that were minded to pass into Spain, there to inhabit, needed
only to repair thither; and that they should have Lands given them to
cultivate, Houses to dwell in, with all the conveniences necessary to Life; and
great Privileges and Exemptions. These Promises, and the rumor of the Beauty
of the Country, caused a world of People to pass the Sea; not only Natural
Moors, This is the second time that the Jews came into Spain.
but Jews of the Hebrew Nation, who passed it with their Wives and Children,
and all the Goods they had, to the number of fifty thousand Families, according
to the Register taken of 'em by Adilbar.

This Viceroy, by an express order he had received from Almanzor, of
repopulating that great Kingdom, which he had confided to his Conduct,
distributed with an admirable economy, throughout the Kingdom of Spain these
new Spaniards, according as they landed. The Governors, and Subordinate
Commanders, gave afterward in the Provinces and Cities, to each of those
Families, Conquered Lands, proportionably as they were convenient for 'em to
live in, whereof he made particular Estates. And they had all so great an
application to this matter, and kept such good order, that this great extent of
Land became in a short space more populous, and more cultivated, than it had
ever been before; and the new comers were so well accustomed with the Natives
of the Country, that there seemed not to be any difference among 'em, nor as if
any change had there happened.

Adilbar seeing so numerous a People under his sway, and all the particular
Governors so obedient to his will (...), obeyed by all.
, thought himself in a posture to make some attempt for the service of his
Master. He remembered that they had not dared to attack Hispalis, by reason of
the Pestilence that raged there when the Generals went away; and had
informations that the Christians flocked thither from all patts, since its
ceasing. For which reason, having assembled the greatest number he could of
Infantry and Cavalry, and made a Body of twelve thousand Foot, and two thousand
Horse; he departed from Cordoua, after having given all the Directions
requisite, and marched directly to Hispalis in the head of this Army; small
indeed, but very brave, and provided with all things necessary (...) well
appointed.
. He straightways sent a Trumpeter to Summons the Inhabitants to Surrender,
promising them all sort of good usage, as Generals of Armies are wont to do in
such occasions.

The Inhabitants, without listening to his Promises, or being concerned at his
Threats, made no other answer, but that they were resolved to defend the
goodness of their Cause to the last, and to be cut all in pieces, rather than
fall under Slavery.

After such an Answer, Adilbar thought there was no farther parlying. On the
morrow morning, he caused a most furious Assault to be made: But as the
Besieged were well informed of the manner with which the Moors had performed
the Sieges of all the other Towns of Spain, they had made Provision of a world
of Posts of several fashions, which they filled with boiling Oil, Juniper and
Turpentine, and threw them upon the Besiegers; which burnt them alive, and
incapacitated them from fighting, by reason of the violence of the pain they
suffered.

Farica.
Adilbar confused and vexed at the damage his men had received from the
Beleaguered, without its being in his Power to do them any, caused the Rerreat
to be sounded, and his Troops put into Quarters, to see what he had to do: He
had lost four hundred men in this first Assault, and plainly perceived, that as
often as he employed force, there would be nothing to be got. Wherefore he
imagined, that being Master of the Field, and having Victuals abundance in his
Army, whose subsistence he could furnish to as long as he pleased, in the
Neighborhood of that Town, he could so well block up the Avenues, that it
should be constrained to Surrender, without his so much as losing one man; he
resolved not to decamp thence till he had famished it.

The Beleaguered guessing that the Moors had taken this course, since they had
remained five and twenty days together, without continuing their attacks; they
resolved to Sally out upon them, when as they least expected it. For this
purpose, without making any Bustle, as could make the Besiegers suspect their
Design, they assembled all their resolute Inzi, Hachi, Resolution.
men; And one Night, Sallying out of one of their Gates, they fell with much
vigor upon Adilbar's Camp.

The Moors defended themselves with great Resolution, but believing the number
of their Enemies still greater than it was, in the darkness that hindered them
from viewing one another, they betook themselves to flight Fazar, a Rout.
, and the Christians made a great slaughter of them. To avoid the
inconveniences that commonly happen in Engagements that are performed by Night,
the Governor had ordered all those that were commanded out upon that Sally, to
cease fighting, and retire into the Town, as soon as he should cause a Horn to
be sounded; whose sound he had caused them to observe. Thus fearing they might
engage too far on the pursuit of the Moors, who might cut them off, he caused
it to be sounded, when he judged it convenient.

The Christians had much ado to resolve upon quitting the Engagement, being
very much fleshed by the Moors, who gave way before them on all sides, and were
pursued by them with the Sword in their Reins: But at the long run, retiring by
little and little, in the order that had been prescribed them, they re-entred
the Town, where they were received with great Applauses, by the Beleaguered;
who caused a world of Musical Instruments to be sounded, in token of Joy for so
great a Victory.

The Day being come, the slaughter the Christians had made appeared to Adilbar
much greater than he had believed it: And perceiving the strength of this Town,
and the Valor of those that defended it, he found it more convenient to raise
the Siege, than to persist any longer obstinately in an Enterprise, which was
more difficult than he had imagined. Whereupon he took his march back to
Cordoua; and having found his Army diminished in two thousand Foot, and two
hundred Horse, he had lost in this Siege, he separated it, and put it into good
Quarters in the Country, that it might recover it self.

CHAP. XXI.
Adilbar makes a second Attempt upon Hispalis, and is as Successless as before.

ADilbar was disconsolate at the bad event of the first Enterprise he had made
for the Valid's Service: He was ashamed that the only Town the Christians held
in Spain, had resisted him, after Tariff, with so little pains, had taken all
the rest. He imagined all the Moors Hird, Murmur, Scandal.
murmured at it, and himself found that Almanzor could not effectually call
himself absolute Master of that Country, as long as that Town was not under his
Obedience.

Wherefore having sent for all the Governors of those Provinces, and conferred
with them about the necessity, and the means for the reducing it; he began to
make greater Preparations than he had yet done; and having assembled fifteen
thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, he took the Field in the beginning of
the Spring Fael Arabeh, Spring.
, of the 95th Year of the Hegira, and marched directly to Hispalis; in the
Neighborhood whereof, he lodged all his Troops.

The trial he had made in the first Siege, of the Valor and Industry of the
Beleaguered, which had made him break up from thence, without having effected
the least, had rendered him wise; and as he was a good Harbal Ahidad, Genius
for War.
Commander, he had caused certain Chariots to be made, covered with very thick
Boards, that so his Soldiers might, as under cover, fight sheltered, without
any inconvenience from the Boiling Oil, and all the other things, that the
Christians might throw from off their Walls.

After having begun, by Summoning the Town again to Surrender, and received
thence as haughty an Answer as that he had before, he caused his covered
Chariots to advance, with a multitude of Pioneers, sustained by a good number
of Soldiers, that he had placed underneath; and having brought them near the
Courtin, he had it undermined in the Places he judged to be the weakest.

The Beleaguered seeing these Machines, and dreading the effect of them,
assembled to consult about the most proper means to secure themselves from so
great a danger. Their Governor, called Sarmato, being a Man of Wit and
Resolution, let them see that there was no occasion for them to be alarmed as
they were, and caused them to separate into three Brigades, that they might the
more easily sustain the three different Attacks.

Adilbar had not omitted any one of the Precautions he could imagine, against
all that the Beleaguered could invent for their defense; and as he had caused
to be made a kind of great Stone-Bows The Arabs call them Mausenech.
, with which they shot up very great Stones, he pointed them to the places
where they could do most mischief; and making 'em mount upon his Chariots, he
caused so great a quantity of 'em to be thrown, that few places were there in
the City, where the Christians could be in safety.

Sarmato seeing so many extraordinary means employed to attack him, fell on his
side also to the contriving some for his Defense; and having caused the
strongest of the Inhabitants to assemble, with fitting Instruments for the
removing the Earth, he caused Ramparts to be raised, behind and within the
Walls, that when even the Moors should have effected the making some Breaches
therein, they might find 'em stopped with so much Earth, as that it would be
impossible for them to enter 'em. This wise Governor, by this Precaution, put
himself in a posture of receiving no damage from all the Inventions of his
Enemies: For there was already so much Earth behind the Wall, that when they
had broken it, they would find they had got nothing by the bargain: Nay, and
many had been crushed to pieces by the great Stones the Christians rolled upon
those Chariots: And as for those the Moors caused to be thrown into the Town,
as there stood Sentinels on the top of the Towers, to give the Signal to the
Inhabitants to make their escape, when they saw any coming, most commonly all
their Machines were fruitless.

Adilbar being in Despondency at so many ill successes, resolved upon giving a
general Assault. While he was preparing all his Forces for that purpose, and
that the Scaling, Ladders were erected on one side, he caused his Chariots to
take a great circuit toward the other end of the City, for the undermining the
Wall at the same time. Whereupon, having given the Signal for the attack, at
break of day, which he had chosen for that intent, the Besiegers went on with
an extraordinary fury, and the Besieged sustained it with great resolution.

The Moors in the mean while, having again changed their Chariots, and
fastening upon part of the Wall that was weaker than the rest, made a great
Breach, by which some entered the Town; but Sarmato repairing in all have
thither, with a great many Soldiers, left them there not long; and having
drove them thence, caused that gap to be stopped up with a great quantity of
Earth: Certain it is, the Town had been taken, had he delayed one moment
longer; but the Night having put an end to the Conflict, Adilbar found he had
lost five hundred men, whereas the Besieged had lost but two hundred: So great
an opposition made him take up again the Resolution he took the time before, of
stopping up all the Avenues of the Town, that so the Christians, being pressed
by hunger and thirst, might be constrained to Surrender. He remained there in
this manner forty five days, after which, Sarmato considering that Adilbar
might hold him blocked up in this manner, as much, and as long as he pleased,
being Master of the Field, from whence he might have all sorts of Refreshments;
he resolved upon going to attack him in his Camp, as he had done the time
before.

Wherefore having assembled twelve hundred Foot, choice men, and a hundred
Horse, he caused them to Sally out at Midnight, through a Postern gate of the
Town. The Moors having seen the Christians had been so long without fighting,
did not expect this sudden Assault at all: By this means the Christians killed
a very great number of them, and retired in good order, by favor of the night.
Adilbar fearing the like accident to that which befell him in the former Siege,
sent a part of his Horse to stop the Soldiers that were minded to pursue them;
insomuch, that he found the next day that he had lost four hundred Foot, and
thirty Horse, whereas there fell not above a hundred and fifty of the
Christians, whom this General caused to be Interred as well as the Moors, for
fear of their creating an Infection in his Camp.

The Besieged were much satisfied with the success of this second Sally; but in
a short time after, Adilbar caused a second assault to be made, which was so
furious, that whatever resistance they made, the Moors at length gained a
Courtine. The Governor flying thither forthwith with a re-inforcement of
Soldiers, performed so well, that he at last drove the Moors again from their
Post, and put it into a posture of Defense. This Conflict lasted from break of
day, till Three of the Clock in the This time is called Hacar in Arabic.
Afternoon; when Adilbar seeing his men disheartened, caused a Retreat to be
sounded, to dress the wounded. He found among the Dead three hundred Moors, and
about a hundred and fifty Christians; but there was a very great number
wounded; and among others, one of his Officers, called Hali Abenzainee, which
afflicted him very much, and whom he caused carefully to be dressed, as well as
all the rest; confirming himself in the first Resolution he had taken, of
having the Town by Famine.

The Besieged fearing to want Victuals, that they might precaution themselves
beforehand, with the remedies necessary against the mischief wherewith they
were threatened, had caused very deep Hazir, Ditches,
Canals to be made, from the Western Gate of their Town to a great River, that
passing very near their Walls, falls afterward into the Sea. By the means of
these Canals, they went into the River with great Boats; and these Canals being
Fortified all along with good Trenches, insomuch that the Cavalry could not do
them any mischief, there came to them, from time to time, Victuals from the
Mountains of a certain Country, called Biscaya: These Canals were a very great
help to the Besieged; for besides their having by this means all things brought
them, the Water of the River served them for a thousand conveniences.

Adilbar having not then any Ships to hinder the Christians from having every
moment all necessaries, was very much at a loss, and was loath to resolve upon
raising the Siege once again: When news was brought him of the revolt of the
Governor of Valence, called Abubaher el Handali, and of the Inroads he made
into the Neighboring Provinces of that Kingdom.

So urgent an evil, and which he saw himself indispensably obliged forthwith to
remedy, made him presently raise the Siege, and march long days journeys to
Cordoua; which the Christians of Hispalis were very glad of.

CHAP. XXII.
Adilbar goes to Valence, defeats the Governor of that Province and has him
Beheaded.

THe great Siege, wherein Abubaher el Handali, Governor of Valence, saw
Adilbar engaged in, had made him hope that he might in that time, render
himself absolute Master of that fine Province. In this Design, having gained
all the Governors of the smaller Cities, and all the Martial Men under his
Authority, he would needs cast off the Valid's Oath; and having brought a small
Army on Foot, he began to make Incursions into the Neighborhood, that he might
by force oblige all the People thereabouts to obey him as their Sovereign Lord.

Adilbar being informed of these Transactions, as I said in the foregoing
Chapter; caused a new Army to assemble, of ten thousand Foot, and eight hundred
Horse; and with these Forces, crossing the high Mountains that are on the
South, he arrived at the City of Murcia; to whose foot extends the Government
of Valence: Abraham Escaladari was then Governor of the Place, who being
informed of Adilbar's march against Abubaher, had got ready a Magazine of
Provisions, to distribute them, as he did among his Soldiers: And having
joined him with all the men he had, they two marched together toward Valence.

The Rebel seeing so great an Army coming against him, and having no place of
safety whether to Retire, thought it much better to try the fortune of a
Battle, and win it, or dye like a Man of Courage, than go basely yield himself
up. Having inspired the same resolution into the minds of his Adherents, and
disposed them into the best order he could, as soon as Adilbar had set footing
in his Government, he went to meet him; and in that Battle, did all that could
be done by a good General, and good Soldier; but being at last taken, and all
his men defeated, Adilbar caused his Head to be struck off, and had it set on
the top of a Lance, on the Gate of that Town, which he gave for Plunder to his
Soldiers.

He made a strict scrutiny after all those that had had a hand in this
Rebellion, that he might of them accordingly make an Exemplary Punishment: And
indeed, many Commanders and Captains had the same Fate with their Leader; and
after having reduced that Country to its Obedience, and there established one
of his Captains, called Mahomet Abenbucar, he returned to Cordoua, and
dismissed his Troops.

CHAP. XXIII.
Almanzor gives Tariff a place in his Council, and chooses him for his
Ambassador Extraordinary, for the Conclusion of the Prince his Sons Match,
with the King of Thunis's Daughter.

ALmanzor making reflection on the great Services rendered him by General
Tariff, on all occasions, and particularly in the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Spain; for the discharging himself of the Obligation he had to him of so great
an augmentation of Empire, and of such vast Riches he had thence derived, had
not a more Glorious Recompense to give him, than a place among those of his
Council Mutagua Quilalriaca, Minister of State.
, and who share in the administration of all his Kingdoms; for which account he
put him into that number, and nominated him Ambassador Extraordinary, to go
conclude the Princes Match, and fetch away the Princess of Thunis. He caused a
Fleet of forty Ships to be fitted out for that purpose, with all the
Magnificence requisite for so solemn an Embassy, and which was undertaken for
so agreeable an end. Tariff being embarked with a world of Courtiers, and a
good number of Soldiers, arrived safe at Thunis, where he was received and
entertained with all his People, as well as heart could wish; and after having
made a very short abode there, he went on Board his Ships again, with the
Princess Omalahaire, and all her Train, and returned into the Levant with a
very fair wind.

The Infanta being arrived in Arabia, the Nuptials were Celebrated with great
Pomp; and there were Tournaments, Tilting, and all the other merriments that are
wont to attend those sort of Festivals.

Almanzor seeing his Son Married, and finding him at an age to govern his State
himself, thought it to be now time to Execute a design he had long meditated,
of discharging himself of that heavy burden, he had for so many years born upon
his Head; finding also that his Old Age, caused him by little and little, to
sink under the weight of it: For which reason, seeing himself worn out, and
attacked with many Infirmities, he resolved upon devolving it upon that of his
Son, that so he might retire into a House of Pleasure, he had caused to be
built in a Mountain, where he had very pleasant Gardens, very thick Woods, and
excellent Waters. Whereupon having caused the States to assemble, where it was
his Pleasure to have all the Governors of the Provinces present, he imparted
to them the Dimission he meant to make of the Empire, in favor of his Son; and
at the same time, caused the following Letters Patents to be expedited.

Letters Patents, Of Almanzor's Demission in favor of his Son.
Praise and Glory be given to that Great God, the Creator of all things, Amen.
Luna amiss Abihabdi Allabi. that signifies the Father of the Servants of God;
and Ibninacer, intimating the Son of Victory.
THE most High, the most Noble, the most Dread Lord and Emperor of the Arabs,
Valid Almanzor; Vicar of God, and Protector of his Law, Son of the most Noble,
and most Honored Lord, and Martial; Warrior, Caliph, and Emperor of the
Arabs; Father of the Servants of God, and exalter of his Law, Abdulmelech, Son
of Victory.

Considering the Necessity we are reduced to, by the Infirmities with which it
has pleased God, our Sovereign Lord, to visit Ziara, Regale.
us; and the decrepit Age wherewith Nature is wont to over-whelm all men in the
order of times; which occasions our being not strong enough to govern so great
an Empire, as we have done in time past; for the settlement of our Crown, the
Peace and Tranquillity of the State, and the greatest Good and Vtility of our
Subjects; and to hinder the Dissentions and Discords that commonly happen after
the Death of Kings, which are wont to overturn the best established Empires;
and for other Considerations, us thereunto moving; we have thought convenient
to Renounce, Grant and Transport, by these Presents Dahir, Patents.
, all the Sovereign Authority that we have, with the Scepter and Crown we bear,
in such manner as it appertains to us, in Quality of Caliph, Absolute and
Sovereign Lord, without acknowledging any Person living for Superior in
Temporals; to our Well Beloved, and Obedient Son, the Wise, Virtuous, and
accomplished Aboulvalid Abenacer, our eldest Son, Lawful Heir, and nearest
Successor; on whom may God bestow the Wisdom necessary for the Governing all
his Kingdoms, in such manner, as that all his Subjects may enjoy a continual
Peace and Tranquillity, by reserving to us the direct Siegneury, in case of
Death, or failure of Succession, or any other such like misfortune, or
disgrace; which we pray God not to suffer to make way for our returning to the
Throne, to which we no longer pretend any Right. For which reason, We signify
and order to our well-beloved Son, and Lawful Heir and Successor in the second
Degree, the Prince Abraham Amcari, and to all those of our Council of State and
of War, and to all the Governors, Cadis, Generals and Captains; and to all,
and as many as there are of our Officers and Subjects, of what Quality and
Condition soever they be, to hold and Honor, as Emperor of all these
Kingdoms, our said Son Aboulvalid Abenacer; and in that Quality, make Oath of
Allegiance and Fidelity to him, as from this present we mean to make to him our
selves, acknowledging him for King, and giving him all the Power we have
hitherto had, according to the Laws, commanding expressly all our Subjects
Alumyid, People.
to obey his Commands, and Execute all his Orders, as if they were issued out
by us, on pain not only of our Malediction, but of that of God, of his anger,
as they must needs all incur that want Fidelity to their King; and for a token
of the effectual Possession of all that is contained in these Presents, we mean
to put them our selves into his hand, in the presence of all the Governors and
Subjects, assembled in our Palace for that purpose. For such is our Express
determinate Will and Pleasure; to which end, we have our selves signed these
Presents with our hand, and have caused our Great Seal to be put thereto.

In our Palace of Corbal, in Arabia Foelix Beginning of the month of October,
in the year 716 of our Lord.
, the 3d. of the Moon de Vaguel, in the Year 95.

By the means of this Renunciation, Aboulvalid Abenacer being acknowledged
Crowned King, his Father Almanzor took a chosen number of his most Faithful and
most Ancient Domestics, to attend and serve him in the Place he had resolved
upon making his Retreat, leaving his Youngest Son Abraham Amcari, with the
King, his Eldest; and no sooner was he arrived in that Solitude, but that his
Infirmities daily augmenting, he fell into an ill Distemper, which lasted upon
him till Death, which, in short, fell out in a little time after.

Abraham had a haughty Spirit, and and mmense Ambition; the Caliph being very
jealous of him, and uneasy on his score, that he might deprive him of the
means of fomenting Cabals against him, sent him into Stony Arabia, which is a
Country of very small extent; and where he could not find wherewithal to do him
any great mischief.

About that time the Governor of Damas, Abenbukar by name, who all his life
long had had roving and Chimerical thoughts, imagined that Almanzor being no
longer in the World, he might attempt all with impunity. He thought of no less
than of dispossessing Aboulvalid, and of placing himself in his stead; and had
assembled a great Army, with which he ravaged all the Provinces bordering upon
his Government. The Caliph was also obliged on his side to take the Field, to
bring him to his Duty; when that Prince Abraham Amcari, who was continually
gnawed with the lust of Reigning, and omitting nothing he judged useful to his
Designs Alhadar, lost no occasion.
, found it to be the most propitious juncture he could wish, for the
manifesting them to the World. Whereupon he on his side assembled the most
Horse and Foot that was possible for him; and after having passed the Deserts
of Arabia Alcahari, Sandy Mountains.
, he marched directly to Court with all his forces, making semblance of coming
to his Brothers assistance against Abenbukar the Rebel. And accordingly he met
with a kind welcome at first; but having all on the sudden changed face, and
having seized on the Castle, and the best Gates of the City, about midnight he
sent to seize on the principal persons of the Court, as well Officers as people
of Service, whom he thought Loyal to his Brother, and had 'em all beheaded.
This so intimidated all the rest, that either out of the fear they had of him,
or by reason of the little affection they bore the King, and the esteem they
had for this Prince, whom they saw to be brave and generous, and love War
Ymala, to win hearts.
, they were easily inclined to acknowledge him for their King; nay, and there
was so great a concourse of People at his Coronation, that meaning to improve
that first heat he saw them in, and not thinking it convenient to let it cool
again, he took the Field with all those that suffered themselves to espouse his
Party. His Brother Aboulvalid was gone at the head of his Forces against
Abenbukar; wherefore he thought he could easily pen him up, between his own
Army, and that of that Rebel. And after having left at Court a Captain, a
Creature of his, called Xaira Alxadali, in whom he put entire confidence, he
marched directly to his Brother with all his Troops; which he found to make up
twenty thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse.

The King was so surpised at this News Aturmuhim, Ill News.
, that he was ready to run mad; and to see if he could apply some remedy to so
great and un-foreseen an Evil, he quitted the design of reducing Abenbukar, to
return with all expedition to meet his Brother.

The two Armies being in sight of one another, Aboulvalid sent a man on purpose
to Abraham, to divert him from so unjust and unreasonable an Enterprise; and
representing to him that he was going to be the occasion of the Death of an
infinite number of men, which could be only imputed to him alone; but that if
he would desist from his design, he promised him in the word of a King, to
forget all that was passed, and to receive him as his Friend and Brother Taha,
obedience, protection, friendship.
. Abraham made no other answer to this, but that he was not come thither to be
reconciled, but to fight; that he stood in no need of the friendship he offered
him, but of the Crown he had upon his Head; that he was Almanzor's Son and Heir
as well as he; that he had only to prepare to defend himself, and that their
Rights being at the point of their Swords, they would that day decide which of
the two had the best, giving the Kingdom to him that should gain the Victory.

Having in this manner sent back Aboulvalid's mediator, and having threatened to
have him hanged, if he came again to importune him with such like harrangues.
The Caliph with grief saw himself obliged to give Battle; but at last, having
marshalled all his Army in Battalia, it began with some squadrons of Horse of
both sides, who were a long while mingled with one another, before any judgment
could be passed which of the two had the advantage: And this Skirmish that
lasted above half the day, without any great loss on either side, plainly
showed the Cavalry to be composed only of good men, that knew admirably well
both to attack and defend.

On the morrow, the twelfth of the Moon Dulquehala In the month of December, in
the year 717.
, in the Year 96, the Battle was renewed, and proved still more bloody for both
Parties; for it lasted from Morning till Noon, without ones being able to judge
on which side the Victory leaned: But at length, Aboulvalid's people beginning
to buckle, and those of Abraham to break in upon them on all sides, Aboulvalid
fearing to fall into his Brothers hands, made his escape out of the hottest of
the Engagement, upon a very fleet Horse, after having made a sign to some of
his people to follow him. The Kings Retreat utterly disheartened all his men,
who were immediately after easily put Facar, fl^^ put to rout.
to flight.

The Prince pursued them at their heels; and after having killed a very great
number of them, he returned to give the necessary orders for all Occurrences,
and then return against Abenbukar, while that Aboulvalid was withdrawn into the
Kingdom of Thunis, where he was kindly received by his Father-in-Law, who
knowing the misfortune that was befallen him, through the perfidy and
wickedness of his Brother, comforted him the best he could, and promised to
assist him in his revenge.

CHAP. XXIV.
Abraham Amcary goes to fight Abenbukar; defeats him, and has him beheaded.

ABraham being puffed up with the winning of this Battle, and overjoyed to see
that all the paces he made, conducted him upon the Throne, without any stop, he
marched directly to Court; where having convened the Estates, to confirm the
Government he meant to establish, he caused them there to take a new Oath of
Allegiance to him, by which, all that he had not been able to get approved of,
but by some, before his going to fight his Brother, was confirmed and ratified
by all the rest: And thus was he owned and declared by a common consent,
Emperor of all Almanzor's Realms, as his Lawful Heir.

Then having made such Regalations as he pleased, and bestowed great Bounties
on all his Creatures, without losing time, he took the Field with fifteen
thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, to go to Damascus.

Abenbukar, being fully informed of all these Transactions, came to meet him
with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, insomuch, that
they were not long without coming to blows. Abraham would needs, before he gave
the Signal for Battle, do as lawful Kings do to Rebels; and sent to tell him,
That as he had not any Right to the Crown, he could not believe he would
persist in his bad designs, or that he would be wanting in his Allegiance to
his Prince; wherefore he offered to Pardon him all that had passed, if he would
but return to his Duty.

Abenbukar having caused the Princes Envoy to come into his presence, would not
go about to excuse himself with sorry reasons, as do all Traitors that can
never have any that are good; but answered him sharply, and like a gallant man,
That between two Traitors, and two Disloyalists, as they both were, he had only
the hand of him: but that Abraham had committed a much greater infidelity in
dispossessing his Brother Aboulvalid, who was his Lawful King, according to the
disposition of his Father, and that of Nature, than he, in withdrawing himself
from his obedience, with all the Province of which he was Governor, seeing all
his people oppressed with impositions Magarem, Subsidies.
, and very severely used by King Aboulvalid.

That he had learnt that to state things aright, Nature caused no body to be
born upon a Throne; that all the Kings of the Earth were Tyrants; that the
Scepter belonged to him to whom God had given the strength to bear it; and the
Sovereign Authority to him that had Wisdom and Ability sufficient to govern the
people; and that as all Created things had their beginning, and their end,
Monarchies were not exempt from this general vicissitude; that thus there was
no need of reasoning any farther.

Abraham being extremely provoked at so haughty and so insolent an Answer,
would no longer defer giving Battle, contrary to the advice of most of his
Officers, who counseled him to stay the Conjunction of all his Forces, that
were not yet arrived, Abubenkar's Army being much stronger than his, and all
his Troops appearing much more sprightful; but they could not prevail with him
to change the resolution he had taken.

Some of the Cavalry that were detached on both sides, having began the
Skirmish, they quickly engaged in a general Battle, that was very obstinately
fought, and very bloody, Abenbukar being skilled in all the stratagems of War,
had placed his best Officer in Ambuscade behind a Hill, with five hundred
chosen Horse, that had order not to appear till the Battle was far engaged, and
then to attack the Princes men in the Rear; and this occasioned Abenbukar's
winning the Battle: For this Captain, bolting just in the nick from his
Ambuscade, put all Abraham's Forces into such great disorder, that this Prince
seeing himself penned up on all sides, threw himself from off his Horse, and so
fled over the Mountains, that he might get again into Arabia.

Abenbukar being Master of the Field of Battle, returned to Damascus, loaded
with Honor, and the Spoils of Abraham's Camp he had plundered; and expecting
to have suddenly another Army upon his back, he did not dismiss his, but put it
only into good Quarters in that Country.

Abraham, at his return, having met with a very cool reception from the
Arabians, it spighted him extremely, and gave him great confusion. Wherefore
having again convened the Governors and Commanders that were under his sway,
he gave them to understand that he was resolved not to suffer Abenbukar to
glory long in his Victory; and commanded them to make ready to take the Field
in fifty days space, with all the Forces they had under their charge. They so
very punctually executed this order, that at the day appointed, he found
himself at the head of an Army of forty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse;
with which he marched again for Syria.

Abenbukar had not slept on his side, and knowing the great preparations that
were making against him, caused Proclamation to be made throughout all the
neighboring Countries, of large pay, and great Rewards, for all those that
would come into his service, and bring him Troops: By this means he framed a
body of thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse; and with these Forces
staid Prince Abraham's coming up, who without entering into any parleys, as he
had done the time before, as soon as he came in fight of Abenbukar's Army, he
marched directly upon him, to engage him in the Battle, that was very bloody on
both sides. But at last, Abenbukar's Troops being defeated, he was taken
generously fighting, and brought to Abraham, who, without saying a word to him,
in the rage he was in, and without giving him time to speak, or the Executioner
to come, he cut his Throat with his own hands, striking him so furious a blow
with his Scimitar upon the nape of his Neck, that he cut off his Head, which he
caused to be put on the top of a Pike, on the Gate of Damascus. He was not
satisfied with having himself performed the Execution, for having caused him to
be fleed, he commanded the placing upon that same Gate that Wretches Skin,
which he had caused to be filled with straw; and the like usage did all those
meet with that had had a hand in this Rebellion. At length, being grown weary
of putting people to Death, and believing that Province absolutely reduced, and
sufficiently chastised, he left there as Governor, a Captain, in whom he had
great confidence, called Abencirix, and returned to recreate himself at Court,
where he was received by his Partisans with great Huzzahs, and mighty
Exultation.

CHAP. XXV.
King Aboulvalid assembles a great Army in Africa, and marches against his
Brother Abraham, gives him Battle, wherein his Brother is killed.

KING Aboulvalid being retired to Thunis, as I have before observed, labored
under great anxiety to see himself drove out of his Kingdom by his own Brother,
and employed his thoughts wholly upon the means of being revenged. Mahomet
Gilhair was no less concerned than this Unhappy Prince, considering him not
barely as his Son-in-law, but as his own Son. Wherefore having resolved on
assisting him with all his might, he made great Levies thoughout the whole
extent of his Kingdom, gave Commissions to all the principal Persons of his
Court and Country, and fitted out a great Naval Army, which he had stored with
all the Provisions necessary for a great Embarkment.

Aboulvalid did not forget himself on his side, and well perceiving there was
no man that could assist him more strongly in his occasions than Muca, Viceroy
of Morocco, and of all the African Provinces; he sent a man on purpose to him
in a Felucca, with this Letter.

King Aboulvalid's Letter, to Muca, Viceroy of Morocco and Africa.
Praise be to God, Amen.
THE Great and Warlike Emperor of the Arabs, of the high Lineage of Motaleb;
Vicar of God, and Defender of his Law; Aboulvalid Abenacer; Son of the most
High and most Dread Caliph, and Emperor of the Arabs, Valid Almanzor: To the
Valiant Captain, Virtuous and Accomplished Knight; Trusty and Loyal Servant of
our Royal Crown, Muca, our Viceroy in Africa, Greeting. Abenbukar Governor of
Damascus, meaning to withdraw himself from his Allegiance to Us, and we having
taken the Field with an Army to chastize him, Prince Abraham our Brother,
taking that occasion to execute the design he long had had of troubling the
State, and having had the boldness to take up Arms against Us, to the great
damage of our Subjects, and to the great contempt of the Obedience to Us
owning; for which, according to all Laws of Justice, he merits Death as well as
Abenbukar; and for the procuring his punishment, and preventing the misfortunes
that his Rebellion may produce, you are ordered, That as soon as you shall have
received this Letter, to cause to assemble, with all possible diligence, the
greatest number of Troops possible, in the extent of our Kingdom of Africa, and
that you cause them to embark with all the Provisions necessary, nay, and with
all the Gold and Silver that is found in Our Treasury of Morocco, all which to
be sent Us to Thunis, where we are at present; further conjuring You, if You
have any one in whom You have sufficient confidence, as to trust with him the
care of your Government, to come your self in Person at the head of your Army,
to serve Us in so urgent an occasion, and to provide for all things according
to your wonted prudence, wherein We have an entire confidence.

From Thunis, the In January 718.
14th. of the Moon of Mahatran, the Year 97.

Muca having with great respect received the King his Masters Letter, in a
short time assembled an Army of thirty thousand Foot, and having got together
all sorts of Ammunition, and fitted out a mighty Fleet, he embarked in it
himself, with the Royal Treasure he had in his keeping, finding that it could
not be better employed than for so good an occasion, for which it was
undoubtedly reserved: Nay, he thought himself obliged to quit all things, to
signalize his Zeal and Fidelity in his Masters Maulab, King and Lord.
service, and contribute thereto, not only with his Cares, but with his Person.
In his room in Africa he left a very brave Man, and in whom he had great
Confidence, called Alicunicy, a Native of Stony Arabia, and arrived safe at
Thunis with all his Army, at the end of the Moon of Rabeh, on the 2 of that
same year 97 of the Hegira.

There he found King Aboulvalid employed in Shipping the Troops he had got
together in those parts; who embraced him very affectionately, and caressed him
to a high degree. This Prince had already nominated Tariff Abenziet, who had
achieved the Conquest of the Kingdom of Spain, in his Fathers Lifetime,
Generalissimo of all his Forces, and had cast his Eyes upon him, as upon the
greatest, and most lucky Captain of those times.

These two great Armies having been a long while in embarking, the King put at
length to Sea, and with as fair a Wind as he could wish, in a few days time he
arrived in Arabia; where having made a Review of all his Troops, his Army was
found to be sixty five thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, which gave him a
great deal of Joy.

All the People of that Coast, seeing so numerous and so flourishing an Army,
far from opposing his Descent, declared themselves immediately for him.

In the mean while, Prince Abraham knowing all his Brothers Preparations, did
not sleep on his side. He had assembled all the Chiefs Musta Mahami, States.
of the Arabians, and after having given 'em notice of the storm wherewith they
were threatened, and having made them apprehend that they were to expect little
less than to be strangled, if Aboulvalid ever re-mounted upon the Throne; and
that it was much better to dye in the Bed of Honor, than upon a Scaffold, as
he was resolved to do, to show 'em the way. They were all so sensibly persuaded
by his Arguments, that in their own Defense, they made up a very considerable
Army, that was found to be sixty thousand men, got truly in the best manner
they could together.

Abraham having made no difficulty to go meet his Brother with his Forces, the
Battle was fought in the Plain of Cahar, on the 3 of the Moon Dulquihida The
Arabians name is Faliaz Ahra, in November 718.
, in the year 97. It lasted from Sun rising to its setting. Abraham then
performed all that could be done by a great General, and a good Soldier: But
seeing his Army in Disorder, he threw himself into the hottest of the
Engagement, where he was killed with his Sword in his hand.

Aboulvalid did much lament his not having been able to take him alive; and
doubtless, as he had ever had a kindness for him, maugre all the mischief he
had done him, he would have given him his life, and would have been contented
with continuing him in a perpetual imprisonment. Wherefore having caused his
Body to be put into a Coffin, he pursued his way toward Carbal, whence the
Queen his Wife was coming to meet him; tho she had ever been kept as a
Prisoner, the Prince had ever had her very civilly treated: Aboulvalid was
mighty joyful to see her again, but could not forbear expressing much grief for
Abraham's death; he caused the whole Court to put on Hisu, mourning, tears.
mourning, and assisted at his Funeral, which he caused to be performed with
great Pomp; nay, he was seen to shed tears in that occasion; but he had not the
same mildness and clemency for all the Officers that sided with his Brother; he
put a great number of them to Death, and set himself to retrieve his Authority,
and set matters again to rights throughout the whole Empire.

General Tariff received a wound in his Right Arm in the Battle, which he had
neglected at first, by not refraining to mount on Horseback, after his usual
manner; but through the little care he took of it, and through the toil and
drudgery of marching, his Arm swelled in such manner as to gangre; and so in a
few days time sent him out of the world.

Aboulvalid was much grieved at the loss of so great a General, and to show the
esteem he had for him, he caused him to be Interred with great magnificency,
and had the same honors paid him, as had been paid to the Person of his
Brother. And I can certainly say one thing of him that is somewhat singular,
that his Valor was accompanied with such great Fortune in War, that he never
undertook any enterprise but what he sped in to his honor.

This Prince, after having punished, as I have said, those that were revolted
against him, began with recompencing those that had served him so usefully in
that War, by distributing among them the Governments, Lieutenancies, and
Employs, insomuch, that they were all satisfied with the returns he made to
their Services; and then set his thoughts upon enjoying amid Pleasure, the
repose that had cost him so dear.

CHAP. XXVI.
Adilbar, Viceroy of Spain, leads his Army into Biscaya, against Pelagius, and
thence returns without doing ought.

ADilbar having sped so ill in the Siege of Hispalis, he had received order
from King Aboulvalid his Master, to go the soonest he could, to make the
Conquest of those Mountains, where Pelage had made his Retreat, and where an
infinite number of Christians were gone to find him, from all the corners of
Spain, to save themselves, with their Wives and Children, from the fury of the
Moors.

Whereupon, he sent a Renegado-spy, to examine the strength of those Places
where this Prince lurked, and to enquire into the number of the Soldiers he
had with him, and the world of People that had there taken refuge.

The Renegado being entered into the Country, pretended to make his escape as
well as the other Christians, from the Persecution of the Moors, and overran
all the Mountains of Biscaya, where he most carefully observed all he saw, in
pursuance of the orders he had received from Adilbar: But when upon his
departure thence again, he was brought before Pelage, by the Guards he had
placed upon the Frontiers, having been taken for a spy as he really was; Pelage
asked him a Thousand Questions, but as he was cunning and crafty, he answered
very pertinently, and without being at a loss: Pelage nevertheless was not
willing to let him go, and kept him some days in Prison; but at length, finding
nothing against him but a weak suspicion, with which his Imagination had been
possessed, he set him at liberty.

After this, the Renegado took his time so well, that he found the means to get
again to Cordoua, where he delivered Adilbar an account of all that had befaln
him, and of all he had seen; assuring him, that it was no difficult matter to
force the pass of those Mountains, that were guarded only by a small handful of
men, of little Courage.

Adilbar being encouraged by this Relation, resolved upon undertaking the War
against Pelage, well perceiving that if he had once reduced the Christians of
that Canton, Hispalis would no longer put him in pain, the succors that Town
had received from Biscaya, having occasioned it is not being surrendered.
Wherefore he prepared suddenly to besiege it, as not believing those
Mountainers could resist him long; and flattering himself with the hopes of
rendering Aboulvalid the absolute Master of all Spain, as far as the Pyrenean
Mountains, that separate it from France.

For this purpose he assembled twelve thousand Foot, and would not take any
Horse along, as not believing they could be useful to him in so rocky a Country
(...), Country of Rocks.
. With this small Army, composed of choice men, he advanced as far as the place
by the Spaniards called the Term of War.

Pelage having notice of his march, convened the Principal Persons of the
Cantons of Biscaya, to concert with them the means of opposing him; and their
unanimous opinion was, to think of defending the Entrance of the Mountains,
which was very difficult; this was also the sentiment of Pelage; so as that
having placed five hundred chosen men, and well armed in Ambuscade in a great
Quarry or Den, that is under a steep Rock, Pelage placed himself a little
higher with fifteen hundred men, being all he could assemble.

The Moors going about to mount, to get to that Mountains top, Pelage charged
them with the small Forces he had, but had quickly been overcome, had not the
five hundred men that were hid in that Cavern, as I newly hinted, appeared in
the nick behind the Enemies, put them into disorder, killed a great number of
them, and put all the rest to flight.

That day Adilbar by computation lost a thousand men, besides the great number
of those that were dangerously Wounded; whereas the Christians lost but four
hundred.

Pelage Retreated forthwith, with all his Men, into the hallow of those
Mountains, to defend the Entrance of them, well knowing this to be the most
important of all; insomuch, that Adilbar enraged at the loss he had newly
undergone; all the faults of which he reflected upon the Christian Renegado,
who had deceived him; he sent him to the Gallows.

After having well examined the difficulty there was in forcing such narrow and
steep Passages, he found his continuing any longer in that Country, would be
only the losing of time and men, and resolved to put off this Enterprise till
another time, when as he might find an entrance more easy to force, than that
from whence he had been newly repulsed. Wherefore without staying there much
longer, he returned into Andalousia, where he dismissed his Army, and set his
thoughts wholly upon Regulating and Policying that Kingdom, while Pelage and
his People blessed God for so favorable a success, and were confirmed in their
opinion of those Mountains, being made in due manner for the putting a stop to
the Conquests of the Moors, and serve for an Azylam and Retreat to the
Christians; wherefore they used their utmost endeavors to fortify them to the
best advantage.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Death of the King of Thunis, and of the great Wars Aboulvalid was
obliged to make to render himself Master of that Kingdom.

THE joy King Aboulvalid had for the victory he had gained over his Brother
Abraham, was quickly ruffled by the news he received in a little space after,
of the Death of his Father-in-law, Mahomet Gilhair. He left no other Children
save Queen Omhalair, wherefore he resolved to send out of hand to take
possession of so fine an Inheritance, for fear that if he deferred any longer,
some change might happen, as commonly does in such occasions: for so solemn an
Embassy, he chose one of his favorites, called Abulcacim Aben Marchan, who
departed in great haste with all his Train, and was very kindly received by all
the Grandees of that Court, and Lodged in the Deceased Kings Palace.

Having forthwith convened all the Members of the Council of that Kingdom, and
having let them peruse the Powers he had from Aboulvalid, in his Name to take
Possession of that State; they examined them, and having found them in the form
they ought to be, King Aboulvalid was acknowledged and declared King of that
great Kingdom, and Abulcacim Aben Marchan Viceroy in his absence. But as in
all times, and all Countries, People there are Transported with a desire of
Ruling; one of the Principal Governors was there of this; who flattering
himself with the thought that being Mahomet Gilhairs near Relation, the Kingdom
ought rather to appertain to him, than to his Daughter, began underhand to
solicit all the Leading men and Governors, each in his turn, to assist him
with his Forces. He represented to them, That being born in the Country, and
with them brought up, and the late Kings nearest Relation, the Crown belonged
to him, rather than to a Foreigner; and had the knack so to coaks them with
fine promises, that they at last resolved among themselves for the most part,
to throw off Aboulvalid's Yoke, and to place him in his stead upon the Throne.
Hacan (so was this Captain called) wanting not courage for so noble an
enterprise; having assembled all the heads of his Party, entered by main force
into the Palace, where Aben Marchan had his residence. This Vice-King
distrusted nothing; but as soon as he had notice of so very treacherous a
design, having put himself upon his defense with what happened to be about him,
he chose rather to dye in defending himself generously, than to fall alive into
the hands of the Revolted. Thus though they only really desired to take him
Prisoner, they killed him, with all those that were about him, without so much
as one escaping.

The rumor of this rising being immediately spread, all those of Hacan's Party
proclaimed him King, after the wonted manner, taking withal an Oath of
Allegiance to him: And this new King failed not at his accession to the Crown,
to bestow favors upon all his Partisans, and to give, as all Usurpers do, all
the orders necessary for the acquiring of reputation Tani, get into credit.
.

At that same time, Subb, a Comet.
one Wednesday evening, a very great Comet appeared upon the Horison; about
whose angle it took up toward the East: It was accompanied with very thick
Clouds, extraordinary Winds, and pernicious Exhalations, and appeared for forty
whole days together. This very much affrighting the new King, he caused the
Mathematicians and Astrologers of the Country to meet; who, after having very
exactly examined the Elevation and Nature of this Comet, and the sign in which
it rise, said that it threatened the Kingdom with great Wars, and the Kings
Person with an imminent Death.

While they were still making their Observations, a great Earthquake was felt,
and being repeated to the eighth, or ninth time; and there arose so furious a
storm at Sea by the great Eastern Winds, that all the people of this Country,
thought that the end of the World was coming; nay, they said they had heard by
night, strange howlings in the Mountains, that seemed to be roaring Lions. But
what most amazed and was most strange, was a Cloud that coming from the West,
burst upon their heads, and rained a water of the color of blood. The
Earthquakes I have newly mentioned, had topsy-turvyed some Houses, and
overwhelmed whole Families uuder their ruins; insomuch, that not only the
people, but the King himself was in a Consternation.

These surprising signs of Heavens anger, were followed with a great scarcity
of Corn, that famished to death several persons, as also with certain
Contagious Acain.
Sores, that taking them in the Groyn, and behind the Ears, knocked off a very
great number.

Aboulvalid, whom Hacan's Rebellion had very much enraged, seeing the people
wearied and ruined by all the late Wars, was not in a very good posture to
undertake so great an one as this that fell upon his hands. He convened the
Estates, where having exposed the necessity he was under, to go reduce under
his obedience a Kingdom that so lawfully belonged to him, on the account of the
Queen his Wife; and having demanded of them succors in Money, they answered
him that they should not fail him in his need, but that it was requisite first
to know in what state the Kingdom of Thunis was, and whether the Pestilence
that had already lasted two months was ceased; the resolution was taken that
enquiry should be made; and the persons sent thither brought word back, That a
world of people was there dead of it, but that the contagion began to diminish.
This occasioned the hastening the preparations for that War; insomuch, that a
great number of stout Ships were fitted out for the taking on Board so great an
Army, as was that then preparing to be embarked in it, in the Spring in the
Year following.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Aboulvalid makes Muca Generalissimo of his Armies, and after having reduced
the Kingdom of Thunis under his Obedience, returns into Arabia.

MVca had served Aboulvalid usefully in the War he had with his Brother; he was
his Father Almanzor's most Trusty Servant, and had had a great share in the
honor of the Conquest of Spain: All these reasons made this Prince cast his
eyes upon him, to confer on him the Conduct of his Army; and being then in his
Government, he sent him an express Courier to give him notice of this new War,
and that he had nominated him Generalissimo in all his Armies; the terms of his
Letter to him were as follow.

Aboulvalid's Letter to Muca Abenzairi, Generalissimo in his Armies.
Praise be to our Sovereign God, Amen.
THE most High, and most Dread, King of the Arabians; Vicar of God, and
Defender of his Law, Aboulvalid Abenacer; Son of the Martial, Caliph, and
Protector of the Faith, Valid Almanzor; to the Governor of our Kingdom of
Africa; the Prudent, Virtuous, and accomplished Gentleman, Loyal and Faithful
Servant of our Crown, and Captain General of our Armies, by Sea and Land; Muca
Abenzair, Greeting. We write to you at present, to let you know that the Great
Caliph Mahomet Gilhair, King of Thunis, our honored Lord and Father-in-law
being dead, and the virtuous Abulcacim Aben Marchan our Servant, who had been
in our name to take possession of that Kingdom, of Right and Justice to us
belonging, hardly beginning to make our people taste the sweetness of our Reign,
when Captain Hacan, as you doubtless have been already informed, entered by main
force into the Palace Royal of Thunis; and after having killed our Governor,
and all our faithful Servants, had withdrawn himself from his Allegiance to us;
and by force, caused himself to be owned the absolute King of all the Country;
which he governs Tyrannically. Wherefore, for the recovery of that Kingdom, it
is necessary that you assemble the greatest number of Troops as shall be
possible for you, in the Kingdoms that are under your Government; and that you
set forth with them and our Army, to repair to the Port of Capha It is not
known in what place that Port is, nor how it is called at present.
, in the midst of the month of Ragab, in the approaching hundredth Year of the
Hegira; at which time, we will go to join you with the Army which we cause to
be raised in the Kingdom of Syria and Arabia; till when we refer the resolving
with you upon all matters, enjoining you to order all as you shall judge most
expedient, by your Prudence and Valor; wherein we have an entire confidence.

From our Presence, in the Palace of Corbal, in Arabia Faelix, the 2d. of the
Moon Mahairan, in the Year 99.

Muca having received the King his Masters Orders, was overjoyed at the
employment with which he honored him; and having made Leavies throughout all
his Kingdom, and heaped up all sorts of Ammunition, as well for the Fleet he
had fitted out, as for his Land Army; he embarked with twenty thousand very
brisk men, and made Sail toward the Levant, while the King was embarked with
twenty five thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, he had assembled in Arabia,
and made Sail toward the West; insomuch, that the two Armies joined happily in
the Port of Capha. This filled this Prince full of joy, for he would needs come
in Person to this War, well perceiving that when he should have reduced the
Kingdom of Thunis, he was absolute Master of all Africa, from the Sea of the
Levant, to that of the Ponant. Wherefore having Landed at Thunis, he found not
any opposition at his descent, and had the means to marshal both his Armies in
Battel-array.

Hacan being fully informed of these Warlike preparations, was extremely
intimidated: Nevertheless, as he had been long prepared to maintain his
Usurpation, he had assembled forty thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse;
with whom he went with great Resolution to meet Aboulvalid, and courageously
stood his coming in a large Plain, not far distant from the Sea, and called
Falh Almaligue The Kings Field.
; where having drawn up his Army in Battalia, it began by two bodies of Horse,
that Skirmish'd for some time before they engaged the rest in the Battle, that
lasted all that day, from Three a Clock in the Afternoon, till Night Daelam,
obscurity.
, that separated the two Armies with the loss of eight hundred Foot, and about
three hundred Horse, on the Kings side; and five hundred Foot, and four hundred
Horse on that of Hacan, without reckoning a number of Wounded; among others,
one of Muca's Children, called Ismael, had two thrusts with a Pike in his
Thigh, for which Aboulvalid was much concerned. But the Father seeing the Grief
his Master thence received, told him with a very gay and resolute countenance,
that there was not matter for so much trouble as his Majesty expressed; neither
he nor his Son being come thither to gain Riches, but to dye for his Service;
and that thus, though his Son should not recover of his Wounds, the matter
would be small, since he was only Born to dye: On the contrary, he should hold
his Death as well employed, because he had first so well avenged it; and this
was true, for he had killed with his own hand a very great number of the
Enemies; and that day performed actions worthy of an Eternal memory.

On the morrow, At the beginning of October, in the Year 725. of our Lord.
which was the 9th. of the Moon of Taquel, in the hundredth Year, the Battle
renewed at break of day, and lasted till Noon, when Hacan's Men began to
Buckle, and were at length by dint of Sword defeated. Hacan seeing the flight
of his Forces, sought his safety in galloping after them.

The King being entered into Thunis, did not think he had gained an absolute
Victory, unless he had Hacan in his hands: So as that he forthwith sent Foot
and Horse out on all sides to seek him, promising them great rewards if they
brought him to him. They sought him so well, that the Dogs of a Flock of Sheep
barking after him in a Cave where he was hid, created a desire in them to go
thither, and occasioned his being taken. He was immediately brought before
Aboulvalid, to whom having given a great deal of ill language, as a desperate
man, that saw there was no Remission for him; the King, that was otherwise very
mild, was so provoked, that he caused him to be impaled alive, and left him in
that condition upon the Gate of the Town, where he languish'd five whole days;
at the end of which he died a very cruel Death. All the Principal Leaders of
this Rebellion were then Beheaded; and one of the General Officers of the Army,
called Abraham Hacen, was chosen to be Viceroy of Thunis, in the room of Hacan
the Rebel.

Aboulvalid having settled his Authority in that Country, and brought all
things again into their Primitive order, set forth again with his Army toward
the Levant; and being arrived at Carbal, where he was received with great
Acclamations, the first thing he did, was to reward all the Principal men that
had served him in that War, and particularly Muca, whom he made of his high
Council, and one of the Principal Ministers of his State. After this, without
staying longer in his Palace than was necessary to repose himself, he thought
of taking a Pilgrimage to Mecque, whither he went with a part of his Court.

Being on his return through the Deserts, there arose so furious a Wind, that
removing whole Mountains of Sand from one side to another, as sometime happens;
it buried above three hundred Persons of his Retinue, that were found thus
Interred alive, which much afflicted him. But having passed them, at the long
run he arrived in good health in Arabia Foelix, where he was received with
great joy by all his Court, and thought in good earnest to recreate himself,
after all the troubles he had thitherto undergone.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Oath of Allegiance which Aboulvalid causes the States to take to Jacob
Almanzor his Son.

THE Caliph thinking only now of leading a more calm and sedate life, and
considering that he had not any other Children than Jacob Almanzor capable of
succeeding him; he was very willing to secure to him the Crown, before he was
overtaken by Death, that regards Kings no more than other men. For which
reason, after having convened all the Grandees of his Kingdom, a Morabite,
called Mahomet Algaseli, that was in great favor with him, and whose advice he
demanded in things of the highest importance; by his order made them a long
Speech, on which he gave them to understand, the reason for which he had called
them together; which was to own Prince Jacob Almanzor for Lawful King of all
his great Realms, after his Fathers Death. Curci Almulq Canopy, Throne.
The States having declared, they all approved this design, as a thing very
advantageous to the good and profit of all the Nations. King Aboulvalid having
one day put on his Royal Robes, sat in his Throne, and caused Prince Jacob
Almanzor to sit there with him, on his Right Hand; and then all the Governors
of the Places being present, Mahomet Algaseli the Morabite, being seated on the
Kings Left Hand, rose up and uttered these words, with a loud and intelligible
voice: Gentlemen, Honored Governors, Virtuous Lords, and all you here
present; King Aboulvalid wills and requires, that you own Prince Jacob
Almanzor, his Lawful Son, who is here present, for absolute Master of all his
Realms, after his Death. Are you willing to make Oath to him accordingly? To
which they answered aloud, Yes, we are willing; Do then, replied Algaseli, as a
token of the Allegiance you promise to him, and of the Possession he from this
present is going to take of the Crown, all that the King and I am going to do.
Then the King rising, took his Son by the Hand, and seated him in his Throne;
and the Prince having taken the Right Hand of his Father, kissed it for a mark
of his Obedience. The Father on his side, for a token of the Blessing Rida,
Benediction.
he gave him, laid his Hand upon his Head; and also kissing his Sons Hand, sat
down by him on his Right Hand; Algeseli the Morabite did the same, and sat down
on his Left; and after him all the Governors of the Provinces having also
kissed his Hand; an Alfaqui having brought the Alcoran, wrapped up in a very rich
stuff, and having laid it on the Table, Algaseli the Morabite rose up from his
Seat, and lifting up his voice, that he might be heard by the whole Assembly;
Honorable Governors, said he, and Virtuous Knights, and also every one of you
here present; Do not you swear and promise by the Supreme God, and by all that
is contained in this Book, to acknowledge and hold all your life long, Prince
Jacob Almanzor, for your King and Sovereign of all the Realms, as Son and
Lawful Heir, and Successor of King Aboulvalid Abenacer, his Father? And all
having answered, Yes, we promise it: Let him then, the Morabite replied, that
shall not accomplish what he has now promised, be declared Perjured, Infamous
Hazir, Infamous, Perjured.
, and a Traitor to the State, and may the curse of the Great God fall upon him,
and on all his; and the whole Assembly cried, Amen. And the Morabite having
said, with an audible voice, That for the solemnity of their Oath of
Allegiance, all should do the same as the King and he did. The King being got
up, and having kissed the Alcoran, put it upon his Head, the Morabite, and all
the Chiefs and Governors did the same afterward, each in their order. After
which, the Morabite being got up from his Seat, and having addressed his Speech
to Prince Jacob Almanzor; Your Celsitude, said he to him, do you not swear and
promise by the most Great, and most High, and by all that is contained in this
Book, in Quality of Kings, and Sovereign of these Realms, to do Justice to his
Subjects; and maintain and keep all the Privileges, that the Kings his
Predecessors in general, and each of them in particular have granted them; so
as that you may cause them to live in Peace, and not suffer any wrong to be
done them. And the Prince having said, Yes, and that he swore and promised it:
Mind it well then, replied Algaseli, for if you do not do it, the curse of God
will fall upon you, as upon one perjured; to which the Prince having answered,
Amen: Let your Celsitude then, continued he, to show you make an solemn Oath,
do as I do: In uttering these words, he took the Book, and having kissed, and
put it on his Head, he presented it to the Prince, who did the like.

This Ceremony being finished, all the Governors, and Leaders of Troops, going
out before the Prince, set him on Horseback, and carried him around through the
City, in great Pomp, amid the noise of a world of Instruments: And all
alighting at the great Mosch; and having said their Prayers there, returned
with the same Pomp to the Palace, where the King his Father waited his coming,
and where the whole Cavalcade ended and separated.

This solemnity lasted three whole days; during which, there was naught but
Feasts, Conserts of Music, Tournaments, and all the other Recreations to be
thought of.

These three days that had been given to joy being passed, the King caused the
States to be held once again in his Palace, to confirm and ratify all that had
been done; and the Morabite opened the Sessions in these terms. Illustrious
Captains, Generous Governors, Brave Cavaliers, that are here all present; do
not you confirm and ratify the Oath of Allegience, to Prince Jacob Almanzor,
our Sovereign Lord, who is here present? And all having answered Yes; and said
expressly, that they ratified it. Let all, pursued he, for the conclusion of so
solemn an Oath, do then, as the King and I shall do: In finishing these words
the King arose, and having taken the Alcoran, he kissed it, and put it again
upon the Table; he also took the Prince his Sons hand and kissed it; and after
that the Morabite, and all those that composed that great Assembly, had done
the same, they were dissolved, after having all received some favors from the
King, who was very much satisfied with seeing the Accomplishment of a thing he
had so much desired. This great Ceremony passed in the ten first days This date
falls in the Year 725 of our Lord, in the month of March.
of the Moon of Rabeh, on the first day of the Year 104 of the Hegira.

CHAP. XXX.
Aboulvalid's Death, who leaves to one of his Kinsmen, called Mahomet Amcari,
the Regency of his State, during his Sons Minority.

ABoulvalid was much joy'd to see all his great Kingdoms in Peace, and all the
Wars and Dissentions he had been obliged to undergo, absolutely stifled: But as
the Wheel of Fortune turns continually, and there is no man upon Earth, that
has a continued and an accomplished happiness; all Great, and all Mighty, as he
was, he tried it like other men: For he fell into so obstinate and so violent a
Fever, that whatever care the greatest and ablest Physicians in the World
took, that were at that time, they could not bring any Remedy to it. Wherefore
this Prince seeing that all that was given him, did him more hurt than good,
resolved upon taking nothing at all: And one day, in their presence, and in
that of the Principal Persons of his Court, he said, That he plainly perceived
it to be the Will of God, that he should dye of that illness; that thus he
thanked them for all the pains they had thitherto taken, and that he had no
longer any need of them. Then he dismissed them, as well as all those that were
about his Bed, and sent for Mahomet Algaseli the Morabite, to confer with him
upon all things, and to provide the best he could for the Government of the
State, after his Death; which was what put him most in pain: For he plainly saw
his Son was as yet too Young, to be able to contain so many Nations in their
Duty; and that it was absolutely requisite, to give the Regency of the State to
some one, during his Minority. He was much at a loss, how to determine on whom
to pitch; but he and Algaseli at last concluded, that there was not a man of
more Ability, nor in whom more Confidence could be put, than in Mahomet Amcari;
his very near Relation; insomuch, that having had him called to him, to tell
him the choice he had made of his Person; and Amcari having made him a thousand
Protestations of Acknowledgment and Fidelity, he named him in his last Will and
Testament, the Regent and Lieutenant General of the Empire, till that his Son
Almanzor was at Age to Govern.

He lived but a very few days after having declared his Will in this manner.
And as he had governed with much Lenity and Justice, his Funeral, that was
performed with great state, was accompanied with a real Mourning by all the
People, and with such tears as departed from a downright Affliction. Mahomet
Amcari having immediately taken upon him the management of Affairs, the Queen
Mother resolved to live retired, as being well becoming a Widow; and that she
might have the more care of her Son, and keep him in the greater security,
withdrew to a Country House, whither the Caliph Almanzor, her Father-in-law,
formerly retired; and where there was all sorts of Conveniences.

Wherefore being gone thither to shut her self up with all her Family, and that
of the King her Son; Amcari seeing himself absolute Master of the State, and
obeyed by all the Governors of all the Realms that compose this great Empire,
began to be sensible of the movements of Ambition, and the desire of Reigning,
that glides by little and little, like an Earth-worm, into the Hearts of all
men; who from the nothing, wherein they were, see themselves raised up to
Authority: For after having began to prick him on by little bites, they came at
length to gnaw him all over.

Having his mind possessed with this thought, and only thinking of the means to
bring it about, he thought it expedient to begin with gaining over the
Principal men of the Council and Army, and the Governors of the Towns and
Provinces; as those that had all the Forces of the State in their hands.
Wherefore he let not any occasion slip, of making them Presents, and of
obliging them. When any of them died, he only put in their place such people as
of whom he was well assured Mutben, ready to serve him
, and whom he thought would not fail him on occasion; and did this with so much
dissimulation, that as he spoke to no body of his design, nor did any body
perceive it. At length, having disposed all things to his fancy; having reduced
them to the point he judged proper for the Executing of his Treason, he would
needs communicate his mind to one of his principal friends, whom he had made
head of the Council of War, called Aben Culeyman; who told him frankly, That
since he asked him his advice, he found great inconveniences, in undertaking a
thing of that nature, as long as the Prince Jacob Almanzor his Master was
alive: For as he was beloved by all his Fathers Creatures, there would be
doubtless, many Governors that would declare for him; that this enterprise
would seem very strange to the Arabians; and that it would meet with great
difficulties in the Provinces; where, in imitation of himself, there would not
be a Governor, but would make himself King, in the extent of his Government:
That thus, whereas all he intended to do, was only to augment his Authority,
and be absolute and independent, he would find himself abyss'd, in the stormy
Sea of Wars, which such an Sutar, Rebellion.
over-turning would occasion; and that after he had thus Rioted the people, it
would be no longer in his power to calm them: These reasons seemed very
pertinent to Mahomet Amcari; and as he had ever sped in following the other
Councils given him by Aben Culeyman, he plainly saw, that this he then gave
him, departed from a man consummated in the experience of State Affairs:
Wherefore he bethought himself of an indubitable expedient, which was to rid
himself of Prince Almanzor. He was resolved not to communicate this thought to
any other than the same Aben Culeyman; but that Wise Counselor still
endeavored to divert him gently, and by the best reasons he could bethink
himself of, from so wicked a design; being in no wise able to approve of so
horrible a cruelty, and so base and black an action. Nevertheless perceiving he
could not root this intention out of his mind, he was furiously vexed; and
having at last resolved upon applying a fitting remedy, he thought it to be
time to discover the secret of this Treason, to the Captain General, as to his
best friend, and to the Prince his Masters most Faithful Servant. Muca being
much surpised at such an infidelity, having confirmed his friend in the design
he already had, of preventing so great a mischief; after having concerted
together what they had to do, and promised one another the strictest secrecy,
they resolved that Aben Culeyman should continue to put the Regent upon this
matter, of which he made him the confident; and that he should endeavor to
discover by what bias he pretended to bring about his design, that so they
might by the same means break all his measures.

This being their result, Aben Culeyman happening to be with Amcari alone, did
not fail to put him upon that Chapter; and the Regent having told him, That
finding the difficulties he had urged rational to all intents, he was resolved
to overcome them, by causing the Prince to be Poisoned; after which all things
would be easy to him: Aben Culeyman having to this made him answer, That he
was in the right; and having much ado to entertain the vexation he had on this
account, he left him as soon as he could, and went in all have to inform Muca.
These two Trusty Servants, considering the blackness of the Regents action, and
of what a consequence it was to think of saving the Prince their Master, from
the peril that was preparing against him, found there to be less evil in
bereaving the Traitor Mahomet Amcari of his life, and fail him in that
occasion, that to keep his secret, to be Traitors to their Lawful King:
Wherefore they both resolved together, that they might make the less noise and
disorder, to invite him one day to Dinner, and to seize on his Person while at
Table: But in the mean while, for fear the Prince should fall into the Trap
that was laid for him, while they were taking their measures for so hardy a
design, they thought it convenient to inform the Queen of all that passed, that
so she might be upon her Guard, against the Treason that was preparing against
the Prince her Son. Whereupon Muca went to her with all Expedition, in that
retired House I mentioned; and having acquainted her with the Regents Perfidy,
she was much afflicted; but she received comfort at the same, in having found
such Loyal Persons as would discover it to her. Muca having entreated the
Queen, to keep the matter very secret, as it highly became her to do, both for
her Sons sake, and the whole Kingdoms; and having assured him, she might make
account of him, and that he was resolved to dye for her Service; he returned in
all have to the Court of Mahomet, the Regent.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Regent Amcari, meaning to bereave Prince Almanzor of his Life, is
discovered, and punished for his Perfidy.

MAhomet Amcari, still contriving to work the Princes Death, and seeking for
that purpose, the safest and least noisie means, caused a very rich Goyhrim, a
Poisoned Robe.
Garment to be made, to make him a Present of, as is customary at certain
times: And after having caused it to be well prepared, with a very subtle
Poison, sent it to the Prince, with a thousand other very gallant, and very
curious Presents.

All those of the Queens Palace, seeing these Presents unfolded, were
immediately transported with the beauty of that Vestment; all saying, That the
Prince could not put on a finer: But the Queen being afraid of its being
poisoned, would by no means suffer him to wear it that day, no not so much as
try it: And the Night being come, to see if she had any reason to harbor such
apprehensions, she had it put upon a great Greyhound, that was found dead on
the morrow, his Skin all covered with Sores.

Mahomet's malice and design being then past all doubt, this generous Princess
being very Prudent, and having a Courage above her Sex; without making any
noise of the thing she had discovered, or of the resolution she had taken in
her mind to punish such an attempt, sent to tell Mahomet Amcari the Regent,
That the Prince would be very glad to see him, and she also, to discourse upon
some matters of consequence. And knowing him to be upon the way thither, she
caused all her Guards to keep the entrance of the Gate, as if it were to do him
honor; but with order, That none of his should be admitted in with him. As
soon as he was entered, they seized on his Person, and brought him into the
Queens presence; who having reproached him with his perfidy, and told him how
she knew all his Treacherous design, she had an Executioner called in, whom she
had at hand on purpose for his Execution, and had his Throat cut into the Basin
of a Fountain that was in the Castle: Then having caused his Body to be laid
upon an Ass, had it carried to Carbal, and so through all the Streets of that
City, followed by the public Criers, who by sound of Trumpet, Proclaimed he
was in that condition, for having designed to Poison his King, and seize on the
Crown; and after having left it in the public place, she caused his Head to be
set upon the Gate of the City.

She did not long defer coming to Carbal, with the Prince her Son; and entering
the Palace, she sent immediately for the two Faithful Servants, who had
revealed to her this most Traiterous design; and told them, That the obligation
she lay under, for the Service they had both newly done her, was so great, that
she knew not how to express the acknowledgement she had of it; that the only
reward proportionate to it, was the Regency of the State; that she had had a
design to give it to the one and to the other: but that as this great Authority
which they both equally deserved, could not be divided, and that she was afraid
of offending one of the two, if she gave it to the other, she was resolved to
Govern the best she could her self, without giving any one that Title; but that
she would ever manage all things by their Councils, and that they should ever
be the first of the State after her. They were both very well satisfied with
this resolution; and News being come of a Party that was framing in the West,
she sent them both, as those in whom she had most confidence; namely, Aben
Culeyman into the Kingdom of Thunis, and Muca into that of Morocco, with an
absolute Authority, there to contain the People in their Duty. Whereupon they
both departed from Carbal, covered with Honor and Testimonies of Esteem and
Affection, which the Queen and Prince gave them, and took their way toward the
Ponant, where they safely arrived; but in a short while after, Aben Culeyman
falling ill, died on the way: Muca spent his time in setting things in order,
in a Kingdom he had so long since left; and Queen Omhalair remained sole Regent.

CHAP. XXXII.
Prince Almanzor's Death; the Queen his Mother dies of Grief, in a short time
after, and Ali Abilhachek causes himself to be Proclaimed Caliph.

QUeen Omhalair made it the whole study and application of her mind, to bring
up well her Son, the Prince Jacob Almanzor, whom she had ever in her Eye. One
day when that she was gone to Dine with him, in a Garden out of the Town, the
Prince after Dinner threw himself upon a Bed, in a Room where he fell a sleep;
and a Spider having pricked him in the Right Eye, his Face swelled in such a
manner, and put him to such great Pain, and occasioned such dangerous Fits, as
that he lived but seven days. The Queen laid his Death so to heart, that not
being capable of receiving any Consolation, or of surviving a Son, for whom she
had so tender an affection; she fell into so great a Languishment, that all the
Remedies of the Physicians in no wise easing her Malady, she died fifteen days
after him.

These two Deaths, so sudden and so close upon one another, occasioned a mighty
amazement in the Court, that was for some time in such a surprise, that their
whole discourse was upon so extraordinary a thing. But at length, coming to
think that there was none left of the Race of the Almanzors, to whom the Crown
appertained by Succession; the Leading men of the Arabians, and the Governors
of the Provinces, began to make their Cabals. One of them, called Ali
Abilhacheck, chancing to have more Friends than the rest, caused himself
himself to be Proclaimed Caliph; and after having caused an Oath of Allegiance
to be taken to him, and had his Coronation solemnized with great Pomp, with the
Solemnity, and the Merriments that are wont to be practiced in such like
occasions; he began with rewarding those that raised him to the place he held,
giving them Governments and Employs; insomuch, that there was no body but on
whom he conferred some savor: Besides this, he applied himself in good earnest
to make regulations upon all abuses that were introduced into the Government,
and to do Justice to all those that required it of him, without making them
wait; insomuch that he acquired in a short time not only a great Reputation,
but also the friendship of all the people; they esteemed themselves very happy
in being governed by so good a King.

Thus ended the Line of the Aboulvalid Almanzors.

The End of the First Part.

